TOOLS https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201807108 4025 J . Cell Biol . 2018 Vol . 217 No . 11 4025 – 4048 Rockefeller University Press While nuclear compartmentalization is an essential feature of three - dimensional genome organization , no genomic method exists for measuring chromosome distances to defined nuclear structures . In this study , we describe TSA - Seq , a new mapping method capable of providing a “cytological ruler” for estimating mean chromosomal distances from nuclear speckles genome - wide and for predicting several Mbp chromosome trajectories between nuclear compartments without sophisticated computational modeling . Ensemble - averaged results in K562 cells reveal a clear nuclear lamina to speckle axis correlated with a striking spatial gradient in genome activity . This gradient represents a convolution of multiple spatially separated nuclear domains including two types of transcription “hot zones . ” Transcription hot zones protruding furthest into the nuclear interior and positioning deterministically very close to nuclear speckles have higher numbers of total genes , the most highly expressed genes , housekeeping genes , genes with low transcriptional pausing , and super - enhancers . Our results demonstrate the capability of TSA - Seq for genome - wide mapping of nuclear structure and suggest a new model for spatial organization of transcription and gene expression . Mapping 3D genome organization relative to nuclear compartments using TSA - Seq as a cytological ruler Yu Chen 1  , Yang Zhang 2 , 3 , Yuchuan Wang 3  , Liguo Zhang 1 , Eva K . Brinkman 4 , Stephen A . Adam 5 , Robert Goldman 5 , Bas van Steensel 4 , Jian Ma 3 , and Andrew S . Belmont 1 , 6 , 7  Introduction While the human genome has been sequenced , how this linear genome sequence folds in 3D within the nucleus remains largely unknown . New genomic methods such as Hi - C ( Lieberman - Aiden et al . , 2009 ; Rao et al . , 2014 ) have generated increasing interest in how 3D chromosome folding may regulate genome functions during development or in health and disease . However , these 3C ( chromosome conformation capture ) - based methods do not di - rectly report on chromosome positioning within nuclei . What is needed is an ability to translate microscopic views of DNA position relative to nuclear compartments ( such as the nu - clear lamina , nucleolus , or nuclear speckles ) into genome - wide maps that show how close loci are to a given compartment and how the chromosomal fiber traverses between compartments . For example , whether transcriptionally active chromosome re - gions are targeted reproducibly to particular nuclear compart - ments has been a long - standing question . Using DNA FISH , a population - based , statistical shift toward the nuclear center has been observed for a number of genes undergoing transcriptional activation ( Takizawa et al . , 2008 ) , leading to the proposal of a gradient of increased transcriptional activity from the nuclear periphery to center ( Takizawa et al . , 2008 ; Bickmore , 2013 ) . However , the functional significance of this radial positioning has been difficult to rationalize given the large variability of gene positioning within individual nuclei ( Takizawa et al . , 2008 ; Kölbl et al . , 2012 ) . Alternatively , this stochastic radial positioning of genes could be the consequence of a more deterministic position - ing of genes relative to a nuclear compartment or compartments that themselves show a stochastic radial positioning . Nuclear speckles , excluded from the nuclear periphery and enriched toward the nuclear center ( Carter et al . , 1991 ) , are an excellent candidate for such a nuclear compartment . Nuclear speckles were first visualized by transmission EM ( TEM ) as dense clusters of 20 – 25 - nm - diameter RNP granules ( Fakan and Puvion , 1980 ) termed interchromatin granule clusters , and they have alternatively been proposed to be storage sites for RNA - processing components ( Spector and Lamond , 2011 ) or transcription hubs for a subset of active genes ( Xing et al . , 1995 ; Shopland et al . , 2003 ; Hall et al . , 2006 ) . Microscopic studies have demonstrated the very close association with ( Xing et al . , 1995 ; Moen et al . , 2004 ) or even movement to ( Hu et al . , 2009 ; Khanna © 2018 Chen et al . This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike – No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date ( see http : / / www . rupress . org / terms / ) . After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License ( Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 4 . 0 International license , as described at https : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 4 . 0 / ) . 1 Department of Cell and Developmental Biology , University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign , Urbana , IL ; 2 Department of Bioengineering , University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign , Urbana , IL ; 3 Computational Biology Department , School of Computer Science , Carnegie Mellon University , Pittsburgh , PA ; 4 Division of Gene Regulation , Netherlands Cancer Institute , Amsterdam , Netherlands ; 5 Department of Cell and Molecular Biology , Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine , Chicago , IL ; 6 Center for Biophysics and Quantitative Biology , University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign , Urbana , IL ; 7 Carl R . Woese Institute for Genomic Biology , University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign , Urbana , IL . Correspondence to Andrew S . Belmont : asbel @ illinois . edu . Chen et al . TSA - Seq mapping of nuclear genome organization Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201807108 4026 et al . , 2014 ) nuclear speckles of a small number of genes upon transcriptional activation . One major problem , however , in judg - ing the significance of this speckle association has been the ab - sence of any successful genome - wide survey of the prevalence of gene association with nuclear speckles . The pooled results from several previous low - throughput microscopy surveys showed that approximately half of the 25 active genes examined had a “close” association to nuclear speckles ( Hall et al . , 2006 ) , but this small sampling of active genes might not be representative of the entire genome . Another significant problem has been the non - quantitative assessment of “close” used in previous studies and the absence of any comparison to the percentage of the genome localized within similar distances . Current genomic methods such as DNA adenine methyltrans - ferase identification ( DamID ; Vogel et al . , 2007 ) and chromatin immunoprecipitation ( ChIP ) sequencing ( ChIP - Seq ; Landt et al . , 2012 ) are limited in mapping nuclear speckle – associated domains as they measure molecular contact frequencies with particular proteins but not the actual cytological distances from specific nuclear compartments . Nuclear speckles behave like a dynamic phase - separated body ( Brangwynne , 2011 ; Zhu and Brangwynne , 2015 ; Galganski et al . , 2017 ) , and no detectable DNA is contained within them ( Spector and Lamond , 2011 ) , while serial - section TEM reconstructions showed large - scale chromatin fibers near , but not necessarily contacting , the periphery of these granule clusters ( Belmont and Bruce , 1994 ) . Thus , the first challenge is detecting DNA sequences that are close to nuclear speckles but not in direct contact . Moreover , all known speckle proteins , although enriched in nuclear speckles , are also found at lower concentrations throughout the nucleus ; most of these proteins are involved in RNA processing and / or transcription and bound to chromatin or nascent transcripts . Therefore , the second chal - lenge is producing a signal proportional to the total amount of a protein within a microscopic neighborhood rather than the small fraction of that protein in molecular contact with DNA . Tyramide signal amplification ( TSA ) , a well - developed tech - nology widely used in immunocytochemistry , works by using HRP to generate tyramide free - radicals ; these free radicals then diffuse and react to form covalent bonds with nearby macromol - ecules including the known target of protein tyrosine residues ( Bobrow et al . , 1989 , 1991 ; van Gijlswijk et al . , 1996 , 1997 ) . Two previous applications of TSA to genomics , RNA TRAP ( tagging and recovery of associated proteins ; Carter et al . , 2002 ) and immuno - TRAP ( Ching et al . , 2013 ) , used chromatin pulldown to assay TSA labeling . However , core histones are poor targets for TSA labeling , while neither of these previous applications of TSA adequately tested for possible labeling bias based on varying nonhistone protein identity and concentration along the genome . In this study , we present TSA sequencing ( TSA - Seq ) , the first genomic method capable of estimating cytological distances of chromosome loci genome - wide relative to a particular nuclear compartment and even inferring chromosome trajectories from one compartment to another . This distance mapping was enabled by our recognition that TSA labels DNA directly and uniformly across the genome and by our demonstration that the steady - state concentration of tyramide free radicals during the TSA re - action can be accurately modeled by a simple exponential decay . TSA - Seq represents the first genomic method that starting from basic physical principles and equations converts sequencing reads into actual calibrated physical distances at a resolution superior to conventional light microscopy . Our TSA - Seq results in K562 cells suggest a refined model of nuclear organization in which the more biologically relevant metric is not fractional dis - tance relative to the nuclear periphery versus nuclear center but rather is the distance of genomic regions to specific nuclear com - partments , e . g . , the nuclear lamina , speckles , or still unknown regions such as transcription factories . Results Gradient of diffusible free radical produced by TSA provides distance - dependent biotin labeling To measure the relative distance of genomic regions to specific nuclear compartments , we turned to TSA ( Wang et al . , 1999 ) , a commonly used immunochemistry method for amplifying sig - nals for target detection . TSA uses an antibody - coupled HRP to catalyze the formation of diffusible biotin - tyramide free radicals and create a free radical concentration gradient centered at the staining target ( Fig . 1 A ) . We measured how far the TSA signal spreads using a cell line with multiple intranuclear GFP spots produced by EGFP – lac repressor binding to 256mer lac operator DNA tags contained within an integrated bacterial artificial chromosome ( BAC ) mul - ticopy transgene array ( Hu et al . , 2009 ) . Each GFP spot served as a point source for biotin - tyramide free radical generation after anti - GFP TSA . Diffusion of tyramide free radicals from a point source combined with a spatially invariant free radical degradation rate is predicted to produce an exponential decay in free radical concentration with distance from this point source at steady state ( Wartlick et al . , 2009 ) . Using the line profiles of streptavidin staining of the observed biotin distribution , we fit the observed signals to exponential decay functions ( Fig . 1 B ) . The unmodified TSA reaction product spread over an ∼ 1 - µm radius ( condition 1 ) . Adding sucrose to increase the solution viscosity reduced this spreading moderately ( condition 2 ) , although it re - duced the biotin labeling approximately fourfold ( not depicted ) . Adding both sucrose and DTT ( condition 3 ) to reduce the tyra - mide free radical’s lifetime and diffusion path length reduced biotin labeling ∼ 20 - fold ( not depicted ) but reduced the staining radius to less than ∼ 0 . 5 µm . Here , the staining radius is defined as the radius at which the TSA labeling becomes indistinguish - able from background staining . To label nuclear speckles in K562 cells , we used anti - SON ( Ab1 ; see Materials and methods ) antibody staining against the protein SON , a highly specific marker for nuclear speckles ( Fig . S1 A ) . Comparison of anti - SON immunostaining ( Fig . 1 C , green ) with the streptavidin labeling of the TSA tyramide - biotin signal ( Fig . 1 C , red ) shows TSA signal spreading over distances consistent with our estimates from the GFP - stained lac operator arrays ( Fig . 1 B ) . The intranuclear biotin labeling is dominated by this TSA signal spreading from nuclear speckles , as shown by 3D surface plots ( Fig . 1 D ) for conditions 1 – 3 , consistent with the low nucleoplasmic SON immunostaining ( Figs . 1 C and S1 A ) . TSA reactions using no primary antibody showed minimal labeling ( not depicted ) . Chen et al . TSA - Seq mapping of nuclear genome organization Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201807108 4027 TSA - Seq translates the distance - dependent TSA biotin labeling into a quantitative sequencing readout To convert TSA staining into a genomic readout , we followed the TSA reaction in K562 cells with reversal of formaldehyde cross - linking , DNA isolation , pulldown of biotinylated DNA , and high - throughput sequencing ( Fig . 2 A ) . Workflow quality control included microcopy of streptavidin - stained cell aliquots follow - ing the TSA reaction and anti - biotin dot - blot staining of the pu - rified DNA ( not depicted ) . Two previous TSA applications focused on TSA protein label - ing through the known reaction of tyramide free radicals with tyrosines and tryptophans ( Carter et al . , 2002 ; Ching et al . , 2013 ) . However , early in our exploration of TSA , we found that core his - tones showed minimal labeling by the biotin - tyramide free radical as determined by Western blotting of total biotinylated proteins after TSA staining ( not depicted ) . This is likely due to the low re - activity of core histone tyrosines within the nucleosome ; indeed , 13 / 15 of the native nucleosomal tyrosines are inaccessible to reac - Figure 1 . TSA generates biotin labeling , which decays exponentially from the staining target . ( A ) TSA : Primary and HRP - conjugated secondary antibodies ( purple dots ) target epitopes ( gray dots ) . HRP catalyzes formation of tyramide - biotin free radicals ( red ) , which diffuse and covalently link to nearby proteins ( gray dots ) , DNA ( gray lines ) , and RNA ( brown lines ) . ( B ) Exponential fitting of spreading of TSA staining : condition 1 ( top ) , condition 2 ( middle ) , and condition 3 ( bottom ) . Left : Biotin staining ( red ) of TSA staining of GFP - lac repressor ( green ) bound to BAC transgene array ; white dashes encircle nuclei and red arrows mark GFP spot used for line scan . Middle : GFP spot ( green ) versus biotin intensities ( red ) along yellow line scan ( left ) . Right : Exponential fit of biotin intensity versus distance from GFP spot . ( C ) Image ( top ) and intensities ( bottom ) along yellow line scan ( top ) of SON immunostaining ( green ) , biotin staining after TSA ( red ) , and DNA DAPI staining ( blue ) . ( D ) Images of SON TSA staining conditions 1 – 3 . Top : Biotin staining ( red ) merged with DAPI DNA staining ( green ) . Bottom : TSA staining surface plots . Bars , 2 µm . Chen et al . TSA - Seq mapping of nuclear genome organization Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201807108 4028 tion with p - nitrobenzenesulfonyl fluoride ( Zweidler , 1992 ) . The low TSA reactivity of core histones suggested the likelihood of a significant bias of chromatin TSA labeling toward regions with elevated nonhistone content , motivating us to examine whether DNA would react with the tyramide free radical . Indeed , TSA also labels DNA , as measured by dot - blot streptavidin staining of purified DNA isolated from cells stained by TSA or purified plasmid DNA reacted with free HRP and tyramide - biotin ( not de - picted ) . Using DNA labeling , we avoid potential biases introduced by differential chromatin solubilization and / or variations in the tyrosine and tryptophan content of surrounding nonhistone proteins . As compared with ChIP - Seq , input variation across the genome is minimized , and pulldown specificity can be improved using harsher washing conditions . We generated TSA enrichment genomic maps by plotting the log 2 ratio of the normalized pulldown read density versus the normalized read density of input DNA over a 20 - kbp slid - ing window . We observed very similar enrichment maps for all three staining conditions ( Fig . 2 B ) , with an ∼ 16 – 32 - fold enrich - ment / depletion dynamic range . Enrichment peaks were slightly Figure 2 . Genome - wide mapping chromosome organization relative to nuclear speckles using TSA - Seq . ( A ) Workflow schematic . ( B ) SON TSA - Seq genomic plots ( human Chr11 ) : no primary control ( top ) , TSA staining conditions 1 – 3 ( middle ) , and lamin B1 DamID ( bottom ) . Red boxes indicate SON TSA - Seq peak - to - valley versus inter - LAD – LAD transitions . ( C ) Color - coding , TSA - Seq scores , and estimated speckle distances for 10 SON TSA - Seq deciles ( TSA condition 2 ) . ( D ) For each of the peak ( probes A – C ) , transition ( probes D and E ) , and valley ( probes F – H ) regions , SON TSA - Seq genomic plots flanking probe locations ( red bars ) are shown on left ; histograms of probe distances to the nearest speckle ( n = 100 ) are shown on right with representative 3D immuno - FISH images : SON ( green ) , FISH ( red ) , and nucleus ( white lines ) . Bars , 1 µm . ( E ) Box plot of probe distances to nearest speckle ( n = 100 ) . Chen et al . TSA - Seq mapping of nuclear genome organization Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201807108 4029 sharper and the dynamic range higher for staining condition 2 , which produced less spreading of the tyramide free radical . Condition 3 further sharpened larger TSA - Seq peaks but reduced or eliminated smaller peaks and flattened many valleys , as ex - pected by the more limited range of the free radical diffusion . The no - primary - control TSA labeling produced a nearly flat map . In a separate experiment , incubating cells with free HRP to produce a uniform concentration of tyramide free radicals also produced a nearly flat map ( not depicted ) . Together , these two controls indicate the absence of significant variation in the accessibility of DNA in different types of chromatin to reaction with the tyramide free radicals . Valleys in the SON TSA - Seq map align with lamina - associated domains ( LADs ) identified by lamin B1 DamID ( Fig . 2 B ) , consis - tent with the known depletion of nuclear speckles near the nu - clear periphery ( Carter et al . , 1991 ) . Unlike the relatively abrupt transitions between inter - LADs and LADs defined by the DamID molecular proximity mapping method , SON TSA - Seq maps typ - ically show gradual , approximately linearly decreasing signals over the several Mbps separating SON TSA - Seq peaks and valleys , which then levels close to the corresponding lamin B1 inter - LAD to LAD boundary ( Fig . 2 B , red boxes ) . We obtained nearly iden - tical TSA - Seq maps using a different anti - SON antibody ( Ab2 ; see Materials and methods ) as well as a monoclonal antibody to a different speckle marker ( phosphorylated SC35 ; Fig . S1 , B and C ) . These speckle TSA - Seq maps are distinctly different from published SC35 and SON ChIP - Seq results , showing near uniform levels at Mbp - scale resolution and localized peaks over cis - regu - latory regions at the resolution level of individual genes ( Fig . S1 D ; Ji et al . , 2013 ; Kim et al . , 2016 ) . In contrast with TSA - Seq , which measures cytological distance to the staining target regardless of whether the proteins are within cross - linking distance , ChIP - Seq as a molecular proximity method detects only the small fraction of SC35 or SON likely associated over nascent transcripts within cross - linking distance to DNA . Indeed , these published ChIP - Seq datasets show localized peaks over all active genes regardless of their distance to nuclear speckles ( Fig . S1 E ) . SON TSA - Seq score is proportional to cytological distance from nuclear speckles and can be calibrated to estimate mean distance in micrometers We used 3D immuno - FISH to validate that SON TSA - Seq scores are proportional to distance from nuclear speckles . We measured the distances to the nearest speckle using eight BAC FISH probes corresponding with three peaks , three valleys , and two transi - tion regions as visualized in SON TSA - Seq color - coded decile and genomic plots ( Fig . 2 , C and D ; and Fig . S2 , A – C , probes A – H ) . A strikingly deterministic localization near nuclear speckles was seen for probes A – C , corresponding with large SON TSA - Seq peaks . Nearly 100 % of alleles probed mapped within 0 . 5 µm of a speckle with mean distances between ∼ 0 . 1 – 0 . 2 µm . Probes from transition ( probes D and E ) and valley ( probes F – H ) re - gions showed progressively larger mean speckle distances and broader distance distributions with decreasing SON TSA - Seq scores ( Fig . 2 , D and E ; and Fig . S2 , A – C , probes A – H ) . If the SON TSA signal is dominated by spreading of tyramide free radicals from nearby speckles , then the TSA - Seq dependence of biotinylated DNA enrichment as a function of speckle distance should follow a similar exponential fit as observed by microscopy of TSA staining ( Fig . 1 B ) . Indeed , we can closely fit an exponen - tial curve ( Fig . 3 A , red lines ) to the plot of DNA genomic enrich - ment versus mean speckle distance for DNA probes A – H ( black squares ) . For each TSA staining condition , the estimated decay constants ( R 0 ) from genomic enrichment plots matched the decay constant calculated from the microscopy of TSA - labeled lac operator sites within the estimated fitting error ( Fig . S2 D ) . To test how well this exponential fit would apply to other genomic regions , we acquired new FISH speckle distance measurements for an additional 10 BAC FISH probes targeting different genomic regions ( Fig . S2 , A – C , probes I – R ) . Plotting mean speckle distance versus TSA genomic enrichment for these additional FISH probe regions showed a close match to the original fitted curve ( Fig . 3 B , open circles ; 0 . 039 [ 0 . 035 ] μm mean [ median ] difference be - tween measured versus predicted distances ) . To further test how well TSA - Seq could estimate mean dis - tance genome - wide , we used these exponential fits to convert TSA enrichment to an estimated mean distance ( Fig . 3 C ) . We observe a very high reproducibility across the entire genome comparing calculated distances from condition 1 versus condi - tion 2 SON TSA - Seq ( residual mean , median , SD : 0 . 060 , 0 . 043 , and 0 . 063 µm , respectively ; Fig . 3 D ) . Reproducibility is also high for condition 3 for predicted mean speckle distances less than ∼ 0 . 4 µm ( Fig . 3 C ) . Above 0 . 4 µm , speckle distance estimation is noisy because the SON TSA genomic enrichment decay curve has reached a plateau equal to background ( Fig . 3 A ) , which also explains the flattening of valleys observed in condition 3 SON TSA - Seq genomic plots ( Fig . 2 B ) . Interestingly , the DNA replica - tion timing profile is strikingly correlated with the mean speckle distance map ( Fig . 3 C ) . Applying TSA - Seq to other nuclear compartment markers provides an integrated view of nuclear organization that mirrors microscopic view To further test the potential for TSA - Seq to probe nuclear orga - nization , we performed TSA - Seq against additional nuclear com - partment markers . We chose lamin A and lamin B ( LB1 and LB2 ) as targets to further compare the relationship between chromo - some distances to the nuclear lamina versus speckles . Lamin A and B TSA - Seq signals are very similar and strikingly inversely correlated with speckle TSA - Seq signals throughout most of the chromosome regions , i . e . , peaks , valleys , and the lin - ear trajectories connecting peaks with valleys ( Figs . 4 and 5 A ) . Whereas the lamin B1 DamID signal shows a more binary dis - tribution , lamin TSA - Seq maps show distinctly different valley depths for different inter - LAD regions . Deeper valleys are cor - related with larger SON TSA - Seq peaks ( Figs . 4 B and 5 A , boxes ) . The genome - wide inverse correlation between lamin and speckle TSA - Seq percentiles defining a nuclear lamina – speckle axis is demonstrated by the 2D scatterplot of lamin B versus SON TSA - Seq ( Fig . 5 B ) . It is important to note that our quantitative model for how TSA - Seq works predicts that any speckle marker with similar immunofluorescence speckle staining as SON , regardless of whether they are colocalized at a molecular level , should show Chen et al . TSA - Seq mapping of nuclear genome organization Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201807108 4030 a very similar TSA - Seq pattern . Indeed , the signals for the SC35 and SON TSA - Seq are nearly identical ( Fig . 5 , A and B ; and Fig . S1 C ) . This is also true for lamin A and B ( Fig . 5 B ) . We also chose RNA pol II – Ser5p , using the monoclonal 4H8 antibody that recognizes this poised form of RNA pol II ( Xie et al . , 2006 ) , as a general marker for active nuclear domains to com - pare with the speckle TSA - Seq chromosome patterns . RNA pol II – Ser5p TSA - Seq shows a lower dynamic range and more binary signal compared with SON TSA - Seq ( Fig . 5 A ) . In contrast with SON TSA - Seq triangular - shaped peaks of varying heights , RNA pol II – Ser5p TSA - Seq shows broader , plateau - shaped peaks of similar heights . The correlation between SON and RNA pol II – Ser5p TSA - Seq is considerably lower than the correlations seen between related datasets such as lamin A versus lamin B TSA - Seq or SON versus SC35 TSA - Seq ( Fig . 5 B ) . Instead , the RNA pol II – Ser5p TSA - Seq chromosomal profile strikingly matches the Hi - C eigenvector ( Fig . 5 A ) , delineating the A ( positive ) and B ( nega - tive ) Hi - C compartments known to be correlated with inter - LADs and LADs , respectively . Comparing the TSA - Seq browser views with direct mi - croscopy visualization of DNA , RNA pol II – Ser5p , SON , and H3K27me3 ( Fig . 5 C ) provides an integrated view of nuclear organization . RNA pol II – Ser5p and nascent transcript foci are largely excluded from a thin zone at the nuclear periphery , but they are distributed throughout most of the nuclear interior , al - though they surround and may even be concentrated near nu - clear speckles ( Fig . 5 , C and D ) . The close spacing of these foci and spreading of the TSA staining produces a merged , low - contrast RNA pol II – Ser5p TSA image . This relatively uniform RNA pol II – Ser5p TSA staining pattern ( Fig . 5 E ) —higher intensity in the nuclear interior and lower intensity in a peripheral zone close to the nuclear periphery ( Fig . 5 E ) —explains the low and flat RNA pol II – Ser5p TSA - Seq peaks and valleys overlapping with inter - LADs and LADs , respectively ( Fig . 5 A ) . At higher resolution , large SON TSA - Seq peaks align only with a subset of RNA pol II – Ser5p TSA - Seq – positive regions , consistent with the RNA pol II – Ser5p immunostaining result : although there is a high concentration of RNA pol II – Ser5p that forms “rings” around the speckle periphery ( Fig . 5 C , white arrowheads ) , there are also many RNA pol II – Ser5p foci widely distributed throughout the nuclear interior that are not speckle associated . Larger SON TSA - Seq speckle peaks align with deeper lamin A and B TSA - Seq valleys , consistent with the more interior localization of nuclear speckles . Most of the smaller SON TSA - Seq local maxima includ - ing small peaks and peaks within valleys align with the remaining RNA pol II – Ser5p TSA - Seq – positive regions . These smaller SON TSA - Seq local maxima correlate with small dips or shallow valleys in the lamin TSA - Seq . Thus , these active chromosome regions are predicted to protrude smaller distances into the nuclear interior , consistent with the distribution of RNA pol II – Ser5p foci ( Fig . 5 C ) and the similar distribution of nascent transcripts ( Fig . 5 D ) within several hundred nm of the nuclear periphery . Interestingly , the RNA pol II – Ser5p - positive regions that contain large SON TSA peaks overlap extensively with A1 Hi - C subcompartment regions defined in GM12878 cells , which have a similar Hi - C profile to K562 cells ( Rao et al . , 2014 ) . In contrast , the remaining RNA pol II – Ser5p - positive regions , which contain smaller SON TSA - Seq local maxima , are contained within A2 Hi - C subcompartment regions . Positive lamin B1 DamID regions ( LADs ) and lamin TSA - Seq peaks overlap with B2 and B3 repressive Hi - C subcompart - ments . In contrast , polycomb - associated , repressive B1 Hi - C subcompartments are interspersed between the two types of active Hi - C subcompartments and , to a lesser extent , between B2 and B3 . This B1 subcompartment genomic distribution is consistent with the microscopic interspersed foci of RNA pol II – Ser5p and H3K27me3 , a marker of polycomb - repressed chroma - tin , throughout the nuclear interior and the closer approach of H3K27me3 foci to the nuclear periphery ( Fig . 5 C ) . Figure 3 . Deriving an accurate genome - wide mean distance map to nuclear speckles from the SON TSA - Seq score . ( A ) Exponential fit ( red line ) of SON TSA - Seq fold - enrichment ( condi - tions 1 – 3 ) versus average speckle distances mea - sured by FISH for eight probes ( black squares ) . ( B ) Enrichment and distances measured for 10 additional FISH probes ( open circles ) map close to the fitted curve calculated using the original eight probes ( shown for condition 1 ) . ( C ) Top to bottom : Speckle distances ( Chr11 ) calculated from the inverse of exponential fit ( conditions 1 – 3 ) versus Repli - Seq DNA replication timing . ( D ) Histogram of genome - wide distance resid - uals between condition 1 – and 2 – calculated speckle distances . Chen et al . TSA - Seq mapping of nuclear genome organization Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201807108 4031 Figure 4 . Inverse correlation between SON and lamin B TSA - Seq scores as shown for all human chromosomes . ( A ) SON TSA - Seq ( black ) and lamin B TSA - Seq ( blue ) maps ( staining condition 2 ) ; y axis shows log 2 ratio of TSA - normalized versus input DNA – normalized reads in 20 - kb bins . For comparison , Hi - C subcompartments ( GM12878 cells ) are shown between the SON and lamin B TSA - Seq plots ( color code , bottom right ) . Plots are based on the hg19 assembly as visualized in the UCSC Genome Browser . Red boxes show examples of linear transitions connecting valleys ( peaks ) to peaks ( valleys ) in SON ( lamin B ) TSA - Seq maps . ( B ) SON TSA - Seq large peaks ( red boxes ) , small peaks ( orange boxes ) , and peaks within valleys ( green boxes ) correlate with lamin B TSA - Seq large valleys , shallow valleys , and dips between peaks , respectively . Top to bottom : K562 cell SON TSA - Seq , lamin B TSA - Seq , and lamin B1 DamID . Chen et al . TSA - Seq mapping of nuclear genome organization Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201807108 4032 Figure 5 . TSA - Seq versus light microscopy view of nuclear organization . ( A ) Top to bottom : TSA - Seq ( Chr7 ) for SON , phosphorylated SC35 , lamin B , lamin A / C , lamin B1 DamID , RNA Pol II - Ser5p TSA - Seq , Hi - C compartment eigenvector , and subcompartment assignment . Speckle TSA - Seq large peaks ( red boxes ) , small peaks ( orange boxes ) , and peaks within valleys ( green boxes ) align with lamin TSA - Seq deep valleys , shallow valleys , and dips between peaks , Chen et al . TSA - Seq mapping of nuclear genome organization Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201807108 4033 A genome - wide view of the relative nuclear spatial distribu - tions of these different Hi - C subcompartments along a nuclear lamina – speckle axis is provided by 2D scatterplots in which each dot , representing a 300 - kb chromosome segment , is plotted as a function of lamin B and SON TSA - Seq percentiles ( Fig . 5 F ) . Interestingly , we found a more peripheral distribution of B3 versus B2 subcompartments , hinting at a heterogeneity within or between LADs . TSA - Seq predicts intranuclear chromosome trajectories , linking genomic analysis with microscopy investigations of nuclear organization Microscopy - based investigations of intranuclear chromosome topology have previously been limited by their low throughput . In this study , we show the ability of TSA - Seq to predict chro - mosome trajectories from genome - wide data and thus guide microscopy - based examination of chromosome organization . The several Mbp genomic distances between SON TSA - Seq valleys and peaks ( Fig . 2 B , red boxes ) are consistent with the micrometer - scale distances of nuclear speckles from the nuclear periphery and the previously observed ∼ 1 – 3 Mbp per micrometer compaction of large - scale chromatin fibers ( Hu et al . , 2009 ) . We predicted that the linear transitions between neighboring peaks and valleys seen in the SON TSA - Seq log2 scores correspond with linear chromosome trajectories that stretch from the nuclear pe - riphery to a nuclear speckle . To test that the TSA - Seq map can indeed predict both chro - mosome location and chromosome topology , we first selected a 4 - Mbp transition from SON TSA - Seq valley to peak for validation by immuno - FISH . Using two probes located near the LAD bound - ary ( probe 1 ) and mid - transition ( probe 3 ) , we observed 77 % of al - leles showing probe 1 ( red ) near the nuclear periphery and probe 2 ( yellow ) toward the interior , with 96 % of examples showing an obvious peripheral to interior orientation for probe 1 versus probe 3 ( Fig . S3 A ) . Using four probes ( red ) spanning from the LAD boundary to within 1 Mbp of the speckle peak , we observed curvilinear trajectories typically beginning near the periphery and pointing toward a nuclear speckle ( Fig . S3 B , green ) . Adding a fifth probe ( yellow ) located at the SON TSA - Seq peak showed that this trajectory terminates at the speckle periphery ( Fig . 6 A ) . Similar trajectories were observed for a second 3 - Mbp valley - to - peak transition ( Fig . 6 B ) . A probe set covering a complete 11 – 12 - Mbp valley - to - peak - to - valley SON TSA - Seq signal revealed U or V chromosome trajectories from the nuclear periphery to a speckle and back to the nuclear periphery ( Fig . 6 C ) . In each of these trajectories , the linear slopes seen in both the SON versus lamin TSA - Seq data appear highly inversely cor - related , consistent with TSA - Seq reporting distance from the target compartments . These linear slopes contrast with various readouts of transcription that vary significantly along these same trajectories ( Figs . 6 C and S3 C ) , indicating that any small fraction of SON protein associating with nascent transcripts must be too small to contribute significantly to the TSA - Seq signal , consistent with our previous demonstration of using the TSA signal expo - nential decay to accurately predict the mean speckle distance of chromosome regions ( Fig . 3 ) . Exceptionally deterministic positioning of specific chromosome regions at nuclear speckles The radial positioning of different chromosome regions is thought to be stochastic ( Takizawa et al . , 2008 ; Bickmore , 2013 ) . In contrast , using DNA FISH , we observed that ∼ 100 % of the al - leles from three different chromosome regions being probed , all belonging to the SON TSA - Seq top 5 % percentile , map within 500 nm to nuclear speckles ( Fig . 2 , D and E ) . This level of determin - istic positioning of a chromosome region relative to a defined nuclear compartment is exceptional . We thus define chromo - some regions with SON TSA - Seq scores in the top 5 % as speckle - associated domains ( SPADs ) , which have a calculated mean distance to nuclear speckles of < 0 . 32 µm ( Fig . 3 ) . Extrapolating from our FISH results , we predict most other SPADs would also map deterministically near nuclear speckles . Nuclear lamina and speckles as anchor points for chromosome nuclear positioning Single - cell FISH analysis reveals that SPADs are deterministi - cally localized near speckles but show large variability in nuclear lamina distance ( Fig . 7 A , probe C ) . Conversely , probes from SON TSA - Seq valleys ( lamin TSA - Seq peaks ) showed a high fraction of alleles positioned near the nuclear lamina but broad nuclear speckle distance distributions ( Fig . 7 B , probes Q and R ) . Probes neither close to lamina nor close to speckles have broad distribu - tions in both speckle and lamina distances , as observed in single cells by DNA FISH . The variable distances of SPADs to the lamina and LADs to speckles reflects the variable intranuclear spatial distribution of speckles . Thus , the nuclear lamina and speck - les act to “anchor” LADs and SPADs , respectively , with variable radial positioning of intermediate and speckle - associated se - quences . Instead , the linear nuclear lamina – speckle axis revealed by 2D scatter plots of lamina versus speckle TSA - Seq represents an ensemble average over the cell population . Variation in genomic and epigenomic features as a function of speckle and lamin TSA - Seq scores We next examined how genomic and epigenomic features dis - tribute with respect to relative distances from nuclear speckles respectively . ( B ) 2D TSA - Seq percentile scatter plots for ( left to right ) same target SON but two TSA labeling conditions , SON versus pSC35 , lamin A / C versus lamin B , lamin B versus SON , and RNA Pol II – Ser5p versus SON TSA ( 300 - kb bins ) . ( C ) Top : 3D SIM of RNA Pol II – Ser5p ( red ) versus H3K27me2 / 3 ( green ; left ) and RNA Pol II – Ser5p ( red ) relative to DAPI ( blue ; right ) . Middle : SON widefield image ( left ) superimposed on 3D SIM RNA Pol II – Ser5p ( red ) and DAPI ( blue ) images ( right ) . Bottom : 3D SIM DAPI ( blue ) versus H3K27me3 ( green ; left ) and both DAPI and H3K27me3 superimposed on a widefield SON image ( white ; right ) . Arrowheads point to nuclear speckles surrounded by RNA Pol II – Ser5p foci . ( D ) 5 - Ethynyl uridine 5 - min pulse label showing nascent RNA ( red ) versus DNA ( DAPI ) staining and SON immunofluorescence ( green ) . ( E ) Image ( top ) and aligned intensities ( bottom ) along line scan ( yellow ; top ) of RNA Pol II – Ser5p immunostaining ( green ) , TSA staining ( red ) , and DAPI ( blue ) . RNA Pol II – Ser5p TSA signal ( red ) is high over nuclear interior but lower near nuclear periphery ( and nucleoli ) . ( F ) 2D lamin B – SON TSA - Seq scatter plots showing distribution of Hi - C subcompartments ( 320 - kb bin size ) . Chen et al . TSA - Seq mapping of nuclear genome organization Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201807108 4034 Figure 6 . TSA - Seq predicts chromosome trajectories between the nuclear periphery and speckle . ( A ) Immuno - FISH against a 4 - Mbp trajectory connect - ing SON TSA - Seq valley and peak . Top left : SON and lamin B TSA - Seq genomic plot and FISH probe locations . Top right : Schematic of TSA - Seq signal versus chromosome trajectory . Bottom : Probes 1 – 4 ( red ) and probe 5 ( yellow ) FISH and DAPI ( blue ) . Bottom left : Boxed region over FISH nuclear signal . Bottom middle : Trajectory viewed in different channels and merged image ( top ) ; three additional examples ( bottom ) . Bottom right : Fifth example . ( B ) Immuno - FISH against 3 Mbp trajectory connecting SON TSA - Seq peak and valley . Top : TSA - Seq genomic plots and FISH probe locations . Bottom left : Probe 9 ( yellow ) and probes 10 – 12 ( red ) FISH and lamin B ( blue ) . Boxed region over FISH nuclear signal . Bottom right : Boxed region viewed in different channels ( top ) plus three additional examples ( bottom ) . ( C ) Immuno - FISH against ∼ 11 Mbp trajectory from SON TSA - Seq valley to peak to valley . Top left ( top to bottom ) : Probe locations and SON TSA - Seq , lamin B TSA - Seq , smoothed , normalized RNA Pol II ChIP - Seq , RNA - Seq , GRO - Seq ( 20 - kb bins ) , H3K36me3 ChIP , and Hi - C subcompartments . Right : Schematic of TSA - Seq signal versus chromosome trajectory . Bottom : Probes 1 – 4 ( red ) and probes 5 – 8 ( yellow ) FISH over lamin B ( blue ) staining . Bottom left : Boxed region over FISH nuclear signal . Bottom middle and right : different channels ( top and middle ) plus three additional examples . Bars , 1 µm . Chen et al . TSA - Seq mapping of nuclear genome organization Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201807108 4035 and lamin as estimated by TSA - Seq . We first calculated histo - grams showing segregation of different features as a function of SON TSA - Seq deciles with the 1st and 10th deciles correspond - ing with the 10 % lowest and highest scores , respectively ( Fig . 8 , A – C ; and Fig . S4 ) . We found a roughly binary division for heterochromatin - re - lated marks : LADs and H3K9me3 are enriched in low SON TSA - Seq deciles and depleted in high SON TSA - Seq deciles ; H3K27me3 , marking facultative heterochromatin , showed the inverse binary relationship ( Fig . 8 A ) . H4K20me1 , alternatively associated with silent ( Sims et al . , 2006 ) versus active chromatin ( Wang et al . , 2008 ) , also shows a binary pattern similar to H3K27me3 ( Fig . S4 C ) . In contrast , nearly all features associated with gene ex - pression showed a linear or steeper gradient spanning all SON TSA - Seq deciles ( Fig . 8 , B and C ; and Fig . S4 C ) . This includes en - hancers , with super - enhancers showing a noticeably steeper gra - dient than normal enhancers ( Fig . 8 D ) , indicating enrichment of super - enhancers at the speckle periphery . Gene expression and gene density , accompanied by decreased gene length , also show progressive increases with SON TSA - Seq decile ( Figs . 8 C and S4 , A and B ) . In Table S3 , we list all protein - coding genes with their corresponding SON TSA - Seq decile and expression levels in K562 cells . 2D scatterplots show that genes with higher expression levels typically show both higher SON and lower lamin TSA - Seq per - centiles ( Fig . 8 , E and F ; and Fig . S5 A ) , while genes with inter - mediate expression levels show broader distributions along this lamin – SON TSA - Seq axis ( Figs . 8 E and S5 A ) . The most highly expressed genes show a pronounced shift away from the nuclear lamina and toward nuclear speckles ( Fig . 8 , C and F ; and Fig . S5 A ) , with > 50 % of the top 5 % expressing genes mapping to the top SON TSA - Seq decile ( Fig . 8 C , right ) ; moreover , their distribu - tion is disproportionally skewed toward being closer to nuclear speckles as compared with furthest from the nuclear lamina , Figure 7 . Single - cell analysis reveals that genomic regions positioned deterministically near nuclear speckles or lamina show stochastic positioning rel - ative to the other compartment . ( A and B ) Although 2D lamin - SON TSA scatter plots show a tight inverse correlation , 3D immuno - FISH reveals that in single cells , cytological distances of a given locus from the nuclear speckle or lamina are not tightly correlated . ( A ) Top : DNA FISH probe location ( red ; arrowheads ) relative to nuclear speckles ( green ) and nuclear DNA staining ( blue , DAPI ) . Probes C ( left ; decile 10 ) , D ( mid - dle ; decile 9 ) , and H ( right ; decile 1 ; probes same as in Figs . 2 , 6 , and S2 ) are from a SON TSA - Seq peak , transition zone , and valley ( overlapping with a LAD ) , respectively ; deciles refer to SON TSA - Seq . Bottom : 2D scatter plots showing shortest distances in microme - ters from both the nearest nuclear speckle ( x axis ) and nuclear periphery ( y axis ) for probes C , D , and H measured for 100 alleles . Probe C shows a very tight distribution of distances ( ∼ 0 – 0 . 5 µm ) close to the nuclear speckle but a broad distribution of distances to the periphery . Instead , Probe H shows a relatively tight distribution of distances for most alleles from the nuclear periphery ( ∼ 0 – 0 . 8 µm ) but a broad distribu - tion of distances to nuclear speckles . Probe D shows distance distributions with an intermediate degree of scatter relative to both nuclear speckle and periphery . ( B ) 10 additional 2D scatter plots for probes I to R ( probes same as in Figs . 2 , 6 , and S2 ) . Chen et al . TSA - Seq mapping of nuclear genome organization Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201807108 4036 particularly for the SPADs ( Fig . 8 F , dashed line ) . Thus , a closer mean distance to speckles rather than a larger distance from the lamina better describes the spatial positioning of the most highly expressed genes . Similarly , DNA replication timing also distributes along this 2D linear speckle – lamin axis : The earliest replicating chromo - some regions cluster nearly uniformly toward lower lamin and higher SON TSA - Seq scores ( Figs . 8 G and S5 B ) , with only a slight Figure 8 . Gradients in transcription - related marks , gene expression , and DNA replication timing along the speckle – lamin TSA - Seq axis reflect ensemble averaging over cells and chromosome regions . ( A – D ) Gene expression and chromatin marks as functions of SON TSA - seq deciles . ( A ) H3K9me3 , H3K27me3 , and LAD fractions . ( B ) H3K4me3 ( peaks ) , H3K9ac , and CTCF ( peaks ) . ( C ) Protein - coding gene expression ( FPKM ; left ) , gene density ( middle ) , and percentage of top 5 % active genes ( right ) . Box plot ( left ) shows median ( black line ) , mean ( red diamond ) , 75 % ( box top ) , whiskers equal to 1 . 5× box size , and outliers ( black dots ) . ( D ) Super - enhancers versus enhancers ( percentage ) . ( E and F ) Lamin B versus SON TSA - Seq percentile 2D scatterplots ( projections at top and right ) . ( E ) Expressed ( red ) versus nonexpressed ( green ) protein - coding genes . ( F ) Top 5 % expressed genes ( blue ) versus remaining expressed protein - coding genes ( gray ) . Top 5 % expressed genes furthest from nuclear lamina ( right ; red box ) show disproportionate skewing toward speckles ( > 95 % SON TSA - Seq per - centile ; dashed line ) . ( G ) DNA replication timing ( 160 - kb bin size ) : earliest to latest ( red to blue ) . Red ellipse indicates slight skewing of early replicating regions toward higher SON TSA versus lower lamin B TSA percentiles . ( H ) Distributions of A1 ( left ) , A2 ( middle ) , and A1 plus A2 ( right ) active Hi - C subcompartments as a function of SON TSA - Seq deciles . Chen et al . TSA - Seq mapping of nuclear genome organization Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201807108 4037 skewing of earlier replicating regions toward disproportionally higher SON TSA - Seq percentiles and intermediate replicating regions toward lower lamin B TSA - Seq percentiles ( Figs . 8 G and S5 B , red ellipses ) . Notably , the observed linear gradient in transcription - related features and gene expression as a function of distance to nuclear speckles ( Fig . 8 , B – D ) represents an ensemble averag - ing over different and noncontiguous chromosome regions . For example , the observed linear gradient in transcription - related features and gene expression in the 1D SON TSA decile plots can be deconvolved as a superposition of the distributions of A1 - and A2 - active Hi - C subcompartment regions ( Fig . 8 H ) . A subset of transcriptionally active “zones” map close to nuclear speckles Further comparison of SON TSA - Seq with transcription - related features and gene expression in the context of chromosome neighborhoods reveals two types of transcription hot zones ( Fig . 9 A ) . We define transcription hot zones as Mbp - sized re - gions with high RNA pol II occupancy , transcription - related marks , and gene expression , where pol II occupancy is measured by a smoothed and normalized RNA pol II ChIP - Seq signal ( gener - ated using the 8WG16 antibody recognizing total RNA pol II ; see Materials and methods ) , and transcription and gene expression are measured by global run - on sequencing ( GRO - Seq ) , RNA - Seq , and H3K36me3 ChIP - Seq . These transcription hot zones are also high in gene density . Strikingly , each SON TSA - Seq local maxi - mum localizes near the center of each of the transcription hot zones , defined computationally using the local maxima of the smoothed RNA pol II ChIP - Seq signal ( Fig . 9 A , red tick marks ) . We define these SON TSA - Seq local maxima as the transcription hot zone “peaks . ” Transcription hot zone peaks show a noticeably larger vari - ation in the magnitude of the SON TSA - Seq peak value than the variation in magnitude seen for peaks of either the RNA pol II ChIP - Seq or RNA pol II – Ser5p TSA - Seq . The centers of tran - scription hot zones containing the largest SON TSA - Seq peaks appeared to map to A1 Hi - C subcompartments ( Fig . 9 A , red ar - rows ) , while the centers of transcription hot zones containing smaller SON TSA - Seq local maxima appeared to map to A2 Hi - C subcompartments . We created a histogram of SON TSA - Seq peak amplitudes using percentile values at the centers of these transcription hot zones ( Fig . 9 B ) . The observed bimodal distribution suggests the existence of two classes of transcription hot zones : Type I con - tains large SON TSA - Seq peaks centered over A1 Hi - C subcom - partment regions , which are typically flanked by a subclass of A2 Hi - C subcompartment regions ( Fig . 9 A , red arrows ) . Type II contains smaller SON TSA - Seq peaks and peaks within val - leys centered over A2 Hi - C subcompartment regions , which are flanked on both sides by repressive Hi - C subcompartment re - gions ( Fig . 9 A , yellow arrows ) . Topologically , the SON TSA - Seq local maxima correspond with the most interiorly located regions of a local chromosome trajectory as speckle and lamin TSA - Seq scores are inversely correlated ( Figs . 4 and 5 ) . Mean genomic distances between the peaks of transcription hot zones and their nearest LAD are larger for type I versus type II transcription hot zones ( Fig . 9 C ) . These distance distributions suggest a degree of genomic hard wiring of these two types of transcription hot zones contained within simple inter - LADs ( Fig . 9 D ) : type I transcription hot zones span A1 subcompartment regions and extend into flanking A2 sub - compartment regions , are longer in length , protrude further into the nuclear interior , and have apexes predicted by their large SON TSA - Seq peak scores to localize adjacent to nuclear speckles ( mean apex distance to speckle , 0 . 36 µm ) . All transcription hot zones in SPADs are type I , but ∼ 60 % of type I hot zones lie out - side of SPADs as their SON TSA - Seq percentile is < 95 % . Type II transcription hot zones span single A2 chromatin domains , are shorter in length , protrude smaller distances into the nuclear interior , and have apexes predicted by their smaller SON TSA - Seq peak scores to localize at intermediate distances to nuclear speckles ( mean apex distance to speckle , 0 . 59 µm ) . Transcription hot zones near nuclear speckles have higher overall gene density , a significantly higher number of the most highly expressed genes , and are enriched in housekeeping genes and genes with low transcriptional pausing Besides their different spatial localization relative to the nuclear lamina and speckles , what other differences might distinguish these two types of transcription hot zones ? We plotted the aver - age gene density as a function of genomic distance from peaks of transcription hot zones ( Fig . 10 A ) . Total gene densities and the top 10 % expressed gene densities are ∼ 2 – 2 . 5 - fold higher in type I versus type II transcription hot zones . Both types of transcription hot zones have approximately twofold higher densities of the top 10 % expressed genes within 100 kb versus > 200 kb of their peak locations . Whereas type I transcription hot zones also show total gene density and the density of moderately expressed genes peaking near their centers , type II transcription hot zones have near constant total gene and moderately expressed gene densi - ties over the 500 - kb regions flanking their peaks . These results indicate that transcription hot zones near nuclear speckles have higher overall gene density and a significantly higher number of the most highly expressed genes . We did not discover any Gene Ontology terms special for genes near nuclear speckles ( unpublished data ) . However , we did see a significant enrichment of genes with low RNA pol II paus - ing index for speckle - associated type I transcription hot zones within 100 kb of their peaks ( Fig . 10 B ) . We also see a relative en - richment of housekeeping versus nonhousekeeping genes close to nuclear speckles ( Fig . 10 C ) . Discussion In this study , we present TSA - Seq , the first genome - wide method capable of directly and quantitatively estimating mean cytologi - cal distances from particular nuclear subcompartments . TSA - Seq fundamentally differs from molecular proximity methods such as ChIP - Seq and DamID , which report only on the small fraction of the target protein in close proximity to DNA but are relatively insensi - tive to much larger concentrations of the same target protein that are not in direct molecular contact distance of the DNA . TSA - Seq instead converts an exponential decay of tyramide free radicals Chen et al . TSA - Seq mapping of nuclear genome organization Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201807108 4038 into a cytological “ruler” that , depending on the staining condi - tion , can be used to probe relative distances over an ∼ 0 . 5 – 1 . 5 - µm radius from discretely labeled nuclear compartments separated by distances on this scale . In the case of nuclear speckle TSA staining , we demonstrated the capability of converting TSA - Seq scores into actual mean distances with an estimated accuracy of < 100 nm . Using DNA labeling as our TSA readout was likely key to our success in accurately measuring cytological distance in our im - plementation of TSA - Seq because the reactivity of DNA to tyr - amide free radicals was near uniform . Previous applications of TSA to genomic analysis used chromatin rather than DNA pull - down ( Carter et al . , 2002 ; Ching et al . , 2013 ) . Using RNA TRAP , peaks of high TSA reactivity near the β - globin locus control re - gion measured ∼ 10 kb in width ( Carter et al . , 2002 ) . This com - pares with the several - hundred - kb minimal peak width that we observed in this study using SON TSA - Seq . It is difficult to ex - plain this narrow peak of RNA TRAP labeling given the > 500 - nm radius of TSA labeling described in this same RNA TRAP study versus the high compaction of chromatin generally observed within mammalian somatic nuclei . Instead , we suspect these narrow peaks might reflect variations in TSA reactivity based on the special nonhistone chromatin composition over these Figure 9 . Two types of transcription hot zones align with SON TSA - Seq local maxima . ( A ) Peaks of approximate Mbp transcription hot zones marked by smoothed RNA Pol II ChIP - Seq maxima align with SON TSA - Seq maxima ( red tick marks ) . Top to bottom ( Chr2 ) : SON TSA - Seq , Hi - C subcompartments , smoothed , normalized RNA Pol II ChIP - Seq , GRO - Seq ( 20 - kb bins ) , RNA - Seq , H3K36me3 , RNA Pol II – Ser5p TSA - Seq , Hi - C eigenvector ( compartment ) , Repli - Seq , LADs , and RefSeq gene annotations . Arrows showing SON TSA - Seq local maxima align with type I ( red ) versus type II ( yellow ) transcription hot zones . ( B ) Bimodal distribution of SON TSA - Seq local maxima number ( y axis ) color coded by A1 ( dark green ) versus A2 ( light green ) Hi - C subcompartment identity versus SON TSA - Seq percentile ( x axis ) . ( C ) Box plots of genomic distances between SON TSA - Seq local maxima and nearest LAD / inter - LAD boundary for A1 ( red ) versus A2 ( blue ) SON TSA - Seq peaks . ( D ) Two types of transcription hot zones : Type I , whose apexes map adjacent to nuclear speckles , and type II , whose apexes map to intermediate distances from nuclear speckles . Chen et al . TSA - Seq mapping of nuclear genome organization Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201807108 4039 regulatory regions , which were not measured in these previ - ous experiments . Previous low - throughput FISH research has led to a model in which a gradient of increasing gene expression potential ex - tends from the nuclear periphery to nuclear center ( Fig . 10 D ; Bickmore , 2013 ) . However , intranuclear spatial positioning of specific genes appeared to be highly stochastic . We propose that previous descriptions of stochastic positioning of chromosome regions as a function of gene expression relative to a nuclear pe - riphery to center axis ( Fig . 10 D ) conceal a more deterministic positioning of different genomic regions relative to specific nu - clear compartments ( Fig . 10 E ) . One such compartment is the nu - clear periphery ( van Steensel and Belmont , 2017 ) . In this study , we show that nuclear speckles act as a second anchor to organize interphase chromosomal organization . Indeed , other previous cytological research has suggested that nuclear speckles act as a hub for a subset of active genes and chromosome regions . This included early observations of enrich - ment of highly acetylated histone H3 , the TAF250 HAT , and sites of bromouridine incorporation at the periphery of nuclear speckles ( Hendzel et al . , 1998 ) . More specifically , this also included the mapping in other cell lines of roughly half of the ∼ 25 active genes examined to the periphery of nuclear speckles ( Hall et al . , 2006 ) as well as the mapping of several gene - rich chromosome bands near speckles ( Shopland et al . , 2003 ) . Our SON TSA - Seq results in K562 cells show these same gene - rich chromosome bands ( 17q22 - 24 , 17q21 , 6p21 , and 19q13 . 3 ) in regions with high SON TSA - Seq scores . However , our genome - wide analysis and distance mapping in K562 cells made possible by our TSA - Seq data now has allowed us to build substantially on these earlier findings to propose a refined model of nuclear organization ( Fig . 10 E ) : inter - LADs vary in how far they protrude into the nuclear interior , with centers of transcriptional hot zones enriched in the most highly expressed genes mapping to the most interior location of an in - ter - LAD chromosome trajectory . These transcription hot zones were divided into two types . Type I transcription hot zones , Figure 10 . Differences between type I and II transcription hot zones and a refined model for nuclear organization . ( A ) Left to right : Density ( y axis ; gene number ) of total genes , top 10 % expressed genes , genes with 40 – 60 % expression levels , and genes with 10 % lowest expression as function of genomic distance ( x axis ; kb ) from centers of type I ( red ) versus type II ( blue ) transcription hot zones . ( B ) Pausing index distribution for expressed genes within ±100 kb of SON TSA - Seq local maxima contained within type I ( A1 peaks ) versus type II ( A2 peaks ) hot zones . ( C ) Percentage ( y axis ) of housekeeping versus nonhouse - keeping genes versus SON TSA - Seq deciles for all genes ( left ) , genes only in A1 subcompartment regions near speckles ( middle ) , or only in A2 subcompartment regions ( right ) . ( D ) Previous model : Transcriptional activity increases radially from low near the nuclear periphery to high toward the nuclear center . ( E ) New , refined model : Transcriptionally active chromosome regions are depleted from heterochromatic compartments close to the nuclear and nucleolar periphery ( black ) . Apexes of chromosome trajectories protruding into the nuclear interior correspond with centers of transcription hot zones , which localize either at the periphery ( red rings ) of nuclear speckles ( gray ; type I ) or at interior sites at intermediate distances from speckles , possibly near unknown compartments such as transcription factories ( type II ) . A second repressive compartment enriched in H3K27me3 ( green dots ) maps throughout the nuclear interior , dispersed between RNA Pol II – Ser5p foci and speckles . Large - scale chromatin fibers ( gray curves ) traverse between these compartments . Chen et al . TSA - Seq mapping of nuclear genome organization Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201807108 4040 mapping very close to nuclear speckles , correspond with the A1 Hi - C subcompartment , have approximately twofold higher gene densities , and are enriched in super - enhancers , the most highly expressed genes , and genes with low transcriptional pausing . In - terestingly , factors involved in RNA pol II pause release ( pTEFb and cdk12 ) are enriched in nuclear speckles ( Herrmann and Mancini , 2001 ; Ko et al . , 2001 ; Dow et al . , 2010 ) . In contrast , type II transcription hot zones , mapping to A2 Hi - C subcompartments , still correspond with the apexes , or most interior locations , of the inter - LAD loops protruding into the nuclear interior , but they are located at intermediate distances from nuclear speckles . SPADs , defined as the fraction ( ∼ 5 % ) of the genome that as - sociate close to nuclear speckles with near 100 % probability , were estimated as having a mean distance to speckle periphery of < 0 . 32 µm . Thus , these SPADs may serve to anchor the most active genomic regions to nuclear speckles , similar to how LADs appear to anchor inactive genomic regions to the nuclear lamina . Both gene expression and timing of DNA replication align along a nuclear speckle – lamina axis , which we show represents an ensemble average over different cells as well as different types of noncontiguous chromosome trajectories . Our model describes several spatially distinct nuclear compartments : ( a ) a thin rim ad - jacent to the nuclear periphery and relatively depleted of RNA pol II and transcription and enriched in LAD regions , likely also local - izing at the periphery of nucleoli and centromeres ( van Steensel and Belmont , 2017 ) that were not directly probed in this study ; ( b ) interior regions enriched in A2 Hi - C active subcompartments ; ( c ) intermingled regions enriched in polycomb - silenced regions corresponding with the B1 Hi - C active subcompartment ; and ( d ) the periphery of nuclear speckles where A1 , type I transcription hot zones terminate ( Fig . 10 E ) . Our TSA - Seq results in fact assign the differential localization of the Hi - C active A1 and A2 subcom - partments to speckle - associated versus interior nuclear locations . The logic of this nuclear organization remains to be deter - mined . Our model would suggest , however , that chromosome movements of just several hundred nm during cell differentia - tion or during a cell physiological response might have signif - icant functional significance . For example , a movement of just several hundred nm from the nuclear periphery toward the nu - clear interior to sites enriched in RNA pol II foci might be needed to significantly boost the transcription of a gene contained within a repressive chromatin domain . Similarly , a movement of just a few hundred nm from the nuclear interior to adjacent to a nuclear speckle might produce either a significant transcrip - tional enhancement and / or an enhancement of post - transcrip - tional processing and / or nuclear export leading to increased gene expression . Indeed , while nuclear speckles contain transcrip - tion - related factors , they also contain a larger number of factors involved in different stages of RNA processing and factors related to nuclear export . Thus , any possible changes in gene expression linked to nuclear speckle proximity might result from changes in either transcription and / or post - transcriptional events . Further analysis to more fully exploit TSA - Seq distance map - ping should provide further insights . So far , our analysis has fo - cused on results from a single cell line : K562 cells . One significant technical limitation of TSA - Seq as currently implemented using DNA labeling as the readout is the requirement for hundreds of millions of cells . This is primarily due to the low efficiency of TSA labeling of DNA . However , based on preliminary data , we antici - pate future improvements in the TSA - Seq protocol to reduce sub - stantially the number of cells required for the procedure , thereby greatly facilitating future TSA - Seq data acquisition . Additional insights should then come from extension of TSA - Seq to addi - tional cell types and additional nuclear compartments as well as examination of changes in nuclear organization accompanying developmental and cell physiological transitions . Materials and methods TSA - Seq TSA cell labeling K562 cells were obtained from the ATCC and cultured according to ENC ODE Consortium recommendations ( http : / / genome . ucsc . edu / ENC ODE / protocols / cell / human / K562 _ protocol . pdf ) . SON TSA labeling was done in independent cell batches . For each batch , cells were divided equally and stained according to four labeling protocols : condition 1 , condition 2 , condition 3 , and No 1° control . Identical staining conditions were used except that 50 % sucrose was included in the TSA staining buffer for the con - dition 2 protocol , 0 . 75 mM DTT in addition to 50 % sucrose was added in the TSA staining buffer for the condition 3 protocol , and the anti - SON primary antibody was omitted for the No 1° control protocol . Conditions , cell numbers , and yield for all SON , pSC35 , lamin A / C , and lamin B TSA - Seq experiments are sum - marized in Table S1 . Cells were fixed by adding 10 ml of 8 % paraformaldehyde ( Sigma - Aldrich ) freshly prepared in calcium and magnesium – free ( CMF ) - PBS to 40 ml cells in culture media , incubating for 20 min at RT , and quenching aldehydes by addition of 5 . 6 ml of 1 . 25 M glycine ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) and incubation for 5 min at RT . All incubation steps used a rotating platform to mix the cell suspension . Cells were then pelleted by centrifugation and resuspended in CMF - PBS buffer with 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) for 30 min at RT . All centrifugations were for 5 min at 100 – 200 g . Cells were centrifuged at RT and resuspended in 1 . 5 % H 2 O 2 ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) in CMF - PBS for 1 h at RT to quench endogenous peroxidases , followed by three washes at RT in PBST ( 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 / CMF - PBS ) by repeated centrifu - gation and cell pellet resuspension . Cells were resuspended in IgG blocking buffer ( 5 % normal goat serum [ Sigma - Aldrich ] in PBST ) at a concentration of 10 7 cells / ml for 1 h , followed by centrifugation and resuspension in primary antibody solution ( rabbit anti - SON primary antibodies [ Ab1 ; HPA023535 ; Atlas Antibodies ) diluted 1 : 1 , 000 or 1 : 2 , 000 in IgG blocking buffer , rabbit polyclonal anti - SON primary an - tibodies [ Ab2 ] diluted 1 : 2 , 000 in IgG blocking buffer , mouse antiphosphorylated SC35 primary antibodies [ S4045 ; Sigma - Al - drich ] diluted 1 : 500 in IgG blocking buffer , mouse monoclonal anti – lamin A / C primary antibody [ clone 5G4 ] diluted 1 : 1 , 000 in IgG blocking buffer , or mouse monoclonal anti – lamin B primary antibodies [ clone 2D8 ] diluted 1 : 1 , 000 in IgG blocking buffer ) at 10 7 cells / ml , or mouse monoclonal anti - RNA polymerase II pri - mary antibodies ( clone 4H8 ; 05 - 623 ; EMD Millipore ) diluted 1 : 300 in IgG blocking buffer at 0 . 5 × 10 7 cells / ml and incubated Chen et al . TSA - Seq mapping of nuclear genome organization Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201807108 4041 20 – 24 h at 4°C . For the no - primary control , cells were incubated in IgG blocking buffer only . Cells were then washed 3× with PBST , resuspended in IgG blocking buffer with secondary antibodies at 10 7 cells / ml , and incubated 20 – 24 h at 4°C . Secondary anti - bodies ( Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories , Inc . ) used were HRP conjugated and either goat anti - rabbit secondary antibody diluted 1 : 1 , 000 or HRP - conjugated goat anti - mouse secondary antibody diluted 1 : 200 or 1 : 1 , 000 . Cells then were washed 3× in PBST and resuspended in reaction buffer A ( CMF - PBS for condition 1 , CMF - PBS with 50 % sucrose for condition 2 , or CMF - PBS with 50 % sucrose and 1 . 5 mM DTT for condition 3 ) at 2 × 10 7 cells / ml . Equal vol - umes of buffer B ( 8 mM tyramide - biotin stock solution diluted 1 : 5 , 000 with 0 . 003 % H 2 O 2 in CMF - PBS for condition 1 or CMF - PBS with 50 % sucrose for conditions 2 and 3 ) were then added . Cells were incubated for 10 min and then washed 3× in PBST at RT . Tyramide - biotin was prepared using tyramide hydrochlo - ride ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , EZ - link Sulfo - NHS - LC - biotin ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) , dimethyl formamide ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , and triethylamine ( Sigma - Aldrich ) as previously described ( Hopman et al . , 1998 ) . Monitoring TSA labeling by antibiotin immunostaining After each TSA labeling batch , one drop of the cell suspension was placed on a glass coverslip , air dried , and fixed with 1 . 6 % paraformaldehyde in CMF - PBS at RT for 15 min . After washing in PBST 3 × 5 min , coverslips were incubated 30 min at RT with streptavidin – Alexa Fluor 594 ( Invitrogen ) diluted 1 : 200 in CMF - PBS , washed 3 × 5 min at RT in PBST , and mounted in antifade media ( 0 . 3 µg / ml DAPI [ Sigma - Aldrich ] / 10 % wt / vol Mowiol 4 – 88 [ EMD Millipore ] / 1 % wt / vol DAB CO [ Sigma - Aldrich ] / 25 % glyc - erol / 0 . 1 M Tris , pH 8 . 5 ) . DNA isolation from labeled cells Cell lysis and protease digestion were done at 55°C with constant mixing in 10 mM Tris , 10 mM EDTA , 0 . 5 % SDS , and 500 µg / ml proteinase K ( NEB ) for 8 – 12 h ( 10 7 cells / ml ) . NaCl was added for a final 0 . 2 M concentration , and the lysate was incubated 20 – 24 h at 65°C with constant mixing to reverse formaldehyde cross - linking . DNA was extracted 2× using an equal volume of phenol ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) / chloroform / isoamyl alcohol ( 25 : 24 : 1 ) and 1× with an equal volume of chloroform / isoamyl al - cohol ( 24 : 1 ) . Tubes were kept at 55°C for 1 h with the cap off to evaporate phenol residues , and then they were treated with 25 µg / ml RNaseA ( QIA GEN ) at 37°C for 1 h and extracted again . DNA was then precipitated with 1 : 10 volume of 3 M Na acetate , pH 5 . 2 , and two volumes of 100 % EtOH at −20°C for 20 – 120 min . DNA fragmentation DNA was dissolved in double - distilled H 2 0 and sonicated to 200 – 800 bp with the majority of the fragments at ∼ 500 bp using a Branson 450 digital sonifier ( with Model 102 converter and mi - crotip ) or a Bioruptor ( UCD - 200 or Pico ) . For the Branson soni - fier , each sonication was done twice with 250 µl volume in 1 . 5 ml Eppendorf tubes on ice for 20 s ( 1 - s chase , 1 - s pulse , and total of 40 s ) . For the Bioruptor , sonication was done with 30 s on and 30 s off , but the number of cycles varied from tube to tube . Monitoring biotin labeling of DNA by dot blot DNA was spotted onto nitrocellulose membrane ( 0 . 45 µm ; Bio - Rad Laboratories ) and UV cross - linked to the membrane ( 0 . 24 J ; UV Stratalinker 1800 ; Agilent Technologies ) . The membrane then was blocked in SuperBlock ( TBS ) blocking buffer ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) with 0 . 05 % Tween - 20 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) for 1 h , incubated 12 – 16 h at 4°C with streptavidin - HRP ( Invitrogen ) diluted 1 : 2 , 500 in the same blocking buffer , washed at RT with TBST ( TBS / 0 . 05 % Tween - 20 ) , treated with SuperSignal West Pico chemiluminescent substrate ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) , and exposed with CL - XPosure film ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) . For TSA labeling with a specific antibody , we estimate biotin la - beling of ∼ 0 . 0004 – 0 . 03 biotin per 10 kb depending on the target and TSA condition ; based on an average DNA fragment size of ∼ 500 bp , this produced ∼ 0 . 002 – 0 . 15 % of fragments labeled with biotin , assuming one biotin per fragment . Affinity purification of biotinylated DNA The low level of biotin labeling achieved by the TSA labeling conditions used in this study meant that we needed very large cell numbers ( approximately hundreds of millions depending on staining condition ) to recover sufficient biotinylated DNA for library construction . Therefore , we performed the TSA staining in multiple batches of cells . DNA derived from TSA staining batches that produced satisfactory TSA labeling , as verified by microscopy and dot blot analysis , was pooled for affinity purifi - cation . The required ratio of DNA and Dynabeads M - 270 strepta - vidin ( Invitrogen ) was estimated from the anti - biotin dot blot results and the known binding capacity of the beads . Beads were washed 3× in wash and binding ( W & B ) buffer ( 5 mM Tris - Cl , pH 7 . 5 , 0 . 5 mM EDTA , and 1 M NaCl ) using a magnetic stand . 10 % input DNA was set aside . The remaining DNA was mixed with an equal volume of 2× W & B buffer . In the initial protocol , DNA sam - ples in 4× beads’ original volume were mixed with the beads and nutated at RT for 0 . 5 h . The beads were immobilized in a magnet , the solution was removed , and an additional 4× original bead volume of DNA in W & B buffer was added . This was repeated until all DNA from each staining condition had been bound to the beads . The last incubation was extended for 8 h at 4°C . Beads then were washed for 4 min at RT 4× with 1× W & B buffer , 4× with TSE 500 ( 20 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 0 . 1 % SDS , 2 mM EDTA , and 500 mM NaCl ) , 4× with 1× W & B buffer , and 4× with TE buffer ( 10 mM Tris and 10 mM EDTA , pH 8 . 0 ) . In a later modified protocol , DNA samples were mixed with the desired amount of beads all at once regardless of the volume of DNA solution , and the mixture was incubated with rotation at RT for 1 h and then 4°C for 8 h . Beads then were washed five times . For each wash , beads were first resuspended in 1 ml 1× W & B buf - fer with Triton X - 100 added at 0 . 05 % final concentration , then were incubated at 55°C on heat block for 2 min , and then were nutated at 55°C for 2 min . Beads were transferred to a new tube after each wash . After the final wash , beads were resuspended in 10 mM Tris , 10 mM EDTA , 0 . 5 % SDS , and 1 mg / ml proteinase K at 600 µl per 100 µl original bead volume . Free biotin was added using 30 µl of a 2 - mM stock solution per 100 µl original bead volume , and beads were digested overnight at 55°C with rotation . DNA was Chen et al . TSA - Seq mapping of nuclear genome organization Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201807108 4042 then extracted using phenol / chloroform as described in the DNA isolation from labeled cells section and was precipitated using 0 . 05 µg / µl glycogen ( Fermentas ) as a carrier with 1 : 10 volume of Na acetate and two volumes of 100 % EtOH for 12 – 16 h at −20°C . Library preparation and high - throughput DNA sequencing For each of the TSA - Seq experiment staining conditions , input and streptavidin - pulldown DNA were used to make sequencing libraries using the Kapa Hyper Prep kit ( Kapa Biosystems ) . DNA was blunt ended , 3′ - end A tailed , and ligated to indexed adap - tors with 6 - nt barcodes . PCR amplification selectively enriched for those fragments with adaptors on both ends . Amplification was performed for 8 – 16 cycles with HiFi polymerase ( Kapa Biosystems ) . A Bioanalyzer DNA high - sensitivity chip ( Agilent Technologies ) was used to determine library fragment sizes . Li - brary fragment concentrations were measured by quantitative PCR on a CFX Connect Real - Time System ( Bio - Rad Laboratories ) before pooling and sequencing . Libraries were pooled at equim - olar concentration and sequenced for 101 cycles on an Illumina HiSeq 2000 , HiSeq 2500 , or HiSeq 4000 using a HiSeq Sequenc - ing - By - Synthesis kit , version 4 . The raw BCL files were converted into demultiplexed compressed fastq files using the bcl2fastq v1 . 8 . 2 and later v2 . 17 . 1 . 14 conversion software ( Illumina ) . 27 – 81 million 100 - nt reads were obtained for each sample with aver - age quality scores > 30 . Library preparation and sequencing were done by the High - Throughput Sequencing and Genotyping Unit of the Roy J . Carver Biotechnology Center at University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign ( UIUC ) . Lamin B1 DamID DamID of lamin B1 was performed in K562 cells as described ( Vogel et al . , 2007 ; Meuleman et al . , 2013 ) except that before the DpnI digestion , 1 . 5 µg genomic DNA was treated for 1 h with 5 U Antarctic phosphatase ( M0289S ; NEB ) in 20 µl 1× Antarctic phos - phatase reaction buffer ( NEB ) followed by ethanol precipitation . This additional step prevents ligation of the adaptor to DNA frag - ments originating from apoptotic cells . Samples from two inde - pendent biological replicates were hybridized to human genome tiling microarrays ( Nimblegen HD2 ) that contained 2 . 1 million probes designed as previously reported ( Meuleman et al . , 2013 ) . 3D immuno - FISH FISH probes were made from BACs ( Invitrogen ; See Table S2 for BAC list ) . Probes were labeled with biotin or digoxigenin ( Dig ) using nick translation ( BioNick kit ; Invitrogen ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions , with a minor change for Dig labeling in which the kit’s 10× dNTP mix was replaced by 0 . 125 mM Dig - 11 - dUTP ( Roche ) , 0 . 375 mM dTTP ( NEB ) , 0 . 5 mM dATP ( NEB ) , 0 . 5 mM dCTP ( NEB ) , 0 . 5 mM dGTP ( NEB ) , 500 mM Tris - HCl , pH 8 . 0 , 50 mM MgCl 2 , and 500 µg / ml BSA ( NEB ) . Alternatively , DNA was end labeled using terminal transferase as described elsewhere ( Dernburg , 2011 ) with the following reagents : ter - minal transferase and 5× buffer ( Fermentas ) , dATP ( NEB ) , and biotin - 14 - dATP ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) for biotin labeling or dTTP ( NEB ) and Dig - 11 - dUTP ( Roche ) for Dig labeling . Concentra - tions of labeled and unlabeled nucleotides were 54 and 108 µM , respectively , for a 25 - µl reaction with 2 µg fragmented DNA . K562 cells were plated on poly - L - lysine ( 70 , 000 – 150 , 000 molecular weight ; Sigma - Aldrich ) – coated Circes # 1 . 5 glass cov - erslips ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) in a 24 - well plate at 0 . 3 ml per well and 10 5 – 6 × 10 5 cells / ml in RPMI culture media plus 10 % FBS ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . Cells attached after 15 min at 37°C in a humid - ified incubator with 5 % CO 2 . Cells were then permeabilized in 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 in CMF - PBS for 1 min at RT , fixed with freshly prepared 3 . 6 % paraformaldehyde ( Sigma - Aldrich ) in CMF - PBS for 10 min at RT , and quenched with 0 . 5 M glycine ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) in CMF - PBS for 5 min at RT . Our 3D immuno - FISH was modified from that previously de - scribed ( Solovei and Cremer , 2010 ) . For anti - SON and anti – lamin B immunostaining , cells were blocked in IgG blocking buffer for 1 h at RT , incubated with rabbit anti - SON antibodies diluted 1 : 1 , 000 with or without mouse anti – lamin B antibodies diluted 1 : 250 in IgG blocking buffer overnight at 4°C , washed with PBST 3 × 5 min at RT , incubated for 1 h at RT with FITC - labeled second - ary goat anti - rabbit IgG ( Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories , Inc . ) , which was diluted 1 : 500 with or without aminomethyl - coumarin - labeled secondary goat anti - mouse IgG ( Jackson Im - munoResearch Laboratories , Inc . ) that was diluted 1 : 50 in IgG blocking buffer , and washed 3 × 5 min with PBST at RT . Cells were then post - fixed with 3 % paraformaldehyde in CMF - PBS for 10 min at RT , quenched with 0 . 5 M glycine in PBS for 5 min at RT , and washed with PBST for 5 min at RT . Coverslips were incubated in 20 % glycerol in CMF - PBS for 30 – 60 min at RT , frozen , and thawed 6× using liquid nitrogen , washed 3 × 5 min with PBST , rinsed and incubated on ice with 0 . 1 M HCl / 0 . 7 % Triton X - 100 / 2× saline - sodium citrate ( SSC ) for 10 min , and then washed 3 × 5 min with 2× SSC . FISH probes ( 100 ng for probes made by nick translation and 20 ng for probes made using terminal transferase ) in 4 µl hybridization buffer ( 10 % dex - tran sulfate , 50 % formamide , and 2× SSC ) were then added to coverslips and sealed onto glass slides with rubber cement . Sam - ples were denatured on a hot plate at 76°C for 3 min and then hybridized 18 – 72 h in a humid chamber at 37°C . Coverslips then were washed at 70°C in 0 . 4× SSC for 2 min and at RT in 4× SSC for 5 min . Alternatively , they were washed at 37°C for 3 × 5 min in 2× SSC and then at 60°C for 3 × 5 min in 0 . 1× SSC and at RT in 4× SSC for 5 min . The biotin and Dig signals were detected by incubation for 40 – 120 min at RT in a humidified chamber with streptavidin – Alexa Fluor 594 diluted 1 : 200 and / or mouse anti - Dig – Alexa Fluor 647 ( Jackson ImmunoResearch Lab - oratories , Inc . ) diluted 1 : 100 in 4× SSC with 4 % BSA ( Sigma - Al - drich ) . Coverslips were washed in 4× SSC / 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 3 × 5min and mounted in DAPI - containing antifade mounting media . Microscopy 3D optical - section images were taken with 0 . 2 - µm z steps using an Applied Precision personal DeltaVision microscope system and DeltaVision SoftWoRx software ( GE Healthcare ) with a 60× , 1 . 4 NA objective lens and a CoolSNAP HQ2 charge - coupled device camera . Images were deconvolved using an enhanced - ratio itera - tive constrained algorithm ( Agard et al . , 1989 ) within SoftWoRx . For immuno - FISH images , 3D distances were measured from the center of each FISH spot to the edge of its nearest nuclear speckle using the Standard Two - Point Measure tool in SoftWoRx . 3D sur - Chen et al . TSA - Seq mapping of nuclear genome organization Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201807108 4043 face plots were generated using FIJI software ( ImageJ ; National Institutes of Health ; Schindelin et al . , 2012 ) with the Spectrum lookup table . All figure panel images were prepared using FIJI and Photoshop CS6 ( Adobe ) . Image enlargement used bicubic interpolation in Photoshop CS6 . Exponential fitting of microscopy and TSA - Seq data For microscopy images , the green - and red - channel pixel inten - sities along a line were exported using the line profiling function in FIJI software and plotted against distance using OriginPro 9 . 1 ( OriginLab ) . We used OriginPro 9 . 1 to fit the TSA signal to the equation y = y 0 + A * exp ( R 0 * x ) , where y is the TSA signal in - tensity , and x the distance to the intensity peak location , using the iterative Levenberg Marquardt algorithm . All fitting results have adjusted R square > 0 . 87 . OriginPro 9 . 1 was also used to fit the TSA - Seq genomic data using the same equation and settings as used for the microscopy images . In this case , y is the TSA en - richment ratio between pulldown and input , and x is the mean speckle distance measured from 100 alleles by 3D immuno - FISH . Eight FISH probes ( probes A – H ) were used to do the fitting , while 10 additional probes ( probes I – R ) were used to test the goodness of the fit . All fitting results have adjusted R square > 0 . 97 . Read mapping and processing Raw sequencing reads were first mapped to the human ge - nome ( UCSC hg19 ) using Bowtie 2 ( version 2 . 0 . 2 ; Langmead and Salzberg , 2012 ) with default parameters . Chromosome Y was excluded in the reference genome to reduce mapping bias since the K562 cell line was derived from a female . PCR duplicate reads were removed using rmdup command from SAMtools ( version 0 . 1 . 19 ; Li et al . , 2009 ) with default parameters . We then normalized and processed the TSA - Seq data using a sliding window approach as follows . First , the normalized TSA - Seq enrichment score was calculated as in Eq . 1 , where N TSA is the number of mapped reads in a 20 - kb window in the pulldown sample , and T TSA is the total number of mapped reads of pull - down sample ( N input and T input are defined similarly for input data ) . This approach can be interpreted as the fold change be - tween the pulldown sample and the input corrected by the total number of mapped reads in each sample . The window slides on the genome with a step size of 100 bp . TSA - Seq enrichment score = log 2 ( N TSA / T TSA _ N input / T input ) ( 1 ) SON TSA - Seq correlations with other genomic features We partitioned the genome into nonoverlapping 20 - kb bins , av - eraging the TSA - Seq score ( Eq . 1 ) over the 100 - bp intervals within this bin for the new TSA - Seq 20 - kb score . The values for these 20 - kb bins were then smoothed by convolution using a Hanning window of length 21 ( 21 × 20 kb or 420 kb ) . This new smoothed TSA - Seq score with 20 - kb sampling was used for SON TSA - Seq decile calculations and comparisons with other genome features . Various functional genomic datasets available for K562 cells were downloaded from the ENC ODE project portal ( https : / / www . encodeproject . org / ; Table S4 ) . For gene expression analysis , we used mRNA fragments per kilobase of transcript per million mapped reads ( FPKM ) values based on RNA - Seq data for pro - tein - coding genes . Gene density was calculated by taking the fraction of protein - coding genes in each SON TSA - Seq decile . For DNase I – hypersensitive sites , we calculated the number of DNase - Seq peaks contained within each decile . Histone modifi - cation and transcription factor ChIP - Seq data are classified into punctuated peaks , broad peaks , or a mixture of punctuated and broad peaks based on signal enrichment patterns . ChIP - Seq data ( H3K27ac , H3K4me1 , H3K4me2 , H3K4me3 , H3K79me2 , H3K9ac , and CTCF ) with punctuated peak patterns show sharply defined peaks of localized enrichment . ChIP - Seq data ( H2A . Z , H3K27me3 , H3K36me3 , H3K9me1 , H3K9m3 , and RNA pol II ) with broad peak patterns show diffuse widespread genomic ChIP - Seq signals without discrete peaks . ChIP - Seq data with a mixture pattern of punctuated peaks and broad peak show both local and large - scale signal enrichment ( H4K20me1 ) . For ChIP - Seq data with punctuated peaks , we counted peak number for each SON TSA - Seq decile . For ChIP - Seq data with broad peaks , we processed the ChIP - Seq data using a similar slid - ing window method as used for the TSA - Seq data ( Eq . 2 ) using normalized ENC ODE bigWig files for both the ChIP sample and input DNA . N ChIP is the sum of signals in a 20 - kb window for the ChIP sample . N input is the sum of signals in a 20 - kb window for the input DNA . EN input is the expected value for a 20 - kb win - dow based on the total number of mapped reads and the total genome - mappable base pairs . N ChIP _ norm can be interpreted as the ChIP signal normalized by the input DNA signal . The mode of the normalized ChIP scores , N ChIP _ norm , was considered as the nonspecific antibody - binding background level , which was subtracted from the normalized score in each 20 - kb window to calculate the final ChIP - Seq enrichment score , E ChIP ( Eq . 3 ) . The summed ChIP - Seq enrichment scores were calculated for each decile . An exception was H3K9me3 , for which real signals were present throughout the genome . For this mark , the 0 . 5 % percen - tile value was assumed as background and subtracted from the normalized score . For data with a mixture of sharp and broad peaks , we calculated the total number of base pairs within the ChIP - Seq peaks ( peak length ) in each SON TSA decile . Genome guanine - cytosine ( GC ) content data were down - loaded from the UCSC Genome Browser , and the GC fraction in each 20 - kb bin was calculated for each decile . We downloaded the RepeatMasker track for hg19 from the UCSC Genome Browser to calculate distributions of different repeat types in each decile . We calculated these distributions using coverage for long inter - spersed nuclear element ( LINE ) repeats but repeat count for the shorter Alu , short interspersed nuclear element ( SINE ) , simple , and satellite repeats . N ChIP _ norm = N ChIP _ N input / E N input ( 2 ) E ChIP = max ( 0 , N ChIP _ norm − Mod e N ChI P norm ) ( 3 ) Replication timing and Hi - C subcompartment data from K562 and GM12878 cells , respectively , were compared with SON TSA - Seq deciles in two ways : ( 1 ) calculating the fraction of each replication timing domain or Hi - C subcompartment group overlapping each SON TSA - Seq decile , and ( 2 ) calculating the Chen et al . TSA - Seq mapping of nuclear genome organization Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201807108 4044 fraction of each SON TSA - Seq decile that was comprised of each replication timing domain or each Hi - C subcompartment group . For display of replication timing , we also used the University of Washington ENC ODE Repli - Seq track corresponding with the wavelet - smoothed signal that combines data from different rep - lication timing domains into one track . For analysis of LAD distribution among the SON TSA - Seq deciles , we first followed the algorithm described previously for LAD segmentation ( Guelen et al . , 2008 ) . Adjacent LADs were then merged if > 80 % of probes of the region between two LADs had positive log 2 ratios . For analysis of distribution of en - hancers and super - enhancers across SON TSA - Seq deciles , we downloaded genomic locations of K562 super - enhancers from Hnisz et al . ( 2013 ) . The SON TSA decile assignment for each en - hancer was picked by whichever had the largest fraction over the enhancer region . Box plots Each box plot shows median ( inside line ) and 25th ( box bot - tom ) and 75th percentiles ( box top ) . The top whisker extends from the 75th percentile to the highest value within 1 . 5 - fold of the box length , and the bottom whisker extends from the 25th percentile to the lowest value within 1 . 5 - fold of the box length . Outliers are marked as black dots . Means are marked with red diamonds if shown . Quality control with TSA - Seq TSA - Seq is fundamentally different from molecular proximity methods such as ChIP - Seq . The amount of biotin - DNA labeling produced by the TSA reaction at a given chromosome locus is proportional to the intensity of the tyramide - biotin signal over that chromosome locus . Therefore , the most essential control for TSA staining is direct microscopic visualization of the biotin in - tranuclear distribution after TSA staining . Labeling specificity should be validated by comparing the biotin staining with tra - ditional immunofluorescence staining using the same primary antibody . TSA labeling should show both a specific labeling with a high intensity at the target compartment as well as a diffuse signal surrounding the target , which decays with distance from the target . We aliquoted cells for biotin staining and microscopic inspection after each batch of TSA staining . Batches showing un - satisfactory TSA staining were discarded . This was followed by dot blot analysis of biotin DNA labeling both before and after af - finity purification . Again , samples that did not show satisfactory biotin enrichment over negative control ( no primary antibody ) samples were discarded . TSA - Seq is different because the tyramide free radical spreads over hundreds of nanometers to a micrometer distance away from the staining target . ChIP - Seq results may vary between an - tibodies probing different components of a multisubunit protein complex because of their varying distances to DNA and ability to cross - link to DNA . The target proteins themselves may show varying ability to cross - link to chromatin and survive the chro - matin solubilization step of ChIP - Seq . In contrast , antibodies tar - geting different subunits of protein complexes should produce similar TSA - Seq results as long as the distance between these target subunits is small relative to the ∼ 10 – 100 - nm distance over which the concentration of tyramide free radical noticeably decays . Even antibodies targeting different protein complexes should produce similar TSA - Seq results as long as these different complexes are colocalized over a distance that is small relative to the microscopically observed distance over which the tyramide free radical concentration noticeably decays . For example , for a decay constant of −4 ( condition 2 ) , the TSA signal would drop only 4 % at a distance of 10 nm from the target , 18 % at a distance of 50 nm , and 33 % at a distance of 100 nm . Conversely , even ChIP - Seq – validated antibodies may perform poorly with TSA - Seq . An antibody may show strong nonspecific or off - target binding without affecting ChIP results if the anti - body is too far to effectively cross - link to DNA . Yet this nonspecif - ically or off - target bound antibody will produce a tyramide free radical signal that will diffuse and react with neighboring DNA , and the amount of DNA reaction will be linearly proportional to the intensity of this nonspecific biotin signal as visualized by light microscopy . Generation of polyclonal antibody against SON Rabbit polyclonal antibody against hSON peptide ( 947 – 964 ; Cys - DPY RLG HDP YRL TPD PYR ) was produced by Pacific Immunology Corp . Antigen peptide was synthesized , conjugated to the carrier protein keyhole limpet hemocyanin , and affinity purified for im - munization . Antibody was affinity purified against the antigen peptide from the third bleed antiserum and stored in 50 % glyc - erol solution at a concentration of 1 . 6 mg / ml . Generation of monoclonal antibodies against lamin A / C and lamin B All of the ROD2 and tail domains of lamin A / C and lamin B ( LB1 and LB2 ) were expressed in bacteria as GST fusion proteins . They were purified by FPLC and then mixed together before injection into mice for immunization . Western blotting was used to screen the monoclonal antibodies from hybridoma colonies for their lamin specificity . Monoclonal antibody from clone 5G4 showed lamin A / C staining with no cross - reactivity apparent at a dilu - tion of 1 : 10 , 000 and only trace reactivity at a dilution of 1 : 500 . Monoclonal antibody from clone 2D8 showed lamin B staining with no cross - reactivity apparent at a dilution of 1 : 2 , 000 and only trace reactivity to lamin A / C at lower dilutions . Dilutions of monoclonal antibodies for TSA staining were of concentrated Bioreactor supernatants . Structured illumination microscopy ( SIM ) 3D SIM images were taken with 0 . 125 - µm z steps using an OMX Blaze V4 ( GE Healthcare ) with a 100× , 1 . 4 NA oil immersion objec - tive lens ( Olympus ) , laser illumination ( 405 , 488 , and 568 nm ) , and an Evolve 512 electron - multiplying charge - coupled device camera ( Photometrics ) . Solid - state illumination was used for Cy5 in widefield mode for the fourth channel ( SON ) in Fig . 5 C . Image reconstruction , channel registration , and alignment were performed with SoftWoRx . Bioinformatics analysis of other genome features For correlating SON TSA - Seq levels relative to DNA repeats , we recorded positions for different repeat classes / families using the Chen et al . TSA - Seq mapping of nuclear genome organization Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201807108 4045 UCSC RepeatMasker track . The GC content in each SON TSA - Seq decile was calculated using the nucBed program included in bedtools ( version 2 . 17 ; Quinlan and Hall , 2010 ) . The number of exons , introns , isoforms , and transcription start sites ( TSS ) were extracted from the GEN CODE ( Harrow et al . , 2012 ) anno - tation file version 19 from the GEN CODE website ( http : / / www . gencodegenes . org / ) . Gene sizes and gene density across SON TSA - Seq deciles were extracted from the GEN CODE annotation file version 3c , the same annotation file used for generating gene expression data . Hi - C compartment eigenvector To generate the Hi - C compartment eigenvector track , we used a recently published high resolution Hi - C dataset ( Rao et al . , 2014 ) from human K562 cells . First , we downloaded the intra - chromosome Hi - C raw contact matrices at 10 - kb resolution and normalized the contact matrices using provided KR - normaliza - tion ( Knight and Ruiz , 2013 ) vectors . Then we applied principal component analysis using the function “princomp” with de - fault parameters in R on the normalized contact matrix of each chromosome individually . As shown previously ( Imakaev et al . , 2012 ) , eigenvector expansion is equivalent to principal compo - nent analysis of the normalized contact matrix . The first princi - ple component ( PC1 ) corresponds with the eigenvector with the largest eigenvalue . Eigenvectors were normalized by magnitude . In this study , we only showed the first eigenvector . Applying the normalization method used for TSA - Seq to Pol II ChIP - Seq data The normalization scheme used for TSA - Seq data , which com - putes relative enrichment / depletion over a certain bin size , can also be applied to ChIP - Seq data . We processed the ENC ODE K562 Pol II ChIP - Seq and input raw fastq reads using the same alignment pipeline as used for the SON TSA - Seq data . Align - ments from replicate ChIP - Seq experiments were merged . We calculated the normalized TSA - Seq enrichment score using Eq . 4 . In this method , N Pol2 is the number of mapped reads in a 20 - kb window in the RNA Pol II ChIP - Seq sample ( N input is defined sim - ilarly for input data ) . B Pol2 is the expected number of reads from the background - nonspecific binding of RNA Pol II antibody to chromatin . To estimate B Pol2 , we first ranked the genomic in - tergenic regions from longest to shortest . We used the top 5 % longest intergenic regions , which we assumed to be gene des - erts , to estimate background reads . For these largest intergenic regions , we calculated the average read count per base pair in the ChIP - Seq data . B Pol2 is the product of the size in base pairs of the sliding window with this average background read count per base pair . The background adjustment for each bin is done by using the max ( 0 , N Pol2 − B Pol2 ) . Finally , T Pol2 is the total num - ber of mapped reads for ChIP - Seq sample after the background subtraction for each bin , and T input is the total number of mapped reads in input data . Pol II ChIP - Seq enrichment score = log 2 ( max ( 0 , N Pol 2 − B Pol 2 ) / T Pol 2 _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ N input / T input ) ( 4 ) Transcription hot zones To identify transcription hot zones , we started with the smoothed RNA Pol II ChIP - Seq track . We identified all genomic regions with positive values > 0 . 1 , and for each of these regions , we matched it to the local maximum in the SON TSA - Seq score within this same region . If more than one local maximum was present within the region , we used the largest local maximum . In nearly all cases , these SON TSA - Seq local maxima aligned with the local maxima in the smoothed RNA Pol II track . We identified the Hi - C subcom - partment assignment corresponding to these SON TSA - Seq local maxima as well as their SON TSA - Seq scores and corresponding percentiles . We then calculated the distance distribution for the A1 and A2 SON TSA - Seq local maxima to the nearest LAD / inter - LAD boundary . 2D TSA - Seq scatter plots For 2D SON or lamin B TSA - Seq and 1 - Mbp smoothed normal - ized RNA Pol II ChIP - Seq scatter plots ( Fig . S3 C ) , each point rep - resents a 160 - kb bin for which the TSA - Seq average score was calculated from the smoothed TSA - Seq score . These points were plotted versus score percentile . We also used similar 2D scatter plots to show the relationship of SON , pSC35 , lamin A / C , lamin B , and Pol II TSA - Seq data in Fig . 5 B . Each point represents a 300 - kb bin from the smoothed TSA - Seq score . These points were plotted versus score value or percentile . We also used these 2D scatter plots to show the rela - tionship between lamin and SON TSA - Seq with gene expression or DNA replication timing . In these scatter plots ( Fig . 8 , E – G ; and Fig . S5 ) , the x – y axes correspond with either TSA - Seq score val - ues or percentiles of the TSA - Seq score over the entire genome , with distribution projections shown on the sides . For gene expression , we calculated the FPKM of each gene and divided genes into two groups : expressed ( FPKM > 0 ) and nonex - pressed ( FPKM = 0 ) . For expressed genes , we further separated them into 10 deciles , ranking them based on their FPKM values . Each dot represents a single gene . For DNA replication timing , we used the UW Repli - Seq data for K562 cells ( Hansen et al . , 2010 ) . Each dot represents a 300 - kb genome bin . The fraction of each 300 - kb bin replicating in each of the measured replication tim - ing domains ( G1 , S1 , S2 , S3 , and S4 ) was calculated , and the bin was assigned to that replication domain with the largest fraction . For computing the 2D TSA - Seq scatter plot showing the distri - bution of Hi - C subcompartments ( Fig . 5 F ) , we computed the av - erage lamin B or SON TSA - Seq scores in 320 - kb nonoverlapping bins calculated from the smoothed 20 - kb bin TSA - Seq scores as described above for the other 2D scatter plots . For each 320 - kb bin , the fraction of this bin corresponding with each Hi - C sub - compartment was calculated . The Hi - C subcompartment with the largest fraction was then assigned to this 320 - kb bin . TSA - Seq scores were plotted as percentiles . 2D TSA - Seq plots of weighted , wavelet - smoothed DNA replication timing We again used the UW replication timing data for K562 cells but now used the weighted , wavelet - smoothed composite signal that measures relative timing of DNA replication such that earlier rep - licating regions have higher values and are ranked as percentiles . Chen et al . TSA - Seq mapping of nuclear genome organization Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201807108 4046 Average replication timing scores were calculated for 160 - kb ge - nomic bins . In Fig . 8 G , each 160 - kb genomic bin was mapped to a given lamin B and SON TSA - Seq percentile based on the average TSA - Seq score calculated for each 160 - kb bin using the smoothed TSA - Seq 20 - kb bin data . We then divided the lamin B and SON TSA - Seq percentile ranges into hexagonal pixels spaced by two percentiles . We calculated the median replication timing of all 160 - kb genomic bins mapping to a given hexagon . These median values of replication percentiles were color - coded and plotted . Gene density near type I and type II peaks We separated ±500 kb of transcription hot zones into five groups based on their distance to peak summit ( ∼ 0 – 100 kb , ∼ 100 – 200 kb , ∼ 200 – 300 kb , ∼ 300 – 400 kb , and ∼ 400 – 500 kb ) . Within each group , we counted the number of overlapping protein - coding genes . The gene density was calculated as the average number of genes per 100 kb . Besides the gene density for all genes , we also calculated the gene density for specific groups of genes based on expression level ( top 10 % expressed genes , ∼ 40 – 60 % expressed genes , and bottom 10 % expressed genes ) . Pausing index of genes in TSA - Seq peaks We calculated the pausing index of each gene based on Pol II ChIP - Seq . The Pol II ChIP - Seq was downloaded from ENC ODE ( ENC SR000FAJ ) . The method of calculating pausing index was described by Day et al . ( 2016 ) . Pausing Index = ReadCount ( TSSR ) / Length ( TSSR ) _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ReadCount ( Gene Body ) / Length ( Gene Body ) TSS region , – 50 to + 300 bp around TSS ; gene body , TSS + 300 bp to + 3 kb past the annotated transcriptional end site . Then , we identified genes that were within the ±100 - kb range of TSA - Seq peaks . TSA - Seq peaks were separated into two groups based on whether they were in A1 or A2 subcompartments . In Fig . 10 B , we plotted the density of the pausing index of genes near ( ±200 kb ) A1 / A2 TSA - Seq peaks . Housekeeping genes in TSA - Seq deciles A list of 3 , 904 human housekeeping genes was downloaded from http : / / www . tau . ac . il / ~ elieis / HKG / HK _ genes . txt , which is an up - dated version of the original release from Eisenberg and Levanon ( 2013 ) . To determine the nonhousekeeping genes as well as the genomic position of these genes , we extracted protein - coding genes with completed CDS annotation from the hg19 RefSeq gene annotation ( downloaded from the UCSC Genome Browser ) . 3 , 791 genes among the original 3 , 904 housekeeping genes were found to have matched gene ID or gene name in the RefSeq gene anno - tation . Therefore , the remaining 15 , 751 protein - coding genes were determined as nonhousekeeping genes . To compare the distri - bution of housekeeping genes to nonhousekeeping genes across a combination of TSA - Seq decile and Hi - C subcompartment , we determined the number of genes overlapping with a specific SON TSA - Seq decile ( e . g . , decile 1 ) within a particular Hi - C subcom - partment ( e . g . , A1 ) . The number of overlapped genes were further normalized to a percentage for each type of Hi - C subcompartment . Data availability All high throughput sequencing data generated by TSA - Seq and microarray data generated by DamID are deposited at GEO under GSE66019 . Code availability All computational code used to analyze TSA - Seq data are avail - able at https : / / github . com / ma - compbio / TSA - Seq - toolkit . Online supplemental material Fig . S1 shows TSA - Seq measures cytological proximity . Fig . S2 shows 3D immuno - FISH validation that SON TSA - Seq score measures cytological mean distance to nuclear speckles . Fig . S3 shows TSA - Seq maps predict both chromosome location and chromosome topology . Fig . S4 shows genome features relative to SON TSA - Seq decile . Fig . S5 shows 2D scatter plots showing distribution of gene expression and DNA replication timing rel - ative to speckle – lamin TSA - Seq axis . Table S1 shows a summary of conditions for all TSA - Seq experiments . Table S2 shows BACs used for DNA FISH . Table S3 shows a list of protein - coding genes and their SON TSA - Seq deciles and expression levels . Table S4 shows the public datasets analyzed . Acknowledgments Sequencing was done at the UIUC Biotechnology Center . We thank William Brieher , Lisa Stubbs , and Brian Freeman ( UIUC , Urbana , IL ) for helpful suggestions during the course of this re - search . We also thank Jiang Xu ( University of Southern Califor - nia , Los Angeles , CA ) for reading our manuscript and providing helpful suggestions for revisions . This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grant R01 GM58460 to A . S . Belmont , R01 HG007352 to J . Ma , and U54 DK107965 to A . S . Belmont , J . Ma , and B . van Steensel as well as a Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research ZonMW - TOP grant to B . van Steensel . The authors declare no competing financial interests . Author contributions : Y . Chen developed the TSA staining and genomic mapping procedures , applied them to SON , pSC35 , lamin A / C , and lamin B , undertook Pol II TSA - Seq genome map - ping , processed sequencing data , and performed FISH valida - tion experiments with guidance from A . S . Belmont . L . Zhang repeated SON TSA - Seq mapping with the original and a different SON antibody and added SON condition 3 . L . Zhang together with Y . Chen produced duplicates of the pSC35 and Pol II TSA - Seq and produced a duplicate of the lamin A / C TSA - Seq . Computational tool development and quantitative analysis of SON TSA - Seq data and integration with other genomic data were done by Y . Zhang and Y . Wang with guidance from J . Ma and discussion among Y . Chen , A . S . Belmont , Y . Zhang , Y . Wang , L . Zhang , and J . Ma . E . K . Brinkman and B . van Steensel generated lamin B1 DamID ge - nomic data from K562 cells . S . A . Adam and R . Goldman provided monoclonal anti - lamin antibodies . The manuscript was written by Y . Chen and A . S . Belmont . Chen et al . TSA - Seq mapping of nuclear genome organization Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201807108 4047 Submitted : 14 July 2018 Revised : 5 August 2018 Accepted : 7 August 2018 References Agard , D . A . , Y . Hiraoka , P . Shaw , and J . W . Sedat . 1989 . Fluorescence micros - copy in three dimensions . Methods Cell Biol . 30 : 353 – 377 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0091 - 679X ( 08 ) 60986 - 3 Belmont , A . S . , and K . Bruce . 1994 . Visualization of G1 chromosomes : a folded , twisted , supercoiled chromonema model of interphase chromatid struc - ture . J . Cell Biol . 127 : 287 – 302 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 127 . 2 . 287 Bickmore , W . A . 2013 . The spatial organization of the human genome . Annu . Rev . Genomics Hum . Genet . 14 : 67 – 84 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev - genom - 091212 - 153515 Bobrow , M . N . , T . D . Harris , K . J . Shaughnessy , and G . J . Litt . 1989 . Catalyzed re - porter deposition , a novel method of signal amplification . Application to immunoassays . J . Immunol . Methods . 125 : 279 – 285 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0022 - 1759 ( 89 ) 90104 - X Bobrow , M . N . , K . J . Shaughnessy , and G . J . Litt . 1991 . Catalyzed reporter depo - sition , a novel method of signal amplification . II . Application to mem - brane immunoassays . J . Immunol . Methods . 137 : 103 – 112 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0022 - 1759 ( 91 ) 90399 - Z Brangwynne , C . P . 2011 . Soft active aggregates : mechanics , dynamics and self - assembly of liquid - like intracellular protein bodies . Soft Matter . 7 : 3052 – 3059 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1039 / c0sm00981d Carter , D . , L . Chakalova , C . S . Osborne , Y . F . Dai , and P . Fraser . 2002 . Long - range chromatin regulatory interactions in vivo . Nat . Genet . 32 : 623 – 626 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ng1051 Carter , K . C . , K . L . Taneja , and J . B . Lawrence . 1991 . Discrete nuclear domains of poly ( A ) RNA and their relationship to the functional organization of the nucleus . J . Cell Biol . 115 : 1191 – 1202 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 115 . 5 . 1191 Ching , R . W . , K . Ahmed , P . C . Boutros , L . Z . Penn , and D . P . Bazett - Jones . 2013 . Identifying gene locus associations with promyelocytic leukemia nu - clear bodies using immuno - TRAP . J . Cell Biol . 201 : 325 – 335 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201211097 Day , D . S . , B . Zhang , S . M . Stevens , F . Ferrari , E . N . Larschan , P . J . Park , and W . T . Pu . 2016 . Comprehensive analysis of promoter - proximal RNA poly - merase II pausing across mammalian cell types . Genome Biol . 17 : 120 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / s13059 - 016 - 0984 - 2 Dernburg , A . F . 2011 . Fragmentation and labeling of probe DNA for whole - mount FISH in Drosophila . Cold Spring Harb . Protoc . 2011 : 1527 – 1530 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / pdb . prot066886 Dow , E . C . , H . Liu , and A . P . Rice . 2010 . T - loop phosphorylated Cdk9 localizes to nuclear speckle domains which may serve as sites of active P - TEFb function and exchange between the Brd4 and 7SK / HEX IM1 regulatory complexes . J . Cell . Physiol . 224 : 84 – 93 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jcp . 22096 Eisenberg , E . , and E . Y . Levanon . 2013 . Human housekeeping genes , revisited . Trends Genet . 29 : 569 – 574 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tig . 2013 . 05 . 010 Fakan , S . , and E . Puvion . 1980 . The ultrastructural visualization of nucleo - lar and extranucleolar RNA synthesis and distribution . Int . Rev . Cytol . 65 : 255 – 299 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0074 - 7696 ( 08 ) 61962 - 2 Galganski , L . , M . O . Urbanek , and W . J . Krzyzosiak . 2017 . Nuclear speckles : mo - lecular organization , biological function and role in disease . Nucleic Acids Res . 45 : 10350 – 10368 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / nar / gkx759 Guelen , L . , L . Pagie , E . Brasset , W . Meuleman , M . B . Faza , W . Talhout , B . H . Eussen , A . de Klein , L . Wessels , W . de Laat , and B . van Steensel . 2008 . Domain organization of human chromosomes revealed by mapping of nuclear lamina interactions . Nature . 453 : 948 – 951 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature06947 Hall , L . L . , K . P . Smith , M . Byron , and J . B . Lawrence . 2006 . Molecular anatomy of a speckle . Anat . Rec . A Discov . Mol . Cell . Evol . Biol . 288 : 664 – 675 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / ar . a . 20336 Hansen , R . S . , S . Thomas , R . Sandstrom , T . K . Canfield , R . E . Thurman , M . Weaver , M . O . Dorschner , S . M . Gartler , and J . A . Stamatoyannopoulos . 2010 . Sequencing newly replicated DNA reveals widespread plasticity in human replication timing . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 107 : 139 – 144 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0912402107 Harrow , J . , A . Frankish , J . M . Gonzalez , E . Tapanari , M . Diekhans , F . Koko - cinski , B . L . Aken , D . Barrell , A . Zadissa , S . Searle , et al . 2012 . GEN CODE : the reference human genome annotation for The ENC ODE Project . Ge - nome Res . 22 : 1760 – 1774 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / gr . 135350 . 111 Hendzel , M . J . , M . J . Kruhlak , and D . P . Bazett - Jones . 1998 . Organization of highly acetylated chromatin around sites of heterogeneous nuclear RNA accumulation . Mol . Biol . Cell . 9 : 2491 – 2507 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . 9 . 9 . 2491 Herrmann , C . H . , and M . A . Mancini . 2001 . The Cdk9 and cyclin T subunits of TAK / P - TEFb localize to splicing factor - rich nuclear speckle regions . J . Cell Sci . 114 : 1491 – 1503 . Hnisz , D . , B . J . Abraham , T . I . Lee , A . Lau , V . Saint - André , A . A . Sigova , H . A . Hoke , and R . A . Young . 2013 . Super - enhancers in the control of cell identity and disease . Cell . 155 : 934 – 947 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 09 . 053 Hopman , A . H . N . , F . C . S . Ramaekers , and E . J . M . Speel . 1998 . Rapid synthesis of biotin - , digoxigenin - , trinitrophenyl - , and fluorochrome - labeled tyra - mides and their application for In situ hybridization using CARD am - plification . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 46 : 771 – 777 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 002215549804600611 Hu , Y . , I . Kireev , M . Plutz , N . Ashourian , and A . S . Belmont . 2009 . Large - scale chromatin structure of inducible genes : transcription on a condensed , linear template . J . Cell Biol . 185 : 87 – 100 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200809196 Imakaev , M . , G . Fudenberg , R . P . McCord , N . Naumova , A . Goloborodko , B . R . Lajoie , J . Dekker , and L . A . Mirny . 2012 . Iterative correction of Hi - C data reveals hallmarks of chromosome organization . Nat . Methods . 9 : 999 – 1003 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2148 Ji , X . , Y . Zhou , S . Pandit , J . Huang , H . Li , C . Y . Lin , R . Xiao , C . B . Burge , and X . D . Fu . 2013 . SR proteins collaborate with 7SK and promoter - associated na - scent RNA to release paused polymerase . Cell . 153 : 855 – 868 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 04 . 028 Khanna , N . , Y . Hu , and A . S . Belmont . 2014 . HSP70 transgene directed motion to nuclear speckles facilitates heat shock activation . Curr . Biol . 24 : 1138 – 1144 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2014 . 03 . 053 Kim , J . H . , M . C . Baddoo , E . Y . Park , J . K . Stone , H . Park , T . W . Butler , G . Huang , X . Yan , F . Pauli - Behn , R . M . Myers , et al . 2016 . SON and Its Alternatively Spliced Isoforms Control MLL Complex - Mediated H3K4me3 and Tran - scription of Leukemia - Associated Genes . Mol . Cell . 61 : 859 – 873 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2016 . 02 . 024 Knight , P . A . , and D . Ruiz . 2013 . A fast algorithm for matrix balancing . IMA J . Numer . Anal . 33 : 1029 – 1047 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / imanum / drs019 Ko , T . K . , E . Kelly , and J . Pines . 2001 . CrkRS : a novel conserved Cdc2 - related pro - tein kinase that colocalises with SC35 speckles . J . Cell Sci . 114 : 2591 – 2603 . Kölbl , A . C . , D . Weigl , M . Mulaw , T . Thormeyer , S . K . Bohlander , T . Cremer , and S . Dietzel . 2012 . The radial nuclear positioning of genes correlates with features of megabase - sized chromatin domains . Chromosome Res . 20 : 735 – 752 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10577 - 012 - 9309 - 9 Landt , S . G . , G . K . Marinov , A . Kundaje , P . Kheradpour , F . Pauli , S . Batzoglou , B . E . Bernstein , P . Bickel , J . B . Brown , P . Cayting , et al . 2012 . ChIP - seq guidelines and practices of the ENC ODE and modENC ODE consortia . Genome Res . 22 : 1813 – 1831 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / gr . 136184 . 111 Langmead , B . , and S . L . Salzberg . 2012 . Fast gapped - read alignment with Bow - tie 2 . Nat . Methods . 9 : 357 – 359 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 1923 Li , H . , B . Handsaker , A . Wysoker , T . Fennell , J . Ruan , N . Homer , G . Marth , G . Abecasis , and R . Durbin . 1000 Genome Project Data Processing Sub - group . 2009 . The Sequence Alignment / Map format and SAMtools . Bioinformatics . 25 : 2078 – 2079 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / bioinformatics / btp352 Lieberman - Aiden , E . , N . L . Van Berkum , L . Williams , M . Imakaev , T . Ragoczy , A . Telling , I . Amit , B . R . Lajoie , P . J . Sabo , M . O . Dorschner , et al . 2009 . Comprehensive mapping of long - range interactions reveals folding principles of the human genome . Science . 326 : 289 – 293 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1181369 Meuleman , W . , D . Peric - Hupkes , J . Kind , J . B . Beaudry , L . Pagie , M . Kellis , M . Reinders , L . Wessels , and B . van Steensel . 2013 . Constitutive nuclear lamina - genome interactions are highly conserved and associated with A / T - rich sequence . Genome Res . 23 : 270 – 280 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / gr . 141028 . 112 Moen , P . T . Jr . , C . V . Johnson , M . Byron , L . S . Shopland , I . L . de la Serna , A . N . Imbalzano , and J . B . Lawrence . 2004 . Repositioning of muscle - specific genes relative to the periphery of SC - 35 domains during skeletal myo - genesis . Mol . Biol . Cell . 15 : 197 – 206 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . e03 - 06 - 0388 Quinlan , A . R . , and I . M . Hall . 2010 . BEDTools : a flexible suite of utilities for comparing genomic features . Bioinformatics . 26 : 841 – 842 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / bioinformatics / btq033 Chen et al . TSA - Seq mapping of nuclear genome organization Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201807108 4048 Rao , S . S . P . , M . H . Huntley , N . C . Durand , E . K . Stamenova , I . D . Bochkov , J . T . Rob - inson , A . L . Sanborn , I . Machol , A . D . Omer , E . S . Lander , and E . L . Aiden . 2014 . A 3D map of the human genome at kilobase resolution reveals principles of chromatin looping . Cell . 159 : 1665 – 1680 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2014 . 11 . 021 Schindelin , J . , I . Arganda - Carreras , E . Frise , V . Kaynig , M . Longair , T . Pietzsch , S . Preibisch , C . Rueden , S . Saalfeld , B . Schmid , et al . 2012 . Fiji : an open - source platform for biological - image analysis . Nat . Methods . 9 : 676 – 682 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2019 Shopland , L . S . , C . V . Johnson , M . Byron , J . McNeil , and J . B . Lawrence . 2003 . Clustering of multiple specific genes and gene - rich R - bands around SC - 35 domains . J . Cell Biol . 162 : 981 – 990 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200303131 Sims , J . K . , S . I . Houston , T . Magazinnik , and J . C . Rice . 2006 . A trans - tail his - tone code defined by monomethylated H4 Lys - 20 and H3 Lys - 9 demar - cates distinct regions of silent chromatin . J . Biol . Chem . 281 : 12760 – 12766 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M513462200 Solovei , I . , and M . Cremer . 2010 . 3D - FISH on cultured cells combined with im - munostaining . Methods Mol . Biol . 659 : 117 – 126 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 60761 - 789 - 1 _ 8 Spector , D . L . , and A . I . Lamond . 2011 . Nuclear speckles . Cold Spring Harb . Per - spect . Biol . 3 : a000646 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a000646 Takizawa , T . , K . J . Meaburn , and T . Misteli . 2008 . The meaning of gene posi - tioning . Cell . 135 : 9 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2008 . 09 . 026 van Gijlswijk , R . P . , J . Wiegant , A . K . Raap , and H . J . Tanke . 1996 . Improved lo - calization of fluorescent tyramides for fluorescence in situ hybridiza - tion using dextran sulfate and polyvinyl alcohol . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 44 : 389 – 392 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 44 . 4 . 8601698 van Gijlswijk , R . P . M . , H . J . M . A . A . Zijlmans , J . Wiegant , M . N . Bobrow , T . J . Erick - son , K . E . Adler , H . J . Tanke , and A . K . Raap . 1997 . Fluorochrome - labeled tyramides : use in immunocytochemistry and fluorescence in situ hy - bridization . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 45 : 375 – 382 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 002215549704500305 van Steensel , B . , and A . S . Belmont . 2017 . Lamina - Associated Domains : Links with Chromosome Architecture , Heterochromatin , and Gene Repres - sion . Cell . 169 : 780 – 791 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2017 . 04 . 022 Vogel , M . J . , D . Peric - Hupkes , and B . van Steensel . 2007 . Detection of in vivo protein - DNA interactions using DamID in mammalian cells . Nat . Protoc . 2 : 1467 – 1478 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2007 . 148 Wang , G . , C . L . Achim , R . L . Hamilton , C . A . Wiley , and V . Soontornniyomkij . 1999 . Tyramide signal amplification method in multiple - label immu - nofluorescence confocal microscopy . Methods . 18 : 459 – 464 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1006 / meth . 1999 . 0813 Wang , Z . , C . Zang , J . A . Rosenfeld , D . E . Schones , A . Barski , S . Cuddapah , K . Cui , T . - Y . Roh , W . Peng , M . Q . Zhang , and K . Zhao . 2008 . Combinatorial pat - terns of histone acetylations and methylations in the human genome . Nat . Genet . 40 : 897 – 903 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ng . 154 Wartlick , O . , A . Kicheva , and M . González - Gaitán . 2009 . Morphogen gradient formation . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 1 : a001255 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a001255 Xie , S . Q . , S . Martin , P . V . Guillot , D . L . Bentley , and A . Pombo . 2006 . Splicing speckles are not reservoirs of RNA polymerase II , but contain an inactive form , phosphorylated on serine2 residues of the C - terminal domain . Mol . Biol . Cell . 17 : 1723 – 1733 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . e05 - 08 - 0726 Xing , Y . , C . V . Johnson , P . T . Moen Jr . , J . A . McNeil , and J . Lawrence . 1995 . Nonran - dom gene organization : structural arrangements of specific pre - mRNA transcription and splicing with SC - 35 domains . J . Cell Biol . 131 : 1635 – 1647 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 131 . 6 . 1635 Zhu , L . , and C . P . Brangwynne . 2015 . Nuclear bodies : the emerging biophysics of nucleoplasmic phases . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 34 : 23 – 30 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2015 . 04 . 003 Zweidler , A . 1992 . Role of individual histone tyrosines in the formation of the nucleosome complex . Biochemistry . 31 : 9205 – 9211 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / bi00153a013