Accountability In Practice : Mechanisms for NGOs ALNOOR EBRAHIM * Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University , Blacksburg , USA Summary . — This paper examines how accountability is practiced by nongovernmental organizations ( NGOs ) . Five broad mechanisms are reviewed : reports and disclosure statements , performance assessments and evaluations , participation , self - regulation , and social audits . Each mechanism , distinguished as either a ‘‘tool’’ or a ‘‘process , ’’ is analyzed along three dimensions of accountability : upward – downward , internal – external , and functional – strategic . It is observed that accountability in practice has emphasized ‘‘upward’’ and ‘‘external’’ accountability to donors while ‘‘downward’’ and ‘‘internal’’ mechanisms remain comparatively underdeveloped . Moreover , NGOs and funders have focused primarily on short - term ‘‘functional’’ accountability responses at the expense of longer - term ‘‘strategic’’ processes necessary for lasting social and political change . Key policy implications for NGOs and donors are discussed . (cid:1) 2003 Elsevier Science Ltd . All rights reserved . Key words — accountability , nongovernmental organizations , reporting , evaluation , self - regula - tion , social audit 1 . INTRODUCTION Concerns about accountability in nongov - ernmental organizations ( NGOs ) 1 have in - creased over the past two decades , due in part to a series of highly publicized scandals that have eroded public conﬁdence in nonproﬁt or - ganizations , coupled with a rapid growth in NGOs around the world ( Gibelman & Gelman , 2001 ; Young , Bania , & Bailey , 1996 ) . The growth of NGOs , especially in the South , has been fueled by a belief among donors that NGOs are more cost - eﬀective than govern - ments in providing basic social services , are better able to reach the poor , and are key players in democratization processes – – despite a lack of suﬃcient empirical evidence to support these counts ( Edwards & Hulme , 1996b , p . 963 ; Mackintosh , 1992 , p . 80 ) . In some cases , NGOs are themselves responsible for exaggerating their claims to legitimacy , which may be based more on a belief in value - driven organizations than on actual monitoring and assessment of their accomplishments ( Riddel , 1999 , pp . 223 – 234 ) . These views , however , are being increas - ingly challenged by long - time practitioners and scholars in the ﬁeld who advocate moving beyond seeing NGOs as ‘‘magic bullets’’ to thinking more concretely about issues of ac - countability ( Edwards & Hulme , 1996a ; Na - jam , 1996a , p . 340 ) . The purpose of this paper is to examine various ways in which accountability is prac - ticed by NGOs . First , I draw upon numerous deﬁnitions of accountability in order to develop an integrated perspective . I then explore ﬁve key accountability mechanisms used by NGOs in practice : reports and disclosure statements , performance assessments and evaluations , participation , self - regulation , and social audits . Finally , I compare these mechanisms across a series of analytic criteria in order to draw general policy conclusions . 2 . AN INTEGRATED PERSPECTIVE ON ACCOUNTABILITY Numerous deﬁnitions of accountability have been oﬀered by scholars and practitioners of development . For example , Edwards and Hulme ( 1996b , p . 967 ) deﬁne it as ‘‘the means by which individuals and organizations report World Development Vol . 31 , No . 5 , pp . 813 – 829 , 2003 (cid:1) 2003 Elsevier Science Ltd . All rights reserved Printed in Great Britain 0305 - 750X / 03 / $ - see front matter doi : 10 . 1016 / S0305 - 750X ( 03 ) 00014 - 7 www . elsevier . com / locate / worlddev * For their insightful comments and suggestions , the author would like to thank the reviewers and editor of World Development , Edward Weisband at Virginia Tech , and participants in two seminars given at the Program on Nonproﬁt Organizations ( Yale University ) and at the Center for Development Research ( University of Bonn ) . Final revision accepted : 16 December 2002 . 813 to a recognized authority ( or authorities ) and are held responsible for their actions . ’’ In their study of accountability in the World Bank and NGOs , Fox and Brown ( 1998 , p . 12 ) similarly describe accountability as ‘‘the process of holding actors responsible for actions . ’’ In a special issue of the IDS Bulletin on ‘‘Account - ability through Participation , ’’ Cornwall , Lu - cas , and Pasteur ( 2000 , p . 3 ) broaden this perspective by suggesting that accountability is both about being ‘‘held responsible’’ by others and about ‘‘taking responsibility’’ for oneself . As such , accountability has both an external dimension in terms of ‘‘an obligation to meet prescribed standards of behavior’’ ( Chisolm , 1995 , p . 141 ) and an internal one motivated by ‘‘felt responsibility’’ as expressed through indi - vidual action and organizational mission ( Fry , 1995 ) . This dual perspective is not unlike that pro - posed by democratic accountability theorists , even though their focus is on public institutions and representation by elected oﬃcials rather than on nonproﬁt organizations ( e . g . , Behn , 2001 ; Dunn , 1999 ; Przeworski , Stokes , & Ma - nin , 1999 ; Weber , 1999 ) . For example , Behn suggests a ‘‘360 - degree model’’ of accountabil - ity that would require public agencies to shift from current adversarial modes of account - ability enforcement to an emphasis on cooper - ative responsibility , while Dunn proposes increased transparency of information from public oﬃcials purporting to act in a public interest . More pointedly , James Madison him - self warned that in governance ‘‘the great dif - ﬁculty lies in this : you must ﬁrst enable the government to control the governed ; and in the next place oblige it to control itself’’ ( 51st Federalist Paper , as quoted in Przeworski et al . , 1999 , p . 1 ) . The organizational behavior literature has also inﬂuenced discussions on accountability , particularly through scholarship on resource dependence and stakeholder theory . While much of the resource dependence literature has focused on private sector ﬁrms ( e . g . , Pfeﬀer & Salancik , 1974 , 1978 ) , it is equally applicable to relationships between NGOs and their funders . Indeed , NGO concerns about accountability to donors have often centered on asymmetries in resources that have resulted in excessive con - ditionalities or onerous reporting requirements being attached to funding . Accountability mechanisms , such as annual project reports and ﬁnancial records ( discussed in more detail be - low ) , are used not only by funders to keep track of NGO spending , but also by NGOs to le - verage funds by publicizing their projects and programs . There is thus a resource interdepen - dence ( albeit often asymmetric ) in which NGOs rely on donors for money , and donors rely on NGOs for their reputations in development ( Ebrahim , 2002 ; Hudock , 1999 ; Perera , 1997 ) . Studies of resource dependence potentially oﬀer much insight on accountability , especially by revealing the kinds of mechanisms used by or - ganizations to leverage responsiveness . What is missing from much of the debate on accountability is an integrated look at how organizations deal with multiple and sometimes competing accountability demands . Stakeholder perspectives from the organiza - tional behavior literature have only just begun to ﬁll this gap . Much of the early work in this ﬁeld is credited to Edward Freeman (cid:1) s ( 1984 ) writing on a ‘‘stakeholder approach’’ to strate - gic management in which stakeholders are de - ﬁned to include not only stockholders but also other individuals and groups who can aﬀect , or are aﬀected by , a particular business . This work has fed into a burgeoning literature on corpo - rate social responsibility , performance , and ethics ( e . g . , Clarkson , 1995 ; Hummels , 1998 ; Jawahar & McLaughlin , 2001 ; Soule , 2002 ; Wheeler & Sillanp € aa € aa , 1997 ; Wicks , Gilbert , & Freeman , 1994 ) and has also led to the emer - gence of various accountability mechanisms such as social auditing ( discussed in more detail below ) , all of which have become only more relevant in the wake of recent accounting scandals featuring such corporate giants as Enron , Arthur Anderson , and WorldComm . Yet while this literature has promoted a wider view of corporate constituencies , it re - mains somewhat limited for reﬂecting on or - ganizations such as NGOs where stockholders are not the primary stakeholders and whose missions often do not include a calculus of proﬁt - making . Arguably , NGOs face the com - peting demands of multiple stakeholders more acutely and regularly than do private ﬁrms . Najam ( 1996a ) has observed that NGOs are accountable to multiple actors : to patrons , to clients , and to themselves . NGO - patron ac - countability or ‘‘upward’’ accountability ( Ed - wards & Hulme , 1996b , p . 967 ) usually refers to relationships with donors , foundations , and governments and is often focused on the ‘‘spending of designated moneys for designated purposes’’ ( Najam , 1996a , p . 342 ) . NGO ac - countability to clients refers primarily to rela - tionships with ‘‘groups to whom NGOs provide WORLD DEVELOPMENT 814 services’’ although it may also include com - munities or regions indirectly impacted by NGO programs ( Najam , 1996a , p . 345 ) . This has also been termed ‘‘downward’’ account - ability ( Edwards & Hulme , 1996b , p . 967 ) . The third category of accountability articulated by Najam concerns NGOs themselves . This inter - nal accountability includes an NGO (cid:1) s respon - sibility to its mission and staﬀ , which includes decision - makers as well as ﬁeld - level imple - menters . These multiple and sometimes com - peting accountabilities can become even more complicated in cases where NGOs enter into contractual relationships foreign donors , local governments , and multinational corporations ( Meyer , 1999 , pp . 110 – 115 ) . Another useful distinction , developed by Avina ( 1993 , as cited in Najam , 1996a , p . 351 ) , concerns functional accountability ( accounting for resources , resource use , and immediate im - pacts ) and strategic accountability ( accounting for the impacts that an NGO (cid:1) s activities have on the actions of other organizations and the wider environment ) . This distinction is similar to that drawn between practical and strategic needs by gender planning theorists ( Moser , 1989 ) , and between tactical and strategic or - ganizational responses drawn by public ad - ministrators ( Kearns , 1996 , p . 43 ) , in order to emphasize the diﬀerence between eﬀorts that focus on short - term organizational change and longer - term structural change . Najam suggests that while functional accountability of NGOs to patrons , operationalized through reports and accounts , is typically high in practice , functional accountability to clients and NGOs themselves is low . He also contends that stra - tegic accountability is weak on all fronts , im - plying that current accountability relations among NGOs , patrons , and clients are focused on short - term activities rather than on long - term change . It is apparent from this brief introduction that accountability is a complex and dynamic concept . It may be deﬁned not only as a means through which individuals and organizations are held responsible for their actions ( e . g . , through legal obligations and explicit reporting and disclosure requirements ) , but also as a means by which organizations and individuals take internal responsibility for shaping their organizational mission and values , for opening themselves to public or external scrutiny , and for assessing performance in relation to goals . Accountability operates along multiple dimen - sions – – involving numerous actors ( patrons , clients , selves ) , using various mechanisms and standards of performance ( external and inter - nal , explicit and implicit , legal and voluntary ) , and requiring varying levels of organizational response ( functional and strategic ) . 2 3 . MECHANISMS OF ACCOUNTABILITY I now turn to a discussion of ﬁve broad ( but far from comprehensive ) categories of ac - countability mechanisms used by NGOs in practice : reports and disclosure statements , performance assessments and evaluations , participation , self - regulation , social audits . The comparative strengths and weaknesses of each of these mechanisms , as well as their policy implications , are further analyzed in the con - cluding section of this paper . The following discussion only peripherally examines organi - zational management elements such as mission or vision statements and governing boards which , while crucial for internal accountability purposes , have been extensively discussed else - where ( e . g . , Carver , 1990 ; Gibelman & Gelman , 2001 ; Kearns , 1996 ) . It also does not discuss issues of democratic accountability , such as those concerning NGO claims to legitimacy in representing views of the poor or marginalized , given the fact that most NGOs are neither membership organizations nor elected bodies . This matter would require a separate discussion on representation and legitimacy . Before discussing the mechanisms , it is help - ful to diﬀerentiate between those that are ‘‘tools’’ and those that are ‘‘processes . ’’ 3 In basic terms , accountability tools refer to dis - crete devices or techniques used to achieve ac - countability . They are often applied over a limited period of time , can be tangibly docu - mented , and can be repeated . For example , ﬁ - nancial reports and disclosures are tools that are applied and repeated quarterly or annually , and are documented as ﬁnancial statements , ledgers , or reports . Performance evaluations are also often carried out at speciﬁc points in time , usually at the end of a speciﬁc project , and result in an evaluation report . On the other hand , process mechanisms such as participation and self - regulation are generally more broad and multifaceted than tools , while also being less tangible and time - bound , although each may utilize a set of tools ( such as participatory rural appraisal ) for achieving accountability . Process mechanisms thus emphasize a course of action rather than a distinct end - result , in ACCOUNTABILITY IN PRACTICE 815 which the means are important in and of themselves . There are also some mechanisms , such as social auditing , that straddle the tool - process boundary . These distinctions are dis - cussed in greater detail below . ( a ) Disclosure statements and reports Disclosure statements and reports are among the most widely used tools of accountability and are frequently required by federal or state laws in many countries . In the United States , for example , nonproﬁt organizations that seek federal tax exempt status are subject to the re - quirements of section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) of the Internal Revenue Code . With some exceptions , non - proﬁts must provide quite detailed information on ﬁnances , organizational structure , and pro - grams through an annual information return known as Form 990 . This information is pro - vided to the Internal Revenue Service in order to ensure that the organization is in confor - mance with tax exemption law , and especially to demonstrate that its activities are primarily for educational , charitable , religious , or scien - tiﬁc purposes and for public , rather than pri - vate , beneﬁt . Furthermore , state law provisions also often include registration and reporting statutes that involve annual ﬁnancial reporting . Such legal disclosures enable some degree of accountability to donors , clients and members who wish to access these reports . On the other hand , donors and clients of a nonproﬁt orga - nization in the United States generally have very limited legal standing to challenge an or - ganization for falling short of legal require - ments , with primary responsibility falling on the attorney general as the ‘‘representative of society at large’’ or on the Internal Revenue Service for matters of tax exemption ( Balda , 1994 , p . 72 ; Chisolm , 1995 , p . 147 ) . At the same time , legal requirements can also be abused by governments to keep tabs on organizations , particularly those suspected of subversive ac - tivity . India (cid:1) s Foreign Contribution Regulation Act ( FCRA ) of 1976 , for example , was enacted shortly after a state of Emergency was declared by the government of Indira Gandhi . The Act enabled the government to monitor the ﬂow of foreign funds to NGOs , and to scrutinize those critical of the state ( Fernandes 1986 , as cited in Sen , 1999 , p . 338 ) . To this date , all Indian NGOs receiving foreign funds must open spe - cial FCRA accounts that enable federal over - sight of the use of those funds . Apart from legally mandated reports , donors require regular reports from organizations that they fund . The nature of these reports varies considerably among funders and projects , and it is subject to some degree of negotiation . For example , the European Commission , which provides bilateral assistance to Southern gov - ernments is increasingly funding NGOs , often requiring highly detailed quarterly and annual reports on ‘‘physical’’ achievements resulting from funded projects ( e . g . , numbers of irriga - tion systems built , hectares of land aﬀorested , and numbers of village organizations formed ) as well as accounts of expenditures based on pre - speciﬁed line items . The Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation ( NORAD ) , on the other hand , which also provides substantial funds to governments and NGOs , requires only very brief annual reports from NGOs and often does not impose any speciﬁc format ( Ebrahim , 1999 ) . In many cases , NGOs with multiple foreign donors expend considerable care in complying with the auditing system of each funder . Some organizations , such as Fundaci (cid:2) oon Natura in Ecuador , even make available a yearly ﬁnancial audit by Pricewaterhouse - Coopers ( Meyer , 1999 , p . 92 ) . Such reports and legal disclosures are sig - niﬁcant tools of accountability in that they make available ( either to the public or to oversight bodies ) basic data on NGO opera - tions . Their distinct and tangible nature makes them easily accessible . Yet , the bulk of this re - porting emphasizes upward reporting of ﬁnan - cial data , with only limited indication of the quality of NGO work and almost no attention to downward accountability to stakeholders . These are external approaches to accountabil - ity , enforced through punitive threats such as the loss of nonproﬁt status or revocation of funds . While important , these external ap - proaches have only limited potential for en - couraging organizations and individuals to take internal responsibility for shaping their orga - nizational mission , values , and performance or for promoting ethical behavior . ( b ) Performance assessment and evaluation Another widely used set of tools for facili - tating accountability includes various kinds of evaluation , including performance and impact assessments . It is useful to distinguish between external and internal evaluations . Donors commonly conduct external evaluations of NGO work near the end of a grant or program WORLD DEVELOPMENT 816 phase , and are increasingly employing mid - term assessments as well . Such evaluations typically aim to assess whether and to what extent program goals and objectives have been achieved and are pivotal in determining future funding to NGOs . These appraisals may focus on short - term results of NGO intervention ( i . e . , ‘‘outputs’’ or ‘‘activities’’ such as training pro - grams oﬀered and irrigation systems built ) or medium - and long - term results ( i . e . , ‘‘impacts’’ or ‘‘outcomes’’ such as improvements in client income , health , natural resource base , etc . ) ( Levy , Meltsner , & Wildavsky , 1974 ; Roche , 1999 , p . 22 ) . Internal evaluations are also common , in which NGO staﬀ gauge their own progress , either toward the objectives of exter - nally - funded programs or toward internal goals and missions . Hybrid internal and external evaluations are not uncommon , with NGO staﬀ working jointly with external evaluators . Both external and internal evaluations run into a series of problems concerning mea - surement and relevance . First , there are con - ﬂicts among NGOs and funders over whether they should be assessing processes such as ‘‘participation’’ and ‘‘empowerment’’ or whether they should measure more tangible products such as the numbers of schools built , trees planted , and land area irrigated . For the most part , donor appraisals tend to focus on products – – they are short - term and emphasize easily measurable and quantiﬁable results over more ambiguous and less tangible change in social and political processes . An appraisal tool increasingly used by bilateral donor agencies is logical framework analysis ( LFA ) . The logical framework is a matrix in which a project (cid:1) s objectives and expected results are clearly identiﬁed , along with a list of indica - tors that are to be used in measuring and verifying progress toward achieving those objectives and results . While LFA can be productively used as a tool for initially fram - ing a project , and it has been helpful in en - abling many NGOs to articulate better their objectives and expected results , the frame - work (cid:1) s tendency toward simpliﬁcation and quantiﬁcation make it inadequate for moni - toring complex development interventions . Edwards and Hulme ( 1996a , p . 968 ) suggest that the wide use of logical frameworks and their derivatives may ‘‘distort accountability by overemphasizing short - term quantitative targets and favoring hierarchical management structures – – a tendency to (cid:2) accountancy (cid:1) rather than (cid:2) accountability . (cid:1) ’’ A second set of problems concerns NGO perspectives on the relevance of evaluation . Riddel ( 1999 ) lists several reasons why NGOs are skeptical about the need for and purpose of evaluation . On one side , NGO culture tends to emphasize action over analysis . NGO staﬀ are , by and large , ‘‘doers’’ that gain legitimacy by helping the poor than by conducting time - consuming and costly evaluations . In addition , the tendency of donor evaluations to focus on discrete projects limits their relevance in ex - amining longer - term processes . A reasonable donor response to such skepticism is , of course , that evaluations can help NGO staﬀ become better ‘‘doers’’ by uncovering weaknesses in project planning or by developing more stra - tegic interventions , and that evaluations can be designed to assess longer - term processes and outcomes rather than simply short - term out - puts . It is more diﬃcult , however , to respond to NGO concerns that performance assessments give funders the arsenal to base funding on ‘‘successful’’ projects , thereby rewarding NGOs that stick to discrete and proven product - based approaches to development , while punishing those which attempt to develop and test more innovative and risky process - based approaches ( Riddel , 1999 , pp . 225 – 226 ) . An additional crucial concern raised by small NGOs is that their limited staﬀ and resources are stretched too thin by evaluation and reporting requests of funders . Donors sometimes fail to recognize that complex evaluation requirements can overwhelm small organizations ( and even large ones at times ) , and that NGO size and capacity should be key factors in determining the scale of an appraisal . Onerous data requirements can lead NGOs to develop monitoring and evalu - ation systems that , while satisfying donor needs for information , are viewed as irrelevant for internal NGO decision - making ( Ebrahim , 2002 ) . A third , and more fundamental , skepticism centers on the purpose of evaluation . There is a tendency to equate evaluation with assessment of performance . While it makes sense to con - duct evaluations in order to assess progress toward objectives , should this be the sole , or even the primary , purpose of evaluation ? Per - formance assessments tend to focus attention on projects or programs , while overlooking the NGO or organization itself ( Fowler , 1996 ) . Evaluations have the potential for facilitating broader organizational change , particularly through capacity building and organizational ACCOUNTABILITY IN PRACTICE 817 learning . In his study of a number of donor and NGO experiences with evaluation , Riddel ( 1999 , p . 237 ) concludes that ‘‘donor funds would probably be better spent in helping NGOs develop and experiment with diﬀerent methods of assessment than in undertaking a large number of impact studies based on methods used to date . ’’ This conclusion is particularly important given that in many countries the capacity for fairly basic moni - toring and assessment is severely limited ( Cornwall et al . , 2000 , p . 2 ) . This observation also points to the potential use of evaluation as a tool for learning , rather than simply for impact and performance as - sessment . Organizations can be seen as learning ‘‘by encoding inferences from history into routines that guide behavior’’ ( Levitt & March , 1988 , p . 320 ) . Learning , as such , involves gen - erating knowledge by processing information or events and then using that knowledge to cause behavioral change . Evaluations that re - ward success while punishing failure ( e . g . , through revocation of funds or additional conditions on funding ) seem unlikely to en - gender organizational learning since they en - courage NGOs to exaggerate successes , while discouraging them from revealing and closely scrutinizing their mistakes ( Smillie , 1996 , p . 189 ) . External evaluators such as donors can thus improve NGO accountability ( upward and downward ) not merely by assessing perfor - mance , but by building NGO capacity to con - duct self - evaluations , and by encouraging the analysis of failure as a means of learning . In order for this to occur , however , donors will need to make funding less contingent on sim - plistic assessments of success , and more closely linked to criteria of capacity - building and learning . Smillie ( 1996 , p . 190 ) has suggested that many donor countries , including the Netherlands , the United States , and Canada , are far from adopting such an approach and generally use evaluation ‘‘more as a control and justiﬁcation mechanism . . . than as a tool for learning or for disseminating ﬁndings . ’’ ( c ) Participation As an accountability mechanism , participa - tion is quite distinct from evaluations and re - ports because it is a process rather than a tool , and it is thus part of ongoing routines in an organization . In examining participation , it is helpful to distinguish between diﬀerent levels or kinds of participation . Drawing from Adnan ( 1992 as cited in Gardner & Lewis , 1996 , p . 111 ) and Arnstein ( 1969 ) , I make four general distinctions between types of participation . At one level , participation refers to information about a planned project being made available to the public , and can include public meetings or hearings , surveys , or a formal dialogue on project options . In this form , participation in - volves consultation with community leaders and members but decision - making power re - mains with the project planners . A second level of participation includes public involvement in actual project - related activities , and it may be in the form of community contribution toward labor and funds for project implementation , and possibly in the maintenance of services or facilities . At a third level , citizens are able to negotiate and bargain over decisions with NGOs or state agencies , or even hold veto power over decisions . At this level , citizens are able to exercise greater control over local re - sources and development activities . Finally , at a fourth tier of participation , are people (cid:1) s own initiatives which occur independently of NGO - and state - sponsored projects . Examples of this kind of participation include social movements such as Chipko in the 1970s in which peasants , particularly women , in the Himalayan moun - tains mobilized against commercial logging ( Gardner & Lewis , 1996 ; Guha , 1989 ) , or ac - tions of local resistance and civil disobedience in India (cid:1) s Narmada River Valley against large dam projects ( Khagram , 1998 ) . The ﬁrst two forms of participation are commonly espoused by state agencies , donors , and NGOs , and are based on an assumption that poverty can be eliminated by increasing local access to resources and services . At both of these levels , very little decision - making au - thority is vested in communities or clients , with actual project objectives being determined by NGOs and funders long before any ‘‘partici - pation’’ occurs . This sort of participation is what Najam ( 1996a , p . 346 ) has referred to as ‘‘a sham ritual’’ functioning as little more than ‘‘a (cid:2) feel - good (cid:1) exercise for both the local com - munity and the NGO . ’’ In linking this problem to accountability , he argues that ‘‘the sham of participation translates into the sham of ac - countability’’ because ‘‘ [ u ] nlike donors , [ com - munities ] cannot withdraw their funding ; unlike governments , they cannot impose conditional - ities’’ ( Najam , 1996a , pp . 346 – 347 ) . The act of participation or the exercise of ‘‘voice’’ ( to use Hirschman (cid:1) s term ) is largely symbolic in such settings ; it is not ‘‘political action par excel - WORLD DEVELOPMENT 818 lence’’ ( Hirschman , 1970 , p . 16 ) . Rarely , in mainstream development practice , has the no - tion of participation been extended to forms of politicized activity that directly challenge social and political inequities ( levels three and four above ) , thus creating beneﬁts that might exceed the costs of exercising voice . These more radical versions of participation stress that poverty is based in power structures embedded in social and political relations . As such , without some mechanism for addressing unequal power re - lations , participation appears unlikely to lead to downwards accountability . While participatory methods – – such as par - ticipatory rural appraisal ( PRA ) and partici - patory learning and action ( PLA ) – – have been part of the ‘‘toolkit’’ of most development agencies for several years now , the mere use of these tools is inadequate for ensuring down - ward accountability . 4 For example , Edun (cid:1) s ( 2000 ) examination of six health care projects in Nigeria ( funded by the World Bank and the bilateral development agencies of the United Kingdom , United States , and Canada ) con - cluded that although each of the projects claimed ‘‘community involvement , ’’ their vari - ous failures showed that they did not ade - quately consider community needs , strengths , and conditions prior to design and imple - mentation . In addition , Roche (cid:1) s ( 1999 , p . 148 ) study of several participatory impact assess - ments observed that ‘‘participatory exercises in groups can neglect some people (cid:1) s views ( for instance , women (cid:1) s or children (cid:1) s ) and , moreover , validate and legitimate the views of dominant groups , thus increasing their power vis - (cid:4) aa - vis others . ’’ He noted that for participatory tools and methods to reﬂect diﬀerences in power and perspective , they must be part of a more de - liberate intervention and research strategy . Two useful examples of how more meaning - ful participation can be built into large and complex development projects are provided by Howard - Grabman ( 2000 ) , who reviewed a pair of USAID - funded projects carried out by Save the Children / US and Johns Hopkins Univer - sity . Both projects aimed to increase commu - nity participation in health care in Latin America by building partnerships between ser - vice providers and clients . The projects in - volved communities not only in assessing services but , equally crucially , in developing service goals and objectives in collaboration with service providers . One project , in Bolivia , established a health information system which utilizes simple forms , community maps , and easy - to - understand graphics to assist commu - nity members and service providers in jointly making decisions , setting priorities , and moni - toring progress . The second project , in Peru , learned from previous ﬁndings that ‘‘a major barrier to clients (cid:1) utilization of reproductive health care services is how health care providers treat them . ’’ As a result , the project emphasized dialogue between clients and service providers in order to identify priorities and strategies to increase community use and ownership of public health services . While actual citizen control over both of these projects was limited , these examples demonstrate that it is possible to develop collaborative arrangements between NGOs , government agencies , and communities in a manner that gives citizens considerable leverage over development interventions . Part of this leverage is obtained through tools such as participatory appraisal and asset mapping which can , at least in part , reverse or moderate conventional relations of authority and power . Actual sharing of power , however , would re - quire both of these projects to go even fur - ther – – not only by requiring dialogue and open access to all project - related information , but also by enabling communities to share in programmatic and ﬁnancial decision - making through voting membership on key decision bodies , and even by recruiting community members into management staﬀ . 5 Downward accountability can also be en - hanced through participatory evaluation . As previously noted , communities are unable to hold NGOs or donors accountable by threat - ening to withdraw funding or by imposing conditionalities . As such , systematic involve - ment of communities in evaluating NGOs and funders is a key mechanism that can serve to increase their leverage . Similarly , downward accountability of funders to NGOs requires that evaluations systematically integrate NGO views on the performance of funders with the traditional ‘‘top – down and bureaucratic’’ funder evaluations of NGOs ( Roche , 1999 , p . 29 ) . In this way , tools of evaluation can be combined with processes of participation to develop complex downward accountability mechanisms . ( d ) Self - regulation The term ‘‘self - regulation , ’’ as used here , re - fers speciﬁcally to eﬀorts by NGO or nonproﬁt networks to develop standards or codes of be - havior and performance . 6 Partly in an eﬀort to ACCOUNTABILITY IN PRACTICE 819 redeem the image of the sector ( as a result of public scandals or exaggerated claims of per - formance ) , and partly to forestall potentially restrictive government regulation , nonproﬁts have begun to turn to various forms of self - regulation ( Schweitz , 2001 ) . While some degree of external intervention may be appropriate in dealing with this problem of public trust ( e . g . , government oversight , especially through re - porting and disclosure requirements ) , self - reg - ulation presents a complementary path that allows nonproﬁts to address directly their own sector - wide problems while retaining some in - tegrity . The focus of this section is on formal , rather than informal , codes of conduct devel - oped by NGOs . While such a focus is some - what narrow , since there are likely many examples of less formalized self - regulatory networks , it is useful for illustrative purposes since the codes are an articulation of appro - priate , or accountable , behavior for an entire sector . Moreover , as the Philippine example below demonstrates , formalized codes some - times provide a visibility that is helpful in en - hancing the reputation of the NGO sector . The process of developing a code of conduct is , in eﬀect , ‘‘an opportunity for self - deﬁnition by national NGO networks , as well as for public presentation of their collective mission , principles , values , and methods’’ ( Schweitz , 2001 , p . 2 ) . The legitimacy of a code , however , is inﬂuenced by the process through which it is established , thus making the code creation process crucial to its eventual adoption . 7 In their study of national and international codes ( Schweitz and Kunugi 1999 , as cited in Schweitz , 2001 ) provide examples of self - regu - lation from Australia , Bulgaria , Canada , Co - lombia , India , Japan , Lesotho , Nepal , the Philippines , South Africa , and the United States , as well as from transnational organiza - tions such as the Commonwealth Foundation , the International Council for Voluntary Agen - cies , and the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement . The code process in all of these cases involved some degree of participa - tory negotiation , frequently lasting over two years , with most codes also including some form of compliance assessment or certiﬁcation . Most of these codes have been adopted within the past 10 years , reﬂecting not only an eﬀort by NGOs to improve their image , but also an increasing sectoral recognition of the necessity for establishing ‘‘common positions , strategic alliances , coordinated action , and proof of ac - countability’’ in order to inﬂuence eﬀectively national and international policy ( Schweitz , 2001 , p . 4 ) . While the content of these codes varies , they essentially agree on key principles and ethics of development ( e . g . , participatory and people - centered development ) , and they also provide guidelines on NGO management ( Schweitz , 2001 , pp . 8 – 9 ) : The most basic requirements of accountability stated in these codes are that the organization have ( 1 ) a clearly speciﬁed purpose or mission , and ( 2 ) a trans - parent internal management system , free of conﬂicts of interest , discrimination , favoritism , secrecy , corrup - tion , and all other unethical practices . Some of the codes explicitly require an elected , independent board of directors and specify its responsibilities . Another crucial aspect of accountability is proper , complete , and open ﬁnancial accounting that . . . is stressed in all codes but with varying degrees of speciﬁcity . In the United States , for example , a set of standards was developed in 1993 by Inter - Action , a membership association of US pri - vate voluntary organizations ( PVOs ) . These standards lay out , in some detail , requirements concerning governance , organizational integ - rity , ﬁnances , public communication and dis - closure , management and hiring practices ( including promoting gender equity ) , programs , and public policy involvement . For instance , the governance standards require that the or - ganization have an independent board of di - rectors and even specify some of the tasks of the board . The integrity standards emphasize truthfulness in conduct and require that each organization develop a written standard of conduct for its directors , employees , and volunteers . In addition , guidelines and re - quirements for promoting gender equity , di - versity , and people with disabilities are found throughout the code . Implementation of these standards is based on self - certiﬁcation , subject to review by a Standards Committee which is also empowered to investigate complaints about noncompliance ( InterAction , 2001 ) . These standards have had impacts beyond the United States , with other consortiums such as the Canadian Council for International Co - operation ( CCIC ) using them as a basis for developing their own codes . In fact , the CCIC Code of Ethics contains almost identical cate - gories and very similar content to InterAction (cid:1) s code ( CCIC , 1995 ) . While InterAction (cid:1) s standards of ethical conduct emerged from an internal decision by its executive committee , the impetus for devel - WORLD DEVELOPMENT 820 oping codes can also emerge from threats by government regulators . In the Philippines , the proliferation of NGOs – – estimated at over 60 , 000 – – fueled government concern about the formation of nominal NGOs serving as tax shields . This led the Department of Finance to challenge NGOs to create a self - regulatory body ‘‘to certify nonstock , nonproﬁt organiza - tions for tax - eﬃcient donee institution status’’ ( Soledad , 2001 , p . 26 ) . In response , the Philip - pine Council for NGO Certiﬁcation ( PCNC ) was established in 1999 by six of the country (cid:1) s largest NGO networks in order to evaluate and certify NGOs on six criteria : vision , mission , and goals ; governance ; administration ; pro - gram operations ; networking ; and , especially , ﬁnancial management . Unlike InterAction which uses self - certiﬁcation subject to investi - gation , the PCNC has trained about 750 NGO oﬃcers as volunteer evaluators who , in teams of three , evaluate applicant organizations . Be - tween its launching in February of 1999 and December of 2000 , the PCNC evaluated 85 organizations , certifying 75 , deferring certiﬁ - cation on three , and denying certiﬁcation to seven organizations . In addition , although the PCNC was initially formed to protect the spe - cial tax status enjoyed by NGOs and to legiti - mate and encourage donations to NGOs , it has also begun to exert policy inﬂuence at a na - tional level ( Soledad , 2001 ) . Numerous similar umbrella organizations have emerged in other parts of Asia , including the Association of Development Agencies in Bangladesh which has its own code of ethics , and the Voluntary Action Network India which has adopted the ‘‘Guidelines for Good Policy and Practice’’ developed by the UK (cid:1) s Commonwealth Foun - dation ( Commonwealth Foundation & Volun - tary Action Network India , 1995 ; Voluntary Action Network India & International Center for Not - for - Proﬁt Law , 1997 ) . The actual im - pacts of these various codes remain to be em - pirically examined . Each of the above cases demonstrates codes developed by national - level network associa - tions . The formation of NGO codes applicable at an international level is considerably more complex , given the nascent nature of a global governance structure and norms within which to situate and enforce standards . Humanitarian responses to natural disasters and conﬂict , for example , frequently involve numerous bilateral donor agencies , multilateral organizations , government agencies , and international and local NGOs , all operating in highly turbulent political , physical , and social contexts . The performance of organizations in this environ - ment is often dependent on the performance of others in the system . For example , the UN (cid:1) s World Food Programme , which provides bulk food aid in emergency situations , is dependent not only on the voluntary support of bilateral donors to fund food procurement and shipping , but also on multiple NGOs to distribute food ( Borton , 2001 ) . Codes that can enhance coor - dination and accountability in such settings have the potential to improve the performance of emergency operations . A number of such codes have begun to emerge over the past decade . For example , eight of the world (cid:1) s largest disaster response agencies developed , in 1994 , the Code of Con - duct for The International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement and NGOs in Disaster Relief . 8 It lays down 10 principles of behavior for NGOs , and also provides recommendations on behavior to governments of disaster aﬀected countries , donor governments , and intergov - ernmental organizations ( International Feder - ation of Red Cross & Red Crescent Societies , 1994 ) . Subsequent eﬀorts by European and US NGOs led to the publication , in 2000 , of a Humanitarian Charter and Minimum Stan - dards in Disaster Response ( the ‘‘Sphere Standards’’ ) . It provides universal minimum standards in the core areas of water supply and sanitation , nutrition , food aid , shelter and site planning , and health services . In addition , a group of organizations in the United Kingdom , has been exploring possibilities for a huma - nitarian ombudsman , in response to an inter - national evaluation of emergency assistance to Rwanda ( Borton , 2001 ) . This eﬀort , now known as the Humanitarian Accountability Project , aims to ‘‘act as an impartial and in - dependent voice for those aﬀected by disaster and conﬂict’’ ( Ombudsman Project Working Group , 1998 , p . 1 ) . In addition to handling the complaints and concerns of local populations , a humanitarian ombudsman could also become a central player in scrutinizing NGO behavior in relation to accepted codes of practice . In sum , self - regulation presents numerous opportunities for NGOs not only to better their public image , but also to enhance performance . Self - regulation through codes of conduct , om - budsmen , and other avenues not discussed here ( such as accreditations ) , provide important mechanisms through which NGOs can improve accountability to funders , communities , and to themselves . A key challenge , especially at the ACCOUNTABILITY IN PRACTICE 821 international level , will lie in the coordination of these emerging standards and accountability mechanisms so that they come to be viewed as legitimate means of improving accountability and humanitarian response , rather than as in - struments of control and isomorphism . The adoption and implementation of such codes will depend both on the processes through which they are developed and thus legitimated , as well as on the mechanisms through which they are enforced . Self - regulation as such , and codes of conduct in particular , are not simple tools of accountability but are part of a com - plex accountability process linked to sectoral identity , legitimacy , and normative views on organizational behavior . ( e ) Social auditing Finally , as another mechanism of account - ability , social auditing refers to a process through which an organization assesses , re - ports , and improves upon its social perfor - mance and ethical behavior , especially through stakeholder dialogue ( Gonella , Pilling , & Zadek , 1998 , p . 21 ; Volunteer Vancouver , 1999 , p . 1 ) . It is not simply a kind of evaluation – – social auditing is a complex process that inte - grates elements of many of the accountability mechanisms discussed above , including disclo - sure statements , evaluations , participation , and standards of behavior . While social auditing has not been widely adopted by NGOs ( nor by the private or public sectors for that matter ) , it merits examination as a distinct accountability mechanism because of its conceptual integra - tion of the accountability tools and processes already discussed . A variety of models for assessing and im - proving upon social performance have arisen over the past decade , with signiﬁcant diﬀer - ences among them . For example , the ‘‘Ethical Accounting Statement’’ developed by Pruzan and Thyssen ( 1994 ) in Denmark , focuses largely on stakeholder dialogue and percep - tions , with limited use of systematic accounting and external benchmarking . This model was already in use by about 50 organization throughout Scandinavia by 1994 ( Mayo , 1996 , p . 17 ) . Similarly , ‘‘Social Performance Re - ports’’ and their variants used by a range of companies such as Ben and Jerry (cid:1) s ice - cream and multinational corporations such as Shell International and British Petroleum , include stakeholder perspectives and a limited degree of external benchmarking and systematic ac - counting , but without a common standard . The ‘‘Social Auditing’’ processes developed by the Institute of Social and Ethical Accountabil - ity ( ISEA ) in London combines stakeholder dialogue with development of indicators and assessment protocols . The organization devel - oped a formal standard for social auditing in 1999 , which it revised in 2002 ( ISEA , 1999 , 2001 ) . Despite their diﬀerences , each of these approaches involves ( to varying degrees ) ﬁve key elements of the process : stakeholder identiﬁcation , stakeholder dialogue , use of in - dicators and / or benchmarks , continuous im - provement , and public disclosure ( Gonella et al . , 1998 , p . 22 ) . Proponents of social auditing oﬀer numerous reasons why nonproﬁt organizations should adopt the process . First it oﬀers internal man - agement advantages in terms of monitoring performance ( Pearce , 1996 , p . 7 as cited in Vol - unteer Vancouver , 1999 , p . 8 ) . A key component of social auditing is the development of social and environmental information systems . This is particularly useful for NGOs that do not already have systems for analyzing and reporting on their social performance . Second , as a mecha - nism of accountability , social auditing enables views of stakeholders ( such as communities and funders ) to be considered in developing or re - vising organizational values and goals , and in designing indicators for assessing performance ( i . e . , downward and upward accountability ) . Third , social auditing can serve as a valuable tool for strategic planning and organizational learning if the information on stakeholder per - spectives and social performance is fed back into decision processes ( Mayo , 1996 , p . 9 ) . Fourth , the external veriﬁcation of social audits provides a way for NGOs to enhance their public repu - tations by disclosing information that is based on veriﬁed evidence rather than on anecdotes or unsubstantiated claims ( Pearce 1996 , p . 7 as cited in Volunteer Vancouver , 1999 , p . 8 ) . This disclosure and veriﬁcation function is especially important not only as a response to public fears about the quality and integrity of nonproﬁt work , but also as a means of tempering exag - gerations by nonproﬁts of their own achieve - ments . Despite the apparent advantages of social audits , a number of factors have constrained their adoption by nonproﬁt organizations . Perhaps the most important factor is cost . The social auditing process can impose signiﬁcant burdens of time and money , especially on small organizations , particularly if external certiﬁca - WORLD DEVELOPMENT 822 tion is desired . On the other hand , the eﬀort and resources spent are likely to diminish with time as the auditing process is integrated with other related systems such as strategic planning and evaluation , annual reporting , and ﬁnancial auditing ( Dawson , 1998 ) . The potential for social audits to overwhelm NGOs with addi - tional information collection and analysis can be countered by insisting on systems that are simple , clear and built upon the existing ca - pacity of the NGO . For example , a study on the relevance of social auditing for Oxfam Great Britain found that the organization was already following some of the key principles of the process and concluded that , ‘‘rather than adopting social audit as a new cycle , a costly and time - consuming exercise , ways should be sought to ensure existing systems live up to its principles’’ ( Dawson , 1998 , p . 1457 ) . Similarly , Maderas del Pueblo , a rural development NGO in Mexico , has sought to integrate elements of social auditing with its experience in participa - tory rural appraisal and developing local com - munity indicators ( Raynard , 1998 ) . An additional concern about social audits is the uncertainty associated with its impact on donors . What if an audit turns up serious problems in the organization or , more likely , it shows that the organization falls short of its rhetoric on participation and poverty allevia - tion ? Are not such ﬁndings more likely to deter than attract donors ? The ultimate response to such potential ﬁndings is dependent on key organizational motivations for undertaking a social audit – – whether it was undertaken pri - marily for purposes of improving performance and accountability , or whether it was seen largely as an exercise for enhancing public standing . Indeed , there is even the potential for social assessments to be overmarketed by or - ganizations for public relations purposes . For example , the Body Shop faced much negative scrutiny upon its announcement that it was undertaking social audits to show that it was an ‘‘ethical’’ company . On the other hand , the Vancouver City Savings and Credit Union re - ceived favorable press in advance of its report , and even more following its release in 1998 ( Volunteer Vancouver , 1999 , pp . 15 – 16 ) . For Oxfam (cid:1) s managers in the United Kingdom , information disclosure is seen as likely to en - hance the NGO (cid:1) s reputation as being trust - worthy and honest . They also indicate concern by recommending the release of information in a ‘‘carefully controlled manner , to avoid the misuse of information received out of context by those with only a partial view of the whole picture’’ ( Dawson , 1998 , p . 1461 ) . For NGOs more generally , the use of social auditing im - plies a shift from highly circumscribed evalua - tions of individual projects or programs to a broader assessment of the organization as a whole ( Raynard , 1998 ) . Another key challenge to the adoption of social auditing is the lack of convergence on appropriate and externally veriﬁable standards . The variety of emergent approaches has led to a proliferation of standards which , while in - dicative of a growing ﬁeld , make it diﬃcult to compare performance across organizations . Some of the standards , such as ISEA (cid:1) s Ac - countAbility ( AA ) 1000 and the International Standard Organization (cid:1) s ( ISO ) 14001 Environ - mental Management Systems standards , are ‘‘process - based’’ in that they specify the ‘‘pro - cesses that an organization should follow to account for its performance , and not the level of performance the organization should achieve’’ ( ISEA , 1999 , p . 13 ) . Such standards aim to as - sist organizations in institutionalizing processes such as indicator development , information collection and analysis , integration of ﬁndings with decision processes and , in the case of AA 1000 , stakeholder involvement . These standards do not actually rank the social or environmental performance of an organization in relation to some external benchmark . Performance - based standards , on the other hand , attempt to set common benchmarks that allow for such com - parisons . Examples of these include the Global Reporting Initiative (cid:1) s new Sustainability Re - porting Guidelines and Social Accountability International (cid:1) s ( SAI ) 8000 standard for work - place conditions in supply chains . 9 These standards , along with many others , have been accompanied by a growth in training and auditor certiﬁcation programs oﬀered by organizations like ISEA and SAI , with ac - counting giants such as KPMG developing special divisions for ‘‘Social , Environmental , and Ethical Performance’’ directed largely at corporate , rather than nonproﬁt , organizations . The extent to which these developments will lead to the use of social auditing as a mechanism for enhancing accountability , rather than sim - ply as a public relations and management con - sulting fad , will depend on the rigor and comprehensiveness of the emerging process and performance standards . Initial analysis of cer - tiﬁcation programs in the forest - products and apparel industries suggests that market forces and the drive toward standardization may lead ACCOUNTABILITY IN PRACTICE 823 ﬁrms to adopt the lowest common - denominator standards , unless watchdog groups are active in delegitimizing weak standards ( Gereﬃ , Garcia - Johnson , & Sasser , 2001 ) . Nonetheless , the integrated nature of social auditing makes it a potentially valuable mech - anism for enhancing accountability . It com - bines a series of tools ( e . g . , use of disclosures and evaluations ) with processes ( e . g . , partici - pation of various stakeholders ) . Given its vol - untary and emergent nature , the impact and relevance of this management approach will depend largely on how it is marketed by its key promoters and certiﬁcation agencies , as well as by how it is used by implementing organiza - tions . A social audit can improve upward and downward accountability only if its users seek systematically to incorporate stakeholders into dialogue , indicator development , and perfor - mance assessment . It can increase organi - zational transparency if information that is collected and analyzed – – including evidence of failure – – is disclosed to stakeholders or the public . As a mechanism for internal account - ability , social auditing oﬀers a coherent frame - work for integrating organizational values and goals with governance and strategic planning only to the extent that its users are committed to acting on ﬁndings . 4 . CONCLUSIONS : SUMMARY AND POLICY IMPLICATIONS Key characteristics of the accountability mechanisms discussed above are summarized in Table 1 . The ﬁrst column lists each of the ﬁve mechanisms , and distinguishes among those that are tools and those that are processes . Following Najam (cid:1) s ( 1996a ) framework , the second column responds to the question of ‘‘accountability to whom ? ’’ – – upward to donors , downward to cli - ents and communities , or internally to NGOs themselves . For example , disclosure statements , reports , and evaluations are currently used primarily for upward accountability from NGOs to donors , although evaluations also have tre - mendous potential for downward accountabil - ity – – by making NGOs more accountable to communities and by making funders more ac - countable to NGOs . While funders frequently require NGOs to seek community input in eval - uating projects , they rarely seek NGO input in evaluating themselves . Similarly , participation , which is primarily conceived by NGOs as a tool of downward accountability to communities , has received only scant attention as a tool for increasing the responsiveness of funders to NGOs . There are two key policy implications to these observations . First , while traditional ap - proaches to improving accountability , such as increased oversight through reporting and dis - closure requirements , enable a degree of up - ward accountability , they are of limited use for enhancing downward accountability . A more balanced approach thus requires a greater role for NGOs in evaluating funders and for clients in evaluating NGOs . Yet is it realistic to expect that funders be held accountable to grant re - cipients , particularly given the asymmetries in resources and power between NGOs and funders ? There is some empirical documenta - tion of successful NGO eﬀorts to minimize these asymmetries , either through strategies to reduce vulnerability and sensitivity to a small number of funding sources , or through the use of resources controlled by NGOs ( such as in - formation and reputation ) to increase their own inﬂuence on funders ( Ebrahim , 2002 ; Hudock , 1999 , pp . 24 – 26 ; Meyer , 1999 , p . 81 ) . While these rare eﬀorts to resist donor pressures are not couched in the language of accountability , they may be viewed as an attempt to reduce the abusive potential of too much upward ac - countability and too little downward account - ability . The key point is that downward accountability mechanisms remain compara - tively underdeveloped , and that NGOs are thus responding indirectly with eﬀorts to protect themselves from unwanted interference from funders . While few , if any , donors are likely to entertain the possibility of being evaluated by NGOs that they fund , downward accountabil - ity will likely prove impossible to attain without serious attention to such mechanisms . A second policy implication is that improv - ing accountability within NGOs themselves also needs attention to special mechanisms . Social auditing and self - regulation are two possible mechanisms , the former being focused on intraorganizational accountability ( and with stakeholders ) , and the latter emphasizing sec - tor - level concerns . The third column in Table 1 focuses on the inducements or drivers behind each account - ability mechanism . In many cases the induce - ments are external , such as legal requirements for annual reports ( e . g . , for retaining nonproﬁt tax status ) or requests by donors for quarterly progress data , backed up by sanctions for noncompliance ( such as loss of funding ) . Ex - WORLD DEVELOPMENT 824 ternal inducements can also be more subtle , such as the erosion of public conﬁdence in NGOs as a result of scandals or exaggerated claims of achievement . Internal inducements are also common , especially in mission - driven organizations that believe in participation , or in the importance of valuing the environmental , social and ethical dimensions of their activities . Accountability , as such , is not simply about ‘‘being held responsible’’ ( i . e . , externally driven ) but also about ‘‘taking responsibility’’ ( i . e . , internally driven ) . Again , the key policy implication is that ex - ternal inducements of accountability , such as reporting requirements mandated by law or by conditions of funding , are only part of the ac - countability equation . While externally driven mechanisms are backed up by threats that can certainly reduce noncompliance , the legitimacy and reputation of the NGO sector need to be buttressed by internally driven mechanisms . For a sector that views itself as largely mission - driven , there is an urgent need to take perfor - mance assessment seriously in order to justify activities with substantiated evidence rather than with anecdote or rhetoric . Funders and regulators also bear responsibility in this re - gard . An emphasis by donors on building the internal capacity of NGOs to develop their own long - term assessment tools , rather than on re - quiring regular reports of a pre - speciﬁed na - ture , might go a long way toward internalizing performance assessment in NGOs . The ﬁnal column in Table 1 characterizes each mechanism in terms of the primary type of organizational response that it generates – – functional ( i . e . , accounts for resource use and short - term results ) or strategic ( i . e . , accounts for Table 1 . Characteristics of accountability mechanisms Accountability mechanism ( tool or process ) Accountability to whom ? ( upward , downward , or to self ) Inducement ( internal or external ) Organizational response ( functional or strategic ) Disclosures / reports ( tool ) – – Upward to funders and oversight agencies – – Downward ( to a lesser de - gree ) to clients or members who read the reports – – Legal requirement – – Tax status – – Funding requirement ( external threat of loss of funding or tax status ) – – Primarily functional , with a focus on short - term results Performanceassessment and evalua - tion ( tool ) – – Upward to funders – – Signiﬁcant potential for downward from NGOs to communities and from funders to NGOs – – Funding requirement ( external ) – – Potential to become a learning tool ( internal ) – – Primarily functional at present , with possibilities for longer - term strategic assessments Participation ( process ) – – Downward from NGOs to clients and communities – – Internally to NGOs themselves – – Signiﬁcant potential for downward from funders to NGOs . – – Organizational values ( internal ) – – Funding requirement ( external ) – – Primarily functional if participation is limited to consultation and implementation – – Strategic if it involves in - creasing bargaining power of clients vis - (cid:4) aa - vis NGOs , and NGOs vis - (cid:4) aa - vis funders Self - regulation ( process ) – – To NGOs themselves , as a sector – – Potentially to clients and donors – – Erosion of public conﬁ - dence due to scandals and exaggeration of ac - complishments ( external loss of funds ; internal loss of reputation ) – – Strategic in that it concerns long - term change involving codes of conduct Social auditing ( tool and process ) – – To NGOs themselves ( by linking values to strategy and performance ) – – Downward and upward to stakeholders – – Erosion of public conﬁ - dence ( external ) – – Valuation of social , en - vironmental , and ethical performance on par with economic performance ( internal ) – – Functional to the extent it aﬀects the behavior of a single organization – – Strategic to the extent it aﬀects NGO - stakeholder interaction , promotes longer - term planning , and becomes adopted sector - wide ACCOUNTABILITY IN PRACTICE 825 longer - term and structural impacts on the wider NGO environment ) . The key observation here is that the most common mechanisms of account - ability , such as disclosure statements , reports , and project evaluations , mainly serve a func - tional purpose because they tend to focus on accounting for funds and measuring their short - term impacts . The complex nature of develop - ment suggests , however , that attention to more strategic processes of accountability are neces - sary for lasting social and political change . As a result , while reporting requirements and frame - works that are biased in favor of easily mea - surable and quantitative assessments of progress ( e . g . , logical framework analysis ) might be suf - ﬁcient for funding and regulatory purposes , they undervalue long - term and qualitative assess - ments that are essential for understanding the real impacts of development activity . Develop - ing an internal capacity in NGOs for conducting long - term evaluations of their own work is an essential strategic response . Self - regulation and social auditing are two additional strategic mechanisms . Self - regula - tion is strategic in the sense that it is targeted toward change at a sector - wide level , not only by establishing codes for NGO behavior , but also by forming NGO umbrella organizations that can engage in national - level policy de - bates . Social auditing is a strategic response in that it can assist NGOs in forming long - term approaches to addressing social develop - ment problems , particularly by better including stakeholders into decision - making and by linking organizational values to plans . For or - ganizations hesitant to engage in a full - scale social audit process due to resource constraints , strategic accountability is also possible through a rethinking of existing practices , such as by modifying short - term performance assessments to focus on longer - term impacts and by moving toward participation models that increase the leverage of weaker stakeholders . The various mechanisms discussed above demonstrate that accountability is both about being held responsible by external actors and standards , as well as about taking internal responsibility for actions . An integrated per - spective on accountability suggests that it op - erates along multiple dimensions – – involving numerous actors ( patrons , clients , selves ) , using various mechanisms and standards of per - formance ( external and internal , legal and vol - untary ) , and requiring diﬀering levels of organizational response ( functional and strate - gic ) . The current emphasis among NGOs and donors on the upward and external dimensions of accountability is problematic in that it en - courages the formation of relationships with highly imbalanced accountabilities . In such cases , patrons can abuse their powers of pun - ishment by threatening NGOs with a loss funds , by imposing conditionalities , or by tar - nishing NGO reputations ( Hudock , 1999 , p . 46 ; Najam , 1996a , p . 344 ; Perera , 1997 ) . Similarly , the present emphasis on functional forms of accountability tends to reward NGOs for short - term responses with quick and tangible im - pacts , while neglecting longer - term strategic responses that address more complex issues of social and political change . The challenge of accountability lies in directly addressing these much neglected components in order to even - tually ﬁnd a balance between external and in - ternal , upward and downward , and functional and strategic approaches . NOTES 1 . The terms nongovernmental organization ( NGO ) , nonproﬁt organization ( NPO ) , and private voluntary organization ( PVO ) are all used interchangeably in this paper . For taxonomies of the sector , see Najam ( 1996b ) and Vakil ( 1997 ) . 2 . Kearns ( 1996 , p . 43 ) proposes a similar integrated framework for conceptualizing accountability organized along three dimensions : ‘‘the higher authority to whom organizations and individuals are accountable , the standards of performance – – explicit or implicit – – for which organizations are held accountable , and the responses to the accountability environment – – tactical or strategic – – from inside the organization . ’’ 3 . I am grateful to an anonymous reviewer for alerting me to this distinction . 4 . For an overview of PRA and a summary of key evaluation tools and methods , see Chambers ( 1994 ) and Roche ( 1999 ) . 5 . The characteristics of such ‘‘member - accountable’’ organizations are discussed in considerable detail by WORLD DEVELOPMENT 826 Smith - Sreen ( 1995 ) . Her framework for examining NGO accountability to members is divided into three constit - uent parts : mechanisms for adequately addressing member problems and suggestions , sharing of power , and providing timely support . Although much of Smith – Sreen (cid:1) s analysis focuses on membership organizations , many of her insights apply equally well to nonmember - ship NGOs . 6 . While the terms ‘‘sectoral’’ or ‘‘mutual’’ regulation might be used in place of ‘‘self - regulation , ’’ I use the latter term because it seems to have more currency in the literature . It also more clearly emphasizes an internal rather than external dimension of accountability , while simultaneously indicating its sectoral signiﬁcance . 7 . Drawing from Scott ( 1992 , p . 305 ) , ‘‘legitimacy’’ may be viewed as ‘‘the property of a situation or behavior that is deﬁned by set of social norms as correct or appropriate , ’’ or more speciﬁcally as ‘‘a condition reﬂecting cultural alignment , normative support , or consonance with relevant rules or laws’’ ( Scott , 1995 , p . 45 ) . Legitimacy , as such , is a ‘‘condition’’ to be achieved , particularly through a process that is broadly perceived as being socially appropriate . 8 . The key sponsers were Caritas Internationalis , Catholic Relief Services , The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies , International Save the Children Alliance , Lutheran World Federation , Oxfam , The World Council of Churches , and The International Committee of the Red Cross . 9 . Numerous other standards and guidelines include the Caux Round Table Principles for Business , CERES Principles , European Ecomanagement and Audit Scheme , Ethical Trading Initiative , Forest Stewardship Council , Global Sullivan Principles , ICFTU Basic Code of Labour Practice , ICC Buisiness Charter for Sustain - able Development , and Sunshine Corporate Reporting ( ISEA , 1999 , p . 52 – 54 ) . REFERENCES Adnan , S . ( Ed . ) ( 1992 ) . People (cid:1) s Participation , NGOs and the Flood Action Plan : An Independent Review . Daka : Oxfam . Arnstein , S . R . ( 1969 ) . A ladder of citizen participation . American Institute of Planning Journal , 35 ( 4 ) , 216 – 224 . Avina , J . ( 1993 ) . The evolutionary life cycles of non - Governmental development organizations . Public Administration and Development , 13 ( 5 ) , 453 – 474 . Balda , J . B . ( 1994 ) . The liability of nonproﬁts to donors . Nonproﬁt Management and Leadership , 5 ( 1 ) , 67 – 83 . Behn , R . D . ( 2001 ) . Rethinking democratic accountabil - ity . Washington , DC : Brookings Institution Press . Borton , J . ( 2001 ) . Accountability in the international humanitarian system . AccountAbility Quarterly ( 15 ) , 23 – 25 . Canadian Council for International Cooperation ( 1995 ) . Canadian Council for International Cooperation code of ethics . Ottawa : Canadian Council for Inter - national Cooperation . Carver , J . ( 1990 ) . Boards that make a diﬀerence : a new design for leadership in non - proﬁt and public organi - zations . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Chambers , R . ( 1994 ) . Participatory rural appraisal ( PRA ) : analysis of experience . World Development , 22 ( 10 ) , 1253 – 1268 . Chisolm , L . B . ( 1995 ) . Accountability of nonproﬁt organizations and those who control them : the legal framework . Nonproﬁt Management and Leadership , 6 ( 2 ) , 141 – 156 . Clarkson , M . B . E . ( 1995 ) . A stakeholder framework for analyzing and evaluating corporate social perfor - mance . Academy of Management Review , 20 ( 1 ) , 92 – 117 . Commonwealth Foundation , Voluntary Action Net - work India ( 1995 ) . Non - governmental organisations : guidelines for good policy and practice . New Delhi : VANI . Cornwall , A . , Lucas , H . , & Pasteur , K . ( 2000 ) . Intro - duction : accountability through participation : devel - oping workable partnership models in the health sector . IDS Bulletin , 31 ( 1 ) , 1 – 13 . Dawson , E . ( 1998 ) . The relevance of social audit for oxfam GB . Journal of Business Ethics , 17 ( 13 ) , 1457 – 1469 . Dunn , J . ( 1999 ) . Situating democratic public account - ability . In A . Przeworski , S . C . Stokes , & B . Manin ( Eds . ) , Demacracy , accountability , and representation ( pp . 329 – 344 ) . Cambridge and New York : Cam - bridge University Press . Ebrahim , A . , ( 1999 ) . The making of NGOs : global inﬂuences and local responses from Western India . Ph . D . Thesis , Civil and Environmental Engineering , Stanford University , Stanford , CA . Ebrahim , A . ( 2002 ) . Information struggles : the role of information in the reproduction of NGO - funder relations . Nonproﬁt and Voluntary Sector Quarterly , 31 ( 1 ) , 85 – 113 . Edun , A . ( 2000 ) . The role of evaluation in accountability in donor - funded projects . IDS Bulletin , 31 ( 1 ) , 48 – 52 . Edwards , M . , & Hulme , D . ( Eds . ) ( 1996a ) . Beyond the magic bullet : NGO performance and accountability in the post - Cold War World . West Hartford , CT : Kumarian Press . Edwards , M . , & Hulme , D . ( 1996b ) . Too close for comfort ? the impact of oﬃcial aid on nongovern - mental organizations . World Development , 24 ( 6 ) , 961 – 973 . ACCOUNTABILITY IN PRACTICE 827 Fowler , A . ( 1996 ) . Assessing NGO performance : diﬃ - culties , dilemmas , and a way ahead . In M . Edwards , & D . Hulme ( Eds . ) , Beyond the Magic Bullet : NGO performance and accountability in the Post - Cold War World ( pp . 169 – 186 ) . West Hartford , CT : Kumarian . Fox , J . A . , & Brown , L . D . ( Eds . ) . ( 1998 ) . The struggle for accountability : The World Bank , NGOs , and grassroots movements . Cambridge , MA : The MIT Press . Freeman , R . E . ( 1984 ) . Strategic management : a stake - holder approach . Boston : Pitman . Fry , R . E . ( 1995 ) . Accountability in organizational life : problem or opportunity for nonproﬁts ? Nonproﬁt Management and Leadership , 6 ( 2 ) , 181 – 195 . Gardner , K . , & Lewis , D . ( 1996 ) . Anthropology , devel - opment and the post - modern challenge . London : Pluto Press . Gereﬃ , G . , Garcia - Johnson , R . , & Sasser , E . ( 2001 ) . The NGO - Industrial complex . Foreign Policy ( July / Au - gust ) . Gibelman , M . , & Gelman , S . R . ( 2001 ) . Very public scandals : nongovernmental organizations in trouble . Nonproﬁt and Voluntary Sector Quarterly , 12 ( 1 ) , 49 – 66 . Gonella , C . , Pilling , A . , & Zadek , S . ( 1998 ) . Making values count : contemporary experience in social and ethical accounting , auditing , and reporting . London : The Association of Chartered Certiﬁed Accountants . Guha , R . ( 1989 ) . The unquiet woods : ecological change and peasant resistance in the Himalaya . Delhi : Oxford University Press . Hirschman , A . O . ( 1970 ) . Exit , voice , and loyalty : responses to decline in ﬁrms , organizations , and states . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Howard - Grabman , L . ( 2000 ) . Bridging the gap between communities and service providers : developing ac - countability through community mobilisation ap - proaches . IDS Bulletin , 31 ( 1 ) , 88 – 96 . Hudock , A . ( 1999 ) . NGOs and civil society : democracy by proxy ? Cambridge , MA : Blackwell . Hummels , H . ( 1998 ) . Organizing ethics : A stakeholder debate . Journal of Business Ethics , 17 , 1403 – 1419 . Institute of Social and Ethical Accountability ( 1999 ) . Accountability 1000 ( AA 1000 ) Framework : stan - dard , guidelines and professional qualiﬁcation . Lon - don : Institute of Social and Ethical Accountability . Institute of Social and Ethical Accountability ( 2001 ) . AA 2000 Accountability management : consultation brieﬁng 1 . London : Institute of Social and Ethical Accountability . InterAction ( 2001 ) . InterAction PVO standards . Wash - ington , DC . : InterAction : American Council for Voluntary International Action . International Federation of Red Cross and Red Cres - cent Societies ( 1994 ) . Code of conduct for the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Move - ment and non - governmental organizations ( NGOs ) in disaster relief . Geneva : International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies . Jawahar , I . M . , & McLaughlin , G . L . ( 2001 ) . Toward a descriptive stakeholder theory : an organizational life cycle approach . Academy of Management Review , 26 ( 3 ) , 397 – 414 . Kearns , K . P . ( 1996 ) . Managing for accountability : preserving the public trust in nonproﬁt organizations . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Khagram , S . ( 1998 ) . Dams , Development and democ - racy : transnational struggles for power and water . Ph . D . Thesis , Political Science , Stanford University , Stanford , CA . Levitt , B . , & March , J . G . ( 1988 ) . Organizational learning . Annual Review of Sociology , 14 , 319 – 340 . Levy , F . , Meltsner , A . J . , & Wildavsky , A . ( 1974 ) . Urban outcomes : schools , streets , and libraries . Berkeley : University of California . Mackintosh , M . ( 1992 ) . Questioning the state . In M . Wuyts , M . Mackintosh , & T . Hewitt ( Eds . ) , Devel - opment Policy and Public Action ( pp . 61 – 89 ) . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Mayo , E . ( 1996 ) . Social auditing for voluntary organ - isations . London : VOLPROF , Centre for Voluntary Sector and Not - for - Proﬁt - Management . Meyer , C . A . ( 1999 ) . The economics and politics of NGOs in Latin America . Westport , CT and London : Prae - ger . Moser , C . O . N . ( 1989 ) . Gender planning in the Third World : meeting practical and strategic gender needs . World Development , 17 ( 11 ) , 1799 – 1825 . Najam , A . ( 1996a ) . NGO accountability : a conceptual framework . Development Policy Review , 14 , 339 – 353 . Najam , A . ( 1996b ) . Understanding the Third Sector : revisiting the prince , the merchant , and the citizen . Nonproﬁt Management and Leadership , 7 ( 2 ) , 203 – 221 . Ombudsman Project Working Group ( 1998 ) . An om - budsman for humanitarian assistance ? A report on the ﬁndings from a feasibility study . London : Om - budsman Project Working Group ( also available at www . oneworld . org / ombudsman / esum . htm ) . Perera , J . ( 1997 ) . In unequal dialogue with donors : the experience of the Sarvodaya Shramadana Move - ment . In D . Hulme , & M . Edwards ( Eds . ) , NGOs , states and donors : too close for comfort ? St . Martin (cid:1) s Press in association with The Save the Children Fund , New York . Pfeﬀer , J . , & Salancik , G . R . ( 1974 ) . Organizational decision making as a political process : the case of the university budget . Administrative Science Quarterly , 19 ( June ) . Pfeﬀer , J . , & Salancik , G . R . ( 1978 ) . The external control of organizations : a resource dependence perspective . New York : Harper and Row . Pruzan , P . , & Thyssen , O . ( 1994 ) . The renaissance of ethics and the ethical accounting statement . Educa - tional Technology ( January ) , 23 – 28 . Przeworski , A . , Stokes , S . C . , & Manin , B . ( Eds . ) . ( 1999 ) . Democracy , accountability , and representa - tion . Cambridge and New York : Cambridge Univer - sity Press . Raynard , P . ( 1998 ) . Coming together : a review of contemporary approaches to social accounting , au - diting and reporting in non - proﬁt organisations . Journal of Business Ethics , 17 ( 13 ) , 1471 – 1479 . Riddel , R . C . ( 1999 ) . Evaluating NGO development interventions . In D . Lewis ( Ed . ) , International per - WORLD DEVELOPMENT 828 spectives on voluntary action : reshaping the Third Sector ( pp . 222 – 241 ) . London : Earthscan . Roche , C . ( 1999 ) . Impact assessment for development agencies : learning to value change . Oxford : Oxfam GB . Schweitz , M . L . ( 2001 ) . NGO network codes of conduct : accountability , principles , and voice . Paper presented to the International Studies Association Annual Convention , Chicago , Illinois , February . Scott , W . R . ( 1992 ) . Organizations : rational , natural , and open systems ( 3rd ed . ) . Englewood Cliﬀs , NJ : Pren - tice Hall . Scott , W . R . ( 1995 ) . Institutions and organizations . In D . Whetten ( Ed . ) , Foundations for Organizational Science . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Sen , S . ( 1999 ) . Some aspects of state - NGO relationships in India in the post - independence era . Development and Change , 30 , 327 – 355 . Smillie , I . ( 1996 ) . Painting Canadian roses red . In M . Edwards , & D . Hulme ( Eds . ) , Beyond the Magic Bullet : NGO Performance and Accountability in the Post - Cold War World ( pp . 187 – 197 ) . West Hartford , CT : Kumarian . Smith - Sreen , P . ( 1995 ) . Accountability in development organizations : experiences of women (cid:1) s organizations in India . New Delhi : Sage . Soledad , F . I . ( 2001 ) . Civil society and NGOs in the Philippines . AccountAbility Quarterly ( 15 ) , 26 – 27 . Soule , E . ( 2002 ) . Managerial moral strategies – – in search of a few good principles . Academy of Management Review , 27 ( 1 ) , 114 – 124 . Vakil , A . C . ( 1997 ) . Confronting the classiﬁcation problem : toward a taxonomy of NGOs . World Development , 25 ( 12 ) , 2057 – 2070 . Voluntary Action Network India , International Center for Not - for - Proﬁt Law ( 1997 ) . Report of the South Asian Conference on Laws , Rules and Regulations for the Voluntary Sector , New Delhi , 6 – 10 March . Volunteer Vancouver ( 1999 ) . What social auditing can do for voluntary organizations . Volunteer Vancou - ver , Vancouver . Weber , E . P . ( 1999 ) . The question of accountability in historical perspective : from Jackson to contemporary grassroots ecosystem management . Administration and Society , 31 ( 4 ) , 451 – 494 . Wheeler , D . , & Sillanp € aa € aa , M . ( 1997 ) . The stakeholder corporation : the body shop blueprint for maximizing stakeholder Value . London : Pitman Publishing . Wicks , A . C . , Gilbert , D . R . , & Freeman , R . E . ( 1994 ) . A feminist reinterpretation of the stakeholder concept . Business Ethics Quarterly , 4 ( 4 ) , 475 – 497 . Young , D . R . , Bania , N . , & Bailey , D . ( 1996 ) . Structure and accountability : a study of national nonproﬁt associations . Nonproﬁt Management and Leadership , 6 ( 4 ) , 347 – 365 . ACCOUNTABILITY IN PRACTICE 829