~ ( H1’92 May3 - 7 , 1992 REALIZING A VIDEO ENVIRONMENT : EUROPARC’S RAVE SYSTEM William Gaver , Thomas Moran , Allan MacLean , Lennart L . & wand , Paul Dow - ish , Kathleen Carter , William Buxton Rank Xerox Cambridge EuroPARC 61 Regent Street , Cambridge CB2 lAB , U . K . gave @ europarc . xerox . com ABSTRACT At EuroPARC , we have been exploring ways to allow physically separatedcolleagues to work together effectively and naturally . In this paper , we briefly discuss several examples of our work in the context of three themes that have emerged the need to support the fidl range of shared work , the desire to ensure privacy without giving up unobtrusive awareness ; and the possibility of creating systems which blur the boundaries between people , technologies and the everyday world . KEY WORDS : Group Work , Collaboration , Media Spaces , Multi - Media , Video INTRODUCTION Work at EuroPARC involves collaboration among people separated by the architecture of our building and the distance to overseas colleagues at PARC . We have turned this difficulty into an opportunity to research technologies that support collaboration . Many of the most important facets of this work involve the Ravenscroft Audio Video Environment ( RAVE ) . RAVE is an example of a “media space” – a computer - controlled network of audio - video equipment used to support collaboration - which shares features with systems being developed elsewhere ( e . g . , 9 , 19 , 23 , 25 ) . In this paper , we focus on three aspects of our research in order to provide an introduction to our media spacxx . We want to support shared work over its entire range - from the sort Of - msual awareness that keeps us infofied about the whereabouts and activities of our neighbors to the more foeussed and planned work that is involved in joint problem - solving . The current controls of our media space reflect this concern , having evolved with our use of a user - tailorable interface to the system . Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct com - mercial advantage , the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publica - tion and its date appear , and notice is given that copying is by permis - sion of the Association for Computing Machinery . Tocopy otherwise , or to republish , requires a fee and / or specific permission , @ 1992 ACM 0 - 89791 - 513 - 5 / 92 / 0005 - 0027 1 . 50 l l We are concerned about privacy , but are hesitant about achieving it at the expense of media spaces’ ability to provide unobtrusive awareness . We consider the attributes of privacy as many - dimensional . Currently , we combine control and feedbaek in RAVE to maintain privacy without a loss of functionality . We are developing the RAVE system to allow a seamless transition between support for synchronous collaboration and systems which support semi - synchronous awareness over long distances and of planned and electronic events . In this way , we hope to blur the traditional boundaries between people , technologies , and the every & y world , relying both on new technologies and an understanding of people’s interactions in the everyday world ( cf . 20 ) , We have been developing a number of systems which use the RAVE infrastructure to enhance our working environment and promote collaboration . In this paper , we discuss examples of systems which have been in relatively wide - spread use at EuroPARC in order to give a taste of the environment we have been developing and to sketeh out the philosophy behind this research . - - Figure 1 : The RAVE system lets us work together in o “media space” as well as the physical workspace . 27 V CHI’92 May3 - 7 , 1992 THE RAVENSCROFT AUDIO VIDEO ENVIRONMENT ( RAVE ) EuroPARC was founded in 1987 and there are currently about 30 staff members . Our building , called Ravenscroft House , has 27 rooms and 5 open areas on 4 floors . Despite the small size of the lab , the layout separates us to a surprising degree , so that the building is effectively a collection of relatively isolated sites . One of the motivations for the work described here was to turn this problem into a research opportunity : Because EnroPARC is a small research lab , we were able to install complete data , audio , and video networks throughout the lab . Each room in the building has several audio and video cables running to and from a central switch as well as access to digital networks ( see 3 for details ) . The resulting system , called RAVE , provides all rooms with some form of an audio - video “node , ” consisting of a camera , monitor , microphone and speakers , which users can move and turn on or off at will . Connections among nodes are completely computer controlled , so that people cti display the views from various cameras on their desktop monitors , set up two - way audio - video connections , etc . ( see Figure 1 ) . Using this system , we live in a media space ( 25 ) as well as the physical workspace . The RAVE system provides us with a great deal of potential functionality . An important design issue concerns how best to constrain it , both to support and encourage its use in ways that enhance existing work practices and to discourage possible misuse ( e . g . , spying , monitoring , etc . ) . In considering this question , it is helpful to consider our first design theme , that of supporting the range of collaboration from casual awarenessto focussed engagement . From Awareness to Collaboration What is collaboration ? One perspective – assumed implicitly by much of the current work on CSCW – is of two or more people focussed intensely on a single task . We prefer a broader approach , one we feel better reflects the range of activities involved in shared work . Figure 2 provides a simple representation of our view of what it means to work together . Two dimensions characterize this framework . The first , degree of engagement , refers to the extent to which a shared focus is involved . The second , amount of planning , refers to the extent that shared activities occur sponmeously or are planned in advance . Although the spaceof shared work is probably characterized by many more than two dimensions , this framework allows us to consider four relevant landmarks of the space . Underlying all is general awareness . This simply refers to the pervasive experience of knowing who is around , what sorts of things they are doing , whether they are relatively busy or can be engaged , and so on . Neither planned nor involving a great degree of interaction , this sort of awareness acts as a foun & tion for closer collaboration – one of the reasons that physical proximity is a highly Degree of engagement ~ Figure 2 : Shared work involves jluid transitions among general awareness , focussed collaboration , serendipitous commwu”mtim . mui divzkion nf ldxmr . accurate predictor of collaboration ( 15 ) . At the other ex - treme is focussed collaboration . This refers to occasions when people plan to work closely on a shared task . Most CSCW applications seem designed to support this kind of shared , focussed activity . There are two way - stations between these extremes . The fiis ~ division of labour , refers to the common practice of splitting a task into its component parts and allowing different people to address them separately . Division of labour does not require the intensely shared focus of attention implied by focussed collaboration , but does require planning and coordination . On the other hand , general awareness often leads to serendipity o us communication , in which an unplanned interaction may lead to the exchange of important information or the recognition of shared interests . The description of collaboration illustrated by this framework suggests the need to provide support for a range of activities , from spontaneous to highly planned and from disengaged to highly focussed . Moreover , we want to support the movement between these forms of shared work . In the worka & y world , people move fluidly between degrees of engagement maintaining awareness of their colleagues , engaging in serendipitous communication , collaborating intensely for a time , and dividing labour . It is important that we support not only different sorts of shared activities , but fluid movement among activities . The RAVE Buttons In providing access to the audio - video network , then , we have emphasized its use in supporting the entire range of shared activities . Because we had few a priori notions of how audio - video connectivity would extend current work practices , we have supported accessto its functionality in a flexible way , using tailorable onscreen buttons such as those shown in Figure 3 . Buttons are the product of research both at Xerox PARC ( 14 ) and at EuroPARC ( 17 ) . They are simple graphical 28 [ HI ’92 May3 - 7 , 1992 objects which allow users to run small programs without having to enter the relevant commands explicitly . In addition , they are tailorable in a number of way ~ Their onscreenlocation and appearancecan be modifim they may be copied and emailed , they are often parametrized so that application - specific variables can be changed easily , and their encapsulated code can be edited . Their flexibility allowed us to explore our media space , developing more useful control structmes as we gained experience . Initially , the RAVE buttons provided access to relatively low level functionality , allowing single connections to be made or broken . Over time , the buttons have been modified by users to reflect the higher - level tasks they wished to accomplish . The result is the series of generic RAVE buttons shown in Figure 3 . These buttons reflect the range of engagement in collaboration discussed above - indd the buttons and our account of collaboration evolved together . The background button , for instance , allows people to select a view from one of the public areas to display on their monitor . This is typically the default connection . Many of us , for example , maintain a view of our largest public space on screen when not actively using the audio - video system . This allows us to notice people come and go to check their mail or get coffee , to see meetings form , or to watch for somebody with whom we want to talk . The effect is similar to having the common area outside one’s door ( without the noise ) . We can maintain a general awareness , not of our immediate surroundings , but of important areas that are more remote . The sweep button provides another way to maintain awareness of remote locations of the building . This button makes short ( - 1 second ) one - way connections to various nodes in the building . It is customizable , so one can sweep all nodes or a subset of relevant ones . Typically this is used to find out who is around and what they are doing ( cf . 23 ) . The glance button , which makes a single 3 - second one - way connection to a selected node , allows more focussed attention to particular colleagues . Glances are often used to find out if a particular person is in and whether or not he or she is busy . Because both the sweep and glance buttons allow one way connections for only a , Jigure 3 : RAVE buttons reflect different & grees of short time , the effect is similar to walking by somebody’s door and glancing in : general information about somebody’s presence and activities can be obtained without jeopardizing privacy ( an issue to which we return below ) . More focussed interactions are supported by the vphone and office share buttons . The fwst is a two - way audio and video connection which allows colleagues to engage in the video equivalent of a face - to - face conversation . When a vphone call is initiated , the recipient must explicitly accept the connection . Thus this sort of connection is closest to traditional telephone calls . Office share connections are identical to vphone connections , but are meant to last longer – for hours , & ys , or even months . The effect is one of sharing an office , but because audio volume can be controlled and the video image is relatively small , the other person’s “presence” allows but does not demand social engagemen ~ It is interesting to note here that the vphone and office share buttons offer exactly the same functionality , that of setting up a two - way audio and video connection . The buttons are differentiated solely in terms of the intentions with which the connections are made . Vphone calls are typically used to support relatively short and focussed conversations , while office share connections typically support longer lasting shared work in which the degree of engagement varies fluidly . This is a good example of interface tools which emerged to control our system in terms of users’ tasks , rather than technological functionality . In sum , the five generic RAVE buttons emerged through a process of interconnected use and design supported by an interface system that affords flexible tailoring . The resulting functionality supported by these buttons reflects the range of shared work tiom general awareness to focussed collaboration to a remarkable degree . The system is even more useful in conjunction with other tools , as we will describe below . But frost , it is worth addressing a common set of concerns about the RAVE system . WHAT ABOUT BIG BROTHER ? Accounts of cameras in every office , one - way glance connections , long - term monitoring of public spaces and so forth can often have Orwellian overtones . Clearly there is a need to protect privacy in audio - video systems such as ours . But there is a trade - off between protection of privacy and provision of functionality that makes the development of such safeguards a non - trivial task . For instance , one way to assure that our work on media spaceswill not add new threats to privacy would be simply to remove all audio and video equipment from EuroPARC – but this would clearly do away with any and all services these technologies offer . More subtly , privacy might be ensured by enforcing symmetrical connections , so that seeing or hearing somebody implies being seen or heard oneself ( indeed , this strategy has been taken at BellCo ~ , 23 ) . But one - way connections have advantages we are unwilling to give up . Glances allow us to maintain our 29 ~ [ HI ’92 May3 - 7 , 1992 awareness of colleagues without actually engaging in interaction with them . Thus they are a valuable prelude to communication ; just as we might look in someone’s door to see if they are busy before entering , so we can look at their video image before vphoning them . Video provides an excellent means to gain general awareness unobtrusively ; enforcing symmetry for the sake of privacy would undermine this functionality . It has become clear to us that privacy is a complex issue that must be disentangled in order to understand the tradeoffs involved in its protection . In particular , four important facets of privacy which may be considered Separatelyare = The desire for control over who can seeor hear us at a given time ; 0 The desire for knowledge of when somebody is in fact seeing or hearing us ; “ The desire to know the intention behind the connection ; but “ The desire to avoid connections being intruswns on our work . The trade - off between privacy and functionality involves a conflict between the desirability of control and knowledge and the intrusion implied by activities needed to maintain them [ cf . 9 ] . Having to allow explicitly every connection mnde to our cameras would give us control , but the requests themselves would be intrusive . Having somebody’s face appear on our monitors every time they connect to us would similarly demand some sort of social response and might well disrupt previous connections . Hawing to specify and be informed of the intention of various connections would likewise transform an simple process into a relatively effortful and attention - demanding one . The challenge of safeguarding privacy , then , is not just one of providing control and notification , but doing so in a lightweight and unobtrusive way . At EuroPARC , our privacy protection depends to a great degree on social convention - indeed , our culture initially provided our only protection . It is assumed that people will use the system with “good” intentions ; that is , that they will not seek information with the intent of using it to harm anybody . Simply speaking , we trust one another . At the same time , social convention encourages people to control their own equipment They are free to turn their camera to face a wall or out a window ; they may keep their microphones switched off , and so forth . We took this initial strategy for several reasons . First , being “willingly naive” about privacy meant that we did not assume the degree to which software support for privacy would be necessary , but instead could treat the question as a research issue . Second , explicitly relying on trust established clear social norms about the use of the media space - instead of building software on the assumption that privacy would otherwise be invaded , we assumed it would not be and expected people to behave accordingly . Finally , this strategy allowed us to concentrate on developing the functionality of the system rather than security measures . Nonetheless , as the equipment has become ubiquitous in our own lab and we begin to export it to other settings , we have started to explore other ways to tackle privacy issues . Our current system now provides services which make intentionality an implicit feature of connections and which allow us to provide both control and notifkations . Offering Control : Godard A certain amount of control over connections is offered by the basic software used to control the audio - video switch . This software , called iiif ( for integrated , interactive , intermedia facility ; see 3 ) , instantiates a simple patchbay metaphor in which device “plugs” are linked to form single point - to - point connections . Each plug and device is “owned” by an associated user and its accessis accordingly controlled . Thus people could restrict accessto their video - out plugs , for instance , to some subset of users . In practice this strategy is awkward to use effectively . Control is offered at the level of individual connections rather than relevant tasks , while the generic RAVE services described above – glances , vphone calls , etc . – usually involve a number of individual connections . Although buttons can make this transparent to the initiator by combining a number of connection requests into one button , the system has no way of knowing the intention of individual connections . Thus it is difficult , using simple plug control , to design the system so that a glance can be allowed but a vphone call denied . For thesereasons , anew layer of software called Goaiard ( 7 ) has been added to the basic iiif software . Godard usesiiif % underlying protection mechanism to control device plugs so that no connections can be made without its permission . Because Godard mediates all connection requests , explicit services can be defined and control can be handled at the service level . When an initiator requests a service , Godard uses information previously obtained from potential recipients to determine whether to perform the service ( and occasionally relies on interactive input to request permission for individual connections or to resolve conflicts ) . If permission is given and all relevant plugs are available , Godard creates a record of pre - existing connections so they can be restored , and then makes and protects the appropriate connections . This architecture allows privacy control to exist at the level of services rather than individual plugs . Thus people can set permission for specific people to use specific services . For instance , Figure 4 shows a “glance control panel . ” The panel presents a complete list of nodes at EuroPARC , and allows the user to select those who will or will not be given permission to glance . Similar control panels exist for vphones , office share connections , and the like . 30 ~ CHI’92 May3 - 7 , 1992 With the addition of Godard , our system now affords a degreeof control adequateto preserve privacy We can now explicitly allow or deny connections to our equipment . In addition , because these connections are represented as higher - level services , the system also provides a useful ( if implicit ) representation of the initiator’s intentions . Finally , it serves as a foundation for the provision of the third aspect of privacy suggested above , that of knowledge of actual events - notifications about the system state . Providing Notifications : Auditory Cues Feelings of privacy are not only supported by control over who can connect to one’s equipment using various services , but by feedback about when such comections are actually made . Because Godard knows about connections to recipients’ audio - video nodes at the service level , it facilitates the provision of such feedback . Several kinds of feedback can be requested by users in cturent instantiation of interface software , including text messagesdisplayed on their workstations and spoken messages played over the audio network . Less obvious than these , and in our experience quite valuable , are auditory cues used to provide information about system state ( 11 ) . For example , when a glance connection is made to a came ~ Godard triggers a sound to be played at the relevant location ( the default is that of a door opening ) . The sound typically comes several seconds before the connection is actually made , so it provides forewarning rather than concurrent information . When the connection is broken , another sound ( typically that of a door closing ) is trigge ~ d . In addition , different sounds indicate different sorts of igure 4 : Control panels allow users to give perw”ssion t specific individuals for specific services . connections ( and thus the intentions behind them ) . A knock or telephone bell indicates a vphone request door sounds indicate glancex footsteps might indicate sweeps ; and acamera whir indicates that a fmmegrabber hasaccessed one’s node . Thus auditory cues provide information about what kind of connection is being made , over and above information about the existence of a connection alone . Playing sounds such as opening and closing doors may seem frivolous , but nonspeech audio as a medium has several advantagesover graphics , text or speech : l . l l . Sound indicates the connection state without requiring symmetry - that is , it provides information without being intrusive . Sounds such as these can be heard without requiring the kind of spatial attention that a written notification would . Non - speech audio cues often seem less distracting and more efficient than speech or music ( although speech can provide different sorts of information , e . g . , who is connecting ) . Sounds can be acoustically shaped to reduce annoyance ( 22 ) . Most of the sounds we use , for instance , involve a very gradual increase in loudness to avoid startling listeners . Finally , caricatures of naturally - occurring sounds are a very intuitive way to present information . The sound of an opening and closing door reflects and reinforces the metaphor of a glance , and is thus easily learned and remembered ( cf . 12 ) . These sorts of auditory cues have provided an flexible and effective way to unobtrusively inform people that somebody is connecting to their node , and thus serve as another means of safeguarding privacy . More generally , with Godard and auditory cues , we have provided control , feedback , and intentionality - three prerequisites for privacy – at very little cost in terms of intrusiveness . Big Brother would have a difficult time at EuroPARC , both becausewe can nmtrict his accessand becausewe can hear him coming . AWARENESS OVER TIME : THE KHRONiKA SYSTEM Our audio - video system has helped us maintain awareness of ongoing events in distant locations . Khronika ( 16 ) is a software “event notification service” that supports selective awareness of planned and electronic events . Khronika is related to online calendar systems , but supports a more general notion of events than most . It tells us when a video connection has been made , reminds us about upcoming meetings , provides information about visitors , and can even be used to gather people to go to the pub . Khronika is based on three fundamental entities : events , daemons , and notifications ( see Figure 5 ) . Events are defined in terms of their class , their start time , and their 31 ~ CHI’92 May3 - 7 , 1992 Senders Khronika Recipients ~ igure 5 : Khronika maintains a database of event , wtered both by people and other ~ stems . Daemons watc ~ br specified events and post notifications when they ar ( duration . Examples of events include conferences , visitors , local movies , and arriving email . Because they are represented as objects in a hierarchical classification structure , they can also be manipulated in terms of more abstract classes such as “professional , ” “electronic , ” and “entertainment . ” Event daemons watch for speeified event types and produce notification events when they are deteeted . Daemons are created by users as a set of constraints , so recipients choose the information about which they wish to be informed . For example , a user may create a daemon which watches for all seminar events occurring in the conference room with the string “RAVE” as a part of their description . They can then instruct the daemon to generate notifkations five minutes before relevant seminars are due to begin . A number of interfaces to the Khronika system have been explored , including buttons which allow users to browse the event database and to create new events and daemons . One of the more interesting and useful interfaces is the xkhbrowser , shown in Figure 6 . The browser serves as an online calendar , with events shown as fields extending over their relevant times . But the event database may be displayed at varying levels of specificity , from the most encompassing ( “event” ) level to more specific ones such as “meetings , “ “glances” or “sound . ” In this way , the xkhbrowser provides a general and powerful mechanism for exploring the databaseof events . Notifying Users About Events Khronika is the mechanism with which Godard generates feedback about audio - video connections . When a request for a connection is made , Godard enters an event into Khroni @ an appropriate daemon ( created using the various privacy controls already described ) then triggers the requested notillcation . Notifications can be generated by daemons in several different forms - for instance , a daemon watching for meetings might send out an email message the day before , display a message on a workstation window , or generate a synthesized speech message . Nonspeech audio cues are commonly used to inform us about the state of the audio - video system ; there are also a number of cues which inform us about other events ( see 11 ) . For example , we are often reminded about upcoming meetings by the sound of murmuring people gathering together , followed by a gavel sound . This sound acts as a ~ igure 6 : The xkhbrowser lists events in a calendar - like format . Event typ es can be seen at various levels of speczjicity . 32 CHI’92 May3 - 7 , 1992 memorable stereotype of naturally - occurring meeting sounds and is thus quickly learned and immediately recognizable . In addition , the sound is designed so that it grows in amplitude quite slowly , so that is not interruptive . Finally , the sharper gavel sound at the end lends a sense of urgency to the sound . Sounds like these me effective yet unobtrusive reminders about remote events – as evidenced by the fact that approximately 50 sounds a day arerequested horn the Khronika system . In general , then , the Khronika system in conjunction with audio remindem hasa number of the system features we are exploring at EuroPARC . It enhances our general awareness of ongoing events and thus promotes collaboration . It does so in a way that blurs the boundaries between the electronic and everyday worlds , allowing information to be entered from and disseminated by both . Finally , it allows for a great degree of user customization and , like all our systems , is in a continual state of evolution guided by use . AWARENESS OVER SPACE : POLYSCOPE AND PORTHOLES RAVE is useful in providing awareness of local nodes . But for technical and financial reasons , we cannot make connections to our overseas colleagues , nor can we connect to more than one node at a time . In order to extend our awarenessover a greater distance and to a number of people simultaneously , we have been experimenting with distributing low - resolution video images via our digital networks . An initial prototype , Polyscope ( 2 ) is a system which we used to distribute digitized images within our building every 5 minutes or so . The resolution of the images is not very high – only 200 by 150 bits , with no grey scale . Nonetheless , people and objects in their environments are usually visible . In addition , a simple animation facility is available , in which a few images are digitized successively and looped on display . Although such animations are often jerky ( and sometimes deliberately frivolous , as when one researcher arranged to periodically transmogrify into Elvis Presley ) , they make movement obvious and are an effective way to disambiguate scenes . Moreover , Polyscope acts as art interface to the audio - video network . Buttoning an image produces a pop - up menu which allows glance or vphone connections to be initiated . We are currently using a more recent version of this kind of system called Portholes ( 8 ) . The major advantage of Portholes over Polyscope is that it runs between EuroPARC and PARC – this means that we can see images of colleagues in a building about 6 , 000 miles away with those of people in our own building . Not only does this support awareness , but it has helped to create and develop a new research community within EuroPARC and PARC - for instance , researchers who have never been co - present nonetheless speak of “knowing” one another through their experience with Portholes . Both Polyscope and Portholes allow several remote locations to be presented simultaneously , affording passive awareness of distributed workgroups without the necessity of explicitly setting up video links and so on . This facilitates smooth transitions between general awareness and more focussed engagements . In addition , the spatially - distributed but asynchronous functionality offered by systems like Portholes and Polyscope complements our synchronous but single - channeled video services quite well . Perhaps most importantly , Portholes allows us to extend this awareness out of our building to colleagues at geographically distant locations . EXPERIENCE , EXPERIMENTS , AND EXPORT We have said little about our experiences using these systems . In general , our development efforts rely on what might be considered a form of participative design , in which designers work closely with users in shaping useful systems ( 4 ) . At EuroPARC , as with most research labs , the division between designers and users is often blurred . Nonetheless , the group can be divided into technical and non - technical staff , and much of our development is guided by the experiences and input of non - technical users ( see 17 for an example of this process ) . In addition , a number of users have been keeping diaries of their experiences with various systems . These accounts are a valuable source of insight about audio - video mediated collaboration . More formal techniques have also been useful in better understanding the nature of our media space . Ethnomethodological and participative design techniques have been employed to study the everyday use of the RAVE system and to assist in its development . For example , observations of video - mediated communication have indicated that the medium can undermine the effectiveness of subtle communicative gestures ( 13 ) , leading us to explore ways to enhance our system . In addition , a series of open - ended interviews have been used to identify problems with the system as well as new possibilities for its design ( 5 ) . We have also used more traditional experimental studies to examine a range of issues . For instance , a recent study assessed the utility of a collaborative text editor called ShrEdit and the effects of shared video on its use ( 21 ) . Another study examined patterns of gaze associated with task and meta - level conversations among co - located or remote partners working in a shared software environment ( 24 ) . In a third study , we found that nonspeech audio feedback changed participants’ perception of a complex collaborative system and their tendency to collaborate while using it ( 10 ) . Finally , we have begun exporting these technologies to new sites to better understand how they interact with and support existing work practices . For example , recent research on participative design has involved the installation of a limited audio - video link in a London architecture fii ( 6 ) . Building on this , a new project is using audio - video technologies to support designers 33 ~ ( H1’92 May3 - 7 , 1992 working together but based in different countries - England and the Netherlands ( 18 ) . REALIZING A VIDEO ENVIRONMENT In this account we have been concerned with describing RAVE and several of the related systems we use to support shared work at EuroPARC . We have suggested ways these systems work together to form an integrated environment , and have sketched some of their philosophical foundations . We hope to have given a feeling for the kinds of systems we are developing . Moreover , we hope to have shown that the three themes of our research – supporting the range of collaboration , maintaining privacy , and extending media spaces to include awareness of planned , electronic , and semi - synchronous events - provide a valuable foundation for research on collaborative systems which are integrated across the working environment . Above all , we have tried to convey a sense of why we find the research at EuroPARC fun , exciting , and important . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Our work at EuroPARC has depended on the collaborative efforts of many people . In particular , Bob Anderson , Ian Daniel , Christian Heath , Paul Luff , Tom Milligan , Wendy Mackay , Mike Molloy , Toby Merrill , Gary Olson , Judy Olson and Randall Smith have all contributed to the development of the research described here , as have our colleagues at PARC Sara Bly , Steve Harrison , Austin Henderson , Scott Minneman , and John Tang . More generally , the entire EuroPARC research community has provided invaluable support for this work simply by using these systems as part of their everyday environment . Finally , the surrounding philosophy has been emerging from our research community at PARC and EuroPARC for years ; it is impossible to assign credit for most of these ideas . Tom Moran’s current address : Xerox PARC , 3333 Coyote Hill Drive , Palo Alto , CA . 94304 . Bill Buxton’s current address : CSRI , University of Toronto , Toronto Ontario , Canada M52 1A4 REFERENCES 1 . Bellotti , V . , Dourish , P . , & MacLean , A . ( 1991 ) . From users themes to designers DReam ~ Developing a design space for shared interactive technologies . EuroPARC / AMODEUS Working Paper RP6 - WP7 . 2 . Borning , A . , and Travers , M . ( 1991 ) . Two approaches to casual interaction over computer and video networks . Proceedings of CHI’91 ( New Orleans , Louisiana , 28 April - 2 May , 1991 ) . ACM , New York , pp . 13 - 19 . 3 . Buxton , W . , and Moran , T . ( 1990 ) . EuroPARC’s integrated interactive intermedia facility ( iiif ) : Early experiences . In Proceedings of the IFIP WG8 . 4 4 . 5 . 6 . 7 . 8 . 9 . 10 . 11 . 12 . 13 . 14 . 15 . Conference on Multi - User Interj22es and Applications ( Herakleion , Crete , September 1990 ) . Carter , K . ( forthcoming ) . Interacting with users : A practitioner’s experience . To appear in Sociology of Software , Woolgar , S . , and Murray , F . ( eds ) . Carter , K . ( July , 1991 ) . Usage of the AV network . Presentation at EuroPARC RAVE Review , Cambridge U . K . Carter , K . and Harper , R . ( 1991 ) . Searching for problems and answers : An empirical report on CSCW . Technical Report No . EPC - 91 - 101 , Rank Xerox EuroPARC , Cambridge U . K . Dourish , P . ( 1991 ) . Godard A flexible architecture for AV services in a media space . Technical Report No . EPC - 91 - 134 , Rank Xerox EuroPARC , Cambridge U . K . Dourish , P . , and Bly , S . ( 1991 ) . Portholes : Supporting awareness in a distributed work group . Proceedings of CHI’92 ( Monterey , California , 3 - 7 May , 1992 ) . ACM , New York . Fish , R . , Kraut , R . , Root , R . , and Rice , R . ( 1991 ) . Evaluating video as a technology for informal communication . Proceedings of CH ~ 92 ( Monterey , California 3 - 7 May , 1992 ) . ACM , New York . Gaver , W . W . , Smith , R . B . , and O’Shea , T . ( 1991 ) . Effective sounds in complex systems : The ARKola simulation . Proceedings of CHZ’91 ( New Orleans , Louisiana , 28 April - 2 May , 1991 ) , ACM , New York . Gaver , W . W . ( 1991 ) . Sound support for collaboration . In Proceedings of ECSCW’91 ( Amsterdam , The Netherlands , 25 - 27 September 1991 ) . Gaver , W . W . ( 1986 ) . Auditory icons Using sound in computer interfaces . Human - Computer Interaction , 2 , pp . 167 - 177 . Heath , C . , and Luff , P . ( 1991 ) . Disembodied conduce Communication through video in a multi - media office environment . Proceedings of CHI’91 ( New Orleans , Louisiana , 28 April - 2 May , 1991 ) , ACM , New York . Henderson , D . A . , and Card , S . ( 1986 ) . Rooms : The use of multiple virtual workspaces to reduce space contention in a window - based graphical user interface . ACM Transactwns on Graphics , 5 , 3 , 211 - 243 . Kraut , R . and Egido , C . ( 1988 ) . Patterns of contact and communication in scientiilc research collaboration . In Proceedings of the CSCW’88 ( Portland , Oregon , September 1988 ) ACM , New York . pp . 25 - 38 . 34 ~ ( Hi ’92 May3 - 7 , 1992 16 . LthWrand , L . ( 1991 ) . Being selectively aware with the Khronika system . In Proceedings of ECSCW”91 ( Amsterdam , The Netherlands , 25 - 27 September 1991 ) . 17 . MacLean , A . , Carter , K . , Moran , T . , and L & strand , L . ( 1990 ) . User - tailorable system ~ Pressing the issues with Buttons . In proceedings of CHI’90 ( Seattle , Washington , 1 - 5 April , 1990 ) ACM , New York , pp . 175 - 182 . 18 . Mackay , W . , and Harper , R . ( 1991 ) . WAVE : The Welwyn and Venray Experiment . Technical Report No . EPC - 91 - 135 , Rank Xerox EuroPARC , Cambridge U . K . 19 . Mantei , M . , Baecker , R . , Sellen , A . , Buxton , W . , Milligan , T . , and Wellman , B . ( 1991 ) . Experiences in the use of a media space . Proceedings of CH ~ 91 ( New Orleans , Louisiana , April 28 - May 2 , 1991 ) ACM , New York , pp . 203 - 208 . 20 . Moran , T . P . and Anderson , R . J . ( 1990 ) . The workaday world as a paradigm for CSCW design . In Proceedings of CSCW90 ( Los Angeles , California , October 1990 ) . ACM , New York . 21 . Olson , G . , and Olson , J . ( 1991 ) . User - centered design of collaboration technology . Journal of Organizational Computing , 1 , 61 - 83 . 22 . Patterson , R . D . ( 1989 ) . Guidelines for the design of auditory warning sounda . Proceedings of the Institute of Acoustics 1989 Spring Cor @ erence . 11 , 5 , 17 - 24 . 23 . Root , R . W . ( 1988 ) . Design of a multi - media vehicle for social browsing . In Proceedings of the CSCW’88 ( Portland , Oregon , September 1988 ) ACM , New York , pp . 25 - 38 . 24 . Smith , R . B . , OShea , T . , OMalIey , C . , ScanIon , E . , and Taylor , J . ( 1989 ) . Preliminary experiments with a distributed , multi - media , problem - solving environment . Proceedings of the First European Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ( Gatwick , England ) . 25 . Stults , R . ( 1986 ) . Media space . Xerox PARC technical report . 35