Understanding current causes of women ’ s underrepresentation in science Stephen J . Ceci and Wendy M . Williams 1 Department of Human Development , Cornell University , Ithaca , NY 14853 Edited by Richard F . Thompson , University of Southern California , Los Angeles , CA , and approved December 6 , 2010 ( received for review October 6 , 2010 ) Explanations for women ’ s underrepresentation in math - intensive ﬁ elds of science often focus on sex discrimination in grant and manuscriptreviewing , interviewing , andhiring . Claimsthatwomen scientists suffer discrimination in these arenas rest on a set of stud - ies undergirding policies and programs aimed at remediation . More recent and robust empiricism , however , fails to support assertions of discrimination in these domains . To better understand women ’ s underrepresentation in math - intensive ﬁ elds and its causes , we re - prise claims of discrimination and their evidentiary bases . Based on a review of the past 20 y of data , we suggest that some of these claims are no longer valid and , if uncritically accepted as current causes of women ’ s lack of progress , can delay or prevent under - standing of contemporary determinants of women ’ s underrepre - sentation . We conclude that differential gendered outcomes in the real world result from differences in resources attributable to choices , whether free or constrained , and that such choices could be in ﬂ uenced and better informed through education if resources were so directed . Thus , the ongoing focus on sex discrimination in reviewing , interviewing , and hiring represents costly , misplaced effort : Society is engaged in the present in solving problems of thepast , ratherthaninaddressingmeaningfullimitationsdeterring women ’ s participation in science , technology , engineering , and mathematics careerstoday . Addressingtoday ’ s causes of underrep - resentation requires focusing on education and policy changes that will make institutions responsive to differing biological reali - ties of the sexes . Finally , we suggest potential avenues of interven - tion to increase gender fairness that accord with current , as opposed to historical , ﬁ ndings . women in science | gender bias | child penalty | peer review S ince 1970 , women have made dramatic gains in science . To - day , half of all MD degrees and 52 % of PhDs in life sciences are awarded to women , as are 57 % of PhDs in social sciences , 71 % of PhDs to psychologists , and 77 % of DVMs to veter - inarians . * Forty years ago , women ’ s presence in most of these ﬁ elds was several orders of magnitude less ; e . g . , in 1970 only 13 % of PhDs in life sciences went to women ( 1 ) . In the most math - intensive ﬁ elds , however , women ’ s growth has been less pro - nounced ( 2 – 4 ) . Among the top 100 US universities , only 8 . 8 – 15 . 8 % of tenure - track positions in many math - intensive ﬁ elds ( combined across ranks ) are held by women , and female full professors number ≤ 10 % . ( SI Text , S1 ) These ﬁ gures reveal a problem , but what is its cause ? Here , we consider one of the most common alleged causes – discrimination against women in the domains of : ( i ) manuscript reviewing , ( ii ) grant funding , and ( iii ) interviewing / hiring . We reprise the evidence for each and describe counterevidence . We conclude that past ini - tiativestocombatdiscriminationagainstwomeninscienceappeartohavebeenhighlysuccessful . Women ’ s current underrepresentation in math - intensive ﬁ elds is not caused by discrimination in these domains , but rather to sex differences in resources , abilities , and choices ( whether free or constrained ) . Thus , current initiatives di - rect energy toward solving past problems rather than current ones . Women ’ s underrepresentation today results from a complex set of interrelated factors , some of which society could meaningfully address if the focus was placed squarely on them . One key to such success is moving beyond historical issues and confronting current ones . Claims of Discrimination Against Women Scientists Recent scienti ﬁ c reports often assert that discrimination against female scientists in hiring , publishing , and funding is a cause of their underrepresentation : “ Substantialresearch showsthatresumesand journalarticleswere rated lower by male and female reviewers when they were told the author was a woman ; similarly , a study of postdoctoral fellowships awarded showed that female awardees needed substantially more publications to achieve the same competency rating as male awardees ” ( 5 , p . 1933 ) . “ It is now recognized that biases function at many levels within sci - ence including funding allocation , employment , publication , and general research directions ” ( 6 , p . 1247 ) . “ Research has pointed to bias in peer review and hiring . For example , Wennerås and Wold found that a female postdoctoral applicant had to . . . publish at least three more papers in a prestigious science journal or an additional 20 papers in lesser - known specialty journals to be judged as productive as a male applicant . . . . The systematic underrating of female applicants could help explain the lower success rate of female scientists in achieving high academic ranks ” ( 7 , p . 24 ) . “ An impressive body of controlled experimental [ research ] . . . shows that , on the average , people are less likely to hire a woman than a man with identical quali ﬁ cations , are less likely to ascribe credit to a woman than to a man for identical accomplishments . . . ” ( 8 , p . S2 ) . Such claims of discrimination against women are consistent with claims of glass ceilings , reduction of authorship credit and pay for comparable work , smaller laboratory space , and fewer research resources ( 9 – 11 ) . For example , economists analyzing auditions for orchestras found that switching to blind auditions in which juries could not see applicants reduced discrimination against women , explaining one - third of the increase in the pro - portion of women hired after blind auditions ( 12 ) . Other exam - ples of discrimination in nonmath ﬁ elds are similarly striking , e . g . , correlations between masculineness of women ’ s ﬁ rst names and likelihood of being awarded judgeships ( 13 ) , downgrading of psychologists ’ and sociologists ’ curriculum vitae when they bear a woman ’ s name ( 14 , 15 ) , or discriminatory pay for female at - torneys ( 16 ) . This evidence from nonmath ﬁ elds raises the specter that similar biases explain the current dearth of women in math - intensive ﬁ elds . Below , we describe empirical evidence for claims of discrimination in the domains of publishing , grant reviewing , and hiring . We ﬁ nd the evidence for recent sex discrimination – when it exists – is aberrant , of small magnitude , and is superseded by larger , more sophisticated analyses showing no bias , or occa - Author contributions : S . J . C . and W . M . W . designed research , performed research , and wrote the paper . The authors declare no con ﬂ ict of interest . This article is a PNAS Direct Submission . Freely available online through the PNAS open access option . 1 Towhomcorrespondencemaybeaddressed . E - mail : stevececi @ cornell . eduorwendywilliams @ cornell . edu . Thisarticlecontainssupportinginformationonlineatwww . pnas . org / lookup / suppl / doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1014871108 / - / DCSupplemental . * Feeder pipelines are sometimes even higher than the numbers earning PhDs , indicating some leakage . For example , slightly more than 60 % of B . S . degrees in biology are earned by women , so 52 % female PhDs represents some pipeline leakage from the 60 % of BS degrees . www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1014871108 PNAS Early Edition | 1 of 6 P S Y C H O L O G I C A L A ND C O GN I T I V E S C I E N C E S sionally , bias in favor of women . Although real barriers are still faced by women in science , especially mathematical sciences , our ﬁ ndings suggest that historic forms of discrimination cannot ex - plain current underrepresentation , and that resources should be redirected toward current rather than historical causes of wom - en ’ s underrepresentation in math - based careers . Discrimination Against Women in Journal Reviewing The question of whether sex discrimination exists in getting work published is ideally answerable by examining manuscript accep - tance rates of men vs . women , holding constant quality of work . However , quality of work is in ﬂ uenced by available resources . Comparing women and men with comparable resources , we ﬁ nd no sex discrimination in publishing ( below ) . However , a secondary issue is whether resources themselves are , in fact , evenly distrib - uted between the sexes . The answer is that they are not , for a complex constellation of reasons , such as women being more apt to occupy teaching - intensive positions , part - time positions , etc . Thus , the attention devoted to righting perceptions of sex dis - crimination in reviewing of manuscripts , which as we show , does not in fact exist ( SI Text , S2 ) , focuses on a spurious issue and detracts from the very real problem that does plague women in publishing — the fact that women more often than men lack resources necessary to produce high - quality work . Budden and her colleagues published several analyses of gen - der bias in manuscript reviewing by undergraduates , graduate students , postdocs , and journal reviewers ( 6 , 17 – 19 ) . In one , they analyzed journal acceptance rates for manuscripts submitted by women to Behavioral Ecology after it began blind peer review ( 18 ) . Acceptance rate for female ﬁ rst - authored manuscripts increased by 7 . 9 % in the 4 y after the onset of blind review , compared with the 4 y prior , suggesting that when reviewers were aware of authors ’ sex , they were less likely to accept women ’ s manuscripts . Critics argued that the difference between pre - and post - blind - review acceptances cannot be tied to sex discrimination , criticizing this ﬁ nding on statistical grounds , and noting that increased ac - ceptance rates for women occurred during this period at six other ecology and evolution journals that did not implement blind re - view and that increases were already apparent in the decade be - fore implementation of blind reviewing at Behavioral Ecology ( 20 – 22 ) . Whittaker ( 22 ) analyzed 1 , 140 manuscripts submitted to the Journal of Biogeography and found no difference in the accep - tance / rejection ratio for male and female authors ( x 2 = 1 . 0637 , p = 0 . 3024 ) ; he also criticized Budden et al . ’ s statistical proce - dures . Others did not replicate Budden et al . ’ s claim of sex dis - crimination with other journals ( see below ) . In response , Budden et al . argued such criticisms cannot explain their full ﬁ ndings , although they acknowledged their inability to rule out alternative explanations due to limited data ( 19 ) . Less - often cited analyses by Budden et al . did not ﬁ nd evidence of sex discrimination . One ( 23 ) compared publication success rates for 2 , 680 papers with male vs . female ﬁ rst authors at ﬁ ve ecology and evolution journals ( with seven editors ) . There was no sex difference in overall acceptance rates ; although one of seven edi - tor ’ s data from one of ﬁ ve journals initially appeared to favor males , this impression was not borne out by more rigorous log - linear analyses , leading to the conclusion that “ there is no signi ﬁ - cant interaction between journal and author gender in their effect on whether manuscripts are accepted for publication ” ( ref . 23 , p . 350 ) . In another study by Budden and her colleagues ( 17 ) , 989 raters ( undergraduates to postdocs ) were given an identical man - uscript with either no name , author ’ s ﬁ rst initial only , a male name , or a female name . This study also found no sex discrimination . To recap , there is evidence of bias from one of Budden ’ s studies ( 18 ) , but criticisms have been published on various grounds ( 20 – 22 ) ; other journals show no such bias ( 24 , 25 ) ; and Budden has acknowledged limitations . Further , archival acceptance data from various journals strongly suggest no sex differences ( see below ) . Another source of evidence is aggregate productivity measures : Are women as likely as men to publish ? Many sources of data span numerous ﬁ elds and cohorts . They show that women are as suc - cessful at publishing as men , when comparisons are between men and women with similar resources and characteristics . ( Compar - ing people possessing unequal resources is not a test of discrimi - nation , but a demonstration of limitations imposed by a lack of resources , and women tend to have jobs that provide fewer resources ; e . g . , teaching - vs . research - intensive positions . ) The editors of Nature Neuroscience analyzed acceptance rates for 449 authors ( 24 ) and found that acceptance rates were statistically indistinguishable between the sexes , p = 0 . 811 , regardless of how the data were parsed . Other journals ( e . g . , Cortex ) have also reported equal acceptance rates ( 25 ) . Others have undertaken sophisticated analyses of archival data showing that any sex difference in productivity is due to differ - ences in structural variables that , although correlated with sex , are causally unrelated to it ( 26 – 27 ) because the same fate befalls male authors with similar structural characteristics . Thus , although such variables ( e . g . , working at teaching - intensive colleges ) affect women more often than men , they hinder men ’ s productivity equally . Scientists ’ publications increase after moving to more prestigious institutions with greater resources ( 27 ) . In this analy - sis , males produced 30 % more publications than women , but when men tenured at R1 universities were compared with women tenured at R1 universities , the gap fell to 8 % , and the difference between men and women full professors at R1s was < 5 % . Thus , the critical variable is not sex per se , but rather access to resources , which correlates with sex because women are more likely to work as adjuncts or at teaching - intensive institutions with limited resources ( SI Text , S2 ) . As evidence , a longitudinal analysis of fac - ulty in 1969 , 1973 , 1988 , and 1993 showed sex differences in pro - ductivity steadily declined — from a female : male ratio of 0 . 580 : 1 in 1969 to 0 . 817 : 1 in 1993 ( 26 ) . The primary factor affecting women ’ s productivity was structural position . When type of institution , teachingload , funding , andresearchassistance werefactoredin , the productivity gap completely disappeared ( which is not to say dis - crimination has not in ﬂ uenced these factors in the real world ) : “ There is very little direct effect of sex on research productivity . . . . men generally have positions superior to those of women , although structural differences by gender have appreciably declined over time . Oncesex differencesinsuch positionsandresources are taken into account , net differences between men and women in pro - ductivity are nil or negligible ” ( ref . 26 , pp . 863 – 864 ) . Similarly , a National Research Council task force concluded that productivity of women science and engineering faculty in - creased over the last 30 y and is now comparable to men ’ s , the critical factor affecting publications being access to institutional resources ( 28 ) . Finally , many others also report no sex differ - ences in productivity , controlling for structural variables con - founded with sex ( e . g . , refs . 7 and 8 ) . In sum , when publication data are controlled for structural position , ensuring that sex differences in manuscript acceptance rates are not con ﬂ ated with sex differences in resources , there is no difference between the sexes ( SI Text , S3 ) . Although structural differences present real barriers for many women — and some men — journal reviewers do not reject papers because they are written by women . The preponderance of evidence , including the best and largest studies , indicates no discrimination in reviewing women ’ s manuscripts : Given equivalent resources , men and women do equally well in publishing . A key issue , separable from sex dis - crimination in manuscript evaluation , is why women occupy positions providing fewer resources and what can be done about this situation . This situation is caused mainly by women ’ s choices , both freely made and constrained by biology and society , such as choices to defer careers to raise children , follow spouses ’ career moves , care for elderly parents , limit job searches geographically , and enhance work - home balance . Some of these choices are freely made ; others are constrained and could be changed ( 3 ) . Discrimination Against Women in Grant Funding Another domain of alleged sex discrimination is grant and fel - lowship reviews . In an in ﬂ uential article in Nature ( cited 212 times ) , † Wennerås and Wold ( 29 ) reported that when reviewers † As a more important indicator of its in ﬂ uence , this article is frequently invoked as evidence by proponents of interventions such as NSF ’ s $ 130 million ADVANCE initiative . 2 of 6 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1014871108 Ceci and Williams judged postdoctoral fellowship applications to the Swedish Med - ical Research Council ( MRC ) in 1995 , the conversion of data into subjective scores was highly prejudiced against women . A Nature commentary stated : “ The response across the world could be measured on the Richter scale after the revelation that the ( MRC ) exercised prejudice in its allocation of research fellowships . Six months later , the implications are still being discussed in the newspapers and on radio and TV ” ( ref . 30 , p . 204 ) . The claim of discrimination was based on 62 applications submitted by men and 52 by women : 16 men were funded ( 25 . 8 % ) vs . 4 women ( 7 . 7 % ) . Evidence of bias was based on analyses of reviewers ’ scores versus objective data ( e . g . , publications , citations ) . Reviewers judged each applicant on scienti ﬁ c competence , proposal relevance , and methodology . Women received somewhat lower mean scores than men in all three categories , the largest discrepancy being in sci - enti ﬁ c competence — 2 . 46 vs . 2 . 21 . The total impact score was most predictive of reviewers ’ ratings of scienti ﬁ c competence ( r 2 = 0 . 47 ) : A woman needed a 2 . 6 times higher “ total impact measure ” score than a man to be judged as competent . To determine whether women and men were judged equally , Wennerås and Wold ( 29 ) assumed an applicant ’ s scienti ﬁ c com - petence is linearly correlated with number and quality of pub - lished journal articles , leading to an examination of total number of publications , total number of ﬁ rst - author publications , total citations , total impact measure , ﬁ rst - author impact measure , and ﬁ rst - author citations . They reported “ a female applicant had to be 2 . 5 times more productive than the average male applicant to receive the same competence score ” ( ref . 30 , p . 342 ) . The most productive female applicants — those with 100 or more impact points ( based on number of publications and how frequently the journals are cited ) — was the only group of women judged as competent as men , but only the least productive men who had fewer than 20 impact points . However , the authors ’ conclusion of bias against women was challenged on statistical , methodological , and conceptual grounds ( SI Text , S4 ) . Analyses of funding socie - ties in Europe and North America failed to ﬁ nd bias against fe - male applicants during this same period ( 1994 – 1995 ) . One analysis of nearly 3 , 000 grant applications to the British Wellcome Trust and MRC for the period 1993 – 1996 revealed no evidence of sex bias in approval rates ( 31 ) . Another reported no sex bias in grant approvals to the UK Biological Sciences Research Council ( 32 ) . A third ( 33 ) reported results of ≈ 8 , 000 grant applications to the MRC of Canada , also failing to ﬁ nd sex differences . Although there are occasional instances of sex effects in these reports , they are rare , of small magnitude , and are as often in favor of women as against them ; the largest aberrations were not close to Wennerås and Wold ’ s ﬁ nding ( 29 ) that women had to be 2 . 5 times more productive than men to obtain similar scores . Consider that Dickson ( 32 ) reported that in 1996 , the success rates for male and female grant applicants to the UK ’ s Bio - technology and Biological Sciences Research Council were 24 % and 19 % , and 26 % and 29 % to the MRC , respectively . Grant et al . ( 31 ) reported that “ the award rates for both sexes are ap - proximately the same . . . Neither is there any evidence that women need a more impressive publication record than men to be suc - cessful in either organization ’ s competitions ” ( p . 438 ) . In fact , successful female candidates for project grants published on av - erage 11 . 2 papers vs . 13 . 8 papers by males ; successful female candidates for senior research fellowships published 11 . 8 papers vs . 14 . 3 for men . In Canada , Friesen ( 33 ) found that , with one exception , grants were also gender - neutral : For the largest program , the success rates for men and women were 26 . 6 % and 25 . 4 % ( n . s . ) . For the prestigious MRC - Canada Scholarship awards , which provided ﬁ ve years of salary for new PhDs , there was likewise no signi ﬁ cant sex difference ( 14 % for men vs . 16 . 6 % for women ) . The sole sex difference favoring men was for the category of PhD students doing postdoc training and health professionals undertaking re - search training : 16 . 3 % for men vs . 12 . 9 % for women ( p < 0 . 05 ) . This difference is small , and of ﬁ ve competitions , two had virtually identical approval rates . Finally , Sandstrom and Hallsten ( 34 ) analyzed more recent data from the Swedish MRC and found that the gender bias reported by Wennerås and Wold ( 29 ) had re - versed itself , so that there was a small but signi ﬁ cant effect in favor of funding women ’ s grants compared to men ’ s with the same score . They analyzed 280 grant applications in 2004 , 118 from female principal investigators , and found no evidence of gender bias : “ Surprisingly , none of the productivity measures interact with gender : Male and female PIs are judged similarly with ref - erence to productivity . When we control for all productivity mea - sures and interactions . . . It appears that female PIs receive a bo - nus compared to male PIs ” ( 34 , p . 186 ) . Perhaps this lack of sex difference is due to Wennerås and Wold ’ s 1997 paper ’ s impact , but this possibility does not explain why even larger , more en - compassing studies preceeding theirs found no sex differences . Thus , a decade after Wennerås and Wold ’ s report ( 29 ) , the Cochrane Methodology Review Group concluded that other than Wennerås and Wold ’ s study , “ a number of other studies carried out in similar contexts found no evidence of ( sex discrimination ) ” ( 35 , p . 2 ) . However , perhaps studies with samples big enough to use the most sensitive measurement framework might unearth sex differences . It is especially useful , therefore , to examine studies meeting this standard . Six large - scale analyses have been published , on net providing compelling counterevidence to sex discrimination claims . The ﬁ rst large - scale analysis ( 36 ) assessed gender bias at the National Science Foundation ( NSF ) , the National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) , and the US Department of Agriculture . This study concluded there was no gender bias in awarding of grants at these three federal agencies ( SI Text , S5 ) . At all three agencies , which fund tens of thousands of US scientists , men ’ s and women ’ s grants were approved at the same rate . [ Relatedly , Leboy ’ s ( 37 ) much smaller report of success rates for ﬁ rst - time RO1 grants at the National Institutes of Health for men and women revealed identical success rates for new submissions between 1998 – 2004 and very similar continuation grants by 2004 . ] Clearly , female PIs did not have to be 2 . 5 times better than males to be approved . The second large - scale analysis is based on the Australian Research Council , which processes > 3 , 000 applications annually in all areas of science . Marsh and his colleagues published several analyses of these data , using sophisticated measurement frame - works ( 38 – 40 ) . In a multilevel analysis of 10 , 023 reviews by 6 , 233 reviewers of 2 , 331 proposals ( 38 , 39 ) , they found that although only 15 . 3 % of applicants for grants were female PIs , their success was almost perfectly proportional ( 15 . 2 % ) . When sex of only ﬁ rst - named investigator was considered , the success rate was identical : 21 % both for men and women . Detailed analyses of second - and third - named researchers also indicated an absence of sex differences in success as did analyses based on mean external ratings and ﬁ nal panel committee ratings ( 38 ) . No gender effect was found in any of the nine disciplines , and there was no gender bias as a function of reviewer or applicant sex or their interaction . [ Subsequently , Marsh et al . ( 39 ) extended these results , again reporting no sex differences in approval rates that again general - ized across disciplines , as well as to reviewers nominated by PIs vs . chosen by the agency , and to the country of the reviewer . ] The third large - scale analysis provides an exception to the consistent failure to ﬁ nd sex differences . Bornmann and Daniel ( 41 ) examined 1 , 022 applications for predoctoral fellowships and 134 for postdoctoral fellowships to a German Foundation be - tween 1985 and 1990 . They found no evidence for gender bias in approving postdoc fellowships , but evidence for bias in approv - ing pre - PhD fellowships , with males more likely to be approved ( SI Text , S6 ) . A follow - up study by Bornmann and his colleagues ( 42 , 43 ) used a sophisticated multilevel approach to a metaanaly - sis , based on their comprehensive collection of studies of peer reviews for grants . This time Bornmann found a difference in favor of men , albeit extremely small — an effect size of < 0 . 04 ( an odds ratio of only 1 . 07 : 1 . 00 ) . Only 1 of 66 sex - difference effect sizes was signi ﬁ cant . Once again , no bias was found for postdocs , the group studied by Wennerås and Wold ( 29 ) . The fourth large - scale study was based on all grant proposals submitted to the Economics Program at NSF during the years 1987 – 1990 . Broder ( 44 ) analyzed6 , 764reviews . Consistentwiththe dearth of women economists in the late 1980s , only 9 . 3 % of the PIs and 7 . 6 % of the reviewers were women . However , Broder found Ceci and Williams PNAS Early Edition | 3 of 6 P S Y C H O L O G I C A L A ND C O GN I T I V E S C I E N C E S female PIs fared well when rated by male reviewers at NSF , butless well when rated by female reviewers , a ﬁ nding she suggested may have worked against increased representation of women . The ﬁ fth large - scale analysis attempted to reconcile contra - dictory ﬁ ndings by Marsh et al . vs . Bornmann et al . These teams joined forces and conducted a reanalysis of Bornmann and Daniel ’ s ( 41 ) data to resolve their differences . Marsh , Bornmann et al . ( 45 ) applied the most powerful analytic approach to date , leading both camps to agree that there was no evidence of sex differences favoring men in any category . In fact , they found ev - idence favoring women , after controlling for discipline and country . These results were robust , with little study - to - study var - iation and a lack of interactions : “ This noneffect of gender gen - eralized across discipline , the different countries ( and funding agencies ) considered here , and the publication year ” ( 45 , p . 1311 ) . Regarding sex differences in approval of fellowship applications , there was a small but statistically signi ﬁ cant difference in favor of men . This ﬁ nding is the closest any of the analyses have come to replicating Wennerås and Wold ( 29 ) ( SI Text , S7 ) , although the magnitude of this ﬁ nding was not nearly as pronounced . The joint team interpreted this single ﬁ nding in favor of men as an aber - ration from an otherwise unambiguous pattern of no sex advan - tages or even slight female advantage , and the lack of sex differ - ences generalized over country and discipline ( 45 ) . Finally , the sixth large - scale analysis of funding was conducted on > 100 , 000 NIH submissions in six biomedical categories be - tween 1996 and 2007 ( 46 ) . The percentages of submissions funded were largely equivalent , with men favored slightly in some cate - gories and women favored in others , leading the authors to con - clude : “ Men and women have near - equal NIH funding success at all stages of their careers , which makes it very unlikely that female attrition is due to negative selection from NIH grant - funding decisions ” ( p . 1473 ) . To recap , the weight of evidence overwhelmingly points to a gender - fair grant review process . There are occasional small aber - rations , sometimes favoring men and sometimes favoring women ; all of the smaller - scale studies failed to replicate Wennerås and Wold ’ s provocative ﬁ ndings , and all but one of the large - scale studies did as well — however , this one study was reversed after a more ambitious joint reanalysis ( 45 ) . Despite this overwhelming counterevidence , numerous organizationscontinuetosuggestgrant review is discriminatory ( 47 ) , thus diverting attention from legiti - mate factors limiting women ’ s participation in math - based careers . The pattern of null sex effects reviewed above is based on funding decisions since the mid - 1980s . This period may differ from that > 25 y ago . Perhaps sexism was more common at agencies then and women ’ s grants had to be superior to men ’ s to be funded . Such sexism would be unsurprising given other evi - dence of sexism from this earlier era . Still , sexist reviews cannot be the source of today ’ s dearth of women entering assistant pro - fessorships in math - intensive ﬁ elds . In contrast to claims of anti - female bias among funding agencies quoted in the Introduction , this review indicates a level playing ﬁ eld over the last two decades . Discrimination Against Women in Hiring If the underrepresentation of women in math - intensive ﬁ elds is not due to biased journal or grant reviews , perhaps it results from biased interviewing and hiring decisions ? A study of mock - search - committee recommendations for hiring of psychology professors ( 15 ) is often invoked for suspecting it does . In this study , 238 psychologists reviewed ﬁ ctitious assistant professor can - didatesand more advanced jobseekers . Theauthorsused the same CV , varying applicant sex , and found that both female and male reviewers favored CVs with male assistant professor names , al - though they did not favor men for the more advanced post . Sim - ilarly , women on business teams receive less credit than men for identical work . For stereotypically male tasks , if there is ambiguity about the quality of a woman ’ s contribution to a joint task , it is downplayed ( 48 ) . Both male and female judges rated a hypotheti - cal worker ’ s performance worse when they thought the worker was female . These results , coupled with ﬁ ndings that nonblind audi - tions for positions in orchestras discriminated against women ( 12 ) and that 18 - y - old college males favored resumes with male names for summer jobs when they were similar , although not identical to , those with female names ( 14 ) , suggest comparable discrimination may be responsible for the dearth of women entering math - intensive ﬁ elds . Although none of this evidence involved discrimination in math - intensive ﬁ elds , it would be unlikely for sex discrimination to occur in all ﬁ elds except math - intensive ones . A Government Accounting Of ﬁ ce ( GAO ) report notes that women in math - intensive ﬁ elds express feelings of isolation , dissatisfaction , and discrimination , “ assertions that we also heard during many of our site visits to selected campuses ” ( ref . 49 , p . 4 ) . ‡ This report touches on several factors supported by various analyses as being relevant to women ’ s underrepresentation ( 50 ) . These factors in - clude women being more likely to prefer working fewer hours and at part - time positions to achieve work - family balance . Although 77 % of female and 81 % of male graduate students believed a full - time career is “ important ” or “ extremely important ” ( 51 ) , sex differences emerged after additional questioning , with 31 % of women ( vs . only 9 % of men ) feeling that working part time for a period is “ important ” or “ extremely important ” . For having a permanent part - time career , the respective proportions were 19 % for women and 9 % for men ( 51 ) . Similarly , in the United Kingdom for 2006 – 2007 , female academics were signi ﬁ cantly more likely than males to work part - time , 41 . 8 % vs . 26 . 8 % ( 25 ) . Such sex differences re ﬂ ect preferences and choices , whether freely made or constrained by gendered expectations , and result in more women in teaching - intensive , part - time posts where re - search resources are scarce . Relatedly , the GAO report men - tions studies of pay differentials , demonstrating that nearly all current salary differences can be accounted for by factors other than discrimination , such as women being disproportionately employed at teaching - intensive institutions paying less and pro - viding less time for research . Historically , however , this was not true ; women , particularly senior women , lagged behind men in pay and promotion ( 52 , 53 ) ( SI Text , S8 ) . Ginther and Kahn ( 54 ) analyzed promotion and pay data , noting that historic asymme - tries favoring males largely disappeared by the early 2000s , with current asymmetries due to nongender factors . Others have also found that after controlling for structural variables such as status of university , discipline , and presence of young children ( which affects women disproportionately ) , there is no evidence of dis - criminatory treatment , because women and men in the same cir - cumstances ( e . g . , same type of institution , discipline , and amount of experience ) fare equivalently . Again , although these variables affect men and women similarly , they disadvantage women more in practice , because more women work at teaching - intensive jobs . A National Center for Education Statistics study found that among full - time faculty , women were more likely to work in 2 - y institutions ( 33 % vs . 23 % ) , and men in research universities ( 20 % vs . 14 % ) . Whether this is a consequence of choices freely made , or constrained by gendered expectations related to work - family balance coupled with in ﬂ exibility in tenure - track timetables and employment options , is worthy of study . Finally , an in - depth analysis of academic interviewing , hiring , institutional resources , and climate at R1 universities in six areas of natural science by an NRC task force ( 55 ) found that , among PhDs applying for tenure - track jobs , women were slightly more likely than men to be invited to interview and offered jobs : “ If women applied for positions at R1 institutions , they had a better chance of being interviewed and receiving offers than male job candidates ” ( ref . 55 , p . 5 ) . These results are inconsistent with initiatives pro - moting gender sensitivity training for search committees and grant panels , which assume bias in funding and hiring of women ( ref . 47 , also seerefs . 11 , 56 , and 57 ) . Such initiatives target historical rather than current problems facing women scientists . ‡ Analyses of > 8 , 000 University of California graduate students ’ responses by Mason and Goulden ( 50 ) documenttheimportantroleplayedbyfamilyformationinfemalegraduate students ’ decisions to switch out of tenure - track careers in science . For example , married female doctoralstudents with childrenare35 % less likely to entera tenure - track position after receiving a Ph . D . than married men with children and they are 27 % less likely than mentoachievetenure . Seehttp : / / ucfamilyedge . berkeley . edu / grad % 20life % 20survey . html . 4 of 6 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1014871108 Ceci and Williams Conclusion : Redirecting Energies Toward Today ’ s Causes of Underrepresentation Despite frequent assertions that women ’ s current underrep - resentation in math - intensive ﬁ elds is caused by sex discrimination by grant agencies , journal reviewers , and search committees , the evidence shows women fare as well as men in hiring , funding , and publishing ( given comparable resources ) . That women tend to occupy positions offering fewer resources is not due to women being bypassed in interviewing and hiring or being denied grants and journal publications because of their sex . It is due primarily to factors surrounding family formation and childrearing , gendered expectations , lifestyle choices , and career preferences — some originating before or during adolescence ( 3 , 50 , 54 , 58 ) ( SI Text , S9 ) — and secondarily to sex differences at the extreme right tail of mathematics performance on tests used as gateways to graduate school admission ( SI Text , S10 ) . As noted , women in math - in - tensive ﬁ elds are interviewed and hired slightly in excess of their representation among PhDs applying for tenure - track positions . The primary factors in women ’ s underrepresentation are prefer - ences and choices — both freely made and constrained : “ Women choose at a young age not to pursue math - intensive careers , with few adolescent girls expressing desires to be engineers or phys - icists , preferring instead to be medical doctors , veterinarians , biologists , psychologists , and lawyers . Females make this choice despite earning higher math and science grades than males throughout schooling ” ( 3 ) . Although women earn a large portion of undergraduate degrees in all science and math ﬁ elds , disproportionately fewer matriculate in math - intensive graduate ﬁ elds , preferring biology , medicine , and nonscience ﬁ elds ( law , humanities ) — even when math ability is held constant . Of women who matriculate in math - intensive graduate ﬁ elds , more drop out or change majors . Even among those who complete doctorates in math ﬁ elds , fewer apply for tenure - track posts than do male counterparts . And the leakage of women continues even after starting careers as as - sistant professors — especially in math and physical sciences , and this trend continues as women advance through the ranks : “ Although the reasons for this attrition are not well understood , it appears to have less to do with discrimination or ability than with fertility decisions and lifestyle choices , both freely made and con - strained . The tenure structure in academe demands that women having children make their greatest intellectual contributions con - temporaneously with their greatest physical and emotional achieve - ments , a feat not expected of men . When women opt out of full - time careers to have and rear children , this is a choice — constrained by biology — that men are not required to make ” ( 3 , p . 4 ) . To the extent that women ’ s choices are freely made and women are satis ﬁ ed with the outcomes , then we have no problem . How - ever , to the extent that these choices are constrained by biology and / or society , and women are dissatis ﬁ ed with the outcomes , or women ’ s talent is not actualized , then we most emphatically have a problem . With a redirection of resources , this problem might be addressed by education and outreach to young women and girls and to academic administrators . Past strategies to remediate women ’ s underrepresentation can be viewed as a success story ; however , continuing to advocate strategies successful in the past to combat shortages of women in math - based ﬁ elds today mis - takes the current causes of women ’ s underrepresentation . If not discrimination , what is the cause of women ’ s under - representation ? Today , the dearth of women in math - based ﬁ elds is related to three factors , one of which ( fertility / lifestyle choices ) hinders women in all ﬁ elds , not just mathematical ones , whereas the others ( career preferences and ability differences ) impact women in math - based ﬁ elds . Regarding the role of math - related career preferences , adolescent girls often prefer careers focusing on people as opposed to things , and this preference accounts for their burgeoning numbers in such ﬁ elds as medicine and biology , and their smaller presence in math - intensive ﬁ elds such as com - puter science , physics , engineering , chemistry , and mathematics , even when math ability is equated . In a recent metaanalysis of > 500 , 000 participants , the male - female effect size for preferring people vs . things overall was d > 0 . 90 , and for engineering , 1 . 1 , both substantial differences ( 59 ) . One strategy to broaden girls ’ interests and aspirations involves providing them with realistic information about career opportunities and exposing them to role models in math - based ﬁ elds . This intervention is not meant to dissuade girls from aspiring to be physicians , veterinarians , and biologists , ﬁ elds in which women are becoming a majority , but rather to ensure they do not opt out of inorganic ﬁ elds because of misinformation or stereotypes . Regarding the role of math - ability differences , potentially in - ﬂ uenced by both socialization and biology , twice as many men as women are found in the top 1 % of the math score distribution ( e . g . , SAT - M , GRE - Q ) . A 30 - y study of 1 . 6 million talent search participants revealed the male - female ratio of SAT - M scores in the top 0 . 01 % has remained relatively stable since the mid - 1990s at roughly 4 : 1 ( 60 ) . This upper - tail difference is more pro - nounced for spatial ability ( 61 ) due partly to sex differences in variances in cognitive abilities ( 4 ) . However , ability differences are a secondary explanation for the dearth of women in math - intensive ﬁ elds because , even given these differences , we would still expect more women in these ﬁ elds ( e . g . , a 4 : 1 ratio would engender 20 % female professors in , say , engineering , and a 2 : 1 ratio would lead to 33 % , whereas actual percentages of women are lower ( 62 ; SI Text , S10 ) . The third factor in ﬂ uencing underrepresentation affects women in all ﬁ elds : fertility choices and work - home balance issues . However , this challenge is exacerbated in math - intensive ﬁ elds because the number of women is smaller to begin with . Attrition at each stage ( from undergraduate to graduate school to tenure track ) further reduces an already small number . There are signi ﬁ cant sex differences in hours worked and lifestyle prefer - ences ( 58 ) , and having children early in one ’ s career exerts more downward pressure on pretenure women than men ( 4 , 52 , 53 ) . The tenure system has strong disincentives for women to have children ; these disincentives are why more women in the academy are childless than men , and even women on tenure track with children are twice as likely as men to say they had fewer children than desired ( 50 ) . Not only is it more common for male academic scientists to have children than for female scientists , but males with children are more likely to be tenured than females with children . Compared with males , new female PhDs are less likely to apply for tenure - track posts ; and among those who do apply , females are more likely to terminate for family reasons ( 55 ) . The GAO report ( 49 ) noted that many women PhD students stated during compliance visits that they would not seek tenure - track positions ( SI Text , S11 ) . In sum , the most salient reasons for women ’ s underrepresentation today are career preferences and fertility / lifestyle choices , both free and constrained . TheGAOreportlistsstrategies , suchasstoppingtenureclocksfor family formation and tenure - track positions seguing from part - time to full - time . Gender Equity Committees have suggested adjusting the length of time to work on grants to accommodate child - rearing , no - cost grant extensions , supplements to hire postdocs to maintain momentum during family leave , reduction in teaching responsi - bilities for women with newborns , grants for retooling after leaves of absence , couples - hiring , and childcare to attend professional meetings ( 47 , 50 , 63 ) . The UC - Berkeley ’ s “ Family Edge ” provides high - quality childcare and emergency backup care , summer camps and school break care , and reentry postdocs and instructs com - mittees to ignore family - related gaps in CVs . Research into these strategies is needed to identify which are promising . Federal agencies and universities could play an important role by funding studies on the differing lifecourses of women ’ s and men ’ s careers to determine whether the traditional timing of hiring , tenure , and promotion may deny society and science the contributions of talented women . Perhaps women in scienti ﬁ c ﬁ elds generally have greater impact later in their careers when family needs are less intense , even if they were less productive earlier because of family - balancing con ﬂ icts , as research has shown in biology ( 64 ) . If this ﬁ nding can be generalized to today ’ s cohort of women in math - intensive ﬁ elds , universities might explore options for offering women part - time tenure - track jobs ( with concomitantly longer periods of time in which to amass a tenure portfolio ) , posts that could segue to full - time Ceci and Williams PNAS Early Edition | 5 of 6 P S Y C H O L O G I C A L A ND C O GN I T I V E S C I E N C E S once women were ready . However , implementing such ﬂ exible options will require motivation and commitment of resources , and raises important questions that research will need to resolve ( e . g . , the impact on graduate students and postdocs working with part - time faculty ; ways to “ game ” the part - time option for ten - ure ) . The linear career path of the modal male scientist of the past may not be the only route to success , and departments and universities should be encouraged and funded to experiment with alternate lifecourse options . A partnership between the academy and federal funding agencies could be instrumental in researching such alternatives . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . We acknowledge critical feedback from David Dunning , Kevin Clermont , Emily Sherwin , Ronald Ehrenberg , Valerie Reyna , Michael Macy , and anonymous reviewers . This work was funded by National Institutes of Health Grant R01 NS069792 - 01 . 1 . Burrelli J ( 2008 ) Thirty - three years of women in S & E faculty positions . InfoBrief NSF 08 - 308 . ( National Science Foundation , Division of Science Resources Statistics , Arlington , VA ) . 2 . Ceci SJ , Williams WM ( 2010 ) The Mathematics of Sex : How Biology and Society Conspire to Limit Talented Women and Girls ( Oxford Univ Press , New York ) . 3 . Ceci SJ , Williams WM ( 2010 ) Sex differences in math - intensive ﬁ elds . Curr Dir Psychol Sci 19 : 275 – 279 . 4 . Ceci SJ , Williams WM , Barnett SM ( 2009 ) Women ’ s underrepresentation in science : Sociocultural and biological considerations . Psychol Bull 135 : 218 – 261 . 5 . Chesler NC , Barabino G , Bhatia SN , Richards - Kortum R ( 2010 ) The pipeline still leaks and more than you think : a status report on gender diversity in biomedical engineering . Ann Biomed Eng 38 : 1928 – 1935 . 6 . Lortie CJ , et al . ( 2007 ) Publication bias and merit in ecology . Oikos 116 : 1247 – 1253 . 7 . Hill C , Corbett C , St . Rose A ( 2010 ) Why So Few ? Women in Science , Technology , Engineering , and Mathematics ( Amer Assoc Univ Women , Washington , DC ) . 8 . NAS Committee on Science , Engineering , and Public Policy ( 2006 ) Beyond Bias and Barriers : Ful ﬁ llingthePotentialofWomenin AcademicScienceandEngineering ( Natl Acad Press , Washington , DC ) . 9 . Faculty Newsletter MIT ( 1999 ) A Study on the Status of Women Faculty in Science at MIT . http : / / web . mit . edu / fnl / women / women . html . Accessed June 10 , 2008 . 10 . McLaughlin T ( December27 , 2006 ) TopWall Streetjobs still elude women , minorities . Boston Globe . Available at http : / / www . boston . com / news / education / higher / articles / 2006 / 12 / 27 / top _ wall _ street _ jobs _ still _ elude _ women _ minorities . RetrievedSeptember 19 , 2008 . 11 . RhodeD ( 1997 ) Speakingof Sex : TheDenialof GenderInequality ( HarvardUnivPress , Cambridge , MA ) . 12 . Goldin C , Rouse C ( 2000 ) Orchestrating impartiality : The impact of “ blind ” auditions on female musicians . Am Econ Rev 90 : 715 – 741 . 13 . Coffey B , McLaughlin P ( 2009 ) Do masculine names help female lawyers become judges ? Am Law Econ Rev 11 : 112 – 133 . 14 . Foschi M , Lai L , Sigerson K ( 1994 ) Gender and double standards in the assessment of job applicant . Soc Psychol Q 57 : 326 – 339 . 15 . SteinpreisR , Anders K , RitzkeD ( 1999 ) Theimpact ofgenderon the reviewof theCVs of job applicants and tenure candidates : A national empirical study . Sex Roles 41 : 509 – 528 . 16 . AngelM , WhangE , BankerR , LopezJ ( 2010 ) StatisticalEvidenceontheGenderGapin Law Firm Partner Compensation . Temple University Legal Studies Research Paper No . 2010 - 24 , http : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 1674630 . 17 . BorsukR , etal . ( 2009 ) Tonameor nottoname : Theeffectof changingauthorgender on peer review . BioSci 59 : 985 – 989 . 18 . Budden AE , et al . ( 2008 ) Double - blind review favours increased representation of female authors . Trends Ecol Evol 23 : 4 – 6 . 19 . Budden A , et al . ( 2008 ) Response to Webb et al . Trends Ecol Evol 23 : 353 – 355 . 20 . Webb TJ , O ’ Hara B , Freckleton RP ( 2008 ) Does double - blind review bene ﬁ t female authors ? Trends Ecol Evol 23 : 351 – 353 , author reply 353 – 354 . 21 . HammerschmidtK , ReinhardtK , Rolff J ( 2008 ) Does double - blind reviewfavor female authors ? Frontiers in Ecol and the Environ 6 : 354 . 22 . Whittaker RJ ( 2008 ) Journal review and gender equality : A critical comment on Budden et al . Trends Ecol Evol 23 : 478 – 479 , author reply 480 . 23 . Tregenza T ( 2002 ) Gender bias in the refereeing process ? Trends Ecol Evol 17 : 349 – 350 . 24 . Nature Neuroscience ( 2006 ) Women in neuroscience . Nature Neurosci 9 : 853 . 25 . Brooks J , Della Sala S ( 2009 ) Re - addressing gender bias in Cortex publications . Cortex 45 : 1126 – 1137 . 26 . XieY , ShaumanK ( 1998 ) Sexdifferencesinresearchproductivity : Newevidenceabout an old puzzle . Amer Soc Rev 63 : 847 – 870 . 27 . Allison P , Long S ( 1990 ) Departmental effectson scienti ﬁ c productivity . Am SociolRev 55 : 119 – 125 . 28 . Committee on Gender Differences in the Careers of Science , Engineering , and MathematicsFaculty ( 2009 ) GenderDifferencesatCriticalTransitionsintheCareersof Science , Engineering , and Mathematics Faculty . ( Natl Acad Press , Washington , DC ) . 29 . WennerasC , WoldA ( 1997 ) Nepotismandsexisminpeer - review . Nature 387 : 341 – 343 . 30 . Abbott A ( 1997 ) Equality not taken for granted . Nature 390 : 204 . 31 . Grant J , Burden S , Breen G ( 1997 ) No evidence of sexism in peer review . Nature 390 : 438 . 32 . Dickson D ( 1997 ) Female scientists wanted — apply to UK research councils . Nature 390 : 431 . 33 . Friesen HG ( 1998 ) Equal opportunities in Canada . Nature 391 : 326 . 34 . Sandstrom U , Hallsten M ( 2008 ) Persistent nepotism in peer - review . Scientometr 74 : 175 – 189 . 35 . Demicheli V , Di Pietrantonj C ( 2007 ) Peer review for improving the quality of grant applications . Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2 : MR000003 . 36 . RAND ( 2005 ) Is there gender bias in federal grant programs ? ( RAND Infrastructure , Safety , and Environment Brief RB - 9147 - NSF ) . Available at http : / / rand . org / pubs / re - search _ briefs / RB9147 / RAND _ RB9147 . pdf . Accessed March 1 , 2008 . 37 . LeboyP ( 2008 ) Fixingthe leaky pipeline . TheScientist 22 : 67 – 70 . 38 . Jayasinghe U , Marsh H , Bond N ( 2003 ) Multilevel cross - classi ﬁ ed modeling approach to peer - review of grant proposals . JR Stat Soc 166A : 279 – 300 . 39 . Marsh HW , Jayasinghe UW , Bond NW ( 2008a ) Improving the peer - review process for grant applications : Reliability , validity , bias , and generalizability . Am Psychol 63 : 160 – 168 . 40 . Marsh HW , Jayasinghe U , Bond N ( 2008b ) Peer Reviews of Grant Applications ( SELF Res Centre , Univ Oxford , Oxford ) . 41 . BornmannL , Daniel H - D ( 2005 ) Selectionofresearchfellowshiprecipientsbycommittee peer review . Scientometr 63 : 297 – 320 . 42 . Bornmann L ( 2007 ) Bias cut : Women , it seems , often get a raw deal in science — So how can discrimination be tackled ? Nature 445 : 566 . 43 . Bornmann L , Mutz R , Daniel HD ( 2007 ) Gender differences in grant peer review : A meta - analysis . J of Informetr 1 : 226 – 238 . 44 . BroderI ( 1993 ) ReviewofNSFeconomicsproposals : Genderandinstitutionalpatterns . Am Econ Rev 83 : 964 – 970 . 45 . Marsh HW , Bornmann L , Mutz R , Daniel H - D , O ’ Mara A ( 2009 ) Gender effects in the peer reviews of grant proposals . Rev Educ Res 79 : 1290 – 1326 . 46 . Ley TJ , Hamilton BH ( 2008 ) Sociology . The gender gap in NIH grant applications . Science 322 : 1472 – 1474 . 47 . Comm on Status of Women in Physics of the American Physics Society ( 2007 ) Strengthening the Physics Enterprise in Universities and National Laboratories . Ga - zette , 26 : 2 . Availableathttp : / / www . aps . org / programs / women / reports / gazette / loader . cfm ? csModule = security / get ﬁ le & PageID = 102599 . Accessed January 11 , 2011 . . 48 . Heilman ME , Haynes MC ( 2005 ) No credit where credit is due : Attributional rationalization of women ’ s success in male - female teams . J Appl Psychol 90 : 905 – 916 . 49 . General Accounting Of ﬁ ce ( July 2004 ) Gender issues : Women ’ s participation in the sciences has increased , but agencies need to do more to ensure compliance with title IX . GAO 04 - 639 . Available at www . gao . gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? GAO - 04 - 639 . 50 . Mason MA , Goulden M ( 2009 ) UC Doctoral Student Career and Life Survey ( Univ of Calif , Berkeley ) . Available at http : / / ucfamilyedge . berkeley . edu / grad % 20life % 20survey . html . Accessed January 3 , 2011 . 51 . Lubinski D , Benbow CP , Shea DL , Eftekhari - Sanjani H , Halvorson MB ( 2001 ) Men and women at promise for scienti ﬁ c excellence : Similarity not dissimilarity . Psychol Sci 12 : 309 – 317 . 52 . Ginther D ( 2004 ) Why women earn less than men . AWIS Mag 33 : 1 – 5 . 53 . Ginther DK ( February 2001 ) . Does Science Discriminate against Women ? ( Fed Res Bank of Atlanta , Atlanta ) , Working Paper 2001 - 02 . 54 . Ginther DK , Kahn S ( 2006 ) Does Science Promote Women ? . Science and Engineering Careers in the United States : An Analysis of Markets and Employment , eds Freeman RB , Goroff DL ( Natl Bur Econ Res , Chicago ) , pp 163 – 194 . 55 . Faculty Committee on Women in Science , Engineering , and Medicine ( 2010 ) . Gender Differences at Critical Transitions in the Careers of Science , Engineering , and Math - ematics Faculty . ( Natl Acad Press , Washington DC ) . 56 . Sommers CH ( 2008 ) Why can ’ t a woman be more like a man ? The American , Available at www . american . com / archive / 2008 / march - april - magazine - contents / why - can2019t - a - woman - be - more - like - a - man . Accessed September 19 , 2008 . 57 . Tierney J ( June 14 , 2010 ) Legislation won ’ t close gender gap in science . New York Times , D4 . Availableat : http : / / www . nytimes . com / 2010 / 06 / 15 / science / 15tier . html ? _ r = 1 & scp = 1 & sq = stephen % 20ceci & st = cse . Accessed 1 / 13 / 2011 . 58 . Ferriman K , Lubinski D , Benbow CP ( 2009 ) Work preferences , life values , and personal viewsoftopmath / sciencegraduatestudentsandtheprofoundlygifted : Developmental changesandgenderdifferencesduringemergingadulthoodandparenthood . JPersSoc Psychol 97 : 517 – 532 . 59 . Su R , Rounds J , Armstrong PI ( 2009 ) Men and things , women and people : A meta - analysis of sex differences in interests . Psychol Bull 135 : 859 – 884 . 60 . Wai J , Cacchio M , Putallaz M , Makel M ( 2010 ) Sex differences in the right tail of cognitive abilities : A 30 year examination . Intelligence 38 : 412 – 423 . 61 . Wai J , Lubinski D , Benbow CP ( 2009 ) Spatial ability for STEM domains : Aligning over ﬁ fty years of cumulative psychological knowledgesolidi ﬁ es its importance . J Ed Psych 101 : 817 – 835 . 62 . Valla J , Ceci S Can sex differences in science be tied to the long reach of prenatal hormones ? Perspect Psychol Sci , in press . 63 . Sher M ( 2006 ) Dual careercouples : Problem of opportunity ? CSWP Gazette 25 : 1 – 2 , 9 . 64 . Long J ( 1992 ) Measures of sex differences in scienti ﬁ c productivity . Soc Forces 71 : 159 – 178 . 6 of 6 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1014871108 Ceci and Williams