Metaphor and Creativity in Learning Science METAPHOR AND CREATIVITY IN LEARNING SCIENCE Janice Hansen & Lindsey E . Richland Department of Education University of California , Irvine Eric P . S . Baumer Information Science Cornell University William Tomlinson Information Technology University of California , Irvine ABSTRACT While much work has examined how students think and and learn with metaphors , relatively little research has focused on thinking about metaphors , that is , thinking critically about current metaphors and considering creative alternatives . This paper presents results from a classroom - based study that involves metaphor in science learning and incorporates a novel computational technique for analyzing metaphors in text . The results here show that students’ ability to engage with a metaphor’s deep , structural aspects significantly predicts ability to generate creative , novel metaphors . Not only do these results carry implications for how best to incorporate metaphor into instruction , but they also draw attention to the ability to reason critically about metaphors as an important area for future research . PURPOSE Metaphor plays a crucial role in human understanding of the world . A metaphor uses that which is familiar , a source concept , to understand that which is unfamiliar , a target concept ( Gentner et al . , 2001 ; Lakoff & Johnson 1980 ) . Metaphors can be powerful aids in education because they can help learners begin to understand novel concepts . Although metaphors abound in human thinking , they can be surprisingly difficult to notice simply due to their ubiquity . We describe a study using a novel computational technique : 1 ) to identify potential metaphors in students’ classroom science writing and 2 ) to prompt students’ metacognitive reflection upon the metaphors they use when learning science . We examined students ' writing within a technology - delivered unit teaching cellular structure through a common instructional Metaphor and Creativity in Learning Science metaphor comparing a cell to a city . Analysis of student text identified novel metaphors that seemed to have been underlying student thinking about cellular organelles . The results of these analyses were provided back to some students . Interestingly , prompting students to reflect upon their metaphor use led to more creative , generative thinking about the science content . Thus , while most educational research on metaphor involves identifying metaphors that can enhance instruction , or that may invite misconceptions , this work reveals that making metaphors explicit can also be used to enhance students ' thinking about the target concept . THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK Rather than being solely a literary device , metaphors permeate human thought and action ( Lakoff & Johnson , 1980 ) . For example , one might describe an argument : “I attacked the weak point in his statement , ” or , “you defeated the opposition’s claims . ” The language used to describe an argument is similar to that used to describe combat , suggesting the metaphor ARGUMENT IS WAR . Some contend that most abstract concepts ( Lakoff & Johnson , 1999 ) , or virtually all concepts ( Hofstadter , 2001 ) , are understood in terms of metaphorical or analogical thinking . However , as Lakoff & Turner ( 1989 ) have noted , “because [ metaphors ] are used so automatically and effortlessly , we find it hard to question them , if we can even notice them . ” Thus , it may be useful to have a technique for drawing attention to patterns of language potentially indicative of underlying conceptual metaphors . Most previous computational linguistic approaches have treated metaphors as relatively isolated anomalies that require exceptional processing ( Fass , 1991 ; Lu & Feldman , 2007 ; Martin , 1990 ) . Educational research has traditionally examined metaphors as being either instructionally helpful or , conversely , sources of misconceptions ( Zook , 1991 ; Zook & DiVesta , 1991 ) . Metaphor and Creativity in Learning Science In contrast , the approach here is to focus on the ubiquity of metaphor in order to identify potential underlying conceptual metaphors , especially where exact expected metaphors are not known in advance . Identifying and making explicit metaphorical reasoning can perhaps foster critical and creative thinking not only about metaphors but also about the target concepts they represent . Any given metaphor highlights certain aspects of a situation while simultaneously downplaying or hiding others ( Lakoff & Johnson , 1980 ) . Further , a metaphor will in some ways fit the situation it frames , and in other ways , not fit . For example , one common science education metaphor is ELECTRICITY IS WATER ( Gentner & Gentner , 1983 ) . In this metaphor , voltage is water pressure , current is the volume of water flow , etc . These are the ways in which the metaphor “fits . ” However , if one bends a pipe the flow of the water is impeded , whereas bending a wire has no impact on the flow of electricity . In this way , the metaphor does not fit . Understanding what a metaphor highlights and what it hides , how it fits and does not fit , are important aspects of understanding the implications of , and inferences sanctioned by , a given metaphor . Drawing a learner’s attention to his own potential metaphorical thought , and asking him to evaluate those metaphors may be one way to foster critical thinking . Furthermore , the patterns of thought exhibited by a student in evaluating metaphors may provide insight into whether he understands the deep , structural similarities and differences between the source metaphor and the target concept , or if he is simply relying on surface comparisons . Metaphors are not simply a conduit for critical thought , they are also linked to creative thinking processes ( Dunbar , 1995 ; Gentner , 2002 ; Gordon , 1974 ) . Metaphor has been found throughout all creative aspects of professional science ( Dunbar , 1995 , 1999 ; Dunbar & Blanchette , 2001 ) . Facility with noticing , recognizing , and making use of metaphorical thought is Metaphor and Creativity in Learning Science thus a crucial part of developing academic creativity . A creative metaphor is both novel , drawing on a relatively uncommon source concept , and useful , with the framing and inferences it entails providing an effective understanding of the target concept . The ability to think critically about metaphorical relationships may in fact be one predictor of the ability to generate novel , creative , metaphors . METHODS Data Sources Participants . The study included 353 1 seventh grade science students from 2 middle schools in a relatively high - SES school district . Seventh grade students in this district are generally aged 12 - 13 and primarily Caucasian and Asian American , with a smaller population of Hispanic students . Teachers identified 13 English language learners and 18 special education students . Design and Procedures . Students were taught science lessons about animal cells and their organelles via a computer - based learning module in the Web - Based Inquiry Science Environment ( see Slotta & Linn , 2009 , for more information on the WISE project ) . The lessons began introducing the metaphor A CELL IS A CITY . This metaphor was selected for a number of reasons . First , it is a complex structural metaphor ( cf . Lakoff & Johnson , 1980 ) with many component mappings and potential inferences about which students might reason . Second , many of the teacher consultants suggested this was a metaphor they had used in the past . Third , the metaphor is invoked in the textbook used in the participating school district ( Coolidge - Stolz , 2008 ) . Finally , not only does the A CELL IS A CITY metaphor draws on a domain with which most 7 th 1 This paper presents results from data from the 146 participants in the group who received direct feedback on metaphors identified in student writing ; see Results for details . Metaphor and Creativity in Learning Science grade students have experience yet also provides conceptual room to generate different metaphors drawing on other source domains . The study took place over four separate days . On day 1 , students learned about a cell , along with the metaphor A CELL IS A CITY and the mappings for six major organelles ( e . g . , THE NUCLEUS IS CITY HALL , RIBOSOMES ARE FACTORIES ) . Following instruction , students were asked to write about their understanding of each organelle’s function . This writing was analyzed using a computational technique ( described below ) to identify potential metaphors . On day 2 , students were first asked to simply match the organelles to the parts of the city they represented in the metaphor they had been provided on day 1 . Next , students received specific explanation of how metaphors can be helpful in understanding unfamiliar concepts , but can also lead to misconceptions ( cf . Gentner & Gentner , 1983 ; Smith , diSessa & Roschelle , 1993 ) . Students were then given examples of computationally - identified metaphors from their own writing . They were told : “A computer program was used to analyze your answers and the answers of your classmates , to look for different patterns of words , and to see what metaphors you might be using . ” One at a time , three different metaphors that had been computationally identified in student writing were presented to the participants . The three metaphors identified were : A GOLGI BODY IS A PORT , AN ORGANELLE IS A BUILDING , and , ENERGY IS FOOD . Students were shown how their words mirrored the way people use words to describe the metaphorical comparative . An example from the first metaphor follows : Metaphor and Creativity in Learning Science A GOLGI BODY IS LIKE A PORT Based on a computer program ' s analysis of your and other students ' writing , one metaphor people seem to use is that the Golgi body is like a port or a harbor . A port is where boats come into and out of a city , often bringing or taking cargo with them . Many people used words like " transport , " " send , " " carry , " and " move " with the Golgi body , which are words that are often used with ports or harbors . For example , " transporting protein to the Golgi body " might be like " transporting goods and products to a port . " After introducing each metaphor , students were asked to respond to questions about the metaphor . They were asked whether the metaphor made sense , whether it was similar to their own thinking , and to describe why they agreed or disagreed with the metaphor . Then , they were asked to identify at least two ways the metaphor was not like the target concept . Following the instruction utilizing the computational analysis , students were asked to generate a brand new metaphor for a cell . They were specifically instructed to avoid using the city metaphor . Students were also asked to map what each organelle would be like in their new metaphor and why . Days 3 and 4 included additional tasks not reported in this paper . Computational Metaphor Identification This study employed computational metaphor identification ( CMI ) , a novel computational technique for identifying potential conceptual metaphors in written text ( Baumer , Hubin & Tomlinson , 2010 ) . The crux of CMI is selectional preference learning ( Resnik , 1993 ) , which quantifies the degree to which certain classes of nouns tend to be associated with specific verbs . For example , words for the concept of food are often the direct object of the verb “eat . ” To identify metaphors , CMI looks for correspondences in selectional preferences between a source corpus and a target corpus . For example , in a corpus about architecture , terms for the concept building would select to be the direct object of “create , ” “build , ” “make , ” and so on . In science students’ writing , words for cell select for those same verbs in the same grammatical Metaphor and Creativity in Learning Science relationships , indicating that they may be thinking of cells in architectural terms , i . e . CELLS ARE BUILDING BLOCKS . Based on the similarity of selectional preferences , each mapping is given a confidence score to indicate how likely the linguistic patterns are to evidence a conceptual metaphor . One of CMI’s strengths is that it works in the aggregate . While individual instances of phrases such as “building a cell” or “created a new daughter cell” may not at first glance appear metaphorical , it is the systematic appearance of these patterns that becomes compelling evidence for the existence of a metaphor . In the present study , student responses to prompts within the computer learning module were aggregated for computational identification of the most commonly used metaphors . Because the metaphors students were invoking to understand a cell and its organelles was not known in advance , a comparative body of writing that included both scientific knowledge and a layman’s writing style was an appropriate source of comparison . The comparative body of writing was taken from the Internet site Wikipedia . Data Coding Student responses were coded by at least two independent coders , with a minimum reliability of Cohen’s κ = . 80 . Responses evaluating the suitability of computationally - identified metaphors were analyzed to determine whether critical reasoning was based on functional dis / similarities between metaphor and target , featural dis / similarities , or some other type of dis / similarities ( see Gentner , 1983 for discussion of functional / featural metaphor mapping ) . To assess creativity , student - generated metaphors were coded for uniqueness of the overall metaphor ( as defined as different from peers’ metaphors ) , and for aptness of the mappings for each organelles . A mapping was coded as apt if it both fit with the overall novel metaphor and was justified using functional reasoning . An example of one student’s unique Metaphor and Creativity in Learning Science metaphor compared a cell to a pizza . The mappings for the organelles in this metaphor , however , relied on featural reasoning : “You can relate the different parts of a cell to the different topping of a pizza . You could relate based on : shape , color , texture , appearance . ” Clearly , the reliance is on the featural aspects of a cell rather than the functions of the organelles themselves . An example of a metaphor that was both novel and apt compared a cell to Disneyland : “the nucleus is the owner , the workers are the mitochondria giving the rides energy…” This student focused on the functions of each organelle rather than nonessential features in describing the reasoning for the given metaphor . RESULTS The results presented in this section are a part of a larger study , one goal of which was to assess the impact of CMI on learning . Therefore , students were divided into different conditions . The analyses presented here are based on data from 146 students who saw and responded to the computationally - identified metaphors . To understand the relationship between critical thinking about metaphors and metaphorical creativity , regression analyses were used to determine what aspects of critical thinking predicted which facets of creativity . The maximal model , including pairwise interactions , was specified , and stepwise modeling selection ( Venables & Ripley 2002 ) with Akaike’s information criterion ( Akaike , 1974 ) was used to find the final model . Table 1 describes the resultant regression model , which was highly significant , along with the coefficients and significance values for each predictor . Decreased use of featural reasoning about how well a metaphor fit significantly predicted increased creativity , as did a combined decrease in featural reasoning and increase in functional reasoning . Functional reasoning alone was not a significant predictor . The interaction between use of functional and Metaphor and Creativity in Learning Science featural reasoning when giving reasons that a metaphor did not fit was also statistically significant , but the coefficient is much lower , indicating it as less of an important predictor on overall creativity . [ INSERT TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE ] DISCUSSION & SIGNIFICANCE These results demonstrate that the ability to think critically about metaphors is related to the ability to generate creative novel metaphors . Specifically , decreased reliance on featural reasoning seems to predict improved ability to generate novel metaphors that are novel and apt . Therefore , this work indicates that engaging students in thinking critically about one ' s metaphors may be a pathway to enhancing learners ' creativity and conceptual understanding of science content . These data also indicate that instruction involving metaphors might benefit from not only emphasizing the structural relations in a metaphor that map from source to target , but also noting the irrelevant featural , or appearance - based similarities . Overall , this work suggests that thinking critically about science metaphors can lead to the generation of creative metaphors , which in turn encourages an increased depth of thought about the conceptual target ; a primary goal of high - quality science instruction . REFERENCES Akaike , H . ( 1974 ) . A new look at the statistical model identification . Automatic Control , IEEE Transactions on , 19 ( 6 ) , 716 - 723 . Baumer , E . P . S . , Hubin , D . , & Tomlinson , B . ( 2010 ) . Computational Metaphor Identification ( No . LUCI - 2010 - 002 ) . Laboratory for Ubiquitous Computing and Interaction ( LUCI ) Technical Reports . Irvine , CA : Department of Information , University of California , Irvine . Retrieved from http : / / luci . ics . uci . edu / websiteContent / repository / techreports / 2010 / LUCI - 2010 - 002 . pdf Coolidge - Stolz , E . ( 2008 ) . California Life Science ( Focus On ) . Prentice Hall . Metaphor and Creativity in Learning Science Dunbar , K . ( 1995 ) . How scientists really reason : Scientific reasoning in real - world laboratories . In Mechanisms of insight ( pp . 365 - 395 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Dunbar , K . ( 1999 ) . The Scientist InVivo : How scientists think and reason in the laboratory . In Model - based reasoning in scientific discovery . New York : Plenum Press . Dunbar , K . , & Blanchette , I . ( 2001 ) . The Invivo / Invitro Approach to Cognition : The Case of Analogy . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 5 , 334 - 339 . Fass , D . ( 1991 ) . Met * : A method for discriminating metonymy and metaphor by computer . Comp Ling , 17 ( 1 ) , 49 - 90 . Gentner , D . ( 1983 ) . Structure - mapping : A theoretical framework for analogy . Cognitive Science , 7 , 155 - 170 . Gentner , D . ( 2002 ) . Analogy in scientific discovery : The case of Johannes Kepler . In Modelbased reasoning : Science , techonlogy , values ( pp . 21 - 39 ) . New York : Kluwer Academic / Plenum . Gentner , D . , & Gentner , D . ( 1983 ) . Flowing waters or teeming crowds : Mental models of electricity . In D . Gentner & A . Stevens ( Eds . ) , Mental Models ( pp . 99 - 129 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Gentner , D . , Bowdle , B . , Wolff , P . , & Boronat , C . ( 2001 ) . Metaphor Is Like Analogy . In D . Gentner , K . J . Holyoak , & B . Kokinov ( Eds . ) , The Analogical Mind : Perspectives from Cognitive Science ( pp . 199 - 253 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Gordon , W . ( 1974 ) . Some source material in discovery - by - analogy . Journal of Creative Behavior , 8 , 239 - 257 . Hofstadter , D . ( 2001 ) . Epilogue : Analogy as the Core of Cognition . In D . Gentner , K . J . Holyoak , & B . K . Kokinov ( Eds . ) , The Analogical Mind : Perspectives from Cognitive Science ( pp . 499 - 539 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Lakoff , G . , & Johnson , M . ( 1980 ) . Metaphors We Live By ( 2003rd ed . ) . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Lakoff , G . , & Johnson , M . ( 1999 ) . Philosophy in the Flesh . New York : Basic Books . Lakoff , G . , & Turner , M . ( 1989 ) . More Than Cool Reason : A Field Guide to Poetic Metaphor . Chicago and London : University of Chicago Press . Lu , X . , & Feldman , A . ( 2007 ) . Workshop on Computational Approaches to Figurative Language . In Human Lang Tech / Conf of the North Amer Chapt of the Assoc for Comp Ling ( HLT / NAACL 2007 ) . Rochester , NY . Retrieved from http : / / chss . montclair . edu / ~ feldmana / FigLang2007 / . Metaphor and Creativity in Learning Science Martin , J . ( 1990 ) . A Computational Model of Metaphor Interpretation . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . Resnik , P . ( 1993 ) . Selection and Information : A Class - Based Approach to Lexical Relationships . University of Pennsylvania , Department of Computer and Information Science . Smith , J . P . , diSessa , A . A . , & Roschelle , J . ( 1993 ) . Misconceptions reconceived : A constructivist analysis of knowledge in transition . Journal of the Learning Sciences , 3 ( 2 ) . Venables , W . , & Ripley , B . ( 2002 ) . Modern Applied Statistics with S . New York : Springer . Zook & DiVesta , 1991 Zook , K . B . ( 1991 ) . Effects of analogical processes on learning and misrepresentation . Educational Psychology Review , 3 ( 1 ) , 41 - 72 . doi : 10 . 1007 / BF01323662 Metaphor and Creativity in Learning Science Table 1 . Regression Model indicating how various aspects of critical thinking about metaphors predict metaphorical creativity . Predictor Description Coeff p - value AgrDis mixed agreement and disagreement with a computationally identified metaphor 0 . 060 0 . 190 Disagree disagreement with a computationally identified metaphor 0 . 014 0 . 638 AgrDis : Disagree interaction between disagreement and mixed agreement and disagreement 0 . 128 0 . 142 FuncAgr functional reasoning used to justify dis / agreement - 0 . 040 0 . 175 FeatAgr featural reasoning used to justify dis / agreement - 0 . 250 0 . 00420 * * FuncAgr : FeatAgr interaction between functional and featural reasoning when justifying dis / agreement with a metaphor 0 . 194 0 . 000945 * * * FuncNotFit functional reasoning used to describe how a computationally identified metaphor does not fit 0 . 047 0 . 202 FeatNotFit featural reasoning used to describe how a computationally identified metaphor does not fit 0 . 023 0 . 560 FuncNotFit : FeatNotFit interaction between functional and featural reasoning when describing how a metaphor might not fit 0 . 065 0 . 00396 * * intercept 0 . 491 < 0 . 0001 * * * model n / a 0 . 000612 * * * Increased creativity most significantly associated with decreased use of featural reasoning when justifying dis / agreement with a metaphor , even more so when combined with an increase in functional reasoning .