Stochastic Model of Clathrin - Coated Pit Assembly Anand Banerjee , † * Alexander Berezhkovskii , ‡ and Ralph Nossal † † Program in Physical Biology , Eunice Kennedy Shriver Institute of Child Health and Human Development and ‡ Mathematical and Statistical Computing Laboratory , Division of Computational Bioscience , Center for Information Technology , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , Maryland ABSTRACT In recent years , ﬂuorescence microscopy has enabled researchers to observe the dynamics of clathrin - coated pit ( CCP ) assembly in real time . The assembly dynamics of CCPs shows striking heterogeneity . Some CCPs are long - lived ( productive CCPs ) ; they bind cargo and grow in size to form clathrin - coated vesicles . In contrast , other CCPs ( abortive CCPs ) are relatively short - lived and disassemble well before reaching vesicle size . Within both populations there is signiﬁcant variance in CCP lifetime . We propose a stochastic biophysical model that links these observations with the energetics of CCPs and kinetics of their assembly . We show that without cargo , CCP assembly faces a high energy barrier that is difﬁcult to over - come . As a consequence , CCPs without cargo are almost always abortive . We suggest a mechanism by which cargo binding stabilizes CCPs and facilitates their growth . The lifetime distribution of abortive pits calculated from our model agrees well with published experimental data . We also estimate the lifetimes of productive CCPs and show that the stochastic nature of CCP assembly plays a crucial role in causing their observed wide distribution . INTRODUCTION Clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) is a major pathway for the internalization of cargo at the plasma membrane of eukaryotic cells ( 1 – 7 ) . Cargo includes hormones , nutrients , adhesion and signaling molecules , viruses , etc . The process involves the assembly of a coat of endocytic proteins on the cytoplasmic side of the membrane , which leads to the formation of a small invagination called a clathrin - coated pit ( CCP ) . As the coat grows in size , the CCP invaginates further , until only a narrow neck joins it to the plasma membrane . Finally , the CCP is pinched off , yielding a cla - thrin - coated vesicle ( CCV ) . In recent years , ﬂuorescence microscopy has enabled scientists to observe the dynamics of CCP assembly in real time ( 8 – 13 ) . In cells expressing ﬂuorescent clathrin or adaptor protein AP - 2 ( typically the two most abundant proteins in the coat ) , CCPs appear as ﬂuorescent spots on the surface of the cell . The dynamic behavior of these spots shows considerable heterogeneity . There exist a large number of spots that are dim and blink out rapidly . The average lifetime of these short - lived clathrin structures is < 20 s ( 6 ) , and their maximal ﬂuorescence intensity indicates that they do not contain sufﬁcient clathrin to produce a CCV . These structures are called abortive CCPs . In addition , there are bright spots that correspond to productive CCPs , i . e . , CCPs that eventually end up as CCVs . The lifetimes of these productive CCPs range from 30 s to > 120 s ( 13 ) , and depending on the size of the CCV , the amount of clathrin in its coat ranges from 60 to 140 clathrin molecules ( 14 ) . It is currently believed that cargo plays a crucial role in deciding the fate ( abortive or productive ) of a CCP ( 6 ) . Abortive CCPs represent nucleation events of the coat components , which start to assemble but then break apart because they do not associate with cargo ( 6 , 9 ) . On the other hand , productive CCPs are the ones that associate with cargo . Cargo binding stabilizes the CCPs and facilitates their growth toward vesicle formation . This relationship between cargo capture and CCV formation is supported by the observation that CCPs that contain cargo rarely abort ( 9 ) . In addition , the overexpression of transferrin receptor , which is internalized by CCPs , decreases the fraction of abortive CCPs ( 13 ) . The above observations raise several questions related to the heterogeneity in CCP dynamics , namely : 1 ) , Why are the pits that fail to bind cargo abortive ? 2 ) , How can one explain the lifetime distribution of the abortive pits ? 3 ) , How does cargo binding stabilize a CCP and facilitate its growth toward vesicle formation ? 4 ) , Why is there such large spread in the lifetimes of productive CCPs ? Recently , statistical studies on CCP lifetimes were carried out to quantify the heteroge - neity ( 13 , 15 ) and address some of these questions , but the mechanistic origin of the heterogeneity still remains unclear . The formation of a CCV is a complex process . It involves a large number of structural , regulatory , and accessory proteins . These proteins are recruited to the site of vesicle assembly in a sequential manner , each protein having its speciﬁc role and times of arrival and departure . In trying to understand such complex phenomena , simple coarse - grained models whose global behavior resembles that of the complex system are very useful . They often help in iden - tifying the key parameters / steps that govern the observed phenomena . There are not many such models related to endocytosis . Some of the existing ones ( 16 – 18 ) are signiﬁ - cant contributions toward understanding vesicle formation , but they do not address the questions mentioned above . Submitted January 20 , 2012 , and accepted for publication May 7 , 2012 . * Correspondence : banerjeea3 @ mail . nih . gov Editor : Stanislav Shvartsman . (cid:1) 2012 by the Biophysical Society 0006 - 3495 / 12 / 06 / 2725 / 6 $ 2 . 00 doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2012 . 05 . 010 Biophysical Journal Volume 102 June 2012 2725 – 2730 2725 In this article , we present a generic model of vesicle formation and use it to address questions related to the heterogeneity in CCP dynamics . We treat the protein coat as a uniform elastic sheet made up of basic structural units that we refer to as monomers . Our model includes a kinetic scheme for the assembly of monomers to form a pit , and an expression relating the energy of a pit to its size ( measured in terms of the number of monomers it contains ) . With these ingredients we are able to map the dynamics of CCPs onto a one - dimensional continuous - time nearest - neighbor random walk with site - dependent rate constants . Our results show that pits without cargo face an energy barrier that is difﬁcult for them to over - come . For this reason , they are almost always abortive . We calculate the lifetime distribution of such abortive pits via kinetic Monte Carlo simulation and show that the distribution agrees well with experimental data . We then suggest an explanation of how cargo stabilizes a CCP and facilitates its growth . Finally , we estimate the lifetimes of productive CCPs and show that the stochastic nature of CCP assembly is an important cause of their wide distribution . METHODS In this section , we present our stochastic model of CCP assembly . As mentioned earlier , the process involves a large number of proteins . There - fore , when developing a theory of assembly , one faces the necessity to deal with multidimensional models . By introducing the concept of monomers , we are able to avoid the multidimensionality and treat the assembly process as a one - dimensional random walk . We assume that the number of mono - mers is equal to the number of clathrin molecules , and we envision that the monomers include endocytic proteins in such a way that , when assem - bled , they capture the structural properties of the real protein coat . In the manuscript , we constantly move back and forth between our model ( which deals with monomer assembly ) and reality ( which deals with clathrin - coated pit formation ) . To make this distinction clear , we shall use the term ‘‘CCP’’ to refer to a real clathrin - coated pit , whereas the word ‘‘pit’’ will refer to our model of a CCP . Energy of pit formation We assume that the shape of a pit is a spherical cap ( 17 – 19 ) that can be described by two parameters : surface area , A , and curvature , c ( see the Supporting Material ) . The surface area of the pit can be related to the number of monomers in the pit , n , by A ¼ l n , where l is the average area occupied by a monomer . In the following , n is considered to be a continuous variable . Although this assumption is reasonable at large n , it may fail when n is small , in which case the discrete structure of the protein coat might have to be taken into account . The energy difference between the components of a pit in the free and assembled states can be written as E ð n ; c Þ ¼ 2 k m l nc 2 þ 2 k p l n (cid:1) c (cid:2) c p (cid:3) 2 (cid:2) bn þ s f ð n ; c Þ ; ( 1 ) where f ð n ; c Þ ¼ 2 p d ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ l n p r ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 1 (cid:2) l nc 2 4 p r : ( 2 ) The origins of the terms in Eq . 1 are described below , and the parameter values are discussed in the Supporting Material . The values of all the quan - tities having units of energy are expressed in kT , where k is the Boltzmann constant and T is the absolute temperature . 1 . The ﬁrst term on the righthand side of Eq . 1 is the Helfrich energy , describing the energetic cost of bending the cell membrane ( 20 ) . k m is the bending rigidity of the membrane , measured in units of energy . We assume that the spontaneous curvature of the membrane is zero . 2 . The second term represents the bending energy of the protein coat . We assume that this term can also be written in the Helfrich - like form . k p and c p are the bending rigidity and the spontaneous curvature of the coat , respectively . 3 . The third term represents the binding energy . The binding - energy contribution comes from the protein - protein and protein - lipid bonds formed in the CCP . Therefore , we assume that this term is proportional to the number of monomers , n , and that b is the corresponding propor - tionality constant measured in units of energy . This assumption implies that all the monomers of the pit are identical and in a similar environ - ment . However , the monomers on the periphery form fewer bonds than those located deeper inside the pit . Thus the third term overesti - mates the binding energy . This overestimation is accounted for by the next term . 4 . The fourth term is a correction to the overestimated binding energy . The correction term is proportional to f ( n , c ) , the number of available binding sites on the periphery of a pit of size n , and is similar to the line - tension energy ( 19 , 21 ) . We determine the number of monomers at the periphery by calculating the perimeter and dividing it by d , the average span of a monomer ( see the Supporting Material ) . s is a constant , measured in units of energy . The third term is the only term that is negative , and contributes towards lowering the energy of the pit . All the other terms are positive , thereby increasing the pit energy . A similar approach has been used to analyze the energetics of clathrin basket assembly ( 22 ) . Energy variation with pit size In Eq . 1 , the pit energy is expressed as a function of two variables , n and c . We assume that for a given pit size , n , the optimal curvature value , c , is the one for which the total energy of the system is minimized , i . e . , ½ v E ð n ; c Þ = v c (cid:3) c ¼ c ¼ 0 . Solving the equation , we get " 1 þ k m k p (cid:2) s 2 d k p ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ l n 4 p (cid:2) l nc 2 r # c ¼ c p : ( 3 ) It is reasonable to assume that k p [ s ( see the Supporting Material ) , in which case the last term in the square brackets can be neglected for almost all values of n ( as discussed at the end of this section ) . Then the curvature c ¼ k p c p = ð k m þ k p Þ is independent of n . It is not known whether individual CCPs grow with constant curvature during CME . However , large changes in the curvature would require signiﬁcant rearrangement of the clathrin lattice , which is quite unlikely ( 6 ) . Therefore , the constant curvature approximation seems reasonable . Upon setting the curvature of the pit equal to c for all values of n , the energy of pit formation , E ð n Þ h E ð n ; c Þ , can be written as E ð n Þ ¼ (cid:5) 2 k m l c 2 þ 2 k p l (cid:1) c (cid:2) c p (cid:3) 2 (cid:2) b (cid:6) n þ s f ð n ; c Þ ( 4 ) ¼ F n þ G ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ n ð N (cid:2) n Þ p ; ( 5 ) where Biophysical Journal 102 ( 12 ) 2725 – 2730 2726 Banerjee et al . F ¼ 2 k m l c 2 þ 2 k p l (cid:1) c (cid:2) c p (cid:3) 2 (cid:2) b ; G ¼ ls c d ; N ¼ 4 p l c 2 : ( 6 ) A similar functional form of energy also appears in theories describing the budding of lipid bilayers induced by intramembrane domains ( 19 ) and the formation of virus capsids ( 23 ) . The energy , E ( n ) , plays a crucial role in our analysis , particularly in determining the lifetime distribution of abortive pits . In Eq . 5 , the ﬁrst term is the sum of the membrane - bending , coat - bending , and binding ener - gies . The second term represents the edge energy . The inset in Fig . 1 shows a typical plot of the two terms , and the main panel shows the total energy for the parameter values given in the ﬁgure caption . The total energy has a maximum at n ¼ n * , which can be considered a critical pit size ; for pits of size n < n * , disassembly is more favorable than assembly , whereas for pits with n > n * , assembly is more favorable . As discussed later , in the absence of cargo , the values of E (cid:4) ¼ E ð n (cid:4) Þ and n * are large ( see Fig . 1 ) , whereas in the presence of cargo , the energy is modiﬁed and the values of E * and n * become much smaller . Using the deﬁnition of N from Eq . 6 , it is easy to see that the last term in the square brackets in Eq . 5 is proportional to ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ n = ð N (cid:2) n Þ p . Due to the small prefactor , s = 2 d k p c z 1 = 250 , the value of this term is < < 1 , even when n ¼ N – 1 . Thus , our assumption is valid for all values of n < N . Kinetics of pit formation We assume that a pit grows by reversible binding of monomers at the edge of the pit . Fig . 2 shows the kinetic scheme for pit assembly . The scheme maps the dynamics of CCPs onto a one - dimensional nearest - neighbor continuous - time random walk with site - dependent rate constants . We presume that once a pit reaches vesicle size , N , it is pinched off , but we ignore the details of the kinetics occurring during the ﬁnal steps of vesicle scission , which involve dynamin and other proteins . As mentioned earlier , the number of clathrin molecules in a CCV is typically between 60 and 140 . With this in mind , in our model we keep the vesicle size ﬁxed at N ¼ 100 . Our results do not change signiﬁcantly with small variations in the value of N . The forward rate constants a n , n ¼ 1 , . , N – 1 , characterize the growth process and are taken to be a n ¼ k b mf ð n Þ ¼ g f ð n Þ . Here , g is a constant , k b is the bimolecular rate constant of a monomer binding to an available site on the pit , m is the free monomer concentration , and f ð n Þ ¼ f ð n ; c Þ . The value of f ( n ) , and therefore that of a n , is maximum when the pit is close to a hemi - sphere . The rate constant a N characterizes the scission of a vesicle from the membrane . For simplicity , we assume that a N ¼ N . When the forward rate constants , a n , are known , one can use the condi - tion of detailed balance to ﬁnd the backward rate constants , b n þ 1 . This leads to the relation b n þ 1 ¼ m f ð n Þ exp ½ E ð n þ 1 Þ (cid:2) E ð n Þ(cid:3) , n ¼ 1 ; . ; N (cid:2) 1 ( see the Supporting Material ) , where m is an unknown constant that we consider as a free parameter . Both g and m have units of s (cid:2) 1 . We use the above scheme to calculate the fate and lifetimes of pits by kinetic Monte Carlo simulations ( see the Supporting Material ) . In our simu - lations , a pit has two possible fates : either it eventually decays in size and falls below a detection threshold ( abortive pits ) , or it grows and reaches vesicle size N ( productive pits ) . The inputs required to run the simulations are the values of the forward and backward rate constants a n and b n . The rate constants depend on g and m ( whose values are not known ) , and the energy function E ( n ) . We determine g and m , as well as b and s appearing in the expression for E ( n ) , by using the data on CCP lifetimes published in Loerke et al . ( 13 ) ( see the Supporting Material ) . RESULTS Lifetime distribution of abortive pits To obtain a good ﬁt to the experimental data , we choose g ¼ 0 : 18 s (cid:2) 1 and treat m , b , and s as free parameters . As discussed later , the value of g is ﬁxed by the rate of growth of productive CCPs . For different combinations of m , b , and s , we determine the fates and lifetimes for an ensemble of pits , and then compare the lifetime distribution of abortive pits with the experimental data . Since we are ﬁtting data on abortive CCPs , in our simulations we impose the constraint that the fraction of pits having an abortive fate should be close to unity . We ﬁnd that for m ¼ 0 : 16 s (cid:2) 1 and E ( n ) , shown in Fig . 1 , 1 ) , the fraction of productive pits is approximately 1 / 1000 , and 2 ) , the lifetime distribution of abortive pits agrees very well with experiment ( see Fig . 3 ) . From our simulations , we ﬁnd the mean lifetime of abortive pits to be 12 s , which is close to the mean lifetime of abortive CCPs calculated from the data in Loerke et al . ( 13 ) ( approx - imately 9 s ) . Notice that at very small lifetimes the experi - mental data are nonmonotonic , whereas the model predicts monotonic behavior for the lifetime distribution . We believe that this discrepancy is due to the fact that our model treats size of pit as a continuous variable , which , strictly speaking , is valid only when the pits are sufﬁciently large . CCPs with short lifetimes correspond to CCPs that grow only to small sizes , and a more detailed model might be required to capture their dynamics accurately . The inferred E ( n ) has a maximum , E (cid:4) z 14 kT at a critical size n (cid:4) z 68 monomers ( see Fig . 1 ) . By making small pertur - bations to E ( n ) , we ﬁnd that as long as E * is between 12 – 15 kT and n * is between 65 and 75 monomers , we can ﬁt the data reasonably well . Notice that these values were FIGURE 1 Dependence of pit energy on pit size , n ( Eqs . 4 – 6 ) . ( Inset ) The two terms contributing to E ( n ) , Eq . 5 . The parameter values are k m ¼ 20 kT , k p ¼ 200 kT , c p ¼ 1 / 45 nm (cid:2) 1 , b ¼ 5 . 5 kT , and s ¼ 1 kT . For these parameter values , F ¼ 0 . 07 kT and G ¼ 0 . 2 kT . FIGURE 2 Kinetic scheme of pit assembly . n is the number of monomers in a pit , and N ¼ 100 is the number of monomers in a vesicle . Biophysical Journal 102 ( 12 ) 2725 – 2730 Clathrin - Coated Pit Assembly 2727 calculated for N ¼ 100 . We repeated the same analysis for N ¼ 80 and 120 and found E (cid:4) z 13 kT and 15 kT , and n (cid:4) z 55 and 79 , respectively . Thus , with increasing N , the critical size increases , but the energy barrier remains approximately the same . Along with the lifetime of an abortive pit , we can also determine its maximum size , which corresponds to the largest number of monomers the pit has during its lifetime . This quantity is similar to the size of an abortive CCP measured in terms of the number of clathrin molecules . From our simulations , we ﬁnd that the average maximum size of the abortive pits is approximately 10 monomers , which is in agreement with the estimates reported in Ehrlich et al . ( 9 ) . Cargo binding promotes vesicle formation In the previous section , we discussed the E ( n ) for abortive pits . We assume that they represent abortive CCPs , i . e . , CCPs without cargo . Experiments suggest that cargo binding can change the coat parameter values of a CCP , which in turn would modify E ( n ) . Adaptor proteins ( like AP - 2 ) are crucial for CCP assembly ( 24 ) . They bind to the cargo proteins and also act as links between membrane and clathrin molecules , which form a lattice around the CCP ( 14 ) . In the presence of cargo , the afﬁnity of AP - 2 for plasma membrane , as measured by the dissociation constant , changes from m M to nM ( 25 ) . That is , the association energy between AP - 2 and the membrane increases . Stably bound AP - 2 can facilitate the formation of a clathrin lattice through an increase in the effective binding strength between triskelion legs ( 22 ) . Based on these observations , we assume that cargo binding to a pit increases the effective binding energy , b . The energy function , E ( n ) , can be characterized by the critical size , n * , and energy barrier , E * . We now explore how these quantities depend on b . The dependence of n * and E * on the coat parameter values ( see Eqs . 4 – 6 ) can be determined using ð v E = v n Þj n ¼ n (cid:4) ¼ 0 and E ð n (cid:4) Þ ¼ E (cid:4) . This leads to n (cid:4) ¼ N 2 (cid:7) 1 þ Z ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 1 þ Z 2 p (cid:8) ; E (cid:4) ¼ N G 2 (cid:9) ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 1 þ Z 2 p þ Z (cid:10) ; ( 7 ) where Z ¼ F = G ¼ ½ 2 k m l c 2 þ 2 k p l ð c (cid:2) c p Þ 2 (cid:2) b (cid:3) = ½ ls c = d (cid:3) . Fig . 4 shows plots of E * and n * as a function of b . The arrows point to the values at which the system operates in the absence of cargo , namely , b ¼ 5 . 5 kT , n (cid:4) z 68 , and E (cid:4) z 14 kT . Note that a small increase in the value of b ( of the order of kT ) lowers n * and E * to very small values ( see also Fig . 5 ) . This observation suggests that the endo - cytic machinery operates at the borderline of stability and instability . In the absence of cargo , the energy barrier is sufﬁciently high so that the pits are unstable and disas - sembly is favored . However , a small increase in the binding energy can signiﬁcantly change the energy landscape and make assembly favorable . Lifetimes of productive CCPs We now discuss how the stochastic nature of CCP assembly manifests itself in lifetimes of productive CCPs . To address this question , we again make use of kinetic Monte Carlo simulations . We consider the starting situation where a pit of size n ¼ 10 contains cargo and then calculate the time it takes for an ensemble of such pits to reach vesicle size N ¼ 100 . The presence of cargo is represented by choosing b ¼ 9 kT . We deliberately choose b large enough so that E ( n ) decreases rapidly with n . Then the backward rate constants , b n , become negligibly small , and the time to vesicle formation is determined only by the forward rates , a n . A similar analysis can be done to FIGURE 4 Energy barrier , E * , and critical size , n * , as a function of the binding - energy constant , b . The arrows point to the operating point ( values of b , n * , and E * ) in the absence of cargo . Note that a small increase in the value of b results in sharp decreases in n * and E * . FIGURE 3 Comparison between the experimental lifetime distribution of abortive CCPs obtained from Loerke et al . ( 13 ) and the lifetime distribu - tion of abortive pits calculated from our simulations . Biophysical Journal 102 ( 12 ) 2725 – 2730 2728 Banerjee et al . study the lifetime distribution of vesicles having other values of N . Productive CCPs grow at an average rate of 1 – 2 clathrin molecules per second ( 9 ) . So , in our simulations we intro - duce the constraint that the mean lifetime of productive pits should be approximately 70 s . The constraint is satisﬁed if we choose g ¼ 0 . 18 s (cid:2) 1 . The forward rate constants are independent of E ( n ) , and we used the same value of g earlier in the calculation of lifetime distribution of abortive pits . Fig . 6 shows the histogram of the calculated lifetimes of productive pits . The lifetimes vary from 50 to 90 s . The large spread is the result of the stochastic nature of pit assembly . Note that in our model , the vesicle size is constant ( N ¼ 100 ) , and that in this particular simulation , all the pits start at n ¼ 10 . However , during CME , the CCPs can grow to vesicles of different sizes , and also can incorporate cargo at different stages of maturation . Our assessment of the spread in lifetimes is therefore an underestimation . Nevertheless , it indicates that the stochastic nature of CCP assembly is an important factor contributing to the wide life - time distribution of productive CCPs . DISCUSSION Over the years , the main method used to probe the mecha - nism of CCP assembly has been knock - down and knock - out experiments . In recent years , ﬂuorescence microscopy combined with automated image analysis has appeared as a new tool . This approach is particularly useful , since it does not interfere with the assembly process signiﬁcantly ( unlike the knock - out and knock - down method ) and thus provides information about a relatively unperturbed system . However , this approach is still in its infancy , and more accu - rate methods to determine the fate and lifetimes of CCPs need to be developed . An important feature that comes from these studies is the remarkable heterogeneity in CCP dynamics . CCPs have different fates , sizes , and lifetimes . Understanding the origin of the heterogeneity is crucial , as it can provide insights into the mechanism of the assembly process . In this article , we have presented a stochastic biophysical model to address certain questions related to the fate and lifetimes of CCPs . Our aim was to keep the model as simple as possible while still being able to reproduce the key aspects of the assembly process . We focused on two basic features , namely , growth by reversible binding of free endo - cytic proteins , and competition between effects that favor and those that disfavor CCP formation . These characteris - tics are present not only during the assembly of a CCV , but also , e . g . , in COP vesicle formation , caveolin - dependent endocytosis , and virus capsid assembly . Thus , our approach is fairly general and can be used as a starting point to develop other more detailed models . The simple approach adopted here ignores some features of CCP assembly . For example , the clathrin lattice satisﬁes certain topological constraints , which in turn impose constraints on the curvature and the overall shape of a CCP . Our modeling of the protein coat as an elastic sheet does not account for this fact . Similarly , we accounted for cargo binding by changing the binding - energy param - eter , b , but cargo size and shape can lead to variations in CCP curvature as well . Currently , only limited experimental information is available on how these features affect CCP assembly . The key points of our work are 1 ) , the energetics of CCP formation plays a crucial role in determining the fate of a CCP , and 2 ) , stochastic kinetics is an important factor responsible for the wide distribution of CCP lifetimes . Our results suggest that when there is no cargo in a CCP , the energy of the CCP increases with size and reaches a maximum value , E * , that is > 10 kT , at a critical pit size , n * ( see Fig . 3 ) . The chance that a CCP grows beyond the crit - ical size by stochastic addition of proteins is almost zero , so CCPs without cargo are almost always abortive . Incorporation of cargo increases the value of the effective binding energy , b . Our model suggests that the endocytic machinery operates at a point where the critical size is FIGURE 5 Energy as a function of the pit size for two values of b . Incor - poration of cargo into a pit increases the effective binding energy and causes the system to jump from one energy curve to another . FIGURE 6 Histogram of productive pit lifetimes calculated from simula - tions based on our model . Biophysical Journal 102 ( 12 ) 2725 – 2730 Clathrin - Coated Pit Assembly 2729 very sensitive to the values of b , and that a small increase in b can move the CCP from a disassembly - favored state to an assembly - favored state . This point is illustrated in Fig . 5 , where we show the energy proﬁle for two values of b , viz . , b ¼ 5 . 5 kT ( solid curve ) and b ¼ 6 . 5 kT ( dashed curve ) . We assume that the effect of cargo binding is to move a pit from one energy curve to another , as shown by the arrow . In the absence of cargo , a pit with n ¼ 10 monomers is below the critical size , and its disassembly is favored . In the presence of cargo , the same pit is beyond the critical size , so its assembly is favored . The mechanism described above suggests that very few empty ( without cargo ) coated vesicles form , and that the pits with cargo end up as vesicles with high probability . Thus , in agreement with the experi - mental observations ( 9 ) , the binding of cargo acts like a switch that determines whether a pit results in a vesicle or not . Our model reproduces the qualitative trend of the lifetime distribution of abortive CCPs very well . When discussing the lifetime distribution of CCPs , Loerke and co - workers ( 13 ) divided the abortive CCPs into two kinetically distinct subpopulations ( early and late abortive ) . Our model repro - duces the full data set , suggesting that there is no funda - mental difference between early and late abortive CCPs , i . e . , the same stochastic dynamics gives rise to both . To summarize , we have developed a model that links coated - pit formation to underlying physical processes . Despite being relatively simple , it captures essential features of CCP dynamics and provides insights that cannot be ob - tained through biochemical experiments alone . We believe that our model is a step forward toward better understanding the mechanistic basis of CME . SUPPORTING MATERIAL Two ﬁgures , the derivation of certain formulas appearing in the main text , Monte Carlo simulation algorithm , and references are available at http : / / www . biophysj . org / biophysj / supplemental / S0006 - 3495 ( 12 ) 00563 - 2 . This study was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the National Institutes of Health Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development , and the Center for Information Technology . REFERENCES 1 . Takei , K . , and V . Haucke . 2001 . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis : membrane factors pull the trigger . Trends Cell Biol . 11 : 385 – 391 . 2 . Mousavi , S . A . , L . Malerød , . , R . Kjeken . 2004 . Clathrin - dependent endocytosis . Biochem . J . 377 : 1 – 16 . 3 . Perrais , D . , and C . J . Merriﬁeld . 2005 . Dynamics of endocytic vesicle creation . Dev . Cell . 9 : 581 – 592 . 4 . Edeling , M . A . , C . Smith , and D . Owen . 2006 . Life of a clathrin coat : insights from clathrin and AP structures . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 : 32 – 44 . 5 . Ungewickell , E . J . , and L . Hinrichsen . 2007 . Endocytosis : clathrin - mediated membrane budding . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 19 : 417 – 425 . 6 . Kirchhausen , T . 2009 . Imaging endocytic clathrin structures in living cells . Trends Cell Biol . 19 : 596 – 605 . 7 . Traub , L . M . 2009 . Clathrin couture : fashioning distinctive membrane coats at the cell surface . PLoS Biol . 7 : e1000192 . 8 . Gaidarov , I . , F . Santini , . , J . H . Keen . 1999 . Spatial control of coated - pit dynamics in living cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 : 1 – 7 . 9 . Ehrlich , M . , W . Boll , . , T . Kirchhausen . 2004 . Endocytosis by random initiation and stabilization of clathrin - coated pits . Cell . 118 : 591 – 605 . 10 . Rappoport , J . Z . , S . M . Simon , and A . Benmerah . 2004 . Understanding living clathrin - coated pits . Trafﬁc . 5 : 327 – 337 . 11 . Merriﬁeld , C . J . , D . Perrais , and D . Zenisek . 2005 . Coupling between clathrin - coated - pit invagination , cortactin recruitment , and membrane scission observed in live cells . Cell . 121 : 593 – 606 . 12 . Puthenveedu , M . A . , and M . von Zastrow . 2006 . Cargo regulates clathrin - coated pit dynamics . Cell . 127 : 113 – 124 . 13 . Loerke , D . , M . Mettlen , . , S . L . Schmid . 2009 . Cargo and dynamin regulate clathrin - coated pit maturation . PLoS Biol . 7 : e57 . 14 . Heuser , J . , and T . Kirchhausen . 1985 . Deep - etch views of clathrin assemblies . J . Ultrastruct . Res . 92 : 1 – 27 . 15 . Loerke , D . , M . Mettlen , . , G . Danuser . 2011 . Measuring the hierarchy of molecular events during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Trafﬁc . 12 : 815 – 825 . 16 . Liu , J . , Y . Sun , . , G . F . Oster . 2009 . The mechanochemistry of endocytosis . PLoS Biol . 7 : e1000204 . 17 . Foret , L . , and P . Sens . 2008 . Kinetic regulation of coated vesicle secre - tion . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 105 : 14763 – 14768 . 18 . Gao , H . , W . Shi , and L . B . Freund . 2005 . Mechanics of receptor - mediated endocytosis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 102 : 9469 – 9474 . 19 . Lipowsky , R . 1993 . Domain - induced budding of ﬂuid membranes . Biophys . J . 64 : 1133 – 1138 . 20 . Helfrich , W . 1973 . Elastic properties of lipid bilayers : theory and possible experiments . Z . Naturforsch . C . 28 : 693 – 703 . 21 . Mashl , R . J . , and R . F . Bruinsma . 1998 . Spontaneous - curvature theory of clathrin - coated membranes . Biophys . J . 74 : 2862 – 2875 . 22 . Nossal , R . 2001 . Energetics of clathrin basket assembly . Trafﬁc . 2 : 138 – 147 . 23 . Zandi , R . , P . van der Schoot , . , H . Reiss . 2006 . Classical nucleation theory of virus capsids . Biophys . J . 90 : 1939 – 1948 . 24 . Praefcke , G . J . K . , M . G . J . Ford , . , H . T . McMahon . 2004 . Evolving nature of the AP2 alpha - appendage hub during clathrin - coated vesicle endocytosis . EMBO J . 23 : 4371 – 4383 . 25 . Ricotta , D . , S . D . Conner , . , S . Honing . 2002 . Phosphorylation of the AP2 mu subunit by AAK1 mediates high afﬁnity binding to membrane protein sorting signals . J . Cell Biol . 156 : 791 – 795 . Biophysical Journal 102 ( 12 ) 2725 – 2730 2730 Banerjee et al .