JCB : Article The Rockefeller University Press $ 30 . 00 J . Cell Biol . Vol . 209 No . 1 143 – 162 www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201407130 JCB 143 Correspondence to Chang - Duk Jun : cdjun @ gist . ac . kr Abbreviations used in this paper : ABM , actin - binding motif ; APB , actin polymer - ization buffer ; APC , antigen - presenting cell ; Arp2 / 3 , Actin - related protein 2 / 3 ; CFSE , carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester ; CH , calponin homology ; CMV , cytomegalovirus ; Cyt D , cytochalasin D ; DCs , dendritic cells ; d - SMAC , distal SMAC ; ERK , extracellular signal – regulated kinase ; ES , embryonic stem ; G - actin , globular actin ; IS , immunological synapse ; OVA , ovalbumin ; PBLs , peripheral blood lymphocytes ; PerCP , peridinin chlorophyll protein complex ; PI3K , phos - phoinositide 3 - kinase ; PLL , poly - l - lysine ; qPCR , quantitative PCR ; SEB , Staphylo - coccal aureus enterotoxin B ; SEE , Staphylococcal aureus enterotoxin E ; SMAC , supramolecular activation cluster ; TCR , T cell receptor ; WT , wild type . Introduction Activated T cells play a central role in adaptive immunity through cytokine secretion or the destruction of antigen - bearing cells . T cell activation and function require physical contact with antigen - presenting cells ( APCs ) at a specialized junction structure known as the immunological synapse ( IS ; Monks et al . , 1998 ; Grakoui et al . , 1999 ) . Once formed , signal - dependent rearrange - ments in actin cytoskeleton dynamics are absolutely necessary to sustain correct temporal and spatial control of the activation process ( Huang and Burkhardt , 2007 ; Yu et al . , 2013 ) . Alteration of actin dynamics at the IS results in immune dysfunction . Our understanding of actin cytoskeleton reorganization during T cell activation has advanced rapidly in the last decade by adding new players and gaining mechanistic insight into T cell biology . The actin - related protein 2 / 3 ( Arp2 / 3 ) complex is a major regulator of actin dynamics in T cells , as in other cell types ( Higgs and Pollard , 2001 ) . Of the Arp2 / 3 - activating factors , WASp ( Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ) , WIP ( WASP - interacting protein ) , WAVE ( WASP - family verprolin - homologous protein ) , and HS1 ( hematopoietic lineage cell - specific protein 1 ) are well studied in T cells , and depletion of these proteins individually results in poor actin polymerization and weakens the ability of T cells to form the IS with APCs ( Huang and Burkhardt , 2007 ) . Formins are a class of actin nucleators that are independent of Arp2 / 3 ( Pruyne et al . , 2002 ) . Two formins , mDia1 and FMNL - 1 ( formin like - 1 ) , are necessary for microtubule - organizing center translocation toward the IS , whereas their depletion has no effect on the development of normal lamel - lipodium and IS ( Gomez et al . , 2007 ) . Additionally , several negative regulators of F - actin have been described in T cells ( Ichetovkin et al . , 2002 ; Eibert et al . , 2004 ) . Cofilin is well T he formation of an immunological synapse ( IS ) re - quires tight regulation of actin dynamics by many actin polymerizing / depolymerizing proteins . How - ever , the significance of actin stabilization at the IS re - mains largely unknown . In this paper , we identify a novel function of TAGLN2—an actin - binding protein predomi - nantly expressed in T cells—in stabilizing cortical F - actin , thereby maintaining F - actin contents at the IS and acquiring LFA - 1 ( leukocyte function - associated antigen - 1 ) activation after T cell receptor stimulation . TAGLN2 blocks actin depolymerization and competes with cofilin both in vitro and in vivo . Knockout of TAGLN2 ( TAGLN2  /  ) reduced F - actin content and destabilized F - actin ring forma - tion , resulting in decreased cell adhesion and spreading . TAGLN2  /  T cells displayed weakened cytokine produc - tion and cytotoxic effector function . These findings reveal a novel function of TAGLN2 in enhancing T cell responses by controlling actin stability at the IS . TAGLN2 regulates T cell activation by stabilizing the actin cytoskeleton at the immunological synapse Bo - Ra Na , 1 Hye - Ran Kim , 1 Indre Piragyte , 1 Hyun - Mee Oh , 2 Min - Sung Kwon , 1 Uroos Akber , 1 Hyun - Su Lee , 1 Do - Sim Park , 3 Woo Keun Song , 1 Zee - Yong Park , 1 Sin - Hyeog Im , 3 , 4 Mun - Chual Rho , 5 Young - Min Hyun , 6 Minsoo Kim , 6 and Chang - Duk Jun 1 1 School of Life Sciences , Immune Synapse Research Center and Cell Dynamics Research Center , Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology ( GIST ) , Gwangju 500 - 712 , South Korea 2 Bioindustrial Process Research Center , Korea Research Institute Bioscience and Biotechnology ( KRIBB ) , Jeongeup 580 - 185 , South Korea 3 Academy of Immunology and Microbiology ( AIM ) , Institute for Basic Science ( IBS ) , Pohang 790 - 784 , South Korea 4 Division of Integrative Biosciences and Biotechnology ( IBB ) , Pohang University of Science and Technology , Pohang 790 - 784 , South Korea 5 Department of Laboratory Medicine , School of Medicine , Wonkwang University , Iksan 570 - 749 , South Korea 6 Department of Microbiology and Immunology , David H . Smith Center for Vaccine Biology and Immunology , University of Rochester , Rochester , NY 14642 © 2015 Na et al . This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike – No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date ( see http : / / www . rupress . org / terms ) . After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License ( Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported license , as described at http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 / ) . T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y on O c t obe r 11 , 2015 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 13 , 2015 http : / / jcb . rupress . org / content / suppl / 2015 / 04 / 09 / jcb . 201407130 . DC1 . html Supplemental Material can be found at : JCB • volume 209 • numBer 1 • 2015 144 Figure 1 . TAGLN2 is associated with F - actin and localizes at the d - SMAC of IS in T cells . ( A ) CHO - K1 cells transfected with TG2 _ GFP or GFP vector were stained with TRITC - phalloidin . The boxed areas ( yellow ) are represented as zoomed images in the right and bottom micrographs . ( middle ) The colocalization on O c t obe r 11 , 2015 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 13 , 2015 145 TAGln2 stabilizes actin filaments • na et al . characterized and functions by severing actin filaments and sequestering actin monomers . Depletion of cofilin results in the formation of increased and longer lamellipodial structures in T cells ( Kim et al . , 2014 ) . The structure of the actin network is also regulated through the actions of a variety of actin cross - linking or bundling pro - teins . An actin cross - linking protein ,  - actinin , regulates IS formation ( Gordón - Alonso et al . , 2012 ) . l - Plastin is involved in efficient spreading of T cells on surfaces with immobilized T cell receptor ( TCR ) ligands ( Wang et al . , 2010 ) . Filamin A interacts with CD28 at the IS ( Tavano et al . , 2006 ) . Overall , the studies on each of these proteins suggest that different actin regulators participate in different aspects of T cell activation and only a fully rearranged actin cytoskeleton is optimal for full T cell activation . TAGLN ( transgelin ) family members have been identified as actin cross - linking / gelling proteins . The family comprises three isoforms , namely TAGLN1 ( also known as transgelin1 or SM22  , highly expressed in smooth muscle cells ; Camoretti - Mercado et al . , 1998 ) , TAGLN2 ( also known as transgelin2 or SM22  , associated with various types of cancers ; Zhang et al . , 2002 , 2010 ; Rho et al . , 2009 ) , and TAGLN3 ( also known as transgelin3 or NP25 , abundant in brain tissues ; Mori et al . , 2004 ) . The term “transgelin” was originally derived from the transformation - sensitive and rapid actin - gelling properties of these proteins ( Shapland et al . , 1993 ) . In this study , we found that TAGLN2 had a modest effect on actin cross - linking or bun - dling , whereas it substantially blocked depolymerization of and competed with cofilin to bind F - actin . These findings suggest that TAGLN2 has a unique role in actin reorganization , in ad - dition to its previously reported function . Indeed , there is little information available regarding the role of actin - stabilizing pro - teins in IS formation and subsequent T cell activation . Our study shows that TAGLN2 is the only transgelin iso - form present in leukocytes , and it is segregated at the distal su - pramolecular activation cluster ( SMAC ; d - SMAC ) within the IS after TCR stimulation . These results prompted us to explore the possibility of TAGLN2 as a potential regulator of IS forma - tion and subsequent T cell activation . Through biochemical and genetic analyses , we uncovered evidence that TAGLN2 stabi - lizes the actin cytoskeleton , leading to an increase in F - actin content at the IS and subsequent activation of integrin function . TAGLN2  /  T cells are unable to sustain a conventional F - actin ring , thus decreasing cell adhesion and spreading after TCR stimulation . As a result , cytokine expression and effector func - tion are impaired . Results TAGLN2 is highly expressed in immunogenic tissues and cells , and TAGLN2 knockdown reduces T cell activation The calponin homology ( CH ) actin - binding domain is found in cytoskeletal and signal transduction proteins , including TAGLNs . A phylogenetic tree of the family of single CH domain - containing proteins is shown in Fig . S1 A . The TAGLN family , in - cluding TAGLN2 , is evolutionarily related to Vav1 and IQGAP1 , which are key cytoskeletal - regulatory proteins involved in T cell immunity . The expressions of TAGLN1 and TAGLN3 are restricted to the smooth muscle ( Camoretti - Mercado et al . , 1998 ) and brain ( Mori et al . , 2004 ) , respectively . However , the expression pat - tern of TAGLN2 has not yet been fully characterized . Thus , we first tested for the presence of TAGLN2 in various human tissues by Northern blot analysis and observed high expression in the spleen ( Fig . S1 B ) . Western blot and real - time quantitative PCR ( qPCR ) analyses of mouse tissues confirmed that TAGLN2 was most highly expressed in the thymus , spleen , and lymph nodes ( Fig . S1 C ) . TAGLN2 expression was also detected in primary immune cells or immune cell lines , and we did not detect the presence of other TAGLNs in these cells ( Fig . S1 D ) . The pre - dominant expression of TAGLN2 in T cells prompted us to ex - plore its role in cytoskeletal regulation , which is essential for T cell function . A dramatic reduction in IL - 2 mRNA and IL - 2 protein levels was observed in human peripheral blood lympho - cytes ( PBLs ) transfected with TAGLN2 siRNA after stimulation with Staphylococcal aureus enterotoxin E ( SEE ) – pulsed Raji B cells ( Fig . S1 E ) , suggesting a potential role for TAGLN2 in T cell immunity . TAGLN2 binds to actin and localizes at the d - SMAC in the IS Just like TAGLN1 and TAGLN3 ( Camoretti - Mercado et al . , 1998 ; Mori et al . , 2004 ) , TAGLN2 colocalized with actin stress fibers and also localized to the lamellipodial leading edge , where actin polymerization actively occurs in CHO - K1 cells ( Fig . 1 A ) . Coimmunoprecipitation of actin with GFP - tagged TAGLN2 ( TG2 _ GFP ) before and after activation revealed that TAGLN2 binding to actin is stimulus independent ( Fig . 1 B ) . These findings led us to analyze endogenous TAGLN2 local - ization in primary T cells . TAGLN2 was localized to the F - actin ring of mouse CD3 + T cells loaded onto anti - CD3 / 28 – coated of GFP and TRITC signals was estimated by the Pearson’s correlation coefficient ( R ) . ( right ) R values of single cells are represented as single dots , and ≥50 cells were examined . Horizontal bars indicate the means . * , P < 0 . 05 versus GFP - transfected cells . ( B ) J - GFP and J - TG2 _ GFP cells were stimulated with anti - CD3 / 28 . Samples were immunoprecipitated and blotted with antibodies against the indicated proteins . Data shown are representative of three independent experiments . IP , immunoprecipitation ; IB , immunoblot ; M , molecular mass . ( C ) Mouse CD3 + T cells on anti - CD3 / 28 coverslips were stained for TG2 ( rabbit IgG , negative control ) and actin . ( D ) J - GFP and J - TG2 _ GFP cells transfected with LifeAct ( Life - A ) on PLL - coated coverslips were imaged and fluorescence intensity profiles were analyzed . Images and intensity profiles are representative of > 50 cells . ( E ) J - TG2 _ GFP cells were conjugated for 30 min with SEE - Raji B cells ( ICAM - 1 [ IC1 ] ) . 3D and rotating views of selected zoomed images ( 90° ) of the boxed area are shown . Also refer to Video 1 . Arrows indicate accumulation of TG2 and ICAM1 at the synapse site . ( F ) J - TG2 _ GFP cells on anti - CD3 / 28 coverslips were stained for LFA - 1 , Arp3 , myosin IIA , and F - actin . Bottom images are shown , and each z - stack image is shown in Fig . S2 . Also refer to Videos 2 – 4 . c , central SMAC ; p , peripheral SMAC ; d , d - SMAC . All images are representa - tive of > 50 cells examined from three independent experiments . DIC , differential interference contrast . Bars , 10 µm . on O c t obe r 11 , 2015 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 13 , 2015 JCB • volume 209 • numBer 1 • 2015 146 Figure 2 . TAGLN2 increases F - actin content and mediates long - lasting T cell adhesion and spreading . ( A ) J - GFP and J - TG2 _ GFP cells transfected with LifeAct ( white ) were loaded on anti - CD3 / 28 coverslips . After initial contact , time - lapse images were acquired , and single images representing 100 - s time points are shown . Also , refer to Videos 5 and 6 . Cell spreading areas were measured using FLUOVIEW program . EV , empty vector . ( B ) Cells were loaded on anti - CD3 / 28 coverslips , incubated for the indicated time points , and stained for F - actin , and the percentages of F - actin rings were scored and quantified . on O c t obe r 11 , 2015 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 13 , 2015 147 TAGln2 stabilizes actin filaments • na et al . coverslips ( Fig . 1 C ) . Ectopic overexpression of TG2 _ GFP in Jurkat T cells ( J - TG2 _ GFP ) revealed TG2 _ GFP expression not only in the cytoplasm but also in the membrane compart - ment ( Fig . 1 D ) . Upon J - TG2 _ GFP cell conjugation with SEE - loaded Raji B cells , TG2 _ GFP localized to the outer border of ICAM - 1 , which is a representative peripheral SMAC molecule present on B cells ( Fig . 1 E and Video 1 ) . To examine the lo - calization of TAGLN2 in greater detail , J - TG2 _ GFP cells were loaded on anti - CD3 / 28 – coated coverslips , and then , the cells were fixed and stained with F - actin , LFA - 1 , Arp3 , and myosin IIA . TAGLN2 was most clearly seen at the outer actin ring ( d - SMAC ; Fig . 1 F , d ) , although it was also observed in the nucleus ( Fig . 1 F , Fig . S2 , and Video 2 ) . TG2 _ GFP signals strongly overlapped with Arp3 at the outer ring , but not with LFA - 1 and myosin IIA , which are representative of the middle ring ( peripheral SMAC ; Fig . 1 F , p ; Fig . S2 ; and Videos 3 and 4 ; Yi et al . , 2012 ) . Collectively , we concluded that TAGLN2 associates with F - actin and is a d - SMAC protein in the IS . TAGLN2 controls the F - actin content in T cells We next investigated the function of TAGLN2 in actin reorga - nization in Jurkat T cells . A kinetic study revealed that , although initial cell spreading and F - actin ring formation were similar , TAGLN2 overexpression prolonged the duration of T cell spread - ing and F - actin ring formation on anti - CD3 / 28 – coated coverslips ( Fig . 2 , A and B ; and Video 5 and 6 ) . This was correlated with the up - regulation of total F - actin content in J - TG2 _ GFP cells after stimulation ( Fig . 2 C ) . Accumulation of F - actin at the IS was also evident during T cell – APC conjugation . TG2 _ GFP was clearly overlapped with LifeAct ( mCherry ; Fig . 2 D , left ) , and the F - actin retention time at the contact region in J - TG2 _ GFP cells was longer than that of J - GFP cells ( Fig . 2 D , right ) . Conversely , targeted knockdown of TAGLN2 by siRNA ( Fig . 2 E ) resulted in diminished cell spreading and F - actin ring formation ( Fig . 2 F ) . Moreover , the F - actin retention time at the contact region was shorter than that of scrambled siRNA - transfected cells ( Fig . 2 G ) . Collectively , these results demon - strate that TAGLN2 controls total F - actin content at the IS that subsequently influences F - actin ring formation and spreading . TAGLN2 controls integrin - mediated T cell adhesion Previous experiments have demonstrated that the actin cyto - skeleton can regulate integrin - mediated T cell adhesion ( Burn et al . , 1988 ) . Inhibitors such as cytochalasin B and D ( Cyt D ) have been used to inhibit  2 - and  1 - mediated adhesion to their ligands ( Rothlein and Springer , 1986 ) . Therefore , we explored whether prolonged accumulation of F - actin at the IS may reflect integrin activation . We performed a T cell – APC conjugation assay and found that J - TG2 _ GFP cells increased conjugate formation over time ( Fig . 3 A ) . Strong inhibition of conjugate formation in J - TG2 _ GFP cells treated with Cyt D or TS1 / 18 ( a blocking antibody for LFA - 1 ) demonstrated that TAGLN2 controls LFA - 1 – mediated T cell adhesion to APC ( Fig . 3 B ) . TAGLN2 overexpression did not change the expression levels of the cell surface molecules CD3 , 28 , LFA - 1 , or ICAM - 1 ( Fig . 3 C ) . An ICAM - 1 adhesion assay further sup - ported TAGLN2 - mediated control of integrin function ( Fig . 3 D ) . Conversely , TAGLN2 deficiency reduced conjugate forma - tion ( Fig . 3 E ) . TAGLN2 directly binds to F - actin and weakly cross - links F - actin in bundles To understand the mechanism of TAGLN2 involvement in actin assembly at the IS , we first analyzed TAGLN2 and actin inter - actions in vitro . We confirmed these interactions using a high - speed cosedimentation assay . TAGLN2 was recovered with F - actin in the pellet ( Fig . 4 A ) , confirming the in vivo observation of associ - ation with stress fibers or localization at the lamellipodial leading edge . The binding of TAGLN2 to actin monomers was saturated at a 1 : 1 ratio ( B max = 0 . 9175 ± 0 . 102 mol / mol ) , with a K d of 7 . 395 µM ( Fig . 4 B ) . TAGLN1 was reported to bundle actin filaments ( Han et al . , 2009 ) ; thus , we tested for a correlation between the bundling activity of TAGLN2 and the increase in the F - actin content of T cells . We found , by low speed centrifugation , that the well - known actin - bundling protein  - actinin ( 1 µM ) precipi - tates most of the F - actin ; however , TAGLN2 does not show any bundling activity up to a 1 : 2 ratio of actin to TAGLN2 ( 8 µM ; Fig . 4 C ) . We saw bundling activity only at higher concentrations ( 16 – 24 µM ) , as assessed by low - speed centrifugation and EM ( Fig . 4 D ) . In contrast to the strong , rope - like structure formed by  - actinin , TAGLN2 - actin bundles were loosened , gel - like structures ( Fig . 4 D ) . The optimal ratio of actin to common actin - bundling proteins such as fascin , fimbrin , filamin , and  - actinin is  1 : 0 . 05 to 1 : 0 . 5 ( Glenney et al . , 1981 ; Stokes and DeRosier , 1991 ; van der Flier and Sonnenberg , 2001 ; Gordón - Alonso et al . , 2012 ) . However , the requirement of exceptionally higher con - centrations of TAGLN2 needed to cross - link actin implies that TAGLN2 has another function other than F - actin cross - linking . TAGLN2 stabilizes F - actin and competes with cofilin for binding to F - actin The aforementioned results prompted us to consider the other functions of TAGLN2 in actin reorganization . We performed ( left ) Representative actin ring images were classified as ring ( R ) , partial ( P ) , and not cleared ( N ) . ( C ) Cells were stimulated with soluble anti - CD3 / 28 . At the indicated times , F - actin content was quantified using flow cytometry . The data are represented as relative fluorescence intensity compared with J - GFP cells at 0 min . ( D ) Cells were preincubated for 10 min with SEE - loaded Raji B cells ( ICAM - 1 [ IC1 ] ) . The cells were then placed on PLL for the indicated time points . LifeAct redistribution was quantified as described in Materials and methods . ( A – D ) * , P < 0 . 05 versus J - GFP cells . ( E – G ) Jurkat T cells were transfected with either scrambled or siRNA targeting TAGLN2 ( 70 nM ) . ( E ) After 48 h , TAGLN2 expression was determined by Western blot . M , molecular mass . ( F ) Cells were loaded on anti - CD3 / 28 coverslips for indicated time points and then stained with TRITC - phalloidin . Cell spreading area and F - actin rings were analyzed as in B . ( G ) LifeAct redistribution at the IS was determined as in D . Graphical data shown are means of three experiments ± SD , with > 50 cells . ( F and G ) * , P < 0 . 05 versus scrambled siRNA ( si _ SC ) . Bars , 10 µm . on O c t obe r 11 , 2015 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 13 , 2015 JCB • volume 209 • numBer 1 • 2015 148 Figure 3 . TAGLN2 controls T cell adhesion through integrin activation . ( A ) Representative flow cytometric profiles of conjugate formation between J - GFP or J - TG2 _ GFP cells and Raji B cells at indicated time points . The percentages of conjugates were calculated as described in Materials and methods . ( B ) J - GFP and J - TG2 _ GFP cells were pretreated for 30 min with or without 2 µM Cyt D , 10 µg / ml TS1 / 18 , and 10 µg / ml TS2 / 4 , and then , the cells were incubated for 30 min with SEE - Raji B cells . * , P < 0 . 05 versus J - GFP in each experimental condition . * * , P < 0 . 05 versus J - TG2 _ GFP cells with SEE - loaded Raji B cells . ( C ) Surface expression of CD3 -  , CD28 , LFA - 1 , and ICAM - 1 . Mean fluorescence intensity ( MFI ) of whole cell population is shown in each graph . Empty line , isotype control . ( D ) J - GFP and J - TG2 _ GFP were preincubated for 30 min with or without 10 µg / ml TS1 / 18 and were then applied to human ICAM - 1 - Fc coverslips for 30 min with or without anti - CD3 / 28 stimulation . Adherent cells were detected using a fluorescence plate reader . C , coated ; T , treated . * , P < 0 . 05 versus anti - CD3 / 28 – stimulated J - GFP cells . ( E ) Cells from Fig . 2 E were mixed with SEE - Raji B cells , and the percentages of conjugates were determined as in A . Flow cytometric plots shown are representative of three independent experiments , and results are the mean ± SD of triplicate experiments . * , P < 0 . 05 versus scrambled siRNA ( si _ SC ) in the presence of SEE . on O c t obe r 11 , 2015 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 13 , 2015 149 TAGln2 stabilizes actin filaments • na et al . an actin polymerization assay with pyrene - labeled actin and compared the polymerizing activity of TAGLN2 with that of Arp2 / 3 and / or the VCA ( verprolin - homology , cofilin homol - ogy , and acidic ) domain of neuronal WASp ( Blanchoin et al . , 2000 ) . Although Arp2 / 3 and VCA successfully enhanced spon - taneous polymerization under actin polymerization buffer ( APB ) , TAGLN2 slightly reduced the kinetics of spontane - ous actin polymerization ( Fig . 5 A ) . We also measured the concentration of globular actin ( G - actin ) required for polym - erization ( critical concentration ) in the presence or absence of TAGLN2 and found that addition of TAGLN2 does not change the critical concentration of G - actin ( Fig . 5 B ) . Figure 4 . TAGLN2 directly binds to F - actin and weakly cross - links actin in bundles . ( A ) Actin was polymerized in APB and then incubated for 30 min with 8 µM TAGLN2 , 1 µM  - actinin , and 1 µM BSA . After high - speed centrifugation ( 100 , 000 g ) , pellets were separated from supernatants and analyzed by SDS - PAGE . S , supernatant ; P , pellet . ( B ) To generate standard curves , different amounts of actin ( 4 µM ) and TAGLN2 ( 0 . 4 – 5 . 6 µM ) were loaded on an SDS - PAGE gel , and the intensities of the bands were measured by a densitometer . The actin binding affinity was measured as described in the Materials and methods . ( C ) For actin bundling assay , various doses of TAGLN2 ( 8 – 24 µM ) were incubated with F - actin ( 4 µM ) . After low - speed centrifugation ( 10 , 000 g ) , pellets and supernatants of the samples were analyzed . All data shown are representative of three independent experiments . M , molecular mass . ( D ) The reactants above C were examined via EM . Images shown are representative of three independent experiments . Bar , 100 nm . on O c t obe r 11 , 2015 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 13 , 2015 JCB • volume 209 • numBer 1 • 2015 150 Figure 5 . TAGLN2 stabilizes F - actin and competes with cofilin for binding to F - actin . ( A ) Actin polymerization was performed with pyrene - labeled 4 µM G - actin in APB containing 10 nM Arp2 / 3 , 400 nM VCA , 4 µM TAGLN2 , or Arp2 / 3 + VCA . The extent of polymerization is shown in normalized fluor - escence units . ( B ) Pyrene - labeled G - actin was diluted to various concentrations in the presence or absence of an equimolar concentration of TAGLN2 , and fluorescence was measured 4 h after adding APB to initiate polymerization . Inset graph indicates fluorescence intensities of 0 – 16  M pyrene - labeled G - actin mixed with same molar concentration of TAGLN2 . ( C ) To visualize TAGLN2 and F - actin , G - actin was incubated for 1 h in APB in the presence or absence of TAGLN2 conjugated with Dylight 488 . F - actin was stained with TRITC - phalloidin . ( D ) Depolymerization of actin filaments was performed in the presence of various concentrations of TAGLN2 . 4 µM phalloidin was used as a positive control . Actin was polymerized in the presence of TAGLN2 or phalloidin for 1 h in APB and then diluted fivefold into G buffer to initiate depolymerization . The degree of depolymerization was monitored using a fluorometer . ( E ) Actin depolymerization was performed as in D in the presence or absence of 1 µM cofilin . T / C indicates the molar ratio of TAGLN2 ( T ) on O c t obe r 11 , 2015 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 13 , 2015 151 TAGln2 stabilizes actin filaments • na et al . The binding of fluorescently labeled TAGLN2 along actin filaments ( Fig . 5 C ) led us to examine whether TAGLN2 may be involved in F - actin stabilization as a side - binding protein . TAGLN2 blocked spontaneous actin depolymerization in con - centrations ranging from 1 to 8 µM , which were lower than those needed for bundling ( Fig . 5 D ) . This demonstrated that TAGLN2 stabilizes F - actin . Moreover , TAGLN2 blocked cofilin - mediated depolymerization , as determined by a depolymeriza - tion assay and confocal analysis ( Fig . 5 E ) . The crystal structure of TAGLN1 was reported to con - tain two cross - linked monomers of TAGLN1 ( Li et al . , 2008 ) . Using the TAGLN1 homodimer as a template , we predicted the dimerization of TAGLN2 monomers ( Fig . 5 F ) . Interestingly , we found a similar mode of homodimerization for TAGLN2 . It was mediated by amino acids at the binding interface that cor - respond to those of the TAGLN1 homodimer ( Li et al . , 2008 ) . The structure of the homodimeric TAGLN2 model enabled us to predict an underlying mechanism of TAGLN2 action in F - actin stabilization . As shown schematically in Fig . 5 F , di - merization of TAGLN2 monomers , through the interaction of one side of the first monomer ( helix I and II ) with the other side of second monomer ( helix IV and V ) , can generate multi - mers of TAGLN2 that stabilize an incoming actin molecule’s position on the growing F - actin lining . The 1 : 1 stoichiometry of TAGLN2 to actin also suggests that there is only one actin - binding motif ( ABM ) on each TAGLN2 monomer ( Fig . 4 B ) . These observations suggest a model in which TAGLN2 func - tions as a “molecular staple” on polymerized actin , binding to actin at one end ( fulcrum ) and undergoing multimeric interactions with two arms ( Fig . 5 F , right ) . The ABM is required for TAGLN2 - mediated T cell activation Sequence alignment with TAGLN1 and TAGLN3 revealed that TAGLN2 contains a predicted ABM between residues 153 and 160 . Deletion of amino acids 153 – 160 (  ABM ) reduced TAGLN2 association with F - actin ( Fig . 6 , A and B ) . This mutant also lost actin - stabilizing activity ( Fig . 6 C ) , further corroborat - ing that the actin stabilizing activity of TAGLN2 is fully depen - dent on its binding to F - actin . To investigate whether TAGLN2 involvement in T cell activation is related to its binding to actin , we also generated J - TG2  ABM _ GFP cells ( Fig . 6 D ) . We observed diminished accumulation of TAGLN2 at the IS , and the expression of IL - 2 mRNA was attenuated in these cells compared with J - TG2 _ GFP cells ( Fig . 6 , D and E ) . These cells also failed to increase conjugate formation ( Fig . 6 F ) . We questioned whether T cell activation by TAGLN2 is caused by its primary role in actin signaling or a secondary effect stem - ming from increased conjugate formation . To test this , J - GFP , J - TG2 _ GFP , or J - TG2  ABM _ GFP cells were loaded on anti - CD3 / 28 – coated plates with or without ICAM - 1 ( ±ICAM - 1 ) , and IL - 2 production was measured . J - TG2 _ GFP cells on the anti - CD3 / 28 + ICAM - 1 – coated plates produced the most IL - 2 . This suggested that TAGLN2 function is enhanced by integ - rin LFA - 1 binding to its ligand ICAM - 1 ( Fig . 6 G ) . On anti - CD3 / 28 – coated plates , however , production of IL - 2 in J - TG2 _ GFP cells was also increased when compared with J - GFP or J - TG2  ABM _ GFP cells ( Fig . 6 G ) . This suggests that the primary role of TAGLN2 in regulation of actin is essential for TAGLN2 - mediated T cell function . TAGLN2 knockout leads to diminished F - actin content and F - actin ring formation— resulting in lowered cell spreading—and shows attenuated cofilin activity in vivo To connect the in vitro and in vivo data , we generated mice de - ficient in TAGLN2 ( Fig . S3 , A and B ) . The sizes of primary and secondary lymphoid organs were not changed , and the weights of age - matched littermates also did not differ significantly among wild - type ( WT ; + / + ) , heterozygous ( + /  ) , and TAGLN2 - null (  /  ) mice ( Fig . S3 , C and D ) . The absence of TAGLN2 ex - pression was confirmed using Western blotting ( Fig . S3 E ) . The TAGLN2  /  mice showed normal T cell development , in terms of the number and percentage of CD4 + and CD8 + single - positive cells in the thymus , lymph nodes , and spleen ( Fig . S3 F ) , as well as normal B cell and dendritic cell populations in the spleen ( Fig . S3 G ) . CD3 + T cells showed normal surface expression of CD3 -  and CD28 ( Fig . S3 H ) . Response to lipopolysaccha - ride was not significantly altered in either dendritic cells ( DCs ; Fig . S3 I ) or B cells ( Fig . S3 J ) taken from TAGLN2  /  mice . We also generated transgenic mice by using an Lck ( lymphocyte - specific protein tyrosine kinase ) promoter - based vector containing GFP or TG2 _ GFP , and we verified the GFP signals within well - defined T cell regions in lymphoid organs such as the thymus , spleen , and lymph nodes ( Fig . S4 A ) . The expres - sion levels of GFP and TG2 _ GFP were confirmed ( Fig . S4 B ) . The mice exhibited normal T cell development as determined by the ratio of CD4 + / CD8 + cells ( Fig . S4 C ) . We compared cell spreading and F - actin ring formation in CD3 + T cells purified from TAGLN2 + / + and TAGLN2  /  mice before and after stimulation on anti - CD3 / 28 – coated coverslips . A kinetic study revealed that the TAGLN2 deficiency inhib - ited cell spreading as well as diminished F - actin ring forma - tion ( Fig . 7 A ) . These cells showed a reduction in total F - actin content after T cell stimulation ( Fig . 7 B ) . TAGLN2  /  CD3 + T cells showed a significant reduction of conjugate formation with SEE - loaded CD19 + B cells purified from WT mice ( Fig . 7 C ) . The ability to adhere to ICAM - 1 was also diminished in these cells , suggesting weakened LFA - 1 function ( Fig . 7 D ) . We next examined the relationship between TAGLN2 and cofilin in vivo . Because active cofilin functions to rap - idly disassemble F - actin , we tested the ability of TAGLN2 to and cofilin ( C ) in the reaction . ( top ) Total change in pyrene intensities (  F ) were calculated as described in Materials and methods . Results represent means ± SD of triplicate experiments . For confocal image analysis , pyrene - labeled G - actin was replaced with 488 – G - actin . All data shown are representative of at least three independent experiments . ( F ) Prediction of the ribbon structure of a TAGLN2 homodimer using Chimera software . ( left ) Black arrows indicate the actin - binding motif ( ABM ) . ( right ) TAGLN2 dimer and multimers are shown schematically . The TAGLN2 dimer is represented by triangular monomers with helices I and II , helices IV and V , and ABM at the three vertices represented by arcs . Bars , 5  m . on O c t obe r 11 , 2015 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 13 , 2015 JCB • volume 209 • numBer 1 • 2015 152 Figure 6 . Mutation at actin binding site loses functions of F - actin stabilization and T cell activation . ( A ) Schematic diagram of wild type ( WT ) – TG2 and TG2  ABM . CH , calponin homology ; ABM , actin - binding motif ; CR , calponin repeat . CHO - KI cells transfected with WT - TG2 _ GFP or TG2  ABM _ GFP were stained for F - actin ( TRITC - phalloidin ) , and colocalization between GFP and TRITC was calculated with the FLUOVIEW and represented as a percentage ( bottom ) . Images are representative of > 50 cells examined . Results represent means ± SD of triplicate experiments . * , P < 0 . 05 compared with cells expressing WT - TG2 . EV , empty vector . ( B and C ) F - actin binding ( B ) and actin depolymerization ( C ) assays were performed as described in Fig . 4 A and Fig . 5 D . Data shown are representative of three independent experiments . M , molecular mass ; S , supernatant ; P , pellet . ( D ) J - GFP , J - TG2 _ GFP , and J - TG2  ABM _ GFP were incubated with SEE - loaded Raji B cells for 30 min . ( left ) The arrows indicate the accumulation of GFP signals at the IS . The ratio of contact / opposite fluorescence was calculated . The ratio of contact / opposite fluorescence in the white boxed area was calculated . Each dot represents 50 cells examined . Horizontal bars indicate the mean of fluorescence intensities . Data shown are representative of three independent experiments . T , J - GFP , J - TG2 _ GFP , and J - TG2  ABM _ GFP cells ; B , Raji B cells . ( E ) IL2 mRNA levels were measured using real - time quantitative RT - PCR . ( F ) Conjugate formations were determined as described in Fig . 3 . ( G ) IL - 2 secretions in each condition were assessed by ELISA . Results are the means ± SD of triplicate experiments . * , P < 0 . 05 versus J - GFP ; * * , P < 0 . 05 versus J - TG2 _ GFP . T , TAGLN2 ; C , cofilin . Bars , 10 µm . on O c t obe r 11 , 2015 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 13 , 2015 153 TAGln2 stabilizes actin filaments • na et al . overcome cofilin - mediated actin depolymerization in CHO - K1 cells . We generated an active form of cofilin by substitution of Ser - 3 to Ala - 3 ( cofilin / S3A ; Moriyama et al . , 1996 ) . Overexpres - sion of TAGLN2 markedly protected F - actin within stress fibers from cofilin - mediated destruction , whereas the actin - binding mutant (  ABM ) had little effect ( Fig . 8 A ) . In Jurkat T cells , co - filin / S3A led to impaired spreading ( area ) on anti - CD3 / 28 – coated plates , presumably as a result of the excessive depolymeriza - tion of F - actin ( Fig . 8 B and Video 7 ) . However , cotransfection with WT - TG2 , but not TG2  ABM , blocked the cofilin effect ( Fig . 8 B ) , thereby corroborating that TAGLN2 antagonizes cofilin activity in vivo as it does in vitro . Cofilin almost similarly colocal - ized with TAGLN2 ( Fig . 8 B and Video 8 ) . Surprisingly , however , careful examination revealed that cofilin mainly localized at two distinguishable regions in the IS—the central SMAC ( correspond - ing to the “F - actin hole” ) and upper region of d - SMAC—where TAGLN2 is rather excluded ( Fig . 8 C ) , suggesting specific loca - tions of two proteins for opposite functions in the IS . Figure 7 . A TAGLN2 knockout leads to diminished F - actin content and F - actin ring formation , resulting in lowered cell spreading and LFA - 1 – mediated conjugation formation . ( A ) T cells from TAGLN2 + / + and TAGLN2  /  mice were loaded on anti - CD3 / 28 – coated coverslips for the indicated time points . Images shown are representative of three independent experiments . Cell spreading area and the percentages of actin rings were measured , as shown in Fig . 2 ( A and B ) . R , ring ; P , partial . Bar , 10  m . ( B ) Relative F - actin content was measured as in Fig . 2 C . KO , knockout . ( C ) Mouse CD3 + T cells were mixed with SEB - loaded B cells , and conjugate formation for the indicated time points was determined as in Fig . 3 A . ( D ) BCECF - labeled mouse CD3 + T cells were preincubated for 30 min with or without 2 µM Cyt D , and then , adhesion to mICAM - 1Fc in response to anti - CD3 / 28 was determined by measuring fluorescence intensity . All graphical results represent means ± SD of triplicate experiments . * , P < 0 . 05 . T , TAGLN2 ; C , cofilin . on O c t obe r 11 , 2015 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 13 , 2015 JCB • volume 209 • numBer 1 • 2015 154 Figure 8 . TAGLN2 antagonizes cofilin in vivo , and TAGLN2  /  T cells show substantial retardation of cofilin activity upon TCR stimulation . ( A ) CHO - K1 cells were transfected with the indicated constructs and then stained with Alexa Fluor 647 – phalloidin . The integrated fluorescence ( Fl ) of F - actin in each transfected cell was estimated by FLUOVIEW . ( B ) Jurkat T cells were cotransfected with the indicated constructs . Cells were loaded on anti - CD3 / 28 – coated on O c t obe r 11 , 2015 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 13 , 2015 155 TAGln2 stabilizes actin filaments • na et al . approximately a twofold increase in IL - 2 or IFN -  expression in response to the indicated stimuli ( Fig . S4 , D – F ) . We next assessed the ability of CD8 + T cells to kill target cells . TAGLN2  /  CD8 + T cells exhibited a profound decrease in target cell lysis ( Fig . 9 D ) . Flow cytometric analysis of TAGLN2  /  CD8 + T cells showed reduced expression of lytic granules ( granzyme B and perforin ) after stimulation ( Fig . 9 E ) , along with the consistent reduction in the secretion of mature granzyme B ( Fig . 9 F ) . On the other hand , CD8 + T cells also showed a reduced conjugation to target cells ( Fig . 9 G ) . These results suggest that decreased cytotoxicity of TAGLN2  /  CD8 + T cells is resulted from both reduced expression of lytic gran - ules and weakened adhesion to target cells . To further confirm that defects in the actin - binding abil - ity of TAGLN2 also affect T cell spreading and activation in vivo , we performed retroviral transduction / reconstitution experiments in TAGLN2  /  T cells . In contrast to WT cells , TG2  ABM cells did not properly form F - actin rings when re - constituted cells were loaded on anti - CD3 / 28 – coated cover - slips ( Fig . 9 H ) . Moreover , the mutant failed to mediate normal T cell activation when the reconstituted cells were incubated with SEB - loaded CD19 + B cells ( Fig . 9 I ) . To further deter - mine whether the signaling defects in TAGLN2 knockouts are a direct result of TAGLN2 function on F - actin polymerization , or a secondary defect in integrin - mediated cell adhesion , the reconstituted cells were loaded on anti - CD3 / 28 – coated plates with or without ICAM - 1 ( ±ICAM - 1 ) , and intracellular signaling was examined . In contrast to the TAGLN2 + / + or WT - transduced TAGLN2  /  T cells ,  ABM - transduced T cells were not op - timally phosphorylated in either condition ( ±ICAM - 1 ; Fig . 9 J ) . These results strongly suggested that direct modulation of actin reorganization is most critical for TAGLN2 function and that integrin - mediated adhesion is important . Discussion Once the IS is established , the surface of the distal region is enriched in molecules with large extracellular domains , such as CD43 and CD45 ( Delon et al . , 2001 ; Freiberg et al . , 2002 ) , whereas a stable centripetal retrograde actin flow drives and regulates T cell activation in the cytoplasmic region ( Babich et al . , 2012 ) . To meet the needs of spatial and temporal regula - tion in the IS , actin polymerization and depolymerization are tightly regulated by many accessory proteins like Arp2 / 3 , WASp , WAVE , cofilin , and HS12 ( Huang and Burkhardt , 2007 ) . We have found that another actin binding protein , TAGLN2 , colocal - izes with F - actin in d - SMAC and controls F - actin levels at the IS by stabilizing F - actin and in part antagonizing cofilin - mediated Although most studies have associated cofilin activation with F - actin depolymerization , this relationship does not al - ways hold . Indeed , cofilin activity favors F - actin polymeriza - tion via its actin - severing activity in vivo and is therefore known to positively regulate T cell activation ( Samstag et al . , 2003 ) . If this is the case , there must be signaling cross talk or a co - operative function , but not opposition , between TAGLN2 and cofilin in vivo . Interestingly , we found that the dephosphoryla - tion ( activation ) of cofilin was not obvious in TAGLN2  /  CD3 + T cells after anti - CD3 / 28 stimulation , whereas the total amount of cofilin was similar in both types of T cells ( Fig . 8 D ) . The opposite of this effect was also seen in transgenic TG2 _ GFP CD3 + T cells ( Fig . 8 D ) . In addition , we observed reduced phos - phorylation of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) and extra - cellular signal – regulated kinase ( ERK ) , an upstream Ras - signaling cascade of cofilin dephosphorylation ( Wabnitz et al . , 2006 ) , in TAGLN2  /  CD3 + T cells ( Fig . 8 E ) . TCR triggering leads to proximal and distal intracellular signaling events that are related to actin dynamics . As shown in Fig . 8 F , none of the proximal molecules showed impaired phosphorylation after TCR stimulation in TAGLN2  /  CD3 + T cells . This could be explained by the fact that none of these signaling molecules require actin for recruitment to the IS ( Larghi et al . , 2013 ) . On the other hand , the phosphorylation of PLC -  was attenuated in TAGLN2  /  CD3 + T cells ( Fig . 8 F ) . This impairment attenuated distal signaling by reducing PKC -  and ERK activation ( Fig . 8 F ) . PLC -  phosphorylation depends not only on recruitment to the IS but also on correct spatial orga - nization , driven by F - actin polymerization and retrograde flow ( Babich et al . , 2012 ) . These results suggest that TAGLN2 plays a role in the spatial organization of IS , which is essential to maintain signaling activation . TAGLN2 positively regulates T cell activation Finally , we examined the physiological significance of TAGLN2 in T cell immunity . CD3 + T cells from TAGLN2  /  mice showed decreased secretion of IL - 2 after incubation with the S . aureus enterotoxin B ( SEB ) – loaded CD19 + B cells or stimu - lation with anti - CD3 / 28 antibodies ( Fig . 9 A ) . To evaluate more antigen - specific effector functions , we generated OTII TCR + and OTI TCR + mice with or without TAGLN2 gene . Purified CD4 + or CD8 + T cells from OTII TCR + / TAGLN2  /  and OTI TCR + / TAGLN2  /  mice , respectively , showed a significant re - duction of IFN -  and IL - 2 protein levels ( Fig . 9 B ) along with the decreased proliferation in response to the specific ovalbumin ( OVA ) peptides ( Fig . 9 C ) . Conversely , CD3 + , CD4 + , and CD8 + T cells from transgenic mice with TG2 _ GFP exhibited coverslips for 5 min , fixed , and stained with Alexa Fluor 647 – phalloidin . Images are representative of > 50 cells examined . The areas and fluorescence intensity of F - actin were analyzed by FLUOVIEW . Data are means ± SD of triplicate experiments . ( A and B ) * , P < 0 . 05 versus empty vector ( EV ) . * * , P < 0 . 05 versus cofilin alone . ( C ) Live images of TG2 _ GFP and cofilin / S3A _ RFP were acquired from cells in B . The colocalization ( yellow and blue circles ) was estimated as described in Fig . 1 A . The yellow arrows indicate the F - actin hole . The boxed area ( yellow ) is represented as 4× zoomed images in the right and quantitated by fluorescence intensity . Data are representative of > 50 cells examined . ( D – F ) Indicated CD3 + T cells were stimulated with an anti - CD3 / 28 for the indicated time points . ( D ) The phosphorylated and total forms of cofilin were assessed by Western blotting . The phosphorylated and total forms of PI3K and ERK ( E ) , Lck , Zap70 , PLC -  , and PKC -  ( F ) were also detected by Western blotting . The data are representative of three independent experiments . DIC , differential interference contrast ; M , molecular mass . Bars , 10 µm . on O c t obe r 11 , 2015 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 13 , 2015 JCB • volume 209 • numBer 1 • 2015 156 Figure 9 . TAGLN2 is necessary for effector T cell function . ( A ) CD3 + T cells from TAGLN2 + / + and TAGLN2  /  mice were stimulated with anti - CD3 / 28 or incubated with SEB - pulsed CD19 + B cells for 24 h , and the levels of IL - 2 production were measured using ELISA . CON , control . ( B ) OTII TCR + CD4 + or OTI TCR + CD8 + T cells from TAGLN2 + / + and TAGLN2  /  mice were stimulated with or without OVA - loaded DCs for 24 h . IFN -  and IL - 2 in the supernatant were on O c t obe r 11 , 2015 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 13 , 2015 157 TAGln2 stabilizes actin filaments • na et al . but rather cooperate to regulate a stable centripetal retrograde actin flow during IS formation . From this point of view , it is interesting that TAGLN2 deficiency results in attenuated cofilin activity in T cells . There are at least two explanations for the down - regulation of cofilin activity in TAGLN2  /  T cells . First , TAGLN2  /  T cells may attenuate cofilin activity to restore the F - actin content , which was reduced by loss of TAGLN2 . Therefore , active cofilin may further exacerbate the deficiency of TAGLN2 in T cells . Alternatively , TAGLN2  /  may attenu - ate actin - linked signaling pathways including PLC , PI3K , and ERK , presumably caused by the immature actin structure at the IS . Indeed , both PI3K and ERK overlap with the Ras - signaling cascade that regulates dephosphorylation of cofilin in human un - transformed T cells ( Wabnitz et al . , 2006 ) . Thus , down - regulation of cofilin activity might be a natural result of attenuated actin - linked signaling in TAGLN2  /  T cells . Another question is why cells do not simply make less co - filin , instead of expressing TAGLN2 to keep actin stable . In this regard , if cellular concentrations of TALN2 are substoichio - metric to active cofilin , its role as a cofilin antagonist is unclear . However , we found that the cellular concentration of TAGLN2 is much higher than cofilin in T cells , as determined by quan - titative Western blotting ( Fig . S5 ) . Moreover , our preliminary results demonstrated that substitution of putative phosphoryla - tion sites in TAGLN2 influences its actin - stabilizing function , while having little effect on F - actin binding ( unpublished data ) . Although more careful experiments are needed to understand how TAGLN2 phosphorylation controls F - actin stabilization , these results strongly suggest that T cells require TAGLN2 to sta - bilize F - actin levels , thereby controlling T cell function under diverse physiological conditions . Although intracellular signals such as Zap70 and Erk1 / 2 are necessary to activate LFA - 1 , the actin cytoskeleton also plays a role in LFA - 1 – mediated adhesion ( Lub et al . , 1997 ; Sampath et al . , 1998 ) . In the present study , increase in T cell conjugation with APC or adhesion to ICAM - 1 , with WT trans - fection but not with  ABM , suggests that actin regulation by TAGLN2 is linked to LFA - 1 affinity or avidity changes . How - ever , this fact raises an important question about whether the bi - ological effectiveness of TAGLN2 is primarily caused by actin regulation , a secondary effect stemming from LFA - 1 adhesion , or both . The current results show that primary actin signaling is critical , but a secondary function to enhance LFA - 1 – mediated T cell adhesiveness may also be important , particularly in cases disassembly . This function is also connected to the up - regulation of LFA - 1 activity in T cells . Furthermore , transgenic or knockout T cells showed up - regulated or impaired activation , demonstrat - ing that TAGLN2 is an important actin regulator in T cells . The similarities between TAGLN2 and its other two fam - ily members , TAGLN1 and TAGLN3 , indicate actin - bundling or - gelling functions ( Shapland et al . , 1993 ; Han et al . , 2009 ) ; however , we detected actin bundling effects only at exception - ally high concentrations of TAGLN2 ( four to eightfold greater than actin ) . Because most actin - bundling proteins can optimally cross - link actin into bundles at concentrations 2 – 20 - fold lower than actin ( Glenney et al . , 1981 ; Stokes and DeRosier , 1991 ; van der Flier and Sonnenberg , 2001 ; Gordón - Alonso et al . , 2012 ) , it is unlikely that TAGLN2 - actin bundling is related to its biological function under physiological conditions . Instead , we found that TAGLN2 could stabilize and protect F - actin from cofilin - mediated depolymerization , which was also confirmed by confocal microscopy . The inability of the actin - binding mu - tant to protect F - actin and to enhance T cell activation suggests that TAGLN2 function is dependent on binding to actin . The mechanism of TAGLN2 stabilization and , further , protection of F - actin from cofilin attack is currently undetermined . We can rule out a role in capping of barbed ends , as the proteins in this category significantly affect spontaneous polymerization . Instead , we hypothesize that TAGLN2 binds along the side of actin filaments and may stabilize filaments by altering their structure , as previously reported ( Stokes and DeRosier , 1987 ) . Thus , we suggest a “molecular staple” model for TAGLN2 - me - diated F - actin stabilization , as described in Fig . 5 F . This fea - ture may be especially beneficial for blocking cofilin activity , as cofilin severs actin filaments by increasing their bending and twisting elasticity ( McCullough et al . , 2011 ) . Cofilin is a small , ubiquitously expressed protein that is essential for cell survival and for T cell activation . Although cofilin is an actin - severing protein , its activity can favor F - actin polymerization , because cofilin activity generates actin mono - mers and new barbed ends where active Arp2 / 3 complexes can associate and promote F - actin elongation ( Huang and Burkhardt , 2007 ) . In this regard , it is very interesting to find that cofilin mainly localizes at upper region of d - SMAC—TAGLN2 is rather excluded at this region and enriched at the bottom re - gion—during IS formation . As these two molecules function oppositely in vivo as well as in vitro , these results suggest that TAGLN2 and cofilin may not compete with each other in vivo measured using ELISA . ( A and B ) All data represent the means ± SD of three independent experiments . * , P < 0 . 05 versus WT . ( C ) After 72 h , cell division was monitored by flow cytometry of CFSE - labeled T cells . Data are one representative of three individual experiments , each with three mice per group . ( D ) After 4 - h coincubation of OTI TCR + CD8 + T cells with OVA - loaded or - unloaded EL4 cells , ex vivo cytotoxicity was tested at various ratios of effector / target cells . The data represent the mean ± SD of three independent experiments . * , P < 0 . 05 versus WT . ( E ) OTI TCR + CD8 + T cells were stimulated with 200 nM PMA and 1 µM ionomycin , and cellular expression of granzyme B and perforin was determined by flow cytometry . The boxed areas indicate the CD8 + granzyme B high or CD8 + perforin high population . Data are one representative of three individual experiments , each with three mice per group . MFI , mean fluorescence intensity . ( F ) Under the condition as described in D , secretion levels of granzyme B were measured using ELISA . ( G ) Conjugate formation was also quantitated after 30 - min incubation of OTI TCR + CD8 + T cells with OVA - loaded EL4 cells . ( H ) TAGLN2 + / + or TAGLN2  /  CD3 + T cells were retro - virally transduced with empty vector ( EV ) , WT - TG2 , or TG2  ABM . Reconstitution was confirmed by Western blotting . Cells were loaded on anti - CD3 / 28 coverslips for 5 min and stained for TG2 and F - actin . Cell spreading was determined . Images are representative of > 50 cells examined . Bar , 5 µm . ( I ) Cells were also incubated with SEB - pulsed CD19 + B cells for 24 h , and IL - 2 levels were measured using ELISA . NT , not treated . ( F – I ) Data are means ± SD of triplicate experiments . * , P < 0 . 05 versus empty vector – expressing T cells . + , P < 0 . 05 versus WT - expressing T cells . ( J ) Cells were loaded on anti - CD3 / 28 coverslips , with or without ICAM - 1 ( ±ICAM - 1 ) . After 10 min , the cells were lysed , and Western blotting was performed , as shown in Fig . 8 ( D and E ) . The data are representative of two independent experiments . KO , knockout ; M , molecular mass . on O c t obe r 11 , 2015 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 13 , 2015 JCB • volume 209 • numBer 1 • 2015 158 of cytotoxic T lymphocyte – mediated cytotoxicity against target cells . However , further studies are necessary to elucidate how TAGLN2 / actin signaling is connected to LFA - 1 activation . In summary , our results indicate that TAGLN2 is a d - SMAC molecule in the IS and plays a key role in mature synapse for - mation by binding and stabilizing actin . We also provide ini - tial evidence linking TAGLN2 with T cell immunity through its role in cytokine production and cytotoxic effector function . TAGLN2 is the only transgelin family member expressed in immune cells . Moreover , the ability of TAGLN2 to influence activation of T cell immunity may be involved in a variety of immune responses and diseases including cancer , infectious dis - eases , septic shock , autoimmune diseases , and immediate and delayed type hypersensitivity reactions . Materials and methods Reagents and antibodies Rabbit polyclonal anti - TAGLN2 and anti - GFP antibodies were raised in rabbits using purified full - length TAGLN2 and GFP proteins ( AbFrontier ) . Rabbit polyclonal anti - TAGLN antibody , mouse polyclonal anti - GFP , and anti – PLC -  antibodies , and goat polyclonal anti –  - actin antibody were pur - chased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . Rabbit polyclonal antibodies against p - PI3K , p - Zap70 , Zap70 , Lck , ERK , p - ERK , p - PLC -  , p - PKC -  , PKC -  , and p - cofilin ; horseradish peroxidase – conjugated anti – mouse IgG ; and anti – rabbit IgG antibodies were obtained from Cell Signaling Technology . Mouse monoclonal antibodies against TAGLN3 , myosin IIA , Arp3 , and co - filin were purchased from Abcam . Anti – human and – mouse CD28 antibod - ies were acquired from R & D Systems . FITC - conjugated anti – mouse CD4 , and peridinin chlorophyll protein complex ( PerCP ) Cy5 . 5 - conjugated CD8 -  antibodies were purchased from eBioscience . Anti – goat IgG , anti – hamster IgG , TRITC - conjugated anti – mouse IgG , TRITC - phalloidin , poly - l - lysine ( PLL ) , and OVA were purchased from Sigma - Aldrich . OKT3 ( human anti - CD3 ; CRL - 8001 ) and 145 - 2C11 ( mouse anti - CD3 ; CRL - 1975 ) hybridoma cell lines were purchased from the ATCC . TS1 / 18 ( anti – human LFA - 1 ; HB - 203 ) and R6 . 5 ( anti – human ICAM1 ) hybridoma cell lines were a gift from T . A . Springer ( Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA ) . Lipofectamine 2000 reagent , Alexa Fluor 647 phalloidin , and carboxyfluorescein succin - imidyl ester ( CFSE ) were obtained from Life Technologies . siRNA - targeting TAGLN2 ( M - 011468 - 02 ; 5  - GCAAGAACGUGAUCGGGUU - 3  ; 5  - UAU - GUGAGCUCAUUAAUGC - 3  ; 5  - CAACUGGUUCCCUAAGAAA - 3  ; 5  - UGCAAGCAGCUGAGCGCUA - 3  ) and a scrambled siRNA ( D - 001810 - 01 ; 5  - UAAGGCUAUGAAGAGAUAC - 3  ) were obtained as a pool of four siRNA duplexes from Thermo Fisher Scientific . SEE and SEB were obtained from Toxin Technology . OVA 257 – 264 and OVA 323 – 339 peptides were purchased from InvivoGen . Cells Jurkat T cells ( TIB - 152 ; ATCC ) , A7r5 ( CRL - 1444 ; ATCC ) , HEK293T ( CRL - 1573 ; ATCC ) , CHO - K1 ( 10061 ; Korean Cell Line Bank ) cells , EL4 ( TIB - 39 ; ATCC ) , and Raji B cells were maintained in RPMI 1640 medium or DMEM medium ( Gibco / Invitrogen ) supplemented with 10 % ( vol / vol ) FBS ( Gibco / Invitrogen ) . After written informed consent , human primary PBLs were iso - lated from healthy donors using dextran sedimentation and centrifugation through a discontinuous Ficoll gradient ( GE Healthcare ) . Mouse CD3 + T cells were purified from the mouse spleen and lymph nodes on a T cell enrichment column ( R & D Systems ) . Mouse splenocytes were dispersed and purified to CD4 + , CD8 + , and CD19 + populations by MACS cell separation ( Miltenyi Biotec ) . The purity of each population was confirmed to be > 95 % by flow cytometry . Mice For generation of TAGLN2 knockout mice , murine genomic DNA for TAGLN2 was obtained from 129 / SvJ mouse J1 embryonic stem ( ES ) cells by PCR . A targeting vector was constructed to delete nucleotides 14 , 691 – 15 , 479 containing exon 2 of TAGLN2 using a long arm fragment and two short arm fragments ligated into the pOSDupDel . Neo vector . The tar - geting vector was then electroporated into 129 / SvJ ES cells after linear - ization using NotI . Positive recombinant ES cells were identified using PCR and then microinjected into C57BL / 6 blastocysts . The resulting chimeric mice were then mated with C57BL / 6 mice . Germline transmission was confirmed using Southern blot analysis ( Macrogen ) . Interbreeding of the heterozygous mice was performed to generate homozygous TAGLN2 - deficient mice . Transgenic mice expressing GFP or TG2 _ GFP on T cells were estab - lished . The cDNA fragments corresponding to GFP or human TAGLN2 _ GFP were subcloned into a transgenic expression vector containing the proximal murine p56Lck promoter and the introns and exons of the human growth hor - mone gene ( Chaffin et al . , 1990 ) . The resulting plasmids were used to gener - ate transgenic mouse lines according to standard protocols ( Macrogen ) . Ova - specific TCR transgenic line I ( OTI ) mice contain transgenic in - serts for mouse Tcra - V2 and Tcrb - V5 genes for recognition of OVA 257 – 264 in the context of H2 - K b , and ova - specific TCR transgenic line II ( OTII ) mice contain transgenic inserts for mouse  - chain and  - chain TCR subunits expressed by a CD4 + T cell hybridoma designated clone 1 . 1 , which is specific for OVA 323 – 339 in the context of H2 - Ab1 ( I - A b ; The Jackson Laboratory ) . TAGLN2  /  , GFP , and TG2 _ GFP mice were then crossed with OTI mice to generate OTI TCR + / TAGLN2  /  , OTI TCR + / GFP , and OTI TCR + / TG2 _ GFP mice for five generations . OTII TCR + / TAGLN2  /  , OTII TCR + / GFP , and OTII TCR + / TG2 _ GFP mice were also generated by back - crossing in the same way as OTI mice . All mouse lines were confirmed by PCR using genomic DNA . All mice were housed in specific pathogen - free conditions , and all experiments were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of the School of Life Sciences , Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology . cDNA constructs To generate TAGLN2 constructs , a human TAGLN2 clone coding for the full - length open reading frame was purchased from ImaGene . The human WT TAGLN2 coding sequence region was ligated to pCDNA3 vector ( cy - tomegalovirus [ CMV ] promoter ; Invitrogen ) , pEGFP - N1 vector ( CMV pro - moter ; Takara Bio Inc . ) , and pHJ - 1 as a lentiviral vector ( CMV promoter ) . TAGLN2  ABM (  154 – 161 ) was generated by overlapping PCR . The 408 – and 81 – base pair products from first - round PCR were used together as an overlapping template to generate TAGLN2  ABM . To produce His - tagged TAGLN2 and TAGLN2  ABM recombinant proteins , the pET - 28a vector was used as an expression vector , which has a T7 promoter and provides six His residues at the N terminus of the expressed protein . The coding sequences of TAGLN2 and mutant TAGLN2 were amplified by PCR , and the products were incorporated into pET - 28a . For retroviral transduction to mouse primary T cells , TAGLN2 and TAGLN2  ABM genes were subcloned into the pRV - GFP vector , which is a retroviral plasmid that directs the expression of GFP . Cofilin cDNA was amplified from cofilin mRNA , and then , the con - stitutively active mutant cofilin ( cofilin / S3A ) was constructed by substituting Ser - 3 with alanine . The PCR product was inserted into pERFP _ N1 ( CMV promoter ; Takara Bio Inc . ) . Cell transfection and lentiviral infection Transient transfection to human PBLs and Jurkat T cells was mostly per - formed by Amaxa technology using the human T cell nucleofector and nucleofector kitV ( Lonza ) . Transfection to CHO - K1 cells was performed using Lipofectamine 2000 ( Life Technologies ) . To establish stable cell lines , cDNAs in pHJ - 1 vector were cotransfected with lentiviral packaging vec - tors into 293T cells . After 48 h , the supernatants were collected and spin infected into Jurkat T cells by centrifugation at 800 g for 30 min in the presence of 8 µg / ml polybrene . T cell stimulation Mouse CD3 + T cells , PBLs , and Jurkat T cells were stimulated with 10 µg / ml anti - CD3 ( OKT3 for human ; 145 - 2C11 for mouse ) / 2 µg / ml CD28 and secondary goat or hamster IgG antibody ( 5 µg / ml ) for the times indicated in the text . In some cases , T cells were stimulated by 25 µg / ml anti - CD3 / 2 µg / ml CD28 with or without ICAM - 1 – coated cov - erslips . For superantigen stimulation , T cells were incubated with 1 µg / ml SEE - pulsed Raji B cells or 1 µg / ml SEB - pulsed mouse CD19 + B cells . For OVA stimulation , CD4 + and CD8 + T cells isolated from spleens of OTII TCR + / TAGLN2 + / + ,  /  and OTI TCR + / TAGLN2 + / + ,  /  mice , respectively , were cultured with T cell – depleted splenocytes pulsed with 10 µg / ml of OVA 323 – 339 ( OTII ) and OVA 257 – 264 ( OTI ) for 24 h . Western blot and Northern blot analysis Cells or homogenized tissues from a C57BL / 6 mouse were lysed in ice - cold lysis buffer ( 50 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 4 , containing 150 mM NaCl , 1 % Triton X - 100 , one tablet of Complete protease inhibitors , and phosphatase inhibitors ) for 1 h on ice . Cell lysates were centrifuged at 16 , 000 g for on O c t obe r 11 , 2015 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 13 , 2015 159 TAGln2 stabilizes actin filaments • na et al . The cells were fixed , washed with PBS , and permeabilized with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 in PBS for 10 min . The cells were then blocked with 1 % BSA in PBS for 1 h , rinsed with PBS , and incubated with primary antibodies in blocking buffer overnight at 4°C . Secondary antibodies were added after washing , incubated for 1 h at room temperature in the dark , rinsed with PBS , and in - cubated for 30 min at room temperature with TRITC - phalloidin or Alexa Fluor 647 – phalloidin in PBS to stain actin . The cells were then washed and mounted with Fluorescent Mounting Medium ( Dako ) . Images were ob - tained using a 100× , NA 1 . 40 oil immersion objective of a laser - scanning confocal microscope ( FV1000 ) . For the 3D localization assay , z stacks were generated from optical sections taken at 0 . 2 - µm intervals , and FLUOVIEW program and Volocity software ( PerkinElmer ) were used for 3D image reconstruction . Image analysis The fluorescence intensity profiles were measured by the FLUOVIEW program . To determine the percentage of F - actin ring formation on anti - CD3 / 28 – coated coverslips , actin rings were assessed as ring ( R ) , partial ( P ) , and not cleared ( N ) and quantified using the following equation : per - centage of actin ring formation = ( R + P ) / ( R + P + N ) × 100 . Actin accumu - lation at the contact sites in the T cells during IS formation was calculated as the ratio between the mean fluorescence intensity of LifeAct in the half portion of contact side ( a ) and distal side ( b ) in the T cells . At least 50 – 100 cells or conjugates were counted in each of three independent experi - ments . All data were plotted using KaleidaGraph ( Synergy Software ) . Cell adhesion assay 96 - well flat - bottom plates ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) were coated with human or mouse rICAM - 1 - Fc ( R & D Systems ) or 1 % BSA ( Sigma - Aldrich ) as a negative control . Cells were labeled with 0 . 5 µM BCECF ( 2  , 7  - bis - ( 2 - carboxyethyl ) - 5 - ( and - 6 ) - carboxyfluorescein ; Invitrogen ) , washed , resuspended in culture media , and then pretreated with or without 10 µg / ml TS1 / 18 or 2 µM Cyt D . For TCR stimulation , cells were incu - bated for 30 min at 37°C in media supplemented with anti - CD3 / CD28 antibodies . T cells were added in triplicate to coated plates ( 10 5 cells / well ) containing secondary anti - IgG as a cross - linker and incubated for 30 min at 37°C . Input was determined by using a fluorescence plate reader ( Molecular Devices ) . Unbound cells were removed by washing three times with warm PBS , and cell adhesion was calculated by divid - ing the fluorescence emission of bound cells by the total emission of all cells seeded per well . Conjugation assay Jurkat T cells and Raji B cells were stained with CellTracker Orange CMTMR ( 5 - ( and - 6 ) - ( ( 4 - chloromethyl ) benzoyl ) amino ) and Green CMFDA ( 5 - chloromethylfluorescein diacetate ) , respectively , according to the manufacturer’s protocol ( Invitrogen ) . Raji B cells ( 2 × 10 5 ) were incu - bated with 5 µg / ml SEE or vehicle control for 30 min , washed , and resuspended in RPMI 1640 medium . For a blocking experiment , Jurkat T cells were incubated with TS1 / 18 , TS2 / 4 ( 10 µg / ml each ) , and Cyt D ( 2 µM ) for 30 min . For conjugation , equal volumes of B and T cells were mixed and incubated at 37°C for indicated time points . The relative proportion of orange , green , and orange – green events in each tube was determined by two - color flow cytometry using a FACSCanto instrument ( BD ) and analyzed with FlowJo software ( Tree Star ) . The number of gated events counted per sample was at least 20 , 000 . The percentage of con - jugated T cells was determined as the number of dual - labeled ( CMFDA and CMTMR positive ) events divided by the number of CMFDA - positive T cells . Mouse CD3 + T cells and SEB - loaded CD19 + B cells conjugates were also stained , incubated , and determined as described as described in Jurkat T cell – Raji B cell conjugation assay . In cytotoxic T cell – target cell conjugation assay , CD8 + T cells from OTI TCR + / TAGLN2 + / + or OTI TCR + / TAGLN2  /  mice were stimulated in vitro by OVA 257 – 264 peptide - loaded DCs in the presence of 10 U / ml rIL - 2 to generate OVA - specific cytotoxic T cells . 2 d after stimulation , cells were washed and seeded into new media daily for 3 – 6 d . OVA - specific cytotoxic T cells were purified by MACS beads , and mixed with EL4 cells , which were used as target cells , loaded with 10 µg / ml OVA 257 – 264 peptide for 1 h . Conjugates were determined as described in the previ - ous paragraph . Purification of recombinant proteins Expression of recombinant proteins in Escherichia coli BL21 ( DE3 ) cells fol - lowed the protocol used for transformation of the aforementioned recombi - nant plasmids . Expression of recombinant proteins was induced by addition of 0 . 3 mM IPTG to culture media for 4 h at 37°C , and then , cells were collected . 25 min at 4°C , and the supernatant was eluted with SDS sample buffer ( 100 mM Tris - HCl , pH 6 . 8 , 4 % SDS , and 20 % glycerol with bromophenol blue ) and heated for 5 min . The proteins were separated through 10 – 12 % SDS - PAGE gels and were transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane by means of Trans - Blot SD semidry transfer cell ( Bio - Rad Laboratories ) . The membrane was blocked in 5 % skim milk ( 1 h ) , rinsed , and incubated with intended antibodies in TBS containing 0 . 1 % Tween 20 ( TBS - T ) and 3 % skim milk overnight . Excess primary antibody was then removed by washing the membrane four times in TBS - T . The membrane was then incubated with 0 . 1 µg / ml peroxidase - labeled secondary antibody ( anti – rabbit or – mouse ) for 1 . 5 h . After three washes with TBS - T , bands were visualized by Western Blotting Detection reagents ( iNtRON Biotechnology ) and were then exposed to x - ray film . For Northern blot analysis , human Northern RNA blot ( 12 major tissues ; OriGene ) was hybridized with TAGLN2 ( 5  - GCTGAGCGCTAT - GGCATTAACACCACTGAC - 3  ) and  - actin ( 5  - GGGAAATCGTGCGT - GACATTAAGGAGAAGC - 3  ) cDNAs as probes labeled with  - [ 32 P ] dCTP ( PerkinElmer ) by random priming using the Prime - It kit ( Agilent Technolo - gies ) , according to the manufacturer’s protocol . Blots were prehybridized for 30 – 60 min at 68°C in Rapid - hyb buffer ( GE Healthcare ) and hybrid - ized for 90 min at 68°C in the presence of cDNA probes , following the protocol provided . Blots were washed three times in 2× SSC / 0 . 05 % SDS at room temperature for 10 min and twice in 0 . 1× SSC / 0 . 1 % SDS at 68°C for 5 min then exposed to x - ray film with intensifying screens at  70°C . RT - PCR and real - time qPCR Total RNA was isolated from cells or homogenized tissues of C57BL / 6 mice with TRI Reagent ( Molecular Research Center , Inc . ) and reverse transcribed using RT Premix ( iNtRON Biotechnology ) . PCR was per - formed with the following primers ( the respective forward and reverse pairs are indicated ) : human IL2 , 5  - CACGTCTTGCACTTGTCAC - 3  and 5  - CCTTCTTGGGCATGTAAAACT - 3  ; mouse IL2 , 5  - TGAGCAGGAT - GGAGAATTACAGG - 3  and 5  - GTCCAAGTTCATCTTCTAGGCAC - 3  ; human GAPDH , 5  - CGGAGTCAACGGATTTGGTCGTAT - 3  and 5  - AGC - CTTCTCCATGGTGGTGAAGAC - 3  ; mouse GAPDH , 5  - GCACAGTCA - AGGCCGAGAAT - 3  and 5  - GCCTTCTCCATGGTGGTGAA - 3  ; and mouse TAGLN2 , 5  - GGTGCAGCAGAAGATTGAGAA - 3  and 5  - GAT - CTTCTTTACTGGGGCCTG - 3  . The amplification protocol consisted of denaturation at 94°C for 30 s , annealing at 60 – 62°C for 20 s , and ex - tension at 72°C for 40 s . The 30 cycles were preceded by denaturation at 72°C for 7 min . The expression levels of the human and mouse IL2 genes were evaluated by real - time RT - PCR , unless otherwise indicated . PCR amplification was performed in StepOne Real - Time PCR Systems ( Applied Biosystems ) for continuous fluorescence detection in a total vol - ume of 10 µl of cDNA / control and gene - specific primers by using SYBR Premix Ex Taq ( Takara Bio Inc . ) . The mRNA levels of the target genes , relative to GAPDH , were normalized using the following formula : relative mRNA expression = 2  (  Ct of target gene   Ct of GAPDH ) , where Ct is the threshold cycle value . In each sample , the expression of the analyzed gene was normalized to that of GAPDH and described as the mRNA level relative to GAPDH . Live imaging For dynamic T cell imaging , J - GFP and J - TG2 _ GFP cells were transiently transfected with LifeAct ( mCherry ) by using Amaxa ( Lonza ) and plated on coverslips ( 18 - nm diameter ; Marienfeld ) coated with human anti - CD3 / 28 . After preincubation , time - lapse series of randomly selected , LifeAct - positive cells in imaging medium ( 137 mM NaCl , 5 mM KCl , 1 mM sodium phosphate , 6 mM d - glucose , 1 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 5 mM MgCl 2 , 1 % BSA , and 10 mM Hepes , pH 7 . 3 ) at 37°C were imaged using a 100× , NA 1 . 40 oil immersion objective of a laser - scanning confocal microscope ( FV1000 ; Olympus ) . Images from the bottom area of each coverslip were recorded every 20 s for a total of 1 , 000 s . For F - actin accumulation at T cell – B cell contact sites , SEE - loaded Raji B cells ( stained for ICAM - 1 with cy5 - conjugated CBRIC1 / 11 ) were mixed with T cells and preincubated in solution for 10 min . After incubation , conju - gated cells were placed on PLL - coated coverslips and initiated imaging . Time - lapse and z - stack images were collected every 10 min , for a total of 120 min at 37°C . The data were obtained , processed , and analyzed by FLUOVIEW software ( Olympus ) . Immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy For immunofluorescence staining , T cells were incubated for 5 min or indicated times on PLL or human or mouse anti - CD3 / 28 – coated coverslips . CHO - K1 cells were incubated for 2 h on 10 µg / ml fibronectin - coated coverslips . on O c t obe r 11 , 2015 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 13 , 2015 JCB • volume 209 • numBer 1 • 2015 160 Visualization of actin filaments by confocal microscopy 4 µM G - actin was incubated with APB in the presence or absence of 8 µM TAGLN2 conjugated with Dylight488 ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) for 30 min at room temperature . One - tenth of the reaction volume was subsequently stained with TRITC - phalloidin and placed on a PLL - coated coverslip . In some cases , G - actin was exchanged with 4 µM 488 - actin ( Hypermol ) , and mixed with TAGLN2 ( 0 – 8 µM ) and cofilin ( 0 – 1 µM ) on coverslips coated by N - ethylmaleimide – myosin II . The fluorescent images were collected using confocal microscopy . EM analysis Negative staining was used to visualize F - actin under EM . After actin po - lymerization , the samples were loaded onto cooper grids coated with For - mvar and carbon for 30 s and excess liquid was removed with filter paper . Actin bound on the grids was stained with 1 % uranyl acetate ( Sigma - Aldrich ) for 10 min and then washed with distilled water . Excess liquid was removed , and grids were air dried . EM observation was performed using a transmission electron microscope ( TECNAI G2 ; FEI ) operated at 120 kV . Determination of cellular F - actin content Jurkat T cells or mouse T cells were maintained in serum - free medium for 12 h and incubated with anti - CD3 / 28 for the indicated times at 37°C . The reactions were terminated by adding 4 % paraformaldehyde . Fixed cells were washed once with PBS and resuspended in PBS containing 1 % BSA and 0 . 25 % Triton X - 100 for 5 min . After permeabilization , cells were washed , stained for 30 min with TRITC - phalloidin , and then analyzed by flow cytometry . Structural modeling of TAGLN2 The crystal structure of human TAGLN1 was used as a template to superim - pose a TAGLN2 monomer on each of two TAGLN1 molecules using the online server SuperPose ( Maiti et al . , 2004 ) . In addition , the prediction of a TAGLN2 homodimer was performed computationally by the ClusPro on - line server , and the same interface was observed as for the TAGLN1 tem - plate . Interactions of the TAGLN2 homodimer were analyzed by University of California , San Francisco Chimera and Discovery Studio Visualizer soft - ware ( Accelrys Software , Inc . ) and optimized by virtual inspection to over - come the steric hindrances . Detection of cell surface proteins and intracellular granzyme B and perforin Jurkat T cells , mouse splenocytes , T cells , B cells , and DCs were suspended in PBS containing 2 % FBS . Cells were stained with fluorescence - conjugated antibodies against human CD3 -  , CD28 , LFA - 1 , ICAM - 1 , and mouse CD4 , CD8 , CD3 -  , CD28 , B220 , CD11c , MHCII , CD86 , and CD80 for 30 min at 4°C . The corresponding isotype controls were used in each antibodies . For intracellular granzyme B and perforin staining , OVA - specific cytotoxic T cells were restimulated with 200 nM PMA and 1 µM ionomycin for 4 h at 37°C . Brefeldin A was added during the last 2 h of restimulation . Cells were stained with anti - CD8 , and then fixed , permeabilized , and stained with antibodies specific for granzyme B and perforin ( eBioscience ) . Cells were acquired on a FACSCanto , and data were analyzed with FlowJo software . Measurement of secretion of cytokines and granzyme B Splenic CD3 + , CD4 + , or CD8 + T cells ( 5 × 10 4 cells / sample ) were stimu - lated as described in T cell activation section . After 24 – 48 h , the amounts of IL - 2 and IFN -  in the supernatants were determined by ELISA with Duo Set Mouse ELISA kits ( R & D Systems ) . To measure granzyme B secretion , OVA - specific cytotoxic T cells generated previously described in Conjuga - tion assay section were restimulated with EL4 cells loaded with 10 µg / ml OVA 257 – 264 at a 20 : 1 ( effector cells / target cells ) ratio for 4 h . The amounts of granzyme B in the supernatants were determined by ELISA . T cell proliferation assay CD4 + and CD8 + T cells were labeled for 30 min at 37°C with 10 µM CFSE ( Molecular Probe ) and washed twice in PBS . Labeled T cells were stimu - lated with anti - CD3 / 28 antibodies . After 72 h , T cells were collected and analyzed by flow cytometry for dilution of CFSE intensity . In vitro cytotoxic assay For the in vitro cytotoxic T cell activity assay , OVA - specific T cells were gener - ated and incubated with target cells described in Measurement of secretion of cytokines and granzyme B section at various ratios of effector cells to tar - get cells . After 4 h , cell - mediated cytotoxicity was determined using CytoTox 96 NonRadioactive cytotoxicity assay kit ( Promega ) , and the percentage of cytotoxicity was calculated according to manufacturer’s instructions . The cell pellets were resuspended in PBS , sonicated , and centrifuged . After centrifugation , recombinant proteins in the supernatant were puri - fied by affinity chromatography on a His - selected Nickel Affinity Gel ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . The gel was equilibrated with 10 volumes of buffer ( 50 mM sodium phosphate , pH 8 . 0 , and 0 . 3 M NaCl ) and incubated with the supernatant . The gel was washed with 5 volumes of wash buffer ( 50 mM sodium phosphate , pH 8 . 0 , 0 . 3 M NaCl , and 10 mM imidazole ) . The pro - tein was eluted with increasing concentrations of imidazole up to 250 mM , and the collected fractions were dialyzed to remove imidazole . The pro - teins were assessed by SDS - PAGE and Coomassie blue staining . In vitro actin cosedimentation assays Actin cosedimentation assays were performed as described previously ( Kwon et al . , 2013 ) . Nonmuscle actin derived from human platelets was purchased ( Cytoskeleton , Inc . ) . Unless otherwise indicated , actin was used at a final concentration of 4 µM . Actin was mixed in G buffer ( 0 . 2 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 2 mM ATP , and 5 mM Tris - HCl , pH 8 . 0 ) to produce an actin stock . Actin was polymerized in APB ( 50 mM KCl , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 2 mM ATP , and 5 mM Tris - HCl , pH 8 . 0 ) at room temperature for 1 h and then incubated with His - tagged TAGLN2 ( 8 – 24 µM ) for 30 min at room temperature . 1 µM  - ac - tinin and 1 µM BSA were used as positive and negative controls . Actin fila - ments with bound proteins were pelleted by centrifugation at 100 , 000 g for 2 h ( for the F - actin binding assay ) or 10 , 000 g for 10 min ( for the F - actin bundling assay ) at room temperature . Equal amounts of pellet and superna - tant were resolved using SDS - PAGE , and proteins were visualized by Coo - massie blue staining . The percentage of actin in supernatant and pellet was quantified densitometrically using ImageJ ( National Institutes of Health ) . Quantification of binding data Quantitation of actin binding affinity was performed as previously de - scribed ( Kwon et al . , 2013 ) . In brief , the intensity ratio of recombinant pro - tein to F - actin in each pellet was converted to a molar ratio ( TAGLN2 / actin ) using standard curves run on each gel that contained known amounts of TAGLN2 ( 0 . 4 – 5 . 6 µM ) and actin ( 4 µM ) in molar / molar ratios . Cosedi - mentation binding data were plotted as a function of the free TAGLN2 concentration added and fitted according to the equation : [ C bound ] / [ actin ] = B max [ C free ] / K d + [ C free ] , where [ C bound ] and [ C free ] are the bound and free concentrations of TAGLN2 , [ actin ] is the total actin concentration , B max is the maximal molar binding ratio , and K d is the dissociation constant ( micro - molars ) . Data were fit using the Excel Solver package ( Microsoft ) by vary - ing the values of B max and K d and minimizing the sum of squares between the actual and predicted binding ratios . Actin polymerization assay Actin polymerization assays were performed using the Actin Polymeriza - tion Biochem kit ( Cytoskeleton , Inc . ) in which the rate of conversion of pyrene - labeled G - actin into F - actin was monitored . In brief , pyrene - labeled G - actin was thawed at 4°C and centrifuged at 14 , 000 g for 30 min at 4°C to remove residual F - actin . Unless otherwise indicated , 4 µM G - actin , 10 nM bovine brain Arp2 / 3 complex ( Cytoskeleton , Inc . ) , recombinant human GST - tagged VCA domain of WASp ( 400 nM ; Cytoskeleton , Inc . ) , and His - tagged TAGLN2 ( 4 µM ) were used for polymerization assay . Actin polymerization was initiated by adding G - actin stock to the wells with APB and target proteins . The plate was read with a fluorometer ( GEMINI XS ; Molecular Probe ) , with excitation at 355 nm and emission at 405 nm . Fluorescence data were zeroed by subtracting baseline fluorescence from all fluorescence values and normalized by dividing all fluorescence values by the mean fluorescence of at the plateau . Actin depolymerization assay For monitoring actin filament disassembly , 20 µM pyrene G - actin was polymerized in APB for 1 h in the presence or absence of various concen - trations of TAGLN2 or phalloidin ( 20 µM ; Cytoskeleton , Inc . ) . Reactants were then diluted to 4 µM with G - actin buffer to induce spontaneous depolymerization . In the case of cofilin - mediated depolymerization , 1 µM cofilin ( Cytoskeleton , Inc . ) in G - buffer was added to F - actin reactants during the dilution step . Decreasing pyrene fluorescence was measured as in the actin polymerization assay . Normalization for fluorescence in - tensity was performed by dividing fluorescence value of reactants with fluorescence value of the reactant in the presence of phalloidin at each time point . Changes in fluorescence intensity (  F ) during depolymeriza - tion were calculated by subtracting the fluorescence measured at last time point from the fluorescence measured at initial time point . Changes of each sample (  F of TAGLN2 or TAGLN2 + cofilin ) were subsequently divided by  F of cofilin . on O c t obe r 11 , 2015 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 13 , 2015 161 TAGln2 stabilizes actin filaments • na et al . 1998 . Expression and cytogenetic localization of the human SM22 gene ( TAGLN ) . Genomics . 49 : 452 – 457 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1006 / geno . 1998 . 5267 Chaffin , K . E . , C . R . Beals , T . M . Wilkie , K . A . Forbush , M . I . Simon , and R . M . Perlmutter . 1990 . Dissection of thymocyte signaling pathways by in vivo expression of pertussis toxin ADP - ribosyltransferase . EMBO J . 9 : 3821 – 3829 . Delon , J . , K . Kaibuchi , and R . N . Germain . 2001 . Exclusion of CD43 from the immunological synapse is mediated by phosphorylation - regulated reloca - tion of the cytoskeletal adaptor moesin . Immunity . 15 : 691 – 701 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1074 - 7613 ( 01 ) 00231 - X Eibert , S . M . , K . - H . Lee , R . Pipkorn , U . Sester , G . H . Wabnitz , T . Giese , S . C . Meuer , and Y . Samstag . 2004 . Cofilin peptide homologs interfere with immunological synapse formation and T cell activation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 101 : 1957 – 1962 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0308282100 Freiberg , B . A . , H . Kupfer , W . Maslanik , J . Delli , J . Kappler , D . M . Zaller , and A . Kupfer . 2002 . Staging and resetting T cell activation in SMACs . Nat . Immunol . 3 : 911 – 917 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ni836 Glenney , J . R . , Jr . , P . Kaulfus , P . Matsudaira , and K . Weber . 1981 . F - actin bind - ing and bundling properties of fimbrin , a major cytoskeletal protein of microvillus core filaments . J . Biol . Chem . 256 : 9283 – 9288 . Gomez , T . S . , K . Kumar , R . B . Medeiros , Y . Shimizu , P . J . Leibson , and D . D . Billadeau . 2007 . Formins regulate the actin - related protein 2 / 3 complex - independent polarization of the centrosome to the immunological synapse . Immunity . 26 : 177 – 190 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . immuni . 2007 . 01 . 008 Gordón - Alonso , M . , M . Sala - Valdés , V . Rocha - Perugini , D . Pérez - Hernández , S . López - Martín , A . Ursa , S . Alvarez , T . V . Kolesnikova , J . Vázquez , F . Sánchez - Madrid , and M . Yáñez - Mó . 2012 . EWI - 2 association with  - actinin regulates T cell immune synapses and HIV viral infection . J . Immunol . 189 : 689 – 700 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 1103708 Grakoui , A . , S . K . Bromley , C . Sumen , M . M . Davis , A . S . Shaw , P . M . Allen , and M . L . Dustin . 1999 . The immunological synapse : a molecular ma - chine controlling T cell activation . Science . 285 : 221 – 227 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 285 . 5425 . 221 Han , M . , L . - H . Dong , B . Zheng , J . - H . Shi , J . - K . Wen , and Y . Cheng . 2009 . Smooth muscle 22 alpha maintains the differentiated phenotype of vascu - lar smooth muscle cells by inducing filamentous actin bundling . Life Sci . 84 : 394 – 401 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . lfs . 2008 . 11 . 017 Higgs , H . N . , and T . D . Pollard . 2001 . Regulation of actin filament network forma - tion through ARP2 / 3 complex : activation by a diverse array of proteins . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 70 : 649 – 676 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev . biochem . 70 . 1 . 649 Huang , Y . , and J . K . Burkhardt . 2007 . T - cell - receptor - dependent actin regula - tory mechanisms . J . Cell Sci . 120 : 723 – 730 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 000786 Ichetovkin , I . , W . Grant , and J . Condeelis . 2002 . Cofilin produces newly po - lymerized actin filaments that are preferred for dendritic nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 12 : 79 – 84 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0960 - 9822 ( 01 ) 00629 - 7 Kim , J . , M . J . Shapiro , A . O . Bamidele , P . Gurel , P . Thapa , H . N . Higgs , K . E . Hedin , V . S . Shapiro , and D . D . Billadeau . 2014 . Coactosin - like 1 an - tagonizes cofilin to promote lamellipodial protrusion at the immune synapse . PLoS ONE . 9 : e85090 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0085090 Kwon , M . - S . , K . R . Park , Y . - D . Kim , B . - R . Na , H . - R . Kim , H . - J . Choi , I . Piragyte , H . Jeon , K . H . Chung , W . K . Song , et al . 2013 . Swiprosin - 1 is a novel actin bundling protein that regulates cell spreading and migration . PLoS ONE . 8 : e71626 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0071626 Larghi , P . , D . J . Williamson , J . - M . Carpier , S . Dogniaux , K . Chemin , A . Bohineust , L . Danglot , K . Gaus , T . Galli , and C . Hivroz . 2013 . VAMP7 controls T cell activation by regulating the recruitment and phosphoryla - tion of vesicular Lat at TCR - activation sites . Nat . Immunol . 14 : 723 – 731 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ni . 2609 Li , M . , S . Li , Z . Lou , X . Liao , X . Zhao , Z . Meng , M . Bartlam , and Z . Rao . 2008 . Crystal structure of human transgelin . J . Struct . Biol . 162 : 229 – 236 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2008 . 01 . 005 Lub , M . , Y . van Kooyk , S . J . van Vliet , and C . G . Figdor . 1997 . Dual role of the actin cytoskeleton in regulating cell adhesion mediated by the integrin lymphocyte function - associated molecule - 1 . Mol . Biol . Cell . 8 : 341 – 351 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . 8 . 2 . 341 Maiti , R . , G . H . Van Domselaar , H . Zhang , and D . S . Wishart . 2004 . SuperPose : a simple server for sophisticated structural superposi - tion . Nucleic Acids Res . 32 ( Suppl . 2 ) : W590 – W594 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / nar / gkh477 McCullough , B . R . , E . E . Grintsevich , C . K . Chen , H . Kang , A . L . Hutchison , A . Henn , W . Cao , C . Suarez , J . - L . Martiel , L . Blanchoin , et al . 2011 . Cofilin - linked changes in actin filament flexibility promote severing . Biophys . J . 101 : 151 – 159 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2011 . 05 . 049 Retroviral transduction in mouse T cells Before retroviral transduction , mouse CD3 + T cells from TAGLN2 + / + and TAGLN2  /  mice were incubated in 10 µg / ml anti - CD3 – coated coverslips with 2 µg / ml anti - CD28 and 10 µg / ml rIL - 2 for 48 h . A total of 6 × 10 6 retroviral packaging cells ( platinum - E cells ; Cell Biolabs ) were plated overnight in 10 - cm 2 dishes . Retroviral particles were generated by trans - fection with retroviral vectors ( empty vector , TG2 , and TG2  ABM ) and pCL - Eco packaging vector using Lipofectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen ) . After 48 h , virus supernatants ( 1 ml ) were harvested , mixed with 10 6 mouse T cells and polybrene ( 8 µg / ml ) in a 12 - well plate and centrifuged for 90 min at 2 , 000 g at 32°C with 20 U / ml rIL - 2 . The transduced T cells were main - tained with fresh media with rIL - 2 and expanded for 5 – 8 d . Statistics Mean values were calculated using data taken from at least three indepen - dent experiments conducted on different days . Where significance testing was performed , unpaired Student’s t tests and one - way analysis of vari - ance tests were used . Differences between groups were considered signifi - cant at P < 0 . 05 . Online supplemental material Fig . S1 shows that TAGLN2 is expressed in immunogenic tissues and cells and knockdown of TAGLN2 reduces T cell activation . Fig . S2 , which cor - responds to Fig . 1 F , shows individual z - stack images acquired as opti - cal sections from bottom to top . Fig . S3 shows the strategy to generate TAGLN2 knockout mice and characterization of their population , develop - ment , and expression of indicated surface molecules . Fig . S4 shows the strategy to generate GFP - T or TG2 _ GFP - T transgenic mice and charac - terization of their T cell development and cytokine secretion in response to TCR activation . Fig . S5 shows the cellular concentrations of TAGLN2 , cofilin , and actin , as determined by quantitative Western blotting . Video 1 , corresponding to Fig . 1 E , shows a 3D view of TAGLN2 _ GFP and ICAM - 1 localization at the contact site of Jurkat T cells and Raji B cells . Videos 2 – 4 , corresponding to Fig . 1 F , show localization of TAGLN2 , Arp3 , myosin IIA , and F - actin in Jurkat T cells placed on anti - CD3 / 28 – coated coverslips . Videos 5 and 6 , corresponding to Fig . 2 A , show real - time F - actin ring formation and dynamic localization of TAGLN2 and actin during J - GFP or J - TG2 _ GFP cell spreading on anti - CD3 / 28 – coated coverslips . Videos 7 and 8 , corresponding to Fig . 8 B , show colocalization of cofilin , TAGLN2 , and F - actin in Jurkat T cells placed on anti - CD3 / 28 – coated coverslips . Online supplemental material is available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 201407130 / DC1 . Image acquisition was performed using the imaging facility of the Bio - Imaging Research Center at the Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology ( GIST ) . This work was supported by the Bio & Medical Technology Devel - opment Program ( 2011 - 0030157 ) , Basic Science Research Program ( 2012R1A2A1A03002115 ) , Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea funded by the Ministry of Education ( 2013R1A6A3A04064259 ) , and Cell Dynamics Research Center Program ( 2007 - 0056244 ) through the National Research Foundation grants funded by the Ministry of Science , ICT ( Imagination , Creativity , and Science Technology ) and Future Planning , Korea . This work was also partially supported by the Bio - Imaging Research Center at GIST . The authors declare no competing financial interests . Submitted : 28 July 2014 Accepted : 27 February 2015 References Babich , A . , S . Li , R . S . O’Connor , M . C . Milone , B . D . Freedman , and J . K . Burkhardt . 2012 . F - actin polymerization and retrograde flow drive sus - tained PLC  1 signaling during T cell activation . J . Cell Biol . 197 : 775 – 787 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201201018 Blanchoin , L . , K . J . Amann , H . N . Higgs , J . B . Marchand , D . A . Kaiser , and T . D . Pollard . 2000 . Direct observation of dendritic actin filament networks nu - cleated by Arp2 / 3 complex and WASP / Scar proteins . Nature . 404 : 1007 – 1011 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 35010008 Burn , P . , A . Kupfer , and S . J . Singer . 1988 . Dynamic membrane - cytoskeletal in - teractions : specific association of integrin and talin arises in vivo after phorbol ester treatment of peripheral blood lymphocytes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 85 : 497 – 501 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 85 . 2 . 497 Camoretti - Mercado , B . , S . M . Forsythe , M . M . LeBeau , R . Espinosa III , J . E . Vieira , A . J . Halayko , S . Willadsen , B . Kurtz , C . Ober , G . A . Evans , et al . on O c t obe r 11 , 2015 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 13 , 2015 JCB • volume 209 • numBer 1 • 2015 162 Monks , C . R . , B . A . Freiberg , H . Kupfer , N . Sciaky , and A . Kupfer . 1998 . Three - dimensional segregation of supramolecular activation clusters in T cells . Nature . 395 : 82 – 86 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 25764 Mori , K . , Y . Muto , J . Kokuzawa , T . Yoshioka , S . Yoshimura , T . Iwama , Y . Okano , and N . Sakai . 2004 . Neuronal protein NP25 interacts with F - actin . Neurosci . Res . 48 : 439 – 446 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neures . 2003 . 12 . 012 Moriyama , K . , K . Iida , and I . Yahara . 1996 . Phosphorylation of Ser - 3 of cofilin regulates its essential function on actin . Genes Cells . 1 : 73 – 86 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1046 / j . 1365 - 2443 . 1996 . 05005 . x Pruyne , D . , M . Evangelista , C . Yang , E . Bi , S . Zigmond , A . Bretscher , and C . Boone . 2002 . Role of formins in actin assembly : nucleation and barbed - end asso - ciation . Science . 297 : 612 – 615 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1072309 Rho , J . - H . , M . H . A . Roehrl , and J . Y . Wang . 2009 . Tissue proteomics reveals dif - ferential and compartment - specific expression of the homologs transgelin and transgelin - 2 in lung adenocarcinoma and its stroma . J . Proteome Res . 8 : 5610 – 5618 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / pr900705r Rothlein , R . , and T . A . Springer . 1986 . The requirement for lymphocyte function - associated antigen 1 in homotypic leukocyte adhesion stimulated by phorbol ester . J . Exp . Med . 163 : 1132 – 1149 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1084 / jem . 163 . 5 . 1132 Sampath , R . , P . J . Gallagher , and F . M . Pavalko . 1998 . Cytoskeletal interactions with the leukocyte integrin beta2 cytoplasmic tail . Activation - dependent regulation of associations with talin and alpha - actinin . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 33588 – 33594 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . 273 . 50 . 33588 Samstag , Y . , S . M . Eibert , M . Klemke , and G . H . Wabnitz . 2003 . Actin cytoskel - etal dynamics in T lymphocyte activation and migration . J . Leukoc . Biol . 73 : 30 – 48 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1189 / jlb . 0602272 Shapland , C . , J . J . Hsuan , N . F . Totty , and D . Lawson . 1993 . Purification and properties of transgelin : a transformation and shape change sensitive actin - gelling protein . J . Cell Biol . 121 : 1065 – 1073 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 121 . 5 . 1065 Stokes , D . L . , and D . J . DeRosier . 1987 . The variable twist of actin and its modula - tion by actin - binding proteins . J . Cell Biol . 104 : 1005 – 1017 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 104 . 4 . 1005 Stokes , D . L . , and D . J . DeRosier . 1991 . Growth conditions control the size and order of actin bundles in vitro . Biophys . J . 59 : 456 – 465 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0006 - 3495 ( 91 ) 82239 - 1 Tavano , R . , R . L . Contento , S . J . Baranda , M . Soligo , L . Tuosto , S . Manes , and A . Viola . 2006 . CD28 interaction with filamin - A controls lipid raft accumu - lation at the T - cell immunological synapse . Nat . Cell Biol . 8 : 1270 – 1276 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb1492 van der Flier , A . , and A . Sonnenberg . 2001 . Structural and functional aspects of filamins . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 1538 : 99 – 117 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0167 - 4889 ( 01 ) 00072 - 6 Wabnitz , G . H . , G . Nebl , M . Klemke , A . J . Schröder , and Y . Samstag . 2006 . Phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase functions as a Ras effector in the signaling cas - cade that regulates dephosphorylation of the actin - remodeling protein cofilin after costimulation of untransformed human T lymphocytes . J . Immunol . 176 : 1668 – 1674 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 176 . 3 . 1668 Wang , C . , S . C . Morley , D . Donermeyer , I . Peng , W . P . Lee , J . Devoss , D . M . Danilenko , Z . Lin , J . Zhang , J . Zhou , et al . 2010 . Actin - bundling protein L - plastin regulates T cell activation . J . Immunol . 185 : 7487 – 7497 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 1001424 Yi , J . , X . S . Wu , T . Crites , and J . A . Hammer III . 2012 . Actin retrograde flow and actomyosin II arc contraction drive receptor cluster dynamics at the immunological synapse in Jurkat T cells . Mol . Biol . Cell . 23 : 834 – 852 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E11 - 08 - 0731 Yu , Y . , A . A . Smoligovets , and J . T . Groves . 2013 . Modulation of T cell signal - ing by the actin cytoskeleton . J . Cell Sci . 126 : 1049 – 1058 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 098210 Zhang , J . C . L . , B . P . Helmke , A . Shum , K . Du , W . W . Yu , M . M . Lu , P . F . Davies , and M . S . Parmacek . 2002 . SM22  encodes a lineage - restricted cytoskel - etal protein with a unique developmentally regulated pattern of expres - sion . Mech . Dev . 115 : 161 – 166 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0925 - 4773 ( 02 ) 00088 - 6 Zhang , Y . , Y . Ye , D . Shen , K . Jiang , H . Zhang , W . Sun , J . Zhang , F . Xu , Z . Cui , and S . Wang . 2010 . Identification of transgelin - 2 as a biomarker of colorectal cancer by laser capture microdissection and quantitative proteome analysis . Cancer Sci . 101 : 523 – 529 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1349 - 7006 . 2009 . 01424 . x on O c t obe r 11 , 2015 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 13 , 2015