This article appeared in a journal published by Elsevier . The attached copy is furnished to the author for internal non - commercial research and education use , including for instruction at the authors institution and sharing with colleagues . Other uses , including reproduction and distribution , or selling or licensing copies , or posting to personal , institutional or third party websites are prohibited . In most cases authors are permitted to post their version of the article ( e . g . in Word or Tex form ) to their personal website or institutional repository . Authors requiring further information regarding Elsevier’s archiving and manuscript policies are encouraged to visit : http : / / www . elsevier . com / authorsrights Author ' s personal copy Review The Fluid — Mosaic Model of Membrane Structure : Still relevant to understanding the structure , function and dynamics of biological membranes after more than 40 years ☆ , ☆☆ Garth L . Nicolson ⁎ Department of Molecular Pathology , The Institute for Molecular Medicine , Huntington Beach , CA 92649 , USA a b s t r a c t a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 10 July2013 Received inrevised form 8 October 2013 Accepted 18 October 2013 Available online 1 November 2013 Keywords : Membrane model Membrane domains Membrane proteins Membrane lipids Membrane thermodynamics Membrane dynamics In 1972 the Fluid — Mosaic Membrane Model of membrane structure was proposed based on thermodynamic principals of organization ofmembranelipids and proteinsand availableevidenceof asymmetryand lateralmo - bility within the membrane matrix [ S . J . Singer and G . L . Nicolson , Science 175 ( 1972 ) 720 – 731 ] . After over 40 years , thisbasicmodelofthecellmembraneremainsrelevantfordescribingthebasicnano - structuresofava - riety of intracellular and cellular membranes of plant and animal cells and lower forms of life . In the intervening years , however , new information has documented the importance and roles of specialized membrane domains , suchaslipidraftsandprotein / glycoproteincomplexes , indescribingthemacrostructure , dynamicsandfunctions of cellular membranes as well as the roles of membrane - associated cytoskeletal fences and extracellular matrix structures in limiting the lateral diffusion and range of motion of membrane components . These newer data build on the foundation of the original model and add new layers of complexity and hierarchy , but the concepts described in the original model are still applicable today . In updated versions of the model more emphasis has been placed on the mosaic nature of the macrostructure of cellular membranes where many protein and lipid componentsarelimitedintheirrotationalandlateralmotilitiesinthemembraneplane , especiallyintheirnatural stateswherelipid – lipid , protein – proteinandlipid – proteininteractionsaswellascell – matrix , cell – cellandintra - cellular membrane - associated protein and cytoskeletal interactions are important in restraining the lateral mo - tility and range of motion of particular membrane components . The formation of specialized membrane domains and the presence of tightly packed integral membrane protein complexes due to membrane - associated fences , fenceposts and other structures are considered very important in describing membrane dy - namics and architecture . These structures along with membrane - associated cytoskeletal and extracellular struc - turesmaintainthelong - range , non - randommosaicmacro - organizationofmembranes , whilesmallermembrane nano - and submicro - sizeddomains , suchas lipidrafts and protein complexes , are important inmaintaining spe - cialized membrane structures that are in cooperative dynamic ﬂ uxin a crowdedmembrane plane . ThisArticle is Part of a Special Issue Entitled : Membrane Structure and Function : Relevance in the Cell ' s Physiology , Pathology and Therapy . © 2013 The Author . Published by Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . Contents 1 . Introduction : The Fluid — Mosaic Membrane model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1452 2 . Thermodynamic considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1453 3 . Asymmetry of membranes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1454 4 . Three classes of membrane proteins and membrane - associated proteins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1455 5 . Cis and trans - membrane control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1455 Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1838 ( 2014 ) 1451 – 1466 Abbreviations : BAR , the Bin / amphiphysin / Rvs family of lipid - binding molecules ; CIC , chloride channel gene superfamily ; EGF , epidermal growth factor ; F - MMM , Fluid — Mosaic Membrane Model ; FRAP , ﬂ uorescent recovery after photobleaching ; GPI , glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored ; N - WASP , neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ; OLT , optical laser trapping ; PC , phosphatidylcholine ; SPT , single - particle tracking ☆ This Article is Part of a Special Issue Entitled : Membrane Structure and Function : Relevance in the Cell ' s Physiology , Pathologyand Therapy . ☆☆ This is an open - access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use , distribution , and reproduction in any medium , provided the original author and source are credited . ⁎ Fax : + 1 714 596 3791 . E - mail address : gnicolson @ immed . org . URL : http : / / www . immed . org . 0005 - 2736 / $ – see front matter © 2013 The Author . Published by Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbamem . 2013 . 10 . 019 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Biochimica et Biophysica Acta journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / bbamem Author ' s personal copy 6 . Membrane - associated cytoskeletal and extracellular matrix interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1455 7 . Protein – protein interactions within membranes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1457 8 . Protein – lipid interactions within membranes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1458 9 . Lipid – lipid interactions within membranes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1458 10 . Different forms of mobility restriction in membranes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1459 11 . Hierarchical membrane structures and the Fluid — Mosaic Membrane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1461 12 . The revised Fluid — Mosaic Membrane Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1462 13 . Future directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1463 Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1463 References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1463 1 . Introduction : The Fluid — Mosaic Membrane model When the Fluid — Mosaic Membrane Model ( F - MMM ) of biological membrane structure was ﬁ rst introduced in 1972 , it was envisioned as abasicframeworkmodelforcellmembranes that could explainexisting data on membrane proteinsand lipid structures andtheir dynamicsand help plan and predict future experimental outcomes [ 1 ] . At the time the accepted model for cellular membrane structure was the Unit Mem - brane Model of Robertson [ 2 – 4 ] or Davidson – Danielli Tri - Layer ( protein – lipid – protein ) Model of membrane structure [ 5 ] . The tri - layermembranemodelwasbasedonthelipidbilayerproposalofGorter and Grendel [ 6 ] , with added unfolded protein sheets on either side of a lipid bilayer . Later some trans - membrane protein components were added to reconcile observations on intramembranous particles , such as those found by Pinto da Silva and Branton , who freeze fractured cell membranes with surface bound ferritin markers [ 7 ] , and the discovery of trans - membrane proteins ( review : [ 8 ] ) However , the basic Unit model has remained a tri - layer structure with most proteins present in extended forms ( beta con ﬁ gurations ) bound to the lipid bilayer by electrostatic and other hydrophilic forces [ 4 ] . An alternative to the tri - layer models for membrane structure was proposed at the time based on repeating subunits of lipoproteins with - out a supporting lipid bilayer matrix [ 9 , 10 ] . Both the Unit Membrane [ 2 – 4 ] and Subunit Membrane [ 9 , 10 ] Models had certain limitations in explaining existing data on membrane structure [ 1 , 8 ] . These earlier membrane models , with the exception of the F - MMM , also did not take into account the ability of components in membranes to rapidly move laterally and dynamically and change their topographic distribu - tions , which was an important aspect of the F - MMM [ 1 ] . As ﬁ rst proposed , the F - MMM depicted biological membranes as a matrix made up of a mostly ﬂ uid bilayer of phospholipids with mobile globular integralmembrane proteinsand glycoproteinsthat were inter - calated into the ﬂ uid lipid bilayer ( Fig . 1 , 1972 ) [ 1 ] . Con ﬁ rmations of the bilayerstructureofmembranephospholipidsandtheirlateralmotionin the membrane plane have been the subjects of a number of reviews over the years [ 11 – 22 ] . For example , Edidin [ 17 ] reviewed the history of membrane lipid structural proposals over the last century and con - cluded that there has been overwhelming support that membrane phospholipids were indeed present as a bilayer structure . The proposal that intrinsic or integral membrane proteins existed as globular struc - tures that were inserted into a ﬂ uid lipid environment was based on structural and spectroscopic analyses as well as physical measurements of protein rotation and motion in the membrane plane [ 1 , 8 , 23 – 28 ] . Other methods also indicated that ( at least some ) membrane proteins were capable of rapid rotational and lateral movements [ 1 , 17 , 27 – 39 ] . ( Only a few examples are given here ) . Although the F - MMM has been cited as the most successful general model of biological membranes [ 40 ] , it suffered from being accepted lit - erallyas a ‘ one model ﬁ tsall ’ for every cellularmembraneunderall con - ditions . Thus thecriticismscame , mostlyafter20 years or more , that the F - MMM did not provide adequate explanations for every cell mem - brane structure , especially those recently discovered , such as lipid rafts , nor could it adequately explain the dynamics of all membrane components [ 41 – 45 ] . Considering the vast amounts of new data on membranes that have been published since 1972 , these criticisms were valid and understandable . However , I hope to demonstrate that theF - MMM actuallyevolvedfrom theoriginalmodel in 1972 , and with - in a few years alternative forms ( or cartoons ) of the F - MMM did take into account many of the criticisms that came later . As mentioned , most of the revisions to the F - MMM occurred within a few years after its initial introduction [ 30 , 31 ] , whereas most of the criticisms came de - cades after the original proposal . In this review I have used only a few examples to make this point . It is rare that scienti ﬁ c models are not modi ﬁ ed from their original forms to re ﬂ ect new observations or data that were not anticipated when the models were ﬁ rst proposed . That is also the case here . None - theless , it is now widely accepted ( including this author ) that there were limitations of the F - MMM as originally proposed in explaining the mosaic or domain structures present in membranes , especially those membranes found in specialized tissues and cells . Thus I have re - termed the model as the ‘ Fluid — Mosaic Membrane Model ’ to high - light the important role of mosaic , aggregate and domain structures in membranes and the restraints on lateral mobility of many if not most membrane protein components . This designation was done not to re - vise history or justify claims that were never part of the original model ; it was done simply to make the model more consistent with newer information that was not available in 1972 . It also takes into ac - count a more macro - structural view of cellular membranes as apposed to themore limitedsubmicro - structuralviewof theF - MMM asoriginal - ly conceived [ 1 ] . Fig . 1 . TheFluid — MosaicMembraneModelofbiologicalmembranestructure , asoriginally proposedin1972 . Inthis cross - sectionalsubmicro - ornano - sizedstructuralviewof acell membrane the solid bodies with stippled cut surfaces represent globular integral mem - brane proteins , which at intermediate range are randomly distributed in the plane of the membrane . At short range , some integral membrane proteins form speci ﬁ c integral pro - tein complexes , as shown in the ﬁ gure . The ﬁ gure represents integral proteins in a completely ﬂ uid bilayer lipid phase , and it does not contain other membrane - associated structures or membrane domains of different compostions . From Singer and Nicolson [ 1 ] . 1452 G . L . Nicolson / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1838 ( 2014 ) 1451 – 1466 Author ' s personal copy Within a few years after its introduction , it had become obvious that the original F - MMM needed to be modi ﬁ ed or augmented to re ﬂ ect the emerging data on extracellular and intracellular mechanisms that can affect the lateral distributions and movements of plasma membrane components , and especially those that limit the mobility of many mem - brane integral proteins and glycoproteins [ 12 , 30 ] . Thus 1976 elabora - tions of the basic F - MMM ( new cartoons ! ) included the interactions of extracellular matrix and membrane - associated cytoskeletal compo - nents withcellmembranes andtheirpotentialin ﬂ uenceonthemobility and distribution of trans - membrane glycoproteins as well as the possi - bility thatless mobile lipid – proteinor lipid – lipid domainsmightexistin membranes as frozenorsemi - frozenislandsoflessmobilelipidsinasea of ﬂ uidphospholipids ( Fig . 2 , 1976 [ 30 ] ) . As will bediscussed below , the hypothesis that trans - membrane interactions with membrane struc - tures exist and in ﬂ uence their dynamics was important in explaining thecontrols overmembranestructure , componentmobility , and impor - tantly function . Indeed , the more recent discoveries of lipid rafts and specialized membrane domains , membrane - associated ‘ fences ’ and membrane ‘ fenceposts , ’ among other membrane structures , and their possible functions in controlling and restraining membrane component distribution continue this trend . Thus models of cell membranes produced a few years after the F - MMM were much less homogeneous looking than the original F - MMM depiction ( for example , Fig . 2 , 1976 [ 30 ] ) , and they contained additional information not included in the original model , such as protein and lipid aggregations and segregation into domains , cytoskeletal interactions , and extracellular matrix interactions . However , the revised F - MMM car - toons still contain all of thebasic elements of theoriginal F - MMM . These newerconceptsofmembraneregulationandhierarchywillbediscussed laterinthisreview , butthiscontributionshouldnotbeconsideredanex - haustive discussion of the topic . In addition to intracellular and extracellular in ﬂ uences on plasma membrane dynamics , in certain membranes thepackingof components into very compact structures and domains maximized the mosaic na - ture of such membranes . For example , viruses , cell junctions , adhesion sites , lipid rafts , mitochondrial inner membranes and other compact membranous structures possess limited lateral macro - mobility of spe - ci ﬁ c membrane components while still exhibiting the basic microstruc - ture of the F - MMM . This will be considered in later sections of this review . Due to the vast literature on various cellular membranes that could not be carefully considered in a single review it has been neces - sary here to concentrate on cell or plasma membrane structure and function . 2 . Thermodynamic considerations As Singer described in his personal memoir on the history of mem - branemodels [ 46 ] , thelandmarkarticlebyKauzmann [ 47 ] ontheconcept ofhydrophobicinteractionsandtheirimportanceinthethermodynamics of protein structure played a critically important role in the development oftheF - MMM . Thepropensityofhydrophobicstructurestoself - associate to exclude water interactions ( driven entropically by water exclusion ) and the propensity of hydrophilic structures to interact with the aqueous environmentformthethermodynamicbasisfortheformationandstabil - ity of biological membranes . Thus membrane lipids , mainly phospho - lipids , self - assemble with their hydrophobic tails excluding water to form bilayers due to the energy provided by the van der Waals forces and the hydrophobiceffect [ 49 ] . Membrane proteins ( at least the integral or intrinsic proteins , see later sections ) were proposed to be globular in structure , not extended β - sheet - protein structures as proposed in other membrane models [ 2 – 5 ] , and their interactions with membrane lipids were due mainly to hydrophobic forces and much less due to hydrophilic interactions between the lipid head groups and hydrophilic groups on proteins . Thisconceptdidnotprecludeordiminishthesigni ﬁ canceofhy - drophilic interactions between membrane lipids and integral membrane globular proteins . It simply described the relative importance of hydro - phobic interactions in determining the basic microstructure of cell membranes . As globular structures , integral membrane proteins were also pro - posed to be amphipathic with their hydrophobic domains embedded inthehydrophobic interior of the lipid bilayer andoneor twohydrophil - ic domains protruding from the hydrophobic portion of the lipid bilayer into the surrounding aqueous environment [ 1 , 17 , 23 – 25 , 27 – 31 , 46 – 50 ] . Thistypeofbasicmicrostructuralproteinmolecularorganization , aspro - posed in the F - MMM [ 1 ] and previous publications [ 23 , 24 , 49 ] , remains completely consistent with current available evidence [ 1 , 12 , 17 , 23 – 25 , 27 – 31 , 40 – 54 ] . ( Only a few of the many publications that support this basic proposal are cited here ) . Of course , there are also hydrophilic Fig . 2 . A modi ﬁ edschematicversionoftheFluid — MosaicMembraneModelofbiological membrane structure , asproposedin1976 . Inthis version , differentsnapshots intime arerepre - sentedby the two panels . Some integral membrane glycoproteinsare relatively free to diffuse laterallyinthemembrane plane within a ﬂ uid lipid region or domain , whereas othersare “ anchored ” or relativelyimpeded by a cytoskeletal assemblage oran ordered or solid lipid phase . In this scheme , an integral membrane glycoproteincomplex is also being displaced by membrane - associated cytoskeletal components in an energy - dependent process . Although this ﬁ gure suggests some possible integral membrane protein and lipid mobility restraint mechanisms , it does not accurately present the sizes or structures of integral membrane proteins , cytoskeletal structures , polysaccharides , lipids , submicro - or nano - sized domains or membrane - associated cytoskeletal structures or their crowding inthe membrane . From Nicolson [ 30 ] . 1453 G . L . Nicolson / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1838 ( 2014 ) 1451 – 1466 Author ' s personal copy ion channels in membranes that are formed by assemblages of trans - membrane globular proteins [ 46 , 50 – 52 ] . The importance of these in maintaining cellular ionic balance and electrical properties of mem - branes will not be discussed here . Similar to integral membrane proteins , membrane lipids , mainly glycerophospholipids , were proposed in the F - MMM to be arranged in a bilayer [ 1 ] , as originally advanced by Gorter and Grendel [ 6 ] , to prevent the hydrophobic portions of their structures from exposure to aqueous environments [ 1 , 16 – 18 , 21 , 22 , 30 , 31 , 41 , 47 – 49 , 55 ] . There are hundreds of different types of lipids within cells , and most of these are membrane lipids , suggesting that each type of lipid may play a role in determining membrane function , structure , topology and dynamics [ 56 – 59 ] . There are many excellent reviews on the properties of membrane lipids and their roles in specialized mem - brane domains and dynamics [ 16 – 19 , 22 , 23 , 56 – 69 ] , and thus this im - portant topic will not be discussed in detail here . Structures , such as lipid rafts and their role in membrane dynamics and other special - ized membrane structures , will be considered in another section of this review . Glycerophospholipid membrane bilayers deform when confronted with forces lessthan those driven by thehydrophobic effect [ 48 ] . Elastic membrane deformation , such as curvature elasticity , depends on the energies of lipid tilt and splay , which in turn are dependent on lipid composition [ 70 , 71 ] . Thus lipids that support positive spontaneous curvature can reverse the effects of lipids that support negative spontaneous curvature to maintain membrane form , and this differ - ence may be important in membrane fusion , ﬁ ssion and other membrane – membrane interactions . Another thermodynamic consideration of the F - MMM was that since the free energy required to ﬂ ip membrane lipids and proteins across the hydrophobic membrane interior would be substantial , cell membrane ﬂ ip - ﬂ op that could result in symmetric structures should beexceptionallylow [ 1 , 49 ] . Withoutsigni ﬁ cant ﬂ ip - ﬂ op , cellmembrane inner surfaces should be different in protein and lipid composition from their outer surfaces , a point raised and discussed by many reviewers [ 1 , 8 , 12 , 27 , 30 , 31 , 40 , 41 , 49 , 50 ] . This will be considered further in the next section . To accommodate various lipid – protein interactions so that differ - ent lipids and proteins could adjust to each other ' s hydrophobic structures Israelachvili proposed that the F - MMM needed to be re - ﬁ ned to account for these differences [ 41 ] . Elaborating further , Mouritsen and Bloom suggested that sorting of lipids and proteins based on the interactions of hydrophobic regions ( and to a lesser de - gree their hydrophilic interactions ) of these different classes of mol - ecules prevented mismatches between lipids and proteins [ 69 ] . They called this the Mattress Model of lipid – protein interactions in mem - branes , and their purpose was to describe how variations in the hydrophobic parts of lipids and proteins drive associations or hydro - phobic matching between these different classes of membrane com - ponents to prevent membrane distortions [ 69 ] . This will be considered again in a later section . What is new on the thermodynamics of membranes since the F - MMM was introduced is mainly a consideration of the forces ( and molecules ) that govern membrane deformation , curvature , com - pression and expansion [ 68 – 75 ] . For example , proteins that contain BAR ( Bin / amphiphysin / Rvs ) domains that form crescent - shaped α - helical bundles that bind to membranes via electrostatic and hydro - phobic interactions are believed to generate membrane curvature by scaffolding to the surface of the membrane causing it to bend to the curvature of the protein [ 76 ] . Alternatively , there are also proteins that when inserted into a membrane can alter their shape by under - going folding transitions to form α - helices that wedge membrane components , deform the membrane and cause curvature by this de - formation [ 77 ] . These events are likely to be important in the forma - tion of highly specialized membrane vesicles , tubes , spikes and other membrane structures but will not be discussed in detail here . 3 . Asymmetry of membranes The asymmetric nature of cell membranes was known for some time before the F - MMM was published [ 1 , 4 , 8 , 12 ] , and in fact , Bretscher pro - posed that this was one of the ﬁ ve major principles that govern mem - brane structure [ 12 ] . For example , it was known that phospholipids and proteins are asymmetrically distributed between the inner and outer membrane lea ﬂ ets , and there was little ‘ ﬂ ip - ﬂ op ’ from one side to the other , as shown by phospholipase digestion , radiolabelling , mag - netic resonance studies and electron microscopy labeling experiments [ 16 , 30 , 31 , 39 , 40 , 78 – 87 ] . Thuscellmembranesmaintaintheirasymmetry , and for good reason — they must be capable of maintaining an appropri - ate asymmetry between inner and outer membrane enzymes , receptors , phospholipids , oligosaccharides , proteins and other structures . Thus maintainingdifferences between the inside and the outside of cells to fa - cilitate the appropriate display of receptors , adhesion molecules , signal - ing systems , scaffolding structures and other molecules on opposite membrane surfaces is probably a logical structural requirement . Of particular interest around the time of publication of the F - MMM was the repeated ﬁ nding of asymmetric distributions of various phos - pholipids between the inner and outer lea ﬂ ets of cell membranes [ 12 , 56 , 59 , 78 , 85 – 89 ] . At the simplest level one can imagine that the enrichment of amine - and serine - containing phospholipids found on the cytoplasmic surface and choline - containing phospholipids and sphingomyelins on the outer surface of the cell membrane ( which in turn , creates increased af ﬁ nity of cholesterol in the outer bilayer lea ﬂ et ) might have someadvantage in terms of membrane associations of cyto - plasmicproteinsandmaintenanceofenzymaticactivities . However , it is now known that there is a cost to pay for not maintaining appropriate cell membrane asymmetry , and it is not just the appropriate display of enzymes , receptors and other functional components of membranes . Disruption of the normal membrane asymmetry is generally associated with cell activation ( activation of cell adhesion , aggregation , apoptosis , recognition by phagocytic cells , etc . ) , and it can also be associated with pathologic conditions [ 89 ] . Cell membrane lipid asymmetry may also guide membrane curva - ture and other aspects of membrane structure [ 59 , 69 , 73 , 74 , 87 , 88 ] . The compositional differences between the inner and outer lea ﬂ ets of the cell membrane lipid bilayer suggest that the outer lea ﬂ et is curvature neutral , whereas the inner lea ﬂ et may have a preference for negative curvature , or as Zimmerberg and Gawrich state in their review , at the inner surface the polar interface has a smaller lateral area than the hy - drocarbon chain region and thus drives a net curvature to minimize total curvature energy of the bilayer [ 73 ] . It follows that a number of lipid transporters that have been discov - ered are important in maintaining lipid asymmetry , such as cytofacially - directed , ATP - dependent transporters ( ‘ ﬂ ippases ’ ) and exofacially - directed , ATP - independent transporters ( ‘ ﬂ oppases ’ ) , but there are also bidirectional , ATP - independent transporters ( ‘ scramblases ’ ) [ 88 – 90 ] . The existence of several of these phospholipid transporters in maintain - ing the proper phospholipid asymmetries in the cell membrane suggests that maintenance of membrane asymmetry is functionally essential for cells [ 88 – 90 ] . Membrane integral protein asymmetry , on the other hand , is eas - ier to explain ( but certainly no less complex ) and is probably initiat - ed at the time of protein synthesis [ 50 , 51 , 91 , 92 ] . The asymmetries of integral membrane proteins are likely formed during the initial in - sertion of the polypeptide chains into the membrane mediated by translocons , molecular gatekeepers that allow newly synthesized polypeptide chains to pass across or directly integrate into the lipid portions of the membrane [ 91 , 92 ] . Thus in contrast to phospholipids , integral membrane protein asymmetry does not have to be actively maintained after initial biosynthesis . The energy required to ﬂ ip in - tegral globular membrane proteins across a hydrophobic barrier would be enormous , and thus this would be an unlikely and uncom - mon event [ 1 , 49 ] . 1454 G . L . Nicolson / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1838 ( 2014 ) 1451 – 1466 Author ' s personal copy 4 . Three classes of membrane proteins and membrane - associated proteins When the F - MMM was ﬁ rst proposed , it was important to distin - guish between the integral ( or intrinsic ) proteins that were tightly bound to membranes by mainly hydrophobic forces and intercalated into the membrane hydrophobic matrix as apposed to peripheral ( or extrinsic ) proteins that were loosely bound by electrostatic or other non - hydrophobic interactions to hydrophilic regions of membranes [ 1 , 27 , 49 ] . There are numerous examples of both types of membrane proteins , and this has been discussed in more detail elsewhere [ 27 , 50 – 53 , 84 , 87 , 91 ] . Up to now I have mainly discussed integral mem - brane proteins and their importance in de ﬁ ning basic cell membrane microstructure ; however , peripheral membrane proteins also have an important role , but not necessarily in maintaining the basic microstruc - tures of membranes . They appear to be more important in providing enzyme activities , protein attachment sites , scaffolding , tethering or membrane - supporting structures , membrane curvature - preserving components and attachment points for soluble enzymes and signaling molecules . Peripheral ( or extrinsic ) membrane proteins were originally opera - tionallyde ﬁ nedasproteinsthatcouldberemoved fromcellmembranes without destroyingthe basic F - MMM microstructure [ 1 , 49 ] . This wasan operational not an exact de ﬁ nition to help explain the roles of different membrane proteins in de ﬁ ning the basic microstructure of cell mem - branes . Peripheral membrane proteins do not have to be strictly globu - lar in structure , and they would include the Robinson proteins with extensive β - sheet structures that bind to membranes mainly by ionic and other interactions [ 3 , 4 ] . In 1976 I proposed a new class of membrane proteins ( membrane - associated proteins ) to the mix [ 30 ] , but these are not really membrane proteins atall . They are cytoskeletaland associated signalingproteins at the inner membrane surface and certain glycoproteins and linked gly - cosaminoglycans at the outer membrane surface ( Fig . 2 , 1976 ) [ 30 ] . These membrane - associated components are thought to be involved in stabilizing cell membranes ( and thus cells ) and immobilizing mem - brane components outside the cell to the extracellular matrix or across the membrane to cytoskeletal networks inside cells where they can function as parts of adhesion structures or cell motility traction points . Thus these components are membrane - associated but not involved in the integral microstructure of cell membranes , and cell membrane mi - crostructure is not dependent on their presence . However , that does not mean that they are not important in maintaining membrane func - tion and dynamics , because they are especially important in events such as cell – matrix and cell – cell adhesion and its stabilization , cell mo - tility and spreading , endocytosis , exocytosis and many other important cell membrane and cellular activities . As with peripheral membrane proteins , membrane - associated com - ponents should be removable from cell membranes without disruption of the phospholipid and globular protein membrane microstructure . Some properties of membrane - associated cytoskeletal components and extracellular matrix components will be discussed later in this review . 5 . Cis and trans - membrane control ShortlyaftertheF - MMMwas ﬁ rstpublished [ 1 ] , itwasapparentthat there were cytoplasmic as well as extracellular in ﬂ uences over cell membrane structure and dynamics , and not all cell membrane compo - nents were found to be freely mobile in the membrane plane . Using an - tibody , lectin and drug treatments as well as protein / glycoprotein crosslinking and distribution studies it was apparent that many mem - brane glycoproteins and proteins were not completely free to rapidly roam in the plane of the membrane , or at least their mobilities and dis - tributions were subject to local control within the plane of the membrane ( cis - membrane control ) or across the membrane ( trans - membrane control ) [ 93 ] . This was ﬁ rst studied with red blood cell membrane ghosts using an - tibodies against external antigens or against a protein , spectrin , known to be an inner membrane peripheral protein [ 94 ] . The major erythrocyte sialoglycoproteinwasfollowedinitsdistributionusinganelectronmicro - scopic label [ 95 ] . Perturbation of outer membrane surface blood groups ( cis ) orinnermembranesurfacespectrin ( trans ) byantibodiescausedag - gregation or clustering of the trans - membrane sialoglycoprotein [ 95 , 96 ] . Similarly , binding and perturbation of outer membrane glycoproteins was found to cause a trans - membrane organizational change at the inner surface as seen by an increase in chemical crosslinking of inner membrane components using bifunctional crosslinking reagents [ 97 ] . As early as 1973 it was apparent that certain specialized cell membranes were highly differentiated along their surfaces in terms of the nonrandom display and mobility of cell surface components and the restriction of some membrane components to speci ﬁ c re - gions of cells . In addition , this type of highly differentiated macro - structure had the capacity to change quickly given the appropriate signal ( s ) . For example , highly specialized cells , such as mammalian spermatozoa , are surrounded not only by a continuous plasma mem - brane but also one that is highly differentiated in terms of the distri - bution of cell surface components [ 98 ] . Studying hamster sperm we found that the distribution of sialoglycoproteins was very different from head to midsection to tail , indicating that sperm membrane sialoglycoproteins were not entirely mobile and capable of freely intermixing in the plane of the membrane [ 99 ] . It was hypothesized that trans - membrane restraints maintained segregation of some membrane glycoprotein components and prevented their free mo - bility [ 99 ] . However , after the sperm interacted with an ovum and fertilization occurred , this situation could quickly change [ 100 ] . Sperm integral membrane components can also be restrained in their mobility by cis interactions occurring at the outer surface [ 101 ] . For example , PH - 20 is a sperm surface protein that is involved in sperm – egg adhesion and is anchored to the membrane via binding to outer surface phosphatidylinositol . Such glycosylphosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) - anchored components can be highly mobile in the membrane plane [ 99 ] . In contrast , sperm PH - 20 lateral mobility was found to be highly restricted [ 101 ] . However , when sperm underwent acrosome re - action in preparation for fertilization , the PH - 20 was found to be freely diffusing and capable of rapid lateral mobility . Interestingly , the mobil - ity of an unattached probe in thelipidbilayer suggestedthatthegeneral state of ﬂ uidity ofthe membrane was not responsibleforrestrainingthe mobilityofPH - 20 , suggestingthatothertypesofcisinteractions , suchas that found in localized lipid rafts , might be responsibility for the low mobility of PH - 20 in sperm membranes before fertilization [ 101 ] . The formation and dynamics of lipid domains and rafts and their restraints on membrane mobility will be discussed in a later section . 6 . Membrane - associated cytoskeletal and extracellular matrix interactions There are a number of situations where trans - membrane controls can alter the macrostructure of cell membranes . For example , trans - membrane controls could cause either a reduction or restriction in free - dom of lateral movement or mobility or cause global movements of membrane glycoprotein aggregates and lipid domains by tethering these complexes to cellular actin - containing ﬁ bers and in some cases in - directly to microtubular structures ( reviews : [ 30 , 31 , 33 – 39 , 102 – 111 ] ) . This later situation can occur when cell membrane - associated actin - containing cytoskeletal components are involved in moving or restraining trans - membrane integral membrane proteins through inter - mediate peripheral membrane proteins and other components ( Fig . 3 , 1976 [ 30 ] ) . At the time this cartoon ( Fig . 3 ) was drawn , there were al - ready examples of restriction of mobility of integral membrane compo - nents . During antigen capping where initially mobile cell surface 1455 G . L . Nicolson / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1838 ( 2014 ) 1451 – 1466 Author ' s personal copy antigens , even if present in small mobile clusters [ 112 ] , were found to be trapped into large , relatively immobile macromolecular trans - membrane complexes in a temperature - and energy - dependent process involving cytoskeletal elements [ 113 – 115 ] . This process eventually resulted in cytoskeletal - mediated endocytosis of some but not all of the large macromolecular complexes [ 116 ] . We now know in lymphoid cells that antigen clustering , domain formation , internalization , acidi ﬁ cation of the resulting endosomes , degradation and membrane recycling are all part of the normal activation process [ 117 ] . This process also dynamically rearranges and changes the composition of cell membranes . In addition , the organizational structures that mediate trans - membrane linkages be - tween clusters of integral membrane receptors and the cytoskeleton were much more complex than the simplistic cartoons of the 1970s , and they are now thought to involve multiple membrane peripheral proteins , lipid – protein domains , and enzymes that assemble into submembrane plaques or supramolecular structures that connect the membrane to a complex cytoskeletal system [ 103 , 104 , 108 , 109 , 118 , 119 ] . The mobility of integral cell membrane components can also be re - strictedbycell – cellandcell – matrixinteractions . Manyyears agoweno - ticed that when cells were aggregated , their surface components at the zones of cell – cell interactions became immobilized over time , possibly due to close membrane glycoprotein interactions or ligand - binding and multiple receptor interactions between adjacent cells [ 120 ] . Also , when cells are bound to an extracellular matrix , it is well known that at least some of their membrane matrix receptors are immobilized in the process . For example , Kobialka and colleagues have studied this by analyzingtheeffects ofglycosaminoglycansonareceptor ( H1 ) thatnor - mally does not bind to matrix components and cycles between the plasma membrane and endosomes [ 121 ] . By modifying the receptor to includesequencetagsof10 – 17aminoacidsencodingaglycosaminogly - can attachment site , they were able to convert the H1 receptor into a glycosaminoglycan - binding receptor . They found that the distribution of the modi ﬁ ed receptor was altered due to its matrix immobilization , and in the process endocytosis was inhibited [ 121 ] . Among the examples of extracellular matrix anchoring of integral cell membrane receptors , the membrane polarity and matrix restric - tionsof epithelial cell receptors stand out . When this wasstudiedin cul - ture , integral membrane receptors for extracellular matrix components tended to be located at the basolateral surface , whereas some cell sur - face components were found mainly at the apical surface . However , not all integral membrane matrix receptors appeared to beimmobilized to the basolateral surface on epithelial cells . Salas et al . found that al - though there was segregation ( and restriction of mobility ) of most basolateral glycoproteins , there were also mobile fractions that were not anchored to matrix or cytoskeletal structures and were apparently free to migrate to other domains of the epithelial cell membrane [ 122 ] . The role of lipid segregation in epithelial cells into specialized do - mains will be discussed later in this review . Trans - membrane adhesion complexes that are immobilized by ma - trix interactions are now known , at least in some cells , to communicate signals that are transmitted through an assembled actin - containing cy - toskeleton to generate mechanical forces that can move cells or resist exterior mechanical stresses , such as external ﬂ uid ﬂ ow [ 123 , 124 ] . Thusfromtheextracellularmatrixto integralmembraneproteins tope - ripheral membrane proteins to adaptor proteins to cytoskeletal ele - ments , this serial system of highly specialized glycoprotein and Fig . 3 . Someproposedmobility - restrainingmechanismsthatcouldpotentiallyaffecttheratesoflateraldiffusionandmobilityofmembraneglycoproteinsandphospholipidsinthemem - braneplane , asenvisionedin1976 . Inthisscheme , differentmechanisms ( glycoproteincomplexes , membranedomains , cytoskeletalinteractions , extracellularmatrixinteractions , periph - eral membrane protein interactions , lipid – lipid interactions , etc . ) can restrain the lateral movements of membrane components and affect their macromolecular structures and distributions . Althoughthis ﬁ guresuggestssome possibleintegralmembraneproteinandlipidmobilityrestraintmechanisms , itdoesnotaccuratelypresentthesizesorstructuresofin - tegral membrane proteins , cytoskeletal structures , polysaccharides , lipids , nano - domains or membrane - associated cytoskeletal structures or their crowding in the membrane . From Nicolson [ 30 ] . 1456 G . L . Nicolson / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1838 ( 2014 ) 1451 – 1466 Author ' s personal copy protein network probably evolved to convert biochemical signals into mechanical forces that are important in cellular behavior . Such mechanical - molecular pathways were proposed by Roca - Cusach et al . along with better - known biochemical pathways to be key regulators of cell function [ 123 ] . What has changed from the earlier proposals on cell membrane - associated cytoskeletal elements and their in ﬂ uence on membrane structure and dynamics is that these complex systems are now being carefully dissected and their multiple subcomponents identi - ﬁ ed [ 102 – 111 , 118 , 123 , 125 – 127 ] . Forexample , wenowknowthatcer - tain membrane - interacting components , such as septins , GTPases , and other components , are involved in cytokinesis and can form higher - order bundles , ﬁ laments and ring structures that bind to actin ﬁ laments and microtubules [ 127 – 130 ] . Septin aggregatesor ﬁ laments donot con - tribute to the generation of contractile forces of the cytoskeleton , but they probablyform scaffoldsatthe cell membrane innersurfacethat in - teract with and form a link to cytoskeletal elements [ 130 ] . In addition , they may also be involved in forming diffusion barriers in cell mem - branes that result in compartmentalization of membrane proteins to speci ﬁ c cell membrane domains [ 131 ] . Other membrane - associated structures may be involved in the removal or traf ﬁ cking of cell membrane components or their move - ments to other organelles or compartments within cells . For exam - ple , it had been known for some time that directed transport of vesicles formed through endocytosis and other processes makes up a system of small vesicle targeting through secretory and endocytic pathways . These specialized intracellular vesicles are characterized by the presence of 60 – 100 nm electron - dense coats on the surface of the vesicles [ 132 , 133 ] . Subsequently the electron - dense coats were isolated and found to be composed of a lattice - like shell com - prised mainly of the protein clathrin [ 134 ] . Clathrins along with other adaptor proteins that form the localized electron - dense coats ( ‘ patches ’ ) were found bound to aggregated trans - membrane pro - teins and linked to the cytoskeletal system where the newly formed endocytic vesicles were being pulled away from donor membrane . Eventually the small , coated endosome vesicles were transported to acceptor organelles or other sites within cells [ 135 ] . For this deliv - ery system to be speci ﬁ c , there had to be several unique membrane recruiting and signaling proteins that were essential for sorting and delivery of the coated vesicles to the appropriate intracellular site [ 136 ] . This constituted only one of many examples of the role of en - docytosis in cellular physiology and immunology , topics that are too complex to be carefully assessed here . Thus the reader is directed to some recent reviews on this speci ﬁ c topic [ 135 , 137 – 143 ] . Although cell membrane peripheral proteins have been identi - ﬁ ed as important in cytoskeletal interactions [ 144 ] , such as those that bind to actin - binding proteins as brie ﬂ y introduced above ( see also [ 145 , 146 ] ) , membrane lipids are also important [ 146 , 147 ] . Speci ﬁ cally , phosphoinositides may regulate interactions between specialized membrane lipid domains through lipid rafts using GPI isoform - binding proteins , such as unfolded N - WASP ( neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein that is now thought to be widely expressed ) , that in turn binds to protein Arp2 / 3 and actin [ 147 ] . Future studies will ultimately con ﬁ rm at the molecular level what we now strongly suspect — that cells are completely integrated mechanostructures — and cell membranes are not autonomous and separate from other intracellular membranes and organelles . They arecontinuouslyinteractingwithothercellularstructuresandreceiving signals , directing contacts and sending instructions , maintaining cellu - larpolarityandmechanicalproperties , whileundergoingconstant turn - over of their constituents [ 144 , 146 , 148 – 150 ] . Cells also shed plasma membranes ( exocytosis ) , and this is done , in part , to signal other cells and initiate important physiological pro - cesses . These important topics will not be discussed here , and there are several recent reviews that are available on these topics [ 138 , 151 – 153 ] . 7 . Protein – protein interactions within membranes Most cell membrane proteins and glycoproteins are not isolated com - ponents orcomplexes ﬂ oatingina ﬂ uidlipidenvironment ( asenvisioned in Fig . 1 , 1972 [ 1 ] ) . They can be assembled into macromolecular com - plexes ( the formation of such complexes can also be part of a signaling mechanism ) that take part in a variety of cooperative cellular functions , including ion and metabolite transport , cellular recognition , enzyme acti - vationandothersignalingevents , celladhesion , movement , etc . Although thiswasacknowledgedintheoriginaldescriptionoftheF - MMM [ 1 ] , over the years it has taken on additional importance in describing the interac - tive relationships of cell membrane glycoprotein complexes and inner membrane peripheral protein components . As their cellular and bio - chemical functions have been elucidated over the years , it has become much clearer how multimeric complexes of cell membrane proteins and glycoproteins perform the variety of actions attributed to them . By cloning , sequencing and functionally expressing integral mem - braneproteinsfurtherinsightsintotheiractivitiesandstructure – function relationshipshavebeenpossible [ 25 , 50 – 53 ] . Inthesestudiessinglemem - brane components can be involved , but usually membrane protein and glycoprotein complexes ( not single protein units and often dynamically controlled ) performavarietyofessentialtasksforcells [ 154 – 156 ] . Forex - ample , the insulin receptor consists of a heterotetrameric complex that activates an intracellular tyrosine kinase domain in one of the protein subunits . Then the receptor undergoes a series of intramolecular trans - phosphorylation reactions in which one subunit of the complex phos - phorylates an adjacent subunit of the complex in order to initiate the sig - naling process [ 157 ] . Protein – protein interactions , which can also be driven by ligand binding , are involved in the dynamic formation of glycoprotein trans - membrane signaling complexes at the cell surface . These interactions mayalso involve multimeric complexes that exist before ligand binding . Eventually the complexes can become activated for cis recruitment of additional components and then trans recruitment of peripheral pro - teins at the inner cell membrane surface to form supramolecular trans - membrane structures that are competent for cell signaling [ 158 ] . Well - studied examples of this are the interactions of cell surface recep - tors with extracellular matrix components , such as the interactions of the appropriate matrix ligands with cell surface integrins . Integrins are heterodimeric trans - membrane cell surface glycoprotein receptors that lack enzymatic activity [ 159 ] . Upon binding their ligand , the integrin heterodimersarethoughttoundergoa ‘ bending ’ conformationalchange that allows their recruitment of submembrane plaque proteins that , in turn , directly or indirectly bind to actin , and thus link the submembrane complex to the cytoskeleton [ 160 , 161 ] . The protein – proteininteractions do not stop at this point , as a potentially larger group of other signaling molecules and enzymes can now be bound to the submembrane , supra - molecular complex that forms , leading to the formation of stable focal adhesioncomplexes . Theprocess ismorecomplexthancanbeeasilyde - scribed here , so the reader is referred to more appropriate reviews for additional detail [ 159 – 161 ] . As primitive organisms evolved , their cell membranes became more complex , andasDiasproposed , thismorecomplextypeofplasmamem - branestructurelikely paralleled theappearance of differentiated tissues and organs [ 162 ] . For example , the CIC gene family of ion channel pro - teins evolved to express an unusually wide variety of functions , with some members of this family possessing gated chloride channel activi - ties and others possessing secondary chloride transporter or chloride – proton exchange activities [ 163 ] . This type of evolution - driven hetero - geneity of cell membrane integral proteins into families with similar but distinct functions and structures is quite obvious to researchers who study integral membrane proteins [ 50 , 51 , 53 ] . An example of the types of membrane protein – protein ( or protein – glycoprotein ) complexes that are commonly found in various cell mem - branes is the major protein / glycoprotein complex of the erythrocyte membrane [ 84 , 154 – 167 ] . This cell membrane is unique in its physical 1457 G . L . Nicolson / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1838 ( 2014 ) 1451 – 1466 Author ' s personal copy properties , since it can resist ﬂ uid stresses that would tear most cells apart [ 165 , 168 ] , but its basic microstructure still corresponds to the basic principles of the F - MMM . In the case of the erythrocyte mem - brane , it derives its elastic properties from an underlying network of inner membrane - associated peripheral proteins composed of spectrin and other proteins that are transiently linked to ( or at least surround - ing ) transmembrane glycoprotein complexes [ 166 – 170 ] . Evenasearlier modelsoftheredbloodcellmembranewerebeingre - evaluated ( forex - ample , compare Fig . 7 of Ref . [ 30 ] drawn in 1976 with the 2008 Fig . 5 of ref . [ 166 ] ) , the basic principles of transmembrane glycoprotein com - plexes interacting with peripheral membrane proteins and cytoskeletal componentswere amply apparentat aboutthetimeof theF - MMM pro - posal [ 30 , 31 , 84 ] . Inthe caseof theerythrocyte inner membrane spectrin [ 94 , 97 , 165 , 171 ] and its associated proteins [ 165 – 170 ] , this complex ap - pears to interact with asymmetrically distributed phospholipids as well as trans - membrane glycoproteins [ 166 , 167 , 172 ] . This will be discussed again , below . There are a variety of cell membrane glycoprotein – protein com - plexes that are involved in cell – cell interactions and the formation of specialized structures between adjacent cells in tissues . For example , epithelial cells are coupled into polarized tissues and have multiple , complex junctional structures that link them and provide molecular seals , and in some cases they can also transfer solutes and signals from cell to cell while providing structural support via cytoskeletal linkages [ 173 – 179 ] . These structures generally have features in common . For ex - ample , interactions through the cytoskeleton systems and plasma membrane complexes in adjacent cells result to an integrated network throughout similar cells and tissues [ 173 , 177 , 178 ] . Cellular junctions also control vital communication pathways and ion linkages between cells [ 173 , 174 , 176 , 178 ] , and they can seal off tissues from environmen - tal contamination [ 175 , 176 ] . The junctional complexes are built with structural subunits that are assembled by protein – protein interactions in the lipid membrane environment , and in some cases , such as gap junctions , forming pore structures that allow cell - to - cell ﬂ ow of ions and signaling molecules [ 174 , 177 , 178 ] . 8 . Protein – lipid interactions within membranes Membrane integral proteins ( or globular glycoproteins with their saccharideportionsfacingtheeventualexteriorcellsurface ) mustinter - act with membrane lipids in a bilayer con ﬁ guration to assemble into an intact plasmamembrane . Thus portionsof theirstructures mustdirectly interact with the acyl portions of membrane phospholipids or hydro - phobic portions of other membrane lipids . This is accomplished by hy - drophobic matching between the hydrophobic lipid bilayer acyl core of boundary phospholipidsand astretchor combinationofhydrophobic amino acids displayed by integral membrane proteins and glycopro - teins [ 28 , 41 , 55 , 59 , 69 , 180 – 182 ] . In actual biomembranes there are additional considerations , such as lateral pressure forces , lateral lipid composition and phase , curvature , and charge interactions , that must be taken into account to produce an overall tensionless structure [ 28 , 55 , 59 , 69 , 180 , 182 ] . The role and for - mationof differentlipid phases anddomainsincell membranes [ 62 – 64 ] and their effects on integral protein distribution will be considered later in this review . The concept of hydrophobic matching between the hydrophobic core of the boundary lipids in the lipid bilayer and hydrophobic stretches of aminoacidsinintegralmembraneproteinswasessentialforunderstand - ing the formation of a stable cell membrane structure [ 169 , 182 – 185 ] . If the hydrophobic portions of this structure are mismatched , there will be an elastic distortion of the lipid matrix around the integral membrane protein [ 69 , 182 , 183 ] . Inordertoproduceanappropriatestructurehydro - phobic matching of particular lipids immediately near particular mem - brane proteins ( ‘ boundary lipids ’ ) must be accomplished , or there will be an energy penalty that causes an elastic distortion of the boundary lipid matrix immediately around the integral protein [ 183 , 184 ] . If the energy penalty is large enough , the integral protein may undergo a con - formationalchange , andthiswasproposedtopotentiallycauseeffectson protein function [ 183 , 184 ] . This can also result in the exclusion of certain lipids , such as cholesterol , from the boundary lipid layer due to unfavor - able membrane protein hydrophobic matching [ 185 – 187 ] . Lipid boundary effects can also affect protein - protein interactions and result in membrane integral protein aggregation in the membrane plane [ 183 , 185 ] . This was shown in the experiments of Kusumi and Hyde [ 188 ] where the rotational diffusion rates and states of aggrega - tion of rhodopsin in reconstituted bilayer membranes were related to speci ﬁ c PC acyl chain - lengths . When PC acyl chain hydrophobic matching with rhodopsin occurred , such as in membranes made with C - 16 PC , rhodopsin existed mostly as monomers with rotational diffu - sion rates similar to those found in intact disk membranes . However , when the PC acyl chain lengths were longer or shorter than C - 16 , rota - tional diffusion rates were signi ﬁ cantly less , indicating the formation of transient protein dimers and oligomers with reduced rotational mo - tions [ 188 ] . The results were interpreted as follows : hydrophobic mis - match is so unfavorable energetically that hydrophobic mismatching between proteins and lipids is minimized by transient formation of protein - protein complexes in the membrane plane [ 185 , 188 ] . Other interactions between proteins and lipids , such as electrostatic interactions between charged amino acids and phospholipids , compli - cate this picture , and Mouritsen and colleagues have proposed that under certain circumstances electrostatic interactions could even over - come or overrule hydrophobic matching [ 59 , 182 , 183 ] . Gil et al . [ 28 ] have proposed that lipid preference for certain integral proteins results in capillarycondensation , and if this occurs around two or more integral membrane proteins , it gives rise to wetting and the formation of a cap - illary condensate between adjacent integral proteins , which in turn leadstoalipid - mediatedjoiningforcethat drives theformationandsta - bilization of integral protein oligomeric complexes . The hydrophobic matching principle may be especially important in the formation of specialized lipid domains or rafts ( see next section ) where enrichment in cholesterol and sphingolipids occurs , and this could be an important mechanism for selective partitioning of integral proteins into these specialized membrane regions . In this case an inte - gralprotein ' s hydrophobicstructuremustmatchupwiththehydropho - bic thickness of the specialized lipid domain to be sequestered into the domain [ 185 , 189 ] . Another property important in lipid – protein interactions is the pro - pensity of some lipids to induce curvature stress and the ability of cer - tain membrane peripheral proteins to overcome this stress [ 76 , 77 ] . This property is similar to hydrophobic matching , but the binding of in - tegral proteins to particular lipids could shift the conformation of near - by integral proteins , for example , to open or close membrane channels [ 181 ] . Alternatively , the binding of peripheral membrane proteins di - rectly to the lipid head groups could decrease or promote lipid curva - ture as discussed previously [ 77 , 182 ] . The concept of trans - bilayer stress and the mechanisms that membrane proteins use to adapt to this stress to form non - lamellar phases are important determinants in protein – lipid interactions [ 59 ] . 9 . Lipid – lipid interactions within membranes As mentioned in Section 3 , it has been known for some time that membrane lipids are asymmetrically arranged in cell membranes [ 78 , 85 – 90 , 190 ] . In addition , they are also unevenly and dynamically distributed in the membrane plane ( examples [ 191 – 194 ] ) ; this was also discussed and extensively referenced in previous reviews [ 11 – 18 , 21 , 22 , 30 , 38 – 40 ] . Certain lipids change the ﬂ uidity , dynamics and lateral structures of cell membranes , such as cholesterol , which as the only sterol present and the single most abundant lipid in biomembranes is particularly important in the formation of mem - brane domains [ 22 , 59 – 62 , 68 , 69 , 182 , 183 , 191 ] . Lipid – lipid in vitro in - teraction studies using mixtures of membrane phospholipids , 1458 G . L . Nicolson / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1838 ( 2014 ) 1451 – 1466 Author ' s personal copy cholesterol and sphingomyelin ( in a 62 : 1 : 1 mixture ) have shown that at any one time cholesterol and sphingomyelin form 1 : 1 dimers , although their energies of interaction are similar [ 192 , 194 , 195 ] . Mouritsen has discussed the role of cholesterol in regulating membrane organization as a compromise between cholesterol ' s “ schizophrenic ” af ﬁ nity for ﬂ uid and solid phases of the lipid mem - brane matrix [ 182 ] . He and his colleagues proposed a new type of membrane phase , the liquid - ordered phase ( to distinguish it from the liquid - disordered or ﬂ uid phase ) , which along with a lipid solid phase results from a compromise between cholesterol ' s af ﬁ nities for various lipid phases [ 196 ] . Indeed , cholesterol partitions into liq - uid ordered and disordered phases to roughly the same extent , indi - cating that cholesterol does not have a strong preference for any of these phases and interacts similarly with lipids in multiple phases [ 22 ] . Moreover , cholesterol ( and possibly other lipids ) may play an im - portant role in the sorting of membrane proteins and lipids through hy - drophobic matching . By modifying the thickness of the hydrophobic cores of membranes certain integral proteins may be partitioned away from certain cellularmembranes into other cellular membranes . For ex - ample , differencesincompositionfoundbetweenGolgimembranesand plasma membranes , which are initially derived from membranes like Golgi , may be caused by such hydrophobic match - sorting [ 193 ] . This may be aided by the differential partitioning of cholesterol , which tends to segregate away from phospholipids with unsaturated acyl chains into membrane domains containing phospholipids with saturat - ed acyl chains where it can form more transient , stable complexes [ 109 , 186 – 188 ] . In addition to cholesterol , sphingolipids are also important in the for - mation of less ﬂ uid lipid membrane domains [ 197 , 199 ] . Sphingomyelins andphosphatidylcholinesconstitutemorethan50 % ofplasmamembrane phospholipids and form the main interaction partners for cholesterol in cell membranes [ 199 , 200 ] . In model membranes sphingomyelins and cholesterol are critically important in the formation of liquid - ordered phases or domains that are generally surrounded by a liquid lipid phase [ 22 , 199 ] . The different lipid phases found in plasma membranes appear to be especially important in membrane domain formation and the lipid raft hypothesis [ 16 – 18 , 59 , 67 , 68 , 197 , 200 , 201 ] . The concept of specialized lipid domains or lipid rafts arose from studies in epithelial cells where the sorting of lipids into polarized membrane domains were studied by differential detergent extraction of the apical and basolateral mem - branes [ 202 ] . van Meer and Simons also showed that ﬂ uorescent pre - cursors of lipids destined for apical sites were sorted intracellularly frombasolaterallipidsanddepositedintotheapicalepithelialcellmem - brane [ 203 ] . The formation of membrane lipid nano - sized domains is now thought to be a dynamic and reversible process that can quickly change [ 67 , 68 , 182 , 197 , 204 – 207 ] . Lipid domain formation appears to be driven by multiple forces : hydrogen bonding , hydrophobic entropic forces , charge pairing and van der Waals forces [ 66 , 195 , 198 ] . When these in - teractions drive speci ﬁ c lipids into transient membrane meso - sized do - mains in cell membranes , the rather small structures that are formed are called lipid rafts [ 16 – 18 , 63 , 64 , 66 – 68 , 103 , 197 , 204 – 208 ] . Lipiddomains , raftsandtheirformationincellmembraneshavebeen the subjects of a number of recent reviews , and I won ' t attempt to dupli - cate these excellent contributions [ 16 – 18 , 63 – 69 , 197 , 197 , 200 , 205 – 214 ] . In addition , specialized structures in plasma membranes , such as rafts that contain speci ﬁ c lipids , integral proteins or even peripheral proteins , can constitute compartmentalized signaling platforms for signal trans - ductionandothercellularfunctions [ 67 , 103 , 197 , 200 , 206 – 214 ] . Although there remain technical limitations that still impede investigations into theexactstructuralrelationshipsbetweenlipidraftsandthemembranes from which they are derived [ 210 – 214 ] , most investigators consider plasma membrane lipid rafts to constitute functional , dynamic submicro - or nano - sized domains ( b 300 nm , most ~ 10 – 200 nm ) that are characterized by the enrichments of cholesterol and sphingolipids [ 18 , 63 , 64 , 67 – 69 , 207 – 221 ] . These specialized lipid domains or rafts form and dissipate rather quickly , with half - lives in the range of 10 – 20 ms . They are also much smaller than the typical ordered - liquid do - mains found in arti ﬁ cial membranes , and until recently their dynamics were not completely understood [ 213 , 214 , 221 , 222 ] . It is thought that small , unstable lipid rafts containing cholesterol and sphingolipids undergo dynamic changes which result in larger signaling rafts that are characterized by clustering and stabilization of raft molecules [ 214 , 221 , 222 ] . Technical limitations in time and space scales that are inherent with magnetic resonance techniques previously caused some confusion as to the actual rates of exchange of raft boundary lipids with the bulk mem - brane lipids ( this has been carefully discussed by Kusumi et al . [ 214 ] ) . We now know that almost all boundary lipids exchange very rapidly ( every 10 – 100 ns ) with the lipids in the bulk membrane , and the presence of trans - membrane proteins increases boundary residency times . Similar to the case of integral membrane proteins , there is also astrongtendencytoexcludecholesterolandunsaturatedphospholipids from boundary lipids [ 214 ] . In addition to the possibility that integral membrane proteins may besequesteredintolipidrafts [ 206 , 207 , 210 , 212 ] , lipid - linkedperipheral proteins can also be caught up in lipid domains [ 223 ] . For example , GPI - anchored proteins in the plasma membrane can be incorporated into lipid rafts [ 223 , 224 ] . This apparently also occurs as an active process in - volving actin - containing cytoskeletal elements that draw small nano - sized clusters of GPI - anchored proteins into larger lipid domains of b 450 nm [ 224 ] . Once in the larger domains , the GPI - anchored proteins can undergo further diffusion ( “ hop diffusion ” ) between other actin - regulated domains with an average dwell time per domain of 1 – 3 ms [ 225 ] . In addition to being dependent on GPI for anchorage , the lipid clusters are also dependent on cholesterol , Src kinases , and caveolin [ 226 ] . In the case of the Thy - 1 GPI - anchored protein / lipid raft , a com - plex of the trans - membrane Src kinase , along with another integral membrane protein ( carboxyl - terminal Src kinase - binding protein ) ap - pears to be the trans - membrane link to the actin - cytoskeleton [ 227 ] . In their recent review on the subject of lipid rafts , Neumann et al . discussed the biological importance of lipid rafts and domains to cells [ 212 ] . The con ﬁ nement of cell membrane constituents to lipid rafts or domainscansignalcriticalcellularprocesses , suchasendocytosis , signal transduction , cell death and other events . Since the lipids in these do - mains can exchange rapidly with lipids in the bulk ﬂ uid membrane as wellasotherrafts , theraftorlipiddomainenvironmentisverydynamic . They speculate that there may be different turnover ( or hop - over ) rates for each raft constituent , and it is likely that a spectrum of submicro - or nano - sized domains exists in cell membranes that contain different lipid ( and protein ) compositions , physical characteristics and functions [ 212 ] . Of course , none of this could have been appreciated when the F - MMM was ﬁ rst published [ 1 ] . The more limited mobility of lipids in specialized domains or rafts and in islands or in boundary lipids around integral membrane proteins has resulted in updated proposals on membrane structural models that limit the fraction of completely free diffusing lipids and proteins in biomembranes [ 17 , 19 , 22 , 44 , 59 , 69 , 228 , 229 ] . Edidin [ 17 ] ( courtesy of P . K . J . Kinnunen ) and Escribá et al . [ 228 ] have produced new cartoons of cell membrane structure that show specialized lipid submicro - domains around integral membrane proteins and glycoproteins and se - vere heterogeneity in topographic distribution andasymmetry of differ - ent membrane lipids ( Fig . 4 ) . 10 . Different forms of mobility restriction in membranes Although the original F - MMM proposed that integral membrane proteins are intercalated into a ﬂ uid lipid matrix and thus free to move laterally in the membrane plane [ 1 ] , we now know that there are restrictions on the lateral mobilities of most integral membrane 1459 G . L . Nicolson / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1838 ( 2014 ) 1451 – 1466 Author ' s personal copy proteins and at least some to most lipids in the plasma membrane . In fact , this was an important aspect in cartoons published shortly ( 4 years ) after the original F - MMM was presented [ 30 , 31 ] . There it was proposed that restriction of mobility could be accomplished by cis - and trans - membrane controls aswell asbysequestration of integral membrane proteins into less mobile membrane domains ( see Section 5 [ 30 , 31 , 93 ] ) . However , it took decades before these notions of mobility restraint could be carefully dissected and fully appreciated , and when they were examined in more detail , the restraint systems took on a slightly different appearance . The reason for the delay was mainly tech - nical , and new instruments and techniques were needed to follow the lateral movements of membrane constituents in more detail [ 20 , 42 – 45 , 205 , 208 , 210 , 214 , 218 , 223 , 225 , 228 – 230 ] . When biomembrane dynamics began to be more precisely exam - ined several years after the publication of theF - MMM , the lateralmove - ments ofintegralmembraneproteinsdidnot ﬁ tthefreelateraldiffusion found for proteins like rhodopsin or integral membrane proteins reconstituted into arti ﬁ cial ﬂ uid lipid bilayers [ 20 , 34 , 109 ] . In fact , most integral membrane proteins had diffusion coef ﬁ cients that were ten to one hundred - fold lower than rhodopsin or freely diffusing membrane proteins [ 20 , 34 , 109 , 214 ] . Moreover , when rotational diffusion coef ﬁ - cients were measured , many membrane integral proteins were only ca - pable of rapid rotationsafter theircytoskeletalinteractions were broken [ 26 , 231 ] . In some cases restrictions on integral membrane protein later - almovements were found under conditions where rotational mobilities were apparently unrestricted , suggesting that there were also indirect restraints on lateral mobility [ 109 , 232 ] . Restrictions on the lateral mobility of integral membrane proteins have been linked to extracellular restrictions , such as binding to extra - cellular matrix , to the formation of specialized membrane nano - domains , such as lipid rafts , and to the formation of large supramolecu - lar protein complexes or domains where high protein concentrations decrease lateral diffusion rates [ 34 , 212 , 214 , 233 ] . The membrane - associated cytoskeletal and peripheral membrane protein barriers to free lateral movements of integral membrane proteins have been lik - ened to inner membrane surface corrals where membrane proteins canmovefreelywithinacorralorskeletalfencework , buttheyonlyrare - ly cross over to adjacent corrals [ 34 , 35 , 43 , 109 , 234 , 218 ] ( see Fig . 5 ) . Membrane - associated cytoskeletal systems have been known for some time to be dynamically associated with immobilization or directed movements of trans - membrane integral proteins ( see Section 6 for references ) . However , this type of domain restriction by cytoskeletal fenceworkis arelativelynewconcept [ 35 , 36 , 43 , 44 , 109 , 185 ] . Inaddition , membrane integral protein components themselves may be involved in the dynamic formation of nano - sized domains by initiating cis interac - tionsat the extracellular surface resultingin macromolecularcomplexes [ 236 ] . Using various methods , such as ﬂ uorescent recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) , single - particle tracking ( SPT ) , optical laser trapping ( OLT ) , ﬂ uorescence correlation spectroscopy ( FCS ) , Förster resonance energy transfer and other techniques the various modes of integral membrane protein / glycoprotein lateral movements have now been revealed [ 34 , 36 , 39 , 43 , 44 , 109 , 162 , 185 , 222 , 237 ] . For example , Jacobson et al . [ 43 ] proposed that the lateral movements of integral membrane proteins could be placed into four different modes . Reviewing the results from three of the optical methods listed above Fig . 4 . A schematic illustration of a modi ﬁ cation of the Fluid — Mosaic Membrane Model , as envisioned by Escribá and colleagues in 2008 . Different lipids are indicated in various colors forming specialized domains around integral membrane proteins and gylcoproteins as well as being asymmetrically distributed across the membrane . From Escribá et al . [ 228 ] . Fig . 5 . Modes of integral membrane protein lateral mobility at the cell surface as envisioned byJacobsonand colleagues in1995 . Integral membrane protein lateral move - mentsaredescribedas : ( A ) transientcon ﬁ nementbyobstacleclusters ; ( B ) transientcon - ﬁ nement by the cytoskeleton ( fences ) ; ( C ) directed motion by direct attachment to the cytoskeleton ; and ( D ) free , random diffusion inthe membrane plane . From Jacobson et al . [ 43 ] . 1460 G . L . Nicolson / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1838 ( 2014 ) 1451 – 1466 Author ' s personal copy ( FRAP , SPT and OLT ) , Jacobson and colleagues described integral mem - brane protein lateral movement modes as : ( i ) transient con ﬁ nement by obstacle clusters ( also called fencepost clusters or pickets [ 109 , 238 ] ) ( Fig . 5 , mode A ) ; ( ii ) transient con ﬁ nement by the cytoskeletal mesh - work to de ﬁ ned areas ( by cytoskeletal fences or corrals formed by fencepost integral membrane proteins attached to cytoskeletal ele - ments or fences [ 109 , 238 , 239 ] ) ( Fig . 5 , mode B ) ; ( iii ) directed motion by direct or indirect attachment to the cytoskeleton ( Fig . 5 , mode C ) ; and ( iv ) free , random diffusion in the ﬂ uid membrane ( Fig . 5 , mode D ) [ 43 ] . A similar but slightly different list of integral membrane protein lateral movement modes was produced by He and Marguet [ 237 ] ; they characterized the modes of lateral movement as : ( i ) free diffusion ; ( ii ) movementlimitedbymeshworkbarriers ( suchasfencesorcorrals ) ; and ( iii ) movementlimited bytraps and domains ( suchaslipid rafts ) . In any case , it is obvious that the original F - MMM description of integral membrane proteins freely diffusing in the membrane plane pertains to only one of these modes of lateral mobility . The actual situation in cell membranes is now considered much more complicated than originally envisioned in 1972 [ 1 ] . A substantial proportionofintegralmembraneproteinsarenowconsideredcon ﬁ ned , atleast transiently , tosmall membrane nano - and micro - sized domains , lattices and corrals and are not freely diffusing in the membrane plane . Even with the appearance of impediments to integral membrane pro - tein lateral movements , the transient times in various compartments or domains suggest that these impediments to free lateral diffusion are temporary . Thus integral proteins can escape from one domain to an adjacent domain and even escape domains altogether that limit lat - eral mobility , and this may be related to the sizes of their cytoplasmic structures , the natures of their cytoskeletal and extracellular interac - tions , andtheirabilitiestodynamicallyundergoproteincomplexforma - tion through cis interactions . In addition , within the lipid environment of the cell membrane Somerharju et al . [ 229 ] proposed that there are a limited number of allowed lipid compositions or combinations that form lipid domains , and the lipid components within these domains are not randomly dis - tributed ; they tend to adopt a structured superlattice network [ 229 ] . Using keratinocytes as a cellular model Kusumi et al . [ 238 ] have es - timated the approximate sizes of plasma membrane micro - and submicro - sized domains . They can vary in size from 0 . 04 to 0 . 24 μ m 2 , and the approximate transit times of membrane receptors in the mem - brane domains can range from 3 to 30 s . Overall , they propose that membrane nano - meso - sized domains are in the range of 2 – 300 nm diameter , with actin - cytoskeletal fence domains [ 239 ] in the range of 40 – 300 nm , lipid raft domains in the range of 2 – 20 nm , and dynamic integral membrane protein domains ( dimmers / oligomers and greater complexes of integral membrane proteins and membrane - associated proteins [ 185 ] ) in the range of 3 – 10 nm in diameter [ 109 ] . These differ - ent types of cell membrane nano - , submicro - and micro - sized domains and motility controls likely evolved for a reason , and it is probably due to the many different intra - and extracellular signals and membrane properties necessary for cellular function . 11 . Hierarchical membrane structures and the Fluid — Mosaic Membrane The plasma membrane forms a dynamic multi - dimensional archi - tecture that can quickly respond to intracellular ( and extracellular ) events . In order to accomplish this Kusumi and colleagues have pro - posed that plasma membranes are organized into dynamic hierarchical structures [ 109 , 185 ] . Within these hierarchical structures membrane components ( macroscopically ) diffuse from 5 - to 50 - times slower than when the same components are reconstituted into arti ﬁ cial membranes without membrane - associated cytoskeletal or other struc - tures . Conversely , the macroscopic diffusion rates can also be increased ( by 20 - fold ) through disruption of membrane - associated cytoskeletal networks [ 109 ] . The notion of membrane - associated cytoskeletal networks imped - ing the mobility of trans - membrane integral proteins is not new and was discussed in many previous reviews ( see Sections 5 and 6 and [ 30 , 31 , 34 , 36 , 125 , 127 ] ) . For example , cytoskeletal - disrupting drugs have been known for some time to change integral membrane protein dynamics ( reviews : [ 30 , 31 , 114 , 240 ] ) . Using drugs or substances that augment or dissociate cytoskeletal networks Tsuji and Ohnishi showed that the impedance of lateral mobility of an integral membrane protein was dependent on the state of aggregation of membrane - associated cytoskeletal elements [ 241 ] . In addition , in cells where the membrane - associated cytoskeletal network was disrupted due to mutation , the mi - croscopic diffusionrate of atrans - membraneintegralproteinwasfound to be 50 - times faster than on normal cells [ 242 ] . Importantly , what is new is that the impedance of mobility ( or lateral diffusion ) of many membrane components can now be directly related in many cell types to cytoskeletal fencing and the formation of cytoskeletal corrals ( see Fig . 5 ) [ 109 , 185 , 243 ] . This type of cytoskeletal control may be more complex than originally envisioned , and there are apparently different types of membrane - associated cytoskeletal structures and membrane interactions , some of which could be less susceptible to cytoskeletal - disrupting drugs . These controls could be important in regulating the lateral mobilities and distributions of membrane submicro - and micro - sized domains . Partitioning plasma membranes and their integral membrane pro - teins into fenced corrals or other obstacle restraints creates relatively stable membrane zones of high densities for certain components . This can alsobe created under certain conditions by theformation of integral membrane protein complexes tethered directly to the cytoskeleton , membrane - associated scaffolds , or to integral membrane proteins or glycolipids sequestered into speci ﬁ c lipid domains [ 30 , 228 ] . Such prop - erties might be necessary to facilitate further interactions , such as com - ponent clustering into supramolecular complexes , or to present enriched cell surface domains to other cells or to ligands in the extracel - lular environment [ 30 , 244 ] . Extracellular networks or lattices can also partition the plasma membrane into domains [ 243 ] . Moreover , thetrap - ping of integral membrane proteins inside corrals constructed of cyto - skeletal fencing / fenceposts ( or extracellular lattices ) appears to be dependent on the state of integral membrane protein complex forma - tion . Some integral protein monomers can escape from corrals but their oligomeric complexes cannot , or at least they cannot escape at the same rates [ 243 ] . Thus the corrals ( or extracellular lattices ) may se - lectively limit integral membrane protein oligomeric complexes from freely diffusing in the membrane plane and limit them to spending most of their time in speci ﬁ c cell membrane domains . What is the function of limiting the mobility of integral membrane proteins to corrals formed by membrane - associated cytoskeleton fences , fenceposts or extracellular lattices ? This question is more dif ﬁ - cult to answer . It was proposed that membrane compartmentalization could be important in signal transduction , cell activation , cell differenti - ation and other complex membrane events by changing the range of movements , distributions and collision rates of various cellular recep - tors and thus affecting their display [ 109 , 185 ] . Kusumi et al . [ 109 ] list a number of potential examples of this , some of which were discussed above and in other sections of this review . The most intriguing example used by Kusumi et al . to explain the possiblefunctionof cytoskeletalcorrals was thattheycanpotentiallyin - crease the local concentrations of membrane receptors and their local rates of biomolecular collisions without affecting the overall rates of cell surface collisions [ 109 , 185 ] . Thus they can create spatial variations in membrane reaction rates without affecting overall cellular reaction rates . In support of this hypothesis , the rate of EGF receptor bimolecular complex formation , a necessary step in EGF receptor activation , in - creased with an increase in the density of actin - cytoskeletal corrals at the inner plasma membrane surface [ 245 ] . Similar spatial variations were also proposed for peripheral membrane components and membrane - associated enzymes [ 109 ] . 1461 G . L . Nicolson / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1838 ( 2014 ) 1451 – 1466 Author ' s personal copy Kusumietal . [ 109 , 185 ] haveproposedthattheplasmamembranehi - erarchicalarchitectureconsistsofmembranedomainsorcompartments : ( i ) actin - cytoskeletal limited domains or corrals formed by cytoskeletal fences anchored to trans - membrane proteins ( fenceposts or pickets ) ; ( ii ) lipid raft domains that can also contain GPI - linked peripheral proteins ( see Section 9 ) ; ( iii ) dynamic , oligomeric integral membrane protein domains that may or may not be linked to the cytoskeleton . Fi - nally , the basic nano - scale membrane feature would be a ﬂ uid — mosaic membrane . The function of the plasma membrane hierarchical architecture would be to : ( a ) provide a mechanism to enhance cell membrane collision / reaction rates ; ( b ) regulate spatial variations in duration of membrane molecular collisions ; and ( c ) partition the entire plasma membrane into specialized domains [ 109 , 185 ] . 12 . The revised Fluid — Mosaic Membrane Model After more than 40 years one would expect that the F - MMM would need extensive revision . In fact , the basic nano - scale model proposed in 1972 ( Fig . 1 ) [ 1 ] doesnotrequireextensiverevisionbeyondtheversions published in 1976 ( Fig . 2 ) [ 30 , 31 ] , but it does require revision that takes into consideration the data published in the last four decades and some of themisconceptionsinherentin the1970sera models [ 1 , 30 , 31 ] . ThusI have attempted to present a modi ﬁ ed F - MMM that takes into account many of the numerous contributions that have been made since the 1970s ( Fig . 6 ) . This model incorporates recent information on mem - brane domains , lipid rafts and cytoskeletal fencing that were unknown in the 1970s . The literature abounds with membrane models , but it should be clear that for basic membrane structure at the nano - structural level the F - MMM has been severely tested and found worthy , if not completely accurate at higher levels of organization where crowding and specialized domain formation are important structural considerations [ 17 , 41 – 45 , 59 – 61 , 66 – 69 , 109 , 110 , 181 , 185 , 200 , 201 , 205 – 212 , 220 , 228 – 239 ] . Indeed , membrane crowding may dominate cellular membrane structure , and most membrane models do not take this into consideration . Yeagle [ 246 ] discussed the issue of membrane crowding and concluded that most models do not take this into account . In fact , most membranes are very likely crowded structures , with integral membraneproteinsseparatedbyonlyafewlayers ofphospholipidmol - ecules [ 246 ] . IntheirarticleVerbeetal . [ 44 ] listedanumberofstructuralshortcom - ings of theoriginal1972 F - MMMproposal . ( I willnotattempt here todis - cuss all of the functional shortcomings of membrane models ) Some of these criticisms were actually addressed in the 1976 version of the F - MMM ( Fig . 2 ) [ 30 , 31 ] , and I have attempted to overcome most of the re - mainder of these in a revised F - MMM ( Fig . 6 ) . Obviously many of these criticisms cannot be easily addressed in any cartoon model of the plasma membrane , especiallypropertiesthataredynamicandcannotbepresent - edinastaticmedium , butIhaveattemptedtoincorporatemostoftheim - portant criticisms of the F - MMM into a single ﬁ gure ( Fig . 6 ) . In this ﬁ gure differenttypesofinteractionsoccurwithintegralmembraneproteinsand glycoproteins , membrane lipids , and membrane - associated cytoskeletal systems and extracellular matrix components . These non - random inter - actions are important in controlling the mobilities , distributions and ag - gregation states of membrane components . Since the cell membrane is a dynamic structure , changes in the interactions of membrane compo - nents are especially important in determining functional properties . In time , this picture will undoubtedly become more and more complex , just as the original concepts of membrane structure have evolved into more and more complex structures . An important aspect of the revised F - MMM was discussed by Bagatolli et al . [ 59 ] . That is the concept that molecules in biological membranes exist as non - uniform , non - random cooperative elements in thermodynamic equilibrium phases with compositional ﬂ uctuations . Membrane molecules can exist in domains of small - scale nano - sized structures to domains of micrometer size or more in the membrane plane . This concept was completely ignored in the original F - MMM , but it is vitally important to our understanding of non - random mem - branecooperativeinteractions , thedynamicsofmembranecomponents and the reversible formations of membrane domains . In Fig . 6 this is Fig . 6 . AnupdatedFluid — MosaicMembraneModelthatcontainsinformationonmembranedomainstructuresandmembrane - associatedcytoskeletalandextracellularstructures . Differ - ent integral proteins , glycoproteins , lipids and oligosaccharides are represented by different colors , and where the membrane has been peeled - up to view the inner membrane surface cytoskeletalfencing isapparentthat restricts thelateral diffusionofsomebut not alltrans - membrane glycoproteins . Otherlateraldiffusion restriction mechanismsarealso represented , suchaslipiddomains , integralmembraneglycoproteincomplexformation ( seeninthemembranecut - away ) , polysaccharide – glycoproteinassociations ( atthefartopleft ) anddirector indirectattachmentofinnersurfacemembranedomainstocytoskeletalelements ( atlowerleft ) . Althoughthis ﬁ guresuggestssomepossibleintegralmembraneproteinandlipidmobility restraint mechanisms , it does not accurately present the sizes or structures of integral membrane proteins , cytoskeletal structures , polysaccharides , lipids , submicro - or nano - sized do - mains or membrane - associated cytoskeletal structuresor their crowding inthe membrane . 1462 G . L . Nicolson / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1838 ( 2014 ) 1451 – 1466 Author ' s personal copy schematically represented by molecules ( within domains ) of different colors , but such colors or distinctions are illusions that bear no resem - blance torealmembranes , nor is there anywaytorepresent thecompo - sitional ﬂ uctuations and dynamics within the colored domains of Fig . 6 . 13 . Future directions Future investigations on cell membranes will likely involve mem - brane modi ﬁ cations to improve health or correct membrane dysfunc - tions in transport , signaling , biosynthesis , remodeling and other membrane functions . In this context membrane lipid modi ﬁ cations by dietary supplements and drugs to improve function and correct defects in membrane structure , enzymatics , signaling and domain formation will be important as well as the development of new membrane - active agents to manipulate and correct pathological alterations of membrane components and their activities and dynamics [ 247 , 248 ] . The last few decades of research on cellular membranes has concen - trated on composition , function and dynamics . Future work will likely concentrate on answering additional questions on the thermodynamics and physical explanations concerning the relationships between the structure and functional activities of membrane components . Cellularmembranes arenot autonomouscellular structures , because they are linked in several ways throughout the cellular interior through cytoplasmic systems , including cytoskeletal networks , signal transduc - tion systems , transport systems , and other structural , enzymatic and communication networks . In tissues membranes are also linked outside the cell to extracellular matrix , other cells and to interstitial protein structures . Thus cellular membranes are fully integrated structures within tissues , and plasma membranes must at the same time be sensi - tive and reactive to environmental changes and signals . This is probably whymembranes haveevolvedtobecomesuchcomplex , dynamicstruc - tures . They have to quickly and selectively respond to a number of quite different signals from inside and outside cells . How they do this by sub - tle changes in membrane structure , dynamics and organization will continue to intrigue investigators for some time . Acknowledgements The Institute for Molecular Medicine is supported by donations , grants and contracts from several organizations , including the U . S . Gov - ernment Department of Health and Human Services and several non - pro ﬁ t charitable organizations . References [ 1 ] S . J . Singer , G . L . Nicolson , The Fluid Mosaic Model of the structure of cell mem - branes , Science 175 ( 1972 ) 720 – 731 . [ 2 ] J . D . Robertson , The ultrastructure of cell membranes and their derivatives , Biochem . Soc . Symp . 16 ( 1959 ) 3 – 43 . [ 3 ] J . D . Robertson , The molecular structure and contact relationships of cell mem - branes , Prog . Biophys . Biophys . Chem . 10 ( 1960 ) 343 – 418 . [ 4 ] J . D . Robertson , Membrane structure , J . Cell Biol . 91 ( 1981 ) 191s – 204s . [ 5 ] J . F . Danielli , H . Davson , A contribution to the theory of permeability of thin ﬁ lms , J . Cell . Comp . Physiol . 5 ( 1935 ) 495 – 508 . [ 6 ] E . Gorter , F . Grendel , On bimolecular layers of lipoids on the chromocytes of the blood , J . Exp . Med . 41 ( 1925 ) 439 – 443 . [ 7 ] P . Pinto da Silva , D . Branton , Membrane splitting in freeze - etching . Covalently bound ferritin as a membrane marker , J . Cell Biol . 45 ( 1970 ) 598 – 605 . [ 8 ] W . Stoeckenius , D . M . Engelman , Current models for the structure of biological membranes , J . Cell Biol . 42 ( 1969 ) 613 – 646 . [ 9 ] A . A . Benson , On the orientation of lipids in chloroplast and cell membranes , J . Am . Oil Chem . Soc . 43 ( 1966 ) 265 – 270 . [ 10 ] D . E . Green , D . W . Allmann , E . Bachmann , H . Baum , K . Kopaczyk , E . F . Korman , S . Lipton , D . H . MacLennan , D . G . McConnell , J . F . Perdue , J . S . Rieske , A . Tzagoloff , For - mation of membranes by repeating units , Arch . Biochem . Biophys . 119 ( 1987 ) 312 – 335 . [ 11 ] A . D . Bangham , Lipid bilayers and biomembranes , Annu . Rev . Biochem . 41 ( 1972 ) 753 – 776 . [ 12 ] M . S . Bretscher , Membrane structure : some general principals , Science 181 ( 1973 ) 622 – 829 . [ 13 ] J . K . Blasie , C . R . Worthington , Planar liquid - like arrangement ofphotopigment mol - ecules in frog retinal receptor disk membranes , J . Mol . Biol . 39 ( 1969 ) 417 – 439 . [ 14 ] D . Chapman , Phase transitions and ﬂ uidity characteristics of lipids and cell mem - branes , Q . Rev . Biophys . 8 ( 1975 ) 185 – 235 . [ 15 ] M . Shinitzky , Y . Barenholz , Fluidityparametersoflipidregionsdeterminedby ﬂ uo - rescence polarization , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 515 ( 1978 ) 367 – 394 . [ 16 ] G . van Meer , D . R . Voelker , G . W . Feigenson , Membrane lipids : where they are and how they behave , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 ( 2008 ) 112 – 124 . [ 17 ] M . Edidin , Lipids onthe frontier : a quartercentury ofcell - membrane bilayers , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 4 ( 2003 ) 414 – 418 . [ 18 ] K . Simons , W . L . Vaz , Model systems , lipid rafts , and cell membranes , Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 33 ( 2004 ) 269 – 295 . [ 19 ] A . J . Garcia - Sáez , P . Schwille , Surface analysis of membrane dynamics , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1798 ( 2010 ) 766 – 776 . [ 20 ] J . M . Sanderson , Resolving the kinetics of lipid , protein and peptide diffusion in membranes , Mol . Membr . Biol . 29 ( 2012 ) 118 – 143 . [ 21 ] R . Machán , M . Hof , Lipid diffusion in planar membranes investigated by ﬂ uores - cence correlation spectroscopy , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1798 ( 2010 ) 1377 – 1391 . [ 22 ] G . Lindblom , G . Orädd , Lipid lateral diffusion and membrane heterogeneity , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1788 ( 2009 ) 234 – 244 . [ 23 ] D . F . H . Wallalch , P . H . Zahler , Protein conformations in cellular membranes , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 56 ( 1966 ) 1552 – 1559 . [ 24 ] J . Lenard , S . J . Singer , Proteinconformationincellmembranepreparationsasstudied byopticalrotatorydispersionandcirculardichroism , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 56 ( 1966 ) 1828 – 1835 . [ 25 ] S . J . Kennedy , Structuresof membraneproteins , J . Membr . Biol . 42 ( 1978 ) 265 – 279 . [ 26 ] T . C . Squier , D . J . Bigelow , D . D . Thomas , Lipid ﬂ uidity directly modulates the overall protein rotational motility of the Ca - ATPase in sarcoplasmic reticulum , J . Biol . Chem . 263 ( 1988 ) 9178 – 9186 . [ 27 ] S . J . Singer , The molecular organization of membranes , Annu . Rev . Biochem . 43 ( 1974 ) 805 – 833 . [ 28 ] T . Gil , J . H . Ipsen , O . G . Mouritsen , M . C . Sabra , M . M . Sperotto , M . J . Zuckermann , The - oretical analysis of protein organization in lipid membranes , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1376 ( 1998 ) 245 – 266 . [ 29 ] L . D . Frye , M . Edidin , The rapid intermixing of cell surface antigens after formation of mouse – human heterokaryons , J . Cell Sci . 7 ( 1970 ) 319 – 335 . [ 30 ] G . L . Nicolson , Transmembrane control of the receptors on normal and tumor cells . I . Cytoplasmic in ﬂ uence over cell surface components , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 457 ( 1976 ) 57 – 108 . [ 31 ] G . L . Nicolson , T . Ji , G . Poste , The dynamics of cell membrane organization , in : G . Poste , G . L . Nicolson ( Eds . ) , Dynamic Aspects of Cell Surface Organization , Elsevier , New York , 1977 , pp . 1 – 73 . [ 32 ] D . Axelrod , Lateralmotionofmembraneproteinsandbiologicalfunction , J . Membr . Biol . 75 ( 1983 ) 1 – 10 . [ 33 ] W . W . Webb , L . S . Barak , D . W . Tank , E . S . Wu , Molecular mobility on the cell surface , Biochem . Soc . Symp . 46 ( 1981 ) 191 – 205 . [ 34 ] K . Jacobson , A . Ishihara , R . Inman , Lateral diffusion of proteins in membranes , Annu . Rev . Physiol . 49 ( 1987 ) 163 – 175 . [ 35 ] M . Edidin , S . C . Kuo , M . P . Sheetz , Lateralmovementsofmembraneglycoproteinsre - stricted by dynamic cytoplasmic barriers , Science 254 ( 1991 ) 1379 – 1382 . [ 36 ] F . Zhang , G . M . Lee , K . Jacobson , Proteinlateralmobilityasare ﬂ ectionofmembrane microstructure , Bioessays 15 ( 1993 ) 579 – 588 . [ 37 ] H . S . Mchaourab , P . R . Steed , K . Kazmier , Towardthefourthdimensionofmembrane protein structure : insights into dynamics from spin - labeling EPR spectroscopy , Structure 19 ( 2011 ) 1549 – 1561 . [ 38 ] E . J . Helmreich , E . L . Elson , Mobility ofproteinsand lipidsinmembranes , Adv . Cyclic Nucleotide Protein Phosphorylation Res . 18 ( 1984 ) 1 – 62 . [ 39 ] A . Watts , Membrane structure and dynamics , Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 1 ( 1989 ) 691 – 700 . [ 40 ] P . de Weer , A century of thinking about cell membranes , Annu . Rev . Physiol . 62 ( 2000 ) 919 – 926 . [ 41 ] J . N . Israelachvili , Re ﬁ nement of the ﬂ uid - mosaic model of membrane structure , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 469 ( 1977 ) 221 – 225 . [ 42 ] S . Damjanovich , R . Gáspár Jr . , C . Pieri , Dynamic receptor superstructures at the plasma membrane , Q . Rev . Biophys . 30 ( 1997 ) 67 – 106 . [ 43 ] K . Jacobson , E . D . Sheets , R . Simson , Revisiting the ﬂ uid mosaic model of mem - branes , Science 268 ( 1995 ) 1441 – 1442 . [ 44 ] G . Verbe , J . Szöllosi , J . Matkó , P . Nagy , T . Farkas , L . Vigh , L . Mátyus , T . A . Waldmann , S . Damjanovich , Dynamic , yet structured : the cell membrane three decades after the Singer – Nicolson model , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 100 ( 2003 ) 8053 – 8058 . [ 45 ] A . Winiewska , J . Draus , W . K . Subczynski , Is the ﬂ uid - mosaic model of biological membranes fully relevant ? Studies on lipid organization in model and biological membranes , Cell . Mol . Biol . Lett . 8 ( 2003 ) 147 – 159 . [ 46 ] S . J . Singer , The structure and function of membranes — a personal memoir , J . Membr . Biol . 129 ( 1992 ) 3 – 12 . [ 47 ] W . Kauzmann , Some factors in the interpretation of protein denaturing , Adv . Pro - tein Chem . 14 ( 1959 ) 1 – 63 . [ 48 ] J . Zimmerberg , K . Gawrisch , The physical chemistry of biological membranes , Nat . Chem . Biol . 2 ( 2006 ) 564 – 567 . [ 49 ] S . J . Singer , Themolecularorganizationofmembranes , in : L . I . Roth ﬁ eld ( Ed . ) , Struc - ture and Function of Biological Membranes , Academic Press , New York , 1971 , pp . 145 – 222 . [ 50 ] S . J . Singer , The structure and insertion of integral proteins in membranes , Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 6 ( 1990 ) 247 – 296 . [ 51 ] G . von Heijne , Transcending the impenetrable : how proteins come to terms with membranes , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 947 ( 1988 ) 307 – 333 . [ 52 ] W . A . Cramer , D . M . Engelman , G . von Heijne , D . C . Rees , Forces involved in the as - sembly and stabilization of membrane proteins , FASEB J . 6 ( 1992 ) 3397 – 3402 . 1463 G . L . Nicolson / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1838 ( 2014 ) 1451 – 1466 Author ' s personal copy [ 53 ] G . vonHeijne , Membrane - proteintopology , Nat . Rev . Mol . CellBiol . 7 ( 2006 ) 909 – 918 . [ 54 ] P . Hubert , P . Sawma , J . - P . Duneau , J . Khao , J . Hénin , D . Bagnard , J . Strugis , Single - spanning transmembrane domains in cell growth and cell – cell interactions , Cell Adhes . Migr . 4 ( 2010 ) 313 – 324 . [ 55 ] J . N . Israelachvili , S . Marcelja , R . G . Hom , Physical principals of membrane organiza - tion , Q . Rev . Biophys . 13 ( 1980 ) 121 – 200 . [ 56 ] P . R . Cullis , B . Kruijff , Lipid polymorphism and the functional roles of lipids in bio - logical membranes , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 559 ( 1979 ) 399 – 420 . [ 57 ] D . Marsh , General features of phospholipids phase transitions , Chem . Phys . Lipids 57 ( 1991 ) 109 – 120 . [ 58 ] J . M . Boggs , Lipidintermolecularhydrogenbonding : in ﬂ uence onstructuralorgani - zation and membrane function , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 906 ( 1987 ) 353 – 404 . [ 59 ] L . A . Bagatolli , J . H . Ipsen , A . C . Simonsen , O . G . Mouritsen , An outlook on the organi - zationoflipidsinmembranes : searchingforarealisticconnectionwiththeorgani - zation of biological membranes , Prog . Lipid Res . 49 ( 2010 ) 378 – 389 . [ 60 ] D . A . Brown , E . London , Structure of ordered lipid domains in biological mem - branes , J . Membr . Biol . 164 ( 1998 ) 103 – 114 . [ 61 ] P . Somerharju , J . A . Virtanen , K . H . Cheng , Lateral organization of membrane lipids . The superlattice view , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1440 ( 1999 ) 32 – 48 . [ 62 ] A . R . Todeschini , S . I . Hakomori , Functional role of glycosphingolipids and ganglio - sides in control of cell adhesion , motility , growth , through glycosynaptic microdo - mains , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1780 ( 2008 ) 421 – 433 . [ 63 ] M . Edidin , The state of lipid rafts : from model membranes to cells , Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 32 ( 2003 ) 257 – 283 . [ 64 ] J . R . Silvius , Partitioning of membrane molecules between raft and non - raft domains : insights from model - membrane studies , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1746 ( 2005 ) 193 – 202 . [ 65 ] J . F . Hancock , Lipid rafts : contentious only from simplistic standpoints , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 ( 2006 ) 456 – 462 . [ 66 ] P . J . Quinn , C . Wolf , Theliquid - orderedphaseinmembranes , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1788 ( 2009 ) 33 – 46 . [ 67 ] K . Simons , J . L . Sampaio , Membrane organization and lipid rafts , Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 3 ( 2010 ) a004697 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a004697 . [ 68 ] P . J . Quinn , Lipid – lipid interactions in bilayer membranes : married couples and ca - sual liaisons , Prog . Lipid Res . 31 ( 2012 ) 179 – 198 . [ 69 ] O . G . Mouritsen , M . Bloom , Mattress model of lipid – protein interactions in mem - branes , Biophys . J . 46 ( 1984 ) 141 – 153 . [ 70 ] S . Leikin , M . M . Kozlov , N . L . Fuller , R . P . Rand , Measured effects of diacylglycerol on structural and elastic properties of phospholipids membranes , Biophys . J . 71 ( 1996 ) 2623 – 2632 . [ 71 ] L . V . Chernomordik , M . M . Kozlov , Protein – lipidinterplayinfusion and ﬁ ssion of bi - ological membranes , Annu . Rev . Biochem . 72 ( 2003 ) 175 – 207 . [ 72 ] H . T . McMahon , J . L . Gallop , Membrane curvature and mechanisms of dynamic cell membrane modeling , Nature 438 ( 2005 ) 590 – 596 . [ 73 ] J . Zimmerberg , K . Gawrich , The physical chemistry of biological membranes , Nat . Chem . Biol . 11 ( 2006 ) 564 – 567 . [ 74 ] J . Zimmerberg , M . M . Kozlov , How proteins produce cellular membrane curvature , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 ( 2006 ) 9 – 19 . [ 75 ] T . Baumgart , B . R . Capraro , C . Zhu , S . L . Das , Thermodynamics and mechanics of membrane curvature generation and sensing by proteins and lipids , Annu . Rev . Phys . Chem . 62 ( 2011 ) 483 – 506 . [ 76 ] A . Frost , V . M . Unger , P . DeCamilli , TheBARdomainsuperfamily : membrane - molding macromolecules , Cell 137 ( 2009 ) 191 – 196 . [ 77 ] B . Antonny , Membrane deformation by protein coats , Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 18 ( 2006 ) 386 – 394 . [ 78 ] A . - H . Ftemadi , Membrane asymmetry : a survey and critical appraisal of the meth - odology . II . Methods for assessing the unequal distribution of lipids , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 604 ( 1980 ) 423 – 475 . [ 79 ] G . L . Nicolson , S . J . Singer , Ferritin - conjugated plant agglutinins as speci ﬁ c saccha - ride stains for electron microscopy : application to saccharidesbound to cell mem - branes , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 68 ( 1971 ) 942 – 946 . [ 80 ] P . Siekevitz , Biological membranes : the dynamics of their organization , Annu . Rev . Physiol . 54 ( 1972 ) 117 – 140 . [ 81 ] R . F . Zwaal , B . Roelofsen , C . M . Colley , Localization of red cell membrane constitu - ents , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 300 ( 1973 ) 159 – 182 . [ 82 ] G . L . Nicolson , S . J . Singer , The distribution and asymmetry of saccharides on mam - malian cell membrane surfaces utilizing ferritin - conjugated plant agglutinins as speci ﬁ c saccharide stains , J . Cell Biol . 60 ( 1974 ) 236 – 248 . [ 83 ] T . L . Steck , G . Dawson , Topographical distribution of complex carbohydrates in the erythrocyte membrane , J . Biol . Chem . 249 ( 1974 ) 2135 – 2142 . [ 84 ] T . L . Steck , The organization of proteins in the human red blood cell membrane , J . Cell Biol . 62 ( 1974 ) 1 – 19 . [ 85 ] J . E . Rothman , E . A . Davidowiec , Asymmetric exchange of vesicle phospholipids cat - alyzed by the phosphatidylcholine exchange protein . Measurement of inside – out - side transitions , Biochemistry 14 ( 1975 ) 2809 – 2816 . [ 86 ] J . E . Rothman , J . Lenard , Membrane asymmetry , Science 195 ( 1977 ) 743 – 753 . [ 87 ] M . S . Bretscher , M . C . Raff , Mammalian plasma membranes , Nature 258 ( 1975 ) 43 – 49 . [ 88 ] T . S . Pomorski , S . Hrafnsdottir , P . F . Devaux , G . van Meer , Lipid distribution and transport across cellular membranes , Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 12 ( 2001 ) 139 – 148 . [ 89 ] D . L . Daleke , Regulation of transbilayer plasma membrane phospholipid asymme - try , J . Lipid Res . 44 ( 2003 ) 233 – 242 . [ 90 ] F . J . Sharom , Flipping and ﬂ opping — lipids on the move , IUBMB Life 63 ( 2011 ) 736 – 746 . [ 91 ] G . von Heijne , D . Rees , Membranes : reading between the lines , Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 18 ( 2008 ) 403 – 405 . [ 92 ] G . von Heijne , Recent advancesintheunderstandingofmembraneproteinassem - bly and structure , Q . Rev . Biophys . 32 ( 2000 ) 285 – 307 . [ 93 ] G . L . Nicolson , Cis - and trans - membrane control of cell surface topography , J . Supramol . Struct . 1 ( 1973 ) 410 – 416 . [ 94 ] G . L . Nicolson , V . T . Marchesi , S . J . Singer , Thelocalizationofspectrinontheinnersur - face of human red blood cell membranes by ferritin - conjugated antibodies , J . Cell Biol . 51 ( 1971 ) 266 – 272 . [ 95 ] G . L . Nicolson , A rapid method for determining the topological distribution of anionic sites on membrane surfaces , J . Supramol . Struct . 1 ( 1972 ) 159 – 164 . [ 96 ] G . L . Nicolson , R . G . Painter , Anionic sites of human erythrocyte membranes . II . Anti - spectrin - induced transmembrane aggregation of the binding sites for posi - tively charged colloidal particles , J . Cell Biol . 59 ( 1973 ) 395 – 406 . [ 97 ] T . H . Ji , G . L . Nicolson , Lectin binding and perturbation of the cell membrane outer surface induces a transmembrane organizational alteration at the inner surface , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 71 ( 1974 ) 2212 – 2216 . [ 98 ] R . N . Peterson , L . D . Russell , Themammalianspermatozoon : amodelforthestudyof regional speci ﬁ city in plasma membrane organization and function , Tissue Cell 17 ( 1985 ) 769 – 791 . [ 99 ] G . L . Nicolson , R . Yanagimachi , Mobility and the restriction of mobility of plasma membrane lectin - binding components , Science 184 ( 1974 ) 1294 – 1296 . [ 100 ] R . Yanagimachi , G . L . Nicolson , Y . D . Noda , M . Fujimoto , Electron microscopic obser - vations of the distribution of acidic anionic residues on hamster spermatozoa and eggs before and during fertilization , J . Ultrastruct . Res . 43 ( 1973 ) 344 – 353 . [ 101 ] B . M . Phelps , P . Primakoff , D . E . Koppel , M . G . Low , D . G . Myles , Restricted lateral dif - fusion of PH - 20 , a PI - anchored sperm membrane protein , Science 240 ( 1988 ) 1780 – 1782 . [ 102 ] S . V . Plotnikov , C . M . Waterman , Guiding cell migration by tugging , Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 25 ( 2013 ) 619 – 626 . [ 103 ] G . R . Chichili , W . Rodgers , Cytoskeleton – membrane interactions in membrane raft structure , Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 66 ( 2009 ) 2319 – 2328 . [ 104 ] G . J . Doherty , H . T . McMahon , Mediation , modulation , and consequences of mem - brane – cytoskeletal interactions , Annu . Rev . Biophys . 37 ( 2008 ) 65 – 95 . [ 105 ] T . I . Baskin , Y . Gu , Making parallellinesmeet . Transferringinformation frommicro - tubules to extracellular matrix , Cell Adhes . Migr . 6 ( 2012 ) 404 – 408 . [ 106 ] S . Stehbens , T . Wittmann , Targeting andtransport : how microtubulescontrolfocal adhesion dynamics , J . Cell Biol . 198 ( 2012 ) 481 – 489 . [ 107 ] M . P . Krahn , A . Wodarz , Phosphoinositide lipid polarity : linking the plasma mem - brane to the cytocortex , Essays Biochem . 53 ( 2012 ) 15 – 27 . [ 108 ] K . Jaqaman , S . Grinstein , Regulation from within : the cytoskeleton in transmem - brane signaling , Trends Cell Biol . 22 ( 2012 ) 515 – 526 . [ 109 ] A . Kusumi , T . K . Fujiwara , R . Chadda , M . Xie , T . A . Tsunoyama , Z . Kalay , R . S . Kasai , K . G . Suzuki , Dynamic organizing principals of the plasma membrane that regulate signal transduction : commemorating the fortieth anniversary of Singer and Nicolson ' s ﬂ uid - mosaic model , Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 28 ( 2012 ) 215 – 250 . [ 110 ] S . Stehbens , T . Wittmann , Targeting andtransport : how microtubulescontrolfocal adhesion dynamics , J . Cell Biol . 198 ( 2012 ) 481 – 489 . [ 111 ] M . Anitei , B . Ho ﬂ ack , Bridging membrane and cytoskeleton dynamics in the secre - tory and endocytic pathways , Nat . Cell Biol . 14 ( 2011 ) 11 – 19 . [ 112 ] G . L . Nicolson , R . H . Hyman , S . J . Singer , The two - dimensional topographic distribu - tion of H - 2 histocompatibility alloantigens on mouse red blood cell membranes , J . Cell Biol . 50 ( 1971 ) 905 – 910 . [ 113 ] M . Edidin , A . Weiss , Antigen cap formation in cultured ﬁ broblasts : a re ﬂ ection of membrane ﬂ uidity and cell motility , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 69 ( 1972 ) 2456 – 2459 . [ 114 ] G . Poste , D . Papahadjopoulos , G . L . Nicolson , Local anesthetics affect transmem - brane cytoskeletal control of mobility and distribution of cell surface receptors , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 72 ( 1975 ) 4430 – 4434 . [ 115 ] L . Y . Bourguigon , S . J . Singer , Transmembrane interactions and the mechanism of capping of surface receptors by their speci ﬁ c ligands , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 74 ( 1977 ) 5031 – 5035 . [ 116 ] E . R . Unanue , W . D . Perkins , M . J . Karnovsky , Ligand - induced movement of lympho - cyte membrane macromolecules . I . Analysis by immuno ﬂ uorescence and ultra - structural radioautography , J . Exp . Med . 136 ( 1972 ) 885 – 906 . [ 117 ] D . B . Tse , C . R . Cantor , J . McDowell , B . Pernis , RecyclingclassIMHCantigens : dynam - ics of internalization , acidi ﬁ cation , and ligand - degradation in murine T lympho - blasts , J . Mol . Cell . Immunol . 2 ( 1986 ) 315 – 329 . [ 118 ] B . Geiger , S . Yehuda - Levenberg , A . D . Bershadsky , Molecular interactions in the submembrane plaque of cell – cell and cell – matrix adhesions , Acta Anat . ( Basel ) 154 ( 1995 ) 42 – 62 . [ 119 ] E . Fuchs , D . W . Cleveland , A structural scaffolding of intermediate ﬁ laments in health and disease , Science 279 ( 1998 ) 1897 – 1907 . [ 120 ] G . L . Nicolson , G . Poste , Lectin - mediated agglutination of murine lymphoma cells . Cell surface deformability and reversibility of agglutination by saccharides , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 554 ( 1979 ) 520 – 531 . [ 121 ] S . Kobialka , N . Beuret , H . Ben - Tekya , M . Spiess , Glycosaminoglycan chains affect exocytic and endocytic protein traf ﬁ c , Traf ﬁ c 10 ( 2009 ) 1845 – 1855 . [ 122 ] P . J . Salas , D . E . Vega - Salas , J . Hochman , E . Rodriguez - Boulan , M . Edidin , Selectivean - choring in the speci ﬁ c plasma membrane domain : a role in epithelial cell polarity , J . Cell Biol . 107 ( 1988 ) 2363 – 2376 . [ 123 ] P . Roca - Cusach , T . Iskratsch , M . P . Sheetz , Finding the weakest link — exploring integrin - mediatedmechanicalmolecularpathways , J . CellSci . 125 ( 2012 ) 3025 – 3038 . [ 124 ] J . Ando , K . Yamamoto , Effects of shear stress and stretch on endothelial function , Antioxid . Redox Signal . 15 ( 2011 ) 1389 – 1403 . [ 125 ] B . Geiger , Membrane – cytoskeletal interaction , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 737 ( 1983 ) 305 – 341 . 1464 G . L . Nicolson / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1838 ( 2014 ) 1451 – 1466 Author ' s personal copy [ 126 ] E . J . Luna , A . L . Hitt , Cytoskeleton – plasma membrane interactions , Science 258 ( 1992 ) 955 – 964 . [ 127 ] M . P . Sheetz , Cell control by membrane – cytoskeleton adhesion , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 ( 2001 ) 392 – 396 . [ 128 ] C . S . Weirich , J . P . Erzberger , Y . Barral , TheseptinfamilyofGTPases : architectureand dynamics , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 ( 2008 ) 478 – 489 . [ 129 ] A . Hagiwara , Y . Taaka , R . Hikawa , N . Morone , A . Kusumi , H . Kimura , M . Kinoshita , Submembranousseptinsasrelativelystablecomponentsofactin - basedmembrane skeleton , Cytoskeleton 68 ( 2011 ) 512 – 525 . [ 130 ] S . Mostowy , P . Cossart , Septins : the fourth component of the cytoskeleton , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 13 ( 2012 ) 183 – 194 . [ 131 ] F . Caudron , Y . Barral , Septins and the lateral compartmentalization of eukaryotic membranes , Dev . Cell 16 ( 2009 ) 493 – 506 . [ 132 ] T . E . Roth , K . R . Porter , Yolk protein uptake in the oocyte of the mosquito Aedes aegypti L , J . Cell Biol . 20 ( 1964 ) 313 – 332 . [ 133 ] D . S . Friend , M . G . Farquhar , Functions of coated vesicles during protein absorption in the rate vas deferens , J . Cell Biol . 35 ( 1967 ) 357 – 376 . [ 134 ] B . M . Pearse , Coated vesicles from pig brain : puri ﬁ cation and biochemical charac - terization , J . Mol . Biol . 97 ( 1975 ) 93 – 98 . [ 135 ] J . S . Bonifacino , J . Lippincott - Schwartz , Coatproteins : shaping membrane transport , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 4 ( 2003 ) 409 – 414 . [ 136 ] J . Goldberg , Decoding of sorting signals by coatomer through a GTPase switch in the COPI coat complex , Cell 100 ( 2000 ) 671 – 679 . [ 137 ] R . G . Parton , M . A . del Pozo , Caveolae as plasma membrane sensors , protectors and organizers , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 14 ( 2013 ) 98 – 112 . [ 138 ] C . Deschamps , A . Echard , F . Niedergang , Phagocytosis and cytokinesis : do cells use common tools to cut and to eat ? Highlights on common themes and differences , Traf ﬁ c 14 ( 2013 ) 355 – 364 . [ 139 ] M . Bohdanowicz , S . Grinstein , Role of phospholipids in endocytosis , phagocytosis and macropinocytosis , Physiol . Rev . 93 ( 2013 ) 69 – 106 . [ 140 ] S . F . Ang , H . Fölsch , The role of secretory and endocytic pathways in the mainte - nance of cell polarity , Essays Biochem . 53 ( 2012 ) 29 – 39 . [ 141 ] D . J . Williamson , D . M . Owen , J . Rossy , A . Magenau , M . Wehrmann , J . J . Gooding , K . Gaus , Pre - existing clusters of the adaptor Lat do not participate in early T cell sig - naling events , Nat . Immunol . 12 ( 2011 ) 655 – 672 . [ 142 ] D . M . Underhill , H . S . Goodridge , Information processing during phagocytosis , Nat . Rev . Immunol . 12 ( 2012 ) 492 – 502 . [ 143 ] M . L . Dustin , D . Depoil , New insights into the T cell synapse from single molecule techniques , Nat . Rev . Immunol . 11 ( 2011 ) 672 – 684 . [ 144 ] U . S . Schwarz , M . L . Gardel , United we stand : integrating the actin cytoskeleton and cell – matrix adhesions in cellular mechanotransduction , J . Cell Sci . 125 ( 2012 ) 3051 – 3060 . [ 145 ] S . H . Lee , R . Dominguez , Regulation of actin cytoskeleton dynamics in cells , Mol . Cells 29 ( 2010 ) 311 – 325 . [ 146 ] C . Revenu , R . Athman , S . Robine , D . Louvard , The co - workers of actin ﬁ laments : from cell structures to signals , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 ( 2004 ) 635 – 646 . [ 147 ] P . A . Janmey , U . Lindberg , Cytoskeletal regulation : rich in lipids , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 ( 2004 ) 658 – 666 . [ 148 ] J . T . Parsons , A . R . Horwitz , M . A . Schwartz , Cell adhesion : integrating cytoskeletal dynamics and cellular tension , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 ( 2010 ) 633 – 643 . [ 149 ] P . E . Morton , M . Parsons , Dissecting cell adhesion architecture using advanced im - aging techniques , Cell Adhes . Migr . 5 ( 2011 ) 351 – 359 . [ 150 ] P . Roca - Cusachs , T . Iskratsch , M . P . Sheetz , Finding the weakest link — exploring integrin - mediated mechanical molecular pathways , J . Cell Sci . 125 ( 2012 ) 3025 – 3038 . [ 151 ] B . György , T . G . Szabó , M . Pásztói , Z . Pál , P . Misják , B . Aradi , V . László , E . Pállinger , E . Pap , A . Kittel , G . Nagy , A . Falus , E . I . Buzás , Membrane vesicles , current state - of - the - art : emerging roles of extracellular vesicles , Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 68 ( 2011 ) 2667 – 2688 . [ 152 ] A . V . Vlassov , S . Magdaleno , R . Setterquist , R . Conrad , Exosomes : currentknowledge of their composition , biological functions , and diagnostic and therapeutic poten - tials , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1820 ( 2012 ) 940 – 948 . [ 153 ] Y . Yuana , A . Sturk , R . Nieuwland , Extracellular vesicles in physiological and patho - logical conditions , Blood Rev . 27 ( 2013 ) 31 – 39 . [ 154 ] M . D . Hollenberg , Structure – activity relationships for transmembrane signaling : the receptor ' s turn , FASEB J . 5 ( 1991 ) 178 – 186 . [ 155 ] C . W . M . Haest , Interactions between membrane skeleton proteinsand the intrinsic domainoftheerythrocytemembrane , Biochim . Biophys . Acta694 ( 1982 ) 331 – 352 . [ 156 ] J . D . Jordan , E . M . Landau , R . Iyengar , Signalingnetworks : theoriginsofcellularmul - titasking , Cell 103 ( 2000 ) 193 – 200 . [ 157 ] J . E . Pessin , A . R . Saltiel , Signalingpathwaysininsulinaction : moleculartargetsofin - sulin resistance , J . Clin . Investig . 106 ( 2000 ) 165 – 169 . [ 158 ] W . Cho , Buildingsignalingcomplexesatthemembrane , Sci . STKE2006 ( 2006 ) pe7 . [ 159 ] I . D . Campbell , M . J . Humphries , Integrin structure , activation and interactions , Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 3 ( 2011 ) a004994 . [ 160 ] B . Geiger , A . Bershadsky , Assemblyandmechanosensoryfunctionoffocalcontacts , Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 13 ( 2001 ) 584 – 592 . [ 161 ] B . Geiger , A . Bershadsky , R . Pankov , K . M . Yamada , Transmembrane extracel - lular matrix – cytoskeleton crosstalk , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 ( 2001 ) 793 – 805 . [ 162 ] M . L . Diaz , Membrane physiology and the biophysics in the next decade : an open balcony to multiple scenarios , Front . Physiol . 1 ( 2010 ) 1 – 2 ( Article 23 ) . [ 163 ] T . J . Jentsch , CLC chloride channels and transporters : from genes to protein structure , pathology and physiology , Crit . Rev . Biochem . Mol . Biol . 43 ( 2008 ) 3 – 36 . [ 164 ] T . L . Steck , G . Faribanks , D . F . Wallach , Dispositionofthemajorproteinsintheisolat - ed erythrocyte membrane , Biochemistry 10 ( 1971 ) 2617 – 2624 . [ 165 ] S . Svetina , D . Kuzman , R . E . Waugh , P . Ziherl , B . Zeks , The cooperative role of mem - brane skeleton and bilayer in the mechanical behavior of red blood cells , Bioelectrochem . 62 ( 2004 ) 107 – 113 . [ 166 ] N . Mohandas , P . G . Gallagher , Red cell membrane : past , present , and future , Blood 112 ( 2008 ) 3939 – 3948 . [ 167 ] T . J . Mankelow , T . J . Satchwell , N . M . Burton , Re ﬁ nedviewsofthemulti - proteincom - plexes in the erythrocyte membrane , Blood Cells Mol . Dis . 49 ( 2012 ) 1 – 10 . [ 168 ] R . P . Rand , A . C . Burton , Mechanical properties of the red cell membrane . I . Mem - brane stiffness and intracellular pressure , Biophys . J . 4 ( 1964 ) 115 – 135 . [ 169 ] N . Mohandas , E . Evans , Mechanical properties of the red cellmembrane inrelation to molecular structure and genetic defects , Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 23 ( 1994 ) 787 – 818 . [ 170 ] D . E . Discher , New insights into erythrocyte membrane organization and microelasticity , Curr . Opin . Hematol . 7 ( 2000 ) 117 – 122 . [ 171 ] V . T . Marchesi , E . SteersJr . , Selective solubilizationofa protein ofthered cellmem - brane , Science 159 ( 1968 ) 203 – 204 . [ 172 ] N . Mohandas , J . A . Chasis , Redbloodcelldeformability , membranematerialproper - ties and shape : regulation by transmembrane , skeletal and cytosolic proteins and lipids , Semin . Hematol . 30 ( 1993 ) 171 – 192 . [ 173 ] M . Cavey , T . Lecuit , Molecular bases of cell – cell junction stability and dynamics , Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 1 ( 2009 ) a002998 . [ 174 ] D . A . Goodenough , D . L . Paul , Gap junctions , Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 1 ( 2009 ) a002576 . [ 175 ] K . Brennan , G . Of ﬁ ah , E . A . McSherry , A . M . Hopkins , Tightjunctions : a barrierto the initiation and progression of breast cancer ? J . Biomed . Biotechnol . 2010 ( 2010 ) 460607 . [ 176 ] S . Koch , A . Nurat , Dynamic regulation of epithelial cell fate and barrier function by intercellular junctions , Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 1165 ( 2009 ) 220 – 227 . [ 177 ] J . A . Orellana , H . A . Sánchez , K . A . Schalper , V . Figueroa , J . C . Sáez , Regulation of intra - cellularcalciumsignalingthroughcalciuminteractionswithconnexin - basedchan - nels , Adv . Exp . Med . Biol . 740 ( 2012 ) 777 – 794 . [ 178 ] L . Matsuuchi , C . C . Naus , Gap junction proteins on the move : connexins , the cyto - skeleton and migration , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1828 ( 2013 ) 94 – 108 . [ 179 ] W . W . Franke , S . Rickelt , M . Barth , S . Pieperhoff , The junctions that don ' t ﬁ t the scheme : special symmetrical cell – cell junctions of their own kind , Cell Tissue Res . 338 ( 2009 ) 1 – 17 . [ 180 ] S . Marcelja , Lipid - mediated protein interaction in membranes , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 455 ( 1976 ) 1 – 7 . [ 181 ] Olaf S . Andersen , R . E . Köppe , Bilayer thickness and membraneprotein function : an energetic perspective , Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 36 ( 2007 ) 107 – 130 . [ 182 ] O . G . Mouritsen , Model answers to lipid membrane questions , Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 3 ( 2011 ) a004622 . [ 183 ] O . G . Mouritsen , Lipids , curvature andnano - medicine , Eur . J . Lipid Sci . Technol . 113 ( 2011 ) 1174 – 1187 . [ 184 ] F . Dumas , M . C . Lebrun , J . - F . Tocanne , Is the protein / lipid hydrophobic matching principle relevant to membrane organization and functions ? FEBS Lett . 458 ( 1999 ) 271 – 277 . [ 185 ] A . Kusumi , K . G . Suzuki , R . S . Kasai , K . Ritchie , T . K . Fujiwara , Hierarchical mesoscale domain organization of the plasma membrane , Trends Biochem . Sci . 36 ( 2011 ) 604 – 615 . [ 186 ] W . K . Subczynski , W . E . Antholine , J . S . Hyde , A . Kusumi , Microimmiscibility and three - dimensional dynamics structures of phosphatidylcholine – cholesterol mem - branes : translationaldiffusionofacoppercomplexinthemembrane , Biochemistry 29 ( 1990 ) 7936 – 7945 . [ 187 ] M . Pasenkiewicz - Gierula , W . K . Subcznski , A . Kusumi , In ﬂ uence of phospholipids unsaturation on the cholesterol distribution in membranes , Biochimie 73 ( 1991 ) 1311 – 1316 . [ 188 ] A . Kusumi , J . S . Hyde , Spin - label saturation - transfer electron spin resonance detec - tion of transientassociation of rhodopsininreconstitutedmembranes , Biochemis - try 21 ( 1982 ) 5978 – 5983 . [ 189 ] T . Gill , M . C . Sabra , J . H . Ipsen , O . G . Mouritsen , Wetting and capillary condensa - tion as a means of protein organization in membranes , Biophys . J . 73 ( 1997 ) 1728 – 1741 . [ 190 ] P . J . Quinn , Plasma membrane phospholipid asymmetry , Subcell . Biochem . 36 ( 2002 ) 39 – 60 . [ 191 ] A . Anishkin , C . Kung , Stiffened lipid platforms at molecular force foci , Proc . Natl . Acad . Aci . U . S . A . 110 ( 2013 ) 4886 – 4892 . [ 192 ] H . Ohvo - Rekila , B . Ramstedt , P . Leppimaki , J . P . Slotte , Cholesterol interactions with phospholipids in membranes , Progr . Lipid Res . 41 ( 2002 ) 66 – 97 . [ 193 ] M . S . Bretscher , S . Munro , Cholesterol and the Golgi apparatus , Science 261 ( 1993 ) 1280 – 1281 . [ 194 ] Z . Zhang , S . Y . Bhide , M . L . Berkowitz , Molecular dynamics simulations of bilayers containing mixtures of sphingomyelin with cholesterol and phosphatidylcholine with cholesterol , J . Phys . Chem . B 111 ( 2007 ) 12888 – 12897 . [ 195 ] J . Aittoniemi , P . S . Niemela , M . T . Hyvonen , M . Karttunen , I . Vattulainen , Insight into the putative speci ﬁ c interactions between cholesterol , sphingomyelin , and palmitoyl - oleoyl phosphatidylcholine , Biophys . J . 92 ( 2007 ) 1125 – 1137 . [ 196 ] J . H . Ipsen , G . Karlström , O . G . Mouritsen , H . Wennerström , M . J . Zuckermann , Phase equilibria in the phosphatidylcholine – cholesterol system , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 905 ( 1987 ) 162 – 172 . [ 197 ] D . Lingwood , K . Simons , Lipid rafts as a membrane - organizing principle , Science 327 ( 2010 ) 46 – 50 . [ 198 ] H . Ohvo - Rekilä , B . Ramstedt , P . Leppimäki , J . P . Slotte , Cholesterol interactionswith phospholipids in membranes , Prog . Lipid Res . 41 ( 2002 ) 66 – 97 . [ 199 ] B . Ramstedt , J . P . Slotte , Sphingolipidsand theformation of sterol - enrichedordered membrane domains , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1758 ( 2006 ) 1945 – 1956 . 1465 G . L . Nicolson / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1838 ( 2014 ) 1451 – 1466 Author ' s personal copy [ 200 ] D . Lingwood , H . - J . Kiser , I . Levental , K . Simons , Lipidraftsasfunctionalheterogene - ity in cell membranes , Biochem . Soc . Trans . 37 ( 2009 ) 955 – 960 . [ 201 ] A . Shevchenko , K . Simons , Lipidomics : coming to grips with lipid diversity , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 ( 2010 ) 593 – 598 . [ 202 ] K . Simons , G . van Meer , Lipid sorting in epithelial cells , Biochemistry 27 ( 1988 ) 6197 – 6202 . [ 203 ] G . vanMeer , K . Simons , Lipidpolarityandsortinginepithelialcells , J . Cell . Biochem . 36 ( 1988 ) 51 – 58 . [ 204 ] T . Rog , M . Pasenkiewicz - Gierula , I . Vattulainen , M . Karttunen , Whathappensifcho - lesterol is made smoother : importance of methyl substituents in cholesterol ring structure on phosphatidylcholine – sterol interaction , Biophys . J . 92 ( 2007 ) 3346 – 3357 . [ 205 ] S . Mayor , M . Rao , Rafts ; scale - dependent , active lipid organization at the cell sur - face , Traf ﬁ c 5 ( 2004 ) 231 – 240 . [ 206 ] K . Jacobson , O . G . Mouritsen , R . G . W . Anderson , Lipid rafts : at a crossroad between cell biology and physics , Nat . Cell Biol . 9 ( 2007 ) 7 – 14 . [ 207 ] K . Simons , E . Ikonen , Functional rafts in cell membranes , Nature 387 ( 1997 ) 569 – 572 . [ 208 ] D . M . Owen , A . Magenau , D . Williamson , K . Gaus , Thelipidrafthypothesisrevisited : new insights on raft composition and function from super - resolution ﬂ uorescence microscopy , Bioessays 34 ( 2012 ) 739 – 747 . [ 209 ] L . Pike , The challenge of lipid rafts , J . Lipid Res . 50 ( 2009 ) S323 – S328 ( Suppl . ) . [ 210 ] K . Simons , M . J . Gerl , Revitalizing membrane rafts : new toolsandinsights , Nat . Rev . 11 ( 2010 ) 688 – 699 . [ 211 ] P . Sengupta , B . Baird , D . Holowka , Lipidrafts , ﬂ uid / ﬂ uidphaseseparation , andtheir relevance to plasma membrane structure and function , Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 18 ( 2007 ) 583 – 590 . [ 212 ] A . K . Neumann , M . S . Itano , K . Jacobson , Understanding lipid rafts and other related membrane domains , F1000 , Biol . Reprod . 2 ( 2010 ) 31 – 36 . [ 213 ] P . J . Quinn , A lipid matrix model of membrane raft structure , Prog . Lipid Res . 49 ( 2010 ) 390 – 406 . [ 214 ] A . Kusumi , I . Koyama - Honda , K . Suzuki , Molecular dynamics and interactions for creation of stimulation - induced stabilized rafts from small unstable steady - state rafts , Traf ﬁ c 5 ( 2004 ) 213 – 230 . [ 215 ] A . Olivera - Couto , P . S . Aguilar , Eisosomesand plasmamembraneorganization , Mol . Genet . Genomics 287 ( 2012 ) 607 – 620 . [ 216 ] K . Simons , D . Toomre , Lipid rafts andsignal transduction , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 1 ( 2000 ) 31 – 39 . [ 217 ] R . G . Parton , A . A . Richards , Lipid rafts and caveolae as portals for endocytosis : new insights and common mechanisms , Traf ﬁ c 4 ( 2003 ) 724 – 738 . [ 218 ] K . Radhkrishnan , A . Halasz , D . Vlachos , J . S . Edwards , Quantitativeunderstanding of cell signaling : the importance of membrane organization , Curr . Opin . Biotechnol . 21 ( 2010 ) 677 – 682 . [ 219 ] K . G . Suzuki , Lipid rafts generate digital - like signal transduction in cell plasma membranes , Biotechnol . J . 7 ( 2012 ) 753 – 761 . [ 220 ] K . S . Koumanov , C . Wolf , P . J . Quinn , Lipid composition of membrane domains , Subcell . Biochem . 37 ( 2004 ) 153 – 163 . [ 221 ] L . J . Pike , Rafts de ﬁ ned : a report on the Keystone symposium on lipid rafts and cell function , J . Lipid Res . 47 ( 2006 ) 1597 – 1598 . [ 222 ] C . Eggeling , C . Ringemann , R . Medda , G . Schwarzmann , K . Sandhoff , S . Polyakova , V . N . Belov , B . Hein , C . von Middendorff , A . Schönle , S . W . Hell , Direcct observation of the nanoscale dynamics of membrane lipids in a living cell , Nature 457 ( 2009 ) 1159 – 1162 . [ 223 ] P . Sharma , R . Varma , R . C . Sarsij Ira , Ira , K . Gousett , G . Krishnamoorthy , M . Rao , S . Mayor , Nanoscale organization of multiple GPI - anchored proteins in living cell membranes , Cell 20 ( 2004 ) 577 – 589 . [ 224 ] D . Goswami , K . Gowrishankar , S . Bilgrami , S . Ghost , R . Raghupathy , R . Shadda , R . Vishwakarma , M . Rao , S . Mayor , NanoclustersofGPI - anchoredproteinsareformed by cortical actin - driven activity , Cell 135 ( 2008 ) 1085 – 1097 . [ 225 ] Y . M . Umemura , M . Vrjic , S . Y . Nishimura , T . K . Fujiwara , K . G . Suzuki , A . Kusumi , Both MHC class II and its GPI - anchored form undergo hop diffusion as observed by single - molecule tracking , Biophys . J . 95 ( 2008 ) 435 – 450 . [ 226 ] Y . Chen , W . R . Thelin , B . Yang , S . L . Milgram , K . Jacobson , Transient anchorage of cross - linked glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol - anchored proteins depends on choles - terol , Src family kinases , caveolin and phosphinositides , J . Cell Biol . 175 ( 2006 ) 169 – 178 . [ 227 ] Y . Chen , L . Vercini , C . Benistant , K . Jacobson , The transmembraneproteinCBP plays a role in transiently anchoring small clusters of Thy - 1 , a GPI - anchored protein , to the cytoskeleton , J . Cell Sci . 122 ( 2009 ) 3966 – 3972 . [ 228 ] P . V . Escribá , J . M . Gonzáles - Ros , F . M . Goñi , P . K . J . Kinnunen , L . Vigh , L . Sánchez - Magraner , A . M . Fernández , X . Busquets , I . Horváth , G . Barceló - Coblijn , Membranes : a meeting point for lipids , proteins and therapies , J . Cell . Mol . Med . 12 ( 2008 ) 829 – 875 . [ 229 ] P . Somerharju , J . A . Virtanen , K . H . Cheng , M . Hermansson , Thesuperlatticemodelof lateralorganizationofmembranesanditsimplicationsonmembranelipidhomeo - stasis , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1788 ( 2009 ) 12 – 23 . [ 230 ] C . M . Yip , Correlative optical andscanningprobe microscopes for mappinginterac - tions at membranes , Meth . Mol . Biol . 950 ( 2013 ) 439 – 456 . [ 231 ] R . J . Cherry , Rotational diffusion of membrane proteins : measurements with bacte - riorhodopsin , band - 3 proteins and erythrocyte oligosaccharides , Biochem . Soc . Symp . 46 ( 1981 ) 183 – 190 . [ 232 ] E . A . Nigg , R . J . Cherry , Anchorageofaband3populationattheerythrocytecytoplas - mic membrane surface : protein rotational diffusion measurements , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 77 ( 1980 ) 4702 – 4706 . [ 233 ] G . Lenaz , Lipid ﬂ uidity and membrane protein dynamics , Biosci . Rep . 7 ( 1987 ) 823 – 837 . [ 234 ] M . P . Sheetz , Membrane skeletal dynamics : role in modulation of red cell deformability , mobility of transmembrane proteins , and shape , Semin . Hematol . 20 ( 1983 ) 175 – 188 . [ 235 ] Y . Lavi , M . A . Edidin , L . A . Gheber , Dynamic patches of membrane proteins , Biophys . J . 93 ( 2007 ) L35 – L37 . [ 236 ] P . Liu , X . Wang , M . S . Itano , A . K . Neumann , K . Jacobson , N . L . Thompson , The forma - tionandstabilityofDC - SIGNmicrodomainsrequire itsextracellularmoiety , Traf ﬁ c 13 ( 2012 ) 715 – 726 . [ 237 ] H . - T . He , D . Marguet , Detecting nanodomains in living cell membranes by ﬂ uores - cence correlation spectroscopy , Annu . Rev . Phys . Chem . 62 ( 2011 ) 417 – 436 . [ 238 ] A . Kusumi , Y . Sako , M . Yamamoto , Con ﬁ ned lateral diffusion of membrane recep - tors as studied by single particle tracking ( nanovid microscopy ) . Effects of calcium - induced differentiation in cultured epithelial cells , Biophys . J . 65 ( 1993 ) 2021 – 2040 . [ 239 ] M . Edidin , Patches , posts and fences : proteins and plasma membrane domains , Trends Cell Biol . 2 ( 1992 ) 376 – 380 . [ 240 ] G . L . Nicolson , G . Poste , The cancer cell : dynamic aspects and modi ﬁ cations in cell - surface organization . Part 1 , N . Engl . J . Med . 295 ( 1976 ) 197 – 203 . [ 241 ] A . Tsuji , S . Ohnishi , Restriction of the lateral motion of band 3 in the erythrocyte membrane by the cytoskeletal network : dependence on spectrin association state , Biochemistry 25 ( 1986 ) 6133 – 6139 . [ 242 ] M . P . Sheetz , M . Schlindler , D . E . Koppel , Lateralmobility of integral membrane pro - teins is increased in spherocytic erythrocytes , Nature 285 ( 1980 ) 510 – 511 . [ 243 ] A . Kusumi , Y . Sako , Cellsurfaceorganizationbythemembraneskeleton , Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 8 ( 1996 ) 566 – 574 . [ 244 ] P . Lajoie , J . G . Goetz , J . W . Dennis , I . R . Nabi , Lattices , rafts and scaffolds : domain reg - ulation of receptor signaling at the plasma membrane , J . Cell Biol . 185 ( 2009 ) 381 – 385 . [ 245 ] I . Chung , R . Akita , R . Vandlen , D . Toomre , J . Schlessinger , I . Mellman , Spatial control of EGF receptor activation by reversible dimerization on living cells , Nature 464 ( 2009 ) 783 – 787 . [ 246 ] P . L . Yeagle , Lipid regulation of cell membrane structure and function , FASEB J . 3 ( 1989 ) 1833 – 1842 . [ 247 ] P . V . Escribá , Membrane - lipid therapy : a new approach in molecular medicine , Trends Mol . Med . 12 ( 2006 ) 34 – 43 . [ 248 ] G . L . Nicolson , M . E . Ash , Lipid Replacement Therapy : a natural medicine approach to replacing damaged lipids in cellular membranes and organelles and restoring function , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1838 ( 2014 ) 1657 – 1679 . 1466 G . L . Nicolson / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1838 ( 2014 ) 1451 – 1466