HEDP # 695710 , VOL 47 , ISS 3 Introduction to “New Conceptualizations of Transfer of Learning” Robert L . Goldstone and Samuel B . Day QUERY SHEET This page lists questions we have about your paper . The numbers displayed at left can be found in the text of the paper for reference . In addition , please review your paper as a whole for correctness . Q1 . Au : Is “Susquehanna University” the correct afﬁliation for Dr . Day ? The email address we have for him is for Indiana University . Q2 . Au : Leeper ( 1935 ) does not have a matching reference . Provide complete reference or remove citation . Q3 . Au : Ball ( 1999 ) : Provide reference or remove citation . Q4 . Au : Chi ( 2005 ) : Provide complete reference or remove citation . Q5 . Au : Provide page number of illustration in Leeper 1935 , name of copyright holder ( the publisher of The Pedagogical Seminary and Journal of Genetic Psychology ) , and year of copyright . Q6 . Au : Your original manuscript said Figure 2 was “reprinted with permission from the publisher . ” Please provide a copy of the communication from the publisher granting you permission to reproduce this ﬁgure . Q7 . Au : Nokes - Malach & Belenky , in press , does not have a matching reference . Provide complete reference or remove citation . Q8 . Au : Chi ( 2012 ) : Provide complete reference or remove citation . Q9 . Au : Ball ( 2011 ) does not have a matching text citation ; please cite in text or delete . Q10 . Au : Schwartz et al . ( 2007 ) : Please provide chapter page range . TABLE OF CONTENTS LISTING The table of contents for the journal will list your paper exactly as it appears below : Introduction to “New Conceptualizations of Transfer of Learning” Robert L . Goldstone and Samuel B . Day EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGIST , 47 ( 3 ) , 1 – 4 , 2012 Copyright C (cid:1) Division 15 , American Psychological Association ISSN : 0046 - 1520 print / 1532 - 6985 online DOI : 10 . 1080 / 00461520 . 2012 . 695710 Introduction to “New Conceptualizations of Transfer of Learning” Robert L . Goldstone Department of Psychology Indiana University 5 Samuel B . Day Department of Psychology Susquehanna University Understanding how to get learners to transfer their knowledge to new situations is a topic of Q1 both theoretical and practical importance . Theoretically , it touches on core issues in knowl - edge representation , analogical reasoning , generalization , embodied cognition , and concept formation . Practically , learning without transfer of what has been learned is almost always un - productive and inefﬁcient . Although schools often measure the efﬁciency of learning in terms of speed and retention of knowledge , a relatively neglected and subtler component of efﬁciency is the generality and applicability of the acquired knowledge . This special issue of Educational Psychologist collects together new approaches toward understanding and fostering appropriate transfer in learners . Three themes that emerge from the collected articles are ( a ) the importance of the perspective / stance of the learner for achieving robust transfer , ( b ) the neglected role of motivation in determining transfer , and ( c ) the existence of speciﬁc , validated techniques for teaching with an eye toward facilitating students’ transfer of their learning . 10 15 20 Most educators want their students to apply what they have learned beyond its original classroom context . Biology teach - ers want their students to understand the genetic mechanisms underlying heredity , not simply how pea plants look . Physics teachers want their students to understand fundamental laws 25 of physics such as conservation of energy , not simply how a particular spring uncoils when weighted down . Unfortu - nately , having students transfer what they have learned to new scenarios that draw on the same principles has proven surprisingly difﬁcult to achieve ( Detterman , 1993 ; Gick & 30 Holyoak , 1980 , 1983 ) . Considerable research indicates that students often do not spontaneously transfer what they have learned , at least not across superﬁcially dissimilar scenarios . In one striking example , Perkins ( 2009 ) cited the amusing , but also horrifying , case of physics students who learned in 35 class how to determine how long it would take a ball to fall to the bottom of a certain height tower ( see Figure 1A ) and then were given on an exam the problem of determining how long it would take a ball to fall to the bottom of a well ( the Correspondence should be addressed to Robert L . Goldstone , Depart - mentofPsychology , IndianaUniversity , PsychologyBuilding , Bloomington , IN 47405 . E - mail : rgoldsto @ indiana . edu scenario on the right ) . Students complained that they were 40 not given any well problems in class . However , there are recent suggestions that students can , under some circumstances , transfer their knowledge across superﬁcially dissimilar domains ( Pedone , Hummel , & Holyoak , 2001 ; Schwartz , Bransford , & Sears , 2005 ; 45 Schwartz , Sears , & Chang , 2007 ) . In fact , in some cases , transfer seems to be spontaneous and automatic . When peo - ple are ﬁrst shown the unambiguous man illustration on the left , they subsequently interpret the ambiguous man - rat ﬁg - ure as a man , but when they are ﬁrst shown the rat illustration 50 on the right , they interpret the ambiguous picture as a rat ( Figure 2 ; Leeper , 1935 ) . This kind of perceptual priming Q2 is not typically construed as transfer , but it does represent a clear case in which people spontaneously carry along ac - quired interpretational strategies without explicitly trying to 55 apply their learning to new situations . The goal of this special issue of Educational Psycholo - gist is to synthesize new theoretical positions , informed by empirical data , about whether and how transfer of knowl - edge is achievable . This is a timely topic for Educational 60 Psychologist because of the recent resurgence of interest in transfer . Part of the reason for this resurgence is the renewed 2 GOLDSTONE AND DAY 4C / Art FIGURE 1 A graphic illustration of the challenge of transferring acquired knowledge . Note . David Perkins ( 2009 ) reported a physics classroom in which students were ﬁrst given falling ball problems of the kind illustrated in A . Students were shown how to determine how long it would take the ball at the top of the 100 - m tower to reach the ground . They were later tested on problems such as B in which a ball started at the top of a 50 - m well and fell down to the bottom . Several students complained that they had never been given “well” problems before , only “tower” problems ( color ﬁgure available online ) . understanding that important principles frequently arise in different domains . For example , complex systems princi - ples such as positive and negative feedback loops arise in 65 economics , geology , physics , chemistry , biology , and the so - cial sciences ( Chi & VanLehn , 2012 / this issue ; Goldstone & Wilensky , 2008 ) . Students who learn about a positive feed - back systems from an example of a microphone feeding into , and placed near , a loudspeaker are missing out on an oppor - 70 tunity for applying their knowledge to an economics situation of people purchasing products that other people had already purchased if they do not engage in cross - domain transfer . It is true that there is a major trend in science toward increas - ingly specialized research topics . However , there is also a 75 scientiﬁc movement to reverse this trend , pursuing the pos - sibility that the same principles can describe seemingly very different phenomena . One attractive aspect of this movement from an educational perspective is that it promotes a view of science that is enfranchising rather than alienating . Students 80 who can apply the Diffusion - limited Aggregation principle that they learned while exploring copper sulfate formations to the growth and structure of cities , lungs , and snowﬂakes ( Ball , 1999 ) will likely develop an appreciation of science Q3 in which any ﬁeld can potentially bear on another ﬁeld ( Chi , 85 2005 ; Chi , Slotta , & deLeeuw , 1994 ) . Q4 Q5 Q6 Another reason for a renewed interest in transfer in cog - nitive science and education is that there has been a method - ological shift from measuring transfer by learners’ explicit statements of correspondence between domains to implicit , 90 indirect measures that students may be sensitive to the con - nection between situations without being able to explicitly verbalize the basis for the connection . This expanded view of what counts as evidence for transfer has taken several forms . Some researchers have focused on how students learn 95 how to see events as manifesting principles , and how this learning prepares them for seeing future events in terms of the same principles ( Bransford & Schwartz , 1999 ) . Other researchers have looked for indications that students have been inﬂuenced by previous activities by examining how they 100 construe situations as similar to the earlier activity ( Lobato , 2003 , 2012 / this issue ; Lobato & Seibert , 2002 ) . Similarly , researchers have argued for transfer occurring by students developing perceptual interpretations of an initial situation and simply continuing to use the same interpretational bias 105 when interacting with a second situation ( Day & Goldstone , 2011 , 2012 / this issue ; Goldstone , Landy , & Son , 2010 ) . The speciﬁc goals of this special issue are to discuss what we know about transfer of learning and how best to foster it . The contributed articles tackle core questions such as 110 • How is transfer best conceptualized ? • Is transfer of learning to ( apparently ) dissimilar situations a viable , and valuable , goal ? • How is transfer affected by the ways in which materials are presented by instructors and approached by students ? 115 • What are the best methods of pedagogical practice for fostering transfer ? • What are the cognitive , distributed , and social processes that underlie transfer ? • What are the roles of context , perception , grounding , rules , 120 and formalisms for achieving transfer ? FIGURE 2 Stimuli from Leeper ( 1935 ) , from “A Study of a Neglected Portion of the Field of Learning—The Development of Sensory Organization , ” by R . Leeper , 1935 , The Pedagogical Seminary and Journal of Genetic Psychology , 46 . Note . When the ambiguous man - rat is preceded by the unambiguous man , it is spontaneously interpreted as a man , but when it is preceded by the unambiguous rat , it is spontaneously interpreted as a rat . TRANSFER OF LEARNING 3 INTEGRATIVE THEMES As a way of orienting the reader to the articles to follow , we brieﬂy mention three themes that unify the contributions and are likely prospects for fertile future research . A ﬁrst 125 theme is that the perspective and active learning stance of the learner makes a critical difference for transfer . Whether transfer occurs is not simply a function of the similarity be - tween the original and new situations . It is fundamentally a function of the proclivity of the learner to make a connec - 130 tion between the situations . This theme prominently appears in Lobato’s ( 2012 / this issue ) “actor - inspired” approach that focuses on what a learner stands to beneﬁt from transferring their previous learning , and Engle , Lam , Meyer , and Nix’s ( 2012 / this issue ) prescriptions for encouraging students to 135 frame what they are learning in an expansive fashion to fos - ter transfer . Schwartz , Chase , and Bransford ( 2012 / this is - sue ) focused on the need for students to adopt a mind - set in which they are oriented toward adapting , not just applying , their knowledge . For Chi and VanLehn ( 2012 / this issue ) and 140 Lobato ( 2012 / this issue ) , transfer literally involves adopting new perspectives—developing new ways of seeing familiar situations . At a broader level , Richland , Stigler , and Holyoak ( 2012 / this issue ) reported evidence indicating that entire cul - tures differ in the emphases that they place on connecting sit - 145 uations . Sensitivity to individual and cultural differences in the quantity and quality of cross - situational connections will be important for tailoring teaching for transfer and for ﬁnd - ing ways to inspire students to be “intellectual entrepreneurs” who proactively create their own opportunities for leveraging 150 their prior knowledge . The approaches described in the fol - lowing articles collectively indicate that transfer can occur in a diversity of ways when learners are actively involved in in - terpreting new situations . A greater appreciation of the diver - sity of transfer may help us to see troubling aspects of positive 155 transfer ( Schwartz et al . , 2012 / this issue ) as well as positive aspects of so - called negative transfer ( Lobato , 2012 / this is - sue ) . All too often , negative transfer is shorthand for “transfer in a way that conﬂicts with what the teacher / experimenter in - tended . ” Learners have their own agendas , and understanding 160 these agendas will help us help students apply their previous experiences in a useful and generative manner . A second theme particularly emphasized in Perkins and Salomon’s ( 2012 / this issue ) discussion is the need to recon - cile the cognitive bases for transfer with motivational consid - 165 erations . Even if a student possesses ideal cognitive abilities for drawing apt connections among experiences , opportuni - ties for transfer will still be forfeited if the student is not motivated to draw out these connections . Cognitive work is necessary for properly taking in experiences , for transform - 170 ing these experiences into transportable encodings , and for ﬁguring out how these encodings are applicable to new sit - uations . The issue here is not only how to inspire students to do this cognitive work but how to inspire them to inspire themselves to interpret their world in useful ways . Standard 175 approaches to transfer from cognitive science have underem - phasized the importance of motivation for achieving trans - fer , and incorporating motivation into cognitive accounts will allow these accounts to better explain successful and unsuccessful cases of transfer ( Nokes - Malach & Belenky , 180 in press ) . Q7 A third theme is that efforts to teach students with an eye toward transfer will incorporate a diverse set of methods aimed at training ﬂexible thinking . Whereas many training programs emphasize “accelerated learning , ” speed should 185 not be viewed as the only measure of efﬁciency . The gen - eralization potential for learning is just as important a facet of efﬁciency , even though far more research on assessment is needed to develop adequate measures of generalization potential . Several speciﬁc proposals for training ﬂexibility 190 in thought are presented in the articles that follow : focusing on interactions between surface features ( Chi , 2012 ) , Q8 invention - based training ( Schwartz et al . , 2012 / this issue ) , comparison - based training ( Richland et al . , 2012 / this issue ) , actor - oriented approaches ( Lobato , 2012 / this issue ) , taking 195 advantage of well - grounded perception and action processes ( Day & Goldstone , 2012 / this issue ) , and explicit framings to encourage developing transportable representations ( Engle et al , 2012 / this issue ) . Rote training procedures may achieve efﬁcient learning of speciﬁc behaviors , but this is only a 200 short - term goal . The “real” goal is for learners to behave in a thoughtful and adaptive manner . Learning scientists risk falling into exactly the same “failure to generalize” trap that they have documented so well in their experimental subjects if they insist on measuring only the most easily 205 quantiﬁed variables of response time and percent correct on problems sampled from the same set as the training problems ( D . Schwartz , personal communication , August 5 , 2011 ) . Fortunately , the current contributions attest to our collective ability to avoid limited learning from our previous 210 studies and theories by simply switching from one rote procedural training system to another . At our best , we are “learning scientists” in both senses of the phrase—scientists that study learning and scientists that are learning from our predecessors’ , and our own , mistakes . 215 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This research was supported in part by National Science Foundation REESE grant 0910218 and Department of Edu - cation IES grant R305A1100060 . We thank Micki Chi , Clark Chinn , Randi Engle , Keith Holyoak , Joanne Lobato , Timothy 220 Nokes - Malach , and Dan Schwartz for helpful comments and discussions throughout the preparation of this special issue . REFERENCES Ball , P . ( 2011 ) . Shapes : Nature’s patterns : A tapestry in three parts . Oxford , England : Oxford University Press . Q9 225 4 GOLDSTONE AND DAY Bransford , J . D . , & Schwartz , D . L . ( 1999 ) . Rethinking transfer : A simple proposal with multiple implications . Review of Research in Education , 24 , 61 – 100 . Chi , M . T . H . , Slotta , J . D . , & deLeeuw , N . ( 1994 ) . From things to processes : a theory of conceptual change for learning science concepts . Learning 230 and Instruction , 4 , 27 – 43 . Chi , M . T . H . , & VanLehn , K . A . ( 2012 / this issue ) . Seeing deep structure from the interactions of surface features . Educational Psychologist , 47 , XX – XX . Day , S . B . , & Goldstone , R . L . ( 2011 ) . Analogical transfer from a simulated 235 physicalsystem . JournalofExperimentalPsychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 37 , 551 – 567 . Day , S . B . , & Goldstone , R . L . ( 2012 / this issue ) . The import of knowl - edge export : Connecting ﬁndings and theories of transfer of learning . Educational Psychologist , 47 , XX – XX . 240 Detterman , D . ( 1993 ) . The case of prosecution : Transfer as an epiphe - nomenon . In R . J . S . D . K . Detterman ( Ed . ) , Transfer on trial : Intelligence , cognition , and instruction ( pp . 1 – 24 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Engle , R . A . , Lam , D . P . , Meyer , X . S . , & Nix , S . E . ( 2012 / this issue ) . How 245 does expansive framing promote transfer ? Several proposed explanations and a research agenda for investigating them . Educational Psychologist , 47 , XX – XX . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1980 ) . Analogicalproblemsolving . Cognitive Psychology , 12 , 306 – 355 . 250 Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schema induction and analogical transfer . Cognitive Psychology , 15 , 1 – 38 . Goldstone , R . L . , Landy , D . H . , & Son , J . Y . ( 2010 ) . The education of perception . Topics in Cognitive Science , 2 , 265 – 284 . Goldstone , R . L . , & Wilensky , U . ( 2008 ) . Promoting transfer through com - 255 plex systems principles . Journal of the Learning Sciences , 17 , 465 – 516 . Lobato , J . ( 2003 ) . How design experiments can inform a rethinking of trans - fer and vice versa . Educational Researcher , 32 , 17 – 20 . Lobato , J . ( 2012 / this issue ) . The actor - oriented transfer perspective and its contributions to educational research and practice . Educational Psychol - 260 ogist , 47 , XX – XX . Lobato , J . , & Siebert , D . ( 2002 ) . Quantitative reasoning in a reconceived view of transfer . Journal of Mathematical Behavior , 21 , 87 – 116 . Pedone , R . , Hummel , J . E . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2001 ) . The use of diagrams in analogical problem solving . Memory & Cognition , 29 , 214 – 221 . 265 Perkins , D . ( 2009 ) . Makinglearningwhole : Howsevenprinciplesofteaching can transform education . San Francisco , CA : Jossey - Bass . Perkins , D . N . , & Salomon , G . ( 2012 / this issue ) . Knowledge to go : A moti - vational and dispositional view of transfer . Educational Psychologist , 47 , XX – XX . 270 Richland , L . E . , Stigler , J . W . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2012 / this issue ) . Teaching the conceptual structure of mathematics . Educational Psychologist , 47 , XX – XX . Schwartz , D . L . , Bransford , J . D . , & Sears , D . ( 2005 ) . Efﬁciency and inno - vation in transfer . In J . Mestre ( Ed . ) , Transfer of learning from a modern 275 multidisciplinary perspective ( pp . 1 – 51 ) . Greenwich , CT : Information Age . Schwartz , D . L . , Chase , C . C . , & Bransford , J . D . ( 2012 / this issue ) . Resisting overzealous transfer : Coordinating previously successful routines with needs for new learning . Educational Psychologist , 47 , XX – XX . 280 Schwartz , D . L . , Sears , D . A . , & Chang , J . ( 2007 ) . Reconsidering prior knowledge . In M . Lovett & P . Shah ( Eds . ) , Thinking with data . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Q10 HEDP # 696438 , VOL 47 , ISS 3 The Import of Knowledge Export : Connecting Findings and Theories of Transfer of Learning Samuel B . Day and Robert L . Goldstone QUERY SHEET This page lists questions we have about your paper . The numbers displayed at left can be found in the text of the paper for reference . In addition , please review your paper as a whole for correctness . Q1 . Au : Is Susquehanna University correct for Dr . Day ? The email address we received via Editorial Manager was for Indiana University . Q2 . Au : This Gick & Holyoak ( 1982 ) citation is listed in the references as 1983 ; please adjust . Q3 . Au : Kaminski & Sloutsky ( in press ) does not have a matching reference . Provide complete reference or remove citation . Q4 . Au : Nathan ( 2012 ) does not have a matching reference . Provide complete reference or remove citation . Q5 . Au : This Goldstone and Son ( 1995 ) citation is listed in the references as 2005 ; please adjust . Q6 . Au : This Richland and McDonough ( 2009 ) citation is listed in the references as 2010 ; please adjust . Q7 . Au : Day et al . ( 2010 ) does not have a matching reference . Provide complete reference or remove citation . Q8 . Au : This Schoenfeld and Hermann ( 1983 ) citation is listed in the references as 1982 ; please adjust . Q9 . Au : Please clarify the caption of Figure 1 . It appears that you are borrowing the ﬁgure from Waltz et al . 2000 , who in turn borrowed it from Markmann & Genter 1993 . Please change the attribution to the correct rights holder using this format : From “ [ article title ] , ” by [ author ( s ) ] , [ year ] , [ journal title ] , [ volume number ] , [ page number of illustration in original source ] . Copyright [ year ] by [ name of rights holder ( publisher ? ) ] . Q10 . Au : As an author you are required to secure permission from the original copyright holder if you want to reproduce any ﬁgure , table , or extract from the text of another source . Please conﬁrm you have permission from the original rights holder of Figure 1 , or it will have to be deleted . Q11 . Au : Is this reference to Lave in general or Lave ( 1988 ) ? Q12 . Au : Greeno ( 1997 ) : Provide full reference or remove citation . Q13 . Au : Lave and Wenger ( 1991 ) : Provide full reference or remove citation . Q14 . Au : Williamson , Hollan , & Stevens : Provide full reference or remove citation . Q15 . Au : Neither Judd nor Hendrickson & Schroeder is in the reference list ; please add full references or delete citations . Q16 . Au : Schwartz , Bransford , & Sears : Please add full reference or delete citation . Q17 . Au : The page number 387 does not appear in the Chase and Simon ( 1973 ) reference listing , which gives the page range as 55 through 81 ; please review . Q18 . Au : This Wertheimer ( 1923 ) citation is listed in the references as 1938 ; please adjust . Q19 . Au : This Gauthier , Tarr , & Bub citation is listed in the references as 2010 ; please adjust . Q20 . Au : Provide page number of illustration in Leeper 1935 , name of copyright holder ( the publisher of The Pedagogical Seminary and Journal of Genetic Psychology ) , and year of copyright . Q21 . Au : Your original manuscript said Figure 2 was “reprinted with permission from the publisher . ” Please provide a copy of the communication from the publisher granting you permission to reproduce this ﬁgure . Q22 . Au : Is Figure 3 directly reproduced or adapted from Day & Goldstone 2011 ? Permission is required for “derivative reproduction” ( where you have created a new ﬁgure or table which derives substantially from a copyrighted source ) . Please conﬁrm you have permission for Figure 3 , or it will have to be deleted . Q23 . Au : Provide page number of illustration in Day & Goldstone 2011 and name of copyright holder ( is it the publisher of Journal of Experimental Psychology ? ) Q24 . Au : Thaden - Koch et al . does not have a matching reference . Provide complete reference or remove citation . Q25 . Au : de Groot 1966 : Please provide chapter page range . Q26 . Au : Gauthier , Tarr , & Bub ( 2010 ) does not have a matching text citation ; please cite in text or delete reference . Q27 . Au : Gentner 1989 : Please provide chapter page range . Q28 . Au : Gibson 1977 : Please provide page range . Q29 . Au : Goldstone , Landy , & Son ( 2010 ) does not have a matching text citation ; please cite in text or delete reference . Q30 . Au : Goldstone and Son ( 2005 ) does not have a matching text citation ; please cite in text or delete reference . Q31 . Au : Greeno et al . 1993 : Please provide chapter page range . Q32 . Au : Harp & Mayer ( 1998 ) does not have a matching text citation ; please cite in text or delete reference . Q33 . Au : Hinsley et al . ( 1978 ) : Please provide chapter page range . Q34 . Au : Kaminski & Sloutsky ( 2010 ) does not have a matching text citation ; please cite in text or delete reference . Q35 . Au : Metzger 1936 : Please provide English translation of title . Q36 . Au : Richland and McDonough does not have a matching text citation ; please cite in text or delete reference . Q37 . Au : Schoenfeld & Herrmann does not have a matching text citation ; please cite in text or delete reference . Q38 . Au : Wertheimer ( 1938 ) does not have a matching text citation ; please cite in text or delete reference . TABLE OF CONTENTS LISTING The table of contents for the journal will list your paper exactly as it appears below : The Import of Knowledge Export : Connecting Findings and Theories of Transfer of Learning Samuel B . Day and Robert L . Goldstone EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGIST , 47 ( 3 ) , 1 – 24 , 2012 Copyright C (cid:1) Division 15 , American Psychological Association ISSN : 0046 - 1520 print / 1532 - 6985 online DOI : 10 . 1080 / 00461520 . 2012 . 696438 The Import of Knowledge Export : Connecting Findings and Theories of Transfer of Learning Samuel B . Day Department of Psychology Susquehanna University 5 Robert L . Goldstone Department of Psychology Indiana University After more than 100 years of interest and study , knowledge transfer remains among the most challenging , contentious , and important issues for both psychology and education . In this article , we review and discuss many of the more important ideas and ﬁndings from the existing research and attempt to bridge this body of work with the exciting new research directions suggested by the following articles . 10 Like many of the people reading this article , we ﬁnd math - ematics intrinsically interesting . However , even if most stu - 15 dents shared in our appreciation of the inherent elegance of mathematical explanation , it is unlikely that this would justify the immense amount of educational time spent on the topic . The goal of learning mathematics is to prepare students to use it in the real world , or even more broadly , to employ rigorous , 20 formal thought processes to their everyday life . In various ways , the same can be said for any educational topic—from physics to history to biology to literature , education is fun - damentally about acquiring knowledge to be used outside of the classroom . It is therefore especially troubling that a 25 considerable corpus of research ﬁnds systematic failures in people’s ability to apply their relevant knowledge in new sit - uations . Because of both the difﬁculty and the importance of transfer , aspects that bear on the very foundation of educa - tion , an enormous amount of research has been conducted on 30 knowledge transfer . The topic remains both frustrating and contentious ; however , with some researchers going so far as to argue that meaningful transfer seldom if ever actually occurs ( e . g . , Detterman , 1993 ) . We had two primary goals in writing this article . First , as 35 a lead - in to this special issue , we have attempted to provide a review of the ( sometimes daunting ) existing literature on knowledge transfer . Of course , such a review will never Correspondence should be addressed to Samuel B . Day , Department of Psychology , Susquehanna University , 514 University Avenue , Selinsgrove , PA 17870 . E - mail : days @ susqu . edu Q1 be close to complete . However , we have tried as much as possible to include a broad sampling of some of the more 40 important and inﬂuential ﬁndings and ideas and to organize these along themes that are renewed by the current set of articles . When combined with the other articles in this issue , our hope is to provide the reader with a solid understanding of the “state of the art” in transfer research . Our second goal 45 for this article was to join with the other authors in presenting our own proposal for a productive way of advancing research in this area—namely , a discussion of the role of perceptual processes and perceptual representations in knowledge transfer . 50 FINDINGS FROM THE TRADITIONAL APPROACH TO TRANSFER The traditional approach to knowledge transfer has its roots in ideas from the early 20th century . In particular , Thorndike’s ( 1924 ; Thorndike & Woodworth , 1901 ) seminal 55 ideas regarding the importance of overlapping features , or “identical elements , ” between the learning and transfer sit - uations remain an important aspect of current psychological theories . However , contemporary views of transfer have been very much shaped by the computational metaphor of 60 cognition that emerged during the “cognitive revolution” of the 1960s ( see Gardner , 1987 ) , and much of the psycho - logical research on transfer has become tightly linked with symbolic cognitive approaches , particularly with theories 2 DAY AND GOLDSTONE of analogical reasoning ( e . g . , Gentner , 1983 ; Hummel & 65 Holyoak , 1997 , 2003 ) . It is therefore worth spending some time reviewing some of the assumptions of these approaches . According to traditional cognitive approaches , knowledge is representedinterms of systems of discretesymbols , eachof which corresponds to a meaningful concept ( see Markman , 70 1999 ) . To meaningfully represent a situation , these mental symbols are combined according to a structured syntax that deﬁnes the relationships between the constituent concepts . As an example of the critical role that relations play in knowl - edge representation , the situation described by the sentence 75 “John loves Mary” reﬂects a different set of relationships than the situation described by “Mary loves John , ” although both are made up of the same three constituent symbols ( John , Mary , and loves ) . This capacity to productively reconﬁg - ure the same set of symbols into many distinct structures 80 is one of the primary beneﬁts of the symbolic approach , and it provides a very straightforward way of capturing the power of the human cognitive system ( Fodor & Pylyshyn , 1988 ) . These assumptions , that concepts are represented in a way 85 that is psychologically discrete and allows for ﬂexible recom - bination , have important consequences for cognition . Most important for our purposes , they imply that the structure of a situation may be understood and processed independently of the particular objects and features that are involved . For ex - 90 ample , consider the following situation : John loves Mary , but Mary loves David , causing John to be jealous of David . The symbolic approach allows us to easily generate new situations involving a completely new cast of characters while main - taining the same underlying system of relationships—for ex - 95 ample , Susan loves Mark , but Mark loves Gretchen , causing Susan to be jealous of Gretchen . Furthermore , this approach allows for the possibility of understanding the system of rela - tions independent of any speciﬁc characters , that is , holding an abstract representation of a “love triangle . ” 100 According to traditional cognitive approaches , it is this capacity to represent systems of relations independently of the objects and features that they bind together , which under - lies our ability to reason analogically ( see Gentner , 1983 ) . An analogy is simply a match between the systems of relations 105 in two represented situations ( their “deep structure” ) , regard - less of any differences in the objects and features they involve ( their “surface features” ) . An individual’s recognition of this similarity relies on a mapping process , in which structurally based correspondences between the situations are identiﬁed 110 ( e . g . , in the aforementioned examples , John and Susan would correspond to each other as a result of their shared role of “jealous unrequited lover” ) . This mapping process may then support analogical inference , the generation of some new potential knowledge on the basis of these structural com - 115 monalities . For example , when confronted with a situation in which Nick loves Melanie but Melanie loves Greg , one might use prior knowledge to reasonably conclude that Nick will be jealous of Greg . Traditional approaches to knowledge transfer fundamen - 120 tally rely on this symbolic conception of analogical process - ing . For example , a student may learn a formula for mathe - matical permutations in the context of a problem involving pizzatoppings ( e . g . , Ross , 1984 ) , andsubsequentlyencounter a new permutations problem that describes the assignment 125 of people to teams . To effectively make use of the infor - mation from the ﬁrst problem , the student must recognize the structural commonalities between the two cases , despite their overt surface differences , and use his or her understand - ing of the correspondences to correctly assign values to the 130 variables in the formula . Although there is some variation in the theoretical approaches taken by different researchers ( e . g . , Gentner , 1983 ; Hummel & Holyoak , 2003 ; Keane , Ledgeway , & Duff , 1994 ) , psychologists have widely adopted the view that transfer is the recruitment of previously known , 135 structured symbolic representations in the service of under - standing and making inferences about new , structurally sim - ilar cases . Surface Similarity Over the last several decades , the traditional view of transfer 140 has been a fertile source of research and has greatly expanded our understanding of the conditions under which transfer is likely ( and unlikely ) to occur . By far the most robust ﬁnd - ing involves the inﬂuence of the concrete surface similarities between cases . Although psychologists view structural sim - 145 ilarity as the critical component in meaningful , productive knowledge transfer , research has repeatedly shown that it is the surface commonalities between cases that are more of - ten the driving force in determining whether transfer actually occurs ( e . g . , Anderson , Farrell , & Sauers , 1984 ; Holyoak & 150 Koh , 1987 ; Reed , 1987 ; Ross , 1987 ; Salomon & Perkins , 1989 ; Singley & Anderson , 1989 ) . When a new case dif - fers in its surface characteristics from a previously learned analogous case , spontaneous transfer is typically quite poor ( e . g . , Gick & Holyoak , 1980 , 1982 ; Simon & Hayes , 1976 ; Q2 155 Weisberg , DiCamillo , & Phillips , 1978 ) . In general , the greatest cognitive difﬁculty seems to be in simply noticing that a new case is structurally similar to a previously known one . For instance , Gentner , Ratterman , and Forbus ( 1993 ) found that although structural commonalities 160 predicted the degree to which participants found an analogy to be “apt” or inferentially sound , these abstract similari - ties were very unlikely to produce reminding on their own . In contrast , surface commonalities between two cases led to frequent remindings , even though participants explicitly 165 recognized their limited beneﬁt . Probably the best known ( and most cited and replicated ) example of this type of recognition failure is the work of Gick and Holyoak ( 1980 , 1983 ) , based on Duncker’s ( 1945 ) classic “radiation problem . ” In that problem , individuals are 170 told about a patient with an inoperable tumor in his stom - ach . There is a kind of ray that could be used to treat the KNOWLEDGE EXPORT 3 patient , but at intensities sufﬁcient to destroy the tumor , a great deal of healthy tissue would also be destroyed . At lower intensities , the ray would be harmless to healthy tissue but 175 will not affect the tumor . Individuals are asked to propose a solution that could destroy the tumor while also leaving healthy tissue intact . The intended solution involves a con - vergence approach , in which several low intensity rays are administered from different locations but converge at the site 180 of the tumor , creating a greater aggregate intensity there . Participants have a very difﬁcult time solving this problem independently . Furthermore , preceding the problem with a relevant analogous example—for instance , a story about sol - diers simultaneously converging on a fortress—did little to 185 improve performance ( Gick & Holyoak , 1980 , 1983 ) . How - ever , when the demands for spontaneous reminding were re - moved from the task by giving participants an explicit cue to consider the relevance of a previously learned situation ( e . g . , “the story you read earlier might be relevant in solving this 190 problem” ) , transfer rates were dramatically higher ( also see Catrambone & Holyoak , 1989 ; Reed , Dempster & Ettinger , 1985 ) . In the absence of such hints , however , recognition fail - ures can be surprisingly robust . In one striking example , 195 Anolli , Antonietti , Crisafulli , and Cantoia ( 2001 ) interrupted participants during their attempts to solve Duncker’s radi - ation problem , asked them to answer a relevant question about the previously seen , analogous problem , and then al - lowed them to continue working on the test problem . Despite 200 this seemingly extreme manipulation , successful transfer oc - curred only rarely ( 5 – 10 % of the time ) and was no better than a control condition in which no analogous prior problem had been given . As previously discussed , in the symbolic view of analog - 205 ical processing , reminding is only the ﬁrst step in achieving transfer . To make accurate inferences between the cases , af - ter reminding occurs individuals must perform a mapping between the two representations to determine structural cor - respondences . There is evidence that surface similarity can 210 have an important inﬂuence during this phase as well . High surface similarity between entities in the same role ( e . g . , en - tities that would be represented by the same variable in a mathematical formula ) tends to facilitate transfer , even when reminding is not a factor ( Ross , 1987 , 1989 ) . This can be 215 contrasted with cases of “cross - mapping , ” in which two sit - uations share similar entities , but these entities play differ - ent roles within their respective systems . For example , after studying a problem in which various cars are assigned to mechanics , an individual may be asked to solve a new prob - 220 lem in which mechanics are assigned to cars . Under these conditions , the concrete commonalities between the situa - tions may improve reminding ( Ross , 1989 ) , but the added difﬁculty required in ignoring the surface similarities be - tween entities during the mapping process ( because cars in 225 the study problem does not correspond to cars in the trans - fer problem ) generally leads to poorer overall performance than when cross - mapping does not occur ( Gentner & Toupin , 1986 ; Ross , 1987 , 1989 ) . In general , however , more attention has been given to the 230 role of surface content on reminding than on mapping , and , in fact , these kinds of effects may be seen as an example of the broader inﬂuence of encoding speciﬁcity ( Tulving & Thomson , 1973 ) on memory and knowledge application . In - deed , Barnett and Ceci ( 2002 ) have developed a fairly com - 235 prehensive taxonomy of the many ways in which learning and transfer situations may differ from one another . These included factors such as physical context , temporal context , functional context , social context and modality , in addition to the content of the materials themselves . The authors sug - 240 gested several areas for future research to ﬁll gaps in our knowledge about the effects and interactions between these factors , but also noted many existing studies in which differ - ences along these dimensions negatively inﬂuenced transfer . For instance , Spencer and Weisberg ( 1986 , again using a ver - 245 sion of Duncker’s radiation problem ) found that even small changes in the context of the learning and testing episodes ( one was described as an experiment , the other as a classroom exercise ) eliminated all evidence of transfer , even though the physical context ( the classroom ) remained constant and the 250 delay between tasks was only a few minutes . Likewise , there is evidence that the similarity between the kinds of cognitive processing used during learning and testing may inﬂuence the likelihood of transfer . For instance , researchers have examined people’s ability to solve brief in - 255 sight puzzles , such as , “A man in the U . S . married 20 dif - ferent women in the same town . All of them are still living and he has never divorced one of them , yet he has broken no law . Can you explain ? ” Surprisingly , providing partici - pants with highly relevant information immediately prior to 260 the test phase ( e . g . , reading the sentence “A minister marries several people each week . ” ) has no impact on their ability to correctly solve the problems ( Perfetto , Bransford , & Franks , 1983 ) . However , when this prior information is presented in a way that mirrors the likely “confusion - resolution” process - 265 ing involved in the test puzzles—such as , “You can marry several people each week . . . if you are minister”—transfer rates increase considerably ( Adams et al . , 1988 ; Lockhart , Lamon , & Gick , 1988 ) . The literature thus provides a strong and consistent picture 270 of the role of similarity in transfer . Structural similarity repre - sents the actual basis for meaningful knowledge transfer , and people are aware of , and sensitive to , this fact ( e . g . , Gentner et al . , 1993 ) . In practice , however , contextual similarity be - tween the situations themselves seems to play a much larger 275 role in determining whether transfer will actually occur . Discerning Deep Structure The role of surface similarity in transfer represents a very serious issue for educators . Educational curricula contain an enormous number of concepts that students are expected to 280 4 DAY AND GOLDSTONE master , each of which reﬂects ( directly or indirectly ) some knowledge or skill that is presumed to be of value outside of the classroom . The literature on similarity and transfer sug - gests that students may often fail to recognize the relevance of these ideas when they are confronted with analogous situa - 285 tions in the real world , particularly when the speciﬁc concrete details of those situations do not closely match those pre - sented by teachers . However , the sheer breadth and volume of the material to be learned , combined with limited class time , means that this will typically not be the case . Teach - 290 ers will never be able to anticipate and address most of the contexts in which important concepts could be applicable . Furthermore , even if this were possible , research suggests that students would encounter difﬁculties simply because of changes to the learning context itself : Information learned in 295 the classroom is often unlikely to be accessed and applied outside of the classroom ( e . g . , Spencer & Weisberg , 1986 ) . Findings such as these seem to call into question the entire enterprise of formal education . However , the research discussed earlier also points to 300 some reasons for hope . Researchers found that when infor - mation was encoded in a way that made it more accessible during the test phase—for instance , by matching the kinds of cognitive processes that were likely to be engaged ( Adams et al . , 1988 ; Lockhart et al . , 1988 ) —transfer was much more 305 likely to occur . More broadly , there has been a considerable amount of research looking at the ways in which speciﬁc aspects of the mental representations that learners initially form may help ( or hinder ) their ability to generalize their knowledge in new contexts . 310 Most frequently , these efforts have involved seeking ways to emphasize the structural aspects of the learned representa - tions while deemphasizing contextual features that are irrele - vant to that structure . Sometimes this has been accomplished very directly . For instance , after giving children a story to 315 read , Ann Brown and her colleagues ( A . L . Brown , Kane , & Echols , 1986 ) asked them a few questions emphasizing relevant aspects of its underlying goal structure , such as the protagonist , the goal , and the obstacle to be overcome . Under these conditions , children were more than 3 times as likely 320 to spontaneously suggest the relevant strategy when solving a new problem . The researchers also found that the children who had emphasized these structural aspects of the story on their own , without the leading questions , were similarly quite likely to transfer the solution ( also see Gick & Holyoak , 325 1983 ) . Another straightforward way to emphasize structural fea - tures during learning is through explicit labeling . For exam - ple , Catrambone ( 1996 , 1998 ) found that labeling the sub - goals involved in a complex mathematical procedure helped 330 students accurately understand the important structural as - pects of a new problem , and thereby transfer the solution more effectively . This result held even when the label was not inherently meaningful . Labeling has proven particularly effective in research with younger children ( e . g . , Kotovsky 335 & Gentner , 1996 ; Loewenstein & Gentner , 2005 ) . For in - stance , preschool - aged children were better able to recog - nize and take advantage of structural commonalities between two physical models when the spatial locations of one of the models were meaningfully labeled ( e . g . , in , on , under ; 340 Loewenstein & Gentner , 2005 ) . For adults as well , labels that emphasize structural relations can promote transfer to new situations that are structurally similar ( Son , Doumas , & Goldstone , 2010 ) . Perhaps the most obvious way of deemphasizing the su - 345 perﬁcial , context - speciﬁc aspects of a situation is by simply reducing their presence in the training materials . Evidence suggests that this can also be an effective strategy . For in - stance , the “seductive details” effect ( e . g . , Garner , Gilling - ham , & White , 1989 ) occurs in situations where interest - 350 ing but structurally irrelevant information distracts learners from the important concepts to be acquired . Harp and Mayer ( 1997 ) found that recall and transfer from a scientiﬁc pas - sage dropped precipitously when interesting but tangential text or illustrations were included ( also see Garner , Brown , 355 Sanders , & Menke , 1992 ; Garner et al . , 1989 ; Hidi & Baird , 1988 ; Wade , 1992 ) . Similarly , Mayer , Grifﬁth , Jurkowitz , and Rothman ( 2008 ) reported studies in which interesting extraneous information signiﬁcantly impaired transfer while leaving retention largely intact . Based on these results , the 360 authors argued that even if the added extraneous material is engaging , the net beneﬁt for learning may be negative due to interference with the deep cognitive processing necessary for the construction of generalizable knowledge structures . The presence of completely extraneous information seems 365 to represent a clear impediment to learning and transfer . A po - tentially more insidious issue , however , involves contextual content that is inherently relevant to the training materials . For instance , an instructor may present the concept of positive feedback systems through a speciﬁc contextualized example , 370 such as the effects of polar melting on global warming . In this case , the concrete details of the situation—the sun , the ice , the reﬂected light—may still interfere with a learner’s abil - ity to transfer their knowledge to new contexts , even though they promote comprehension of the example . Researchers 375 have had some success in facilitating mapping and transfer between situations by simply reducing the “richness” of the content in the training materials ( e . g . , Clement , Mawby , & Giles , 1994 ; DeLoache , 1995 ; Goldstone , Medin , & Gentner , 1991 ; Goldstone & Sakamoto , 2003 ; Markman & Gentner , 380 1993 ; Rattermann & Gentner , 1998 ) . For example , Goldstone and Sakamoto ( 2003 ) taught participants about the principle of competitive specialization in the context of ants foraging for food . When a computer simulation of the system por - trayed these ants as dots rather than realistic drawings , partic - 385 ipants were better able to transfer their knowledge to a new , superﬁcially dissimilar instantiation of the same principle . Clement and colleagues ( 1994 ) found a similar pattern with text materials that used domain - general or domain - speciﬁc words . For instance , a domain - general version of one of the 390 KNOWLEDGE EXPORT 5 scenarios described a political candidate who stole ideas and incorporated them into his speeches ; in the domain - speciﬁc version , the candidate was described as plagiarizing ideas and typing them into his speeches , terms which are much more speciﬁc in their applicability . Participants in these stud - 395 ies were far more likely to recognize and retrieve structurally similar cases when their relationships were described in more domain - general rather than domain - speciﬁc terms . In work with young children , DeLoache ( e . g . , 1991 , 1995 ; DeLoache & Burns , 1994 ) has consistently found evidence 400 that salient concrete details in a learning experience can im - pair knowledge transfer , even between situations that are seemingly very similar . In one of her standard experimental paradigms , children watch a miniature item being hidden in a small model of a room ( e . g . , a miniature toy might be hidden 405 under a miniature bed ) and are then asked to ﬁnd the matching item in the corresponding location of a matching full - sized room ( a real toy under a real bed ) . Younger children have a surprisingly difﬁcult time with this task . However , their success or failure can be inﬂuenced by the subjective con - 410 creteness of the learning case . For instance , they are more successful when the initial model is a two - dimensional im - age rather than a three - dimensional scaled model . Similarly , it was found that children were better able to transfer their knowledge from a scaled model when it was seen behind 415 a plexiglass window but transfer was impaired when they were allowed to interact and play with the scaled items prior to using the model to ﬁnd the corresponding items in the full - sized room . DeLoache argued that these effects reﬂect the difﬁculty of representing something both as a physical 420 object and as a symbol for something else and that this issue is exacerbated when the concrete physicality of the object is emphasized . As some of these examples demonstrate , the notion of concreteness is not necessarily equivalent to the objective 425 “quantity” of perceptual features . Perhaps the broadest and most applicable way of construing concreteness is in terms of the amount of information that a representation conveys to a particular individual ( e . g . , Kaminski & Sloutsky , in press ) . Q3 For instance , a simple line drawing of a cat would contain 430 less information than a photograph of a cat , and would there - fore be a less concrete representation . Important to note , this conception of concreteness can reﬂect more than just the information inherent to the materials themselves . For in - stance , a picture of one’s own cat could be considered even 435 more concrete , in that it evokes a great deal of previously existing knowledge . Along these lines , Kaminski , Sloutsky , and Heckler ( 2008 ) taught students about the modulo 3 op - eration , using either symbols representing a familiar , well - structured context ( e . g . , line drawings of measuring cups ) or 440 more generic symbols without any relevant preexisting asso - ciations . The generic symbols led to much greater transfer to a new context , whereas performance by the concrete training group did not differ from chance . Similarly , Son and Gold - stone ( 2009 ) reported that participants’ ability to transfer the 445 principles of signal detection theory was impaired when the protagonist of the scenario was a well - known ﬁctional televi - sion character rather than an anonymous doctor . Activation of speciﬁc , preexisting knowledge appears to have negative consequences for transfer similar to the hindrance for transfer 450 caused by overt contextual detail . There is therefore a broad range of evidence that reducing the concrete content of a learning experience can aid in an individual’s ability to apply their knowledge to new , dissim - ilar situations . Taken to its natural conclusion , this pattern 455 suggests that the ideal learning materials would be those that eliminate such information altogether . For instance , math - ematical ideas could be taught entirely in terms of num - bers , variables , and formulae , or a principle such as “positive feedback loop” could be conveyed in terms of abstract rela - 460 tionships and processes ( e . g . , “A system in which changes to a variable result in additional changes to that variable in the same direction” ) . However , evidence suggests that this is generally an ineffective approach . Although completely abstract materials can present information in a way that is 465 both efﬁcient and maximally general , it seems to do so at the expense of comprehensibility ( e . g . , Bruner , 1966 ; Carra - her , Carraher , & Schliemann , 1987 ; see Nathan , 2012 , for a related argument ) . Q4 In one clear example of the issues associated with com - 470 plete abstraction , researchers ( LeFevre & Dixon , 1986 ) pro - vided participants with both explicit written instructions for a task and a worked example . For some participants , how - ever , these two sources of instruction were in conﬂict and reﬂected entirely different tasks that would lead to different 475 correct responses . Under these conditions , more than 90 % of the participants ignored the verbal instructions and in - stead followed the example of the worked concrete problem . Work by Ross ( 1987 ) suggests a similar phenomenon . In his study , participants learned about a particular mathemati - 480 cal procedure in the context of a speciﬁc , concrete example . During a later test , individuals were provided with the correct formula needed to solve a new analogous problem . Never - theless , performance was signiﬁcantly affected by the details of the example that had been seen earlier ( also see Anderson 485 et al . , 1984 ) . A similar pattern has been observed in percep - tual classiﬁcation tasks . Even when people know a simple , clear - cut rule for a classiﬁcation , performance is better on frequently presented , compared to rare , examples ( Allen & Brooks , 1991 ) . 490 A recent study by McNeil and her colleagues ( McNeil , Uttal , Jarvin , & Sternberg , 2009 ) captures the complexity of the issue of concreteness in learning . Students in that study were less successful in solving word problems about money when the task involved interaction with actual phys - 495 ical bills and coins than when it did not . However , the con - creteness of the physical money seemed to convey some important advantages as well . Analysis of students’ work showed that those who used the perceptually rich money were less likely to make conceptual errors ( i . e . , they were 500 6 DAY AND GOLDSTONE more likely to attempt the correct mathematical operations ) , suggesting that the concreteness helped them to compre - hend the overall structure of scenarios . Similarly , in a recent study exploring the tradeoffs between contextually grounded versus abstract ( equation - based ) representations , Koedinger , 505 Alibali , and Nathan ( 2008 ) found that for simple problems , grounded word problems were solved better , but for complex problems , equations were solved more accurately . In both of these studies , the real - world contextualization provides useful checks and constraints that prevent certain kinds of 510 mistakes , but this same contextualization can interfere with transfer to new , complex situations . Combining Concreteness and Abstraction The research on concreteness in learning and transfer presents researchers with some confounding issues . On one 515 hand , presenting information via concrete examples may lead to mental representations that are overly “bound” to a par - ticular context and may interfere with a person’s ability both to recognize new situations where their knowledge could be relevant and to apply their knowledge in an appropriate way . 520 On the other hand , efforts to circumvent these problems by presenting information abstractly , with minimal speciﬁc con - text , may seriously impair the learner’s ability to accurately represent the information at all . Educators may , reasonably , feel faced with the unappealing task of choosing between 525 comprehensibility and applicability . Of course , these extremes do not represent the only possi - bilities , and researchers have given serious attention to ﬁnd - ing ways to leverage the beneﬁts of both concreteness and ab - straction . For instance , Goldstone and Son ( 1995 ) conducted Q5 530 a study in which a previously unfamiliar scientiﬁc principle ( competitive specialization ) was taught through two inter - active computer simulations , each of which could be either relatively concrete or relatively idealized . They found that participants showed superior performance on learning and 535 transfer after interacting with one concrete and one ideal - ized version of the simulation , relative to participants who had interacted with two simulations of the same type . This advantage was especially pronounced under conditions of “concreteness fading , ” in which a concrete simulation was 540 followed by one that was less perceptually rich . Scheiter , Ger - jets , and Shuh ( 2010 ) replicated and extended this ﬁnding . In their study , a computer simulation demonstrated a continu - ous morphing between very concrete and more abstract visual representations . For example , an initial display of realistically 545 rendered trees became progressively less detailed , until they were ultimately transformed into small green squares , which were then combined into larger contiguous groupings that made the relative proportions of different types of trees very salient . This approach ( which simultaneously used both rich 550 and idealized representations and facilitated cognitive map - ping between the two types ) led to reliable gains in transfer . One of the most investigated—and apparently most effective—ways of overcoming the limitations of speciﬁc concrete examples is by comparing multiple dissimilar cases . 555 This approach can allow a learner to encode the content in terms of meaningful , comprehensible situations , but then to distill the structurally relevant information on the basis of commonalities across the examples . In particular , there is evidence that the act of mapping the correspondences be - 560 tween two situations ( i . e . , identifying which entities play the same respective roles ) can serve to highlight the struc - tural content . For example , Loewenstein , Thompson , and Gentner ( 2003 ) conducted research with management ( MBA ) students enrolled in a course on negotiation . Some of 565 the students compared two speciﬁc cases involving a “con - tingency contract , ” a useful but sometimes counterintuitive negotiation technique . Other students received the same two cases but read and analyzed them sequentially , without any explicit comparison . Later , all students took part in a face - 570 to - face bargaining exercise in which the use of a contingency contract represented the optimal approach . Students who had compared cases were nearly 3 times as likely to apply this principle to the new case as those who had analyzed the cases separately . In fact , the latter group performed no better on the 575 transfer task than those who had received no training on the contingency principle at all . Results from many other stud - ies across a variety of contexts are consistent with the idea that comparison and mapping between dissimilar cases fa - cilitates structural processing ( e . g . , Catrambone & Holyoak , 580 1989 ; Christie & Gentner , 2010 ; Cummins , 1992 ; Gentner , Loewenstein , Thompson , & Forbus , 2009 ; Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ; Richland & McDonough , 2009 ) . In one example from a real - world educational setting , Richland and McDonough ( 2009 ) found that explicitly cuing the meaningful common - Q6 585 alities between two math problems—for example , by visually presenting both examples at once and gesturing between cor - responding aspects of them—improved students’ ability to transfer to new cross - mapped cases . Research on this approach has typically involved explicit , 590 directed comparison between cases , but there is also evidence that multiple examples may provide a beneﬁt under less di - rected conditions as well . Quilici and Mayer ( 2002 ) taught students about statistical tests ( t test , chi - square , correlation ) by sequentially presenting a set of examples that systemat - 595 ically varied surface and structural properties . Speciﬁcally , students read examples describing t tests in three different concrete contexts , followed by examples of chi - square tests in the same three contexts , followed by the same for correla - tion problems . Although participants in this study were not 600 explicitly asked to map between the cases , the structure of the problem presentation invited at least informal compari - son . Consistent with this , transfer rates were reliably higher relative to other study structures . Ross and Kennedy ( 1990 ) also examined the effects of 605 nondirected comparison . Speciﬁcally , when participants in their study used a previous example to solve a new problem KNOWLEDGE EXPORT 7 ( as a result of spontaneous reminding ) , they then showed superior performance on subsequent problems of that type . This is consistent with the idea that the initial reminding 610 and application involved a comparison and mapping process that helped to create a stronger structural representation . The authors suggest that this kind of “unsupervised” compari - son reﬂects a natural and realistic way in which generaliz - able knowledge could develop in the real world , particularly 615 given that in many domains , surface , and structural charac - teristics tend to be correlated ( e . g . , Gentner , 1989 ; Lewis & Anderson , 1985 ; Mayer , 1981 ) . Finally , as discussed earlier , research has found that explicit labeling can be beneﬁcial in highlighting structural commonalities between situations 620 ( e . g . , Catrambone , 1998 ) . Some researchers have argued that these labels are effective because they invite spontaneous comparison ( e . g . , Kotovsky & Gentner , 1996 ; Namy & Gen - tner , 2002 ) , and there is some recent evidence to support this interpretation ( Son et al . , 2010 ) . 625 Despite a growing body of evidence for the beneﬁts of comparison , however , the results are not uniformly positive . For example , Reed ( 1989 ) found that comparing two algebra problems did not improve performance on new problems . Catrambone and Holyoak ( 1989 ) found that although com - 630 parison helped transfer in the short term , these beneﬁts dis - appeared after short delays or changes in context ( although longer term transfer could be facilitated through more in - tensive , experimenter - directed comparisons ) . In one recent study ( Mayer , DeLeeuw , & Ayres , 2007 ) , exposure to multi - 635 ple cases was actually found to impair transfer . Participants in that study learned about the design and function of hy - draulic brake systems , and some of those participants also saw descriptions of other types of brake systems ( air and caliper brakes ) . The researchers found that those who had 640 learned about multiple systems performed worse on tests of both retention and transfer than those who had only learned about one . One possible explanation for this disadvantage is that the transfer questions in this study all involved inferences about hydraulic brakes themselves , not inferences based on 645 any structural commonalities across the different systems . If true , this suggests that the beneﬁts of generalizability asso - ciated with comparison may sometimes come at the expense of more speciﬁc kinds of knowledge . Overall , however , research suggests that the comparison of 650 multiple cases represents a particularly promising avenue for developing generalizable representations from concrete ex - amples . There are still important questions about the optimal ways of organizing these comparisons , however , and much less evidence exists regarding the kinds of cases that should 655 be compared . On one hand , a case could be made that com - paring situations with very dissimilar surface features should lead to the best generalization . If comparison serves to high - light commonalities between cases while deemphasizing dif - ferences , comparing situations that share irrelevant features 660 could result in those features being retained in a learner’s mental representation ( the idea of “conservative generaliza - tion” ; Medin & Ross , 1989 ; Ross & Kennedy , 1990 ) . This , in turn , could limit generalizability to new , dissimilar cases . Some research is consistent with this conclusion ( e . g . , Day , 665 Goldstone , & Hills , 2010 ; Goldstone & Sakamoto , 2003 ; Halpern , Hansen , & Riefer , 1990 ; Rittle - Johnson & Star , 2009 ) . For example , Halpern and colleagues ( Halpern et al . , 1990 ) asked students to read scientiﬁc passage that included either “near” ( superﬁcially similar ) or “far” ( superﬁcially 670 dissimilar ) analogies . The passages including far analogies led to superior retention , inference , and transfer than those featuring superﬁcially similar comparison , which showed no beneﬁt at all . On the other hand , there are also good reasons to suggest 675 that the comparison of more similar cases might be beneﬁcial , particularly early in the learning process . As discussed ear - lier , the process of mapping two representations to ﬁnd struc - tural correspondences is facilitated when entities in similar roles are concretely similar . The less similar two situations 680 are overall , the less likely it becomes that corresponding enti - ties will share overt surface similarities , and thus the process of mapping itself becomes both more cognitively demanding and more prone to error ( see Gentner , Loewenstein , & Hung , 2007 ) . Together with the considerable evidence that cogni - 685 tive demands represent a general impediment to learning ( see Sweller , 1999 ) , this suggests that there may be circumstances in which the comparison of concretely similar cases would lead to better transfer , and there is some evidence to support this idea . For instance , Kotovsky and Gentner ( 1996 ) found 690 that although young children initially had a very difﬁcult time recognizing and responding on the basis of structural similarities between perceptually dissimilar stimuli , they be - came reliably better at this task when they had ﬁrst observed the structural commonality between overtly similar stimuli , a 695 phenomenon termed “progressive alignment” ( also see Gen - ter et al . , 2007 ; Loewenstein & Gentner , 2001 ) . Thus , there is some evidence for each of these two compet - ing ideas—that transfer will beneﬁt most from the compar - ison of similar and of dissimilar cases . One possible way to 700 reconcile these ﬁndings is by suggesting that different kinds of learners may beneﬁt from different kinds of comparisons . In the absence of other constraints , comparisons of dissimilar situations should be best , because they can serve to highlight only those features that are relevant to the broadest possible 705 set of applicable cases . Of course , learning and cognition are inevitably subject to ( often serious ) constraints . When an individual’s working memory capacity is more restricted , because of limited background knowledge , individual dif - ferences in ability , or both , the comparison of concretely 710 similar cases may be preferable . In fact , some recent ﬁndings are consistent with this idea ( Day , Hills , & Goldstone , 2010 ; Q7 Rittle - Johnson , Star , & Durkin , 2009 ) . If this reconciliation is correct , then a general recommendation for promoting transfer would be to present a principle using the most dis - 715 similar cases that still allow a learner to compare the cases and recognize the basis for their similarity . 8 DAY AND GOLDSTONE Prior Knowledge Several lines of research have established that an individual’s existing knowledge can provide a signiﬁcant advantage in 720 his or her ability to recognize and take advantage of deep structural content . One of the classic ﬁndings in this area comes from the work of Chi , Feltovich , and Glaser ( 1981 ) examining the differences between experts and nonexperts in the domain of physics . The researchers found that experts 725 ( advanced physics PhD students ) overwhelmingly tended to group physics problems on the basis of the general princi - ples underlying their solution ( e . g . , conservation of energy , Newton’s second law ) . In contrast , relative novices ( under - graduates who had just completed an introductory mechan - 730 ics course ) were much more likely to group problems by their concrete features ( e . g . , the presence of springs , inclined planes , pulleys , etc . ) . This general pattern , with experts using meaningful structural commonalities to assess similarity and novices using surface features , has been replicated in a wide 735 range of domains . For instance , expert programmers tend to sort computer programs on the basis of their underlying algo - rithms , whereas novices are more likely to sort on the basis of application type ( Weiser & Shertz , 1983 ) . Similarly , trained musicians were found to group musical pieces exclusively by 740 similarities in their melodic and harmonic structure , whereas nonmusicians had a strong bias to group them by similarities in instrumentation ( Wolpert , 1990 ) . Likewise , when expert and novice subjects were asked to solve the Tower of Hanoi puzzle and judge the similarity between the goal and vari - 745 ous states , experts’ judgments were more likely to be based on the number of moves required to transform one posi - tion to the other , rather than number of shared superﬁcial features ( Suzuki , Ohnishi , & Shigemasu , 1992 ) . Although most of this research has examined individuals that are al - 750 ready experts in their ﬁeld , similar effects can be induced experimentally through training . For example , Schoenfeld and Hermann ( 1983 ) found that students were more likely to Q8 sort mathematical problems on the basis of their underlying structure after an intensive training course on mathematical 755 problem solving . Important for our purposes , these expertise differences appear to have a strong inﬂuence on the likelihood of spon - taneous analogical reminding and use . For example , Novick ( 1988 ) found that students with greater expertise in mathe - 760 matics ( as assessed by scores on the mathematical section of the SAT ) were much more likely to make use of previously seen problems that were analogous but overtly dissimilar to a new test problem . In contrast , the nonexpert students were more likely to be inﬂuenced ( negatively ) by remindings of 765 prior problems with surface commonalities ( also see Ball , Ormerod , & Morley , 2004 ; Gentner et al . , 2009 ) . Of course , experts are not completely immune to the in - ﬂuence of surface features ( e . g . , Blessing & Ross , 1996 ; Hardiman , Dufresne , & Mestre , 1989 ) . In fact , in some cir - 770 cumstances , experts’ greater knowledge and experience can leave them susceptible to new kinds of surface inﬂuences . For instance , Blessing and Ross ( 1996 ) asked experienced math students to solve story problems that varied in both their surface features ( the cover story of the problem ) and 775 their underlying structure ( the formula necessary to solve them correctly ) . According to prior research , one might pre - dict that these experts would have learned simply to ignore the irrelevant contextual information and focus solely on the abstract relationships within each problem . However , 780 these students’ prior experience had provided them with ad - ditional relevant information : that certain kinds of mathe - matical problems tend to be presented in certain kinds of contexts . The researchers found that students’ performance was impaired when the problems involved content that was 785 typically associated with a different type of solution formula ( also see Bassok , Wu , & Olseth , 1995 ; Hinsley , Hayes , & Simon , 1978 ) . Overall , however , expertise provides signiﬁcant advan - tages for transfer . There are many factors that might con - 790 tribute to this fact . Experts may have simply had more prac - tice construing situations in terms of the abstractions that are relevant to their ﬁeld . For instance , physicists are likely to be quite good at thinking about speciﬁc problems in terms of abstract objects and forces . Because of this , their mental 795 representations of two problems that involve the same under - lying principles are likely to be fairly similar , which would facilitate both reminding and mapping . One of the most im - portant factors in experts’ transfer , as we discuss in the next section , is that their rich background knowledge allows them 800 to overcome limitations in working memory . Cognitive Load and Task Difﬁculty Potentially the greatest constraint on learning in general , and therefore on transfer , is the severe cognitive restriction on the amount of information that can be processed at any one 805 time . Research on working memory ( see Baddeley , 2000 ; Baddeley & Hitch , 1974 ) has provided a wealth of evidence that individuals are only capable of keeping a handful of units of information active simultaneously and are able to actively manipulate even fewer . Furthermore , this kind of 810 knowledge is typically very short - lived . In the absence of active rehearsal , information tends to remain active for only a few seconds . These facts are especially relevant for transfer because there are reasons to suspect that structural knowledge in 815 particular could be disproportionately inﬂuenced by such restrictions . In general , learners need to represent the indi - vidual entities in a situation before they are able to repre - sent the relationships between those constituent parts ( e . g . , Goldstone & Medin , 1994 ) . This suggests that when an 820 individual has limited resources to devote to a set of facts—perhaps because new content in a lecture is displacing it quickly—it is the representation of the relational structure that is most likely to suffer ( see Halford , Wilson , & Phillips , KNOWLEDGE EXPORT 9 1998 ) . Similarly , this limited capacity means that learners 825 have fewer opportunities to elaborate on the new information by generating new inferences , making connections to exist - ing knowledge , and developing more general schemas from the information ( e . g . , Sweller , 1994 ) . Given this , limitations in cognitive capacity could lead to serious difﬁculties in both 830 recognizing and making use of analogous structures . There is empirical evidence to support this idea . Waltz and colleagues ( Waltz , Lau , Grewal , & Holyoak , 2000 ) ex - amined people’s ability to recognize structural commonalities between pairs of visual scenes , each of which portrayed vari - 835 ous people and objects interacting in some way . For example , one picture showed a woman receiving groceries from a man from a food bank , while the paired picture showed the same woman giving food to a squirrel ( see Figure 1 ) . In this and all of the pairs , one of the entities was “cross - mapped” between 840 the images—for example , the woman in the ﬁrst picture cor - responded to the woman in second picture on the basis of their similar physical appearance , but she corresponded to the squirrel in terms of their shared role as “recipient of food” ( see Markman & Gentner , 1993 ) . The question of inter - 845 est was which of these alternatives participants would select when asked which entity corresponded to the ﬁrst woman . Under normal conditions , the relational match ( the squirrel ) and the perceptual match ( the woman ) were chosen about equally often . However , when participants were put under 850 a cognitive load during the task—for example , by asking them to maintain a string of digits in memory—they were far more likely to ignore the structural features and prefer the perceptually similar match . Similar results have been found from manipulations that deplete working memory capacity 855 indirectly , such as inducing anxiety in participants ( Tohill & Holyoak , 2000 ) . Because of the critical role that working memory con - straints play in learning and transfer , researchers have been very interested in determining effective ways of managing 860 FIGURE 1 Sample stimuli from Markman and Gentner ( 1993 ) used by Waltz et al ( 2000 ) . Q9 Q10 10 DAY AND GOLDSTONE processing demands during learning . Cognitive load theory ( CLT ; Sweller , van Merrienboer , & Paas , 1998 ) , which distin - guishes between different kinds of cognitive demands based on their relevance to learning , has provided a productive framework for examining these issues . For example , several 865 studies have reported superior learning and transfer after stu - dents had been shown several worked examples ( see Renkl , 2005 ; Renkl & Atkinson , 2010 ) . This worked - example effect is typically explained in terms of learners having the oppor - tunity to develop meaningful schemas without having unnec - 870 essary demands placed on their cognitive processing . Other research has shown that learning can beneﬁt from manipu - lations such as the removal of irrelevant , distracting content ( e . g . , Garner et al . , 1989 ) , using cues to direct attention to rel - evant content ( e . g . , Lorch , 1989 ; Mautone & Mayer , 2001 ) , 875 allowing learners to pace their own training in order allow sufﬁcient processing time ( e . g . , Lusk et al . , 2009 ; Mayer & Chandler , 2001 ) , and “pretraining” students on relevant sub - components of a system prior to the complete training phase ( e . g . , Mayer , Mathias , & Wetzell , 2002 ; Pollock , Chandler , 880 & Sweller , 2002 ) . CLT also takes into consideration the fact that auditory and visual working memory systems appear to be relatively independent ( e . g . , Baddeley , 1986 ; Paivio , 1990 ) . That is , a heavy processing demand from one kind of information ( e . g . , 885 auditory or verbal content ) typically does not signiﬁcantly interfere with processing for a different kind of information ( e . g . , visual content ) . Because of this , it is often possible to more effectively balance the information load between these two subsystems . For instance , Mayer and colleagues report 890 several studies in which the presentation of visual material that was accompanied by oral narration led to better learn - ing and transfer than the simultaneous presentation of visual material and text ( e . g . , Mayer & Moreno , 1998 ; Moreno & Mayer , 1999 ; Moreno , Mayer , Spires , & Lester , 2001 ) . In 895 this case , presenting the visual and verbal content in different modalities avoids overloading a single system . Other stud - ies have found beneﬁts associated with aligning images and text spatially ( e . g . , Hegarty & Just , 1989 ; Moreno & Mayer , 1999 ) and synchronizing their presentation temporally ( e . g . , 900 Mayer & Anderson , 1991 , 1992 ; Mayer & Sims , 1994 ) , both of which should reduce the length of time that information must be maintained in working memory . In all of these examples , the degree to which learners’ working memory is taxed has an important inﬂuence on their 905 ability to acquire new knowledge , and particularly their abil - ity to develop knowledge structures that can generalize to new situations . In fact , constraints on cognitive processing almost certainly play a role in many of the transfer effects that have already been discussed . For example , both the fa - 910 cilitation observed in analogical mapping between similar objects and the impairment associated with “cross - mapping” entities to dissimilar roles ( e . g . , Gentner & Toupin , 1986 ; Ross , 1987 , 1989 ) are likely to reﬂect the relative difﬁculty of maintaining similar versus dissimilar correspondences in 915 working memory . Likewise , the labeling of relational struc - tures ( e . g . , Catrambone , 1996 , 1998 ) may be beneﬁcial in part because it serves to reduce cognitive demands by group - ing and thereby simplifying the information to be stored and processed . 920 One of the clearest examples of the role of processing constraints on transfer is in the differences between experts and novices . Speciﬁcally , expertise seems to involve spe - cialized kinds of processes and representations that allow an individual to efﬁciently work around these severe cogni - 925 tive constraints . A considerable amount of evidence supports the idea that proﬁciency in a content domain is not asso - ciated with improved storage or processing capacity per se . Rather , individuals are able to become much more efﬁcient at processing information through the acquisition of long - term 930 knowledge structures . Through the process of chunking , ex - perts may reduce very large quantities of information into a much smaller number of representational units . For instance , although a novice looking at a chessboard in mid - game is confronted with an overwhelming amount of information , 935 chess experts are able to quickly recognize and classify large groups of pieces into a small number of meaningful struc - tures ( e . g . , Chase & Simon , 1973 ; de Groot , 1966 ) . Impor - tant for our purposes , chunked knowledge structures such as these not only allow individuals to encode content far more 940 quickly and remember conﬁgurations much more effectively . They also serve as a kind of classiﬁcation which enables ex - perts to associate appropriate procedures and strategies with different kinds of complex situations . For example , a physics expert may classify diverse problems into structurally mean - 945 ingful categories ( e . g . , Chi et al . , 1981 ) that highlight relevant relationships and suggest speciﬁc kinds of solutions . Although there are many clear examples of beneﬁts from reducing the cognitive demand associated with learning , the story is made somewhat more complex seemingly contradic - 950 tory evidence for the beneﬁts of cognitive difﬁculty . “Desir - able difﬁculties” ( Bjork , 1994 ) are aspects of a learning situ - ation that make immediate learning and encoding more dif - ﬁcult but that also enhance long - term retention and retrieval . Although such effects have typically been examined in terms 955 of basic information recall , several studies suggest that cer - tain kinds of difﬁculties during training may enhance trans - fer as well . For instance , Kornell and Bjork ( 2008 ) showed participants several examples of paintings from each of 12 different artists and then looked at the participants’ ability 960 to generalize their knowledge by recognizing new paintings by those artists . Participants overwhelming preferred con - ditions in which the paintings by any particular artist were grouped together consecutively , and believed that this presen - tation improved their test performance . In reality , however , 965 the more challenging “spaced” presentation , in which paint - ings by each artist were presented “interleaved” with those of other painters , led to reliably better generalization . In a more typical problem - solving transfer test , Chen and Mo ( 2004 ) found that although greater variability in training 970 KNOWLEDGE EXPORT 11 examples led to slower , more difﬁcult learning , it also left participants better equipped to generalize their knowledge to new transfer problems . Similarly , researchers have found that participants’ ability to transfer a solution to an insight problem was improved when the source problem was pre - 975 sented in a way that made structural relationships within the problem less salient , and therefore more difﬁcult to encode ( Didierjean & Nogry , 2004 ; Gick & McGarry , 1992 ) . In all of these cases , the introduction of difﬁculty during training improved later transfer performance . 980 The recommendations from CLT and Desirable Difﬁcul - ties are , on the face of it , conﬂicting , and each has its share of empirical support . One possible reconciliation of these con - ﬂicting results is that introducing difﬁculties into learning can confer beneﬁts for transfer so long as solid learning is 985 nonetheless achieved . Reminiscent of Nietzsche’s aphorism “What does not destroy me , makes me strong , ” the recom - mendation would be to introduce learning challenges that do not completely derail learning . Adaptive learning technolo - gies that adjust the difﬁculties of materials while learning 990 is ongoing represent a promising way of implementing this recommendation . Types of Processing and Strategic Approaches All of the effects discussed thus far have related to inﬂu - ences outside of the learner’s immediate control—features 995 inherent in the learning materials and situations themselves , or knowledge that individuals bring from their prior experi - ence . However , transfer can also be affected by a variety of online factors , reﬂecting different kinds of processing used during encoding or transfer . 1000 Surprisingly little evidence exists regarding one of the most direct potential processing inﬂuences—namely , whether individuals can be in a cognitive state that causes them to interpret things more or less relationally in general . In one of the few studies on this question ( Bliznashki & 1005 Kokinov , 2010 ) , researchers recently reported evidence that engaging in one task that requires relational construal of in - formation can prime participants to interpret subsequent sit - uations more relationally . Speciﬁcally , after attempting sev - eral items from the Raven Progressive Matrices test , which 1010 involves solving visual analogies based on structural relation - ships between a series of diagrams , participants were more likely to judge the similarities between new scenes based on structural rather than featural information . Relatedly , in re - search with young children , A . L . Brown and Kane ( 1988 ) 1015 found that 3 - and 4 - year - old participants seemed to “learn to learn , ” quickly developing a mind - set to look for rela - tional similarities between cases after previous exposure to other analogous situations . However , much work remains to be done on this fundamental issue . 1020 Another way in which learners may inﬂuence their own encoding is in terms of the speciﬁc goals with which they approach a given task . A great deal of research over the past two decades has examined the inﬂuence of achievement goals on learning , primarily in terms of mastery versus per - 1025 formance goals ( see Ames , 1992 ) . Although mastery goals relate to basic competence , with the aim of personal learning and improvement , performance goals relate to success on the immediate task , particularly in terms of demonstrating one’s ability relative to others . These competing goal types have 1030 been shown to have a signiﬁcant impact on learning in general ( see Elliot , 1999 ; Pintrich , 2000 ) , with mastery goals being associated with greater engagement and long - term success , as well as correlating well with a variety of factors ben - eﬁcial to learning , such as persistence and the adoption of 1035 appropriate cognitive strategies . Recent research has revealed similar effects on knowledge transfer more speciﬁcally . For instance , Bereby - Meyer , Moran , and Unger - Aviram ( 2004 ) put groups of participants into a negotiation task and exam - ined their ability to maximize their gains through the use of 1040 mutually beneﬁcial strategies . Some participants were given instructions that emphasized immediate performance and the minimization of errors , whereas others received instructions that emphasized content mastery . All participants’ perfor - mance improved on subsequent versions of similar tasks . 1045 However , when participants transferred their knowledge to a new scenario in which important conditions and details were changed , those in the performance - oriented condition performed no better than a control group , whereas those who had been given mastery - oriented instructions improved reli - 1050 ably . Other research has extended this ﬁnding to situations in which such achievement orientations were primed at the time of transfer rather than during initial learning ( Bereby - Meyer & Kaplan , 2005 ) . Similar results have been found by sim - ply varying the speciﬁcity of learners’ goals during training 1055 ( Vollmeyer , Burns , & Holyoak , 1996 ) . When participants in that study were provided with a speciﬁc goal to achieve in the training phase , immediate performance was good . However , transfer to a task with a new goal was reliably poorer than for participants who had freely explored during training without 1060 any speciﬁc goal . Finally , there is evidence that individuals may vary greatly in the quantity and quality of explanations that they spon - taneously generate when studying examples and that these differences can have an important inﬂuence on their abil - 1065 ity to learn and transfer from studied materials . Inﬂuen - tial research by Chi and colleagues ( Chi , Bassok , Lewis , Reimann , & Glaser , 1989 ) found that students who self - explained well—explaining and justifying steps in an exam - ple problem , and considering goals , consequences , and the 1070 relationships between subsequent actions—were far more successful at solving later transfer problems . Renkl ( 1997 ) replicated and expanded on these ﬁndings , reporting large effects of self - explanation even when controlling for time on task , and distinguishing between several qualitatively differ - 1075 ent types of explanation styles , which he found to be quite sta - ble within individuals across situations . This self - explanation effect seems to beneﬁt learning via multiple routes , both by 12 DAY AND GOLDSTONE supplementing the presented information through the gener - ation of relevant inferences and by helping learners to recog - 1080 nize and correct disparities between their own mental models and the ones suggested by the examples ( see Chi , 2000 ) . Following on these correlational results , researchers have had some success in improving transfer by eliciting self - explanations from learners , particularly in combination with 1085 other favorable learning conditions . For instance , Renkl , Stark , Gruber , and Mandl ( 1998 ) used multiple worked ex - amples to teach participants about compound interest calcu - lation and found that participants who had been trained to generate appropriate self - explanations ( through the observa - 1090 tion of good self - explanation , followed by practice with feed - back and coaching ) exhibited reliably better transfer perfor - mance . In another study ( Atkinson , Renkl , & Merrill , 2003 ) , researchers found that transfer following training through a “fading” procedure , in which worked - out steps were succes - 1095 sively removed from training examples , was improved when participants were prompted for self - explanations at each step of the training problems . Challenges to the Traditional View Although the traditional approach to transfer has generated 1100 an enormous body of research , it has also come under an increasing amount of criticism . Many of the basic themes of this criticism are captured by the inﬂuential work of Lave ( 1988 ) , who lays out several interrelated points of concern . Most fundamentally , she questions the model of knowledge 1105 representation that underlies ( explicitly or implicitly ) the ba - sic cognitivist approach . Traditional psychological research tends to view knowledge as a stable mental entity , which un - der the right conditions may be brought forth and applied to new situations . For example , a student may learn a general 1110 rule for applying the distributive property to a mathemati - cal formula . When confronted with a problem in which this method would be appropriate , the student may retrieve this existing knowledge structure and apply it to the new prob - lem . Although there are many ways in which this process 1115 could break down—a failure to successfully retrieve the ex - isting knowledge , an inaccurate mapping between the known method and the new situation—the relevant knowledge itself is typically treated as a discrete , reiﬁed entity . In fact , the very word “transfer” seems to reﬂect this assumption—that 1120 a discrete piece of knowledge is being “carried over” intact from one context to another . Lave presented a very different view of knowledge , both Q11 in terms of acquisition and use . In this view , all knowledge is a by - product of participation in particular situations and is 1125 very much tied to those speciﬁc contexts . Because of this , the most traditional kind of knowledge transfer between dissim - ilar cases is simply not possible , because there is no knowl - edge that is in a sufﬁciently abstracted form to be applicable across highly variable contexts . Rather , new knowledge is 1130 constructed in the course of understanding and participating in new situations , a process generally referred to as “situated learning . ” ( As Greeno , 1997 , p . 12 , noted , however , Lave does not explicitly say that far transfer cannot occur , but that there are serious concerns about the underlying theory on 1135 which this assumption is based . ) Q12 In particular , Lave and colleagues emphasized the social and interactive nature of learning , observing that learning typically takes place in “communities of practice , ” or groups of people who interact in the service of shared interests and 1140 goals . For example , when Lave and Wenger ( 1991 ) analyzed Q13 the process of learning within several different communities of shared interest ( e . g . , Yucatan midwives , apprentice tailors , members of Alcoholics Anonymous ) , they found a general pattern in which newcomers to a group gradually acquired 1145 knowledge from more experienced members as an inciden - tal by - product of group participation . Apprentice tailors , for instance , typically begin their careers by performing a num - ber of seemingly trivial tasks—running errands , preparing the tailor’s materials and workspace at the beginning of each 1150 day , adding ﬁnishing details to garments that the tailor has completed—that serve to familiarize the novice with the framework of fundamental knowledge of that community . The apprentice’s responsibilities gradually progress “back - ward” to cutting and sewing jobs , and this progress “can be 1155 arranged and interrelated in ways that gradually transform that skeletal understanding” ( p . 96 ) . In addition to questioning the established views of what constitutes learning , Lave also took issue with many prac - tical aspects of the experimental research on transfer . For 1160 instance , transfer research is typically designed to measure participants’ application of one particular principle or strat - egy , which is chosen or designed by experts whose knowledge may be quite different from that of the learners . In so doing , most transfer studies prioritize expert knowledge while over - 1165 looking or disregarding the relationships that novice par - ticipants ﬁnd relevant . As an example , Lave cited a study ( Williamson , Hollan , & Stevens , 1983 ) that describes an indi - Q14 vidual attempting to understand and make predictions about a heat exchange mechanism ( a system in which cool ﬂuids 1170 are used to reduce the temperature of hotter ﬂuids ) . Over the course of answering questions about this system , the individ - ual generated multiple , distinct models of its operation . New questions allowed the learner to recognize ﬂaws in his previ - ous models , and in trying to integrate and coordinate these 1175 different models he both improved his models and furthered his overall understanding of the system . Lave argued that tra - ditional studies of learning and transfer that are based solely on matches to experimenter - generated “normative” models and solutions would have failed to capture this individual’s 1180 learning and knowledge . Lave also noted that the most common experimental de - sign for assessing transfer involves training with a single ar - tiﬁcially constructed example , followed by measurement of that example’s inﬂuence on a single subsequent case ( which 1185 has been judged analogous by an expert ) . This “two - problem” KNOWLEDGE EXPORT 13 design seems to severely restrict the scope of what prior knowledge a participant can meaningfully bring to bear on a new situation . These critiques have resonated with many researchers in - 1190 terested in learning and education and have been adapted and expanded upon in various ways , both in terms of the - ory and application . For example , Carreher and Schliemann ( 2002 ) argued that the idea of transfer itself represents a theory rather than an actual phenomenon to be investigated 1195 or explained . Furthermore , they believe it is a theory that is largely incompatible with existing empirical ﬁndings , and one which should therefore be abandoned . In reviewing the literature , and in their own studies examining ﬁfth - grade stu - dents’ acquisition of the concept of negative numbers , they 1200 found little evidence for any of the passive “carrying over” of knowledge between cases that the transfer metaphor implies . Instead , in - depth interviews with their student participants suggested that they were “drawing upon a broad history of experience regarding numbers , general arithmetical opera - 1205 tions , money , notation and diagrams , and so forth” ( p . 19 ) , and integrating and adapting that diverse knowledge during the online processes of comprehension and learning . Thus , they argued that existing knowledge is often altered to ac - commodate new information . Schwartz , Chase , and Brans - 1210 ford ( 2012 / this issue ) describe this process as seeing the new in the old—interpreting previous situations in new ways . In contrast , traditional views of knowledge transfer seem to allow only the assimilation of new information into static existing knowledge structures—seeing the old in the new . 1215 Other researchers are more open to the value of tradi - tional transfer research , while still agreeing with many of Lave’s speciﬁc concerns . Lobato and her colleagues ( e . g . , Lobato , 2012 / this issue ; Lobato & Seibert , 2002 ) have done work addressing two of the major issues raised by Lave—the 1220 emphasis in transfer research on conforming to expert knowl - edge , and the reliance on simple “two problem” transfer de - signs . In her work , Lobato has performed in - depth analyses of verbal protocols collected from students over the course of several days of training . Through these analyses , she has 1225 been able to identify ways in which students’ understand - ings during training are reﬂected and adapted during later transfer episodes . In this way , her research allows a much richer picture of what information is being drawn upon dur - ing application , and also highlights how that knowledge may 1230 develop gradually throughout learning experiences . In one example ( Lobato & Seibert , 2002 ) , a student was observed and interviewed while learning about slope , ra - tios , and proportionality . In analyzing those protocols , the researchers found evidence that an approach discovered by 1235 the student in an earlier session ( partitioning a particular rise / run “unit , ” which could then be iterated any number of times ) was brought to bear on a later problem in a very dif - ferent context . However , this use did not appear to reﬂect a straightforward importing of a previous piece of knowledge . 1240 Rather , the interview suggested an extended process that re - quired both a reinterpretation of the new problem and an adaptation of the original knowledge . James Greeno and his colleagues ( e . g . , Greeno , Smith , & Moore , 1993 ) offered a reconceptualization of transfer that is 1245 related to , but somewhat distinct from , Lave’s . Greeno inter - preted transfer on the basis of the affordances ( Gibson , 1977 ) that a situation offers—in other words , the ways in which an agent may meaningfully interact with a situation . When sim - ilar affordances are shared across different situations , there 1250 is a possibility for transfer to occur . As an example , Greeno examined Judd’s ( 1908 ; replicated by Hendrickson & Schroeder , 1941 ) classic study in which Q15 participants practiced hitting an underwater target with a dart or an air riﬂe . Some of those participants received an expla - 1255 nation of light refraction and how it could lead to deceptive perceptions of the target’s location . Although all participants performed equally well on the initial task , those who had received the additional instruction performed much better on a transfer task in which the depth of the target was changed . 1260 Greeno suggested that success on this task depends on at - tending to the affordances of the situation that are invariant across the contexts—namely , the relative angle of the ap - parent path of the projectile after hitting the water—rather than attending to any of the other means of adjusting one’s 1265 aim that would not be invariant across contexts . According to this interpretation , those participants who had received in - formation about refraction were more attuned to the relevant , task - invariant affordances , and thus more likely to interact with the modiﬁed version appropriately . 1270 As this example highlights , for Greeno these affordances do not reﬂect a quality of the external situation itself , but rather a relationship between the situation and the agent who is acting upon it . Greeno argued that just as the idea of motion reﬂects a relationship between an object and a point of refer - 1275 ence , so too does cognition necessarily depend on a relation - ship between an agent and a context . It is therefore incorrect to treat context as simply an inﬂuence on cognition—by his interpretation , the very idea of cognition without context is meaningless . 1280 One of the most inﬂuential reconsiderations of learning and transfer is through the idea of preparation for future learning ( e . g . , Bransford & Schwartz , 1999 ; Schwartz & Martin , 2004 ) . Several decades ago , educational philosopher Harry Broudy ( 1977 ) suggested three different ways in 1285 which knowledge could be manifested in an individual : replicative knowledge ( “knowing that” something is true ) , applicative knowledge ( “knowing how” to accomplish some task ) , and interpretive knowledge ( “knowing with” some existing knowledge ) . Although traditional tests of transfer 1290 have looked extensively at the ﬁrst two ways of understand - ing , they have largely ignored the third—the ways in which our prior experience shapes our interpretations of new infor - mation ( see Schwartz , Bransford , & Sears , 2005 ) . Through Q16 this kind of application , speciﬁc prior knowledge serves as 1295 a lens for the construal of new content rather than being the 14 DAY AND GOLDSTONE direct focus of cognition itself . Consistent with the themes of recent transfer critiques , research has demonstrated powerful interpretive effects of knowledge that would have been overlooked by more conventional measures . For instance , 1300 most transfer studies involve a simple manipulation during the study phase ( e . g . , viewing a relevant analog vs . viewing an unrelated control example ) , followed by an assessment of this manipulation’s effect on a transfer task ( e . g . , solving a problem ) . In contrast , Schwartz and Martin ( 2004 ) designed 1305 a “double - transfer paradigm , ” in which some participants re - ceived additional training between the study and test phases . In one of their studies , ninth - grade algebra students learned about standardized scores , which allow comparison of individual values across groups with different averages 1310 and variabilities ( e . g . , how does one performance on the high jump compare to another performance on the long jump ? ) . One group of students began by attempting to invent a way of standardizing scores on their own , whereas another group was shown an intuitive way of visually understanding stan - 1315 dardization , which they then practiced themselves . The re - searchers found no difference between the groups in terms of direct transfer to transfer problems given immediately after the manipulation . Typically , this would be interpreted to mean that the manipulation had no effect . However , the study in - 1320 volved an additional manipulation : Prior to testing , half of the students in each group were given additional training on the conventional method of calculating standardized scores . It is important to note that this training was identical for the two conditions . The researchers found that for these students , the 1325 initial condition did inﬂuence transfer performance . Specif - ically , those students who began by trying to invent their own procedure and then received more formal training per - formed markedly better than the other three groups , whose performance was essentially identical . Apparently , the initial 1330 manipulation inﬂuenced the way in which individuals were able to learn from the supplemental training . In general , mainstream psychologists have not responded to ( or even acknowledged ) the critiques from education re - searchers . In the most prominent direct response , Anderson , 1335 Reder , and Simon ( 1996 , 1997 ) disputed the general claims of situated learning on empirical grounds , pointing to evi - dence that transfer is possible even across situations that are concretely very dissimilar . Others have complained that the arguments presented by Lave and others are largely untestable 1340 and unfalsiﬁable . However , some of the research and ideas from mainstream psychologists are at least consistent with the points raised by situated thinkers . For instance , many transfer researchers have discussed an adaptation or “re - representation” phase in transfer , during 1345 which one or both of the representations involved is altered to make analogical mapping more consistent ( e . g . , Clement , 1988 ; Gentner & Colhoun , 2010 ; Holyoak , Novick , & Melz , 1994 ; Keane , 1996 ) . For example , when Clement ( 1988 ) an - alyzed protocols collected during physics problem solving , 1350 he found that individuals often transformed or modiﬁed prior cases in order make them applicable to new problems . Fur - thermore , he reported that problem solving often involved the generation of Gedanken experiments , or novel , artiﬁcially constructed thought experiments . Such mental constructions 1355 would clearly not involve transferring knowledge from a spe - ciﬁc prior case but would instead require learners to draw on and adapt multiple sources of experience . Consistent with this last point , several studies have ex - amined transfer from “real - world” episodes outside of any 1360 experimental context , helping to address issues with the stan - dard “two problem” design . For example , Dunbar ( 2001 ) used an “in vivo” approach , in which he recorded weekly meet - ings from biology laboratories . In analyzing these discus - sions , he discovered numerous examples of scientists draw - 1365 ing on outside analogies to help them formulate new theories , design experiments , and explain new ideas to one another ( also see Ball et al . , 2004 ; Bearman , Ball , & Ormerod , 2007 ; Christensen & Schunn , 2007 ) . Other research has looked at individuals’ ability to retrieve autobiographical examples 1370 that are structurally similar to new experimentally presented cases . For instance , Chen , Mo , and Honomichl ( 2004 ) found evidence that people were likely to spontaneously retrieve and use relevant folk tales in order to solve new analo - gous problems . Similarly , Gentner et al . ( 2009 ) found that 1375 just as comparison of multiple cases can improve transfer to new situations , it can also facilitate retrieval of previ - ously known , structurally similar episodes , including autobi - ographical memories from an individual’s own past . Traditional cognitive approaches have generally consid - 1380 ered analogical reasoning to be a very active , deliberative process in which two situations are explicitly mapped to one another . This characterization is difﬁcult to reconcile with ar - guments for the importance of “knowing with , ” or using prior knowledge as an interpretive lens for understanding new sit - 1385 uations . However , there is some evidence for less delibera - tive , more implicit forms of analogical transfer . For instance , Schunn and Dunbar ( 1996 ) presented participants with a sim - ulated biochemistry problem that required a strategy of inhi - bition in order to be solved ( other participants were given a 1390 problem with a different solution strategy ) . On a molecular genetics problem the following day , these participants were better able to generate the correct inhibition - based solution . Despite this transfer , however , the participants appeared to be unaware of the relationship between the two problems and 1395 did not mention the earlier simulation in their verbal proto - cols or in a questionnaire given after the transfer task . Other recent studies have reported similar effects , even when par - ticipants were explicitly asked about the relationship between the training and transfer tasks ( e . g . , Day & Gentner , 2007 ; 1400 Day & Goldstone , 2011 ; also see Gross & Greene , 2007 ) . Kostic and colleagues ( Kostic , Cleary , Severin , & Miller , 2010 ) found further evidence for this phenomenon , showing a dissociation between familiarity and recall for previously seen analogical relationships . Participants in that study of - 1405 ten knew that they had seen a structurally similar example KNOWLEDGE EXPORT 15 earlier in the session , even when they could not explicitly remember the content of that example . This further suggests the likelihood of situations in which the structure of prior ex - periences may inﬂuence later processing without requiring 1410 explicit analogical mapping between speciﬁc cases . The critiques of the traditional view of transfer present serious challenges to mainstream transfer research . By point - ing out potential problems with the models on which such research is based , such critiques seem to call into question 1415 the very foundations and justiﬁcation for this extensive body of literature , not to mention its ﬁndings . On the other hand , it is often not clear to psychologists how these criticisms can be addressed within a straightforward experimental framework . Contemporary researchers are making progress in bridging 1420 this apparent divide , however . The work on preparation for fu - ture learning and Lobato’s approach of iterating explicit ma - nipulations with in - depth qualitative analysis provide prime examples of taking these issues seriously while simultane - ously maintaining scientiﬁc rigor . And as discussed earlier , 1425 research by mainstream psychologists is increasingly pro - ducing ﬁndings that bear on these issues , whether or not that is their explicit goal . The extent to which the critiques of Lave and others will ever be satisfactorily addressed is of course an open question , but examples such as these provide 1430 reason for optimism . PERCEPTION , COGNITION , AND TRANSFER Taken as a whole , a review of the literature on transfer pro - vides a story of challenges and frustrations , but also rea - sons for hope . In one way or another , each of the articles in 1435 this special issue draws creatively on broad swaths of this literature—including recent critiques—in order to advance our understanding of how we can best foster generalizable knowledge . In this section , we would like to propose our own suggestion for reconceptualizing transfer , which is , ironically 1440 enough , to shift transfer from an abstract , high - level concep - tualization to perception – action processes . Speciﬁcally , we believe the evidence suggests that perceptual learning and perceptual processes provide a critical foundation for both knowledge representation and knowledge use , and that we 1445 can leverage this fact in order to facilitate learning and trans - fer . This proposed connection is by no means new . For in - stance , in their seminal work on expertise and problem solv - ing , Chase and Simon ( 1973 ) asserted that “it is no mistake of 1450 language for the chess master to say that he ‘sees’ the right move ; and it is for good reason that students of complex problem solving are interested in perceptual processes” ( p . 387 ) . Later in his career , Herb Simon ( 2000 ) maintained that Q17 “an audience of scientists will very likely agree that thinking 1455 doesn’t always ( or maybe not even usually ) use the medium of words , ” and that often , “seeing is the most efﬁcient way of reasoning” ( pp . 119 – 120 ) . This idea has also intrigued education researchers . For instance , the views of J . S . Brown , Collins , and Duguid ( 1989 ) on situated cognition assume 1460 a primary role for perception in knowledge acquisition and use . However , both the interest and the empirical evidence for a relationship between perception and cognition have been expanding rapidly in recent years , and a more thorough con - sideration seems warranted . There are at least two productive 1465 ways in which one can draw connections between perception and cognition . The ﬁrst , weaker connection is in the terms of the general kinds of characteristics that are typically as - sociated with each type of processing ; the second , stronger potential connection is the suggestion that cognition may rely 1470 on perceptual processes and representations in a very literal way . Relative to most views of how cognition operates , per - ceptual processes tend to be very fast , to occur automatically without conscious deliberation , and to rely largely on pattern - 1475 matching with respect to existing representations . This , of course , is not to say that perception is either simple or content - free . In fact , the efﬁciency and subjective ease of perceptual experience belies both the complexity and the ﬂexibility of the processes involved . Some of this efﬁciency may derive 1480 from the availability of general , possibly innate organizing principles , such as those suggested by the Gestaltists ( e . g . , Metzger , 1936 ; Wertheimer , 1923 ) or more recently by de - Q18 velopmental psychologists such as Spelke ( 1990 ) and Bail - largeon ( 1987 ) . However , perception is also strongly inﬂu - 1485 enced by prior experience . For instance , expertise in a given domain is often accompanied by a kind of perceptual “tun - ing” that leaves the individual more sensitive to perceptual features and patterns that are relevant to their ﬁeld ( see Gau - thier , Tarr , & Bub , 2009 ) . Such gradual adaptation is consis - Q19 1490 tent with other kinds of “nondeliberate” learning , such as the acquisition of procedural knowledge and automaticity ( e . g . , Shiffrin & Schneider , 1977 ) . However , lasting changes in perceptual interpretations can also result from much briefer experiences . A classic example of this is the “rat - man demon - 1495 stration” ( Leeper , 1935 ) , in which a single , brief exposure to an image strongly biases one’s subsequent interpretation of a similar , ambiguous ﬁgure ( see Figure 2 ) . Similarly , DeSchep - per and Treisman ( 1996 ) found that a single exposure to an abstract ﬁgure inﬂuenced individuals’ perception for several 1500 weeks , even when they demonstrated no conscious recogni - tion for that ﬁgure . In one dramatic demonstration of this type of effect , individuals exhibited facilitated recognition for picture fragments after a single , brief exposure during an initial study conducted 17 years earlier ( Mitchell , 2006 ) . 1505 Participants in the follow - up experiment frequently reported having no memory for the previous study itself , much less for the speciﬁc items . There are clear parallels between these kinds of perceptual effects and the idea of “knowing with , ” in which prior con - 1510 ceptual knowledge is used to interpret new situations . In fact , one recent study ( Day & Gentner , 2007 ) represents a fairly straightforward replication of the rat - man demonstration 16 DAY AND GOLDSTONE FIGURE2 The“rat - man”demonstration , from“AStudyofaNeglectedPortionoftheFieldofLearning—TheDevelopmentofSensoryOrganization , ” by R . Leeper , 1935 , The Pedagogical Seminary and Journal of Genetic Psychology , 46 . Interpretation of the ambiguous ﬁgure in the middle is strongly inﬂuenced by which unambiguous version the individual has seen previously . Q20 Q21 with conceptual materials ( narrative passages ) . In this study , participants’ interpretations of an ambiguous passage were 1515 strongly inﬂuenced by an unambiguous analogous passage they had recently read , with two different versions of the ﬁrst passage leading to two different interpretations of the subsequent passage . As in the perceptual task , the structure of a recent stimulus served to guide the interpretation of 1520 a new case , although in this instance it was conceptual , relational structure that was being affected . Also paralleling the rat - man demonstration , this inﬂuence did not appear to be deliberate or effortful . When participants were asked afterward , they reported that the ambiguous target passage 1525 had been completely understandable on its own and that they had not referred to any prior passages in trying to understand the new one . As in the perceptual task , participants in this study not only were unaware of the inﬂuence of the ﬁrst stimulus on the second but also appeared to be unaware of 1530 the ambiguity in the second case altogether . Consistent with the concept of knowing with , the earlier scenario was not an explicit focus of attention but rather provided a frame - work through which new incoming information could be structured ( also see Day & Goldstone , 2011 , discussed next ) . 1535 However , there are reasons to suggest an even stronger , more direct connection between perceptual and conceptual processes . Speciﬁcally , we would suggest that a consider - able amount of cognitive activity—even those aspects which seems relatively “abstract”— relies on mental representa - 1540 tions that are perceptually and spatially concrete . As such , the relationship between our conceptual and perceptual pro - cesses and representations could be considered a very literal one . For example , individuals are reliably faster when re - sponding to smaller numbers with their left hands and to 1545 larger numbers with their right hands , a phenomenon known as the “SNARC” effect ( Dehaene , Bossini , & Giraux , 1993 ) . Follow - ups and extensions to this study strongly suggest that these individuals are relying on a spatial mental representa - tion such as a number line when performing the seemingly 1550 abstract task of assessing magnitude . Some of the most extensive evidence for the role of per - ceptual representations in cognition comes from research on mental models . Such models provide a simpliﬁed spatial and mechanical representation of a situation , allowing individu - 1555 als to reason about relationships within a system and about consequences of different possible actions . In a recent review , Hegarty ( 2004 ) discussed a considerable body of evidence supporting the use of such analog spatial models in a variety of mechanical reasoning tasks . For instance , the ability to 1560 solve simple mechanical problems is highly correlated with independent measures of spatial ability but not measures of verbal ability ( e . g . , Hegarty & Sims , 1994 ) . Similarly , such problems experience more disruptive interference from a si - multaneous secondary task that involves visuospatial work - 1565 ing memory than from one involving verbal working memory ( e . g . , Sims & Hegarty , 1997 ) . Studies have also found pat - terns of reaction times for such problems that are consistent with reliance on an analog mental simulation ( e . g . , Schwartz & Black , 1996 ) . Such phenomena are not limited to me - 1570 chanical problem solving situations , of course . For instance , research on text processing has repeatedly found evidence for the construction of mental “situation models” in the course of comprehending text passages ( see Zwaan & Radvansky , 1998 ) . Through the use of such models , readers are able to 1575 quickly and automatically infer the physical affordances of the entities described in text ( e . g . , Glenberg & Robertson , 2000 ) . In fact , there is evidence that reading comprehension may actually be fostered by asking individuals to “act out” written passages with physical objects ( Glenberg , Gutierrez , 1580 Levin , Japuntich , & Kaschak , 2004 ) . Mental models can also play an important role beyond such literal approximations of real - world situations . Indi - viduals may also use models that are only analogically or metaphorically similar to novel cases . For example , Gentner 1585 and Gentner ( 1983 ) reported that learners were very likely to understand concepts related to electrical currents in terms of mental models of ﬂowing water or moving crowds of peo - ple . Similarly , Johnson - Laird and colleagues have reported extensive evidence that seemingly very abstract types of log - 1590 ical reasoning are often performed through the use of analog , perceptually - concrete mental representations ( see Johnson - Laird , 2006 ) . The role of perceptual representations in comprehension and reasoning suggests that such content may be important 1595 KNOWLEDGE EXPORT 17 in transfer as well , and there is a growing body of evidence that this is the case . Some of the earliest evidence involved problems that were inherently and literally spatial in nature . For instance , Dreistadt ( 1969 ) reported that individuals were better able to solve a spatial insight problem ( e . g . , “organize 1600 10 items into ﬁve rows of exactly 4 items each” ) when a perceptual image that was relevant to the solution ( e . g . , a star ) was present as an incidental feature of the environment . The author reported anecdotally that participants were largely unaware of this inﬂuence on their reasoning . In an even earlier 1605 example , Maier ( 1931 ) reported that participants were much more likely to solve the “two - string” insight problem after witnessing the researcher “accidentally” brush against one of the strings and cause it to swing ( a crucial component of the solution ) . Again , this inﬂuence was reported to occur largely 1610 outside of conscious awareness . Recently , we ( Day & Goldstone , 2011 ) examined the pos - sibility of achieving “far” transfer through similar means . Speciﬁcally , we hypothesized that because knowledge trans - fer appears to be contingent on the psychological ( rather than 1615 objective ) similarity between two situations , and because in - dividuals often seem to represent complex situations through simpliﬁed , concrete mental models , it is possible that transfer could occur between cases that appear quite dissimilar on the surface but are in fact represented similarly . 1620 In our study , participants began by interacting with a com - puter simulation of a ball that was suspended between two elastic bands , and oscillated horizontally between them ( see Figure 3 ) . In addition , there was a fan located to the left of this system that could blow rightward across it , adding an 1625 additional force in that direction . Participants were given the goal of using the fan to cause the ball to either ( a ) stop in the middle between the two poles connected to the ball by the bands or ( b ) reach the far right - hand side of the system . In either case , the goal could be accomplished by coordinating 1630 one’s actions with the inherent frequency of the ball’s oscil - lations . For instance , by applying the rightward force from the fan only when the ball was traveling leftward , and not when it was traveling rightward , the amplitude of the ball’s oscillations could quickly be reduced and the ball would 1635 eventually stop in the middle of the system . ( The alternate goal required the opposite strategy , applying force from the fan only when the ball was moving rightward . ) Next , par - ticipants moved on to a second , seemingly unrelated task that was quite dissimilar to the ball simulation in a number 1640 of important ways . First , rather than being a perceptually rich simulation of moving , interacting parts , the second task was entirely text based . Furthermore , although the ball task displayed actions and interactions unfolding in real time , this task progressed in discrete time steps , controlled by the users’ 1645 button presses . Finally , the domain itself was quite dissimilar : The second simulation involved managing the population of a city . Speciﬁcally , some participants were assigned the goal of stabilizing the city’s population at 500 , 000 , whereas other participants attempted to reach a population of 1 , 000 , 000 . 1650 To achieve these goals , participants decided whether or not to invest in media advertisement for the city at each time step , which would inject a temporary positive “force” on the population level . Despite the numerous overt differences between the ﬁrst 1655 and second simulation , they were in fact governed by the same underlying dynamics . Both involved oscillatory mo - tion ( of the ball or the population ) that could be manipulated by a force in one direction , to either stabilize or maximize or the relevant value ( ball location or population size ) . Like - 1660 wise , the appropriate methods for achieving these goals were completely analogous between the two tasks . We predicted , and found , that participants would achieve the goal in the second task more quickly when it was structurally similar to the goal they were assigned in the previous simulation 1665 ( e . g . , both goals involved either stabilization or maximiza - tion ) . Of interest , participants in our study were unlikely to report noticing the relationship between the tasks , and such noticing was not related to more successful transfer . We argue that , although the two situations are quite dis - 1670 similar from one another on the surface , the physical dynam - ics of the ball and fan simulation provided a useful mental model for representing the ( less overtly spatial ) population task . Consistent with this interpretation , when the order of the tasks was reversed ( with the more decontextualized pop - 1675 ulation task presented ﬁrst ) , no evidence for transfer was observed . In other words , the overtly perceptual and spatial nature of the training task appeared to be critical for this kind of transfer to occur . Other research is consistent with our general conclusions . 1680 For example , Beveridge and Parkins ( 1987 ) used a concrete perceptual model to improve performance on a Duncker’s ( 1945 ) radiation problem . As noted earlier , previous research FIGURE 3 Schematic of the ball simulation used by Day and Goldstone . From “Analogical Transfer From a Simulated Physical System , ” by S . B . Day and R . L . Goldstone , 2011 , Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 37 . Q22 Q23 18 DAY AND GOLDSTONE has shown that participants have a very difﬁcult time solving this problem independently and are unlikely to make sponta - 1685 neous use of relevant analogous examples ( Gick & Holyoak , 1980 , 1983 ) . However , Beveridge and Parkins found that par - ticipants were much more likely to transfer their knowledge successfully when they had previously been shown a physical model that captured the relevant “convergence” structure of 1690 the problem . Speciﬁcally , they were shown a set of colored transparent strips of plastic that fanned out from a central location , where they overlapped . These strips demonstrated a darker , “stronger” color in that central location , analogous to the greater summed intensity of the converging rays in 1695 the radiation problem . Similar results have been obtained af - ter showing an animated diagram depicting moving lines of arrows converging at a central point ( Pedone , Hummel , & Holyoak , 2001 ) . Grant and Spivey ( 2003 ) , also using Duncker’s radiation 1700 problem , demonstrated the important role of online percep - tual processing in understanding and transferring knowledge . Those researchers tracked participants’ eye movements while viewing a simple diagram of the described of the situation , with parts labeled tumor , healthy tissue , skin , and outside . 1705 They found that individuals who successfully solved the problem had spent considerably more time looking at the skin area of the diagram , and suggested that this pattern reﬂected more eye movements crossing the skin boundary while look - ing between the inside and outside of the body . In other 1710 words , successful problem solvers’ eye movements were ef - fectively “acting out” the convergence pattern . Thomas and Lleras ( 2007 , 2009a ) subsequently reported achieving simi - lar effects through experimental manipulation . Participants in their studies were more likely to solve the radiation problem 1715 after performing a visual task that guided their eye move - ments ( 2007 ) and / or visual attention ( 2009a ) in a conver - gence pattern on the diagram , alternating between various locations inside and outside the body . Such perceptual effects on thinking are not limited to vi - 1720 sual representations . In fact , a large body of research on “embodied” cognition ( see Barsalou , 1999 ; Glenberg , 1997 ; Wilson , 2002 ) has focused on the important relationship be - tween physical action and thought . For example , the “action compatibility effect” ( Glenberg & Kaschak , 2002 ) refers to 1725 the fact that individuals’ speed at judging the sensibility of a sentence is inﬂuenced by the physical action involved in their response . For instance , participants take longer to con - ﬁrm that “close the drawer” is a sensible phrase when their response involves a motion toward their own bodies ( which 1730 is incompatible with the motion required to actually close a drawer ) . Similarly , Goldin - Meadow and colleagues ( see Goldin - Meadow , 2005 ) have repeatedly demonstrated the importance of gesture in learning and comprehension and have even shown that experimental manipulations of indi - 1735 viduals’ gesturing can help or hinder their learning ( e . g . , Cook , Mitchell , & Goldin - Meadow , 2008 ) . Effects such as these suggest the possibility of similar embodied effects on problem solving and transfer , and there is some prelimi - nary evidence for this . For instance , just as acting out a pas - 1740 sage with physical objects can lead to greater comprehension ( Glenberg et al . , 2004 ) , Catrambone , Craig , and Nersessian ( 2006 ) found that acting out an analog to Duncker’s radia - tion problem with wooden blocks increased the likelihood of transferring the convergence solution . In a different kind 1745 of paradigm , Thomas and Lleras ( 2009b ) found that partic - ipants were better able to solve Maier’s two - string problem after performing an exercise which involved swinging their arms , although most participants remained unaware of this effect . 1750 It is important to note , however , that most of the effects described in this section would not necessarily arise from “raw” perceptual representations , containing only informa - tion about form , location , color , and so forth . Rather , our explanation assumes that these mental models are integrated 1755 representations of both perceptual and meaningful concep - tual content . Thinking back to the ball and fan simulation , for example , it is clear that a model based on this simulation would need to include information about properties such as “force” to be effective , properties that are not directly per - 1760 ceivable themselves but must be inferred from the visible components . Furthermore , that particular example requires additional conceptual content in order to assign meaningful directionality to the systems . That is , although the population task that follows it has an inherent positive direction , the ball 1765 task is horizontal , with neither direction explicitly “higher” or “lower” than the other . However , as discussed previously , there is evidence that individuals rely on a mental number line that automatically associates the rightward direction with increase . If this conceptual content were included in partici - 1770 pants’ mental models of the ball task , it would help to explain the mapping between our two simulations—in both cases , the participants’ interventions would be perceived to provide a net positive force . Consistent with this interpretation , when we ran a follow - up study in which the direction of the fan was 1775 reversed , such that it was on the right - hand side blowing left - ward across the ball system , no transfer to the population task was observed . A mapping that included this additional con - ceptual content appeared to be fundamental to the usefulness of the model . 1780 This inherent integration of perceptual and conceptual content also highlights the fact that these mental models are not equivalent to actual perception . A recent study involv - ing physics students ( Thaden - Koch , Dufresne , & Mestre , 2006 ) demonstrated this distinction clearly . In that study , Q24 1785 participants observed a simulation of two balls rolling along adjacent tracks . When one of the balls moved in an un - realistic manner—accelerating on an uphill portion of the track—honors physics students were less likely to notice this error than were physics novices . In this case , the physics 1790 students’ ( still - developing ) knowledge about the principles operating in the simulation led them to ignore overt percep - tual information in favor of their own expectations about the KNOWLEDGE EXPORT 19 behavior that “should” occur . We would suggest that these students’ observations may , in fact , be guided by models that 1795 are perceptual in that they involve dynamic and spatial rep - resentations . However , perceptually grounded models need not be veridical models , and they can possess systematic dis - tortions . With systematic training , the students’ perceptual expectations might be brought into better alignment with 1800 the real behavior of the rolling balls , with revisions to their underlying interpretations possibly resulting . Knowledge is both inﬂuencing , and is inﬂuenced by , perceptual interpreta - tions . Mathematics provides an interesting domain for exam - 1805 ining the interplay between perception and cognition . On one hand , mathematics is , by deﬁnition , abstracted from any speciﬁc content domain . Ideas such as “three” or “multiplica - tion” are by design theoretically unattached to any particular concrete instantiation . On the other hand , individuals ( par - 1810 ticularly experts ) routinely report a subjectively strong per - ceptual component to their mathematical reasoning . Because of reports such as these , researchers have recently been giv - ing more attention to the potential importance of perceptual representations and perceptual processing in mathematics . 1815 Most of the research conducted thus far has speciﬁcally ex - amined the role of perception in the processing of external representations of mathematical concepts , such as equations or graphs . For instance , Kellman and his colleagues ( e . g . , Kellman , 1820 Massey , & Son , 2009 ) created an interactive classiﬁcation task that trained participants to recognize the relevant percep - tual features underlying accurate transformations between representations ( e . g . , matching a graph to an equation ) . In - dividuals who completed that task were subsequently much 1825 more accurate in generating their own transformations be - tween representations , a crucial step in successful problem solving . Similarly , David Landy and colleagues have focused ontheroleof perceptual processes inunderstandingandinter - acting with mathematical formulas . For instance , in practice , 1830 the perceptual grouping of terms ( i . e . , which terms are closer together in space on the page ) can interfere with and even trump groupings based on operator precedence ( e . g . , group - ing by multiplication before grouping by addition ; Landy & Goldstone , 2007a , 2007b ) . On the other hand , experience 1835 with mathematical formulas can lead to the automatic deploy - ment of attention to operators with higher priority ( Landy , Jones , & Goldstone , 2008 ) . People also appear to interact with equations in ways that seem concretely grounded . For instance , students may learn to use a strategy of transposi - 1840 tion , or “moving” a term from one side of an equation to the other ( and then applying the inverse operation ) . So , for example , the equation 5x + 7 = 12 may be rewritten as 5x = 12 – 7 by moving the 7 to the right . There is evidence that for experienced students , this operation is conceived in 1845 terms of actual spatial movement . Goldstone et al . ( 2010 ) reported a study in which an equation was presented on a computer screen with a subtle moving grating in the back - ground , and participants were asked to solve the equation for a particular variable . Performance was reliably worse when 1850 this grating was moving in the opposite direction of the im - plicated spatial transposition of the term—for instance , when a solution required “moving” a term rightward but the grat - ing was moving to the left . This suggests that the grating’s motion was interfering with participants’ imagined spatial 1855 movements of terms within the equation . Taken together , ﬁndings such as these provide a way of ex - tending and enriching our understanding of traditional trans - fer phenomena while also addressing many of the concerns and critiques that have been raised against the standard cog - 1860 nitivist approach . For example , the suggestion that transfer is often a largely perceptual process is inherently consistent with the idea of “knowing with . ” Perception is by nature a process of interpretation , in which existing knowledge struc - tures guide and constrain the organization of new incoming 1865 information . Many of the phenomena described in this sec - tion could best be explained in terms of providing a model by which new information may be structured and understood ( e . g . , Beveridge & Parkins , 1987 ; Day & Gentner , 2007 ; Day & Goldstone , 2011 ; Pedone et al . , 2001 ) . This differs in im - 1870 portant ways from the more traditional account of transfer , which begins with the recognition of structural common - alities . Instead , perception and action routines can provide the basis for linking two situations , and once linked , more formal , more generalizable structures that are compatible 1875 with the linking can be constructed . This kind of mechanism may also underlie the advantage that Kotovsky and Gentner ( 1996 ) found for progressively removing perceptual support for connecting two structurally similar situations . Consistent with construing existing knowledge as a “lens” 1880 rather than a focus of cognitive processing , the effects de - scribed here frequently appear to be implicit , often occurring without deliberation or even conscious awareness ( e . g . , Day & Gentner , 2007 ; Day & Goldstone , 2011 ; Dreistadt , 1969 ; Maier , 1931 ; Schunn & Dunbar , 1996 ; Thomas & Lleras , 1885 2009b ) . The notion of perceptually grounded models under - lying interpretation also provides a productive way of consid - ering new means for promoting transfer . If transfer between overtly dissimilar situations is possible when those cases in - volve similar mental models ( e . g . , Day & Goldstone , 2011 ) , 1890 transfer research may be most successful when it focuses on understanding underlying models used by novices and experts in a domain ( see Lobato , 2012 / this issue ) . These ideas are consistent with the themes of several of the critiques , and they link particularly well with the ideas 1895 and research of Lobato , described earlier ( e . g . , Lobato & Seibert , 2002 ) . The student described in that example ap - peared to be forming a model of slope and proportionality as a discrete , integrated unit that could be combined iteratively to ﬁt different situations . Such a model would seem to lend itself 1900 to a fairly perceptual , spatial representation . Such a model would also be consistent with her general ﬁnding that prior knowledge was not imported wholesale in order to solve an 20 DAY AND GOLDSTONE analogous case , but rather that knowledge provided a means of working through and organizing new information—which 1905 allowed the original model to be simultaneously modiﬁed and adapted . A perceptual interpretation of transfer is also consistent with the idea that knowledge is not typically transferred from a single source . The knowledge that underlies one’s under - 1910 standing of a concrete , analog system seems to exist in a variety of independent , sometimes conﬂicting pieces ( e . g . , Collins & Gentner , 1987 ; diSessa , 1982 ) . To the extent that comprehension often involves interplay between new facts and existing knowledge working together to construct appro - 1915 priate models ( e . g . , Clement , 1988 ) , transfer may often draw on a lifetime of knowledge and experience . This ﬁts well with the analysis by Carreher and Schliemann ( 2002 ) described previously . Students in their research were informed and in - ﬂuenced by knowledge from multiple domains at once , and 1920 their learning involved an active process of novel integration across those domains . Of course , this is not to say that such “interpretation” - based transfer invariably relies on multiple sources . As with literal perception , interpretation may also sometimes rely heavily on a single recent episode ( e . g . , Day 1925 & Gentner , 2007 ; Day & Goldstone , 2011 , Schunn & Dunbar , 1996 ) . Our goal in this section has not been to suggest that percep - tual representations are “the” basis for knowledge transfer , or that they supply an explanation for the many varied ﬁnd - 1930 ings and phenomena reported in the transfer literature . Al - though such a conclusion would necessarily follow from the strongest claims that all of cognition is inherently perceptual ( e . g . , Barsalou , 1999 ) , there is at present simply not enough empirical data to support make this argument convincingly . 1935 Nor are we suggesting that the path to improved transfer is to make learning materials more “perceptual . ” In fact , there is considerable evidence discussed earlier in this paper that explicitly contradicts this conclusion . Rather , we would ar - gue that acknowledging and leveraging learners’ perceptual 1940 representations , particularly as they relate to mental models of learned material , is one important , effective , and largely unexplored means of supporting transfer . CONCLUSIONS In this article , we have tried to organize the diverse litera - 1945 ture on knowledge transfer into a coherent whole . Obviously , however , these broad - ranging ideas and ﬁndings sometimes defy straightforward integration . For example , as researchers and educators continue to struggle with the challenges of helping students to achieve generalizable knowledge , it is 1950 clear that the critiques of the more traditional models of transfer will need to be taken seriously . It is also possible that by recognizing different approaches as being reﬂective of dif - fering goals or levels of analysis , and honestly considering both the advantages and weaknesses of different perspec - 1955 tives , it will prove to be the case that no single approach is sufﬁcient to account for all aspects of transfer . However , as transfer researchers of all stripes continue to become more open and creative in their search for explanations and so - lutions , the development of theories and principles that are 1960 both very general and highly effective remains an enticing possibility . As the other articles in this special issue make clear , the coming decade promises to be a productive and exciting period for transfer research . REFERENCES 1965 Adams , L . T . , Kasserman , J . E . , Yearwood , A . A . , Perfetto , G . A . , Bransford , J . D . , & Franks , J . J . ( 1988 ) . Memory access : The effects of fact - oriented versus problem - oriented acquisition . Memory & Cognition , 16 , 167 – 175 . Allen , S . W . , & Brooks , L . R . ( 1991 ) . Specializingtheoperationofanexplicit rule . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 120 , 3 – 19 . 1970 Ames , C . ( 1992 ) . Classrooms : Goals , structures , and student motivation . Journal of Educational Psychology , 84 , 261 – 271 . Anderson , J . R . , Farrell , R . , & Sauers , R . ( 1984 ) . Learning to program in LISP . Cognitive Science , 8 , 87 – 129 . Anderson , J . R . , Reder , L . M . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1996 ) . Situated learning and 1975 education . Educational Researcher , 25 , 5 – 11 . Anderson , J . R . , Reder , L . M . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1997 ) . Rejoinder : Situa - tive versus cognitive perspectives : Form versus substance . Educational Researcher , 26 , 18 – 21 . Anolli , L . , Antonietti , A . , Crisafulli , L . , & Cantoia , M . ( 2001 ) . Accessing 1980 source information in analogical problem - solving . The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology Section A , 54 , 237 – 261 . Atkinson , R . K . , Renkl , A . , & Merrill , M . M . ( 2003 ) . Transitioning from studying examples to solving problems : Effects of self - explanation promptsandfadingworked - outsteps . JournalofEducationalPsychology , 1985 95 , 774 – 783 . Baddeley , A . D . ( 1986 ) . Workingmemory . NewYork , NY : OxfordUniversity Press . Baddeley , A . ( 2000 ) . The episodic buffer : a new component of working memory ? Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 4 , 417 – 423 . 1990 Baddeley , A . D . , & Hitch , G . J . ( 1974 ) . Working memory . In G . A . Bower ( Ed . ) , Recent advances in learning and motivation ( Vol . 8 , pp . 47 – 90 ) . New York , NY : Academic . Baillargeon , R . ( 1987 ) . Objectpermanencein3 12 - and4 12 - month - oldinfants . Developmental Psychology , 23 , 655 – 664 . 1995 Ball , L . J . , Ormerod , T . C . , & Morley , N . J . ( 2004 ) . Spontaneous analogising in engineering design : a comparative analysis of experts and novices . Design Studies , 25 , 495 – 508 . Barnett , S . M . , & Ceci , S . J . ( 2002 ) . When and where do we apply what we learn ? A taxonomy for far transfer . Psychological Bulletin , 128 , 612 – 637 . 2000 Barsalou , L . W . ( 1999 ) . Perceptual symbol systems . Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 22 , 577 – 609 . Bassok , M . , Wu , L . - l . , & Olseth , K . L . ( 1995 ) . Judging a book by its cover : Interpretative effects of content on problem - solving transfer . Memory & Cognition , 23 , 354 – 367 . 2005 Bearman , C . R . , Ball , L . J . , & Ormerod , T . C . ( 2007 ) . The structure and function of spontaneous analogising in domain - based problem solving . Thinking & Reasoning , 13 , 273 – 294 . Bereby - Meyer , Y . , & Kaplan , A . ( 2005 ) . Motivational inﬂuences on transfer of problem - solving strategies . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 2010 30 , 1 – 22 . Bereby - Meyer , Y . , Moran , S . , & Unger - Aviram , E . ( 2004 ) . When perfor - mance goals deter performance : Transfer of skills in integrative nego - tiations . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 93 , 142 – 154 . 2015 KNOWLEDGE EXPORT 21 Beveridge , M . , & Parkins , E . ( 1987 ) . Visual representation in analogical problem solving . Memory & Cognition , 15 , 230 – 237 . Bjork , R . A . ( 1994 ) . Memoryandmetamemoryconsiderationsinthetraining of human beings . In J . Metcalfe & A . Shimamura ( Eds . ) , Metacognition : Knowing about knowing ( pp . 185 – 205 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . 2020 Blessing , S . B . , & Ross , B . H . ( 1996 ) . Content effects in problem categoriza - tionandproblemsolving . JournalofExperimentalPsychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 22 , 792 – 810 . Bliznashki , S . , & Kokinov , B . ( 2010 ) . Relational versus attributional mode ofproblemsolving ? ProceedingsoftheThirty - SecondAnnualConference 2025 of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 465 – 470 ) . Portland , OR : Cognitive Science Society . Bransford , J . D . , & Schwartz , D . L . ( 1999 ) . Rethinking transfer : A simple proposal with multiple implications . Review of Research in Education , 24 , 61 – 100 . 2030 Broudy , H . S . ( 1977 ) . Types of knowledge and purposes of education . In R . C . Anderson , R . J . Spiro , & W . E . Montague ( Eds . ) , Schooling and the acquisition of knowledge ( pp . 1 – 17 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Brown , A . L . , & Kane , M . J . ( 1988 ) . Preschool children can learn to transfer : Learning to learn and learning from example . Cognitive Psychology , 20 , 2035 493 – 523 . Brown , A . L . , Kane , M . J . , & Echols , C . H . ( 1986 ) . Young children’s mental models determine analogical transfer across problems with a common goal structure . Cognitive Development , 1 , 103 – 121 . Brown , J . S . , Collins , A . , & Duguid , P . ( 1989 ) . Situated Cognition and the 2040 Culture of Learning . Educational Researcher , 18 , 32 – 42 . Bruner , J . S . ( 1966 ) . Toward a theory of instruction : Cambridge , MA : Har - vard University Press . Carraher , T . N . , Carraher , D . W . , & Schliemann , A . D . ( 1987 ) . Written and oral mathematics . Journal for Research in Mathematics Education , 18 , 2045 83 – 97 . Carraher , D . , & Schliemann , A . ( 2002 ) . The transfer dilemma . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 11 , 1 – 24 . Catrambone , R . ( 1996 ) . Generalizing solution procedures learned from ex - amples . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and 2050 Cognition , 22 , 1020 – 1031 . Catrambone , R . ( 1998 ) . The subgoal learning model : Creating better exam - ples so that students can solve novel problems . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 127 , 355 – 376 . Catrambone , R . , Craig , D . L . , & Nersessian , N . J . ( 2006 ) . The role of per - 2055 ceptually represented structure in analogical problem solving . Memory & Cognition , 34 , 1126 – 1132 . Catrambone , R . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1989 ) . Overcoming contextual limita - tions on problem - solving transfer . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 15 , 1147 – 1156 . 2060 Chase , W . G . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1973 ) . Perception in chess . Cognitive Psy - chology , 4 , 55 – 81 . Chen , Z . , & Mo , L . ( 2004 ) . Schema induction in problem solving : A mul - tidimensional analysis . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 30 , 583 – 600 . 2065 Chen , Z . , Mo , L . , & Honomichl , R . ( 2004 ) . Having the memory of an elephant : Long - termretrievalandtheuseofanaloguesinproblemsolving . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 133 , 415 – 433 . Chi , M . T . H . ( 2000 ) . Self - explaining expository texts : The dual processes of generating inferences andrepairing mental models . In R . Glaser ( Ed . ) , 2070 Advances in instructional psychology ( pp . 161 – 238 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erl - baum . Chi , M . T . H . , Bassok , M . , Lewis , M . W . , Reimann , P . , & Glaser , R . ( 1989 ) . Self - explanations : How students study and use examples in learning to solve problems . Cognitive Science , 13 , 145 – 182 . 2075 Chi , M . T . H . , Feltovich , P . J . , & Glaser , R . ( 1981 ) . Categorization and representation of physics problems by experts and novices . Cognitive Science , 5 , 121 – 152 . Christensen , B . T . , & Schunn , C . D . ( 2007 ) . The relationship of analogical distance to analogical function and preinventive structure : The case of 2080 engineering design . Memory & Cognition , 35 , 29 – 38 . Christie , S . , & Gentner , D . ( 2010 ) . Where hypotheses come from : Learning new relations by structural alignment . Journal of Cognition and Devel - opment , 11 , 356 – 373 . Clement , J . ( 1988 ) . Observed methods for generating analogies in scientiﬁc 2085 problem solving . Cognitive Science , 12 , 563 – 586 . Clement , C . A . , Mawby , R . , & Giles , D . E . ( 1994 ) . Theeffectsofmanifestre - lational similarity on analog retrieval . Journal of Memory and Language , 33 , 396 – 420 . Collins , A . , & Gentner , D . ( 1987 ) . How people construct mental models . 2090 In D . H . N . Quinn ( Ed . ) , Cultural models in language and thought ( pp . 243 – 265 ) . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Cook , S . W . , Mitchell , Z . , & Goldin - Meadow , S . ( 2008 ) . Gesturing makes learning last . Cognition , 106 , 1047 – 1058 . Cummins , D . ( 1992 ) . Role of analogical reasoning in the induction of prob - 2095 lem categories . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 18 , 1103 – 1124 . Day , S . B . , & Gentner , D . ( 2007 ) . Nonintentional analogical inference in text comprehension . Memory & Cognition , 35 , 39 – 49 . Day , S . B . , & Goldstone , R . L . ( 2011 ) . Analogical transfer from a simulated 2100 physicalsystem . JournalofExperimentalPsychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 37 , 551 – 567 . Day , S . , Goldstone , R . L . , & Hills , T . T . ( 2010 ) . The effects of similarity and individual differences on comparison and transfer . Proceedings of the Thirty - Second Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society . ( pp . 2105 465 – 470 ) . Portland , OR : Cognitive Science Society . de Groot , A . D . ( 1966 ) . Perception and memory versus thought : Some old ideas and recent ﬁndings . In B . Kleimnuntz ( Ed . ) , Problem solving . New York , NY : Wiley . Q25 Dehaene , S . , Bossini , S . , & Giraux , P . ( 1993 ) . The mental representation 2110 of parity and numerical magnitude . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 122 , 371 – 396 . DeLoache , J . S . ( 1991 ) . Symbolic functioning in very young children : Un - derstanding of pictures and models . Child Development , 62 , 736 – 752 . DeLoache , J . S . ( 1995 ) . Early understanding and use of symbols : The model 2115 model . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 4 , 109 – 113 . DeLoache , J . S . , & Burns , N . M . ( 1994 ) . Early understanding of the repre - sentational function of pictures . Cognition , 52 , 83 – 110 . DeSchepper , B . , & Treisman , A . ( 1996 ) . Visual memory for novel shapes : Implicit coding without attention . Journal of Experimental Psychology : 2120 Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 22 , 27 – 47 . Detterman , D . ( 1993 ) . The case of prosecution : Transfer as an epiphe - nomenon . In R . J . S . D . K . Detterman ( Ed . ) , Transfer on trial : Intelligence , cognition , and instruction ( pp . 1 – 24 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Didierjean , A . , & Nogry , S . ( 2004 ) . Reducing structural - element salience 2125 on a source problem produces later success in analogical transfer : What role does source difﬁculty play ? Memory & Cognition , 32 , 1053 – 1064 . diSessa , A . ( 1982 ) . Unlearning Aristotelian physics : A study of knowledge - based learning . Cognitive Science , 6 , 37 – 75 . 2130 Dreistadt , R . ( 1969 ) . The use of analogies and incubation in obtaining in - sights in creative problem solving . Journal of Psychology : Interdisci - plinary and Applied , 71 , 159 – 175 . Dunbar , K . B . , I . ( 2001 ) . The in vivo / in vitro approach to cognition : the case of analogy . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 5 , 334 – 339 . 2135 Duncker , K . ( 1945 ) . On problem - solving . Psychological Monographs , 58 , i - 113 - i - 113 . Elliot , A . J . ( 1999 ) . Approach and avoidance motivation and achievement goals . Educational Psychologist , 34 , 169 – 189 . Fodor , J . A . , & Pylyshyn , Z . W . ( 1988 ) . Connectionism and cognitive archi - 2140 tecture : A critical analysis . Cognition , 28 , 3 – 71 . Gardner , H . ( 1987 ) . The mind’s new science : a history of the cognitive revolution . New York , NY : Basic Books . Garner , R . , Brown , R . , Sanders , S . , & Menke , D . ( 1992 ) . “Seductive details” and learning from text . In K . A . Renninger , S . Hidi , & A . Krapp ( Eds . ) , 2145 The role of interest in learning and development ( pp . 239 – 254 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . 22 DAY AND GOLDSTONE Garner , R . , Gillingham , M . G . , & White , C . S . ( 1989 ) . Effects of “seductive details” on macroprocessing and microprocessing in adults and children . Cognition and Instruction , 6 , 41 – 57 . 2150 Gauthier , I . , Tarr , M . J . , & Bub , D . ( 2010 ) . Perceptual expertise : Bridging brain and behavior : New York , NY : Oxford University Press . Q26 Gentner , D . ( 1983 ) . Structure - mapping : A theoretical framework for anal - ogy . Cognitive Science , 7 , 155 – 170 . Gentner , D . ( 1989 ) . Mechanisms of analogical learning . In S . Vosniadou & 2155 A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning . New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . Q27 Gentner , D . , & Colhoun , J . ( 2010 ) . Analogical processes in human thinking and learning . In B . Glatzeder , V . Goel , & A . M¨uller ( Eds . ) , Towards a theory of thinking ( pp . 35 – 48 ) . Berlin , Germany : Springer Berlin Heidel - 2160 berg . Gentner , D . , & Gentner , D . R . ( 1983 ) . Flowing waters or teeming crowds : Mental models of electricity . In D . G . A . L . Stevens ( Ed . ) , Mental models ( pp . 99 – 129 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Gentner , D . , Loewenstein , J . , & Hung , B . ( 2007 ) . Comparison facilitates 2165 children’s learning of names for parts . Journal of Cognition and Devel - opment , 8 , 285 – 307 . Gentner , D . , Loewenstein , J . , Thompson , L . , & Forbus , K . D . ( 2009 ) . Reviv - ing inert knowledge : Analogical abstraction supports relational retrieval of past events . Cognitive Science , 33 , 1343 – 1382 . 2170 Gentner , D . , Rattermann , M . J . , & Forbus , K . D . ( 1993 ) . The roles of sim - ilarity in transfer : Separating retrievability from inferential soundness . Cognitive Psychology , 25 , 524 – 575 . Gentner , D . , & Toupin , C . ( 1986 ) . Systematicity and surface similarity in the development of analogy . Cognitive Science , 10 , 277 – 300 . 2175 Gibson , J . J . ( 1977 ) . The theory of affordances . In R . E . Shaw & J . Bransford ( Eds . ) , Perceiving , acting , and knowing . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Q28 Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1980 ) . Analogicalproblemsolving . Cognitive Psychology , 12 , 306 – 355 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schema induction and analogical 2180 transfer . Cognitive Psychology , 15 , 1 – 38 . Gick , M . L . , & McGarry , S . J . ( 1992 ) . Learning from mistakes : Inducing analogous solution failures to a source problem produces later successes in analogical transfer . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 18 , 623 – 639 . 2185 Glenberg , A . M . ( 1997 ) . What memory is for . Behavioral and Brain Sci - ences , 20 , 1 – 55 . Glenberg A . M . , Gutierrez , T . , Levin , J . R . , Japuntich , S . , & Kaschak , M . P . ( 2004 ) . Activity and imagined activity can enhance young children’s reading comprehension . Journal of Educational Psychology , 96 , 424 – 36 . 2190 Glenberg , A . M . , & Kaschak , M . P . ( 2002 ) . Grounding language in action . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 9 , 558 – 565 . Glenberg , A . M . , & Robertson , D . A . ( 2000 ) . Symbol grounding and mean - ing : A comparison of high - dimensional and embodied theories of mean - ing . Journal of Memory and Language , 43 , 379 – 401 . 2195 Goldin - Meadow , S . ( 2005 ) . Hearing gesture : how our hands help us think . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Goldstone , R . L . , Landy , D . H . , & Son , J . Y . ( 2010 ) . The education of perception . Topics in Cognitive Science , 2 , 265 – 284 . Q29 Goldstone , R . L . , & Medin , D . L . ( 1994 ) . Time course of comparison . 2200 Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 20 , 29 – 50 . Goldstone , R . L . , Medin , D . L . , & Gentner , D . ( 1991 ) . Relational similarity and the nonindependence of features in similarity judgments . Cognitive Psychology , 23 , 222 – 264 . 2205 Goldstone , R . L . , & Sakamoto , Y . ( 2003 ) . The transfer of abstract principles governingcomplexadaptivesystems . CognitivePsychology , 46 , 414 – 466 . Goldstone , R . L . , & Son , J . Y . ( 2005 ) . The transfer of scientiﬁc principles using concrete and idealized simulations . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 14 , 69 – 110 . Q30 2210 Grant , E . R . , & Spivey , M . J . ( 2003 ) . Eye movements and problem solving : Guiding attention guides thought . Psychological Science , 14 , 462 – 466 . Greeno , J . G . , Smith , D . R . , & Moore , J . L . ( 1993 ) . Transfer of situated learning . In D . K . Detterman & R . J . Sternberg ( Eds . ) , Transfer on trial : 2215 Intelligence , cognition , and instruction . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Q31 Gross , W . L . , & Greene , A . J . ( 2007 ) . Analogical inference : The role of awareness in abstract learning . Memory , 15 , 838 – 844 . Halford , G . S . , Wilson , W . H . , & Phillips , S . ( 1998 ) . Processing capacity deﬁned by relational complexity : Implications for comparative , develop - 2220 mental , and cognitive psychology . Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 21 , 803 – 831 . Halpern , D . F . , Hansen , C . , & Riefer , D . ( 1990 ) . Analogiesasanaidtounder - standing and memory . Journal of Educational Psychology , 82 , 298 – 305 . Hardiman , P . T . , Dufresne , R . , & Mestre , J . P . ( 1989 ) . The relation between 2225 problem categorization and problem solving among experts and novices . Memory & Cognition , 17 , 627 – 638 . Harp , S . , & Mayer , R . E . ( 1997 ) . The role of interest in learning from scientiﬁc text and illustrations : On the distinction between emotional interest and cognitive interest . Journal of Educational Psychology , 89 , 2230 92 – 102 . Harp , S . F . , & Mayer , R . E . ( 1998 ) . How seductive details do their damage : A theory of cognitive interest in science learning . Journal of Educational Psychology , 90 , 414 – 434 . Q32 Hegarty , M . ( 2004 ) . Mechanical reasoning as mental simulation . Trends in 2235 Cognitive Sciences , 8 , 280 – 285 . Hegarty , M . , & Just , M . A . ( 1989 ) . Understanding machines from text and diagrams . In H . Mandl & J . Levin ( Eds . ) , Knowledge acquisition from text and picture ( pp . 171 – 194 ) . Amsterdam , The Netherlands : North Holland . Hegarty , M . , & Sims , V . K . ( 1994 ) . Individual differences in mental anima - 2240 tion during mechanical reasoning . Memory & Cognition , 22 , 411 – 430 . Hidi , S . , & Baird , W . ( 1988 ) . Strategies for increasing text - based interest and students’ recall of expository texts . Reading Research Quarterly , 23 , 465 – 483 . Hinsley , D . A . , Hayes , J . R . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1978 ) . Fromwordstoequations : 2245 Meaning and representation in algebra word problems . In P . A . Carpenter & M . A . Just ( Eds . ) , Cognitive processes in comprehension . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Q33 Holyoak , K . J . , & Koh , K . ( 1987 ) . Surface and structural similarity in ana - logical transfer . Memory & Cognition , 15 , 323 – 340 . 2250 Holyoak , K . J . , Novick , L . R . , & Melz , E . R . ( 1994 ) . Component processes in analogical transfer : Mapping , pattern completion , and adaptation . In Analogical connections ( pp . 113 – 180 ) . Westport , CT : Ablex . Hummel , J . E . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1997 ) . Distributedrepresentationsofstruc - ture : A theory of analogical access and mapping . Psychological Review , 2255 104 , 427 – 466 . Hummel , J . E . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2003 ) . A symbolic - connectionist theory of relational inference and generalization . Psychological Review , 110 , 220 – 264 . Johnson - Laird , P . N . ( 2006 ) . How we reason . New York , NY : Oxford Uni - 2260 versity Press . Kaminski , J . A . , & Sloutsky , V . M . ( 2010 ) . Representation and transfer of abstract mathematical concepts . In V . F . Reyna ( Ed . ) , The adolescent brain : Learning , reasoning , and decision making . Q34 Kaminski , J . A . , Sloutsky , V . M . , & Heckler , A . F . ( 2008 ) . The advantage of 2265 abstract examples in learning math . Science , 320 , 454 – 455 . Keane , M . T . ( 1996 ) . On adaptation in analogy : Tests of pragmatic im - portance and adaptability in analogical problem solving . The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology Section A , 49 , 1062 – 1085 . Keane , M . T . , Ledgeway , T . , & Duff , S . ( 1994 ) . Constraints on analogical 2270 mapping : Acomparison ofthree models . Cognitive Science , 18 , 387 – 438 . Kellman , P . J . , Massey , C . , & Son , J . Y . ( 2009 ) . Perceptual learning mod - ules in mathematics : Enhancing students’ pattern recognition , structure extraction and ﬂuency . Topics in Cognitive Science , 2 , 285 – 305 . Koedinger , K . , Alibali , M . , & Nathan , M . ( 2008 ) . Trade - offs between 2275 grounded and abstract representations : Evidence from algebra problem solving . Cognitive Science , 32 , 366 – 397 . Kornell , N . , & Bjork , R . A . ( 2008 ) . Learning concepts and categories . Psy - chological Science , 19 , 585 – 592 . KNOWLEDGE EXPORT 23 Kostic , B . , Cleary , A . M . , Severin , K . , & Miller , S . W . ( 2010 ) . Detectingana - 2280 logical resemblance without retrieving the source analogy . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 17 , 405 – 411 . Kotovsky , L . , & Gentner , D . ( 1996 ) . Comparison and categorization in the development of relational similarity . Child Development , 67 , 2797 – 2822 . 2285 Landy , D . , & Goldstone , R . L . ( 2007a ) . Formal notations are dia - grams : Evidence from a production task . Memory & Cognition , 35 , 2033 – 2040 . Landy , D . , & Goldstone , R . L . ( 2007b ) . How abstract is symbolic thought ? Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 2290 33 , 720 – 733 . Landy , D . H . , Jones , M . N . , & Goldstone , R . L . ( 2008 ) . How the appearance of an operator affects its formal precedence . In Proceedings of the Thirti - eth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 2109 – 2114 ) . Washington , DC : Cognitive Science Society . 2295 Lave , J . ( 1988 ) . Cognition in practice : mind , mathematics , and culture in everyday life : New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . Leeper , R . ( 1935 ) . Astudyofaneglectedportionoftheﬁeldoflearning—the development of sensory organization . The Pedagogical Seminary and Journal of Genetic Psychology , 46 , 41 – 75 . 2300 LeFevre , J . - A . , & Dixon , P . ( 1986 ) . Do written instructions need examples ? Cognition and Instruction , 3 , 1 – 30 . Lewis , M . W . , & Anderson , J . R . ( 1985 ) . Discriminationofoperatorschemata in problem solving : Learning from examples . Cognitive Psychology , 17 , 26 – 65 . 2305 Lobato , J . ( 2012 / this issue ) . The actor - oriented transfer perspective and its contributions to educational research and practice . Educational Psychol - ogist , 47 , XX – XX . Lobato , J . , & Siebert , D . ( 2002 ) . Quantitative reasoning in a reconceived view of transfer . The Journal of Mathematical Behavior , 21 , 87 – 116 . 2310 Lockhart , R . S . , Lamon , M . , & Gick , M . L . ( 1988 ) . Conceptual transfer insimple insight problems . Memory & Cognition , 16 , 36 – 44 . Loewenstein , J . , & Gentner , D . ( 2001 ) . Spatial mapping in preschoolers : Close comparisons facilitate far mappings . Journal of Cognition and Development , 2 , 189 – 219 . 2315 Loewenstein , J . , & Gentner , D . ( 2005 ) . Relational language and the devel - opment of relational mapping . Cognitive Psychology , 50 , 315 – 353 . Loewenstein , J . , Thompson , L . , & Gentner , D . ( 2003 ) . Analogical learning in negotiation teams : Comparing cases promotes learning and transfer . Academy of Management Learning & Education , 2 , 119 – 127 . 2320 Lorch , R . F . ( 1989 ) . Text - signaling devices and their effects on reading and memory processes . Educational Psychology Review , 1 , 209 – 234 . Lusk , D . L . , Evans , A . D . , Jeffrey , T . R . , Palmer , K . R . , Wikstrom , C . S . , & Doolittle , P . E . ( 2009 ) . Multimedia learning and individual differences : Mediating the effects of working memory capacity with segmentation . 2325 British Journal of Educational Technology , 40 , 636 – 651 . Maier , N . R . F . ( 1931 ) . Reasoning in humans . II . The solution of a problem and its appearance in consciousness . Journal of Comparative Psychology , 12 , 181 – 194 . Markman , A . B . ( 1999 ) . Knowledge representation . New York , NY : Psy - 2330 chology Press . Markman , A . B . , & Gentner , D . ( 1993 ) . Structural alignment during simi - larity comparisons . Cognitive Psychology , 25 , 431 – 467 . Mautone , P . D . , & Mayer , R . E . ( 2001 ) . Signaling as a cognitive guide in multimedia learning . Journal of Educational Psychology , 93 , 2335 377 – 389 . Mayer , R . E . ( 1981 ) . Frequency norms and structural analysis of algebra word problems into families , categories , and templates . Instructional Sci - ence , 10 , 135 – 175 . Mayer , R . E . , & Anderson , R . B . ( 1991 ) . Animations need narrations : An 2340 experimental test of a dual - coding hypothesis . Journal of Educational Psychology , 83 , 484 – 490 . Mayer , R . E . , & Anderson , R . B . ( 1992 ) . The instructive animation : Helping students build connections between words and pictures in multimedia learning . Journal of Educational Psychology , 84 , 444 – 452 . 2345 Mayer , R . E . , & Chandler , P . ( 2001 ) . When learning is just a click away : Does simple user interaction foster deeper understanding of multimedia messages ? Journal of Educational Psychology , 93 , 390 – 397 . Mayer , R . E . , DeLeeuw , K . E . , & Ayres , P . ( 2007 ) . Creating retroactive and proactiveinterferenceinmultimedialearning . AppliedCognitivePsychol - 2350 ogy , 21 , 795 – 809 . Mayer , R . E . , Grifﬁth , E . , Jurkowitz , I . T . N . , & Rothman , D . ( 2008 ) . In - creased interestingness of extraneous details in a multimedia science presentation leads to decreased learning . Journal of Experimental Psy - chology : Applied , 14 , 329 – 339 . 2355 Mayer , R . E . , Mathias , A . , & Wetzell , K . ( 2002 ) . Fostering understanding of multimedia messages through pre - training : Evidence for a two - stage the - ory of mental model construction . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Applied , 8 , 147 – 154 . Mayer , R . E . , & Moreno , R . ( 1998 ) . A split - attention effect in multime - 2360 dia learning : Evidence for dual processing systems in working memory . Journal of Educational Psychology , 90 , 312 – 320 . Mayer , R . E . , & Sims , V . K . ( 1994 ) . For whom is a picture worth a thou - sand words ? Extensions of a dual - coding theory of multimedia learning . Journal of Educational Psychology , 86 , 389 – 401 . 2365 McNeil , N . M . , Uttal , D . H . , Jarvin , L . , & Sternberg , R . J . ( 2009 ) . Shouldyou show me the money ? Concrete objects both hurt and help performance on mathematics problems . Learning and Instruction , 19 , 171 – 184 . Medin , D . L . , & Ross , B . H . ( 1989 ) . The speciﬁc character of abstract thought : Categorization , problem solving , and induction . In Advances in 2370 the psychology of human intelligence , Vol . 5 . ( pp . 189 – 223 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Metzger , W . ( 1936 ) . Gesetze des Sehens . Frankfurt , Germany : Waldemar Kramer . Q35 Mitchell , D . B . ( 2006 ) . Nonconscious priming after 17 years . Psychological 2375 Science , 17 , 925 – 929 . Moreno , R . , & Mayer , R . E . ( 1999 ) . Cognitive principles of multimedia learning : The role of modality and contiguity . Journal of Educational Psychology , 91 , 358 – 368 . Moreno , R . , Mayer , R . E . , Spires , H . A . , & Lester , J . C . ( 2001 ) . The case 2380 for social agency in computer - based teaching : Do students learn more deeply when they interact with animated pedagogical agents ? Cognition and Instruction , 19 , 177 – 213 . Namy , L . L . , & Gentner , D . ( 2002 ) . Making a silk purse out of two sow’s ears : Young children’s use of comparison in category learning . Journal of 2385 Experimental Psychology . General , 131 , 5 – 15 . Novick , L . R . ( 1988 ) . Analogical transfer , problem similarity , and expertise . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 14 , 510 – 520 . Paivio , A . ( 1990 ) . Mental representations : A dual coding approach . New 2390 York , NY : Oxford University Press . Pedone , R . , Hummel , J . E . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2001 ) . The use of diagrams in analogical problem solving . Memory & Cognition , 29 , 214 – 221 . Perfetto , G . A . , Bransford , J . D . , & Franks , J . J . ( 1983 ) . Constraints on access in a problem solving context . Memory & Cognition , 11 , 24 – 31 . 2395 Pintrich , P . ( 2000 ) . The role of goal orientation in self - regulated learning . In M . Boekaerts , P . Pintrich & M . Zeidner ( Eds . ) , Handbook of self - regulation ( pp . 452 – 502 ) . London , UK : Academic . Pollock , E . , Chandler , P . , & Sweller , J . ( 2002 ) . Assimilating complex infor - mation . Learning and Instruction , 12 , 61 – 86 . 2400 Quilici , J . L . , & Mayer , R . E . ( 2002 ) . Teaching students to recognize struc - tural similarities between statistics word problems . Applied Cognitive Psychology , 16 , 325 – 342 . Rattermann , M . J . , & Gentner , D . ( 1998 ) . More evidence for a relational shift in the development of analogy : Children’s performance on a causal - 2405 mapping task . Cognitive Development , 13 , 453 – 478 . Reed , S . K . ( 1987 ) . A structure - mapping model for word problems . Jour - nal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 13 , 124 – 139 . Reed , S . K . ( 1989 ) . Constraints on the abstraction of solutions . Journal of 2410 Educational Psychology , 81 , 532 – 540 . 24 DAY AND GOLDSTONE Reed , S . K . , Dempster , A . , & Ettinger , M . ( 1985 ) . Usefulness of analogous solutions for solving algebra word problems . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 11 , 106 – 125 . Renkl , A . ( 1997 ) . Learning from worked - out examples : A study on individ - 2415 ual differences . Cognitive Science , 12 , 1 – 29 . Renkl , A . ( 2005 ) . Theworked - out - exampleprincipleinmultimedialearning . In R . Mayer ( Ed . ) , Cambridge handbook of multimedia learning ( pp . 229 – 246 ) . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Renkl , A . , & Atkinson , R . K . ( 2010 ) . Learning from worked - out examples 2420 and problem solving . In J . Plass , R . Moreno , & R . Br¨unken ( Eds . ) , Cog - nitive load theory and research in educational psychology ( pp . 91 – 108 ) . New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . Renkl , A . , Stark , R . , Gruber , H . , & Mandl , H . ( 1998 ) . Learning from worked - out examples : The effects of example variability and elicited 2425 self - explanations . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 23 , 90 – 108 . Richland , L . E . , & McDonough , I . M . ( 2010 ) . Learning by analogy : Dis - criminating between potential analogs . Contemporary Educational Psy - chology , 35 , 28 – 43 . Q36 Rittle - Johnson , B . , & Star , J . R . ( 2009 ) . Compared with what ? The effects of 2430 differentcomparisonsonconceptualknowledgeandproceduralﬂexibilityforequationsolving . Journal of Educational Psychology , 101 , 529 – 544 . Rittle - Johnson , B . , Star , J . R . , & Durkin , K . ( 2009 ) . The importance of prior knowledge when comparing examples : Inﬂuences on conceptual and procedural knowledge of equation solving . Journal of Educational 2435 Psychology , 101 , 836 – 852 . Ross , B . ( 1984 ) . Remindings and their effect in learning a cognitive skill . Cognitive Psychology , 16 , 371 – 416 . Ross , B . H . ( 1987 ) . This is like that : The use of earlier problems and the sep - aration of similarity effects . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learn - 2440 ing , Memory , and Cognition , 13 , 629 – 639 . Ross , B . ( 1989 ) . Remindings in learning and instruction . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Ed . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 438 – 469 ) . New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . Ross , B . H . , & Kennedy , P . T . ( 1990 ) . Generalizing from the use of ear - 2445 lier examples in problem solving . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 16 , 42 – 55 . Salomon , G . , & Perkins , D . N . ( 1989 ) . Rocky roads to transfer : Rethinking mechanism of a neglected phenomenon . Educational Psychologist , 24 , 113 – 142 . 2450 Scheiter , K . , Gerjets , P . , & Schuh , J . ( 2010 ) . The acquisition of problem - solving skills in mathematics : How animations can aid understanding of structural problem features and solution procedures . Instructional Sci - ence , 38 , 487 – 502 . Schoenfeld , A . H . , & Herrmann , D . J . ( 1982 ) . Problem perception and 2455 knowledge structure in expert and novice mathematical problem solvers . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 8 , 484 – 494 . Q37 Schunn , C . D . , & Dunbar , K . ( 1996 ) . Priming , analogy , and awareness in complex reasoning . Memory & Cognition , 24 , 271 – 284 . 2460 Schwartz , D . L . , & Black , J . B . ( 1996 ) . Shuttling between depictive mod - els and abstract rules : Induction and fallback . Cognitive Science , 20 , 457 – 497 . Schwartz , D . L . , Chase , C . C . , & Bransford , J . D . ( 2012 / this issue ) . Resisting overzealous transfer : Coordinating previously successful routines with 2465 needs for new learning . Educational Psychologist , 47 , XX – XX . Schwartz , D . L . , & Martin , T . ( 2004 ) . Inventing to prepare for future learn - ing : The hidden efﬁciency of encouraging original student production in statistics instruction . Cognition and Instruction , 22 , 129 – 184 . Shiffrin , R . M . , & Schneider , W . ( 1977 ) . Controlled and automatic human 2470 information processing : II . Perceptual learning , automatic attending and a general theory . Psychological Review , 84 , 127 – 190 . Simon , H . A . ( 2000 ) . Observations on the sciences of science learning . Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology , 21 , 115 – 121 . Simon , H . A . , & Hayes , J . R . ( 1976 ) . The understanding process : Problem 2475 isomorphs . Cognitive Psychology , 8 , 165 – 190 . Sims , V . K . , & Hegarty , M . ( 1997 ) . Mental animation in the visuospatial sketchpad : evidence from dual - task studies . Memory & Cognition , 25 , 321 – 332 . Singley , M . K . , & Anderson , J . R . ( 1989 ) . The transfer of cognitive skill . 2480 Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Son , J . Y . , Doumas , L . A . , & Goldstone , R . L . ( 2010 ) . When do words promote analogical transfer ? The Journal of Problem Solving , 3 , 52 – 92 . Son , J . Y . , & Goldstone , R . L . ( 2009 ) . Contextualization in perspective . Cognition and Instruction , 27 , 51 – 89 . 2485 Spelke , E . S . ( 1990 ) . Principles of object perception . Cognitive Science , 14 , 29 – 56 . Spencer , R . M . , & Weisberg , R . W . ( 1986 ) . Context - dependent effects on analogical transfer . Memory & Cognition , 14 , 442 – 449 . Suzuki , H . , Ohnishi , H . , & Shigemasu , K . ( 1992 ) . Goal - directedprocessesin 2490 similarity judgment . In Proceedings of the Fourteenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 343 – 348 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Sweller , J . ( 1994 ) . Cognitive load theory , learning difﬁculty , and instruc - tional design . Learning and Instruction , 4 , 295 – 312 . Sweller , J . ( 1999 ) Instructional design in technical areas . Melbourne , Aus - 2495 tralia : ACER . Sweller , J . , van Merrienboer , J . J . G . , & Paas , F . G . W . C . ( 1998 ) . Cognitive architecture and instructional design . Educational Psychology Review , 10 , 251 – 296 . Thomas , L . E . , & Lleras , A . ( 2007 ) . Movingeyesandmovingthought : Onthe 2500 spatialcompatibilitybetweeneyemovementsandcognition . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 14 , 663 – 668 . Thomas , L . E . , & Lleras , A . ( 2009a ) . Covert shifts of attention function as an implicit aid to insight . Cognition , 111 , 168 – 174 . Thomas , L . E . , & Lleras , A . ( 2009b ) . Swinging into thought : Directed 2505 movement guides insight in problem solving . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 16 , 719 – 723 . Thorndike , E . L . ( 1924 ) . Mental discipline in high school studies . Journal of Educational Psychology , 15 , 83 – 98 . Thorndike , E . L . , & Woodworth , R . S . ( 1901 ) . Theinﬂuenceofimprovement 2510 in one mental function upon the efﬁciency of other functions . Psycholog - ical Review , 8 , 247 – 261 . Tohill , J . M . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2000 ) . The impact of anxiety on analogical reasoning . Thinking & Reasoning , 6 , 27 – 40 . Tulving , E . , & Thomson , D . M . ( 1973 ) . Encoding speciﬁcity and retrieval 2515 processes in episodic memory . Psychological Review , 80 , 352 – 373 . Vollmeyer , R . , Burns , B . D . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1996 ) . The impact of goal speciﬁcity on strategy use and the acquisition of problem structure . Cog - nitive Science , 20 , 75 – 100 . Wade , S . ( 1992 ) . How interest affects learning from text . In K . A . Ren - 2520 minger , S . Hidi , & A . Krapp ( Eds . ) , The role of interest in learning and development ( pp . 255 – 277 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Waltz , J . A . , Lau , A . , Grewal , S . K . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2000 ) . The role of working memory in analogical mapping . Memory & Cognition , 28 , 1205 – 1212 . 2525 Weisberg , R . W . , DiCamillo , M . , & Phillips , D . ( 1978 ) . Transferring old associationstonewproblems : Anon - automaticprocess . JournalofVerbal Learning & Verbal Behavior , 17 , 219 – 228 . Weiser , M . , & Shertz , J . ( 1983 ) . Programming problem representation in novice and expert programmers . International Journal of Man – Machine 2530 Studies , 19 , 391 – 398 . Wertheimer , M . ( 1938 ) . Laws of organization in perceptual forms . In A source book of Gestalt psychology ( pp . 71 – 88 ) . London , UK : Kegan Paul , Trench , Trubner . Q38 Wilson , M . ( 2002 ) . Six views of embodied cognition . Psychonomic Bulletin 2535 & Review , 9 , 625 – 636 . Wolpert , R . S . ( 1990 ) . Recognition of melody , harmonic accompaniment , and instrumentation : Musicians vs . nonmusicians . Music Perception , 8 , 95 – 105 . Zwaan , R . A . , & Radvansky , G . A . ( 1998 ) . Situation models in language 2540 comprehension and memory . Psychological Bulletin , 123 , 162 – 185 . HEDP # 695709 , VOL 47 , ISS 3 Seeing Deep Structure From the Interactions of Surface Features Michelene T . H . Chi and Kurt A . VanLehn QUERY SHEET This page lists questions we have about your paper . The numbers displayed at left can be found in the text of the paper for reference . In addition , please review your paper as a whole for correctness . Q1 . Au : Please verify that both authors are in the psychology department . Q2 . Au : Update for VanLehn & Chi “in press” ? Q3 . Au : Please list the ﬁnal draft year in place of “submitted” for this Chi citation and reference . Q4 . Au : Update for Schwartz et al . “in press” ? Q5 . Au : Update for Schwartz et al . “in press” ? Q6 . Au : Chi ( submitted ) : List year of ﬁnal draft ( or “in press” or year of publication ) and book editors . Provide chapter page range if now published . Q7 . Au : Genter and Kurtz ( 2006 ) : Please provide chapter page range . Q8 . Au : Reed ( 2012 ) : Provide journal volume number . Q9 . Au : Schartz et al . : Please update this ( in press ) reference if its status has changed . Q10 . Au : VanLehn & Chi : Please update this ( in press ) reference with year and chapter page range if its status has changed . TABLE OF CONTENTS LISTING The table of contents for the journal will list your paper exactly as it appears below : Seeing Deep Structure From the Interactions of Surface Features Michelene T . H . Chi and Kurt A . VanLehn EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGIST , 47 ( 3 ) , 1 – 12 , 2012 Copyright C (cid:1) Division 15 , American Psychological Association ISSN : 0046 - 1520 print / 1532 - 6985 online DOI : 10 . 1080 / 00461520 . 2012 . 695709 Seeing Deep Structure From the Interactions of Surface Features Michelene T . H . Chi and Kurt A . VanLehn Department of Psychology Arizona State University 5 Transfer is typically thought of as requiring individuals to “see” what is the same in the deep Q1 structure between a new target problem and a previously encountered source problem , even though the surface features may be dissimilar . We propose that experts can “see” the deep structure by considering the ﬁrst - order interactions of the explicit surface features and the second - order relationships between the ﬁrst - order cues . Based on this speculative hypothesis , we propose a domain - speciﬁc bottom - up instructional approach that teaches students explicitly to focus on deriving the ﬁrst - order interactions cues and noticing the second - order relationships among the ﬁrst - order interaction cues . To do so , researchers and instructional designers need to ﬁrst extract from experienced solvers or experts how they derive such ﬁrst - order cues . Transfer is assumed to be based on the similarities in the second - order relationships , which are familiar everyday relationships such as equal to , greater than , and so forth . 10 15 Transfer can be broadly construed as the ability of individ - uals to “treat” a new concept , problem , or phenomenon as similar to one ( s ) they have experienced before . The term “treat” can be used broadly to refer to performing various 20 tasks such as categorizing , deciding , diagnosing , explaining , identifying , learning , problem solving , and analogical rea - soning in or across different contexts , concepts , problems , patients , phenomena , or situations . For example , if students have learned to explain one phenomenon correctly , can they 25 then explain another similar phenomenon , thereby exhibiting transfer ? Transfer can also be construed more speciﬁcally as consisting of two sets of processes : initial learning followed by reusing or applying what was learned . In this article , we propose a new hypothesis for why transfer often fails in the 30 classic “two - problem transfer paradigm , ” and we suggest an instructional approach that may remediate the “failure - to - transfer phenomenon . ” We begin by brieﬂy describing these terms next . THE FAILURE - TO - TRANSFER PHENOMENON 35 IN THE TWO - PROBLEM TRANSFER PARADIGM The majority of research on transfer focuses on the pro - cedural task of problem solving , such as , if students have Correspondence should be addressed to Michelene T . H . Chi , Depart - ment of Psychology , Arizona State University , P . O . Box 871104 , Tempe , AZ 85287 - 1104 . E - mail : Michelene . Chi @ asu . edu learned to solve one algebra problem , are they able to 40 transfer that knowledge by solving another algebra prob - lem that has the same underlying deep structure ? In this section , we brieﬂy describe the failure - to - transfer phe - nomenon in this classic context which has sometimes been referred to as the two - problem transfer paradigm ( Lave , 45 1988 ) . In the typical two - problem transfer paradigm , students are ﬁrst asked to attempt to learn and solve a source prob - lem A ( such as learning by reading a solution or worked - out example to Problem A , or learning by solving Problem A suc - 50 cessfully ) , and then students are asked to solve a novel target problem X that has the same deep structure as problem A . By and large , students can successfully solve Problem X only if the surface features are very similar to the surface features of Problem A ( they basically copy the same procedure ) . That is , 55 transfer almost always occurs when the source problem and the target problem are similar in their surface features ( Reed , Demster , & Ettinger , 1985 ) . In the context of algebra word problems , surface similarity means that the two problems describe the same surface situation ( or are literally similar ) , 60 such as involving two cars traveling at different speeds , with the goal of ﬁnding out how many hours it will take the second car to overtake the ﬁrst car . So , a source problem may list a particular speed and distance , whereas the target problem lists a different speed and / or distance . ( We elaborate more 65 next the operational deﬁnitions of surface features and deep structures , as used in the literature . ) 2 CHI AND V AN LEHN However , the majority of studies using variations of the classic two - problem transfer paradigm show that transfer fails when the two problems are dissimilar at the surface 70 level but similar at the deep structural level . The typical ﬁnding seems to be that after students have succeeded in solving a source problem , they cannot then solve a target problem successfully that is slightly different at the surface level ( Catrambone & Holyoak , 1989 ; Gick & Holyoak , 1980 , 75 1983 ; Reed et al . , 1985 ; Ross & Kennedy , 1990 ) even though they have the same underlying deep structure . The point is that regardless of whether one takes a cogni - tive or an alternative perspective on transfer ( see Reed , 2012 ) , this failure - to - transfer phenomenon needs to be explained 80 rather than dismissed as a contrived lab - based paradigm , es - pecially because many standard texts used in school curricula adopt this mode of assessing transfer . For example , students are often asked to learn how to solve problems by studying worked - out solution examples either presented in their texts 85 or worked - out by their teachers at the whiteboard , and then they are either tested for their understanding or asked to prac - tice as homework by solving additional problems ( provided either at the end of the chapter or by the teachers ) that are either similar or dissimilar in the surface features . Therefore , 90 this traditionally used laboratory - based two - problem trans - fer paradigm is a somewhat authentic paradigm . In short , the failure - to - transfer phenomenon is ubiquitous in school settings and needs to be explained . The failure - to - transfer phenomenon is surprising because 95 the assumption is that students should have been able to “see” ( as experts can ) that the target problem X and the source problem A are similar at a deep level , thus allowing them to retrieve the procedure learned from and used in source problem A , then apply this retrieved ( or could be 100 modiﬁed ) procedure to the target problem X . In contrast to the failure - to - transfer phenomenon in problem - solving research , in categorization research , it has been shown that participants can categorize a new instance successfully even when there is no visual similarity with a prior instance , but there is some 105 underlying theory - based similarity . For example , if we know how intoxicated people tend to act , then we might categorize a fully clothed man jumping into a swimming pool as a drunk ( Murphy & Medin , 1985 ) , especially if the context is a pool party with lots of available alcohol , even though this 110 particular intoxicated person’s behavior does not resemble that of other drunks one has seen . Thus , participants are usually able to “transfer” by categorizing “a clothed man jumping into the pool” as the same as “a man talking loudly and wildly in a bar , ” even though they look and act very 115 differently and are seen in different contexts . Thus , broadly conceived , the processes of transfer require that students abstract or understand the deep structure of the ﬁrst problem and then recognize that the second problem also has the same deep structure , therefore the procedure associ - 120 ated with such a deep structure then applies . Thus , for the purpose of understanding our hypothesis on instruction and learning , we simplify transfer in problem solving as consti - tuting these two broad sets of processes ( as stated earlier ) : The ﬁrst set of processes can be called initial learning , and 125 the second set can be referred to as the processes of reusing or applying what had been learned . Before we can entertain hypotheses for the failure - to - transfer phenomenon , we need to describe the difference between surface features and deep structures , as used in the literature . 130 Surface Features Versus Deep Structures Researchers pretty much agree that “surface features” refer to literal objects , concepts , or entities explicitly described in a problem statement or a situation , sometimes also referred to as the cover story . However , many different ways of deﬁning 135 “deep structure” are offered in the context of different studies and different domains . In the problem - solving literature , deep structure often refers to the procedure for solving a problem . For example , in probability problems , whether a problem involves a combination principle or a permutation principle 140 has been considered the deep structure , whereas the cover stories that described the problems in the context of marbles and cars are usually considered the surface features ( Ross , 1987 ) . Thus , traditionally , for problem - solving research , if two problems or solution steps are generated by the same 145 rule , then they share the same deep structure ( Muldner & Conati , 2010 ) . In such a deﬁnition , a rule can be an equation such as rate 1 × time 1 = rate 2 × time 2 ( Reed et al . , 1985 ) for a math distance problem , or a principle such as Newton’s Second Law for physics problems ( Chi , Feltovich , & Glaser , 150 1981 ) . Besides rules , there are many other ways to deﬁne deep structure . One other way to deﬁne a deep structure is in terms of a schema . In the classic Gick and Holyoak ( 1980 , 1983 ) studies , when a problem solver successfully solved 155 the fortress problem ( in which a general needs to capture a fortress by dividing the army and converging on the fortress from many sides ) , the hope was that the solvers had induced a “convergence” schema that could be reused to solve a new tumor problem ( in which rays can be divided into weaker 160 strengths so they will not kill healthy tissue , yet they can converge and destroy the tumor ) . Another alternative way to deﬁne deep structure in problem solving is to consider not just rules that generate a solution ( such as a formula to compute density ) but rules that are more conceptual and 165 abstract , such as learning rules that density is invariant under transformation ( Schwartz , Chase , Oppezzo , & Chin , 2011 ) . In non - problem - solving research , deep structure also has been deﬁned in other ways . For example , in understanding stories , the surface features would refer to the setting and ob - 170 jects , whereas the deeper structure would refer to the structure of the causal plot ( Gentner , Rattermann , & Forbus , 1993 ) . In learning studies , deep structure has been deﬁned as the men - TRANSFER AND DEEP LEARNING 3 tal models that students have constructed . For example , in learning about the human circulatory system ( Chi , de Leeuw , 175 Chiu , & LaVancher , 1994 ) , students’ deep understanding can be assessed as the correctness of the mental model that can be depicted to represent their understanding of the circulatory system . Similarly , in work on students’ learning of science processes , two schemas were described as relevant to stu - 180 dents’ understanding : an “emergent” schema and a “direct” schema . These schemas would constitute the deep structures for various science processes ( Chi , Roscoe , Slotta , Roy , & Chase , 2012 ) . In categorization research , deep structure has also been 185 deﬁned in terms of the ﬁrst - order relationships between two objects , things , locations , arguments , or more generally , two entities ( Gentner & Kurtz , 2006 ; Gentner & Markman , 2006 ) . Thus , two objects have the same deep structure if they invoke the same relationship even though they can be superﬁcially 190 dissimilar . For example , a bridge or bridging is a relationship that connects two things , and the things can be two locations , two concepts , or two entities . This means that a wooden plank has the same relational structure ( because it connects two locations ) as a dental bridge ( that connects two teeth ) . 195 Thus , a dental bridge and a wooden plank share this relational similarity whereas they share little , if any , intrinsic similarity , or similarities of features of the entities . An intrinsic feature of the wooden plank bridge might be that it is made of wood or it is wide enough for people to walk on , whereas an intrinsic 200 feature of a dental bridge is that it permanently joins adjacent teeth or dental implants . In sum , there are many ways to identify and deﬁne the deep structure of concepts , categories , entities , problems , phenom - ena , and situations . Its main difference from surface features 205 is that the surface features can usually be perceived whereas the deep structures often cannot be directly perceived . Lacking Deep Initial Learning of the Source Problem One obvious explanation for the discrepancy in the failure of 210 transfer in the context of the two - problem transfer paradigm compared to the success of transfer in other tasks such as categorization is that initial learning was not deep . Let’s call this the lacking - deep - initial - learning hypothesis . There is agreement among multiple perspectives ( such as a cognitive , 215 a situative , or an embodied perspective ) and multiple re - searchers on this explanation . For example , from a cognitive perspective , Ross ( 1987 ) stated , Assume that novices are trying to make an analogy between the current and past problem , but that they do not have a good 220 understanding of the appropriate problem structure [ empha - sis added ] , . . . in this case , novices may rely on superﬁcial similarities of the problems to decide how to set up the cor - respondences between problems . ( p . 630 ) From a situated perspective , Engle ( 2006 ) said , “First con - 225 sider the crucial issue of whether students’ initial learn - ing [ emphasis added ] of the relevant content was success - ful enough to provide a substantive basis for them to have transferred what they learned to next context” ( p . 453 ) . Sim - ilarly , Lobato ( 2006 ) suggested that “transfer from the actor - 230 oriented perspective is the inﬂuence of learners’ prior [ initial learning ] activities on their [ subsequent ] activity in novel situations” ( p . 437 ) . But more explicitly , Lobato’s opening sentence stated that “a central and enduring goal of educa - tion is to provide learning experiences that are useful be - 235 yond the speciﬁc conditions of initial learning ” ( p . 431 ) . Likewise , Marton ( 2006 ) stated that “transfer is about how what is learned in one situation [ initial learning ] affects or inﬂuences what the learner is capable of doing in another [ subsequent ] situation” ( p . 499 ) . In short , regardless of per - 240 spectives , it is commonly assumed that transfer ﬁrst requires deep initial learning of the source problem A before one can expect successful transfer to the target problem X . This lacking - deep - initial - learning hypothesis should pre - dict that if students did learn the source problem deeply , 245 then they would be able to transfer more successfully than if they did not learn it deeply . One way to substantiate this hy - pothesis is to consider how participants were asked to learn the source problem . In many classic studies using the two - problem transfer paradigm , it becomes apparent that students 250 were not required to learn the initial problem deeply . For ex - ample , students were often asked to either read a provided solution to the source problem ( Gick & Holyoak , 1980 ) or at - tempt to solve and then read a provided solution ( Reed et al . , 1985 ) . Reading a solution clearly does not imply that students 255 have understood the example . In a framework that Chi ( 2009 ) introduced that differentiates various overt modes of engage - ment with learning materials as either passive ( receiving in - formation only ) , active ( selecting information for empha - sis ) , constructive ( generating new information ) , or interac - 260 tive ( collaboratively constructing or co - constructing new in - formation ) , reading is considered a passive overt engagement activity in which students only receive information , whereas generating a solution or self - explaining each solution step is considered a constructive engagement activity , which engen - 265 ders greater learning . This ICAP framework ( with the ICAP hypothesis that interactive - I mode of learning is better than constructive - C , which is better than active - A , which in turn is better than passive - P ) thus suggests that reading a solu - tion example alone is not a good enough learning activity 270 to engender deep learning ( Chi , Bassok , Lewis , Reimann , & Glaser , 1989 ) . The ICAP hypothesis can also interpret the results of Gick and Holyoak’s ( 1983 ) third experiment . The results of the third experiment show that students manifested greater trans - 275 fer if they provided their own solution to the source problem rather than merely reading the solution to the source problem , because reading a solution is a receiving mode of learning , 4 CHI AND V AN LEHN whereas providing a solution is a generative mode . Therefore , providing their own solutions led to deeper initial learning , 280 and deeper initial learning did foster greater transfer , thus providing direct evidence in support of the lacking - initial - deep - learning hypothesis . The preceding paragraph suggests that deep learning can - not be guaranteed by having students read the solution steps . 285 Deep learning also cannot be accurately assessed merely by seeing if students can solve the ﬁrst problem successfully , be - cause the correct solution can arise from copying an example solution , or from retrieving a similar solution . Both would be classiﬁed as the active mode of learning , in which students 290 copied a solution or retrieved the steps of a prestored solu - tion ( neither of which is generative ) . There is considerable evidence showing that being able to solve a problem without error ( i . e . , knowing the procedure ) does not necessarily im - ply that one has understood the deep structure of a problem . 295 For example , Kim and Pak ( 2002 ) found no correlation be - tween problem - solving ability and understanding of concepts such as force and acceleration after students have solved on average 1 , 000 mechanics problems . Similarly , Nurrenbern and Pickering ( 1987 ) found a lack of relationship between 300 solving numerical chemistry problems and understanding the molecular concepts underlying the problems . Thus , the re - sults of many studies suggest that successfully solving an initial problem ( in a transfer paradigm ) so that students have acquired the procedure for solving an initial source problem 305 does not guarantee that students have actually learned the underlying deep structure of the initial problem , such as the principle or concepts underlying the procedure . Consistent with the deep - initial - learning hypothesis , stud - ies that have directly assessed students’ initial understanding 310 of the source problems also have shown conclusively that the representation ( or understanding ) that students had of the initial problem determined the degree of transfer . This was shown clearly in Gick and Holyoak’s ( 1983 ) fourth experi - ment . In that experiment , they provided two source stories 315 and asked participants to write down ways in which the two stories were similar , and then the quality of their descriptions were rated in terms of good , intermediate , or poor . Good means that the basic idea of convergence was present . The results were very pronounced and clear : 91 % of the partic - 320 ipants who wrote a good description could solve the target problem even without a hint , as compared to 30 % of the participants who wrote a poor description . This result seems unequivocal in showing that if participants understand source problems deeply , then they are more able to transfer . Similar 325 results were also obtained by Novick and Holyoak ( 1991 ) . Thus again , there seems to be direct evidence in support of the lacking - initial - deep - understanding hypothesis . As just pointed out , because there is general agreement among researchers that failure - to - transfer reﬂects a lack of 330 deep initial learning , and there is evidence to show directly that deeper initial learning leads to greater transfer , then the problem of failure - to - transfer becomes a problem of how to foster deeper initial learning . The next section focuses on methods that have been used to foster deeper initial learning . 335 Instructional Methods That Fostered Deeper Initial Learning Successfully Many well - known concrete instructional methods that suc - ceeded in fostering transfer did so basically by enhancing initial learning . One method is to provide two source exam - 340 ples , and furthermore to ask students to explicitly compare and contrast the two source examples so that they are more likely to be able to abstract the underlying structure ( Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ; Schwartz et al . , 2011 ) . Another method is to ask students to self - explain a worked - out solution exam - 345 ple of the source problem ( Chi et al . , 1989 ) . A third method is to require students to identify , for every written step in a solution , the deep principle that generated it ( Min Chi & VanLehn , 2010 ; VanLehn & Chi , in press ) . In all these cases , Q2 transfer successes improved . 350 The successes of these methods at enhancing transfer can be explained generally by the ICAP framework , in that the students were asked to be more constructive in the initial learning processes . Recall that constructive activities refer to activities undertaken by students that generate knowledge 355 beyond the information given , such as drawing a diagram when none was provided by a problem , self - explaining a worked - out solution , identifying the deep principle that jus - tiﬁes every step , or comparing and contrasting two problems , as such comparisons and contrasts produce similarities and 360 differences that were not explicitly stated in the two source problems ( Chi , 2009 ) . Constructive activities typically fos - ter deeper understanding and learning , which then lead to greater transfer . Despite the successes of these general instructional meth - 365 ods that encourage constructive / generative activities , these instructional approaches do not explain how deep initial learning is achieved . More speciﬁcally , these construc - tive / generative methods do not address one crucial dilemma , which is that experts or experienced problem solvers can 370 “see” the deep structure of a problem but novice solvers can - not . Being able to see the deep structure obviously enhances transfer . Might there be a more speciﬁc instructional method that can enhance students’ deep initial learning to the point that they can “see” a problem’s deep structure and thereby 375 transfer ? We address this dilemma next . HOW CAN EXPERTS “SEE” THE DEEP STRUCTURE ? The dilemma is , when given the exact same problem state - ment , experts can “see” the deep structure , whereas novice 380 learners cannot ( Chi et al . , 1981 ) . We assume that the ability to “see” the deep structure of a problem is an outcome of having learned the materials with deep understanding . The TRANSFER AND DEEP LEARNING 5 question is , How can experts “see” the deep structure and how can instruction facilitate novice students to “see” the 385 deep structure as well ? In this section , we explore an al - ternative hypothesis and suggest how it might translate to instruction . We start by describing novice students’ success at “seeing” the relevant surface features , in contrast to their inability to “see” the deep structures . 390 Students Can See the Relevant Surface Features Although everyone agrees what surface features refer to in a problem statement , there is very little discussion about whether students can pick out the relevant from the less 395 relevant or superﬁcial surface features , because obviously not all surface features are relevant or important for the problem solution . Suppose a math problem is about how fast a pickup truck is traveling ( Ross , 1987 ) ; in such a problem , the surface features are the truck , the speed at which the truck is traveling , 400 the time it started , and so forth . Obviously the pickup truck is a superﬁcial surface feature whereas the speed and time are relevant surface features . We have some evidence to suggest that students are capa - ble of differentiating relevant from irrelevant ( or superﬁcial ) 405 surface features . The evidence shows that novice students ( as - suming they have shallower understanding ) are just as com - petent as experts ( assuming they have deeper understanding ) at distinguishing relevant from superﬁcial surface features . We base this conjecture on the following ﬁnding . In Study 8 410 of Chi , Glaser , and Rees ( 1982 ) , six expert students ( grad - uate students ) and six novice students ( who had completed one course in mechanics with at minimum a B grade ) were asked to ﬁrst judge ( rate on a 1 – 5 scale ) how difﬁcult each of the 20 physics problems presented to them were ( these 415 problems did have different underlying structures in terms of the physics principles ) , and then to simply circle the key words or phrases that helped them reach their decisions on a problem’s difﬁculty . The surprising ﬁnding was that there were no major differ - 420 ences , in that both the experts and the novices were equally facile at picking out the important or relevant surface features in the statements of the physics problems , such as “horizontal force , ” “frictionless , ” and “move together . ” For 19 of the 20 problems , the expert and novice students circled the same set 425 of words or phrases in the problem statement . Only in seven of the 20 problems did the experts identify 1 . 6 additional features , whereas in 13 of the 20 problems , the novices iden - tiﬁed an additional 2 . 1 features as important . In other words , it was not the case that experts picked out one set of surface 430 features as important or relevant , whereas novices picked out a different set of literal features . This ﬁnding presents an important dilemma . That is , if the experts’ superiority is in “seeing” the deep structure of problems , but novices were equally facile at identifying rele - 435 vant surface features , then what allowed the experts to “see” beyond the surface features ? We propose a novel hypothesis to address this dilemma . Deep Structure Is Derived From Perceiving Interactions of Surface Features : A Novel 440 Hypothesis The hypothesis we propose here is that experts can “see” the deeper cues by considering the interactions of the explicit surface features . Again , we use the term “features” here to refer to words , concepts , or phrases that are explicitly stated 445 in the problem and can be picked out successfully by students as relevant ( as just described ) , and the term “cues” to refer to deeper structural concepts , rules , or principles that must be derived , inferred , or computed . This hypothesis is based on insights that can be gleaned from analyzing what domain 450 experts see when they solve problems . The insights are sug - gested by both the results of Study 7 in Chi et al . ( 1982 ; also reported as Study 4 in Chi et al . , 1981 ) and Study 8 ( Chi et al . , 1982 ) . In Study 7 , two novice students ( who had completed a 455 basic college mechanics course with an A grade ) and two expert physicists ( who had frequently taught introductory mechanics ) were asked to state the “basic approach” they would take to solve the same 20 problems ( without deﬁning for them what “basic approach” meant ) . Moreover , they were 460 also asked to state the problem features that led them to their choice of basic approach . In contrast to the task described previously of asking students to circle the relevant key fea - tures in the problem statements ( Study 8 , Chi et al . , 1982 ) , for which there were no differences between novices and experts , 465 in this task there were overwhelming differences between the experts and novices in the key features they verbally cited as contributing to their decisions about the basic approach to the solution of the problems . In fact , none of the key features cited by the novices and experts overlapped . Not surprisingly , 470 novices , again , mentioned the literal surface features such as objects and concepts that were explicitly stated in the prob - lems , such as “pulleys , ” “friction , ” and “gravity . ” Experts , on the other hand , stated deeper structural cues such as “it’s a before - and - after situation . ” These have been called derived 475 cues ( see Table 11 in Chi et al . , 1981 ) . There are a few different ways to characterize the dif - ferences in the derived cues and surface features that the experts and novices “see . ” One general way is to say that the experts identiﬁed and “saw” more process cues than novices 480 ( 74 process cues for experts vs . two for the novices ) , and novices saw more entity cues than experts ( 39 entity cues for novices vs . 21 for experts ; Chi , 2011 ) . Examples of process cues cited by both experts were a “before - and - after situation” and “inelastic collision , ” and examples of entity cues cited 485 by both novices were “friction” and “spring . ” Processes and entities are distinct ontological categories that are difﬁcult for students to shift across , thereby reinforcing the difﬁculty of helping students “see” a process cue ( Chi , submitted ) . Q3 6 CHI AND V AN LEHN However , characterizing the cues that experts see ( e . g . , “a 490 before - and - after situation” ) as a process cue does not tell us how experts see them . We propose that an additional way to characterize process cues is that they represent interactions among the surface features or the literal objects and entities . We now describe ﬁve ﬁndings that can be reinterpreted as 495 showing the skill of seeing the interactions among features . First , when physics experts mention a cue such as a “before - and - after situation” in the study just described , not only is this cue not explicitly stated in the problem description , but such a cue must be derived from surface features contained in 500 a problem description such as “The cart starts from rest and rolls down the ramp” and “When the cart reaches the bottom of the ramp , it is moving at 2 m / s . ” Somehow , the surface fea - tures embodied in the mentally conceived situation ( or mental model ) can generate the energy information needed for two 505 conditions , when the cart was at rest ( the initial condition ) and when the cart reached the bottom of the ramp ( the ﬁnal condition ) . Thus , experts can derive the energy information at the initial and ﬁnal conditions ( what is referred to as ﬁrst - order cues ) . Once derived , these ﬁrst - order cues allow the 510 expert to “see” or know that the mechanical energy ( kinetic + potential ) at one time point is the same as the mechan - ical energy at the other time point . ( Later , this equivalence relationship will be referred to as a second - order cue . ) The equivalence of the two energy quantities must have led to the 515 cue of a “before - and - after situation , ” meaning that the energy before the cart rolls down is the same as the energy after the roll . The point is that it is the interaction between two surface features that yield the ﬁrst - order and second - order cues . We unpack this example further next . 520 A second example comes from the domain of chess . When novice chess players see a chess board in the middle of a game , they do see the relevant pieces ( such as the Queens and the Kings ) , where they are located on the board , and maybe which other pieces are adjacent and nearby . However , 525 when an expert sees a chess board in a middle game position , they also see the complicated interactions among the pieces . Chase and Simon ( 1973 , p . 234 ) , for example , showed that an expert player can see “abstract” attack interactions that involve a combination of pieces of the same color converging 530 on the opponent’s King position . Novice players presumably do not see these “abstract” attacks that depict complicated interactions . This third example is a developmental study that illus - trates more directly that seeing the interactions of dimen - 535 sions leads to more successful problem solving . In Siegler’s ( 1978 ) study , he asked children of different ages to predict which side of a balance scale would go down when varying weights are placed on pegs at varying distances on two sides of the fulcrum . Younger children tended to make predictions 540 based on either the weight or the distance dimension ( i . e . , using Rules I and II ) . However , older children were able to consider both the weight and the distance dimensions ( us - ing what he called Rule III ) , although not knowing precisely how they interact until even older when they can use Rule 545 IV . Rule IV usage showed that children could compute the torques on each side by multiplying the amount of weight on each peg by the peg’s ordinal distance from the fulcrum . In short , this study showed clearly that success at solving this balance scale problem depended on children’s ability to 550 consider the interaction of two dimensions . In using Rule III , even though they could consider only the interactions of weight and distance in a vague subjective way , causing them to simply “muddled through” when the two dimensions conﬂicted ( Siegler , 1978 , p . 114 ) , children using Rule III 555 were nevertheless more advanced than children using Rules I or II , in that they were more prepared to advance to Rule IV . The point here is that simply considering the interaction between two dimensions , even without knowing exactly how they relate , made these children more advanced than younger 560 children who only considered one dimension at a time . For a fourth example , we apply the same interpretation to a transfer study described by Schwartz , Chase , and Brans - ford ( in press ) . In their clown study , middle - school students Q4 in both conditions were given the same pairs of problems to 565 either practice applying a formula to ﬁnd the density of a pair of buses that exhibited the same ratio ( the apply condi - tion ) or invent a crowdedness ( density ) index by comparing and contrasting these same pairs of buses ( the invent condi - tion ) . Students in the invent condition exhibited far greater 570 transfer in terms of their understanding of the ratio structure that comprises density . To invent the density index , students in the invent condition must have considered the relation - ship between the number of clowns and the number of bus compartments ( or volume ) . 575 Finally , the failure of novice students to consider interac - tions can be explicitly shown by the ﬁnding in Study 5 of Chi et al . ( 1982 ) . In that study , four physics experts ( two college professors , one postdoc , and one 5th - year graduate student ) and four novice students ( who had completed the introduc - 580 tory physics course with a B grade , using the Halliday & Resnick , 1974 , text ) were simply asked to summarize Chap - ter 5 on particle dynamics of Halliday and Resnick ( 1974 ) . Because this chapter introduced Newton’s three laws , all par - ticipants mentioned the three laws so that we can compare 585 what they say about each law . The textbook was available to them while they summarized out loud for 15 min . There were no differences between the experts and novices in terms of quantitative measures such as the length of their summaries or the number of quantitative relations mentioned . However , 590 a content analysis revealed important differences . We illus - trate with an example of their summary of Newton’s Third Law . In the 1974 version of the text , Newton’s Third Law was stated as “To every action there is always opposed an equal 595 reaction ; or the mutual actions of two bodies upon each other are always equal , and directed to contrary parts . ” We de - composed this Law into ﬁve major components with the important concepts italicized as follows : ( a ) the reaction is TRANSFER AND DEEP LEARNING 7 opposite in direction , ( b ) the reaction is equal in magnitude , 600 ( c ) action - reaction involves the mutual actions of two gen - eral bodies , ( d ) action - reaction are general forces extended by each body on the other , and ( e ) the direction of action - reaction is a straight line . Because seven out of the eight participants did not mention component ( e ) , we ignore this 605 ﬁfth component . Among the ﬁrst four components , we might agree that components ( c ) and ( d ) are relevant to interac - tions , whereas components ( a ) and ( b ) are not relevant to interactions ( because they refer to notions of opposite and magnitude ) . The results show that both the expert and novice 610 students ( all eight of them ) mentioned component ( a ) , and all four experts and three of the novices ( totaling seven ) men - tioned component ( b ) . However , none of the novice students mentioned either components ( c ) or ( d ) , whereas three of the four experts mentioned both components ( c ) and ( d ) . In 615 short , the ﬁndings show clearly that to understand this Third Law deeply , one must understand the interaction aspects of the Third Law , as the experts were able to articulate . Collectively , the ﬁndings of these ﬁve studies all suggest that to understand some principles or solve some problems 620 successfully , students must consider the interactions among some literal features . Thus , the hypothesis we propose here is that experts can “see” the underlying principle or deep structure of a problem because they can derive the higher order cues based on the interactions of the surface features , 625 in which the surface features can be directly perceived ( e . g . , the weights and distance in the case of the balance scale ) . This hypothesis differs from alternative hypotheses that have been proposed . For example , for Siegler’s developmen - tal ﬁndings , the superior ability of older children to use Rule 630 III and IV had sometimes been attributed to children’s men - tal capacity that develops with age ( Case , 1974 ) . In our own earlier work ( Study 8 ; Chi et al . , 1982 ) , the fact that experts can “see” the deep structures of problems were hypothesized to arise from experts having acquired causal inference rules 635 that related explicit problem features directly with derived cues and principle , in a linearly causal way , without consid - ering the interactions of the literal features . For example , we had assumed that literal cues such as “frictionless” would lead directly to the derived cue of “not having dissipative 640 forces” and then subsequently to the principle of Conserva - tion of Momentum / Energy , without assuming that “friction - less” may interact with other literal features in the problem . The next section proposes an instructional approach based on our hypothesis . 645 AN INSTRUCTIONAL APPROACH BASED ON THE HYPOTHESIS OF PERCEIVING INTERACTIONS Our hypothesis of the importance of focusing on interac - tions of literal features may suggest alternative methods of 650 instruction . In contrast to the general constructive / generative instructional methods described earlier , such as comparing and contrasting or self - explaining , which are effective over - all for all types of tasks and domains , the general construc - tive / generative instructional approaches can be enhanced in 655 a way that is tailored speciﬁcally to our hypothesis . A di - rect instructional implication of our hypothesis is to teach students explicitly to focus on the interactions among the rel - evant literal surface features as a way to “see” and understand the deep structure . This requires that students learn to derive 660 ﬁrst - order cues . Deriving First - Order Interaction Cues Our instructional proposal can be illustrated in the case of the clown study again ( Schwartz et al . , in press ) . In that task , Q5 eighth - grade students were told to either apply a formula to 665 ﬁnd the density of each bus company that carries clowns or invent a density index for the buses . For the apply condition , they were given the formula that density equals the number of objects divided by the volume ( which was a given quan - tity ) . For the invent condition , students were asked to come 670 up with a procedure to ﬁnd out how crowded the buses for a company are . An instructional approach that is intermedi - ate between these two approaches ( apply vs . invent ) is the one proposed here : In addition to being asked to invent a crowdedness index , students receive the hint to look for in - 675 teractions among relevant dimensions . That is , they would be asked to think about how the relevant dimensions re - late to each other . Based on our earlier results showing that novice physics problem solvers could in fact pick out the relevant surface features , we surmise that students will not 680 have difﬁculty picking out the relevant dimensions ( in this case , number of clowns and number of bus compartments ) , but what they must look for in addition is the way those dimensions interact . ( Using Siegler’s balance scale task as an example , this hint is analogous to scaffolding students to 685 consider interactions of two dimensions , the clowns and the bus compartments ; that is , to push them to consider Rule III . ) Although this instructional method should be even more effective than the invent instructions without the hint to look for interactions , the point of the example is merely to illus - 690 trate how instruction can draw students’ attention to focus on interacting surface features , thus expediting acquisition of ﬁrst - order cues . For another example , consider again the cart - ramp physics problem : 695 A cart starts from rest and rolls down the ramp . When the cart reaches the bottom of the ramp , it is moving at 2 m / s . Neglecting all sources of friction ( air , rolling , etc . ) , what is the height of the ramp ? ( Assume that the mass of the cart is 5 kg . ) 700 The surface features are the cart , the ramp , air friction , and so forth , and we assume that novice students are capable of 8 CHI AND V AN LEHN imagining the dynamic situation of a cart gaining speed as it rolls down a ramp . This dynamic image can be conceived of as the student’s mental simulation of the situation described 705 in the problem . ( Note that because this dynamic situation is relatively simple , students can form an accurate mental model of it readily , in contrast to our earlier study , in which students had to learn to form a complicated correct model of the human circulatory system ; Chi et al . , 1994 . ) 710 We postulate that students will not have as much difﬁculty learning to ascertain from their mental simulations that there are two time points : The initial time when the cart is at rest at the top of the ramp , and the ﬁnal time after the cart is moving and is at the bottom of the ramp . The surface features that are 715 relevant at each time point are the cart’s mass , velocity , and height . Because the height at the ﬁnal time is zero ( because cart is at the bottom of the ramp ) , the energy at the ﬁnal time is a function of the cart’s mass and its velocity ( both are given quantities ) , which are related by the equation E = m ∗ h ∗ g + 720 0 . 5 ∗ m ∗ v 2 . In essence , this equation allows students to derive the ﬁrst - order interaction cue of the ﬁnal energy . But even before considering the interactions of the relevant features , students are often required to infer some of their values . For example , students need to infer that the height is zero at the 725 ﬁnal time because the cart reaches the bottom of the ramp and to infer that the initial velocity of the cart is also zero because the cart starts from rest . For the initial time , even though the value of height is unknown , students can still be taught to derive it by considering the interactions among the 730 cart’s velocity , mass , and height , as speciﬁed in the same equation . As indicated earlier , these energies are referred to as the ﬁrst - order interaction cues , and students can be taught to derive them from the surface features . The hypothesis is that novice students should be taught 735 explicitly to focus on deriving ﬁrst - order cues based on the interactions of the surface features described in the problem statement . Such an approach may have other beneﬁts , such as helping students to overlook similarities in the surface features , when the deep structures differ . This is a situa - 740 tion in which two problems look almost identical but in fact have very different deep structures . In such a case , students need to be able to overlook surface similarities . The same instructional approach of deriving interacting cues can facil - itate such overlooking . For example , in Study 2 of Chi et al . 745 ( 1981 ) , physics problems were intentionally designed so that they looked similar at the surface level ( the diagram looked similar , the problem statement contained the same concepts and entities and described the same situations ) but required different deep principles for solutions . In fact , the entire de - 750 scription of the problem statement was identical with the exception of the ﬁnal question . For example , both problems began with A man of mass M 1 lowers himself to the ground from a height X by holding onto a rope passed over a massless frictionless 755 pulley and attached to another block of mass M 2 . The mass of the man is greater than the mass of the block . One problem then asked students to ﬁnd the tension on the rope ( thus making it into a force problem ) , whereas the other problem asked students to ﬁnd the speed that the man hit the 760 ground ( making it an energy problem ) . Thus the two prob - lems required very different underlying solution principles based on the question that was asked at the end . Experts treated these two problems as different ( by sorting them into different categories ) whereas novices treated them as 765 the same . The puzzle is , How is it possible that experts can see a different deep structure when the surface features were essentially identical ? That is , by what processes do experts “see” the deep structure ? When an expert reads “ﬁnd the tension in the rope , ” the expert considers the interaction of 770 the surface cue “tension” with the gravitational force on the block , the mass of the block , and the acceleration of the block ( i . e . , Newton’s Second Law applied to the block ) and its in - teraction with the gravitational force on the man , the mass of the man and the acceleration of the man ( i . e . , Newton’s 775 Second Law applied to the man ) . On the other hand , when the expert reads “ﬁnd the speed of the block when it hits the ground , ” the expert considers the interaction of the surface feature “speed” with the height of the block at ground level ( which is zero ) , the mass of the block , and the total mechani - 780 cal energy of the block ( i . e . , deﬁnition of mechanical energy applied to the block ) . In short , depending on which surface cue is in the “ﬁnd . . . ” statement , the expert notices different ﬁrst - order cues for the whole solution . To implement the instructional approach of teaching stu - 785 dents about cues requires that researchers and instructional designers ﬁrst elicit from experts the cues that they use , as opposed to our earlier focus on the principles that they used ( Chi et al . , 1981 ) . Such a knowledge elicitation approach requires more than just collecting and analyzing problem 790 solving protocols , as the protocols may not reveal the cues of the experts , because experts can perceive the derived cues for routine problems implicitly without explicitly mentioning or even consciously reasoning about them . Such an elicitation method is also different from merely asking domain experts 795 for their subjective opinions on how to solve or how to instruct students to solve problems . Experts’ subjective opinions can often be misleading . Although this instructional approach is domain speciﬁc in the sense that how experts derive cues must be known before instruction can be designed , the ap - 800 proach itself is applicable to multiple domains for which interaction cues must be derived in order for novice students to “see” the underlying structure . Are First - Order Cues Sufﬁcient for Transfer ? Having recommended teaching students more explicitly how 805 to derive the ﬁrst - order cues or quantities that relate the interaction of several surface features , the question now is whether successfully deriving the ﬁrst - order cues is sufﬁ - cient for transfer , and if not , what else is needed . Our con - jecture is that transfer is based on second - order cues , where 810 second - order cues are relations among ﬁrst - order cues . TRANSFER AND DEEP LEARNING 9 In our cart - ramp problem , once the ﬁrst - order cues are derived ( i . e . , the energy at the initial time and the energy at the ﬁnal time ) , learners need to infer that they are equal . This equality relates two ﬁrst - order interactions , so it is a second - 815 order cue . There are two ways to infer this second - order cue of equality : a top - down way and a bottom - up way . Experts would know that the Conservation of Total Mechanical En - ergy principle applies in this problem because there is no friction or heating . That is , the surface feature or condition 820 of no friction elicits the Conservation of Total Mechanical Energy principle . And if this principle applies , this means that the second - order relationship of energies at the initial and ﬁnal times is equal . However , we assume instead that na¨ıve students have not understood this principle ; that is , 825 they have not learned that no friction is an important condi - tion that should invoke the Conservation principle , which in turn dictates the equality of total energy at two time points . What they have learned basically is to associate an equation with the name of the principle . Thus , novice students cannot 830 solve this problem in a top - down way . This assumption that they have not learned all the con - ditions that invoke a principle is based on our prior analy - ses of novice students’ self - explanations when they studied worked - out physics examples . From their self - explanations , 835 we coded their acquisition of physics principles such as New - ton’s First and Second Laws ( Chi & VanLehn , 1991 , p . 94 ) . We found that the acquisition of Newton’s Second Law , for example , consisted of learning several unidirectional infer - ence rules , each with speciﬁc conditions ( including inducing 840 an incorrect inference rule ) , such as 1 . If the forces acting on a body do not sum to zero , then the body will move . 2 . If a body is accelerating , then its net force must not be zero . 845 3 . If a body has acceleration , then it must experience a net force . 4 . If a body has a net force , then it is accelerating . 5 . If a body is not at rest , then the net force will not equal to zero ( incorrect ) . 850 This analysis suggests that learning a principle such as New - ton’s Second Law ( that the sum of Forces = ma ) requires that students ﬁrst acquire multiple unidirectional inference rules with various speciﬁc conditions . Although we surmise that experts treat all these inference rules as simple variations 855 on a principle and know all the conditions that can elicit the correct principle , for novice students , complete under - standing of the principle may require acquiring all the vari - ous unidirectional conditional rules related to the principle , weeding out incorrect unidirectional rules , then consolidat - 860 ing the remaining correct unidirectional rules into a single bidirectional principle ( e . g . , F = ma ) . In short , we assume that novice learners cannot readily invoke the correct princi - ple ( e . g . , Conservation of Energy ) from a condition stated in the problem statement ( such as no friction ) , to then conclude 865 in a top - down way that the energies at the two time points are equal . If novice students have not learned all the conditions that can invoke a relevant principle to apply , then how can they possibly transfer , as transfer is often based on “seeing” the 870 deep principle ? With respect to the cart - ramp problem , this means that after having derived the ﬁrst - order cues of the mechanical energy at the initial and ﬁnal times , how will novice students know that they should be equal ? We propose that there is a bottom - up way to learn the prin - 875 ciple , and that is for novice learners to be taught to notice the second - order cues , which consist of simple relationships such as equal to , greater - than , less - than , and so on . Contin - uing with the previous example , suppose novices see how the problem was solved for the height of the ramp ( the un - 880 known quantity ) by setting the two energies to be equal ( such as from studying a work - out example ) ; this allows them to compute the total mechanical energy at the two time points and therefore ﬁnding the unknown height quantity . Through such exercises , novices can notice that the two expressions 885 are equal . Essentially the outcome of noticing is compara - ble to applying the Conservation of Energy principle . How - ever , our bottom - up approach provides a way for students to learn to induce and transfer by the second - order relation - ship of equality , without assuming that they already know 890 and can invoke the principle in a top - down way . In fact , we surmise that this bottom - up approach may be the route by which students eventually acquire an operational version of the Conservation of Total Mechanical Energy . Thus , this is a bottom - up approach , in contrast to the experts’ top - down 895 approach of applying a principle that is already known and invoked . To recap , we are proposing that the difﬁculty for novice learners in transfer is not realizing that ( a ) they must derive ﬁrst - order cues from the interactions of objects and entities 900 directly stated in the problem , and then ( b ) they must look for and notice the second - order cues of equal to , or greater than , and so on . Our assumption is that “seeing” the second - order relationships is not difﬁcult because the relationships are commonsense everyday ones , whereas ﬁrst - order cues 905 may involve complicated and unfamiliar interactions . Nev - ertheless , students must be told that they need to notice the second - order cues , after they have learned to derive the ﬁrst - order cues . We can provide another example to point out that the na - 910 ture of second - order cues are familiar everyday relationships such as simultaneous , independent , all , and so on ( Chi et al . , 2012 ) . For example , for many science concepts of processes taught in school , it is often mandatory for learning and correct understanding that students can understand an emergent kind 915 of processes ( such as diffusion of ink in water ) . One way to understand an emergent process is to notice a set of relevant second - order cues among the ﬁrst - order interactions . For ex - ample , to understand diffusion ﬂow , students have to notice that the collisions of molecules ( a ﬁrst - order interaction ) can 920 occur simultaneously ( a second - order relationship ) . In other 10 CHI AND V AN LEHN words , one pair of molecules colliding can occur simulta - neously with another pair of molecules colliding . Another second - order relationship is that the pairs of molecules can collide independently of each other pair’s collisions . Again , 925 we assert that the meaning of these second - order relation - ships ( e . g . , simultaneous , independent ) themselves are not difﬁcult to understand . The problem is that students need to be told to notice these second - order relationships , and to rec - ognize that they are the same across situations or problems , 930 thereby allowing them to transfer . In sum , although deep structure in a problem can refer to both ﬁrst - order and second - order cues , we propose that trans - fer is based on the second - order relationships . But second - order relationships can only be perceived when ﬁrst - order 935 interactions are derived . Therefore , instruction needs to fo - cus on both deriving ﬁrst - order interaction cues and noticing second - order relationships . Similarities and Differences With Analogies The ﬁrst - order types of cues described here in the context of 940 learning to solve problems are similar to those described by Gentner ( 1983 ) in the context of solving analogy problems or understanding analogies such as “The atom is like the solar system . ” In this solar system example , the entities in a solar system are the planets and sun . The ﬁrst - order relationships 945 ( statements about entities ) are that the planets revolve around the sun and that the planets and the sun attract each other . The second order relationships ( statements about statements ) are that the attraction of the planets and the sun causes the revolution of the planets around the sun . Thus the second - 950 order cue is a causal relationship , whereas in the case of the cart - ramp example , the second - order relationship is that of equality between the initial and ﬁnal energy , so in both cases , we assert that the second - order relationships ( causal or equivalent ) are everyday relationships that students are 955 familiar with and can understand . It is simply a matter of noticing what they are . However , there are many differences between learning to solve problems ( as in physics ) and learning about atoms from analogizing to the solar system . First , the ﬁrst - order interac - 960 tion cues of the planet - solar analogy ( revolving , attracting ) are already known and familiar to students while learning about atoms , whereas students must learn to derive the ﬁrst order relationship of mechanical energy at both time points . A second difference between the planet - solar analogy ex - 965 ample and the cart - ramp problem - solving example has to do with our assumption about transfer . In analogy , transfer is based on the success of mapping . As Gentner pointed out , when students are told , “The atom is like the solar system , ” making correct inferences about the atom requires that stu - 970 dents realize not only that the electrons are like the planets and the nucleus is like the sun ( mapping the entities ) but also that they map over the ﬁrst - order relationships ( revolv - ing , attracting ) and the second - order relationships ( attracting causing revolving ) . We postulate instead that transfer in prob - 975 lem solving is not based on mapping either the entities or the ﬁrst - order relationships , as they can be so different between problems , but rather transfer is based on noticing the simi - larity in the second - order relationships . To illustrate the role of the second - order relationships on 980 transfer in physics , consider the following problem : A block of mass M is dropped onto a spring with a spring constant k . When the spring is fully compressed , the block is H meters below where it started . How much was the spring compressed ? Neglect friction and heating of the spring . 985 To transfer the solution of the cart - ramp problem to this block - spring problem , students must notice that the energy at the initial time equals the energy at the ﬁnal time for both problems ( i . e . , the second - order cues are the same for the two problems ) . From this example , we can see more clearly the 990 differences between problem - solving transfer and analogy transfer . First , in analogy transfer , the nature of the ﬁrst - order interactions are identical in order for transfer to occur ( both situations involve revolving or attracting ) , whereas the ﬁrst - order interactions are not identical in the case of the 995 physics problems ; that is , the way energy is computed in the cart - ramp case is quite different from the way energy is computed in the block - spring case . The cart case involves the interaction of the cart’s velocity , mass , and height , whereas the spring case involves computing the interaction between 1000 the blocks’ velocity , the spring’s compression distance and its spring constant . A second difference between the analogy of the solar sys - tem to the atom and the analogy of the cart - ramp system to the block - spring system is that the solar system is more ex - 1005 plicitly taught and thus better understood than the artiﬁcially constructed cart - ramp situation . Thus , the solar system is of - ten used to teach students about the atom because students have explicitly been taught the solar system’s ﬁrst - order rela - tionship ( attracting , revolving ) and second - order relationship 1010 ( attracting cause revolving ) . In the case of problem solving in physics , and the cart - ramp problem as an example , students are taught a mathematical derivation of its solution but they are not explicitly taught how they need not only to derive the ﬁrst - order interactions but also to notice the second - order 1015 relationships . Thus , students are not able to use the cart - ramp problem to understand how to solve the block - spring problem . CONCLUSION In this article , we present the novel hypothesis that one reason 1020 transfer often fails in the two - problem transfer paradigm is that students have not learned to derive deeper ﬁrst - order cues from attending to the interactions of the surface features , and notice the relationships between the ﬁrst - order interactions TRANSFER AND DEEP LEARNING 11 ( i . e . , the second - order cues ) . Based on this hypothesis , we 1025 propose an instructional approach that focuses on explicitly teaching students how to derive ﬁrst - order interaction cues and notice second - order relationships . We showed how such cues could be useful in learning to transfer when the surface features are different but the deep structures of second - order 1030 cues are the same , and conversely in preventing students from being misled by situations where the surface features are predominately similar but in fact the deep structures are different . Although most methods of teaching for transfer mention surface features and deep structures , we advocate 1035 instruction to focus on deriving ﬁrst - order cues . Because both the ﬁrst - order and second - order cues can be inferred from percepts , they explain the dilemma of understanding how experts can “see” the deep structures from the same surface features available to novices . 1040 Our instructional proposal can be characterized as more of a bottom - up approach . It is bottom - up in that it focuses on teaching students how to derive interaction cues and to notice second - order relationships between the ﬁrst - order interac - tion cues . Once these second - order relationships are noticed , 1045 learners can then apply more straightforwardly the relevant equations or principles . Deriving these cues and noticing their relationships characterize what we believe is the skill of “seeing” the underlying structure . This bottom - up approach is different from the assump - 1050 tions of a typical top - down approach . A top - down approach takes the perspective of the experts and assumes , for the problem just described , that success is determined by already knowing the principle , which is invoked from speciﬁc surface features , such as that friction is zero implies that the Conser - 1055 vation of Total Mechanical Energy principle applies ( thereby the energies at the two points are equal ) . However , we have shown that novice students , even those who have received a grade of B or better , have not yet acquired a complete under - standing of the principles . As we previously described , this 1060 can be seen by two kinds of evidence : ﬁrst , in their incom - plete acquisition of unidirectional conditional rules related to the Second Law ( including the acquisition of incorrect condi - tional rule ) , and second , in their incomplete articulation of all the components of a principle ( missing especially the compo - 1065 nents related to interactions of the Third Law ) . Such evidence suggests that even after having the opportunity to learn the relevant materials ( such as Chapter 5 of Halliday & Resnick , 1974 ) or having completed a course on mechanics , students did not have complete understanding of the principles em - 1070 bedded in the chapter . Therefore , a bottom - up approach of ﬁrst learning to derive the ﬁrst - order interaction cues fol - lowed by noticing second - order relationships , may lead to transfer and subsequently to a more complete understanding of the relevant principle . Thus , we are suggesting that deep 1075 structure may be the second - order relationships between the ﬁrst - order derived cues . Although the examples used in this article to illustrate our interaction hypothesis focus on the domain of physics , we believe that this approach is generalizable to other domains as 1080 well . That is , in many other domains , it is also the ﬁrst - order and the second - order cues that must be derived and attended to in order to understand problems , analogies , or processes correctly . We illustrated the importance of ﬁrst - and second - order cues in physics problems , in scientiﬁc analogies , and 1085 in understanding emergent processes . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We are grateful for the support provided by the Institute of Education Science to the ﬁrst author ( Grant Number R305A110090 and R305A110811 ) and the National Science 1090 Foundation ( REESE Grant Number 0910221 ) to the second author , for the preparation of this article . We appreciate and beneﬁted tremendously from the reviews and comments pro - vided by Sam Day and two anonymous reviewers . REFERENCES 1095 Case , R . ( 1974 ) . Structures and strictures : Some functional limitations on the course of cognitive growth . Cognitive Psychology , 6 , 544 – 574 . Catrambone , R . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1989 ) . Overcoming contextual limita - tions on problem - solving transfer . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory and Cognition , 15 , 1147 – 1156 . 1100 Chase , W . G . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1973 ) . The mind’s eye in chess . In W . G . Chase ( Ed . ) , Visual information processing ( pp . 215 – 281 ) . New York , NY : Academic . Chi , M . T . H . ( 2009 ) . Active - Constructive - Interactive : A conceptual frame - work for differentiating learning activities . Topics in Cognitive Science , 1105 1 , 73 – 105 . Chi , M . T . H . ( 2011 ) . Expertise and perspective shift . In Y . Li & G . Kaiser ( Eds . ) , Expertiseinmathematicsinstruction : Aninternationalperspective ( pp . 17 – 39 ) . , New York , NY : Springer Science + Business Media . Chi , M . T . H . ( Submitted ) . Two kinds and four sub - types of misconceived 1110 knowledge , ways to change it and the learning outcomes . In International handbook of research on conceptual change ( 2nd ed . ) . New York , NY : Routledge . Q6 Chi , M . T . H . , Bassok , M . , Lewis , M . , Reimann , P . , & Glaser , R . ( 1989 ) . Self - explanations : How students study and use examples in learning to 1115 solve problems . Cognitive Science , 13 , 145 – 182 . Chi , M . T . H . , de Leeuw , N . , Chiu , M . H . , & LaVancher , C . ( 1994 ) . Elic - iting self - explanations improves understanding . Cognitive Science , 18 , 439 – 477 . Chi , M . T . H . , Feltovich , P . , & Glaser , R . ( 1981 ) . Categorization and repre - 1120 sentation of physics problems by experts and novices . Cognitive Science , 5 , 121 – 152 . Chi , M . T . H . , Glaser , R . , & Rees , E . ( 1982 ) . Expertise in problem solving . In R . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Advances in the psychology of human intelligence ( Vol . 1 , pp . 7 – 76 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . 1125 Chi , M . T . H . , Roscoe , R . , Slotta , J . , Roy , M . , & Chase , M . ( 2012 ) . Miscon - ceived causal explanations for emergent processes . Cognitive Science , 36 , 1 – 61 . Chi , M . T . H . , & VanLehn , K . A . ( 1991 ) . The content of physics self - explanations . Journal of the Learning Sciences , 1 , 69 – 105 . 1130 Chi , M . , & VanLehn , K . A . ( 2010 ) . Meta - cognitive strategy instruction in intelligent tutoring systems : How , when and why . Journal of Educational Technology and Society , 13 , 25 – 39 . 12 CHI AND V AN LEHN Engle , R . A . ( 2006 ) . Framing interactions to foster generative learning : A situative explanation of transfer in a community of learners classroom . 1135 The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 15 , 451 – 499 . Gentner , D . ( 1983 ) . Structure - mapping : A theoretical framework for anal - ogy . Cognitive Science , 7 , 155 – 170 . Gentner , D . , & Kurtz , K . J . ( 2006 ) . Relational categories . In W . K . Ahn , R . L . Goldstone , B . C . Love , A . B . Markman , & P . W . Wolff ( Eds . ) , 1140 Categorization inside and outside the lab . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association . Q7 Gentner , D . , & Markman , A . B . ( 2006 ) . Deﬁning structural similarity . The Journal of Cognitive Science , 6 , 1 – 20 . Gentner , D . , Rattermann , M . J . , & Forbus , K . D . ( 1993 ) . The roles of sim - 1145 ilarity in transfer : Separating retrievability from inferential soundness . Cognitive Psychology , 25 , 524 – 575 . Gick , M . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1980 ) . Analogical problem solving . Cognitive Psychology , 12 , 306 – 355 . Gick , M . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schemainductionandanalogicaltransfer . 1150 Cognitive Psychology , 15 , 1 – 38 . Halliday , D . , & Resnick , R . ( 1974 ) . Fundamentals of physics ( 2nd ed . ) . New York , NY : Wiley . Kim , E . , & Pak , S . J . ( 2002 ) . Studentsdonotovercomeconceptualdifﬁculties after solving 1000 traditional problems . American Journal of Physics , 70 , 1155 759 – 765 . Lave , J . ( 1988 ) . Cognition in practice . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge Univer - sity Press . Lobato , J . ( 2006 ) . Alternative prespectives on the transfer of learning : His - tory , issues , and challenges for future research . The Journal of the Learn - 1160 ing Sciences , 15 , 431 – 449 . Marton , F . ( 2006 ) . Sameness and differences in transfer . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 15 , 501 – 538 . Muldner , K . , & Conati , C . ( 2010 ) . Scaffolding meta - cognitive skills for effective analogical problem solving via tailored example selection . 1165 International Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Education , 20 , 99 – 136 Murphy , G . L . , & Medin , D . L . ( 1985 ) . The role of theories in conceptual coherence . Psychological Review , 92 , 289 – 316 . Novick , L . R . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1991 ) . Mathematical problem solving by analogy . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and 1170 Cognition , 17 , 398 – 415 . Nurrenbern , S . C . , & Pickering , M . ( 1987 ) . Concept learning versus prob - lem solving : Is there a difference ? Journal of Chemical Education , 64 , 508 – 510 Reed , S . ( 2012 ) . Learning by mapping across situations . The Journal of the 1175 Learning Sciences , 1 – 46 . Q8 Reed , S . K . , Dempster , A . , & Ettinger , M . ( 1985 ) . Usefulness of anal - ogous solutions for solving algebra word problems . Journal of Ex - perimental Psychology : Learning , Memory and Cognition , 11 , 106 – 125 . 1180 Ross , B . ( 1987 ) . This is like that : The use of earlier problems and the separa - tion of similarity effects . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 13 , 629 – 639 . Ross , B . H . , & Kennedy , P . T . ( 1990 ) . Generalizing from the use of ear - lier examples in problem solving . Journal of Experimental Psychology : 1185 Learning , Memory and Cognition , 16 , 42 – 55 . Schwartz , D . L . , Chase , C . C . , & Bransford , J . D . ( inpress . ) Adaptivetransfer : The tension of routines and novelty . Educational Psychologist . Q9 Schwartz , D . L . , Chase , C . C . , Oppezzo , M . A . , & Chin , D . B . ( 2011 ) . Practicing versus inventing with contrasting cases : The effects of telling 1190 ﬁrst on learning and transfer . Journal of Educational Psychology , 103 , 759 – 775 . Siegler , R . S . ( 1978 ) . The origins of scientiﬁc reasoning . In R . S . Siegler ( Ed . ) , Children’s thinking : What develops ? ( pp . 109 – 149 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . 1195 VanLehn , K . , & Chi , M . ( in press ) . Adaptive expertise as acceleration of future learning : A case study . In P . J . Durlach & A . Lesgold ( Eds . ) , Adap - tive technologies for training and education . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Q10 HEDP # 667065 , VOL 47 , ISS 2 Teaching the Conceptual Structure of Mathematics Lindsey E . Richland , James W . Stigler , and Keith J . Holyoak QUERY SHEET This page lists questions we have about your paper . The numbers displayed at left can be found in the text of the paper for reference . In addition , please review your paper as a whole for correctness . Q1 . Au : Please conﬁrm your postal addresses is correct . Q2 . Au : Figure 1 : Please provide the page number from the original source on which this ﬁgure appears , and verify that the copyright holder is listed correctly . Q3 . Au : This Ross & Kennedy ( 1989 ) citation is listed in the references as 1990 ; Please adjust . Q4 . Au : This Kotovsky & Gentner ( 2008 ) citation is listed in the references as 1996 ; Please adjust . Q5 . Au : Please add Schwartz 2012 / this issue and Chi 2012 / this issue to references . Q6 . Au : Figure 2 : Please provide the page number from the original source on which this ﬁgure appears . Q7 . Au : Figure 3 : Please provide the page number from the original source on which this ﬁgure appears . Q8 . Au : Figure 4 : Please provide the page number from the original source on which this ﬁgure appears . Q9 . Au : Battista ( 1984 ) and Schoenfeld ( 1988 ) : Provide complete references or remove citations . Q10 . Au : Hatano et al . : Please provide chapter page range . Q11 . Au : Hiebert et al . ( 2005 ) is not cited in the text ; Please cite in text or delete from references . Q12 . Au : Hilbert ( 1990 ) : Please provide the month of the meeting . Q13 . Au : Holyoak ( 2012 ) : Please provide page range . Q14 . Au : Koedinger and Roll : Please provide chapter page range . Q15 . Au : Kotovsky & Gentner is not cited in the text ; Please cite in text or delete from references . Q16 . Au : Ross & Kennedy 1990 is not cited in the text ; Please cite in text or delete from references . Q17 . Au : Shulman ( 1986 ) is not cited in the text ; Please cite in text or delete from references . Q18 . Au : Shulman ( 1987 ) is not cited in the text ; Please cite in text or delete from references . Q19 . Au : Stigler & Hiebert ( 2004 ) uis not cited in the text ; Please cite in text or delete from references . TABLE OF CONTENTS LISTING The table of contents for the journal will list your paper exactly as it appears below : Teaching the Conceptual Structure of Mathematics Lindsey E . Richland , James W . Stigler , and Keith J . Holyoak Educational Psychologist , 47 ( 2 ) , 1 – 15 , 2012 Copyright C (cid:1) Division 15 , American Psychological Association ISSN : 0046 - 1520 print / 1532 - 6985 online DOI : 10 . 1080 / 00461520 . 2012 . 667065 Teaching the Conceptual Structure of Mathematics Lindsey E . Richland Department of Comparative Human Development University of Chicago 5 James W . Stigler and Keith J . Holyoak Department of Psychology University of California , Los Angeles Many students graduate from K – 12 mathematics programs without ﬂexible , conceptual mathe - matics knowledge . This article reviews psychological and educational research to propose that reﬁning K – 12 classroom instruction such that students draw connections through relational comparisons may enhance their long - term ability to transfer and engage with mathematics as a meaningful system . We begin by examining the mathematical knowledge of students in one community college , reviewing results that show even after completing a K – 12 required mathematics sequence , these students were unlikely to ﬂexibly reason about mathematics . Rather than drawing relationships between presented problems or inferences about the repre - sentations , students preferred to attempt previously memorized ( often incorrect ) procedures ( Givvin , Stigler , & Thompson , 2011 ; Stigler , Givvin , & Thompson , 2010 ) . We next describe the relations between the cognition of ﬂexible , comparative reasoning and experimentally de - rived strategies for supporting students’ ability to make these connections . A cross - cultural study found that U . S . teachers currently use these strategies much less frequently than their international counterparts ( Hiebert et al . , 2003 ; Richland , Zur , & Holyoak , 2007 ) , suggesting that these practices may be correlated with high student performance . Finally , we articulate a research agenda for improving and studying pedagogical practices for fostering students’ relational thinking about mathematics . 10 15 20 25 Many schools are failing to teach their students the concep - tual basis for understanding mathematics that could support ﬂexible transfer and generalization . Nowhere is this lack of a conceptual base for mathematical knowledge more apparent than among the population of American students who have 30 successfully graduated from high school and entered the U . S . community college system ( Givvin , Stigler , & Thompson , 2011 ; Stigler , Givvin , & Thompson , 2010 ) . These commu - nity college students have completed the full requirements of a K – 12 education in the United States and made the moti - 35 vated choice to seek higher education , but typically without the ﬁnancial resources or academic scores to enter a 4 - year institution . Despite having completed high school success - fully , based on entry measures the majority of these stu - Correspondence should be addressed to Keith J . Holyoak , Department of Psychology , University of California , Los Angeles , Box 951563 , 2279B Franz , Los Angeles , CA 90095 - 1563 . E - mail : holyoak @ lifesci . ucla . edu Q1 dents place into “developmental” or “remedial” mathematics 40 courses ( e . g . , Adelman , 1985 ; Bailey , Jenkins , & Leinbach , 2005 ) . Too often , these remedial courses then turn into barri - ers that impede progress toward a higher level degree ( Bailey , 2009 ) . The numbers of community college students in the United 45 States who cannot perform adequately on basic mathemat - ics assessments provides some insight into the questionable efﬁcacy of the U . S . school system . More broadly , detailed measures of these students’ knowledge further elucidate the ways in which K – 12 educational systems ( in any country ) 50 have the potential to misdirect the mathematical thinking of many students . We begin this article by describing the results of detailed assessment and interview data from students in a California community college to better understand some longer term outcomes of a well - studied K – 12 educational 55 system ( Givvin et al . , 2011 ; Stigler et al . , 2010 ) . To antici - pate , the mathematics knowledge of these students appears 2 RICHLAND , STIGLER , HOLYOAK to be largely bound to speciﬁc procedures , leaving the stu - dents ineffective at reasoning through a mathematics prob - lem . They are apt to attempt procedures that are partially or 60 incorrectly recalled without regard to the reasonableness of the solution . We then consider what may be missing from typical U . S . K – 12 mathematics instruction , a gap that leads to such impoverished knowledge representations . In particular , we 65 consider one key to developing ﬂexible and conceptual understanding : comparing representations and drawing connections between them . This topic has been the focus of a great deal of cognitive and educational research , enabling us to forge relationships between these literatures to draw 70 implications for pedagogical practice . An integration of these literatures leads us to posit the crucial roles of developing causal structure in knowledge representations , and in supporting students in learning to represent novel problems as goal - oriented structured systems . 75 The term “conceptual understanding” has been given many meanings , which in turn has contributed to difﬁculty in changing teacher practices ( e . g . , see Skemp , 1976 ) . For our purposes in this article , we rely on a framework proposed by Hatano and Inagaki ( 1986 ) , which characterizes conceptual 80 understanding as attainment of an expertlike ﬂuency with the conceptual structure of a domain . This level of understand - ing allows learners to think generatively within that content area , enabling them to select appropriate procedures for each step when solving new problems , make predictions about 85 the structure of solutions , and construct new understandings and problem - solving strategies . For the sake of clarity , rather than discussing “conceptual understanding” throughout his article , we primarily focus our review of the literature and re - search agenda on the goal of facilitating learners’ acquisition 90 of the conceptual structure of mathematics . We next turn from consideration of student knowledge to studies of videotaped teacher practice , to examine the align - ment between current teacher practice and the strategies we hypothesize to be effective . We ﬁnd that the practices of 95 American teachers often do not correspond at all well with the strategies that we believe would promote deep learning and acquisition of the conceptual structure of mathematics . Finally , we consider the role that researchers can play in un - derstanding how teachers might practicably engage students 100 in effective representational thinking . We lay out a research agenda with the aim of developing strategies for facilitat - ing students’ learning to reason about mathematics and to generalize their mathematical knowledge . WHAT COMMUNITY COLLEGE STUDENTS 105 KNOW ABOUT MATHEMATICS Studying the U . S . mathematics instructional system pro - vides insights into more general relationships between stu - dent knowledge , student cognition , and teacher practices . We know from international research that American students fall 110 far behind their counterparts in other industrialized nations , both on standardized tests of mathematics achievement ( Gon - zales et al . , 2008 ) and on tests designed to measure students’ abilities to apply their knowledge to solving novel and chal - lenging problems ( Fleishman , Hopstock , Pelczar , & Shelley , 115 2010 ) . We also know that the gap between U . S . students and those in other countries grows wider as students progress through school , from elementary school through graduation from high school ( Gonzales et al . , 2008 ) . Many researchers have attributed this low performance in 120 large part to the mainly procedural nature of the instruction American students are exposed to in school ( e . g . , Stigler & Hiebert , 1999 ) . By asking students to remember procedures but not to understand when or why to use them or link them to core mathematical concepts , we may be leading our students 125 away from the ability to use mathematics in future careers . Perhaps nowhere are the results of our K – 12 education sys - tem more visible than in community colleges . As previously noted , the vast majority of students entering community col - lege are not prepared to enroll in a college - level mathematics 130 class ( Bailey , 2009 ) . We know this , mostly , from their per - formance on placement tests . But placement tests provide only a speciﬁc type of information : They measure students’ ability to apply procedural skills to solving routine problems but provide little insight into what students actually under - 135 stand about fundamental mathematics concepts or the degree to which their procedural skills are connected to understand - ings of mathematics concepts . American community college students are interesting be - cause they provide a window for examining long - term conse - 140 quences of a well - studied K – 12 instructional system . Not ev - eryone goes to community college , of course . Some students do not continue their education beyond the secondary level , and some American students , through some combination of good teaching , natural intelligence , and diligent study , learn 145 mathematics well in high school and directly enter 4 - year col - leges . Some community college students pass the placement tests and go on to 4 - year colleges , and some even become mathematicians . However , we believe much can be learned from examining the mathematical knowledge of that majority 150 of community college students who place into developmental mathematics courses . Most of these students graduated high school . They were able to remember mathematical proce - dures well enough to pass the tests in middle school and high school . But after they stop taking mathematics in school , we 155 can see what happens to their knowledge—how it degrades over time , or perhaps was never fully acquired in the ﬁrst place . The level of usable knowledge available to community college students may tell us something about the long - term impact of the kinds of instructional experiences they were 160 offered in their prior schooling . We begin by looking more closely at what developmen - tal mathematics students in community college know and understand about mathematics . Little is known about the CONCEPTUAL STRUCTURE 3 mathematical knowledge of these students . Most of what 165 we know was learned in two small studies—one a survey of several hundred students at one Los Angeles area col - lege ( Stigler et al . , 2010 ) , and the other a more qualitative interview study in which interviewers engaged students in conversations about mathematics ( Givvin et al . , 2011 ) . Both 170 of these studies steered clear of the typical , procedural ques - tions asked on placement tests . Students were not asked to multiply fractions , perform long division , or solve algebraic equations . The questions focused instead on very basic con - cepts : Could students , for example , place a proper fraction 175 on a number line , or use algebraic notation ( e . g . , a + b = c ) to reason about quantitative relationships ? More general questions were also asked , such as , What does it mean to do mathematics ? We brieﬂy summarize some of the conclusions from these two studies . 180 Students View Mathematics as a Collection of Rules and Procedures to Be Remembered Consistent with the view that K – 12 mathematics instruction focuses primarily on practicing procedures , these students for the most part have come to believe that mathematics is not 185 a body of knowledge that makes sense and can be “ﬁgured out . ” Instead , they see mathematics as a collection of rules , procedures , and facts that must be remembered—a task that gets increasingly more difﬁcult as students progress through the curriculum . 190 When asked what it means to be “good at mathematics , ” 77 % of students presented views consistent with these beliefs ( Givvin et al . , 2011 ) . Here is a sampling of what they said : • “Math is just all these steps . ” • “In math , sometimes you have to just accept that that’s the 195 way it is and there’s no reason behind it . ” • “I don’t think [ being good at math ] has anything to do with reasoning . It’s all memorization . ” This is , of course , a dysfunctional view of what it means to do mathematics . If students don’t believe that it is possible to 200 reason through a mathematics problem , then they are unlikely to try . And if they don’t try to reason , to connect problems with concepts and procedures , then it is hard to imagine how they would get very far in mathematics . Mathematicians , naturally , see reasoning about relation - 205 ships as central to the mathematical enterprise ( e . g . , Hilbert , 1900 ; Polya , 1954 ) , a view that also is common among math - ematics teachers at community colleges . When data on stu - dents’ views of mathematics were presented to a community college mathematics department , the faculty members were 210 astounded . One said , “The main reason I majored in mathe - matics was because I didn’t have to memorize it , it could all be ﬁgured out . I think I was too lazy to go into a ﬁeld where you had to remember everything . ” Every one of the other faculty members present immediately voiced their agreement . 215 Given this disconnect between the students and their com - munity college professors , one might ask where the students’ views of mathematics come from , if not from their teachers ? First , it is important to point out that they bring this view with them based on their K – 12 experiences . But it also is quite 220 possible that students’ views of what it means to do mathe - matics arise not from the beliefs of their teachers but from the daily routines that deﬁne the practice of school mathe - matics ( see , e . g . , Stigler & Hiebert , 1999 ) . Unless teachers’ beliefs are somehow instantiated in daily instructional rou - 225 tines or made explicit in some other way , they are unlikely to be communicated to students . As we see later , the routines of K – 12 school mathematics emphasize repeated recall and performance of routine facts and procedures , and these routines are supported by state 230 standards , assessments , and textbooks in addition to teaching practices . Although a small percentage of students do seek meaning and do achieve an understanding that is grounded in the conceptual structure of mathematics—and we assume that community college mathematics faculty are among this 235 small percentage—the majority of students appear to exit high school with a more limited view of what it means to do mathematics . Regardless of Placement , Students Are Lacking Fundamental Concepts That Would Be Required 240 to Reason About Mathematics Although the developmental mathematics students in the studies were placed into three different levels of mathe - matics courses—basic arithmetic , pre - algebra , or beginning algebra—they differed very little in their understanding 245 of fundamental mathematics concepts . Their similarity may not be that surprising given their procedural view of mathematics : If mathematics is not supposed to make sense , consisting mainly of rules and procedures that must be memorized , then basic concepts may not be perceived as 250 useful . That said , the range of things these students did not understand is surprising . One student , in the interviews , was asked to place the frac - tion 4 / 5 on a number line . He carefully marked off a line , la - beled the marks from 0 to 8 , and then put 4 / 5 between 4 and 5 . 255 Many students appeared to have fundamental misunderstand - ings of fractions and decimals , not seeing them as numbers that could be compared and ordered with whole numbers . In the survey , students were shown the number line depicted in Figure 1 , which spanned a range from – 2 to + 2 . They were 260 asked to place the numbers − 0 . 7 and 13 / 8 on the number line . Only 21 % of the students could do so successfully . Most young children know that if you add two quantities together to get a third , the third quantity is then composed of the original two quantities such that if you removed one you 265 would be left with the other . The students in these studies , however , seemed happy to carry out their mathematics work without connecting it to such basic ideas . In the interviews 4 RICHLAND , STIGLER , HOLYOAK FIGURE 1 Number line on which students were to place − . 7 and 13 / 8 . From“WhatCommunityCollegeDevelopmentalMathematics Students Understand About Mathematics , ” by J . W . Stigler , K . B . Givvin , and B . Thompson , 2010 , The MathAMATYC Educator , 10 . Copyright2010byAmericanMathematicalAssociationofTwo - Year Colleges . Reprinted with permission . a student was asked if he could think of a way to check that Q2 the sum of two three - digit numbers was correct . The spe - 270 ciﬁc example presented was 462 + 253 = 715 . The student proceeded to subtract 253 from 715 and ended up with 462 . The interviewer then asked him if he could have subtracted the 462 instead . He did not think so ; he had been told , he said , that you subtract the second addend , not the ﬁrst . But 275 would it make a difference , the interviewer asked ? He wasn’t sure . The interviewer told him he could try it , and he did . He seemed genuinely surprised to ﬁnd that , indeed , he could subtract either addend to get the other . In one ﬁnal example , students were asked , “Which is 280 greater ? a / 5 or a / 8 . Only 53 % correctly answered a / 5 , a percentage that could have been obtained just by guessing . The students were also asked to explain how they got their answer . About one third ( 36 % ) could not come up with an explanation ( half of these had answered correctly , the 285 other half incorrectly ) . The ones who provided some sort of explanation tended to summon some rule or procedure from memory that they thought might do the trick . Many of the students said that a / 8 is larger because 8 is larger than 5 . Not surprisingly , another group claimed just the 290 opposite , having remembered that the lower the denominator the larger the number . Some students tried to perform a procedure : Some found common denominators , though often they made mistakes and got the wrong answer anyway . Others cross - multiplied ( something they apparently believed 295 you can do whenever you have two fractions ) . Only 15 % of the students tried to reason it through . These students said things such as , If you have the same quantity and divide it into ﬁve parts , then the parts would be larger than if you divide it into eight parts . Assuming you have the 300 same number of these different - sized parts , then a / 5 must be larger . Although it is discouraging that only 15 % took this approach , it is interesting to note that every one of these students got the answer correct . If we could only ﬁgure out how to connect such fundamental ideas with the mathematics 305 procedures students are learning in school , the mathematical knowledge the students acquire might be more robust . Students Almost Always Apply Standard Procedures , Regardless of Whether They Make Sense or Are Necessary 310 Students were asked a number of questions in the interviews that could have been answered just by thinking . As evident in the preceding example , only a small percentage of students tried to think their way to a solution . For some questions , just a bit of thinking and reﬂection might have guided students 315 to use a more appropriate procedure , or to spot errors in the procedures they did use . Rarely , however , did students take the bait . In one part of the interview students were presented with a list of multiplication problems and asked to solve them 320 mentally : 10 × 3 = 10 × 13 = 20 × 13 = 30 × 13 = 31 × 13 = 29 × 13 = 22 × 13 = Clearly there are many relationships across these prob - lems , and results of previous problems could potentially be used to derive the answers to subsequent problems . But this was not the way in which students approached this task . 325 Most students just chugged through the list , struggling to apply the standard multiplication algorithm to each problem . Fully 77 % of the students never noticed or used any rela - tion among the different problems , preferring to work each problem independently . 330 Here is an example of the answers produced by one student ( Givvin et al . , 2011 ) : 10 × 3 = 30 10 × 13 = 130 20 × 13 = 86 30 × 13 = 120 31 × 13 = 123 29 × 13 = 116 22 × 13 = 92 In summary , most students answered most problems by retrieving answers or procedures from memory . Many of the procedures they used were not necessary or not appropriate 335 to the problem at hand . Rarely were the procedures linked to concepts , which might have guided their use in more ap - propriate ways . When students were asked to solve multiple problems they almost never made comparisons across the problems , leading to more mistakes and fewer opportunities 340 to infer the principles and concepts that could make their knowledge more stable , coherent , ﬂexible , and usable . CONCEPTUAL STRUCTURE 5 Why might students have developed such an orientation toward mathematics through their K – 12 mathematics educa - tion ? Although teaching in the United States is multifaceted 345 and the reasons behind student success or failure are much too complex to fully treat here , we consider in particular one candidate explanation : Students do not view mathematics as a system , because their teachers do not capitalize on op - portunities to draw connections between mathematical rep - 350 resentations . In the following sections we ﬁrst expand on what kinds of processes might be required for the develop - ment of deep and ﬂexible mathematical knowledge . We then consider , based on classroom observational studies , whether American students have opportunities to engage in these pro - 355 cesses . We ﬁrst consider the cognition involved in students’ comparative thinking and transfer , and then we turn to studies of teacher practices to examine alignment between pedagogy and cognition . LEARNING RELATIONAL STRUCTURE 360 THROUGH COMPARISON It seems a safe conjecture that the very same students who apparently found no interesting patterns within a series of juxtaposed multiplications by 13 are quite capable of notic - ing other sorts of potential comparisons and learning from 365 them . They might compare the plots of movies , the sources of difﬁculty in different video games , the reasons why various romantic relationships have succeeded or failed . In such ev - eryday situations people of all ages , including the very young , spontaneouslyseekexplanations for why things happen , espe - 370 cially when faced with surprising events ( e . g . , Legare , Gel - man , & Wellman , 2010 ) . The answer to a “why” question inevitably hinges on relational representations , particularly cause – effect relations ( for a review , see Holyoak & Cheng , 2011 ) , or more generally ( and especially in mathematics ) , 375 functional relations that govern whether inferences are justi - ﬁed ( Bartha , 2010 ) Learning Schemas Via Analogical Reasoning A causal model is a kind of schema , or mental representation of the relational structure that characterizes a class of 380 situations . The acquisition of schemas is closely related to the ability to compare situations and draw analogies based in part on corresponding relations . Analogical reasoning is the process of identifying goal - relevant similarities between what is typically a familiar source analog and a 385 novel , less understood target , and then using the set of correspondences , or mapping , between the two analogs to generate plausible inferences about the latter ( see Holyoak , 2012 , for a review ) . The source may be a concrete object ( e . g . , a balance scale ) , a set of multiple cases ( e . g . , multiple 390 problems involving balancing equations ) , or a more abstract schema ( e . g . , balancing equations in general ) . The target may be a relatively similar problem context ( e . g . , a balancing equations problem with additional steps ) , or a more remote analog ( e . g . , solving a proportion ) . 395 It has been argued that analogical reasoning is at the core of what is unique about human intelligence ( Penn , Holyoak , & Povinelli , 2008 ) . The rudiments of analogical reasoning with causal relations appear in infancy ( Chen , Sanchez , & Campbell , 1997 ) , and children’s analogical ability becomes 400 more sophisticated over the course of cognitive development ( Brown , Kane , & Echols , 1986 ; Holyoak , Junn , & Billman , 1984 ; Richland , Morrison , & Holyoak , 2006 ) . Whereas very young children focus on global similarities of objects , older children attend to speciﬁc dimensions of variation ( Smith , 405 1989 ) and to relations between objects ( Gentner & Ratter - mann , 1991 ) . Analogical reasoning is closely related to transfer . Cru - cially , comparison of multiple analogs can result not only in transfer of knowledge from a speciﬁc source analog to a 410 target ( Gick & Holyoak , 1980 ) but also in the induction of a more general schema that can in turn facilitate subsequent transfer to additional cases ( Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ) . Peo - ple often form schemas simply as a side effect of applying one solved source problem to an unsolved target problem 415 ( Novick & Holyoak , 1991 ; Ross & Kennedy , 1989 ) . The Q3 induction of such schemas has been demonstrated both in adults and in young children ( e . g . , Brown et al . , 1986 ; Chen & Daehler , 1989 ; Holyoak et al . , 1984 ; Loewenstein & Gen - tner , 2001 ) . Comparison may play a key role in children’s 420 learning of basic relations ( e . g . , comparative adjectives such as “bigger than” ) from nonrelational inputs ( Doumas , Hum - mel , & Sandhofer , 2008 ) , and in language learning more generally ( Gentner & Namy , 2006 ) . Although two examples can sufﬁce to establish a useful schema , people are able to 425 incrementally develop increasingly abstract schemas as ad - ditional examples are provided ( Brown et al . , 1986 ; Brown , Kane , & Long , 1989 ; Catrambone & Holyoak , 1989 ) . Why Schema Learning Can Be Hard ( Especially in Mathematics ) 430 If humans have a propensity to use analogical reasoning to compare situations and induce more general schemas , why did the community college students described earlier ap - pear not to have acquired ﬂexible schemas for mathematical concepts ? Several issues deserve to be highlighted . As we 435 have emphasized , most everyday thinking focuses on un - derstanding the physical and social environment , for which causal relations are central ( Holyoak , Lee , & Lu , 2010 ; Lee & Holyoak , 2008 ) . Not all relational correspondences are viewed as equally important . Rather , correspondences 440 between elements causally related to a reasoning goal are typically considered central ( Holyoak , 1985 ; Spellman & Holyoak , 1996 ) . It seems that the human ability to learn from analogical comparisons is closely linked to our tendency to 6 RICHLAND , STIGLER , HOLYOAK focus on cause – effect relations , which are the building blocks 445 of causal models . But by its very nature , mathematics is a formal system , within which the key relations are not “causal” in any straight - forward sense . ( Note that this observation applies not only to mathematics but to other domains as well . For example , a 450 similar pattern of teaching and learning has been identiﬁed in the domain of physics by Jonassen , 2010 . ) Worse , unless mathematical procedures are given a meaningful interpreta - tion , students may assume ( as we have seen ) that there are no real “reasons” why the procedures work . In some sense , 455 the community college students we interviewed probably did have a “schema” for multiplication , consisting of roles for multiplicands and a product . However , lacking any mean - ingful model of what multiplication “means” outside of the procedure itself , the students lacked a reliable basis for ﬁnd - 460 ing “interesting” relationships between juxtaposed problems such as “10 × 13 = “ and “20 × 13 = ” . In contrast , their community college professors clearly viewed mathematics as a meaningful system , governed by an interconnected set of relations . Though not “causal” per se , 465 these relations are seen as having relevance to mathematical goals ( Bartha , 2010 ) . As Bartha argued , the general notion of functional relevance ( of which causal relations are a special case ) governs inference based on mathematics . Just as causal relations determine the consequences of actions in the phys - 470 ical world , mathematical relations determine the validity of procedures in a formal world . For example , multiplication can be deﬁned as repeated addition , which can be deﬁned in turn as the concatenation of two quantities , and quantities can in turn be decomposed ( e . g . , the quantity 20 is equal to 475 two quantities of 10 ) . This is the type of relational knowl - edge required to notice , for example , that the value of 20 × 13 has a special relationship to the value of 10 × 13 . Sim - ilarly , the professors , but not their students , understand that numbers in decimal notation like – 0 . 7 and improper fractions 480 like 13 / 8 , along with integers , can all be placed on a num - ber line because all of them are real numbers , representing quantities along a continuum . One might say , then , that the students and their professors have incommensurate schemas for mathematics , in that only the latter place emphasis on 485 functional relations that serve to explain why various math - ematical inferences are valid . Clearly , simply solving sequences of math problems is no guarantee that the student will end up deeply understanding the conceptual structure of mathematics . Even in nonmath - 490 ematical domains , simply providing multiple examples does not ensure formation of a useful schema . If two examples are juxtaposed but processed independently , without relational comparison , learning is severely limited ( Gentner , Loewen - stein , & Thompson , 2003 ; Loewenstein , Thompson , & Gen - 495 tner , 2003 ) . Even when comparison is strongly encouraged , some people will fail to focus on the goal - relevant functional relations and subsequently fail on transfer tasks ( Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ) . When mathematics problems are embedded in speciﬁc contexts , details shared by different contexts are 500 likely to end up attached to the learned procedure , potentially limiting its generality . For example , people tend to view ad - dition as an operation that is used to combine categories at the same level in a semantic hierarchy ( e . g . , apples and or - anges , not apples and baskets ; Bassok , Pedigo , & Oskarsson , 505 2008 ) , because word problems given in textbooks always re - spect this constraint . At an even more basic level , analogical transfer is ultimately limited by the reasoner’s understanding of the source analog ( Bartha , 2010 ; Holyoak et al . , 2010 ) . If every solution to a math problem is viewed as “just all these 510 steps” with “no reason behind it , ” simply comparing multiple examples of problems ( that to the student are meaningless ) will not sufﬁce to generate a deep schema . Thus , although relational comparisons can in principle foster induction of ﬂexible mathematical knowledge , many 515 pitfalls loom large . The teacher needs to introduce source analogs that “ground out” formal mathematical operations in domains that provide a clear semantic interpretation ( e . g . , introducing the number line as a basic model for concepts and operations involving continuous quantities ) . Moreover , 520 even if a good source analog is provided , relational compar - isons tax limited working memory ( Halford , 1993 ; Hummel & Holyoak , 1997 , 2003 ; Waltz , Lau , Grewal , & Holyoak , 2000 ) . In general , any kind of intervention that reduces working - memory demands , and helps people focus on goal - 525 relevant relations , will aid learning of effective problem schemas and thereby improve subsequent transfer to new problems . For example , Gick and Holyoak ( 1983 ) found that in - duction of a schema from two disparate analogs was facil - 530 itated when each analog included a clear statement of the underlying solution principle . In some circumstances , trans - fer can also be improved by having the reasoner generate a problem analogous to an initial example ( Bernardo , 2001 ) . Other work has shown that abstract diagrams that highlight 535 the basic solution principle can aid in schema induction and subsequent transfer ( Beveridge & Parkins , 1987 ; Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ) . Schema induction can also be encouraged by a procedure termed “progressive alignment” : providing a series of comparisons ordered “easy to hard , ” where the 540 early pairs share salient similarities between mapped objects as well as less salient relational correspondences ( Kotovsky & Gentner , 2008 ) . More generally , to understand the poten - Q4 tial role of analogical reasoning in education , it is essential to consider pedagogical strategies for supporting relational rep - 545 resentations and comparative thinking . Next we consider sev - eral such pedagogical strategies , including highlighting goal - relevant relations in the source analog , introducing multiple source representations , and using explicit verbal and gestural cues to draw attention to relational commonalities and differ - 550 ences ( see also Schwartz , 2012 / this issue , and Chi , 2012 / this issue ) . Q5 CONCEPTUAL STRUCTURE 7 How American Teachers Introduce Mathematical Relations Are teachers invoking these and related strategies in U . S . 555 mathematics instruction , either explicitly or implicitly ? Al - though the list of potential “best practices” in mathematics is long and varied , there is general agreement about the im - portance of drawing connections and supporting student rea - soning . The National Council of Teachers of Mathematics 560 ( NCTM ) has issued strong recommendations in this vein , publishing a new series of books for high school mathemat - ics under the titled theme of Reasoning and Sense - Making ( NCTM , 2009 ) . They deﬁne “reasoning” broadly , including any circumstance in which logical conclusions are drawn 565 on the basis of evidence or stated assumptions , from infor - mal explanations to deductive and inductive conclusions and formal proofs ( p . 19 ) . Sense making is characterized as the interrelated but more informal process of developing under - standing of a situation , context , or concept by connecting it 570 with existing knowledge ( p . 19 ) . Based on reviews of educa - tional research in mathematics and mathematics education , the authors explore the following theme throughout the main volume in this series as well as in books with speciﬁc cur - riculum foci : 575 Reasoning and sense making are the cornerstones of mathe - matics . Restructuring the high school mathematics program aroundthemenhancesstudents’developmentofboththecon - tent and processknowledge they need to be successfulintheir continuing study of mathematics and in their lives . ( p . 19 ) 580 These themes , though under the different title of “Focal Topics in Mathematics” are also central to their description of high quality elementary instruction ( NCTM , 2006 ) . Thus , there is growing consensus in both the psychologi - cal and educational research literatures that teaching students 585 effectively requires teaching them to reason with mathemat - ics . Further , there is agreement that this aim necessitates drawing connections and fostering students’ awareness that mathematics is a sensible system , one that can be approached using the student’s broad repertoire of “sense making , ” in - 590 cluding causal and analogical thinking strategies . Approach - ing mathematics in this way enables students to develop better structured knowledge representations that may be more easily remembered and used more ﬂexibly in transfer contexts—to solve novel problems , to notice mathematically relevant com - 595 monalities and differences between representations , and to reason through mathematics problems when one cannot re - member a procedure . Although drawing connections and sense making do not guarantee transfer , these are cognitive routines that lead to 600 schema acquisition and knowledge representations that sup - port transfer . Positive transfer will be facilitated by noticing similarities between two or more representations or objects . INTERNATIONAL VARIATIONS IN STUDENTS’ OPPORTUNITIES FOR LEARNING TO DRAW 605 CONNECTIONS IN MATHEMATICS Hiebert and Grouws ( 2007 ) conducted a meta - analysis of all studies in which features of teaching were empirically related to measures of students’ learning . They found that two broad features of instruction have been shown to promote students’ 610 understanding of the conceptual structure of mathematics . First , teachers and students must attend explicitly to concepts , “treating mathematical connections in an explicit and public way” ( p . 384 ) . According to Hiebert and Grouws , this could include 615 discussingthe mathematical meaning underlying procedures , asking questions about how different solution strategies are similar to and different from each other , considering the ways in which mathematical problems build on each other or are special ( or general ) cases of each other , attending to the 620 relationships among mathematical ideas , and reminding stu - dents about the main point of the lesson and how this point ﬁts within the current sequence of lessons and ideas . ( p . 384 ) The second feature associated with students’ understand - ing of mathematics’ conceptual structure is struggle : Stu - 625 dents must spend part of each lesson struggling to make sense of important mathematics . Hiebert and Grouws de - ﬁned “struggle” to mean “students expend effort to make sense of mathematics , to ﬁgure out something that is not immediately apparent” ( p . 387 ) . Thus , students must expend 630 effort to make connections between mathematical problems and the concepts and procedures that can be marshaled to solve them . Note that Hiebert and Grouws did not identify any single strategy for achieving these learning experiences in classrooms , pointing out that there are many ways of doing 635 so . And clearly , not all struggle is good struggle . The point they made is simply that connections must be made by the student ( i . e . , they cannot be made by the teacher for the stu - dent ) and the making of these connections will require effort on the students’ part . 640 Corroboration of these conclusions comes from the largest studies ever conducted in which mathematics classrooms have been videotaped in different countries , the TIMSS video studies . Two studies were conducted : the ﬁrst in 1995 in Germany , Japan , and the United States ( Stigler & Hiebert , 645 1999 ) , and the second in 1999 in seven countries : Australia , the Czech Republic , Hong Kong , Japan , the Netherlands , Switzerland , and the United States ( Gonzales et al . , 2008 ; Hiebert et al . , 2003 ) . In each country , a national probability sample of approximately 100 teachers was videotaped teach - 650 ing a single classroom mathematics lesson . An international team of researchers collaboratively developed and reliably coded all lessons to gather data about average teaching prac - tices across and within countries . 8 RICHLAND , STIGLER , HOLYOAK One goal of these studies was to try to ﬁnd features of 655 teaching that might differentiate the high - achieving countries ( in general , all except the United States and Australia in the preceding list ) from the low - achieving countries . Of interest , the ﬁndings ﬁt nicely with the conclusions of Hiebert and Grouws ( 2007 ) , and also help to explain why we see the kind 660 of outcomes just reported in the studies of community college developmental mathematics students . Many surface features of teaching did not appear associated with cross - national dif - ferences in student achievement . For example , among the high - achieving countries , there were countries that empha - 665 sized teacher lecture as the primary mode of instruction , and countries that tended to have students work independently or in groups on learning assignments . There were countries that used many real - world problems in their mathematics classes , and countries that dealt almost completely with symbolic 670 mathematics . None of these simple variations could explain differences in student outcomes . Finding common features among the high - achieving countries required looking more closely at what was hap - pening in the lessons . It was neither the kinds of problems 675 presented nor teaching style employed that differentiated the high - achieving countries from the others , but the kinds of learning opportunities teachers create for students , namely , making explicit connections in the lesson among mathemat - ics procedures , problems , and concepts and ﬁnding ways 680 to engage students in the kind of productive struggle that is required to understand these connections in a deep way . The ways that teachers went about creating these learning opportunities differed from country to country . Indeed , an instructional move that inspires a Japanese student to engage 685 might not have the same effect on a Czech student , and vice versa , due to the different motivational beliefs , attitudes , in - terests , and expectations students in different cultures bring to the task at hand . But the quality of the learning opportu - nities teachers were able to create did seem to be common 690 across the high - achieving countries . This conclusion was based on an analysis of the types of problems that are presented , and how they are worked on , in different countries . Across all countries , students spend about 80 % of their time in mathematics class working on problems , 695 whether independently , as part of a small group , or as part of the whole class . The beginning and end of each problem was identiﬁed as it was presented and worked on in the videos . The types of problems presented were characterized , as was how each was worked on during the lesson . 700 The two most common types of problems presented were categorized as Using Procedures and Making Connections . Using Procedures problems , by far the most common across all countries , involved asking a student to solve a problem that they already had been taught to solve , applying a procedure 705 they had been taught to perform . This is what is typically regarded as “practice . ” Take , for example , a lesson to teach students how to calculate the interior angles of a polygon . If the teacher has presented the formula [ 180 × ( number of sides – 2 ) ] , and then asks students to apply the formula to 710 calculate the sums of the interior angles of ﬁve polygons , that would be coded as Using Procedures . If , however , a teacher asks students to ﬁgure out why the formula works , to derive the formula on their own , or to prove that the formula would work for any polygon , that would be coded as a Making 715 Connections problem . A problem like this has the potential for both struggle and for connecting students with explicit mathematical concepts . The percentage of problems presented in each country that were coded as Using Procedures versus Making Con - 720 nections is presented in Figure 2 . As is evident in the ﬁgure , there was great variability across countries in the percentage FIGURE 2 Percentage of problems that were coded Using Procedures and Making Connections . From “Improving Mathematics Teaching , ” by J . W . Stigler and J . Hiebert , 2004 , Educational Leadership , 61 . Copyright 2004 by Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development . Reprinted with permission . Q6 CONCEPTUAL STRUCTURE 9 of problems of each type . All countries have some Making Connections problems , though only Japan has more Mak - ing Connections problems than Using Procedures problems . 725 Clearly , just presenting more Making Connections problems does not appear to be related to student achievement . Two of the highest achieving countries in the group are Hong Kong and Japan . Hong Kong has the lowest percentage of Making Connections problems , and Japan has the highest . 730 The United States , it is interesting to note , falls in between Hong Kong and Japan . This pattern suggests that curriculum change alone ( e . g . , increasing the percentage of Making Con - nections problems in a textbook ) will not necessarily result in improved learning . 735 A more compelling pattern emerges when we examine , in the videos , how the presented problems were actually worked on in the lesson . Although “struggle” per se was not coded , each problem was coded a second time to determine whether the teacher and students engaged with the problem in a way 740 that required them to grapple with concepts or draw connec - tions , or whether the teacher or students changed the activ - ity to reduce the conceptual demand . As evidenced by the data , once a Making Connections problem was presented it was often changed , by the teacher into something else , most 745 commonly a Using Procedures problem . In other words , just because a problem has the potential to engage students in pro - ductive struggle with mathematics concepts , it will not nec - essarily achieve that potential . For example , a teacher might give additional instruction or a worked example to aid the 750 students in solving the Making Connections problem , which means that the activity becomes only practice for students . In the United States , one of the reasons that problems do not succeed in engaging students in productive struggle is that the students push back ! Teaching is a complex system , and 755 teaching routines are multiply determined . A teacher may ask students why , for example , the equation for ﬁnding the sum of the interior angles of a convex polygon works . But stu - dents may disengage at this point , knowing that the reasons why will not be on the ﬁnal exam . Reasons why also may be 760 misaligned with the students’ emerging sense of what mathe - matics is all about : a bunch of procedures to be remembered . Cultural and individual views of the nature of intelligence and learning , speciﬁcally as they relate to mathematics , and re - lated processes such as stereotype threat and sense of belong - 765 ing and self - efﬁcacy , may undermine students’ motivation to engage in persistent effort toward achieving a mathematics learning goal ( see , e . g . , Blackwell , Trzesniewski , & Dweck , 2007 ; Dweck & Leggett , 1988 ; Heine et al . , 2001 ; Walton & Cohen , 2007 , 2011 ) . 770 But teaching practice also may be limited by teachers’ own epistemological beliefs about mathematics and how to learn it . Although many K – 12 teachers espouse the importance of teaching for “conceptual understanding , ” the meaning of this phrase has quite variable interpretations ( see Skemp , 775 1976 ) . Because the ability to successfully complete math - ematics problems requires both conceptual and procedural skills , teachers regularly ﬁnd these difﬁcult to distinguish , and may deﬁne conceptual understanding and successful learning as comfort with procedures . For this reason , again 780 we ﬁnd it useful to articulate our hypothesis that students will be best served by learning to represent mathematics as a system of conceptual relationships in which problems and concepts must be connected . Figure 3 presents just the Making Connections problems , 785 showing the percentage of problems that were actually FIGURE 3 Percentage of making - connections problems that were implemented as using procedures and making connections . Note : Bars do not add up to 100 % because there were other transformations that sometimes occurred . From “Improving Mathematics Teaching , ” by J . W . Stigler and J . Hiebert , 2004 , Educational Leadership , 61 . Copyright 2004 by Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development . Reprinted with permission . Q7 10 RICHLAND , STIGLER , HOLYOAK implemented as Making Connections problems versus those that were transformed into Using Procedures problems . Consider Hong Kong and Japan : Whereas they looked com - pletely different when comparing the percentage of problems 790 presented , they look very similar when we look just at how the Making Connections problems are implemented . Both Hong Kong and Japan , and most of the other countries too , are able to realize the full potential of Making Connections problems approximately half the time . The United States , 795 now , is the outlier . Virtually all of the Making Connections problems presented in the United States were transformed into Using Procedures problems , or something requiring even less student conceptual participation . ( The reason the percentages do not add up to 100 is that teachers sometimes 800 did other things with Making Connections problems , e . g . , just giving the students the answer without allowing them the opportunity to ﬁgure it out . ) The kinds of comparison processes that would be required for conceptual learning of mathematics would tend to happen 805 during these Making Connections problems . But for a variety of reasons , such processes do not occur , at least with much frequency , in the U . S . classrooms . Similar patterns were revealed in smaller scale , more de - tailed analyses of subsets of the TIMSS video data ( Rich - 810 land , Holyoak , & Stigler , 2004 ; Richland , Zur , & Holyoak , 2007 ) . Richland et al . ( 2007 ) focused speciﬁcally on struc - tured analogies , or opportunities for drawing connections and comparative reasoning . These investigators examined a subset of the United States , Hong Kong , and Japanese video - 815 taped lessons to identify teacher practices in using and sup - porting students in making comparisons between problems , representations , or concepts . These included opportunities for comparisons between problems ( e . g . , “These are both division problems but notice this one has a remainder” ) be - 820 tween mathematical concepts ( e . g . , between convex and con - cave polygons ) , between mathematics and nonmathematics contexts ( e . g . , “an equation is like a balancing scale” ) , or between multiple student solutions to a single problem . Every instance identiﬁed as a comparison was coded to 825 reveal teachers’ strategies for supporting students in draw - ing the connections intended by the teacher . An international team coded the videos , with native speakers from each coun - try , yielding high reliability across all codes . Because ( as previously discussed ) the cognitive science literature on com - 830 parative reasoning indicates that novices in a domain often fail to notice or engage in transfer and comparative thinking without explicit cues or support , the codes were designed to determine the extent to which teachers were providing such aids . The codes were developed based on the cognitive sci - 835 ence literature and on teacher practices observed in other TIMSS videotaped lessons , in an iterative fashion . Speciﬁcally , the codes measured teacher instructional practices that could be expected to encourage learners to draw on prior causal knowledge structures and reduce work - 840 ing memory processing load . The codes assessed the pres - ence or absence of the following teacher practices during comparisons : ( a ) using source analogs likely to have a fa - miliar causal structure to learners ( vs . comparing two new types of problems or concepts ) , ( b ) producing a visual rep - 845 resentation of a source analog versus only a verbal one ( e . g . , writing a solution strategy on the board ) , ( c ) making a visual representation of the source analog visible during compari - son with the target ( e . g . , leaving the solution to one problem on the board while teaching the second , related problem ) , ( d ) 850 spatially aligning written representations of the source and target analogs to highlight structural commonalities ( e . g . , us - ing spatial organization of two problem solutions on the board to identify related and unrelated problem elements ) , ( e ) us - ing gestures that moved comparatively between the source 855 and target analogs , and ( f ) constructing visual imagery ( e . g . drawing while saying “consider a balancing scale” ) . Teachers in all countries invoked a statistically similar number of relational comparisons ( means of 14 – 20 per les - son ) . ( These are different from the numbers of Making Con - 860 nections problems identiﬁed in the analysis described previ - ously , as these included also additional types of opportunities for drawing relationships . ) Of interest , the data revealed that the U . S . teachers were least likely to support their students in reasoning comparatively during these learning opportuni - 865 ties . These ﬁndings were highly similar qualitatively to those from the overall TIMSS results , suggesting that U . S . teach - ers are not currently capitalizing on learning opportunities ( i . e . , opportunities for comparison ) that they regularly evoke within classroom lessons . Both teachers in Hong Kong and 870 Japan used all of the coded support strategies more often than did the U . S . teachers . As shown in Figure 4 , some strategies were used frequently , others less often , but the Asian teach - ers were always more likely to include one or more support strategies with their comparisons than were teachers in the 875 United States . Overall , these data suggest that although the U . S . teachers are introducing opportunities for their students to draw con - nections and reason analogically , there is a high likelihood that the students are not taking advantage of these opportu - 880 nities and are failing to notice or draw the relevant structural connections . At this point , we have come full circle in our discussion and return back to the students with whom we started . Community college developmental mathematics stu - dents don’t see mathematics as something they can reason 885 their way through . For this reason , and no doubt other rea - sons as well , they do not expend effort trying to connect the procedures they are taught with the fundamental concepts that could help them understand mathematics as a coherent , meaningful system . The roots of their approach to mathe - 890 matics can be seen in K – 12 classrooms , where , it appears , teachers and students conspire together to create a mathe - matics practice that focuses mostly on memorizing facts and step - by - step procedures . We know from research in the learn - ing sciences what it takes to create conceptual coherence and 895 ﬂexible knowledge representations that support transfer . But CONCEPTUAL STRUCTURE 11 0 20 40 60 80 100 F E D C B A Percent of Analogies FIGURE 4 Percentage of analogies by region containing cognitive supports : ( A ) visual and mental imagery , ( B ) comparative gesture , ( C ) visual alignment , ( D ) use of a familiar source , ( E ) source visible concurrently with target , ( F ) source presented visually . Note . White denotes U . S . teachers , gray denotes Chinese teachers , and black de - notes Japanese teachers . From “Cognitive Supports for Analogy in the Mathematics Classroom , ” by L . E . Richland , O . Zur , and K . J . Holyoak , 2007 , Science , 316 . Copyright2007bytheAmericanAsso - ciation for the Advancement of Science . Reprinted with permission . we have found it difﬁcult to implement such ideas in class - Q8 rooms . Where do we go from here ? HOW MIGHT TEACHERS BETTER SUPPORT STUDENTS IN SYSTEMATIC MATHEMATICAL 900 THINKING ? A RESEARCH AGENDA The well - established cognitive literature on learning by struc - tured comparisons , together with our analysis of current teacher practice and student outcomes in mathematics in - struction , provides insight into strategies that might better 905 leverage students’ reasoning capacities to lead to meaningful understanding of mathematics . We propose several directions for research that would develop a foundation for integrating these ideas into classroom teaching . The ﬁrst are experimen - tal studies directly investigating the relationship between the 910 pedagogical practices of comparison and analogy and student learning for ﬂexible , transferable mathematics . Second , we outline the importance of understanding teacher and student epistemologies of mathematics in general , and epistemolo - gies of comparison and cognition more speciﬁcally . This is 915 essential to understanding the origin of the current problem and to develop recommendations that are likely to have an impact on practice . Third , we call for research on professional development strategies because the problem of how to impact teacher routines , particularly in this area of supporting stu - 920 dents’ connected , transferable thinking , have proven difﬁcult . Classroom Efﬁcacy Tests of Strategies for Supporting Comparisons Although the TIMSS 1999 video data results just reviewed are provocative , they do not allow us to make causal infer - 925 ences about the relationship between teacher practices and student learning . Several projects have begun to experimen - tally test the strategies for supporting comparisons that were identiﬁed as more frequent in the high - achieving countries ( e . g . , Richland & McDonough , 2010 ) . So far , this work has 930 found that using a combination of the most common sup - port cues invoked by teachers in Japan and Hong Kong was not necessary to teach basic memorization and use of an instructed strategy , but these cues did increase students’ ﬂex - ibility and ability to identify relevant similarities and differ - 935 ences between instructed problems and transfer problems . We and other research groups are addressing the question of how to best design and support instructional comparisons . Our team is using controlled videotaped presentation of var - ied instruction , whereas other research groups are designing 940 tools that aid teachers in leading instruction by comparisons as well as studying comparisons made by peers ( see Rittle - Johnson & Star , 2007 , 2009 ; Star & Rittle - Johnson , 2009 ) . More work is needed to investigate strategies for optimiz - ing teachers’ current use of problems and comparisons that 945 could be used to encourage students to draw connections and reason meaningfully about mathematics . Speciﬁcally , one of the strategies that needs further re - search is to better understand how students’ prior knowl - edge structures are related to the types of representations and 950 comparisons that are of most use in supporting sense making and relational reasoning . Adequate prior knowledge is essen - tial for reasoning by comparison , primarily because without awareness of the fundamental elements of a representation , one cannot hope to discern the important structural corre - 955 spondences and draw inferences on that basis ( e . g . , Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ; Goswami , 2002 ) . Yet surprisingly , us - ing very familiar source analogs was the comparison support strategy identiﬁed in the TIMSS video studies that was em - ployed proportionally least frequently by teachers in all coun - 960 tries . As reviewed earlier , the lack of well - structured knowl - edge about the source will limit students’ schema formation and generalization from the target , as they are simultane - ously acquiring and reasoning about the causal structure of both the source and target analogs . At minimum , the practice 965 of using unfamiliar source analogs will impose high cogni - tive demands on the learner , making the additional supports for cognitive load yet more important to ensure that students have sufﬁcient resources to grapple with the relationships between the two problems . 970 Despite the challenges of drawing inferences from a rela - tively unfamiliar source analog , the literature is not clear as to whether generalization from two less well - known analogs can be as effective as between a known and less well - known analog , assuming the learner has access to optimal supports 975 12 RICHLAND , STIGLER , HOLYOAK for causal thinking and sense making . Providing multiple representations certainly can be helpful , even when the do - main is fairly novel , through a kind of analogical scaffolding ( Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ) . However , this may vary depending on the background 980 knowledge of the learner . Rittle - Johnson , Star , and Durkin ( 2009 ) found that general algebraic knowledge about manip - ulating equations predicted whether students beneﬁted at all from being taught through comparison between two solution strategies . Those who began instruction with better initial 985 algebra intuitions about procedures for balancing equations ( even if the procedures were not executed properly ) bene - ﬁted from this type of comparison , whereas those who were less prepared beneﬁted more from serial instruction about two problems without explicit support for comparison , or 990 from comparisons between two problem types . These stu - dents were working in collaborative pairs of peers , so those who began the lesson without adequate knowledge may not have had the level of support necessary to surmount the dif - ﬁculty of aligning and mapping the representations , but it is 995 not clear what types of supports would have been sufﬁcient . Kalyuga ( 2007 ) proposed an “expertise reversal effect” for the role of cognitive load . This could be interpreted to imply that until students have adequate knowledge , they will beneﬁt from all possible efforts to reduce cognitive load , in - 1000 cluding reducing the instructional objective to have students encode the structure of a new representation . Once students have more expertise , however , they will gradually be able to handle more cognitive load and may actually beneﬁt from more effortful work to align and map between source and 1005 target analogs . Thus , the optimal level and role of teacher supports for relational thinking and sense making may shift over the course of students’ learning ( cf . Koedinger & Roll , 2012 ) . Overall , research is necessary to better understand the 1010 role of individual differences in prior knowledge and opti - mal relational learning conditions . Relational thinking and alignment between prior conceptual knowledge and new representations may be a way to characterize an impor - tant element of the more general construct “struggle” as 1015 described by Hiebert and Grouws ( 2007 ) . According to this construct , the level of struggle must be attenuated based on students’ level of prior knowledge so that the re - quirement to reason causes struggle , yet the challenge is surmountable . 1020 Although theoretically a very powerful framework for understanding the relationship between student learning needs and instructional content , one can imagine that this level of ﬂexible instruction may be very challenging for teachers . In particular , learning to use such strategies 1025 is difﬁcult for novice teachers ( Stein , Engle , Smith , & Hughes , 2008 ) , and much more research is needed to better understand teachers’ beliefs about comparisons and students’ analogical reasoning . Teacher Knowledge and Professional 1030 Development The instructional strategies we have discussed to this point will be heavily reliant on a teacher who orients to mathemat - ics as a meaningful system and is able to ﬂexibly vary his or her instruction based on diagnosis of students’ current knowl - 1035 edge states . There are several parts to this description of a hy - pothesized ideal teacher that may be important to understand before we can know how to realistically integrate cognitive principles of comparison into classroom instruction . The ﬁrst pertains to the structured organization of teacher 1040 knowledge and beliefs about the role of connections in math - ematics learning . In the community college sample , there was a clear distinction between the professors’ and students’ orientations to mathematics , with the professors viewing mathematics as more of a meaningful system than their stu - 1045 dents . K – 12 mathematics teachers may be more similar to their students in their stored knowledge systems of mathe - matics , however , appearing more focused on rules ( Battista , 1984 ; Schoenfeld , 1988 ) . Several measures have been de - Q9 signed to assess teacher knowledge about mathematics con - 1050 tent and about students’ mathematical thinking ( e . g . , Hill , Ball , & Shilling , 2008 ; Hill , Schilling , & Ball , 2004 ; Kerst - ing , Givvin , Sotelo , & Stigler , 2010 ) , yet we need to learn more about teachers’ beliefs and knowledge about mathemat - ics as a system , speciﬁcally with respect to the roles of multi - 1055 ple representations and drawing connections among content . In particular , it will be important to try to discover where students acquire their belief that mathematics is a series of memorized rules . International studies suggest that despite variability in 1060 teacher expertise in the domain within the United States , there may still be differences in the ways that the mathe - matical knowledge of American teachers is organized when compared with either mathematics domain experts or with teachers in other counties , particularly with respect to the role 1065 of interconnections within the content . Ma ( 1999 ) found that the U . S . mathematics teachers had taken more mathemat - ics courses than the average Chinese mathematics teachers in her sample , but the Chinese teachers’ representations of mathematics were far more systematic , interconnected , and 1070 structurally organized . The U . S . teachers tended to represent the mathematics curriculum as linearly organized , whereas the Chinese teachers’ representations of the curriculum more closely resembled a web of connections . Further research in - ternationally as well as within the United States may better 1075 reveal teachers’ underlying conceptualizations of mathemat - ics , with particular attention to the role of interconnections and meaningful systems of relationships , in much the same way we have gathered information from the community col - lege students ( Givvin et al . , 2011 ) . Greater understanding 1080 of teachers’ knowledge of mathematics may aid in develop - ing procedures or tools to better facilitate teacher practices CONCEPTUAL STRUCTURE 13 and to optimize the effectiveness of comparison strategies as pedagogical tools . Finally , we join the NCTM and other mathematics teacher 1085 educators in calling for further research on professional de - velopment strategies for promoting a conceptual shift for teachers from teaching mathematics as memorization of pro - cedures to a structured system of goal - oriented problem solv - ing . We in particular emphasize the need for professional 1090 development to support teachers in learning how to represent problems as goal - oriented systems that can be connected meaningfully to other problems , representations , and con - cepts . As we have identiﬁed in the TIMSS analyses , U . S . teachers are not currently leveraging opportunities for draw - 1095 ing connections and thereby encouraging students to orga - nize their knowledge around mathematical relationships . We require research to better understand how to provide such knowledge to teachers in a way that is usable . In addition , it may prove useful to support teachers through better textbooks 1100 and resource tools that include more connected , comparison - based suggested instruction . In sum , we posit that leveraging students’ reasoning skills during K – 12 mathematics instruction may be a crucial way to enhance their ability to develop usable , ﬂexible mathematics 1105 knowledge that can transfer to out - of - school environments . U . S . teachers are not currently providing most students with opportunities to develop meaningful knowledge structures for mathematics , as revealed by studies of community college students’ mathematical skills and video - based observations 1110 of teacher practices . Cognitive scientiﬁc research on chil - dren’s causal and relational thinking skills provides insights into strategies for supporting students in gaining more sen - sible , meaning - driven representations of mathematics . How - ever , more research is necessary to determine how these ideas 1115 may become effectively integrated into classroom teaching . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Preparation of this article was supported by the Insti - tute of Education Sciences ( Award R305C080015 ) , the Spencer Foundation , and the Ofﬁce of Naval Research 1120 ( N000140810186 ) . This article is also based on work sup - ported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No 0954222 . We thank Belinda Thompson and Karen Givvin for helpful conversations . Robert Goldstone and Dan Schwartz provided valuable comments on an earlier draft . 1125 REFERENCES Adelman , C . ( 1985 ) . The new college course map and transcript ﬁles . Wash - ington , DC : United States Department of Education . Bailey , T . ( 2009 ) . Challenge and opportunity : Rethinking the role and func - tion of developmental education in community college . New Directions 1130 for Community Colleges , 145 , 11 – 30 . Bailey , T . , Jenkins , D . , & Leinbach , T . ( 2005 ) . Community college low - incomeandminoritystudentcompletionstudy : Descriptive statistics from the1992highschoolcohort . NewYork , NY : ColumbiaUniversity , Teach - ers College , Community College Research Center . 1135 Bartha , P . ( 2010 ) . By parallel reasoning : The construction and evaluation of analogical arguments . New York , NY : Oxford University Press . Bassok , M . , Pedigo , S . F . , & Oskarsson , A . T . ( 2008 ) . Priming addition facts with semantic relations . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 34 , 343 – 352 . 1140 Bernardo , A . B . I . ( 2001 ) . Principle explanation and strategic schema ab - straction in problem solving . Memory & Cognition , 29 , 627 – 633 . Beveridge , M . , & Parkins , E . ( 1987 ) . Visual representation in analogical problem solving . Memory & Cognition , 15 , 230 – 237 . Blackwell , L . A . , Trzesniewski , K . H . , & Dweck , C . S . ( 2007 ) . Theories of 1145 intelligence and achievement across the junior high school transition : A longitudinal study and an intervention . Child Development , 78 , 246 – 263 . Brown , A . L . , Kane , M . J . , & Echols , C . H . ( 1986 ) . Young children’s mental models determine analogical transfer across problems with a common goal structure . Cognitive Development , 1 , 103 – 121 . 1150 Brown , A . L . , Kane , M . J . , & Long , C . ( 1989 ) . Analogical transfer in young children : Analogies as tools for communication and exposition . Applied Cognitive Psychology , 3 , 275 – 293 . Catrambone , R . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1989 ) . Overcoming contextual limita - tions on problem - solving transfer . Journal of Experimental Psychology : 1155 Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 15 , 1147 – 1156 . Chen , Z . , & Daehler , M . W . ( 1989 ) . Positive and negative transfer in ana - logical problem solving by 6 - year - old children . Cognitive Development , 4 , 327 – 344 . Chen , Z . , Sanchez , R . P . , & Campbell , T . ( 1997 ) . From beyond to within 1160 their grasp : The rudiments of analogical problem solving in 10 - and 13 - month - olds . Developmental Psychology , 33 , 790 – 801 . Doumas , L . A . A . , Hummel , J . E . , & Sandhofer , C . M . ( 2008 ) . A theory of the discovery and predication of relational concepts . Psychological Review , 115 , 1 – 43 . 1165 Dweck , C . S . , & Leggett , E . L . ( 1988 ) . A social - cognitive approach to moti - vation and personality . Psychological Review , 95 , 256 – 273 . Fleischman , H . L . , Hopstock , P . J . , Pelczar , M . P . , & Shelley , B . E . ( 2010 ) . Highlights from PISA 2009 : Performance of U . S . 15 - year - old students in reading , mathematics , and science literacy in an international con - 1170 text ( NCES 2011 – 004 ) . Washington , DC : United States Department of Education , National Center for Education Statistics . Gentner , D . , Loewenstein , J . , & Thompson , L . ( 2003 ) . Learningandtransfer : A general role for analogical encoding . Journal of Educational Psychol - ogy , 95 , 393 – 408 . 1175 Gentner , D . , & Namy , L . L . ( 2006 ) . Analogical processes in language learn - ing . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 15 , 297 – 301 . Gentner , D . , & Rattermann , M . ( 1991 ) . Language and the career of similar - ity . In S . A . Gelman & J . P . Byrnes ( Eds . ) , Perspectives on thought and language : Interrelations in development ( pp . 225 – 277 ) . Cambridge , UK : 1180 Cambridge University Press . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1980 ) . Analogicalproblemsolving . Cognitive Psychology , 12 , 306 – 355 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schema induction and analogical transfer . Cognitive Psychology , 15 , 1 – 38 . 1185 Givvin , K . B . , Stigler , J . W . , & Thompson , B . J . ( 2011 ) . Whatcommunitycol - lege developmental mathematics students understand about mathematics , Part II : The interviews . The MathAMATYC Educator , 2 ( 3 ) , 4 – 18 . Gonzales , P . , Williams , T . , Jocelyn , L . , Roey , S . , Kastberg , D . , & Bren - wald , S . ( 2008 ) . Highlights from TIMSS 2007 : Mathematics and science 1190 achievement of U . S . fourth - and eighth - grade students in an international context ( NCES 2009 - 001 ) . Washington , DC : National Center for Educa - tion Statistics , U . S . Department of Education . Goswami , U . ( 1992 ) . Analogical reasoning in children . Hillsdale , NJ : Erl - baum . 1195 Halford , G . S . ( 1993 ) . Children’sunderstanding : The development of mental models . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . 14 RICHLAND , STIGLER , HOLYOAK Hatano , G . , & Inagaki , K . ( 1986 ) . Twocoursesofexpertise . InH . Stevenson , H . Azuma , & K . Hakuta ( Eds . ) , Child development and education in Japan . New York , NY : Freeman . Q10 1200 Heine , S . J . , Kitayama , S . , Lehman , D . R . , Takata , T . , Ide , E . , Leung , C . , & Matsumoto , H . ( 2001 ) . Divergent consequences of success and failure in JapanandNorthAmerica : Aninvestigationofself - improvingmotivations and malleable selves . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 81 , 599 – 615 . 1205 Hiebert , J . , Gallimore , R . , Garnier , H . , Givvin , K . B . , Hollingsworth , H . , Ja - cobs , J . , . . . Stigler , J . W . ( 2003 ) . Teachingmathematicsinsevencountries : Results from the TIMSS 1999 video study ( NCES 2003 - 013 ) . Washington , D . C . : National Center for Education Statistics , United States Department of Education . 1210 Hiebert , J . C . , & Grouws , D . A . ( 2007 ) . Theeffectsofclassroommathematics teaching on students’ learning . In F . K . Lester , Jr . ( Ed . ) , Second handbook of research on mathematics teaching and learning ( Vol . 1 , pp . 371 – 404 ) . New York , NY : Information Age . Hiebert , J . , Stigler , J . W . , Jacobs , J . K . , Givvin , K . B . , Garnier , H . , Smith , M . , 1215 . . . Gallimore , R . ( 2005 ) . MathematicsteachingintheUnitedStatestoday ( and tomorrow ) : Results from the TIMSS 1999 Video Study . Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis , 27 , 111 – 132 . Q11 Hilbert , D . ( 1900 ) . Mathematical problems . Lecture delivered before the International Congress of Mathematicians , Paris , France . Q12 1220 Hill , H . , Ball , D . L . , & Schilling , S . ( 2008 ) . Unpacking “pedagogical con - tent knowledge” : Conceptualizing and measuring teachers’ topic - speciﬁc knowledge of students . Journal for Research in Mathematics Education , 39 , 372 – 400 . Hill , H . C . , Schilling , S . G . , & Ball , D . L . ( 2004 ) . Developing measures 1225 of teachers’ mathematics knowledge for teaching . Elementary School Journal , 105 , 11 – 30 . Holyoak , K . J . ( 1985 ) . The pragmatics of analogical transfer . In G . H . Bower ( Ed . ) , The psychology of learning and motivation ( Vol . 19 , pp . 59 – 87 ) . New York , NY : Academic Press . 1230 Holyoak , K . J . ( 2012 ) . Analogy and relational reasoning . In K . J . Holyoak & R . G . Morrison ( Eds . ) , The Oxford handbook of thinking and reasoning . New York , NY : Oxford University Press . Q13 Holyoak , K . J . , & Cheng , P . W . ( 2011 ) . Causal learning and inference as a rational process : The new synthesis . Annual Review of Psychology , 62 , 1235 135 – 163 . Holyoak , K . J . , Junn , E . N . , & Billman , D . O . ( 1984 ) . Development of analogical problem - solving skill . Child Development , 55 , 2042 – 2055 . Holyoak , K . J . , Lee , H . S . , & Lu , H . ( 2010 ) . Analogical and category - based inference : A theoretical integration with Bayesian causal models . Journal 1240 of Experimental Psychology : General , 139 , 702 – 727 . Hummel , J . E . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1997 ) . Distributedrepresentationsofstruc - ture : A theory of analogical access and mapping . Psychological Review , 104 , 427 – 466 . Hummel , J . E . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2003 ) . A symbolic - connectionist theory 1245 of relational inference and generalization . Psychological Review , 110 , 220 – 263 . Jonassen , D . ( 2010 ) . Learning to solve problems : A handbook for designing problem - solving learning environments . London , UK : Routledge . Kalyuga , S . ( 2007 ) . Expertise reversal effect and its implications for learner - 1250 tailored instruction . Educational Psychology Review , 19 , 509 – 539 . Kersting , N . B . , Givvin , K . B . , Sotelo , F . L . , & Stigler , J . W . ( 2010 ) . Teachers’ analyses of classroom video predicts student learning of mathematics : Further explorations of a novel measure of teacher knowledge . Journal of Teacher Education , 61 , 172 – 181 . 1255 Koedinger , K . R . , & Roll , I . ( 2012 ) . Learning to think : Cognitive mecha - nisms of knowledge transfer . In K . J . Holyoak & R . G . Morrison ( Eds . ) , The Oxford handbook of thinking and reasoning . New York , NY : Oxford University Press . Q14 Kotovsky , L . , & Gentner , D . ( 1996 ) . Comparison and categorization in 1260 the development of relational similarity . Child Development , 67 , 2797 – 2822 . Q15 Lee , H . S . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2008 ) . The role of causal models in analogical inference . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 34 , 1111 – 1122 . 1265 Legare , C . H . , Gelman , S . A . , & Wellman , H . M . ( 2010 ) . Inconsistency with prior knowledge triggers children’s causal explanatory reasoning . Child Development , 81 , 929 – 944 . Loewenstein , J . , & Gentner , D . ( 2001 ) . Spatial mapping in preschoolers : Close comparisons facilitate far mappings . Journal of Cognition and 1270 Development , 2 , 189 – 219 . Loewenstein , J . , Thompson , L . , & Gentner , D . ( 2003 ) . Analogical learning in negotiation teams : Comparing cases promotes learning and transfer . Academy of Management Learning and Education , 2 , 119 – 127 . 1275 Ma , L . ( 1999 ) . Knowing and teaching elementary mathematics . Teachers’ understanding of fundamental mathematics in China and the United States . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . National Council of Teachers of Mathematics . ( 2006 ) . Curriculum focal points for prekindergarten through grade 5 mathematics : a quest for 1280 coherence . Reston , VA : Author . National Council of Teachers of Mathematics . ( 2009 ) . Focus in high school mathematics : Reasoning and sense making . Reston , VA : Author . Novick , L . R . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1991 ) . Mathematical problem solving by analogy . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and 1285 Cognition , 17 , 398 – 415 . Penn , D . C . , Holyoak , K . J . , & Povinelli , D . J . ( 2008 ) . Darwin’s mistake : Explaining the discontinuity between human and nonhuman minds . Be - havioral and Brain Sciences , 31 , 109 – 178 . Polya , G . ( 1954 ) . Mathematics and plausible reasoning : Induction and 1290 analogy in mathematics ( Vol . 1 ) . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Richland , L . E . , Holyoak , K . J . , & Stigler , J . W . ( 2004 ) . The role of analogy in teaching middle - school mathematics . Cognition and Instruction , 22 , 37 – 60 . 1295 Richland , L . E . , & McDonough , I . M . ( 2010 ) . Learning by analogy : Dis - criminating between potential analogs . Contemporary Educational Psy - chology , 35 , 28 – 43 . Richland , L . E . , Morrison , R . G . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2006 ) . Children’s devel - opment of analogical reasoning : Insights from scene analogy problems . 1300 Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 94 , 249 – 271 . Richland , L . E . , Zur , O . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2007 ) . Cognitive sup - ports for analogy in the mathematics classroom . Science , 316 , 1128 – 1129 . Rittle - Johnson , B . , & Star , J . R . ( 2007 ) . Does comparing solution methods 1305 facilitate conceptual and procedural knowledge ? An experimental study on learning to solve equations . Journal of Educational Psychology , 99 , 561 – 574 . Rittle - Johnson , B . , & Star , J . ( 2009 ) . Compared to what ? The effects of different comparisons on conceptual knowledge and procedural ﬂex - 1310 ibility for equation solving . Journal of Educational Psychology , 101 , 529 – 544 . Rittle - Johnson , B . , Star , J . R . , & Durkin , K . ( 2009 ) . Theimportanceoffamil - iarity when comparing examples : Impact on conceptual and procedural knowledge of equation solving . Journal of Educational Psychology , 101 , 1315 836 – 852 . Ross , B . H . , & Kennedy , P . T . ( 1990 ) . Generalizing from the use of ear - lier examples in problem solving . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 16 , 42 – 55 . Q16 Shulman , L . S . ( 1986 ) . Those who understand : Knowledge growth in teach - 1320 ing . Educational Researcher , 15 , 4 – 14 . Q17 Shulman , L . S . ( 1987 ) . Knowledge and teaching : Foundations of the new reform . Harvard Educational Review , 57 , 1 – 22 . Q18 Skemp , R . ( 1976 ) . Relational understanding and instrumental understand - ing . Mathematics Teaching , 77 , 20 – 26 . 1325 Smith , L . B . ( 1989 ) . From global similarities to kinds of similarities : The construction of dimensions in development . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony CONCEPTUAL STRUCTURE 15 ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 147 – 177 ) . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Spellman , B . A . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1996 ) . Pragmaticsinanalogicalmapping . 1330 Cognitive Psychology , 31 , 307 – 346 . Star , J . R . , & Rittle - Johnson , B . ( 2009 ) . It pays to compare : An experimen - tal study on computational estimation . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 101 , 408 – 426 . Stein , M . K . , Engle , R . A . , Smith , M . S . , & Hughes , E . K . ( 2008 ) . Orchestrat - 1335 ing productive mathematical discussions : Helping teachers learn to better incorporate student thinking . Mathematical Thinking and Learning , 10 , 313 – 340 . Stigler , J . W . , Givvin , K . B . , & Thompson , B . ( 2010 ) . What community col - lege developmental mathematics students understand about mathematics . 1340 The MathAMATYC Educator , 10 , 4 – 16 . Stigler , J . W . , & Hiebert , J . ( 1999 ) . The teaching gap : Best ideas from the world’s teachers for improving education in the classroom . New York , NY : Free Press . Stigler , J . W . , & Hiebert , J . ( 2004 ) . Improving mathematics teaching . Edu - 1345 cational Leadership , 61 , 12 – 17 . Q19 Walton , G . M . , & Cohen , G . L . ( 2007 ) . Aquestionofbelonging : Race , social ﬁt , and achievement . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 92 , 82 – 96 . Walton , G . M . , & Cohen , G . L . ( 2011 ) . A brief social - belonging interven - 1350 tion improves academic and health outcomes among minority students . Science , 331 , 1447 – 1451 . Waltz , J . A . , Lau , A . , Grewal , S . K . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2000 ) . The role of working memory in analogical mapping . Memory & Cognition , 28 , 1205 – 1212 . 1355 HEDP # 696317 , VOL 47 , ISS 3 Resisting Overzealous Transfer : Coordinating Previously Successful Routines With Needs for New Learning Daniel L . Schwartz , Catherine C . Chase , and John D . Bransford QUERY SHEET This page lists questions we have about your paper . The numbers displayed at left can be found in the text of the paper for reference . In addition , please review your paper as a whole for correctness . Q1 . Au : Is short title in running head okay ? Q2 . Au : Please conﬁrm you have permission for Figure 1 , or it will have to be deleted . Q3 . Au : Provide page number of illustration in Schwartz et al . 2011 and name of copyright holder ( is it the publisher of Journal of Educational Psychology ? ) Q4 . Au : Please clarify : Your original manuscript said Figure 2 was both “adapted” ( which implies changes from the original source ) and “reprinted” ( which implies no changes from the original source ) . Is “adapted from” correct ? Q5 . Au : Your original manuscript said Figure 2 was “reprinted with permission . ” Please provide a copy of the communication from the rights holder granting you permission to reproduce this ﬁgure . Q6 . Au : Please provide page number of the illustration from the original source and the name of the rights holder ( is it the publisher of Journal of Educational Psychology ? ) . Q7 . Au : Please conﬁrm you have permission for Figure 3 , or it will have to be deleted . Q8 . Au : Provide page number of illustration in Schwartz et al . 2011 and name of copyright holder ( is it the publisher of Journal of Educational Psychology ? ) Q9 . Au : This Stevens & Richey ( 2012 ) citation is listed in the references as 2011 ; please adjust . Q10 . Au : Thorndike ( 1913 ) : Provide full reference or remove citation . Q11 . Au : Anderson & Pearson : Please provide chapter page range . Q12 . Au : Chase ( 2011 ) : Is there a DAI volume and page number to list ? Q13 . Au : Chase : Please update this ( in press ) reference if its status has changed . Q14 . Au : Johnson and Loring : Is CreateSpace the publisher ? List location ( city , state ) . Q15 . Au : Provide journal volume number and article page range for Lawton et al . 2012 . Q16 . Au : Stevens & Richey ( 2011 ) does not have a matching text citation ; please cite in text or delete reference . TABLE OF CONTENTS LISTING The table of contents for the journal will list your paper exactly as it appears below : Resisting Overzealous Transfer : Coordinating Previously Successful Routines With Needs for New Learning Daniel L . Schwartz , Catherine C . Chase , and John D . Bransford EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGIST , 47 ( 3 ) , 1 – 11 , 2012 Copyright C (cid:1) Division 15 , American Psychological Association ISSN : 0046 - 1520 print / 1532 - 6985 online DOI : 10 . 1080 / 00461520 . 2012 . 696317 Resisting Overzealous Transfer : Coordinating Previously Successful Routines With Needs for New Learning Daniel L . Schwartz School of Education Stanford University 5 Catherine C . Chase Human - Computer Interaction Institute Carnegie Mellon University John D . Bransford 10 School of Education University of Washington Many approaches to instruction focus on helping people learn to recognize “the old in the new”—to turn what would otherwise be novel problems into familiar patterns that can be solved efﬁciently through the reuse of prior learning . Instruction that leads to efﬁcient transfer is important , but it can also promote what we call “overzealous” transfer ( OZT ) , where people focus primarily on seeing the old in the new because old routines have been successful before . As a result , OZT can hinder opportunities for new learning , and this can further diminish adaptive transfer later on . We relate OZT to “negative transfer , ” provide experimental examples of OZT , discuss how a number of professions have developed procedures for avoiding OZT , argue that many common approaches to instruction and assessment may inadvertently produce OZT , and suggest some implications for future research . 15 20 Heraclitus , a famous pre - Socratic philosopher , stated that no two experiences are identical ; people never step into the same river twice . Nevertheless , people do ﬁnd consistency in 25 variation and see the same river , even if it contains different water from moment to moment . If people experienced every situation as completely novel , the demands of constant adap - tation would make life intolerable . But if people treated every experience as the same , life would be impossible . Transfer re - 30 search can ask how people strike the balance between reusing previous learning to treat new situations like old ones , while also avoiding the tendency to overgeneralize prior learning and miss what is new . Hatano and Inagaki ( 1986 ) noted that some people ( rou - 35 tine experts ) restrict themselves to familiar settings and chal - lenges that limit their need to see novelty . Others ( adaptive Correspondence should be addressed to Daniel L . Schwartz , School of Education , StanfordUniversity , 485LasuenMall , Stanford , CA94305 - 3096 . E - mail : Daniel . schwartz @ stanford . edu experts ) are more likely to move outside of existing com - fort zones to take on new challenges that require transfer plus some adaptation to meet contextual variation . We frame 40 our discussion with the goals of helping people to be more adaptive , even if they never have the opportunity to become adaptive experts . FAILED TRANSFER AND POSITIVE TRANSFER 45 Failed Transfer The phenomenon of transfer has been explored from many perspectives , for example , how identities cross participation boundaries ( Beach , 1999 ) or how foundational capacities such as executive function can support many tasks ( Blair & 50 Razza , 2007 ) . Educators have been especially concerned with people’s frequent failures to transfer learning from problem 2 SCHWARTZ , CHASE , BRANSFORD to problem and from setting to setting ( see Bransford et al . , 2006 ; National Research Council [ NRC ] , 2000 ) . Whitehead ( 1929 ) coined the term “inert knowledge” to describe cases 55 where people have learned relevant knowledge and skills yet fail to spontaneously access this knowledge despite its relevance for problem solving . Examples include failures to transfer skills and knowledge learned in school to real life settings ( Lave , 1988 ) , failures to utilize cues for problem 60 solving unless explicitly instructed to do so ( e . g . , Lockhart , Lamon , & Gick , 1988 ; Perfetto , Bransford , & Franks , 1983 ) , failures to use recently learned problem solutions to solve an analogous problem where the cover story has changed ( Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ) , and failures to use expertise in one area 65 to solve problems in another ( Chase , in press ) . Positive Transfer To overcome transfer failures , a major strategy is to help people learn to “see the old in the new . ” Chi and VanLehn ( 2012 / this issue ) summarize the cognitive literature : 70 Thus , wecansafelysaythatalltheoreticalperspectiveswould agree that transfer means there ought to be some “saving” ( sometimes measured in terms of speed , efﬁciency , or er - rors ) from one context towards performing in a new context without substantial relearning . ( p . XX ) 75 From this perspective , schools emphasize transfer because it is resource effective—it is easier to reuse than create afresh . Researchers have studied a variety of instructional strate - gies for decreasing failed transfer and increasing positive transfer . Wertheimer ( 1959 ) provided a classic example of 80 helping students think about and represent geometric area that subsequently supported transfer , from learning about a simple ﬁgure to a new ﬁgure with more complexity . Without his new approach to instruction , students looked at the new transfer problem and tended to say they had never seen it 85 before ( e . g . , see NRC , 2000 ) . Gick and Holyoak’s ( 1983 ) classic studies also show how a problem solution can fail to support transfer to a similar prob - lem if the later problem has a different cover story and occurs a mere two pages later . However , if people ﬁrst have a chance 90 to make the connection between two analogous problems , then they make the transfer to the next problem much better ( see also Brown & Kane , 1988 ) . Transfer is often aided by seeing the same idea in at least two different contexts ( NRC , 2000 ) . In other cases , transfer improves if ideas are initially 95 presented in ways that are problematized rather than simply presented as declarative statements ( e . g . , Adams et al . , 1988 ; Martin et al . , 2007 ; Needham & Begg , 1991 ) . Instruction that helps students differentiate the applicability conditions of problem solutions also improves transfer because peo - 100 ple can better recognize contextual cues for the use of their knowledge ( Bransford , Franks , Vye , & Sherwood , 1989 ) . Researchers have also shown that many traditional transfer measures are not sensitive enough to reveal important learn - ing experiences that support transfer from one situation to 105 another . Most assessments used in transfer research are “one shot” rather than iterative ( people answer one problem and move to another unrelated problem ) and “sequestered” in the sense that people have no access to resources for new learn - ing . As argued elsewhere ( Bransford & Schwartz , 1999 ) , 110 sequestered problem solving often represents too blunt an instrument for discovering whether and why previous expe - riences have prepared people to transfer for future learning , for example , by preparing them to understand a lecture , no - tice new things , ask more relevant questions , seek feedback , 115 and do other things as they engage in ( what need to be ) information - rich transfer tasks . Overall , it seems fair to claim that knowledge of how to improve positive transfer and how to measure it with more sensitivity has improved considerably over the years . Still , 120 all is not well with respect to understanding positive transfer . Many examples of negative transfer still abound , and many routines for learning represent instances of negative transfer . NEGATIVE TRANSFER AND OVERZEALOUS TRANSFER 125 Negative Transfer Negative transfer refers to the overgeneralization of prior learning . With negative transfer , people do not fail to trans - fer ; instead , they transfer learning to a situation where it is inappropriate to do so ( e . g . , Ross , 1987 ) . From early on , 130 the transfer literature recognized problems of negative trans - fer , where previous learning hurts new learning and problem solving . In many instances , negative transfer appears as in - terference that people recognize but cannot overcome at ﬁrst . For instance , verbal learning research asked participants to 135 associate stimuli in Set A with responses deﬁned by Set B ( e . g . , tree → ball ; car → house ) . This association subse - quently interfered with the participants’ abilities to learn the association of the stimuli in Set A with a new set of responses deﬁned by Set C ( e . g . , now learn tree → chair , instead of 140 tree → ball ) . Similarly , switching from a car with a clutch and stick shift to one with an automatic transmission often results in people trying to press the clutch of the new car and ﬁnding it is not there . Over time , people extinguish the unnecessary negative transfer of the “clutch” response . But 145 they can also experience positive transfer of aspects of driv - ing , like keeping an eye on the road and mirrors and using the brakes and steering wheel appropriately . So transfer can have both negative ( attempts to ﬁnd the clutch ) and positive ( know - ing how to drive in general ) impacts on people’s subsequent 150 behaviors , rather than simply a single good or bad effect . Other instances of disappointing transfer appear to be the result of people assuming that a new situation is like an old one . They do not recognize that a new situation is something different from those before , and they are unaware of the neg - 155 ative transfer . For example , McNeil ( 2008 ) provided children RESISTING OVERZEALOUS TRANSFER 3 with a novel problem that depended on arithmetic : 7 + 2 + 5 = 7 + . The children transferred their addition skills to the novel problem format by adding up all the digits on both sides of the equation to ﬁnd a total ( i . e . , 21 ) . They did not appear 160 to appreciate the novel equivalence format of the problem . Similarly , Silver ( 1986 ) provided students with a word problem on how many busses are needed to transport a group of students . He found that many students concluded that the answer was 3 1 / 3 buses , because they approached the “how 165 many buses do we need” problem by simply dividing the seating capacity of each bus with the number of people go - ing on a trip—evidently forgetting that 1 / 3 buses are in short supply . Reusser ( as cited in Schoenfeld , 1989 ) presented mid - dle school students with the following problem in the context 170 of other mathematics problems : There are 26 sheep and 10 goats on a ship . How old is the captain ? Approximately three fourths of the students came up with a numerical answer . As noted elsewhere ( Bransford & Stein , 1993 ) , one of us ( JB ) gave this problem to our child in ﬁfth grade with a strong be - 175 lief that there would be laughter followed by a statement like “That’s ridiculous . ” Instead , our child looked at the problem , smiled conﬁdently , and gave the answer 36 . When asked why that was the answer , he responded ( we paraphrase ) , “Because that’s the kind of thing you do in problems like this . This was 180 an easy one , I only had to add . ” Overzealous Transfer In the examples of negative transfer , it seems safe to say that students gave wrong answers—but wrong answers from whose perspective ? In many cases , it is not so clear that a 185 transfer is negative ( Lobato , 2003 , 2012 / this issue ) . From the vantage point of the students , they may believe they are doing the right thing , and without appropriate feedback they cannot know otherwise . Of particular concern are situations where students transfer skills , knowledge , and routines that 190 are effective for the task at hand but may nevertheless be sub - optimal in the long run because they block additional learn - ing . We will call this overzealous transfer ( OZT ) —people transfer solutions that appear to be positive because they are working well enough , but they are nevertheless negative with 195 respect to learning what is new . Luchins and Luchins’s ( 1959 ) classic water jug studies of Einstellung ( mental set ) illustrate problems with OZT . They gave participants three different sizes of jars and asked them to use these to reach a particular target amount of water . 200 To illustrate , imagine a target goal of 25 oz of water and receiving three jars of water that contained 29 , 3 , and 5 oz of water , respectively . One solution is to ﬁnd a way to subtract 9 oz from 29 . One could pour water from the 29 - oz jar into the 3 - oz jar three times ( emptying it each time ) . This would 205 yield 20 oz in the big jar . Then one could pour the 5 - oz jar into the big jar to reach 25 oz . Participants in the Luchins’s experiment encountered many variations of the water jar problem . A major feature of the experiment was to present people with blocks of prob - 210 lems ( known only to the experimenters ) that each required a similar set of procedures ( e . g . , subtracting water from a larger jar , then adding water from a smaller jar ) . People got better within a block of problems because they developed a helpful mental set for solving a series of related problems . 215 However , the set also caused OZT . Special test problems were inserted throughout the study , which could be solved much more simply than by using the routines the participants had learned . Most participants did not notice the simpler solution and relied on their mental sets . It is noteworthy that the use of 220 the overly complex procedures did not cause errors—people were still able to reach the target numbers . They were just less efﬁcient because they did not let go of their complex mental set to seek a simpler solution . Q1 The Luchins and Luchins ( 1959 ) study illustrates three 225 important points about OZT . First , OZT is a type of negative transfer in that people apply old learning in situations where it would be more effective to avoid whole - cloth transfer . In - stead , people should selectively transfer some aspects of their knowledge but not others . For example , it was useful for par - 230 ticipants to transfer their general understanding of the water jug task across problems , but it was suboptimal to transfer the speciﬁc solutions . The second point is that OZT transfer is frequently “good enough” to meet the apparent demands of the task . When there is no mechanism for negative feed - 235 back , the transfer of previously successful routines will seem like a positive transfer rather than a negative one . The third point is that OZT can cause people to miss opportunities for new learning . Reliance on old routines that seem to work ( at least partially ) reduces the need for seeing and adapting to 240 what is new . As we describe next , many instructional routines exacerbate OZT , because they provide positive feedback for getting the right answer , without providing negative feedback that the students missed what is new to be learned . In this case , students are not simply “satisﬁcing” ( Simon , 1956 ) , but 245 instead they believe they are doing what they are supposed to be doing . In this sense , transfer is overzealous 1 because people are eagerly applying prior routines that they believe will successfully solve the problem at hand . INSTRUCTION AND OVERZEALOUS 250 TRANSFER OZT is not conﬁned to the transfer of concepts or proce - dures covered in a lesson . OZT can also occur with instruc - tional and learning routines . For instance , in a study of begin - ning teachers , Grossman ( 1989 ) described how one teacher 255 taught Hamlet by transferring his own school experience . He loved Shakespeare and learned it in college through a “close reading” of the text , so he taught his students in the same 1 We do not mean to use the term overzealous to connote an affective component of transfer . For instance , we are not claiming that students are transferring with a strong sense of passion . 4 SCHWARTZ , CHASE , BRANSFORD way . This appears to be a case of OZT , and by Grossman’s analysis , the high school students learned poorly . In contrast , 260 a second teacher tried to adapt to the needs of his students . He began by ﬁrst asking them to think about the circumstances that might drive them so mad that they would contemplate murdering another human being . Only after students had se - riously contemplated the major issues of the play did they 265 begin reading . Rather than transfer in his college experience whole cloth , this teacher attempted to learn what might make an antique story compelling to modern - day students . OZT can occur in the context of learning , problem solv - ing , and even teaching . A common instructional and learning 270 routine is the “tell and practice” ( T & P ) method . T & P was de - rived from work on problem solving , which notes that it is not enough to simply provide general statements about problem - solving strategies ( Simon , 1980 ) . People must also practice solving problems so they can learn to relate general solutions 275 to speciﬁc applications . So teachers and texts typically pro - vide students with sets of “application problems” to solve as homework or after reading a textbook chapter . T & P is an im - provement over just telling . But , in practice , there are often shortcomings in implementing this approach . 280 Richland , Stigler , and Holyoak ( 2012 / this issue ) argue that an overuse of T & P in U . S . schools helps explain why they do relatively poorly on international comparisons of math . In reviewing the work of Heibert and Stigler ( 2004 ) , as well as that of Richland , Zur , and Holyoak ( 2007 ) , they 285 note that American classrooms and their international peers do not differ greatly in the amount of curricular material designed for active inquiry . The difference is that American instructors rely on a set of T & P routines to teach the material , so there is effectively no inquiry . The teachers overgeneralize 290 an instructional routine . T & P is what Tyack and Cuban ( 1995 ) called a com - mon “grammar of schooling . ” It is also a common grammar of transfer research . Schwartz , Chase , Oppezzo , and Chin ( 2011 ) documented that 75 % of studies on the transfer of 295 science , technology , engineering and mathematics ( STEM ) content used some form of T & P for both control and treat - ment conditions , which further indicates the prevalence of T & P routines . Our major concern is that the routines that people transfer can have a tremendous inﬂuence over what 300 they will learn and may undermine other manipulations de - signed to improve the transfer of concepts and skills . One possible problem with T & P routines is that they can overemphasize efﬁciency at the expense of discovering new ways of seeing and doing ( Bonawitz et al . , 2011 ) . The reason 305 is that T & P is a familiar learning routine that focuses on executing what one has been told . Although valuable for exercising an idea or procedure , it can come at the expense of engaging in new learning , such as noticing the unique contextual structures that call for the application of an idea 310 or procedure . A recent study demonstrates how T & P routines can in - advertently interfere with appreciating key contextual struc - 4C / Art FIGURE 1 Worksheet for learning about density . Note . Each row of the worksheet represents a company who uses the same average density of clowns per bus compartment . Students in a “tell and prac - tice” condition were told how to compute density and practiced by ﬁnding the density used by each company . Would the students learn that density comprises a ratio of mass ( clowns ) to volume ( bus com - partments ) ? From “Practicing Versus Inventing With Contrasting Cases : The Effects of Telling First on Learning and Transfer , ” by D . L . Schwartz , C . C . Chase , M . A . Oppezzo , & D . B . Chin , 2011 , Jour - nal of Educational Psychology , 103 . Copyright 2011 ( color ﬁgure available online ) . tures ( Exp . 2 ; Schwartz et al . , 2011 ) . Eighth - grade students in a T & P treatment were told about some everyday exam - 315 ples of density and the formula that describes them ( d = m / v ) . They also received a worked example for how to use the formula to ﬁnd answers . They then practiced with the application worksheet shown in Figure 1 . Their task was to ﬁnd the density each company uses to ship its clowns to 320 parties . Each company , designated as a row in the worksheet , ships clowns using a constant density of clowns to buses . The worksheet comprises a set of contrasting cases designed to help students notice the ratio structure of density : A company uses the same ratio so that both instances are proportional . 325 At the same time , different companies use different ratios , so students can see differences deﬁned by ratios rather than simple counts of clowns or buses . Q2 Q3 RESISTING OVERZEALOUS TRANSFER 5 FIGURE 2 Evidence on learning the ratio structure of density . Note . Examples of free - recall drawings separated by whether they included the proportionate density structure and whether they in - cluded surface features about clowns . Adapted from “Practicing Versus Inventing With Contrasting Cases : The Effects of Telling First on Learning and Transfer , ” by D . L . Schwartz , C . C . Chase , M . A . Oppezzo , & D . B . Chin , 2011 , JournalofEducationalPsychology , 103 . Copyright 2011 . Students ﬁnished the worksheet in approximately 10 min and were more than 90 % accurate at determining the den - 330 sities . So they were successfully applying the T & P routine . However , the key research question was whether students would also pick up the ratio structure of density . To ﬁnd out , students were asked to redraw the worksheet a day later from memory . Q4Q5 Q6 335 Figure 2 provides examples of drawings . To receive credit for re - creating the deep ratio structure , students did not have to remember the exact ratios ; they just had to produce a pair of proportionate ratios for a given company . Despite being 90 % accurate in applying the density formula , they were only 340 38 % accurate in detailing that a given density is comprised of equivalent ratios . ( Figure 2 also shows that some students included surface details , such as dotted lines , which was uncorrelated with recreating the deep structure . ) In their zeal to apply the formula , the students turned the 345 physics formula into a division problem . They mapped the variables of the formula ( mass and volume ) to the features of the cases ( clowns and bus cubes ) , so they could execute the relevant division ( mass by volume ) . They saw the old in the new , namely , a math problem . They did not see the ratio 350 structure of density , which was the important new content . The students were unaware that there was something new to be learned , in part , because they could solve the problems using familiar T & P learning routines . Even when a topic is marked as novel , students can overzealously transfer learning 355 routines that are intended for solidifying skills rather than inducing new patterns . As we describe next , this can have strong consequences for subsequent transfer . INSTRUCTIONAL TECHNIQUES FOR BLOCKING OZT 360 The previous section described the OZT of a common learn - ing routine called T & P . This section shows its consequences for transfer of concepts . Transferring a suboptimal learning routine in to a situation can make transferring the content out of the lesson less likely . In this way , the OZT of a learning 365 routine can set the stage for a cycle of transfer failures . In this section , we also describe an instructional technique designed to help students discover what is novel about a problem situ - ation , and we show how it affects transfer . In the previous study , there was a second treatment de - 370 signed to skirt the OZT of T & P . It used an instructional technique called Inventing with Contrasting Cases ( ICC ) . Students in the ICC condition received exactly the same worksheet ( Figure 1 ) , but they were not told about density or its formula beforehand . Instead , they had to invent their own 375 ways to ﬁnd the “crowdedness” used by each company . They had to invent an index of crowdedness that could be applied to all the companies . The ICC students took about the same amount of time as the T & P students . Despite having little guidance and no feedback , ICC students were quite success - 380 ful at this task though slightly less accurate than T & P stu - dents . About 85 % of their crowdedness indices corresponded to the correct density value . Even so , on the next day , 58 % of their worksheet redrawings included the proportionate ratio structure of the companies , compared to the 38 % in the T & P 385 condition . These differences had implications for transfer . Over the next few days , the T & P students received a general lecture on the importance of ratio in physics , as in the cases of density , speed , and several other science topics . They then 390 completed three more activities following the same T & P format as the initial lesson ; one on density and two on speed ( also an extensive ratio , S = d / t ) . Each time the topic of the worksheet was different so students could experience ratio across multiple contents . 395 The ICC students also received the three worksheets and had to invent an index for each one , as before . It was not until after these inventing activities that they ﬁnally heard the lecture that explained ratio and the canonical formulas . Both groups then solved a series of standard word problems 400 on density and speed for about 15 min . A week after completing the lessons , the students in both conditions received a pair of posttests . One posttest asked them to solve computational and qualitative word problems about density and speed . The two conditions achieved the 405 same level of accuracy ( ∼ 65 % ) , which indicates that ICC did not come at the expense of learning the standard solutions relative to the T & P treatment . The second posttest held the transfer problem . Figure 3 shows that students had to describe the stiffness of different trampoline fabrics ( i . e . , the spring 410 constant ) . The question was whether students would use a ratio to describe the stiffness of the fabric—number of people by the stretch of the fabric ( number of rungs ) . By this time , participants in the T & P condition had re - ceived a series of analogies that all involved the structure 415 of ratio , they were told the general principal that connected the examples , and they successfully followed a set of worked 6 SCHWARTZ , CHASE , BRANSFORD 4C / Art FIGURE 3 A problem used to test the transfer of the ratio concept . Note . The question was whether students would use a ratio of people by stretch distance to describe the fabrics for each trampoline . From “Practicing Versus Inventing With Contrasting Cases : The Effects of Telling First on Learning and Transfer , ” by D . L . Schwartz , C . C . Chase , M . A . Oppezzo , & D . B . Chin , 2011 , Journal of Educational Psychology , 103 . Copyright 2011 ( color ﬁgure available online ) . examples to prepare them for the worksheets on a variety of topics . All of these are known to support transfer ( e . g . , Brown & Kane , 1988 ; Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ; Pass & Van Merrien - 420 boer , 1994 ) . Nevertheless , the zeal to follow the T & P learn - ing routine trumped the effectiveness of these techniques , and this had consequences for the trampoline transfer problem . About 23 % of the T & P answers used a ratio structure to de - scribe the stiffness of the trampoline fabrics , with most of the 425 answers simply counting the number of people or the number of rungs , but not both . In contrast , the ICC students correctly Q7Q8 used a ratio 51 % of the time . Of interest , the study also found that the low - achieving ICC students ( based on class grades ) outperformed the high - achieving T & P students at transfer 430 ( 41 % vs . 33 % , respectively ) . We interpret the poor perfor - mance of the T & P group as a result of OZT . They practiced what they had been told when using the worksheets , which makes sense , given that it was good enough to achieve the right answers on the worksheets . However , this success had 435 the hidden consequence that the students did not learn what was new , namely , the ratio structure of many physical phe - nomena . As a result , they did not transfer because they had never learned to recognize the applicability conditions for the use of ratio . 440 Other experiments and transfer tasks replicated these ﬁnd - ings and demonstrated strong beneﬁts of ICC over T & P , even when the ICC students never heard a lecture on ratio before the transfer problem . It is important to note that the ICC stu - dents were not left to their own devices to come up with a new 445 learning routine . The worksheets were carefully designed as contrasting cases that highlighted the ratio structures , and students were speciﬁcally told to invent a quantitative index to characterize the cases . Across all the inventing worksheets , ICC students got 85 % of the answers correct ( T & P students 450 were at 92 % ) . This differs from prior studies that have found an advantage for T & P instruction compared to unscaffolded exploration ( Klahr & Nigam , 2004 ; Tuovinen & Sweller , 1999 ) . Many students do not have good learning routines for exploration , given that American schools use a heavy diet of 455 T & P . It makes sense that without routines for organizing their learning , students would ﬂounder in free - exploration condi - tions compared to the strong guidance of T & P . The preceding ICC lessons were one way to provide students with a tractable learning routine to help them adapt to what was new ( to them ) 460 about the physical phenomenon . It effectively stopped stu - dents from overzealously transferring in suboptimal learning routines while providing an alternative learning approach . 2 Additional studies have also shown beneﬁts of asking students to invent their own descriptions of a set of well - 465 organized data compared to T & P . Schwartz and Bransford ( 1998 ) demonstrated the beneﬁts of invention for transfer with college students learning principles of cognitive psy - chology . Schwartz and Martin ( 2004 ) made a similar demon - stration with high school students learning statistics . Kapur 470 ( 2008 ) found that withholding answers improves the depth of learning and transfer , even when students often fail to gener - ate the correct solutions . Parker et al . ( 2011 ) redesigned an American Government , Advanced Placement ( AP ) course , so that it was organized around a set of challenges where 475 students engaged in relevant activities ( e . g . , participating in a mock trial ) prior to receiving detailed lectures and read - ings . It inverted the usual learning routine , so that “telling” came after , rather than before , substantive problem solving . Students who took this version of the AP course scored as 480 well as , or better than , control groups that used a traditional AP course ( highly memory oriented ) , and they did better on 2 A reasonable question is whether it would work to have students com - plete T & P and then invent afterward . Although it remains to be tested , our speculation is that they would just apply the formulas they had been taught without ﬁnding the deep structure of the ratios . It would be difﬁcult for students to forget what they had just learned to only come up with the exact same answer through inventing . If the problems were masked so that stu - dents did not know they were ﬁnding density or speed , then they would be inventing again rather than reusing what they already knew , and we would expect them to show the beneﬁts of avoiding the zealous application of division . RESISTING OVERZEALOUS TRANSFER 7 a “complex scenario test” where students were asked to solve novel problems . Similar kinds of “inquiry ﬁrst” instruction have yielded more effective and ﬂexible transfer in middle 485 school science ( Shutt , Vye , & Bransford , 2011 ) . Ideally , there would be more studies to report , but as mentioned earlier , most studies of transfer have used a “tell - ﬁrst” approach for all the conditions . Results like these led Schwartz , Bransford , and Sears 490 ( 2005 ) to hypothesize that ﬂexible transfer could be enhanced through the use of well - designed innovation activities that help students ﬁrst recognize applicability conditions before learning the efﬁcient solutions through T & P . The innovation activities , which can seem inefﬁcient at ﬁrst glance , speed up 495 the subsequent acquisition of the efﬁcient solution , once de - livered , because students understand what the solutions need to accomplish . In addition , starting with an innovation ac - tivity blocks the natural tendency toward an OZT that stops students from noticing what is new . This does not mean that 500 all lessons should begin with guided - discovery activities . For example , improving automaticity depends on practice that emphasizes speed and accuracy . Guided - discovery activities are most appropriate when the goal is to help students see what is new ( for them ) . 505 PROFESSIONALS WITH METHODS FOR AVOIDING OZT People need efﬁcient schemas and routines that enable them to handle recurrent situations quickly and effectively . When it is possible to anticipate a stable future , routine expertise 510 is appropriate . For instance , in the foreseeable future , En - glish words will be read left - to - right , top - to - bottom ; will be comprised of letters ; and will have spaces in between . For decoding words , we want to put students on a trajectory of routine expertise , so they can take advantage of the stability 515 of words with high efﬁciency . For other topics , there is less of a guarantee that the future will resemble the past . When learning in school , topics change from week to week , and many workplace demands change with the times . In these cases , we want to help people rely on their past efﬁciencies 520 but also go beyond those efﬁciencies so they can better learn what is new . For schools , it seems possible to design instruc - tion that avoids the perils of OZT and helps students balance important routines with the needs for new learning . A different challenge involves preparing people to avoid 525 OZT once instruction is no longer present . Are there ways to prepare people for the transfer of learning routines that , despite being routines , manage to block OZT ? Professionals provide a useful test case . They have accu - mulated a body of knowledge that enables them to complete 530 their work effectively , so they do not need to incur the inefﬁ - ciencies of learning from each new instance . This may lead them to OZT , because they might see each new instance as an old one . At the same time , they may have learned routines to resist overassimilation , so they can seek what is novel rather 535 than always use prepackaged solutions . Miller ( 1978 ) , who studied information designers , pro - vided a useful example . He found that some designers were “virtuosos” who actively sought contextual information to adapt their designs to speciﬁc client needs . These designers 540 ﬁt the description of adaptive experts , who seek to understand the variability of new contexts ( Hatano & Inagaki , 1986 ) . However , he also found designers who were “artisans . ” They used off - the - shelf solutions to satisfy their clients . These de - signers ﬁt the description of routine experts , who rely on the 545 efﬁciencies of prior knowledge to get the job done . We are especially interested in examples of adaptive experts . One example comes from Wineburg’s ( 1991 ) comparison of college students and professional historians . Working in - dividually , they each received a set of source documents and 550 had to explain what happened at the Battle of Lexington . The historians were not experts in American history , but they were professional historians who had speciﬁc approaches to avoid OZT . They did not assume that the words in each document were true , but rather , they attempted to better understand the 555 intents of the documents’ authors and the historical context in which they were written . In contrast , college students did not attempt to explore and understand the perspective behind each data source ; they tried to understand the documents based on their own experiences . From the vantage of most 560 schooling practices , the college students demonstrated ap - propriate transfer . They tried to make sense of the facts in the texts by connecting them to prior knowledge ( e . g . , Anderson & Pearson , 1984 ; Bransford & Johnson ; 1972 ) . In contrast , the experts had learned a set of approaches that enabled them 565 to avoid the OZT of this familiar reading routine . Using a similar research design , Atman , Chimka , Bur - sic , and Nachtmann ( 1999 ) studied engineering students and professional engineers . Participants were asked to design a playground , given a set of initial speciﬁcations . Compared to 570 students , the professional engineers were much more likely to ask for additional information from stakeholders rather than assume they fully understood the design context , and seniors in engineering were more likely to ask relevant questions than were juniors , who in turn asked more than sophomores 575 did . So , like the professional historians , professional engi - neers seek out new information so they can develop a better understanding and formulation of the problem context . In addition to seeking new information rather than as - suming they know enough to get the job done , Martin and 580 Schwartz ( 2009 ) demonstrated that adaptive experts also work to organize that information , even when it is not strictly necessary to get the job done . They looked at gradu - ate students—early - stage experts—in STEM domains . They compared them to undergraduates solving a set of novel di - 585 agnosis problems . On sheets of paper , the students received cases that described prior patients , their symptoms , and their diagnoses . Their task was to use these cases to help order tests and make diagnoses for new simulated patients on a 8 SCHWARTZ , CHASE , BRANSFORD nearby computer . The undergraduates immediately turned 590 to the computer . For each new patient that appeared on the screen , they would search through the sheets of paper to de - termine what test to order and , based on the test results , they would sift through the papers again to decide the next test and / or diagnoses . This was sufﬁcient to get by , and the un - 595 dergraduates’ ultimate diagnoses were excellent . In contrast , by the time the undergraduate students were nearly done , the graduate students had not diagnosed a single patient ! Every single graduate student spent approximately the ﬁrst 10 min creating a representation of the original cases , 600 for example , by making a tree or matrix of the symptoms and diseases . When the graduate students ﬁnally turned to the computer to start diagnosing , they never looked back to the sheets . So , whereas the undergraduates handled each case as it arose , which was sufﬁcient to complete the task at hand , 605 the graduate students gave up short - term efﬁciency to create a general ( visual ) solution that could handle any case . The graduate students had the same diagnostic accuracy as the undergraduates , but they were better at ordering the minimal number of tests to make a diagnosis . 610 We surmise that the graduate students had learned the value of considering the long - term nature of tasks when it comes to handling data and that this prompted them to ﬁnd a general solution that would ensure long - term success across many problems . We do not know if the graduate students 615 were explicitly taught to create data visualizations , but we do know that instruction can be enhanced so that students transfer the idea of creating “smart tools” that can handle a range of contextual variation ( Schwartz , 1993 ; Zech et al . , 1998 ) . 620 In each of the preceding examples , the experts had domain - speciﬁc routines for avoiding OZT . The graduate stu - dents had learned to look for general solutions when it comes to data analysis , the historians had learned to contextualize documents to their sources , and engineers had learned to 625 ask for more information from clients in a design task . The routines were tailored to recurrent professional situations , where OZT could be problematic . A valuable contribution to professional education would be to discover and inculcate profession - or discipline - speciﬁc ways to avoid OZT . 630 LEARNING ROUTINES FOR AVOIDING OZT Learning routines that can help overcome OZT exhibit a strong focus on active understanding of new and variable contexts while seeking explanations and solutions that gener - alize across the stable components . Often times , these learn - 635 ing routines depend on bypassing solutions that are good enough , yet are not optimally sensitive to context . Even so , the development of any new learning routine runs the risk of OZT . For instance , teachers and students might overgeneralize guided - discovery activities to situations 640 where telling ﬁrst might be more appropriate . Ideally , people would know the conditions under which one learning routine is more optimal than another , and when it is important to learn rather than just perform . Perhaps it is possible for peo - ple to develop a meta - routine for deciding among different 645 learning routines across the range of contexts and outcomes that one might conceivably anticipate in an ever - changing future . Unfortunately , we know of no examples of successful metastrategies for selecting among learning routines . However , there is a promising general solution for help - 650 ing overcome OZT : Actively seek feedback . Prior to devel - oping a deep understanding of an endeavor and its context , people do not have internal models that enable them to self - monitor whether they are over assimilating . Without support for noticing , people can miss many features of their every - 655 day experiences ( e . g . , Feuerstein , Feuerstein , & Falk , 2010 ; O’Mahony et al . , 2012 ) , and what they do notice can be lim - ited in its scope . Feedback provides an important source of information , because it can alert learners that their current routines and knowledge are suboptimal . Educators often pro - 660 vide feedback for learning , and this is very important ( e . g . , Black & Williams , 1998 ) . However , people also need to de - velop learning routines to seek feedback rather than wait for it , or worse , avoid it ( Chase , 2011 ) . As an illustration , good designers have a strong tradi - 665 tion of being client and stakeholder centered ( Bransford et al . , 2011 ; Nelson & Stolterman , 2003 ) . Their interac - tive learning routines lead them to continually seek feedback from clients as well as from those who will be impacted by their designs ( Atman et al . , 1999 ) . This can help block 670 the kinds of OZT that fail to take into account new fea - tures , needs , and opportunities that would be missed if they simply used their previously acquired assumptions of what a good solution would be . Several design schools now use client - and stakeholder - centered design with their students , 675 in the hopes that they develop feedback - driven learning rou - tines ( e . g . , Olin College of Engineering and Stanford Design Institute ) . Outside of design , another example of feedback - seeking routines is found in Problem - Based Case Learn - 680 ing ( PBCL ) , an instructional approach that is being devel - oped by a group of community college leaders ( http : / / www . makinglearningreal . org ) . PBCL involves teachers and stu - dents working with local small businesses to help everyone learn from one another ( Johnson & Loring , 2012 ) . PBCL ac - 685 tively connects community college instructors and students with small business owners and heads of other programs that exist in their local communities . In addition to creating a need to know and a reason to get it right , PBCL maintains constant interactions among collaborators and hence helps 690 students and instructors realize when their proposed solu - tions represent negative or positive transfer through feed - back from client and stakeholder perspectives . We suspect that these types of PBCL routines will transfer , given sufﬁ - cient experiences . For example , students in PBCL should de - 695 velop the kinds of information seeking propensities and skills RESISTING OVERZEALOUS TRANSFER 9 demonstrated in the previously discussed studies of expert designers conducted by Atman et al . ( 1999 ) . Is there a way that approaches like PBCL could be brought to K - 12 classrooms , especially when younger students are 700 less able to produce designs that would be embraced by clients ? With some adaptation to the basic model , it seems possible . For example , in American Government courses , stu - dents can engage in simulations of political decision making where students play the role of different constituents ( Parker 705 et al . , 2011 ) . To ensure that students can move beyond the as - sumptions they bring to their roles , experts can visit the class - room to provide “pushback . ” In addition , new technologies and games provide possibilities for creating rich feedback in a variety of contexts including social studies and political sci - 710 ence ( e . g . , http : / / www . icivics . org ; http : / / www . legsim . org ) . Future research should explore novel ways of helping stu - dents learn to seek feedback , plus explore the bigger question of whether seeking feedback can become a balanced routine that transfers well . 715 SUMMARY Many people have proposed that transfer is rare ( e . g . , Detter - man , 1993 ; Lave , 1988 ) . From this vantage , the question is whether it is possible to improve rates of positive transfer so that people can efﬁciently reuse prior learning in otherwise 720 novel situations . From another perspective , transfer is ubiq - uitous . There is no situation , no matter how novel , where people do not transfer in prior experiences to make some sense of that situation . From this vantage , the challenge is how to help people avoid negative transfer , so they can re - 725 duce the hold of prior knowledge to more effectively learn what is new and adapt . Both perspectives are correct . The overarching question for transfer should ask how people can strike a balance between ( a ) the efﬁciencies of seeing the “old in the new” and reusing what they know and ( b ) the adaptive 730 learning that comes from seeing the “new in the old” and exploring learning opportunities that may exist . The tensions of positive and negative transfer apply to organizational learning as well as individual learning . For example , the organizational theorists Levinthal and March 735 ( 1993 ) described exploitation and exploration . Exploitation is the “the use and development of things already known , ” whereas exploration is “the pursuit of knowledge , of things that may come to be known” ( p . 105 ) . Their focus involves the strategic management of corporations and the kinds of 740 organizational supports and routines put in place to balance efﬁciency and innovation ( see also Bransford et al . , 2012 ) . In this sense , individual attitudes and learning strategies are affected by the organizational structures and goals of the company . 745 For both the organization and the individuals , issues of OZT are pervasive because it is often efﬁcient to attempt to exploit previously successful routines but , in the process , overlook opportunities to learn that may yield even more suc - cessful ways of proceeding . The analogy between strategic 750 management and individual learners reacting to an everyday world should not be taken too far . But mapping from the corporate world to individuals can help highlight issues that individuals face , especially regarding OZT . The Boeing Company’s switch from aluminum planes to 755 composite planes provides a useful example for drawing out the mappings and the differences . The company had expertise and infrastructure in the development of aluminum planes , which it had successfully exploited . Nevertheless , it made a decision to explore and eventually pursue a plane made of 760 composite materials ( e . g . , see Stevens & Richey , 2012 ) . This Q9 caused some short - term losses in efﬁciency ( what Fullan , 2001 , called “implementation dips” ) , as the company had to adapt along a number of dimensions , including how to teach the employees to work with composites instead of aluminum 765 ( Lawton et al . , 2012 ; O’Mahony et al . , 2012 ) . One mapping involves feedback loops that inform actions and decisions . Boeing’s decision to invest in how to make a fundamentally new plane was based on strong metrics about a number of issues ( customer demand , the design of new mate - 770 rials ) that signaled the need to break from the past . In contrast , many school practices do not provide the kinds of feedback opportunities that are important for adaptation—especially in our fast - changing environment . For example , many schools do not gather sufﬁcient feedback about the performance of 775 policymakers , teachers , students , and communities—the lack of which allows individual and institutional learning routines to become entrenched . For individuals , there often is not a set of strong routines in place for regularly seeking feedback . Hence it can be difﬁ - 780 cult to recognize that one is overrelying on prior knowledge based on what has worked in the past . From the perspective of the individual , when feedback is not naturally forthcom - ing , transfer can look positive when it may be negative . The importance of feedback , especially formative feedback that 785 offers opportunities for new learning , is well known ( e . g . , Black & Williams , 1998 ; NRC , 2001 ; Thorndike , 1913 ) . Q10 This brings up the concern that even when feedback is pro - vided , it can be misleading ( Bransford & Schwartz , 1999 ) . For example , students may receive positive feedback for cor - 790 rect answers , but they may still not notice what is new in a lesson . A particularly important issue is that instruction often does not prepare students to seek feedback once they leave the orchestrated lessons and tests of school . Without learning 795 routines for seeking feedback , it is less likely that they will receive signals for when they should adapt and learn . We described several promising approaches for helping people learn to seek feedback ( e . g . , working with actual clients as in many design schools ) , but this is an area that requires more 800 research . Another mapping between corporations and individuals involves the challenge of letting go of familiar routines and 10 SCHWARTZ , CHASE , BRANSFORD knowledge that appear to be working well enough . In the Boeing case , the decision to engage in composite planes was 805 a calculated and considered risk that factored in the likely short - term losses and costs of retooling against the projected beneﬁts . When learners give up well - known ways of accom - plishing immediate goals to pursue novelty , they also put themselves at risk . For instance , they may actually be in a sit - 810 uation where it would have been better to stick with the tried and true . Moreover , people must be able to handle the ambi - guity that often accompanies innovation and adaptation . They must believe they can be efﬁcacious in learning something new ( Bandura , 1997 ) and that they are capable of chang - 815 ing their ways of thinking and doing ( Dweck , 2000 ; Nolen , Ward , & Horn , 2011 ) . Another critical factor in adapting to new situations is having the courage to persist despite initial failures ( Chase , 2011 ) . Letting go of old routines requires a disposition that can tolerate the potential perils of the new 820 and unknown . In sum , the literature on transfer has predominantly stud - ied positive transfer on the assumption that it is the most efﬁcient and rational behavior . When we add OZT to the mix , the assumption changes , so the question becomes how 825 people strike a balance between positive transfer and overgen - eralizations that block new learning . Finding the appropriate balance is difﬁcult and typically goes beyond a learner’s pos - sible rational analysis of the available information . As such , it brings a host of new issues that range from seeking more in - 830 formation to developing dispositions for handling ambiguity and failure . Research on transfer would beneﬁt by expanding its boundaries , so it is not just about how to help people get the right answer but also about how to help people to continue learning . 835 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under grants SMA - 0835854 , DRL - 1020362 , and IIS - 0904324 . Any opinions , ﬁndings , and con - clusions or recommendations expressed in this material are 840 those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the National Science Foundation . We thank the inﬁnite patience of our editors . REFERENCES Adams , L . , Kasserman , J . , Yearwood , A . , Perfetto , G . , Bransford , J . , & 845 Franks , J . ( 1988 ) . Theeffectsoffactsversusproblem - orientedacquisition . Memory and Cognition , 16 , 167 – 175 . Anderson , R . C . , & Pearson , P . D . ( 1984 ) . A schema - theoretic view of basic processes in reading comprehension . In P . D . Pearson ( Ed . ) , Handbook of reading research ( 255 – 291 ) . White Plains , NY : Longman . Q11 850 Atman , C . J . , Chimka , J . R . , Bursic , K . M . , & Nachtmann , H . L . ( 1999 ) . A comparison of freshman and senior engineering design processes . Design Studies , 20 , 131 – 152 . Bandura , A . ( 1997 ) . Self - efﬁcacy : The exercise of control . New York , NY : W . H . Freeman . 855 Beach , K . ( 1999 ) . Consequential transitions : A socio - cultural expedition beyond transfer in education . In A . Iran - Nejad & P . D . Pearson ( Eds . ) , Re - view of research in education ( pp . 101 – 139 ) . Washington , DC : American Educational Research Association . Black , P . , & Williams , D . ( 1998 ) . Inside the black box : Raising standards 860 through classroom assessment . Phi Delta Kappan , 80 , 139 – 148 . Blair , C . , & Razza , R . P . ( 2007 ) . Relating effortful control , executive func - tion , and false - belief understanding to emerging math and literacy ability in kindergarten . Child Development , 78 , 647 – 663 . Bonawitz , E . B . , Shafto , P . , Gweon , H . , Goodman , N . D . , Spelke , E . , & 865 Schulz , L . ( 2011 ) . The double - edged sword of pedagogy : Instruction affects exploration and discovery . Cognition , 120 , 322 – 330 . Bransford , J . D . , Franks , J . J . , Vye , N . J . & Sherwood , R . D . ( 1989 ) . New approaches to instruction : Because wisdom can’t be told . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 470 – 497 ) . 870 New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . Bransford , J . D . , & Johnson , M . K . ( 1972 ) . Contextual prerequisites for understanding : Some investigations of comprehension and recall . Journal of Verbal Learning & Verbal Behavior , 11 , 717 – 726 . Bransford , J . , Mosborg , S . , Copland , M . A . , Honig , M . I . , Nelson , H . G . , 875 Gawal , D . , Vye , N . ( 2012 ) . Adaptive people and adaptive systems : Issues of learning and design . In A . Hargreaves , M . Fullan , D . Hopkins , & A . Leiberman ( Eds . ) , The second international handbook of educational change ( pp . 825 – 856 ) . Dordrecht , The Netherlands : Springer . Bransford , J . , & Schwartz , D . L . ( 1999 ) . Rethinking transfer : A simple 880 proposal with multiple implications . In A . Iran - Nejad & P . D . Pearson ( Eds . ) , Review of research in education ( pp . 61 – 100 ) . Washington , DC : American Educational Research Association . Bransford , J . D . , & Stein , B . S . ( 1993 ) . The IDEAL problem solver ( 2nd ed . ) . New York , NY : Freeman . 885 Bransford , J . , Vye , N . , Stevens , R . , Kuhl , P . K . , Schwartz , D . , Bell , P . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Learning theories and education : Toward a decade of synergy . In P . Alexander & P . Winne ( Eds . ) , Handbook of educational psychology , ( pp . 209 – 244 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Brown , A . L . , & Kane , M . J . ( 1988 ) . Preschool children can learn to transfer : 890 Learning to learn and learning from example . Cognitive Psychology , 20 , 493 – 523 . Chase , C . C . ( 2011 ) . Motivating persistence in the face of failure : The impact of an ego - protective buffer on learning choices and outcomes in a computer - based educational game . Dissertation Abstracts International . Q12 895 Chase , C . C . ( in press ) . Motivating expertise : Equipping novices with the motivational tools to move beyond failure . In J . J . Staszewski ( Ed . ) , Ex - pertise and skill acquisition : The impact of William G . Chase . New York , NY : Psychology Press . Q13 Chi , M . T . H . , & VanLehn , K . A . ( 2012 / this issue ) . Seeing deep structure 900 from the interactions of surface features . Educational Psychologist , 47 , XX – XX . Detterman , D . L . ( 1993 ) . The case for the prosecution : Transfer as epiphe - nomenon . In D . K . Detterman & R . J . Sternberg ( Eds . ) , Transfer on trial : Intelligence , cognition , and instruction ( pp . 1 – 24 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . 905 Dweck , C . S . ( 2000 ) . Self theories : Their role in motivation , personality , and development . Philadelphia , PA : Taylor & Francis . Feuerstein , R . , Feuerstein , R . S . , & Falk , L . H . ( 2010 ) . Beyond smarter : mediated learning and the brain’s capacity for change . New York , NY : Teachers College Press 910 Fullan , M . ( 2001 ) . Leading in a culture of change . San Francisco , CA : Jossey - Bass . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schema induction and analogical transfer . Cognitive Psychology , 15 , 1 – 38 . Grossman , P . ( 1989 ) . Learning to teach without teacher education . Teachers 915 College Record , 91 , 191 – 208 . Hatano , G . , & Inagaki , K . ( 1986 ) . Twocoursesofexpertise . InH . Stevenson , H . Azuma , & K . Hakuta ( Eds ) . ChilddevelopmentandeducationinJapan ( pp . 262 – 272 ) . New York , NY : Freeman . RESISTING OVERZEALOUS TRANSFER 11 Hiebert , J . , & Stigler , J . W . ( 2004 ) . A world of difference . National Staff 920 Development Council , 25 ( 4 ) , 10 – 15 . Johnson , J . , & Loring , R . ( 2011 ) . Problem - Based Case Learning : Partner - ships among educators , businesses , and students . CreateSpace . Q14 Kapur , M . ( 2008 . ) Productive failure . Cognition and Instruction , 26 , 379 – 424 . 925 Klahr , D . , & Nigam , M . ( 2004 ) . The equivalence of learning paths in early science instruction : Effects of direct instruction and discovery learning . Psychological Science , 15 , 661 – 667 . Lave , J . ( 1988 ) Cognition in practice . Mind , mathematics and culture in everyday life . New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . 930 Lawton , D . , Vye , N . , Bransford , J . D . , Sanders , E . , Richey , M . C . , French , D . E . , & Stephens , R . ( 2012 ) . Online learning based on essential concepts and formative assessment . Journal of Engineering Education . Q15 Levinthal , D . A . , & March , J . G . ( 1993 ) . The myopia of learning . Strategic Management Journal , 14 , 95 – 112 . 935 Lobato , J . ( 2003 ) . How design experiments can inform a rethinking of trans - fer and vice versa . Educational Researcher , 32 , 17 – 20 . Lobato , J . ( 2012 / this issue ) . The actor - oriented transfer perspective and its contributions to educational research and practice . Educational Psychol - ogist , 47 , XX – XX . 940 Lockhart , R . S . , Lamon , M . & Gick , M . L . ( 1988 ) . Conceptual transfer in simple insight problems . Memory & Cognition , 16 , 36 – 44 . Luchins , A . S . , & Luchins , E . H . ( 1959 ) . Rigidity of behavior . Eugene : University of Oregon Press . Martin , L . , & Schwartz , D . L . ( 2009 ) . Prospective adaptation in the use of 945 representational tools . Cognition and Instruction , 27 , 370 – 400 . Martin , T . , Pierson , J . , Rivale , S . R . , Vye , N . J . , Bransford , J . D . , & Diller , K . ( 2007 ) . The function of generating ideas in the Legacy Cycle . In W . Aung ( Ed . ) , Innovations 2007 : World Innovations in Engineering Education and Research ( pp . 147 – 161 ) . Arlington , VA : International Network for 950 Engineering Education and Research . McNeil , N . M . ( 2008 ) . Limitations to teaching children 2 + 2 = 4 : Typical arithmetic problems can hinder learning of mathematical equivalence . Child Development , 79 , 1524 – 1537 . Miller , R . B . ( 1978 ) . The information system designer . In W . T . Singleton 955 ( Ed . ) , The analysis of practical skills ( pp . 278 – 291 ) . Baltimore , MD : University Park Press . National Research Council . ( 2000 ) . How people learn : Brain , mind , experi - ence , andschool ( expandededition ) . Washington , DC : NationalAcademy Press . 960 National Research Council . ( 2001 ) . Knowing what students know : The sci - ence and design of educational assessment . Washington , DC : National Academy Press . Needham , D . R . , & Begg , I . M . ( 1991 ) . Problem - oriented training pro - motes spontaneous analogical transfer : Memory - oriented training pro - 965 motes memory for training . Memory & Cognition , 19 , 543 – 557 . Nelson , H . , & Stolterman , E . ( 2003 ) . The design way : Intentional change in an unpredictable world . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Educational Technology . Nolen , S . B . , Ward , C . J . , & Horn , I . S . ( 2011 ) . Motivation , engagement , and identity : Opening a conversation . In D . McInerny , R . Walker , & G . A . D . 970 Liem ( Eds . ) , Sociocultural theories of learning and motivation : Looking back , looking forward ( pp . 109 – 135 ) . Greenwich , CT : Information Age . O’Mahony , T . K . , Vye , N . J . , Bransford , J . D . , Stevens , R . , Sanders , E . , Stephens , R . , Soleiman , M . K . ( 2012 ) . A comparison of lecture - based and challenge - based learning in a workplace setting : Course designs , 975 patterns of interactivity , and learning outcomes . Journal of the Learning Sciences , 21 , 182 – 206 . Parker , W . C . , Mosborg , S . , Bransford , J . , Vye , N . , Abbott , R . , & Wilkerson , J . ( 2011 ) . Rethinking advanced high school coursework : Tackling the depth / breadth tension in the AP US Government and Politics course . 980 Journal of Curriculum Studies , 43 , 553 – 559 . Pass , F . G . , & Van Merrienboer , J . G . ( 1994 ) . Variability of worked exam - ples and transfer of geometrical problem - solving skills : A cognitive - load approach . Journal of Educational Psychology , 86 , 122 – 133 . Perfetto , G . A . , Bransford , J . D . , & Franks , J . J . ( 1983 ) . Constraints on access 985 in a problem solving context . Memory and Cognition , 11 , 24 – 31 . Richland , L . E . , Zur , O . , & Holyoak , K . ( 2007 ) . Cognitive supports for analogies in the mathematics classroom . Science , 316 , 1128 – 1129 . Richland , L . E . , Stigler , J . W . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2012 / this issue ) . Teaching the conceptual structure of mathematics . Educational Psychologist , 47 , 990 XX – XX . Ross , B . H . ( 1987 ) . This is like that : The use of earlier problems and the sep - aration of similarity effects . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learn - ing , Memory , and Cognition , 13 , 629 – 639 . Schoenfeld , A . H . ( 1989 ) . Teaching mathematical thinking and problem 995 solving . In L . B . Resnick & L . E . Klopfer ( Eds . ) , Toward the thinking curriculum : Current cognitive research ( pp . 83 – 103 ) . Alexandria , VA : American Society for Curriculum Development . Schwartz , D . L . ( 1993 ) . Theconstructionandanalogicaltransferofsymbolic visualizations . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 30 , 1309 – 1325 . 1000 Schwartz , D . L . , & Bransford , J . D . ( 1998 ) . A time for telling . Cognition and Instruction , 16 , 475 – 522 . Schwartz , D . L . , Bransford , J . , & Sears , D . ( 2005 ) . Efﬁciency and innova - tion in transfer . In J . Mestre ( Ed . ) , Transfer of learning from a modern multidisciplinary perspective ( pp . 1 – 51 ) . Greenwich , CT : Information 1005 Age . Schwartz , D . L . , Chase , C . C . , Oppezzo , M . A . , & Chin , D . B . ( 2011 ) . Practicing versus inventing with contrasting cases : The effects of telling ﬁrst on learning and transfer . Journal of Educational Psychology , 103 , 759 – 775 . 1010 Schwartz , D . L . , & Martin , T . ( 2004 ) . Inventing to prepare for future learn - ing : The hidden efﬁciency of encouraging original student production in statistics instruction . Cognition and Instruction , 22 , 129 – 184 . Shutt , K . , Vye , N . , & Bransford , J . ( 2011 , March ) . The role of agency and authenticity in argumentation during science inquiry . Paper presented at 1015 the National Association of Research on Science Teaching Conference , Orlando , FL . Silver , E . A . ( 1986 ) . Usingconceptualandproceduralknowledge : Afocuson relationships . In J . Hiebert ( Ed . ) , Conceptual and procedural knowledge : The case of mathematics . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . 1020 Simon , H . A . ( 1956 ) . Rational choice and the structure of the environment . Psychological Review , 63 , 129 – 138 . Simon , H . A . ( 1980 ) . Problemsolvingandeducation . InD . T . Tuma & F . Reif ( Eds . ) , Problem solving and education : Issues in teaching and research ( pp . 81 – 96 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . 1025 Stevens , R , & Richey , M . ( 2011 ) . Accelerating STEM capacity : A com - plexadaptivesystemperspective . JournalofEngineeringEducation , 100 , 417 – 423 . Q16 Tuovinen , J . E . , & Sweller , J . ( 1999 ) . A comparison of cognitive load asso - ciated with discovery learning and worked examples . Journal of Educa - 1030 tional Psychology , 91 , 334 – 341 . Tyack , D . , & Cuban , L . ( 1995 ) . Tinkering toward utopia : A century of public school reform . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Wertheimer M . ( 1959 ) . Productive thinking . New York , NY : Harper and Row . 1035 Whitehead , A . N . ( 1929 ) . Theaimsofeducation . NewYork , NY : Macmillan . Wineburg , S . ( 1991 ) . Historical problem solving : A study of cognitive pro - cesses used in the evaluation of documentary and pictorial evidence . Journal of Educational Psychology , 83 , 73 – 87 . Zech , L . , Vye , N . J . , Bransford , J . D . , Goldman , S . R . , Barron , B . J . , Schwartz , 1040 D . L . , . . . CTGV . ( 1998 ) . An introduction to geometry through anchored instruction . In R . Lehrer & D . Chazan ( Eds . ) , New directions for teaching and learning in geometry ( pp . 439 – 463 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . HEDP # 695678 , VOL 47 , ISS 3 How Does Expansive Framing Promote Transfer ? Several Proposed Explanations and a Research Agenda for Investigating Them Randi A . Engle , Diane P . Lam , Xenia S . Meyer , and Sarah E . Nix QUERY SHEET This page lists questions we have about your paper . The numbers displayed at left can be found in the text of the paper for reference . In addition , please review your paper as a whole for correctness . Q1 . Au : Mestre ( 2003 ) does not have a matching reference . Provide complete reference or remove citation . Q2 . Au : Schwartz & Nasir ( 2003 ) does not have a matching reference . Provide complete reference or remove citation . Q3 . Au : This Goldstone , Landy , & Son ( 2009 ) citation is listed in the references as 2010 ; please adjust . Q4 . Au : Update for Reed “in press” ? Q5 . Au : Please conﬁrm that “Creative Commons Attribution license” is correct way to indicate the source article for Table 1 is open choice ( open access ) . Q6 . Au : APA style does not use “in preparation” in an in - text citation . ( This description is used only in the full reference . ) Please provide the year of the draft you consulted . Q7 . Au : Please change “in preparation” to the year of the draft you consulted for Meyer et al . Q8 . Au : Pugh and colleagues ( 2010 ) does not have a matching reference . Provide complete reference or remove citation . Q9 . Au : Please change “in preparation” to the year of the draft you consulted for Meyer et al . Q10 . Au : Meyer et al . ( 2011 ) does not have a matching reference . Provide complete reference or remove citation . Q11 . Au : Please indicate if this is Engle 2006a or 2006b . Q12 . Au : Goldstone , Landy , & Son ( 2010 ) : Cite in text or delete from references . Q13 . Au : Hammer et al . : Please provide chapter page range . Q14 . Au : Provide chapter page range for Lam et al . 2012 Q15 . Au : Loewenstein : Please provide chatper page range . Q16 . Au : Meyer et al . ( in preparation ) : List year of ﬁnal draft . Q17 . Au : Please update this Reed ( in press ) reference if its status has changed . Q18 . Au : Schwartz , Bransford , & Sears : Please provide chapter page range . TABLE OF CONTENTS LISTING The table of contents for the journal will list your paper exactly as it appears below : How Does Expansive Framing Promote Transfer ? Several Proposed Explanations and a Research Agenda for Investigating Them Randi A . Engle , Diane P . Lam , Xenia S . Meyer , and Sarah E . Nix EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGIST , 47 ( 3 ) , 1 – 17 , 2012 Copyright C (cid:1) Division 15 , American Psychological Association ISSN : 0046 - 1520 print / 1532 - 6985 online DOI : 10 . 1080 / 00461520 . 2012 . 695678 How Does Expansive Framing Promote Transfer ? Several Proposed Explanations and a Research Agenda for Investigating Them Randi A . Engle , Diane P . Lam , Xenia S . Meyer , and Sarah E . Nix Graduate School of Education University of California , Berkeley 5 When contexts are framed expansively , students are positioned as actively contributing to larger conversations that extend across time , places , and people . A set of recent studies provides empirical evidence that the expansive framing of contexts can foster transfer . In this article , we present ﬁve potentially complementary explanations for how expansive framing may promote transfer and outline a research agenda for further investigating them . Speciﬁcally , we propose that expansive framing may ( a ) foster an expectation that students will continue to use what they learn later , which may affect the learning process in ways that can promote transfer ; ( b ) create links between learning and transfer contexts so that prior learning is viewed as relevant during potential transfer contexts ; ( c ) encourage learners to draw on their prior knowledge during learning , which may involve them transferring in additional examples and making generalizations ; ( d ) make learners accountable for intelligently reporting on the speciﬁc content they have authored ; and ( e ) promote authorship as a general practice in which students learn that their role is to generate their own solutions to new problems and adapt their existing knowledge in transfer contexts . 10 15 20 If students are to be successful and if schooling is to have a signiﬁcant impact on their lives , it is essential that students regularly transfer what they learn ( Renkl , Mandl , & Gruber , 1996 ; Schwartz , Bransford , & Sears , 2005 ) . Transfer occurs when “learning to participate in an activity in one situation 25 [ i . e . , learning context ] . . . inﬂuence [ s ] ( positively or neg - atively ) one’s ability to participate in another activity in a different situation [ i . e . , transfer context ] ” ( Greeno , Smith , & Moore , 1993 , p . 100 ) . In this article , we examine the idea that transfer can be 30 promoted by the instructional practice of framing learning contexts in an expansive manner and develop several expla - nations for how it may do so . First , we quickly summarize the two basic ways that transfer is usually explained . We then explain what we mean by the framing of learning contexts as 35 compared to these approaches and brieﬂy review recent stud - ies that provide evidence that framing indeed affects transfer . In the core of the article , we propose ﬁve potentially comple - mentary explanations for how expansive framing may pro - mote transfer , illustrating each with existing data . Finally , we 40 Correspondence should be addressed to Randi A . Engle , Graduate School of Education , University of California , Berkeley , 4641 Tolman Hall , Berkeley , CA 94720 - 1670 . E - mail : raengle @ berkeley . edu close by proposing a research agenda for further investigating these explanations . TWO EXISTING TYPES OF EXPLANATIONS FOR TRANSFER In this section , we ﬁrst discuss two types of explanations 45 for transfer that are common in existing research . This then allows us to describe how the framing of learning and transfer contexts relates to these types of explanations in the rest of this article . Explanations for Transfer That Focus on Content 50 Most research on explaining transfer focuses in some way on the substantive content that learners are to transfer ( Mestre , 2003 ; Reeves & Weisberg , 1994 ; Schwartz & Nasir , 2003 ) . Q1 Q2 For example , the classic paper by Gick and Holyoak ( 1983 ) provided evidence for their hypothesis that “the induction of 55 a general schema from concrete analogs will facilitate ana - logical transfer” ( p . 1 ) . Their general idea was that learners are more likely to apply what they have learned from one analogous problem to another if they form a content - based 2 ENGLE , LAM , MEYER , NIX generalization ( a . k . a . “schema” ) at the appropriate level of 60 abstraction such that it can be applied to a new problem . Gick and Holyoak ( 1980 , 1983 ) illustrated this idea in a series of clever experiments in which learners were more or less likely to transfer a prior solution to analogous problems depending on the degree of support they were provided for inducing 65 such generalizations . Subsequent research has provided ad - ditional evidence for the importance of forming such gener - alizations ( e . g . , see Chi & VanLehn , this issue / 2012 ; Gentner , Loewenstein , & Thompson , 2003 ; Reeves & Weisberg , 1994 ; Rittle - Johnson & Star , 2007 ) , with recent research showing 70 how instructional interactions can lead learners to focus on making certain kinds of generalizations rather than others ( Lobato , Ellis , & Mu˜noz , 1999 ) . Since then , most research on explaining transfer has fo - cused , in one way or another , on the substantive content 75 that we hope learners , will be able to transfer . In addition to the importance of content - based generalizations , there is a consensus that the most fundamental prerequisite for transfer is that the particular content to be transferred has been learned in a sufﬁciently deep , strong , and lasting way 80 ( Bransford , Brown , & Cocking , 1999 . see also Chi & Van - Lehn , this issue / 2012 ) . Second , comparing multiple exam - ples and nonexamples of a potentially transferable idea has been found to be particularly important for inducing three transfer mechanisms : ( a ) constructing appropriate general - 85 izations ( e . g . , Chang , 2006 ; Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ; Gen - tner et al . , 2003 ; Goldstone , Landy , & Son , 2009 ; Gold - Q3 stone & Wilensky , 2008 ; Ming , 2009 ; Richland , Stigler , & Holyoak , this issue / 2012 ; Rittle - Johnson & Star , 2007 ) and ( b ) forming useful mappings between the examples and gen - 90 eralizations ( e . g . , Goldstone & Wilensky , 2008 ; Reeves & Weisberg , 1994 ; Wagner , 2006 ) , and ( c ) constructing map - pings between examples as part of analogical reasoning ( Holyoak , 2005 ; Reed , in press ) . All of these mechanisms aid Q4 transfer and affect exactly what particular content is trans - 95 ferred . Finally , it has been shown that speciﬁc , content - based hints to use prior learning enhance transfer by specifying the particular pieces ( s ) of knowledge to be used and encouraging students to immediately apply it to solve a particular prob - lem ( Anolli , Antonietti , Crisafulli , & Cantoia , 2001 ; Campi - 100 one & Brown , 1984 ; Catrambone & Holyoak , 1989 ; Gick & Holyoak , 1980 , 1983 ; Reed , Ernst , & Banarji , 1974 ; Spencer & Weisberg , 1986 ) . Although different in many other ways , all of these explanations for transfer—learning the content - to - be - transferredmoreeffectively , comparingmultipleexam - 105 ples , forming content - based generalizations , and responding to content - based hints—focus in one way or another on the substantive content to be learned and hopefully transferred . In general , content - based explanations for transfer have the following basic form ( see top of Figure 1 ) . First there 110 is either an explicit or implicit effort to decontextualize 1 the 1 We want to make it clear that when we say “social context” we are not referring to “problem contexts , ” the cover stories in which mathematical social context ( Step 1 ) by either removing it as a potential distraction ( explicit ) or simply by focusing exclusively on the content ( implicit ) . Then , learning of the content to be transferred occurs ( Step 2 ) . As part of this , whatever content - 115 based mechanisms for fostering transfer are also used ( Step 3 ) . Finally , this leads to successful transfer of that content ( Step 4 ) . Explanations for Transfer That Focus on Physical Aspects of Contexts 120 In contrast to content considerations , issues of context have been underemphasized in most transfer research . When con - text is addressed in research on transfer mechanisms it is primarily treated as a physical reality . In this conceptual - ization , the context includes features that could be captured 125 in a photograph including where a learning or transfer ses - sion is being conducted , when it occurs , and who and what is present ( Barnett & Ceci , 2002 ; Catrambone & Holyoak , 1989 ; Reeves & Weisberg , 1994 ; Spencer & Weisberg , 1986 ; Thorndike , 1903 / 2009 ) . The consensus of empirical research 130 into the effect of physical contexts on transfer is that the likelihood of transfer increases the more that such physical features overlap between learning and transfer contexts ( Bar - nett & Ceci , 2002 ; Catrambone & Holyoak , 1989 ; Reeves & Weisberg , 1994 ; Ross , 1984 ; Spencer & Weisberg , 1986 ) . 135 This ﬁnding has been explained in classical cognitive ac - counts by the idea that contextual features are stored in memory along with the content being learned so that similar contextual features in a transfer context end up priming or cueing recall of the associated content ( Anderson & Bower , 140 1973 ; Godden & Baddeley , 1975 , 1980 ; Reeves & Weis - berg , 1994 ; Ross , 1984 ; Smith , Glenberg , & Bjork , 1978 ; Tulving & Thomson , 1973 ) . In physical context - based ac - counts , there are four steps to successful transfer ( middle of Figure 1 ) : 145 1 . Associating the physical context at learning with the content to be learned ; 2 . Learning that content ; 3 . Noticing physical similarities between the learning and transfer contexts ; and 150 4 . Successfully transferring the content because of the content being cued or primed by the physical features of the transfer content . and other school - like problems are sometimes expressed ( e . g . , Goldstone & Wilensky , 2008 ; Wagner , 2006 ) . Instead , social context is the socially estab - lished who , when , where , how , and why of a learning or transfer situation . Given that , in this article , “decontextualization” means somehow removing this surrounding social context so that only the “content” to be learned and ( we hope ) transferred remains . Part of what would remain after this kind of decontextualization would be any associated problem contexts . EXPLAINING FRAMING’S EFFECTS ON TRANSFER 3 Content - based approaches Physical context - based approaches Social context - based approaches 3 ) abstract , compare , exemplify , analogize , focus , ground , etc . social context at learning 1 ) decontextualize ( implicitly or explicitly ) content 2 ) learn content 4 ) content transferred 4 ) cues or primes 1 ) associate in memory 2 ) learn 5 ) content transferred content 3 ) recognizes similarities physical context at learning physical context at transfer 1 ) learn 2 ) forward & backward links made between contexts 4 ) when enough links , creation of social context at learning content social context at transfer 3 ) content transferred encompassing context social context at learning content social context at transfer 5 ) content transferred FIGURE 1 Diagrammatic comparisons of three approaches to explaining and fostering transfer . FRAMING SOCIAL CONTEXTS AS AN INSTRUCTIONAL PRACTICE THAT AFFECTS 155 TRANSFER In our research on framing contexts and transfer , we instead conceptualize contexts as social realities ( Searle , 1995 ) . Our claim is that learning and transfer contexts can be socially framed in different ways and that this will then inﬂuence stu - 160 dents’ propensity to transfer what they learn ( Engle , 2006b ; Engle , Nguyen , & Mendelson , 2011 ) . Framing is the meta - communicative act of characterizing what is happening in a given context and how different people are participat - ing in it ( Bateson , 1972 ; Goffman , 1974 ; Goodwin & Du - 165 ranti , 1992 ; Kelly & Chen , 1999 ; Tannen , 1993 ) . For ex - ample , a teacher can frame a lesson as a one - time event of learning something that students are unlikely to ever use again , or as an initial discussion of an issue that students will be actively engaging with throughout their lives . Our 170 contention is that the ﬁrst kind of framing , which we re - fer to as bounded , will tend to discourage students from later using what they learn , while the second , which we refer to as expansive , will tend to encourage it . Thus , in our view , which builds upon earlier situative and socio - 175 cultural theorizing on transfer ( Greeno et al . , 1993 ; Labo - ratory for Comparative Human Cognition [ LCHC ] , 1983 ; Lave , 1988 ; Pea , 1987 ) , it is not just the physical as - pects of a context that matter for transfer ( Barnett & Ceci , 2002 ; Catrambone & Holyoak , 1989 ; Reeves & Weisberg , 180 4 ENGLE , LAM , MEYER , NIX 1994 ; Spencer & Weisberg , 1986 ) , but also how social in - teractions frame learning and transfer contexts as particular kinds of social realities ( Gee & Green , 1998 ; Searle , 1995 ) . From this perspective , the reason that contexts matter for transfer is that content knowledge is inextricably tied with 185 its contexts of use ( Greeno et al . , 1993 ; LCHC , 1983 ; Lave , 1988 ; Pea , 1987 ) as shown in the bottom of Figure 1 . Ac - cordingly , how a context is framed ends up having profound effects on whether and how its associated content knowl - edge is used elsewhere . Speciﬁcally , transfer is encouraged 190 to the extent that a learning context and therefore the con - tent learned within it ( Step 1 ) can be recognized as provid - ing resources for productive action in potential future trans - fer contexts ( Engle , 2006b ; cf . Hammer , Elby , Scherr , & Redish , 2005 ) . Complementarily , transfer is also encouraged 195 to the extent that transfer contexts are framed as being con - nected back to past learning contexts ( Pea , 1987 ) . Both kinds of framing links—forward in time from learning contexts to potential transfer contexts or backward in time from transfer contexts to prior learning contexts ( Step 2 ) —create what is 200 referred to as intercontextuality between learning and trans - fer contexts ( Beach & Phinney , 1998 ; Bloome , Power Carter , Morton Christian , Otto , & Shuart - Faris , 2005 ; Floriani , 1994 ; Gee & Green , 1998 ; Leander , 2001 ; Putney , Green , Dixon , Duran , & Yeager , 2000 ) . This intercontextuality then fosters 205 transfer between the linked learning and transfer contexts ( Step 3 ) . When enough links between learning and transfer contexts are made , the degree of intercontextuality can get so strong that a larger encompassing context is formed that seamlessly incorporates learning and transfer contexts ( see 210 Step 4 in bottom of Figure 1 ; Greeno et al . , 1993 ) . As a result , further transfer is promoted ( Step 5 ) . In contrast to transfer after speciﬁc links are made between learning and transfer contexts ( Step 3 ) , this time learners are not aware that they are transferring anything as to them they are simply continuing 215 to use the same relevant knowledge within the same ( larger ) context ( Greeno et al . , 1993 ; Lave , 1988 ; LCHC , 1983 ) . We believe that there are several different aspects of learn - ing contexts that can be framed to affect transfer . This article focuses on framing that is expansive versus bounded with re - 220 spect to settings and roles . Because settings comprise times , places , and participants , an expansive framing of a learning setting may extend it to include the past and the future , differ - ent places , and additional people . Conversely , an extremely bounded framing of a learning setting may constrain it solely 225 to a short span of the present time , a small part of the avail - able physical space , and just one or two of the people that are physically present . Framing may also be negotiated around the roles of learn - ers . In an expansive framing of roles , learners are positioned 230 as active participants in a learning context where they serve as authors of their own ideas and respondents to the ideas of others . Within this sort of learning environment , students’ authored ideas are recognized and integrated into class dis - cussions and other activities ( e . g . , Mercer , 1995 ) . In contrast , 235 in a bounded framing of roles , learners may be positioned on the periphery of a learning context , where , rather than sharing their own ideas , they are expected to report on their learn - ing about the ideas of others , such as those presented by a text or a teacher . As active participants in a learning context , 240 expansively framing learners “crucially make [ s ] use of the fact that the one form of intercontextuality that always exists between learning and transfer contexts is the presence of the same learner” ( Engle , 2006b , p . 457 ) . We further specify these contrasting ways of framing in 245 Table 1 , which shows how we successfully operationalized these two distinct ways of framing in a one - on - one tutor - ing experiment ( Engle et al . , 2011 ) . More bounded or more expansive frames were proposed by a tutor for each par - ticipating student , with the framing negotiated between the 250 tutor and student until the student typically acceded to the tutor’s proposed framing . In the expansively framed tutor - ing sessions , students were positioned as integral parts of a university - based learning environment involving a larger research team and were credited for having their own ideas 255 about the topics being discussed in text and diagrams . In contrast , in the tutoring sessions with the bounded framing , tutors narrowly circumscribed the time , place , and partici - pant aspects of settings to here and now and positioned the role of the learners as disconnected reporters of the text and 260 diagrams’ ideas . Further , these sessions were also framed as a private matter between each tutor and the student and were restricted to each particular learning session and part of the room . Responses from student surveys and interviews re - vealed how students perceived and responded to the framing . 265 These data showed that the framing manipulations , based on the contrasts shown in Table 1 , were successful . EVIDENCE THAT FRAMING CONTEXTS AFFECTS TRANSFER A growing series of studies have empirically investigated 270 connections between the framing of contexts and transfer . Two recent experiments systematically tested one or more aspects of this general hypothesis and four classroom re - search studies provide complementary evidence that transfer may be affected by framing . 275 The ﬁrst known experiment related to framing and transfer was conducted by Hart and Albarracin ( 2009 , Experiment 2 ) . They showed that people are more likely to repeat an action they have just engaged in—the most basic form of transfer that there is ( cf . Salomon & Perkins 1989 ) — if they are 280 prompted to describe it using a progressive verb aspect that frames it as a continuing activity ( “I was doing . . . ” ) versus a perfective aspect that frames it as a completed action ( “I did . . . ” ) . Engle et al . ( 2011 ) then created the tutoring experi - ment , framing manipulation of which was illustrated in Table 285 1 . They showed that students being tutored with an expan - sive , versus a bounded , framing were about twice as likely EXPLAINING FRAMING’S EFFECTS ON TRANSFER 5 TABLE 1 Operationalization of Expansive Versus Bounded Framing in the Tutoring Experiment Aspects of Contexts That Can Be Framed Expansi v e Framing ( Shown to Promote Transfer ) Bo u nded Framing ( Shown to Disco u rage Transfer ) Setting : Ask student to specify other settings in which the topic ( s ) have , are , or will be likely to come up in their lives Do not ask student to specify other settings in which the topic has , is , or will be likely to come up in their lives • Time • Refer to the study as a whole as including both days • Refer to each part of each day’s session as a separate event • Refer to other times , both inside and outside of the experiment • Make no references to times other than the just completed present • Use present progressive verbs ( “you’re ﬁguring out” ) • Use simple past with completion verbs ( “we’re ﬁnished with that now” ) • Place • Frame location as at a university • Frame location as this speciﬁc room • Refer to other places—their home , school , doctor’s ofﬁce , etc . —in which they can use what they’re learning • Do not make references to other places outside of the room • Participants • Treat larger activity as involving the student , you and the rest of the study team , plus their family , friends , teachers , and anyone else they mention above • Treat tutoring event as a private matter involving only you and the student , and not other members of study team or other people they know • Ask student how they would explain their ideas to the other people they mentioned as part of the settings • Have student explain the text’s ideas to you just as often and as extensively as in the expansive condition • When students show understanding of one of the key ideas , note that they can now explain that to whoever they mentioned as an audience • When students show understanding of one of the key ideas , note that they have properly represented what the text said Roles • Ask student to explain their own evolving ideas about the system using the text sentences as a resource . • Ask student to explain what the text has said about the system in each sentence . • Revoice student’s explanations , crediting student with authorship and checking with them about whether you reformulated their ideas accurately . • Reformulate what student said as what the text has presented , not giving them an opportunity to correct as the reformulation should be accurate . Note . Adapted under Creative Commons Attribution license from “The Inﬂuence of Framing on Transfer : Initial Evidence From a Tutoring Experiment , ” by R . A . Engle , P . D . Nguyen , & A . Mendelson , 2011 , Instructional Science , 39 , p . 612 . Copyright 2011 by R . A . Engle , P . D . Nguyen , & A . Mendelson . Q5 to appropriately transfer facts , a conceptual principle , and a learning strategy from one human body system to another . In the ﬁrst classroom study related to framing and its 290 effects on transfer , Hammer et al . ( 2005 ) found that when two transfer contexts were reframed as having to do with active student sense making rather than simply the replica - tion of knowledge , students were more likely to “transfer - in” ( Schwartz et al . , 2005 ) their prior knowledge in ways that 295 helped them understand new physics concepts . Engle ( 2006a , 2006b ) then presented a case of successful classroom transfer that could not be explained by considering only content - based supports for transfer . She showed how this case of transfer could be explained by also considering the teacher’s fram - 300 ing of the learning context . This teacher expansively framed her interactions with her ﬁfth - grade students studying endan - gered species by ( a ) temporally connecting to prior and future interactions in which students could use what they were learn - ing , and ( b ) positioning students as contributing to a larger 305 community of people interested in what they were learning about . A more recent classroom case study illustrated how a high school biology teacher expansively framed his class - room by ( a ) making links to settings outside of school ; ( b ) extending temporal horizons to the past , where content was 310 learned , and to the future , where it remains relevant ; ( c ) con - necting curriculum units across time ; ( d ) training students to make connections across topics ( cf . Richland et al . , 2012 / this issue ) ; and ( e ) positioning students as part of a larger learn - ing community ( Engle , Meyer , Clark , White , & Mendelson , 315 2010 ; Meyer , Mendelson , Engle , & Clark , in preparation ) . Q6 These students scored well on researcher - designed transfer tests as well as on end - of - year standardized tests . Finally , showing that framing matters for subjects other than science , Mendelson ( 2010 ) found that student transfer of linguistic 320 forms from online to in - person , second language learning contexts was supported by an instructor’s expansive fram - ing , where text - based forum activities were framed as being connected to later in - class , face - to - face discussions . HYPOTHESIZED EXPLANATIONS FOR HOW 325 FRAMING CONTEXTS MAY AFFECT TRANSFER Although prior research has shown that framing contexts dif - ferently can affect transfer , it has not explained exactly how this process occurs . In this section , we propose ﬁve potential 330 6 ENGLE , LAM , MEYER , NIX FIGURE 2 Five potential explanations for how expansive framing may foster transfer . Note . Dashed arrows and boxes indicate processes that may or may not occur depending on what content - based supports for transfer are available . explanations for how expansive framing may promote trans - fer ( see Figure 2 ) . Each explanation describes a different se - ries of processes through which expansive framing may lead to transfer . In some cases , these effects are partly mediated by other already documented transfer mechanisms . 335 It is important to note that these explanations are not mutually exclusive and may even be complementary . Thus , an account of how transfer was promoted by expansive framing for any particular student may involve all ﬁve , just one , or any other combination of these explanations . 340 We ﬁrst preview each explanation by describing it with reference to relevant literature . We then characterize each set of explanatory processes in more detail by drawing on our existing data from two prior studies of expansively framed classrooms ( Engle , 2006b ; Engle et al . , 2010 ; Meyer et al . , 345 in preparation ) as well as the tutoring experiment ( Engle Q7 et al . , 2011 ) . OVERVIEW OF EACH EXPLANATION Each proposed process for explaining how expansive framing promotes transfer is prompted by one or two aspects of a 350 full expansive framing . Given that , we ﬁrst introduce two explanatory processes that begin by connecting settings with eachother . Wethendiscussoneexplanationthatisinitiatedby both connecting settings and promoting student authorship . Finally , we consider two explanations that are started simply 355 by promoting student authorship . First , we propose that expansive framing can create con - nections between settings for learners , in which knowledge that is relevant in one setting is recognized as also relevant in other settings , a key aspect of intercontextuality . Connect - 360 ing settings with each other encourages transfer : ( a ) during learning , when students expect they will later need to trans - fer what they are learning and may be more likely to prepare for this possibility , and ( b ) during potential transfer contexts , when students view prior content as continuing to be relevant 365 ( Leander , 2001 ; Pea , 1987 ; Ross , 1984 ) . These ﬁrst two ex - planations and their processes are laid out in the trajectories shown in Figure 2 . With respect to the ﬁrst explanation , existing literature about transfer has already recognized that transfer can be 370 promoted by creating an expectation for transfer in which students see that what they are learning will maintain EXPLAINING FRAMING’S EFFECTS ON TRANSFER 7 relevance over time ( e . g . , Bereiter , 1995 ; Brown , 1989 ) . This notion is closely related to the concept of utility value , or the degree to which a task is perceived as being relevant beyond 375 the immediate situation ( Hulleman , Durik , Schweigert , & Harackiewicz , 2008 ) . It is also related to Pugh and colleagues’ ( 2010 ) ﬁnding that transfer can be promoted in Q8 part by framing curricular content as having the potential for transforming students’ everyday experiences . This article 380 adds to these prior literatures by explaining how framing settings as connected may foster such an expectation for transfer and showing how it initiates a series of processes that eventually lead to greater transfer . Fostering an expectation for future transfer by having 385 teachers connect learning settings with future settings in which transfer is desired may lead students to study what they are learning about in potentially more effective ways that support transfer . At the most basic level , students who ex - pect they will need to continue using what they have learned 390 may prepare for such future use . They are likely to study that material more often and more intensively , which may re - sult in more enduring memory representations that students can draw upon during later transfer tasks . This general idea is consistent with ﬁndings from motivational research that 395 shows that students who perceive classroom tasks as hav - ing a higher utility value both report that they expend more effort in their science classes ( Cole , Bergin , & Whittaker , 2008 ; Mac Iver , Stipek , & Daniels , 1991 ) and perform bet - ter in them ( Bong , 2001 ; Hulleman et al . , 2008 ; Malka & 400 Covington , 2005 ; Simons , Dewitte , & Lens , 2003 ) . Such expectations for transfer may have an even greater impact on transfer to the extent that individual students are aware of and able to use content - based strategies for enhanc - ing transfer like generating examples , comparing them , con - 405 structing generalizations , and becoming sensitive to the ap - plicability conditions of examples and generalizations ( e . g . , Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ; Gentner et al . , 2003 ; Renkl et al . , 1996 ; Wagner , 2006 ) . 2 For example , research has already shown that when students have the expectation that what they 410 are learning will continue being relevant , they put more effort into becoming sensitive to the speciﬁc features of examples that make them suitable for applying relevant generalizations ( Gilbert et al . , 2011 ; Keiler , 2007 ) . In effect , the expansive framing of settings may make students more likely to use 415 content - based supports for transfer as part of preparing for expected future transfer events ( Engle , 2006b ) . Turning to Explanation 2 ( again see Figure 2 ) , an ex - pansively framed learning environment may also increase the likelihood that , in a potential transfer context , students 420 view what they learned before as having continued relevance ( Clark , 1996 ; Leander , 2001 ) . Consequently , students are more likely to be reminded of relevant learned knowledge from the prior learning context ( Ross , 1984 ) and be inclined 2 Because processes may or may not occur in particular cases , a dashed line surrounds the box that encloses them . to use it , especially if the learning context has been posi - 425 tioned as continuing to have socially desirable knowledge resources ( Pea , 1987 ) . As Pea ( 1987 ) explained , transfer is promoted when a student is socially inﬂuenced to construct “a ‘reading’ of a problem situation as one for which transfer of previous knowledge is possible , or important , or worth the 430 effort” ( p . 655 ) . Thus , by creating links back to prior learning contexts , the expansive framing of past settings may encour - age students to make use of transfer opportunities by using their relevant learned knowledge . The third explanation relies on both framing a learning 435 setting as being connected to prior ones and on framing roles by positioning students as authors of their own ideas ( again refer to Figure 2 ) . Both types of framing are likely to lead stu - dents to view their own prior knowledge as relevant to current learning , encouraging them to “ transfer - in ” ( Schwartz et al . , 440 2005 ) more of their prior knowledge during learning as they construct new understandings . Drawing on prior knowledge in this way generally enhances the quality of initial learning , which is necessary for later transfer - out to new contexts ( e . g . , Bransford et al . , 1999 ) . In drawing more extensively on their 445 prior knowledge , students may also potentially transfer - in additional examples and generalizations related to what they are learning about , which prior research has shown speciﬁ - cally enhances transfer ( e . g . , Gick & Holyoak , 1980 , 1983 ; Reeves & Weisberg , 1994 ; Salomon & Perkins , 1989 ) . These 450 examples and generalizations then can provide additional re - sources that could allow the student to make comparisons between examples ( e . g . , Chang , 2006 ; Gentner et al . , 2003 ; Rittle - Johnson & Star , 2007 ) or consider when examples are most applicable ( e . g . , Renkl et al . , 1996 ) , additional content - 455 based ways in which transfer can be promoted . Our fourth explanation ( Figure 2 ) hypotheses is that by itself authorship may foster student accountability to par - ticular content , which then makes students more likely to use this content in transfer contexts . Just like authors of aca - 460 demic papers , individual students become identiﬁed with , and then are held accountable for , commenting intelligently on the speciﬁc content they have authored ( Engle , 2006b ; Greeno , 2006 ; Jacoby & Gonzales , 1991 ) . This accountabil - ity then increases opportunities and other people’s expecta - 465 tions for them to continue sharing what they know about that topic and related topics in additional settings ( Bereiter , 1995 ; Engle , 2006b ; Greeno , 2006 ) . In fact , students may purposely engage more frequently with contexts in which they can use the knowledge they have become identiﬁed with , sometimes 470 even helping to construct new settings in which they can use their knowledge ( Bereiter , 1995 ) . Thus the identiﬁcation of particular students with particular topics provides social op - portunities and expectations that students will transfer what they know about those topics in situations that ask them to 475 draw on their expertise ( Brown et al . , 1993 ) . 3 3 WenotethatthisexplanationdiffersfromExplanation1 , anexpectation for transfer , as the expectation for transfer is more of an individual internal 8 ENGLE , LAM , MEYER , NIX Finally our ﬁfth explanation ( Figure 2 again ) proposes that if authorship becomes a general practice that students regu - larly participate in , it may promote the practices of generating new knowledge and engaging in adaptive problem solving 480 ( Hatano & Inagaki , 1986 ; Hatano & Oura , 2003 ; Schwartz et al . , 2005 ; Schwartz , Chase , & Bransford , 2012 / this issue ) . Students may then be more likely to transfer their knowl - edge when confronted with a completely novel problem sit - uation , because part of the role of being someone who regu - 485 larly authors knowledge is to generate reasonable responses ; in effect , this role encourages such students to adapt their prior knowledge to address that new problem ( Boaler , 2002 ; Greeno , 2006 ) . This response contrasts with students who respond to a transfer problem for which they do not have 490 an obvious solution by either saying “I don’t know” or com - plaining about the unfairness of a question whose answer or exact solution methods have not been taught to them ( Boaler , 2002 ) . Although as we discuss later there are undoubtedly com - 495 plex relationships between these ﬁve potential explanations for how expansive framing promotes transfer , the primary goal of this article is to distinguish between the explanations . This differentiation will provide a foundation for being able to systematically investigate the explanations in future research . 500 To advance that agenda we now characterize the ﬁve expla - nations in more detail using examples from our existing data . EXPLANATION 1 : CONNECTING SETTINGS PROMOTES AN EXPECTATION FOR FUTURE TRANSFER 505 The framing of learning contexts in an expansive manner makes it more likely that students will develop an expectation that they will need to transfer what they are currently learn - ing into the future , which then encourages them to prepare for that future use . Our ongoing research in an expansively 510 framed high school biology classroom 4 provides an example of this expectation . For example , the teacher , Mr . Kent , used expansive framing on a day that the chemistry teacher vis - ited his class ( along with a range of additional pedagogical strategies for fostering transfer that were probably working 515 concurrently with this framing ) . He set up the expectation that students would need to transfer what they were learn - ing during Biology class to their future Chemistry class . Mr . Kent referred to a future setting when the students would be in Mr . Brown’s Chemistry class , and said , 520 one and this involves social expectations . Also an individual expectation for transfer arises from settings being framed as connected and this social expectation for transfer arises from students being framed as authors of particular content that they have learned . 4 ThisisthesameteacherwhowasanalyzedinEngleetal . ( 2010 ) , butthe teacher’s practices have become more expansively framed in several ways from collaborating with the researchers and learning about their ﬁndings . Most of you . . . will next year have Mr . Brown . This is Mr . Brown . He’s our Chemistry teacher for Health and Medicine . So you guys will have him for chemistry next year . . . . The reasonthatI’mso [ strict ] aboutthingslikelabsafety , noopen - toed shoes , data charts , accurate measurements , is because 525 . . . this guy expects you to walk into his class on the very ﬁrst day of school being able to do this . He cannot afford , in Chemistry , to spend time teaching you this . So if I’m just a nice guy and let you go . . . you’re gonna get to his class and start off [ week ] 1 , week 2 with a D because you can’t do 530 this , and then he’s gonna be upset because he wants you to do well . I’m gonna be upset because he’s gonna come back and say “Didn’t you teach them anything ? ” . . . This is why we’re so adamant about you guys doing it right . In this example , by connecting laboratory settings across the 535 two classes , Mr . Kent made it more likely that his students would develop an expectation that they will need to transfer what they would learn about conducting labs in Biology class to their future Chemistry class . Our contention is that this expectation may easily have motivated his students to learn 540 lab safety more effectively in order to prepare for that future transfer . We then found evidence that Mr . Kent’s students tended to notice this kind of expansive framing of time and also developed an expectation that what they were learning now 545 would be needed in the future . Student surveys were used to detect the extent to which students perceived this aspect of the teacher’s expansive framing of time , and to what extent they reported that they believed that what they were learn - ing would be useful in the future . Students were ﬁrst asked , 550 “During a typical biology class , how often does your teacher tell you that what you are learning might be useful . . . ” at various times in the future . Student survey data indicated that students generally recognized that Mr . Kent often told them that what they were learning would be useful the next day , in 555 the next few weeks , in the next year , and beyond ( see leftmost bars in Figure 3 ) . Students were then asked , “During a typical biology class , how often do you think what you are learning might be useful . . . ” at various times in the future . Student responses to this 560 survey question indicated that students had also developed expectations that what they were learning would often be useful at various timepoints in the future ( see rightmost bars in Figure 3 ) . Our claim from this survey data is that Mr . Kent’s expansive framing may have caused many of his students to 565 develop an expectation for future transfer that was equivalent with , or perhaps even stronger than , the degree to which they noticed the teacher emphasizing future usefulness . Further investigation is needed to determine how , if at all , students changed their studying and other learning habits to prepare 570 for that transfer . Although data from a comparison classroom that employs a bounded framing are not yet available , these data provide initial evidence consistent with the ﬁrst explanation that the expansive framing of settings can lead students to develop 575 EXPLAINING FRAMING’S EFFECTS ON TRANSFER 9 FIGURE 3 Average student perceptions of frequency of teacher telling students what they are learning will be useful the future , and student reports about how often they think what they are learning will be useful in the future . expectations for future transfer . We further offer that this expectation may increase the likelihood that students will study content more often or more deeply . This may potentially also involve students taking better advantage of any content - based supports for transfer that are available in their learning 580 environment . EXPLANATION 2 : CONNECTING SETTINGS MEANS PRIOR CONTENT CONTINUES BEING RELEVANT IN POTENTIAL TRANSFER CONTEXTS 585 Findings from thesameclassroom just described ( Engleet al . , 2010 ) also support the viability of the hypothesis that con - necting settings fosters transfer by making it more likely that students will view their prior knowledge as being relevant , thus increasing the likelihood that they will be reminded of 590 it during transfer opportunities . One example of connecting to prior settings during potential transfer opportunities was seen when Mr . Kent emphasized the importance of students making connections in their current laboratory work to prior class discussions and homework ( Meyer et al . , in preparation , 595 p . 13 ) : Q9 You have to connect what’s going on in lab to what’s going on in class . . . . When I’m in lab , I am always thinking , “What is this lab teaching me about what we’re discussing ? ” . . . So when you’re in lab today—what is it that we’re doing in 600 lab , that connects to what our homework was about this past weekend ? It is important to note that expansive framing across time , places , and activities differs from ideas about both practicing transfer and providing content - based hints . In this example , 605 Mr . Kent broadly spoke about the idea of students mak - ing connections between the lab setting and other course - related settings like class discussions and doing homework . Although there is a family resemblance , this is very differ - ent from providing hints to students about speciﬁc content 610 connections they should make as it is less speciﬁc and less focused on particular content . Instead , this teacher expanded the relevance of what his students were learning across dif - ferent settings , a practice that was common in his classroom instruction . However , in asking students to speciﬁcally think 615 about how what they were doing in lab connected to their prior homework assignment , Mr . Kent also employed the more basic transfer mechanism of asking students to practice transfer . Although practicing transfer is not part of expansive framing per se , Mr . Kent’s request served to make it clear 620 that he expected them to try to transfer what they had learned from any settings he had connected to the current one . During that same lab , we observed students responding to Mr . Kent’s instruction by trying to transfer in knowledge from their prior classwork , as in the following excerpt : 625 Student 1 : How do you think this connects to thehome - work ? 10 ENGLE , LAM , MEYER , NIX Student 2 : That is how , like , light reaction happens . Student 1 : Dark and light ? Student 2 : Yeah . 630 Thus , Mr . Kent’s connection of the current lab setting to prior activities potentially prompted students to transfer what they had learned during those earlier activities . As the course pro - ceeded , students continued to make connections without Mr . Kent’s prompting . This process occurred because students 635 may have begun to see lab and classroom settings as being interconnected perhaps as a result of Mr . Kent’s expansive framing of these particular settings . These initial analyses of Mr . Kent’s instruction are also consistent with our second explanation that expansive 640 framing causes students to view learned knowledge as having ongoing relevance across settings . We hypothesize that with this view , students are more likely to be reminded of relevant learned knowledge in potential transfer contexts , which will , in turn , increase their propensity to transfer this 645 learned content . EXPLANATION 3 : AUTHORSHIP AND CONNECTING TO PRIOR SETTINGS DURING LEARNING LEADS TO TRANSFER - IN OF PRIOR KNOWLEDGE IN WAYS THAT 650 SUPPORT LATER TRANSFER - OUT The third explanation hypothesizes that in an expansive environment , one in which students are positioned as authors whose knowledge from prior settings is considered welcome , students are more likely to transfer - in knowledge 655 during learning in ways that can enhance later transfer - out . In our tutoring experiment ( Engle et al . , 2011 ) , we found students transferring - in prior knowledge in ways that would be expected to enhance transfer - out . These students , who were all in the expansive framing condition in which both 660 authorship and connecting to past settings was supported ( see Figure 2 ) , sometimes brought in their own outside examples to form generalizations about the topics they were learning . Data showed that these students were also more likely to transfer certain facts , principles , and a learning 665 strategy to a new context . For example , one student in the expansively framed condition transferred - in his own example of the structure of a school to generalize his understanding of the structure of the heart : 670 How is the heart structured ? The name atrium . . . it reminds me of all schools . . . like my school has a big atrium . . . kinda big . [ motions “big” with his hands ] and [ it’s ] someplace you go and it separates out to all the classes . So I guess you can kinda picture that . [ Tutor nods ] You can store all the stuff in 675 the atrium before it goes out to the right place . By being positioned as an author whose past knowledge was relevant , this student was in effect encouraged to transfer - in whatever he already knew that could be relevant for his learning . In comparing the heart’s structure with his school’s 680 architecture , he was able to make the generalization that both kinds of atriums store things ( students or blood ) before dis - tributing them to the next place . With this generalization supporting his learning , this student then successfully trans - ferred what he had learned about the circulatory system to 685 later transfer assessments about the respiratory system . Given that the sample size for the tutoring study was not particularly large , it was reassuring to ﬁnd evidence of a similar dynamic occurring in Mr . Kent’s biology class ( Meyer et al . , 2011 ) . Like tutors in the expansive framing Q10 690 condition , Mr . Kent also positioned students as authors of their own learning and made connections with prior settings . Furthermore , survey data show that students in this class tended to transfer - in their prior knowledge . Speciﬁcally , stu - dents reported that during a typical biology class they often 695 transferred - in ideas they already knew from the previous few days and weeks and sometimes transferred - in ideas they al - ready knew from within the past year or longer than a year before ( see Table 2 ) . Although comparisons to bounded class - rooms would be informative , these results are consistent with 700 the idea that in an expansively framed classroom , students may be likely to transfer - in ideas from prior learning , which would then improve the quality of their learning in ways that would promote transfer - out later . Thus , preliminary results from our tutoring experiment 705 and our analyses of Mr . Kent’s teaching are both consis - tent with our third explanation that , by positioning students as authors of their own learning and making connections with prior settings , expansive framing encourages students to bring in prior knowledge , including outside examples and 710 TABLE 2 Student Reports About Ho w Often They Transfer - In Their Prior Kno w ledge How Often During a Typical Biology Class Do YOU Think About or Use Ideas That You Already Knew From . . . Never Rarely Sometimes Often All the Time Within the previous few days ? 0 . 0 % 0 . 0 % 27 . 3 % 33 . 3 % 39 . 4 % Within the previous few weeks ? 0 . 0 % 3 . 0 % 39 . 4 % 33 . 3 % 24 . 2 % Within the last year ? 0 . 0 % 28 . 1 % 43 . 8 % 9 . 4 % 18 . 8 % Longer than a year before ? 16 . 1 % 29 . 0 % 35 . 5 % 16 . 1 % 3 . 2 % EXPLAINING FRAMING’S EFFECTS ON TRANSFER 11 abstract generalizations , which previous research has shown increases students’ propensity to transfer . EXPLANATION 4 : AUTHORSHIP PROMOTES ACCOUNTABILITY TO PARTICULAR CONTENT 715 Positioning students as authors through the use of expansive framing may also promote accountability in ways that lead to transfer . If a student shares particular content knowledge , that student can be framed as the author of that content and be pub - licly recognized as such . The student then becomes expected 720 to be able to use that content during transfer opportunities . For example , Engle ( 2006b ; Engle & Conant , 2002 ) de - scribed a classroom where student groups were each assigned research projects about a particular endangered animal pop - ulation . Within these groups , individual students were as - 725 signed particular topics about the populations for which they were to author oral explanations and written reports . The positioning of students as authors included language that at - tributed explanations about content to speciﬁc students or groups of students , rather than to the teacher or textbook 730 ( e . g . , Teacher : You’ve [ the student or student group has ] just explained something to me [ adapted from Engle , 2006b , p . 486 ] ) . Over time , these students became positioned as local experts about the content they had authored ( Brown et al . , 1993 ; Engle & Conant , 2002 ) . Whenever anyone visited the 735 classroom , each student - expert was expected to teach the vis - itor about their topic ( Engle & Conant , 2002 ) , which provided opportunities for students to transfer what they had learned . In later individual transfer assessments , Engle ( 2006a ) found that students regularly referenced their own research as with 740 one whale group student who explained why birthrate mat - ters for species survival and endangerment by saying , “Like , that’s like the whales . They only have like one calf every four out of ﬁve years . And by people hunting them , they can die off quickly” ( p . 18 ) . Thus , through authorship , stu - 745 dents in this class were held accountable to the explanations they had previously authored and were able to transfer these explanations to new contexts . This example illustrates the proposal that students who are positioned as authors of particular content during learn - 750 ing are then held accountable for that content by others . As a result , this accountability increases the likelihood that stu - dents will transfer the particular content they authored in future contexts . EXPLANATION 5 : AUTHORSHIP AS A 755 PRACTICE PROMOTES GENERATION AND ADAPTATION OF KNOWLEDGE IN TRANSFER CONTEXTS Finally , expansive framing may allow students to author con - tent regularly such that they eventually assume authorship as 760 a standard practice . This authorship role means that when stu - dents are faced with potentially new transfer problems they are ready to generate a response by adapting their existing knowledge . As compared to Explanation 4 , we do not intend to suggest that students are being prepared to transfer spe - 765 ciﬁc content in speciﬁc transfer - related tasks . Rather , we are proposing that through regularly practicing authorship as a result of expansive framing , students begin to see themselves as being capable of addressing unfamiliar situations using what they already know just as authors do . In Mr . Kent’s 770 classroom , authorship of ideas became a regular practice . In the following example , we see a pair of his students adapting their prior knowledge and generating new knowledge while responding to a transfer problem in which they were asked to make connections between materials from three different 775 units : 1 Edward : Meiosis is sex cells . 2 Adrienne : Meiosis is made [ inaudible ] protein synthesis ? 3 Edward : Protein synthesis is how when DNA makes RNA ? And RNA goes to the ribosomes 780 4 Adrienne : Okay . 5 Edward : And makes [ inaudible ] . 6 Adrienne : That kinda links because - To make the - to make the zygote or whatever , DNA is ( . . ) chromosomes from the parents , right ? 785 7 Edward : ( . . ) Wait , what ? [ laughs ] 8 Adrienne : Hmm chromosomes from the parent , so it like produces protein . ( . . . ) It makes it , that makes the kid ? 9 Edward : So you’re saying protein synthesis makes a kid ? 10 Adrienne : Yeah . 790 11 Edward : Makes the body ? 12 Adrienne : Yeah , doesn’t it ? 13 Edward : So - so protein - how does protein synthesis links to genetic heredity ? 14 Adrienne : Because DNA , 795 15 Edward : Well yeah . 16 Adrienne : that’s what DNA is like , right ? DNA is ( . . ) the kid , you get the baby . . . 17 Edward : So ( . . ) meiosis links to genetic heredity because of um the sex cells ? 800 18 Adrienne : Yeah . 19 Edward : And then protein synthesis is for building the body ? 20 Adrienne : Mmhmm . [ in agreement ] In this example , we see this pair of students combine their 805 knowledge and adapt their understandings of concepts that they learned from previous units to related concepts in the current unit . Edward brought in his knowledge about the Central Dogma of molecular biology from what he learned in the Protein Synthesis Unit by describing the process of 810 DNA leading to protein synthesis ( Turn 3 ) . Adrienne then “linked” this idea to meiosis by connecting DNA to the for - mation of zygotes ( Turn 6 ) . The students then generated the idea that the chromosomes or DNA that are involved in the 12 ENGLE , LAM , MEYER , NIX synthesis of proteins also produce proteins that “makes a kid” 815 or “the body” ( Turns 8 – 12 ) . Next , they added genetic hered - ity to the conversation by connecting it to meiosis through the presence of DNA and sex cells ( Turns 13 – 18 ) . The stu - dents ﬁnally conclude that protein synthesis is what builds the body ( Turns 19 – 20 ) . Thus , in part because of the supported 820 practice of authorship , Edward and Adrienne were able to approach a novel situation , in which they were asked to con - nect various topics learned at different times in the school year , by adapting their prior knowledge about several topics and generating connections between them and the units from 825 which they were drawn . Although the number of students examined is small , this example is consistent with our hypothesis that students who are regularly positioned as authors are likely to adopt author - ship as a practice . As a result , these students may become 830 proﬁcient at adapting their knowledge to ﬁt novel situations or , in other words , to transfer appropriate knowledge in future contexts . POTENTIAL INTERACTIONS BETWEEN THE FIVE EXPLANATIONS 835 Although a detailed discussion of the interactions between these ﬁve explanations for how expansive framing promotes transfer requires further research , we have identiﬁed several ways that they could potentially interact . First , as shown in Figure 2 , the two main aspects that make up expansive fram - 840 ing group the explanations based on their origins in framing settings as connected or in promoting student authorship . Speciﬁcally , Explanations 1 and 2 derive from connecting settings whereas Explanations 4 and 5 derive from promot - ing student authorship . Explanation 3 , in contrast , has its 845 origins in both of these aspects of expansive framing . Second , two of the explanations function by improving students’ learning , which then enhances transfer . Speciﬁcally , in Explanation 1 , when a student expects that he or she will need to use what is being learned in connected settings , the 850 student improves his or her learning process in preparation for transfer . Similarly , in Explanation 3 , by transferring - in his or her prior knowledge during learning , the student improves his or her learning process . A third connection that we identiﬁed reveals that three 855 of the explanations depend on expansive framing occurring speciﬁcally in the learning context rather than in the transfer context . Students expecting that they will need to use what they learn later ( Explanation 1 ) , viewing their knowledge as both relevant and desired socially ( Explanation 3 ) , and 860 adopting the practice of authoring knowledge ( Explanation 5 ) , all require that the learning context be framed expansively . In contrast , when a student views what was learning before as relevant in a potential transfer context ( Explanation 2 ) , or when a student becomes publicly recognized as the author 865 of particular transferable content ( Explanation 4 ) , it is not essential that expansive framing occur when the content was actually learned . Fourth , if students are frequently recognized in public as the author of content ( Explanation 4 ) , it is likely that the 870 student will eventually adopt authorship as a general practice ( Explanation 5 ) . Finally , several explanations may connect to one another over time . For example , a student may ﬁnd her prior knowl - edge to have continued relevance in a particular social context 875 ( Explanation 2 ) in which someone requests that she explain her understanding of a topic . By responding to this request , it is likely that the student now begins to view her knowledge as socially desired ( Explanation 3 ) . Finally , the other person in the conversation may come to recognize her for the expla - 880 nation she authored and from then on hold her accountable for the content she shared ( Explanation 4 ) . A RESEARCH AGENDA FOR INVESTIGATING HOW FRAMING AFFECTS TRANSFER In this article , we have gone beyond prior work that focuses 885 on documenting that there is an effect of framing contexts on transfer to begin constructing several explanations of ex - actly how expansive framing may promote transfer . In so doing , we have been careful to consider how framing may work both independently of and in coordination with other 890 known transfer mechanisms . We also recognize that these explanations may often work in concert and that there are undoubtedly complex relationships between them , some of which we have identiﬁed . Because of this , we now propose a research agenda for investigating each explanation and the 895 relationships between them . We suggest three kinds of studies that are likely to be especially fruitful : ( a ) experiments focused on disentangling the effects of different aspects of framing , ( b ) comparative studies in classroom settings , and ( c ) microgenetic investiga - 900 tions that provide data - grounded explanations of how each set of processes unfolds , separately or in concert , to foster transfer . Disentangling Experiments Considering that current research suggests that expansive 905 framing as a whole enhances transfer , a key next step is to manipulate the framing of different aspects of contexts separately and in coordination with one another in order to ascertain their individual and combined effects on transfer . In particular , given that three of the proposed explanations 910 for how framing affects transfer are prompted by the framing of student roles as authors and three of the proposed explana - tions are prompted by framing settings ( with Explanation 3 being prompted by both ) , a clear next step is to run a 2 × 2 ex - perimental design in which student roles ( expansive : author 915 vs . bounded : spokesperson ) are crossed with the framing of EXPLAINING FRAMING’S EFFECTS ON TRANSFER 13 settings ( expansive : linked vs . bounded : disconnected ) . This design will allow us to see which of these aspects of fram - ing matter for which kinds of transfer and whether they each make independent contributions or if the whole is greater 920 than the sum of the parts . Additional follow - up experiments can be run to further disentangle these effects . A second kind of disentangling experiment that would be valuable would be one in which the timing of expansive framing is manipulated , with the effects on different kinds 925 of transfer assessed . 5 As previously described , some of the proposed explanations rely on expansive framing during the learning process ( Explanations 1 , 3 and 5 ) , whereas others would still be at least partially effective even if expansive framing is provided after learning ( deﬁnitely Explanation 2 930 and perhaps also Explanation 4 ) . Given that , manipulating when expansive framing occurs would allow us to further distinguish between these explanations . As noted in Engle et al . ( 2011 ) , such experiments “will si - multaneously advance understanding of how exactly framing 935 works , provide additional replication of the effects of fram - ing on transfer , and guide educators about which aspects of framing to focus on” ( p . 621 ) . Comparative Classroom Studies Another way to learn whether and how framing affects trans - 940 fer is to make systematic comparisons between and within classroom - based case studies . To compare the effects be - tween bounded and expansive framing , teachers teaching multiple sections of the same course can be encouraged to implement more bounded or more expansive framing in or - 945 der to see what beneﬁt , if any , the expansive implementation has on students’ propensity to demonstrate different kinds of transfer . At the same time , within studies of particular classrooms in which expansive framing is employed , it is possible to 950 see whether there are correlations between the degree to which each student transfers and the degree of each student’s awareness and uptake of expansive framing . Speciﬁcally , one could examine the degree to which different students appear to detect the existence of different aspects of the expansive 955 framing and show evidence of “taking it up” ( Austin , 1962 ; Clark , 1996 ) in their own behavior through a combination of surveys and interviews . This research then would allow one to see whether those students who noticed and responded to the expansive framing more strongly were also the same students 960 who show greater evidence of transfer on assessments after controlling for other predictors of transfer . 6 5 We thank Rob Goldstone for this suggestion . 6 Evidence of this sort is currently being generated ( Meyer , 2012 ) . Pre - liminary results of exploratory correlational and regression analyses ( Engle , Meyer , & Chong , 2012 ) showed correlations between three different mea - sures of transfer and students’ responsiveness to 10 different instances of expansive framing that spanned both roles and the three main aspects of Microgenetic Investigations Finally , both kinds of studies can embed microgenetic inves - tigations that are focused on directly observing the hypoth - 965 esized processes in action ( Maxwell , 2004a , 2004b ; Saxe , 2002 ; Siegler Shadish , Cook & Campbell , 2002 ; , 2006 ) . In - tensive videotaping combined with interviewing and docu - mentation of student work and instructional materials during the complete span in which learning and transfer take place 970 can allow one to develop explanations for cases in which expansive framing has been shown to relate to subsequent transfer , which would be documented not just with formal assessments but also by examining subsequent activity af - ter instruction for evidence of students using what they had 975 learned in their own ways ( Lobato , 2012 / this issue ) . Such explanations would trace how an instructor’s fram - ing was responded to by a student in ways that then affected their learning processes , the use of any known or hypothe - sized transfer mechanisms , and eventually how and what they 980 were able to transfer . We have already begun this work by explaining the surprising transfer of one struggling student in another of Mr . Kent’s high school biology classes ( Lam et al . , 2012 ) . The validity of such explanations can be fur - ther increased by also explaining contrasting cases in which 985 transfer did not occur . Interviews with students in which they are asked to ex - plain how they themselves addressed transfer situations may also help inform which of the proposed processes were in - volved ( Lobato , 2012 / this issue ) . Such microgenetic inves - 990 tigations have the potential for further specifying how each process works for individual students , based on how they themselves interpret and respond to different framings ( cf . Lobato , 2012 / this issue ; Lobato et al . , 1999 ) . It may also lead to potentially identifying other ways in which expansive 995 framing promotes transfer . In addition , these investigations provide especially fertile ground for investigating how the ﬁve proposed explanations can interact with one another , in real time , and for particular students . CONCLUDING THOUGHTS 1000 By focusing on the effects of expansive framing on transfer , we are addressing an institutional problem that exists in much formal education , especially in high schools and beyond setting ( time , place , and participants ) . Most correlations were positive and involvedstudentsreportingthattheyhadadoptedtheframingintheiractionsratherthanjustagreedwithit . Knowing the content to be transferred was correlated with two of the three measures of transfer while many potential predictors of learning like prior grades , test scores , motivational variables , and standard demographic variables did not correlate with transfer . The best regression models all involved expansive framing as predictors and were able to account for between 26 % and 60 % of the variance in transfer . How - ever , these results are preliminary as we have not yet been able to include in our analyses useful measures of each student’s exposure to classical transfer mechanisms like generalizing and comparing examples . 14 ENGLE , LAM , MEYER , NIX ( Sizer , 1984 ) , in which bounded framing has become the working norm . Students’ classes are often framed as being 1005 completely separate from one another such that they are considered to involve completely different people , be about disconnected topics ( cf . Richland et al . , 2012 / this issue ) , and happen in distinct places and times . Prior to the institution of schooling , learning may not have been as compartmentalized 1010 as in this age , and as a result , studies of transfer across con - texts may have been moot because of the much broader way that learning was understood by both learners and teachers . Compared to other methods of fostering transfer , expan - sive framing is widely applicable to all academic subjects 1015 and adaptable to a variety of instructional methods . Standard content - based instructional methods for fostering transfer need to be precisely speciﬁed for that particular content , a very time - consuming process . In contrast , methods for expansively framing learning contexts can be implemented 1020 in similar ways , no matter what topic or discipline is being learned . In addition , the expansive framing of settings in particular can be used across all forms of instruction from traditional lectures to discovery - based approaches or any other variation or combination of these . All the instructor 1025 needs to do is connect the learning environment to other times , places , and participants in ways that his or her students will believe and be ready to act upon ( Zheng , Meyer , & Engle , 2012 ) . In effect , expansive framing allows instructors to better leverage whatever student learning they are able to 1030 achieve through whatever means . At the same time , however , we do not claim that expansive framing is the be - all or end - all for instruction . Our informal observations of tutoring and classroom instruction as well as broader theoretical considerations suggest that there may 1035 be costs as well as beneﬁts of expansive framing for both learning and transfer . For example , we observed that a few learners in the expansive framing condition of the Engle et al . , ( 2011 ) tutoring experiment had a tendency to bring in so much prior knowledge during learning that they became 1040 cognitively overwhelmed or had difﬁculty focusing on what the provided text and diagrams could contribute to their un - derstanding . Thus , it may make sense for the beginnings and endings of lessons or curriculum units to be framed more expansively but to use a somewhat less expansive framing 1045 when students need to focus on learning important new ma - terial . In such circumstances , the advantage for learning in a more bounded framing is that it could help students to focus exclusively on the content at hand without being distracted by other knowledge . 1050 In addition , by itself expansive framing encourages learn - ers to regularly use what they already know , but it does not provide resources for students to judge which prior knowl - edge is the most appropriate for a particular problem or issue . By itself , then , expansive framing can lead to over - 1055 generalization ( Engle , 2006 ) or what is also called “negative Q11 transfer” ( see also Schwartz et al . , 2012 / this issue ) . Therefore expansive framing should be regularly paired with activities in which learners critically evaluate the knowledge they have transferred in for its relevance and validity . Some of the 1060 techniques that Schwartz et al . ( 2012 / this issue ) suggest for avoiding negative transfer like proactively seeking feedback are likely to be particularly helpful in this regard . For this reason , it also may make sense for instruction to employ more targeted expansive framings in which students 1065 are provided with speciﬁc contexts for when generalization from the learned content will be most appropriate , such as specifying that a particular topic will be relevant both in a future Chemistry class and for helping themselves or loved ones address a common disease . This targeted expansive 1070 framing contrasts with a more general expansive framing where only vague contexts are provided and thus expands to include all contexts , such as telling students that what they are learning will be useful “in the future” or “almost everywhere . ” A targeted expansive framing may reduce 1075 negative transfer that occurs when irrelevant content is transferred , or is transferred inappropriately . However , it is possible that only using targeted expansive framing may constrain scientiﬁc discovery , which often involves creating deep analogies across contexts that were not initially thought 1080 to be relevant to one another ( e . g . , Goldstone & Wilensky , 2008 ) . In this case , an expansive framing that encompasses all contexts may be more effective . 7 Nonetheless , it has long been recognized that the key challenge to transfer is in students being reminded of and 1085 actually bringing in their knowledge in the ﬁrst place ( e . g . , Loewenstein , 2010 ; Reeves & Weisberg , 1994 ; Ross , 1984 ) . It is in addressing this key challenge that expansive framing is particularly powerful . In closing , we hope this article will advance future inves - 1090 tigations of the relationships between framing and transfer . We believe it provides a basis for researchers to be able to provide clear demonstrations of the multiple ways in which framing affects transfer and how they interact with each other in real learning situations . 1095 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This article is based upon research supported by a National Science Foundation CAREER grant to Randi A . Engle ( NSF # 0844910 ) , a UC Berkeley Chancellor’s Fellowship for Grad - uate Study awarded to Diane P . Lam , and a graduate fellow - 1100 ship from the Research in Cognition and Mathematics Educa - tion training grant at UC Berkeley funded by the Institute for Education Sciences ( IES # R305B090026 ) to Sarah E . Nix . Any opinions , ﬁndings , and conclusions or recommendations 7 Perhaps a way to get the best of both extremes would be to specify a few key transfer contexts for the knowledge being learned and then speciﬁcally openupthepossibilityofadditionalcontextswithphraseslike“andbeyond”or“andmore . ” If done in a believable way , this phrasing may also prompt students to think about additional contexts in which they can use what they are learning . EXPLAINING FRAMING’S EFFECTS ON TRANSFER 15 expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not 1105 necessarily reﬂect the views of any of the funders . Order of authorship is alphabetical as this was a true collaboration , with all four authors contributing equally . An earlier version of this article was presented in a sympo - sium entitled “Theoretical and Empirical Accounts of Fram - 1110 ing in Classroom Interactions” at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association in April 2011 . We appreciate feedback on earlier drafts of this ar - ticle from Kevin Klein , Adam Mendelson , Kevin Leander , and the current Framing and Transfer research team , which 1115 includes Norielle Adricula , Anusha Challa , Jim Clark , Lloyd Goldwasser , Richard Hsu , Christina Lin , Erica Naves , Sarah Perez , Hernan Rosas , Sadaf Sareshwala , Danny Tan , Mai Nhia Vang , Sue Wang , Lynn Yu , and Kathleen Zheng . REFERENCES 1120 Anderson , R . C . , & Bower , G . H . ( 1973 ) . Human associative memory . New York , NY : Wiley . Anolli , A . , Antonietti , A . , Crisafulli , L . & Cantoia , M . ( 2001 ) . Accessing source information in analogical problem - solving . Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 54A , 237 – 261 . 1125 Austin , J . L . ( 1962 ) . How to do things with words . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Barnett , S . M . , & Ceci , S . J . ( 2002 ) . When and where do we apply what we learn ? A taxonomy for far transfer . Psychological Bulletin , 128 , 612 – 637 . Bateson , G . ( 1972 ) . A theory of play and fantasy . In Steps to an ecology 1130 of mind : Collected essays in anthropology , psychiatry , evolution , and epistemology ( pp . 177 – 193 ) . New York , NY : Ballantine . Beach , R . & Phinney , M . ( 1998 ) . Framing literary text worlds through real - life social negotiations . Linguistics and Education , 9 , 159 – 198 . Bereiter , C . ( 1995 ) . A dispositional view of transfer . In A . McKeough , J . Lu - 1135 part , & A . Marini ( Eds . ) , Teaching for transfer : Fostering generalization in learning ( pp . 21 – 34 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Bloome , D . , Power Carter , S . , MortonChristian , B . , Otto , S . , & Shuart - Faris , N . ( 2005 ) . Discourse analysis and the study of classroom language and literacy events : A microethnographic perspective . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 1140 Boaler , J . ( 2002 ) . Experiencing school mathematics : Traditional and reform approaches to teaching and their effect on student learning . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Bong , B . ( 2001 ) . Role of self - efﬁcacy and task value in predicting college students’ course enrollments and intentions . Contemporary Educational 1145 Psychology , 26 , 553 – 570 . Bransford , J . , Brown , A . L . , & Cocking , R . ( Eds . ) . ( 1999 ) . Learning and transfer . In How people learn : Brain , mind , experience , and school ( pp . 39 – 66 ) . Washington , DC : National Academy Press . Brown , A . L . ( 1989 ) . Analogical learning and transfer : What develops ? In 1150 S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 369 – 412 ) . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Brown , A . L . , Ash , D . , Rutherford , M . , Nakagawa , K . , Gordon , A . , & Cam - pione , J . C . ( 1993 ) . Distributed expertise in the classroom . In G . Salomon ( Ed . ) , Distributed cognitions : Psychological and educational considera - 1155 tions ( pp . 188 – 228 ) . New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . Campione , J . C . , & Brown , A . L . ( 1984 ) . Learning ability and transfer propensity as sources of individual differences in intelligence . In P . H . Brooks , R . D . Sperber , & C . McCauley ( Eds . ) , Learning and cognition in the mentally retarded ( pp . 265 – 294 ) . Baltimore , MD : University Park 1160 Press . Catrambone , R . & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1989 ) . Overcoming contextual limita - tions on problem - solving transfer . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 15 , 1147 – 1156 . Chang , N . M . ( 2006 ) . Learning to discriminate and generalize through 1165 problemcomparisons ( Unpublisheddoctoraldissertation ) . Pittsburgh , PA : Carnegie Mellon University . Chi , M . T . H . , & VanLehn , K . A . ( 2012 / this issue ) . Seeing deep structure from interactions of surface features : A hypothesis for transfer . Educa - tional Psychologist , 47 , XX – XX . 1170 Clark , H . H . ( 1996 ) . Using language . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge Univer - sity Press . Cole , J . S . , Bergin , D . A . , & Whittaker , T . A . ( 2008 ) . Predicting student achievement for low stakes testing with effort and task value . Contempo - rary Educational Psychology , 33 , 609 – 624 . 1175 Engle , R . A . ( 2006a ) . Findingsaboutthenatureofthewhalegroup’stransfer [ Supplement ] . Available from the author . Engle , R . A . ( 2006b ) . Framing interactions to foster generative learning : A situative account of transfer in a community of learners classroom . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 15 , 451 – 498 . 1180 Engle , R . A . , & Conant , F . R . ( 2002 ) . Guiding principles for fostering productive disciplinary engagement : Explaining an emergent argument in a community of learners classroom . Cognition and Instruction , 20 , 399 – 483 . Engle , R . A . , Meyer , X . S . , & Chong , A . M . ( 2012 , March ) . Connect - 1185 ing expansive framing to transfer : A progress report . In X . S . Meyer ( Chair ) , Connecting expansive framing to transfer in a high school biol - ogy classroom . Related paper - set presented at the National Association for Research in Science Teaching International Conference , Indianapolis , IN . 1190 Engle , R . A . , Meyer , X . , Clark , J . , White , J . & Mendelson , A . ( 2010 , March ) . Expansiveframingandtransferinahighschoolbiologyclass : Hybridizing settings and promoting connections within a larger learning community . In R . A . Engle ( organizer ) , Applying new mechanisms and conceptual - izations of the ‘transfer - of - learning’ to science classrooms : The dynamic 1195 role of contexts and interactions . Symposium presented at the National Association for Research in Science Teaching Annual International Con - ference , Philadelphia , PA . Engle , R . A . , Nguyen , P . D . , & Mendelson , A . ( 2011 ) . The inﬂuence of framing on transfer : Initial evidence from a tutoring experiment . Instruc - 1200 tional Science , 39 , 603 – 628 . Retrieved from http : / / www . springerlink . com / content / b451q46006907539 / Floriani , A . ( 1994 ) . Negotiating what counts : Roles and relationships , texts and contexts , content and meaning . Linguistics and Education , 5 , 241 – 274 . 1205 Gee , J . P . , & Green , J . L ( 1998 ) . Discourse analysis , learning , and social practice : A methodological study . Review of Research in Education , 23 , 119 – 169 . Gentner , D . , Loewenstein , J . , & Thompson , L . ( 2003 ) . Learningandtransfer : A general role for analogical encoding . Journal of Educational Psychol - 1210 ogy , 95 , 393 – 408 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . ( 1980 ) . Analogical problem solving . Cognitive Psychology , 12 , 306 – 355 . Gick , M . L . & Holyoak , K . ( 1983 ) . Schemainductionandanalogicaltransfer . Cognitive Psychology , 15 , 1 – 38 . 1215 Gilbert , J . K . , Bulte , A . M . W . , & Pilot , A . ( 2011 ) . Concept development and transfer in context - based science education . International Journal of Science Education , 33 , 817 – 837 . Godden , D . R . , & Baddeley , A . D . ( 1975 ) . Context - dependent memory in two natural environments : On land and underwater . British Journal of 1220 Psychology , 66 , 325 – 331 . Godden , D . R . , & Baddeley , A . D . ( 1980 ) . When does context inﬂuence recognition memory ? British Journal of Psychology , 71 , 99 – 104 Goffman , E . ( 1974 ) . Frame analysis : An essay on the organization of expe - rience . New York , NY : Harper & Row . 1225 Goldstone , R . L . , Landy , D . H . , & Son , J . Y . ( 2010 ) . The education of perception . Topics in Cognitive Science , 2 , 265 – 284 . Q12 Goldstone , R . L . & Wilensky , U . ( 2008 ) . Promoting transfer by grounding complex systems principles . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 17 , 465 – 516 . 1230 16 ENGLE , LAM , MEYER , NIX Goodwin , C . , & Duranti , A . ( 1992 ) . Rethinking context : An introduction . In A . Duranti & C . Goodwin ( Eds . ) , Rethinking context : Language as inter - active phenomenon ( pp . 1 – 42 ) . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Greeno , J . G . ( 2006 ) . Authoritative , accountable positioning and connected , 1235 general knowing : Progressive themes in understanding transfer . The Jour - nal of the Learning Sciences , 15 , 537 – 547 . Greeno , J . G . , Smith , D . R . , & Moore , J . L . ( 1993 ) . Transferofsituatedlearn - ing . In D . K . Detterman & R . J . Sternberg ( Eds . ) , Transfer on trial : Intel - ligence , cognition , and instruction ( pp . 99 – 127 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . 1240 Hammer , D . , Elby , A . , Scherr , R . E . , & Redish , E . F . ( 2005 ) . Resources , framing , and transfer . In J . Mestre ( Ed . ) , Transfer of learning : Research and perspectives . Greenwich , CT : Information Age . Q13 Hart , W . , & Albarracin , D . ( 2009 ) . What was doing vs . what I did : Verb aspect inﬂuences memory and future actions . Psychological Science , 20 , 1245 238 – 244 . Hatano , G . , & Inagaki , K . ( 1986 ) . Two courses of expertise . In H . W . Steven - son , H . Azuma , & K . Hakuta ( Eds . ) , Child development and education in Japan : A series of books in psychology ( pp . 262 – 272 ) . New York , NY : W . H . Freeman . 1250 Hatano , G . & Oura , Y . ( 2003 ) . Commentary : Reconceptualizing school learning using insight from expertise research . Educational Researcher , 32 ( 8 ) , 26 – 29 . Holyoak , K . J . ( 2005 ) . Analogy . In K . J . Holyoak & R . G . Morrison ( Eds . ) , The Cambridge handbook of thinking and reasoning ( pp . 117 – 142 ) . New 1255 York , NY : Cambridge University Press . Hulleman , C . S . , Durik , A . M . , Schweigert , S . A . , & Harackiewicz , J . M . ( 2008 ) . Task values , achievement goals , and interest : An integrative anal - ysis . Journal of Educational Psychology , 100 , 398 – 416 . Jacoby , S . , & Gonzales , P . ( 1991 ) . The construction of expert – novice in 1260 scientiﬁc discourse . Issues in Applied Linguistics , 2 , 149 – 181 . Keiler , L . ( 2007 ) . Students’explanationsoftheirdatahandling : Implications for transfer of learning . International Journal of Science Education , 29 , 151 – 172 . Kelly , G . J . , & Chen , C . ( 1999 ) . The sound of music : Constructing science 1265 as sociocultural practices through oral and written discourse . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 36 , 883 – 915 . Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition . ( 1983 ) . Culture and cogni - tive development . In P . H . Mussen ( Ed . ) , Handbook of child psychol - ogy : Vol . 1 . History , theory and methods ( pp . 295 – 356 ) . New York , NY : 1270 Wiley . Lam , D . P . , Meyer , X . S . , Engle , R . A . , Goldwasser , L . , Perez , S . , Zheng , K . , . . . Tan , D . ( 2012 ) . A microgenetic analysis of how expansive framing led to transfer for one struggling student . In J . van Aalst , K . Thompson , M . J . Jacobson , & P . Reimann ( Eds . ) , The future of learning : Proceedings of 1275 the 10th International Conference of the Learning Sciences ( ICLS 2012 ) – Volume 1 , Full papers . Sydney , Australia : International Society of the Learning Sciences . Q14 Lave , J . ( 1988 ) . Cognition in practice : Mind , mathematics , and culture in everyday life . New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . 1280 Leander , K . M . ( 2001 ) . “This is our freedom bus going home right now” : Producing and hybridizing space - time contexts in pedagogical discourse . Journal of Literacy Research , 33 , 637 – 679 . Lobato , J . ( 2012 / this issue ) . The actor - oriented transfer perspective and its contributions to educational research and practice . Educational Psychol - 1285 ogist , 47 , XX – XX . Lobato , J . , Ellis , A . , & Mu˜noz , R . ( 2003 ) . How“focusingphenomena”inthe instructional environment support individual students’ generalizations , Mathematical Thinking and Learning , 5 , 1 – 36 . Loewenstein , J . ( 2010 ) . How one’s hook is baited matters for catching an 1290 analogy . In B . H . Ross ( Ed . ) , Psychology of learning and motivation , Volume 53 . New York , NY : Elsevier . Q15 Mac Iver , D . J . , Stipek , D . J . , & Daniels , D . H . ( 1991 ) . Explaining within - semester changes in student effort in junior high school and senior high school courses . Journal of Educational Psychology , 83 , 201 – 11 . 1295 Malka , A . , & Covington , M . V . ( 2005 ) . Perceiving school performance as instrumental to future goal attainment : Effects on graded performance . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 30 , 60 – 80 . Maxwell , J . A . ( 2004a ) . Causal explanation , qualitative research , and scien - tiﬁc inquiry in education . Educational Researcher , 33 ( 2 ) , 3 – 11 . 1300 Maxwell , J . A . ( 2004b ) . Using qualitative methods for causal explanation . Field Methods , 16 , 243 – 264 . Mendelson , A . ( 2010 ) . Using online forums to scaffold oral participation in foreign language instruction . L2 Journal , 2 ( 1 ) , 23 – 44 . Mercer , N . ( 1995 ) . The guided construction of knowledge : talk amongst 1305 teachers and learners . Bristol , UK : Multilingual Matters . Meyer , X . S . ( 2012 , March ) . Connecting expansive framing to transfer in a highschoolbiologyclassroom . Relatedpaper - setpresentedattheNational Association for Research in Science Teaching International Conference , Indianapolis , IN . 1310 Meyer , X . , Mendelson , A . , Engle , R . A . , & Clark , J . ( in preparation ) . Ex - pansive framing and transfer in a high school biology class : Promoting connections within and beyond the classroom . Manuscript in preparation . Q16 Ming , N . C . ( 2009 ) . Analogies vs . contrasts : A comparison of their learn - ing beneﬁts . In B . Kokinov , D . Gentner , & K . Holyoak ( Eds . ) , New 1315 frontiers in analogy research : Proceedings of the second international conference on analogy ( pp . 338 – 347 ) . Soﬁa , Bulgaria : New Bulgarian University . Pea , R . D . ( 1987 ) . Socializingtheknowledgetransferproblem . International Journal of Educational Research , 11 , 639 – 663 . 1320 Putney , L . G . , Green , J . , Dixon , C . , Duran , R . , & Yeager , B . ( 2000 ) . Con - sequential progressions : Exploring collective - individual development in bilingual classrooms . In C . D . Lee & P . Smagorinsky ( Eds . ) , Vygotskian perspectives on literacy research : Constructing meaning through col - laborative inquiry ( pp . 86 – 126 ) . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University 1325 Press . Reed , S . K . ( in press ) . Learning by mapping across situations . The Journal of the Learning Sciences . Q17 Reed , S . K . , Ernst , G . W . , & Banarji , R . ( 1974 ) . Theroleofanalogyintransfer between similar problem states . Cognitive Psychology , 6 , 436 – 450 . 1330 Reeves , L . M . , & Weisberg , R . W . ( 1994 ) . The role of content and abstract information in analogical transfer . Psychological Bulletin , 115 , 381 – 400 . Renkl , A . , Mandl , H . , & Gruber , H . ( 1996 ) . Inert knowledge : Analysis and remedies . Educational Psychologist , 31 , 115 – 122 . Richland , L . E . , Stigler , J . W . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2012 / this issue ) . Teaching 1335 the conceptual structure of mathematics . Educational Psychologist , 47 , XX – XX . Rittle - Johnson , B . , & Star , J . R . ( 2007 ) . Does comparing solution methods facilitate conceptual and procedural knowledge ? An experimental study on learning to solve equations . Journal of Educational Psychology , 99 , 1340 561 – 574 . Ross , B . H . ( 1984 ) . Reminding and their effects in learning a cognitive skill . Cognitive Psychology , 16 , 371 – 416 . Salomon , G . , & Perkins , D . N . ( 1989 ) . Rocky roads to transfer : Rethinking mechanisms of a neglected phenomenon . Educational Psychologist , 24 , 1345 113 – 142 . Saxe , G . ( 2002 ) . Children’s developing mathematics in collective practices : A framework for analysis . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 11 , 175 – 200 . Schwartz , D . L . , Bransford , J . D . , & Sears , D . ( 2005 ) . Efﬁciency and inno - 1350 vation in transfer . In J . Mestre ( Ed . ) , Transfer of learning : Research and perspectives . Greenwich , CT : Information Age . Q18 Schwartz , D . L . , Chase , C . C . , & Bransford , J . ( 2012 / this issue ) . Resisting overzealous transfer : Coordinating previously successful routines with needs for new learning . Educational Psychologist , 47 , XX – XX . 1355 Searle , J . ( 1995 ) . The construction of social reality . New York , NY : The Free Press . Shadish , W . R . , Cook , T . D . , & Campbell , D . T . ( 2002 ) . Experimental and quasi - experimental designs for generalized causal inference . Boston , MA : Houghton - Mifﬂin . 1360 EXPLAINING FRAMING’S EFFECTS ON TRANSFER 17 Siegler , R . S . ( 2006 ) . Microgenetic analyses of learning . In W . Damon & R . M . Lerner ( Series Eds . ) & D . Kuhn & R . S . Siegler ( Vol . Eds . ) , Handbook of child psychology : Volume 2 : Cognition , perception , and language ( 6th ed . , pp . 464 – 510 ) . Hoboken , NJ : Wiley . Simons , J . , Dewitte , S . , & Lens , W . ( 2003 ) . “Don’t do it for me . Do it for 1365 yourself ! ” Stressing the personal relevance enhances motivation in phys - ical education . Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology , 25 , 145 – 160 . Sizer , T . ( 1984 ) . Horace’s compromise : The dilemma of the American high school . New York , NY : Houghton Mifﬂin . Smith , S . M . , Glenberg , A . , & Bjork , R . A . ( 1978 ) . Environmental context 1370 and human memory . Memory and Cognition , 6 , 342 – 353 . Spencer , R . M . , & Weisberg , R . W . ( 1986 ) . Context - dependent effects on analogical transfer . Memory and Cognition , 14 , 442 – 449 . Tannen , D . ( 1993 ) . Introduction . In D . Tannen ( Ed . ) , Framing in discourse ( pp . 3 – 13 ) . New York , NY : Oxford University Press . 1375 Thorndike , E . L . ( 2009 ) . Educational psychology . Charleston , SC : Biblio - Life . ( Original work published 1903 ) Tulving , E . , & Thomson , D . M . ( 1973 ) . Encoding speciﬁcity and retrieval processes in episodic memory . Psychological Review , 80 , 353 – 370 . Wagner , J . ( 2006 ) . Transfer in pieces . Cognition and Instruction , 24 , 1380 1 – 71 . Zheng , K . , Meyer , X . S . , & Engle , R . A . ( 2012 , March ) . Student respon - siveness to the teacher’s expansive framing . In X . S . Meyer ( Chair ) , Con - necting expansive framing to transfer in a high school biology classroom . Related paper - set presented at the National Association for Research in 1385 Science Teaching International Conference , Indianapolis , IN . HEDP # 693353 , VOL 47 , ISS 3 The Actor - Oriented Transfer Perspective and Its Contributions to Educational Research and Practice Joanne Lobato QUERY SHEET This page lists questions we have about your paper . The numbers displayed at left can be found in the text of the paper for reference . In addition , please review your paper as a whole for correctness . Q1 . Au : This Barnett & Ceci , 2002 , citation is listed in the references as 2005 ; please adjust . Q2 . Au : This Barnett & Ceci , 2002 , citation is listed in the references as 2005 ; please adjust . Q3 . Au : Please be sure that the equations appear as you intended in the proofs . Q4 . Au : The page number 24 does not appear in the Bransford and Schwarz ( 1999 ) reference ( the reference gives the page range as 61 – 100 ) ; please review . Q5 . Au : As an author you are required to secure permission from the original copyright holder if you want to reproduce any ﬁgure , table , or extract from the text of another source . Please conﬁrm you have permission from the original rights holder of Figure 1 , or it will have to be deleted . Q6 . Au : Provide page number of illustration in Bassok & Holyoak 1989 , name of copyright holder ( is it the publisher of Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition ? ) , and year of copyright . Q7 . Au : Update for Lobato et al . , in press ? Q8 . Au : Update for Thompson “in press” ? Q9 . Au : Update for Reed , in press ? Q10 . Au : This Lobato & Thanheiser , 2000 , citation is listed in the references as 2002 ; please adjust . Q11 . Au : Update for Belenky & Nokes - Malach , in press ? Q12 . Au : Update for Lobato , Rhodehamel , & Hohensee , in press ? Q13 . Au : Update for Lobato , Rhodehamel , & Hohensee , in press ? Q14 . Au : Update for Lobato , Rhodehamel , & Hohensee , in press ? Q15 . Au : Provide journal volume number and article page range for Anderson et al . 2000 . Q16 . Au : Barnett & Ceci ( 2005 ) : Cite in text or delete . Q17 . Au : Belenky & Nokes - Malach : Please update this ( in press ) reference if its status has changed . Q18 . Au : Gruber , Law , Mandl , & Renkl : Please provide chapter page range . Q19 . Au : Lobato , Hohensee , Rhodehamel , & Diamond : Please update this ( in press ) reference if its status has changed . Q20 . Au : Update for Lobato et al . 2011 “manuscript under review” ? Q21 . Au : Lobato , Rhodehamel , & Hohensee : Please update this ( in press ) reference if its status has changed . Q22 . Au : Lobato & Thanheiser ( 2002 ) : Cite in text or delete . Q23 . Au : Rebello et al . : Please provide chapter page range . Q24 . Au : Reed : Please update this ( in press ) reference if its status has changed . Q25 . Au : Thompson : Please update this ( in press ) reference if its status has changed . TABLE OF CONTENTS LISTING The table of contents for the journal will list your paper exactly as it appears below : The Actor - Oriented Transfer Perspective and Its Contributions to Educational Research and Practice Joanne Lobato EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGIST , 47 ( 3 ) , 1 – 16 , 2012 Copyright C (cid:1) Division 15 , American Psychological Association ISSN : 0046 - 1520 print / 1532 - 6985 online DOI : 10 . 1080 / 00461520 . 2012 . 693353 The Actor - Oriented Transfer Perspective and Its Contributions to Educational Research and Practice Joanne Lobato Department of Mathematics and Statistics San Diego State University 5 Although any mainstream thought is subject to theoretical challenges , the challenges to the mainstream cognitive perspective on transfer have had an unfortunate divisive effect . This article takes a pragmatic view that transfer perspectives are simply designed objects ( Plomp & Nieveen , 2007 ) , which provide different information for different purposes . Speciﬁcally , this paper compares one alternative approach—the actor - oriented transfer perspective —with the mainstream cognitive perspective on transfer , by examining the points of compatibility and tension across 5 dimensions . As a result , a space is opened up to explore 3 issues that are particularly well suited to an actor - oriented transfer approach : ( a ) how students interpret transfer situations , ( b ) the socially situated nature of transfer processes in classrooms , and ( c ) how contextual - sensitivity can play a productive role in the transfer of learning . Exploring the beneﬁts and trade - offs of various approaches allows for greater understanding of the contributions of each perspective to educational research and practice . 10 15 People often notice the transfer of learning when it doesn’t happen . For example , a mother is disappointed when her 3 - 20 year - old son fails to use his enumeration skills to count out the number of placemats she lays on the table . A calculus professor wonders how to help his college students when they are unable to solve a straightforward physics applica - tion using skills of integration they already have . A high 25 school mathematics teacher is disheartened when students who had performed well on a test of linear functions and slope respond to a novel task by treating slope as a differ - ence rather than a ratio . Our expectation for transfer in each case may be an indication of our everyday experience of the 30 world having order and regularity : Past experiences carry over from one context to the next . Furthermore , nearly all learning theories presume that prior knowledge inﬂuences the comprehension of any new situation ( Anderson , 1996 ; Bereiter , 1995 ; Booker , 1996 ; Bransford & McCarrell , 1974 ; 35 Hatano & Greeno , 1999 ) . For example , according to Dewey’s ( 1938 ) principle of the continuity of experience , “Every ex - perience both takes up something from those which have Correspondence should be addressed to Joanne Lobato , Department of Mathematics and Statistics , San Diego State University , Center for Research in Mathematics and Science Education , 6475 Alvarado Road , Suite 206 , San Diego , CA 92120 . E - mail : lobato @ math . sdu . edu gone before and modiﬁes in some way the quality of those which come after” ( p . 34 ) . 40 On the other hand , transfer has been notoriously illusive to produce consistently in laboratory studies ( Barnett & Ceci , 2002 ; Detterman , 1993 ; Perkins & Salomon , 1989 ) . Q1 Furthermore , there have been numerous critiques of the theoretical and methodological underpinnings of transfer 45 research ( Beach , 1999 , 2003 ; Bransford & Schwartz , 1999 ; Evans , 1998 ; Greeno , 1997 ; Gruber , Law , Mandl , & Renkl , 1996 ; Lave , 1988 ; Packer , 2001 ; Tuomi - Gr¨ohn & Engestr¨om , 2003 ) . As a result , some researchers have abandoned transfer as a research construct ( Carraher & Schliemann , 2002 ; 50 Hammer , Elby , Scherr , & Redish , 2005 ; Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition [ LCHC ] , 1983 ) , whereas others have developed alternative transfer perspectives ( Beach , 1999 , 2003 ; Bransford & Schwartz , 1999 ; Greeno , Smith , & Moore , 1993 ; Nemirovsky , 2011 ; Tuomi - Gr¨ohn & 55 Engestr¨om , 2003 ; Wagner , 2006 , 2010 ) . This article focuses on one such alternative approach—the actor - oriented trans - fer perspective ( AOT ; Lobato , 2003 , 2006 , 2008a , 2008b ) . Among other points , I argue that AOT can be used as a lens to detect instances of the generalization of learning experi - 60 ences ( meaning the expansion of instructional or everyday experiences beyond the conditions of initial learning ) , even when there is a lack of transfer according to traditional deﬁnitions , as is the case in the three opening scenarios . 2 LOBATO The AOT perspective emerged in response to critiques of 65 the mainstream cognitive approach to transfer , which often challenged its epistemological assumptions . However , I take a more pragmatic view that models of transfer are simply designed objects ( Plomp & Nieveen , 2007 ) , which provide different information for different purposes . Rather than con - 70 ceiving of a particular perspective as being ﬂawed and in need of replacement , points of compatibility and tension between models of transfer are explored , thus allowing for greater un - derstanding of the contributions to educational research and practice by each perspective . Speciﬁcally , I begin by examin - 75 ing the beneﬁts and trade - offs of both mainstream cognitive and actor - oriented perspectives on the transfer of learning , with the goal of ﬂeshing out the tenets of AOT and open - ing up a space to explore transfer issues that are particularly well suited to an AOT approach . After all , there is no point 80 in presenting an alternative approach if the dominant per - spective can be used to satisfactorily explore the broad array of phenomena that interest transfer researchers . The goal of this article is not to supplant one perspective but rather to articulate speciﬁc issues that can beneﬁt from an alternative 85 approach . To that end , I draw upon empirical studies from a variety of researchers operating from an AOT perspective to articulate some speciﬁc ways in which AOT can afford new insights into understanding : ( a ) how students interpret transfer situations , ( b ) the socially situated nature of transfer 90 processes in classrooms , and ( c ) how contextual - sensitivity can play a productive role in the transfer of learning . DIFFERENTIATING BETWEEN THE MAINSTREAM COGNITIVE AND ACTOR - ORIENTED PERSPECTIVES 95 ON TRANSFER : POINTS OF COMPATIBILITY AND TENSION Mainstream Cognitive Perspective on Transfer By the mainstream cognitive perspective on transfer , I refer broadly to the family of approaches that emerged during the 100 last half of the 20th century as part of the cognitive revolution ( offered by a variety of researchers including but not limited to Bassok & Holyoak , 1993 ; Gentner , 1983 , 1989 ; Nokes , 2009 ; Novick , 1988 ; Reed , 1993 ; Ross , 1984 ; Singley & Anderson , 1989 ; Sternberg & Frensch , 1993 ) . Researchers 105 formulated explanations for transfer based on relationships between a learner’s mental representations , as opposed to the theories posited by associationists and behaviorists based on environmental similarity and observable stimuli ( Royer , Mestre , & Dufresne , 2005 ) . A hallmark of this general ap - 110 proach is a commitment to a cognitive architecture com - prising ( a ) short - term , long - term , and sensory memories ; ( b ) representations as symbolic mental symbol structures that encode , process , and store one’s experiences ; and ( c ) a con - trol mechanism to oversee the retrieval and utilization of 115 information ( Bruer , 2001 ; Ericsson & Simon , 1993 ) . Under this general umbrella exist different strands of re - search . One prominent approach is the cognitive descendent to Thorndike’s ( 1906 ) theory of identical elements . In their seminal cognitive account of transfer , Singley and Anderson 120 ( 1989 ) explained that they “resurrected Thorndike’s theory by redeﬁning his identical elements as the units of declar - ative and procedural knowledge” ( p . 248 ) , thus addressing Thorndike’s lack of an explicit representational language , which can allow for the ﬂexible reconstruction of knowl - 125 edge . A second inﬂuential theory is the structure - mapping approach of Gentner and colleagues , developed as an ac - count of analogical reasoning but readily adapted to exam - ine lateral transfer ( Genter , 1983 , 1989 ; Gentner & Kurtz , 2006 ; Gentner , Loewenstein , & Thompson , 2003 ; Gentner & 130 Markman , 1997 ) . From this perspective , transfer involves a mapping between mental representations of relations among objects and their attributes in initial learning and transfer situations . Other points of diversity within the mainstream cognitive approach include ( a ) the use of different subpro - 135 cesses to explain the occurrence of transfer , such as constraint violation ( Ohlsson & Rees , 1991 ) or analogical systematicity ( Markman & Gentner , 2000 ) ; ( b ) a focus on different types of transfer ( as summarized in Barnett & Ceci , 2002 ) , and ( c ) Q2 disagreements regarding whether the mental representation 140 of a transfer situation is constructed during engagement with that situation ( e . g . , Gentner , 1983 ) or in the initial learning situation ( Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ) . Despite these differences , there are many common features among family members of the mainstream cognitive 145 perspective on transfer . First , the formation of sufﬁciently abstract representations is a necessary condition for transfer ( so that properties and relations can be recognized in both initial and transfer situations ) , where abstraction is conceived as a process of decontextualization ( Fuchs et al . , 150 2003 ; Gentner , 1983 ; Reeves & Weisberg , 1994 ; Singley & Anderson , 1989 ) . Second , explanations for the occurrence of transfer are based on the psychological invariance of symbolic mental representations ( Bassok & Holyoak , 1993 ; Nokes , 2009 ; Sternberg & Frensch , 1993 ) . Finally , transfer 155 occurs if the representations that people construct of initial learning and transfer situations are identical , overlap , or can be related via mapping ( Anderson , Corbett , Koedinger , & Pelletier , 1995 ; Gentner et al . , 2003 ; Gick & Holyoak , 1983 , 1987 ; Novick , 1988 ; Reed , 1993 ) . 160 From a mainstream cognitive perspective , transfer is char - acterized as “how knowledge acquired from one task or sit - uation can be applied to a different one” ( Nokes , 2009 , p . 2 ) . From the AOT perspective , transfer is deﬁned as the gen - eralization of learning , which also can be understood as the 165 inﬂuence of a learner’s prior activities on her activity in novel situations ( Lobato , 2008a ) . The differences between perspec - tives may not be apparent from these deﬁnitions , especially because there are instances in which researchers operating THE ACTOR - ORIENTED TRANSFER PERSPECTIVE 3 from the mainstream cognitive perspective have described 170 transfer as the inﬂuence of prior learning experiences on attempts to solve problems in new situations ( see Marini & Genereux , 1995 ; Reed , Ernst , & Banerji , 1974 ) . Thus , I explore ﬁve dimensions across which the two perspectives differ : ( a ) the nature of knowing and representing , ( b ) point 175 of view , ( c ) what transfers , ( d ) methods , and ( e ) goals . For each dimension , I discuss points of contact and tensions as well as the beneﬁts and trade - offs of each perspective . Nature of Knowing and Representing Both actor - oriented and mainstream cognitive perspectives 180 on transfer share the view that the basis for transfer is psy - chological similarity rather than similar features of physical or task environments ( ´a la Thorndike , 1906 ) . However , the AOT perspective places greater emphasis on the interpreta - tive nature of knowing than is present in many studies con - 185 ducted from a mainstream cognitive perspective . This means that researchers operating from an AOT perspective look for the ways in which students appear to treat transfer situations as instances of something they have already thought about , based on their interpretation and construal of meaning of the 190 activities and events in the initial learning situation . That is , knowing and representing arise as a product of interpretive engagement with the experiential world , through an interac - tion of prior learning experiences , task and artifactual affor - dances , discursive interplay with others , and personal goals . 195 Within the mainstream cognitive perspective on transfer , there appears to be a much closer correspondence between events / objects in the world and mental representations . In principle this relationship is problematized , as evidenced in the following quote from Anderson , Reder , and Simon 200 ( 2000 ) : “The representational view of mind , as practiced in cognitive psychology , certainly makes no claims that the mind represents the world accurately or completely” ( p . 14 ) . Similarly , Gentner and Markman ( 1997 ) acknowledged that mental representations are informed by an individual’s goals 205 and prior knowledge . However , after analyzing many empir - ical studies conducted within both the identical elements and structure - mapping strands , Wagner ( 2010 ) concluded that in practicality both models tend to treat representations as unproblematic , “as if situational structure could be directly 210 perceived in the world” ( p . 447 ) . This stance is also reﬂected in other empirical and theoretical papers , for example , by English and Halford ( 1995 ) , when they stated that “cognitive processes entail operations on mental representations , which are internal mental structures that correspond to the struc - 215 ture of a segment of the world” ( p . 21 ) ; by Rittle - Johnson , Siegler , and Alibali ( 2001 ) , when they code mental presen - tations of learning and transfer situations as either correct or incorrect ; and by Anderson ( 1996 ) , when he claimed that “declarative knowledge is a fairly direct encoding of things 220 in our environment ; procedural knowledge is a fairly direct encoding of observed transformations” ( p . 364 ) . A notable exception is the work by Day and Goldstone ( 2011 ) , who attempted to disambiguate external similarity from similar mental representations . 225 These observations are not intended as criticism ; rather , the differences between perspectives suggest implications re - garding optimal research domains for each perspective . For example , the research venues that can most beneﬁt from the use of an AOT perspective are ones with semantically rich 230 content that is open to a variety of often idiosyncratic ways of comprehending and interpreting . The AOT approach was not developed to address areas that have typically been the focus of research from the mainstream cognitive perspective , such as the transfer of procedural skill ( e . g . , transfer across 235 text editors , Singley & Anderson , 1989 ; transfer of LOGO debugging skills , Klahr & Carver , 1988 ) , puzzle - type prob - lems ( e . g . , Tower of Hanoi / Monster problems , Kotovsky & Fallside , 1989 ) , procedural elements of semantically rich do - mains ( e . g . , algebraic skills in word problems , Koedinger & 240 Anderson , 1998 ) , and tasks with a rule - oriented or syntac - tic focus ( e . g . , continuing sequences of letters in a pattern , Nokes , 2009 ) . To illustrate what is meant by focusing on the interpre - tive nature of knowing within a transfer study , I brieﬂy turn 245 to an example from my previous research with colleagues ( Lobato , Ellis , & Mu˜noz , 2003 ) . The study occurred in the ninth - grade algebra classroom of a teacher using a reform - oriented curricular unit on linear functions . We expected that the development of linear functions as dependency re - 250 lationships in multiple real - world situations would increase the likelihood that students would successfully negotiate the quantitative complexity of novel transfer situations . Further - more , the unit spent much longer investigating slope than is typical in traditional algebra classrooms , and it linked infor - 255 mal explorations with the presentation of the slope formula ( m = y 2 − y 1 x 2 − x 1 ) . Thus , we were surprised when qualitative anal - ysis revealed that the interview participants interpreted the slope of a linear function , not as a ratio of the changes in the dependent variable for each 1 - unit change in the correspond - 260 ing independent variable , but incorrectly as a difference ( in y - values , x - values , or in the scale of the x - axis ) . For example , in an interview task in which the slope represented the ratio of the amount of water collected from a leaking faucet over time ( i . e . , 8 oz per hour ) , a common response was to identify 265 the difference in amounts of water presented in a table of data , without regard for the corresponding difference in time ( e . g . , using 10 as the slope when 10 oz of water leaked in 1 . 25 hr rather than 1 hr ) . We found this surprising because these students had been selected as higher performers in the class 270 and had been able to correctly ﬁnd the slope of liner functions in unit quizzes prepared by their teacher . Perhaps their under - standing was bound to the context of the learning situation . However , closer examination revealed that all of the stu - dents who produced an equation for a given line or table 275 wrote “y = (cid:1) ± (cid:1) x” ( rather than the more standard y = m x + b ) and referred to the two boxes respectively as the Q3 4 LOBATO “starting point” and “what it goes up by . ” The fact that this language and these inscriptions were used in class suggested that students were generalizing or expanding their instruc - 280 tional experiences beyond the conditions of initial learning . This was conﬁrmed during qualitative analysis of videotaped classroom episodes . Speciﬁcally , we identiﬁed several fea - tures of the classroom practices that regularly directed stu - dents’ attention to various differences in a single quantity 285 rather than to the coordination of quantities . In each case , the classroom practices were understandable , despite the unfore - seen and undesirable consequences . For example , the teacher regularly used the phrase “goes up by” when talking about slope , perhaps in an effort to connect with students through 290 initial use of more accessible language before moving to for - mal symbolization . Although the teacher used the phrase to speak about ratios ( e . g . , “the y ’s go up by 3 when the x ’s go up by 1” ) , the students apparently interpreted the teacher’s utterances in terms of differences in a single quantity . In sum , 295 this example demonstrates the unexpected connections that learners can make between their personal interpretations of learning experiences and transfer situations . A critical reader may question the value of identifying generalizing activity that results in incorrect performance . 300 However , the AOT perspective responds to the following challenge by Bransford and Schwarz ( 1999 ) : Prevailing theories and methods of measuring transfer work well for studying full - blown expertise , but they represent too blunt an instrument for studying the smaller changes 305 in learning that lead to the development of expertise . New theories and measures of transfer are required . ( p . 24 ) Q4 Novices are likely to demonstrate greater variety in their interpretations of learning environments than experts ; thus , making them a desirable object of research from the AOT per - 310 spective . Furthermore , I revisit this study later to demonstrate how information from an AOT study can inform revisions to curriculum and pedagogy during iterative cycles of instruc - tional design , leading to improvements in the nature of what is learned and transferred . 315 Point of View Central to the AOT perspective is the distinction between an “actor’s” and an “observer’s” point of view . Taking an ob - server’s point of view entails predetermining the particular strategy , principle , or heuristic that learners need to demon - 320 strate in order for their work on a novel task to count as transfer . It is also in operation when learners perform cor - rectly on tasks that an observer sees as structurally similar to initial learning tasks , and inferences are made that the learner sees the same similarity as the observer . When tak - 325 ing an actor’s point of view , the researcher does not mea - sure transfer against a particular cognitive or behavioral target but rather investigates instances in which the stu - dents’ prior experiences shaped their activity in the trans - fer situation , even if the result is non - normative or incorrect 330 performance . Transfer research from the mainstream cognitive perspec - tive is typically conducted from an observer’s point of view . Consider the study by Bassok and Holyoak ( 1989 ) exam - ining analogical transfer across the domains of algebra and 335 physics . In one of the experiments , half of the ninth - grade stu - dents were taught formulas for arithmetic progression meth - ods with practice on a variety of algebraic word problems , such as a n = a 1 + ( n – 1 ) d , where a 1 and a n are the initial and n th terms in the sequence , respectively , and d is the constant 340 difference of successive terms . Similarly , the other half were taught formulas related to constant acceleration with practice on physics problems ( i . e . , v f = v i + at , where v i and v f are the initial and ﬁnal velocities of an object traveling in a straight line , a the constant acceleration , and t the time taken to move 345 from the initial to the ﬁnal state ) . Students were then asked to solve transfer tasks ( such as those shown in Figure 1 ) from the domain in which they had not received instruction . The measure of transfer was “whether the learned method Q5 Q6 had been applied to structurally isomorphic but unfamil - 350 iar problems” ( p . 157 ) , meaning that transfer was depen - dent on explicit evidence of the formula and notation taught in class . Using this standard , the algebra students suc - cessfully mapped the arithmetic - progression methods onto the physics problems 72 % of the time . Additional verbal 355 Algebra During a laboratory observation period it is found that the diameter of a tree increases the same amount each month . If the diameter was 8 mm at the beginning of the first month , and 56 mm at the end of the 24 th month , by how much does the diameter increase each month ? Physics What is the acceleration ( = increase in speed each second ) of a racing car if its speed increased uniformly from 44 meters per second ( 44 m / s ) at the beginning of the first second , to 55 m / s at the end of the 11 th second ? FIGURE 1 Representative matched pair of algebra and physics transfer items . From “Interdomain Transfer Between Isomorphic Topics in Algebra and Physics” by M . Bassok & K . J . Holyoak , 1989 , Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 15 . THE ACTOR - ORIENTED TRANSFER PERSPECTIVE 5 protocol evidence supported the claim that the algebra stu - dents spontaneously recognized that the kinematics problems could be addressed using the arithmetic - progression formu - las . In contrast , the physics students used the constant ac - celeration formulas on only 10 % of the algebra problems . 360 The researchers concluded that arithmetic - progression pro - cedures transferred better than the kinematics procedures , due to the greater content speciﬁcity of the physics represen - tations . One beneﬁt of the observer’s point of view is the emer - 365 gence of a yardstick to illuminate differences in reasoning . In this study , it helped distinguish the effect of training differ - ences in learners’ ability to map equations across domains . The observer’s point of view can also be used effectively in the summative assessment of an instructional treatment . A 370 trade - off is that the generalization of learning can be under - estimated . For example , the physics students in the Bassok and Holyoak ( 1989 ) study did , in fact , solve 94 % of algebra transfer tasks correctly ( despite using the taught equations and notations on only 10 % of the tasks ) . Their use of the 375 same methods to solve both the algebra transfer tasks and the pretest items suggests that they were generalizing but that they generalized some experiences gained prior to the study rather than generalizing their experiences with the targeted techniques . A second trade - off is that dimensions related to 380 learners’ comprehension of situations can be overlooked as the basis for task isomorphism . Although the tasks in Figure 1 are isomorphic along the dimension of mapping values of terms in the same positions in two sequences , they are not isomorphic along the dimension of measurable attributes to 385 be conceived . Using the physics formula to solve the tree diagram task entails mapping an extensive quantity ( a di - rectly measurable quantity—the tree diameter ) onto a ﬁrst order ratio ( the ratio of two extensive quantities , here , the ratio of distance to time , or velocity ) and a ﬁrst order ra - 390 tio ( the growth rate of diameter ) onto a second order ratio ( the ratio of a ratio to an extensive quantity , here the ratio of velocity to time , or acceleration ; J . L . Schwartz , 1988 ) . Thus , according to the dimension of measurable attributes , the tree problem is isomorphic to a constant velocity rather 395 than a constant acceleration problem . Research suggests that forming these different relationships among measurable at - tributes of a situation is a central yet challenging aspect of understanding this domain for novices ( Lobato , Hohensee , Rhodehamel , & Diamond , in press ; Stroup , 2002 ; Thompson , Q7 400 1994 ) . The deﬁnition of transfer from an AOT perspective as the generalization of learning signiﬁes a research interest in the expansion of experiences beyond the conditions of initial learning , rather than the formation of particular highly 405 valued generalizations alone . Both represent legitimate but somewhat different avenues of research . To further illustrate the differences , consider a brief example of data analyzed from both observer and actor points of view . The data were collected from exams given to 139 high school introductory 410 algebra students participating in a 6 - week unit on slope and linear functions ( Lobato , 1996 ) . The students performed well on tasks encountered in the experimental curriculum , such as ﬁnding the slope of staircases ( 87 % correct ) and lines ( 80 % correct ) . The transfer tasks asked students to ﬁnd the 415 slope of a playground slide and the roof of a house . In each case , the slope can be determined by identifying and then measuring the “rise” or vertical change of the object ( by ﬁtting a staircase or stairstep to the object—a method taught in class ) , identifying and measuring the “run” or horizontal 420 change of the object , and then dividing the rise by the run . Strong transfer ﬁndings were predicted , in part because the situation aligned with Singley and Anderson’s ( 1989 ) ﬁnding of nearly total transfer for related - rates calculus problems given the conditions that the tasks shared the same production 425 rules and solution methods and the students had extensive practice . Contrary to expectations , transfer was poor—40 % to the slide task and 33 % to the roof task . Follow - up interviews using an AOT perspective presented a different picture , namely , that all interview participants 430 demonstrated evidence of the generalization of their learning experiences . While working on the playground slide task ( see Figure 2a ) , the students correctly recalled the slope formula as “rise divided by run” and treated the slope formula as relevant in the novel situation . However , they made incorrect 435 rise and run choices . Jarek’s response is particularly striking because the rise and run seem disconnected from the part of the apparatus that is steep ( see Figure 2b ) . However , his in - terpretation of experiences with staircases during instruction was conceptually related to his reasoning on the transfer task . 440 Speciﬁcally he appeared to look for a stair step in the slide set - ting ( e . g . , an object with connected “up” and “over” compo - nents that visually affords climbing in an imagined state of af - fairs ) , whichhefoundontheright sideof theslide ( Figure2c ) . The platform as the run may have held appeal because it was 445 the only visible “tread” or “over” affordance . In sum , taking an actor’s point of view helped illuminate ways in which learners’ unanticipated interpretations of instructional ex - periences were connected to their comprehension of transfer situations . Furthermore , it helped identify elements of mathe - 450 matical understanding ( e . g . , the constraint that mathematical “staircases” need to be connected to the part of the object that is steep ) , which can remain implicit in an expert model until their absence is surprisingly demonstrated in student work . 455 By revealing unexpected ways in which people generalize their learning experiences , the use of an actor’s point of view can help guard against conclusions that reasoning is hopelessly context - bound or that transfer failures “are an inevitable consequence of the limited power and gen - 460 erality of human knowledge” ( Singley & Anderson , 1989 , p . 2 ; see also Detterman , 1993 ; Hatano , 1996 ; Perkins & Salomon , 1989 ) . One trade - off of the AOT perspective is the time - intensive nature of the qualitative data analysis ( espe - cially because what is transferring is typically not known in 465 6 LOBATO FIGURE 2 From Lobato’s ( 1996 ) study : ( a ) the Transfer Task , ( b ) one student’s response , which identiﬁed the rise in slope = rise / run as the height of the ladder and the run as the length of the platform , and ( c ) possible image connecting transfer and learning tasks from the student’s point of view . advance ) and the need of a research design that affords access to the inﬂuencing experience . Furthermore , a critical reader may interpret the slope study as simply juxtaposing novice with expert representations , which has been addressed from a mainstream cognitive perspective . For example , Novick 470 ( 1988 ) found that when training and transfer tasks shared structural features but not surface features , experts were more likely to use the training - taught procedure to solve the transfer problems than novices were . On the other hand , when the two problems shared surface but not structural fea - 475 tures , novices were more likely to continue using the taught procedure inappropriately ( resulting in negative transfer ) . By similarly adopting an observer’s perspective to interpret the results of the slope study , one can conclude that the students used a taught procedure ( slope = rise / run ) inappropriately . 480 However , this leaves unexplored the issue that the students’ interpretation of the instruction did not match what was intended . Thus , the actor’s point of view allows an inves - tigation of the particular ways in which students interpret the meaning of slope , staircases , steepness , and so on . This 485 opens up the issue of what transfers—a strategy versus one’s comprehension of a situation—which I address next . What Transfers ? In their review of transfer research during the 20th century , Singley and Anderson ( 1989 ) concluded that there is little 490 evidence for the transfer of general problem - solving facul - ties across a broad range of domains . Instead , much of the recent research from both mainstream cognitive and AOT perspectives has focused on the transfer of speciﬁc content knowledge . However , there is one important distinction be - 495 tween the nature of knowledge studied in mainstream cogni - tive accounts ( particularly the common elements approach ) and AOT , namely , the transfer of well - deﬁned actions and strategies versus a more holistic conceptualization . This dis - tinction is elaborated through the following example . 500 Thompson ( in press ) interpreted a case study from his own Q8 research ( Thompson , 1994 ) from both mainstream cognitive and AOT perspectives . The study began with a sixth - grader called JJ answering questions such as the following , “How much time will it take Turtle ( a computer character ) to travel 505 200 cm if he goes 25 cm / sec ? ” JJ drew successive line seg - ments , each representing 25 cm , until she reached a total of 200 cm and then counted the number of segments—in this case , 8—for an answer of 8 s . She could also answer these questions using division ( e . g . , with 200 ÷ 25 ) . JJ was then 510 asked questions such as the following , “At what speed must Rabbit ( a second computer character ) travel so that it will travel 200 cm in 7 sec ? ” She initially experienced a dilemma because she wanted to make a speed segment but didn’t know the length of the segment to draw . Consequently , she adopted 515 a guess - and - test strategy , trying ﬁrst one “speed” and then another , without the use of division . According to Thompson , this episode would unlikely be considered an instance of transfer from the cognitive common elements perspective . When transfer involves comparing two 520 productions ( condition – action pairs ) for different tasks , then the individual performs some well - deﬁned mental or physi - cal operation ( often a strategy or calculation in a mathemat - ical context ) , when the task representation meets particular conditions ( Anderson , 1996 , 2005 ; Anderson et al . , 1995 ; 525 Muldner & Conati , 2010 ; Singley & Anderson , 1989 ) . Thus , Thompson concluded that JJ’s work on the second type of task would not count as transfer under this perspective because the student did not use the same solution method . However , Thompson claimed that this would count as 530 complete transfer from an AOT perspective , where what THE ACTOR - ORIENTED TRANSFER PERSPECTIVE 7 transferred was JJ’s conceptualization of speed , distance , and time , rather than the reuse of a well - deﬁned action . Speciﬁ - cally , speed was not a ratio for JJ but rather a distance ( or what Thompson calls a “speed - length” ) . She comprehended both 535 settings as essentially the same—that of traveling a distance in successive speed - lengths . In the ﬁrst case , JJ imagined measuring the given distance in units of a speed - length , and the number of speed - lengths contained in the given distance told her the amount of time the character traveled . In the sec - 540 ond situation , she again imagined measuring the given dis - tance in units of a speed - length—this time a guessed speed - length guided by an estimate of how many speed - lengths it would take to create the given number of seconds . In a sense , she was searching for a ruler of the right length by which 545 to measure the to - be - traveled distance . Thus , JJ appeared to comprehend the second situation as being pretty much the same as another that she had already thought about . A beneﬁt of targeting well - deﬁned actions is that they translate well into the if / then statements of computer pro - 550 grams , which can then be used to build intelligent tutoring systems . The trade - off is that such an approach may not account for an underlying conceptualization that can give rise to multiple strategies or behavioral actions . That said , a reader may wonder , as Reed ( in press ) did , if the no - Q9 555 tion of mapping—the formulation of a set of systematic correspondences—could be used to establish commonali - ties between mainstream cognitive and AOT perspectives . For example , Reed interpreted the slope example with Jarek ( from Figure 2 ) as an instance of a partial mapping ( meaning 560 partially successful because the rise but not the run com - ponent was correct ) from the symbolic representation of the slope formula to the diagrammatic representation of the play - ground slide . In contrast , from an AOT perspective , I con - sider Jarek’s work—much like JJ’s— to indicate complete 565 transfer of his conceptualization of slope . Jarek appeared to comprehend slope situations as linked with staircases , which in turn , brought to mind images of steps , with up and over components that afford climbing . How one diagnoses the problem—as related to discrete ac - 570 tions , partial mappings , or an underlying conceptualization— has important implications for instructional responses . For example , Reed diagnosed Jarek’s problem as failing to con - struct the auxiliary line segment that would allow a correct mapping to the run component . In response a teacher could 575 present worked examples that include the critical parts of a diagram before asking students to construct them . From an AOT perspective , Jarek’s conceptualization was problematic . He and the other students appeared to conceive of slope as two whole numbers—a rise and run value—which were not com - 580 pared multiplicatively to form a ratio . Furthermore , Jarek’s rise choice was correct only in a calculational sense , not a conceptual one , because it was disconnected from the part of the apparatus that was steep . Our subsequent design - based instructional approach focused on isolating the attribute to 585 be measured and constructing slope as a ratio to measure the particular attribute ( Lobato & Siebert , 2002 ; Lobato & Thanheiser , 2000 ; Olive & Lobato , 2008 ) . Q10 Methods Singley and Anderson ( 1989 ) described the methods often 590 used to establish transfer in both historical and mainstream cognitive approaches . Speciﬁcally , subjects are typically taught a solution , response , or principle in an initial learning situation and then solve a transfer task ( s ) . The initial learn - ing and transfer tasks share some structural features ( e . g . , a 595 common solution approach ) but have different surface forms ( e . g . , different word problem contexts or domain - speciﬁc details ) . The performance of the experimental group is com - pared with that of a control group , which is given the transfer tasks but receives no practice on the learning tasks . If the 600 performance of the experimental group on the transfer tasks is better than the control group , then transfer is said to occur . Some researchers have made adaptations to this basic ap - proach by using multiple measures to capture the transfer of learning . For example , Chen and Klahr ( 1999 ) investigated 605 the transfer of a “control of variables” strategy to design unconfounded experiments by using transfer tasks set in two contexts , a “strategy similarity awareness” measure , and a de - layed remote transfer measure . Other studies have used ver - bal protocol methods to examine solution procedures ( e . g . , 610 Bassok & Holyoak , 1989 ; Gentner , 1989 ; Nokes , 2009 ) , though , according to Novick ( 1988 ) , most transfer stud - ies from a mainstream cognitive perspective rely primarily on performance measures . In addition , accounts of transfer found in ACT - R studies ( Anderson , 1996 , 2005 ; Koedinger 615 & Terao , 2002 ; Singley & Anderson , 1989 ) , demonstrate a care for “what” transfers in their articulation of ﬁne - grained production rules ( though in practicality , accuracy of perfor - mance or time to complete a task is often used , and the object of transfer is inferred ) . However , the use of a predetermined 620 standard or a cognitive model based on an observer’s perspec - tive leaves an opening for more information to be gathered regarding unexpected ways in which people may construe learning and transfer situations as connected . To provide this type of information , the AOT perspec - 625 tive relies on qualitative methods to identify the nature of students’ reasoning in transfer situations and their comprehension of previous learning activities , allowing researchers to identify what transfers from an actor’s point of view ( Lobato , 2008a ) . Often inductive codes emerging 630 from the data are used rather than a priori codes ( Miles & Huberman , 1994 ) , because the nature of reasoning in the transfer situation and the particular meanings students develop during instruction are often unanticipated . A typical AOT design ( e . g . , as used in Karakok , 2009 , or Lobato & 635 Siebert , 2002 ) relies on extended , conceptually oriented classroom instruction , followed by the use of transfer tasks in clinical interviews ( Ginsburg , 1997 ) , but one could use a series of interviews or examine the use of novel tasks during instruction ( e . g . , as illustrated by Ellis , 2007 , and Sinha et al . , 640 8 LOBATO 2010 ) . Within a classroom / interview design , conducting preinstructional interviews or relying on instructional settings where participants have limited knowledge of the content to be learned can help isolate the experience that is inﬂuencing participants’ reasoning on the transfer tasks . 645 Typically the interview data are analyzed using open coding from grounded theory ( Strauss & Corbin , 1990 ) to categorize students’ inferred ways of thinking , comprehending , and meaning - making related to the transfer tasks . The classroom data are then analyzed qualitatively to identify any plausible 650 conceptual connections between the students’ reasoning on the transfer tasks and the instructional activities . There are beneﬁts , as well as trade - offs , associated with the methodological approach of each transfer perspective . Speciﬁcally , the reliance on transfer as a performance 655 measure allows researchers from a mainstream cognitive perspective to investigate the relationship between transfer and other factors such as motivation , achievement goals , metacognition , and learning disabilities ( Belenky & Nokes - Malach , in press ; Brownell , Mellard , & Deshler , 1993 ; Q11 660 Butterﬁeld & Nelson , 1991 ; Pugh & Bergin , 2006 ) . On the other hand , performance alone is a limited basis on which to infer an underlying cognitive model , as multiple models can lead to the same performance . This can be offset when qualitative methods are used , but the additional use of the 665 observer’s point of view can constrain the generalizing that is captured . On the other hand , the reliance on ethnographic methods constrains researchers to small sample sizes and brings with it the associated difﬁculties in generalizing claims and accounting for selection bias ( Sloane & Gorard , 670 2003 ) . However , a beneﬁt associated with this trade - off is the ability of AOT methods to capture the often unexpected nature of reasoning on transfer tasks , interpretative meanings of learning activities , and personal connections constructed between learning and transfer situations . 675 When mainstream cognitive transfer studies are grounded in an experimental design , they can capitalize on the logic of stochastic causality to make claims about the effective - ness of both preparatory and learning activities on students’ ability to perform on transfer tasks . This type of informa - 680 tion may be of greater use to policymakers than the results from AOT approaches regarding the particular nature and quality of individuals’ reasoning . In contrast , AOT studies are typically supported by Maxwell’s ( 2004 ) articulation of a type of scientiﬁc explanation that identiﬁes processes that 685 connect events conceptually and that can help explain later events , qualitatively . This approach helps capture explana - tory accounts of reasoning over extended periods of time , which can be useful in addressing questions of how or why something is happening . 690 Goals A major goal of mainstream cognitive transfer research is to document the occurrence of transfer ( or explain the failure of transfer ) , which includes investigating the types of knowledge that transfer better , the conditions that promote 695 or hinder transfer , and the instructional methods that support transfer ( e . g . , Butler , 2010 ; Butterﬁeld & Nelson , 1991 ; Chen & Mo , 2004 ; Gentner et al . , 2003 ; Rittle - Johnson , 2006 ) . In contrast , AOT research assumes that people regularly generalize their learning experiences and ﬁnds the 700 lack of transfer from the mainstream cognitive perspective understandable , given the large research base demonstrating that novices rarely make the same connections as experts ( Bransford , Brown , & Cocking , 2000 ) . Therefore , the goal of AOT studies is not to obtain transfer ( as it is already 705 assumed to occur ) but rather to understand the interpretative nature of the connections that people construct between learning and transfer situations , as well as the socially situated processes that give rise to those connections . Investigating the nature of how people generalize their 710 learning experiences , even when such generalizing results in incorrect performance , should not be misinterpreted as a lack of interest in the goal of ultimately having students achieve mathematical correctness or expertise . An important aim of many AOT studies is to improve the nature of stu - 715 dents’ generalizing activity . Therefore , AOT is often situated within design - based research , where information regarding how students generalize their learning experiences informs and improves the next cycle of instruction ( Kelly , Lesh , & Baek , 2008 ; Lobato , 2003 , 2008a ) . In fact , mainstream cog - 720 nitive and AOT perspectives may overlap in the ﬁnal stages of design - based research when the ultimate goal of the in - structional innovation should be met , namely , to support the formation of connections between learning and transfer sit - uations that are more expert in nature . ( To see an overlap , 725 qualitative measures would need to be used in the main - stream cognitive approach and the focus would need to be on identifying underlying conceptualizations rather than strate - gies . ) However , in practicality , the goal of research conducted by my colleagues and myself has been to identify increasing 730 levels of sophistication in displays of transfer , much like Min - strell’s ( 2001 ) facets of students’ understanding of physics , where one facet may be indicative of more sophisticated un - derstanding than another , even when both facets represent non - normative or incorrect reasoning . This is because , even 735 after several iterations , we often do not achieve full - blown ex - pertise ( perhaps because of limits in the length of instruction or the age of the participants ) . To illustrate how AOT research can meet the goal of lead - ing to substantive improvements in both instruction and in 740 the ways students generalize their learning experiences , we revisit the classroom study in which students had generalized slope to novel situations as a difference rather than a ratio ( Lobato , Ellis , & Mu˜noz , 2003 ) . Because the analysis of the transfer interviews revealed that students’ conceptualization 745 of slope focused on differences in a single quantity , one goal of the instructional redesign was to necessitate the coordina - tion of two quantities ( Lobato , 2005 ; Lobato , Rhodehamel , & THE ACTOR - ORIENTED TRANSFER PERSPECTIVE 9 Hohensee , 2011 , in press ; Lobato & Siebert , 2002 ) . Because Q12 the classroom analysis revealed that the use of tables in which 750 the x - values increased by 1 in successive rows focused atten - tion on the y - values , a goal of the instructional revision was to promote multiplicative reasoning between x and y - values with data not presented in unit intervals . Because the class - room analysis suggested that the language of numbers and 755 recursive number patterns ( e . g . , “goes up by” ) focused atten - tion on single quantities , the next iteration asked students to speak of measurable attributes ( e . g . , distance , time , speed ) and covarying quantities ( e . g . , 5 s for 7 cm ) . These and other principles were intended to direct attention toward covarying 760 quantities and away from single quantities changing . As a result , a later iteration in the design - based research resulted in more productive generalizing about slope and lin - ear functions ( Lobato et al . , 2011 ; Lobato , Rhodehamel et al . , in press ) . The design consisted of an adaptation for younger Q13 765 students—seventh graders—and took place in a context in which it ( Class 1 ) could be compared to another class that addressed the same content goals with a different instruc - tional approach ( Class 2 ) . Students from both classes par - ticipated in postinstructional clinical interviews ( Ginsburg , 770 1997 ) using transfer tasks set in contexts not covered in ei - ther class . Qualitative analysis revealed distinct differences in how students reasoned with a table of linear data in a wa - ter pumping situation ( see Figure 3 ) ( Lobato et al . , 2011 ) . In Class 1 , 88 % of the students coordinated the two quan - 775 tities in a way that preserved the multiplicative relationship between the quantities and correctly determined the pump - ing rate ( which corresponds to the slope of the function ) . In contrast , only 33 % of students in Class 2 reasoned similarly , with the rest of the students engaging in nonmultiplicative 780 reasoning on the task , including reasoning with differences in only one quantity and reasoning additively . A critical reader may wonder if we could have shifted to an observer’s point of view for this later iteration of the design - based study and achieved the same goal . After all , it 785 was surely a goal of the instruction in Class 1 to coordinate two quantities in a way that preserved the multiplicative relationship between them . In actuality , there had been a more sophisticated goal Aor instruction in Class 1 , namely , to form a ratio as a multiplicative comparison ( e . g . , Kaput 790 & Maxwell - West , 1994 ) , and this goal would likely have been used as the standard by which to judge whether or not students’ reasoning counted as transfer , from an observer’s point of view . For example , in the Pool Task , forming a ratio as a multiplicative comparison entails noticing that the water 795 values are twice as large as the corresponding time values , obtaining 2 as the ratio , and interpreting it in context as 2 gal / min . If we had restricted transfer to this expert goal , we would have missed the way that many students thought about the task . For example , one student used the information from 800 the second and third rows , concluded that 4 gal were pumped in 2 min , formed a unit of these two amounts , halved the unit to produce 2 gal in 1 min , and then built up both amounts to check ( 2 gal in 1 min , 4 gal in 2 min , 6 gal in 3 min , etc . ) . Al - though many researchers call this pre - ratio reasoning ( Lesh , 805 Post , & Behr , 1988 ) , we believe it demonstrates an advance over the reasoning from the original study and represents a generalization of the students’ learning experiences . Thus , using the AOT perspective in our design - based research helped us meet our goals of uncovering the nature of the con - 810 nections that students made between learning and transfer situations at each iteration and using this information to make Time in minutes Amount of Water in gallons 0 0 3 6 5 10 9 18 Water is being pumped through a hose into a large swimming pool . The table shows the amount of water in the pool over time . The amount of water is measured in gallons . The time is measured in minutes . Do you think the water is being pumped equally fast over time or is it being pumped faster at certain times ? How do you know ? How fast is the water being pumped into the swimming pool ? 4C / Art FIGURE 3 The Pool Task ( color ﬁgure available online ) . 10 LOBATO incremental and productive changes in how students gener - alized their learning experiences in each successive iteration . By differentiating AOT from the mainstream cognitive 815 perspective on transfer along ﬁve dimensions , I have argued that the AOT perspective ( a ) emphasizes the interpretative nature of knowing ; ( b ) operates from an actor’s point of view ; ( c ) focuses on the transfer of conceptualizations rather than strategies , solution methods , or well - deﬁned actions ; ( d ) is 820 grounded in the use of inductive qualitative methods ; and ( e ) was developed to explore and iteratively improve the nature of novices’ generalization of their learning activities in semantically rich content domains . These features make the perspective well suited for investigating particular aspects 825 of the broad array of issues and questions that interest transfer researchers—three of which are explored next . HOW STUDENTS INTERPRET TRANSFER SITUATIONS Just as taking an actor’s perspective entails setting aside a pre - 830 determined standard for judging the occurrence of transfer , the AOT perspective also sets aside observer assumptions re - garding the surface / structure distinction . At the heart of this distinction is a presumption that initial learning and transfer situations share a similar level of complexity . However , what 835 constitutes a surface feature for an expert may introduce a structural complexity for the novice , along a dimension that was unforeseen during the task design process . The use of an AOT perspective can foreground students’ comprehen - sion of transfer situations as an object of inspection , which 840 in turn can make explicit particular understandings that are implicit in the researcher’s own expertise and can provide useful information for an instructional response . For example , Rebello and colleagues conducted an AOT study to gain insight into the connections that students make 845 between concepts and techniques learned in a calculus class and physics problems that utilize these ideas ( Cui , 2006 ; Cui , Rebello , & Bennett , 2006 ; Rebello , Cui , Bennett , Zollman , & Ozimek , 2007 ) . To maximize the chances that students would form productive connections , the researchers used 850 straightforward physics tasks and paired each task with an isomorphic calculus problem . However , the physics transfer problems were much more difﬁcult for students than antici - pated . In response , the researchers investigated how students experienced the transfer problems . They discovered that stu - 855 dents had no trouble carrying out the calculus procedures but found it challenging to decide which variables in the physics situations needed to be integrated or differentiated and to de - termine the limits of integration . The researchers concluded that what may be conceived , from the perspective of an ex - 860 pert , as a straightforward instance of transfer involving the activation and mapping of new information onto an existing knowledge structure , may in fact involve the creation of new knowledge or knowledge reorganization for students . The information gained from an investigation of learners’ 865 construal of transfer situations can reveal surprising com - plexities , which can then productively inform an instructional response . For example , when researchers were surprised by the failure of young children to use their counting skills in ev - eryday situations , they used an AOT approach to investigate 870 the children’s comprehension of the transfer situations ( Han - nula & Lehtinen , 2004 , 2005 ; Lehtinen & Hannula , 2006 ) . They discovered that young children often have difﬁculty structuring the physical world in such a way that the feature of cardinality becomes prominent , especially in naturalistic 875 settings where so many other features compete for their at - tention ( such as the color or shape of objects or the physical movements of the adults who they are mimicking ) . Once chil - dren’s ability to focus on numerosity was identiﬁed as cru - cial , the researchers were able to demonstrate that successful 880 transfer of enumeration skills was related to this propensity ( Lehtinen & Hannula , 2006 ) . In addition , subsequent inter - ventions capitalized on the insight that what appears to be an obvious and surface feature for an adult ( namely , the ability to isolate and attend to cardinality ) is a signiﬁcant structural 885 feature for young children—one that needs explicit develop - ment . Consequently , the researchers designed an effective in - tervention by training Finnish daycare providers to notice and follow up on the moments when children spontaneously paid attention to numerosity in everyday situations , such as clean - 890 ing up or free play ( Hannula , Mattinen , & Lehtinen , 2005 ) . The intervention led to a long - term effect on the children’s tendency to focus on cardinality and to use their counting skills in new situations . These studies demonstrate that transfer situations may be 895 isomorphic to initial learning situations along a particular di - mension , yet may include a dimension of complexity that is hidden from the view of an expert until one investigates stu - dents’ understanding of the transfer situations more closely . Partly , this is because what is challenging for students to un - 900 derstand early on in their development of an idea is often no longer apparent to an adult looking through the lens of sophisticated understanding ( Simon , 2006 ) . An actor’s point of view , along with the use of qualitative analysis of students’ reasoning in transfer situations , can help researchers under - 905 stand what it takes for students to successfully tackle such conceptual complexities . THE SOCIALLY SITUATED NATURE OF TRANSFER PROCESSES IN CLASSROOMS A number of researchers have called for the expansion of 910 transfer processes in order to acknowledge the contribution of social interactions , language , cultural artifacts , and normed practices in the occurrence of transfer ( Guberman & Greenﬁeld , 1991 ; Lave , 1988 ; Pea , 1989 ) . In response , some researchers have shifted away from attributing transfer to 915 cognitive mechanisms ( Beach , 1999 , 2003 ; Bereiter , 1995 ; THE ACTOR - ORIENTED TRANSFER PERSPECTIVE 11 LCHC , 1983 ; Tuomi - Gr¨ohn & Engestr¨om , 2003 ) . However , this puts the ﬁeld in danger of losing important insights gained from cognitive models of transfer . Consequently , our recent work from the AOT perspective has offered 920 an explanatory account of the occurrence of transfer in a classroom - based study , by coordinating individual cognitive processes with socially situated processes via the construct of “noticing” ( Lobato et al . , 2011 ; Lobato , Rhodehamel , et al . , in press ) . This is in keeping with the AOT position that trans - Q14 925 fer is a distributed phenomenon across individual cognition , social interactions , material resources , and normed practices . To illustrate , we brieﬂy outline our explanatory account of the previously described ﬁnding that two classes of sev - enth graders reasoned differentially on a transfer task ( see 930 Figure 3 ) . Eighty - eight percent of the students in Class 1 coordinated two quantities in a way that preserved the multi - plicative relationship , whereas two thirds of the Class 2 stu - dents engaged in non - multiplicative reasoning on the task , including reasoning with differences in only one quantity 935 and additive reasoning ( Lobato et al . , 2011 ) . To explain why this result occurred , we ﬁrst analyzed the classroom data to identify what individual students noticed mathematically . By noticing , we do not mean simply “paying attention” but rather the selecting and processing of particular properties , 940 features , or conceptual objects , when multiple sources of in - formation compete for one’s attention . Speciﬁcally , students in Class 1 shifted from initially noticing a single quantity to noticing a joined or composed unit of two quantities . In Class 2 , students initially noticed differences in a single quantity 945 ( the additive growth of the function ) . Then two thirds of the students discovered a relationship between two quanti - ties , which had the potential of becoming a multiplicative relationship . Unfortunately , during the next lesson , students’ attention returned to additive growth and stayed there for the 950 rest of the unit . This is problematic for the development of slope , because slope is multiplicative in nature , not additive . To understand how these differences in what students no - ticed mathematically emerged in each class , we examined the role of both students and teachers in the co - constitution 955 of what was noticed through discursive practices ( conceived broadlytoincludegesture , diagrams , andtalk ) . This approach acknowledges Goodwin’s ( 1994 ) contention that what peo - ple notice “is not a transparent , psychological process , but is instead a socially situated activity” ( p . 606 ) . To illustrate 960 the approach , consider the discursive practices that occurred close in time to the shift in noticing back to additive growth in Class 2 , as this appeared to be a pivotal event . The class had been investigating the visual pattern shown in Figure 4 . The teacher validated the relationship that two 965 thirds of the students had noticed , namely that the ordinal po - sition of a ﬁgure in the pattern ( called the “step number” ) is the same as the number of squares in each “arm” in the associ - ated ﬁgure . As a result , students could determine the number of squares in any ﬁgure by multiplying the step number by 4 970 ( the number of “arms” ) and adding 3 ( the number of squares 1 . Study the pattern . 2 . Build the fourth term . 3 . Make a sketch of the fourth and fifth terms . 4 . Use the pattern you discovered to sketch the tenth term . 5 . How many units make up the tenth term ? 6 . Describe any number patterns you notice . FIGURE 4 The Visual Pattern Task . in the middle of each ﬁgure ) . The teacher demonstrated how students used the step number to calculate the number of squares in the ﬁrst three ﬁgures of the pattern ( as shown in Figure 5 ) . For the statement associated with the third ﬁgure 975 ( 3 · 4 + 3 = 15 ) , she labeled the step number , the number of arms , and the middle ( see Figure 5 ) . In an important move , a student directed attention back to additive growth and to a single quantity by asking why they couldn’t just add 11 + 4 ( from Step 2 to Step 3 ) , as they knew the growth was 980 4 . The teacher validated the student’s idea , and in a crucial move , renamed the 4 in “3 · 4 + 3 = 15” as the growth and wrote “growth” beneath “ # of arms . ” However , the 4 is not the growth ; rather it represents the number of arms , which does not change . The teacher conjoined these two constructs 985 by saying that “they use arms for growth here . . . every time it’s growing by 4 , ” consequently bringing attention back to additive growth . This discursive interchange—beginning with the teacher responding to a relationship students had noticed , followed by a student’s attention - focusing response 990 and an emergent renaming move from the teacher— signaled a turning point in the unit , shaping what students attended to mathematically in subsequent visual patterns for the remain - der of the unit . This study , along with subsequent research by Hohensee 995 ( 2011 ) , demonstrates that the particular mathematical fea - tures students notice are conceptually connected to the ways in which students transfer their learning experiences . Further - more , noticing is socially organized by the joint participation of students and teachers in classroom discourse practices . 1000 This exploratory work suggests that it is unlikely for a teacher 12 LOBATO FIGURE 5 The Class 2 teacher’s annotations on ﬁgures from the Visual Pattern Task . to simply say , “Look here ! ” and her students will notice what she targets . Instead , there is a system of elements ( discourse practices , mathematical tasks , and the nature of mathemati - cal activity ) that work together to bring forth the noticing of 1005 particular mathematical features in classrooms . THE PRODUCTIVE ROLE OF CONTEXTUAL - SENSITIVITY IN TRANSFER A common theme in the history of transfer research has been that transfer involves some experience of similarity or same - 1010 ness across situations . As the locus of such similarity , the mainstream cognitive perspective has emphasized the encod - ing and recognition of abstract structures that “delete details across exemplars and avoid contextual speciﬁcity so that they can be applied to other instances or across situations” ( Fuchs 1015 et al . , 2003 , p . 294 ) . The importance of overcoming context is summarized in a report of the National Research Council : “Knowledge that is overly contextualized can reduce trans - fer ; abstract representations of knowledge can help promote transfer” ( Bransford et al . , 2000 , p . 53 ) . Although the transfer 1020 of learning may occur via the formation of abstract represen - tations , it need not be the only way in which transfer occurs . Wagner ( 2010 ) , drawing upon both the AOT perspective and diSessa’s ( 1993 ) knowledge - in - pieces perspective , offers an alternative account in which transfer is supported through 1025 the incremental growth and organization of smaller elements of knowledge , which are highly sensitive to context and are only gradually reﬁned to extend to a widening circle of situ - ations . That is , sensitivity to context—rather than something to be overcome—can play an important role in the transfer 1030 of learning . Speciﬁcally , Wagner argues that a concept may have asso - ciated with it multiple concept projections , which are particu - lar knowledge resources that allow the knower to interpret the situation’s affordances in a meaningful way ( diSessa & Wag - 1035 ner , 2005 ; Wagner , 2010 ) . To illustrate , Wagner ( 2010 ) pre - sented a case study of a college student , Jason , who formed two concept projections linked with the concept of the law of large numbers ( i . e . , the idea that larger samples are more likely than smaller samples to be representative of their parent 1040 population ) . In solving problems across a variety of settings , Jason explained some problems in the language of “more or less well , ” revealing one concept projection that was particu - larly useful in contexts involving people’s physical skill ( e . g . , skiing or playing squash ) . In other problems , Jason spoke in 1045 terms of “small groups / large groups” and “more or less of - ten , ” revealing a second concept projection , which was useful in contexts associated with a statistical interpretation of re - peated events ( e . g . , gender of births in various hospitals or the results of coin tosses ) . According to Wagner , forming and 1050 connecting the two concept projections were the means by which Jason saw the “same thing” across multiple problems . Thus , the case study demonstrates how a single mathematical principle ( e . g . , the law of large numbers ) came to be recog - nized through a variety of ﬁne - grained interpretive cognitive 1055 resources that were inﬂuenced by contextual factors . Wagner’s account of the productive role of context sen - sitivity in transfer is consistent with the AOT perspective’s emphasis on the interpretative nature of knowledge . From an AOT approach , structuring is an active process that occurs 1060 through an interaction of contextual affordances , personal goals , and prior learning experiences . Structuring is con - trasted with the view of extracting a structure from a situa - tion , where , as I argued previously , a closer correspondence between the external world and mental structures is often 1065 assumed . Relatedly , AOT is rooted in the notion of reﬂective abstraction ( Campbell , 1977 / 2001 ; von Glasersfeld , 1990 ) , which is a constructive rather than inductive formulation of abstraction . It focuses on the abstraction of regularities in records of experience in relationship to one’s goals and 1070 expectations , rather than on regularities inherent in a situa - tion or the encoding of common properties across instances ( Goodson - Espy , 2005 ) . In sum , one way in which a concept may become more robust and general is due to the abstractness of mental repre - 1075 sentations , which backgrounds contextual details . In an alter - native account , generalizability is supported by the increas - ing complexity of a concept’s composition and the context - sensitivity of its parts to accommodate new situations ( Wag - ner , 2006 , 2010 ) . From the former perspective , comparing 1080 multiple examples can promote the extraction of a common structure ( Reeves & Weisberg , 1994 ) . From the latter per - spective , having more examples may not necessarily help unless they necessitate a new concept projection or help the learner construct connections among concept projections 1085 ( diSessa & Wagner , 2005 ) . CONCLUDING REMARKS According to Campione , Shapiro , and Brown ( 1995 ) , “it is not clear that a single theory could exist to cover the range of phenomena to which the term [ transfer ] might be , and 1090 has been , applied” ( p . 35 ) . In this article , I have argued that the AOT perspective emphasizes the interpretative nature of knowing and the transfer of learners’ underlying conceptual - izations , relinquishes a predetermined standard for judging THE ACTOR - ORIENTED TRANSFER PERSPECTIVE 13 what counts as transfer and draws upon inductive qualitative 1095 methods . These characteristics make the perspective well suited for investigating how learners construe meaning in transfer situations , understanding the often unexpected con - nections learners make between learning and transfer situa - tions and then mining this information to improve instruc - 1100 tional responses , accounting for the socially situated nature of transfer processes , and understanding how sensitivity to context can be useful in the generalization of learning . Cor - respondingly , there are many aspects of the phenomena of transfer for which other perspectives are better matched . 1105 For example , from a situated cognitive perspective , Engle , Lam , Meyer , and Nix ( 2012 / this issue ) explore the role of so - cial framing in the transfer of learning in classrooms . From a preparation for future learning perspective , D . Schwartz , Chase , and Bransford ( 2012 / this issue ) develop and explore 1110 the construct of adaptive transfer . And from the mainstream cognitive perspective , Nokes ( 2009 ) proposed a uniﬁed the - ory of how multiple transfer subprocesses ( such as constraint violation , analogical reasoning , and knowledge compilation ) interact with each other and with particular task conditions . 1115 Viewing these transfer approaches as designed objects that provide different information for different purposes is analogous at a metalevel to the overarching message from the research on transfer - appropriate processing ( Morris , Bransford , & Franks , 1977 ) . Countering the accepted view 1120 that superﬁcial levels of processing were always inferior to semantic processing , Morris et al . demonstrated that the na - ture and retention of memory depends not just on the level of processing but on how well the conditions of learning activ - ities match the goals and purposes of the retrieval activities . 1125 Similarly , rather than judging any one transfer model in an absolute sense , there is value in differentiating various ap - proaches to gain a better understanding of the features and methods of each approach relative to its goals and purposes . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 1130 The research described in this article is supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant DRL - 0529502 . The views expressed do not reﬂect ofﬁcial positions of the Foundation . I offer my gratitude to Charles Hohensee , Jaime Diamond , Anthony E . Kelly , Sam Day , Clark Chinn , and three 1135 anonymous reviewers for their thoughtful feedback on earlier versions of this article . REFERENCES Anderson , J . R . ( 1996 ) . ACT : A simple theory of complex cognition . Amer - ican Psychologist , 51 , 355 – 365 . 1140 Anderson , J . R . ( 2005 ) . Human symbol manipulation within an integrated cognitive architecture . Cognitive Science , 29 , 313 – 341 . Anderson , J . R . , Corbett , A . T . , Koedinger , K . R . , & Pelletier , R . ( 1995 ) . Cognitive tutors : Lessons learned . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 4 , 167 – 207 . 1145 Anderson , J . R . , Reder , L . M . , & Simon , H . A . ( 2000 ) . Applications and misapplications of cognitive psychology to mathematics education . Texas Educational Review . Q15 Barnett , S . , & Ceci , S . J . ( 2005 ) . Assessingwhetherlearningtransfersbeyond the classroom . In J . P . Mestre ( Ed . ) , Transfer of learning from a modern 1150 multidisciplinaryperspective ( pp . 295 – 312 ) . Greenwich , CT : Information Age . Q16 Bassok , M . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1989 ) . Interdomain transfer between isomor - phic topics in algebra and physics . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 15 , 153 – 166 . 1155 Bassok , M . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1993 ) . Pragmatic knowledge and conceptual structure : Determinants of transfer between quantitative domains . In D . K . Detterman & R . J . Sternberg ( Eds . ) , Transfer on trial : Intelligence , cognition , and instruction ( pp . 68 – 98 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Beach , K . ( 1999 ) . Consequential transitions : A sociocultural expedition 1160 beyond transfer in education . In A . Iran - Nejad & P . D . Pearson ( Eds . ) , Review of research in education ( Vol . 24 , pp . 101 – 140 ) . Washington , DC : American Educational Research Association . Beach , K . D . ( 2003 ) . Consequential transitions : A developmental view of knowledge propagation through social organizations . In T . Tuomi - Gr¨ohn , 1165 & Y . Engestr¨om , ( Eds . ) , ( Between school and work : New perspectives on transfer and boundary - crossing ( pp . 39 – 62 ) . Oxford , UK : Elsevier Science . Belenky , D . M . , & Nokes - Malach , T . J . ( in press ) . Motivation and transfer : The role of mastery - approach goals in preparation for future learning . 1170 The Journal of the Learning Sciences . Q17 Bereiter , C . ( 1995 ) . A dispositional view of transfer . In A . McKeough , J . Lupart , & A . Marini ( Eds . ) , Teaching for transfer : Fostering generaliza - tion in learning ( pp . 21 – 34 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Booker , G . ( 1996 ) . Constructing mathematical conventions formed by the 1175 abstraction and generalization of earlier ideas : The development of initial fraction ideas . In L . Steffe , P . Nesher , P . Cobb , G . Goldin , & B . Greer ( Eds . ) , Theories of mathematical learning ( pp . 381 – 395 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Bransford , J . D . , Brown , A . L . , & Cocking , R . R . ( Eds . ) , Committee on 1180 Developments in the Science of Learning , & National Research Council ( 2000 ) . Learning and transfer . In How people learn : Brain , mind , ex - perience , and school ( pp . 39 – 66 ) . Washington , DC : National Academy Press . Bransford , J . D . , & McCarrell , N . S . ( 1974 ) . Asketchofacognitiveapproach 1185 to comprehension : Some thoughts about what it means to comprehend . In W . G . Weimer & D . S . Palermo ( Eds . ) , Cognition and symbolic processes ( pp . 189 – 229 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Bransford , J . D . , & Schwartz , D . L . ( 1999 ) . Rethinking transfer : A simple proposal with multiple implications . In A . Iran - Nejad & P . D . Pearson 1190 ( Eds . ) , Reviewofresearchineducation ( Vol . 24 , pp . 61 – 100 ) . Washington , DC : American Educational Research Association . Brownell , M . T . , Mellard , D . F . , & Deshler , D . D . ( 1993 ) . Differences in the learning and transfer performance between students with learning disabilities and other low - achieving students on problem - solving tasks . 1195 Learning Disability Quarterly , 16 , 138 – 156 . Bruer , J . T . ( 2001 ) . School for thought : A science of learning in the class - room . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Butler , A . C . ( 2010 ) . Repeated testing produces superior transfer of learn - ing relative to repeated studying . Journal of Experimental Psychology : 1200 Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 36 , 1118 – 1133 . Butterﬁeld , E . C . , & Nelson , G . D . ( 1991 ) . Promoting positive transfer of different types . Cognition and Instruction , 8 , 69 – 102 . Campbell , R . ( 2001 ) . Reﬂecting abstraction in context . In R . Camp - bell ( Ed . & Trans . ) , Studies in reﬂecting abstraction by Jean Piaget 1205 ( pp . 1 – 27 ) . Sussex , England : Psychology Press . ( Original work published 1977 ) 14 LOBATO Campione , J . C . , Shapiro , A . M . , & Brown , A . L . ( 1995 ) . Forms of transfer in a community of learners : Flexible learning and understanding . In A . McKeough , J . Lupart , & A . Marini ( Eds . ) , Teachingfortransfer : Fostering 1210 generalization in learning ( pp . 35 – 68 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Carraher , D . , & Schliemann , A . D . ( 2002 ) . The transfer dilemma . The Jour - nal of the Learning Sciences , 11 , 1 – 24 . Chen , Z . , & Klahr , D . ( 1999 ) . All other things being equal : Acquisition and transfer of the control of variables strategy . Child Development , 70 , 1215 1098 – 1120 . Chen , Z , & Mo , L . ( 2004 ) . Schema induction in problem solving : a mul - tidimensional analysis . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 30 , 583 – 600 . Cui , L . ( 2006 ) . Assessing college students’ retention and transfer from 1220 calculus to physics ( Unpublished doctoral dissertation ) . Manhattan , KS , Kansas State University . Retrieved from http : / / www . compadre . org / Repository / document / ServeFile . cfm ? ID = 4769 & DocID = 209 Cui , L . , Rebello , N . S . , & Bennett , A . ( 2006 , April ) . Transferoflearningfrom college calculus to physics courses . Paper presented at the proceedings of 1225 theNationalAssociationforResearchinScienceTeaching , SanFrancisco , CA . Day , S . , & Goldstone , R . ( 2011 ) . Analogical transfer from a simulated physicalsystem . JournalofExperimentalPsychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 37 , 551 – 567 . 1230 Detterman , D . K . ( 1993 ) . Thecasefortheprosecution : Transferasanepiphe - nomenon . In D . K . Detterman , & R . J . Sternberg ( Eds . ) , Transfer on trial : Intelligence , cognition , and instruction ( pp . 1 – 24 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Dewey , J . ( 1938 ) . Experience and education . New York , NY : Macmillan . 1235 diSessa , A . A . ( 1993 ) . Toward an epistemology of physics . Cognition & Instruction , 10 , 105 – 225 . diSessa , A . A . , & Wagner , J . ( 2005 ) . What coordination has to say about transfer . In J . P . Mestre ( Ed . ) , Transfer of learning from a modern mul - tidisciplinary perspective ( pp . 121 – 154 ) . Greenwich , CT : Information 1240 Age . Ellis , A . B . ( 2007 ) . A taxonomy for categorizing generalizations : General - izing actions and reﬂection generalizations . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 16 , 221 – 262 . Engle , R . A . , Lam , D . P . , Meyer , X . S . , & Nix , S . E . ( 2012 / this issue ) . How 1245 does expansive framing promote transfer ? Several proposed explanations and a research agenda for investigating them . Educational Psychologist , 47 , XX – XX . English , L . D . , & Halford , G . S . ( 1995 ) . Mathematics education : Models and processes . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 1250 Ericsson , A . , & Simon , H . ( 1993 ) . Protocol analysis : Verbal reports as data ( Rev . ed . ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Evans , J . ( 1998 ) . Problems of transfer of classroom mathematical knowl - edge to practical situations ( pp . 269 – 289 ) . In F . Seeger , J . Voigt , & U . Waschescio ( Eds . ) , Thecultureofthemathematicsclassroom . Cambridge , 1255 UK : Cambridge University Press . Fuchs , L . S . , Fuchs , D . , Prentice , K . , Burch , M . , Hamlett , C . L . , Owen , R . , Jancek , D . ( 2003 ) . Explicitly teaching for transfer : Effects on third - grade students’ mathematical problem solving . Journal of Educational Psychology , 95 , 293 – 305 . 1260 Gentner , D . ( 1983 ) . Structure - mapping : A theoretical framework for anal - ogy . Cognitive Science , 7 , 155 – 170 . Gentner , D . ( 1989 ) . The mechanisms of analogical learning . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 199 – 241 ) . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . 1265 Gentner , D . , & Kurtz , K . K . ( 2006 ) . Relations , objects , and the composition of analogies . Cognitive Science , 30 , 1 – 34 . Gentner , D . , Loewenstein , J . , & Thompson , L . ( 2003 ) . Learningandtransfer : A general role for analogical encoding . Journal of Educational Psychol - ogy , 95 , 393 – 405 . 1270 Gentner , D . , & Markman , A . B . ( 1997 ) . Structure mapping in analogy and similarity . American Psychologist , 52 , 45 – 56 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schema induction and analogical transfer . Cognitive Psychology , 15 , 1 – 38 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1987 ) . The cognitive basis of knowledge 1275 transfer . In S . M . Cormier & J . D . Hagman ( Eds . ) , Transfer of learning : Contemporary research and applications ( pp . 9 – 47 ) . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . Ginsburg , H . ( 1997 ) . Entering the child’s mind . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . 1280 Goodson - Espy , T . ( 2005 , October ) . Why reﬂective abstraction remains rel - evant in mathematics education research . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the North American Chapter of the International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education . Goodwin , C . ( 1994 ) . Professional vision . American Anthropologist , 96 , 1285 606 – 633 . Greeno , J . G . ( 1997 ) . Response : on claims that answer the wrong questions . Educational Researcher , 26 , 5 – 17 . Greeno , J . G . , Smith , D . R . , & Moore , J . L . ( 1993 ) . Transferofsituatedlearn - ing . In D . K . Detterman & R . J . Sternberg ( Eds . ) , Transfer on trial : Intel - 1290 ligence , cognition , and instruction ( pp . 99 – 167 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Gruber , H . , Law , L . , Mandl , H . , & Renkl , A . , ( 1996 ) . Situated learning and transfer . In P . Reimann & H . Spada ( Eds . ) , Learning in humans and machines : Towards an interdisciplinary learning science . Oxford , UK : Pergamon . Q18 1295 Guberman , S . , & Greenﬁeld , P . M . ( 1991 ) . Learningandtransferineveryday cognition . Cognitive Development , 6 , 233 – 260 . Hammer , D . , Elby , A . , Scherr , R . E . , & Redish , E . F . ( 2005 ) . Resources , framing , and transfer . In J . P . Mestre ( Ed . ) , Transfer of learning from a modern multidisciplinary perspective ( pp . 89 – 120 ) . Greenwich , CT : 1300 Information Age . Hannula , M . M . , & Lehtinen , E . ( 2004 , April ) . Relationships between spon - taneous focusing on numerosity and early mathematical skills . In J . Lo - bato ( Chair ) , Attentional processes , salience , and “transfer” of learning : Perspectives from neuroscience , cognitive science , and mathematics ed - 1305 ucation . San Diego , CA : Symposium conducted at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association . Hannula , M . M . , & Lehtinen , E . ( 2005 ) . Spontaneous focusing on numeros - ity and mathematical skills of young children . Learning and Instruction . 15 , 237 – 256 . 1310 Hannula , M . M . , Mattinen , A . , & Lehtinen , E . ( 2005 ) . Does social inter - action inﬂuence 3yearold children’s tendency to focus on numerosity ? A quasiexperimental study in day care . In L . Verschaffel , E . De Corte , G . Kanselaar , & M . Valcke ( Eds . ) , Powerful environments for promoting deep conceptual and strategic learning ( pp . 63 – 80 ) . Leuven , Belgium : 1315 Leuven University Press . Hatano , G . ( 1996 ) . A conception of knowledge acquisition and its impli - cations for mathematics education . In L . P . Steffe , P . Nesher , P . Cobb , G . A . Goldin , & B . Greer ( Eds . ) , Theories of mathematical learning ( pp . 197 – 218 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 1320 Hatano , G . , & Greeno , J . G . ( 1999 ) . Commentary : Alternative perspectives on transfer and transfer studies . International Journal of Educational Research , 31 , 645 – 654 . Hohensee , C . ( 2011 ) . Backward transfer : How mathematical understand - ing changes as one builds upon it ( Unpublished doctoral dissertation ) . 1325 University of California at San Diego and San Diego State University . Retrieved from Retrieved from http : / / hdl . handle . net / 10211 . 10 / 1441 Kaput , J . J . , & Maxwell - West , M . ( 1994 ) . Missing - value proportional rea - soning problems : Factors affecting informal reasoning patterns . In G . Harel & J . Confrey ( Eds . ) , The development of multiplicative reasoning 1330 in the learning of mathematics ( pp . 235 – 287 ) . Albany : State University of New York Press . Karakok , G . ( 2009 ) . Students’ transfer of learning of eigenvalues and eigenvectors : Implementation of the actor - oriented transfer frame - work ( Unpublished doctoral dissertation ) . Corvallis : Oregon State Uni - 1335 versity . Retrieved from http : / / ir . library . oregonstate . edu / xmlui / bitstream / handle / 1957 / 11181 / Karakok thesis . pdf ? sequence = 1 THE ACTOR - ORIENTED TRANSFER PERSPECTIVE 15 Kelly A . E . , Lesh , R . A . , & Baek , J . Y . ( Eds . ) . ( 2008 ) . Handbook of design research methods in education : Innovations in science , technology , engi - neering , and mathematics learning and teaching . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 1340 Klahr , D . , & Carver , S . M . ( 1988 ) . Cognitive objectives in a LOGO debug - ging curriculum : Instruction , learning , and transfer . Cognitive Psychol - ogy , 20 , 362 – 404 . Koedinger , K . R . , & Anderson , J . R . ( 1998 ) . Illustrating principled design : The early evolution of a cognitive tutor for algebra symbolization . Inter - 1345 active Learning Environments , 5 , 161 – 179 . Koedinger , K . R . , & Terao , A . ( 2002 ) . A cognitive task analysis of us - ing pictures to support pre - algebraic reasoning . In C . D . Schunn & W . Gray ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the Twenty - Fourth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 542 – 547 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 1350 Kotovsky , K . , & Fallside , D . ( 1989 ) . Representation and transfer in prob - lem solving . In D . Klahr & K . Kotovsky ( Eds . ) , Complex information processing : The impact of Herbert A . Simon ( pp . 69 – 108 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . LaboratoryofComparativeHumanCognition . ( 1983 ) . Cultureandcognitive 1355 development . In W . Mussen ( Ed . ) , Handbook of child psychology , volume 1 : History , theory , and methods ( pp . 295 – 356 ) . New York , NY : Wiley & Sons . Lave , J . ( 1988 ) . Cognition in practice : Mind , mathematics , and culture in everyday life . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . 1360 Lehtinen , E . , & Hannula , M . M . ( 2006 ) . Attentional processes , abstrac - tion and transfer in early mathematical development . In L . Verschaf - fel , F . Dochy , M . Boekaerts , & S . Vosniadou ( Eds . ) , Instructional psy - chology : Past , present and future trends ( pp . 39 – 54 ) . Oxford , UK : Elsevier . 1365 Lesh , R . , Post , T . , & Behr , M . ( 1988 ) . Proportional reasoning . In J . Hiebert & M . Behr ( Eds . ) , Number concepts and operations in the middle grades ( pp . 93 – 118 ) . Reston , VA : Erlbaum and National Council of Teachers of Mathematics . Lobato , J . ( 1996 ) . Transfer reconceived : How “sameness” is produced in 1370 mathematical activity . ( Doctoral dissertation , University of California , Berkeley , 1996 ) . Dissertation Abstracts International , AAT 9723086 . Lobato , J . ( 2003 ) . How design experiments can inform a rethinking of trans - fer and vice versa . Educational Researcher , 32 , 17 – 20 . Lobato , J . ( 2005 , August ) . Attention - focusing and the “transfer” of learning . 1375 In J . Emanuelsson & M . F . Pang ( Chairs ) , Contrasting different perspec - tives on the object of learners’ attention . 11th Biennial Conference of the European Association for Research on Learning and Instruction , Nicosia , Cyprus . Lobato , J . ( 2006 ) . Alternative perspectives on the transfer of learning : His - 1380 tory , issues , and challenges for future research . The Journal of the Learn - ing Sciences , 15 , 431 – 449 . Lobato , J . ( 2008a ) . Research methods for alternative approaches to transfer : Implications for design experiments . In A . E . Kelly , R . A . Lesh , & J . Y . Baek ( Eds . ) , Handbook of design research methods in education : Innova - 1385 tions in science , technology , engineering , and mathematics learning and teaching ( pp . 167 – 194 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Lobato , J . ( 2008b ) . When students don’t apply the knowledge you think they have , rethink your assumptions about transfer . In M . Carlson & C . Rasmussen ( Eds . ) , Making the connection : Research and teaching in un - 1390 dergraduate mathematics ( pp . 289 – 304 ) . Washington , DC : Mathematical Association of America . Lobato , J . , Ellis , A . B . , & Mu˜noz , R . ( 2003 ) . How “focusing phenomena” in the instructional environment afford students’ generalizations . Mathe - matical Thinking and Learning , 5 ( 1 ) , 1 – 36 . 1395 Lobato , J . , Hohensee , C . , Rhodehamel , B . , & Diamond , J . ( in press ) . Using studentreasoningtoinformthedevelopmentofconceptuallearninggoals : The case of quadratic functions . Mathematical Thinking and Learning , 14 ( 2 ) . Q19 Lobato , J . , Rhodehamel , B . , & Hohensee , C . ( 2011 ) . Mathematicalnoticing : 1400 What do students attend to mathematically during classroom instruction and why ? Manuscript under review . Q20 Lobato , J . , Rhodehamel , B . , & Hohensee , C . ( in press ) . “Noticing” as an alternative transfer of learning process . The Journal of the Learning Sci - ences . Q21 1405 Lobato , J . , & Siebert , D . ( 2002 ) . Quantitative reasoning in a reconceived view of transfer . The Journal of Mathematical Behavior , 21 , 87 – 116 . Lobato , J . , & Thanheiser , E . ( 2002 ) . Developing understanding of ratio as measure as a foundation for slope . In B . Litwiller ( Ed . ) Making sense of fractions , ratios , and proportions : 2002 Yearbook ( pp . 162 – 175 ) . Reston , 1410 VA : National Council of Teachers of Mathematics . Q22 Marini , A . , & Genereux , R . ( 1995 ) . The challenge of teaching for trans - fer . In A . McKeough , J . Lupart , & A . Marini ( Eds . ) , Teaching for transfer : Fostering generalization in learning ( pp . 1 – 20 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 1415 Markman , A . B . , & Gentner , D . ( 2000 ) . Structure - mapping in the compari - son process . American Journal of Psychology , 113 , 501 – 538 . Maxwell , J . ( 2004 ) . Causal explanation , qualitative research , and scientiﬁc inquiry in education . Educational Researcher , 33 ( 2 ) , 3 – 11 . Miles , M . B . , & Huberman , A . M . ( 1994 ) . Qualitative data analysis ( 2nd 1420 ed . ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Minstrell , J . ( 2001 ) . Facets of students’ thinking : Designing to cross the gap from research to standards - based practice . In K . Crowley , C . Schunn , & T . Okada ( Eds . ) , Designing for science : Implications from everyday , class - room , and professional settings ( pp . 415 – 444 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 1425 Morris , C . D . , Bransford , J . D . , & Franks , J . J . ( 1977 ) . Levels of processing versus transfer appropriate processing . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 16 , 519 – 533 . Muldner , K . , & Conati , C . ( 2010 ) : Scaffolding meta - cognitive skills for effective analogical problem solving via tailored example selec - 1430 tion . International Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Education , 20 , 99 – 136 . Nemirovsky , R . ( 2011 ) . Episodic feelings and transfer of learning . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 20 , 308 – 337 . Nokes , T . J . ( 2009 ) . Mechanisms of knowledge transfer . Thinking and Rea - 1435 soning , 15 ( 1 ) , 1 – 36 . Novick , L . R . ( 1988 ) . Analogical transfer , problem similarity , and expertise . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 14 , 510 – 520 . Ohlsson , S . , & Rees , E . ( 1991 ) . Adaptive search through constraint viola - 1440 tions . Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 3 , 33 – 42 . Olive , J . , & Lobato , J . ( 2008 ) . Thelearningofrationalnumberconceptsusing technology . In M . K . Heid & G . W . Blume ( Eds . ) , Research on technol - ogy and the teaching and learning of mathematics : Research syntheses 1445 ( pp . 1 – 54 ) . Charlotte , NC : Information Age and the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics . Packer , M . ( 2001 ) . The problem of transfer , and the sociocultural critique of schooling . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 10 , 493 – 514 . Pea , R . D . ( 1989 ) . Socializing the knowledge transfer problems ( Report No . 1450 IRL89 – 0009 ) . Palo Alto , CA : Institute for Research on Learning . Perkins , D . N . , & Salomon , G . ( 1989 ) . Are cognitive skills context - bound ? Educational Leadership , 18 ( 1 ) , 16 – 25 . Plomp , T . , & Nieveen , N . ( 2007 ) . An introduction to educational design re - search . Enschede , the Netherlands : Netherlands Institute for Curriculum 1455 Development . Pugh , K . J . , & Bergin , D . A . ( 2006 ) . Motivational inﬂuences on transfer . Educational Psychologist , 14 , 53 – 69 . Rebello , N . S . , Cui , L . , Bennett , A . G . , Zollman , D . A . , & Ozimek , D . J . ( 2007 ) . Transfer of learning in problem solving in the context of mathe - 1460 matics and physics . In D . H . Jonassen ( Ed . ) , Learning to solve complex scientiﬁc problems . New York , NY : Erlbaum . Q23 Reed , S . K . ( 1993 ) . A schema - based theory of transfer . In D . K . Detterman & R . J . Sternberg ( Eds . ) , Transfer on trial : Intelligence , cognition , and instruction ( pp . 39 – 67 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . 1465 Reed , S . K . ( in press ) . Learning by mapping across situations . The Journal of the Learning Sciences . Q24 16 LOBATO Reed , S . K . , Ernst , G . W . , & Banerji , R . ( 1974 ) . Theroleofanalogyintransfer between similar problem states . Cognitive Psychology , 6 , 436 – 450 . Reeves , L . M . , & Weisberg , R . W . ( 1994 ) . The role of content and ab - 1470 stract information in analogical transfer . Psychological Bulletin , 115 , 381 – 400 . Rittle - Johnson , B . ( 2006 ) . Promoting transfer : effects of self - explanation and direct instruction . Child Development , 77 , 1 – 15 . Rittle - Johnson , B . , Siegler , R . S . , & Alibali , M . W . ( 2001 ) . Developing con - 1475 ceptual understanding and procedural skill in mathematics : An iterative process . Journal of Educational Psychology , 93 , 346 – 362 . Ross , B . H . ( 1984 ) . Remindings and their effects in learning a cognitive skill . Cognitive Psychology , 16 , 371 – 416 . Royer , J . M . , Mestre , J . P . , & Dufresne , R . J . ( 2005 ) . Framing the transfer 1480 problem . In J . P . Mestre ( Ed . ) , Transfer of learning from a modern multi - disciplinaryperspective ( pp . vii – xxvi ) . Greenwich , CT : InformationAge . Schwartz , D . L . , Chase , C . C . , & Bransford , J . D . ( 2012 / this issue ) . Resisting overzealous transfer : Coordinating previously successful routines with needs for new learning . Educational Psychologist , 47 , XX – XX . 1485 Schwartz , J . L . ( 1988 ) . Intensive quantity and referent transforming arith - metic operations . In : J . Hiebert , & M . Behr ( Eds . ) , Number concepts and operations in the middle grades ( pp . 41 – 52 ) . Reston , VA : National Council of Teachers of Mathematics . Simon , M . A . ( 2006 ) . Key developmental understandings in mathematics : A 1490 direction for investigating and establishing learning goals . Mathematical Thinking and Learning , 8 , 359 – 371 . Singley , M . K . , & Anderson , J . R . ( 1989 ) . The transfer of cognitive skill . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Sinha , S . , Gray , S . , Hmelo - Silver , C . , Jordan , R . , Honwad , S . , Eberbach , 1495 C . , Goel , A . ( 2010 ) , Appropriating conceptual representations : A case of transfer in a middle school science teacher . In K . Gomez , L . Lyons , & J . Radinsky ( Eds . ) , Learning in the disciplines : Proceedings of the 9th International Conference of the Learning Sciences ( Volume 1 , pp . 834 – 841 ) . Chicago , IL : International Society of the Learning Sciences . 1500 Sloane , F . C . , & Gorard , S . ( 2003 ) . Exploring modeling aspects of design experiments . Educational Researcher , 32 , 29 – 31 . Sternberg , R . J . , & Frensch , P . A . ( 1993 ) . Mechanisms of transfer . In D . K . Detterman & R . J . Sternberg ( Eds . ) , Transfer on trial : Intelligence , cognition , and instruction ( pp . 25 – 38 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . 1505 Strauss , A . , & Corbin , J . ( 1990 ) . Basics of qualitative research . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Stroup , W . M . , ( 2002 ) . Understanding quantitative calculus : A structural synthesis of learning research . International Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning , 7 , 167 – 215 . 1510 Thompson , P . W . ( 1994 ) . The development of the concept of speed and its relationship to concepts of rate . In G . Harel & J . Confrey ( Eds . ) , The development of multiplicative reasoning in the learning of mathematics ( pp . 179 – 234 ) . Albany , NY : SUNY Press . Thompson , P . W . ( in press ) . Quantitative reasoning and mathematical mod - 1515 eling . In L . L . Hatﬁeld , S . Chamberlain & S . Belbase ( Eds . ) , New per - spectives and directions for collaborative research in mathematics edu - cation . Laramie : University of Wyoming Press . Retrieved from http : / / pat - thompson . net / PDFversions / 2011QR & Modeling . pdf Q25 Thorndike , E . L . ( 1906 ) . Principles of teaching . New York , NY : A . G . Seiler . 1520 Tuomi - Gr¨ohn , T . , & Engestr¨om , Y . ( 2003 ) . Conceptualizing transfer : From standard notions to developmental perspectives . In T . Tuomi - Gr¨ohn , & Y . Engestr¨om , ( Eds . ) , ( Between school and work : New perspectives on transfer and boundary - crossing ( pp . 19 – 38 ) . Oxford , UK : Pergamon . von Glasersfeld , E . ( 1990 ) . An exposition of constructivism : Why some 1525 like it radical . In R . B . Davis , C . A . Maher , & N . Noddings ( Eds . ) , Constructivistviewsontheteachingandlearningofmathematics . Journal for Research in Mathematics Education , Monograph # 4 ( pp . 19 – 29 ) . Reston , VA : National Council of Teachers of Mathematics . Wagner , J . F . ( 2006 ) . Transferinpieces . CognitionandInstruction , 24 , 1 – 71 . 1530 Wagner , J . F . ( 2010 ) . A transfer - in - pieces consideration of the perception of structure in the transfer of learning . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 19 , 443 – 479 . HEDP # 693354 , VOL 47 , ISS 3 Knowledge to Go : A Motivational and Dispositional View of Transfer David N . Perkins and Gavriel Salomon QUERY SHEET This page lists questions we have about your paper . The numbers displayed at left can be found in the text of the paper for reference . In addition , please review your paper as a whole for correctness . Q1 . Au : Please conﬁrm that both your postal and email addresses are correct . Q2 . Au : This special issue has another full article : Day & Goldstone , “The Import of Knowledge Export : Connecting Findings and Theories of Transfer of Learning . ” This full article does not appear to be mentioned in your commentary . Do you want to add a line about it ? Q3 . Au : Provide month of symposium for Linn 2002 . Q4 . Au : Millgram ( 1965 ) does not have a matching text citation ; please cite in text or delete . TABLE OF CONTENTS LISTING The table of contents for the journal will list your paper exactly as it appears below : Knowledge to Go : A Motivational and Dispositional View of Transfer David N . Perkins and Gavriel Salomon EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGIST , 47 ( 3 ) , 1 – 11 , 2012 Copyright C (cid:1) Division 15 , American Psychological Association ISSN : 0046 - 1520 print / 1532 - 6985 online DOI : 10 . 1080 / 00461520 . 2012 . 693354 Knowledge to Go : A Motivational and Dispositional View of Transfer David N . Perkins Harvard Graduate School of Education Harvard University 5 Gavriel Salomon Department of Educational Psychology University of Haifa We synthesize ideas from the foregoing articles in this special issue and from the broader literature on transfer to explore several themes . In many ordinary life circumstances , transfer proceeds easily , but formal learning often shows much less transfer than educators would like , making failure to transfer a focus of investigation . Transfer , like any complex cognitive performance , beneﬁts from motivational and dispositional drivers , an aspect of transfer not much discussed in these articles but inviting attention . Episodes of transfer can be analyzed according to a detect – elect – connect model : detecting a potential relationship with prior learn - ing , electing to pursue it , and working out a fruitful connection . These three “bridges” are somewhat independent ; ways in which each of them succeed and fail are detailed , drawing on the contributed articles and the broader literature . Finally , insights from this collection of articles and elsewhere put educators in a position to teach for transfer more effectively , but shifts of mind - set about the nature of knowledge and learning are required . 10 15 20 Schools are supposed to be stopovers in life , not ends in themselves . The information , skills , and understandings they offer are knowledge - to - go , not just to use on site . To be sure , often Monday’s topics most conspicuously serve the Tuesday problem set , the Friday quiz , or the exam at the end of the year . 25 However , in principle those topics are an investment toward thriving in family , civic , cultural , and professional lives . Unfortunately , considerable research suggests that much of the knowledge - to - go served up by schools does not “go” that far . Besides just plain forgetting , people commonly fail 30 to marshal what they know effectively in situations outside the classroom or in other classes in different disciplines . The bridge from school to beyond or from this subject to that other is a bridge too far . This , broadly , is the challenge of transfer of learning as 35 encountered by formal education . It is a challenge taken up by all of the foregoing articles . For instance , Chi and VanLehn ( 2012 / this issue ) makes the “failure - to - transfer phenomenon” central to her analysis . Lobato ( 2012 / this Correspondence should be addressed to David Perkins , Harvard Grad - uate School of Education , Harvard University , Room 609 , 20 University Road , Cambridge , MA 02138 . E - mail : David Perkins @ harvard . edu Q1 issue ) remarks that “people notice the transfer of learning 40 when it doesn’t happen” ( p . XX ) . Lobato also cautions that even when exactly the transfer we want does not occur , other pertinent kinds of transfer may . Among others , the work of Richland , Stigler , and Holyoak ( 2012 / this issue ) reminds us that transfer includes not just fruitful transfers 45 missed but unfruitful ones made . Focusing on the case of mathematics learning in junior colleges , Richland et al . document particularly egregious examples of negative transfer , where students commonly apply mathematical routines to new situations quite inappropriate to them and 50 with little attention to the plausibility of the results . With all these negatives , sometimes transfer seems like the hopelessly slow child of learning . But not so for the contrib - utors to this issue . All the articles take an optimistic stance . Their common motif is not whether signiﬁcant transfer of 55 learning can occur but under what conditions of learning . They offer perspectives on those conditions , even as they of - ten caution that business - as - usual in classrooms does not do a very good job of meeting them . It’s our responsibility and pleasure to comment on these 60 articles , identifying themes and patterns . The organizers of this issue also have encouraged us to offer our own ideas on 2 PERKINS AND SALOMON knowledge - to - go . Accordingly , we begin our discussion by examining the meaning of transfer of learning as expressed by the contributing authors . Then we outline a framework for 65 analyzing transfer . Then we offer several sections drawing on the contributing authors to discuss when and why transfer comes easy or comes hard . We conclude with an assessment of the prospects of teaching for transfer . BROAD MEANINGS FOR TRANSFER 70 OF LEARNING What counts as transfer of learning in contrast with just plain learning ? The question arises because all learning involves transfer in some sense . Evidence of learning always entails the learner doing something at least later and under another 75 set of conditions , if not elsewhere , informed by what has been learned ; otherwise there would be no basis to claim that learning had occurred . On this reading , transfer has an inclusive meaning , always part of learning and a matter of degree—how much later , how far elsewhere , and how dif - 80 ferent the conditions under which it is displayed . However , transfer as researchers usually use the term takes on a con - trastive meaning—successful initial learning positively inﬂu - encing performance on a later occasion and with a different appearance ( transfer ) versus not inﬂuencing ( failure to trans - 85 fer ) . Yet another case is negative inﬂuence , generally called negative transfer . But what counts as “inﬂuence” ? The term transfer it - self suggests a simple pattern of learn - it - here , apply - it - there . However , the contributors to this issue emphasize that trans - 90 fer should be viewed far more broadly . Chi and VanLehn ( 2012 / this issue ) and Lobato ( 2012 / this issue ) both pick up a warning from Lave ( 1988 ) about the limits of the “two - problems” transfer paradigm where subjects tackle one prob - lem and then face another with different surface charac - 95 teristics but a similar deep structure . Although this work has proved revealing ( e . g . , Gick & Holyoak , 1980 , 1983 ) , many scenarios of transfer do not resemble a two - problem paradigm . But it cannot be dismissed as a mere laboratory construct . Chi and VanLehn point out that some typical pat - 100 terns of instruction in schools look very much like an ex - panded version of the two - problems paradigm . A broader pattern of transfer is the direct application of an explanatory concept to new instances well removed from the initial learning . For instance , imagine some students studying 105 the law of supply and demand . The learning activities include using the law to interpret several diverse cases . A couple of weeks later a student goes supermarket shopping and gets annoyed with the surprisingly high price of oranges . Puzzling over the situation , the student relates this to a cold winter in 110 Florida that killed much of the orange crop , lowering supply and driving up prices . Such direct applications at some distance from the initial learning are also a limited scenario . Lobato ( 2012 / this issue ) notes that transfer situations can be sites for invention and 115 reorganization , not just carrying forward and plugging in . Schwartz , Chase , and Bransford ( 2012 / this issue ) contrast routine transfer with adaptive transfer , which involves not just applying but adapting and revising prior knowledge in the context of transfer . 120 For instance , imagine another student in the group that learned the law of supply and demand . This student , in the midst of a messy social life , ponders love and the reciproci - ties it involves . The student suddenly wonders whether such personal exchanges somehow reﬂect the law of supply and 125 demand and mulls over the idea . “It’s hard for me to ﬁnd a girlfriend I really like , ” he thinks . “There’s so much competi - tion . That’s demand . Well , but just saying it’s hard , is that like a price ? Well , it’s kind of like cost - of - effort maybe . But look , this isn’t a market really , or if it is kind of , that’s certainly not 130 a nice way to think about it . ” He sees some similarities and differences . The mismatches as well as the matches reveal more about the reach of the law of supply and demand itself . This illustrates “backward transfer , ” where dealing with the current situation leads to revisionary adaptations in a 135 prior conception ( Hohensee , as cited in Lobato , 2012 / this is - sue ) . For instance , Ross and Kennedy ( 1990 ) discussed how problem solvers addressing new problems by analogy with previous ones constructed generalizations of the approaches to the previous problems , developing a more ﬂexible reper - 140 toire . More broadly , Engle , Lam , Meyer , and Nix ( 2012 / this issue ) draw on the notion of intercontextuality , where learn - ing contexts can refer forward to potential transfer contexts and vice versa , with enough linkages making them perceived as one large context . 145 Lobato also warns of the tendency to evaluate transfer of learning only from an expert’s perspective : Are students grasping and using the big ideas anointed by the discipline ? The economist might be happy with the price of oranges example and maybe even the love example . However , other 150 students might be taking away something more modest but still useful—for instance , simply a broad tendency to ques - tion where prices come from . Lobato and others recommend an actor - centered perspective , asking what sorts of transfers ﬁgure in learners’ learning and how , even if they aren’t the 155 anointed ideas . Finally , not just payoffs in the moment but “preparation for future learning” is an important and documented bene - ﬁt of transfer ( Bransford & Schwartz , 1999 ) . In particular , learning experiences involving inventive exploration of the 160 topic can deepen learning from later , more presentational learning of the topic , even if the inventive explorations do not in themselves yield a very good understanding . All this adds up to an appropriately ﬂexible conception of transfer . However , we note one way in which the conception 165 is confusingly ﬂexible : There is considerable interpretive latitude about whether to frame some situations as failure to transfer or failure of initial learning . For instance , Richland et al . ( 2012 / this issue ) discuss how some junior college KNOWLEDGE TO GO 3 students cannot place a simple fraction like 4 / 5 on the 170 number line , along with related mishaps . They treat this as failure to transfer from initial conventional instruction that successfully establishes certain kinds of routine compu - tational knowledge . However , other researchers might say that the initial instruction failed—surely it was intended to 175 develop a general understanding of fractions , but the learning may have been extremely situational and bound to fractions routines . More generally , Chi and VanLehn ( 2012 / this issue ) notes that one of the most prevalent explanations for failure of transfer is that the learners did not achieve a sufﬁciently 180 deep understanding of the content in the ﬁrst place . Such cases always allow an alternative description : They weren’t failures of transfer but failures of initial learning . How is it that contrasting descriptions of the same situa - tion arise ? Because different researchers can have different 185 conceptions of what applications fall within the intended scope of the initial learning ( where failure indicates failure of the initial learning ) and what applications reach markedly beyond it ( where failure indicates failure of transfer ) . To be sure , further empirical investigations might help to clarify 190 the situation with ﬁner grained accounts of the intended ini - tial learning and the learning and transfer actually achieved . However , where to draw the line between a straightforward extension of initial learning and true transfer remains some - thing of a judgment call . Much may depend on one’s judg - 195 ment of the “distance” between what is learned and the do - main of application . Imagine , for instance , a history unit on the decline of Rome that also touched on comparisons and contrasts with more recent cases such as the Ottoman Empire and the British Empire . Later , students are asked to analyze 200 the case of the USSR . Would this count as a straightforward extension ? After all , the students had practiced on other em - pires . Or would it count as transfer ? After all , the students had not taken up the USSR or other near - contemporary cases before . Clearly there is no absolute answer . Accordingly , al - 205 ternative descriptions of some situations as failure to transfer or failure of initial learning are likely to persist . On the positive side , when the extrapolations from initial learning clearly reach well beyond the straightforward , no such ambiguity surfaces . If the students’ study of the decline 210 of Rome had not ranged beyond Rome at all , applications to the USSR clearly would count as transfer because of the “distance” from the initial learning—more precisely , the surface and , to an extent , deep - structure ( dis ) similarlities between the two . Engle et al . ( 2012 / this issue ) discuss a high 215 school biology teacher encouraging students to make links beyond the immediate unit , and outside of school , and to chemistry class ; a student generating a metaphor between the atrium of the heart and an atrium in the school ; and students ﬁnding links between three different units . Our examples of 220 the price of oranges and of love both involve reaches well beyond the initial learning ; they require the incidental notic - ing of possible connections while engaged in other matters entirely . With an emphatically broad and ﬂexible conception of 225 transfer in view , we turn to a perspective on how transfer happens . THREE BRIDGES FOR TRANSFER OF LEARNING Let’s look back at the student relating the high price of or - 230 anges to the chilly Florida winter and the student pondering love as a dynamic of supply and demand . To bring it off , these students have to build three mental bridges . In mnemonic spirit , let’s call them detect , elect , and connect . The student in the supermarket has to detect a possible link between the 235 high price of oranges and the law of supply and demand , elect to explore the link , and connect the law to the particu - lars of the orange crop . The student thinking about love has to detect a possible relationship with supply and demand , elect to pursue the idea , and connect the law effectively to 240 this very nonmonetary sort of situation , certainly more of a stretch than the orange case ( remember , connect can mean developing insightful contrasts , not just similarities ) . As we see later , depending on the circumstances , any of the three bridges can be a bridge too far . 245 In general , it’s natural to think in terms of transfer when one notes contextual or structural gaps of detect , elect , or connect between earlier learning and the moment of inter - est . When the moment of interest appears seamless with what’s gone before , this would not be called transfer in the 250 contrastive sense discussed earlier . Imagine for instance a supply - and - demand quiz featuring the kinds of problems stu - dents had just discussed in class . Good performance on the quiz would count as a sign of initial learning rather than a demonstration of transfer . 255 We relate detect , elect , and connect to the larger literature on transfer in later sections , for now proﬁling them broadly . We view detect , elect , and connect as functions to be ful - ﬁlled one way or another on any occasion of transfer . . . but not always fulﬁlled in the same way , much as , to make 260 an analogy , one might come to a decision by means of a pro – con list or reviewing how similar decisions worked out previously or a quick intuitive judgment . The three bridges get built in various ways by the business - as - usual of cog - nition noted throughout this collection of articles—memory 265 retrieval by similarity , pattern recognition , the acquisition of routines , surface and deep coding , the consequent formation of schemas , analogizing , and so on . In keeping with a grab bag of contributing processes , the three bridges sometimes occur serially but sometimes virtu - 270 ally simultaneously . In the episodes about oranges and love , the bridges get built in serial succession—detect the occa - sion , elect to pursue it , work out the connection . However , transfer commonly occurs through sudden recognitions of signiﬁcance or of unexpected absence or anomaly understood 275 in an instant that fold together detect , elect , and connect . 4 PERKINS AND SALOMON Also , the three bridges do not presume conscious aware - ness of making a link . It’s important to recognize that con - siderable transfer , maybe most transfer , occurs automati - cally . This can be the case even when people are alert and 280 attentive to what they are doing . For instance , Day and Goldstone ( 2011 ) , using the two - problems paradigm , demon - strated marked transfer from one computer - based manipula - tive task to another involving simple dynamic systems , with many subjects not reporting any awareness of the relation - 285 ship . Moreover , in a version of the experiment where subjects were required to formulate explicitly the relationship between the tasks , this undermined rather than enhanced transfer . Relatedly , Salomon and Perkins ( 1989 ) distinguished be - tween high - road and low - road transfer . High - road transfer 290 involves deliberate reﬂective processing , whereas low - road transfer depends on pattern recognition and the reﬂexive trig - gering of routines . The high - road / low - road contrast relates to dual processing models of cognition that juxtapose deliber - ative with automatic processing ( e . g . , Epstein , 1994 ; Evans , 295 2008 ; Stanovich , 1999 ) . Here we note that the bridges of detect , elect , and connect can get built by both deliberative and automatic processes . For instance , one can detect a con - nection through mindful scouting for prior knowledge that might help ( high road ) or simply through noticing a ﬁt ( low 300 road ) . High - road and low - road processing can mix . For in - stance , one might systematically scout for a helpful link to prior learning ( high road ) , and , locating a lead , ﬁnd that the rest falls into place like a sudden insight ( low road ) . Finally , the ideas about detect - elect - connect and high - 305 road / low - road provide a frame for discussing the place of motivations and dispositions in transfer of learning . High - road episodes of detect , elect , or connect by deﬁnition de - mand extended cognitive effort and hence require signiﬁcant motivational or dispositional drivers . For instance , to delib - 310 erate about the high price of oranges , our student in the supermarket would need to be curious about it , or perhaps deciding whether to complain to the manager about the cost unless it seemed justiﬁed . The student pondering love would be worried about personal relationships . 315 The story is different for low - road episodes of detect , elect , or connect . By deﬁnition , these unfold relatively au - tomatically , the principal impetus that of habit rather than motivation or dispositions . However , this does not mean that motivation and dispositions play no role . For instance , driv - 320 ing a moving van when you have only driven cars before can require courage , even though most of the mechanics of driving automatically transfer . We distinguish the three bridges toward illuminating the nature and mechanisms of transfer further in the following 325 pages , drawing particularly on the articles in this issue . We do not expect the authors to have employed these concepts them - selves , but their investigations reveal much about the three bridges , when they carry trafﬁc , and when they fail . Also , the place of motivation and dispositions in transfer is not 330 prominent in the articles collected here . Only Schwartz et al . ( 2012 / this issue ) directly discuss motivational and disposi - tional factors . Other authors bring forward matters such as understanding , meaningfulness , and expectations that clearly would contribute to the motivational and dispositional side 335 of the story but do not discuss it much as such . Accordingly , we take the opportunity to do so throughout this article . EASY TRAVELS FOR TRANSFER OF LEARNING As noted earlier , researchers study transfer of learning be - 340 cause their hope for knowledge - to - go often does not pan out . For balance , it’s useful to recognize that transfer is far from the wingless dodo of human cognition . Transfer routinely succeeds in a wide range of cases . A better perspective on what makes transfer hard comes from noting cases where 345 transfer proves easy . For example , comparison is an everyday kind of cognition that inevitably involves elements of transfer . Richland et al . ( 2012 / this issue ) , distressed about students’ poor transfer of basic concepts in arithmetic , remark that the very same stu - 350 dents almost certainly readily “compare the plots of movies , the sources of difﬁculty in different videogames , the rea - sons why various romantic relationships have succeeded or failed . ” Richland et al . note how everyday understanding in terms of cause – effect relations supports such transfer . Chi 355 and VanLehn ( 2012 / this issue ) suggests that transfer almost always happens when surface features match , and surface features often correlate with deep structure . Bereiter ( 1995 ) emphasized several areas where for most learners transfer occurs so routinely and reliably that no one 360 studies it as transfer—reading , writing , routine arithmetic skills , and the use of prior knowledge for further learning building directly on the same ideas . The three bridges help to explain why . For instance , text directly cues reading , one has both the habit of reading text and generally a reason to 365 read texts one picks up , and the basic skills are established . In other words , the bridges of detect , elect , and connect are solidly in place . The world of ready transfer goes well beyond literal com - parisons . When William B . Yeats in his “Sailing to Byzan - 370 tium” compares an aged man to a tattered coat upon a stick or Shakespeare has Romeo say Juliet is the sun , we generally understand such tropes effortlessly . Nor do we have to turn to classic authors for examples . Readily understood metaphors saturate everyday speech . Although some are idioms , oth - 375 ers , freshly coined , still communicate easily . In terms of the three bridges , listeners do not need to detect a potential rela - tionship , because the speech or text already directly cues it . Engagement in the interaction makes electing to interpret the metaphor the default and virtually reﬂexive course of action . 380 Listeners only have to connect across the gap of meanings posed by the metaphors , a mental bridge set up to be read - ily constructed because speakers speak with accessibility in KNOWLEDGE TO GO 5 mind . Note also that on the production side , coming up with casual metaphors is a common part of everyday conversation . 385 Humor is another everyday area where transfer thrives . Spontaneous humor commonly involves category miscegenation of varied sorts . Consider this classic linking of well - motivated homicide and suicide : Lady Astor : If you were my husband , I’d poison your tea ! 390 Winston Churchill : My dear , if you were my wife I’d drink it . To produce such a quip , Churchill had to detect the oppor - tunity , elect to pursue it , and connect a poisoning scenario with one that paradoxically welcomed it , all in a ﬂash . Most of us are not as word - nimble as Churchill , but we readily 395 understand even if we don’t produce . Also , quips of one sort or another are commonplace with certain people in certain social settings , like cocktail parties—the settings prime the reach to detect , elect , and connect , presumably with the help of schemas for various quip structures . 400 Lest metaphors and jokes seem too unserious ( but , of course , they are often very serious ) , social rules and their violations are another area of ready transfer . We often carry norms of behavior from home to workplaces or social activi - ties , and sometimes mistakenly carry them to other countries 405 and cultures where they do not ﬁt . One could go on , but perhaps these diverse examples sug - gest that , if transfer sometimes comes hard , it also may come easy . Lobato ( 2012 / this issue ) , discussing the actor - oriented perspective on transfer , emphasizes that the traditional ap - 410 proach to investigating transfer tends to “underestimate in - stances of the generalization of learning . ” Indeed so ! Trans - fer comes easy when prior learning , surface cues , direct cueing , situational priming , and preselection of targets for accessible consumption as in metaphor and humor support 415 detect – elect – connect . The question remains why transfer has proved such a Gor - dian knot in formal education . We pursue this theme by visit - ing each of the bridges as individually necessary and mutually sufﬁcient conditions for transfer . It would seem most natural 420 to address detect ﬁrst , then elect , and then connect , as the bridges often get built sequentially . However , the contribu - tions of the authors to the special issue suggest a different order of discussion . The contributions address connect most directly . Accordingly , it’s more orienting to examine ﬁrst the 425 ﬁnal bridge of connect , and then consider how detect and elect lead up to it . CONNECTING—SOMETIMES A BRIDGE TOO FAR In the detect – elect – connect framework , connecting ad - 430 dresses the challenge of ﬁnding a relevant relationship be - tween initial learning and the transfer situation , with detect and elect already taken care of one way or another . In some classrooms and some everyday circumstances , developing the connection is the principal problem . Participants already 435 understand that they are supposed to apply a prior learning and feel motivated . Even so , the connection may prove hard to see . A familiar idiom testiﬁes to connection problems : “What’s that got to do with the price of oranges ? ” . . . or the price of eggs , or tea , or ﬁsh . We make this complaint when 440 someone has said something supposedly relevant , directly cueing a connection we want to understand . . . but we don’t get it . The nature of connections and the challenges of work - ing them out are matters richly addressed by the contributors to this issue . 445 Perhaps the most commonly mentioned basis for transfer is sufﬁciently deep understanding developed in the origi - nal context of learning . Such an understanding commonly is said to take the form of schemas representing the knowledge in question . Transfer requires coordinating the schemas with 450 new situations . This process may constitute a straightforward application , what Schwartz et al . ( 2012 / this issue ) call routine transfer as noted earlier ; or it may involve signiﬁcant recon - struction of the source schemas and the target situation to bring them into an illuminating relationship , what Schwartz 455 et al . call adaptive transfer . As noted earlier , the price - of - oranges example illustrates the former , the love example the latter . Discussion of schemas often includes a contrast between surface and deep structure . As Chi and VanLehn ( 2012 / this 460 issue ) puts it , for real understanding and good prospects of transfer , learners need to learn to “see” through surface fea - tures of situations to discern underlying patterns . Chi and VanLehn observe that , in some everyday areas , this seems quite easy—for instance classifying diverse kinds of be - 465 havior as drunken despite very different surface characteris - tics . Richland et al . ( 2012 / this issue ) emphasize how causal schemas support making sense of everyday cause – effect rela - tionships . Constructing the relationship does not necessarily mean that the initial learning yielded schemas fully prepared 470 for the stretch . Richland et al . ( 2012 / this issue ) , among oth - ers , note that schemas often get constructed as a side effect , as people apply a solved source problem to a new problem . Lobato ( 2012 / this issue ) warns that such relationships may not be the same from person to person , neatly deter - 475 mined by the source knowledge and target situation . The constructed connection can take different particular forms while reﬂecting the same broad principles . Lobato illustrates with case studies from Wagner ( 2010 ) concerning the law of large numbers , where subjects applied the principle to solve 480 the same problems effectively but in very different ways . Lobato relates this to “transfer - in - pieces , ” an alternative to a schema - based view of transfer also drawn from Wagner ( 2006 ) . Rather than the development of abstract schemas , Wagner argues that transfer emerges from the gradual accu - 485 mulation of smaller elements of knowledge , rooted in par - ticular contexts , and gradually extended to a great range of situations . 6 PERKINS AND SALOMON These ideas help to explain how the bridge of connect might get built—that is , how people actually work out re - 490 lationships between source knowledge and target situations . However , connect sometimes is a bridge too far . Chi and VanLehn ( 2012 / this issue ) observes how in classic work on the two - problems paradigm in transfer , as well as consid - erable work on science learning , often students do not see 495 through the surface . Novices tend to group problems by sur - face features such as inclined planes or falling bodies and approach them in routine procedural ways associated with those characteristics . Experts see past the surface and focus on underlying physical principles such as conservation of en - 500 ergy , grouping problems quite differently . Chi and VanLehn’s analysis contrasts same – same cases , where surface and deep structure between source and target both align and transfer generally occurs ; different – same cases , where different sur - face structure masks similar deep structure , blocking trans - 505 fer ; and same – different cases , where similar surface structure lures inappropriate transfer despite different deep structure . For another kind of difﬁculty , Richland et al . ( 2012 / this is - sue ) suggests that junior college students have difﬁculty with rather elementary mathematical understandings in part be - 510 cause the connective structure of mathematics is not causal but formal . Learning experiences in mathematics that fos - ter analogical reasoning might aid in developing appropriate causal and formal schematic structures . Difﬁculties with building a connection become particu - 515 larly salient when tasks provide detect and elect directly by asking learners to apply prior knowledge to speciﬁc prob - lems . Even with nothing but connect to worry about , learn - ers can easily fail . One case mentioned earlier was inability to place a fraction on a number line . For another example 520 from Richland et al . ( 2012 / this issue ) , the authors also report students’ responses to the question , “Which is greater ? a / 5 or a / 8 . ” Results were extremely disappointing , virtually at chance level . Another example comes from the control group of a study 525 by Chase and Schwartz ( as cited in Schwartz et al . , 2012 / this issue ) of eighth - grade students learning about density , one group through a tell - and - practice condition , another in a con - dition that required students to invent their own formula , with a direct introduction to the ofﬁcial formula later . The question 530 was whether the students would catch on to the ratio struc - ture of density . In the “invent” condition , about half of them showed this understanding on later directly posed problems . In the tell - and - practice condition , most did not , especially when the tell - and - practice condition featured concrete rather 535 than abstract illustrations , a difference that did not matter in the “invent” condition . Such examples reveal how easily straightforward instruc - tional paradigms fall short of building a basic understanding . As discussed earlier , whether this is called failure to transfer 540 or simply superﬁcial initial learning is a descriptive choice for researchers . Either way , the initial learning comes up wanting . Such examples also illustrate how laboratory and aca - demic settings for transfer tend to obscure the role of motiva - 545 tions and dispositions “in the wild , ” even as they disclose the role of deep structure or related constructs . In virtually all the foregoing cases , learners are directly asked to undertake tasks , motivated by compliance and rewards such as subject fees or course - completion credits . Emphasis falls on learn - 550 ers’ ability to make the desired connections rather than their motivation or disposition to do so . We continue this theme in the following sections . DETECTING—SOMETIMES A BRIDGE TOO FAR 555 In the detect – elect – connect framework , detecting means dis - cerning the possibility of a connection . This sometimes oc - curs on the ﬂy out of the blue , as with the stories of the price of oranges or love . The themes from the previous section on connecting certainly have implications for the bridge of 560 detecting . Schemas , causal networks , or the knowledge ele - ments of transfer - in - pieces can help to set the learner up for recognition of possible connections well beyond the imme - diate context of initial learning . However , catching possible connections on the ﬂy is a fundamentally different challenge 565 than working them out once identiﬁed . The student noticing the high price of oranges might easily never even think of trying to relate it to the law of supply and demand , no matter whether the student could succeed in doing so . In general , circumstances inviting interpretation from this 570 or that perspective come up all the time in our lives . We can hardly expect to catch more than a small fraction of the opportunities . Moreover , the most promising circumstance for detect—high surface similarity—may favor superﬁcial rather than deep connections , because there is less press to 575 construct an abstract relationship between the source and target situations ( Byrge & Goldstone , 2011 ; Day , Goldstone & Hills , 2010 ; Goldstone & Sakamoto , 2003 ) . Detect has its own processing demands somewhat different from connect . For instance , Ross ( 1984 , 1989 ) 580 examined a version of detect through the concept of remindings—automatic recollections of previous speciﬁc episodes of learning in a new situation—ﬁnding the retrieval process dominated by the surface content of the prior learning . Gentner , Rattermann , and Forbus ( 1993 ) offered 585 evidence that , after surface properties drive retrieval , com - parison can readily draw out deeper relational properties , the sort generally thought to be important in making a good connection . Moreover , both expertise and more intensive learning activities favor some initial retrieval by deeper 590 structural characteristics . Missing the very possibility of a connection ﬁgures com - monly in failure to transfer . In the classic work of Gick and Holyoak ( 1980 , 1983 ) on transfer between problem analogs , the earlier experiments involved telling subjects directly that 595 KNOWLEDGE TO GO 7 the ﬁrst problem they considered might bear on the second ( transfer ) problem . This hint never involved substantive in - formation about the nature of the connection . However , in later experiments , the researchers systematically included or dropped the hint , virtually always ﬁnding a substantial im - 600 pact . They explicitly framed noticing the possibility of a connection to the target problem as an additional processing requirement ( Gick & Holyoak , 1980 ) . The discussion of “inert knowledge” by Bransford , Franks , Vye , and Sherwood ( 1989 ) also offers clear cases of 605 detection problems . The authors emphasize that knowledge can be learned and understood but still inert , not activated in relevant contexts . In one experiment , subjects learned ideas about water as a standard of density , solar - powered airplanes , nutrition , and other matters . One group studied for informa - 610 tion ; the other group learned in the context of thinking about a jungle journey . Both groups showed good retention on di - rect probes . The subjects also engaged in planning a desert expedition . The group that had learned for information made little use of it ; the knowledge was “inert” in the jungle journey 615 context . In contrast , subjects who had learned in the active planning context of the jungle journey made rich use of the knowledge for the desert expedition . Some of our own research shows that people have acquired thinking skills that are often inert . As part of an investigation 620 into thinking dispositions , Perkins and colleagues studied adolescents’ comments on stories including everyday prob - lem solving and decision making ( Perkins , Jay , & Tishman , 1993 ; Perkins , Tishman , Ritchhart , Donis , & Andrade , 2000 ; Perkins & Ritchhart , 2004 ) . The stories included lapses of 625 good thinking , such as failing to examine the other side of the case or neglect of more imaginative options . The stud - ies disclosed that subjects rarely detected a lapse on their own , even though they were asked and encouraged to eval - uate the thinking in the story and despite participating with 630 interest . However , the subjects demonstrated prior learning of the skills and their importance : Many of the subjects rec - ognized the lapses as problems when they were pointed out speciﬁcally . Virtually all the subjects had the skills to repair the lapses , for instance , generating reasons on the other side 635 of the case or more imaginative options . In sum , the biggest problem was detecting possible lapses in the ﬁrst place . In ad - dition , detecting did not correlate with short - form measures of intelligence . All this contrasts sharply with the tendency to attribute shortfalls of thinking primarily to limitations in 640 intelligence , thinking abilities , or strategic repertoire . Relatedly , Klaczysnki ( 2005 ) reported a series of stud - ies of reasoning in adolescents chosen to have strong be - liefs in some area , for instance , a religious denomination . Subjects read arguments or brief reports of scientiﬁc in - 645 vestigations containing ﬂaws . The readings were edited so that the conclusions would conﬂict , align , or be neutral with respect to the beliefs . The research revealed that subjects commented insightfully on the ﬂaws far more often in the belief – conﬂict situation than the other two . The explanation 650 reﬂects a dual processing perspective : The statements con - trary to subjects’ general beliefs activated mindful deliberate processing , quickly leading to the discovery of ﬂaws . Going back to Berlyne ( 1965 ) , the conﬂict situation is sufﬁciently unsettling to arouse strong motivation to re - settle the con - 655 ﬂict . In the other conditions , detection became the “bridge too far”—why look critically when you can readily accept what’s being said ? In further studies , instructions were added to motivate careful thinking : If subjects did not reason clearly and care - 660 fully , they would need to meet with researchers later in the week to justify their responses . This direct cue to think things through greatly increased detection of ﬂaws regardless of condition , although subjects’ reasoning still proved far more elaborate in the belief – conﬂict condition . 665 As noted earlier , we are bringing the detect – elect – connect contrast to this discussion , not expecting to ﬁnd it in the con - tributed articles . However , some of the authors show concern with the prospects of transfer well beyond the original occa - sions of learning and in situations where prior knowledge is 670 not directly cued . Engle et al . ( 2012 / this issue ) foreground a contrast be - tween expansive and bounded framing of the original learn - ing . Expansive framing emphasizes the meaningfulness and usefulness of what’s being learned and its potential to relate 675 to a range of other circumstances . Bounded framing treats what’s being learned as for the unit , for the class , for the quiz . The broad teaching / learning moves that characterize expansive framing plainly put learners in a better position to detect opportunities for transfer . They include cultivating 680 expectations that what’s being learned will speak to related settings ; treating previous learning as continuously relevant , treating the use of prior learning as desired socially ; and , broadly speaking , encouraging students to see themselves as the agents of their own learning and use of knowledge . 685 The verb “see” with its tone of perceptual immediacy suggests detecting possible connections . Recall how Chi and VanLehn ( 2012 / this issue ) emphasizes the importance of “seeing” the deep structure in situations . This relates to the earlier distinction between high - road ( deliberate ) and low - 690 road ( automatic ) processing . For the expert , the deep struc - ture has become almost automatically available . Schwartz et al . ( 2012 / this issue ) remind us of classic research on mental sets and functional ﬁxedness , which demonstrates how problem solvers can be blinded by initial 695 associations and ways of framing problems ( Dunker , 1945 ) . For instance , problem solvers could easily fail to detect a nearby paper clip as a potential tool for ﬁshing a ring out of a drain , even though they would easily act on the suggestion . 700 In general , seeing what one might think is straightfor - wardly “there” cannot be taken for granted . Hannula and Lehtinen ( 2005 ; Lehtinen & Hannula , as cited in Lobato , 2012 / this issue ) examined how young children apply count - ing to naturalistic situations . These investigators discovered 705 8 PERKINS AND SALOMON that children who can count perfectly well often do not ﬁnd number of items a salient feature . The authors devised and tested an intervention that cultivated more alertness to nu - merosity . Their work demonstrated , on one hand , that detect can be the bridge too far and on the other that interventions 710 can directly address detect . In accordance with Lobato’s per - spective , their work argues for the importance of an actor - oriented approach to transfer that examines carefully just what’s going on . ELECTING—SOMETIMES A BRIDGE TOO FAR 715 In the detect – elect – connect framework , elect means choosing to pursue a possible connection . The student noticing the high price of oranges might muse , “Maybe it has something to do with that supply – demand thing , ” but then drift along to something else . Just as we miss many opportunities for 720 transfer altogether , many others we do not bother to pursue . Although , as argued earlier , motivations and dispositions play a role in all three of detect – elect – connect , elect takes on special status as a pivotal point where the learner either moves forward or turns aside . 725 More provocative than simply letting a possible con - nection go are cases where alternative entrenched ways of responding and contrary motives hijack potential transfer . As to entrenched ways , Langer and Imber ( 1979 ) showed how “practice makes imperfect” as it leads to overlearned 730 routines , thus mindlessly treating new problems as if they are familiar ones . As to contrary motives , just think of why Milgram’s ( 1963 , 1974 ) subjects would continue harming another individual being , motivated to satisfy a scientiﬁc authority , or why otherwise honest students cheat on exams . 735 Instead of the student in the supermarket , imagine the person who has learned a new exercise plan . The person understands perfectly well the routine to be followed . Unfortunately , at the critical moments , old aversions capture behavior , accompanied by convenient rationalizations like “I’ll let it 740 go just this once” or “I’m easing into it . ” Likewise , when people face moral dilemmas or ﬁnd themselves tempted by impulsive but unwise actions , they recognize the choice but often the “dark side” wins . To mention some of our own work again , Salomon ( 2006 ) 745 reported how the initially positive impact of peace education programs on perceptions and attitudes quickly dissipates in the face of contrary sociopolitical forces . The problem is that after participants return to “life as usual , ” social contexts erode the mind - sets and behaviors that have been acquired . 750 It’s not that the ideas have been forgotten or become obscure in a conceptual sense . Rather , commitment to them falters in the face of counterforces . The fact that the changes of attitude and perception have not disappeared is revealed by the repeated ﬁnding that they can be revived by means of 755 reﬂection , peer teaching , or role playing . One might question whether the bridge of elect should ﬁgure in the story of transfer at all . It could be said that elect was just a matter of choice and not about building the cognitive bridges of detect and connect . However , leaving 760 elect out of the picture would impoverish the idea of transfer . Remember that knowledge - to - go is the aim . A causal account of why knowledge does not “go” needs to recognize that potential transfers often face sharp competition from other responses and other motivations . Areas of hot cog - 765 nition like peace and war are not the only examples . For a more academic case , research on physics learning regularly reveals that students’ technical understanding competes with and often loses out to everyday intuitive misconceptions . An elegant example comes from Marcia Linn ( 2002 ) , who 770 wryly quoted a student’s view of a Newtonian principle : “Objects in motion remain in motion in the classroom , but come to rest on the playground . ” As is the case with detect , the contributors to this issue do not , for the most part , address elect directly . However , 775 some bring forward factors that would contribute strongly to a person electing to pursue a detected potential trans - fer . The expansive framing of teaching / learning advocated by Engle et al . ( 2012 / this issue ) would make what is learned much more meaningful in a broad range of circumstances and 780 therefore more meriting of attention . The same can be said for teaching / learning that fosters seeing deeper structures ( Chi & VanLehn , 2012 / this issue ) . Richland et al . ( 2012 / this issue ) emphasize the problem of meaninglessness in students’ typ - ical learning of basic mathematics . The authors discuss how 785 students end up viewing mathematics as a bundle of rituals to be executed accurately , with little sense of mathematical or practical signiﬁcance . One consequence is misapplications when students are asked directly to address one or another kind of problem . Another consequence would be reluctance 790 to elect mathematical approaches to understanding situations . Schwartz et al . ( 2012 / this issue ) mention work by Chase , the second author , on 8th graders learning about genetics from a collection of games in different rooms highlighting different aspects of genetics . Chase found that the simple 795 measure of leaving - after - failure accounted for 50 % of the variance in learning . The quitters tended not to learn : Dis - engagement naturally subverted learning opportunities , in - cluding connecting previous learning to the present moment . Schwartz et al . ( 2012 / this issue ) relate this to Dweck’s ( 1975 , 800 2000 ) entity learner phenomenon , where learners hold “ei - ther you get it or you don’t” belief systems that undercut investment of effort . These perspectives speak strongly to making learning meaningful and fostering productive persistence . However , 805 they say little about the problem of previously ingrained re - sponses and other motives hijacking the desired transfer . Re - hearsal techniques with reﬂection are one way of coping with this , as for instance found in programs and studies designed to help students manage their anger and sexual impulses ( e . g . , 810 Reyna , Adam , Poirier , LeCroy , & Brainerd , 2005 ) . KNOWLEDGE TO GO 9 ARE WE READY TO TEACH FOR TRANSFER ? Conditions for transfer have been in the foreground so far : When does transfer of learning happen , when not , and why ? The contributors to this collection have explored these ques - 815 tions richly but certainly have not stopped there . Educators as well as researchers , they all have discussed not just what’s going on but how we can do better . Their recommendations are diverse , and some appear at various points earlier . How - ever , it may be useful here to bring forward broad theories of 820 action from each of the articles . Chi and VanLehn focus on the challenge of learners com - ing to see through the surface features of problems to their deeper parallels and differences . She advocates teaching for deeper understanding generally , with engaging learners in 825 self - explanation as one important strategy . However , Chi and VanLehn also urge directly helping learners to read through those surfaces by examining ﬁrst - and second - order interac - tions of surface features , from which deeper relationships can be discerned . Engle et al . ﬁnd a villain in typical classroom 830 patterns that telegraph to learners a narrow view of con - tent as for now , this day , this unit—what they term bounded framing . The authors advocate expansive framing , which in various ways fosters expectations for diverse later uses , for the relevance of prior learnings to the current moment , and 835 for the authorial role of the learners in making the most of their own learning . Relatedly , Lobato champions an actor - centered perspec - tive on learning for transfer . She warns about concluding that transfer has failed when learners do not soon manifest 840 the rather broad and deep transfers desired by experts . She envisions a dynamic of teaching and learning attentive to and encouraging of the many kinds and layers of transfer that learners display . Richland et al . bewail the extremely superﬁcial learning of mathematics . They outline a vision of 845 mathematical learning that treats mathematical connections in an explicit public way and engages students in struggling to make sense of important mathematics . Certainly the same principles could be applied to any discipline . Finally , Schwartz et al . build on their distinction between 850 routine and adaptive transfer to recommend a course of learn - ing that navigates between the tensions of routines and nov - elty . The “optimal adaptability corridor” would provide efﬁ - cient tools for straightforward situations along with enough stretch to build ﬂexible understandings generative of further 855 learning . An important tool here is asking learners to explore and construct their own understandings of topics before ex - posure to standard explanations . It’s reasonable to ask whether these somewhat different recommendations conﬂict with one another . We think not ! 860 Besides many overlaps , the recommendations appear plainly complementary . The differences emanate from the particu - lar challenges the authors put center stage . Of course , this does not mean that the authors would agree on every point . However , for the most part one could bundle together their 865 various ideas toward a vision of teaching and learning far more attentive to transfer than the norm . So , are we ready to teach for transfer ? Perhaps not com - pletely . There is still both the matter of the three bridges of detect , elect , and connect and relatedly the role of mo - 870 tivations and dispositions in transfer . Teaching for transfer ideally not only prepares the learner to ﬁgure out how what’s been learned connects to new situations but also to detect the opportunities and elect to pursue them . Unfortunately , detect and elect pose major challenges of their own , even more so 875 “in the wild , ” away from focusing and motivating laboratory or classroom contexts . As to detect , recall how the clutter of events in another con - text , comfort with the messages one is hearing even though they have ﬂaws , or functional ﬁxedness and mental set can 880 mask potential transfers . Patterns of instruction that encour - age reﬂective mindful processing ( high - road processing as we called it before ) not just in the classroom but beyond can be expected to increase rates of detection . Indeed , all the au - thors champion in one way or another the cause of motivated 885 reﬂective mindful processing . Their visions of good learning seem likely to cultivate broad dispositional characteristics such as mindfulness ( Langer , 1989 ) , need for cognition ( Ca - cioppo & Petty , 1982 ) , need for validity more than quick cognitive closure ( Kruglanski & Webster , 1996 ) , and incre - 890 mental versus entity stances toward intellectual challenge ( Dweck , 1975 , 2000 ) . As to elect , recall how strong rival habitual responses and urgent countermotives , or also total indifference to a theme , can preempt potential transfers . Intellectual understanding 895 alone is not likely to save the day when such interference is involved . To add to previous examples , consider Zim - bardo’s ( 2006 ) students who abused their fellow students despite humane principles they must have held , or the ob - servations of Darley and Latane ( 1968 ) about the indiffer - 900 ence of bystanders who fail to apply simple principles of helping a person in need . Called for are patterns of instruc - tion that change the emotional and motivational landscape through such means as reimagining scenarios , cultivating empathy , and role - playing , as for instance in some school 905 programs addressing sexual behavior and school violence ( e . g . , Reyna et al . , 2005 ) . More broadly , Bereiter ( 1995 ) urged cultivating general dispositions that motivate transfer , men - tioning moral dispositions such as respect for human life and thinking dispositions such as a scientiﬁc approach to natural 910 phenomena . So now , ﬁnally , are we ready to teach for transfer ? If “we” means researchers , the research base to improve prac - tice considerably certainly exists . However , is the rest of the world ready ? For many teachers and students , knowledge 915 of whatever sort is something to “possess , ” to have in the mental warehouse ready for deployment as acquired . The key question for these teachers and their students becomes whether students can show knowledge on demand—through assignments and tests that relatively directly call for what 920 10 PERKINS AND SALOMON hopefully has been learned . Such settings of learning display what might be called a learning culture of demand . Students can learn a great deal that way . A learning culture of demand can serve quite well when later contexts of use cue and motivate deploying what’s been learned , thereby helping 925 with detect and elect , and when applications are straight - forward , making connect tractable . Recalling the familiar distinction between passive and active vocabulary , a culture of demand can build a passive “vocabulary” of skills , in - formation , and understandings . Moreover , a culture of de - 930 mand simpliﬁes the logistics of education in ways reinforced by the current emphasis on high - stakes standardized exams . Exercises and tests can be relatively direct rather than open - ended . Courses andunits canberelativelyencapsulatedrather than richly cross - connected—bounded rather than expansive 935 framing in terms of Engle et al . ( 2012 / this issue ) . Finally , no - tice that a culture of demand does not exclude some degree of learning for understanding . For instance , one can teach the law of supply and demand with plenty of interpretive exercises in response to varied problems . 940 However , for many of the roles educators envision for knowledge in learners’ lives , a passive vocabulary is not enough . The environment does not strongly cue up the knowl - edge . Also , use is more discretionary and often in the face of contrary habits , intuitions , motives , and expectations from 945 oneself or others . Most students participating in a straightfor - ward unit on the law of supply and demand probably would not make spontaneous links later to love or the price of or - anges . One needs to be motivated to do so or have a general mindful disposition to look for possible bridges . 950 What’s needed rather than a learning culture of demand is a learning culture of opportunity with the expansive fram - ing Engle et al . ( 2012 / this issue ) suggest . Such a culture would not constantly organize students’ work as a series of highly targeted demands . It would often engage learners 955 in farther ranging and more open - ended experiences where supports are “faded” over time . Learners would more often need to grope for potentially relevant prior knowledge ( de - tect ) and use judgment to decide on its relevance and how to proceed ( elect ) . Such a culture would anticipate likely 960 counterhabits and countermotivations undermining later op - portunities and prepare learners to face them . Indeed , such a culture would not limit its activities strictly to the class - room , but reach beyond the walls , for instance , through re - ﬂective diary keeping about facets of everyday life or partic - 965 ipation in social and intellectual initiatives in the home and community . In summary , however well we understand the conditions of transfer technically , widescale attention to transfer of learn - ing in education calls for a shift of mind - set about what it 970 means to know something and the kind of learning culture that fosters that kind of knowing . But the good news is this : Typical education has difﬁculty with transfer of learning not because transfer is an occult mystery or because it is in - tractably difﬁcult to attain . We just need to build the right 975 bridges . . . and build them in the right places , classrooms , and schools hither and yon . This sounds very much like a challenge of transferring teaching for transfer . Q2 REFERENCES Bereiter , C . ( 1995 ) . A dispositional view of transfer . In A . McKeough , J . Lu - 980 part , & A . Marini ( Eds . ) , Teaching for transfer : Fostering generalization in learning ( pp . 21 – 34 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Berlyne , D . E . ( 1965 ) . Structure and direction in thinking . Oxford , England : Wiley . Bransford , J . D . , Franks , J . J . , Vye , N . J . , & Sherwood , R . D . ( 1989 ) . New 985 approaches to instruction : Because wisdom can’t be told . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 470 – 497 ) . New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . Bransford , J . D . , & Schwartz , D . L . ( 1999 ) . Rethinking transfer : A simple proposal with interesting implications . In A . Iran - Nejad & P . D . Pearson 990 ( Eds . ) , Reviewofresearchineducation ( Vol . 24 , pp . 61 – 101 ) . Washington , DC : American Educational Research Association . Byrge , L . , & Goldstone , R . L . ( 2011 ) . Distinguishing levels of grounding that underlie transfer of learning . In L . Carlson , C . Holscher , & T . Ship - ley ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive 995 Science Society ( pp . 2818 – 2823 ) . Austin , TX : Cognitive Science Society . Cacioppo , J . T . , & Petty , R . E . ( 1982 ) . The need for cognition . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 42 , 116 – 131 . Chi , M . T . H . , & VanLehn , K . A . ( 2012 / this issue ) . Seeing deep structure from the interactions of surface features . Educational Psychologist , 47 , 1000 XX – XX . Day , S . B . , & Goldstone , R . L . ( 2011 ) . Analogical transfer from a simulated physicalsystem . JournalofExperimentalPsychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 37 , 551 – 567 . Day , S . , Goldstone , R . L . , & Hills , T . ( 2010 ) . The effects of similarity 1005 and individual differences on comparison and transfer . In Proceedings of the Thirty - Second Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 465 – 470 ) . Portland , OR : Cognitive Science Society . Dunker , K . ( 1945 ) . On problem solving . Psychological Monographs , 58 ( Whole No . 270 ) . 1010 Dweck , C . S . ( 1975 ) . The role of expectations and attributions in the allevi - ation of learned helplessness . Journal of Personality and Social Psychol - ogy , 31 , 674 – 685 . Dweck , C . S . ( 2000 ) . Self - theories : Their role in motivation , personality , and development . Philadelphia , PA : Psychology Press . 1015 Engle , R . A . , Lam , D . P . , Meyer , X . S . , & Nix , S . E . ( 2012 / this issue ) . How does expansive framing promote transfer ? Several proposed explanations and a research agenda for investigating them . Educational Psychologist , 47 , XX – XX . Epstein , S . ( 1994 ) . Integration of the cognitive and psychodynamic uncon - 1020 scious . American Psychologist , 49 , 709 – 724 . Evans , J . ( 2008 ) . Dual - processing accounts of reasoning , judgment , and social cognition . Annual Review of Psychology , 59 , 255 – 278 . Gentner , D . , Rattermann , M . J . , & Forbus , K . D . ( 1993 ) . The roles of sim - ilarity in transfer : Separating retrievability from inferential soundness . 1025 Cognitive Psychology , 25 , 524 – 575 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1980 ) . Analogicalproblemsolving . Cognitive Psychology , 12 , 306 – 365 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schema induction and analogical transfer . Cognitive Psychology , 15 , 1 – 38 . 1030 Goldstone , R . L . , & Sakamoto , Y . ( 2003 ) . The transfer of abstract principles governingcomplexadaptivesystems . CognitivePsychology , 46 , 414 – 466 . Hannula , M . M . , & Lehtinen , E . ( 2005 ) . Spontaneous focusing on numeros - ity and mathematical skills of young children . Learning and Instruction , 15 , 237 – 256 . 1035 Klaczynski , P . A . ( 2005 ) . Metacognition and cognitive variability : A dual - process model of decision making and its development . In J . E . Jacobs & KNOWLEDGE TO GO 11 P . A . Klaczynski , The development of judgment and decision making in children and adolescents ( pp . 39 – 76 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Kruglanski , A . , & Webster , D . ( 1996 ) . Motivated closing of the mind : “Seiz - 1040 ing” and “freezing . ” Psychological Review , 103 , 263 – 283 . Langer , E . J . ( 1989 ) . Mindfulness . Menlo Park , CA : Addison - Wesley . Langer , E . J . , & Imber , L . G . ( 1979 ) . When practice makes imperfect : Debilitating effects of overlearning . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 37 , 2014 – 2024 . 1045 Lave , J . ( 1988 ) . Cognition in practice : Mind , mathematics and culture in everyday life . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Linn , M . ( 2002 ) . The role of customization of innovative science curricula : Implications for design , practice , and professional development . New Or - leans , LA : Symposium at the annual meeting of the National Association 1050 for Research in Science Teaching Q3 Lobato , J . ( 2012 / this issue ) . The actor - oriented transfer perspective and its contributions to educational research and practice . Educational Psychol - ogist , 47 , XX – XX . Milgram , S . ( 1963 ) . Behavioral study of obedience . Journal of Abnormal 1055 and Social Psychology , 67 , 371 – 378 . Milgram , S . ( 1965 ) . Some conditions of obedience and disobedience to authority . Human Relations , 18 , 57 – 76 . Q4 Milgram , S . ( 1974 ) . Obedience to authority : An experimental view . New York , NY : Harper . 1060 Perkins , D . N . , Jay , E . , & Tishman , S . ( 1993 ) . Beyond abilities : A disposi - tional theory of thinking . The Merrill - Palmer Quarterly , 39 , 1 – 21 . Perkins , D . N . , & Ritchhart , R . ( 2004 ) . When is good thinking ? In D . Y . Dai & R . J . Sternberg ( Eds . ) , Motivation , emotion , and cognition : Integrative perspectives on intellectual functioning and development ( pp . 351 – 384 ) . 1065 Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Perkins , D . N . , Tishman , S . , Ritchhart , R . , Donis , K . , & Andrade . A . ( 2000 ) . Intelligence in the wild : A dispositional view of intellectual traits . Edu - cational Psychology Review , 12 , 269 – 293 . Reyna , V . F . , Adam , M . B . , Poirier , K . M . , LeCroy , C . W . , & Brainerd , C . J . 1070 ( 2005 ) . Risky decision making in childhood and adolescence : A fuzzy - trace theory approach . In J . E . Jacobs & P . A . Klaczynski ( Eds . ) , The developmentofjudgmentanddecisionmakinginchildrenandadolescents ( pp . 77 – 106 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Richland , L . E . , Stigler , J . W . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2012 / this issue ) . Teaching 1075 the conceptual structure of mathematics . Educational Psychologist , 47 , XX – XX . Ross , B . H . ( 1984 ) . Reminding and their effects in learning a cognitive skill . Cognitive Psychology , 16 , 371 – 416 . Ross , B . H . ( 1989 ) . Remindings in learning and instruction . In S . Vosniadou 1080 & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 438 – 469 ) . Cambridge , England : Cambridge University Press . Ross , B . H . , & Kennedy , P . T . ( 1990 ) . Generalizing from the use of ear - lier examples in problem solving . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 16 , 42 – 55 . 1085 Salomon , G . ( 2006 ) . Does peace education really make a difference ? Peace and Conﬂict , 12 , 37 – 48 . Salomon , G . , & Perkins , D . N . ( 1989 ) . Rocky roads to transfer : Rethinking mechanisms of a neglected phenomenon . Educational Psychologist , 24 , 113 – 142 . 1090 Schwartz , D . L . , Chase , C . C . , & Bransford , J . D . ( 2012 / this issue ) . Resisting overzealous transfer : Coordinating previously successful routines with needs for new learning . Educational Psychologist , 47 , XX – XX . Stanovich , K . E . ( 1999 ) . Who is rational ? Studies of individual differences in reasoning . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 1095 Wagner , J . F . ( 2006 ) . Transferinpieces . CognitionandInstruction , 24 , 1 – 71 . Wagner , J . F . ( 2010 ) . A transfer - in - pieces consideration of the perception of structure in the transfer of learning . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 19 , 443 – 479 . Zimbardo , P . G . ( 2006 ) . On rethinking the psychology of tyranny : The BBC 1100 prison study . British Journal of Social Psychology , 45 , 47 – 53 .