Epithelial repair mechanisms in the lung Lynn M . Crosby 1 and Christopher M . Waters 1 , 2 , 3 Departments of 1 Physiology , 2 Medicine , and 3 Biomedical Engineering , University of Tennessee Health Science Center , Memphis , Tennessee Submitted 15 October 2009 ; accepted in ﬁnal form 26 March 2010 Crosby LM , Waters CM . Epithelial repair mechanisms in the lung . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 298 : L715 – L731 , 2010 . First published April 2 , 2010 ; doi : 10 . 1152 / ajplung . 00361 . 2009 . —The recovery of an intact epithelium following lung injury is critical for restoration of lung homeostasis . The initial processes following injury include an acute inﬂammatory response , recruitment of immune cells , and epithelial cell spreading and migration upon an autologously secreted provisional matrix . Injury causes the release of factors that contribute to repair mechanisms including members of the epidermal growth factor and ﬁbro - blast growth factor families ( TGF - (cid:1) , KGF , HGF ) , chemokines ( MCP - 1 ) , interleu - kins ( IL - 1 (cid:2) , IL - 2 , IL - 4 , IL - 13 ) , and prostaglandins ( PGE 2 ) , for example . These factors coordinate processes involving integrins , matrix materials ( ﬁbronectin , collagen , laminin ) , matrix metalloproteinases ( MMP - 1 , MMP - 7 , MMP - 9 ) , focal adhesions , and cytoskeletal structures to promote cell spreading and migration . Several key signaling pathways are important in regulating these processes , including sonic hedgehog , Rho GTPases , MAP kinase pathways , STAT3 , and Wnt . Changes in mechanical forces may also affect these pathways . Both localized and distal progenitor stem cells are recruited into the injured area , and proliferation and phenotypic differentiation of these cells leads to recovery of epithelial function . Persistent injury may contribute to the pathology of diseases such as asthma , chronic obstructive pulmonary disease , and pulmonary ﬁbrosis . For example , dysregulated repair processes involving TGF - (cid:2) and epithelial - mesenchymal tran - sition may lead to ﬁbrosis . This review focuses on the processes of epithelial restitution , the localization and role of epithelial progenitor stem cells , the initiating factors involved in repair , and the signaling pathways involved in these processes . wound healing ; alveolar epithelium ; airway epithelium ; mechanotransduction INJURY TO THE LUNG EPITHELIUM can be caused by bacterial or viral infections , inﬂammation , allergic reactions ( asthma ) , ex - posure to xenobiotics ( e . g . , cigarette smoke ) , physical trauma ( mechanical ventilation ) , cancer , or pathology of unknown origin ( idiopathic ﬁbrosis ) . Depending on the nature of the injury , lung repair mechanisms are initiated immediately fol - lowing the insult and include an acute inﬂammatory response involving cytokine release , immune cell recruitment , and acti - vation of the coagulation cascade ( Fig . 1 ) . Injury can occur in both proximal and distal airways , but the initial response of epithelial cells in different regions is similar : nearby progenitor cells migrate and spread to cover denuded surfaces . During the progression of the wound repair process , these localized pro - genitor cells , as well as newly recruited circulating progenitor cells , proliferate and undergo phenotypic differentiation to reestablish the integrity and functional organization of the epithelial layer . While the early repair processes in response to various types of injury are similar , the response to persistent injury may vary markedly in different regions of the lung due to variations in tissue architecture , matrix properties , level of oxygenation , proximity to the vasculature and / or lymphatics , presence of surfactant or mucous secretions , mechanical prop - erties of underlying parenchyma , and the type of resident progenitor cell in different regions . Such regional differences when coupled with persistent injury may contribute to the pathology of lung diseases . For example , repeated exposure to cigarette smoke elicits a chronic cycle of injury and repair that leads to signiﬁcant changes in the structure , function , and gene expression of airway and alveolar epithelial cells that contrib - utes to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease ( COPD ) in a subset of smokers ( reviewed in Refs . 24 , 63 , 125 , 129 , 132 , 158 ) . Others have outlined a process in which a repetitive or recurrent injury to the alveolar - capillary membrane causes loss of basement membrane integrity and activation of ﬁbroblasts / myoﬁbroblasts that results in dysregulated and exaggerated repair processes leading to ﬁbrosis ( 61 , 160 , 191 ) . Similarly , there is growing support for the hypothesis that inappropriate repair of airway epithelial cells following repeated exposures to allergens or other environmental toxins drives airway re - modeling and hyperresponsiveness in asthma ( 26 , 58 , 64 , 65 , 100 ) . In this review , we describe the different types of progen - itor cells that facilitate lung epithelial repair , as well as the processes of spreading , migration , proliferation , and differen - tiation . We also discuss the major signaling pathways that have been shown to regulate these repair mechanisms in the lung and how interactions among these pathways can lead to dys - regulated repair . Address for reprint requests and other correspondence : C . M . Waters , Dept . of Physiology , Univ . of Tennessee Health Science Center , 894 Union Ave . , Rm . 426 , Memphis , TN 38163 - 0001 ( e - mail : cwaters2 @ uthsc . edu ) . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 298 : L715 – L731 , 2010 . First published April 2 , 2010 ; doi : 10 . 1152 / ajplung . 00361 . 2009 . Review 1040 - 0605 / 10 Copyright © 2010 the American Physiological Society http : / / www . ajplung . org L715 b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on A ugu s t 6 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m EPITHELIAL RESTITUTION As described above , epithelial restitution involves spread - ing and migration of neighboring epithelial cells to cover the denuded area , and this is followed by migration and prolif - eration of progenitor cells to restore cell numbers and differentiation to restore function ( 125 , 161 , 179 , 198 , 200 , 201 ) . In the airways , the ﬁrst 12 – 24 h after injury involve cell spreading and migration as the primary repair mecha - nisms , while proliferation begins by 15 – 24 h and continues for days to weeks . This has been demonstrated in vivo by examining epithelial wound repair in the guinea pig ( 36 – 38 , 76 ) and rat ( 67 ) trachea . The recovery of a pseudostratiﬁed epithelium may require several weeks ( 34 ) . In vivo repair of the alveolar epithelium has been more difﬁcult to examine , and most studies have focused on alveolar type II ( ATII ) cell proliferation as an index of repair ( 115 , 130 , 196 ) . Thus , considerably less is known about the early mechanisms of epithelial repair at the alveolar level . However , the progres - sion of spreading , migration , and proliferation has been demonstrated using cultured ATII cells ( 72 ) . Nevertheless , one of the major challenges in the ﬁeld is the development of models and methods to examine epithelial repair mech - anisms directly in the lung , particularly in the alveoli . The concept that the initial wound closure of pulmonary epithelial cells occurs primarily by mechanisms involving cell spreading and migration is supported by studies involv - ing other types of epithelium including kidney ( MDCK ) ( 45 ) , cornea ( 25 ) , and gut ( 101 ) . The mechanisms of epi - thelial wound healing involve interactions between initiat - ing factors , extracellular matrix ( ECM ) components , signal - ing pathways , and structural components , some of which are discussed in more detail below . The dynamic remodeling that occurs during cell spreading and migration relies upon the establishment of directional polarity of the migrating cells and extension of ﬁlopodial and lamellipodial protru - sions in the direction of migration ( 71 , 80 , 88 , 139 ) , and RhoA and Rac1 are prominent signaling intermediates in these processes . During cell movement into the wound area , the actin cytoskeleton interacts with focal adhesion com - plexes and integrins . Integrins associate with ECM compo - nents and provide traction for the cell as it pulls forward . The driving force for this mechanism is the contraction of actomyosin complexes . It has been suggested that the actin bundles at the wound edge can serve to distribute forces created by actively moving cells more evenly to nearby cells ( 45 ) . We previously observed the formation of these prom - inent actin bundles at the wound edge of both human bronchial epithelial cells ( 28 ) and rat ATII cells ( 29 ) . Adhesion sites provide the traction for the cells during these processes and act as the signaling fulcrum between the ECM and cellular cytoskeleton . Two types of adhesion sites have been described : focal adhesions that connect to actin stress ﬁber bundles , and focal complexes that associate with actin ﬁlament networks and ﬁlo - podia ( 154 ) . Focal complexes can become focal adhesions through changes in activity of members of the Rho GTPase family ( 142 ) . PROGENITOR CELLS While eye , gut , and skin epithelia constantly renew by proliferation and migration of stem cells , lung epithelial cells renew slowly and are stimulated to self - renew upon injury ( 39 , 41 , 51 , 52 , 66 , 136 , 161 ) . Measurements of [ 3 H ] thymidine incorporation indicated that less than 1 % of mouse bronchiolar epithelial cells entered S - phase in 24 h , and this rate increased (cid:3) 10 - fold upon injury ( 134 ) . Similar measurements of bro - modeoxyuridine ( BrdU ) incorporation in rat lungs indicated labeling indices of 0 . 7 % and 0 . 3 % for alveolar and bronchial epithelial cells , respectively ( 195 ) . In the airways , non - ciliated epithelial Clara cells of the lung are believed to function as Fig . 1 . Sequence of events in epithelial re - pair . Following injury , macrophages , neutro - phils , and localized stem cells become acti - vated , and growth factors , cytokines , inter - leukins , and matrix materials are released . Some of these factors recruit other immune cells to the site of injury . Cells adjacent to the site of injury secrete extracellular matrix ( ECM ) through integrin and growth factor signaling , reorganize their cytoskeleton to facilitate movement , secrete MMPs that de - grade cell - matrix attachments , and spread and migrate along the autologously secreted provisional matrix using ﬁlopodial and la - mellipodial extensions . Both localized and recruited progenitor cells proliferate and continue to secrete ECM . Dysregulated re - pair may lead to epithelial - mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) and ﬁbrosis . Resolution occurs by means of cell cycle arrest , apopto - sis , disappearance of immune cells , and de - activation of macrophages . Review L716 LUNG WOUND HEALING AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol • VOL 298 • JUNE 2010 • www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on A ugu s t 6 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m facultative progenitor cells , normally quiescent but capable of returning to proliferation after attrition or injury ( 161 ) . Such cells , determined by pulse - chase experiments to be proliferat - ing , were devoid of secretory granules and smooth endoplas - mic reticulum ( 39 , 41 ) . After replenishment of ciliated cells , the Clara cell is believed to return to quiescence . Redifferen - tiation occurs days after epithelial injury , reestablishing muco - ciliary function ( 39 ) . At the alveolar level , the ATII cell is generally considered to be the facultative progenitor cell for the recovery of both the type I ( ATI ) and type II pneumocyte pools , with the capability to differentiate into ATI cells fol - lowing lung injury ( 105 , 106 , 163 ) . However , it should be pointed out that the evidence in support of the role of ATII cells as progenitors is based in part on early studies showing increased ATII cell proliferation following injury and the incorporation of 3 H - thymidine in ATII cells followed by in - corporation into ATI cells ( 2 , 40 ) . Further support has been provided by studies demonstrating that primary cultures of ATII cells are capable of differentiating into ATI - like cells ( 9 , 10 , 33 , 69 , 138 ) . However , new evidence has emerged that rat ATI cells also proliferate , express Oct4 ( a pluripotency marker ) , and show phenotypic plasticity in vitro ( 54 , 127 ) . Kim et al . ( 74 ) have described bronchioalveolar stem cells isolated from the bronchoalveolar duct that putatively maintain both Clara cells and alveolar epithelial cells , but others have sug - gested a clear distinction between these two cell compartments ( 161 ) . Thus , deﬁnitive identiﬁcation of alveolar progenitor and stem cells remains elusive and is an important challenge in the ﬁeld . While the localization and identiﬁcation of adult epithe - lial progenitor / stem cells in the lungs is ongoing , several niche populations have been studied ( reviewed in Refs . 99 , 161 , 178 ) primarily through rodent models of lung injury . Liu and Engelhardt ( 99 ) propose ﬁve putative stem cell niches in the mouse lung that include an unidentiﬁed cell type in the submucosal glands of the proximal trachea ( 35 ) , basal cells within the intercartilagenous zones of the trachea and bronchi ( 11 , 141 , 151 ) , variant Clara cells ( Clara v ) associated with neuroendocrine cells that form neuroepithe - lial bodies residing in the bronchioles ( 66 , 135 ) , Clara v cells associated with bronchiolar alveolar duct junctions ( 52 , 74 ) , and ATII cells in the alveoli . Recent reports have suggested other stem cell niches in the lungs that participate in the repair of airway epithelium . In mice after naphthalene wounding , ciliated bronchiolar epithelial cells , previously believed to be terminally differentiated , underwent squa - mous metaplasia with upregulated expression of transcrip - tion factors active during lung embryogenesis ( (cid:2) - catenin , FOXA2 , FOXJ1 , SOX17 , SOX2 ) growing and spreading underneath Clara cells ( 119 ) . The authors suggested that ciliated epithelial cells differentiated into both ciliated and non - ciliated cell types to repopulate the airway epithelium . In contrast , Rawlins et al . ( 130 ) found through heritable marker lineage - tracing experiments using FOXJ1CreEr 2T mice that ciliated cells did not function as progenitors during development or after treatment with naphthalene or sulfur dioxide . However , other studies have demonstrated that ciliated cells morphologically differentiated into mu - cous - secreting cells in acute asthma or viral infection mod - els ( 131 , 167 ) . Thus , there are still many unanswered ques - tions regarding regional differences in cells responsible for maintenance and repair . Furthermore , the speciﬁc identiﬁ - cation and localization of stem cell niches in the lung is complicated by the possibility of sequestering microenvi - ronments that may be necessary to maintain epithelia with a relatively slow rate of turnover ( 161 ) . In addition to stem cell niches located within the lungs , several groups have provided intriguing evidence suggesting that bone marrow - derived stem cells ( BMSC ) can engraft into the lungs and differentiate into lung epithelial cells ( reviewed in Ref . 86 ) . One in vitro study demonstrated the capability of BMSC to express markers of bronchial epithelial cells and to repair an injured epithelial layer ( 155 ) , whereas another pro - posed a model for the correction of the Cl (cid:4) transport defect in cystic ﬁbrosis patients using BMSC that had differentiated into lung epithelial cells ( 177 ) . Several groups have suggested that BMSC may be useful in repair mechanisms following lung injury , but the mechanisms of engraftment and differentiation are poorly understood , and the results may depend on the injury model , the route of delivery , and the population of BMSC used . One group suggested that transplanted BMSC differentiated into ATI cells following bleomycin injury in mice ( 85 ) , but no differentiation was seen in later studies by the same group using an irradiation model ; the authors suggested that the earlier results may have been due to an artifact in the staining of the tissue ( 84 ) . Ortiz and collaborators ( 114 ) used an enriched population of BMSC that were depleted of hema - topoietic cell types , and demonstrated lung engraftment fol - lowing bleomycin injury , the presence of donor - derived cells among isolated ATII cells , and reduced bleomycin - induced injury . Liebler et al . ( 98 ) showed that human BMSC were retained in the distal portion of the lungs in bleomycin - treated mice , suggesting that these cells could repopulate alveoli . Other groups have demonstrated attenuation of endotoxin - induced lung injury utilizing BMSC in mice ( 57 , 194 ) . A recent study demonstrated that allogeneic human BMSC or media conditioned by these cells was capable of restoring alveolar ﬂuid clearance in isolated perfused human lungs following endotoxin - induced injury ( 91 ) . Finally , a subpopulation of epithelial - like BMSC from humans and mice was identiﬁed that expressed CCSP ( Clara cell speciﬁc protein ) and alveolar type I and II markers , homed to the lung after naphthalene - induced injury , and successfully repopulated the airways of lethally irradiated mice ( 193 ) . There are thus sources exoge - nous to the lung functioning as stem cell reservoirs able to repair the lung epithelium . The underlying mechanisms for recruitment and phenotypic differentiation , however , remain to be established . PATHWAYS OF EPITHELIAL REPAIR The process of epithelial repair outlined above is complex , involving interactions between multiple initiating factors , sol - uble ligands , structural elements , signaling pathways , and the mechanical environment . In the sections below , we will exam - ine some of these components and how these interactions occur in bronchial and in alveolar epithelium . Figure 2 illustrates these repair processes in the airways , some speciﬁc cell types involved , and their roles , and Table 1 summarizes some of the many factors and pathways that have been shown to be in - volved in epithelial repair . While this review cannot exhaus - tively discuss all possible components and interactions , in the Review L717 LUNG WOUND HEALING AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol • VOL 298 • JUNE 2010 • www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on A ugu s t 6 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m following sections we will focus on a limited number for which there is evidence of importance in the lung . Growth Factors , Cytokines , and Other Soluble Factors Injury to lung epithelium and the ensuing inﬂammatory response causes the release of a wide variety of soluble factors from ﬁbroblasts , endothelial cells , macrophages , and the in - jured and neighboring epithelial cells , as well as from the underlying matrix and from plasma exudate . The milieu of soluble factors that participate in epithelial repair includes growth factors , cytokines , chemokines , interleukins , prosta - glandins , and matrix components . The majority of studies examining these soluble factors have focused on the response of cultured cells , and our understanding of the role of these factors is limited by a lack of precise knowledge about their cellular source and the spatial and temporal regulation of their activity in vivo . It is important to recognize that the conditions regulating the responsiveness of speciﬁc cells to these factors have not been clearly elucidated . However , they serve impor - tant roles in each of the processes of repair , some of which are described below . Epidermal growth factor family . Several members of the epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) family of growth factors have been shown to participate in epithelial repair . In the airways , expression of EGF , transforming growth factor - (cid:1) ( TGF - (cid:1) ) , and the EGF receptor ( EGFR ) were upregulated within 1 – 2 days of naphthalene injury in the distal bronchioles of mice , and EGFR expression began to decrease 4 – 7 days after injury ( 171 ) . EGF and TGF - (cid:1) were both shown to stimulate prolif - eration of cultured neonatal rabbit ATII cells ( 143 ) , and Leslie and collaborators ( 95 ) found that heparin - binding EGF ( HB - EGF ) was mitogenic for rat ATII cells . Lesur et al . ( 96 ) demonstrated that rat ATII cell migration was stimulated by EGF in the absence of commitment to proliferation . Using cultured rat alveolar epithelial monolayers , Kheradmand and colleagues ( 72 ) demonstrated that cell spreading was more important than cell migration in wound closure and that both serum and TGF - (cid:1) signiﬁcantly increased wound closure fol - lowing a scratch wound . Soluble TGF - (cid:1) was found to be present in the pulmonary edema ﬂuid of patients with acute lung injury ( ALI ) ( 20 ) , and subsequent studies demonstrated that edema ﬂuid from ALI patients also stimulated the repair of wounded human A549 cell monolayers ( 48 ) . This group found that cell spreading and motility in a wounded rat ATII mono - layer were enhanced by the addition of soluble ﬁbronectin and that wound healing was stimulated by IL - 1 (cid:2) via a pathway that was EGF or TGF - (cid:1) dependent ( 49 ) . Trinh et al . ( 164 ) found that EGF stimulated K ATP and KvLQT1 currents and channel expression via the EGFR in an autocrine fashion in primary rat alveolar type II cells . They subsequently found that bronchial epithelial cell migration was signiﬁcantly lower in cells iso - lated from cystic ﬁbrosis patients compared with cells from controls and that this decrease correlated with decreased EGFR activation and decreased K (cid:5) currents ( 165 ) . Thus , expression of EGFR and EGF family peptides appears to increase in response to lung injury , and these peptides stimulate prolifer - ation , spreading , and migration of lung epithelial cells . There is still much to learn about the interactions between EGFR and downstream signaling pathways and how these regulate repair . EGFR in epithelial repair in asthma . Studies have suggested that EGFR signaling may be altered in asthma and thus affect epithelial repair . EGFR immunoreactivity was found to be signiﬁcantly higher in the epithelium from biopsies of patients with mild and severe asthma compared with normal subjects ( 126 ) . These authors and others have demonstrated EGF - stimulated migration of bronchial epithelial cells ( 77 , 126 ) . Although (cid:2) 2 - adrenergic agonists are commonly used in the treatment of asthma , one group found that isoproterenol atten - uated EGF - stimulated wound closure of bronchial epithelial cells ( 150 ) . Using an in vitro human bronchial epithelial model ( 1HAEo - cells ) , mechanical injury was shown to cause secre - tion of EGF and HB - EGF , and the release of HB - EGF ( but not Fig . 2 . Processes involved in epithelial repair in the airways . Injury ( 1 ) initiates activation of macrophages ( M ) to activated macro - phages ( AM ) and the recruitment of immune cells ( 2 ) , mesenchymal stem cells ( MSC ) , or niche stem cells ( NSC ) . Soluble factors ( S ) secreted by immune and nonimmune cells ( 3 ) act on epithelial cells and ﬁbroblasts , which spread and migrate ( 4 ) closing the wound and reestablishing intact barrier func - tion . TGF - (cid:2) signaling results in trans - differ - entiation of epithelial cells to myoﬁbroblasts ( MY ) , the EMT , and the initiation of a chronic inﬂammatory response ( 5 ) with fur - ther elaboration of ECM . During resolution ( 6 ) , immune cells disappear from the site of injury , macrophages are deactivated , cells differentiate , and hyperproliferation is re - duced through apoptosis , allowing tissue re - modeling ( 7 ) . Review L718 LUNG WOUND HEALING AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol • VOL 298 • JUNE 2010 • www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on A ugu s t 6 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Table 1 . Summary of factors and pathways involved in epithelial repair Pathway or Factor Functional Effect Model System Epidermal growth factor family EGF , TGF - (cid:1) , HB - EGF , EGFR Enhanced epithelial repair via stimulation of mitosis , migration , spreading ( 72 , 95 , 96 , 143 , 171 ) Mouse airways in vivo , neonatal 1° rabbit ATII , 1° rat ATII Pulmonary ﬂuid from ALI patients containing TGF - (cid:1) stimulated wound healing ( 48 ) A549 EGF - stimulated repair dependent on K (cid:5) currents ( 164 ) 1° rat ATII Migration and EGFR activation decreased in cells from cystic ﬁbrosis patients ( 165 ) 1° HBEC EGFR EGFR expression upregulated in asthma biopsies ( 126 ) Human bronchial biopsies EGF , HB - EGF EGF stimulated migration and HB - EGF stimulated proliferation in asthma healing ( 77 , 126 ) GP AEC , 16HBE Fibroblast growth factor family HGF Stimulated mitogenesis ( 104 , 117 ) Rat ATII in vitro / in vivo Increased HGF levels in edema ﬂuid from ALI , but not hydrostatic edema , patients ( 172 ) Human ALI or hydrostatic edema patients Stimulated proliferation & migration ( 46 ) Rat ATII Differentiation ( 111 ) HBEC HGF & KGF Increased levels in BAL of ALI & ARDS patients and increased mRNA & protein levels in cultured ﬁbroblasts of ALI / ARDS patients ( 128 ) Human BAL ﬂuid , human ﬁbroblasts in vitro HGF Stimulated migration but not proliferation ( 199 ) Nasal HBEC KGF Stimulated migration , spreading , accelerated repair , mitogenesis ( 30 , 47 , 115 , 118 , 168 ) 1° rat ATII , rat ATII in vivo Directed ( early ) expression in lung epithelium caused pulmonary malformation and embryonic lethality in lung epithelium ( 153 ) Transgenic mice expressing KGF Protective against hyperoxia , stimulated ATII proliferation ( 115 ) Rats in vivo Increased cellular adhesion via EGFR activation ( 5 ) 1° rat ATII Increased wound closure ( blocked by inhibition of PKC ) and overcame inhibition of repair caused by cyclic mechanical strain ( 181 ) NHBE , Calu 3 Accelerated repair ( 53 ) Heterotopic syngeneic tracheal transplants ( mouse ) Stimulated Clara cell proliferation ( 42 ) Rats in vivo Rat ATII hyperplasia stimulated by KGF resolved spontaneously by differentiation to type I or II cells or apoptosis ( 43 , 44 ) Rats in vivo Protective against radiation or H 2 O 2 ( 147 , 182 ) Calu 3 , 16HBE Restoration of alveolar barrier function by BMSC dependent on release of KGF ( 92 ) Ex vivo perfused human lung and BMSC HGF - MEK - ERK Increased proliferation ( 162 ) BEAS - 2B , 16HBE HGF - COX - 2 , Akt , MAPK , (cid:2) - catenin Increased proliferation ( 93 ) NHBE FGF - 10 - Grb2 - SOS - Ras / RAF - 1 - ERK1 / 2 pathway Reduced DNA damage caused by H 2 O 2 or mechanical stretch ( 169 , 170 ) 1° rat ATII Chemokine receptors Chemokine receptor 3 ( CCR3 ) & ligands Expression increased in asthmatic patients , stimulated wound closure ( 6 ) Bronchial biopsies from asthmatics , BEAS - 2B , 16HBE , 1° HBE CCR2 Protein expressed in wounded monolayer ( 23 ) 1° mouse ATII CCR2 ligand MCP - 1 Stimulated repair in wounded monolayer ( 23 ) 1° mouse ATII Interleukins IL - 2 via ERKs Stimulated migration , reduced apoptosis ; enhanced by IFN - (cid:6) ( 97 ) 1° rat ATII , rats in vivo IL - 4 via IRS - 1 or IRS - 2 but not STAT6 Stimulated migration and repair ( 187 ) 1° HBEC IL - 4 & IL - 13 Decreased migration ( 3 ) Calu 3 IFN - (cid:6) Increased migration ( 3 ) Calu 3 IL - 13 via HB - EGF , EGFR activation Stimulation of proliferation , enhanced repair ( 4 ) 1HAEo (cid:4) , differentiated HBEC IL - 13 - TGF - (cid:1) & EGFR activation Stimulation of proliferation ( 8 , 171 ) NHBE , mouse BE IL - 1 (cid:2) Stimulation of wound closure , blocked by MAPK inhibitor PD - 98059 ( 48 , 49 ) 1° rat ATII , A549 IL - 1 (cid:2) via NF - (cid:7) B p65 Acceleration of migration , but not in cells from asthmatic patients ( 186 ) 1° differentiated HBE , 16HBE Eicosanoids COX - 1 , COX - 2 , PGE 2 Inhibition of COX blocked wound closure ; PGE 2 enhanced wound closure ( 144 ) 16HBE , NHBE , CTE Continued Review L719 LUNG WOUND HEALING AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol • VOL 298 • JUNE 2010 • www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on A ugu s t 6 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Table 1 . — Continued Pathway or Factor Functional Effect Model System Coagulation pathway Tissue factor , ﬁbrinogen , factor XIIIA Stimulation of repair ( 121 ) NHBE , 16HBE Integrins (cid:1) v - , (cid:2) 5 - , (cid:2) 6 - , (cid:1) 5 - subunits Increased expression in migrating cells at wound edge ( 122 ) In vivo xenograft of human bronchial epithelium (cid:1) v (cid:2) 3 - and (cid:2) 1 - integrins Migration mediated by these integrins ( 75 ) 1° rat ATII (cid:1) 2 (cid:2) 1 - integrin Migration on ﬁbronectin mediated by this integrin ( 75 ) 1° rat ATII (cid:1) 2 - , (cid:1) 3 - , (cid:1) 6 - integrins via EGF Migration and spreading on collagen IV ( 185 ) 16HBE (cid:2) 1 - integrin Subunit required for migration on laminin - 1 or (cid:4) 2 ( 185 ) 16HBE (cid:1) v (cid:2) 6 and (cid:1) v (cid:2) 8 - integrins These integrins activated TGF - (cid:2) 1 ; TGF - (cid:2) 1 decreased wound closure ( 112 ) NHBE Extracellular matrix and matrix metalloproteinases Vitronectin via (cid:1) v - integrins & inter - (cid:1) - trypsin inhibitor 1a1 Stimulated cell adhesion & migration , promotion of wound repair ( 1 ) A549 , BEAS - 2B MMP - 1 Decreased cell adhesion & stiffness ; increased migration on collagen I ( 123 ) A549 , 1° rat ATII MMP - 7 ( matrilysin ) Upregulation correlated with migration and increased wound closure ( 120 ) Wild - type and null MMP - 7 mouse AEC cultures Facilitation of E - cadherin ectodomain shedding from injured cells ( 107 ) A549 , Calu 3 Stimulation of cells regulated by TIMP - 1 ( 18 ) Matrilysin or TIMP - 1 null mouse AEC cultures Shedding of syndecan - 1 facilitated wound closure , stimulation of repair ( 17 ) Wild - type and null MMP - 7 mouse AEC cultures Duox - 1 - dependent stimulation of migration ( 184 ) NHBE , HBE1 MMP - 9 Increased MMP - 9 protein after arsenic exposure and decreased migration ; MMP - 9 inhibition enhanced wound repair ( 113 ) 16HBE Plasminogen activator inhibitor - 1 Decreased repair ( 89 ) 1° mouse ATII Decreased repair in asthmatics correlated with increased PAI - 1 protein & mRNA ( 159 ) 1° BEC from pediatric asthmatics Urokinase plasminogen activator & plasmin Required for efﬁcient wound closure ; decreased KGF - stimulated wound repair upon inhibition of PAI - 1 activity ( 102 ) 1° rat ATII Signal transduction intermediates STAT3 and GP130 Decreased repair ( 73 ) ATII cells of null STAT3 or GP130 mice , NHBE PTEN Blocking accelerated wound closure ( 87 ) Differentiated primary HBEC , BEAS - 2B PI3K Inhibition decreased cell migration after injury ( 31 ) 16HBE (cid:1) - catenin GSK3 (cid:2) and (cid:2) - catenin Wound closure inhibited by overexpression of GSK3 (cid:2) and enhanced by overexpression of (cid:2) - catenin ( 203 ) PBEC , 16HBE (cid:2) - catenin Regulated cell differentiation and fate during branching morphogenesis ( 109 , 110 ) Transgenic mouse expressing activated form of (cid:2) - catenin Rho GTPases RhoA Inactivated RhoA inhibited wound repair ( 50 ) A549 Decreased RhoA activity stimulated migration ( 156 ) 1° BPE RhoA or Rac1 , Rho kinase Constitutively active or dominant negative RhoA or Rac1 inhibited wound closure ; inhibition of Rho kinase stimulated cell migration ( 28 ) 16HBE CA or DN RhoA Increased RhoA activity blocked by KGF ; CA RhoA inhibited wound closure ; DN RhoA stimulated wound closure ( 30 ) 1° ATII isolated from rats ventilated with high tidal volume Rac1 via Tiam 1 Inhibitor of Tiam 1 / decreased Rac1 activity inhibited cell migration ( 29 ) 1° rat ATII , A549 MAP kinase pathways p38 MAPK and CXCR3 ligand I - TAC Inhibitors decreased migration ; p38 and JNK rapidly activated near wound edge ( 188 ) 16HBE Mechanical stretch - induced inhibition of cell migration associated with decreased JIP - 3 - induced JNK phosphorylation ( 32 ) 16HBE P38 inhibition decreased chemotaxis , inhibition of ERK 1 / 2 had no effect ( 152 ) 1° HBE , 16HBE Stimulation of wound repair by VIP blocked by inhibition of ERK 1 / 2 ( 56 ) 16HBE Nitric oxide and ERK1 / 2 Inhibition of migration by NO via decreased ERK1 / 2 activation ( 12 ) NHBE MIF and ERK1 / 2 MIF stimulated ERK1 / 2 phosphorylation and proliferation but not in ATI - like cells ( 103 ) 1° mouse ATII , 1° differentiated ATI - like cell Continued Review L720 LUNG WOUND HEALING AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol • VOL 298 • JUNE 2010 • www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on A ugu s t 6 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m EGF ) was dependent on IL - 13 , which caused indirect activa - tion of the EGFR ( 4 ) . IL - 13 has also been shown to stimulate proliferation of primary human bronchial epithelial ( HBE ) cells through mechanisms involving TGF - (cid:1) ( 8 ) . Given the important role of IL - 13 in the pathogenesis of experimental asthma ( 55 , 192 ) , these ﬁndings suggest a potential role for IL - 13 - dependent HB - EGF secretion and HBE proliferation in dysregulated bronchial epithelial repair in asthma . Fibroblast growth factor family . Three members of the ﬁbroblast growth factor ( FGF ) family play important roles in epithelial repair in the lungs ( reviewed in Ref . 180 ) : keratino - cyte growth factor ( KGF ) , hepatocyte growth factor ( HGF ) , and FGF - 10 . HGF levels were shown to be increased in the pulmonary edema ﬂuid from patients with ALI compared with ﬂuid from patients with hydrostatic edema ﬂuid , but KGF levels were unchanged ( 172 ) . In contrast , it was recently reported that the bronchoalveolar lavage ﬂuid ( BAL ) of pa - tients with ALI or acute respiratory distress syndrome ( ARDS ) contained increased levels of both HGF and KGF ( 128 ) and that the BAL elicited upregulation of HGF and KGF mRNA and protein in cultured ﬁbroblasts . HGF is a known mitogen for rat ATII cells in vitro ( 104 ) and in vivo ( 117 ) . HGF inhibited the formation of basement membrane and stimulated both proliferation and migration of immortalized ATII cells ( 46 ) ; however , HGF increased cell migration but not prolifer - ation during human nasal epithelial repair in vitro ( 199 ) , suggesting that epithelial cells from different locations may display differing responses to HGF . Takami et al . ( 162 ) re - ported that HGF stimulated proliferation of a human bronchial epithelial cell line ( BEAS - 2B ) and that the MEK - ERK signal - ing pathway was necessary but not sufﬁcient for this stimula - tion . Another group also reported stimulation of human bron - chial epithelial cell proliferation by HGF that was dependent on increased cyclooxygenase - 2 ( COX - 2 ) expression mediated by an Akt - , MAPK - , and (cid:2) - catenin - dependent pathway ( 93 ) . In addition , HGF has been shown to be important in the differ - entiation of cultured human bronchial epithelial cells ( 111 ) . Thus HGF has been demonstrated to produce pleiotrophic effects mediated by MAPK , eicosanoids , and (cid:2) - catenin path - way elements . KGF is protective against injury and accelerates repair . KGF has a well - documented role in lung development , and Table 1 . — Continued Pathway or Factor Functional Effect Model System Wnt Aberrent Wnt / (cid:2) - catenin pathway activation ( 22 ) Human IPF Lung branching morphogenesis regulated by Wnt ( 27 ) Gain and loss of function studies in TOPGAL or Wnt reporter mice - WISP - 1 Mediates pulmonary ﬁbrosis in mice ; upregulated in human IPF ( 83 ) Mouse in vivo , human IPF TGF - (cid:1) Stimulation of migration & cytoskeleton reorganization , decreased proliferation in rabbit cells ( 7 ) 1° rabbit TEC - and MMP - 2 Stimulation of wound repair ( 90 ) Lung BE biopsies - and EMT Induction of EMT in lungs following overexpression of TGF (cid:2) ( 78 ) Triple transgenic mouse and adenoviral expression of TGF - (cid:2) - and EMT , with (cid:2) - catenin Induction of EMT ( 83 ) 1° rat ATII Smad3 & transgelin Stimulation of migration ( 197 ) A549 TGF - (cid:2) & Smad3 Acceleration of wound repair , survival promotion ( 14 ) 1° rat ATII TGF - (cid:2) Inhibited epithelial sheet migration , increased cell adhesion ( 157 ) BPEC TGF - (cid:2) and integrins (cid:1) v (cid:2) 6 and (cid:1) v (cid:2) 8 Wounding induced activation of TGF - (cid:2) via these integrins and migration was inhibited by exogenous TGF - (cid:2) and stimulated by anti - TGF - (cid:2) or (cid:1) v (cid:2) 8 antibodies ( 112 ) NHBE TGF - (cid:2) and MMP - 7 MMP - 7 activated TGF - (cid:2) , mediated ﬁbrosis and IPF ( 17 ) MMP - 7 null mouse cultures , mouse naphthalene injury model , BEAS - 2B E - cadherin Loss correlated with induction of EMT ( 70 ) HBE cancer Shh Activated during repair and development ( 183 ) Induced EMT & metastasis in cancer ( 70 ) Mouse embryonic lung epithelial cells , Ptch heterozygous null , adult mouse BE cells HBE cancer Mechanical forces Cyclic stretch , compression Inhibition of cell spreading & migration , stimulation of BrdU incorporation ( 146 , 149 ) Calu - 3 , NHBE , CTE , 1HAEo (cid:4) - and FAK Loss of FAK phosphorylation and decreased cell migration ( 30 , 32 ) 16HBE , 1° rat ATII - and JIP - 3 Dissociation of JIP - 3 from FAK ( 31 ) 16HBE - and JNK Decreased activation of JNK ( 31 ) 16HBE - and Paxillin , RhoA Decreased phosphorylation of FAK & paxillin , increased RhoA activity , decreased cell adhesion ( 30 ) 1° ATII from rats ventilated with high tidal volume - and Tiam 1 , Rac1 Decreased wound repair via decreased Rac1 activity ( 29 ) 1° rat ATII - and Cell stiffness Elastic modulus of cells migrating at wound edge & stiffness varied markedly ( 175 ) 16HBE 1° , primary ; BE , bronchial epithelium ; TEC , tracheal epithelial cell ; ATII , alveolar epithelial type II ; ATI , alveolar epithelial type I ; A549 , human lung carcinoma A549 cell line ; 1° BPE , primary bovine bronchial epithelial cells ; 16HBE , human bronchial epithelial cell line ( 16HBE14o - ) ; 1° HBEC , primary human bronchial epithelial cells ; CTE , primary feline airway epithelial cell line ; BEAS - 2B , human bronchial epithelia cell line ; GP , guinea pig ; AEC , airway epithelial cell ; BEC , bronchial epithelial cell ; BMSC , bone marrow - derived mesenchymal stem cells ; 1HAEo (cid:4) cells , human airway epithelial cell line ( SV40 - transformed ) ; PBEC , primary porcine bronchial epithelial cells ; BPE , bovine pulmonary epithelial cells ; IPF , idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis ; CA , constitutively active ; DN , dominant negative . Review L721 LUNG WOUND HEALING AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol • VOL 298 • JUNE 2010 • www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on A ugu s t 6 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m targeted expression of KGF in lung epithelium causes exten - sive pulmonary malformation and embryonic lethality ( 153 ) . The protective effects of KGF against injury were ﬁrst reported by Panos et al . ( 115 ) using rats exposed to hyperoxia , and subsequent studies have demonstrated protection against sev - eral different types of injury ( reviewed in Ref . 180 ) . KGF also accelerates repair mechanisms in lung epithelium following injury . As in the case of HGF , KGF is mitogenic for ATII cells in vitro and in vivo ( 115 , 118 , 168 ) and also stimulates ATII cell migration and enhances ATII cell adhesion ( 30 , 47 ) . When administered intratracheally to rats before isolation of alveolar epithelial cells , KGF stimulated wound closure in cultured monolayers primarily by increasing cell spreading and migra - tion at the wound edge , and increased cellular adhesion in an EGFR activation - dependent manner ( 5 ) . We also found that KGF increased the rate of wound closure of bronchial epithe - lial cell monolayers by stimulation of cell spreading and migration , and further , that these effects were blocked by inhibition of protein kinase C . KGF treatment also overcame the inhibitory effects of cyclic mechanical stretch on epithelial repair ( 181 ) . Using a tracheal transplant model in mice , Gomp - erts and colleagues ( 53 ) showed that KGF accelerated the repair of injured tracheal epithelium . These studies clearly demonstrate the beneﬁcial effects of KGF in repair following lung injury . Fehrenbach et al . ( 42 ) have suggested that the effects of KGF on proliferation in the airways may be restricted to Clara cells . Hyperplasia of ATII cells stimulated by KGF treatment in rats resolved spontaneously by differentiation of type II to type I cells or by apoptosis ( 43 , 44 ) . FGF - 10 shares many similarities with KGF and moreover has been shown to reduce ATII cell DNA damage caused by mechanical stretch or H 2 O 2 through mechanisms involving MAPK activation via the Grb2 - SOS - Ras / RAF - 1 - ERK1 / 2 pathway ( 169 , 170 ) . While KGF and other members of the FGF family have clear protec - tive roles against injury and may accelerate repair , their poten - tial clinical utility for lung injury is uncertain . As discussed by Ware and Matthay ( 180 ) , lung injury is generally not antici - pated , except potentially in response to chemotherapy or radi - ation therapy , and so its usefulness for pretreatment may be limited . However , we previously demonstrated that KGF also partially prevented the loss of barrier function of cultured airway epithelial cells when given after exposure to either radiation or hydrogen peroxide ( 147 , 182 ) , and a recent study suggested that restoration of alveolar barrier function by postinjury treatment with allogeneic BMSC was dependent on release of KGF ( 91 ) . Thus , given the potential restorative capabilities of KGF , it might be useful in the treatment of ALI in which epithelial repair is essential for recovery . Mediators of inﬂammation : chemokines , eicosanoids , interleukins . Other soluble factors that are normally associated with inﬂam - mation have also been shown to participate in epithelial repair mechanisms . Expression of the chemokine receptor - 3 ( CCR3 ) was found to be increased in bronchial biopsies from asthmat - ics , and treatment of primary HBE cells and cell lines ( BEAS - 2B and 16HBE14o - ) with CCR3 ligands stimulated wound closure ( 6 ) . Since repair processes are considered to be compromised in asthmatic airways , the upregulation of CCR3 may be a compensatory mechanism to enhance repair . CCR2 was expressed in isolated mouse ATII cells , and treatment with a CCR2 ligand ( monocyte chemoattractant protein - 1 ; MCP - 1 ) stimulated repair in wounded monolayers ( 23 ) . We previously demonstrated that inhibition of COX - 1 or COX - 2 essentially blocked wound closure of human and feline airway epithelial cells and that wound closure was restored by addition of PGE 2 ( 144 ) . Sustained effects on wound closure were observed when COX was inhibited only at the beginning of the repair , sug - gesting that eicosanoids participate in early wound healing events . Interleukin effects may be context sensitive . Interleukins have also been shown to participate in repair processes in the lung , but in some cases differing responses have been reported . Inﬂammatory mediators such as interleukins are increased in asthma and in ALI . IL - 1 (cid:2) has been shown to augment the repair of injured rat ATII cells ( 49 ) and A549 cells ( 48 ) , and the MAPK inhibitor PD - 98059 blocked this stimulation in ATII cells . White and collaborators ( 186 ) found that IL - 1 (cid:2) accelerated the migration of an HBE cell line ( 16HBE14o - ) and primary differentiated HBE cells , but this effect was not observed in cells isolated from asthmatics . IL - 1 (cid:2) - stimulated migration was also reduced using an siRNA approach to decrease the expression of the p65 component of NF - (cid:7) B , suggesting that the cells from asthmatics might have compro - mised NF - (cid:7) B function that affects either receptor expression or downstream signaling pathways . Proallergic response activa - tors IL - 4 and IL - 13 were both shown to decrease the migration of Calu - 3 human lung epithelial cells , while the innate immune response molecule IFN - (cid:6) enhanced migration ( 3 ) . In contrast , Booth et al . ( 8 ) demonstrated that IL - 13 induced proliferation of primary HBE cells through mechanisms involving TGF - (cid:1) and activation of the EGFR ( see above and Ref . 8 ) , and Allahverdian et al . ( 4 ) showed that IL - 13 stimulated HB - EGF release , activation of EGFR , and enhanced the repair of wounded 1HAEo - cells . Also , White and collaborators ( 187 ) found that IL - 4 stimulated the migration and repair of differentiated primary HBE cells through mechanisms involving insulin receptor sub - strate ( IRS ) - 1 or IRS - 2 but not the transcription factor STAT6 ( signal transducer and activator of transcription - 6 ) . Differences in responsiveness of Calu3 cells compared with primary cultures or other cell lines may explain the above differences in response to IL - 4 and IL - 13 . Another proinﬂammatory compound , IL - 2 , was shown to increase the migration of injured rat ATII cells and reduce apoptosis of these cells through mechanisms dependent on extracellular signal - regulated kinases ( ERKs ) ( 97 ) . The effects of IL - 2 were enhanced by pretreatment with the innate immune modulator IFN - (cid:6) . Coupled with the ﬁnding that BALF from asthmatics contained increased levels of IL - 2 , IL - 3 , IL - 4 , IL - 5 , and granulocyte / macrophage colony - stimulating factor ( GM - CSF ) , but not IFN - (cid:6) ( 140 ) , and that epithelial repair is thought to be dysregulated in asthmatic airways , there remain many ques - tions about the role of inﬂammatory mediators in epithelial repair . Matrix , Integrins , and Glycoproteins During the early stages of epithelial restitution , the processes of cell spreading and migration involve coordinated movement of cells in which adhesion sites between the cells and the substrate are alternately formed and released as the cells contract and advance forward . The matrix beneath the cells undergoes remodeling during the repair process , and compo - nents within this matrix interact with cellular integrin receptors to regulate cell migration , proliferation , and differentiation ( reviewed recently in Ref . 19 ) . For example , in the early stages Review L722 LUNG WOUND HEALING AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol • VOL 298 • JUNE 2010 • www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on A ugu s t 6 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m of epithelial restitution , cells migrate on a provisional matrix composed of serum ﬁbronectin and ﬁbrinogen . Antibody blocking studies demonstrated the importance of tissue factor , ﬁbrinogen , and factor XIIIA in the repair of normal HBE cells and 16HBE14o - cells ( 121 ) . Although space limitations preclude an extensive discussion , integrins and matrix enzymes play a major role in epithelial repair , and several are discussed below . Integrins regulate cell migration . The adhesion and migra - tion of cells upon the underlying matrix involves cell surface receptors such as integrins that consist of (cid:1) - and (cid:2) - subunits , and interactions between matrix components and integrin sub - units affect epithelial repair mechanisms in the lung . Pilewsky et al . ( 122 ) used an in vivo xenograft model of human bron - chial epithelium to demonstrate increased expression of the (cid:1) v - , (cid:2) 5 - , (cid:2) 6 - , and (cid:1) 5 - integrin subunits in cells migrating at the wound edge . Kim and collaborators ( 75 ) used antibody block - ing studies to demonstrate that migration of rat ATII cells on ﬁbronectin was partially mediated by (cid:1) v (cid:2) 3 - and (cid:2) 1 - integrins , and that migration on type I collagen was dependent on (cid:1) 2 (cid:2) 1 - integrin . A similar approach using 16HBE14o - cells showed that EGF - stimulated migration and spreading on col - lagen IV was blocked by antibodies to (cid:1) 2 - , (cid:1) 3 - , (cid:1) 6 - integrins and that the (cid:2) 1 - integrin subunit was required for migration on laminin - 1 or laminin - 2 ( 185 ) . Together , these studies demon - strate that cell migration is regulated in part by the identity of the integrin subunits and their interaction with the underlying matrix . Vitronectin is a component of extracellular matrix that promotes cell adhesion and migration through binding to sev - eral different (cid:1) v - integrins . Adair and collaborators ( 1 ) found that inter - (cid:1) - trypsin inhibitor ( IaI ) , found in serum protein , binds to vitronectin and promotes the repair of wounded A549 and BEAS - 2B cells . Dystroglycan is a glycosylated extracel - lular protein that functions as a lectin and was found to increase in expression 12 h after wounding of 1HAEo - cells and to regulate cell migration ( 189 ) . Integrins may also function as activators of other factors that regulate wound closure . Neurohr et al . ( 112 ) found that (cid:1) v (cid:2) 6 - and (cid:1) v (cid:2) 8 - integrins were expressed on airway epithelial cells and were capable of activating TGF - (cid:2) 1 , which resulted in decreased wound closure . Thus , although several speciﬁc integrins have been identiﬁed in epithelial repair processes , there are still gaps in our knowledge regarding the overall integration of integrin expression , regu - lation , and activation . Matrix metalloproteinases are activated during repair . The matrix metalloproteinase ( MMP ) family of enzymes is not normally expressed in healthy tissues ( except , importantly , MMP - 7 ) , but the expression of these enzymes is upregulated during most repair processes . MMPs are involved in remodel - ing of extracellular matrix and facilitate cell migration , and several members of this family have been implicated in lung epithelial repair mechanisms . Treatment of A549 cells or primary rat ATII cells with exogenous MMP - 1 caused de - creased cell adhesion and cell stiffness and increased cell migration on type I collagen ( 123 ) . The expression of MMP - 7 , or matrilysin , is known to be upregulated in migrating airway epithelial cells ( 120 ) , and MMP - 7 facilitates E - cadherin ectodomain shedding from injured airway epithelial cells ( 107 ) . MMP - 7 - mediated stimulation of airway epithelial cells is negatively regulated by tissue inhibitor of metalloprotein - ases - 1 ( TIMP - 1 ) ( 18 ) , and MMP - 7 shedding of syndecan - 1 from mouse airway epithelial cells was shown to facilitate wound closure by altering the conformation of the (cid:1) 2 (cid:2) 1 - integrin ( 17 ) . MMP - 9 has also been shown to stimulate the repair of bronchial epithelial cells in vitro ( 94 ) , and MMP - 9 - mediated stimulation of HBE cell migration was shown to be dependent on the activation of dual oxidase 1 ( Duox1 ) ( 184 ) . In contrast , exposure of 16HBE14o - to arsenic caused in - creased MMP - 9 activity and expression and decreased cell migration , whereas inhibition of MMP - 9 enhanced wound repair ( 113 ) . Another group previously found that plasminogen activator inhibitor - 1 ( PAI - 1 ) , another protein associated with matrix degradation , decreased the repair of ATII cells by binding to vitronectin ( 89 ) . In support of the role of PAI - 1 in epithelial repair , Stevens et al . ( 159 ) showed that primary bronchial epithelial cells from pediatric asthmatics exhibited signiﬁcantly reduced wound repair compared with cells from healthy control subjects , and this correlated with a signiﬁcant increase in PAI - 1 mRNA and protein expression . Interestingly , gene silencing of PAI - 1 decreased wound repair of cells from healthy controls , but had little effect on cells from asthmatics . In a study of KGF - stimulated repair of rat ATII cells it was found that wound healing was decreased by inhibition of PAI - 1 activity , but the proteolytic activity of urokinase plasminogen activator ( uPA ) and plasmin were required for efﬁcient wound healing ( 102 ) . Although substantial progress has been made in identifying matrix and structural components involved in epithelial repair , many unanswered questions remain . Some of these include fundamental questions in biology such as how cells organize matrix and in turn how matrix regulates the functional activity of different cell types during repair . A question of particular relevance in the lungs is how the physical / mechanical environ - ment interacts with the biochemical environment . For example , diseases such as pulmonary ﬁbrosis and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease ( COPD ) involve changes in the local me - chanical environment of the lung , and the progression of the disease may involve an imbalance between the activation of MMPs and their inhibitors caused by changes in mechanics . Furthermore , potential interactions between biochemical and mechanical signals are important in light of the fact that many in vitro studies involve cells grown on a substrate that is an order of magnitude greater in stiffness than native tissue . Signal Transduction Intermediates and Pathways While there has been extensive study of the many factors ( growth factors , cytokines , integrins , matrix components , etc . ) that are involved in epithelial repair mechanisms , the signal transduction intermediate pathways that are activated by these factors have received less attention . Using a naphthalene injury model in mice , Watkins et al . showed extensive activation of the sonic hedgehog ( Shh ) signaling pathway during repair of the airway epithelium , and , interestingly , this pattern of acti - vation was similar to that observed during normal airway development ( 183 ) , prompting discussions of whether repair actually recapitulates ontogeny . Shh signaling has also been implicated in the epithelial - mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) , and this is discussed below . Targeted deletion of either STAT3 or GP130 ( glycoprotein 130 ) from pulmonary epithelial cells resulted in compromised repair of the bronchial epithelium following naphthalene injury ( 73 ) . This study also showed that in vitro migration of airway epithelial cells was inhibited by Review L723 LUNG WOUND HEALING AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol • VOL 298 • JUNE 2010 • www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on A ugu s t 6 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m expression of dominant - negative STAT3 and was stimulated by expression of wild - type STAT3 . Another intermediate in cell signaling that has been shown to affect wound closure is phosphoinositide - 3 kinase ( PI3 - kinase ) , a known regulator of cell motility . PI3 - kinase activity is suppressed by PTEN ( phos - phatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome ten ) , and inhibition of PTEN , expression of a dominant negative form of PTEN , or siRNA directed against PTEN caused accelerated wound closure of primary human airway epithelial cells ( 87 ) . Adding to this evidence , we recently showed that inhibition of PI3 - kinase or expression of a dominant negative form of PI3 - kinase in 16HBE14o - cells caused decreased cell migra - tion following injury ( 31 ) . These studies highlight the impor - tance of PI3 - kinase / PTEN signaling in airway epithelial heal - ing and the need for further study of this pathway . Another key intermediate , (cid:2) - catenin ( discussed in more detail below ) , is an essential mediator of the classical Wnt signaling pathway , regulating the differentiation of respiratory epithelial cells in vivo ( 109 ) and cell fate during branching morphogenesis in the lung ( 110 ) . In vitro wound closure of bovine bronchial epithe - lial cells was inhibited by overexpression of glycogen synthase kinase 3 (cid:2) ( GSK3 (cid:2) ) , while overexpression of (cid:2) - catenin , which is known to be phosphorylated and downregulated by GSK3 (cid:2) , promoted wound closure ( 203 ) . In this study , scratch wounding was followed by nuclear translocation of (cid:2) - catenin , which promoted the expression of cyclin D1 ( indicative of cell pro - liferation ) . As is true in the broader context of wound healing , the spatial localization and activation of these signaling inter - mediates , both within a particular cell and within the tissue structure , is essential to regulate the repair process . However , our current knowledge of the spatial biology of these processes within the lungs is limited . Rho GTPases regulate cytoskeletal remodeling and cell contraction . Cytoskeletal remodeling is important in each of the processes associated with wound healing . Actin remodel - ing , formation and turnover of adhesion sites , and actomyosin contraction are all regulated by members of the Rho family of small guanosine triphosphatases ( GTPases ) . RhoA is involved in the organization of actin into bundles and stress ﬁbers , the formation of large focal adhesions , and the promotion of actomyosin tension through its action on myosin light chain phosphorylation . Rac1 stimulates the formation of focal com - plexes and polymerization of actin in lamellipodia , while Cdc42 performs a similar function in ﬁlopodia . While these GTPases have been widely studied in different tissues , and the speciﬁc roles vary from tissue to tissue , a limited number of studies have examined the role of GTPases in lung epithelial repair . Inactivation of RhoA by the bacterial toxin ExoT caused inhibition of wound repair in A549 cells ( 50 ) , whereas a decrease in RhoA activity caused by stimulation of protein kinase A stimulated bronchial epithelial cell migration ( 156 ) . We found that expression of either a constitutively active ( CA ) or a dominant negative ( DN ) form of RhoA inhibited wound closure of 16HBE14o - cells , suggesting that normal repair requires an appropriate balance of RhoA activity ( 28 ) . Similar inhibition was found when wild - type Rac1 was overexpressed or when a dominant negative form of Rac1 was expressed . Inhibition of Rho kinase , the downstream effector of RhoA , stimulated cell migration . In another study we found that RhoA activity was increased in ATII cells isolated from rats follow - ing high tidal volume ( 25 ml / kg ) mechanical ventilation , but this increased activity was blocked by treatment with KGF ( 30 ) . Expression of CA - RhoA in rat ATII cells inhibited wound closure , whereas expression of DN - RhoA stimulated wound closure , in contrast with the results from 16HBE14o - cells in which DN - RhoA caused decreased cell migration . We recently demonstrated that cell migration of rat ATII and A549 cells was inhibited by treatment with an inhibitor of Tiam1 , a Rac1 - speciﬁc guanine exchange factor ( 29 ) . As discussed above , it is important to recognize that the various activities of these molecules vary with location in the cells . For example , Rac1 may be more active at the leading edge of the migrating cell , whereas RhoA may be more active stabilizing adhesions for traction and generating tension in the more central regions of the cell . Studies that clarify these molecular functions and their localization will be key to understanding migration and wound healing in the lung . MAP kinase pathways . Several of the factors that regulate lung epithelial repair utilize the mitogen - activated protein ( MAP ) kinase pathway . These serine / threonine protein kinases are involved in cell proliferation , differentiation , and migra - tion . White and collaborators ( 188 ) showed that migration of primary human airway epithelial cells and 16HBE14o - cells on collagen - IV was decreased when cells were treated with inhib - itors of p38 MAPK , JNK , or ERK1 / 2 , and that both p38 and JNK were rapidly activated in cells near the wound edge . We recently showed that mechanical stretch - induced inhibition of cell migration involved a decrease in JIP3 - induced JNK phos - phorylation ( 32 ) . Inhibition of p38 MAPK also decreased chemotaxis of primary human airway epithelial cells and 16HBE14o - cells in response to the CXCR3 ligand I - TAC , but inhibition of ERK1 / 2 had no effect ( 152 ) . Another group found that stimu - lation of wound repair in cultured human bronchial epithelial cells by vasoactive intestinal peptide ( VIP ) was blocked by inhibition of ERK1 / 2 ( 56 ) . Bove et al . ( 12 ) found that inﬂam - matory levels of nitric oxide inhibited the migration of human bronchial epithelial cells in part because of a decrease in activation of ERK1 / 2 . Interestingly , macrophage migration inhibitory factor ( MIF ) stimulated rapid and sustained ERK1 / 2 phosphorylation and proliferation in mouse ATII cells , but failed to do so in differentiated ATI - like cells ( 103 ) . Thus , the roles for speciﬁc members of the MAPK family in epithelial repair appear to vary in different tissues and in response to various activators . As in the case of differences in response to soluble mediators , activation of different MAPK pathways may be dependent on temporal and spatial variables such as integrin / matrix interactions and the presence of inﬂammatory mediators during repair . Wnt , TGF - (cid:1) Signaling , and Epithelial - Mesenchymal Transition Wnt / (cid:1) - catenin signaling . The role of (cid:2) - catenin - mediated wingless integration ( Wnt ) signaling is proving to be central to mechanisms of lung healing in ﬁbrosis , cancer , and stem cell maintenance ( 62 , 79 , 82 , 124 , 133 , 190 ) . (cid:2) - catenin signaling stimulates tissue remodeling , cell migration , and wound clo - sure ( through Cox - 2 / PGE 2 or MMP ) or tissue remodeling and destruction ( through MMPs , IL - 1 , IL - 6 , IL - 8 , IL - 15 , MCP - 1 , TNF - (cid:1) , ICAM1 or TGF - (cid:2) ) ( 124 ) . Wnt binding to cognate Frizzled ( Fzd ) receptors results in GSK - 3 (cid:2) phosphorylation , inactivating GSK - 3 (cid:2) , and the cytosolic accumulation of Review L724 LUNG WOUND HEALING AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol • VOL 298 • JUNE 2010 • www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on A ugu s t 6 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m (cid:2) - catenin , which then translocates to the nucleus and partici - pates in lymphoid enhancer factor / T cell factor - p300 ( LEF / TCF - p300 ) - dependent gene transcription ( 124 , 191 ) . MMPs proteolytically degrade basement membrane , facilitating cell migration , and are key activators of TGF - (cid:2) . This activation directly or indirectly stimulates many of the proinﬂammatory cytokines ( e . g . , IL - 1 ) that participate in inﬂammation - mediated tissue destruction and elaboration of ECM and thickened hy - aline membranes . Wnt / (cid:2) - catenin signaling has also been shown to regulate the stem cell hierarchy in the renewal of lung epithelium ( 137 ) . However , a recent study used a targeted knockout strategy in bronchiolar epithelium and found that (cid:2) - catenin was not required for maintenance and repair follow - ing naphthalene - induced airway injury ( 202 ) . It is important to recognize that Wnt / (cid:2) - catenin signaling has been documented to vary in different tissues and contexts ( stage of development , receptor binding , pathway ) ( 13 , 15 , 21 , 108 ) , and there are still many unresolved questions regarding the role of Wnt / (cid:2) - catenin both in development and in repair mechanisms . TGF - (cid:1) signaling is complex in repair . Because of its mul - tifunctional roles in development , inﬂammation , wound repair , cell proliferation , and differentiation , the role of TGF - (cid:2) in lung epithelial repair mechanisms is both complex and controver - sial . TGF - (cid:2) is both a potent immunosuppressor and proinﬂam - matory . TGF - (cid:2) - induced target genes include connective tissue growth factor ( CTGF ) , (cid:1) - smooth muscle actin ( (cid:1) - SMA ) , col - lagen 1a2 ( col1a2 ) , and PAI - 2 ( serpine 2 ) ( reviewed in Ref . 191 ) . Several of these gene products elaborate connective tissue and (cid:1) - smooth muscle actin , the expression of which is a hallmark of cells that differentiate into myoﬁbroblasts via the epithelial - mesenchymal transition ( EMT , described below ) . Two early studies suggested that TGF - (cid:2) stimulated cell mi - gration of cultured rabbit tracheal epithelial cells ( 7 ) and 16HBE14o - cells ( 68 ) , but cell proliferation was reduced in the former study . Another group demonstrated that TGF - (cid:2) stimu - lated airway epithelial wound repair in vitro by upregulating MMP - 2 and altering the matrix upon which cells migrated ( 90 ) . Migration was also stimulated by TGF - (cid:2) in A549 cells and primary mouse ATII cells in a Smad - 3 - and transgelin - dependent manner ( 197 ) . TGF - (cid:2) was also shown to accelerate rat ATII scratch wound repair through Smad - dependent sig - naling ( 14 ) . In contrast , Spurzem and collaborators ( 157 ) found that TGF - (cid:2) inhibited epithelial sheet migration of bovine bronchial epithelial cells . In addition , Neurohr et al . ( 112 ) showed that wounding of primary airway epithelial cells in - duced activation of TGF - (cid:2) through integrins (cid:1) v (cid:2) 6 and (cid:1) v (cid:2) 8 , and that cell migration was inhibited by exogenous TGF - (cid:2) and stimulated by antibodies against TGF - (cid:2) or (cid:1) v (cid:2) 8 . These con - trasting effects of TGF - (cid:2) may be due to differences in cell origin ( airway vs . alveolar , transformed vs . primary , human vs . rodent ) , differences in matrix or integrin expression , or differ - ences in concentration - dependent responses . Epithelial - mesenchymal transition . Deﬁning the role of TGF - (cid:2) in epithelial repair mechanisms is further complicated by its role in EMT ( reviewed more extensively in Ref . 191 ) . EMT involves the conversion of differentiated epithelial cells into ﬁbroblasts and myoﬁbroblasts that occurs normally during development , but in aberrant wound repair processes , EMT may lead to ﬁbrosis and scarring . TGF - (cid:2) has been identiﬁed as a “master switch” in the induction of EMT in several tissues including the lung , and , speciﬁcally , together with (cid:2) - catenin , in ATII cells ( 82 ) . EMT occurs in cancer metastasis and ﬁbrosis and in human idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis ( IPF ) ( 81 , 82 ) . MMP7 found on the surface of lung epithelial cells ( 17 ) is one of several MMPs that activate TGF - (cid:2) , and is known to be a key mediator of pulmonary ﬁbrosis and IPF . Chen et al . ( 17 ) found that MMP7 promoted inﬂammation early in the injury response ( via shedding syndecan - 1 / KC complexes ) , enhanced cell mi - gration and wound closure , and later , in adaptive immune responses , facilitated shedding of E - cadherin . EMT is accom - panied by loss of E - cadherin ( 191 ) , which leads to the disas - sembly of adherens junctions and impaired cell - cell contacts preceding cell migration . The TGF - (cid:2) inhibitors Smad7 or BMP7 can inhibit EMT ( 191 ) . Although recent studies have identiﬁed several mediators and pathways involved in EMT and its dysregulation , a more complete understanding of these processes and how aberrant repair results in ﬁbrosis and scar - ring in the lungs is needed . Mechanical Forces Both repair mechanisms following injury and normal epi - thelial turnover occur within an environment and upon a substrate that is undergoing cyclic mechanical deformation . Epithelial repair is a dynamic process involving cell spreading and cell migration in the early stages , and these processes inherently involve biomechanics : cytoskeletal remodeling , ad - hesion / loss of adhesion , generation of force / relaxation , cell locomotion , etc . Furthermore , as discussed above , the role of interactions between mechanical and biochemical signals in the lung is not well understood . This is particularly important in light of the potential for alterations in repair in diseases that involve changes in lung mechanics such as IPF , asthma , and COPD . In addition , patients with ALI placed on mechanical ventilators may experience elevated levels of mechanical dis - tention that may contribute to injury or affect repair mecha - nisms . To investigate the latter possibility in vitro , we used cell lines ( Calu - 3 , 1HAEo - ) and primary cultures of human bron - chial epithelial cells to demonstrate that both cyclic stretch and cyclic compression signiﬁcantly inhibited wound closure by inhibiting cell spreading and cell migration ( 148 ) . Inhibition was dependent on the magnitude of mechanical strain , and , interestingly , the extent of inhibition was dependent on the duration of strain during each cycle and not speciﬁcally the frequency of stretch . In contrast to the inhibitory effects on spreading and migration , mechanical stretch and compression were shown to stimulate BrdU incorporation in wounded bronchial epithelial cells in culture ( 146 ) . We later showed that treatment with KGF abrogated the inhibitory effects of me - chanical strain on wound repair by promoting spreading and migration ( 181 ) . More recently , we demonstrated that mechan - ical stretch of wounded 16HBE14o - cells caused loss of focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) phosphorylation , dissociation of JIP - 3 ( JNK - interacting protein 3 ) from FAK , and decreased activa - tion of JNK ( 32 ) . We also found that ATII cells isolated from rats followin g 2 h ofhigh tidal volume mechanical ventilation ( 25 ml / kg with 50 % oxygen ) exhibited decreased phosphory - lation of FAK and paxillin , increased RhoA activity , and decreased cell adhesion ( 30 ) . Wound repair of cultured rat ATII cells was inhibited by adenoviral expression of a kinase - inactive from of FAK ( FRNK ) , whereas repair was stimulated by overexpression of wild - type FAK . We also found that cyclic Review L725 LUNG WOUND HEALING AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol • VOL 298 • JUNE 2010 • www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on A ugu s t 6 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m stretch of rat ATII cells caused decreased wound repair through mechanisms involving decreased Tiam1 - mediated Rac1 activ - ity ( 29 ) . Although it is well - recognized that there are spatial variations in the localization and activity of Rho GTPases , focal adhesion , and other signaling molecules during coordi - nated cell migration , the relationship between these dynamic processes and the local mechanical properties of the cells are less well understood . Atomic force microscopy was used to demonstrate that the elastic modulus of 16HBE14o - cells varied markedly in cells migrating at the wound edge and that cell stiffness was signiﬁcantly increased between 10 and 15 (cid:8) m from the wound edge and signiﬁcantly decreased within the ﬁrst 5 (cid:8) m ( 175 ) . These results suggest that epithelial repair mechanisms may in part be directed by changes in localized mechanical properties . In addition to inhibitory effects on early processes of epithelial restitution , mechanical forces may also negatively impact epithelial repair in other ways . Several groups have demonstrated that mechanical stretch of cells in culture or high tidal volume in vivo causes ATII cell injury ( 173 , 174 ) , apoptosis ( 59 , 60 ) , and necrosis ( 16 , 166 ) . How - ever , the interplay between mechanical and biochemical sig - naling during repair processes in vivo has not been extensively studied . Conclusions and Future Directions This survey of the current knowledge of mechanisms of lung epithelial repair illustrates some of the complexities of this ﬁeld and points toward some of the challenges for future research . Clearly there is a need for advancements in methods that can be used to examine epithelial repair mechanisms in vivo . Approaches involving lineage tracking and in situ visu - alization coupled with transgenic mouse models will be useful in the detailed identiﬁcation and characterization of resident progenitor and stem cells in discrete , and in some cases sequestered , regions of the lung . These approaches may also be useful for investigating how persistent injury or inﬂammation can lead to different pathologies depending on the site of injury ( airway vs . alveolar ) . Differences in gene proﬁles in epithelial cells from patient samples may help us to understand why repeated exposure to cigarette smoke progresses to COPD in some , but not all , smokers . Similar genetic proﬁling from epithelial cells of asthmatics may provide clues about the importance of chronic epithelial injury and repair in the patho - genesis of asthma . Another major challenge is to determine the source , mechanisms of recruitment and engraftment , and the regulation of differentiation of BMSC . The development of improved methods for the isolation , identiﬁcation , and charac - terization of these cells will be required , and it will be impor - tant to translate these approaches into studies of human cells . While numerous factors involved in epithelial migration , spreading , and proliferation have been identiﬁed from studies of cultured cells , there is a signiﬁcant need for understanding how these varied and sometimes disparate signals are inte - grated into a coordinated response . This will require increased understanding of the source of the mediators , the pathways that become activated , the timing of their activation , their spatial targeting , and the factors that regulate their responsiveness . For example , the role of TGF - (cid:2) in epithelial repair appears to depend on the context and site of the injury , and the factors that lead to dysregulated EMT and ﬁbrosis have not been clearly elucidated . More universal challenges include increasing our understanding of the regulation of matrix and its role in regulating repair , the examination of how signaling pathways vary spatially within cells to regulate migration and spreading , and the determination of how changes in localized mechanical forces and tissue properties alter repair mechanisms . As we have attempted to describe , there have recently been many exciting and important revelations in this ﬁeld , but many unanswered questions remain , and a comprehensive under - standing of epithelial repair in the lungs is still far from complete . GRANTS This work was supported by National Heart , Lung , and Blood Institute Grants HL - 064981 , HL - 080417 , and HL - 094366 . DISCLOSURES No conﬂicts of interest , ﬁnancial or otherwise , are declared by the author ( s ) . REFERENCES 1 . Adair JE , Stober V , Sobhany M , Zhuo L , Roberts JD , Negishi M , Kimata K , Garantziotis S . Inter - (cid:1) - trypsin inhibitor promotes bronchial epithelial repair after injury through vitronectin binding . J Biol Chem 284 : 16922 – 16930 , 2009 . 2 . Adamson IY , Bowden DH . Derivation of type 1 epithelium from type 2 cells in the developing rat lung . Lab Invest 3 2 : 736 – 745 , 1975 . 3 . Ahdieh M , Vandenbos T , Youakim A . Lung epithelial barrier function and wound healing are decreased by IL - 4 and IL - 13 and enhanced by IFN - gamma . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 281 : C2029 – C2038 , 2001 . 4 . Allahverdian S , Harada N , Singhera GK , Knight DA , Dorscheid DR . Secretion of IL - 13 by airway epithelial cells enhances epithelial repair via HB - EGF . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 38 : 153 – 160 , 2008 . 5 . Atabai K , Ishigaki M , Geiser T , Ueki I , Matthay MA , Ware LB . Keratinocyte growth factor can enhance alveolar epithelial repair by nonmitogenic mechanisms . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 283 : L163 – L169 , 2002 . 6 . Beck LA , Tancowny B , Brummet ME , Asaki SY , Curry SL , Penno MB , Foster M , Bahl A , Stellato C . Functional analysis of the chemo - kine receptor CCR3 on airway epithelial cells . J Immunol 177 : 3344 – 3354 , 2006 . 7 . Boland S , Boisvieux - Ulrich E , Houcine O , Baeza - Squiban A , Pouche - let M , Schoevaert D , Marano F . TGF beta 1 promotes actin cytoskel - eton reorganization and migratory phenotype in epithelial tracheal cells in primary culture . J Cell Sci 109 : 2207 – 2219 , 1996 . 8 . Booth BW , Adler KB , Bonner JC , Tournier F , Martin LD . Interleu - kin - 13 induces proliferation of human airway epithelial cells in vitro via a mechanism mediated by transforming growth factor - alpha . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 25 : 739 – 743 , 2001 . 9 . Borok Z , Danto SI , Lubman RL , Cao Y , Williams MC , Crandall ED . Modulation of t1 (cid:1) expression with alveolar epithelial cell phenotype in vitro . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 275 : L155 – L164 , 1998 . 10 . Borok Z , Lubman RL , Danto SI , Zhang XL , Zabski SM , King LS , Lee DM , Agre P , Crandall ED . Keratinocyte growth factor modulates alveolar epithelial cell phenotype in vitro : expression of aquaporin 5 . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 18 : 554 – 561 , 1998 . 11 . Borthwick DW , Shahbazian M , Krantz QT , Dorin JR , Randell SH . Evidence for stem - cell niches in the tracheal epithelium . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 24 : 662 – 670 , 2001 . 12 . Bove PF , Wesley UV , Greul AK , Hristova M , Dostmann WR , van der Vliet A . Nitric oxide promotes airway epithelial wound repair through enhanced activation of MMP - 9 . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 36 : 138 – 146 , 2007 . 13 . Bradley RS , Brown AM . The proto - oncogene int - 1 encodes a secreted protein associated with the extracellular matrix . EMBO J 9 : 1569 – 1575 , 1990 . 14 . Buckley S , Shi W , Barsky L , Warburton D . TGF - (cid:2) signaling promotes survival and repair in rat alveolar epithelial type 2 cells during recovery after hyperoxic injury . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 294 : L739 – L748 , 2008 . Review L726 LUNG WOUND HEALING AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol • VOL 298 • JUNE 2010 • www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on A ugu s t 6 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 15 . Burrus LW , McMahon AP . Biochemical analysis of murine Wnt proteins reveals both shared and distinct properties . Exp Cell Res 220 : 363 – 373 , 1995 . 16 . Cavanaugh KJ Jr , Margulies SS . Measurement of stretch - induced loss of alveolar epithelial barrier integrity with a novel in vitro method . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 283 : C1801 – C1808 , 2002 . 17 . Chen P , Abacherli LE , Nadler ST , Wang Y , Li Q , Parks WC . MMP7 shedding of syndecan - 1 facilitates re - epithelialization by affecting alpha ( 2 ) beta ( 1 ) integrin activation . PloS One 4 : e6565 , 2009 . 18 . Chen P , McGuire JK , Hackman RC , Kim KH , Black RA , Poindexter K , Yan W , Liu P , Chen AJ , Parks WC , Madtes DK . Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase - 1 moderates airway re - epithelialization by regulat - ing matrilysin activity . Am J Pathol 172 : 1256 – 1270 , 2008 . 19 . Chen P , Parks WC . Role of matrix metalloproteinases in epithelial migration . J Cell Biochem 108 : 1233 – 1243 , 2009 . 20 . Chesnutt AN , Kheradmand F , Folkesson HG , Alberts M , Matthay MA . Soluble transforming growth factor - alpha is present in the pulmo - nary edema ﬂuid of patients with acute lung injury . Chest 111 : 652 – 656 , 1997 . 21 . Chien AJ , Conrad WH , Moon RT . A Wnt survival guide : from ﬂies to human disease . J Invest Dermatol 129 : 1614 – 1627 , 2009 . 22 . Chilosi M , Poletti V , Zamo A , Lestani M , Montagna L , Piccoli P , Pedron S , Bertaso M , Scarpa A , Murer B , Cancellieri A , Maestro R , Semenzato G , Doglioni C . Aberrant Wnt / beta - catenin pathway activa - tion in idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis . Am J Pathol 162 : 1495 – 1502 , 2003 . 23 . Christensen PJ , Du M , Moore B , Morris S , Toews GB , Paine R , 3rd . Expression and functional implications of CCR2 expression on murine alveolar epithelial cells . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 286 : L68 – L72 , 2004 . 24 . Crystal RG , Randell SH , Engelhardt JF , Voynow J , Sunday ME . Airway epithelial cells : current concepts and challenges . Proc Am Thorac Soc 5 : 772 – 777 , 2008 . 25 . Danjo Y , Gipson IK . Actin ‘purse string’ ﬁlaments are anchored by E - cadherin - mediated adherens junctions at the leading edge of the epi - thelial wound , providing coordinated cell movement . J Cell Sci 111 : 3323 – 3332 , 1998 . 26 . Davies DE . The role of the epithelium in airway remodeling in asthma . Proc Am Thorac Soc 6 : 678 – 682 , 2009 . 27 . Dean CH , Miller LA , Smith AN , Dufort D , Lang RA , Niswander LA . Canonical Wnt signaling negatively regulates branching morphogenesis of the lung and lacrimal gland . Dev Biol 286 : 270 – 286 , 2005 . 28 . Desai LP , Aryal AM , Ceacareanu B , Hassid A , Waters CM . RhoA and Rac1 are both required for efﬁcient wound closure of airway epithelial cells . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 287 : L1134 – L1144 , 2004 . 29 . Desai LP , Chapman KE , Waters CM . Mechanical stretch decreases migration of alveolar epithelial cells through mechanisms involving Rac1 and Tiam1 . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 295 : L958 – L965 , 2008 . 30 . Desai LP , Sinclair SE , Chapman KE , Hassid A , Waters CM . High tidal volume mechanical ventilation with hyperoxia alters alveolar type II cell adhesion . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 293 : L769 – L778 , 2007 . 31 . Desai LP , White SR , Waters CM . Cyclic mechanical stretch decreases cell migration by inhibiting phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase - and focal adhesion kinase - mediated JNK1 activation . J Biol Chem 285 : 4511 – 4519 , 2009 . 32 . Desai LP , White SR , Waters CM . Mechanical stretch decreases FAK phosphorylation and reduces cell migration through loss of JIP3 - induced JNK phosphorylation in airway epithelial cells . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 297 : L520 – L529 , 2009 . 33 . Dobbs LG , Williams MC , Brandt AE . Changes in biochemical char - acteristics and pattern of lectin binding of alveolar type II cells with time in culture . Biochim Biophys Acta 846 : 155 – 166 , 1985 . 34 . Dupuit F , Gaillard D , Hinnrasky J , Mongodin E , de Bentzmann S , Copreni E , Puchelle E . Differentiated and functional human airway epithelium regeneration in tracheal xenografts . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 278 : L165 – L176 , 2000 . 35 . Engelhardt JF . Stem cell niches in the mouse airway . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 24 : 649 – 652 , 2001 . 36 . Erjefalt JS , Erjefalt I , Sundler F , Persson CG . Effects of topical budesonide on epithelial restitution in vivo in guinea pig trachea . Thorax 50 : 785 – 792 , 1995 . 37 . Erjefalt JS , Erjefalt I , Sundler F , Persson CG . In vivo restitution of airway epithelium . Cell Tissue Res 281 : 305 – 316 , 1995 . 38 . Erjefalt JS , Erjefalt I , Sundler F , Persson CG . Microcirculation - derived factors in airway epithelial repair in vivo . Microvasc Res 48 : 161 – 178 , 1994 . 39 . Evans MJ , Cabral - Anderson LJ , Freeman G . Role of the Clara cell in renewal of the bronchiolar epithelium . Lab Invest 38 : 648 – 653 , 1978 . 40 . Evans MJ , Cabral LJ , Stephens RJ , Freeman G . Transformation of alveolar type 2 cells to type 1 cells following exposure to NO 2 . Exp Mol Pathol 22 : 142 – 150 , 1975 . 41 . Evans MJ , Johnson LV , Stephens RJ , Freeman G . Renewal of the terminal bronchiolar epithelium in the rat following exposure to NO 2 or O 3 . Lab Invest 35 : 246 – 257 , 1976 . 42 . Fehrenbach H , Fehrenbach A , Pan T , Kasper M , Mason RJ . Kera - tinocyte growth factor - induced proliferation of rat airway epithelium is restricted to Clara cells in vivo . Eur Respir J 20 : 1185 – 1197 , 2002 . 43 . Fehrenbach H , Kasper M , Koslowski R , Pan T , Schuh D , Muller M , Mason RJ . Alveolar epithelial type II cell apoptosis in vivo during resolution of keratinocyte growth factor - induced hyperplasia in the rat . Histochem Cell Biol 114 : 49 – 61 , 2000 . 44 . Fehrenbach H , Kasper M , Tschernig T , Pan T , Schuh D , Shannon JM , Muller M , Mason RJ . Keratinocyte growth factor - induced hyper - plasia of rat alveolar type II cells in vivo is resolved by differentiation into type I cells and by apoptosis . Eur Respir J 14 : 534 – 544 , 1999 . 45 . Fenteany G , Janmey PA , Stossel TP . Signaling pathways and cell mechanics involved in wound closure by epithelial cell sheets . Curr Biol 10 : 831 – 838 , 2000 . 46 . Furuyama A , Mochitate K . Hepatocyte growth factor inhibits the formation of the basement membrane of alveolar epithelial cells in vitro . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 286 : L939 – L946 , 2004 . 47 . Galiacy S , Planus E , Lepetit H , Fereol S , Laurent V , Ware L , Isabey D , Matthay M , Harf A , d’Ortho MP . Keratinocyte growth factor promotes cell motility during alveolar epithelial repair in vitro . Exp Cell Res 283 : 215 – 229 , 2003 . 48 . Geiser T , Atabai K , Jarreau PH , Ware LB , Pugin J , Matthay MA . Pulmonary edema ﬂuid from patients with acute lung injury augments in vitro alveolar epithelial repair by an IL - 1 (cid:2) - dependent mechanism . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 163 : 1384 – 1388 , 2001 . 49 . Geiser T , Jarreau PH , Atabai K , Matthay MA . Interleukin - 1 (cid:2) aug - ments in vitro alveolar epithelial repair . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 279 : L1184 – L1190 , 2000 . 50 . Geiser TK , Kazmierczak BI , Garrity - Ryan LK , Matthay MA , Engel JN . Pseudomonas aeruginosa ExoT inhibits in vitro lung epithelial wound repair . Cell Microbiol 3 : 223 – 236 , 2001 . 51 . Giangreco A , Arwert EN , Rosewell IR , Snyder J , Watt FM , Stripp BR . Stem cells are dispensable for lung homeostasis but restore airways after injury . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106 : 9286 – 9291 , 2009 . 52 . Giangreco A , Reynolds SD , Stripp BR . Terminal bronchioles harbor a unique airway stem cell population that localizes to the bronchoalveolar duct junction . Am J Pathol 161 : 173 – 182 , 2002 . 53 . Gomperts BN , Belperio JA , Fishbein MC , Keane MP , Burdick MD , Strieter RM . Keratinocyte growth factor improves repair in the injured tracheal epithelium . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 37 : 48 – 56 , 2007 . 54 . Gonzalez RF , Allen L , Dobbs LG . Rat alveolar type I cells proliferate , express OCT - 4 , and exhibit phenotypic plasticity in vitro . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 297 : L1045 – L1055 , 2009 . 55 . Grunig G , Warnock M , Wakil AE , Venkayya R , Brombacher F , Rennick DM , Sheppard D , Mohrs M , Donaldson DD , Locksley RM , Corry DB . Requirement for IL - 13 independently of IL - 4 in experimental asthma . Science 282 : 2261 – 2263 , 1998 . 56 . Guan CX , Cui YR , Zhang M , Bai HB , Khunkhun R , Fang X . Intracellular signaling molecules involved in vasoactive intestinal pep - tide - mediated wound healing in human bronchial epithelial cells . Pep - tides 28 : 1667 – 1673 , 2007 . 57 . Gupta N , Su X , Popov B , Lee JW , Serikov V , Matthay MA . Intrapul - monary delivery of bone marrow - derived mesenchymal stem cells im - proves survival and attenuates endotoxin - induced acute lung injury in mice . J Immunol 179 : 1855 – 1863 , 2007 . 58 . Hackett TL , Knight DA . The role of epithelial injury and repair in the origins of asthma . Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 7 : 63 – 68 , 2007 . 59 . Hammerschmidt S , Kuhn H , Gessner C , Seyfarth HJ , Wirtz H . Stretch - induced alveolar type II cell apoptosis : role of endogenous bradykinin and PI3K - Akt signaling . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 37 : 699 – 705 , 2007 . Review L727 LUNG WOUND HEALING AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol • VOL 298 • JUNE 2010 • www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on A ugu s t 6 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 60 . Hammerschmidt S , Kuhn H , Grasenack T , Gessner C , Wirtz H . Apoptosis and necrosis induced by cyclic mechanical stretching in alveolar type II cells . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 30 : 396 – 402 , 2004 . 61 . Harari S , Caminati A . IPF : new insight on pathogenesis and treatment . Allergy . In press . 62 . He B , Jablons DM . Wnt signaling in stem cells and lung cancer . Ernst Schering Found Symp Proc 5 : 27 – 58 , 2006 . 63 . Henson PM , Vandivier RW , Douglas IS . Cell death , remodeling , and repair in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease ? Proc Am Thorac Soc 3 : 713 – 717 , 2006 . 64 . Holgate ST . Epithelium dysfunction in asthma . J Allergy Clin Immunol 120 : 1233 – 1244 ; quiz 1245 – 1236 , 2007 . 65 . Holgate ST , Roberts G , Arshad HS , Howarth PH , Davies DE . The role of the airway epithelium and its interaction with environmental factors in asthma pathogenesis . Proc Am Thorac Soc 6 : 655 – 659 , 2009 . 66 . Hong KU , Reynolds SD , Giangreco A , Hurley CM , Stripp BR . Clara cell secretory protein - expressing cells of the airway neuroepithelial body microenvironment include a label - retaining subset and are critical for epithelial renewal after progenitor cell depletion . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 24 : 671 – 681 , 2001 . 67 . Horiba K , Fukuda Y . Synchronous appearance of ﬁbronectin , integrin alpha 5 beta 1 , vinculin and actin in epithelial cells and ﬁbroblasts during rat tracheal wound healing . Virchows Arch 425 : 425 – 434 , 1994 . 68 . Howat WJ , Holgate ST , Lackie PM . TGF - (cid:2) isoform release and activation during in vitro bronchial epithelial wound repair . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 282 : L115 – L123 , 2002 . 69 . Isakson BE , Lubman RL , Seedorf GJ , Boitano S . Modulation of pulmonary alveolar type II cell phenotype and communication by extra - cellular matrix and KGF . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 281 : C1291 – C1299 , 2001 . 70 . Kato Y , Hirano T , Yoshida K , Yashima K , Akimoto S , Tsuji K , Ohira T , Tsuboi M , Ikeda N , Ebihara Y , Kato H . Frequent loss of E - cadherin and / or catenins in intrabronchial lesions during carcinogen - esis of the bronchial epithelium . Lung Cancer 48 : 323 – 330 , 2005 . 71 . Kaverina I , Krylyshkina O , Small JV . Regulation of substrate adhesion dynamics during cell motility . Int J Biochem Cell Biol 34 : 746 – 761 , 2002 . 72 . Kheradmand F , Folkesson HG , Shum L , Derynk R , Pytela R , Mat - thay MA . Transforming growth factor - (cid:1) enhances alveolar epithelial cell repair in a new in vitro model . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 267 : L728 – L738 , 1994 . 73 . Kida H , Mucenski ML , Thitoff AR , Le Cras TD , Park KS , Ikegami M , Muller W , Whitsett JA . GP130 - STAT3 regulates epithelial cell migration and is required for repair of the bronchiolar epithelium . Am J Pathol 172 : 1542 – 1554 , 2008 . 74 . Kim CF , Jackson EL , Woolfenden AE , Lawrence S , Babar I , Vogel S , Crowley D , Bronson RT , Jacks T . Identiﬁcation of bronchioalveolar stem cells in normal lung and lung cancer . Cell 121 : 823 – 835 , 2005 . 75 . Kim HJ , Henke CA , Savik SK , Ingbar DH . Integrin mediation of alveolar epithelial cell migration on ﬁbronectin and type I collagen . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 273 : L134 – L141 , 1997 . 76 . Kim JS , McKinnis VS , Adams K , White SR . Proliferation and repair of guinea pig tracheal epithelium after neuropeptide depletion and injury in vivo . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 273 : L1235 – L1241 , 1997 . 77 . Kim JS , McKinnis VS , Nawrocki A , White SR . Stimulation of migra - tion and wound repair of guinea - pig airway epithelial cells in response to epidermal growth factor . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 18 : 66 – 74 , 1998 . 78 . Kim KK , Kugler MC , Wolters PJ , Robillard L , Galvez MG , Brum - well AN , Sheppard D , Chapman HA . Alveolar epithelial cell mesen - chymal transition develops in vivo during pulmonary ﬁbrosis and is regulated by the extracellular matrix . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 : 13180 – 13185 , 2006 . 79 . Kleber M , Sommer L . Wnt signaling and the regulation of stem cell function . Curr Opin Cell Biol 16 : 681 – 687 , 2004 . 80 . Kole TP , Tseng Y , Jiang I , Katz JL , Wirtz D . Intracellular mechanics of migrating ﬁbroblasts . Mol Biol Cell 16 : 328 – 338 , 2005 . 81 . Konigshoff M , Balsara N , Pfaff EM , Kramer M , Chrobak I , Seeger W , Eickelberg O . Functional Wnt signaling is increased in idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis . PLoS One 3 : e2142 , 2008 . 82 . Konigshoff M , Eickelberg O . WNT signaling in lung disease : a failure or a regeneration signal ? Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 42 : 21 – 31 , 2010 . 83 . Konigshoff M , Kramer M , Balsara N , Wilhelm J , Amarie OV , Jahn A , Rose F , Fink L , Seeger W , Schaefer L , Gunther A , Eickelberg O . WNT1 - inducible signaling protein - 1 mediates pulmonary ﬁbrosis in mice and is upregulated in humans with idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis . J Clin Invest 119 : 772 – 787 , 2009 . 84 . Kotton DN , Fabian AJ , Mulligan RC . Failure of bone marrow to reconstitute lung epithelium . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 33 : 328 – 334 , 2005 . 85 . Kotton DN , Ma BY , Cardoso WV , Sanderson EA , Summer RS , Williams MC , Fine A . Bone marrow - derived cells as progenitors of lung alveolar epithelium . Development 128 : 5181 – 5188 , 2001 . 86 . Krause DS . Bone marrow - derived cells and stem cells in lung repair . Proc Am Thorac Soc 5 : 323 – 327 , 2008 . 87 . Lai JP , Dalton JT , Knoell DL . Phosphatase and tensin homologue deleted on chromosome ten ( PTEN ) as a molecular target in lung epithelial wound repair . Br J Pharmacol 152 : 1172 – 1184 , 2007 . 88 . Lauffenburger DA , Horwitz AF . Cell migration : a physically integrated molecular process . Cell 84 : 359 – 369 , 1996 . 89 . Lazar MH , Christensen PJ , Du M , Yu B , Subbotina NM , Hanson KE , Hansen JM , White ES , Simon RH , Sisson TH . Plasminogen activator inhibitor - 1 impairs alveolar epithelial repair by binding to vitronectin . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 31 : 672 – 678 , 2004 . 90 . Lechapt - Zalcman E , Pruliere - Escabasse V , Advenier D , Galiacy S , Charriere - Bertrand C , Coste A , Harf A , d’Ortho MP , Escudier E . Transforming growth factor - (cid:2) 1 increases airway wound repair via MMP - 2 upregulation : a new pathway for epithelial wound repair ? Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 290 : L1277 – L1282 , 2006 . 91 . Lee JW , Fang X , Gupta N , Serikov V , Matthay MA . Allogeneic human mesenchymal stem cells for treatment of E . coli endotoxin - induced acute lung injury in the ex vivo perfused human lung . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106 : 16357 – 16362 , 2009 . 92 . Lee JW , Gupta N , Serikov V , Matthay MA . Potential application of mesenchymal stem cells in acute lung injury . Expert Opin Biol Ther 9 : 1259 – 1270 , 2009 . 93 . Lee YH , Suzuki YJ , Grifﬁn AJ , Day RM . Hepatocyte growth factor regulates cyclooxygenase - 2 expression via (cid:2) - catenin , Akt , and p42 / p44 MAPK in human bronchial epithelial cells . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 294 : L778 – L786 , 2008 . 94 . Legrand C , Polette M , Tournier JM , de Bentzmann S , Huet E , Monteau M , Birembaut P . uPA / plasmin system - mediated MMP - 9 activation is implicated in bronchial epithelial cell migration . Exp Cell Res 264 : 326 – 336 , 2001 . 95 . Leslie CC , McCormick - Shannon K , Shannon JM , Garrick B , Damm D , Abraham JA , Mason RJ . Heparin - binding EGF - like growth factor is a mitogen for rat alveolar type II cells . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 16 : 379 – 387 , 1997 . 96 . Lesur O , Arsalane K , Lane D . Lung alveolar epithelial cell migration in vitro : modulators and regulation processes . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 270 : L311 – L319 , 1996 . 97 . Lesur O , Brisebois M , Thibodeau A , Chagnon F , Lane D , Fullop T . Role of IFN - gamma and IL - 2 in rat lung epithelial cell migration and apoptosis after oxidant injury . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 286 : L4 – L14 , 2004 . 98 . Liebler JM , Lutzko C , Banfalvi A , Senadheera D , Aghamohammadi N , Crandall ED , Borok Z . Retention of human bone marrow - derived cells in murine lungs following bleomycin - induced lung injury . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 295 : L285 – L292 , 2008 . 99 . Liu X , Engelhardt JF . The glandular stem / progenitor cell niche in airway development and repair . Proc Am Thorac Soc 5 : 682 – 688 , 2008 . 100 . Lloyd CM , Saglani S . Asthma and allergy : the emerging epithelium . Nat Med 16 : 273 – 274 , 2010 . 101 . Lotz MM , Rabinovitz I , Mercurio AM . Intestinal restitution : progres - sion of actin cytoskeleton rearrangements and integrin function in a model of epithelial wound healing . Am J Pathol 156 : 985 – 996 , 2000 . 102 . Maquerlot F , Galiacy S , Malo M , Guignabert C , Lawrence DA , d’Ortho MP , Barlovatz - Meimon G . Dual role for plasminogen activa - tor inhibitor type 1 as soluble and as matricellular regulator of epithelial alveolar cell wound healing . Am J Pathol 169 : 1624 – 1632 , 2006 . 103 . Marsh LM , Cakarova L , Kwapiszewska G , von Wulffen W , Herold S , Seeger W , Lohmeyer J . Surface expression of CD74 by type II alveolar epithelial cells : a potential mechanism for macrophage migration inhibitory factor - induced epithelial repair . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 296 : L442 – L452 , 2009 . 104 . Mason RJ , Leslie CC , McCormick - Shannon K , Deterding RR , Na - kamura T , Rubin JS , Shannon JM . Hepatocyte growth factor is a growth factor for rat alveolar type II cells . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 11 : 561 – 567 , 1994 . Review L728 LUNG WOUND HEALING AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol • VOL 298 • JUNE 2010 • www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on A ugu s t 6 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 105 . Mason RJ , Williams MC . Type II alveolar cell . Defender of the alveolus . Am Rev Respir Dis 115 : 81 – 91 , 1977 . 106 . Mason RJ , Williams MC , Greenleaf RD , Clements JA . Isolation and properties of type II alveolar cells from rat lung . Am Rev Respir Dis 115 : 1015 – 1026 , 1977 . 107 . McGuire JK , Li Q , Parks WC . Matrilysin ( matrix metalloproteinase - 7 ) mediates E - cadherin ectodomain shedding in injured lung epithelium . Am J Pathol 162 : 1831 – 1843 , 2003 . 108 . Mikels AJ , Nusse R . Puriﬁed Wnt5a protein activates or inhibits beta - catenin - TCF signaling depending on receptor context . PLoS Biol 4 : e115 , 2006 . 109 . Mucenski ML , Nation JM , Thitoff AR , Besnard V , Xu Y , Wert SE , Harada N , Taketo MM , Stahlman MT , Whitsett JA . (cid:2) - Catenin regulates differentiation of respiratory epithelial cells in vivo . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 289 : L971 – L979 , 2005 . 110 . Mucenski ML , Wert SE , Nation JM , Loudy DE , Huelsken J , Birch - meier W , Morrisey EE , Whitsett JA . (cid:2) - Catenin is required for speci - ﬁcation of proximal / distal cell fate during lung morphogenesis . J Biol Chem 278 : 40231 – 40238 , 2003 . 111 . Myerburg MM , Latoche JD , McKenna EE , Stabile LP , Siegfried JS , Feghali - Bostwick CA , Pilewski JM . Hepatocyte growth factor and other ﬁbroblast secretions modulate the phenotype of human bronchial epithelial cells . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 292 : L1352 – L1360 , 2007 . 112 . Neurohr C , Nishimura SL , Sheppard D . Activation of transforming growth factor - beta by the integrin alphavbeta8 delays epithelial wound closure . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 35 : 252 – 259 , 2006 . 113 . Olsen CE , Liguori AE , Zong Y , Lantz RC , Burgess JL , Boitano S . Arsenic upregulates MMP - 9 and inhibits wound repair in human airway epithelial cells . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 295 : L293 – L302 , 2008 . 114 . Ortiz LA , Gambelli F , McBride C , Gaupp D , Baddoo M , Kaminski N , Phinney DG . Mesenchymal stem cell engraftment in lung is enhanced in response to bleomycin exposure and ameliorates its ﬁbrotic effects . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100 : 8407 – 8411 , 2003 . 115 . Panos RJ , Bak PM , Simonet WS , Rubin JS , Smith LJ . Intratracheal instillation of keratinocyte growth factor decreases hyperoxia - induced mortality in rats . J Clin Invest 96 : 2026 – 2033 , 1995 . 117 . Panos RJ , Patel R , Bak PM . Intratracheal administration of hepatocyte growth factor / scatter factor stimulates rat alveolar type II cell prolifera - tion in vivo . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 15 : 574 – 581 , 1996 . 118 . Panos RJ , Rubin JS , Csaky KG , Aaronson SA , Mason RJ . Keratino - cyte growth factor and hepatocyte growth factor / scatter factor are hepa - rin - binding growth factors for alveolar type II cells in ﬁbroblast - condi - tioned medium . J Clin Invest 92 : 969 – 977 , 1993 . 119 . Park KS , Wells JM , Zorn AM , Wert SE , Laubach VE , Fernandez LG , Whitsett JA . Transdifferentiation of ciliated cells during repair of the respiratory epithelium . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 34 : 151 – 157 , 2006 . 120 . Parks WC , Lopez - Boado YS , Wilson CL . Matrilysin in epithelial repair and defense . Chest 120 : 36S – 41S , 2001 . 121 . Perrio MJ , Ewen D , Trevethick MA , Salmon GP , Shute JK . Fibrin formation by wounded bronchial epithelial cell layers in vitro is essential for normal epithelial repair and independent of plasma proteins . Clin Exp Allergy 37 : 1688 – 1700 , 2007 . 122 . Pilewski JM , Latoche JD , Arcasoy SM , Albelda SM . Expression of integrin cell adhesion receptors during human airway epithelial repair in vivo . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 273 : L256 – L263 , 1997 . 123 . Planus E , Galiacy S , Matthay M , Laurent V , Gavrilovic J , Murphy G , Clerici C , Isabey D , Lafuma C , d’Ortho MP . Role of collagenase in mediating in vitro alveolar epithelial wound repair . J Cell Sci 112 : 243 – 252 , 1999 . 124 . Pongracz JE , Stockley RA . Wnt signalling in lung development and diseases . Respir Res 7 : 15 , 2006 . 125 . Puchelle E , Zahm JM , Tournier JM , Coraux C . Airway epithelial repair , regeneration , and remodeling after injury in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease . Proc Am Thorac Soc 3 : 726 – 733 , 2006 . 126 . Puddicombe SM , Polosa R , Richter A , Krishna MT , Howarth PH , Holgate ST , Davies DE . Involvement of the epidermal growth factor receptor in epithelial repair in asthma . FASEB J 14 : 1362 – 1374 , 2000 . 127 . Qiao R , Yan W , Clavijo C , Mehrian - Shai R , Zhong Q , Kim KJ , Ann D , Crandall ED , Borok Z . Effects of KGF on alveolar epithelial cell transdifferentiation are mediated by JNK signaling . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 38 : 239 – 246 , 2008 . 128 . Quesnel C , Marchand - Adam S , Fabre A , Marchal - Somme J , Philip I , Lasocki S , Lecon V , Crestani B , Dehoux M . Regulation of hepato - cyte growth factor secretion by ﬁbroblasts in patients with acute lung injury . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 294 : L334 – L343 , 2008 . 129 . Randell SH . Airway epithelial stem cells and the pathophysiology of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease . Proc Am Thorac Soc 3 : 718 – 725 , 2006 . 130 . Rawlins EL , Ostrowski LE , Randell SH , Hogan BL . Lung develop - ment and repair : contribution of the ciliated lineage . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104 : 410 – 417 , 2007 . 131 . Reader JR , Tepper JS , Schelegle ES , Aldrich MC , Putney LF , Pfeiffer JW , Hyde DM . Pathogenesis of mucous cell metaplasia in a murine asthma model . Am J Pathol 162 : 2069 – 2078 , 2003 . 132 . Rennard SI , Togo S , Holz O . Cigarette smoke inhibits alveolar repair : a mechanism for the development of emphysema . Proc Am Thorac Soc 3 : 703 – 708 , 2006 . 133 . Reya T , Clevers H . Wnt signalling in stem cells and cancer . Nature 434 : 843 – 850 , 2005 . 134 . Reynolds SD , Giangreco A , Power JH , Stripp BR . Neuroepithelial bodies of pulmonary airways serve as a reservoir of progenitor cells capable of epithelial regeneration . Am J Pathol 156 : 269 – 278 , 2000 . 135 . Reynolds SD , Hong KU , Giangreco A , Mango GW , Guron C , Mo - rimoto Y , Stripp BR . Conditional clara cell ablation reveals a self - renewing progenitor function of pulmonary neuroendocrine cells . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 278 : L1256 – L1263 , 2000 . 136 . Reynolds SD , Reynolds PR , Snyder JC , Whyte F , Paavola KJ , Stripp BR . CCSP regulates cross talk between secretory cells and both ciliated cells and macrophages of the conducting airway . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 293 : L114 – L123 , 2007 . 137 . Reynolds SD , Zemke AC , Giangreco A , Brockway BL , Teisanu RM , Drake JA , Mariani T , Di PY , Taketo MM , Stripp BR . Conditional stabilization of beta - catenin expands the pool of lung stem cells . Stem Cells 26 : 1337 – 1346 , 2008 . 138 . Ridge KM , Rutschman DH , Factor P , Katz AI , Bertorello AM , Sznajder JL . Differential expression of Na - K - ATPase isoforms in rat alveolar epithelial cells . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 273 : L246 – L255 , 1997 . 139 . Ridley AJ , Schwartz MA , Burridge K , Firtel RA , Ginsberg MH , Borisy G , Parsons JT , Horwitz AR . Cell migration : integrating signals from front to back . Science 302 : 1704 – 1709 , 2003 . 140 . Robinson DS , Hamid Q , Ying S , Tsicopoulos A , Barkans J , Bentley AM , Corrigan C , Durham SR , Kay AB . Predominant TH2 - like bron - choalveolar T - lymphocyte population in atopic asthma . N Engl J Med 326 : 298 – 304 , 1992 . 141 . Rock JR , Onaitis MW , Rawlins EL , Lu Y , Clark CP , Xue Y , Randell SH , Hogan BL . Basal cells as stem cells of the mouse trachea and human airway epithelium . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106 : 12771 – 12775 , 2009 . 142 . Rottner K , Hall A , Small JV . Interplay between Rac and Rho in the control of substrate contact dynamics . Curr Biol 9 : 640 – 648 , 1999 . 143 . Ryan RM , Mineo - Kuhn MM , Kramer CM , Finkelstein JN . Growth factors alter neonatal type II alveolar epithelial cell proliferation . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 266 : L17 – L22 , 1994 . 144 . Savla U , Appel HJ , Sporn PH , Waters CM . Prostaglandin E ( 2 ) regulates wound closure in airway epithelium . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 280 : L421 – L431 , 2001 . 146 . Savla U , Olson LE , Waters CM . Mathematical modeling of airway epithelial wound closure during cyclic mechanical strain . J Appl Physiol 96 : 566 – 574 , 2004 . 147 . Savla U , Waters CM . Barrier function of airway epithelium : effects of radiation and protection by keratinocyte growth factor . Radiat Res 150 : 195 – 203 , 1998 . 148 . Savla U , Waters CM . Mechanical strain inhibits repair of airway epithelium in vitro . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 274 : L883 – L892 , 1998 . 150 . Schnackenberg BJ , Jones SM , Pate C , Shank B , Sessions L , Pittman LM , Cornett LE , Kurten RC . The (cid:2) - agonist isoproterenol attenuates EGF - stimulated wound closure in human airway epithelial cells . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 290 : L485 – L491 , 2006 . 151 . Schoch KG , Lori A , Burns KA , Eldred T , Olsen JC , Randell SH . A subset of mouse tracheal epithelial basal cells generates large colonies in vitro . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 286 : L631 – L642 , 2004 . 152 . Shahabuddin S , Ji R , Wang P , Brailoiu E , Dun N , Yang Y , Aksoy MO , Kelsen SG . CXCR3 chemokine receptor - induced chemotaxis in Review L729 LUNG WOUND HEALING AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol • VOL 298 • JUNE 2010 • www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on A ugu s t 6 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m human airway epithelial cells : role of p38 MAPK and PI3K signaling pathways . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 291 : C34 – C39 , 2006 . 153 . Simonet WS , DeRose ML , Bucay N , Nguyen HQ , Wert SE , Zhou L , Ulich TR , Thomason A , Danilenko DM , Whitsett JA . Pulmonary malformation in transgenic mice expressing human keratinocyte growth factor in the lung . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92 : 12461 – 12465 , 1995 . 154 . Small JV , Kaverina I , Krylyshkina O , Rottner K . Cytoskeleton cross - talk during cell motility . FEBS Lett 452 : 96 – 99 , 1999 . 155 . Spees JL , Olson SD , Ylostalo J , Lynch PJ , Smith J , Perry A , Peister A , Wang MY , Prockop DJ . Differentiation , cell fusion , and nuclear fusion during ex vivo repair of epithelium by human adult stem cells from bone marrow stroma . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100 : 2397 – 2402 , 2003 . 156 . Spurzem JR , Gupta J , Veys T , Kneiﬂ KR , Rennard SI , Wyatt TA . Activation of protein kinase A accelerates bovine bronchial epithelial cell migration . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 282 : L1108 – L1116 , 2002 . 157 . Spurzem JR , Sacco O , Rickard KA , Rennard SI . Transforming growth factor - beta increases adhesion but not migration of bovine bron - chial epithelial cells to matrix proteins . J Lab Clin Med 122 : 92 – 102 , 1993 . 158 . Steiling K , Lenburg ME , Spira A . Airway gene expression in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease . Proc Am Thorac Soc 6 : 697 – 700 , 2009 . 159 . Stevens PT , Kicic A , Sutanto EN , Knight DA , Stick SM . Dysregulated repair in asthmatic paediatric airway epithelial cells : the role of plasmin - ogen activator inhibitor - 1 . Clin Exp Allergy 38 : 1901 – 1910 , 2008 . 160 . Strieter RM . What differentiates normal lung repair and ﬁbrosis ? In - ﬂammation , resolution of repair , and ﬁbrosis . Proc Am Thorac Soc 5 : 305 – 310 , 2008 . 161 . Stripp BR , Reynolds SD . Maintenance and repair of the bronchiolar epithelium . Proc Am Thorac Soc 5 : 328 – 333 , 2008 . 162 . Takami K , Takuwa N , Okazaki H , Kobayashi M , Ohtoshi T , Ka - wasaki S , Dohi M , Yamamoto K , Nakamura T , Tanaka M , Nakahara K , Takuwa Y , Takizawa H . Interferon - gamma inhibits hepatocyte growth factor - stimulated cell proliferation of human bronchial epithelial cells : upregulation of p27 ( kip1 ) cyclin - dependent kinase inhibitor . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 26 : 231 – 238 , 2002 . 163 . Ten Have - Opbroek AA . Immunological study of lung development in the mouse embryo . II . First appearance of the great alveolar cell , as shown by immunoﬂuorescence microscopy . Dev Biol 69 : 408 – 423 , 1979 . 164 . Trinh NT , Prive A , Kheir L , Bourret JC , Hijazi T , Amraei MG , Noel J , Brochiero E . Involvement of K ATP and KvLQT1 K (cid:5) channels in EGF - stimulated alveolar epithelial cell repair processes . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 293 : L870 – L882 , 2007 . 165 . Trinh NT , Prive A , Maille E , Noel J , Brochiero E . EGF and K (cid:5) channel activity control normal and cystic ﬁbrosis bronchial epithelia repair . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 295 : L866 – L880 , 2008 . 166 . Tschumperlin DJ , Oswari J , Margulies AS . Deformation - induced injury of alveolar epithelial cells . Effect of frequency , duration , and amplitude . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 162 : 357 – 362 , 2000 . 167 . Tyner JW , Kim EY , Ide K , Pelletier MR , Roswit WT , Morton JD , Battaile JT , Patel AC , Patterson GA , Castro M , Spoor MS , You Y , Brody SL , Holtzman MJ . Blocking airway mucous cell metaplasia by inhibiting EGFR antiapoptosis and IL - 13 transdifferentiation signals . J Clin Invest 116 : 309 – 321 , 2006 . 168 . Ulich TR , Yi ES , Longmuir K , Yin S , Biltz R , Morris CF , Housley RM , Pierce GF . Keratinocyte growth factor is a growth factor for type II pneumocytes in vivo . J Clin Invest 93 : 1298 – 1306 , 1994 . 169 . Upadhyay D , Bundesmann M , Panduri V , Correa - Meyer E , Kamp DW . Fibroblast growth factor - 10 attenuates H2O2 - induced alveolar epithelial cell DNA damage : role of MAPK activation and DNA repair . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 31 : 107 – 113 , 2004 . 170 . Upadhyay D , Correa - Meyer E , Sznajder JI , Kamp DW . FGF - 10 prevents mechanical stretch - induced alveolar epithelial cell DNA dam - age via MAPK activation . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 284 : L350 – L359 , 2003 . 171 . Van Winkle LS , Isaac JM , Plopper CG . Distribution of epidermal growth factor receptor and ligands during bronchiolar epithelial repair from naphthalene - induced Clara cell injury in the mouse . Am J Pathol 151 : 443 – 459 , 1997 . 172 . Verghese GM , McCormick - Shannon K , Mason RJ , Matthay MA . Hepatocyte growth factor and keratinocyte growth factor in the pulmo - nary edema ﬂuid of patients with acute lung injury . Biologic and clinical signiﬁcance . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 158 : 386 – 394 , 1998 . 173 . Vlahakis NE , Schroeder MA , Pagano RE , Hubmayr RD . Deforma - tion - induced lipid trafﬁcking in alveolar epithelial cells . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 280 : L938 – L946 , 2001 . 174 . Vlahakis NE , Schroeder MA , Pagano RE , Hubmayr RD . Role of deformation - induced lipid trafﬁcking in the prevention of plasma mem - brane stress failure . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 166 : 1282 – 1289 , 2002 . 175 . Wagh AA , Roan E , Chapman KE , Desai LP , Rendon DA , Eckstein EC , Waters CM . Localized elasticity measured in epithelial cells mi - grating at a wound edge using atomic force microscopy . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 295 : L54 – L60 , 2008 . 177 . Wang G , Bunnell BA , Painter RG , Quiniones BC , Tom S , Lanson NA Jr , Spees JL , Bertucci D , Peister A , Weiss DJ , Valentine VG , Prockop DJ , Kolls JK . Adult stem cells from bone marrow stroma differentiate into airway epithelial cells : potential therapy for cystic ﬁbrosis . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102 : 186 – 191 , 2005 . 178 . Warburton D , Perin L , Deﬁlippo R , Bellusci S , Shi W , Driscoll B . Stem / progenitor cells in lung development , injury repair , and regenera - tion . Proc Am Thorac Soc 5 : 703 – 706 , 2008 . 179 . Ware LB , Matthay MA . The acute respiratory distress syndrome . N Engl J Med 342 : 1334 – 1349 , 2000 . 180 . Ware LB , Matthay MA . Keratinocyte and hepatocyte growth factors in the lung : roles in lung development , inﬂammation , and repair . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 282 : L924 – L940 , 2002 . 181 . Waters CM , Savla U . Keratinocyte growth factor accelerates wound closure in airway epithelium during cyclic mechanical strain . J Cell Physiol 181 : 424 – 432 , 1999 . 182 . Waters CM , Savla U , Panos RJ . KGF prevents hydrogen peroxide - induced increases in airway epithelial cell permeability . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 272 : L681 – L689 , 1997 . 183 . Watkins DN , Berman DM , Burkholder SG , Wang B , Beachy PA , Baylin SB . Hedgehog signalling within airway epithelial progenitors and in small - cell lung cancer . Nature 422 : 313 – 317 , 2003 . 184 . Wesley UV , Bove PF , Hristova M , McCarthy S , van der Vliet A . Airway epithelial cell migration and wound repair by ATP - mediated activation of dual oxidase 1 . J Biol Chem 282 : 3213 – 3220 , 2007 . 185 . White SR , Dorscheid DR , Rabe KF , Wojcik KR , Hamann KJ . Role of very late adhesion integrins in mediating repair of human airway epithelial cell monolayers after mechanical injury . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 20 : 787 – 796 , 1999 . 186 . White SR , Fischer BM , Marroquin BA , Stern R . Interleukin - 1 (cid:2) mediates human airway epithelial cell migration via NF - (cid:7) B . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 295 : L1018 – L1027 , 2008 . 187 . White SR , Martin LD , Abe MK , Marroquin BA , Stern R , Fu X . Insulin receptor substrate - 1 / 2 mediates IL - 4 - induced migration of human airway epithelial cells . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 297 : L164 – L173 , 2009 . 188 . White SR , Tse R , Marroquin BA . Stress - activated protein kinases mediate cell migration in human airway epithelial cells . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 32 : 301 – 310 , 2005 . 189 . White SR , Wojcik KR , Gruenert D , Sun S , Dorscheid DR . Airway epithelial cell wound repair mediated by alpha - dystroglycan . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 24 : 179 – 186 , 2001 . 190 . Willert K , Brown JD , Danenberg E , Duncan AW , Weissman IL , Reya T , Yates JR 3rd , Nusse R . Wnt proteins are lipid - modiﬁed and can act as stem cell growth factors . Nature 423 : 448 – 452 , 2003 . 191 . Willis BC , Borok Z . TGF - (cid:2) - induced EMT : mechanisms and implica - tions for ﬁbrotic lung disease . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 293 : L525 – L534 , 2007 . 192 . Wills - Karp M , Luyimbazi J , Xu X , Schoﬁeld B , Neben TY , Karp CL , Donaldson DD . Interleukin - 13 : central mediator of allergic asthma . Science 282 : 2258 – 2261 , 1998 . 193 . Wong AP , Keating A , Lu WY , Duchesneau P , Wang X , Sacher A , Hu J , Waddell TK . Identiﬁcation of a bone marrow - derived epithelial - like population capable of repopulating injured mouse airway epithelium . J Clin Invest 119 : 336 – 348 , 2009 . 194 . Xu J , Woods CR , Mora AL , Joodi R , Brigham KL , Iyer S , Rojas M . Prevention of endotoxin - induced systemic response by bone marrow - derived mesenchymal stem cells in mice . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 293 : L131 – L141 , 2007 . 195 . Yano T , Mason RJ , Pan T , Deterding RR , Nielsen LD , Shannon JM . KGF regulates pulmonary epithelial proliferation and surfactant protein gene expression in adult rat lung . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 279 : L1146 – L1158 , 2000 . Review L730 LUNG WOUND HEALING AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol • VOL 298 • JUNE 2010 • www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on A ugu s t 6 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 196 . Yee M , Vitiello PF , Roper JM , Staversky RJ , Wright TW , McGrath - Morrow SA , Maniscalco WM , Finkelstein JN , O’Reilly MA . Type II epithelial cells are critical target for hyperoxia - mediated impairment of postnatal lung development . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 291 : L1101 – L1111 , 2006 . 197 . Yu H , Konigshoff M , Jayachandran A , Handley D , Seeger W , Kaminski N , Eickelberg O . Transgelin is a direct target of TGF - beta / Smad3 - dependent epithelial cell migration in lung ﬁbrosis . FASEB J 22 : 1778 – 1789 , 2008 . 198 . Zahm JM , Chevillard M , Puchelle E . Wound repair of human surface respiratory epithelium . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 5 : 242 – 248 , 1991 . 199 . Zahm JM , Debordeaux C , Raby B , Klossek JM , Bonnet N , Puchelle E . Motogenic effect of recombinant HGF on airway epithelial cells during the in vitro wound repair of the respiratory epithelium . J Cell Physiol 185 : 447 – 453 , 2000 . 200 . Zahm JM , Kaplan H , Herard AL , Doriot F , Pierrot D , Somelette P , Puchelle E . Cell migration and proliferation during the in vitro wound repair of the respiratory epithelium . Cell Motil Cytoskel 37 : 33 – 43 , 1997 . 201 . Zahm JM , Pierrot D , Chevillard M , Puchelle E . Dynamics of cell movement during the wound repair of human surface respiratory epithe - lium . Biorheology 29 : 459 – 465 , 1992 . 202 . Zemke AC , Teisanu RM , Giangreco A , Drake JA , Brockway BL , Reynolds SD , Stripp BR . (cid:2) - Catenin is not necessary for maintenance or repair of the bronchiolar epithelium . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 41 : 535 – 543 , 2009 . 203 . Zhu M , Tian D , Li J , Ma Y , Wang Y , Wu R . Glycogen synthase kinase 3beta and beta - catenin are involved in the injury and repair of bronchial epithelial cells induced by scratching . Exp Mol Pathol 83 : 30 – 38 , 2007 . Review L731 LUNG WOUND HEALING AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol • VOL 298 • JUNE 2010 • www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on A ugu s t 6 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m