ANRV381 - SO35 - 03 ARI 17 March 2009 22 : 6 R E V I E W S I N A D V A N C E Interdisciplinarity : A Critical Assessment Jerry A . Jacobs 1 and Scott Frickel 2 1 Department of Sociology , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania 19104 ; email : jjacobs @ sas . upenn . edu 2 Department of Sociology , Washington State University , Pullman , Washington 99164 ; email : frickel @ wsu . edu Annu . Rev . Sociol . 2009 . 35 : 43 – 65 The Annual Review of Sociology is online at soc . annualreviews . org This article’s doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev - soc - 070308 - 115954 Copyright c (cid:2) 2009 by Annual Reviews . All rights reserved 0360 - 0572 / 09 / 0811 - 0043 $ 20 . 00 Key Words academic disciplines , interdisciplinary research , cross - disciplinary communication , knowledge diffusion , knowledge integration Abstract This article draws together disparate research and theorizing on inter - disciplinarity . We ﬁrst describe widespread efforts to promote interdis - ciplinarity in U . S . universities and critically examine the assumptions underlying these initiatives . Next , we present a cross - sectional view of interdisciplinary communication , knowledge diffusion , research assess - ment , and interdisciplinary research centers . We then describe research and theories that provide historical perspectives on the disciplinary sys - tem , interdiscipline formation , applied and professional ﬁelds , and in - stitutional fragmentation . We present original ﬁndings on the preva - lence of research centers , faculty hiring patterns in hybrid ﬁelds , and the diffusion of research across disciplines in the humanities and social sciences . The review concludes with a critical summary and suggestions for future research . 43 Review in Advance first posted online on April 2 , 200 9 . ( Minor changes may still occur before final publication online and in print . ) A nnu . R e v . S o c i o l . 2009 . 35 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O h i o S t a t e U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y on 05 / 04 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV381 - SO35 - 03 ARI 17 March 2009 22 : 6 INTRODUCTION In this article , we critically examine the status of claims underlying recent efforts to promote interdisciplinarity , which we deﬁne as commu - nication and collaboration across academic dis - ciplines . In recent years , numerous efforts to promote interdisciplinary scholarship and re - search have been advanced by academics and university administrators . For example , there havebeencallsformoreinterdisciplinaryschol - arship in such diverse social policy arenas as international migration ( Boomes & Morawska 2005 ) , leisure studies ( Mair 2006 ) , obesity ( Tifﬁn et al . 2006 ) , poverty ( Hulme & Toye 2006 ) , and public health ( von Lengerke 2006 ) , as well as emerging natural science research ar - eas such as nanotechnology ( Schummer 2004 ) and neurosciences ( Toescu 2005 ) . The literature invoking interdisciplinarity as a topic for theory , research , education , and policy is vast . The breadth of this intellectual terrain is suggested by the forthcoming Oxford Handbook on Interdisciplinarity ( Frodeman et al . 2009 ) . This hefty volume , which promises 42 stand - alone chapters ranging from the physical and life sciences to ethics and design , conﬁrms the premise that academic interest in interdis - ciplinarity is broad based . The literature is top - ically diverse as well , with discussions ranging from interdisciplinary pedagogy ( Lattuca 2001 , Mansilla & Duraising 2007 ) to interdisciplinary knowledge practices ( Galison & Stump 1996 , Weingart & Stehr 2000 ) and interdisciplinary epistemologies and formal theory construction ( Faber & Schepper1997 , Fuller2004 ) , aswellas observations on interdisciplinarity as a histori - cal , political , and economic subject ( e . g . , Klein 1990 , Nowotny et al . 2001 , Shinn 1999 ; see also Weingart 2000 , Klein 2000 , Hackett 2000 , Kockelmans 1979 , Newell 1998 , Berkenkotter 1995 ) . Among sociologists , interdisciplinarity is lauded as an ideal , scorned as a threat , and em - braced as a practice . Scholars have commented on and mapped sociology’s historical relation - ships with neighboring disciplines ( Calhoun 1996 , Camic 1995 ) , chronicled the mounting insularity of the discipline with the rise of sociological positivism in the 1950s ( Steinmetz 2007 ) , and charted more recent sociological contributions to interdisciplinary scholarship across a wide range of areas of inquiry ( Smelser 2003 , Collins 2007 ) . Reviews that have ap - peared in the Annual Review of Sociology have touched on issues related to interdisciplinarity but have not tackled this topic directly . Essays on the sociology of knowledge ( Swidler & Arditi 1994 ) and scientiﬁc knowledge ( Shapin 1995 ) , the knowledge economy ( Powell & Snellman 2004 ) , and the nature of social and cultural boundaries ( Lamont & Molnar 2002 ) bear on the topic of interdisciplinarity and its implications for sociological research , yet none attend explicitly to interdisciplinarity as such . Instead , these essays provide discus - sions of phenomena presumably constitutive of interdisciplinarity—such as hybridity or boundary crossing—but without drawing close connections to the broader set of processes that produce and transform relationships among academic disciplines . The widespread attention that administra - tors , funders , and faculty alike are giving to interdisciplinarity—and the intensity of the de - bates that attention has generated—is striking given the fact that relatively little research on many of the underlying issues has been con - ducted . As a result , we are skeptical of a number of the assumptions advanced by advocates of in - terdisciplinarity , and we caution against a major reorganizationofacademicﬁeldswithoutasub - stantiallystrongercasebeingmadeonboththe - oretical and empirical grounds . We point out a number of areas where the critique of existing disciplines is not consistent with the available research and point to many topics that warrant further inquiry . This review is organized into four main parts . First , we highlight current interdisci - plinary research and scholarship initiatives and identify the major assumptions that underlie those initiatives . Next , we take a contemporary or cross - sectional view of the connections between disciplines , assessing the empirical case for interdisciplinarity as it relates to 44 Jacobs · Frickel A nnu . R e v . S o c i o l . 2009 . 35 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O h i o S t a t e U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y on 05 / 04 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV381 - SO35 - 03 ARI 17 March 2009 22 : 6 communication and knowledge diffusion patterns , the assessment of interdisciplinary research , and the institutionalizing role of interdisciplinary research centers . The third part introduces a set of longer - term historical perspectives and questions that focus on the disciplinary system , interdiscipline formation , the rise of applied and professional ﬁelds , and institutional fragmentation . The fourth part draws together these ﬁndings and charts a research agenda on the determinants and consequences of interdisciplinarity . This review focuses primarily on issues re - lated to academic interdisciplinary research and touches on issues of undergraduate education and cultural practices of scientiﬁc work only tangentially . Given the breadth of the poten - tiallyrelevantliteratures , ourtreatmentofthese issues is necessarily selective . Our review does not cover the substance of interdisciplinary re - search studies undertaken by sociologists—for example , we do not review sociobiological work that combines genetics and social demographic or health data ( e . g . , Bearman et al . 2008 ) or re - search by environmental sociologists on cou - pled human and natural systems ( e . g . , Dietz et al . 2009 ) . We also largely set aside questions of interorganizational research collaborations ( e . g . , Powell et al . 2005 ) . The literature we review is characterized by considerable terminological ambiguity . Some scholars draw clear distinctions between re - search that is cross - disciplinary or multidis - ciplinary ( contributions from two or more ﬁelds to a research problem ) , interdisciplinary or pluridisciplinary ( integration of knowledge originating in two or more ﬁelds ) , or trans - disciplinary ( knowledge produced jointly by disciplinary experts and social practitioners ) ( Aboelela et al . 2007 , Salter & Hearn 1996 ) . The underlying goal of these terms is to distin - guish between low , moderate , and high levels of interconnectedness or intellectual integra - tion . Others are more comfortable with looser distinctions . We count ourselves among the latter group and in this article use interdisci - plinary and interdisciplinarity as general terms for describing interrelationships among aca - demic disciplines . INTERDISCIPLINARYINITIATIVESANDUNDERLYINGASSUMPTIONS Top - Down and Bottom - Up Interdisciplinary Initiatives Recent efforts to promote interdisciplinary scholarship have come from numerous sources , including federal agencies , private foundations , and universities . They have taken several forms , including dedicated grant support , competition for seed projects , interdisciplinary training pro - grams , and hiring initiatives targeted at fac - ulty whose expertise spans traditional academic boundaries . Speciﬁcally , in 2006 , the National ScienceFoundation ( NSF ) setasidefundsforan interdisciplinary training program for graduate researchfellowscalledtheIntegrativeGraduate Education and Research Traineeship ( IGERT ) ( http : / / www . igert . org ) . In 2007 , the National Institutes of Health funded nine interdisci - plinary research consortia “as a means of in - tegrating aspects of different disciplines to ad - dress health challenges that have been resistant to traditional research approaches” ( National Institutes of Health 2007 ) . As part of its ongo - ing capital campaign , Stanford University seeks to raise $ 1 . 4 billion for multidisciplinary efforts “to seek solutions to the century’s most pressing global challenges” ( Strout 2006 ) . Since 2002 , theMellonFoundationNewDirectionsfellow - ships have offered faculty in the humanities and social sciences the opportunity to “acquire sys - tematic training outside their own disciplines” ( Mellon Foundation 2008 ) . In May 2008 , the UniversityofMichiganannouncedplanstohire 100 interdisciplinary faculty members over ﬁve years “in areas that advance interdisciplinary teaching and research” ( University of Michigan 2008 ) . These are not isolated developments . Brint ( 2005 ) carefully documents a growing empha - sis on interdisciplinary research initiatives by www . annualreviews . org • Interdisciplinarity 45 A nnu . R e v . S o c i o l . 2009 . 35 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O h i o S t a t e U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y on 05 / 04 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV381 - SO35 - 03 ARI 17 March 2009 22 : 6 university deans , presidents , and provosts , es - pecially at leading private research universities . Common initiatives in this push for interdisci - plinary creativity include hiring academic stars to promote interdisciplinary scholarship ; orga - nizing competitions for seed money for new , interdisciplinary initiatives ; and promoting cross - disciplinary training . Brint’s emphasis on government , foundation , and alumni funding highlights the importance of external ﬁnancial support of these top - down initiatives . He also acknowledges the intellectual ferment bubbling up from the ranks of the faculty whose break - through research is driving many of these de - velopments , especially in natural sciences . Although the impetus for interdisciplinary research appears to be driven primarily by uni - versity presidents , provosts , and deans , there is also broad acceptance of the value of interdis - ciplinary knowledge on the part of faculty . A recent national survey of 1353 college and uni - versity faculty found that 70 % agreed ( strongly or somewhat ) with the statement that “interdis - ciplinary knowledge is better than knowledge obtained by a single discipline” ( N . Gross & S . Simmons , personal communication ) . This view is shared by scholars in the humanities , social sciences , and natural sciences . Indeed , a majority of faculty in 19 of 21 ﬁelds agreed with this statement ; only mechanical engineers and economists disagreed . Economists’ skepticism of research from other disciplines is also evi - dent in their low rate of citation of other social science research ( Pieters & Baumgartner 2002 ) . The bottom - up push for more interdisci - plinarity has been accompanied by more dis - cussion of this topic in academic journals . As a rough indicator of the growth of scholarship in this area , we have charted the use of the term “interdisciplinary” in the titles of jour - nal articles , drawing on data from the Web of Science (cid:2) R . Nearly 8000 articles have been pub - lished to date using this term . As shown in Figure 1 , research in this area has grown rapidly since the 1990s . The upward trend is remarkably consistent over time ( see also Braun & Schubert 2003 ) . Table 1 displays the distribution of these articles by the academic discipline of the pub - lishing journal . There has been interest in in - terdisciplinary scholarship across a wide range of subject areas , from education to chemistry , 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 A nnu a l pub li ca t i on s Annual number of articles Running average Figure 1 Trends in articles with the term “interdisciplinary” in title , 1990 – 2007 . 46 Jacobs · Frickel A nnu . R e v . S o c i o l . 2009 . 35 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O h i o S t a t e U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y on 05 / 04 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV381 - SO35 - 03 ARI 17 March 2009 22 : 6 Table 1 Distribution of articles with the term “interdisciplinary” in title , by journal subject category Record count ( N = 7694 ) % Education and Educational Research 351 4 . 6 % Gerontology 347 4 . 5 % Medicine , general and internal 319 4 . 1 % Psychology , multidisciplinary 298 3 . 9 % Education , scientiﬁc disciplines 284 3 . 7 % Public , Environmental , and Occupational Health 270 3 . 5 % Rehabilitation 266 3 . 5 % Psychiatry 260 3 . 4 % History 257 3 . 3 % Sociology 228 3 . 0 % Multidisciplinary sciences 223 2 . 9 % Chemistry , multidisciplinary 218 2 . 8 % Information Science and Library Science 212 2 . 8 % Social Sciences , interdisciplinary 206 2 . 7 % Surgery 194 2 . 5 % Health Care Sciences and Services 186 2 . 4 % Oncology 174 2 . 3 % Nursing 170 2 . 2 % Literature 162 2 . 1 % Geriatrics and Gerontology 158 2 . 1 % Language and Linguistics 151 2 . 0 % Religion 148 1 . 9 % Clinical Neurology 147 1 . 9 % Psychology 142 1 . 8 % Philosophy 137 1 . 8 % Source : Thompson Scientiﬁc , 1956 – 2007 . ISI Web of Knowledge SM . Web of Science (cid:2) R . Science Citation Index . Philadelphia , PA : Thompson Scientiﬁc Corporation . Available online at http : / / isiknowledge . com . oncology , andphilosophy , asevidencedbythese data . Assumptions Underlying the Current Push for Interdisciplinarity Most advocates point to problem solving as the main promise of interdisciplinary research ( Klein 1990 , 1996 ; Frodeman & Mitcham 2007 ) . Whether basic or applied , interdisci - plinarity is supposed to integrate knowledge and solve problems that individual disciplines cannot solve alone . Despite its promise , advocates see numerous barriers impeding interdisciplinary research and scholarship ( National Academy of Sciences 2004 , pp . 30 – 39 ) . Epistemic barriers involve incom - patible styles of thought , research traditions , techniques , and language that are difﬁcult to translate across disciplinary domains . Disci - plinary structures reinforce these inefﬁciencies through specialized journals , conferences , and departments that route communication inward . Administrative barriers reinforce this intellectual balkanization . Thus , individual researchers must make extra effort and take on additional risk to pursue interdisciplinary research without the kind of support that www . annualreviews . org • Interdisciplinarity 47 A nnu . R e v . S o c i o l . 2009 . 35 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O h i o S t a t e U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y on 05 / 04 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV381 - SO35 - 03 ARI 17 March 2009 22 : 6 comes easily to researchers who remain within their home disciplines . The stakes are high and pressing . “To hinder [ interdisciplinary ] activity is to diminish our ability to address the great questions of science and to hesitate before the scientiﬁc and societal challenges of our time” ( National Academy of Sciences 2004 , p . 25 ) . This line of argument is grounded in a number of underlying assumptions about the nature of disciplines , research communities , universities , and knowledge : (cid:2) Interdisciplinary research has vast poten - tial for societal good in the form of new kinds of knowledge . (cid:2) More interdisciplinary research is better than less ; its growth is fundamental to the health of the scientiﬁc enterprise . (cid:2) Disciplines and the institutional policies that reinforce them represent major bar - riers to interdisciplinary research . (cid:2) Reducing those barriers will enhance conditions for the efﬁcient production of interdisciplinary knowledge . Although these assumptions are broadly shared by advocates of interdisciplinarity , rarely have they been subject to empirical investiga - tion . Case studies predominate in the empirical literature that does exist , many of which take the form of personal reﬂections ( e . g . , Salter & Hearns 1996 ) . In contrast , there are virtually no comparative studies that investigate how disciplinary and interdisciplinary relationships develop and whether the consequences of those collaborative outcomes are meaningfully dif - ferent . For example , there have been periodic efforts to promote interdisciplinary research dating back to the work of the Social Science Research Council in the 1920s , the Rockefeller Foundation in the 1930s , military science in the 1940s and 1950s , and applied social problems in the 1960s ( Klein 1990 , Pickering 1995 , Abir - Am 1988 ) . Yet the lessons from historical successes and failures are not systematically leveraged to clarify how current initiatives are similar to or different from those un - dertaken in earlier decades . As a result , the literature does not clearly establish the dual propositions that disciplines impede the development of knowledge and that inter - disciplinary knowledge is more valuable than that emerging from within disciplines . Some studies have highlighted the organizational and epistemological challenges experienced by interdisciplinary research collaborations ( e . g . , various chapters in Kockelmans 1979 and Weingart et al . 1997 ) . However , without comparative research designs it is not clear how many of these difﬁculties in collaboration are unique to cross - disciplinary teams . In other words , collaboration often involves the com - bination of researchers with complementary skill sets . As a result , even intradisciplinary collaborations may have their own challenges and result in different qualities of knowledge ( Moody 2004 ) . With these concerns in mind , we next bring some data on the contemporary situation to bear on the assumptions underlying the broad push for interdisciplinarity . INTERDISCIPLINARITY : A CROSS - SECTIONAL VIEW The Prevalence of Interdisciplinary Communication As we note above , an underlying assumption of advocates of interdisciplinarity is that dis - ciplines represent disconnected silos that in - hibit innovation and stiﬂe inquiry on topics outside the narrow conﬁnes of each discipline ( Bitner & Brown 2006 ; see also Campbell 1969 ) . Another image of science , however , em - phasizes the interconnectedness of academic scholarship : a web . This is the dominant metaphor in bibliometric research . Researchers examinepatternsofcitations , andotherties , be - tween scholarly research articles to reveal a web of connections between scholarly articles , with no discipline standing completely apart from the others . 1 Research nodes represent dense areas of connections within a broader map of 1 Recent advances in scholarly databases hold the promise of expanding this line of research to include books as well as articles ( Jacso 2005 ) . 48 Jacobs · Frickel A nnu . R e v . S o c i o l . 2009 . 35 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O h i o S t a t e U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y on 05 / 04 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV381 - SO35 - 03 ARI 17 March 2009 22 : 6 science ( Small 1999 , Small & Grifﬁth 1974 , Boyack et al . 2005 ) . Disciplines are located nearer or farther from each other based on the density of connections as indexed by coc - itations , that is , citations in common between articles . For example , Boyack et al . ’s ( 2005 ) ﬁnding that biochemistry ranks high on in - terdisciplinary connections is consistent with Whitley’s ( 1984 ) emphasis on interdisciplinar - ity in the laboratory - based natural sciences . The literature on citation patterns is large , with many substantive and technical issues , too large to be summarized here ( e . g . , Nicolaisen 2007 , Gmur 2003 ) . For our purposes , a central question is how common the connections are between disci - plines . The answer depends greatly on the level of aggregation of research specialties and the substantive distance between ﬁelds . Porter & Chubin ( 1985 ) ﬁnd relatively few citations in common between demography , operations research , and toxicology , which they view as evidence of the wide gulf between engineer - ing , the life sciences , and the social sciences . Van Leeuwen & Tijssen ( 2000 ) , however , re - port very extensive connections across ﬁelds . They classiﬁed 2314 journals into 119 disci - plines represented by ISI subject categories and report that most ( 69 % ) references are cross - disciplinary , that is , most references in a given journal are drawn from journals in other dis - ciplinary ﬁelds . This remarkably high rate of cross - disciplinary citation in part reﬂects the detailed journal classiﬁcation scheme they em - ploy . Had they grouped journals into 20 or 30 ﬁelds rather than 199 , van Leeuwen & Tijssen likely would have reported a lower rate of cross - disciplinary citations . Nonethe - less , their research ﬁts more closely with the “web of science” imagery than with the “iso - lated silos” assumption . Classifying references into 11 broad ﬁelds , the National Science Foundation ( 2000 ) re - ports cross - disciplinary citation rates ranging from highs of 38 . 3 % in biology and 34 . 5 % in psychology to lows of 18 . 3 % in physics and 16 . 8 % in earth science . The social sciences fall inthemiddle , with22 . 7 % ofreferencesdrawing from outside the social sciences . Delving within these 11 broad ﬁelds , the NSF data reveal that the social science ﬁeld that draws most heavily on research from other disciplines is area stud - ies , with a substantial majority ( 71 . 7 % ) of cita - tions coming from journals in other disciplines . Sociology falls in the middle with 48 . 5 % of ref - erences coming from outside sociology . In the social sciences , economics is the most insular , withonly18 . 7 % ofreferencesbasedonresearch outside of economics . Riniaetal . ( 2001 ) approachedtheissueofin - terdisciplinarity in terms of timing . They show that , in general , references to research within the discipline tend to be to more recent articles , whereas references outside the discipline tend to be more dated . They suggest that this ﬁnding is consistent with the diffusion of research from the home discipline outward to related ﬁelds . We were struck not by the existence of such a delay but by how small the differences typically are and by the fact that 4 of the 16 ﬁelds exam - ined cited literature outside the ﬁeld even faster than that within the ﬁeld . Thus , although studies of selected ﬁelds of - ten reveal notable barriers to communication ( e . g . , Howey et al . 1999 , Biehl et al . 2006 ) , the broader picture suggests a web of intellectual ties that connects ﬁelds across the natural and social sciences . What is not clear is what distin - guishes well - connected from poorly connected ﬁelds and what the optimum level of cross - disciplinary citation ought to be . Much of the disciplinary self - citation rates may reﬂect the nature of academic specialization rather than artiﬁcial barriers to communication posed by the disciplinary organization of academic de - partments . Without a standard for the “appro - priate”levelofcross - disciplinarycitation , advo - cates of interdisciplinarity can always complain thattheobservedlevelislowerthanitshouldbe . The Diffusion of Ideas Across Disciplines Studies of interdisciplinarity assume that there is little if any diffusion of ideas across disci - plinary boundaries , but as we note above , the www . annualreviews . org • Interdisciplinarity 49 A nnu . R e v . S o c i o l . 2009 . 35 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O h i o S t a t e U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y on 05 / 04 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV381 - SO35 - 03 ARI 17 March 2009 22 : 6 most inﬂuential statements on interdisciplinar - ity do not investigate this assumption . Rather than sum all citations by journal or discipline , as the studies noted above have done , we sought examples of the prevalence of speciﬁc ideas or terms in various ﬁelds . The data strongly support Crane’s ( 2008 ) contention that some concepts successfully diffuse across the human - ities and sometimes the social sciences as well . Table 2 presents data on the prevalence of the term “postmodern” in academic journal articles catalogedelectronicallybyThompsonISI . This term appears in thousands of journal articles spread across disciplines in the humanities ( e . g . , literature , religion , philosophy ) , the social sci - ences ( sociology , political science , psychology ) , as well as various applied ﬁelds such as educa - tion . This tabulation by no means captures the full range of diffusion of this term , given that the analysis focuses only on journal articles and omits books and other forms of writing . We examined the term postmodern as part of the article title and then broadened our search to include the term as a subject cate - gory for the article . The latter approach yields a slightlydifferentrankingofdisciplinesbutleads to the same substantive conclusion . Even in the specialized context of academic journal articles , the term postmodernism diffused broadly . In - deed , the concept appears in journals from over 100 disciplines . Because the term postmodern may mean different things to different scholars , we re - peated this analysis with a narrower term that is less vulnerable to this concern , namely Bruno Latour’s “actor - network theory . ” This term has been the subject of 317 journal articles . As is evident in Table 2 , this concept has diffused across a number of disciplines , from environ - mental science to sociology to economics . It appears in many other disciplinary journals as well , including anthropology , business , ethics , law , public health , and urban studies . We then analyzed citations to Latour’s two most inﬂuential books ( Laboratory Life , Latour & Woolgar [ 1979 ( 1986 ) ] , and Science in Action , Latour [ 1987 ] ) . Again , each book is different withaslightlydifferentsetofdisciplines , butthe Table 2 Diffusion of terms and concepts in the humanities and social sciences A . Presence of the term “postmodern” in the title of an academic journal article , by ﬁeld of journal ( 2282 entries total ) 1 . Literature 13 . 7 % 2 . Religion 11 . 0 3 . Sociology 7 . 3 4 . Humanities 6 . 5 ( multi - disciplinary journals ) 5 . Philosophy 6 . 1 6 . History 3 . 9 7 . Romance Literatures 3 . 9 8 . Education 3 . 6 9 . Political Science 3 . 3 10 . Linguistics 3 . 1 B . “Actor - network theory” as a title or subject area of an academic journal article , by ﬁeld of journal ( 389 articles total ) 1 . Geography 18 . 8 % 2 . Sociology 18 . 5 3 . Management 18 . 0 4 . Environmental Studies 8 . 7 5 . Information and Library Science 6 . 2 6 . Computer Science 5 . 7 7 . Social Science 5 . 7 ( multi - disciplinary journals ) 8 . History and Philosophy of Science 4 . 6 9 . Social Issues 3 . 6 10 . Economics 4 . 1 Source : Thompson Scientiﬁc , 1956 – 2007 . ISI Web of Knowledge SM . Web of Science (cid:2) R . Science Citation Index . Philadelphia , PA : Thompson Scientiﬁc Corporation . Available online at http : / / isiknowledge . com . same thrust remains : Latour’s work is discussed by researchers in many ﬁelds . Whether these concepts diffused too quickly ( becoming a fad ) or too slowly ( owing to unwarranted resistance ) is not something these data directly address . As - sessing this would require a baseline indicator of how much reception there should have been . Nonetheless , these data do appear to counter the simple assumption that ideas developed in one discipline are rarely adopted in another . 50 Jacobs · Frickel A nnu . R e v . S o c i o l . 2009 . 35 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O h i o S t a t e U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y on 05 / 04 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV381 - SO35 - 03 ARI 17 March 2009 22 : 6 The data on references to Latour can also be viewed as a case of the incorporation of in - terdisciplinary ideas into disciplinary contexts . Latour’s work is stridently and explicitly nondisciplinary or postdisciplinary . This case thus raises questions about whether the accep - tance of ideas by scholars and researchers de - pends on whether these ideas originate in a discipline or have an interdisciplinary origin . We repeated this analysis using the works of such prominent humanists as Lacan , Der - rida , and Foucault , along with prominent social scientists including Charles Tilly and Robert Putnam ( results not shown ) . Although each of theseauthorshasbeeninﬂuentialinasomewhat different set of disciplines , nonetheless each has been the subject of articles in many ﬁelds in the social sciences and humanities . Another common pattern of diffusion of ideas across disciplinary boundaries is in the area of methods , especially statistical tech - niques . For example , survival analysis is a sta - tistical technique that has been used in tens of thousands of published journal articles since the 1990s . These papers appeared in public health journals ; many types of medical journals , including oncology , cardiology , and surgery ; statistics journals ; computer science ; demogra - phy ; economics ; ecology ; andmanyotherﬁelds . In examining the spread of this powerful statis - tical technique , it is hard to see evidence of aca - demic silos impeding its diffusion . Is this diffu - sion too slow ? Perhaps , but it is hard to specify what the right rate of diffusion would be . Of course scholars in certain disciplines of - ten resist the ideas of those in other disciplines . One noted case involves the largely opposite explanations of improvements in health and declines in mortality advanced by McKeown and Preston . Thomas McKeown , a prominent British epidemiologist , argued that economic development was more important than med - ical advances or even public health measures in contributing to the advancement in human longevity ( McKeown 1976 ) . Samuel H . Preston ( 1975 ) , at nearly the same time , argued that economic development was less important than commonly thought and that public health measures were more important . It is commonly believedthatepidemiologistshavetendedtoac - cept McKeown’s side of the argument , whereas demographers have rallied to Preston’s posi - tion . In a 2007 symposium on his original 1975 paper , Preston ( 2007 ) notes one possible reason for the continued difference of opinion , namely that both studies were based on indirect evi - dence . Both scholars advanced their arguments largely by the process of eliminating alternative explanations rather than providing data directly supportingtheirconclusions . Ouranalysisofci - tation patterns suggests that both the Preston and McKeown papers were cited in journal ar - ticles in epidemiology , public health , demog - raphy , and other areas , and thus differences of opinion were not the result of lack of visibility of these studies . Is there a “citation penalty” for interdis - ciplinary research ? In other words , do schol - ars pay a price in terms of the recognition of their work by pursuing interdisciplinary top - ics ? Studies on this topic yield conﬂicting re - sults . For example , Levitt & Thelwall ( 2008 ) ﬁnd a disadvantage for interdisciplinary stud - ies in the natural sciences but not in the so - cial sciences . In contrast , Rinia et al . ( 2002 ) report no cost to interdisciplinary publications . The difference between these two arguments depends in large part on the status of interdis - ciplinary journals . If one adjusts for the rela - tively low status of interdisciplinary journals , as Rinia and colleagues did , then there is lit - tle or no additional penalty for interdisciplinary publications compared with similarly ranked disciplinary journals . However , advocates of interdisciplinarity might point out that there are relatively few interdisciplinary journals that haveobtainedhighstatus , thusinhibitingschol - ars from pursuing interdisciplinary research . The Assessment of Interdisciplinary Work A concern voiced by many academic commen - tators is that interdisciplinary work is too of - ten the product of “amateurism and intellec - tual voyeurism” ( Davis 2007 ) and results in www . annualreviews . org • Interdisciplinarity 51 A nnu . R e v . S o c i o l . 2009 . 35 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O h i o S t a t e U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y on 05 / 04 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV381 - SO35 - 03 ARI 17 March 2009 22 : 6 knowledge of “dubious quality” ( Mansilla & Gardner 2003 ) . To address such claims , univer - sity administrators , funding agencies , and in - terdisciplinary researchers themselves rely on indirect measures of the efﬁcacy of interdis - ciplinary research bundled in statistics on the numberofpatents , grants , publications , citation patterns , and the like . Yet scientists working in interdisciplinary contexts recognize the prob - lem with such indicators , most critically that the standard measures of scientiﬁc productivity and quality represent the “disciplinary assess - ment of their interdisciplinary work” ( Mansilla & Gardner 2003 ) . It may be useful to distinguish isolated for - ays into interdisciplinary topics from dramati - cally expanding interdisciplinary ﬁelds . Rapidly growing areas of inquiry such as neuroscience and nanotechnology may not need special cri - teria for evaluation : These emerging ﬁelds have grown explosively , have successfully competed for funds , have spawned many conferences and journals , and fare well on traditional criteria such as citation rates . The concern regarding specialcriteriaforevaluationmaybemorecom - pelling in the absence of this type of success . Unfortunately , systematic efforts to develop evaluative criteria for judging interdisciplinary knowledge have been slow to develop , and di - rectempiricalevidenceonhowthequalityofin - terdisciplinaryresearchisassessedremainsthin . As Klein ( 1996 ) noted some years ago , “cri - teria for judgment constitute the least under - stood aspect of interdisciplinarity , in part be - cause the issue has been the least studied and in part because the multiplicity of tasks seems to mitigate against a single standard . ” The gap remains a pressing one today and the central focus of a recent special issue of Research Eval - uation ( Klein 2006 ) . Contributing authors to that issue are in broad agreement that the as - sessment of interdisciplinary work is both ex - tremely complex—involving “multiple actors making multiple decisions in multiple organi - zational settings” ( Feller 2006 ) —and requires new models for evaluating the new “cultures of evidence” that are emerging from interdisci - plinary endeavors ( Klein 2006 ) . Empirical work to date , although limited , identiﬁes a number of speciﬁc challenges associated with the practice and evaluation of interdisciplinary research . The relative absence of epistemic clarity likely has impacts on the organization of in - terdisciplinary research and on the trajectory of interdisciplinary careers . Summarizing re - sults from a survey of researchers working in ﬁve NSF - funded interdisciplinary programs , Rhoten ( 2005 , Rhoten & Parker 2004 ) reports that younger faculty and especially graduate students express more enthusiasm for interdis - ciplinary work , claim more experience working in interdisciplinary contexts , and develop more interdisciplinary than disciplinary connections than do their more senior colleagues . At the same time , younger researchers were also more likely to identify particular costs associated with the decision to pursue an interdisciplinary re - search track , including expectations that they would encounter obstacles to employment and tenure . Still other sorts of challenges derive from broader social forces that shape interdisci - plinary outcomes . Combining primary data from three surveys on interdisciplinarity ( the only three in existence at the time of their anal - ysis ) , Rhoten & Pﬁrman ( 2006 ) ﬁndthatwomen scientists are engaged in cross - fertilization ac - tivities , form cross - disciplinary collaborations , and participate in institutional efforts of emerg - ing interdisciplines and problem - oriented re - search at greater rates than their male coun - terparts . Although provocative , these ﬁndings are highly constrained by the limitations of the data , which do not permit consideration of other intervening factors ( e . g . , race , cohort , in - stitutional context ) , do not distinguish between push and pull factors , and do not consider is - sues related to the performance of interdisci - plinary science . They also do not consider dif - ferences among interdisciplinary domains that are marginalized ( e . g . , women’s studies ) com - pared with those that are “hot” ( e . g . , complexity research ) . Nevertheless , these ﬁndings provide preliminary support for the thesis that interdis - ciplinarity is gendered , and , perhaps more im - portantly , they draw attention to the need for 52 Jacobs · Frickel A nnu . R e v . S o c i o l . 2009 . 35 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O h i o S t a t e U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y on 05 / 04 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV381 - SO35 - 03 ARI 17 March 2009 22 : 6 research that attends not only to the social pro - duction of interdisciplinary motivations , prac - tices , perceptions , and outcomes , but also to their consequences . In a novel attempt to understand how in - terdisciplinary training affects the collaborative production of interdisciplinary ideas , Rhoten and colleagues ( Rhoten et al . 2008 , Hacket & Rhoten 2008 ) recently conducted a “real - life” experiment , modeled after design “charrettes” ( discussion groups ) popular in nineteenth cen - tury French schools of architecture , in which graduate students participating in NSF - funded interdisciplinary training programs ( IGERT ) were compared with students with disciplinary training . Students were placed into working groups that controlled for gender , ﬁeld , and years of graduate training and were then given two and a half days to develop brief propos - als that would chart the next generation of re - search on human - ecosystem sustainability . The collaborative group process was monitored by trained observers , and the groups’ products ( the proposal and a 20 - minute presentation ) were evaluated by a multidisciplinary panel of ex - perts , with the goal of assessing “whether and in what ways educational experiences change how young scientists work together and the quality ofwhattheyproduce” ( Hackett & Rhoten2008 , p . 14 ) . Contrary to the researchers’ expecta - tions , they found that IGERT groups with less training ( one to two years ) received the high - est average scores of all groups , including in - terdisciplinary groups with three or more years training in the IGERT program . In a series of papers and a forthcoming book examining how disciplinary experts judge interdisciplinary work ( Lamont et al . 2006 , Mallard et al . 2009 , Lamont 2009 ) , Michele Lamont and her colleagues asked 81 expert panelists from a dozen multidisciplinary fel - lowship competitions in the social sciences and humanities how they assess the quality of interdisciplinary research proposals and how collectively the panel negotiates fairness in selecting winners . In ways that complement results from Hackett & Rhoten’s ( 2008 ) charrette experiment , this study ﬁnds that “discipline - speciﬁc ways of producing theory and methods are still the bedrock of peer eval - uation” ( Mallard et al . 2009 , p . 22 ) . Although idiosyncratic preferences play a role in experts’ evaluations of proposals from other disciplines , thetendencyisforpaneliststoabidebytheepis - temological styles and evaluative criteria of the discipline of the proposal under review . This ﬁnding suggests that the key to procedural fair - ness in assessing the quality of interdisciplinary work is not in giving up disciplinary autonomy , but in knowing when to give one set of dis - ciplinary standards priority over others in the context of assigning greater value to proposals with intellectual breadth . The Role of Research Centers Research centers represent an important fea - ture of contemporary research universities that has largely been neglected in the discussion of interdisciplinarity ( Friedman & Friedman 1982 ; see also Klein 1996 , chapter 6 ) . Centers are often organized around applied topics , such as the problems of an aging society or the chal - lenges of bioethics , but there are also many cen - ters that focus on topics of enduring academic interest , such as the Minda de Gunzburg Cen - ter for European studies at Harvard . Our research indicates that research centers are an increasingly common feature of U . S . higher education . Drawing on the census of organizations compiled by the Gale research group ( Gale Group 2008 ) , we found nearly 10 , 000 research centers located at colleges and universities in the United States in 2007 . Re - search centers are most common at the lead - ing research universities . Our analysis of the 25 leading research universities in the United States revealed that there were nearly 100 re - search centers ( 94 . 6 ) per school . There are thus often more research centers than disciplinary departments . A remarkable total of 2366 re - search centers are found at these 25 universi - ties , representing nearly one - quarter of the to - tal found at all U . S . colleges and universities . Examination of a sample of these centers from university Web sites suggests that the www . annualreviews . org • Interdisciplinarity 53 A nnu . R e v . S o c i o l . 2009 . 35 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O h i o S t a t e U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y on 05 / 04 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV381 - SO35 - 03 ARI 17 March 2009 22 : 6 vast majority are ostensibly interdisciplinary , at least in name and in self - presentation . Given their sheer number and tendency to identify institutionally with interdisciplinary goals , re - search centers may function—imperfectly to be sure—as intrauniversity “boundary organi - zations” ( see Guston 2000 ) that help to bridge disciplinary divides and serve as an organiza - tional counterweight to academic departments . Strong disciplines combined with the ﬂexibility tocreatediverseresearchcentersasneededmay be an attractive organizational solution to the challenges of organizing rapidly growing bod - ies of research and knowledge , perhaps not least byprovidingmicromobilizationcontextsforre - cruitmentintoemerginginterdisciplinaryﬁelds ( Frickel & Gross 2005 ) . Thus , although advo - cates of interdisciplinarity have lambasted the ostensiblyhide - boundnatureofacademicdisci - plines , it is clear that university - based academic departments coexist with an increasing number and diversifying array of research centers that at minimum represent an organizational con - text for bringing together scholars from diverse backgrounds with shared interests . Do such centers facilitate communication across disciplinary boundaries ? Among the rel - atively few studies to address this question em - pirically , Rhoten ( 2005 ) offers a guardedly pes - simistic analysis . On the positive side of the ledger , faculty in the six interdisciplinary re - search centers she studied reported spending half of their work time on center - related inter - disciplinary activity , and 83 % said that their re - lationships with other center members had pos - itively inﬂuenced their own research agendas . She also reports that those centers with larger numbers of afﬁliated faculty yielded more in - formation sharing but fewer substantive inter - disciplinary connections . Despite these encouraging ﬁndings , Rhoten’s overall appraisal is pessimistic . She complains that the centers tend to be organized around catch - all themes rather than unifying problem deﬁnitions and consequently fall short of achieving the transformative levels of interdisciplinary synthesis . Although this valuable study identiﬁes some important orga - nizational problems , the question of whether research centers represent efﬁcacious solutions to generating interdisciplinary research is far from settled . Our view is that a more modest standard of interdisciplinary awareness and co - operation puts her data in a more positive light . Furthermore , if voluntary participation in interdisciplinary research centers does not pro - duce true interdisciplinarity , it is worthwhile to consider what types of organizational settings might be more conducive to interdisciplinary research and scholarship . INTERDISCIPLINARITY : HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVES Continuity and Diversity in the Disciplinary System The nature of disciplines and relations among them is an old topic in the sociology , philos - ophy , and history of science , and there is no shortage of theories about them ( Ben David & Collins 1966 , Clarke 1998 , Graham et al . 1983 , Lenoir 1997 , Lemaine et al . 1976 , Sherif & Sherif 1969 ) . The strongest recent statement regarding the durability of disciplinary social structures in the face of interdisciplinary pres - sures is offered by Abbott ( 2001 ) . He main - tains that the basic disciplinary structure of the academy has changed little since the turn of the last century and that virtually all universities and colleges have lists of departments mirror - ing the original set of natural science , social sci - ence , and humanities disciplines . Abbott traces this resilience to a “dual institutionalization” whereby disciplines structure the national aca - demic labor market as well as hiring practices at individual universities , which cannot move away from the disciplinary organization of de - partments without undermining their graduate students’ opportunities to ﬁnd employment at other universities . Stasis is reinforced by the system of undergraduate majors that has been in place since the late nineteenth century . Like the academic structure of employment , the vast majority of majors are also organized by dis - cipline . Anchored in this way by the structure 54 Jacobs · Frickel A nnu . R e v . S o c i o l . 2009 . 35 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O h i o S t a t e U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y on 05 / 04 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV381 - SO35 - 03 ARI 17 March 2009 22 : 6 of faculty hiring and undergraduate education , “disciplinary departments are the essential and irreplaceable building blocks of American uni - versities” ( Abbott 2001 , p . 128 ) . Abbott views interdisciplinarity as a direct consequence of this disciplinary social struc - ture . He argues that interdisciplinarity is “old news” not only in that a hundred years ago “disciplines bred interdisciplinarity almost im - mediately , ” but also in that academic interest in interdisciplinarity has been relatively con - tinuous over the decades since ( Abbott 2001 , pp . 131 , 132 ) . Despite this second - order stabil - ity , interdisciplinarity does not threaten disci - plinary dominance . This is in part because the disciplinary organization of the academic labor market holds the employability of interdisci - plinary researchers and thus their institutional reproduction in check . Abbott suggests that the disciplines endure for intellectual as well as organizational rea - sons . Speciﬁcally , he suggests that the problem - driven knowledge that interdisciplinarity tends to produce is not sufﬁciently abstract to com - pete successfully with the theory - driven knowl - edge that comes from disciplines—knowledge that is often substantively sufﬁcient for tack - ling many complex problems . Only a system - wide shift in the way academic careers are struc - tured can overturn this “virtually unbreakable” system . A similar argument for the durability of pre - vailing disciplinary distinctions derives from organizational theory ( Frank & Gabler 2006 , DiMaggio & Powell 1983 ) . The force of in - stitutional isomorphism induces colleges and universities to copy the patterns and practices of other institutions in order to maintain their legitimacy , meaning that a given university is likely to have a biology and a history depart - ment because other schools do the same . Creso Sa ( 2008 ) , an advocate for interdisciplinarity , has suggested that the durability of disciplines is due in large part to institutional pressures of this nature . Whereas Abbott sees the current disci - plinary structure as impervious to all but the most powerful winds of change , a num - ber of other scholars emphasize the his - torical contingency and variability of disci - plines . Turner ( 2000 ) , who shares a number of Abbott’s premises , sees disciplines as employ - ment markets , essentially economic cartels whose main functions are creating and regu - larizing internal markets for training and ex - changing faculty . Disciplines hire from within , and this characteristic—not a distinctive canon , intellectual traditions , or forms of knowledge or expertise—differentiates disciplines from nondisciplinary or extradisciplinary efforts . Turner differs from Abbott in his view of interdisciplinarity . For Turner , interdisciplinar - ity creates “novel divisions of labor in response to novel ends” ( Turner 2000 , p . 56 ) . The ends differ , and so do the resource constraints inter - disciplinary efforts must navigate . For example , they may need to secure regular funding , ap - peaseapublicconstituency , offerrespitefordis - placed academics from other units , etc . These different ends and constraints help to account for why interdisciplinary efforts take so many different forms , as well as why they so often fail ( e . g . , Abir - Am 1987 , Barmark & Wallen 1980 , Frickel 2004b ) . Turner draws on exam - ples from the marine sciences and oceanogra - phytoillustratehisframework ( seealsoMukerji 1989 on oceanography and Knorr Cetina 1999 on molecular biology ) . Whereas Abbott sees interdisciplinarity as a residual phenomenon , structured by the so - cial organization of disciplines , Turner sees dis - ciplines and interdisciplinarity as distinct and largely independent systems . On this reading , interdisciplinarity is not so tightly dependent on disciplines as to be derivative . “Where re - searchers are not dependent on [ students and clients ] , disciplinarity is weak and interdis - ciplinary and nondisciplinary forms ﬂourish” ( Turner 2000 , p . 60 ) . Where Abbott anchors his argument empir - ically on the century - long stability of the basic disciplinary ﬁeld , Turner sees this pattern as a historical anomaly . Turner maintains that the power of disciplines is in part an artifact of his - tory , and he offers the recent fate of physics as an example of how once ascendant disciplines www . annualreviews . org • Interdisciplinarity 55 A nnu . R e v . S o c i o l . 2009 . 35 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O h i o S t a t e U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y on 05 / 04 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV381 - SO35 - 03 ARI 17 March 2009 22 : 6 can weaken when “cartels make themselves ir - relevant” through the “fossilization” of their in - ternal markets ( p . 64 ) . Whitley ( 1984 ) also stresses the historical variability of academic disciplines based on a long view of organizational changes in systems of knowledge production and control over the past 300 years . But even during the initial hey - day of discipline formation , he notes that not all ﬁelds became deeply entrenched in universi - ties as disciplines . Some , like natural history , re - mainedopento“learnedgentlemen”—amateur scientists working on private estates outside the academy ( see Worster 1994 , chapter 1 ) . But more importantly , the centrality of academic disciplines to the organization of scientiﬁc re - search has greatly diminished since then . Whitley contends that over the course of the twentieth century , the degree to which scien - tiﬁc ﬁelds have become mutually dependent— for example by sharing technical procedures and instruments or by adopting evaluative stan - dards from one another—has increased , albeit unevenly . Greater interdependence has meant that intellectual ﬁelds today generally exhibit ( among other things ) weakened boundaries , in - creased mobility of ideas and skills across those boundaries , and increased interﬁeld coordina - tion of research objectives , strategies , and re - sults . Whitley argues that “traditional patterns of integration and control through academic disciplines seem to have broken down in many ﬁelds without any coherent and stable structure emerging to replace them” ( p . 292 ) . Whitley presents interdisciplinarity as a var - iegated process of organizational change that is sensitive to the internal organization of ﬁelds , relationships among ﬁelds , and the relation of science to other social systems . Like Abbott , Whitley sees interdisciplinarity as an elemental feature of knowledge production systems , but also one that is highly variable from one ﬁeld to the next and over time . In that sense , Whitley’s perspective is far removed from Abbott’s view of interdisciplinarity as a “standing wave” pro - duced by and coextensive with the disciplinary system ( Abbott 2001 , p . 150 ) . Where Abbott argues that transformative changes to the university system will be required to dislodge academic disciplines , Whitley contends that in the natural sciences this occurred long ago . And countering Abbott’s argument that inter - disciplinarity poses little threat to disciplinary autonomy and identity , Whitley’s analysis sets increased interdependence directly against the persistence of disciplinary control . Thus , dis - ciplines and interdisciplinarity are not distinct systems , as Turner argues , but neither is the relation between the two organizationally uni - form or historically stable , as Abbott contends . The contributions of Abbott , Turner , and Whitley differ on the historical stability of the disciplinary system and the role of interdisci - plinarity within this framework , but each takes disciplines as a starting point for their analy - sis . Steve Fuller’s work on interdisciplinarity provides a counterweight to their discipline - centric views . For Fuller , disciplines are utterly conventional results of knowledge - makers’ suc - cessful bids to gain access to various kinds of re - sources that , once secured , are then controlled largely through the rhetorical construction of disciplinary boundaries ( Fuller 1991 ; see also Gieryn 1999 ) . Instead , and in stark contrast to Abbott , Turner , and Whitley , Fuller ( 2003 , pp . 1 , 3 ) views disciplines as “artiﬁcial holding patterns” that provide “the legitimating ideol - ogy of the makeshift solutions that deﬁne the department structure of particular universities” andwhosehistoriestendtobepresentedinways that make the current regime of disciplines ap - pear inevitable ( see also Pickering 1993 ) . For Fuller ( 2003 , p . 4 ) , the real source of creative knowledge is to be found in inter - disciplinary inquiry , which he sees as a cen - tral “internal motivator of sustained epistemic change . ” The position that interdisciplinarity is primary and not derivative ( like Turner , above ) takes its historical grounding from the obser - vation that today’s disciplines began as inter - disciplinary social movements “that aspired to address all manner of phenomena and regis - ters of life” ( Fuller 2003 , p . 4 ) and its polit - ical grounding from the ubiquity of contem - porary calls for interdisciplinary solutions to disciplinary problems ( e . g . , Wallerstein 1996 ) . 56 Jacobs · Frickel A nnu . R e v . S o c i o l . 2009 . 35 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O h i o S t a t e U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y on 05 / 04 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV381 - SO35 - 03 ARI 17 March 2009 22 : 6 The point of interdisciplinarity , Fuller ( 2004 ) argues , is not to build on methods and insights from existing disciplines—a common , but mis - guided approach that mistakenly assumes com - bining methods makes for better knowledge . Instead , the transformative promise of interdis - ciplinarity lies in its capacity to interpenetrate disciplines , changing what they do by providing communicative forms and channels for renego - tiating disciplinary boundaries and generating new epistemic standards . These observations provideballastforthepositionofthemostcom - mitted enthusiasts for interdisciplinarity ( Klein 1990 , 1996 ; Rhoten & Parker 2004 ) . Fuller’s theory also shifts the empirical focus of research from the structural nature of disciplinary inter - relations to questions of process : Speciﬁcally , where do interdisciplinary ﬁelds come from ? Interdiscipline Formation Recent scholarship has come to view the forma - tion of disciplinary hybrids or interdisciplinary ﬁelds as the result of collective action that is in many ways analogous to that found in social movements . Scientiﬁc and intellectual move - ments ( SIMs ) are “collective efforts to pursue research programs or projects for thought in the face of resistance from others in the sci - entiﬁc or intellectual community” ( Frickel & Gross 2005 , p . 206 ; see also McLaughlin 2008 ) . The SIMs framework is based on the assump - tion that , however delimited , new knowledge ﬁelds are fundamentally political outcomes , the result of struggles for resources , identities , and status . The framework has particular relevance for studying the emergence and legitimation of “interdisciplines” ( Frickel 2004a ) . A growing body of historical research doc - uments the diversity of these processes in re - lation to a variety of institutional contexts and historical eras . These include studies of inter - disciplinary SIMs that are more or less internal to the scientiﬁc , medical , or academic ﬁelds , with biochemistry and cognitive sciences be - ing two well - studied examples ( Bechtel 1986 , Kohler 1982 ) . Other studies situate interdis - ciplinary SIMs as straddling the academy and other institutions . For example , SIMs as di - verse as mid - nineteenth century demography ( Schweber 2006 ) and 1970s - era genetic toxi - cology ( Frickel 2004b ) have origins rooted in state administrative and research bureaucra - cies . Others are tied more or less directly to social movements , as the cases of black stud - ies ( Rojas 2007 ) and women’s studies ( Boxer 1998 ) illustrate . Taken together , this body of work provides mixed support for the notion that interdisciplinarity is something that can be straightforwardly manufactured through top - down administrative policies . Although schol - ars have identiﬁed cases of interdisciplinary SIMs that directly beneﬁted from administra - tivemandates—CaliforniaInstituteofTechnol - ogy’s use of Rockefeller Foundation funds to promote molecular biology is a classic case in point ( Abir - Am 1988 , Kohler 1991 ) —in gen - eral , interdisciplinary SIMs are better under - stood as intellectual insurgencies generated and sustained from below by faculty and graduate students organizing collective challenges to the disciplinary order . This framework also has implications for theories of disciplinary interaction , reviewed above . We learn , for example , that interdis - ciplinary pressure in the academy is punctu - ated , rather than continuous , as suggested by Abbott’s “standing wave” argument . It also sug - gests that interdisciplines are shaped by so - cial forces beyond disciplinary labor markets , as Turner argues . Research suggesting that the movements for civil rights , women’s equality , and environmental protection contributed to student demand for programs in African Amer - ican studies , women’s studies , and environmen - tal studies ( Brint et al . 2008 ) is consonant with Frickel & Gross’s ( 2005 ) framework , although the latter does not require political disruption per se . Institutional instability of any form that creates opportunities for insurgent intellectu - als to press the legitimacy of their claims can provide conditions for the emergence of inter - disciplinary SIMs . Although the concentration of new interdisciplinary ﬁelds in the 1970s in the social sciences and humanities is related to that decade’s signature social movements , the www . annualreviews . org • Interdisciplinarity 57 A nnu . R e v . S o c i o l . 2009 . 35 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O h i o S t a t e U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y on 05 / 04 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV381 - SO35 - 03 ARI 17 March 2009 22 : 6 creation of area studies programs in previous decades is more likely an outcome of national security interests , whereas interdiscipline for - mation in the 1980s and 1990s in the life sci - ences was likely spurred by instabilities created by technological innovation and changes in the legal structures governing proprietary knowl - edge ( i . e . , intellectual capital , patents , licensing agreements ) . Researchers have yet to study in any detail the rise of interdisciplines compara - tively or over broad historical periods . The Rise of Professional and Applied Departments The degree to which the current disciplinary structure has been endured historically is a question over which the theorists discussed above differ . Frank & Gabler ( 2006 ) document long - term shifts in the relative size of differ - ent academic ﬁelds ( see also Gabler & Frank 2005 ) . Their work is distinctive in emphasizing the global nature of these trends : Their analysis draws on data they compiled on universities in 89 countries spanning the course of a century . Some academic domains and historical eras are likely to be more conducive to SIM - type activity than others . Brint ( 2002 ) highlights the growth of applied and professional ﬁelds of study and a corresponding decline in the dom - inance of the traditional arts and sciences disci - plines . He envisions a future in which the inﬂu - ence of the traditional discipline is diminished . In a more recent paper , Brint et al . ( 2008 ) docu - ments the growth in undergraduate enrollment in interdisciplinary ﬁelds . One key point of contention between Brint and Abbott is Abbott’s suggestion that the disci - plines will maintain their inﬂuence because the more applied ﬁelds hire faculty from the dis - ciplines . Thus , if faculty members in schools of communications or business continue to be drawn from psychology , sociology , and eco - nomics departments , then the emergence of such applied ﬁelds will pose less of a threat to the disciplines . Brint ( 2005 ) , however , presents data that indicate that the applied ﬁelds have developed their own doctoral programs and are relying less on the academic disciplines to re - cruit their faculty . We compiled data from the 2004 National Survey of Postsecondary Faculty ( NSOPF ) that addresses this issue in more detail ( see Table 3 ) . The data summarize the fraction of faculty in each discipline , program , or school that has their highest degree in the same ﬁeld in which they are currently teaching . The ﬁnd - ings on the disciplines in the arts and sci - ences conﬁrm Abbott’s ( and Turner’s ) emphasis on the concordance between degrees and de - partments : The overwhelming majority of fac - ulty in disciplines such as economics , sociology , and psychology have PhDs in these ﬁelds . But the same pattern now holds for applied ﬁelds as well : Most faculty in business , communica - tions , education , engineering , and medicine are homegrown , and are not imported from the ba - sic disciplines in the social or natural sciences . While some ﬁelds , such as business and com - munication , draw a signiﬁcant minority of their faculty from the traditional disciplines , in most cases a clear majority of faculty report that they obtained their degrees in these applied and pro - fessional ﬁelds and not in the basic disciplines . Thus , the emergence of applied and profes - sional ﬁelds of study in higher education ap - pears to be related to a decline in the role of the traditional disciplines . With the possi - ble exception of the very top tier universities , Abbott’s conﬁdence regarding the continued inﬂuence of the traditional disciplines in the hiringpracticesofappliedandprofessionalpro - grams appears to be misplaced . Differentiation and Fragmentation How interdisciplinary are interdisciplinary ﬁelds ? One possibility is that the rapid growth of a new interdisciplinary ﬁeld results in higher than anticipated levels of internal differentia - tion . Successful interdisciplinary research ar - eas thus may generate a new set of journals , subspecialties , internal conﬂicts over resources , in short , the same fragmentation that certain advocates of interdisciplinarity hope can be overcome . 58 Jacobs · Frickel A nnu . R e v . S o c i o l . 2009 . 35 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O h i o S t a t e U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y on 05 / 04 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV381 - SO35 - 03 ARI 17 March 2009 22 : 6 Table 3 Faculty hiring patterns by ﬁeld of department . For both columns , the data indicate the percent of faculty whose degree is in the same ﬁeld as their current department . The ﬁrst column is for all four year institutions ; the second is for research universities Percent of faculty with degree in same ﬁeld as current teaching position—all four - year institutions Percent of faculty with same area teaching position—research universities No degree 1 . 7 3 . 1 Agriculture and home economics 68 . 6 70 . 3 Business 73 . 5 76 . 6 Communications 68 . 8 69 . 9 Teacher education 85 . 3 86 . 7 Other education 78 . 8 72 . 9 Engineering 83 . 6 81 . 5 Fine arts 89 . 4 84 . 8 First - professional health sciences 85 . 0 86 . 0 Nursing 73 . 5 67 . 8 Other health sciences 52 . 3 53 . 9 English and literature 87 . 0 87 . 9 Foreign languages 88 . 8 89 . 8 History 91 . 6 90 . 0 Philosophy and religion 85 . 8 88 . 3 Law 92 . 6 98 . 4 Biological sciences 81 . 0 79 . 9 Physical sciences 93 . 0 96 . 8 Mathematics 85 . 0 88 . 0 Computer sciences 58 . 3 64 . 9 Economics 91 . 2 89 . 9 Political science 94 . 0 93 . 4 Psychology 93 . 2 93 . 0 Sociology 92 . 3 94 . 7 Other social sciences 69 . 4 68 . 0 Occupationally speciﬁc programs 50 . 1 58 . 9 All other programs 67 . 0 67 . 7 Source : National Survey of Postsecondary Faculty 2004 . Bibliometric research on nanotechnology has explored this issue but is thus far not deﬁni - tive in resolving it . An early study suggests a high degree of interdisciplinary citations in nanotechnology research ( Meyer & Persson 1998 ) . However , a more recent study of coau - thorship patterns ( Schummer 2004 ) suggests that nanotechnology is not a single ﬁeld but rather offshoots of physics , chemistry , electrical engineering , mechanical engineering , and ma - terials science . Schummer’s strong conclusion is that nanotechnology’s “apparent interdisci - plinarity consists of largely mono - disciplinary ﬁelds which are rather unrelated to each other and which hardly share more than the preﬁx ‘nano’” ( Schummer 2004 , p . 425 ) . We also think it is important to consider the possibility that interdisciplinarity might lead to its own type of fragmentation . One example we found when we were investigating www . annualreviews . org • Interdisciplinarity 59 A nnu . R e v . S o c i o l . 2009 . 35 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O h i o S t a t e U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y on 05 / 04 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV381 - SO35 - 03 ARI 17 March 2009 22 : 6 university - based research centers illustrates the point . Pennsylvania State University has endeavored to promote research related to homeland security ( see the HSI : Home - land Security Initiative Web site , for example : http : / / homelandsecurity . psu . edu / discovery / centers ) . This worthy goal does not fall within the purview of any single academic discipline and thus is typical of the examples used to argue for the development of organizational models that mobilize the insights and skills of diverse scholars . Yet the Penn State example suggests that interdisciplinarity does not mean the uniﬁcation or integration of knowledge . They have developed no less than 21 research centers focused on various aspects of homeland security . These include the International Center for the Study of Terrorism , the Center for Information Assurance that addresses issues of cyber security in the context of threats to computer systems , the Protective Technology Center that focuses research and development activities with the goal of protecting people and infrastructure from terrorist attacks , and other centers focused on crisis management , infectious diseases , nonlethal defense tech - nologies , and a host of other issues . Each of these may represent a laudable endeavor , but the proliferation of these research centers , institutes , and laboratories underscores the fact that there are many aspects of any issue and that interdisciplinary initiatives can lead just as easily to the multiplication of academic units rather than their consolidation . CONCLUSION AND RESEARCH AGENDA We have reviewed the recent trend toward the promotion of interdisciplinarity on the cam - puses of many U . S . research universities . This development appears to be widespread and fu - eled by many different sources . Given these ef - forts to change one of the basic building blocks of our current scholarly system , we believe the assumptions underpinning this effort warrant careful scrutiny . Wedonotbelievethatthecasehasbeenfully made , theoretically or empirically , for the gen - eral superiority of interdisciplinary over disci - plinary knowledge . The established disciplines are not as static or as isolated as advocates of in - terdisciplinarity sometimes suggest . Although there are certainly successful examples of inter - disciplinarity , established academic disciplines remain dynamic centers of knowledge produc - tion that are open to external developments even while insisting on internal standards . Fur - thermore , the more than 10 , 000 research cen - ters currently occupying the campuses of U . S . colleges and universities provide considerable opportunities for those interested in building bridges between ﬁelds , even if that potential is often underutilized . Additionally , the tradi - tional disciplines are not as dominant as they once were . Enrollment , degree , and faculty employment data all indicate that the tradi - tional disciplines represent a smaller share of the academy than was the case only a gen - eration ago . We are also skeptical about the notion that interdisciplinarity will substantially advancetheintegrationofknowledge . Manyin - terdisciplinary projects make only limited gains ( as do many disciplinary - based investigations ) , and those that are spectacularly successful can become established as new ﬁelds of inquiry , leading to a new round of differentiation and fragmentation . The rapid growth of interdisciplinary re - search and university - wide effort to promote such scholarship raises many questions for re - search . Most of the topics discussed above war - rant much further inquiry . For example , in what contexts is the centralized promotion of interdisciplinarity effective , and in what cir - cumstances is interdisciplinarity more success - ful when it percolates from the bottom up ? Do departments with faculty from multiple disci - plinary backgrounds promote interdisciplinary scholarship or just an additional level of faculty inﬁghting ? What types of interdisciplinary re - search centers are most dynamic ? Which tend tobemostenduring ? Isthehiringofestablished senior scholars whose work crosses disciplinary 60 Jacobs · Frickel A nnu . R e v . S o c i o l . 2009 . 35 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O h i o S t a t e U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y on 05 / 04 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV381 - SO35 - 03 ARI 17 March 2009 22 : 6 boundaries more effective as a strategy than hir - ing newly minted PhDs with cross - disciplinary training ? There is a clear need for more studies with a comparative research design . How does in - terdisciplinary scholarship compare with oth - erwise similar scholarship ? Just as there are intellectual and social gulfs between disci - plines , there are also many chasms in research approaches and styles within disciplines . What are the similarities and differences between boundary - spanning research within disciplines compared with similar efforts that cross disciplines ? History also provides an important terrain for research . What can we learn from the his - tory of disciplinary and interdisciplinary re - search that would give us further insights into the efforts to promote interdisciplinarity ? For example , there have been efforts to establish interdisciplinary ﬁelds in the past . What can we learn from the successes as well as the failures of these efforts that would help aca - demic faculty and administrators best advance scholarship in general and interdisciplinarity in particular ? Many topics in this area require serious conceptual advances as well as creative col - lection of new data . For example , can gen - eral criteria be developed that would indicate the appropriate level of communication be - tween disciplines ? Can general criteria be de - veloped for the evaluation of interdisciplinary research ? The renewed efforts to promote in - terdisciplinary scholarship have given impetus to these and other research questions . DISCLOSURE STATEMENT The authors are not aware of any afﬁliations , memberships , funding , or ﬁnancial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS For helpful comments and suggestions we thank Steven Brint , Diana Crane , Robert Frodeman , Steve Fuller , Neil Gross , Lowell Hargens , Michele Lamont , Erin Leahy , Susan Lindsey , Neil McLaughlin , Diana Rhoten , Jason Owen Smith , Laurel Smith - Doerr , and Mitchell Stevens . LITERATURE CITED Abbott A . 2001 . Chaos of Disciplines . Chicago : Univ . Chicago Press Abir - Am P . 1987 . The biotheoretical gathering , trans - disciplinary authority and the incipient legitimation of molecular biology in the 1930s : new perspective on the historical sociology of science . Hist . Sci . 25 : 1 – 69 Abir - Am P . 1988 . The assessment of interdisciplinary research in the 1930s : the Rockefeller Foundation and physico - chemical morphology . Minerva 26 : 153 – 76 Aboelela SW , Larson E , Bakken S , Carrasquillo O , Formicola A , et al . 2007 . Deﬁning interdisciplinary research : conclusions from a critical review of the literature . Health Serv . Res . 42 ( 1 ) : 329 – 46 Barmark J , Wallen G . 1980 . The development of an interdisciplinary project . In The Social Process of Scientiﬁc Investigation , ed . KD Knorr , R Krohn , R Whitley , pp . 221 – 35 . Dordrecht : D . Reidel Bearman PS , Martin M , Shostak S , eds . 2008 . Exploring genetics and social structure . Am . J . Sociol . 114 ( Spec . Issue ) : S1 – 287 Bechtel W . 1986 . Integrating Scientiﬁc Disciplines . Dordrecht , Neth . : Martinus Nijhoff Ben David J , Collins R . 1966 . Social factors in the origins of a new science : the case of psychology . Am . Sociol . Rev . 31 ( 4 ) : 451 – 65 Berkenkotter C . 1995 . Preview : special issue on boundary rhetorics and the work of interdisciplinarity . Soc . Epistemol . 9 ( 2 ) : 89 – 90 Biehl M , Kim H , Wade M . 2006 . Relationships among the academic business disciplines : a multi - method citation analysis . Omega 34 ( 4 ) : 359 – 71 www . annualreviews . org • Interdisciplinarity 61 A nnu . R e v . S o c i o l . 2009 . 35 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O h i o S t a t e U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y on 05 / 04 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV381 - SO35 - 03 ARI 17 March 2009 22 : 6 Bitner MJ , Brown SW . 2006 . The evolution and discovery of services science in business schools . Commun . ACM 49 ( 7 ) : 73 – 78 Boomes M , Morawska E . 2005 . International Migration Research : Constructions , Omissions , and the Promises of Interdisciplinarity . Burlington , VT : Ashgate Boxer MJ . 1998 . When Women Ask the Questions : Creating Women’s Studies in America . Baltimore , MD : Johns Hopkins Univ . Press Boyack KW , Klavans R , Borner K . 2005 . Mapping the backbone of science . Scientometrics 64 ( 3 ) : 351 – 74 Braun T , Schubert A . 2003 . A quantitative view on the coming of age of interdisciplinarity in the sciences 1980 – 1999 . Scientometrics 58 ( 1 ) : 183 – 89 Brint S , ed . 2002 . The Future of the City of Intellect . Stanford , CA : Stanford Univ . Press Brint S . 2005 . Creating the future : ‘new directions’ in American research universities . Minerva 43 : 23 – 50 Brint S , Turk - Bicakci L , Proctor K , Murphy SP . 2008 . Expanding the social frame of knowledge : interdisciplinary , degree - granting ﬁelds in American four - year colleges and universities , 1975 – 2000 . Work . Pap . , Univ . Calif . , Riverside . http : / / www . higher - ed2000 . ucr . edu / Publications / Brint % 20et % 20al % 20 ( 2008b ) . pdf CalhounC . 1996 . Theriseanddomesticationofhistoricalsociology . In TheHistoricTurnintheHumanSciences , ed . TJ McDonald , pp . 305 – 38 . Ann Arbor : Univ . Mich . Press Camic C . 1995 . Three departments in search of a discipline : localism and interdisciplinary interaction in American sociology , 1890 – 1940 . Soc . Res . 62 : 1003 – 34 Campbell DT . 1969 . Ethnocentrism of disciplines and the ﬁsh - scale model of omniscience . In Interdisciplinary Relationships in the Social Sciences , ed . M Sherif , CW Sherif , pp . 328 – 48 . Chicago : Aldine Clarke AE . 1998 . Disciplining Reproduction : Modernity , American Life Sciences , and the Problems of Sex . Berkeley : Univ . Calif . Press Collins PH . 2007 . Pushing the boundaries or business as usual ? Race , class and gender studies and sociological inquiry . In Sociology in America : A History , ed . C Calhoun , pp . 572 – 604 . Chicago : Univ . Chicago Press Crane D . 2008 . Cultural sociology and other disciplines : interdisciplinarity in the social sciences . Presented at Second Cult . Sect . 20th Anniv . Symp . : Cultural Sociology and Its Others , July 31 , Boston , MA Davis LJ . 2007 . A grand uniﬁed theory of interdisciplinarity . Chron . High . Educ . 53 ( 40 ) : B9 Dietz T , Rosa EA , York R . 2009 . Environmentally efﬁcient well - being : rethinking sustainability as the rela - tionship between human well - being and environmental impacts . Hum . Ecol . Rev . 16 : 113 – 22 DiMaggio P , Powell WW . 1983 . The iron cage revisited : institutional isomorphism and collective rationality in organizational ﬁelds . Am . Sociol . Rev . 48 ( 2 ) : 147 – 60 Faber J , Schepper WJ . 1997 . Interdisciplinary social science : a methodological analysis . Q . Quant . 31 : 37 – 56 Feller I . 2006 . Multiple actors , multiple settings , multiple criteria : issues in assessing 6interdisciplinary re - search . Res . Eval . 15 : 5 – 15 Frank JD , Gabler J . 2006 . Reconstructing the University . Worldwide Shifts in Academia in the 20th Century . Stanford , CA : Stanford Univ . Press Frickel S . 2004a . Building an interdiscipline : collective action framing and the rise of genetic toxicology . Soc . Probl . 51 : 269 – 87 Frickel S . 2004b . Chemical Consequences : Environmental Mutagens , Scientist Activism , and the Rise of Genetic Toxicology . New Brunswick , NJ : Rutgers Univ . Press Frickel S , Gross N . 2005 . A general theory of scientiﬁc / intellectual movements . Am . Sociol . Rev . 70 : 204 – 32 Frodeman R , Klein JT , Mitcham C . 2009 . The Oxford Handbook of Interdisciplinarity . Oxford : Oxford Univ . Press Frodeman R , Mitcham C . 2007 . New directions in interdisciplinarity : broad , deep , and critical . Bull . Sci . Technol . Soc . 27 ( 6 ) : 506 – 14 Friedman RS , Friedman RC . 1982 . The role of university organized research units in academic science . Natl . Sci . Found . Rep . NTIS PB 82 - 253394 , Cent . Study High . Educ . , Pa . State Univ . Fuller S . 1991 . Disciplinary boundaries and the rhetoric of the social sciences . Poet . Today 12 : 301 – 25 Fuller S . 2003 . Interdisciplinarity : the loss of the heroic vision in the marketplace of ideas . Prepared for Rethinking Interdisciplinarity , Interdisciplines , Paris , Oct . 1 . http : / / www . interdisciplines . org / interdisciplinarity / papers / 3 Fuller S . 2004 . Philosophy , Rhetoric , and the End of Knowledge . Madison : Univ . Wis . Press . 2nd ed . 62 Jacobs · Frickel A nnu . R e v . S o c i o l . 2009 . 35 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O h i o S t a t e U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y on 05 / 04 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV381 - SO35 - 03 ARI 17 March 2009 22 : 6 Gabler J , Frank JD . 2005 . Natural sciences in the university : change and variation of the 20th century . Sociol . Educ . 78 : 183 – 206 Gale Group . 2008 . Gale’s Ready Reference Shelf . Farmington Hills , MI : Gale . http : / / galenet . gale . com / a / acp / db / grr / index . html Galison P , Stump DJ . 1996 . The Disunity of Science : Boundaries , Contexts , and Power . Stanford , CA : Stanford Univ . Press Gieryn TF . 1999 . Cultural Boundaries of Science : Credibility on the Line . Chicago : Chicago Univ . Press Gmur M . 2003 . Co - citation analysis and the search for invisible colleges : a methodological evaluation . Scientometrics 57 ( 1 ) : 27 – 57 Graham L , Lepenies W , Weingart P , eds . 1983 . Functions and Uses of Disciplinary Histories . Dordrecht / Boston / Lancaster : D . Reidel Guston DH . 2000 . Between Science and Politics : Assuring the Integrity and Productivity of Research . New York : Cambridge Univ . Press Hackett EJ . 2000 . Interdisciplinary research initiatives at the U . S . National Science Foundation . See Weingart & Stehr 2000 , pp . 248 – 59 Hackett E , Rhoten D . 2008 . The Snowbird Charrette : an experimental study of interdisciplinary collabora - tion in the design of environmental research . SSRC White Pap . Soc . Sci . Res . Counc . , New York . http : / / programs . ssrc . org / ki / ﬁs / pubs Howey RM , Savage KS , Verbeeten MJ , Van Hoof HB . 1999 . Tourism and hospitality research journals : cross - citations among research communities . Tourism Manag . 20 ( 1 ) : 133 – 39 Hulme D , Toye J . 2006 . The case for cross - disciplinary social science research on poverty , inequality and well - being . J . Dev . Stud . 42 ( 7 ) : 1085 – 107 Jacso P . 2005 . As we may search—comparison of major features of the Web of Science , Scopus and Google Scholar citation - based and citation - enhanced databases . Curr . Sci . 89 ( 9 ) : 1537 – 47 Klein JT . 1990 . Interdisciplinarity : History , Theory and Practice . Detroit : Wayne State Univ . Press Klein JT . 1996 . Crossing Boundaries : Knowledge , Disciplinarities , and Interdisciplinarities . Charlottesville : Univ . Press Va . Klein JT . 2000 . A conceptual vocabulary of interdisciplinary science . See Weingart & Stehr 2000 , pp . 3 – 24 Klein JT . 2006 . Afterword : the emergent literature on interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary research evalu - ation . Res . Eval . 15 : 75 – 80 Knorr Cetina K . 1999 . Epistemic Cultures : How the Sciences Make Knowledge . Cambridge , MA : Harvard Univ . Press Kockelmans JJ , ed . 1979 . Interdisciplinarity and Higher Education . University Park : Pa . State Univ . Press Kohler RE . 1982 . From Medical Chemistry to Biochemistry : The Making of a Biomedical Discipline . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge Univ . Press Kohler RE . 1991 . Partners in Science : Foundations and Natural Scientists , 1900 – 1945 . Chicago : Univ . Chicago Press LamontM . 2009 . HowProfessorsThink : InsidetheCuriousWorldofAcademicJudgment . Cambridge , MA : Harvard Univ . Press . In press Lamont M , Mallard G , Guetzkow J . 2006 . Beyond blind faith : overcoming the obstacles to interdisciplinary evaluation . Res . Eval . 15 ( 1 ) : 43 – 55 Lamont M , Molnar V . 2002 . The study of boundaries in the social sciences . Annu . Rev . Sociol . 28 : 167 – 95 Latour B . 1987 . Science in Action . Milton Keynes : Open Univ . Press Latour B , Woolgar S . 1979 ( 1986 ) . Laboratory Life : The Construction of Scientiﬁc Facts . Princeton , NJ : Princeton Univ . Press Lattuca LR . 2001 . Creating Interdisciplinarity : Interdisciplinary Research and Teaching among College and University Faculty . Nashville , TN : Vanderbilt Univ . Press Lemaine G , MacLoed R , Mulkay M , Weingart P . 1976 . Perspectives on the Emergence of Scientiﬁc Disciplines . Chicago : Aldine Lenoir T . 1997 . Instituting Science : The Cultural Production of Scientiﬁc Disciplines . Stanford , CA : Stanford Univ . Press Levitt JM , Thelwall M . 2008 . Is multi - disciplinary research more highly cited ? A macrolevel study . J . Am . Soc . Inf . Sci . Technol . 59 : 1973 – 84 www . annualreviews . org • Interdisciplinarity 63 A nnu . R e v . S o c i o l . 2009 . 35 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O h i o S t a t e U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y on 05 / 04 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV381 - SO35 - 03 ARI 17 March 2009 22 : 6 Mair H . 2006 . The potential of interdisciplinarity for leisure research . Leis . Sci . 28 ( 2 ) : 197 – 202 MallardG , LamontM , GuetzkowJ . 2009 . Fairnessasappropriateness : negotiatingepistemologicaldifferences in peer review . Sci . Technol . Hum . Values . In press Mansilla VB , Duraising ED . 2007 . Targeted assessment of students’ interdisciplinary work : an empirically grounded framework proposed . J . High . Educ . 78 : 215 – 37 Mansilla VB , Gardner H . 2003 . Assessing interdisciplinary work at the frontier : an empirical exploration of symptoms of quality . Prepared for Rethinking Interdisciplinarity , Interdisciplines , Paris , Dec . 1 . http : / / www . interdisciplines . org / interdisciplinarity / papers / 6 McKeown T . 1976 . The Modern Rise of Population . New York : Acad . Press McLaughlin NG . 2008 . Collaborative circles and their discontents : revisiting conﬂict and creativity in Frank - furt School Critical Theory . Sociologica . doi : 10 . 2383 / 27714 Mellon Foundation . 2008 . New directions fellowships . http : / / www . mellon . org / grant programs / programs / higher - education - and - scholarship / new - direction - fellowships / # ProgramDescription Meyer M , Persson O . 1998 . Nanotechnology—interdisciplinarity , patterns of collaboration and differences in application . Scientometrics 42 ( 2 ) : 195 – 205 Moody J . 2004 . The structure of a social science collaboration network : disciplinary cohesion , 1963 – 1999 . Am . Sociol . Rev . 69 : 213 – 38 Mukerji C . 1989 . A Fragile Power : Scientists and the State . Princeton , NJ : Princeton Univ . Press National Academy of Sciences . 2004 . Facilitating Interdisciplinary Research . Washington , DC : Natl . Acad . Press National Institutes of Health . 2007 . NIH launches interdisciplinary research consortia . http : / / www . nih . gov / news / pr / sep2007 / od - 06 . htm National Science Foundation . 2000 . Science and Engineering Indicators—2000 . Arlington , VA : Natl . Sci . Found . http : / / www . nsf . gov / statistics / seind00 / pdfstart . htm Newell WH , ed . 1998 . Interdisciplinarity : Essays from the Literature . New York : Coll . Entr . Exam . Board Nicolaisen J . 2007 . Citation analysis . Annu . Rev . Inf . Sci . Technol . 41 : 609 – 41 Nowotny H , Scott P , Gibbons M . 2001 . Re - Thinking Science : Knowledge and the Public in an Age of Uncertainty . Cambridge , UK : Polity Pickering A . 1993 . Anti - discipline or narratives of illusion . In Knowledges : Historical and Critical Studies in Disciplinarity , ed . E Messer - Davidow , DR Shumway , DJ Sylvan , pp . 103 – 22 . Charlottesville / London : Univ . Va . Press Pickering A . 1995 . Cyborg history and the World War II regime . Perspect . Sci . 3 : 1 – 48 Pieters R , Baumgartner H . 2002 . Who talks to whom ? Intra - and interdisciplinary communication of eco - nomics journals . J . Econ . Lit . 40 : 483 – 509 Porter AL , Chubin DE . 1985 . An indicator of cross - disciplinary research . Scientometrics 8 : 161 – 76 Preston S . 1975 . The changing relation between mortality and economic development . Popul . Stud . 29 : 231 – 48 Preston SH . 2007 . Response : on ‘The Changing Relation between Mortality and Level of Economic Devel - opment . ’ Int . J . Epidemiol . 36 : 502 – 3 Powell WW , Snellman K . 2004 . The knowledge economy . Annu . Rev . Sociol . 30 : 199 – 220 Powell WW , White DR , Koput KW , Owen - Smith J . 2005 . Network dynamics and ﬁeld evolution : the growth of interorganizational collaboration in the life sciences . Am . J . Sociol . 110 : 1132 – 205 Rhoten D . 2005 . Interdisciplinary research : trend or transition . Items Issues 5 : 6 – 11 RhotenD , O’ConnorE , HackettE . 2008 . Theactofcollaborativecreationandtheartofintegrativecreativity : originality , disciplinarity , and interdisciplinarity . Thesis 11 ( November ) 83 – 108 Rhoten D , Parker A . 2004 . Risks and rewards of an interdisciplinary research path . Science 306 : 2046 Rhoten D , Pﬁrman S . 2006 . Women in interdisciplinary science : exploring preferences and consequences . Res . Policy 36 : 56 – 75 Rinia EJ , Van Leeuwen TN , Bruins EW , Van Vuren HG , Van Raan AFJ , et al . 2001 . Citation delay in interdisciplinary knowledge exchange . Scientometrics 51 ( 1 ) : 293 – 309 Rinia EJ , Van Leeuwen TN , Van Raan AFJ . 2002 . Impact measures of interdisciplinary research in physics . Scientometrics 53 ( 2 ) : 241 – 48 Rojas F . 2007 . From Black Power to Black Studies : How a Radical Social Movement Became an Academic Discipline . Baltimore , MD : Johns Hopkins Univ . Press 64 Jacobs · Frickel A nnu . R e v . S o c i o l . 2009 . 35 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O h i o S t a t e U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y on 05 / 04 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV381 - SO35 - 03 ARI 17 March 2009 22 : 6 Sa C . 2008 . Interdisciplinary strategies in U . S . research universities . High . Educ . 55 : 537 – 52 Salter L , Hearn A , eds . 1996 . Outside the Lines : Issues in Interdisciplinary Research . Montreal : McGill - Queens Univ . Press Schweber L . 2006 . Disciplining Statistics : Demography and Vital Statistics in France and England , 1830 – 1885 . Durham , NC : Duke Univ . Press Schummer J . 2004 . Multidisciplinarity , interdisciplinarity , and patterns of research collaboration in nanoscience and nanotechnology . Scientometrics 59 ( 3 ) : 425 – 65 Shapin S . 1995 . Here and everywhere : sociology of scientiﬁc knowledge . Annu . Rev . Sociol . 21 : 289 – 321 Sherif M , Sherif CW , eds . 1969 . Interdisciplinary Relationships in the Social Sciences . Chicago : Aldine Shinn T . 1999 . Change or mutation ? Reﬂections on the foundations of contemporary science . Soc . Sci . Inf . 38 : 149 – 76 Small H . 1999 . Visualizing science by citation mapping . J . Am . Soc . Inf . Sci . 50 ( 9 ) : 799 – 813 Small H , Grifﬁth BC . 1974 . The structure of scientiﬁc literatures 1 : identifying and graphing specialties . Sci . Stud . 4 : 17 – 40 SmelserNJ . 2003 . Oncomparativeanalysis , interdisciplinarityandinternationalizationinsociology . Int . Sociol . 18 : 643 – 57 Steinmetz G . 2007 . Transdisciplinarity as a nonimperial encounter : for an open sociology . Thesis 11 91 : 48 – 65 Strout E . 2006 . Stanford announces biggest campaign . Chron . High . Educ . Oct . 20 . http : / / chronicle . com / weekly / v53 / i09 / 09a03502 . htm Swidler A , Arditi J . 1994 . The new sociology of knowledge . Annu . Rev . Sociol . 20 : 305 – 29 TifﬁnR , TraillWB , MortimerS . 2006 . Foodchoiceinaninterdisciplinarycontext . J . Agric . Econ . 57 ( 2 ) : 213 – 20 Toescu EC . 2005 . Integration and interdisciplinarity in contemporary neurosciences . J . Cell . Mol . Med . 9 ( 3 ) : 529 – 30 Turner S . 2000 . What are disciplines ? And how is interdisciplinarity different ? See Weingart & Stehr 2000 , pp . 46 – 65 University of Michigan . 2008 . U - M to add 25 interdisciplinary junior faculty . May 5 . http : / / www . ns . umich . edu / htdocs / releases / story . php ? id = 6532 Van Leeuwen T , Tijssen R . 2000 . Interdisciplinary dynamics of modern science : analysis of cross - disciplinary citation ﬂows . Eval . Res . 9 ( 3 ) : 183 – 87 von Lengerke T . 2006 . Public health is an interdiscipline , and about wholes and parts—indeed , critical health psychology needs to join forces . J . Health Psychol . 11 ( 3 ) : 395 – 99 Wallerstein I , ed . 1996 . Open the Social Sciences : Report of the Gulbenkian Commission on the Restructuring of the Social Sciences . Stanford , CA : Stanford Univ . Press Weingart P . 2000 . Interdisciplinarity : the paradoxical discourse . See Weingart & Stehr 2000 , pp . 25 – 45 Weingart P , Mitchell SD , Richerson PJ , Massen S , eds . 1997 . Human by Nature : Between Biology and the Social Sciences . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Assoc . Weingart P , Stehr N . 2000 . Practising Interdisciplinarity . Toronto : Univ . Toronto Press Whitley R . 1984 . The Intellectual and Social Organization of the Sciences . Oxford : Clarendon Worster D . 1994 . Nature’s Economy : A History of Ecological Ideas . New York : Cambridge Univ . Press www . annualreviews . org • Interdisciplinarity 65 A nnu . R e v . S o c i o l . 2009 . 35 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O h i o S t a t e U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y on 05 / 04 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y .