Content from this work may be used under the terms of theCreativeCommonsAttribution 3 . 0 licence . Any further distribution of this work must maintain attribution to the author ( s ) and the title of the work , journal citation and DOI . Published under licence by IOP Publishing Ltd The 6th International Conference on Eco Engineering Development 2022 ( ICEED 2022 ) IOP Conf . Series : Earth and Environmental Science 1169 ( 2023 ) 012069 IOP Publishing doi : 10 . 1088 / 1755 - 1315 / 1169 / 1 / 012069 1 The Study of Creative Process in Problem Solving Waste Material Into Commercial Product Andriano Simarmata , Doni Morika , Bayu Ramadhan Wardani Interior Design Department , School of Design , Bina Nusantara University , Bandung , Indonesia Email : andriano . simarmata @ binus . ac . id Abstract . Creativity is the rationale possessed by humans in which conscious and unconscious processes occur in problem solving and the creation of a work product . Creativity in the process of creating each individual , especially in the field of design education , can be trained by giving stimuli based on the problems obtained in the surrounding environment . This research considers the ecosystem problem through the environment , especially industrial waste with rattan material , which accounts for almost 10 % of waste from raw materials used every month . The waste treatment becomes a medium for sharpening student creativity . The study was conducted by conducting a project design that processes waste problems into new , more commercial products to see the creative process . Research involves lecturers and experts from the design industry related to the process and achievement of creativity based on thinking patterns in solving a problem . Various results were found where the achievement of creativity through the process was successful and some failed . This design project - based training is a challenge for lecturers to be able to improve their role performance and direct students as young designers to sharpen their creative abilities . 1 . Introduction Creativity is a process that is closely related to design activities . This activity is carried out by applying the logic of knowledge , science , technology , and artistic intuition which will ultimately provide a subjective solution in the form of design . Creativity itself is a continuous process that refers to one ' s ability to process information and produce something new and original [ 1 ] . In society , the role and contribution of higher education institutions that have an intellectual basis are also needed in forming new individuals who can overcome the problems that exist around them , of course in a creative way . In life , creativity is needed in every aspect of life even though there is no standard measure related to the criteria of creativity . Creativity can be trained and have a real possibility to develop [ 2 ] . So that during the learning process students should be trained to hone their sensibility of creativity in improving life skills . Training can be done by giving stimuli in the form of problems that can be found in the surrounding environment , including processing waste problems . Processing of waste from unused residual production can be said to be one of the solution actions because it sees opportunities in optimizing unused resources into other efficient products to be used as efficient products . Based on the data , industrial waste accounts for at least 10 % of waste every month . Seeing this potential , this research study was initiated by involving design students as participants as a method to sharpen creativity . With the contribution of design knowledge , it is expected to be able to stimulate the creative process by creating products in the form of furniture and crafts such as home decor from waste or industrial production residues . This research would be interesting because of studying the creative process in which each student is unique and has a The 6th International Conference on Eco Engineering Development 2022 ( ICEED 2022 ) IOP Conf . Series : Earth and Environmental Science 1169 ( 2023 ) 012069 IOP Publishing doi : 10 . 1088 / 1755 - 1315 / 1169 / 1 / 012069 2 different way of learning , it will be seen how they are in the creative process using the theory of Wallas [ 3 ] . From previous research , there are two conventional approaches to studying the concept of creativity , One approach is to study people ' s explicit theories of creativity in which psychologists use some creativity assessment , and the second approach is to study the implicit theories by asking , psychologists , lecturers or expertise about their views of creativity [ 4 ] . Because the scope of this research is the design area , it will tend to use the principle of an implicit approach , by looking at depth analysis from the point of view of experts related to design education and design practitioners . 2 . Creative : Theory , Stimuli , and Process A . Theory of Creative Process In his theory , Graham Wallas ( 1926 ) proposes a model of the creative process in terms of alternations of conscious and unconscious activity [ 5 ] . By developing Henri Poincare’s idea , He distinguishes the creative process into four major stages that are known ; 1 ) Preparation , when the problem is investigated in all directions 2 ) Incubation , a period of ‘not consciously thinking about t he problem’ 3 ) Illumination , ‘the appearance of the happy idea’ 4 ) Verification , the conscious testing of the solution By it process , the preparation stage means as centres on initial conscious work on problem , in which the thinker immerses him or herself deeply in the problem , becoming familiar with it and attempting solutions [ 5 ] . The second stage , incubation is an unconscious work where the thinker is still thinking about the problem . The discovery of a new potentially useful combination of the unconscious led to the third stage , the conscious experience of illumination . Finally , the idea that produced the illumination requires verification so that adequacy can be determined . Each step is continuous and carries out an active pattern of conscious and unconscious roles . Based on Wallas’s theory period of more or less unconscious Incubation and Illumination is central of the creative process , flanked by more of less conscious stage of preparation and verification [ 5 ] . B . Creative Stimuli Creativity is a typical meeting point between three psychological attributes : intelligence , cognitive style , and personality / motivation [ 6 ] . In addition to these aspects , environmental factors influence human creativity in the environment , providing stimulation and opportunities for creativity to emerge [ 7 - 8 ] . Every human being is born with reason , and during his life , he continues to learn with the conditions in which he lives . As long as humans continue to be able to think and have the desire to find something new , then creativity continues to grow and the environment becomes the stimuli . Creativity is essential because , in the end , it becomes an individual ' s ability to develop in his life in the future . Fostering creativity in education is intended to address many concerns . This includes dealing with ambiguous problems , coping with the fast - changing world , and facing an uncertain future . Fostering creativity in education is intended to address many concerns . In a summary , this includes dealing with ambiguous problems , coping with the fast - changing world and facing an uncertain future [ 9 ] . The education period is a process of creativity honing where the educational curriculum directs students to train their cognitive abilities . Creative abilities in students can be honed through training efforts , especially in their cognitive abilities [ 10 ] . People’s creative performances nowadays are becoming more important in modern societies [ 4 ] , so students must be prepared with creativity and motivation during their education . In higher education , lecturers play a vital role in motivating students to generate creative thinking , mainly while the teaching and learning process occurs [ 11 ] . In the end , the three psychological attributes mentioned can form superior designer candidates and can contribute to solving problems that are often encountered in the future . The 6th International Conference on Eco Engineering Development 2022 ( ICEED 2022 ) IOP Conf . Series : Earth and Environmental Science 1169 ( 2023 ) 012069 IOP Publishing doi : 10 . 1088 / 1755 - 1315 / 1169 / 1 / 012069 3 C . Top - Down Creative Problem solving Wallas states that creativity is about the creative cognitive process or creative problem solving [ 3 ] . Creative problem solving means problem solving skills with creativity [ 11 - 12 ] . At the beginning of 1963 , Osborn proposed six stages of creativity , 1 ) problem orientation , 2 ) preparation , 3 ) hypothesis , 4 ) incubation , 5 ) synthesis , and 6 ) confirmation . Through any discussion in 1995 , Osborn integrated his creative skill process in solving problems in five - stage , namely 1 ) facts - finding , 2 ) problem - finding , 3 ) ideal - finding , 4 ) solution finding , and 5 ) acceptance finding [ 11 ] . In principle , creative problem solving involves knowing what the individual has previously possessed . From structure in Figure 1 is called top - down processing because information at the top of the system works down into the earlier flow of information to affect those processes . In analyses of many cognitive phenomena , psychologists have gained and found evidence for an important directive role played by knowledge in such processes as storage to recall information from memory , selectively attending to the stimuli in the environment , forming images , problem solving , and language comprehension and production and known as top - down processing . The situation would be different if using bottom - up processing since knowledge had an important role in these systems . In this study , the role of the environment is a situation that provides stimuli , while knowledge is material that has been obtained by students during college . Since the creative involves cognitive as one of its attributes , then cognitive attributes also participate in creative thinking process activities , including 1 ) memory as remembering something , 2 ) planning , how to carry out some activity before doing it , 3 ) Judging , the outcome of anticipated action will be acceptable , dan 4 ) reasoning , perceiving a general pattern in the set of specific experiences . 3 . Methodology This research was conducted and modified by a design project [ 14 ] , involving 10 participants ( three professional lecturers from the field of design and furniture , two RnD Rattan Product Expertise , and five students ) . Each participant has their role in the research carried out by the design project method . The experts who participated as judges were two experts from two rattan companies who were experienced in the export of rattan products and were responsible for RnD experience in the industry . And the student participants were from a design background , so all student participants already have fundamental insight into design . The design project scheme consists of several sessions that begin with providing insight related to natural rattan materials and their industrial waste delivered by the lecturer ( Table 1 ) . Table 1 . The Organization of Creative Process Stage Wallas’s Four Stages ( 1926 ) Discussion Design Project Activities Preparation The problem is first perceived and defined ( Conscious stage ) Lecturing : Rattan material and waste Design Brief Knowledge Perceptual processing of sensory information Input From Environment Sensory analysis of input Conscious experience and directed activities : Problem solving and creative thingking Figure 1 Top - Down Processes : The Use of Knowledge in Problem Solving and Creative thinking The 6th International Conference on Eco Engineering Development 2022 ( ICEED 2022 ) IOP Conf . Series : Earth and Environmental Science 1169 ( 2023 ) 012069 IOP Publishing doi : 10 . 1088 / 1755 - 1315 / 1169 / 1 / 012069 4 Incubation , In the mind , manipulate the problem ( Unconscious Stage ) Group Discussion Brainstorming Illumination Due to the limited time , finally , students decided on the solution ( Conscious – Conscious Stage ) 2D sketch on paper or 3D model making Verification Stage Evaluate the final design as the final decision ( Conscious stage ) Completing design in a presentation board Judging by Lecture and Expertise In the next stage , students were asked to explore designs from brief materials ( Table 2 ) . After getting the results , the design exploration in presentation and visual sketches will become data that lecturers and industry experts will assess how the creative process is done ( Table 3 ) . Assessments carried out include ; fact - finding , problem - finding , ideas - finding , solution - finding , and acceptance finding , each of which is seen from the technical capabilities , innovation , design development potency , commercial potency , and validity of the product . Students are also given a post - design project questionnaire to see how their response to waste industry problems as an opportunity and motivation for creative thinking ( Table 4 ) . 4 . Finding In this study , all sketches ( 15 products in Table 2 ) done by students from the design project will be collected and analysed . Lecturers and experts analysed the students’ work together to check , and validate the originality of student work in innovation , development / refinement potency , and also a commercial possibility . Table 2 . Design Project Result No Product Design Materials ( Rattan Waste ) Design Innovation and Creativity Design Development Potency Commercial Potency Expertise Validity 1 Wall Hanger Small rattan core Low High High Needs to be refined : Main structure Commercial market : USA , Australia , Korea 2 Decorative Mirror 1 Small rattan Core Low High High Needs to be refined : Main structure , shape , and supports 3 Decorative Mirror 2 Small rattan core Low Low High Detected as replicate / plagiarism 4 Glasses Frame and Strap Medium rattan core and rattan peel High Medium Low Needs to be refined : Main structure , shape , and support 5 Door Handle Small rattan core and rattan peel High High Medium Needs to be refined : Ergonomic shape and technical knit system 6 Fashion Belt Rattan peel High High High New rattan invention as a “fashion statement” 7 Quran Stand Medium rattan core Medium / High Low Medium Needs to be refined : Main structure , ergonomics , and human habits 8 Tape Dispenser Rattan peel Medium Low Low Quite common , and not too vital for its functions and needs . 9 Phone Holder Small rattan core Medium Low Low Can ' t be created due to the limited rattan characteristic 10 Cigarette Box Rattan peel Medium Low Low Limited to the niche market 11 Jewellery Box Rattan peel Medium Medium Medium / High Needs to be refined : shape , dimension , and the system Commercial market : Asia ( Japan , China , Korea ) 12 Earing - Fashion Rattan peel Medium / High High High Needs to be refined : Shapes , dimensions “potential as a fashion statement” The 6th International Conference on Eco Engineering Development 2022 ( ICEED 2022 ) IOP Conf . Series : Earth and Environmental Science 1169 ( 2023 ) 012069 IOP Publishing doi : 10 . 1088 / 1755 - 1315 / 1169 / 1 / 012069 5 Commercial market : Asia ( Korea ) 13 Stationary Shelf Medium rattan core and rattan peel Low Medium Medium Needs to be refined : Shapes , dimensions 14 Stationary Basket 1 Small rattan core and rattan peel Low Medium High Needs to be refined : Shapes , dimensions and weaving system 15 Stationary Basket 2 Small rattan core and rattan peel Low Medium High Needs to be refined : Shapes , dimensions and weaving system The project design process and each product design result were analysed and discussed to reveal the creative process as findings in this study . Findings are described in Table 3 which highlights how design problem solving works . Table 3 . Creative Problem solving in Design Project Project Design Discussion Finding Wallas’s Stages ( 1926 ) Osborn Stage ( 1963 ) Preparation Problem Orientation Self Interest Phase : highly engaged Students have high enthusiasm for the exploration and development of designs . Preparation Understanding the Problem Phase : medium to high Students quickly understand sustainable issues involving waste materials Incubation Hypothesis Design approach method Phase : medium to low Experiment and explore Field observations Through experience during the internship Observation via internet Incubation Illumination Synthesis Product Results Phase : low , medium , and high peak creativity It comprises 15 products with a relatively high level of product diversity with different types and functions . Verification Stage Confirmation Practical Ability Phase : low , medium , and high peak creativity Creativity varies from simple to complex Phase : 40 % high and excellent Phase : 60 % in average to low Design Development Potency Phase : 40 % high and excellent Phase : 60 % in average to low Presentation techniques in pictures Dominant still meets the standard ( not complete dimensions , details , material specs , etc ) Commercial Potency The average product is in the commercial category , and others have high commercial potential . After the design project has been completed , the lecturer collects the students ' self - evaluation responses ( Table 4 ) to see the formation of their self - reflection . The data also provides information on whether they will have the motivation and self - efficacy to face the same problems in the future with conditions that may be more complex than this design project experience . Table 4 . Student Evaluation and Self Reflection Topic Activities Finding Self Reflection Satisfaction with Design Skills Some students feel dissatisfied with the results of manual sketch drawings . Self Efficacy Students are enthusiastic about design exploration and development . Constraint Dominantly lack manual drawing skills Lack of understanding of renewable ideas Difficulty getting inspired to implement ideas Feeling not have enough time Motivation towards Waste Inspired to contribute to the action of sustainability Future Hope Positive response , full of self - motivation to contribute to answering environmental problems creatively . The 6th International Conference on Eco Engineering Development 2022 ( ICEED 2022 ) IOP Conf . Series : Earth and Environmental Science 1169 ( 2023 ) 012069 IOP Publishing doi : 10 . 1088 / 1755 - 1315 / 1169 / 1 / 012069 6 5 . Discussion The design project results from the workshop were analyzed by three lecturers and two expert practitioners to ascertain the creative problem solving approach ; by discussing the level of creativity , design development potential , and the commercial value of the designed product . The discussion will be described based on Tables 3 and 4 . 5 . 1 . Creative Problem solving Project . The finding shows that the creative problem solving process in this research showed a variety of results . Starting from the process that is considered to be perfectly successful because he is able to show a comprehensive process in thinking , giving decisions and good design execution , or he is considered a failure because he is wrong in determining the action in one of the steps which will be explained in the points below : • Understanding the Problem . Findings show that students highly engage with the lecturer ' s material because they already have an in - depth understanding of the basics and principles of design . According to the lecturer , students do not experience difficulties because students are familiar with and already have general Knowledge related to the curriculum that has been taught during students studying in the previous year . Through the provision of material , students easily understand because . It happened because the role of memory that recalls their thinking exhibits continuity with the past [ 13 ] . The students already have an in - depth understanding of the basics and principles of design . According to the lecturer , students do not experience difficulties because students are familiar with and already have general Knowledge related to the curriculum that has been taught during students studying in the previous year . Through the provision of material , students easily understand because . It happened because of the role of memory . • Self Efficacy . Findings show that the self - efficacy of students with the material is very high , considering that rattan is a material that is often encountered in their daily lives . However , they have not had the opportunity to explore it compared to other materials such as wood or metal . There are also new facts about the nature of rattan which has high flexibility and strength properties that are different from wood materials . Exploration of organic and flexible forms is the advantage of rattan material , providing new opportunities for new designs and shapes . Self - efficacy becomes a critical assessment considering the importance of individual beliefs about the ability to perform tasks , achieve goals , and overcome obstacles [ 7 ] [ 15 ] . Assessment of self - efficacy becomes the initial capital of students in influencing goals , overcoming problems , and persistence in trying to face difficulties . Students also feel very interested because the boundaries of the problems given are specific , namely those related to waste , so it is psychologically more accessible for them to identify their following actions . • Idea - Generating Method . The activity of design is all about generating new solutions to the problem . This research provides a design brief as a problem statement about rattan waste material to solve . This design brief has goals , constraints , and criteria by which a successful solution might be recognised by giving suggest a variety of possible solutions . This project allowed students to choose the ideal approach that suits them . Idea generating method is practically based on the top - down process of solving a particular problem using design knowledge they had . Findings show that the student had a variety of approaches to generating ideas , such as ; inspiration from the internet , observation on the field ( retail , rattan industry , craftsmen ) , and even from their ideas based on experience while doing an internship in industry . Through further observation of the student , lecturers found that some students had difficulties in generating ideas since the design brief has constraints in limited time . • Product Result . The products produced are diverse , consisting of 15 products in several categories , such as fashion accessories , stationary , small furniture , and home decor , which The 6th International Conference on Eco Engineering Development 2022 ( ICEED 2022 ) IOP Conf . Series : Earth and Environmental Science 1169 ( 2023 ) 012069 IOP Publishing doi : 10 . 1088 / 1755 - 1315 / 1169 / 1 / 012069 7 predominantly consider functional aspects . The products produced include decorative mirrors , clothes hangers , eyeglass frames , straps , handle door , belt , Al - Quran stand , tape dispenser , phone holder , cigarette case , jewellery box , earing , stationary shelf , stationary bowl , and box . Based on the identification of the originality of the product , it turns out that one of the fifteen products indicated plagiarism or imitating designs that have been circulating on the internet . Unfortunately , inspiration from the internet can also entirely limit creativity and close sensitivity to awards for copyrighted works . This is an important note for educators , especially in the field of design , to provide an understanding of the other side of the use of the internet , which can be misused for inspiration and eventually be trapped in conditions that can be detrimental to some parties and are against the law . • Practical Ability . The level of creativity found is varied , and is judged by the products that have been produced , including products that are new or original , products that are useful in functions , or products that are aesthetically valuable . Students’ interpretations of solutions to problems and their creative abilities consist of three types : low , medium , and high . The finding is that the factor of using the inspirational approach affects creative ability . Internal sources of inspiration usually provide more motivation to think and elaborate ( develop , enrich , and detail ) an idea [ 7 ] . Individuals will have a high level of creative ability if it is based on an internal drive to optimize their potential ; on the contrary , it will be low if , during the incubation period , they do not use time properly and do not explore the potential knowledge that has been studied previously . Visually , the criteria for creativity are assessed from the complexity , innovation or novelty achieved . It was found that some of the products have novelty designs with new features that have not been found in any market . This is a crucial highlight considering that innovations are created from complex thinking and self - expression . However , there are still gaps where there is an act of plagiarism in one of the products produced . Analysed from the source of inspiration scheme , it can be stated that the source of inspiration from the internet or can be said to be sourced from outside has a powerful influence on encouraging students when faced with the impasse in thinking . External factors that encourage individuals to create by imitating the work of others will make the individual ' s creative ability low . This must be in stark contrast to the theory of creativity that comes from within . • Design Development Potency . The product designs have diversity and development potency that can support the uniqueness of the product . Judging from the mapping , ideation from perspective drawings becomes the basis for lecturers and experts to state and determine the potential for design development . Designs with complete information and good working drawings have a higher potential for design development . Through the identification of visual forms , a new product made with a functional approach from products circulating in the market is also a consideration where the product still has the potential to be refined because it already has commercial interests and has market taste . • Presentation Techniques . The ability of students to visualize ideas into product sketches dominantly lacks of detailed information . The whole idea and information must be communicated in a worksheet . Students are more dominant in providing working drawings using front , top , side , and isometric drawing methods . However , the drawback is that students are still negligent in providing information related to the specific material they want , descriptions of the type of colour , and the sizing dimensions . Some students are aware of the importance of the latest details and features they want to achieve from the limitations of the waste material . They begin to expose unique details they want to highlight , such as the type of webbing , technical installation , or technical use of furniture products . • Commercial Potency . Commercial potency is an aspect that can be predicted from the resulting design category . The most dominant commercial potential is the product from the decoration category in the form of mirrors and storage media such as baskets . That product category already has its market demand and export prospect . The reality in the field to achieve exports The 6th International Conference on Eco Engineering Development 2022 ( ICEED 2022 ) IOP Conf . Series : Earth and Environmental Science 1169 ( 2023 ) 012069 IOP Publishing doi : 10 . 1088 / 1755 - 1315 / 1169 / 1 / 012069 8 of a product has a specific quality range and has one of the advantages , between good design and good quality , efficiency ( saving materials ) , or affordable prices . Not infrequently , aspects of the design approach are not considered because they focus on functional aspects . However , the commercial potential can also be mapped based on the destination country of the product being exported . Certain countries sometimes require a quality approach from a high control stage to an optimal design ( clean , compact , premium ) with the application of traditional oriental style interiors ; classics , Japanese styles , Mediterranean , and others . However , there is also a trend where certain countries accept products with a contemporary style design approach ( unpolish , organic and natural , rustic ) with the application of contemporary bohemian and traditional interior styles . Because the product is a processed product from waste material , it will undoubtedly have weaknesses in terms of material quality , size , and limited connection system , so it tends to have a contemporary , unpolished style . For commercial and market potential , it also tends to be targeted at the targeted export market for locals or specific countries . 5 . 2 . Self Reflection Finally , the findings show that the end of the study is about evaluation and self - reflection that impact students ' motivation and behaviour in the future . Based on Table 4 it is found that there are several points to discuss : • In the beginning all students had a high sense of enthusiasm and curiosity towards the product design project because the issues of the design brief ( environmental and commercial ) were different from the design projects they did before . • Although the expectation for the final result would be excellent , some of the students feel dissatisfied with the results . Most of the students feel that they still lack the ability to be more creative because of visualisation and presentation in drawing techniques . Some are still not satisfied with their manual sketch drawings in forming 3Dimentional perspective / isometric views . On the other hand , the student with high manual sketching skills tends to be more stand out and more satisfied with the result . • Student dominantly interest in exploration activities is related to environmental aspects . The issue of environmental problems concerning this current generation . Students tend to have high empathy for nature and it becomes a stimulus to drive creativity from an environmental perspective . • Some students feel less able to express new ideas because of difficulties in finding inspiration due to time constraints . Although at the beginning they all were inspired to contribute to the action of sustainability and highly motivated to solve design problems related to waste . That statement is expected to make it a self - concept to more contribute to the action of sustainability . • The challenges through this design project activity made students aware of the many opportunities that could be done . In the end , resulting in a beneficial impact both on environmental awareness and also economic opportunities that could be obtained . This training is also a tool for each of the students to be more observant in problem solving with better creative design approaches for the future . 6 . Conclusion To conclude , the creative process is an activity that is directly related to design activities in which there is problem solving . Students who have been provided with design knowledge are retrained to be more sensitive to problem solving in a creative way . Through this creative activity , students have various knowledge and methods to be able to provide various design approaches , even though in this project there are gaps ( high and low creativity ) in the final result . Reminding that sometimes in the process students were unconsciously tempted to take shortcuts which ultimately lead them to act contrary to the creative process , and in the end , the resulting causes problem solving to fail . Also concluded that other variables are sufficient to encourage creativity , it is an internal encouragement in the form of a willingness to practice these abilities . In Creative learning , every student is unique and has a different way of learning . Lecturers have an important role to guide , leed and help students in their study processes , especially in project design studios The 6th International Conference on Eco Engineering Development 2022 ( ICEED 2022 ) IOP Conf . Series : Earth and Environmental Science 1169 ( 2023 ) 012069 IOP Publishing doi : 10 . 1088 / 1755 - 1315 / 1169 / 1 / 012069 9 by intense brainstorming , group discussion , mapping ideas , and others . Self - control , motivation and other things that come from within need to be stimulated by problems to arise empathy that form the student’s self - motivation in creative action in the future . References [ 1 ] Torrance E P 1993 Understanding Creativity : Where to Start ? Psychological Inquiry , 4 , 232 - 234 . [ 2 ] Karkockiene Daiva 2005 Creativity : Can it be Trained ? A Scientific Educology of Creativity . cd - International Journal of Educology [ 3 ] Wallas G 1926 The Art of Thought . New York , NY : Harcourt , Brace , & World . [ 4 ] Niu Weihua 2002 Contemporary Studies on the Concept of Creativity : the East and the West . [ 5 ] Pope Rob 2005 Creativity : Theory , History , Practice . Canda : Routledge . [ 6 ] Stenberg , Robert J , Edward E . Smith . 1988 . The Psychology of Human Thought . USA : Cambridge University Press . [ 7 ] Ghufron , M Nur 2010 Teori - Teori Psikologi . Jogjakarta [ 8 ] Munandar S C U 1977 Creativy and Education : A Study of Relationship Between Measusres of Creative Thinking and a Number of Educational Variables in Indonesians Primary and Secondary Schools . Jakarta : Dirjen Dikti Depdikbud . [ 9 ] Parkhurst H 1999 Confusion , Lack Of Consensus , And The Definition Of Creativity As A Construct . Journal of Creative Behavior , 33 , 1 - 21 [ 10 ] Junaidy D W , Anwar M F 2016 Rattan Furniture Design - Training Delivery towards Commercial Value of Commodity Sector . [ 11 ] Amran , M S , Kutty F M , Surat S 2019 Creative Problem solving ( CPS ) Skills among University Students . Creative Education , 10 , 3049 - 3058 . [ 12 ] Osborn A F 1963 Applied Imagination : Principles and Procedures of Creative Problem Solving ( 3rd Revised ed . ) . New York : Scribners . [ 13 ] Weisberg W , Robert 2006 Creativity : Understanding Innovation in Problem Solving , Science , Invention , and the Arts . Canada : John Wiley & Sons [ 14 ] Rosli D I , Sern L C , Chick S S N 2017 Creative Criteria to Develop Product Design in Life Skill Class Room . World Engineering Education Forum [ 15 ] Baron RA , Byrne D 1991 Social Psychology Understanding Human Interaction . Boston : Allyn & Bacon