Thinking Like A Scientist About Real - World Problems : The Cornell Institute for Research on Children Science Education Program $ Wendy M . Williams * , Paul B . Papierno , Matthew C . Makel , Stephen J . Ceci * Department of Human Development , Cornell University , Ithaca , NY 14853 , USA Abstract We describe a new educational program developed by the Cornell Institute for Research on Children ( CIRC ) , a research and outreach center funded by the National Science Foundation . Thinking Like A Scientist targets students from groups historically underrepresented in science ( i . e . , girls , people of color , and people from disadvantaged backgrounds ) , and trains these individuals to reason scientifically about everyday problems . In contrast to programs that are content based and which rely on disciplinary concepts and vocabulary within a specific domain of science ( e . g . , biology ) , Thinking Like A Scientist is domain - general and attempts to promote the transfer of scientific reasoning . Although the full evaluation of Thinking Like A Scientist must await more data , this article introduces the conceptual basis for the program and provides descriptions of its core themes and implementation . D 2003 Published by Elsevier Inc . Keywords : Scientific reasoning ; Education ; Disadvantaged students ; Minority students ; Female students ‘‘ Scientific thinking tends to be compartmentalized , viewed as relevant and accessible only to the narrow segment of the population who pursue scientific careers . If science education is to be successful , it is essential to counter this view , establishing the place that scientific thinking has in the lives of all students . A typical approach to this objective has been to try to connect the content of science to phenomena familiar in students’ everyday lives . An ultimately more powerful approach may be to connect the process of science to thinking processes that figure in ordinary people’s lives ’’ ( Kuhn , 1993a , p . 333 ) . 0193 - 3973 / $ - see front matter D 2003 Published by Elsevier Inc . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . appdev . 2003 . 11 . 002 $ This paper was submitted for consideration for publication in the special issue of the Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology honoring the professional legacy of Rodney R . Cocking . It is dedicated to his memory . * Corresponding authors . Tel . : + 1 - 607 - 255 - 2537 ; fax : + 1 - 607 - 255 - 9856 . E - mail addresses : wmw5 @ cornell . edu ( W . M . Williams ) , sjc9 @ cornell . edu ( S . J . Ceci ) . Applied Developmental Psychology 25 ( 2004 ) 107 – 126 1 . Introduction When the first author of this article was in school , back in the Pleistocene era , the science curriculum was rich in content . Lesson after lesson explored the phylogeny of mammals , plate tectonics , the moons of Jupiter , principles of botany , white blood cells , and disease—you name it . This author attended a high school specializing in science , then went on to major in science in college . Despite this intensive scientific steeping from ages 6 to 22 , however , not once were strategies for thinking scientifically ever articulated and elucidated as such . Students were thought ( and hoped ) to extract such principles of scientific reasoning as a result of in - depth instruction in specific content . Some did ( and many of them enjoy science to this day , using scientific thinking in their personal and professional lives ) , but others did not , and for this group , the specifics of the science lessons they learned are long forgotten . Quite frankly , even for those students who managed to extract the principles of scientific thinking and ultimately pursued careers in science , our memories of the content of the lessons we were taught are generally fuzzy at best . It is enough to make one wonder whether the way science is taught could potentially be improved so that , ideally , all students are left with a set of tools they can use to help them think rigorously and scientifically throughout their lives about a whole range of problems and issues , both professional and personal . Having a set of scientific thinking tools as students leave 12th grade would be optimal , even for those who do not pursue science education beyond high school . It was precisely this thinking that motivated the educational program developed by the Cornell Institute for Research on Children ( CIRC ) , which is called Thinking Like A Scientist . Thinking Like A Scientist seeks to reach students through innovative materials that train thinking and reasoning in the scientific method about problems in daily life . These skills , in particular , are associated with intellectual achievement and success in high school , college , and everyday life . Thinking Like A Scientist exercises taught by science and / or social science teachers focus on the following themes central to scientific reasoning applied to practical problems : ( a ) Ask the question : ‘‘What is science ? ’’ ; ( b ) Define the problem : See many sides ; ( c ) Distinguish fact from opinion : What constitutes evidence ? ; ( d ) Weigh evidence and make decisions ; ( e ) Move from science to society ; and ( f ) Revisit , reflect , and review . Through the lessons taught as part of this project , we hope to impart an understanding of how to analyze problems and think scientifically about everyday real - world problems . Our lessons also show how science can appropriately be used to inform public policy—they discuss how science impacts our society by contributing to policy decisions that affect all of us . Our lessons provide students with the scientific thinking tools we believe are essential to effective decision making in daily life . An important goal of this work is to seek ways to increase the representation in science careers of girls , people of color , and people from less - privileged backgrounds . In particular , we hope to encourage these students to continue their education beyond high school and possibly pursue careers in science in the future . To accomplish this goal , the program ( a ) utilizes lesson content that will interest students who may have been turned off to more traditional science instruction in the past , ( b ) incorporates discussions and activities that relate the material to students’ daily lives , ( c ) seeks students who match the demographic profile by working within schools in geographic areas that match this profile , and ( d ) concludes each lesson with an informational section on a variety of science careers and occupations . The explicit goal of this last aspect of the program is to raise students’ awareness of the various career options available , together with providing information about the training these careers require and how one can obtain this training despite economic hardship . W . M . Williams et al . / Applied Developmental Psychology 25 ( 2004 ) 107 – 126 108 We begin the description and evaluation of this program by reviewing the research on the development and training of scientific thinking , then move to discussing the concept of transfer of knowledge and its relevance to our goals . An actual lesson from our program is presented to show how the scientific thinking themes are instantiated in actual classroom activities . We analyze the problems and issues concerning the assessment of scientific thinking and show how we are evaluating students . Finally , we describe our goals for the upcoming years during which we will continue to develop and implement this instructional program . 2 . Background 2 . 1 . Literature on teaching scientific thinking To better understand how students can be taught how to think scientifically , it is helpful to understand how researchers , whose findings inform teaching practices , study the development of scientific reasoning . Koslowski ( 1996 ) distinguishes two prominent approaches to studying this development . The first approach focuses on content knowledge and conceptual reorganization . The alternative approach explores strategies used for informal hypothesis testing that are not specific to any content area . In her review of the literature on the development of scientific reasoning skills , Zimmerman ( 2000 ) provides a succinct overview of these domain - specific and domain - general approaches . The domain - specific approach requires the use of conceptual knowledge to solve a task in a particular domain of science . For example , in their study of participants’ reasoning about scientific processes , Miller and Bartch ( 1997 ) asked children and college students to consider the changeability of and explanations for biological , psychological , and mechanical functions . Pauen ( 1996 ) used a weight - pulling task to test children’s and adults’ interpretations of the physics of motion by requiring them to reason about the interaction of forces . Moreover , Hood ( 1995 , 1998 ) tested children’s reasoning via a displacement task that explored participants’ theories about gravity . Of interest to practitioners of this approach are conceptual changes , misconceptions , and the content and structure of naı¨ve mental models that people hold about particular scientific phenomena ( Zimmerman , 2000 ) . Contrary to the domain - specific approach , the domain - general approach to studying scientific thinking investigates experimental design and hypothesis testing . Of primary interest to this approach is the development of reasoning skills about causal relationships that are transferable to other domains of knowledge ( Zimmerman , 2000 ) . Accordingly , proponents of this approach have used multiple methods to investigate participants’ coordination of theories and evidence , which is considered requisite for the development of scientific thinking skills ( e . g . , Koslowski , 1996 ; Kuhn , Garcia - Mila , Zohar , & Anderson , 1995 ) . For example , Kuhn , Amsel , and O’Loughlin ( 1988 ) and Koslowski ( 1996 ) presented participants with evidence that was embedded within hypothetical scenarios ( e . g . , development of a stain remover ; strategies to increase book sales ) to investigate their evaluation of evidence ( with and without the influence of preconceived theories ) , their interpretations of causal relationships ( i . e . , by manipulating the covariation and independence of evidence ) , and their interpretations of divergent evidence . Researchers have also advocated the exploration of domain general strategies without disregarding participants’ domain - specific content knowledge ( e . g . , Kuhn , 1993a ) . Novel methodologies that have been employed by researchers include the use of the microgenetic method to study participants’ development of scientific reasoning strategies ( Kuhn et al . , 1995 ; Siegler & Crowley , 1991 ) and the examination of children’s and W . M . Williams et al . / Applied Developmental Psychology 25 ( 2004 ) 107 – 126 109 adults’ strategies for generating and interpreting evidence in the context of self - directed experimentation ( Schauble , 1996 ) . Akin to the dichotomy in the scientific reasoning literature , of primary concern to both researchers and science educators is how to best bring together domain - specific content with generalizeable reasoning strategies ( e . g . , thinking with the scientific method ) . One common theme is the importance of linking science to real - world contexts . Such strategies recognize the significance of scientific thinking beyond the context of science itself ( Kuhn , 1997 ) . In this view , a number of researchers have emphasized the links between scientific and informal reasoning ( Kuhn , 1993a , 1993b ) , recognizing the similarities between the latter and scientific inquiry in terms of the ways in which , for example , scientists utilize rules of argumentative thinking to communicate scientific claims ( Jimenez - Aleixandre , Rodriguez , & Duschl , 2000 ) and coordinate theory with supporting and divergent evidence ( Bell & Linn , 2000 ) . Our educational program also emphasizes the multiple links between scientific and everyday thinking and reasoning ; in fact , we built upon these links to derive the six themes underlying the program , which represent metacognitive strategies for thinking like a scientist about real - world problems . 2 . 2 . Training metacognition and academic success Over the past 20 years , research on higher order thinking skills has established a firm connection between metacognitive skills and academic success . For example , metacognition has been associated with both intelligence ( Sternberg , 1986 ) and improved learning ( Borkowski , Carr , & Pressley , 1987 ) . In this light , and as educators recognize the importance of students’ ability to transfer knowledge and skills across multiple contexts ( e . g . , Halpern , 1996 ) , the training of metacognitive skills has become an increasingly important component of children’s education . Within specific domains , researchers have investigated metacognitive skills training in , for example , mathematical problem solving ( e . g . , Desoete , Roeyers , & De - Clercq , 2003 ) , reading ( e . g . , Schmitt & Hopkins , 1993 ) , and memory ( e . g . , van - Ede , 1996 ) . In the scientific domain , approaches to teaching metacognitive skills ( i . e . , teaching students to think scientifically ) can be broadly grouped into two camps . In one method , students are instructed in the content of particular domains of science with the expectation that they will extract the scientific thinking process on their own . This way of teaching is reminiscent of the more traditional , teacher - centered , instructional style in which students are taught facts about science , participate in domain - specific activities , and conduct experiments without explicit training in scientific thinking . For example , in many science courses , students participate in experiments based on given hypotheses intended to generate a priori outcomes . Although such lessons do inform students of the processes that scientists use in experimentation , they neglect to definitively teach the higher order metacognitive skills required for authentic scientific inquiry ( i . e . , generation of hypotheses , evaluation of evidence ) . This approach is much like the implicit instructional styles that have been used to teach the nature of science , of which scientific thinking is an integral component . In that curriculum structure , students are expected to gain an understanding of the nature of science through instruction that excludes an explicit explanation of that concept ( see Khishfe & Abed - El - Khalick , 2002 ) . More recently , researchers and educators have emphasized the integration of scientific thinking skills with the concepts of particular domains of science . In this process , metacognitive skills are explicitly infused with content . The impetus for this change in ideology was recognition that implicit teaching styles were deficient in endowing students with more generalized scientific thinking skills . The realization of the need for educating students in higher order skills that transfer to multiple domains W . M . Williams et al . / Applied Developmental Psychology 25 ( 2004 ) 107 – 126 110 of science , reflected in the 1996 National Science Education Standards , has led to the continuing development of many innovative approaches to teaching scientific thinking . Notably , the majority of programs aimed at explicitly teaching scientific thinking make use of computer simulations because , as noted by de Jong and van Joolingen ( 1998 ) , learning via computer simulations is closely related to the constructivistic scientific discovery learning process ( e . g . , Klahr & Dunbar , 1988 ) . For example , Hollingworth and McLoughlin ( 2001 ) developed an online environment , metA - HEAD , to promote metacognitive skill development in university science students . This approach was predicated on the assumption that science students may be limited in the quantity of knowledge they can acquire within a given domain and it is therefore more important to impart more generalized thinking skills that students can transfer to future learning situations ( Hollingworth & McLoughlin , 2001 ) . The online program utilizes constructivist educational design principles to present simulations within a series of phases during which students are taught problem - solving skills , tested for transfer of the skill , and ultimately reflect on their own reasoning . The Instruction in Scientific Inquiry Skills ( ISIS ) , part of the Air Force Fundamental Skills Training Project , employs a similar stepwise approach to teaching thinking skills that are applied to the context of ecology ( e . g . , Steuck & Miller , 1997 ) . ISIS uses computer simulations to teach middle - and high - school students to form hypotheses , design experiments , and draw conclusions about problems contextualized in real - world scenarios . Non - technologically - based programs include training students in argumentation in the context of genetics ( Zohar & Nemet , 2002 ) . Regardless of the medium of instruction , the overall goal of the integrative approach is to train students in scientific inquiry as it is carried out in authentic science ( e . g . , Dunbar , 1995 ; Schunn & Anderson , 1999 ; and see special section of Science Education , Volume 86 ( 2 ) , 2002 , devoted to teaching authentic inquiry in science classrooms ) . 2 . 3 . Transfer of scientific knowledge Typically , when students’ learning about scientific thinking and reasoning is evaluated , an unfortunate finding is that the learning seldom generalizes beyond the specifics of the content that was taught ( Barnett & Ceci , 2002 ) . To some degree , then , we should not be surprised by students’ failure to transfer scientific thinking to content beyond that which was explicitly taught . Cognitivists have long been aware of the contextual constraints on students’ knowledge ( e . g . , Ceci , 1991 ) . The preschool child who seems to possess knowledge of a ‘‘halving rule’’ will quickly yield to situationalism when probed : For example , in response to the question ‘‘If I cut an apple in half , how many pieces will I have ? ’’ the child accurately replies ‘‘Two’’ . However , when the issue is pursued with ‘‘If I cut a carpet in half , how many pieces will I have ? ’’ the child may reply , ‘‘It depends on how large the carpet is . ’’ ( Ceci , 1996 ) . From such observations , it comes as little surprise that children taught scientific principles often do not spontaneously extend such learning beyond the content and procedures taught . Brown et al . ( Brown , 1989 ; Brown & Campione , 1990 ; Brown & Kane , 1988 ; Brown , Kane , & Echols , 1986 ; Brown , Kane , & Long , 1989 ) conducted a series of experiments designed to study whether young children generalized their training but found that they did so only under very constrained circumstances . For example , some of these experiments ( Brown , 1989 ; Brown & Kane , 1988 ) showed that children can transfer some principles , such as ‘‘hide , using visual mimicry as a defense mechanism , ’’ from one animal to another . Children transferred most successfully when they understood events at a causal level rather than when W . M . Williams et al . / Applied Developmental Psychology 25 ( 2004 ) 107 – 126 111 they merely learned to replicate particular behaviors . That is , they transferred when they developed a deep rather than surface understanding . However , the problem of limited generalization of scientific reasoning does not end with children , as it can be found among college students at the nation’s most elite universities . For example , Gick and Holyoak ( 1980 ) showed only limited successful transfer of analogical reasoning using the classic Dunker tumor radiation problem and a military analogy with college - aged participants . Students were presented with the following military problem : ‘‘A general wishes to capture a fortress located in the center of a country . There are many roads radiating outward from the fortress . All have been mined so that while small groups of soldiers can pass over the roads safely , a large force will detonate the mines . A full - scale direct attack is therefore impossible . The general’s solution is to divide the army into small groups , send each group to the head of a different road , and have the groups converge simultaneously on the fortress . ’’ The radiation problem described an analogous situation in which a type of ray could be used to kill a cancerous tumor ; however , in the dosages needed it would also kill surrounding tissues . The solution is to spread the rays around the patient’s body so they converge simultaneously on the tumor from different locations , thus not killing the surrounding tissues . Gick and Holyoak ( 1980 ) presented college students with one or more such stories followed , either immediately or after a few minutes break , by the radiation problem . Data showed that those students who were trained with the closest analogy in terms of its proximity to the radiation problem were more likely to come up with the solution to the tumor problem . However , most students did not transfer their prior learning unless they were given an explicit hint ( i . e . , when they were explicitly told to think about the new problem in the context of the training problem ) . Similarly , Reed , Ernst , and Banerji’s ( 1974 ) college students failed to demonstrate transfer beyond the specifics of their training . Reed et al . investigated transfer between the missionary – cannibal problem ( how to get safely across a river in a limited - capacity boat without having the cannibals in the group ever outnumbering the missionaries ) and a directly analogous problem substituting wives and jealous husbands for missionaries and cannibals . Other researchers have investigated the ways in which training can be conducted to most readily facilitate such a deep scientific understanding in students . These various approaches focus on getting the students to work with the training materials at a deep , structural level . For example , Catrambone and Holyoak ( 1989 ) used comparison questions to promote induction of a general schema from multiple examples , which then improved transfer , and Cummins ( 1992 ) also found that interproblem processing ( focus on comparison questions ) promoted more transfer than intraproblem processing ( focus on specific wording or details ) . Similarly , Needham and Begg ( 1991 ) found that problem - oriented training ( e . g . , trying to explain ) resulted in greater generality of problem - solving performance than memory - oriented training . Finally , Halpern , Hansen , and Riefer ( 1990 ) enhanced students’ skill in making inferences from a studied passage by including analogies in their training materials , presumably encouraging a focus on deep , structural processing . In sum , attempts by researchers to engender the broad - based transfer of scientific reasoning skills in students have been no more successful than the efforts of curriculum developers . Students appear to learn the specifics of the lessons but they do not generalize beyond them . Recently , Barnett and Ceci ( 2002 ) proposed a taxonomy for understanding when and why transfer of scientific learning occurs . In their model , the roles of various forms of context loom prominent . One of these concerns the type of cognitive process involved in the generalization of knowledge , specifically a shift from surface - level , W . M . Williams et al . / Applied Developmental Psychology 25 ( 2004 ) 107 – 126 112 verbatim teaching of facts to the inculcation of an awareness of the internal workings of the students’ cognitive systems—so - called metacognitive awareness . 3 . Cornell Institute for Research on Children ( CIRC ) approach to training scientific reasoning 3 . 1 . Shifting the metaphor In our work , as part of CIRC , we have conceptualized the training of scientific reasoning differently from the way many curriculum developers have in the past . Specifically , we view our attempts to train students to reason scientifically as a form of metacognitive training rather than science education . One might argue that this is merely a terminological ‘‘sleight of hand , ’’ using a different vocabulary to refer to the same phenomenon . This would be incorrect , however . Numerous studies of training students in metacognitive skills have demonstrated the feasibility of instilling deep , transdomainal modes of awareness . For example , in the areas of memory development and reading comprehension , Pressley has conducted numerous studies demonstrating the success of metacognitive strategies at improving performance ( see , e . g . , Pressley , Borkowski , & Schneider , 1987 ; Pressley , Ross , Levin , & Ghatala , 1984 ; Pressley , Snyder , & Cariglia - Bull , 1987 ) . More closely related to our current work in science education is the research of Williams et al . ( Williams et al . , 1996 , 2002 ) on increasing students’ practical intelligence for school , which was accomplished via training in five metacognitive themes underlying practically intelligent thinking . In that program , known as the Practical Intelligence for School Project ( PIFS ) , researchers sought to boost school achievement by creating an intervention that would develop practical intelligence for school in middle - school students . Researchers worked with teachers in Connecticut and Massachu - setts schools over a 2 - year period . Teachers were trained to deliver a five - part program designed to promote the development of practical intelligence by emphasizing five sources of metacognitive awareness : knowing why , knowing self , knowing differences , knowing process , and revisiting . A broad range of assessments was administered in a pre – post design both to the children receiving the practical intelligence program and to matched control children . Williams et al . ( 1996 , 2002 ) found that the program successfully enhanced both practical and academic skills in each of the target skill areas ( reading , writing , homework , and test taking ) in children from diverse socioeco - nomic backgrounds and attending diverse types of schools . Their results supported the importance of the acquisition of cognitive and metacognitive insights during adolescence . The results of Williams et al . ( 1996 ) also showed that training in metacognitive skills enhanced adolescent achievement over and above traditional g - based approaches to learning . The success of PIFS inspired much of CIRC’s science education program . In sum , based on the results from these studies of metacognitive training of various academic material ( PIFS , memory , reading , etc . ) , we wondered whether scientific reasoning might also be amenable to metacognitive induction . To adumbrate our conclusion , we do not yet know—the critical evaluation must await far more training and data gathering . However , we believe that there is a solid basis for pursuing this avenue in the hope that when students are taught metacognitive strategies , they will remember and continue to apply these strategies across content areas , beyond the classroom , and throughout their lives . W . M . Williams et al . / Applied Developmental Psychology 25 ( 2004 ) 107 – 126 113 3 . 2 . Thinking Like A Scientist : An example of educational programming from CIRC Consider an example of how we have instantiated our goals regarding training students to think scientifically into actual classroom lessons and activities ( see Fig . 1 ) . Fig . 1 displays a lesson on the motivating effects of praise , based on a recent review by Henderlong and Lepper ( 2002 ) . As previously noted , much of the content that students are taught about science will likely be forgotten . However , this does not mean that content is not important and cannot be used advantageously . Learning is impeded if students are not interested in a topic . Therefore , efforts must be devoted to framing topics in a compelling manner . Geology and fuel cells may be important scientific issues , but they may not be inherently interesting to most teens , particularly those teens in our target demographic groups who may have been turned off to science in the past . Rather than attempting to spin these topics in a fun way—an approach often taken by classroom teachers wishing to make dense or difficult material seem more interesting to students— Thinking Like A Scientist uses content that is naturally interesting to most students to capture and hold their attention . To select such topics , a general search of the psychological literature was conducted to find top - journal review articles and meta - analyses addressing issues relevant to today’s youth and their interests , as well as topics that are easily accessible to students who may not have a strong educational background . Examples of our lesson topics include the scientific basis of extrasensory perception , the controversy surrounding silicone breast implants , the effects of hypnosis on pain , the consequences of self - esteem , approaches to treating depression , and the effects of playing violent video games on behavior . Once students’ attention is piqued by the interesting topic , more resources ( and especially time ) can be devoted to examining the underlying scientific principles and relevant scientific thinking on the issue . Coupled with this process is the explicit message to students that science is relevant to them and can easily be integrated into their lives . Instead of skirting the issue of scientific thinking and using examples that will likely not be a part of extracurricular conversation , as is often the case with the traditional science curriculum , this project infuses each lesson with anecdotes and examples that are relevant to students and that consequently can be used to illustrate thinking in the scientific method . It is essential to use topics relevant to students’ daily lives because familiarity with a lesson topic allows personal experience and knowledge to be brought to bear on learning , beginning a cycle that perpetuates interest and subsequent learning . The familiar nature of the lesson topics helps reinforce the first theme of Thinking Like A Scientist : ‘‘What is Science ? ’’ Thinking Like A Scientist shows students that science explains a myriad of things that are often encountered but not inspected . This is accomplished not only within the lessons but also by the topics of the lessons themselves . Consider the lesson on the motivational effects of praise on children presented in Fig . 1 . Compliments are a part of everyday life ( or at least they should be ) , and by showing that complimenting behavior can be scientifically examined , Thinking Like A Scientist illustrates how science permeates everyday life in ways that students most likely have never considered . The topic of praise behavior is relevant because the youth are experienced in giving and receiving compliments as well as being familiar with their effects . As seen in Fig . 1 , students can be engaged in a discussion of who likes compliments and why right at the outset of the lesson . Instead of relating scientific principles to Mendel’s hybridization of seeds , for example , in the CIRC program students are encouraged to make connections with their personal experiences . W . M . Williams et al . / Applied Developmental Psychology 25 ( 2004 ) 107 – 126 114 In the second theme of each lesson we ask students to define the problem and see many sides of the issue at hand . In the example of the praise lesson in Fig . 1 , this entails coming up with a working definition of praise and exploring when praise has positive effects versus possible negative Fig . 1 . Sample lesson from the Cornell Institute for Research on Children Thinking Like A Scientist Educational Program . W . M . Williams et al . / Applied Developmental Psychology 25 ( 2004 ) 107 – 126 115 effects . Although it may seem unnecessary , explicitly asking students to define the problem teaches them that it is essential to clearly state the purpose of the venture and requires students to process the issue at a deeper level than is typical during the learning of rote information . It also opens the door to students viewing a topic as having a variety of viewpoints from which problems can be considered . This skill is particularly important given that students often believe that the perspective Fig . 1 ( continued ) . W . M . Williams et al . / Applied Developmental Psychology 25 ( 2004 ) 107 – 126 116 that they are told about , whether via television , a teacher , or a textbook , is the end of the story . Consequently , the students never consider the possibility that multiple viewpoints exist . Focusing on a familiar hypothesis , such as that ‘‘praise benefits children , ’’ allows students to concentrate more fully on the objectives of the theme , which is that issues can be viewed from more than one perspective . Students then proceed to discuss examples pertinent to their lives . Asking whether Fig . 1 ( continued ) . W . M . Williams et al . / Applied Developmental Psychology 25 ( 2004 ) 107 – 126 117 praise can have negative effects evokes comprehension and retention more easily than a less familiar topic , such as botany . Additionally , using a familiar topic gives teachers the opportunity to discuss issues about which students already have opinions . Thinking Like A Scientist uses these preexisting opinions as a means of facilitating students’ ability to ‘‘Distinguish Fact from Opinion and Ask What Constitutes Evidence’’ ( representing the Fig . 1 ( continued ) . W . M . Williams et al . / Applied Developmental Psychology 25 ( 2004 ) 107 – 126 118 third theme ) . The praise lesson in Fig . 1 differentiates personal opinion and experience from the systematic gathering of evidence through a discussion of anecdotes and examples , such as how a friend having a bad experience with praise differs fundamentally from an experiment in which one measures the influence of praise on a randomly selected group of kindergarteners . The purpose of this theme is to enlighten students regarding the varying degrees of quality inherent in different Fig . 1 ( continued ) . W . M . Williams et al . / Applied Developmental Psychology 25 ( 2004 ) 107 – 126 119 types of information . Because students have a preexisting schema involving praise and its consequences , Thinking Like A Scientist is able to illustrate for students the differences in how scientists and laypeople view information . Once the distinction is made between fact and opinion , it becomes possible to ‘‘Weigh the Evidence and Make Decisions’’ ( theme four of the program ) . In this part of the lesson , the conclusions of the Henderlong and Lepper ( 2002 ) article are distilled , and the lesson then describes Fig . 1 ( continued ) . W . M . Williams et al . / Applied Developmental Psychology 25 ( 2004 ) 107 – 126 120 the scientific requirements that must be met for a statement to be considered praise and to increase motivation . Thinking Like A Scientist makes assigning varying levels of importance to assorted pieces of evidence more manageable for students because it capitalizes on student familiarity with the evidence . Accordingly , this strategy allows students to devote more cognitive resources to the process of evaluating evidence rather than having them expend time and mental energy on deciphering arbitrary content . As with the rest of the lesson , the reasoning behind this approach is that an increase in student familiarity with the content augments students’ ability to grasp the scientific methods at work . Once the sources of evidence have been critically examined and students understand the scientific conclusions relevant to the topic , Thinking Like A Scientist ‘‘Moving from Science to Society’’ ( theme five ) . At this point , lessons discuss potential real - world applications of the topic that further solidify the relevance of science to the real world and to students’ lives . Thus , the lessons come full circle both by connecting students’ lives to science and by relating science to students’ lives . The activities in this section of the lesson accomplish this goal by asking students to consider how what they have learned has changed their thinking about praise , for example , and how their new understanding will influence their future praising behaviors . Finally , the program’s ultimate theme calls for students to ‘‘Revisit , Reflect , and Review . ’’ Here , the program illustrates the importance of continual reevaluation in science as well as the value of checking the validity and applicability of findings over time . In the praise lesson , for example , we explore potential areas of further study on praise that could yield new and relevant information as further research becomes available . This point is stressed to students . Serving as a conclusion to each lesson , the revisit – reflect – review theme stresses the ongoing nature of science as well as the continually evolving nature of the process of thinking scientifically . In short , the Thinking Like A Scientist educational program ( a ) uses content appropriate to its audience ( b ) to capitalize on the students’ prior interest and knowledge ( c ) in the teaching of the principles of sound scientific thinking and reasoning ( d ) via the six themes organizing all Thinking Like A Scientist lessons . 4 . Implementation of the program The implementation of the program involves many steps that are tailored to the needs of individual schools , teachers , and students . We provide all materials to the school , including self - contained full lesson plans suitable for students in Grades 8 through 12 . These lessons do not in any way conflict with teachers’ current curricula ; the lessons are completely modifiable by teachers to meet their particular curricular and educational goals . In the past , teachers who used our materials taught one or two lessons per week in their science ( usually biology ) or social science classes . These teachers chose which lessons they wished to teach and the order in which they wished to teach them . We provided assistance and support , but the teachers had complete freedom to do what was best for their students . We induce schools to participate by discussing benefits with them . In return for a school’s participation in our program , we offer ( a ) complete copies of our program for interested teachers to use ; ( b ) stipends for schools and participating teachers ; ( c ) assistance from advanced graduate students and CIRC Fellows ; ( d ) results from our study at all participating schools , showing what W . M . Williams et al . / Applied Developmental Psychology 25 ( 2004 ) 107 – 126 121 works about our program and why ; and most importantly , ( e ) an opportunity for teachers to expand their approaches and skills to benefit their students . Teachers also enjoy the experience of being part of a project sponsored by Cornell University and funded by the National Science Foundation , and contributing to the process of making this work possible . 5 . Evaluation The issue of how to evaluate our program has proved thorny . Some previous educational interventions have been deep in audience participation but shallow in evaluation . To improve upon this , we seek to assess the students exposed to our materials to ascertain whether they absorb the metacognitive skills and learn how to use these skills in a meaningful way . Our goal is to simultaneously test comparable students , both in participating and nonparticipating classrooms ( the latter are often on the wait list to receive the program in the near future ) . Despite a broad search , we have found no formal or standardized assessments that measure the types of scientific thinking we hope to train . Therefore , we designed our own assessment ( see Appendix A for sample questions 1 ) . Our test does not focus on the specific content of the science lessons we have designed ; rather , it seeks to measure students’ extraction of the scientific thinking skills embodied in the themes described above . This is gauged by assessing students’ ability to recognize science when it happens and to think like a scientist when solving real - world problems . Because the test is not related to the lesson content , it is fair to the control - classroom students who have not yet participated in the program . Our goal is to administer matched pre - and posttests both to students who are receiving the program and to students who have not yet received the program at the beginning and end of the semester ( approximately 6 months apart ) . In the meantime , their normal classroom teachers will teach our materials to the students in the experimental condition . Our hope is that we will eventually be able to document meaningful increases in the ability to think like a scientist as a result of exposure to our program . 6 . Conclusions In this article , we describe a novel method for inculcating and evaluating the development of scientific reasoning skills in students , particularly those from traditionally underrepresented back - grounds . Our educational program seeks to improve upon existing programs that focus on specific content ( with the expectation that students will extract scientific reasoning skills ) or those that explicitly train scientific thinking but in the context of a particular domain of science . Thinking Like A Scientist attempts to accomplish this goal by focusing the content of the lessons on real - world topics that students find relevant to their own lives , rather than by teaching scientific thinking skills within the traditional domains of science for which the content may be less personally engaging . It is our expectation that this approach will result not only in the increased use of scientific thinking within domains of science but that these skills will transfer beyond the 1 A copy of the complete evaluation instrument is available from the first author . W . M . Williams et al . / Applied Developmental Psychology 25 ( 2004 ) 107 – 126 122 classroom to students’ everyday lives . We are initiating large - scale evaluations of Thinking Like A Scientist that will determine whether our expectations are correct . However , we already have ample evidence that students from low - SES backgrounds enjoy the lessons and remain focused on the instruction—important and worthy goals in their own right for our target groups of students , many of whom are in remedial classrooms and are on the verge of dropping out of school altogether . Thinking Like A Scientist has also passed the important hurdle of being judged flexible and easy to use by teachers , who also appreciate the solid scientific basis that underpins the lessons . Reaching these students with the message that science is worthwhile and enjoyable , that thinking scientif - ically can become part of their lives , and that continuing their education in science is both possible and even practical is without doubt our foremost mission and an essential goal for our society as a whole . Acknowledgements Portions of this article were prepared with support to Wendy M . Williams and Stephen J . Ceci from the National Science Foundation , Grant No . 0126555 . The Cornell Institute for Research on Children ( CIRC ) is an intellectual infrastructure funded by the National Science Foundation under the aegis of the Children’s Research Initiative , which was spearheaded by the late Rodney R . Cocking . Cocking’s vision of integrated developmental science is an integral part of CIRC’s philosophy . This article is dedicated to his memory . Appendix A . Examples of questions from the assessment developed to evaluate the Thinking Like A Scientist Educational Program ( the item response form is presented only for the first item in each set ) Part I . Questions ( n = 11 items ) in this group ask if the person is behaving scientifically Jordan goes to test - drive a car and the dealer tells her that she needs the more powerful V8 engine , instead of the V6 . After test driving both , Jordan decides the V6 engine is good enough for her . Is Jordan behaving scientifically ? Jamaal reads his horoscope one morning , and then that evening he tells his brother that several predictions in the horoscope came true . The next day , Jamaal starts making decisions based on his horoscope . Is Jamaal behaving scientifically ? Part II . Questions ( n = 3 scenarios with multiple items ) in this group ask about making decisions based on science 1 2 3 4 5 Definitely not Probably not Maybe Probably Definitely W . M . Williams et al . / Applied Developmental Psychology 25 ( 2004 ) 107 – 126 123 Carlos has a sore knee . It hurts whenever he plays sports . He is thinking about trying a special knee brace . Carlos wants to make a decision based on science . How important should each of the following pieces of information be to Carlos when he makes his decision ? ( a ) His grandmother tried the brace and it did not work . ( b ) His doctor said 8 out of 10 people who use the brace feel better . ( c ) A television commercial for the brace claims it always works . ( d ) Carlos’s coach said the brace helped three other boys on the team . Part III . Questions ( n = 17 ) in this group ask you to tell us about yourself In general , I like school . I think science is a boring class . I think women can be good scientists . I trust the ideas scientists come up with . My friends think scientists are ‘‘nerdy . ’’ References Barnett , S . M . , & Ceci , S . J . ( 2002 ) . When and where do we apply what we learn ? A taxonomy for far transfer . Psychological Bulletin , 128 , 612 – 637 . Bell , P . , & Linn , M . C . ( 2000 ) . Scientific arguments as learning artifacts : Designing for learning from the web with KIE . International Journal of Science Education , 22 , 797 – 817 . Borkowski , J . , Carr , M . , & Pressley , M . ( 1987 ) . ‘‘Spontaneous’’ strategy use : Perspectives from metacognitive theory . Intelli - gence , 11 , 61 – 75 . Brown , A . L . ( 1989 ) . Analogical learning and transfer : What develops ? In S . Vosniadou , & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 369 – 412 ) . Cambridge , MA : Cambridge University Press . Brown , A . L . , & Campione , J . C . ( 1990 ) . Communities of learning and thinking , or a context by any other name . In D . Kuhn ( Ed . ) , Developmental perspectives on teaching and learning thinking skills . Contributions to human development , ( vol . 21 , pp . 108 – 126 ) . Basel , Switzerland : Karger . Brown , A . L . , & Kane , M . J . ( 1988 ) . Preschool children can learn to transfer : Learning to learn and learning from example . Cognitive Psychology , 20 , 493 – 523 . Brown , A . L . , Kane , M . J . , & Echols , C . H . ( 1986 ) . Young children’s mental models determine analogical transfer across problems with a common goal structure . Cognitive Development , 1 , 103 – 121 . Brown , A . L . , Kane , M . J . , & Long , C . ( 1989 ) . Analogical transfer in young children : Analogies as tools for communication and exposition . Applied Cognitive Psychology , 3 , 275 – 293 . Catrambone , R . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1989 ) . Overcoming contextual limitations on problem - solving transfer . Journal of Exper - imental Psychology . Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 15 , 1147 – 1156 . 1 2 3 4 5 Definitely not Probably not Maybe Probably Definitely 1 2 3 4 5 Not important A little important Somewhat important Very important Extremely important W . M . Williams et al . / Applied Developmental Psychology 25 ( 2004 ) 107 – 126 124 Ceci , S . J . ( 1991 ) . How much does schooling influence general intelligence and its cognitive components ? A reassessment of the evidence . Developmental Psychology , 27 , 703 – 722 . Ceci , S . J . ( 1996 ) . On intelligence : A bioecological treatise on intellectual development . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Cummins , D . ( 1992 ) . Role of analogical reasoning in the induction of problem categories . Journal of Experimental Psychology . Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 18 , 1103 – 1124 . De Jong , T . , & van Joolingen , W . R . ( 1998 ) . Scientific discovery learning with computer simulations of conceptual domains . Review of Educational Research , 68 , 179 – 201 . Desoete , A . , Roeyers , H . , & De - Clercq , A . ( 2003 ) . Can offline metacognition enhance mathematical problem solving ? Journal of Educational Psychology , 95 , 188 – 200 . Dunbar , K . ( 1995 ) . How scientists really reason . Scientific discovery in real - world laboratories . In R . J . Sternberg , & J . Davidson ( Eds . ) , The nature of insight ( pp . 365 – 395 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1980 ) . Analogical problem solving . Cognitive Psychology , 12 , 306 – 355 . Halpern , D . F . ( 1996 ) . Thought and knowledge : An introduction to critical thinking . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Halpern , D . F . , Hansen , C . , & Riefer , D . ( 1990 ) . Analogies as an aid to understanding and memory . Journal of Educational Psychology , 82 , 298 – 305 . Henderlong , J . , & Lepper , M . R . ( 2002 ) . The effects of praise on children’s intrinsic motivation : A review and synthesis . Psychological Bulletin , 128 , 774 – 795 . Hollingworth , R . W . , & McLoughlin , C . ( 2001 ) . Developing science students’ metacognitive problem solving skills online . Australian Journal of Educational Technology , 17 , 50 – 63 . Hood , B . M . ( 1995 ) . Gravity rules for 2 – 4 year - olds ? Cognitive Development , 10 , 577 – 598 . Hood , B . M . ( 1998 ) . Gravity does rule for falling events . Developmental Science , 1 , 59 – 63 . Jimenez - Aleixandre , M . , Rodriguez , A . , & Duschl , R . ( 2000 ) . ‘‘Doing the lesson’’ or ‘‘doing science : ’’ Argument in high school genetics . Science Education , 84 , 757 – 792 . Khishfe , R . , & Abed - El - Khalick , F . ( 2002 ) . Influence of explicit and reflective versus implicit inquiry - oriented instruction on sixth - graders’ views of nature of science . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 39 , 551 – 578 . Klahr , D . , & Dunbar , K . ( 1988 ) . Dual space search during scientific reasoning . Cognitive Science , 12 , 1 – 55 . Koslowski , B . ( 1996 ) . Theory and evidence : The development of scientific reasoning . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Kuhn , D . ( 1993a ) . Science as argument : Implications for teaching and learning scientific thinking . Science Education , 77 , 319 – 337 . Kuhn , D . ( 1993b ) . Connecting scientific and informal reasoning . Merrill - Palmer Quarterly , 39 , 74 – 103 . Kuhn , D . ( 1997 ) . Constraints or guideposts ? Development psychology and science education . Review of Educational Psychol - ogy , 67 , 141 – 150 . Kuhn , D . , Amsel , E . , & O’Loughlin , M . ( 1988 ) . The development of scientific thinking skills . Orlando , FL : Academic Press . Kuhn , D . , Garcia - Mila , M . , Zohar , A . , & Andersen , C . ( 1995 ) . Strategies of knowledge acquisition . Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development , 60 ( 4 , Serial No . 245 ) . Miller , J . L . , & Bartch , K . ( 1997 ) . The development of biological explanation : Are children vitalists ? Developmental Psychol - ogy , 26 , 942 – 951 . National Research Council ( 1996 ) . National science education standards . Washington , DC : National Academy Press . Needham , D . R . , & Begg , I . M . ( 1991 ) . Problem - oriented training promotes spontaneous analogical transfer : Memory - oriented training promotes memory for training . Memory and Cognition , 19 , 543 – 557 . Pauen , S . ( 1996 ) . Children’s reasoning about the interaction of forces . Child Development , 67 , 2728 – 2742 . Pressley , M . , Borkowski , J . G . , & Schneider , W . ( 1987 ) . Cognitive strategy users coordinate metacognition and knowledge . In R . Vasta , & G . Whitehurst ( Eds . ) , Annals of Child Development , ( vol . 5 , pp . 89 – 129 ) . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press . Pressley , M . , Ross , K . A . , Levin , J . R . , & Ghatala , E . ( 1984 ) . The role of strategy utility knowledge in children’s strategy decision making . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 38 , 491 – 504 . Pressley , M . , Snyder , B . L . , & Cariglia - Bull , T . ( 1987 ) . How can good strategy use be taught to children ? Evaluation of six approaches . In S . M . Cormier , & J . D . Hagman ( Eds . ) , Transfer of learning : Contemporary research and applications ( pp . 81 – 120 ) . San Diego : Academic Press . Reed , S . K . , Ernst , G . W . , & Banerji , R . ( 1974 ) . The role of analogy in transfer between similar problem states . Cognitive Psychology , 6 , 436 – 450 . W . M . Williams et al . / Applied Developmental Psychology 25 ( 2004 ) 107 – 126 125 Schauble , L . ( 1996 ) . The development of scientific reasoning in knowledge - rich contexts . Developmental Psychology , 32 , 102 – 119 . Schmitt , M . C . , & Hopkins , C . J . ( 1993 ) . Metacognitive theory applied : Strategic reading instruction in the current generation of basal readers . Reading Research and Instruction , 32 , 13 – 24 . Schunn , C . D . , & Anderson , J . R . ( 1999 ) . The generality / specificity of expertise in scientific reasoning . Cognitive Science , 23 , 337 – 370 . Siegler , R . , & Crowley , K . ( 1991 ) . The microgenetic method : A direct means for studying cognitive development . American Psychologist , 46 , 606 – 620 . Sternberg , R . J . ( 1986 ) . Intelligence applied . NY : Harcourt Brace Jovanovich . Steuck , K . , & Miller , T . ( 1997 , March ) . Evaluation of an authentic learning environment for teaching scientific inquiry skills . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association , Chicago , Illinois . van - Ede , D . M . ( 1996 ) . Should we tell students about metamemory or teach them how to apply it when studying ? Journal of Cognitive Education , 5 , 155 – 169 . Williams , W . M . , Blythe , T . , White , N . , Li , J . , Gardner , H . , & Sternberg , R . J . ( 2002 ) . Practical intelligence for school : Developing metacognitive sources of achievement in adolescence . Developmental Review , 22 , 162 – 210 . Williams , W . M . , Blythe , T . , White , N . , Li , J . , Sternberg , R . J . , & Gardner , H . ( 1996 ) . Practical intelligence for school . NY : HarperCollins . Zimmerman , C . ( 2000 ) . The development of scientific reasoning skills . Developmental Review , 20 , 99 – 149 . Zohar , A . , & Nemet , F . ( 2002 ) . Fostering students’ knowledge and argumentation skills through dilemmas in human genetics . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 39 , 35 – 62 . W . M . Williams et al . / Applied Developmental Psychology 25 ( 2004 ) 107 – 126 126