21 Probing , Mocking and Prototyping : Participatory approaches to identity infrastructuring Andrew Clement Brenda McPhail Karen Louise Smith Joseph Ferenbok Faculty of Information , University of Toronto 140 St . George Street , Toronto ON , Canada M5S 3G6 { andrew . clement , brenda . mcphail , karen . louise . smith , joseph . ferenbok } @ utoronto . ca ABSTRACT Since the 1980s , PD has been expanding its scope in terms of scale of information systems as well as diversity of participants , settings and design techniques . A current frontier of PD is infrastructuring , the development of large scale systems that serve a wide range of needs of varied ‘publics’ in an ideally taken - for - granted manner . This paper takes a participatory approach to one prominent area of contemporary infrastructure development , that of jurisdictional identity schemes . Such developments pose significant privacy and security risks . However , for the most part ID scheme expansion is being conducted without the active participation of those most directly affected . We address this concern through a series of action research ‘interventions’ into the development of proposed North American ID schemes . We sought to turn what is often treated as a dry , technical topic into an open , accessible and even fun collective enterprise . Drawing on ‘classic’ PD precepts , such as iteration , realistic use scenarios , ethnographically informed fieldwork , situated reflection , and mock - ups and prototypes , we experimented publically with various artifacts that range from a mock RFID scheme to an Android smartphone digital ID wallet app . Based on this experience , we reflect on lessons for the PD community in terms of how it might approach the growing need for participatory infrastructuring . Author Keywords Identity Cards , ID schemes , Infrastructure , Infrastructuring , Participatory Design , Prototyping ACM Classification Keywords H5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . INTRODUCTION “Privacy concerns about the information in the [ Enhanced Drivers Licences ] EDLs are unlikely to derail the initiative . ” ( Wikileaks cable , http : / / cablesearch . org / cable / view . php ? id = 08TORONTO233 & hl = rfid + toronto ) This quote is taken from a ‘Sensitive But Unclassified’ report in 2008 by the US Consulate in Toronto , Canada , made public as part of Wikileaks’ 2011 release of US diplomatic cables . The EDL mentioned here refers to the ‘Enhanced’ Drivers Licence , a modification of the conventional drivers licence then under development as a passport substitute for land and water border crossings into the US . The cable reports on a public forum that our research team co - organized with Ontario’s Information and Privacy Commissioner to discuss the privacy and security issues around this proposed ID card . Evidently the US Consulate was concerned that Canadian cooperation in the post 9 / 11 effort to ‘secure’ US borders may have been jeopardized by such a discussion . The report is accurate in its conclusion , the initiative wasn’t derailed , but it also gives a hint of how fraught and fragile the building of ID infrastructures can be , as well as the kinds of actors and forces at play . While we would have been happy to have helped halt the controversial EDL initiative , we mainly sought the more modest goal of opening a public discussion about the many issues it raised and the prospect of privacy protective alternatives . The event itself was one in a series of our attempted interventions , informed by participatory design sensibilities , into the on - going transformation of identification infrastructures . The taken - for - granted use of infrastructure is discussed by Star ( 1999 ) . By using ( the verb ) infrastructuring we are emphasizing the possibility of making visible , actively designing and using a system that may later become entrenched and installed as infrastructure ( the noun ) . In daily life , we rely on identification infrastructures , incorporating large and heterogeneous arrays of human and non - human actors - ID cards , backend databases , enabling legislation , inspectors , checkpoints , regulatory standards , cultural practices , and so on . Proponents of ‘modernizing’ these infrastructures , through new technologies such as digital networking , radio frequency ID ( RFID ) chips and automated facial recognition , make familiar claims about bringing greater consumer convenience and reducing costs . However , these changes also present serious risks to privacy and other civil liberties , while altering the relationship between citizen and state ( Lyon , 2009 ) . ID scheme changes along these lines have often raised stiff public opposition , and in some jurisdictions , notably the UK , ambitious ID projects already underway have even been cancelled due to their unpopularity ( Home Office , n . d . ) . While the public has vital interests at stake in ID scheme initiatives , and ideally provided with information and a voice in the development , in this case , perhaps wary of the opposition faced elsewhere , public consultation was limited . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . PDC ' 12 , August 12 - 16 2012 , Roskilde , Denmark Copyright 2012 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 0846 - 5 / 12 / 08 … $ 10 . 00 22 It was in this context that we sought to make a contribution , to facilitate more effective public participation in the design and implementation of the ID cards that people carry , as well as the wider techno - institutional apparatus of which the cards are but a small though highly visible part . We adopted many of the conventional modes of citizen engagement around policy issues , such as the public forum mentioned above , written briefs , appearances at parliamentary hearings , op - ed opinion pieces , petitions and the like . However , none of these modes , nor any others we were aware of , addressed directly the fact that the immediate focus of concern was a complex digital artifact that people would need to use in their daily lives . In the absence of alternatives , and especially in pursuit of democratic participation , we saw the repertoire of by now relatively well established Participatory Design ( PD ) approaches and techniques as particularly promising . We recognized that PD techniques were largely developed in settings very different from the one that we faced , but fundamental PD precepts around inclusion , lay expertise based on direct lived experience , and rights by those directly affected by decisions to a voice in their making , remained highly relevant in this setting . In this paper we seek to explore the relevance of PD approaches to matters of contemporary large - scale infrastructure development . While the focus here is on what PD can learn from our over three years of experimentation with PD techniques in particular ID scheme initiatives , we begin this investigation by examining the prominent characteristics of infrastructures more generally and the kinds of challenge and opportunity they pose for PD . We then look at identification schemes , their salient infrastructural aspects as well as the thorny public policy issues they raise . We then describe a series of PD - inspired interventions into the public policy discussion , distinguishing between those that sought to critique and resist certain developmental agendas we regarded as particularly problematic , from ones in which we attempted to demonstrate positive alternatives for ID technologies that we hope might lead to wider adoption . We close by reflecting on this experience and the lessons we can draw for participatory infrastructuring in other domains . THE CHALLENGES OF PARTICIPATORY INFRASTRUCTURING The information and communication infrastructures that underpin everyday life , at the personal , organizational and societal scales , are undergoing rapid transformation as digital networking is increasingly woven into the fabric of our contemporary economic , social , political and cultural practices . It would appear that PD has something to say in terms of developing these infrastructures , but what more precisely ? In particular , what about the mundane networked public infrastructures , in health , telecommunications , education , banking , government services , transportation and the like , that play an essential but unglamorous role in our daily lives ? These have largely been built on the same principles as those of large private sector global enterprises , and unobtrusively embed and reinforce a host of political / economic / cultural assumptions that shape our daily experiences and life chances . Shapiro ( 2005 ) proposes “that Participatory Design . . . should seriously consider claiming an engagement in the development of large scale systems , and more particularly an engagement with the procurement and development of systems in the public sector” ( p . 32 ) . While PD approaches have contributed to some specific infrastructural systems , notably in the Danish Broadcasting Corporation ( Kensing , Simonsen & Bødker , 1998 ) and in health fields ( e . g . the Health Information Systems Project ( HISP ) ( Braa et al 2004 ) , or Balka’s ( 2006 ) account of PD in Canada’s public health care system ) , there so far has not been a sustained attempt to bring PD insights to bear on these large - scale infrastructures . In ‘Inside the belly of the beast’ , Balka ( 2006 ) suggests the possibility that “PD practitioners can play a role in making the politics of infrastructure visible , but [ that PD ] may need additional resources institutionally in order to effect change in how decisions are made” ( p . 139 ) . While there is again certainly great promise in PD values of inclusion and attention to multiple perspectives in realistic use situations , just how can this potential be achieved in practice ? The challenges facing PDers , or any others attempting to democratize the development of technological infrastructures , are formidable . As Sclove ( 1995 ) notes , “ [ T ] he ‘nuts and bolts of democracy’ - - ordinarily a metaphor denoting concern with the nitty - gritty of democratic politics - - must grow to encompass a literal concern with nuts and bolts . Currently , there are few institutions through which citizens can become critically engaged with choosing or designing technologies . ” ( p . 9 ) Compounding the problem of needing to involve a potentially large number of people in actively contributing to infrastructural development is that as a topic it is often arcane and highly technical . As Star ( 1999 ) notes , somewhat tongue in cheek given her own obvious fascination , infrastructural matters can be very “boring” . Somehow , coming to grips with a complex technological system deeply embedded in older structures , that ideally is invisible , needs to become interesting if we wish it to be a focus of attention for many people used to taking it for granted . It is here that the notion of ‘publics’ becomes useful . While it is commonplace to claim to serve the public interest , as is if there just a single public that has a well defined interest , the picture is more complex . American pragmatist philosopher John Dewey and his book The Public and Its Problems ( 1927 ) offers a fruitful way of framing groups of people and their motivation for undertaking action and pursuing change . For Dewey , the idea of the public as a generic , undifferentiated mass was off the mark . Rather than a singular public , there is a multiplicity of publics . These publics are groups of people brought together around and through an issue , in order to address that issue and its consequences . As he describes , ‘Those indirectly and seriously affected for good or for evil form a group distinctive enough to require recognition and a name . The name selected is 23 “The Public . ”’ ( Dewey 1927 : 7 ) . Science studies scholar Latour , in the book and exhibition Making Things Publi c ( Latour & Weibel 2005 ) invokes Dewey and ‘publics’ , and combines this with an exploration of the notion of ‘things’ as socio - material - political assemblages to probe the question of what an object - oriented democracy might be ; that is , a democracy that is acted out and through artifacts and systems . We can interpret this as reinvigorating the interplay of artifacts and politics , but with a greater attention to the role of design in the production of those artifacts . Notably , in ‘Participation in Design Things , ’ Ehn draws together Dewey and Latour to consider how the notion of publics might inform participatory design practice ( 2008 ) . And this brings us to the last , but not least of the challenges - politics - which while hardly unfamiliar to PD , becomes even more salient and demanding in the case of infrastructuring . Building infrastructures is typically a highly charged political endeavor , as sometimes powerful and long buried interests re - surface when the hardened compromises threaten to become unstuck . Here it may be helpful to regard the basis of democracy as not so much one of pursuing consensus , but of contestation , according to Mouffe ( 2000 ) . DiSalvo and Ehn have found her concept of agonistic democracy , founded upon a radical pluralism and the ability to dispute , helpful in framing some of their PD projects . In this view , a “challenge and opportunity for participatory design is to create the constructs and situations through which this pluralism and disputation can manifest itself constructively . ” ( DiSalvo et 2012 p . 200 ) In this light , DiSalvo et al’s ( 2012 ) observation that , ‘ [ c ] ontributing to the development of information and communication infrastructures , especially in articulating and serving broad public interests , represents community - based PD’s potentially most rewarding challenge’ ( p . 201 ) can be extended to PD more generally . This paper takes exploring this challenge as its central ambition . In this case , we focus on our attempts to open up for public scrutiny , and in that way influence , the developmental trajectory of identification infrastructures surrounding the familiar drivers’ licence . NEW ID SCHEMES AS POTENTIALLY TROUBLESOME PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE One of the vital information infrastructures that underpins contemporary life - - that in many , some quite literal ways , defines who we are and what we are able to do , is that of individual identification . The cards we carry in our wallets - - to present on request when making a purchase , borrowing a book , boarding a plane , and a host of other everyday transactions - - represent just the visible tip of a very large extended assemblage . The latter includes networked databases , physical production facilities , foundational documents , embodied performative practices of self - presentation ( Borchorst et al , 2012 ) , rules , standards and regulations , all of which quietly come together to enable us , usually , to proceed smoothly with our lives . Those of us in relatively privileged social positions seldom need pay attention to these details . Under a variety of commercial , administrative and authoritarian pressures , our contemporary identification infrastructure is undergoing a significant but not widely understood transformation , based on incorporating a range of digital technologies . In schematic terms there are three main steps in the use of an ID card or similar document : checking that the card itself is authentic or not tampered with ; checking that the person presenting the card actually is the person referred to on the card , i . e . not an impostor ; and finally once those two prior points are established , checking that the person is entitled to proceed with the requested transaction ( such as boarding a plane ) . New technologies are being introduced to improve , at least from the perspective of the authenticating authorities , each step in the process . Improving the security of the card itself , through cryptographic encoding or holographic printing does not raise public policy concerns , but the ‘improvements’ in the other two areas certainly do . Biometric techniques , notably the digitization and automated verification of specific body parts such as faces , fingers , and irises , or dynamic behaviours , such as handwriting , are now actively promoted as more firmly linking the card holder to the card or other personal records . These techniques , because of the intimacy and sensitivity of the data , as well as the risks of unauthorized exposure during capture , transmission , or storage , raise serious concerns about surveillance , privacy and other civil liberties and have often been vigorously opposed . In many cases , such as crossing a border , holding up a valid document for visual inspection that adequately matches its holder has typically been sufficient for the person to proceed . This is known as a ‘credential’ approach to identity authentication and eligibility . However , in a more security demanding climate , particularly since 9 / 11 , this is no longer deemed good enough , and increasingly ID cards are being used to check against data banks for up to the moment assessments of the risk posed by the individual , and to update the databases with new information captured about each individual transaction . In contrast to a relatively anonymous credential - based transaction approach , this full disclosure approach means that in principle all details of one’s life are available in assessing the risk or potential value posed by the cardholder . This may be referred to as a ‘full identification’ approach to identity authentication and eligibility , and is much more problematic from a civil liberties point of view . This form of authentication means replacing visual inspection with an electronic connection to the relevant database ( s ) . In order increase the speed and convenience of the transaction , various forms of ‘contactless’ radio frequency ID ( RFID ) technologies are being introduced into the cards . These are designed to enable rapid reading of the cards at distances varying from a few centimetres , up to 10 metres , as in the case of EPC global UHF Gen 2 chips originally developed for livestock and warehouse inventory management applications . As we will see in the next section these latter technologies , which have been introduced into passport substitutes , are particularly worrisome from a personal privacy and security point of 24 view as the personal information they contain can be read surreptitiously at a considerable distance using readily available commercial equipment . Adding considerably to the civil liberties concerns are the actors that are pushing hardest for these changes in identity infrastructure , and the way that the changes are being introduced to the public . The most prominent promoters of the new ID are security agencies , such as the Department of Homeland Security in the US , and large private equipment and software enterprises with a direct financial interest . Given the privacy and other risks posed by the proposed introduction of jurisdiction - wide ID schemes relying on new biometric and RFID technologies and pushed by security oriented agencies and high tech firms , it is not surprising that they have been greeted by considerable public skepticism and outright opposition . The most notable example of this is the UK , where the biometric National Identity Card program , linked to a National Identity Register database , faced stiff public and parliamentary resistance before legislative approval in 2006 , and was cancelled in 2010 with the next change in government . In North America , immediately after 9 / 11 there was a flurry of high - profile discussion about introducing national ID cards , but in both the US and Canada the idea was officially dropped by 2003 after it was deemed politically unpopular and of questionable utility as a security measure . Nevertheless , in less overt ways governments pursued a similar agenda , based on adding functions to the existing driver’s license , and standardizing its characteristics and issuing process across the various jurisdictions . Perhaps wary of inciting public opposition , unlike with the earlier National ID debate , the proposed changes were introduced quietly , with minimal public information and no fanfare . The civil liberties concerns were the same , but more than ever the public was systematically marginalized in the policy discussions . It was to help fill this policy vacuum and assist the civil society organizations that were attempting to draw public attention to these issues that we began a series of design - oriented ‘interventions’ in the public discourse , aimed at facilitating wider public participation in shaping the next stage of identity infrastructure development . INTERVENING IN ID SCHEME DEVELOPMENT IN NORTH AMERICA Given the huge scale of identity infrastructure and the array of powerful actors promoting particular forms of change , our uninvited contributions to the transformational process were necessarily quite limited and had to be chosen carefully for maximum effect . Our own comparatively modest resources , mainly a shifting handful of keen and talented researcher advocates , meant we were in no position to undertake a major infrastructure building project . Instead , we took an interventionist approach - selecting particular moments to stage an event in which our identification technology / policy artifacts and expertise could be brought to bear with effect . Lievrouw ( 2006 ) sees interventionist work in PD as aiming to “subvert commonsense or taken - for - granted meanings and situations” ( p . 120 ) , a goal we embraced . A common starting point for our various interventions was to view ID schemes as a democratically significant infrastructure , where much is at stake . The PD field received a renewed call for such work focusing on “societal / political / ethical” implications of design by Beck ( 2002 ) . In our work , while the individual interventions each had differing tactical objectives , they were united through an overall goal of rendering ID infrastructures and their transformation more publicly visible , understandable , accountable and responsive to public interests . In our overall approach , we drew from Agre’s ( 1997 ) notion of ‘critical technical practice’ , and Ratto’s ( 2011 ) ‘critical making’ , which emphasize linking social / political critique with technical projects through hands on construction and situated reflection . We were also inspired by several other participatory , interventionist socio - technical projects , such as those initiated by MIT’s Centre for the Future of Civic Media , Environmental Health Clinic , Neighbourhood Networks ( DiSalvo et al 2008 ) , and the Public Laboratory . In the participatory design community , these activist and interventionist sensibilities are discussed by Lievrouw ( 2006 ) . Of the four genres of oppositional new media Lievrouw offers , we see similarities between her category of alternative computing and our ID interventions . She defines alternative computing as including “critical , but constructive , activities” ( p . 118 ) using technology . Work in this tradition may be ironic or humorous when implemented . An important impetus for beginning our ID infrastructure interventions was a feeling of powerlessness in the face of the seemingly unstoppable ID scheme proposals put forward by governments with no public consultation . The first impulse was to try to slow development by contributing to their critique , to help give people time and resources to understand better what the risks were and to figure out their own positions on the topic . Our initial interventions were consequently along these critical / oppositional lines . While there is merit in the oppositional approach , especially when time is limited and a particularly egregious proposal , such as the EDL , is being pushed through over well - founded concerns , a shortcoming of this negative approach is that it is always a rear - guard action . People can’t eliminate the need for ID , and given the techno - political dynamics there are an endless stream of similar initiatives to deal with . Saying ‘no’ can be powerful and is sometimes necessary , but it doesn’t represent an adequate strategy in the long run . One must also be able to offer a positive alternative . So we also pursued a ‘constructive’ approach to ID schemes , attempting to provide some tangible and usable examples of how ID could be made to work in ways better aligned with public interests than those proposed . SERIOUSLY PLAYFUL CRITIQUE The design of ID infrastructures can have serious privacy and civil liberty implications . Within this context , our iterative prototyping of ID infrastructures has taken up 25 playful design strategies to construct a critique that engages people and draws their attention to these risks . In Smith et al . ( 2011 ) we introduce our playful methods for a surveillance studies audience . Playful design strategies are by no means new to PD . It is well known that the Utopia project used cardboard mockups and prototypes in a kind of ‘design game’ with workers at the Aftonbladet newspaper in Stockholm ( Ehn and Kyng 1991 p . 175 ) . We began our project also influenced by the playful approaches of Gaver and colleagues using cultural probes ( i . e . Gaver e t al . , 2004 ) . The following sections describe the various iterative prototypes that we developed , and the events at which we presented them . Mock ID cards The first prototypes we created in relation to ID infrastructures were provoked most directly by the UK’s biometric National ID Card schemes under development following parliamentary approval in 2006 . To enable attendees of the ( ironically titled ) ‘New Sciences of Protection : Designing Safe Living’ conference at Lancaster University in July 2008 to experience for themselves an environment made ‘safe’ based on a thorough , fine - grained ID regime , < blinded author > volunteered to create custom ID badges for all conference attendees . Along with the name and affiliation , the badges featured playful photos , DNA codes , biometric identifiers , machine readable zones , RFID chips , risk codes and security threat assessment levels all of which were fake ( see Figure 1 ) . The intention of the ID badges was to allow participants at the conference to engage with and discuss the implications of ‘secure’ ID in the benign , no consequence setting of a conference . For example , the risk codes on the badges were ostensibly based on DNA analysis in combination with back - end databases provided by the national health service and other government agencies . These codes indicated whether an individual presented a risk to themselves or others . e . g . A “D” code indicated someone was prone to Internet Obsessive Disorder and hence their access to wifi was restricted . Metal cutlery was prohibited for those regarded as a hijacking ( H ) risk . The ID badges were an experimental prototype developed by Total Transparency Solutions™ a fictitious corporation we invented ( see : http : / / totaltransparencysolutions . pbworks . com / ) . Although the ID badges were low - tech ( they were simply designed in a word processing program and printed on a colour printer ) , conference participants playfully engaged with the ‘secure’ ID features . Regular briefings by the representative of Total Transparency Solutions™ , reporting on the disciplinary actions taken against violators of the ‘safe conferencing’ rules , and extolling the benefits of the SafeTBioID™ prototypes were a humorous and well - received start of each conference day . Based on the ‘success’ , at least in terms of audience reaction and feedback , the IS scheme prototype has been progressively refined , and demonstrated at nine further privacy and security events in the UK , US and Canada . We refined the prototype to incorporate a functioning RFID chips and live databases laden with personal information , as we discuss next . Figure 1 Sample mock ID card , with explanations of its components RFID demos Providing a link between ID cards and back - end databases was a significant goal for our prototyping activities because this is key to understanding the privacy risks . We also wanted to extend our playful approach to a higher fidelity ID scheme . In the next stage of our research , we responded to an emerging policy window in Ontario , Canada surrounding enhanced drivers licenses ( EDLs ) , to be equipped with a particular radio frequency identification ( RFID ) chip , the EPC global UHF Gen 2 , widely regarded as especially insecure and privacy invasive because of its lack of encryption and long read range ( McPhail et al . 2009 ; Juels 2006 ) ) . Ontario as well as other Canadian provinces and US border states were considering implementing EDLs as a border crossing identification document , to comply with the Western Hemisphere Travel Initiative ( WHTI ) . Following the first public forum , mentioned above , we made a written submission reiterating the privacy and security concerns to the Ontario legislative committee considering Bill 85 : The Photocard Act , which would have authorized issuing the EDL . We also made an oral presentation to the public hearings in October 2008 and were dismayed that the elected officials had numerous misconceptions about how the technology would actually work ( see Smith et al . , 2011 ) . This provided fresh impetus to develop an operational mock EDL infrastructure that we could show to others . Work began in earnest when an engineering graduate student joined the research team to build an RFID - based ID infrastructure . The first tasks he completed were to test the read range of RFID cards , to demonstrate ‘killing’ the cards and cloning , and also to test the effectiveness of the protective sleeves ( Faraday cages ) which were to be issued with RFID cards . These confirmed the ease with which the integrity of the RFID system could be compromised . We then began to build the links to a back - end database that could display results in real - time . The public debut for this live mock EDL scheme was the ‘National public forum on “enhanced” drivers licences , privacy and state surveillance under the new Canada - U . S . border regime’ we co - organized in Ottawa , Canada on 26 March 24 , 2009 , with several civil liberties and consumer organizations . This event garnered considerable press . At this and subsequent public and privacy / security oriented events we issued mock EDLs to participants and used commercially available RFID - reading equipment to detect cardholders’ presence in the room , and display for all to see the information linked to their cards . In this manner , we modelled how this equipment might be used and abused at US - Canada border crossings and elsewhere . We continued to refine the prototype through several iterations based on the experiences at these events and on participant feedback which was solicited informally through conversation and formally in some venues using feedback forms . At the time of our most recent demonstration , in May 2011 , the ID scheme had these functionalities : • Displayed names of cardholders in range of the reader • Used the unique tag numbers on the RFID cards to visibly ‘welcome’ people as they entered the space • Painted cells on the display matrix according to threat levels ( green , yellow , red ) • Generated an overall ‘threat’ level for the room , aggregated from the individual public risk scores of the recently read cards . The five level colour scheme was based directly on that then in use by DHS . • Updated attendance every few seconds • Displayed a panel to the side of the grid to show biographical information on ‘select’ attendees at events Figure 2 , shows how these elements combined in the prototype from May 2009 . Pictured in the figure is a screenshot taken during an event where we deployed our prototype , with Bruce Schneier , a renowned security expert delivering the keynote . With his permission , we displayed his photo and citizenship , along with the names of other cardholders then in the lecture theatre and a mock overall threat assessment for the gathering ( note the red EXTREME threat level , based on the number of high risk individuals in the vicinity ) . On another screen , we also displayed some of his political associations and charitable donations we collected from the web . Figure 2 Database display of audience RFID tag reader , highlighting Bruce Schneier’s ID . “CONSTRUCTIVE” ALTERNATIVES - MINIMAL DISCLOSURE The second way in which we have attempted to bring research and participatory design principles to bear on identification issues is through what we call “constructive” alternatives to current and potential identification documents , practices , and infrastructures . These alternatives are constructive in two ways . First , we have designed and created medium fidelity prototypes to demonstrate the potential functionality of the kind of system ( s ) we envisage . Secondly , we wish to engage constructively , as it were , in the debates around the ways in which ID infrastructures and applications should be developed as they evolve to take their place in a more digital environment . As with our playful RFID prototypes , our designs to model proportionate identification provide concrete examples to help people to understand the principles that ID systems should instantiate , including data protection and user control over personal information . The concept of proportionality is common in the privacy realm , and is based on the “data minimization principle” that requires organizations to collect no more information than is needed for a transaction ( see , for example , Federal Trade Commission 2007 ; OECD 1980 ) . In Canada , our research context , the Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act ( PIPEDA ) , governs how information should be collected and used during commercial transactions and embodies data minimization as a principle ( Canada 2000 ) . We began our work around identification through ethnographically - informed fieldwork to learn about the issues people face when using their ID . We then used these findings , in combination with workshops , demonstrations , and field - testing , to iteratively develop physical and digital prototypes based on the proportionality principle . Field studies ( “waiting line ethnography” ) Our work with identification issues and identification documents bridges several interrelated projects . Foundational to our design efforts , we began with fieldwork to understand people’s current ID practices as well as their concerns , issues , problems and successes in dealing with existing identity infrastructures and processes . The field sites included places where people lined up to obtain identification documents : a large Canadian university outside of the student ID office , and a provincial government service office in an urban area . We hoped that while people were waiting to conduct an ID transaction it might be easier to solicit their thoughts on identification documents generally , using the current transaction as a launching point . We conducted 20 + interviews at the university , and 37 interviews with citizens waiting to enter into service encounters in the government service location . Participants were recruited through a brief survey and if they were willing to be interviewed , we proceeded to discuss their experiences applying for and using ID in daily life ( such as errors on ID documents , theft , and border crossing incidents ) . These “identity stories” told us how people think that the ID system , including cards and underlying infrastructures , works for them now , areas of breakdown , and generally , what people want and need in an ID system . For prototyping purposes , one key theme was a concern with 27 the amount of personal information that is shared during ID transactions . This work is reported in more detail in Borchorst et al . ( 2012 ) . ID card overlays - situated probes Using the fieldwork data as a starting place , we embarked on a set of prototyping activities to develop privacy - enhancing identification models for both physical and digital transactions . As with the RFID prototyping work discussed above , we combined participatory and probe principles and practices . Probes as we use them are artifacts designed to investigate taken - for - granted infrastructures / practices while fitting within the inclinations and everyday practices of users . They are concrete artifacts that , we hope , help people to learn about abstract issues . In the case of our “Proportionate Identification” , or “Prop - ID” tools , these issues include informational privacy and the principle of data minimization . We wished to design functional , simple tools to allow citizens using government - issued identification in face - to - face service encounters , such as purchasing liquor or picking up a parcel at a post office , to provide their personal information only in proportion to what is required for the specific transaction . Rather than relying on organizations to abide by the data minimization principle , we tried to provide the option for citizens to minimize the information that is circulated about them , putting the onus on the organization to be explicit about what information they need and why . After analyzing the different parts of the Ontario Driver’s Licence and the Ontario Health Card , and researching organizations’ information collection policies , we held a workshop to develop a variety of scenarios for ID - requiring transactions , including voting , picking up a parcel , and the most common type of transaction , age - verification ( such as purchasing alcohol and entering alcohol - licenced venues ) . We then developed ID card overlays to accommodate these scenarios , through an iterative process that gathered feedback from the potential users ( during two prototyping and feedback workshops ) as well as the organizations ( through field testing ) . Each workshop included 7 - 12 participants who chose to attend based on advertising and word of mouth within the Faculty of Information at the University of Toronto . While there was variation in gender , age and ethnic origin amongst participants , they self - selected to participate and were not necessarily representative of the Canadian population . Most were students ; all were interested in some aspect of ID , privacy , or technology . Our prototype began as a self - contained wallet - insert consisting of a bound series of plastic sleeves , with each sleeve imprinted with dark black bars to block out particular pieces of information on the specified card , and , based on ongoing feedback , became progressively smaller . The sixth and final version is a small , removable plastic patch placed directly on the card , with unnecessary details of the card obstructed . Participants were given brief presentations describing the features and potential use of the overlays and then asked to share their thoughts , concerns and critiques . Each workshop included some participants from previous gatherings and some new interested individuals , providing some continuity but also fresh perspectives . Workshop discussions guiding this progression covered the content and appearance of the overlays , functionality ( such as whether they fit in a wallet and were easy or difficult to remove or change ) and user - experience ( such as the confidence citizens had to use these overlays in day - to - day activity and the comfort organizations had to accept these overlays with minimal suspicion ) . In addition to distributing over 100 of these overlays , we posted do - it - yourself kits to the Prop - ID website http : / / propid . ischool . utoronto . ca / Figure 3 , Overlay on a drivers license , hiding all personal data except for facial image and birth date . Proportionate ID digital - smartphone prototyping In parallel with developing the physical overlays , we also developed a mobile application for Android smartphones using the same proportionality principles . Financial transactions are increasingly digital ; Google Wallet is among the most recent attempts to capitalize on this trend . It is likely only a matter of time before a similar migration of identity documents into a digital environment , where the current norm is for large amounts of data to be collected and stored during transactions . The intent of our Prop - ID app is to publicly demonstrate the technical and operational viability of a mobile digital device that offers a privacy - protective alternative to conventional ID schemes and illustrates principles of minimally disclosing credentials . Rather than routinely turning over fully identifying data , the device would reveal identity information only in proportion to what is actually needed . In particular , the prototype attempts to illustrate key aspects of anonymous credential transfer during proportional ID transactions . The Prop - ID application consists of two main components : “Proportionate ID Wallet” and “Service Authenticator” . The Proportionate ID wallet provides a repository of credentials and would securely dispense the minimum necessary identity certificates for conducting in - person service transactions . The Service Authenticator is used by the service provider during the transaction to receive and test the identity certificates . The credentials that are stored within the ID wallet do not depend on the device itself ; rather , they are kept within the Prop - ID application in the form of identity certificates issued by a 28 Certificate Authority . The authenticity of the identity certificate is verified using the public key of the Certificate Authority by which the certificate was issued . For example , in order to provide proof of age using a driver’s license when making a liquor purchase , the customer would initiate the transaction and pass the identity certificate with proof of age and picture issued by the Ministry of Transportation to the Service Authenticator . After receiving the identity certificate , the Service Authenticator would use the public key of the Ministry of Transportation to verify its authenticity . Technical security measures , such as encryption , associated with real - world deployment of proportional ID were beyond the scope of the project . Figure 4 : Screen of Proportionate ID Digital Wallet prototype on an Android smartphone The Prop - ID app was also demonstrated at the workshops described above . Participants could play with it and were asked to discuss it on a pragmatic level—is the information displayed clear ? Is the interface intuitive ? Do the steps make sense ? —and on a more theoretical level , where questions of possible use were raised as well as concerns about security and data integrity . The ultimate goal of both the Android application and the plastic card overlays is citizen empowerment through information and tools to permit thoughtful , active and critical engagement with government and other ID - requiring organizations , while making ID infrastructure issues vivid and concrete . By participatorily making tangible artifacts that people can interact with , modify and use , we open up the typically “black boxed” technologies , organizational practices and built - in assumptions that are hidden within contemporary identification practices while provoking debate and discussion about the ways these technologies need to work for people going forward . In keeping with one of the overall goals of community participatory design , “design and the use of computational media becomes a form of political action through which the desires and agendas of a community are explored and instantiated” ( DiSalvo 2012 ) . REFLECTIONS ON OUR INTERVENTIONS In attempting to bring fundamental PD precepts and methods to the realm of ID infrastructure design , we faced a number of challenges , learned several lessons , and generated further questions with which we have only just begun to grapple . These are divided broadly below into reflections on the opportunities for participation and opportunities for intervention in infrastructure development . Opportunities for participation Prototype development ID infrastructures are large and distributed , and used by virtually every citizen , which raises questions about participation on at least two levels : how do you find participants , and how are they best engaged in the design activities ? These questions , of course , reflect common areas of concern across the field of participatory design ; we merely note that issues of participation are at least as fraught in studies of large - scale infrastructures as in other areas of the field , particularly with regards to issues of scale and scalability . Community - based participatory design , in seeking ways to bound the term ‘community , ’ often focuses on groups within a defined geographical area , groups bound by common interests , or bound by common identity claims . In studying ID infrastructures , however , we extend community design principles to a societal scale . Where there are no prior Deweyian publics , creating them de novo , though ultimately vital , is very hard to do , and well beyond our immediate means . As preliminary steps in that direction we developed provocative , educational artifacts that we hoped would both engage people’s interest and help illuminate promising alternative possibilities . Our approach to this challenge was to turn to fieldwork to solicit the views and stories of as wide a range of participants as time , geographic limitations , and financial constraints would permit , choosing as our sites locations characterized by a demographically - diverse user group . Even in our relatively small , localized study , the range of potential uses for identification was wide and the needs and preferences of our participants were highly diverse and sometimes contradictory . Qualitative analysis of the local and particular data was conducted to create a number of categories of ID experiences , and to identify aspects of identification that users found problematic . These data - derived categories then became part of the information that we used to inform the prototypes and to establish the citizen - based values we hoped to encode into the system design . During prototype development we worked with smaller participant groups , primarily and opportunistically composed of university students in the case of the proportionate ID project , and a combination of experts , academics , and students in the case of the RFID system . In each case ‘participation’ while relatively brief , was cumulative . Demonstrations and use situations We sought concrete ways of intervening in evolving ID infrastructures in moments of policy flux , so our search for opportunities for citizen participation with our prototypes and models by necessity extended beyond the design process and into demonstrations and use situations . We disseminated our work in a variety of academic and public fora , encouraging people to experience the mock RFID infrastructure and provide us commentary , or to take samples of our ID overlays , try them out during their daily transactions and then report 29 back . We found that our attempts to use design to open big ‘black boxed’ systems , rendering them more transparent , did seem to help people connect their life experiences with infrastructures , or to imagine the impact an infrastructure change might have on their own activities . Our data for this is largely anecdotal , however ; a potential ongoing challenge to designing alternative infrastructures is assessing the result of the intervention . In both our prototyping and demonstration activities , we worked largely in isolation from other ( civil society ) organizations that could help drive the design and give it a wider reach . With large populations potentially affected by ID documents , participation should ideally be drawn from a much wider range of citizens than we were able to manage . While the RFID mock infrastructure was shown at a public forum in which we participated with a number of other groups including the Canadian Civil Liberties Association and the Council of Canadians , we did not engage members of those groups in a sustained way with our actual design processes . A more participatory approach may be to involve more pre - existing groups with an interest in infrastructure issues . Involving other organizations will present new challenges however , especially when considering the lines and tensions between advocacy , education , research and design . With large scale infrastructuring interventions like ID schemes , a PD approach will inevitably challenge some of the existing boundaries between these spheres . Opportunities for intervention Timing In the case of our RFID mock infrastructure , because we were designing with a goal of using our system to encourage resistance to the EDL implementation in Ontario and elsewhere , we were working within a narrow window of opportunity at a particular juncture of the policy - making process ( Kingdon , 1984 ) . While the research and design process needed to create these mock infrastructures participatorily takes time , the policy timeline moved much more quickly , which creates a challenge when trying to design for intervention . The implication is a need for flexibility of tactics , informed by a long term strategy , so one can respond quickly to opportunities as they arise . In the case of our RFID - based prototype , it would have been ideal to have a version to show during the public hearings for Bill 85 : The Photocard Act in Ontario . At the time the legislation was being discussed was when the media and public’s attention could be more easily captured to challenge the design or to think constructively about ID schemes . Breakdowns The strategies we used to oppose and also more constructively design ID infrastructures were informed by the work of Susan Leigh Star and colleagues on infrastructure , particularly Bowker and Star’s ( 1999 ) statement that infrastructure “becomes visible upon breakdown” ( p . 35 ) . From our varied design activities we identify numerous ways in which this insight can be extended to be incorporated into design practice by PD researchers : i ) Induce breakdowns to open up latent infrastructural issues and alternatives : Our RFID - based ID prototype made the privacy and civil liberty concerns associated with EDLs a central and visible aspect of the deployment of prototypes . Attendees at events and conferences were encouraged to live the potentially negative experience of being flagged as risky in a database . In a playful manner , a critique was constructed . Similarly , the overlays we created as part of the Proportionate ID work would often trigger a breakdown in everyday uses of IDs . Although citizens should be able to disclose only necessary information during a transaction , the act of using an overlay could cause questioning or a breakdown in the use and acceptance of ID documents . Our waiting line interview participants were often attracted to the project by the opportunity to tell us a story of when their ID caused them problems . What do citizens do to make their infrastructures work ? This is a question that may be applicable in a broader array of PD projects on infrastructure . ii ) Use value breakdowns to raise political issues : Breakdowns which call for articulation work by citizens are only one type of breakdown . Bowker and Star ( 1999 ) suggest that there are power relations to consider in who does the articulation work . People often feel subordinated when having to comply with unreasonable requirements , and if alternatives are available , motivated to pursue them . Similarly , the experiences of individual citizens with breakdowns can be extended to consider whether the democratic values that should underpin public infrastructure are being realized . If the social values of an infrastructure are broken , there is potentially a space for design intervention . As examples of this , the privacy and civil liberty concerns with EDLs encouraged us to begin probing , mocking and prototyping . Similarly , our concern that data minimization principles are not being practiced in everyday ID information transactions encouraged us to explore proportionate ID alternatives . Seeking out instances of value breakdowns may assist PD practitioners to frame other projects . CONCLUSIONS We have shown how PD inspired design interventions can begin to open up possibilities for infrastructural reform , but are we still in the realm of PD ? While the use of ‘design’ to engage participation in the larger social dialogue about how identity and identification infrastructures are constructed looks a lot like political advocacy , does it also constitute Participatory Design ? Our answer , though tentative , is yes . The use of design probes or process designs to stimulate public imagination not only constitutes a clear form of the social responsibility encouraged by most design philosophies , but also requires participation across a range of designer / researchers , stakeholder groups , users / citizens and publics for the effective design of these complex systems . PD was born in the impulse to ( workplace ) democracy , with experiments in ‘counter planning’ , seeking to demonstrate viable alternatives to managerially imposed information systems . It also drew on wider 30 political movements for some of its collaborative techniques , such as future workshops . Now the terrain of contestation over information systems is societal in scope . During this period of growing tensions between competing visions for a globalized network society , perhaps engaging more directly with political movements should be the future of PD . It has a lot to offer . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We appreciate the contributions of our teammates Eleonore Fournier - Tombs , Grant Patten , Alex Tichine and Jennette Weber , as well as the many volunteers who tried out our prototypes and provided us with invaluable feedback . This research was funded by SSHRC and the Office of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada . REFERENCES Agre , P . Toward a Critical Technical Practice : Lessons Learned in Trying to Reform AI , in Bowker , G . et al eds , Bridging the Great Divide : Social Science , Technical Systems , and Cooperative Work , Erlbaum . 1997 . http : / / polaris . gseis . ucla . edu / pagre / Balka , E . Inside the belly of the beast : the challenges and successes of a reformist participatory agenda , Proc . PDC , 2006 , 134 - 143 . Beck , E . E . P for Political : Participation is not enough . Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems , 2002 . Retrieved 15 May , 2007 , from http : / / www . cs . aau . dk / SJIS / journal / volumes / volume14 / articles / no1 / 05 _ beck _ p77 - 92 . pdf Braa , J . , Monteiro , E . and Sahay , S . ‘Networks of action : sustainable health information systems across developing countries’ , MIS Quarterly , 2004 , 28 ( 3 ) : 337 - 362 . Boler , M . Digital media and democracy : tactics in hard times . MIT Press . 2009 . Borchorst , N . , McPhail , B . , Smith , K . L . , Ferenbok , J . and Clement , A . “Bridging Identity Gaps - Supporting Identity Performance in Citizen Service Encounters . ” Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) : The Journal of Collaborative Computing , 2012 , 21 ( 1 ) : 1 - 36 . Bowker , G . C . and Star , S . L . Sorting things out : classification and its consequences . MIT Press . 1999 . Canada . Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act ( PIPEDA ) . 2000 . Retrieved from : http : / / laws . justice . gc . ca / PDF / Statute / P / P - 8 . 6 . pdf DiSalvo , C . , Nourbakhsh , I . , Holstius , D . , Akin , A . and Louw , M . ( 2008 ) ‘The Neighborhood Networks Project : a case study of critical engagement and creative expression through participatory design’ , in Simonsen , J . , Robertson , T . and Hakken , D . ( Eds . ) Proc . PDC 2008 , 41 - 50 . DiSalvo , C . , Clement , A . and Pipek , V . Communities : Participatory Design For , With , and By Communities , to appear in Robertson , T and Simonsen , J . ( eds ) International Handbook of Participatory Design , Routledge . 2012 ( forthcoming ) . Ehn , P . and Kyng , M . Cardboard computers : Mocking it up or hands on the future . In Design at work : cooperative design of computer systems , edited by J . Greenbaum and M . Kyng . LEA . 1991 . Federal Trade Commission . Fair Information Practice Principles . 2007 . Retrieved 18 Oct 2011 from : http : / / www . ftc . gov / reports / privacy3 / fairinfo . shtm Gaver , W . , Boucher , A . , Pennington , S . and Walker , B . . Cultural probes and the value of uncertainty . Interactions , 2004 , 11 ( 5 ) : 53 - 56 . Home Office . Identity cards : The UK National Identity Card and the Identification Card for EEA ( European economic area ) nationals ceased to be valid legal documents on 21 January 2011 . n . d . Retrieved 24 May 2012 from http : / / www . homeoffice . gov . uk / agencies - public - bodies / ips / about - us / suppliers / identity - cards / Juels , A . RFID security and privacy : a research survey . IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications , 2006 , 24 ( 2 ) : 381 - 394 . Kensing , F . , Simonsen , J . and Bødker , K . Participatory Design at a Radio Station . Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) : The Journal of Collaborative Computing , 1998 , 7 ( 3 - 4 ) : 243 - 271 . Kingdon , J . W . Agendas , alternatives , and public policies . Boston : Little , Brown . 1984 . Lyon , D . Identifying citizens : ID Cards as Surveillance . Oxford : Polity Press . 2009 . McPhail , B . , Boa , K . , Ferenbok , J . , Smith , K . L . and Clement , A . ( 2009 ) . Identity , privacy and security challenges with Ontario ' s enhanced driver ' s licence . In Proceedings 2009 IEEE Toronto International Conference – Science and Technology for Humanity . Toronto : September 26 - 27 , 2009 , 904 - 909 . OECD Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy and Transborder Flows of Personal Data ( 1980 ) . Directorate for Science , Technology and Industry . Retrieved January 11 , 2012 from : http : / / www . oecd . org / document / 18 / 0 , 3746 , en _ 2649 _ 3 4255 _ 1815186 _ 1 _ 1 _ 1 _ 1 , 00 & & en - USS _ 01DBC . html . Ratto , M . Critical Making : Conceptual and Material Studies in Technology and Social Life . The Information Society , 2011 , 27 ( 4 ) . Sclove , R . Democracy and Technology . Guilford . 1995 . Shapiro , D . Participatory Design : the will to succeed . Proceedings of the 4th Decennial Conference on Critical Computing : between sense and sensibility . Aarhus , Denmark August 21 - 25 , 2005 . 29 - 38 . Star , S . L . The Ethnography of Infrastructure . American Behavioral Scientist , 1999 , 43 ( 3 ) : 377 - 391 . Smith , K . L . , McPhail , B . , Ferenbok , J . , Tichine , A . and Clement , A . Playing with surveillance : The design of a mock RFID - based identification infrastructure for public engagement . Surveillance & Society , 2011 , 9 ( 1 - 2 ) : 149 - 166 .