An Argument For Design Space Reflection Graham Dove Aarhus University Aarhus , Denmark graham . dove @ cc . au . dk Nicolai Brodersen Hansen Aarhus University Aarhus , Denmark nbhansen @ cavi . au . dk Kim Halskov Aarhus University Aarhus , Denmark halskov @ cavi . au . dk ABSTRACT We argue that documenting , revisiting and reflecting on the design space of a project provides three important benefits . First it increases our awareness of the constraints introduced by particular design choices . Second , this qualifies our understanding of the way a design space has been filtered by design activities . Third we are prompted to challenge these constraints and reconsider disregarded opportunities . To support this argument , we revisit key activities from two projects in our interaction design lab’s portfolio , selected because of the detailed documentation available . We also introduce SnapShot , the web - based tool we are developing for this method of design space reflection . Based on these examples , we present a critical discussion and outline areas of future research . Author Keywords Design space ; reflective practice ; design documentation . ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous ; INTRODUCTION Documenting design activities , outputs and processes is an important task for those undertaking research through design [ 40 ] , and whose focus is the way design processes unfold [ 1 ] . One purpose of such documentation is to revisit a project and prompt reflection on prior design activity . Here we consider the design space as an important part of this reflection . Typically , HCI and interaction design has documented the design space as it is filtered through individual artifacts , such as sketches or prototypes [ e . g . 23 ] . We argue that documenting and reflecting on the design space beyond the qualities selected in individual design representations offers three key benefits . First , this reflection increases our awareness of the constraints we introduce with particular design choices , and how they can ripple throughout the design space . Second , it qualifies our understanding of the way that design activities and artifacts can filter a design space , by keeping temporarily disregarded options open and making a wider range of aspects explicit . Third , it prompts us to challenge the constraints we identify and reconsider disregarded opportunities , encouraging exploratory experimentation . In arguing for this , we do not wish to downplay the importance of individual artifacts , as these are obviously crucial to design . Rather we want to highlight the additional benefits offered by a process of design space reflection . This paper extends previous work in which design documentation moves beyond descriptions of the particular designed artifact . Other examples of which attempt to : capture information relating to design events and support shared reflection [ 9 ] ; capture resemblances in families of final design artifacts [ 5 ] , and show the rationale behind particular design decisions [ 24 , 8 ] . Our approach differs from these because rather than explaining the local rationale for particular design decisions we consider the wider impact these decisions have had on the emerging design space . To support this we show how design spaces can be understood as instances of conceptual spaces , and provide a simple , structured framework for revisiting and reflecting on the constraints introduced by particular design decisions . Design space reflection offers a contribution to research through design because it can highlight the constraints particular design choices introduce , and prompt us to challenge those constraints or consider why areas of the design space may have been disregarded . It contributes to design education because it can prompt reflection on particular design judgments , clearly position these within the wider design situation , and help us identify areas of the design space to revisit for exploratory experimentation . The remainder of the paper is structured as follows . First we present a review of related work in which we discuss how the term design space has been used within HCI , and how interaction designers have attempted to document design spaces . Following this , we explore in detail how design spaces might be understood as conceptual spaces , and discuss reflective design practice . We then introduce SnapShot , the web - based tool we are developing to support design space reflection , and present two examples in which we revisit media architecture projects , which were selected from our interaction design lab’s portfolio because of the detailed documentation available . Finally we present a critical discussion , highlighting key points in our argument , and outline areas of future research . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . NordiCHI ' 16 , October 23 - 27 , 2016 , Gothenburg , Sweden © 2016 ACM . ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4763 - 1 / 16 / 10… $ 15 . 00 DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2971485 . 2971528 THE DESIGN SPACE IN HCI The term design space is likely to have originated in engineering practice , and its appearance in academic literature goes back at least to the middle of the twentieth century [ e . g . 12 , 33 ] . Here it typically refers to a Cartesian space whose axes each represent a specific design variable , and within which a point represents a particular design . In a tightly constrained and well - described context , such a design space can have both analytical and predictive power [ 35 ] . Early examples of design spaces in HCI were also often generated with analytical and predictive intentions . For instance , Card , Mackinlay and Robertson offer a classification of input devices organized through technical abstractions and human factors concerns [ 7 ] , and Nigay and Coutaz classify multimodal systems along the dimensions of concurrent processing and data fusion [ 26 ] . In addition to classifying existing systems and devices , HCI also has a tradition of exploring the predictive design space of new interaction techniques through the development and evaluation of prototype interfaces . A good example of this is Fitzmaurice , Ishii and Buxton’s discussion of the development of ‘Bricks’ , which they use to investigate the design space of ‘graspable user interfaces’ [ 14 ] . Hornecker and Buur present an alternative design space analysis for what has subsequently been termed tangible interaction by exploring the phenomenological and social aspects of user experience [ 20 ] . Here they illustrate the impact of humanistic research on possible design spaces in HCI . Gaver [ 17 ] uses the term design space to refer to the curated collections of ideas and concepts in a design workbook or proposal . The ideas presented in these artifacts are said to occupy a metaphorical landscape of design opportunities , rather than a Cartesian space of possible designs ; and their purpose is to inspire rather than prescribe design choices . He claims a strong move away from classifying what is and towards speculating about what might be . Sengers and Gaver [ 34 ] argue that the ambiguity in these design spaces encourages a different view of computer systems than is typically seen in HCI . This perspective on design spaces reflects the influence of art practice on HCI . Lim , Stolterman and Tenenberg [ 23 ] describe how prototypes are used to traverse a design space , acting as a filter that focuses on particular regions , and as concrete realizations of particular conceptual design ideas . They argue that the incomplete nature of prototypes is powerful because it allows decisions along selected dimensions to be put to one side , whilst others are instantiated and tested . This view is echoed by Beaudouin - Lafon and MacKay who describe how prototypes are used to creatively explore certain dimensions of a design space [ 2 ] , which otherwise constrains design possibilities . This reflects an operationalized understanding of design spaces . Other uses of the term design space in HCI refer : to the physical places within which design activities take place [ 30 ] ; to the likely contexts in which the designed system or artifact will be introduced or used [ 11 ] ; to uncharted areas of speculative future technologies [ 27 ] ; to the philosophical , political or cultural positions a design project may adopt [ 13 ] ; as a conceptual tool to represent all possible design solutions [ 38 ] ; and as a network graph that can be explored computationally [ 39 ] . These examples highlight the diversity of interpretations of the term design space in HCI . We do not show this to argue for a single canonical interpretation , but rather to indicate how liberally the term is being interpreted in practice , and how usage changes . Documenting Design Spaces Alongside research investigating , describing or generating design spaces , interaction designers have also attempted to document them . Design Space Analysis [ 24 ] is perhaps the most widely discussed , and is an approach to design rationale that aims to understand a particular artifact in terms of its relationship to plausible design options . A design space is constructed , based on the QOC ( Questions , Options , Criteria ) notation , in which a design question is posed ; alternative solutions are suggested ; and the criteria for selection made explicit . This results in a tree structure that shows the rationale behind individual design choices , with indications of a positive or negative assessment of the different options . Whilst this offers a useful method for understanding a design process through the unfolding argumentation behind design decisions , it quickly becomes complex , and can impose a potentially large overhead . Also , its focus on the rationale for particular design choices may make it difficult to identify constraints these choices introduce elsewhere in the design space . Carroll and Rosson [ 8 ] describe an alternative approach to argumentative design rationale that uses a Task - Artifact Framework to analyse specific designs in use . They base their rationale on task analyses , and present descriptive use - case scenarios with associated claims about the positive or negative impact of design choices . Competing theoretical claims or system requirements can therefore be weighed - up or traded - off within a single coherent analysis . Like Design Space Analysis , undertaking this approach thoroughly and systematically can demand a significant overhead . Heape [ 19 ] takes a higher level , all - encompassing view , using the design space to understand , encapsulate and represent the dynamics of a design process through its activities . He describes this design space as “a fluid , dynamic , emergent and systemic whole of interweavings , traced by trajectories of exploration , experiment and change” , and the design process as the construction , exploration and expansion of this design space . Heape documents and represents these design spaces with a complex notation that aims to show things such as material differences , emergent relationships and interrelated structure . He also produces quite beautiful and inspiring diagrams , which reference birds flocking and galaxies swirling . However , these diagrams appear dense and can be difficult to interpret , limiting their usefulness as tools for reflection or analysis . Biskjaer , Dalsgaard , & Halskov [ 3 ] consider a conceptual design space , showing how it is encompased by the creativity constraints that strongly influence what might ( and might not ) be designed . They also introduce the Design Space Schema as an intentionally lightweight and simple notation technique for capturing salient components of a design space . This notation aims to help designers structure and ( re ) develop their design space using pen and paper . We have incorporated this style of notation into the web - based SnapShot tool introduced in this paper , extending its use to document and compare the design space at particular moments in time ; thereby capturing something of the dynamics of an unfolding process and supporting design space reflection . We have also adapted their notation to better reflect the clarity offered by our structured way of thinking about design spaces as examples of conceptual spaces , which is introduced below . A CONCEPTUAL INTERPRATION OF DESIGN SPACE In line with a number of other authors [ e . g . 2 , 3 , 23 , 38 ] , we use the term design space to refer to a dynamic conceptual space that bounds possible or probable designs , and which is constructed and explored through design activities . In this section we consider more closely how such a conceptual space might be understood . To help with this we adopt a structural metaphor , in which conceptual spaces consist of quality dimensions , each of which has a number of possible values through which it might be instantiated . This model of conceptual spaces has been presented in detail by [ 29 , 16 ] , and we believe it helps us think about design spaces in the following ways . First , thinking of conceptual spaces as consisting of a number of important quality dimensions provides a mechanism through which some qualities might be instantiated independently of others [ 16 ] . For example , a value of 1kg might be assigned to a weight dimension independently of a value of red being assigned to a colour dimension or a value of 45 O C being assigned to a temperature dimension . It also provides a mechanism through which different instances of a concept might have their qualities instantiated with different values , and yet still be recognizable as an instance of that concept [ 37 ] . For example , it is possible to agree that a beanbag , a rocking chair and a deck chair all fit within the conceptual space of ‘chair’ . This is because the values for important qualities such as size and the affordance of ‘sitting - on’ are sufficiently closely aligned . However , each of these examples of chair is also very different , and is designed for a particular purpose . Therefore along dimensions such as number of legs or seating material they may be sufficiently distant to be clearly differentiated . When we think about design spaces in this conceptual way , these mechanisms help us understand the power of prototyping . For example , when creating prototypes it may be possible to instantiate a particular dimension of a system with a number of different options ; and prototypes may instantiate some qualities with particular values whilst putting other dimensions temporarily to one side [ 2 , 23 ] . These quality dimensions are not necessarily independent of each other , and it is unlikely that a value of 1kg would be assigned to a weight dimension independently of the value assigned to a heaviness dimension . For example , if we are considering the conceptual space of human babies , a weight value of 1kg might be associated with a heaviness value of ‘dangerously low’ . In the same conceptual space a weight value of 3kg might be associated with a heaviness value of ‘normal’ , and a weight value of 4 . 5kg associated with a heaviness value of ‘high’ . Here , the weight and heaviness dimensions can be said to co - vary ; as , for example , might the dimensions of sweetness , sugar content , ripeness and colour in the conceptual space of ‘fruit’ [ 15 ] . In a design space , these strong connections mean that selecting a value to instantiate one dimension can introduce constraints to many others . For example , the setting for interactions can strongly imply constraints on qualities such as scale , mobility , display - technology , privacy , and interaction modality [ 11 , 20 ] . Biskjaer , Dalsgaard and Halskov [ 3 ] discuss the importance of constraints in understanding design spaces . We develop this work by introducing a method for reflecting on the changing design space , identifying the wider impact of particular design choices , and prompting investigation of disregarded opportunities . REFLECTIVE DESIGN PRACTICE Following Schön , interaction design is now commonly discussed as reflective practice in which knowing is embodied in action and understanding arrived at through reflection . This reflection is both in action ( i . e . an integral part of the ongoing activity ) and also on action ( i . e . to some degree removed from and examining activity ) . In the famous descriptions of architectural student Petra and studio master Quist [ 31 ] design is described as reflection in action , through the metaphor of a conversation with the situation that is undertaken in the medium of sketching . Elsewhere however , Schön also describes movements “up” to higher levels of activity , i . e . movement from action to reflection on that action , and uses the metaphor of the rungs of a ladder to indicate how prior activity becomes the object of reflection . Using this metaphor , he describes rungs of “designing” , “description of designing” , “reflection on description of designing” , and “reflection on reflection on description of designing” [ 32 : 115 ] . It is through this process of reflection on knowing in action that new repertoire and competencies become more firmly established . Using this metaphor , design space reflection would be the third of these rungs , offering a way of reflecting on descriptions of design practice . Such reflection on action , although less widely discussed , is just as important to design as reflection in action , and is a key reason that design documentation is so important . Dalsgaard and Halskov [ 9 ] highlight the double role that documentation can play in supporting reflection on design activities , showing how it serves both as a source of insight and also as a source of supporting evidence for insights gained . Here we introduce a tool for design space documentation , and then show how it can be used to support reflection on previous design activity . INTRODUCING THE SNAPSHOT TOOL As design researchers , we often revisit previous projects in order to gain insight about our processes and acquire new perspectives . An important aspect of this is developing tools that support new ways of documenting and reflecting on our work . To support our approach to design space reflection , we are developing a web - based tool that we have called SnapShot . This has been inspired by the metaphor of taking a ‘snapshot’ with a camera , which captures a dynamically changing scene at a particular moment in time . Overview The SnapShot tool , Figure 1 , is made up of a series of design space schemas listed chronologically , each of which documents important aspects of the situation at a selected point in time . This builds on the notation introduced in [ 3 ] , and turns a paper - based approach into a digital tool that can compare a design space at different times , and so better reflect dynamic design processes . The left - hand - side of the tool contains a vertical navigation timeline , which provides an overview of the project . Individual schema can be opened or collapsed to enable comparison . Design Space Schema The design space schema is a table in which each column represents a quality dimension in the design space , and the entries made in that column represent possible values for instantiating that quality . This reflects our understanding of design spaces as instances of conceptual spaces , described in the previous section . The text entered into the schema cells can be transformed ( e . g . bold , italic , colour of font ) using a toolbar that sits above the schema table . These text transformations can be used to show the effect of changes in the design space , such as highlighting relationships between different possible values with which co - varying dimensions might be instantiated , or showing how different prototypes and design artifacts filter the current design space . This toolbar is also used to associate footnotes with values entered into the schema . Notes and Footnotes Below each schema table there is a free text box for adding notes . These can be used to record additional details , such as the motivations for planning a design workshop . Below this , the footnotes associated with selected value options are listed . These can be retained across different schema , or used to describe things of interest to a particular instance . EXAMPLES OF DESIGN SPACE REFLECTION To illustrate the insights gained from design space reflection , we revisit two media architecture projects using SnapShot . Media architecture is an area of design in which our lab has several years of experience , and these examples were chosen because of the detailed documentation available . First we revisit designs for a Museum of Modern Art in Warsaw , Poland ; a project originally discussed by [ 10 ] . Second , we revisit designs for a new metro station in Stockholm , Sweden ; a project originally discussed by [ 22 ] . In the following descriptions we adopt the convention that the names of Quality Dimensions are shown in italics and underlined , whilst the possible Values are shown in italics . In each example , we first revisit selected activities to highlight the impact of particular decisions on the wider design space , and to identify constraints introduced . Following this we explore possible alternatives , challenge these constraints , and reconsider disregarded options . Warsaw Museum of Modern Art Our interaction design lab was invited to help develop a proposal for a new Museum of Modern Art in Warsaw , Poland by a leading Danish architectural studio . This collaboration unfolded over a period of two months during which we helped develop ideas to integrate interactive technologies into the building ' s façade and interior . For the design space reflection presented here we focus on a key ideation workshop early in the process . First we discuss the design space following our preparation for the workshop . We then discuss the impact on the design space of the decisions that were made during the workshop . This followed the inspiration card workshop format , which is based around combining two kinds of cards , domain cards and technology cards [ 18 ] . Design Space Following Preparation for the Workshop Our domain card preparation focused on the wider Location in which the museum was to be situated , including the Plaza , Metro Station and Parking Lot ; areas of the museum such as the Exhibition Space , Entrance and Façades ; and generic building features such as Wall and Corridor . To provide richer context , the Situation in which visitors would experience the media architecture was also considered . This was informed by McCullough’s work on situational types in urban spaces , with options including Passing By , Arrival , Transit , Self - expression , Communicating , Departure , Playing , Resting , Exploring and Sharing [ 25 ] . Our primary aim when preparing the technology cards was to introduce unfamiliar new technologies that would stimulate research interests . This would particularly encourage exploration of the dimensions of Interaction Input and Display Technology . The technologies selected for representation included : Camera Tracking , Proximity Sensors , Touch , Pressure , Gesture , and Mobile Device based Interaction Input ; and Thermochromic Pigment , Lenticular Film , LED Panels , and Light - controlled Film as examples of possible Display Technology . Figure 1 : SnapShot design space for the Warsaw Museum of Modern Art project , following preparation for and then following analysis of the inspiration card workshop during which Thermochromic Concrete was selected as a display technology Design Space Following the Workshop In a key workshop moment , the principle architect selected the Thermochromic Pigment card , and used it to introduce Thermochromic Concrete as a selection for Display Technology . Thermochromic Concrete is a material that enables a concrete façade to become a display in its own right , through the application of heat . This selection had a wide - ranging impact on the design space , introducing a number of new constraints . First , this choice put other possible values in the Display Technology dimension to one side . It also constrained the Location considered for a media façade . The site’s Metro Station was ruled out because the concrete would most likely be used within the building’s core structure , and this Location was already complete and in use . In another example of a constraint introduced by the choice of Thermochromic Concrete , Touch was ruled out as a feasible mode of Interaction Input . Alongside constraints on the likely values chosen for those quality dimensions already identified , the choice of Thermochromic Concrete as Display Technology also helped to structure the emerging design space by suggesting new dimensions to explore . For example , a Heating Method for manipulating the colour of the Thermochromic Concrete would be needed . The initial options identified here were Electricity and Hot Water . In addition , the choices of Display Technology and Heating Method introduced further constraints in the Pixel Form that could be achieved in the concrete . Three initial options were identified : Tile , Dot and Wire . The ideas and concepts developed during the workshop also explored possible Content that the media façade could present . Options included : Images , Visitor Guidance , Ornamentation , Data Visualization , Curated Content from featured artists , and Animation . Selecting Thermochromic Concrete , which has a very slow refresh - rate , saw Animation disregarded . Revisiting Opportunities in the Design Space : What If ? Figure 1 presents a screenshot from SnapShot , which we have reconstructed for print clarity , showing how the design space is documented at each of these two stages . This begins to make some of the impacts of our design decisions explicit , and shows how they might filter the design space when instantiated in prototypes [ 23 ] . It also shows how values in important quality dimensions of the emerging design space co - vary , and how design choices in one dimension can introduce a ripple of new constraints across the design space . Revisiting the design space and posing ‘ What If ? ’ questions prompts us to investigate the implications of design decisions and consider alternatives , or to undertake what Schön terms exploratory experiments [ 31 : 145 ] . In this example we show how we might reflect on one of the self - imposed constraints that followed the selection of Thermochromic Concrete , ruling out Animation . We select this because it was an unquestioned decision , indicating an area of inquiry that would extend our repertoire . ‘What If ’ we reconsider Animation as Content ? Challenging this constraint opens up a number of new areas of the design space for investigation such as : What might be the design implications of having a small selection of colours , where individual ‘pixels’ are monochromatic ? Here we look for inspiration in ASCII art , retro gaming , or in the 4kb intros built on 1980s hardware that are a feature of the demoscene . Experiments in these alternative materials show how extreme constraints can sometimes be an important driver for creative responses . How can we make the slow response time of the Thermochromic Concrete into a virtue ? Here we look to slow technology examples of Informative Art [ 28 ] for inspiration . This prompts us to develop ideas for animation that encourages moments of concentration or reflection in viewers , taking them away from the hustle of daily travel . How small or large can we make individual Thermochromic Concrete pixels ? And how much fine - grained control can we gain over the heating process ? Investigating these concerns leads us to explore materials science and reach out to engineers and architects in our network . This expands our understanding of the limitations involved in working with new materials . Our process of reflection and inquiry opens up Colour Palette , Temporality and Pixel Size as new dimensions in the design space , and highlights Heating Method as a dimension that needs closer consideration . However , as we have already seen , our design decisions have implications beyond these dimensions . For example , taking inspiration from slow technology prompts us to explore the different types Situation , and what it might mean to encourage moments of concentration and reflection in each case . In this example we see how documenting and reflecting on the design space has helped us to understand the filtering that follows the selection of Thermochromic Concrete ; has highlighted the constraints this filtering imposed ; and has encouraged us to challenge our decision to disregard Animation . This pushes us to test our competencies and extend our repertoire through exploratory experimentation . Stockholm Metro Station Our second design case involves a project in which our design lab was invited to participate in the development of a proposal for a media façade for a new metro station in Stockholm , Sweden . This project unfolded over a period of ten months , but here we focus on two specific points in the process . First , selecting sources of inspiration in preparation for a Concept Development Workshop ( CDW ) ; and second , following a subsequent meeting during which the twelve initial design concepts , created in the CDW , are refined prior to creating three video prototypes . Design Space Following Preparation for the CDW The purpose of the CDW was to generate a set of initial design concepts for the media façade . Like many such projects , one of the key dimensions to consider was Location . After meeting with the architects , the Stairs and Plaza above the station were under consideration , whilst other options like the Entrance , Façades , Escalators , Elevators , Floor , Ceiling and Walls were disregarded . This helped constrain the design space to be explored during the CDW , and guided the selection of inspirational materials . Other dimensions identified included Purpose , Characteristics , Content Type , Content Theme , and Situation . The Situation values were once again informed by [ 25 ] . Initial values were then brainstormed . Those for Purpose included : Practical Information , Station Information , City Guide , Social Interaction , Reflection , Game Play , Stage and Ornamentation . Characteristics included : Seriousness , Playfulness , Engagement , Involvement , Community , Inspiration , and Openness . Content Type included : Text , Images , Video , Audio , Graphs and Light . Content Theme included : Subtle Changes of Light , Pause Modes , Curated Content , Data Visualization , Emergent Behavior , Slow Development , and Optical Illusions . In addition , these early meetings had also highlighted the possible use of LED as a Display Technology that could be inset into the edges of Stairs , although other options included : Projection , Monitors , Integrated Displays and Directional Sound . Preparation for the CDW included selecting a series of evocative photographs that would offer a source of inspiration to encourage alternative ways of seeing - as [ 31 : 139 ] . This selection was informed by the desire to consider non - typical use - cases of the Location , particularly the Stairs . For example , one of the photos showed two youths using the Stairs as a Stage to pose on , whilst another showed children using the Stairs for Game Play , and a third showed a couple using the Stairs as a Location for Resting , Sharing , and intimate Social Interaction . We also prepared video snippets showing three inspirational installations with a strong participatory element . Body Movies [ 6 ] uses Projection to show portraits on a building’s façade , revealing them through the shadows of passers - by , leading to Emergent Behavior where people’s Social Interaction becomes Game Play . Blinkenlights [ 4 ] makes use of the Light shone through windows of a building on Alexanderplatz in Berlin . Using Mobile Devices for Interaction Input , people are able to upload Images or engage in Game Play , e . g . pong . Love Doodles , is an interactive installation from the Danish art museum ARoS [ 21 ] . Using Pen and Camera for Interaction Input , people leave messages with a strong element of Self - expression , involving delayed Social Interaction . These inspirational materials also added Unforeseen Uses to the Purpose dimension , and Traces to the Content Theme dimension . Design Space After The Refining Concepts Meeting The CDW resulted in a total of twelve initial design ideas , all of which employed the Stairs as a Location , and LED as a Display Technology . Eleven days after the CDW , a follow up meeting was held to refine these into three concepts , which would be turned into video prototypes and presented to the architects . Each of the twelve ideas from the CDW was presented for discussion . Then , to start the refinement process , they were grouped ; based on the Situation in which visitors would engage with the media façade , and the proposed Content Theme , Purpose and Characteristics of the installation . Further refinement of these grouped ideas introduced Visitor Control as a new dimension of the design space , and considered the Display Technology and Content Type . At the end of this process there were three design concepts : ‘Contours’ , ‘Traces’ and ‘PlayHead’ ‘Contours’ focuses on the spatial features of the site , using light and shadow to create a Content Theme of Optical Illusions . It begins with lines drawn around the edge of the Stairs , lights each step , fades through the central area , and concludes by pulsing up and down ; before the pattern is repeated . Its Purpose is Ornamentation . Visitors engage when Passing By . The Display Technology is LED and Content Type is Light . It is an Autonomous System without Visitor Control or Interaction Input . ‘Traces’ sees a person sit down on the Stairs to plant a " seed of light " that generates an aura around them , which fades slowly . If the person moves to another place , or other people sit down , the light spreads out . It combines the Content Theme options of Slow Development and Emergent Behavior ; for the Purpose of Social Interaction and Ornamentation ; has the Characteristics of Playfulness and Openness ; Interaction Input comes via Camera Tracking ; Display Technology is LED ; Content Type is Light ; the Situation is ostensible Resting ; and there is a Subtle Influence in the Visitor Control . Figure 2 : SnapShot design space of the Stockholm Metro Station , following planning for the Concept Development Workshop and following the development of video prototype ideas during the Refining Concepts Meeting ( NB navigation has been removed ) ‘PlayHead’ is a concept in which the Stairs are used as a musical stave , with each step representing the line for a particular pitch . The ‘play - head’ traverses the Stairs at regular intervals playing the relevant note as it passes the position of each person present . Its Purpose is Game Play , and it combines the Situation options of Playing and Listening with Resting . It has the Characteristics of Playfulness and Engagement ; and uses Camera Tracking for Interaction Input , LED and Directional Sound for Display Technology , Light and Audio for Content Type , and Emergent Behavior for Content Theme . There is a Strong Influence in the Visitor Control . Revisiting Opportunities in the Design Space : What If ? Figure 2 shows a SnapShot screenshot of the design space at each of these stages , which has again been reconstructed for print clarity . In this example we present a number of different ‘ What If ? ’ questions to playfully probe the design space and help us gain new insight into our design practices . These ask us to consider opportunities and options that may have been disregarded , and to reflect on constraints introduced by our previous design choices . ‘What If’ we imposed new constraints , such as Seriousness as a Characteristic , Communicating as a Situation , and Practical Information as a Purpose ? How , for example , might we incorporate the Content Theme of Data Visualization ? What kind of Visitor Control and Interaction Input would be needed ? What types of Content Type and Display Technology would be most effective ? And how would this impact the choice of Stairs as a Location ? ‘What If’ we encouraged visitors to be competitive ? What would be the constraints on the types of Game Play ? How can we take advantage of the same people’s Arrival at or Passing By the station on a regular basis ? ‘What If’ we considered greater individual Visitor Control ? What would be the constraints on Interaction Input and Display Technology ? How might we combine the Content Themes of Curated content and Emergent Behavior , and retain the Characteristics of Engagement and Openness ? DISCUSSION In our discussion of related work we highlight how HCI has used the term design space liberally to capture many different concerns . Early examples reflect a contemporary focus on engineering and cognitive psychology [ e . g . 7 , 14 , 26 ] , whilst later discussion reflects the expansion of HCI research into humanistic and aesthetic areas [ e . g . 11 , 20 ] . Our intention is not to suggest that there should be a single canonical interpretation , but rather to develop a lightweight documentation method flexible enough to reflect these changes whilst still offering a structured representation of the design space . In order to do this , we have articulated an interpretation in which design spaces are instances of conceptual spaces , described by the possible values that might be selected to instantiate important quality dimensions . Our analysis examples illustrate how these dimensions may co - vary , and therefore , how choices in one dimension can introduce constraints in others . This increased awareness of the impact of particular design choices also supports a more nuanced understanding of the design space filtering that occurs during design activities . Lim , Stolterman and Tenenberg [ 23 ] highlight the important role that prototypes play as filters of a design space , enabling the exploration of particular dimensions whilst putting others to one side . We offer a way to supplement this exploration with more qualified reflection on the wider effects of this filtering . By documenting the changing design space , and the way that relationships between possible values for instantiating different quality dimensions might co - vary , we highlight constraints that might otherwise have passed unquestioned , and enable options that had temporarily been disregarded to remain present . As our examples illustrate , we are then able to revisit and reflect on these previous design choices , identify and challenge the constraints that were introduced , and open up our designs to exploratory experimentation . We also believe that the lightweight , flexible notation used in SnapShot is an important argument in favour of design space reflection . This is because previous approaches appear not to have been widely adopted , despite the potential benefits of design documentation being widely acknowledged [ 9 , 40 ] . Design Space Analysis ( DSA ) [ 24 ] , for example , dates back to the early 1990’s , being used mainly within its immediate research community . Whilst there may be many different reasons for this , there is one that we believe to be particularly relevant to this discussion . The QOC notation used in DSA offers a method for close analysis of the rationale behind relatively low - level technical design decisions . This can be instructive and informative , and provides a powerful tool for very local argumentation . However , this close focus means that it quickly becomes complex ; making it difficult to identify the impact these individual decisions have elsewhere in the design space . Similarly , whilst the Task - Artifact Framework [ 8 ] offers a comprehensive method of weighing up competing theoretical or technical claims , it too is a method that focuses on the local impact of particular design decisions . We would argue that a key distinguishing feature of design space reflection is the consideration paid to wider changes in the design space . Using the SnapShot tool offers a systematic way of making more of the design space explicit , of viewing the dynamics of this design space at a glance , and of reflecting on disregarded opportunities . Because of this lightweight nature , it might be counter argued that design space reflection fails to capture the situated complexity of a design space . We would respond by saying that it is not our intention to capture the full complexity of a design situation , as this is more than likely impossible ; but rather to offer a method and tool that support synthetic activities [ 36 ] . We might also point to the work of Heape [ 19 ] who attempts this kind of all encompassing and ambitious representation of design spaces . Whilst his images are both inspirational and beautiful , they are also dense and hard to interpret . We believe that because of this , their usefulness as an analysis and reflection tool is limited . However , we would also acknowledge that using the SnapShot tool to document selected areas of the design space for reflection can have a wider impact on the design process . When we explicitly represent certain things they are given status and can command a focal position . The danger here might be that keeping some things present in the design space also has the potential to exclude some other things that have not yet been considered or represented at all . This is a concern that should remain present in our reflections on our future practice . FUTURE WORK We believe that design space reflection will be particularly helpful to less experienced designers . This is because it makes the wider impact of particular design decisions explicit , and prompts critical reflection . With this in mind , an important area of future work will be to introduce it into design education . Students may learn from portfolio examples , as we have shown here , or use it within ongoing design processes . As our understanding of what is possible with design space reflection increases , the SnapShot tool will also develop . Studying its effectiveness within ongoing projects will be important , as will making the tool available for other researchers , and learning from their experiences . We also believe that design space reflection offers benefits where a particular design space is the product of a collection of design representations in a workbook [ 17 ] . This is because of the more structured way our method of documentation supports revisiting design choices , highlights connections in co - varying dimensions , and helps to identify disregarded opportunities . Adding an explicit analysis of the changing design space to carefully curated workbooks could therefore offer a new example of how an annotated portfolio [ 5 ] might be constructed . CONCLUSION In this paper we have presented two example cases in which we revisit projects taken from our interaction design lab’s portfolio to argue for the importance of documenting and reflecting on the design space beyond the qualities selected for instantiation in individual design representations . We have also used these examples to introduce SnapShot the web - based tool we are developing to support an approach we have called design space reflection . To provide theoretical support for our work we have articulated an interpretation of the term design space in which a design space is considered an instance of a conceptual space . This means it can be described by the important quality dimensions identified during design work , and by the possible values that might be used to instantiate each of these dimensions . We believe this process of design space reflection offers three important benefits : First , in making the effects of particular design decisions more explicit , we become aware of constraints that choices in one dimension of the design space introduce into others . Also , by understanding the source of these constraints , and retaining alternative options , we qualify our understanding of how design activities and artifacts filter a design space . Third , when revisiting these choices and reflecting on our design decisions , we are prompted to challenge these constraints and to reconsider disregarded opportunities . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This research has been funded by The Danish Innovation Foundation grant 1311 - 00001B , CIBIS . REFERENCES 1 . Basballe , D . , and Halskov , K . Dynamics of research through design . In Proc . DIS’12 ACM Press ( 2012 ) 58 - 67 2 . Beaudouin - Lafon , M . , and Mackay , W . Prototyping tools and techniques . In The Human Computer Interaction Hanbook . J . Jacko , A . Sears , J . Jacko , & A . Sears ( Eds . ) . Laurence Erlbaum Associates . Hillsdale , NJ . ( 2003 ) 1017 - 1040 . 3 . Biskjaer , M . M . , Dalsgaard , P . and Halskov , K . A constraint - based understanding of design spaces . In Proc . DIS’14 ACM Press ( 2014 ) 453 - 462 4 . Blinkenlights Project . Retrieved April 3 , 2016 , from http : / / blinkenlights . net / 5 . Bowers . , J . The logic of annotated portfolios : communicating the value of research through design . In Proc . DIS’12 ACM Press ( 2012 ) 68 - 77 6 . Bullivant , L . Responsive environments : architecture , art and design . V & A . London . 2006 7 . Card , S . K . , Mackinlay , J . D . and Robertson , G . G . The design space of input devices . In Proc . CHI’90 ACM Press ( 1990 ) . 117 - 124 8 . Carroll , J . M . and Rosson , M . B . 2003 . Design rationale as theory . In Carroll , J . ( Ed . ) HCI models , theories and rameworks : Towards a multidisciplinary science . Morgan Kaufmann . London . ( 2003 ) 431 - 461 . 9 . Dalsgaard , P . and Halskov , K . Reflective design documentation . In Proc . DIS’12 ACM Press ( 2012 ) 428 - 437 . 10 . Dalsgaard , P . , Halskov , K . and Nielsen , R . Maps for design reflection . In Artefact , 2 , 3 ( 2008 ) 176 - 189 . 11 . Dix , A . , Rodden , T . , Davies , N . , Trevor , J . , Friday , A . and Palfreyman , K . Exploiting space and location as a design framework for interactive mobile systems . In ACM Trans . on Computer - Human Interaction , 7 , 3 . ACM Press ( 2000 ) 285 - 321 . 12 . Feder , D . Automatic optical design . In Applied Optics . 2 , 12 . ( 1963 ) 1209 - 1226 . 13 . Ferri , G . , Bardzell , J . , Bardzell , S . and Louraine , S . Analyzing critical designs : categories , distinctions , and canons of exemplars . In Proc . DIS’14 ACM Press ( 2014 ) 355 - 364 . 14 . Fitzmaurice , G . , Ishii , H . and Buxton , W . Bricks : laying the foundations for graspable user interfaces . In Proc . CHI’95 ACM Press ( 1995 ) 442 - 449 15 . Gärdenfors , P . Conceptual spaces as a framework for knowledge representation . In Mind and Matter . 2 , 2 . ( 2004 ) 9 - 27 . 16 . Gärdenfors , P . Induction , conceptual spaces and AI . In Philosophy of Science . 57 , 1 . ( 1990 ) 78 - 95 . 17 . Gaver , W . Making spaces : how design workbooks work . In Proc . CHI’11 ACM Press ( 2011 ) 1551 - 1560 18 . Halskov , K . and Dalsgaard , P . Inspiration Card Workshops . In Proc . DIS’06 ACM Press ( 2006 ) 2 - 11 19 . Heape , C . The Design Space : the design process as the construction , exploration and expansion of a conceptual space . Ph . D . Dissertation . University of Southern Denmark . 2007 20 . Hornecker , E . and Buur , J . Getting a grip on tangible interaction : a framework on physical space and social interaction . In Proc . CHI’06 ACM Press ( 2006 ) 437 - 446 21 . Kollision . Retrieved April 3 , 2016 , from http : / / kollision . dk / en / lovedoodles 22 . Korsgaard , H . , Hansen , N . B . , Basballe , D . , Dalsgaard , P . and Halskov , K . Odenplan : a media façade design process . In Proc . MAB’12 ( 2012 ) 23 - 32 23 . Lim , Y - K . , Stolterman , E . and Tenenberg , J . The anatomy of prototypes . In ACM Trans . on Computer - Human Interaction . 15 , 2 ( 2008 ) 7 : 1 - 7 : 27 . 24 . MacLean , A . , Young , R . , Bellotti , V . and Moran , T . Questions , options and criteria : elements of Design Space Analysis . In Human - Computer Interaction , 6 , ( 1991 ) 201 - 250 . 25 . McCullough , M . Digital Ground : Architecture , Pervasive Computing , and Environmental Knowing . MIT Press . Cambridge , MA . 2004 26 . Nigay , L . and Coutaz , J . A design space for multimodal systems : concurrent processing and data fusion . In Proc . CHI’93 ACM Press ( 1993 ) . 172 - 178 27 . Odom , W . , Zimmerman , J . , Davidoff , S . , Forlizzi , J . , Dey , A . and Min , K . Y . A fieldwork of the future with user enactments . In Proc . DIS’12 ACM Press ( 2012 ) 338 - 347 28 . Redström , J . , Skog , T and Hallnäs , L . Informative art : using amplified artworks as information dispays . In Proc . DARE 2000 . ( 2000 ) 103 - 114 29 . Ritchie , G . The transformational creativity hypothesis . In New Generation Computing , ( 2006 ) 241 - 266 . 30 . Sanders , E . and Westerlund , B . Experiencing , exploring and experimenting in and with co - design spaces . In Proc . Nordes No 4 . 2011 31 . Schön , D . A . The Reflective Practitioner . Basic Books . New York . 1983 32 . Schön , D . A . Educating the Reflective Practitioner . Iossy Bass . San Francisco 1987 33 . Schmit , L . and Fox , R . An integrated approach to structural synthesis and analysis . In AIAA Journal , 3 , 6 . ( 1965 ) 1104 - 1112 34 . Sengers , P . and Gaver , B . Staying open to interpretation : engaging multiple meanings in design and evaluation . In Proc . DIS’06 ACM Press ( 2006 ) 99 - 108 35 . Shaw , M . The role of design spaces . In IEEE Software . 29 , 1 ( 2012 ) 46 - 50 . 36 . Stolterman , E . , McAtee , J . , Royer , D . and Thandapani , S . 2008 . Designerly tools . In Proc . DRS’08 DRS ( 2008 ) 116 / 1 - 116 / 14 37 . Warglien , M . and Gärdenfors , P . Semantics , conceptual spaces , and the meeting of minds . In Synthese , 190 , 2 . ( 2013 ) 2165 - 2193 . 38 . Westerlund , B . Design space conceptual tool - grasping the design process . In Proc . Nordes 2005 ( 2005 ) D2 . 39 . Woodbury , R . and Burrow , A . Whither design space ? In Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing , 20 , 2 ( 2006 ) 63 - 82 . 40 . Zimmerman , J . , Forlizi , J . and Evensen , S . Research through design as a method for interaction design research in HCI . In Proc . CHI’07 ACM Press ( 2007 ) 493 - 502