One of the major concerns in science education is how to foster thinking with similarities ( or analogies ) , in order to improve the understanding of general sci - ence concepts . Indeed , quite a lot of concepts of usual curricula in secondary education yield similar features . The first author has started to integrate similarity of concepts in various approaches of guided discovery learning during school programs . He aimed at a facil - itated transfer of concepts by similarity . The still unre - solved question about the effectiveness of similarity - based discovery learning was the starting point of this study . Discovery Learning Various definitions of the term discovery learning exist within instructional research . As Anderson ( 2002 ) points out , the term of inquiry teaching is often em - ployed in US to design guided discovery learning as well as open inquiry learning . However , the conception used in this study is much more restrictive . Therefore , it shall first be delimited from other conceptions . A tax - onomy of laboratory instruction styles has been pro - posed by Domin ( 1999 ) and may additionally prove helpful for more general purposes . Guided Discovery Learning ( or discovery learning ) denotes , according to Domin’s taxonomy , an instruc - tion style by which the learners are led to discover a predetermined outcome . The predetermined goal usu - ally consists of finding some general principle . The learners commonly develop this general principle by studying specific situations ( that is , by induction ) . Open Inquiry Learning or inquiry learning , some - times also called open discovery learning ( e . g . Mayer , 2004 ) is described in detail by Hameyer ( 1999 ) . The learners explore a new field in order to acquire a better understanding in this field . However , the teacher has not determined in advance any knowledge to be ac - quired ( e . g . , Domin , 1999 ) . The students will rather de - termine by themselves , which question to investigate and how to proceed . This process is usually inductive . The first conception of guided discovery learning ap - peared to be particularly suitable for use in the exper - imental design of this study . Thus , this type of discovery learning was focused on . Learning aids are usually included and may be of - fered in various amounts . In the physics course , for ex - ample , if students are to discover the concept of heat flow , the teacher may distribute written information showing useful formal or graphical representations . By performing experiments , the students may discover , for example , that metal rods are better thermal conductors than wooden sticks . The instruction notes describe how the students should proceed and which experimental data they should collect . After completion of the ex - periments , the students should make conclusions on the properties of thermal conductivity . Output studies in the past show , in average , an im - provement of transfer effects when using guided dis - covery or inquiry learning rather than direct teaching , such as lectures , for instance . Mayer ( 2004 ) briefly summarizes the main findings . Positive effects in re - spect to school performance have been confirmed by meta - analyses , with a mean effect size of 0 . 4 or a cor - responding correlation of r = . 2 ( Anderson , 2002 ; Fraser , Walberg , Welch , & Hattie , 1987 ; Neber , 1981 ) . An effect has also been reported in conjunction with Effect of Similarity - Based Guided Discovery Learning on Conceptual Performance Pierre - A Mandrin Daniel Preckel ETH Zurich Analogies are known to foster concept learning , whereas discovery learning is effective for transfer . By com - bining discovery learning and analogies or similarities of concepts , attractive new arrangements emerge , but do they maintain both concept and transfer effects ? Unfortunately , there is a lack of data confirming such com - bined effectiveness . This experimental study involving 280 young students in the domain of physics showed that adequately structured similarities between mechanics and geometry improves conceptual performance ( percep - tion of functional relations ) by as much for discovery learning as for conventional teaching texts with questions . Adequate structures were provided following Glynn’s teaching with analogy model . The learning form had no significant impact on concept performance . The effect of similarity increased when the level of difficulty of the treatment was raised . These results were found using a 2 × 2 - factorial design . A qualitative questionnaire provided individual information about the usefulness of similarities and about learning strategies of the participants . School Science and Mathematics 133 computer simulations ( de Jong & van Joolingen , 1998 ) . The meta - analyses report that there are several moderating factors influencing the effect of discovery or inquiry learning , for example guidance and explicit vs . implicit approach . Often , successful learning is only made possible by appropriate and sometimes detailed guiding hints ( Hameyer , 1999 ; Mayer , 2004 ) . For ex - ample , the teacher instructs the students to examine the precise shape of an experimentally obtained graph of the thermal conductivity of copper . Moreover , inquiry oriented instruction should always precisely foster those competencies which match the immediate goal related to the desired transfer effect ( Khishfe & Abd - El - Khalick , 2002 ) . The students shall understand basic general principles , for example of thermal conductivity . The students shall then be able to explain , for example , why a metal plate is felt as being colder than a wooden plate . According to the findings of Khishfe and Abd - El - Khalick , a transfer effect is to be expected if the students themselves discover this gen - eral principle and explicitly formulate this principle ( explicit - reflective discovery learning ) . Likewise , the students in the paleontology course shall raise a hy - pothesis on fossils , - about what a given living being may have looked like . The general principle resides in to what extent scientists are able to reconstruct proper - ties of extinguished living beings and to what extent they are not . In contrast to the explicit - reflective learning men - tioned above , implicit learning occurs if transfer goals are not explicitly referenced ( Khishfe & Abd - El - Khalick , 2002 ) . In the last example of paleontology , no emphasis would be made on the reconstruction process of extinguished living beings . Implicit learning as such is usually employed , but may hardly allow the intended transfer goals to be reached . Although open inquiry learning differs somewhat from guided discovery learning , transfer goals may be applied in both cases . Analogies and Similarities According to the definition of Duit ( 1991 ) and Duit and Glynn ( 1995 ) , an “analogy” denotes “similarities between two domains with respect to specific proper - ties” ( Duit & Glynn , p . 44 ) . Similarly , Gentner ( 1989 , p . 201 ) describes an analogy as a “mapping of knowl - edge from one domain ( the base ) into another ( the tar - get ) ” , thus yielding “relational commonalties” between these domains . One frequently wishes to explain some new concept ( target ) by referring to a concept already known or understood ( base or analog ) . Thus one con - siders an analogy relation between the analog and the target . Example : There is an analogy between an electrical circuit and a water circuit . The electrical circuit is usu - ally introduced as a target ( new concept ) , and the water circuit is used as an analog . Furthermore , similarities of concepts may link to - gether different contexts or school subjects . In this way , geometry and physics concepts may show many corre - sponding features . However , students may not fully re - alize these correspondences by themselves , especially if these concepts are taught by different teachers . Examples : There is a similarity between the geomet - ric concept of similar triangles ( used as an “analog” ) and the physical behavior of a bicycle on the inclined plane ( used as a “target” ) . Or : The geometric concept of equal surface for rectangles shows similar features as the concept of equal torque for levers . These exam - ples are further considered in the course of this article . As could be shown in experimental studies , the use of analogies can foster the understanding of concepts . Performance in problem solving and comprehension tests can be improved , and experimental data exist for many different learning conditions . Mayer ( 1989 ) sum - marizes 20 studies ; Hammond , Seifert , and Gray ( 1991 ) focus on analogical transfer ; McVey ( 1993 ) combines analogies with meta - cognition ; Schwartz ( 1993 ) treats symbolic visualizations ; Newton and Newton ( 1995 ) report on children’s understanding ; Lin , Shiau , and Lawrenz ( 1996 ) use pictorial analogies ; Markmann and Gentner ( 1997 ) relate analogies with memory effects ; Loewenstein , Thompson , and Gentner ( 1999 ) deal with multiple analogies ; Antonietti ( 2001 ) treats and investigates basic learning mechanisms sys - tematically . Several studies yield an effect of more than one standard deviation on performance . However , the use of analogies or similarities also may prove detri - mental in certain cases . The learners may develop mis - conceptions ( Duit , Roth , Komorek , & Wilbers , 2001 ) . For example , the above - mentioned analogy between the electrical circuit and the water circuit may give rise to the impression that an electric conductor could be “emptied” like a water pipe . Or in the example of the inclined plane , learners may mistake forces for lengths ( such an example is reported in this study ) . Such mis - conceptions may lead to a reduced learning perform - ance . Klauer ( 1991 ) systematically demonstrates problems which may arise when procedural support is lacking in the education of thinking with analogies . Similarity - Based Guided Discovery Learning 134 Volume 109 ( 3 ) Without the explicit approach of an analogy , the anal - ogy learning may fail ( Brown & Clement , 1989 ) . Therefore , analogy learning generally requires a high level of guidance and learning hints . Duit ( 1991 ) describes how situations of possible misconceptions during instruction with analogies may be confronted , namely by using the following two structuring techniques : “Teaching - with - analogy” - model or TWA - model ( Glynn , 1989 ) , and if necessary “Bridging Analogy” ( Brown & Clement , 1989 ; Clement , 1993 ) . The TWA - model comprises the following steps : 1 . The target concept has to be introduced first ( e . g . electrical circuit ) . 2 . The learners are then required to recall the analog concept ( e . g . water pipe ) . 3 . The learners shall identify similar features of both concepts ( e . g . current ) . 4 . These similar features are mapped ( e . g . by draw - ing a table ) . 5 . Conclusions are drawn about the concepts . 6 . It is indicated where the analogy breaks down ( e . g . behavior of open circuit ) . Bridging Analogy : Analogy relations may some - times fail to be recognized by learners . In this case , in - termediate situations may be introduced between the analog and target concept ( so called bridging analogy ) . The authors of this study consider that the findings about analogies may also be applied to similarities of concepts ( for example in the context of forces and geometry ) . In the Discussion , we support this view fur - ther as we compare our results with former research about analogies . Application of Similarities ( Including Analogies ) in Combination with Discovery Learning The TWA - model may be considered as an appropri - ate means for explicit - reflective inquiry ( or discovery ) learning along the lines of Khishfe and Abd - El - Khalick ( 2002 ) . A similarity ( with its correspondences and dif - ferences ) is a form of general principle . Therefore , transfer is expected to occur with respect to this “sim - ilarity thinking” , and the “explicit approach” relies on the TWA - model . So far , there has been a lack of experimental studies concerning similarity - based discovery learning . Though Flick ( 1991 ) did explicitly use analogies in dis - covery learning , this was not implemented as an exper - imental study . Lin et al . ( 1996 ) employed teacher - based pictorial analogies according to the TWA - model . Dif - ferent social forms were run during the examined les - sons : presentations by the teacher , questions addressed to the class , and discussions in small groups . Regarding conceptual performance , an improvement of up to three standard deviations was measured . However , the experimental and the control group were not taught by the same teachers , and the influence of the applied learning forms on the effect was not investigated . Objective and Hypotheses Until now there has been a lack of objective com - parison between different learning forms for the use of similarities . In particular , it has remained unexplored as to which extent similarities , in combination with guided discovery learning , may foster conceptual per - formance when presented in a written assignment for individual learning ( similarity - based guided discovery learning ) . In fact , there was no guarantee that similar - ities ( including analogies ) act independently of the em - ployed learning form . So if the choice of the form came to interfere with the effect of similarities , concept learning could well be affected . Especially the time re - quired for thinking might have an impact on how effec - tively concepts are acquired . This study therefore aims to examine the combined effect of similarity and learning forms ( guided discov - ery learning vs . expository learning ) . It is designed as an experimental and double blind study . In this study , guided discovery learning was concep - tualized according to the taxonomy of Domin ( 1999 ) . The following hypotheses were investigated in this study : Hypothesis 1 : Similarities are as effective in the case of guided discovery learning as they are in the case of direct teaching , even if the time available for learning is not any longer . Hypothesis 2 : The effect of a similarity on concept learning is particularly large if study material chal - lenges the learners ( difficulty level as a parameter ) . Conversely , we would expect no effect in case of ex - tremely easy material . Hypothesis 3 : The use of similarities affects concept learning stronger than the learning arrangement applied ( here : expository or guided discovery learning ) . Dis - covery learning alone is not sufficient to simultane - ously foster transfer and concept understanding . Method Sample There were 298 young students ( 8th - and 9th - grade students ) from eight Swiss - German schools participat - Similarity - Based Guided Discovery Learning School Science and Mathematics 135 ing in this study . The schools were partly in urban , partly in rural environments , and were located in three different cantons . The experiment was conducted by 12 teachers who taught the classes on a regular basis . For the final analysis , 280 students who met the fol - lowing criteria could be included . The authors and evaluators were excluded from par - ticipation as teachers ; teachers and students were not informed about the goals of the study ( double blind study ) . The experiment was integrated into the regular lessons and teaching environment . Data collection took place in July 2004 and between April and July 2005 . The study design was experimental , i . e . the students of the 14 participating classes were randomly distributed to the different groups of the experiment , one of which served as control group ( 2005 : four groups ; 2004 : two groups ) . In each class , the participants ( who were as - signed to different groups ) worked simultaneously , silently and without any interaction , during the inter - vention and the tests . The intervention was in form of written assignments . The role of the teacher was to care for correct organization and timing . Explanations of the teacher were restricted to the introduction before the actual investigation . Material For this study the first author developed four differ - ent variations of written material for the learners . All documents were written in German . We first give a brief description and then present the more detailed content of each of the four variations . The first varia - tion combined similarity and discovery learning ( Vari - ation SD ) . In this variation , an assignment for guided discovery learning was offered with a high degree of guidance due to goal - related questions and especially due to helpful figures . The assignment guided the learners to a predetermined similarity of concepts ( pro - portionality ) by using questions and pictures , and in accordance to the TWA - model . The similarity was be - tween the geometry of similar triangles and the physi - cal behavior of a bicycle on the inclined plane . The second variation combined similarity and teaching text with interspersed questions ( Variation ST ) . By direct mediation , the Variation ST learners were confronted with a given description and interpretation of the be - fore - mentioned similarity . The third variation showed no similarity but discovery learning ( Variation ND ) . The learners received the same material as for Variation SD , but without reference to any similarity . Instead of the explicit question concerning the similarity , an al - ternative problem was posed on the same topic ( “tar - get” concept ) . The fourth variation showed no similarity but teaching text ( Variation NT ) . As in Vari - ation ND , the similarity was replaced by alternative in - formation . Moreover , the learning form was the same as in Variation ST . In 2004 the variants SD and ND were presented to the participants , in 2005 all four variants . Table 1 shows the study design ( a 2 × 2 factorial design ) . All four variations of assignment were comparable in terms of amount , structure and number and kind of figures . The assignment and all other materials for the students were examined in respect to physical correct - ness and adequate domain specific logic structure ( physics / didactics context ) by two didacts of physics from the ETH Zurich ( experts ) . On average , the stu - dents worked on the assignment for 17 minutes ( ± 3 minutes ) . The time spent on the assignments did not differ significantly between the four groups . During the experiment a construction figure of the target concept was projected ( and was used as first step according to the TWA - model ) . Content of Variation SD ( first experimental group ) . Two pictures represent similar objects ( Figure 1 : Tar - get – inclined plane ; Figure 2 : “Analog” – similar tri - angles ) . The learners have to find out how the labeled sides of the triangles relate to each other ( second step of the TWA - model ) . In this way , the learners are led to the concept of proportionality ( or similarity ) . Subse - quently , they have to search for the intended “similarity relation” ( which does not appear in proper words in the instructions , however ) . The learners note correspon - dences and differences ( third , fourth and sixth step of Similarity - Based Guided Discovery Learning Variables Discovery Teaching Text With similarity Variation SD ( experimental group ) n = 77 Variation ST ( experimental group ) n = 65 Without similarity Variation ND ( experimental group ) n = 83 Variation NT ( control group ) n = 55 Table 1 . Study Design with Four Groups 136 Volume 109 ( 3 ) the TWA - model , respectively ) . Noting correspon - dences makes the learners aware of the usefulness of the similar concepts . Consequently , they have to find the relation between the forces and lengths for the in - clined plane ( fifth step of the TWA - model ) . This rela - tion corresponds to the concept of proportionality , yet in a different situation . All requirements of the TWA - model are fulfilled at this point . Subsequently , the learners check their discovery ( target concept ) with ex - amples of their own choice . These freely chosen exam - ples should allow for a deeper insight into the similar concepts . Finally , the learners resume their discovery in an abstract form ( proportionality / formula ) . The goal of this activity is that participants fully understand and explain the meaning of the proportionality relation in the context of the inclined plane . On average , if learn - ers encountered increasing difficulty during discovery learning , they had a lower chance to find the correct proportionality relation , expressed as a formula . For this reason , the rate of finding the correct formula ap - peared to be helpful to compare the difficulty of dif - ferent versions of assignments . The content of the assignment is as follows ( texts are in quotation marks and translated from German ; the answers given by participant number 286 are shown as an example in quotation marks ) : Part 1 : “Consider the following triangles” ( Figure 2 ) . “Complete the following calculation , so that it cor - responds to the figure : 1 . 5 : … = 3 : …” Answer by participant : “1 . 5 : 4 = 3 : 8” . Part 2 : “The steep street” ( Figure 1 ) . “What are the correspondences between this steep street and the triangles of Part 1 ? ” Answer by participant : “Right angle triangle ; the smaller one is the triangle which determines F H , the larger one is the street . ” “Where is a difference ? ” No answer by participant . “Is there a similar calculation as in Part 1 ? What is it ( with numbers ) ? ” Similarity - Based Guided Discovery Learning Figure 1 . Target - inclined plane with sloping site and parallelogram of forces ( Version 2005 ) . Figure 2 . “Analog” - similar triangles ( Version 2005 ) . School Science and Mathematics 137 Answer by participant : “4 . 5 : 1 . 2 = 4 : 1 . 5” . Part 3 : “Draw a street yourself – make it either steeper or flatter ! Take the same bicyclist as in Part 2 ! ” Participant draws a steeper inclined plane . “What is the difference of your street compared to Part 2 ? ” Answer by participant : “Mine is steeper” . “Draw the forces again ! ” Participant draws a small triangle with the forces F G and F H . “How large are here : l = … , h = … , F G = … , F H = …” Answer by participant : “ l = 10 m , h = 7 . 5 m , F G = 3 . 5 m , F H = 2 . 6 m” . “What is the calculation here ? ” Answer by participant : “7 . 5 : 10 = 3 . 5 : 2 . 6” . “ . . . Replace all numbers by the corresponding sym - bols l , h , F G , F H : ” Answer by participant : “ h : l = F G : F H” . Unfortunately , participant number 286 did not ( fully ) succeed in finding the correct proportions , although the participant could partly take advantage from the simi - larity ( the participant also confirmed this by the quali - tative questionnaire ) . Moreover , the participant mistook the forces for lengths . This problem might have been avoided , if the participant had stated at least one difference between Figures 1 and 2 in Part 2 . Content of Variation ND ( second experimental group ) . Variation ND differs from Variation SD in a substi - tute depiction with a different accompanying text ( see Figure 3 ) instead of Figure 2 . The substitute depiction represents an inclined plane in which the subjects have to identify and measure two identical acute angles . Variation ND does not explicitly lead to any similar features , but has the same extent as Variation SD . The content of the assignment is as follows : Part 1 : “In this figure ( Figure 3 ) , the resulting force F H is composed of the components F G and F ⊥ . Measure the angle α : α = … Find a further angle of equal size as α . Label the angle as β . Check by measuring the angle : β = …” Part 2 : “The steep street” ( Figure 1 ) . “Complete the following calculation , so that it corresponds to the figure : 150 : … = 4 . 5 : …” Part 3 : This part is identical to Part 3 of Variation SD . Content of Variation ST ( third experimental group ) . Variation ST corresponds to a standard teaching text with interspersed questions . The content is exactly the same as for Variation SD , except that learners do not have to discover anything in Variation ST . Instead , sim - ilar and dissimilar features of “analog” and target are explained , and the proportionality relation is shown . The content of the assignment is as follows : Part 1 : “Introduction : Consider the following triangles ( Figure 2 ) . The numbers fulfill a simple relation : 1 . 5 : 4 = 3 : 8 . Check the side lengths with a ruler . Label the meas - ured lengths near the sides . ” Part 2 : “The steep street” ( Figure 1 ) . “In this steep street , there are similar trian - gles as in Part 1 : one larger and one smaller triangle . Draw the right angles . Label in Part 1 the sides with the symbols l , h , … corresponding to the sides of Part 2 . Yet there is also an important difference : The paral - Similarity - Based Guided Discovery Learning Figure 3 . Substitute representation instead of Figure 2 ( Version 2005 ) . 138 Volume 109 ( 3 ) lelogram is made of arrows of forces . Forces are some - thing else than the lengths of the triangle sides of Part 1 . For this steep street , the calculation is : 150 N : 400 N = 4 . 5 m : 12 m . Does this calculation correspond to the one in Part 1 ? Look for the side “150 N” , then the corresponding side in Part 1 , underline its value in the calculation . Etc . ” Part 3 : This part is identical to Part 3 of Variation SD . Content of Variation NT ( control group ) . Variation NT corresponds to a standard teaching text with interspersed questions . In respect to learning con - tent , ND and NT correspond . Of all four assignments , Variation NT resembles most to the average usual teaching practice ( for a characterization of regular classes see e . g . Hage et al . , 1985 , p . 76 – 87 ) . The content of the assignment is as follows : Part 1 : “In this figure ( Figure 3 ) , the resulting force F H is composed of the components F G and F ⊥ . Measure the angle α : α = …” In the figure , one of the acute angles of the parallelogram has been marked as β by the main author . “Measure the angle β : β = … The angle β is of equal size as α . There is another angle of equal size : Label it . ” Part 2 : “The steep street” ( Figure 1 ) . “Street length : l = … , street height : h = … , weight force : F G = … , force along the inclined plane : F H = … In this figure , the numbers fulfill a simple relation : 150 N : 400 N = 4 . 5 m : 12 m . Check the side lengths with a ruler . Label the measured lengths near the sides . Put your measured values above . ” Part 3 : This part is iden - tical to Part 3 of Variation SD . To test the second hypothesis , the difficulty level of the tasks was slightly varied between the years 2004 and 2005 . The rate of finding the correct formula was used as an indication of the difficulty . Figures 1 and 2 show the less demanding version of 2005 . With this version , 72 % of the students came up with a correct formula of the assignment . The year before , one of the four numbers appearing in the depiction was removed ( in 2004 , there were Variations SD and ND only ) . Only 51 % of the students came up then with the correct for - mula . Therefore , the version of 2004 was on a higher level of difficulty . Unlike the assignments , the pre - tests and post - tests of 2004 and 2005 were corresponding . Thus it was possible to analyze the influence of chang - ing the level of difficulty on concept performance . Procedure Seven days before the experimental intervention with the assignment , subjects underwent a uniform pre - test ( only 2 days before for two classes with a total of 45 students , and 4 days in advance for one class with 22 students ) . During the experimental intervention , the subjects received only written information ( assign - ment ) . Subjects underwent a uniform post - test after completion of the intervention . The questions of the post - test were preceded by a restatement of the end for - mula of the intervention assignment , thus ensuring that every participant could theoretically answer the ques - tions . After the post - test , a qualitative questionnaire had to be filled out . Closed and open questionnaire items revealed , to which extent the learners benefited from a similarity . Subjects kept the documents of the experimental intervention until all parts of the experi - ment were completed ( in the course of one lesson ) . The pre - tests and post - tests however , were collected imme - diately after the lapse of time ( 7 minutes each ) . The role of the teacher was to organize the lesson according to the study design . Table 2 shows the sequence of the various experi - mental stages . Instruments Both the pre - test and the post - test collected the fol - lowing two variables with corresponding score scales and types of questions , for all groups : The “algorithmic variable” concerned the applica - tion of new problem - solving procedures ( construction of parallelogram ) . The question in the pre - and post - Similarity - Based Guided Discovery Learning Point in time Stage 1 . Before pre - test Make sure that necessary requirements are met ( simi - larity of triangles ; vector addition of forces ) 2 . 1 week before intervention Pre - test 3 . Beginning of intervention . Intervention ( four variations of assignment ) 4 . Immediately after intervention . Post - test 5 . Immediately after post - test . Qualitative questionnaire Table 2 Sequence of the Various Experimental Stages stages 3 , 4 , and 5 took place within one lesson . School Science and Mathematics 139 test is ( text in quotation marks is translated from Ger - man ) : “Complete the construction of parallelogram of forces in the following figure …” . In the pre - test , the figure represents the inclined plane , the weight force F G and the line of force perpendicular to the inclined plane . In the post - test , the figure represents the inclined plane , the force F ⊥ perpendicular to the inclined plane and the line of force of the weight force F G . The “concept variable” referred to conceptual per - formance in the sense of complete comprehension of a functional relation ( here : proportionality with an exist - ing “analog” in the geometry of triangles ) . The ques - tions in the pre - test are ( translated from German ) : “The street could also be flatter than in the figure above” ( same figure as for the algorithmic variable ) . “Would the resultant force F H be larger , smaller or equal com - pared to the figure ? Give the reasons for your answer in a short sentence and using F H etc . How could we make F H larger without modifying the steepness ? ” The questions in the post - test are : “What does the above re - lation express ? ” ( F H : F G = h : l ) “Complete the fol - lowing sentences . 1 . If the height h is higher at constant length of the street , the street is steeper and therefore … 2 . If the street is longer at constant height , … 3 . Also vary something else than h or l : … 4 . Why does this rule apply to any situation ? Make a few sentences . ” In a certain sense , learning with or without similar concepts may be considered as a matter of problem solving strategy ( the same consideration may also apply to former studies , see for example Lin et al . , 1996 ) . But similar concepts may also act on concept understanding . In contrast , problem solving strategies are not necessarily related to comprehension of a con - cept . That is why some of the test items above are not related to problem solving ability , but characteristic for the concept variable . To avoid mere repetitions , the questions of the post - test are slightly different from those of the pre - test , al - though of the same type . The main author divided the expected solutions into equal solution steps , each step corresponding to one scale point for the evaluation . The pre - test and the post - test were designed in such a manner that , on average , the learners attained about half of the scores ( based on pilot tests ) . Thus a differ - ence between pre - test and post - test cannot actually be interpreted as an “improvement” or “loss” of compe - tence ( in case of positive or negative difference , respec - tively ) . In addition , the algorithmic variable was used to test whether differences in algorithmic solving ability re - sulted from the variations of assignment used in the in - tervention . If all variations were constructed to be fully equivalent except for the above - mentioned intentional differences , no differential effects should be found for the algorithmic variable . A confirmation is given in the results section . Test rating . Two raters independently evaluated the algorithmic and the concept variable in the pre - and post - test ac - cording to a rating scheme ( two physicists holding at least a bachelor degree ; the authors , experts and inves - tigating teachers were excluded ) . The two independent ratings corresponded well ( Cohen’s Kappa : 0 . 8 ) . Consequently , we calculated the average of the two ratings for all scores and used this for further analyses . Statistical evaluation was then per - formed on the four groups ( SD , ST , ND , NT ) using 2× 2 ANOVA and multiple group comparison tech - niques . Group comparability in the pre - test . Before the main evaluation , equivalence of learning conditions of the four groups was tested . We first checked that the groups were on comparable levels of performance in the pre - test . None of the two variables yielded any significant difference at the . 05 level , algo - rithmic variable : F ( 3 , 279 ) = 1 . 33 , p > . 2 ; concept vari - able : F ( 3 , 279 ) = 1 . 02 , p > . 3 . Nor did a multiple comparison between the four groups yield any signif - icant differences ( p > . 05 ) . Additionally , averaged grades in physics and math - ematics were collected . They correlated significantly with the algorithmic variable in the pre - test scores ( grades in physics , r = . 22 ; grades in mathematics , r = . 20 ) . The grades in physics also correlated significantly with the concept variable in the pre - test scores ( r = . 16 ) . Results From this point , we accounted for pre - and post - test data and thus introduced the time dimension ( repeated measures ) . We also referred to the 2× 2 factorial design shown in Table 1 . So we conducted a 2× 2 repeated measures ANOVA with similarity ( with similarity , without similarity ) and discovery learning ( with dis - covery learning , without discovery learning ) as the two repeated - measures factors . In some cases , we addition - ally sought for possible interaction - time - effects . An alpha level of . 05 was used for all tests . Algorithmic variable We first tested whether the variations of assignments Similarity - Based Guided Discovery Learning 140 Volume 109 ( 3 ) could cause undesired differences in algorithmic solv - ing ability in the post - test . No significant differences could be found for the algorithmic variable between the four groups , F ( 3 , 279 ) = 0 . 90 , p > . 4 , multiple com - parison between groups : p > . 1 . Moreover , no signifi - cant interaction - time - effect was observed ( p > . 7 ) . Up to this point , all necessary tests had been completed to indicate equivalent learning conditions for all groups . Concept variable We shall now present the main results concerning the concept variable in the post - test . Before testing our three hypotheses , we compared the scores of the different groups . We found a significant group effect , F ( 3 , 279 ) = 2 . 74 , p < . 05 . A multiple comparison between groups yielded differences as follows : Group SD lay 0 . 45 points higher than Group ND in the score ( LSD - test : p < . 01 ; Bonferroni - test : p < . 05 ) ; Group ST lay 0 . 36 points higher than Group ND in the score ( LSD - Test : p < . 04 ) . This means that both groups with similarity reached better scores than did the discovery learning group without similarity . No further significant differences were found be - tween the other group pair combinations ( p > . 05 ) . The result of the univariate analysis was in accor - dance with the measured interaction - time - effect with respect to the concept variable ( F = 2 . 73 , p < . 05 ) . That means that the scores with similarity also showed more progress with respect to the pre - test scores . Table 3 shows the averaged scores of the concept variable in the post - test for all four groups ( on a scale from 0 to 5 ) . The highest score was obtained by the dis - covery learning group with similarity ( SD ) . The lowest score was reached by the discovery learning group without similarity ( ND ) . We also compared the scores with and without sim - ilarity . To do this , we joined both groups with similarity to form a “similarity group” and both groups without similarity to form a „non - similarity” group , respec - tively . We found a significant improvement of 0 . 31 points in the score in favor of the similarity group , F ( 1 , 279 ) = 6 . 16 , p < . 02 : The difference was 0 . 3 standard deviations . Considering the interaction - time - effect , a slightly stronger effect appeared ( F = 7 . 94 , p = . 005 ) . To conclude our evaluation , we routinely checked for undesired effects on the similarity and non - similarity groups . Regarding the algorithmic variable in the post - test as well as the algorithmic and conceptual variables in the pre - test , all differences were not significant ( p > . 2 ) . There was no observable interaction - time - effect on the algorithmic variable either ( p > . 8 ) . Test of Hypothesis 2 : In this test , we analyzed how the effect of similarity of concepts changed depending on the difficulty of the assignments . In 2004 the differ - ence was 0 . 72 scale points for the 37 subjects , F ( 1 , 36 ) = 6 . 35 , p < . 02 ( assignments in 2004 comprised of less numbers in the depictions and were therefore more de - manding compared to 2005 ) . The score difference in 2004 was considerably larger then the score difference in 2005 . This means that the similar concepts were more effective when applied in conjunction with a higher degree of difficulty ( assignment yielding 51 % success only ) . Hypothesis 2 was confirmed . Test of Hypothesis 1 : We did not find any signs in - dicating that similar concepts would be less effective when presented within discovery learning compared to teaching texts ( difference between SD and ND : 0 . 45 ; difference between ST and ND : 0 . 36 ) . Hypothesis 1 was confirmed . Test of Hypothesis 3 : We postulated that similar con - cepts had a stronger action on concept learning than did the variation of learning form ( direct mediation with teaching texts or guided discovery learning ) . We thus checked whether discovery learning influenced the scores substantially compared to teaching texts . Overall , we found no significant difference between discovery learning and texts , F ( 1 , 279 ) = 0 . 51 , p > . 4 . Even with the comparison confined to samples with similarity ( SD compared to ST ) and without similarity ( ND compared to NT ) , there was no significant differ - ence . We again concluded the evaluation with a routine check for undesired effects . Discovery learning did not differ from teaching texts in respect to either the algo - rithmic variable in the post - test or to the algorithmic and concept variable in the pre - test ( p > . 5 ) . Neither Similarity - Based Guided Discovery Learning Concept variable Discovery Teaching text With similarity 2 . 05 ( 1 . 19 ) 1 . 96 ( 1 . 00 ) Without similarity 1 . 60 ( 1 . 00 ) 1 . 85 ( 1 . 03 ) Table 3 Means ( Standard Deviations in Parentheses ) of the Concept Variable in the Post - Test School Science and Mathematics 141 did we find any significant interaction - time - effect re - garding the algorithmic or concept variable ( p > . 3 ) . In summary , the learning form did not have any notice - able effect on concept learning . So Hypothesis 3 was confirmed . Temporal changes on the concept variable . The overall trends of the concept variable can be summarized as follows . We observed a general positive trend for the groups with similarity , compared to the groups without similarity . Within Group SD and Group ST , the means tended to increase from pre - test to post - test ( positive trend , with similarity ) . Within Group ND and Group NT , a diminution of means could be ob - served from pre - test to post - test ( negative trend , with - out similarity ) . Figure 4 illustrates this observation . The observed trends correspond to the significant inter - action - time - effects which we already have quantified in the main results ( group effect and effect of similarity group ) . Discussion In accordance to former empirical data about anal - ogy learning , our study showed that the similarity of concepts allows improved conceptual performance ( similarity structured according to the TWA - model ) . The effect was still observed when the similarity of concepts was included into guided discovery learning . In addition , we were able to show that the effect is more important when the level of difficulty in the inter - vention is raised . As discovery learning is adequate to foster transfer , and as similarity of concepts remains powerful when combined with discovery learning , similarity based dis - covery learning should be recommended for practice . Furthermore , analogies and similar concepts including the TWA - model make the intended transfer goal ex - plicit . For us , the results of this study indicate the need for an appropriate cognitive structuring aid for discovery learning ( see also Mayer , 2004 ) . In our case , similar features served as a structuring aid . We are , however , of the opinion that it is not sufficient to briefly mention similar features , metaphors or analogies ( Glynn , 1989 ) . Rather , guiding aids have to be integrated explicitly . The TWA - model was already used in the past as a guiding aid . The assignments of this study were con - structed on this basis . In our view , the TWA - model rep - resents more than a problem solving strategy , as it fosters concept comprehension . In particular , the TWA - model may be necessary for successful analogy medi - ation , regardless of the chosen learning form . In this study , two very different learning arrange - ments were used ( guided discovery learning and teach - ing texts with interspersed questions ) . However , we could not find any indication that the choice of specific learning arrangements could influence the effect of Similarity - Based Guided Discovery Learning Figure 4 . Temporal changes on the concept variable ( means in the pre - test and post - test ) . 142 Volume 109 ( 3 ) similar concepts significantly . This means that no inter - ference between the employed learning form and the learning with similarities is apparent . The results presented here are concerned with the concept of proportionality in physics . Further concepts could be applied in a similar way , although they were not subject of this investigation . For example , the in - verse proportionality could be implemented in connec - tion with the law of the lever ( Figure 5 ) : Instead of the similar triangles depicted above , rectangles of an equal surface would be used in the “analog” ( Figure 6 ) . The forces ( F 1 , F 2 ) correspond to the vertical sides of the rectangles , the lever arms ( l 1 , l 2 ) to the horizontal sides of the rectangles . The delineated construction of as - signments can then be immediately transferred . The learners would have to find an equation for the inverse proportionality from Figure 6 , compare Figure 5 and 6 ( similarities and differences ) , induce the relation be - tween forces and lever arms according to Figure 5 , gen - erate a new example of their choice and summarize their findings . As for the inclined plane , more demand - ing assignments can arise by presenting less than the four numbers shown in the depictions . With assign - ments of this kind , we would expect a similar effect as in our study . In a similar manner , the analogy of two physical con - cepts may also be introduced . For example , a water cir - cuit might be depicted instead of the similar triangles of our study , and an electrical circuit would appear in - stead of the inclined plane . The learners would have to Similarity - Based Guided Discovery Learning Figure 5 . Target - lever in balance . Figure 6 . “Analog” - rectangles of equal surface . School Science and Mathematics 143 find differences and correspondences for concepts like current , tension / pressure and resistance . They would have to draw circuits with large and narrow water pipes ( and thus low and high resistance ) . They should then be able to explain , for example , how the electric tension and the current affect the resistance . As former studies already found a significant effect of various analogies on concept performance , we ex - pect those findings to apply more generally , when dis - covery learning is associated to analog or similar concepts . However , confirmation of this generalization would need additional experiments . Due to the results we assume that the effect produced by analogy learning might be fundamentally independ - ent of the teaching methods applied . To ensure that our findings can be generalized on a wider range of learn - ing forms or methods , one would have to test additional methods or variations systematically ( such as , for ex - ample , problem - based learning or more open discovery or inquiry learning ) . References Anderson , R . D . ( 2002 ) . Reforming science teaching : What research says about inquiry . Journal of Science Teacher Education , 13 , 1 – 12 . Antonietti , A . ( 2001 ) . Analogical discoveries : Identify - ing similarities to solve problems . Roma , Italy : Car - roci . Brown , D . E . , & Clement , J . ( 1989 ) . Overcoming mis - conceptions via analogical reasoning : Abstract trans - fer versus explanatory model construction . Instructional Science , 18 , 237 – 261 . Clement , J . ( 1993 ) . Using bridging analogies and an - choring intuitions to deal with students’ preconcep - tions in physics . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 30 , 1241 – 1257 . De Jong , T . , & van Joolingen , W . R . ( 1998 ) . Scientific discovery learning with computer simulations of conceptual domains . Review of Educational Re - search , 68 , 179 – 201 . Domin , D . S . ( 1999 ) . A review of laboratory instruction styles . Journal of Chemical Education , 76 , 543 – 547 . Duit , R . ( 1991 ) . On the role of analogies and metaphors in learning science . Science Education , 75 , 649 – 672 . Duit , R . , & Glynn , S . ( 1995 ) . Analogien : Brücken zum Verständnis [ Analogies : bridges for understanding ] . Naturwissenschaften im Unterricht : Physik , 27 , 44 – 50 . Duit , R . , Roth , W . M . , Komorek , M . , & Wilbers , J . ( 2001 ) . Fostering conceptual change by analogies - between Scylla and Charybdis . Learning and In - struction , 11 , 283 – 303 . Flick , L . ( 1991 ) . Where concepts meet percepts : Stim - ulating analogical thought in children . Science Edu - cation , 75 , 215 – 230 . Fraser , B . J . , Walberg , H . J . , Welch , W . W . , & Hattie , J . A . ( 1987 ) . Syntheses of educational productivity re - search . International Journal of Educational Re - search , 11 , 145 – 252 . Gentner , D . ( 1989 ) . The mechanisms of analogical learning . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Simi - larity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 199 - 241 ) . Cam - bridge , MA : University Press . Glynn , S . M . ( 1989 ) . The teaching with analogies model . In K . D . Muth ( Ed . ) , Children’s comprehen - sion of text ( pp . 185 – 204 ) . Newark , DE : International Reading Association . Hage , K . , Bischoff , H . , Dichanz , H . , Eubel , K . - D . , Oehlschläger , H . - J . , & Schwittmann , D . ( 1985 ) . Das Methoden - Repertoire von Lehrern [ The repertoire of methods of teachers ] . Opladen , Germany : Leske . Hameyer , U . ( 1999 ) . Entdeckendes Lernen [ Discovery learning ] . In J . Wiechmann ( Ed . ) , Zwölf Unter - richtsmethoden : Vielfalt für die Praxis [ Twelve teaching methods : Diversity for practical use ] ( pp . 114 – 129 ) . Weinheim , Germany : Beltz . Hammond , K . J . , Seifert , C . M . , & Gray , K . C . ( 1991 ) . Functionality in analogical transfer : A hard match is good to find . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 1 ( 2 ) , 111 – 152 . Khishfe , R . , & Abd - El - Khalick , F . ( 2002 ) . Influence of explicit and reflective versus implicit inquiry - ori - ented instruction on sixth graders’ views of nature of science . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 39 , 551 – 578 . Klauer , K . J . ( 1991 ) . Erziehung zum induktiven Denken : Neue Ansätze der Denkerziehung [ Educa - tion for inductive thinking : New approaches for ed - ucation of thinking ] . Unterrichtswissenschaft , 19 , 135 – 151 . Lin , H . , Shiau , B . , & Lawrenz , F . ( 1996 ) . The effec - tiveness of teaching science with pictorial analogies . Research in Science Education , 26 , 495 – 511 . Loewenstein , J . , Thompson , L . , & Gentner , D . ( 1999 ) . Analogical encoding facilitates knowledge transfer in negotiation . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 6 , 586 – 597 . Markmann , A . B . , & Gentner , D . ( 1997 ) . The effect of alignability on memory . Psychological Science , 8 , 363 – 367 . Similarity - Based Guided Discovery Learning 144 Volume 109 ( 3 ) Mayer , R . E . ( 1989 ) . Models for understanding . Review of Educational Research , 59 ( 1 ) , 43 – 64 . Mayer , R . E . ( 2004 ) . Should there be a three - strikes rule against pure discovery learning ? American Psy - chologist , 59 ( 1 ) , 14 – 19 . McVey , M . D . ( 1993 ) . Analogical transfer : Are there performance differences among high ability stu - dents ? Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association , At - lanta . Neber , H . ( 1981 ) . Entdeckendes Lernen [ Discovery learning ] . Basel : Beltz . Newton , D . , & Newton , L . ( 1995 ) . Using analogy to help young children understand . Educational Stud - ies , 21 , 379 – 393 . Schwartz , D . L . ( 1993 ) . The construction and analogi - cal transfer of symbolic visualizations . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 30 , 1309 – 1325 . Author Note We are much obliged to the following people for their support in this study : counseling for the statistical analysis : Prof . Dr . Joachim Fischer ; counseling and support during the early project phases : Prof . Dr . K . Frey ; counseling and didactic expertise of teaching ma - terials : Prof . Dr . R . Duit . , W . Vogel and Dr . M . Lieber - herr ; counseling concerning theoretical concepts : Dr . J . Wilbers ; execution of the experiment in classes ( pilot and main phases , 2004 / 2005 ) : T . Rösch , S . Büchi , Dr . N . Emmenegger , T . Fröhlich , S . Gamper , Dr . W . Grentz , P . Läßer , Dr . A . Prieur , H . Rubin , S . Schäublin , Dr . M . Schmid ( execution and internal school coordi - nation ) , M . Vogel - Stalder . Similarity - Based Guided Discovery Learning School Science and Mathematics 145