REVISTA INVESTIGACION OPERACIONAL Vol . 21 , No . 1 , 2000 RESEÑAS / BOOK REVIEWS AN INTRODUCTION TO CATEGORICAL DATA ANALYSIS A . Agresti Wiley . ISBN : 0 - 471 - 11338 - 7 Xi - 290 p This book gives a systematic introduction to Categorical Data Analysis . The text is self contained and most of the models are acompanied by a worked real life example . The author had in mind the needs of practicioners . A list of proposed problems is provided at the end of each chapter and an Appendix gives an account of the features of some popular statistical packages . Chapter 1 presents a concise introduction to the inference with categorical data . Chapter 2 describes Contingency Tables and discusses the inferences based on them . Some well known examples illustrate their use . Generalized Linear Models are discussed in Chapter 4 . Models for binary responses ( logistic regression , loglinear models , etc ) . A special feature is the discussion of the fitness of a Generalized Linear Model . Six tables illustrate results of the examined example . In Chapters 5 , 6 & 8 the particular models are deeply analyzed . Logistic regression is the theme of Chapter 5 , Loglinear Modeling is treated in Chapter 6 and Logit models in Chapter 8 . Chapter 7 discusses the model building , selection and diagnostic . Chapter 9 introduces methods for the analysis of dependent data . Chapter 10 gives a historical skecht of the development of Categorical Data Analysis . This book is more readibly for students and specialists without a formation in Mathematical Statistics than the other book of the author “Categorical Data Analysis” . It meets its purpose of raising and estimulating the interest of practitioners of statistics and students . I recommend it as a useful source of information for any person dealing with applications . It is also valuable as a means of instruction . 75 A PRACTICAL GUIDE TO HEAVY TAILS . STATISTICAL TECHNIQUES AND APPLICATIONS J . Robert , R . Adler , R . , E . Feldman and S . Murad . Taqqu . [ editors ] , 1998 xvi - 533 ISBN 0 - 8176 - 3951 - 9 ISBN 3 - 7643 - 3951 - 9 [ Basel ] Birkhauser , Boston The existence of Heavy Tailed distributions and processes appears as a problem to be solved in many applications . This book seeks to spread light on it . The contributors are well known and have published different papers on the topic . A comprehensive and lucid exposition of the features of the problem is made . The importance of the theme is endured by the support of grants from the Israel Science Foundation , US - Israel Binational Science Foundation , the Office of Naval Research and the National Science of Foundation of Usa . The need of working with the available data is present in all the applications . To avoid the use of ' outliers ' is a common solution for granting that the available statistical models work correctly . It is a crazy solution but to disregard the ' bad data ' is unfortunately a too popular solution in the experimental sciences . This volume is devoted to the discussion of methods that cope with the existence of a Heavy Tailed [ HT ] Distribution [ HTD ] . The first part presents contributions that deal with the intrinsically heavy tailed distributions arising in communication and finance problems . They are two major areas where applied mathematics are playing an increasing role . Crovella - Taqqu - Bestravros discuss on the distributions that arise in the work with the number of files sizes in Word Wide Web . Willinger - Paxson - Taqqu complete this study with the results of experiments conducted on ' Local area networks ' and ' Wide area networks ' ' . They are analyzed through structural models . Financial problems are analyzed in the following 3 papers . Muller - Dacorogna - Pictet established that HTD arises in foreing exchange and interbank markets . The tail of financial assets are estimated . Mittnik - Rachev - Paolella provide an insight in the stable probability schemes . Conditional models are estimated using ARMA and ARMA - GARCH . Density functions are approximated by fast Fourier transforms . The stable paretian model appears as a realistic model for optimal valuation , capital asset pricing model , and arbitrage pricing . Theory of Risk management is presented by Bassi - Embrechts - Kafetzaki . The estimation of quantiles appears as and adequate solution in the use of different instruments . The proposed methods are based on the use of Likelihood , Goodness of fit Bayesian and graphical techniques . Their conclusions are supported by numerous tables and graphics . 76 The Time Series [ TS ] part is more theoretically oriented . Adler - Feldman - Gallagher concentrate on the use of ARMA models . Box - Jenkins technique is the kernel of the method used for identification , estimation and diagnostic checking . Simulation studies illustrate the behavior of the methods . The next paper , Clader - Davies , is devoted to the estimation of parameters in this setting while Taqqu - Teverovsky ' s paper tackled the estimation of long range dependence , taking into account if the TS is finite or not . Resnick ' s paper deals with the challenge posed by the un - convergence of the sample autocorrelation coefficient . Simulation experiments illustrate the authors remarks . The next paper analyzes how statistical methods must be modified for dealing with TS when the noises have HTD ' s , Mikosh . The potentialities of a Bayesian approach is the subject of the paper of Ravishanker - Chou . The behavior of some Gibb ' s samplers is discussed . Part III , HT Estimation , contains two papers . The first one deals with the study of the use of classic estimators and robust resampling plans , Picet - Darogna - Muller , while the other Kogon - Wlliams , copes with the use of estimation based characteristic functions under the hypothesis that the distribution parameters are stable . In part IV are presented applications to regression of some ideas of the third part . Le Page - Podgorsky - Rysnar - White use robust resampling when the errors have a HTD and McCulloch assumes that the disturbances are symmetrically stable and derived that the Maximum Likelihood [ ML ] Estimators are asymptotically normal distributed . Illustrations of the performance of the proposal are given in both papers . Part V is devoted to signal processing . The paper of Tsakalidas - Nikias deals with the estimation of parameters when additive interferences are present . A ML estimator procedure is used and simulation experiments validate the proposals . Tsikrintzis develops a similar model for fading signals for a α - stable class constructed Papers of Goldie - Kluppelberg ( subexponential distributions ) , Rosinsky ( Structure of Stationary Stable processes ) and Samorodnetsky ( Tail behavior of some shot noise processes ) are placed in Part VI . They study the model structures . The last part [ Numerical Procedures ] has four papers . They deal with stable distribution problems . McCulloch derived approximations which permit to develop statistical analysis . In another paper , coauthored with D . B . Panton , rates are tabulated for maximally skewed stable distributions for various values of α . The first paper of J . P . Nolan presents the state of the art of multilevel stable distributions problems . In a second paper he presents a computational package for computing the parameters of univariate stable distributions . The book is very well organized . It gives a coverage of the subject of HTD and is suitable for obtaining an overview of the latest results in the numerical treatment of statistical problems when HTD are present . 77 HANDBOOK OF STATISTICAL MODELING FOR THE SOCIAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES C . Arminger , C . Clogg and M . Sobel [ editors ] , 1995 xiv - 592 Plenum , New York ISBN 0 - 306 - 44805 - x This book presents , in ten chapters , the roots of different methods of wide use in applications . The name of the book is somewhat misleading because its use is broader than the expressed . The discussed models and approaches to the analysis of data are of wide use in biomedicine , ecology and other non behavioral sciences . The readers should have a good mathematical statistics basis as well as some experience on applications . The chapters are self contained and proofs are not included . A huge list of references permit to obtain the nowadays knowledge of the exposed theme . The authors are well known . The set of subjects , though not exhaustive , contains the discussion of problems of common interest for statisticians that aim to use modern statistical procedures . The first Chapter tackles the crucial problem of cause - effect , which is the generator of causal inference . M . Sobel presents a historical and philosophical sketch . The probabilistic point of view is discussed and the statistical approaches are presented . Particularly the discussion on the effect of a manipulated variable and the model based approach is very illustrating of the inferential errors that can be generated by the incorrect use of statistical tools . R . Little and N . Schwanker wrote on Missing Data . The chapter gives an insight of the general problem , not only for sampling and design of experiments but for other particular problems as Probit models . The proposal of Bayesian Monte Carlo methods and the corresponding discussion is very on line with the modern approach to inference . I missed a discussion on the possibility of the use of Reference Analysis within the Bayesian modeling . The third chapter is almost a book , 107 pages . G . Arminger discussed in it one of the big challenges to regression modeling in applications . He focused on the problem of fixing the relationship between sets of independent and dependent variables . The concept of ' mean structures ' is used for coping with the general problem . The diminish of the set of needed hypothesis for fixing a model permits to cope with the general problems and to have another look to regression problems such as diagnostics , censoring , generalized estimating equations . The next chapter , M . Brown and G . Arminger , completes the mean structure inference analyzed in the previous one . The role of the existence of latent variables is included . The presentation of estimations and computational aspects of structure models which include mean and covariance is the kernel of the chapter . M . Sobel wrote a chapter on the Analysis of Contingency Tables which provides an almost complete account of the subject . It is an adequate overview of the problem . I make a similar evaluation of the chapter " Latent class models " developed by the late C . C . Clogg . This is a problem that is not as well known as Contingency Tables . Therefore the provided overview is very important . 78 The next two chapters deal with the use of Panels . The first one is devoted to the analysis when we deal with metric data , Cheng Hsiao , and the second one with the case of qualitative data . A . Hamerle - G . Ronning . Both themes are very important in longitudinal analysis . The usefulness of the use of the same sample on several occasions is discussed . The subsequent chapter , T . Petersen , deals with the same problem but considering a dynamical model when coping the survival models . In this case the respondent ' s state can change . Several illustration are made using real life data . The last chapter is due to N . T . Longford and studies the problem of the effect of using multistage clustering instead of simple sampling design in the validity of data analysis procedures . These effects are discussed and general estimating criteria for evaluating them is made through multilevel modeling . The discussion of the existing statistical packages takes a place in the different chapters . I highly recommend it for specialists of statistics dealing with applications and for the work in seminars of advanced students . Carlos Bouza Universidad de La Habana 79