Radical Futures : Supporting Community - Led Design Engagements through an Afrofuturist Speculative Design Toolkit Kirsten Bray Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta , GA , USA Christina N . Harrington Carnegie Mellon University Pittsburgh , PA , USA Andrea G . Parker Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta , GA , USA N’Deye Diakhate Black Womxn Flourish New York , NY , USA Jennifer Roberts Versed Education Group Washington , D . C . , USA ABSTRACT When considering the democratic intentions of co - design , designers and design researchers must evaluate the impact of power imbal - ances embedded in common design and research dynamics . This holds particularly true in work with and for marginalized commu - nities , who are frequently excluded in design processes . To address this issue , we examine how existing design tools and methods are used to support communities in processes of community building or reimagining , considering the influence of race and identity . This paper describes our findings from 27 interviews with community design practitioners conducted to evaluate the Building Utopia toolkit , which employs an Afrofuturist lens for speculative design processes . Our research findings support the importance of design tools that prompt conversations on race in design , and tensions between the desire for imaginative design practice and the imme - diacy of social issues , particularly when designing with Black and brown communities . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → HCI design and evaluation methods . KEYWORDS design methods , method , design research methods , participatory design , qualitative methods ACM Reference Format : Kirsten Bray , Christina N . Harrington , Andrea G . Parker , N’Deye Diakhate , and Jennifer Roberts . 2022 . Radical Futures : Supporting Community - Led Design Engagements through an Afrofuturist Speculative Design Toolkit . In CHI ’22 : ACM CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , April 30 - May 6 , 2022 , New Orleans , Louisiana , United States . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 13 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3501945 Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , topostonserversortoredistributetolists , requirespriorspecificpermission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . CHI ’22 , April 30 - May 6 , 2022 , New Orleans , Louisiana , United States © 2022 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9157 - 3 / 22 / 04 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3501945 1 INTRODUCTION Researchers in the field of HCI have documented the need for more research with groups often considered as marginalized commu - nities to expand methods and outcomes across cultural contexts and hopefully generate more equitable technology [ 26 , 54 , 61 ] . As this need to diversify our research culture has grown , so has the need to think about power dynamics and the cultural resonance of design methods and probes . Participatory design is one such method , first adopted by Scandinavian workers’ unions in the 1970s and developed to create a democratized design process that pro - moted more equitable design outcomes [ 6 , 35 ] . Co - design , though sometimes used interchangeably with participatory design , encom - passes a broader range of methodologies intended to incorporate end users in design processes [ 50 ] . Co - design aims to bring people outside formal design and research spaces into the design process [ 50 ] . This method pushes for deeper collaboration with designers and non - designers across disciplines and cultures , emphasizing an acknowledgement of lived expertise [ 20 , 50 ] . Both participatory and co - design methods have been proposed by HCI researchers to encourage equitable design engagements within marginalized communities [ 34 , 37 ] . One of the benefits of both participatory design and co - design is that they can allow designers to collaborate with diverse groups of participants , either through intentionality in methods or by the nature of the focus of the research . As the practices have spread and developed across the globe , a criticism of these practices has emerged , calling attention to how design - ers employing these methods must also account for the historical implications of participants’ racial identities and the subsequent implications for power dynamics within design research [ 37 , 38 , 45 ] . When evaluating how participatory and co - design methods transfer across global contexts , researchers in the United States have identified barriers in historically marginalized communities [ 7 , 60 , 61 ] , such as the need to consider racial identity and existing power dynamics , both between design researchers and the com - munities they work with , as well as those embedded in the larger systems of oppression these communities navigate . Bødker and Kyng comment on how in practicing participatory design that mat - ters , political context and social analysis must eventually become a part of the practice [ 7 ] . Tran O’Leary et al . similarly describe their experiences working in Seattle , and the history of segregation that underscored the importance of the Africatown project [ 60 ] . CHI ’22 , April 30 - May 6 , 2022 , New Orleans , Louisiana , United States Bray , et al . Researchers have described how sociopolitical context shapes de - sign practice in the United States [ 7 ] , specifically in how research relationships can be influenced by the histories of racialization , segregation and white supremacy [ 60 , 61 ] . Both a scarcity of re - search and existence of past research that has been exploitative or harmful have fostered a sense of mistrust between marginalized communities and researchers , making the process of undertaking collaborative research one that must be predicated on solidarity and continual trust - building work [ 61 ] . In the exploration of design as a socially - involved engagement , many researchers assert that social context matters when applying methods used in design processes , and can play a determining role in their outcomes [ 2 , 3 , 60 ] . Power imbalances in design can perpet - uate social hierarchy and unconsciously reinforce harmful stereo - types associated with marginalized communities [ 26 , 36 , 42 , 55 ] ; for instance , in technology innovations that fail to recognize Black faces as human [ 36 ] or replicate racial bias in healthcare algorithms [ 26 , 42 ] . If the existing strategies for inclusive design are hindered by both power structures embedded in the practice and larger soci - ety , then these imbalances must be addressed to achieve the goals of co - design and foster collaborative relationships with communi - ties that are minoritized , marginalized , and historically oppressed . Working closely with community members that designers seek to include can determine whether the methods used in these cases are sufficient for addressing their concerns and design needs while also attempting to address power dynamics . Previous design researchers have highlighted the importance of leveraging institutional power to support design engagements outside the presence of formal re - searchers or designers as a means of redistributing that power [ 31 ] within the communities designers intend to work with , thus recog - nizing and bolstering the ability of communities to generate their own solutions . This research asserts that the creation of tools that aid community - led design would allow historically marginalized communities to facilitate design practice that places their values first in the process . Design probes can serve as an entry into creating community - led design tools , addressing complex topics that allow participants in research to interact with prompts that generate rich insights . Probes embrace the value of lived expertise and can be distributed and used without a researcher’s presence , making them a fitting medium for our research . More specifically , toolkits are a form of design probe that offer a more guided form of design participation , informed by research informed design expertise [ 51 ] . When considering design with communities working independently of designers , a toolkit offers the opportunity to take a more guided approach to design , while retaining the ability to be used when and how communities using them see fit . More recently , researchers have been explor - ing using design probes at the intersections of speculative design and race [ 60 ] , though this area of design has been criticized for its lack of engagement with Black and Brown futures [ 15 , 27 , 43 , 59 ] . Researchers have found that when engaging in speculation with Black communities , it is hard to separate racially - driven implica - tions of technology from the concept of “ideal alternate worlds” [ 27 ] . Researchers are therefore increasingly calling for design and computing work that directly acknowledges the impact of race , and supports the autonomy of racially minoritized communities in HCI research [ 19 , 26 , 43 , 63 ] . Building on our previous work examining speculative design and Afrofuturism as an approach to community futuring [ 8 , 27 ] , this paper discusses the evaluation of a community - designed specula - tive design toolkit as a potential approach to more inclusive design processes when designing futures alongside racially minoritized groups . To situate conversations of race and power dynamics within the larger conversation of speculative design , this toolkit applies tenets of Afrofuturism and liberation to center communities that are often neglected in design and marginalized in a larger societal context . Afrofuturism is a genre that encompasses both the poli - tics and aesthetics of the African diaspora as a futuristic interplay with technological concepts and alternative worlds , and has been positioned as one such approach which may prove more empa - thetic than traditional speculative design [ 63 ] . As a design lens , Afrofuturism places cultural identities at the forefront of design by encouraging us to consider worlds that are inclusive of indi - viduals from the Black American diaspora by relying on both the philosophy of science and the cultural history of these communi - ties . Incorporating Afrofuturism and liberation in practice therefore opens space to address the long - term impacts of racial inequity while operating under the assumption that radically improved and more equitable futures are achievable , but contingent upon the involvement of those impacted . We draw from research on the in - tersections of race , design , and technology and discuss the benefits of Afrofuturist speculative design as an approach to considering the needs of Black and Brown communities in the United States [ 63 ] . We therefore evaluate the cultural relevance and effectiveness of this toolkit through semi - structured interviews to examine the following research questions : ( 1 ) In what ways could an Afrofuturist toolkit support commu - nity design practitioners who work in historically oppressed communities in the United States ? ( 2 ) How might an Afrofuturism - based speculative design toolkit promote the inclusion of historically excluded groups in design ? Our contributions to the HCI and design research community are threefold . Firstly , we present the development and evaluation of an Afrofuturist speculative design toolkit for community design ideation . Secondly , we describe how applying an Afrofuturist lens to the conception of a design probe can be used to prompt con - scious engagements around race when designing . These can be both for marginalized groups participating in design and seeking more concrete considerations of present - day issues , or for non - marginalized groups to participate in open dialogue about how social issues impact design . Finally , we report on the considera - tions our investigation revealed for researchers seeking to structure co - design engagements using speculation as a tool for designing equitable futures with communities underrepresented in HCI 1 . Our research provides guiding suggestions for speculative design at the margins , asking what technology and solution - building look like when community futuring and race - conscious ideation is the driving force behind a design . 1 Throughout our text we acknowledge the history of both participatory and co - design while situating the intent of our toolkit to be expansive to both subareas of design research Radical Futures CHI ’22 , April 30 - May 6 , 2022 , New Orleans , Louisiana , United States 2 RACIAL POLITICS IN DESIGN The United States’ relationship with race has been marked by a history of slavery and segregation , with the harms of institutional - ized racism persisting into the present day [ 33 ] . As conversations surrounding race have expanded across social disciplines and in public discourse , HCI research has also undergone a notable shift in how race is discussed . Previously , researchers have reported a notable absence of race - related work [ 26 ] . Researchers who did choose to pursue race - related work identified a growing need for work critically examining the role technology plays , both in perpet - uating existing inequities or directly combating them . Presently , the field has seen a growth in research surrounding the intersections of race and technology ; critical race theory has been posed as a means of evaluating HCI research [ 43 ] and the toll of bias and power im - balance in research has been underscored as researchers navigate discrimination within the field [ 19 ] , as external communities un - derrepresented in HCI grapple with the history of power relations between themselves and researchers [ 60 ] and as bias replicated in existing technology is uncovered [ 5 , 49 ] . These projects indicate that it is unlikely design could be blind to race , nor should it aspire to be . Rather , there are new opportunities to reconsider what it means to see race and diversity in HCI . There are new opportunities to examine how design contributes to liberatory work . Speculating possible futures is not limited to the desire to contribute to technological innovation , the motivations need not center on technology at all , rather the need for social change or the desire to preserve one’s community . When contend - ing with a history of institutionalized oppression that has continued into the present , intent to collectively thrive in the future is linked with an understanding that the existence of racial oppression can - not be treated as an unstated , inevitable condition of all futures . This is not a novel insight , and while it may not be referred to as such outside academic settings , artists , designers and community - led organizations have practiced speculation and futuring within their own communities [ 29 ] . Previous community - led experiments have contributed to this work , for instance the Intelligent Mischief Creative studio created the project ‘What if Bedstuy was a Black Utopia’ to provoke thought on radical imagination at the intersec - tion of art , design , civic engagement , and world building . Similarly , Wormsly’s ‘There are Black people in the Future’ deliberately calls forth the concept of Black existence beyond the present with a simple , yet contentious [ 52 ] [ 66 ] statement . Shaowen Bardzell de - scribes core feminist utopian thinking as one foregrounding the cognitive act of utopian envisioning over adherence to a set vision to “explore a radically better future without attempting to define it” [ 2 ] . We hope Afrofuturist speculation might be approached in a similar fashion , with the realization that resisting racial inequity is a complex and long - term goal , at least as complex as many forms of future speculation , and that the concept of a more equitable future is neither easily defined or uncomplicated . We thus consider the value of imagining radical futures , or ones both socially ambi - tious and multifaceted in nature . This research adds to these prior practices with the assertion that it is the liberation of the histor - ically oppressed that fuels innovative speculation and equitable design . 3 RELATED WORK Our work builds on the growing field of research at the intersection of design research probes , speculative design , and Afrofuturism in HCI as well as the ongoing dialogue of engaging co - design from a community - based approach . 3 . 1 Probes for Speculative Design in HCI Ruha Benjamin argued that speculation can be used to disrupt racist expectations of Blackness by counteracting assumptions that stories of past and present - day injustices should eclipse stories examining the possibility of equitable futures [ 5 ] . Speculation poses a poten - tial means of using the past and present to critically examine the social implications of future technologies and rethink community - building in the future [ 5 ] . This is perhaps one of speculation’s greatest strengths when practiced in marginalized communities ; engaging with futures that are conscious of , but not constrained by , the limitations of institutionalized racism . Researchers have documented how design probes have been used to explore such dif - ficult topics in HCI and deepen understandings when working with communities designers are unfamiliar with [ 4 , 13 , 17 , 21 , 25 ] . Gra - ham and Rouncefield describe design probes as a means of “going into unknown , uncharted and difficult to reach research territory ; and asking questions that both the researcher and researched gen - erate answers to” [ 25 ] . When first introduced by Gaver , Dunne and Pacenti , probes were packages containing collections of items intended to provoke responses that would help designers gain rich insights into the community they intended to design for [ 21 ] . Since , design probes have been used by designers in communities , chal - lenging researchers as a way of exploring design possibilities by first gathering input those involved to be interpreted “empatheti - cally , not intellectually” [ 23 ] . Design probes can be investigative , emotional , disruptive , or even playful , but determining the probe that fits the community is often dependent on first understanding who will be engaging with the probes and the ultimate intentions of using probes [ 25 ] . Perhaps most importantly , probes situate par - ticipants as the experts on their own experiences and open a venue for new levels of participation [ 25 ] . A consideration when using probes is that their creative ap - proaches to understanding collaborators are frequently both lacking in quantifiable data and resistant to analysis [ 21 ] . When consider - ing probes’ appeal to playfulness and inspirational design [ 21 , 23 ] , there is a question of whether invoking an open - ended approach is appropriate for addressing the immediate concerns of communities that are seeking to change in the present . This research asserts that taking an open - ended approach is a valid means of facilitating co - design engagements that seek to overcome power imbalances in research and prompt radical futuring . Design probes have played an important role in documenting the experiences of the people design researchers intend to collaborate with [ 21 ] . Smith et al . documented their use of cultural and newspa - per probes with youth in Namibia to explore the nation’s colonial past and the links between that history and their present reality [ 13 ] . Common design methods were coupled with the participants’ own personal reflections , prompting researchers to reflect both on the rich insights brought to discussions on the tools provided and the need to move beyond generalized design methods to support CHI ’22 , April 30 - May 6 , 2022 , New Orleans , Louisiana , United States Bray , et al . local knowledge sharing and production [ 13 ] . Design workbooks in particular can be used as a tool to record the iterative process of design and encourage creative thought processes [ 22 ] . Desjardins et al . have further discussed the potential of using booklets and sketch - ing as means of more accessible engagement , sharing design ideas , and encouraging co - speculation [ 17 ] . In particular , the researchers emphasize the alignment of the booklets with feminist theory and the potential for “moments of equality” [ 17 ] in research when using these probes . Our work therefore draws from prior research on probes and futuring , suggesting that probes have the potential to engage with complex social ideas when looking towards the future . 3 . 2 Community Design Methods : Social Context and Power in Design Engagements Scholars in HCI and design speak to the emancipatory capabilities of co - design , underscoring the importance of futuring in estab - lishing visions for activists to look towards [ 2 , 15 ] . The advent of participatory design played a pivotal role in addressing the con - cerns of Scandinavian workers seeking better workplace conditions , ensuring that the goals of design projects aligned with those of workers [ 35 ] . Yet when approaching design for Black futures in the United States , we must address one ever - present question in community design and co - design research : Is it possible to engage in community - based design research from the perspective of an aca - demic institution without acknowledging and addressing inherent power imbalances ? Prior research suggests that this may not be possible or advisable when conducting academic research , as the racialized power imbalances impact design practice in ways that are not directly synonymous from other forms of power imbalance . Despite participatory design’s origin and intention of providing opportunities to cooperatively design technology with laypersons [ 30 ] , there are often unseen power imbalances and inequities em - bedded in traditional design and research practices that extend into collaborative design methods . Researchers have seen these be - come most apparent when working with marginalized communities [ 3 , 27 , 57 , 60 , 62 ] . When conducting cooperative inquiry sessions in Baltimore , Walsh uncovered a notable example of barriers to participation , finding that speculation workshops that were readily available to affluent white children posed far more barriers to entry for low - income Black children [ 62 ] . The children who could partici - pate were primarily those who could commit to multiple sessions in a long - term study , had access to a car , and had an available parent without work obligations that prevented them from taking their child to the sessions [ 62 ] . To incorporate people often excluded in research , researchers must be aware of the costs of participation and find ways to meet participants where they are . Pushing this argument further , there is an identified need for community de - sign engagements that are not contingent upon the presence of a researcher . Communities can and have facilitated their own co - design en - gagements without the involvement of academic researchers or industry designers , and researchers have identified the importance of community - led design [ 14 , 39 ] . For instance , [ 39 ] discusses ‘Block by Block’ , a resident - led project for data activism , and it’s potential to encourage proactive community engagement . They reiterate the importance of supporting experimentation “in the small” [ 39 ] , in this case referring to methods for assisting individuals seeking to change their communities . Our research seconds this notion that community members are frequently the ones best positioned to understand the values and needs of those closest to them , and therefore best equipped to lead in designing their own futures . 3 . 3 Afrofuturism and Speculative Design Mark Dery coined the term Afrofuturism in 1994 [ 16 ] to describe a field of speculative literature that has now grown into a breadth of mediums featuring pan - African protagonists . History , culture , social issues and Black aesthetic are woven into a genre that begins with the assumption that speculation incorporates Black American experiences , filling a long - standing gap in prominent speculative fiction . When discussing the limitations of speculative design , there is a discourse that runs parallel to the criticisms of speculative fiction as a genre on the limitations and criticisms of its procliv - ity towards narratives featuring white , male protagonists [ 48 , 58 ] . Winchester writes that Afrofuturism can be leveraged as a lens to examine the implicit cultural assumptions of present design practices and broaden the scope of the design imagination in hu - man centered design [ 63 ] . Complex engagements with race are of particular importance in design methods intended to incorporate non - designers in the design process . Research and design broadly have previously grappled with representation within the field and within the subjects of HCI research [ 1 , 54 ] . Issues of racial equity and representation are of heightened importance within the United States , where race can play a key role in the power dynamics in a research process [ 61 , 62 ] . Previous researchers have discussed the need for design practitioners to embrace the latent activism of participatory design work [ 7 , 60 ] , while pushing for more revolu - tionary thinking geared toward long term impacts . It is this concept of more visionary , democratic approaches to generating sustained changes that speculative design can leverage if done in a proper setting . Though speculative design has faced criticism stating that the premise is too vague in its efforts and lacking in meaningful en - gagements with race or class , [ 15 , 59 ] , there is value in speculation outside of classed or privileged interpretations [ 3 , 40 , 60 ] . In a project by Baumen et al . situated in a historically Black Los Angeles neighborhood , researchers uncovered ways to help communities address ‘wicked problems’ using future projections to create their own urban planning concepts [ 3 ] . When “infrastruc - tures of imagination” were employed , community members were drawn into a design process that drew from personal context and imagination to meaningfully engage with design and technology concepts . A research project working with Africatown Seattle simi - larly supports this sentiment , with authors writing that : “It is by putting the process of imagination in conversation with legacies of racialization that we find useful work on Blackness , feminism and design” [ 60 ] . In this research , authors collaborated with the organization to create spaces for Black businesses and community members . During the process , the researchers’ highlight the role of imagination , coupled with efforts to acknowledge and dismantle barriers derived from design elitism and classism and embrace the activism inherent to the project [ 60 ] . These researchers underscore a common sentiment that communities historically overlooked in design practice in the United States are not lacking in the capacity or Radical Futures CHI ’22 , April 30 - May 6 , 2022 , New Orleans , Louisiana , United States desire to speculate on radical futures . Rather , these anecdotes open the opportunity for designers and researchers in HCI to consider how and where they approach speculation , and the greater impacts of moving beyond standard notions of who is speculating what futures . When practicing design work with Black communities , Afrofuturism may offer an opportunity to engage non - designers further in STEM , asking how far a concept can be taken when design begins with marginalized populations as the catalysts for solution building and key collaborators in the design process . Our research evaluates a toolkit designed to function as a probe , which consists of a workbook and cards . Throughout the paper we use toolkit to refer to both workbook and cards , referring indi - vidually to workbook or cards only when these components were modified , critiqued or otherwise specifically addressed . The toolkit was developed in response to prior research on futuring with Black and brown youth [ 27 ] and uses Afrofuturism as a premise for design speculation , incorporating prompts that use present inequities and community strengths to frame the speculation of possible futures [ 8 ] . The cards and workbook were chosen as mediums useful for conducting in - person , collaborative speculation exercises in ways that are adaptable with a largely low barrier to entry for production and use . [ 63 , 64 ] . We discuss the process of the toolkit development and the method of evaluation in the next section . 4 DEVELOPING THE BUILDING UTOPIAS TOOLKIT Design methods toolkits have been used in the HCI and design research space as a way to engage diverse groups in the practice of design thinking through a problem , detailing their previous experiences with an artifact or system , or eliciting imagination . This toolkit builds off our research team’s exploration of design toolkits and speculative design probes to support Black and LatinX youth in community futuring [ 8 , 27 ] . We began the development of this toolkit in hopes of creating a publicly available speculative design resource to be used by designers and non - designers alike to elicit critical future speculation [ 8 ] . As one of the major underlying goals of this work was to attune to the power dynamics often inherent in existing design methods , we aimed to create an accessible , open - source tool that would afford engagements with design methods that could be led and staffed solely by those native to the community engaging in the work . 4 . 1 Brainstorming Sessions One of our primary goals is that this toolkit represents and engages elements of collectivism among community design practitioners . Thus , we held four virtual design brainstorming sessions with com - munity design practitioners that facilitate futuring in communities of color . These sessions had the objective of defining concepts of liberation and radical futures , outlining the desired outcomes from using the toolkit and examining ways this toolkit could be used to meet them . Sessions were led by one of two community design practitioners - one design practitioner is a co - founder and mem - ber of a Black women - led design collective that works to foster well - being and support the health of Black women and nonbinary people ; the other runs a group dedicated to helping organizations practice equitable , antiracist work using co - creation processes in partnerships with communities . Both had a background in social design and design research and offered insights to revise the deck and select topics for the cards . We worked alongside these commu - nity design practitioners to revise the various card decks as well as the toolkit language , brainstorming ways to evaluate the toolkit with other community design practitioners . The first brainstorming meeting was 30 minutes and follow - ing meetings were extended to an hour and then 90 minutes to allow more time to review the toolkit for potential revisions . The academic research team reviewed ideas for the Building Utopias toolkit by sharing the existing state of the decks and an ideation workbook that were previously developed [ 8 ] . Community design practitioners then guided our research team through envisioning exercises which helped us to collectively define the intentions of the toolkit and how revised cards would support these intentions . The group determined that an Afrofuturist toolkit for co - design should provide an understanding of present barriers to better fu - tures while leveraging joy , liberation , and community building within the process . These tenets were selected based on literature and foundational work discussing design activism and its reliance on such constructs which embrace the humanity of groups and acknowledge elements that contribute to that humanity [ 10 , 11 ] . The design methods included in the toolkit needed to have the end goal of considering how to build future communities , while guiding communities in ways that were not confined to a single ‘correct’ methodology , thereby allowing them to adapt the kit to their own uses . In the second session , we discussed how the toolkit might address community - defined goals and values with design methods encouraging people to collaboratively create potential solutions . Having a toolkit that was imaginative , accessible , and considerate of modern day issues and creativity would be a way to connect like minds to build equitable futures . During this session , language accessibility was also underscored as an important factor , and we prioritized making a toolkit that was less text heavy and free of jargon that primarily known by those in areas of academic or cor - porate design . We then reviewed the existing card decks to replace or refine cards based on these discussions and identified values . In the third session , we reviewed the Topics deck and decided to balance the themes mentioned to consider topics that contribute to both dystopian and utopian realities . This allowed for the ac - knowledgement of the gravity of present - day issues as well as the embracing of creativity and ingenuity . We also discussed the addition of cards and workbook sections that would expand the inclusivity of the decks . For example , adding a card for ability or using the term ‘cultural bias’ to broaden the scope of the cards , as well as providing context for how Afrofuturism could be used in design and community building . We reframed ‘Solutions’ as ‘Tools’ so people using the toolkit could see these as options supporting liberation rather than mediums intended to cure the complex issues raised in the topics or liberation prompts and broadened the scope of what this deck would include to incorporate overarching cate - gories of solutions , as opposed to specific technologies or mediums that might limit creative output . By the final session the research team introduced the interview protocol created to evaluate the toolkit with other community design practitioners . We conducted a run - through of the interview , which helped us restructure our CHI ’22 , April 30 - May 6 , 2022 , New Orleans , Louisiana , United States Bray , et al . Forecasting Topics Liberation Tools Methods Includesnumberedintervalsoftimeinthepresentor10 , 25 , 50 or 100 years into the past or future . We created this deck as a means of ask - ing participants to reflect on changes in approaches to de - sign from the past and into the future . Explores topics informed by the previous co - design sessions [ blinded for re - view ] and initial brainstorm - ing sessions . Considers con - cerns for the present and hopes for the future might be addressed through de - sign . Prompts were chosen and refined alongside commu - nity design practitioners to reflect questions that are directed towards solid - ifying community - defined interpretations of freedom and examining how that is achieved and sustained . Renamed from ‘Solutions and Technology’ to ’Tools’ to better reflect how both technical and nontechnical tools can and are being used to construct better futures . Consists of overarching cat - egories that reflect potential ways communities can cre - ate their own solutions . Encourages storytelling and collaboration between par - ticipants during the process of design . These methods in - cluded more conventional ones like storyboarding as well as informal methods for radical future thinking . Table 1 : Review of the Building Utopias card decks protocol to ensure we were answering our research questions and engaging the community design practitioners in meaningful ways . 4 . 2 The Toolkit Previous work in design research asserts the value and benefit of developing design tools and resources that can be made publicly available for those outside of formal design organizations [ 51 ] . Thus , we sought to create a speculative design toolkit that was designed by community design practitioners and could be easily engaged by organizers , community strategists , and advocates of social change in their environment . Following our brainstorming sessions with community design practitioners , we refined the toolkit materials to then be tested with a larger audience . The current toolkit consists of six card decks with updated topics , methods , and solutions chosen to prompt Afrofuturist speculative design ( see Table 1 for details on each deck ) . The card decks are intended to be used alongside an ideation workbook for documentation and further direction . The ideation workbook was also redesigned to serve as a companion and guide to the speculation card decks , incorporating more prompts and new concepts identified in the decks . This toolkit form was deemed appropriate , as the card decks provide opportunity for in person co - design sessions that might be used to collaboratively gen - erate new ideas . Additionally , the workbook relays design - thinking , co - design , and technology concepts , allowing community designers to share knowledge and apply speculation and design thinking in their work . We believe these features made them well - suited to meeting community needs . This toolkit is meant to be used as a community futuring re - source , and the cards can be chosen and used together in simple design engagements that question the past , present or future of communities and what elements they wish to maintain or change . Initially , we believed participants should use all 5 speculation decks and answer the prompts on the cards in order of Topic , Forecasting , Liberation , Tools and Solution . After our brainstorming sessions we saw an opportunity for people using the decks to pick a card from just one or a few of the decks to guide their process , and sought to discuss this further in our interviews when inquiring about what exercises or scenarios interviewees could imagine using the deck in . As a probing toolkit , this meant the order of using the toolkit was left open to interpretation . For instance , in workshops held by a community organization , attendees could take a card from one of the decks or use multiple , taking turns sharing their responses to the prompts or envisioning a timeline of design for their communities . 5 TOOLKIT TESTING As a first step to understand the impact and reception of the Building Utopias toolkit , the first author conducted semi - structured inter - views with 27 community design practitioners . We chose commu - nity design practitioners as subject matter experts as they have both design experience and experience with futuring and design engagements for community design . This research was approved by the university Institutional Review Board and participants were compensated $ 50 at the end of their interview . 5 . 1 Semi - structured Interviews An interview protocol was defined to gain insight into how to improve the efficacy of our toolkit from practitioners who work closely with community collectives on a regular basis . Due to the COVID - 19 restrictions , interviews were conducted remotely over Zoom . Prior to interviews , participants were sent digital pages of the cards and ideation workbook in the toolkit via Issu , an online Radical Futures CHI ’22 , April 30 - May 6 , 2022 , New Orleans , Louisiana , United States PDF viewer with shareable links that participants could use to view the digital materials . A pre - interview survey was also sent to par - ticipants prior to their session . The survey asked for demographic details as well as questions about their practices and experiences with design . At the start of the interview we asked community design practitioners about their experiences working with their col - lectives and for general feedback on the documents sent . We then walked interviewees through each of the documents and moved through our interview protocol to assess perceptions of the toolkit , feelings of cultural relevance , and thoughts on how the toolkit might be received by the communities that the community design practitioners worked with . Participants were then guided through a brainstorming activity via a Miro board to share their ideas of design methods that could be done with the toolkit based on their prior experiences with community speculation and futuring . Figure 1 : Pages from the Building Utopias toolkit 5 . 2 Recruitment We recruited individuals who had previously participated in re - search with our research team , community design practitioners that had working relationships with the research team , and also con - tacted relevant organizations such as the Design Justice Network , an organization devoted to liberatory , accessible and sustainable de - sign guided by principles of design justice [ 41 ] who forwarded our request for participants to their network of over 200 network mem - bers . We also used snowball sampling throughout our interviews to find new people that fit this description . We defined community design practitioners as people engaging in design work primarily within a specific geographic community [ 34 ] . We identified three categories of community design practitioners : 1 - Subject matter experts on designing with Black communities or using Afrofutur - ism ; 2 - People who have an active role in organizations practicing community - based design ; and 3 - People leading collaboratives or organizations practicing community design work . 5 . 3 Data Analysis and Positionality Participant audio and video were recorded during each interview session . Researchers took notes during the interviews to be ana - lyzed after the interview . Note - takers followed questions within the interview script and documented responses from the partici - pants . All interviews were audio and video recorded in Zoom and audio recordings were sent to Scribie for professional transcription . Researchers reviewed the transcripts and videos , writing out pre - liminary thoughts and ideas sparked by the interview sessions . The interview analysis was based on notes taken during the interviews . Using an inductive approach the researchers identified recurring sentiments identified in Atlas . ti . These in - vivo and descriptive codes were sorted into an affinity diagram to identify common themes . Answers to specific individual interview items were also examined for common themes . Pre - interview survey forms were also ana - lyzed for descriptive statistics of the group interviewed . Interview feedback was organized via a matrix that would allow us to quan - tify and prioritize suggested toolkit revisions by those that were mentioned most often , or impacted accessibility or usability and thus should be implemented in earlier iterations of the prototype . As a way of identifying potential bias in our data analysis , as is becoming customary with qualitative research , we identify the positionality of the research team . Data collection was conducted by a racially diverse research team and was led by the first author , who is a Black woman from the Midwest with both a graduate - level degree and formal prior experience in the design and tech sector . Data analysis was supported by two Black women scholars in the HCI and design field with formal backgrounds in this area of research , and member - checked by our community design prac - titioner collaborators . These community design practitioners also engaged in the writing of this manuscript to contribute additional considerations in the data and discussion of this work . 5 . 4 Participants We recruited a total of twenty - seven participants . Fifteen identified as women , 8 as men and 6 identified as multiple , non - binary or other genders . Twenty - four of our respondents reported that they worked in urban settings , while 3 reported working in both rural and urban environments . All of our participants held some form of post - high school degree , with the majority of our respondents ( N = 18 ) holding Master’s degrees . Our participants worked across sectors of education , nonprofit , and independent consulting . All but one of our interviewees reported living in the United States ( See Table 2 ) . 5 . 5 Background and Familiarity with Design To give an overview of who we interviewed , we analyzed demographic data to detail both current workspaces of community design practitioners , and their background experiences and familiarity with topics related to design futuring . In the pre - interview survey , community design practitioners from our sample rated items pertaining to their design experiences and beliefs . Of the 27 participants interviewed , 12 agreed with the statement “I think CHI ’22 , April 30 - May 6 , 2022 , New Orleans , Louisiana , United States Bray , et al . PID Age Race / Ethnicity Roles P1 25 - 34 Black or African American “Strategist , Designer , Technologist , Researcher " P2 25 - 34 White “Community Activist , Organizer , Pol - icy Advocate " P3 25 - 34 White “Community Activist , Organizer , Strategist , Designer , Facilitator , Technologist , Educator , Researcher , Policy Advocate , Urban Planner " P4 25 - 34 Black or African American “Strategist , Facilitator , Educator , Re - searcher , Artist " P5 25 - 34 Black or African American “Educator , Researcher " P6 25 - 34 Mixed Race “Strategist , Designer , Facilitator , Tech - nologist , Educator , Artist " P7 25 - 34 Asian “Designer , Artist " P8 25 - 34 Black or African American “Community Activist , Organizer , Designer , Facilitator , Educator , Researcher , Artist , amateur architect " P9 35 - 44 White “Organizer , Designer , Facilitator , Edu - cator , Researcher , Trainer " P10 25 - 34 Black or African American “Designer , Researcher , Artist " P11 35 - 44 White “Organizer , Designer , Educator , Re - searcher , Artist " P12 35 - 44 Mixed Race “Designer , Educator , Researcher " P13 25 - 34 White “Organizer , Designer , Facilitator , Ed - ucator , Researcher , Policy Advocate , Artist " P14 25 - 34 Hispanic or Latino “Designer , Facilitator , Educator , Artist " P15 45 - 54 “Black or African Ameri - can , Carribean or West Indian " “Designer , Facilitator , Educator , Re - searcher " P16 25 - 34 Black or African American “Strategist , Designer , Facilitator , Ur - ban Planner , Social Entrepreneur " P17 35 - 44 White “Community Activist , Designer " P18 45 - 54 White “Strategist , Designer , Facilitator , Edu - cator , Researcher , Social Worker " P19 25 - 34 Mixed Race Researcher P20 25 - 34 Black or African American “Community Activist , Strategist , Designer , Facilitator , Educator , Researcher , Policy Advocate " P21 25 - 34 Asian “Community Activist , Organizer , De - signer , Facilitator , Developer , Educa - tor " P22 25 - 34 Black or African American “Organizer , Designer , Facilitator , Edu - cator , Researcher , Artist " P23 25 - 34 White “Designer , Facilitator , Researcher , Artist " P24 25 - 34 Black or African American “Technologist , Researcher , Artist " P25 25 - 34 White Designer P32 45 - 54 Black or African American “Community Activist , Strategist , Technologist , Educator " P49 35 - 44 Asian “Community Activist , Organizer , Fa - cilitator , Educator , Artist " Table 2 : Participant Demographics design is positioned to address prominent societal issues” . Despite this , none of the community design practitioners that we interviewed agreed with the statement “I think design is accessible to the communities that need it most” . Similarly , respondents expressed a desire to work with academics in their work , and 18 of the community design practitioners surveyed strongly agreed with the statement “I think there could be more cohesion between academic researchers and community organizations” . All community design practitioners that were interviewed had heard of Afrofuturism in some form prior to the interview , and 23 were familiar with the term speculative design . 6 FINDINGS We discuss our findings in three main areas - Perceptions of the toolkit ; Anticipated use cases ; and Ways that this toolkit may support community design . 6 . 1 Perceptions of the Building Utopias Toolkit In this section we discuss community design practitioners’ perceptions of the Building Utopias toolkit specifically to address their needs and current gaps in existing design methods and tools . 6 . 1 . 1 PerceptionofAfrofuturistTenets . Thedefiningdeviationofourtoolkit from existing speculative design probes was its application of Afrofutur - ism . Tenets of joy , liberation and community building were identified as being central to Afrofuturist speculative design , expanding our previous integration of this framework as a design lens [ 8 ] . In our interviews we introduced these tenets as the foundation of our toolkit , asking if these were incorporated in their current practice , and their feelings on this application in the Building Utopias toolkit . A repeated sentiment among participants was the desire to incorporate joy in design , but lacking the resources or support to do so . When asked about leading design exercises on joy , libera - tion , or planning for a community’s future , P8 - a self - described de - colonial designer with an academic background - stated : “I would say that [ design exercises ] maybe didn’t necessarily focus on joy , that’s something that I really want to do specifi - cally in my laboratory , but that we focused on emotions and positive feelings , so in the context of a very specific space that we’re interior designing together . . . This is very practical be - cause it’s inside a non - profit , and it’s for the spaces . I will say that one of the challenges too , especially for me in this context of the organization and what I’ve been pushing for within my organization , is that nonprofits make a lot of false promises . ” Ingeneral , participantsfeltthatincorporatingAfrofuturisminourtoolkit also opened up the opportunity to discuss race in design . When asked about what came to mind when thinking of an Afrofuturist toolkit , P20 described it as a “powerful framework” stating : “Afrofuturism offers a specific color of light that then can illuminate what people thought was white critical white light . And that’s what that’s the metaphor that comes to mind that the possibilities that come to mind and trying to see try my my role as building out a toolkit or any other resources , specifically Afrofuturism , is to find every single type of indigo that goes through those prisms and have that represented in the tool . ” - P20 . Otherintervieweesmentionedthe useof Afrofuturismopened thedesign process to broad conversations on equitable futures , using a simple medium to facilitate discussions on complex issues . When asked about how she could see the toolkit being used , P4 described how : “I think it allows us to have some more of those nuanced con - versations , especially in a real context about class dynamics , about access to wealth , and what safety looks like for some of us , gender dynamics , accessibility and so forth . ” P13 also Radical Futures CHI ’22 , April 30 - May 6 , 2022 , New Orleans , Louisiana , United States noted the specific appeal of Afrofuturism , commenting that “I think that I have not seen enough explicitly Afro - futurist educational attempts , which is one reason why this is so cool to me . ” This sentiment was not exclusive to community design practitioners working within Black American communities , and designers described their interactions with various futurisms such as Chicanafuturism [ 46 ] , Indige - nous futurism [ 32 ] and Africanfuturism [ 44 ] . ( Historically , these futurisms have been inspired by Afrofuturism and thus have also adopted the principle of centering and reflecting on respective cultures , values , and aesthetics . ) While these futurisms broke to center their respective cultures , they shared an intention to transfer cultural understandings into visions for the future . For instance , when asked about familiarity and relevance of a design lens such as Afrofuturism , P12 mentioned that she was familiar through her interest in Indigenous futurisms and the similarities between the two : “a lot of what I’ve seen so far in Indigenous futurism looks at that , pictures people in sci - fi , like in space . Because native people aren’t represented in science fiction literature , and so [ our representation ] is like , well , almost thought of as being like extinct” . The Building Utopias toolkit’s centering of race also appeared to encour - age community design practitioners to bring other elements of identity into the conversation ( e . g . queerness , ability , or class ) and consider whether this toolkit could be adapted to have conversations incorporating intersectional identities . P14 , when commenting about the absence of class in the topics deck , mentioned that “I think about race , gender , class , you know it’s kind of like the Holy Trinity of political frameworks and [ there’s ] not a lot directly about that . ” When asked about what came to mind when thinking of an Afrofuturist toolkit , P6 also mentioned how “I’ve often seen it used within like a queer Black feminist lens” . Inversely , questions did arise of who the toolkit was made for , who could use the toolkit , and some community de - sign practitioners expressed a concern of how the toolkit would be received in non - Black spaces as well , and whether the toolkit was intended to be a resource in those spaces . P11 , for example , asked “Would you imagine mixed - race groups using this , would you imagine groups of all - white people using this , or would you feel like this has been targeted for black communities to be engaging ? ” Thoughoverallthelanguagewasviewedasaccessible , communitydesign practitioners that worked outside of Black communities within the United States did explain that they might adapt the toolkit or change the language to better suit the communities they served . For example P8 described how “So gentrification is something that is definitely happening in urban spaces in west Africa . But it’s not necessarily like a term that we would use a lot or that I see a lot of those communitiesusingtodescribethatprocess . Iprobablywouldn’t needtotranslateitthatmuch , eventhoughImightjustformore relevance to the context , but then people who are outside of the creative space and may not have as cosmopolitan exposures I would change the language for them . ” Age also played a role in language accessibility . P2 explained that “I think some of the terms that I think are a little bit more new age , so to speak , like ‘ableism’ , I don’t know , for our seniors is [ this ] a term that they would be familiar with and would [ they ] need somebody to explain [ it ] to them a little bit” . 6 . 1 . 2 Comparing Building Utopias to Existing Tools . After sharing the toolkit with community design practitioners , we also gathered feedback on how the toolkit we created compared to the tools and methods they were currently using to see whether it addressed the values they discussed . Many community design practitioners said it would be useful in the communities they worked with , and we found that many were interested in having a toolkit that could operate as a teaching resource to help facilitate conver - sations around identity in the design process and planning for the future . P17 described his impressions of the toolkit by saying : “I guess that my first impressions were like , ‘Oh , another card deck . ’ But then I was excited about the content , and a lot of it was like , ‘Yes , we need more of this in the world , ’ you know what I mean ? ” Others also echoed this sentiment about the abundance of toolkits , but the majority of participants described how the Building Utopias toolkit might be beneficial to their work . The Liberation deck in particular received much attention . For instance , P7 described : “I feel like just looking at a few prompts in the Liberation deck , I would use some of this for the researchers and the team to do internal reflection . As an accountability to a measure , to see where they’re at and what they’re seeing . ” Similarly , P2 also described a scenario using the cards : “I think one of the things that I would probably do with the liberation card specifically , is probably just have a free flow exercise or meeting where we would have these cards available , and people in this space could choose whatever card most resonated with them , and then . . . This is also probably very rootedinmymentalhealthbackground . . . Iprimarilyworkedin grouptherapy . So , choosingoneofthecardsthatmostresonated with them and having just a stream of consciousness reflection on that card in whatever way felt right to them . ” While the flexibility of the toolkit was noted as a positive attribute , this same feature may have lessened the sense of structure when being introduced to the toolkit . When considering the intentions of the toolkit towards encouraging speculation that is equity - driven , without explicitly stating it , this intention may not be immediately obvious depending on who is using the toolkit . As one community design practitioner described , “How does someone else define joy , and how can joy be issued by something that’s being designed for a different populace . . . depending on the group or demographic that I am working towards building something for , it’ll vary . ” Another question that arose as we explained our toolkit and its Afrofu - turist lens was one of how to speculate in the far future without dismissing the need to build solutions in the present . The potential issues in taking a future - oriented approach to speculation as opposed to focusing on things that could be actualized more immediately was mentioned in our interviews , and has also been discussed in previous literature [ 9 , 27 , 28 ] . Speculative design practice can meet resistance when done in communities that have a need for more immediate and realistic solutions , and thus see futuring through the Building Utopias toolkit as a form of escapism . P22 raised this concern about potential difficulties in getting others “on board” with the toolkit as a resource , saying that “people [ have an ] ’it’s not a game’ attitude about the work that they’re doing - the organizing they’re already doing , I think , [ that ] might make it ( use of the toolkit ) difficult . ” The same participant continued on to say , however , that “I think this stuff is very useful for visioning because I think people get really stuck in like what’s possible if we never break out of that” This was a sentiment mentioned by other community design practition - ers as they described the potential of imagination through the use of the Building Utopias toolkit . Ultimately , we found that among existing design methods and tools there is a need to consider realistic and grounded ap - proachestodesignfuturingandretainingthatbasisinthepresentwithintheBuildingUtopiastoolkitcouldhelpitserveasausefultoolforcommunitydesignpractitioners . 6 . 2 Anticipated Use Cases of the Building Utopias Toolkit During our interviews we asked community design practitioners about scenarios in which they could see the toolkit being used . Of the use - cases weheardof , thereweretwooverarchingthemes , whichwereuse casesonan individuallevelandusecaseswithinorganizations . Mostofintervieweesfelt CHI ’22 , April 30 - May 6 , 2022 , New Orleans , Louisiana , United States Bray , et al . that they could see this toolkit being used in the communities they worked in , particularly by community organizers or organizations . Community - oriented , nonprofit , and grassroots organizations were mentioned by the community design practitioners as potential places where this could be used . Interviewees mentioned that they could see the toolkit being used in workshops , or to facilitate conversations with community members to gain insight into their desires for the future . In corporate design , the toolkit was also described as potentially allowing designers in formal practice to rethink design and how it does or does not incorporate historically marginalized people . IntervieweesspoketohowtheBuildingUtopiastoolkitmightbeusedasa waytosupplementcurrentcommunityworkatvaryinglevelsofcommunity - based organizations . Community design practitioners reiterated the poten - tial of the toolkit to facilitate necessary conversations in community design , particularly near the start of projects . P14 , for instance , commented “I imagine that there are contexts in which there are city offi - cials interacting with citizens , both on small local government scales and also state and federal governments , that something like this could be a good way to introduce the very , very first steps of conversations . But I think that it’s a set of things that can be hard to talk about , especially if you’re new to talking about it , and so I think that this booklet and the new stack of cards provide language that people can respond to instead of responding to each other and probably the implicit bias and racism that a lot of us have they can respond to the cards , it becomes an easier way of hosting a hard conversation . ” Others agreed with this sentiment , broadly mentioning how the toolkit could be used by a wide variety of people , including industry designers and people within academic institutions . P17 , for instance , commented , “I mean obviously it’s sort of geared towards designers but I don’t think it would necessarily have to be community organizers and activists , maybe the next group is just anybody who sort of wants to see some sort of social change . ” P19 similarly commented that , “I could see it definitely , community orga - nizations , non - profits , academic institutions , industry , government . Honestly , I think that a lot of these things , there’s something for everyone here . ” Some participants even mentioned that they could see themselves using the toolkit in personal practice . One potential challenge , was that those who are completely unfamiliar with design might be intimidated or confused by how to get started with the toolkit : “So looking at it right now I feel like this would be something where I’d be like ’Oh , this would be cool’ if I needed to facilitate something and I knew what the thing was . I feel like if someone I know in [ the ] community were to find this , they would be overwhelmed by it” - P22 . This has great implications for the potential of the Building Utopias toolkit to better help designers engage with constructs of race and their own personal identity when considering historically marginalized groups in their work . While there is some capacity for evaluation , when considering when to use the toolkit , the speculation serves as a way to open conversations and guide the start of design ideation process as a frame of reference for values in the design process . This feedback helped us identify the need to define design stages and arrange the workbook in a way that frames examples for people using the toolkit , while incorporating language that is inviting for people who choose to use it . 6 . 3 Supporting Community Design The evaluation of this toolkit ultimately seeks to determine how to create tools that support community design practitioners and people seeking to use design to realize their visions for their own community . As such , we also documented the suggestions the community design practitioners offered as ways to support their use of the toolkit . Having guidance in the process of navigating the toolkit was one of the most frequent sentiments echoed throughout our interviews . P11 discusses this by saying , “ . . . if your goal is to make it so that people could , like , pick this up and adapt it , and adapt it into a lot of new content . I think it just needs a guide for how to do that . ” Our interviews provided context on how researchers might create specu - lative design tools that support independent creativity in community design while offering enough guidance to share the usefulness of design methods . Tools made available to community design practitioners must aid them in either establishing goals and context at the start of the exercise or guiding them in the process of solidifying these goals . In the case of our design decks , having the ability to move past the topics allows people to use the other cards to focus on design if needed . Having cards with plain - language definitions was helpful for setting context and making sure everyone has a shared understanding of issues to address . Additionally , for more com - plex topics , these brief concepts can serve as an introduction facilitating conversations that explore them in - depth . By adding prompts to the work - book and offering examples , participants would be able to gain a clearer understanding of potential uses without being limited by a strict procedure . When asking interviewees how they felt about the ways race was ad - dressed within the toolkit , we observed how incorporating race might bring in or deter communities from engaging with Afrofuturist speculation tools . When reviewing the toolkit , P11 addressed this with a question , saying ” [ . . . ] so I guess then my other question would be how directly do you want to address race in what follows from Afrofuturism so like , do you really like lead with Afrofuturism ? And I love the prompts about like , utopian and dystopian futures . But then it seems like , at least for me there’s a way that feels like race drops out of the conversation or , or Afrofuturism drops out of the conversation , so I guess I just wonder how much it should be there or not you know ? ” Conversely , P24 mentioned that “I think it is , it’s pretty open there’s no like assumption of any sort of universal black experience , which I think it can be nice , it’s nice . ” The option of being more explicit in incorporating Afrofuturism could potentially be viewed as an attempt to define Blackness or as alienating for other minoritized communities . However , creating tools that are too nonspecific in their engagement with race , could produce additional tools that don’t directly speak to race or serve Black and Brown communities . 7 DISCUSSION The goal of this study was to evaluate the usefulness of applying an Afro - futurist lens as an approach to design futuring . We discuss the perception of Afrofuturism as a lens in design work , and close by summarizing ways researchers can support equitable design in community design work . 7 . 1 Design Tools for Community Engagement Findings from our study raise questions of how to evaluate tools in the wild while diminishing the presence of design researchers as an attempt to miti - gate power dynamics . A key function of the Building Utopias is its potential as a tool to be used outside a formal research context while still leveraging the value of design concepts and methodology . These interviews demon - strate how the construction of tools that allow communities to generate their own activities can serve as a guiding resource for idea generation and documentation . As such , we are hopeful in the capability of such a toolkit as one that reduces the need for researcher facilitation and offers a flexibility of use that allows for greater community direction . We view this as a step towards power redistribution in research , by which researchers may still play a supportive role by providing written guidance of potential method approaches to using the toolkit or sharing grounding design knowledge without explicitly directing the way communities use the tools provided . Radical Futures CHI ’22 , April 30 - May 6 , 2022 , New Orleans , Louisiana , United States Another primary takeaway from this research was the value of this toolkit in guiding conversations within Black and Brown communities and betweennon - minoritygroupsandBlackandBrowncommunities . TheBuild - ing Utopias Topics deck , for instance , provides an opportunity to impart new ways of framing design and associated language by explicitly incorporating topics such as black joy , cultural bias or environmental racism . Such topics are foregrounded during future building to encourage design thinking that attends to the racialized implications and consequences of technology . We believe this foregrounding sets the stage for empathic designs bolstered by diversity in thought and a greater awareness of potential consequences of design . Additionally , the ability to generate collections of ideas , couples with steps towards actualization , can open meaningful exchanges and aid community organizing around shared values . Creating a medium for guid - ing these conversations may help build and strengthen community ties . As such , applying an Afrofuturist lens to community led engagements in Black communities derives value from approaching ideation with tenets of joy , liberation , and community building . When designing a toolkit for co - design activities , the feedback received from community design practitioners in our interview study also suggests that explicitly stating the goals of the cards would be a more effective approach than leaving them open to interpretation . While probes evade traditional data generation [ 21 ] , opening up a space to freely generate ideas requiresaleveloftrustintheprocessthatcanbesupportedbyclearlystatingwhenandwhythismaybenefitco - design processes . When community members are positioned as the experts and decision makers in the design process , clearly outlining the goals of the toolkit can help them determine how much of the toolkit they would like to engage with should they choose to use it . By doing so , the toolkit may aid in envisioning a path towards the end goals of these values . 7 . 2 Afrofuturist Probes and Identity These interviews also illuminate the potential of Afrofuturism as a tool to bridge identity gaps ; particularly when organizers / community design practitioners are seeking to engage community members with the intent to promote racial equity . While the Building Utopias toolkit was designed with Black and Brown communities as the target audience , these interviews illu - minated a secondary use of Afrofuturism and the Building Utopias toolkit to frame conversations on race , as well as the present and the future of Black communities with people who may not share this identity . Designers employing an Afrofuturist lens may also consider how we build a consensus on values that support Black and Brown futures while making space to encourage cross - cultural dialogue . A deliberate evocation of Afrofuturist principles may offer a lens to encourage such shifts in thinking . It is equally important to note that Afrofuturism is a genre that frequently incorpo - rates conversations of gender , class , sexuality and the ways these identities intersect with various facets of identity that exist within Blackness . As such , findings from our study indicate that incorporating these dimensions of identity in speculative design toolkits can enrich these tools and their outcomes 7 . 3 Considerations for Afrofuturist Speculation The community design practitioners we worked with noted the level of re - sponsibility that comes with engaging in design speculation . Radical future speculation without commitment actualizes criticisms that such thinking is not grounded or conducive to positive change . It additionally poses the threat of instilling further distrust when hopes are not met . Such engage - ments are heavily dependent on the commitment of those involved to ensure efforts towards actualization are sustainable in the long term . Additionally , this underscores the importance supporting the efforts of community design practitioners who have already demonstrated their capacity to do so . It is therefore important that toolkits have the potential to be used exclusively by communities and adapted to suit their goals . While Building Utopias uses the concepts of utopias and dystopias to frame how people might envision futures that do and do not support their communities , we reiterate the importance of resisting the notion of an end goal as one set vision of an uncomplicated utopian future . Many Afrofuturist works have reimagined or worked outside the binary of utopian / dystopian concepts . Drawing from a more popular Afrofuturist work , Octavia E But - ler’s Parable of the Sower [ 12 ] juxtaposes the social and environmental neglects that realized a post - apocalyptic United States with the possibility of sustainable , communities and aspirations for generativity through space travel . Incorporating Afrofuturism in design speculation is a rich oppor - tunity to resist homogeneity in speculation by centering voices not often included in traditional design processes . By prompting such speculation , the toolkit provides one means of examining the social impacts of design and embracing the range of speculative design when we do so . 7 . 4 An Agenda to Design for Black Liberation and Joy When design practitioners maximize the readily available creative resources and context - specific expertise of community members , it encourages design practices that align with community goals and encourage an autonomous design process that can outlast a researcher’s immediate involvement . As co - design methods are incorporated in HCI practice , researchers have un - derscored the value of stoking imagination in community collaboration and designing the future with communities . Speculative design approaches ideation from a future - oriented perspective , asking designers to examine the present and project what ideal futures could be [ 18 ] . This technique has been used to conceptualize healthcare technologies , privacy solutions and other present - day social issues , ones that are often daunting to grapple with in the present [ 3 , 53 , 65 ] . Whereas participatory and co - design processes are typically grounded in the present , speculative design extends these processes by emphasizing the importance of creating designs that are often situated in far or radically different futures [ 18 ] . By looking beyond the present to elicit ideas of what is possible , speculative design removes the barriers of present expectations . Gerber speaks to the provocative nature of speculative design in HCI , describing the intention of free idea gener - ation rather than immediate production [ 24 ] . Gerber’s work also calls for designers to “defend the act of imagining alternatives” , and the importance of imagination in envisioning radically different futures [ 24 ] . A radically dif - ferent future is a rational expectation when envisioning the future of Black and brown communities in the context of the United States . This is primarily because when the present context is still influenced by historical systems that shape present inequalities [ 33 , 36 ] , future thinking must be coupled with progress towards dismantling inequity to fully explore the possibility of potential futures . Prior researchers have highlighted the necessity for Black , liberatory spaces [ 47 ] and our interviews demonstrate how joy and imagination hold the potential to carry meaning both beyond and including small engagements . Marginalized groups ( e . g . Black , brown , people with low socioeconomic status ) are frequently constrained to the standards of the present , even in fictional settings [ 48 ] , which raises the question of whether engaging the speculative imagination can push beyond the present while remaining conscious of what is necessary to do so . HCI is so often grounded in stories of users , which provide the basis for empathizing with who a product is being built for and understanding how it might accommodate their context [ 56 ] . When this is the case , designers and researchers must remain cognizant of whose stories are gathered and where they come from . The Building Utopias toolkit acknowledges the resources communities possess within themselves that can address problems while also examining how we center constructs that make up our holistic being such as self - care , joy , rest , etc . This work highlights Afrofuturism as a genre with the capacity to actualize these values . Harnessing the capacities of visioning , liberatory CHI ’22 , April 30 - May 6 , 2022 , New Orleans , Louisiana , United States Bray , et al . work and community celebration openly resists systems and institutions that serve to limit the capacity of minoritized populations . As such , there is value in creating tools that bring these principles into spaces that are in pursuit of social change . 8 CONCLUSION This work details our findings from 27 interviews conducted with commu - nity design practitioners , who evaluated a toolkit that applies and Afrofu - turist lens to speculative design . Our analysis illustrates how this lens might be applied in speculative design , the strengths that are associated with such and approach , and considerations for engaging in speculation with histori - cally minoritized populations . It is our hope that this work demonstrates both an avenue for application and the value of Afrofuturist speculation as a medium for facilitating equitable design engagements . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by a Google Award for Inclusion Research . We thank the many community partners and design practitioners that provided feedback on this toolkit by participating in our research . REFERENCES [ 1 ] AIGA . 2019 . Design Census 2019 . AIGA . [ 2 ] Shaowen Bardzell . 2018 . Utopias of Participation : Feminism , Design , and the Futures . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction 25 , 1 ( Feb . 2018 ) , 6 : 1 – 6 : 24 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3127359 [ 3 ] KarlBaumann , BenjaminStokes , FrançoisBar , andBenCaldwell . 2017 . Infrastruc - turesof theImagination : CommunityDesign forSpeculativeUrban Technologies . In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Communities and Technolo - gies ( C & amp ; T ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 266 – 269 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3083671 . 3083700 [ 4 ] Anaëlle Beignon , Emeline Brulé , Jean - Baptiste Joatton , and Aurélien Tabard . 2020 . Tricky Design Probes : Triggering Reflection on Design Research Methods in Service Design . In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1647 – 1660 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3357236 . 3395572 [ 5 ] RuhaBenjamin . 2018 . BlackAfterLivesMatter . http : / / bostonreview . net / race / ruha - benjamin - black - afterlives - matter . [ 6 ] Erling Björgvinsson , Pelle Ehn , and Per - Anders Hillgren . 2010 . Participatory Design and " Democratizing Innovation " . In Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Par - ticipatory Design Conference ( PDC ’10 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 41 – 50 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1900441 . 1900448 [ 7 ] Susanne Bødker and Morten Kyng . 2018 . Participatory Design That Mat - ters & # x2014 ; Facing the Big Issues . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction 25 , 1 ( Feb . 2018 ) , 4 : 1 – 4 : 31 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3152421 [ 8 ] Kirsten Bray and Christina Harrington . 2021 . Speculative Blackness : Considering AfrofuturismintheCreationofInclusiveSpeculativeDesignProbes . In Designing Interactive Systems Conference 2021 ( DIS ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machin - ery , New York , NY , USA , 1793 – 1806 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3461778 . 3462002 [ 9 ] Andre Brock . 2020 . Black Technoculture and / as Afrofuturism . Extrapolation 61 , 1 - 2 ( March 2020 ) , 7 – 29 . [ 10 ] Andrienne - Marie Brown . 2017 . Emergent Strategy . AK Press , Chico , CA . [ 11 ] Andrienne - Marie Brown . 2019 . Pleasure Activism . AK Press , Chico , CA . [ 12 ] Octavia E . Butler . 2017 . Parable of the Sower . Seven Stories Press , New York , NY . [ 13 ] Rachel Charlotte Smith , Heike Winschiers - Theophilus , Asnath Paula Kambunga , and Sarala Krishnamurthy . 2020 . Decolonizing Participatory Design : Memory Making in Namibia . In Proceedings of the 16th Participatory Design Conference 2020 - Participation ( s ) Otherwise - Volume 1 ( PDC ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , NewYork , NY , USA , 96 – 106 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3385010 . 3385021 [ 14 ] Sasha Costanza - Chock . 2020 . Design Justice : Community - Led Practices to Build the Worlds We Need . The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . [ 15 ] Luiza Prado de O . Martins and Pedro J . S . Vieira de Oliveira . 2016 . Breaking the Cycle of Macondo : Design and Decolonial Futures . XRDS : Crossroads , The ACM Magazine for Students 22 , 4 ( June 2016 ) , 28 – 32 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2930880 [ 16 ] Mark Dery . 1994 . Black to the Future : Interviews with Samuel R . Delany , Greg Tate , and Tricia Rose . Duke University Press , Durham , NC , Chapter 10 , 179 – 222 . [ 17 ] Audrey Desjardins , Cayla Key , Heidi R . Biggs , and Kelsey Aschenbeck . 2019 . Be - spoke Booklets : A Method for Situated Co - Speculation . In Proceedings of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ’19 ) . Association for Comput - ing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 697 – 709 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3322276 . 3322311 [ 18 ] Anthony Dunne and Fiona Raby . 2013 . Speculative Everything : Design , Fiction , and Social Dreaming . The MIT Press , Cambridge , Massachusetts ; London . [ 19 ] Sheena Erete , Yolanda A . Rankin , and Jakita O . Thomas . 2021 . I Can’t Breathe : Reflections from Black Women in CSCW and HCI . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 4 , CSCW3 ( Jan . 2021 ) , 234 : 1 – 234 : 23 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3432933 [ 20 ] Michelle Farr . 2018 . Power Dynamics and Collaborative Mechanisms in Co - Production and Co - Design Processes . Critical Social Policy 38 , 4 ( Nov . 2018 ) , 623 – 644 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0261018317747444 [ 21 ] Bill Gaver , Tony Dunne , and Elena Pacenti . 1999 . Design : Cultural Probes . Inter - actions 6 , 1 ( Jan . 1999 ) , 21 – 29 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 291224 . 291235 [ 22 ] William Gaver . 2011 . Making Spaces : How Design Workbooks Work . In Proceed - ingsoftheSIGCHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems ( Vancouver , BC , Canada ) ( CHI ’11 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1551 – 1560 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979169 [ 23 ] William W . Gaver , Andrew Boucher , Sarah Pennington , and Brendan Walker . 2004 . Cultural Probes and the Value of Uncertainty . Interactions 11 , 5 ( Sept . 2004 ) , 53 – 56 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1015530 . 1015555 [ 24 ] Alix Gerber . 2018 . Participatory Speculation : Futures of Public Safety . In Proceed - ings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Situated Actions , Workshops and Tutorial - Volume 2 ( Hasselt and Genk , Belgium ) ( PDC ’18 ) . As - sociation for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 23 , 4 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3210604 . 3210640 [ 25 ] Connor Graham and Mark Rouncefield . 2008 . Probes and Participation . In Pro - ceedings of the Tenth Anniversary Conference on Participatory Design 2008 ( PDC ’08 ) . Indiana University , USA , 194 – 197 . [ 26 ] DavidHankerson , AndreaR . Marshall , JenniferBooker , HoudaElMimouni , Imani Walker , and Jennifer A . Rode . 2016 . Does Technology Have Race ? . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHIEA’16 ) . AssociationforComputingMachinery , NewYork , NY , USA , 473 – 486 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2851581 . 2892578 [ 27 ] Christina Harrington and Tawanna R Dillahunt . 2021 . Eliciting Tech Futures Among Black Young Adults : A Case Study of Remote Speculative Co - Design . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 15 . [ 28 ] Christina Harrington , Sheena Erete , and Anne Marie Piper . 2019 . Deconstructing Community - Based Collaborative Design : Towards More Equitable Participatory Design Engagements . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 3 , 216 ( Nov . 2019 ) , 1 – 25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359318 [ 29 ] Christina Harrington , Shamika Klassen , and Yolanda Rankin . 2022 . “All that You Touch , You Change ? : Expanding the Canon of Speculative Design Towards Black Futuring” . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’22 ) , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , 1 – 10 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3502118 [ 30 ] Marie Lena Heidingsfelder , Florian Schütz , and Simone Kaiser . 2016 . Expanding Participation Participatory Design in Technology Agenda - Setting . In Proceedings of the 14th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Interactive Exhibitions , Workshops - Volume 2 ( PDC ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 25 – 28 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2948076 . 2948087 [ 31 ] Alexis Hope , Catherine D’Ignazio , Josephine Hoy , Rebecca Michelson , Jennifer Roberts , KateKrontiris , andEthanZuckerman . 2019 . HackathonsasParticipatory Design : Iterating Feminist Utopias . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300291 [ 32 ] Lynette James . 2016 . Children of Change , Not Doom . Extrapolation 57 , 1 - 2 ( Jan . 2016 ) , 151 – 177 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3828 / extr . 2016 . 9 [ 33 ] PhD Jennifer L . Eberhardt . 2019 . Biased : Uncovering the Hidden Prejudice That Shapes What We See , Think , and Do . Penguin Books , New York . [ 34 ] HelenaKarastiandKarenS . Baker . 2008 . CommunityDesign : GrowingOne’sOwn Information Infrastructure . In Proceedings of the Tenth Anniversary Conference on Participatory Design 2008 ( PDC ’08 ) . Indiana University , USA , 217 – 220 . [ 35 ] Finn Kensing and Joan Greenbaum . 2013 . Heritage : Having a Say . Routledge , United Kingdom , Chapter 2 , 20 – 36 . [ 36 ] Keith Kirkpatrick . 2016 . Battling Algorithmic Bias : How Do We Ensure Al - gorithms Treat Us Fairly ? Commun . ACM 59 , 10 ( Sept . 2016 ) , 16 – 17 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2983270 [ 37 ] Helena Kraff . 2018 . A Tool for Reflection—on Participant Diversity and Change - ability over Time in Participatory Design . CoDesign 14 , 1 ( Jan . 2018 ) , 60 – 73 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710882 . 2018 . 1424204 [ 38 ] María Laura Ramírez Galleguillos and Aykut Coşkun . 2020 . How Do I Matter ? A Review of the Participatory Design Practice with Less Privileged Participants . In Proceedings of the 16th Participatory Design Conference 2020 - Participation ( s ) Otherwise - Volume 1 ( PDC ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 137 – 147 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3385010 . 3385018 [ 39 ] Amanda Meng , Carl DiSalvo , and Ellen Zegura . 2019 . Collaborative Data Work Towards a Caring Democracy . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( Nov . 2019 ) , 42 : 1 – 42 : 23 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359144 [ 40 ] Larissa Vivian Nägele , Merja Ryöppy , and Danielle Wilde . 2018 . PDFi : Partici - patory Design Fiction with Vulnerable Users . In Proceedings of the 10th Nordic Radical Futures CHI ’22 , April 30 - May 6 , 2022 , New Orleans , Louisiana , United States Conference on Human - Computer Interaction ( NordiCHI ’18 ) . Association for Com - putingMachinery , NewYork , NY , USA , 819 – 831 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3240167 . 3240272 [ 41 ] Design Justice Network . 2016 . Design Justice Network . Design Justice Network . https : / / designjustice . org [ 42 ] Ziad Obermeyer , Brian Powers , Christine Vogeli , and Sendhil Mullainathan . 2019 . Dissecting Racial Bias in an Algorithm Used to Manage the Health of Populations . Science ( New York , N . Y . ) 366 , 6464 ( Oct . 2019 ) , 447 – 453 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . aax2342 [ 43 ] IhudiyaFindaOgbonnaya - Ogburu , AngelaD . R . Smith , AlexandraTo , andKentaro Toyama . 2020 . Critical Race Theory for HCI . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 16 . [ 44 ] Nnedi . Okorafor . 2019 . Africanfuturism Defined . http : / / nnedi . blogspot . com / 2019 / 10 / africanfuturism - defined . html . [ 45 ] Dorian Peters , Susan Hansen , Jenny McMullan , Theresa Ardler , Janet Mooney , andRafaelA . Calvo . 2018 . " ParticipationIsNotEnough " : TowardsIndigenous - Led Co - Design . In Proceedings of the 30th Australian Conference on Computer - Human Interaction ( OzCHI ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 97 – 101 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3292147 . 3292204 [ 46 ] Catherine S . Ramirez . 2008 . Afrofuturism / Chicanafuturism : Fictive Kin . Aztlan : A Journal of Chicano Studies 33 , 1 ( 2008 ) , 185 – 194 . [ 47 ] AkiraDrakeRodriguez . 2016 . RemakingBlackPoliticalSpacesforBlackLiberation . Metropolitics . http : / / www . metropolitiques . eu / Remaking - Black - Political - Spaces . html [ 48 ] Daniel M . Russell and Svetlana Yarosh . 2018 . Can We Look to Science Fiction for Innovation in HCI ? Interactions 25 , 2 ( Feb . 2018 ) , 36 – 40 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3178552 [ 49 ] SafiyaUmojaNoble . 2018 . AlgorithmsofOppression : HowSearchEnginesReinforce Racism . NYU Press , New York . [ 50 ] Elizabeth B . - N . Sanders and Pieter Jan Stappers . 2008 . Co - Creation and the New Landscapes of Design . CoDesign 4 , 1 ( March 2008 ) , 5 – 18 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710880701875068 [ 51 ] Elizabeth B . - N . Sanders and Pieter Jan Stappers . 2014 . Probes , Toolkits and Prototypes : Three Approaches to Making in Codesigning . CoDesign 10 , 1 ( Jan . 2014 ) , 5 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710882 . 2014 . 888183 [ 52 ] Sarah Rose Sharp . 2018 . Artist’s Billboard Declaring “There Are Black People in the Future” Taken Down by Landlord . http : / / hyperallergic . com / 436763 / alisha - wormsley - the - last - billboard - pittsburgh - there - are - black - people - in - the - future / . [ 53 ] Shenando Stals , Michael Smyth , and Oli Mival . 2019 . UrbanIxD : From Ethnog - raphy to Speculative Design Fictions for the Hybrid City . In Proceedings of the Halfway to the Future Symposium 2019 ( HTTF 2019 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 10 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3363384 . 3363486 [ 54 ] Christian Sturm , Alice Oh , Sebastian Linxen , Jose Abdelnour Nocera , Susan Dray , and Katharina Reinecke . 2015 . How WEIRD Is HCI ? Extending HCI Principles to Other Countries and Cultures . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Con - ference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’15 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 2425 – 2428 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702613 . 2702656 [ 55 ] LatanyaSweeney . 2013 . DiscriminationinOnlineAdDelivery : GoogleAds , Black Names and White Names , Racial Discrimination , and Click Advertising . Queue 11 , 3 ( March 2013 ) , 10 – 29 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2460276 . 2460278 [ 56 ] Theresa Jean Tanenbaum , Marcel Pufal , and Karen Tanenbaum . 2016 . The Limits of Our Imagination : Design Fiction as a Strategy for Engaging with Dystopian Futures . In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Computing within Limits ( LIMITS ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 9 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2926676 . 2926687 [ 57 ] Mamello Thinyane , Karthik Bhat , Lauri Goldkind , and Vikram Kamath Can - nanure . 2018 . Critical Participatory Design : Reflections on Engagement and Empowerment in a Case of a Community Based Organization . In Proceed - ings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference : Full Papers - Volume 1 ( PDC ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 10 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3210586 . 3210601 [ 58 ] Ebony Elizabeth Thomas . 2019 . Dark Fantastic , The : Race and the Imagination from Harry Potter to the Hunger Games . New York University Press , New York , NY . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 18574 / 9781479864195 [ 59 ] CameronTonkinwise . 2014 . HowWeIntendtoFuture : ReviewofAnthonyDunne and Fiona Raby , Speculative Everything : Design , Fiction , and Social Dreaming . Design Philosophy Papers 12 , 2 ( Dec . 2014 ) , 169 – 187 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2752 / 144871314X14159818597676 [ 60 ] Jasper Tran O’Leary , Sara Zewde , Jennifer Mankoff , and Daniela K . Rosner . 2019 . Who Gets to Future ? Race , Representation , and Design Methods in Africatown . In Proceedingsofthe2019CHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 13 . [ 61 ] SepehrVakil , MaxineMcKinneydeRoyston , Na’ilahSuadNasir , andBenKirshner . 2016 . Rethinking Race and Power in Design - Based Research : Reflections from the Field . Cognition and Instruction 34 , 3 ( July 2016 ) , 194 – 209 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 07370008 . 2016 . 1169817 [ 62 ] Greg Walsh . 2018 . Towards Equity and Equality in American Co - Design : A Case Study . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 434 – 440 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202185 . 3202768 [ 63 ] WoodrowWinchester . 2018 . Afrofuturism , Inclusion , andtheDesignImagination . Interactions 25 ( Feb . 2018 ) , 41 – 45 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3182655 [ 64 ] WoodrowWinchester . 2019 . EngagingTheBlackEthos : AfrofuturismasaDesign LensforInclusiveTechnologicalInnovation . JournalofFutureStudies 24 , 2 ( 2019 ) , 55 – 62 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 6531 / JFS . 201912 _ 24 ( 2 ) . 0007 [ 65 ] Richmond Y . Wong and Vera Khovanskaya . 2018 . Speculative Design in HCI : From Corporate Imaginations to Critical Orientations . In New Directions in Third WaveHuman - ComputerInteraction : Volume2 - Methodologies , MichaelFilimowicz and Veronika Tzankova ( Eds . ) . Springer International Publishing , Cham , 175 – 202 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 73374 - 6 _ 10 [ 66 ] Alisha B Wormsley . 2017 . There Are Black People in the Future . https : / / alishabwormsley . com / there - are - black - people - in - the - future .