A Spherical Self - adaptive Gripper with Shrinking of an Elastic Membrane Tianyi Zhu , Hailong Yang , Wenzeng Zhang * , Member , IEEE Dept . of Mechanical Engineering , Tsinghua University , Beijing 100084 , China wenzeng @ tsinghua . edu . cn Abstract — The traditional grippers with multiple fingers are able to grip a variety of objects . But the structure is complex , the control is complicated and the cost is high . A novel gripper , Spherical Self - Adaptive ( SSA ) Gripper was developed . The SSA Gripper is capable of gripping multiple objects self - adaptively . The SSA Gripper consists of a bowl part , an elastic membrane , water , a tendon and a two - segment aisle . In SSA Gripper , the motor pulls the tendon , and on the other end of the tendon (cid:28435) the elastic membrane which contains water is tightened and shrinks . In cooperation with the bowl part , some water enters aisles and the elastic membrane wraps the object self - adaptively . The water presses the object and there is a vacuum region between the elastic membrane and the object . Through the water pressure , atmospheric pressure and the friction between the elastic membrane and the object , the gripping process is achieved . The experiments show that the SSA Gripper can adapt to grip different shapes and sizes of objects in different directions automatically ; the SSA Gripper can grip multiple objects simultaneously ; simple structure , easy control and low cost lead to the potential for bulk productions and large - scale applications . Keywords—robotic gripper ; self - adaptation ; membrane ; fluid I . I NTRODUCTION Robotic grippers are important for the operation of robots . Robots use their hands to grip and manipulate objects . Most two - finger industrial grippers can grip objects . Their structures are simple and their costs are low . The grippers can grip objects with same shapes and sizes but they cannot grip the objects with different shapes and sizes . Improvement of the adaptability of grippers has become a prominent issue . Since the shapes and the sizes of objects are different , grippers are required to have a good self - adaptability to grip and manipulate universal objects . Self - adaptive grippers with universal ability mainly are divided into four following ways . A . Multi - fingered dexterous hands Multi - fingered dexterous hands are based on the principle of human hands . There are more joints and drivers in its fingers . In recent decades , a variety of dexterous hands have been developed . Dexterous robotic hands can control a plurality of joints to grip objects . High integration , complex program and large number of sensors are their main characteristics . For example , NASA developed Robonaut R2 gripper [ 1 ] , German Aerospace Center ( DLR ) and Harbin Institute of Technology ( HIT ) developed HIT - DLR II gripper [ 2 ] . The real - time control system of dexterous robotic hands is very complicated , and they are quite expensive . B . Multi - fingered underactuated grippers A self - adaptive underactuated gripper [ 3 ] was designed by Hirose in 1978 . It uses fewer motors to drive more joints , and it can automatically adapt objects of different shapes and sizes . Therefore , there is less requirement on sensing and control . Over the past decade many adaptive underactuated grippers have been developed . For example , Laval University [ 4 ] , Yale University [ 5 ] , and Tsinghua University [ 6 ] have developed their underactuated Robotic grippers . But the contacting area between objects and fingers are limited . The underactuated grippers are disable to adapt more directions ( multiple dimensions ) . The self - adaptability of underactuated grippers still are required to be further improved . C . Flexible - surface Robotic grippers Flexible - surface robotic grippers have flexible surfaces which can adapt to different objects . In 2010 , an elastic membrane filled with magneto - rheological fluid ( MRF ) was installed in the front of fingers of a two - finger gripper by Pettersson [ 7 ] , shown in Fig . 1a , 1b . The gripper adapts to the surface of the object through the flexible elastic membrane and the MRF inside . The MRF can fix the surface shape of the finger temporarily because the MRF can be transformed from liquid to solid by applying a magnetic field . So the self - adaptability of industrial two - finger grippers is improved . These kinds of grippers using flexible parts to adapt the shapes of objects . However , their main components are rigid . They can only achieve partial self - adaptive effects . D . Flexible grippers By 2015 , German Festo Company [ 8 ] uses an elastic membrane of a special shape like a cup , liquid , closed pneumatic components , piston , pump , closed pneumatic components and a driving mechanism to manufacture a self - adaptive gripper imitating lizard’s tongue , shown in Fig . 1c . It can grip objects with the help of the special - shaped membrane . The structure of the gripper is complicated and it is expensive to manufacture . In 2012 , Cornell University , the University of Chicago and iRobot Company developed a Universal Jamming ( UJ ) gripper [ 9 ] , shown in Fig . 2 . The UJ gripper uses a lot of coffee grains * This Research was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China ( No . 51575302 ) . 512 2016 International Conference on Advanced Robotics and Mechatronics ( ICARM ) 978 - 1 - 5090 - 3364 - 5 / 16 / $ 31 . 00 ©2016 IEEE ( or other granular material ) and the flexible balloon membrane to adapt the shapes of objects passively . After a pump sucking all air in the flexible balloon membrane , the object can be gripped due to the jamming hardening of coffee grains . ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) Fig . 1 . ( a , b ) A two - finger gripper [ 7 ] , ( c ) The gripper [ 8 ] of Festo Company . ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) 1 - base ; 2 - external collar ; 3 - balloon membrane ; 4 - coffee grains ; 5 - air filter ; 6 - vacuum line port ; 7 - high pressure port . Fig . 2 . The UJ gripper [ 9 ] . The Universal Jamming ( UJ ) gripper is spherical , similar to the hand of a well - known cartoon characters Doraemon . The gripper can grasp a variety of objects self - adaptively . Its structure is simple and it is easy to control . However , it still exists some shortages : 1 ) The gripper need a reaction force from objects to deform the balloon membrane ; 2 ) The amount of coffee grains influence the effect of grasping . 3 ) The gripper does not apply to the environment with large external pressure or rapidly change of temperature . 4 ) The gripper needs an air pump with high power , which means to be noisy and high energy consumption . It takes a long time to pump all the air so the gripping process is long . In 2014 , Okatani [ 10 ] developed a universal magneto - rheological fluid ( MRF ) robotic gripper ( MRα Gripper ) , shown in Fig . 3 . They put MRF into the universal gripper so that the gripper does not need a pump . Magneto - rheological fluid has a characteristic that it turns into solid under a strong enough magnetic field but turns into fluid under a weak enough magnetic field . The gripper can adapt objects of different shapes and sizes under small magnetic field and grip the object under strong magnetic field with the help of friction between the object and the elastic membrane . It avoided the work of high - power pump and does not need granular material . The gripper has the following disadvantages : 1 ) It cannot work in the environment with a strong magnetic field ; 2 ) Some sensors could not work well due to existing of a strong magnetic field ; 3 ) The MRα gripper cannot grip magnetic objects because they would affect the performance of the magnetic field . ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) Fig . 3 . The magneto - rheological fluid ( MRα ) gripper [ 10 ] . Traditional robotic grippers mentioned above are multi - fingered grippers , which are able to grip a variety of objects , but their structures are complex , their control systems are cumbersome and expensive . The special grippers without any fingers such as electromagnets , suction discs , etc . are quite limited in the grasping ranges . Robotic grippers with the grasping effect of self - adaptation can adapt objects of different shapes and sizes . There is a wide range of applications for self - adaptive grippers . Traditional self - adaptive underactuated grippers use complex mechanical structures to achieve multi - joints motion . Their self - adaptability is inadequate . Although the flexible - surface grippers can adapt objects of different shapes and sizes , but their self - adaptability are limited by the multiple rigid phalanges of fingers . The flexible robotic gripper ( or the soft gripper ) is an important research field at present and in near future . The flexible robotic gripper shows adaptability and multi - dimensional self - adaptive gripping features , but there are still a number of shortages mentioned above . II . A SPHERICAL SELF - ADAPTIVE ( SSA ) GRIPPER The paper presents a novel robotic gripper , called spherical self - adaptive ( SSA ) gripper , shown in Fig . 4 . The SSA Gripper can fit objects of different shapes and sizes automatically . The SSA Gripper can adapt objects in different directions and the gripping force is stable . Simple structure , easy control and low cost are prominent advantages of the SSA Gripper . ( a ) ( b ) Fig . 4 . The spherical self - adaptive ( SSA ) gripper . A . Structural Principle of the SSA Gripper The SSA Gripper , shown in Fig . 5 , includes a base , a motor , a transmission mechanism , a tendon , an elastic membrane and water ( or other fluid ) . The base includes a two - segment aisle and a bowl part . The two - segment aisle and the bowl part constitute a cavity structure . The elastic membrane 513 is a hollow structure made by deformable material ( such as balloon ) . The connection is described following . The motor is installed in the base . The output shaft of the motor connects the input shaft of the transmission mechanism . The output shaft of the transmission mechanism connects the upper end of the tendon . The lower end of the tendon connects the bottom of the elastic membrane . The elastic membrane contacts the inner surface of the bowl part . Water is sealed in the elastic membrane . This SSA Gripper is installed at the end of a robotic manipulator . (cid:20) (cid:21) (cid:22) (cid:23) (cid:25) (cid:24) (cid:26) (cid:20)(cid:19) (cid:20)(cid:20) (cid:20)(cid:21) (cid:28) (cid:27) 1 - base , 2 - bowl part , 3 - elastic membrane , 4 - water , 5 - tendon , 6 - hole , 7 , 8 - aisles , 9 - connection point , 10 - driving force , 11 - fall movement , 12 - object . Fig . 5 . Structural principle of the SSA Gripper . B . Working principle of the SSA Gripper The working principle of SSA Gripper , shown in Fig . 6 , is introduced as follows . 1 ) Firstly , the transmission mechanism , driven by the motor , pull up the tendon . The central bottom area of the elastic membrane which connects one end of the tendon will shrink inside . 2 ) Secondly , the SSA Gripper falling down due to the robotic manipulator will approach a target object for grasping and the surface of the elastic membrane contacts the object . 3 ) Thirdly , the transmission mechanism will pull up again the tendon . The elastic membrane will envelop the object and self - adapt its shapes under the cooperation of the bowl part . At the same time , the elastic membrane containing water will be partly pulled into the two - segment aisle . The bowl part will apply a force to the object according to the elastic membrane and the water inside , so that the friction between the elastic membrane and the object will increase . Moreover , there may be form a negative pressure area between the object and the elastic membrane . In the joint actions of the friction and the atmospheric pressure , the SSA Gripper grip object stable . Finally , the object leaving the desk due to the movement of the robot arm . The core gripping principle of the SSA Gripper is described as follows . 1 ) A hermetic space is formed between the elastic membrane and the object . When the transmission mechanism pulling up the tendon , the volume of the hermetic space will increase , so that its pressure will decrease . The pressure of the hermetic space turns to be negative comparing with the outside atmospheric pressure . The SSA Gripper grips the object stable under the effect of atmospheric pressure . Fig . 6 . The Grasping principle of the SSA Gripper . 2 ) The elastic membrane is partly pulled into the two - segment aisle which consists of first aisle of medium size and second aisle of small size . Because of the difference in size of aisles , there will form a multi - stage compression structure at the upper part of the elastic membrane . Thereby , it utilizes the friction force to grip the object . C . The advantages of the SSA Gripper The SSA Gripper has the following advantages : 1 ) The SSA Gripper uses the tendon to pull the central bottom area of the elastic membrane , which achieves an active deformation effect of the elastic membrane . 2 ) The two - segment aisle increase the force between the bowl part and the elastic membrane , thereby increasing the gripping force . 3 ) Water has a good fluidity , so that the elastic membrane can fit objects of different shapes and sizes under the effect of gravity . In the SSA Gripper , good fluidity of water increases the self - adaptability . 4 ) The SSA Gripper takes advantages of the hermetic space of negative pressure to assist gripping . III . P ARAMETER ANALYSIS OF THE SSA G RIPPER Assuming that the object is a ball in order to simplify the analysis , shown in Fig . 7 . The main parameters of the SSA Gripper are : 1 ) The radius R of the elastic membrane , 2 ) The inner diameter d of the two - segment aisle , 3 ) Fluid density ρ within the elastomeric membrane , 4 ) Tendon height h , 5 ) The mass m of the object , 6 ) Radius r of the grasping object , 7 ) Tendon drive force T , 8 ) Elastic coefficient of the elastic membrane q ( linear approximation ) , 9 ) The friction coefficient of the elastomeric membrane μ . There are some following equations under the consideration of the above parameters . To analyses the elastic membrane and object . The lower part of the area of the elastic membrane changed from S 1 to S 3 , the upper part of the area of the elastic membrane changed from S 2 to S 4 , considering the balance of the integral static forces , one can obtain : (cid:2) 3 3 1 4 2 4 / 3 ( ) ( ) T R g mg q S S q S S F (cid:3) (cid:4) (cid:5) (cid:6) (cid:6) (cid:7) (cid:6) (cid:7) (cid:6) (cid:20) (cid:2) (cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:2) 514 d R d 1 ( a ) h r 0 T F 1 mg f mg F 2 ( b ) Fig . 7 . The parameter analysis of the SSA Gripper . To analysis the pressure from the bowl part and the pressure inside the elastic balloon membrane : (cid:2) 2 4 F p ds R p (cid:5) (cid:5) (cid:11) (cid:20) (cid:90) (cid:90) (cid:2) (cid:8)(cid:12)(cid:10)(cid:2) To analysis the force balance of the object : (cid:2) mg f (cid:5) (cid:2) (cid:8)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:2) To analysis the pressure F 2 from the elastic membrane to the object and the friction f ( simplified to uniform force ) : (cid:2) 2 2 ' 4 F p ds r p (cid:5) (cid:5) (cid:11) (cid:90) (cid:90) (cid:2) (cid:8)(cid:14)(cid:10)(cid:2) (cid:2) 2 ' 4 f p ds r p (cid:15) (cid:15) (cid:5) (cid:5) (cid:11) (cid:90) (cid:90) (cid:2) (cid:8)(cid:16)(cid:10)(cid:2) According to the volume of water , analyzing the change amount in the area of the elastic membrane : (cid:2) 2 3 3 2 2 2 0 0 1 3 ( ) 3 4 2 12 4 8 d d d d r h h r d h (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:5) (cid:7) (cid:6) (cid:17) (cid:5) (cid:7) (cid:2) (cid:8)(cid:18)(cid:10)(cid:2) (cid:2) 2 1 / 4 S d (cid:3) (cid:5) (cid:2) (cid:8)(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:2) (cid:2) 2 2 0 S r (cid:3) (cid:5) (cid:2) (cid:8)(cid:20)(cid:10)(cid:2) (cid:2) 2 3 ( ) 2 2 d d S d h dh (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:5) (cid:7) (cid:6) (cid:5) (cid:2) (cid:8)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:2) (cid:2) 2 2 2 2 4 0 0 0 0 1 2 2 S r h r r r h (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:5) (cid:6) (cid:22) (cid:5) (cid:6) (cid:2) (cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:23)(cid:10)(cid:2) Taking Eq . ( 2 ) and Eq . ( 10 ) into Eq . ( 1 ) : (cid:2) 2 3 2 3 3 3 2 2 2 2 4 1 ( ) + 3 4 3 3 3 ( ) ( ) 4 8 4 8 4 8 mgR T R g mg q d h d r d d d q d h d d h h h (cid:3) (cid:4) (cid:3) (cid:15) (cid:3) (cid:5) (cid:6) (cid:6) (cid:7) (cid:6) (cid:24) (cid:25) (cid:7) (cid:22) (cid:6) (cid:7) (cid:7) (cid:6) (cid:26) (cid:27) (cid:26) (cid:27) (cid:28) (cid:29) (cid:2) (cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:2) IV . E XPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS OF THE SSA G RIPPER The grasping experiments of the SSA Gripper are shown in Fig . 8 . Experimental results show that the SSA Gripper can automatically adapt objects of different shapes and sizes and it can fit their shapes well . The SSA Gripper can grasp objects in multiple directions so that it achieves the multi - dimensional self - adaptive effect . In order to research the relationship between the gripping forces and the sizes of objects , this paper uses 3D printer to produce a series sizes of cylindrical objects for grasping experiments . The sizes of cylinders , shown in Fig . 9 , are ( in mm ) : ϕ32 , ϕ30 , ϕ28 , ϕ26 , ϕ24 , ϕ22 , ϕ20 . The diameter of the elastic membrane is 71 . 31 mm , and its thickness is 0 . 255 mm . Fig . 8 . The grasping experiments of the SSA Gripper . Fig . 9 . The objects for tension measuring of the SSA Gripper . After gripping the objects for measuring , an electronic tautness meter was used to measure the gripping forces . The experimental results are shown in Fig . 10 . Fig . 10 . The relationship between gripping forces and the sizes of objects . 515 As Fig . 10 shows , when the diameter of the object is too small , the elastic membrane cannot provide enough gripping forces because of the small contact area . Conversely , when the object is too large , the deformation of the elastic membrane is insufficient so that the gripping force is low . The experimental results show that when the object diameter is 39 % of the elastic membrane diameter , the gripping force will be maximum . In order to study the fault tolerance of SSA Gripper , this paper studies the relationships between the offset distances and the gripping success rate . Each object grips 40 times , the experimental results are shown in Fig . 11 . Fig . 11 . The relationship between deviate distance and the success rate . As shown in Fig . 11 , when the offset distance between 20 mm to 27 mm , the gripping success rate dramatically declines . In order to ensure the success rate of gripping , the offset distance must less than 42 % of the radius of the elastic membrane . This data is higher than the traditional gripper . To study the relationship between the mass of the object and the driving force pulling up the tendon , this paper selected diameter ϕ22 mm lightweight 3D printing object , and hanging different masses in weight below it . After the SSA Gripper has gripped this object , a tension sensor will be used to measure the driving forces . Fig . 12 . The relation between driving forces and object weights . The relationship between driving forces and the object weight is not a simple linear function shown in Fig . 12 , which is due to the hole . When the driving forces is low , the elastic membrane will not enter the hole , but when the driving forces are high , the elastic membrane will enter the upper second aisle through the hole . Therefore , the driving forces will increase . The driving forces are about 2 . 5 times of the gripping force . According to the research of the UJ Gripper ( developed by Cornell University ) , the gripping forces are depending on the amount of infill particles , guessing the water filled spherical elastic membrane will influence the gripping forces . This paper uses an experiment to find out the relationship between water volume , object diameter and gripping forces , the experimental results are shown in Fig . 13 . Fig . 13 . The relationship between diameter , volume and gripping forces . As shown in Fig . 13 , when the object diameter is over 33 % of the diameter of the elastic membrane , to a certain extent , the smaller the volume of water is , the greater the gripping forces are . While the object diameter is less than 33 % of the diameter of the elastic membrane , the relationship between the volume of water and the gripping forces are like a trend downward opening parabola , in a suitable volume of water and there will be a maximum of gripping forces . V . C ONCLUSIONS This paper developed a novel robotic gripper , called the SSA Gripper . The SSA Gripper achieves multi - dimensional self - adaptive effects by one motor , water , an elastic balloon membrane and a tendon . Experimental results show that the SSA Gripper can automatically adapt objects of different shapes and sizes . The SSA Gripper fits objects well using water adaptability . The SSA Gripper is able to grip object in multiple directions , which obtained multi - dimensional self - adaptive effect . The SSA Gripper not only can grip larger object like a sucker , but also can grip smaller object according to the friction . The experimental results show that the amount of water inside the elastic membrane , offset distance , driving force and the size of object will influence the gripping effect of the SSA Gripper . Analysis of the experimental data can further optimize the SSA Gripper . Simple structure , easy 516 control and low cost lead to the potential for bulk productions and large - scale applications of the SSA Gripper . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] C . Lovchik , and M . A . Diftler , " The robonaut hand : A dexterous robot hand for space . " pp . 907 - 912 , 1999 . [ 2 ] H . Liu , P . Meusel , N . Seitz , B . Willberg , G . Hirzinger , M . Jin , Y . Liu , R . Wei , and Z . Xie , “The modular multisensory DLR - HIT - Hand , ” Mechanism and Machine Theory , vol . 42 , no . 5 , pp . 612 - 625 , 2007 . [ 3 ] S . Hirose , and Y . Umetani , “The development of soft gripper for the versatile robot hand , ” Mechanism and machine theory , vol . 13 , no . 3 , pp . 351 - 359 , 1978 . [ 4 ] L . Birglen , and C . M . Gosselin , “Kinetostatic analysis of underactuated fingers , ” IEEE Transactions on Robotics and Automation , vol . 20 , no . 2 , pp . 211 - 221 , 2004 . [ 5 ] A . M . Dollar , and R . D . Howe , “Towards grasping in unstructured environments : Grasper compliance and configuration optimization , ” Advanced Robotics , vol . 19 , no . 5 , pp . 523 - 543 , 2005 . [ 6 ] G . Li , B . Li , J . Sun , W . Zhang , Z . Sun , and Q . Chen , “Development of a directly self - adaptive robot hand with pulley - belt mechanism , ” International Journal of Precision Engineering and Manufacturing , vol . 14 , no . 8 , pp . 1361 - 1368 , 2013 . [ 7 ] A . Pettersson , S . Davis , J . Gray , T . Dodd , and T . Ohlsson , “Design of a magnetorheological robot gripper for handling of delicate food products with varying shapes , ” Journal of Food Engineering , vol . 98 , no . 3 , pp . 332 - 338 , 2010 . [ 8 ] Festo Company . http : / / v . youku . com / v _ show / id _ XOTMwMTI2N - DU2 . html ? from = s1 . 8 - 1 - 1 . 2 , 2016 . [ 9 ] J . R . Amend , E . Brown , N . Rodenberg , H . M . Jaeger , and H . Lipson , “A positive pressure universal gripper based on the jamming of granular material , ” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol . 28 , no . 2 , pp . 341 - 350 , 2012 . [ 10 ] Y . Okatani , T . Nishida , and K . Tadakuma , " Development of universal robot gripper using MRα fluid . " pp . 231 - 235 , 2014 . [ 11 ] S . Jacobsen , E . Iversen , D . Knutti , R . Johnson , and K . Biggers , " Design of the Utah / MIT dextrous hand . " pp . 1520 - 1532 , 1986 . [ 12 ] M . T . Mason , and J . K . Salisbury Jr , “Robot hands and the mechanics of manipulation , ” 1985 . [ 13 ] P . Tuffield , and H . Elias , “The shadow robot mimics human actions , ” Industrial Robot : An International Journal , vol . 30 , no . 1 , pp . 56 - 60 , 2003 . [ 14 ] B . S . Armstrong , J . A . Gutierrez , B . A . Wade , and R . Joseph , “Stability of phase - based gain modulation with designer - chosen switch functions , ” The International Journal of Robotics Research , vol . 25 , no . 8 , pp . 781 - 796 , 2006 . [ 15 ] C . M . Gosselin , and T . Laliberte , " Underactuated mechanical finger with return actuation , " U . S . Patent No . 5 , 762 , 390 . 9 Jun . 1998 . 517