Envisioning the ( In ) Visibility of Discreet and Wearable AAC Devices Humphrey Curtis Department of Informatics King’s College London London , UK humphrey . curtis @ kcl . ac . uk Zihao You Department of Informatics King’s College London London , UK zihao . you @ kcl . ac . uk William Deary Department of Informatics King’s College London London , UK william . deary @ kcl . ac . uk Miruna - Ioana Tudoreanu Department of Informatics King’s College London London , UK miruna - ioana . tudoreanu @ kcl . ac . uk Timothy Neate Department of Informatics King’s College London London , UK timothy . neate @ kcl . ac . uk ABSTRACT High - tech augmentative and alternative communication ( AAC ) de - vices can offer vital communication support for those with complex communication needs ( CCNs ) . Unfortunately , these devices are rarely adopted . Abandonment has been linked to many factors – commonly , stigma resulting from the visibility of the device and its intrusion into other essential modes of communication like body language . However , visible AAC is strategically useful for setting conversational expectations . In this work , we explore how we might envision AAC to address these tensions directly . We con - duct user - centred design activities to build three high - fidelity AAC prototypes with different communities with CCNs , specialists and stakeholders . The prototypes demonstrate different form factors , visibility and modes of input / output . Subsequently , we conduct two qualitative focus groups using convergent and divergent co - design methods with people with the language impairment aphasia – sup - porting ideation of seven discreet and wearable low - fidelity AAC prototypes and critique of the three high - fidelity prototypes . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Accessibility technologies . KEYWORDS AAC , Alternative and Augmentative Communication , Accessibility , Discreet and Wearable Devices , Focus Groups ACM Reference Format : Humphrey Curtis , Zihao You , William Deary , Miruna - Ioana Tudoreanu , andTimothyNeate . 2023 . Envisioningthe ( In ) VisibilityofDiscreetandWear - able AAC Devices . In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Fac - tors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’23 ) , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany . ACM , NewYork , NY , USA , 19pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3544548 . 3580936 Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , topostonserversortoredistributetolists , requirespriorspecificpermission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany © 2023 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9421 - 5 / 23 / 04 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3544548 . 3580936 1 INTRODUCTION With an ageing Western population and increased incidence of some disabilities – there are greater numbers of individuals worldwide who live with complex communication needs ( CCNs ) [ 37 , 38 ] . CCNs can be onset from a wide range of developmental , acquired and de - generative conditions including populations that are deaf or hard of hearing ( DHH ) , have autism spectrum disorder ( ASD ) , intellectual developmental disabilities ( IDD ) , motor impairments , other cogni - tive impairments such as dementia and language impairments such as aphasia . People living with CCNs are at a significantly greater risk of employment challenges [ 63 ] , reduced education access [ 17 ] , social isolation [ 46 ] , emotional distress [ 12 ] and depression [ 2 ] . Ad - ditionally , people with CCNs could face barriers to long - term speech and language therapy as global health systems face mounting pres - sure and unrelenting service demands [ 18 , 30 , 45 , 81 ] . Augmentative and alternative communication ( AAC ) encapsulates a broad set of strategies , techniques , and tools that support individuals with CCNs in expressing thoughts , desires , feelings , and ideas 1 [ 29 , 48 ] . Re - search has even found that people with CCNs can effectively use high - tech AAC to support their communication and live more in - dependently [ 35 , 72 ] . Yet overall , adoption of AAC still remains low amongst many communities with CCNs [ 71 , 76 , 82 ] . Subse - quent investigations have established complications concerning high - tech AAC interventions – culminating in frequent short - term and long - term abandonment [ 55 , 76 ] . Some of these core reasons include : the inability of high - tech AAC devices to support real - time communication in a timely manner [ 53 ] , devices being unreliable in diverse settings [ 32 ] , hard to program [ 6 ] and inconsiderate of cultural factors [ 36 ] . In particular , AAC devices are typically de - signed with large awkward form factors [ 6 , 32 , 65 ] and face limited social acceptance due to stigmas [ 47 , 49 , 50 , 56 ] . Against this context , over the last two decades , technologies which afford discreetness , such as wearables , have grown in com - mercial prominence as consumers increasingly adopt and integrate them into their everyday lives [ 33 ] . There is a nascent area of research exploring discreet and wearable technologies to assist communities with disabilities and CCNs . Three recent examples 1 For further information , we have previously systematically reviewed high - tech aided AACdevicessuchasspeechgeneratingdevices ( SGDs ) orvoiceoutputcommunication aids ( VOCAs ) [ 14 ] . CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Curtis et al . Build CONVERGENT Focus group 2 Tangible design languages Evaluation of prototypes : Prompt Me Out , My Speech OS and STT Badge USER - CENTERED DESIGN CYCLES Research Design STT Badge COMPLEMENTARY FOCUS GROUPS Build Research Design My Speech OS Build Research Design Prompt Me Out PROBLEM SPACE Start Results DIVERGENT Focus group 1 Video prompts Low - fidelity prototyping Figure 1 : Research chronology from start to results : initial user - centered design cycles in Section 3 for the three high - fidelity prototypes then Section 4’s complementary divergent and convergent focus groups with people with aphasia . include : the successful deployment of a smartwatch app to support sound awareness for DHH users [ 34 ] , enhanced non - verbal com - munication through peripheral expressive robotic objects [ 70 ] and a head - worn display enabling glanceable vocabulary support for people living with aphasia [ 82 ] . Yet critically , this previous research has not directly considered the nuanced challenge of visibility – the social perceptions of the assistive technology and its subsequent ramifications for supporting communication interactions within different public contexts [ 19 , 24 , 75 ] . In this work , we investigate the present challenges of visibility in everyday communication . We envision discreet and wearable AAC technologies , which af - ford varying levels of visibility with people living with CCNs , and aim to understand their acceptability . We begin through three ex - ploratory discreet and wearable high - fidelity AAC prototypes built with user - centred design techniques – that traverse different form factors , areas of placement on / around the body and input / output modalities – thereby affording different amounts of visibility . We present an ‘earable’ [ 62 ] technology – Prompt Me Out , which dis - creetly prompts users pre - prepared dialogues directly to the ear , a smartwatch AAC – My Speech OS , which enables symbolic com - munication from a smartwatch , and a badge technology – STT Badge , which supports live transcription of face - to - face dialogue on a device not worn by the intended AAC user . Following this de - velopment process , we held two complementary focus groups with people living with aphasia to understand their feasibility , and more completely consider the opportunities and challenges for discreet and wearable AAC . From the complementary focus groups , we report communica - tion challenges , subsequent ideation through divergent discussion with video prompts , low - fidelity prototyping and participants’ con - vergent evaluation of the three high - fidelity AAC prototypes . We discuss a range of users’ perspectives and ideas concerning dis - creet and wearable AAC technology – especially the significance of control over AAC visibility dependent on context and communi - cation partner . An outline of the research chronology is illustrated in Figure 1 and cumulatively this work makes three contributions : ( 1 ) Proposal of three high - fidelity discreet and wearable AAC prototypes , designed with communities which afford dif - ferent levels of ( in ) visibility [ 19 ] . These were designed in collaboration with communities with CCNs , specialists and stakeholders – specifically , speech and language therapists ( SLTs ) for people living with aphasia , specialists from a Cen - tre for children with IDD and ASD and members of the DHH community . ( 2 ) Findings from two complementary focus groups with people with aphasia and SLTs on discreet and wearable AAC . Focus group one utilised divergent co - design methods . In contrast , focus group two favoured convergent co - design methods . Results include qualitative thematic data and low - fidelity dis - creet and wearable AAC prototypes that let the user control their ( in ) visibility . ( 3 ) Guidance regarding the ( in ) visibility of discreet and wear - able AAC devices and an evaluation of the methods and participatory design techniques used within this research . 2 RELATED WORK 2 . 1 Wearable and Discreet Assistive Technologies Weiser’s conception of ubiquitous , discreet and wearable forms of computing enabling seamless and discreet human - computer in - teractions presents a novel conception of future technologies and applications [ 78 , 79 ] . However , as contemporary computers evolve Envisioning the ( In ) Visibility of Discreet and Wearable AAC Devices CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany towards this paradigm it is essential to support accessibility – there - fore communities with disabilities and CCNs must be at the fore - front of the development of these technologies [ 16 , 23 , 64 ] . In light of this , we strongly advocate Bennett et al . ’s interdependence frame of assistive technology – meaning all collectively interact with the assistive technology – helping mitigate the systemic marginalisa - tion of people with disabilities [ 4 , 64 ] . Adding to this , if the assistive technology itself is discreet or even wearable – this can offer the ben - efit of supporting disabilities such as CCNs unobtrusively [ 19 ] . As Bennett et al . note , very visible assistive devices can often portray users as vulnerable or incapable leading to awkward social interac - tions and minimal use – even if the device grants the user greater autonomy and supports their communication [ 4 ] . Furthermore , Parette et al . have found that visible assistive technology usage can potentially perpetuate stigma and unwanted attention – forcing people with disabilities to experience social isolation and marginal - isation [ 43 , 56 ] . Indeed , this research into the social perceptions of assistive technology is especially significant , if the technology is AAC and deployed to improve access to face - to - face forms of human communication 2 . However , it is essential to caveat with Faucett et al . ’s argument of highly visible assistive technology adding credi - bility and supporting accessibility – for example , visible AAC can serve as a social indicator that a person could need extra support and communication assistance [ 19 ] . Indeed , people with disabilities can face day - to - day disbelief , minimisation , denial and illegitimacy – especially if the disability is not outwardly visible [ 19 , 67 , 80 ] . Therefore , it is significant to enable the end user to have control over the visibility of their assistive technology dependent on cir - cumstance or setting [ 19 ] . Previous research has experimented with the form factor of AAC and re - conceptualised AAC as a wearable , discreet and less visible assistive technology – developing successful and effective interven - tions for different communities with CCNs . For instance , Voss et al . devised a Google Glass application , which discreetly delivers real - time social cues to the wearer – the AAC is designed to sup - port the communication of children with autism spectrum disorder ( ASD ) [ 77 ] . From minimally visible hardware , the child with ASD receives real - time social cues and can learn to recognise facial ex - pressions – improving their overall ability to communicate [ 77 ] . A similar high - tech AAC application was developed by Williams et al . on Google Glass to provide real - time conversational vocabulary prompts for people living with aphasia [ 82 ] . In a different form factor but similar vein of thinking , Schlosser et al . utilised discreet and wearable smartwatch technology ( i . e . , an Apple Watch ) to pro - vide just - in - time supports for children with ASD and intellectual disabilities ( ID ) – enabling discreet , naturalistic and unobtrusive communication support amongst their peers . Whilst for a different community , Fleury et al . developed a fabric and tactile wearable speech generating device ( SGD ) to support spontaneous interac - tions for a nonverbal paediatric user with vision impairment [ 21 ] . Promising advantages include the persistent availability of the wear - able SGD and personalisation of the device fabric aesthetics ( i . e . , colours and textures ) [ 21 ] . In contrast , Valencia et al . ’s physical ex - pressive objects offer discreet support of non - verbal gestures using 2 The power dynamics and interactions between two interlocutors in conversation can certainly be impacted by inhibiting AAC technologies [ 31 , 32 ] . motion - based AAC for a user with cerebral palsy . Indeed , these discreet AAC Sidekicks support the user’s autonomy by enhancing their non - verbal communication during conversations [ 70 ] . 2 . 2 Current High - tech AAC Interventions for People Living with CCNs With respect to commercially available AAC technologies , dedi - cated hardware and apps remain the most common intervention strategies 3 . Indeed , commercial AAC devices for people with CCNs are either typically external and standalone high - tech AAC de - vices or increasingly subscription - based apps to be downloaded on mobile , tablet , computer and even smartwatch [ 26 , 53 ] . Starting with dedicated external high - tech AAC devices , there is a myr - iad of options – in our previous work , we found DynaVox models most mentioned within the AAC literature [ 14 ] . However , three es - tablished commercial manufacturers : DynaVox , Liberator Ltd . and Lingraphica Ltd . – all have a number of purpose - built symbol - based AAC devices that receive indiscreet and often slow input from the touchscreen , eye - gaze modalities or manual switches [ 1 , 41 , 42 ] . Devices from these companies present libraries of images , sym - bols and text navigable via grids and output audio of constructed sentences [ 1 , 41 , 42 ] . Benefits accrued from these standalone AAC commercial devices include that they afford high visibility and credibility – making any potential communication partners aware of the users disability during communication [ 19 ] . Yet , these de - vices also have several key design problems . In particular , they are not discreet causing potentially debilitating stigmas [ 19 , 56 ] whilst the underlying form factor of these devices is rigid – preventing adaptability and personalisation [ 6 ] . Furthermore , these devices physically block / obstruct pathways for users non - verbal communi - cation [ 32 ] and can be a burden to carry daily if the user has motor impairments / paralysis – instead they are typically mounted to a wheelchair [ 32 ] . Further problems include that these devices are very expensive 4 , provide audio output , which replaces the user’s own natural voice and are often not designed for a specific commu - nity of focus [ 53 , 82 ] . In terms of commercial mobile applications available on con - sumer platforms such as iOS and Android there are many options – the Tavistock Trust for Aphasia offers an extensive public library of downloadable AAC software and apps [ 22 ] . AAC apps afford the user more discreetness , less visibility and consequently limit stigma but at the expense of credibility and raising awareness of the user’s disability in social settings [ 19 ] . For example , Faucett et al . note that an iPad configured with an AAC app for children with disabilities could be potentially mistaken for a toy – preventing access to assistive services and downplaying the significance of the disability [ 19 ] . Within our previous research and systematic review , we found Proloquo2Go the most mentioned AAC app 5 – it offers 3 Of note , Moffat et al . , provide useful data from a web survey of adopted AAC tech - nology answered by 70 respondents with aphasia [ 49 ] . 4 Although there is governmental device funding available , access to this high - tech AAC technology comes at a premium cost . At the time of writing , Dynavox Ltd . high - tech AAC devices require a quote , yet the PC Eye Model starts at $ 1249 . 00 . In a similar vein , Lingraphica Ltd . models require a consultation . Lastly , Liberator Ltd . high - tech AAC devices start at $ 999 . 99 up to $ 7000 . 00 and above . 5 We equally found tactile inputs the second most mentioned modality with 32 . 7 % and Audio the most mentioned output modality 62 . 8 % [ 14 ] . CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Curtis et al . portability via the smartphone , extensive customisation , progres - sive language features and can even be deployed on a wearable smartwatch [ 14 ] . Other popular mobile app offerings for people living with CCNs include the Lingraphica suite of apps , which offer both AAC support and video speech exercises for daily language therapy [ 42 ] . Despite the advantage of less visibility from these apps – they often cost subscription fees 6 , undesirably replace the user’s own natural voice , commonly are not co - designed with their community of focus and have been found to slow communication rates [ 6 , 49 ] . 2 . 3 Creativity and Participatory Design Techniques Accessibility scholarship has emphasised the significance of inte - grating and involvingend - users and stakeholders directly within the design process as essential for developing innovative technologies that will effectively support individuals with disabilities [ 60 , 64 ] . Consequently , in this study , we used the contrasting approaches of divergent and convergent design thinking directly with end - users and stakeholders across two distinct and complementary focus groups [ 27 ] . Our approach involved using the contrasting meth - ods of divergent and convergent thinking to support focus group activities on ( in ) visible discreet and wearable AAC devices [ 13 ] . Expanding on this , focus group one instigated divergent thinking and co - design methods , which focus on the generation of multiple different ideas and strands of thought – building in essence , a web of associative knowledge [ 13 , 27 ] . In particular , divergent thinking encourages creative risks and ideating potentially unfeasible solu - tions [ 13 ] . In contrast , focus group two transitioned to co - design methods focused on convergent thinking . Specifically , convergent thinking is more analytical , honing in on the single best answer and sticking to a more narrow range of information – resulting in more realistic , recognisable and safe solutions [ 13 , 27 ] . Much of this paper involved collaboration and co - design with people living with aphasia . Aphasia is most commonly caused by a stroke , which causes damage to the parts of the brain responsible for language [ 5 ] . Notably , people living with aphasia experience differ - ing difficulties with reading , writing , speaking and language [ 5 , 69 ] . Recruiting , designing and directly engaging people with aphasia can be particularly challenging as people with aphasia can poten - tially find it hard to communicate , provide consent , communicate cooperatively in groups and easily suffer from fatigue [ 3 , 83 ] . Ad - ditionally , participatory design methods can be very cognitively exerting and language - based – resulting in fatigue for research participants with aphasia [ 83 ] . However , to effectively co - design ( in ) visible discreet and wearable AAC devices we were influenced by the following participatory design techniques to maximise in - clusion for our collaborators with aphasia . Upholding the social model for disability , Wilson et al . , advocate the use of tangible design languages supporting participants with aphasia’s voice in design – examples include : short , direct tasks and the frequent us - age of tangible physical artefacts [ 83 ] . Other engaging techniques for collaboration with people with aphasia include Neate et al . ’s empowering use of co - created personas – this enhanced the ease 6 At the time of writing , Proloquo2Go costs $ 249 . 99 . Whilst , Lingraphica Ltd . offers SmallTalk , TalkPath Therapy and TalkPath News all for free . of communication and supported critiquing during the co - design process [ 51 ] . In other projects , Neate et al . , co - designed with peo - ple with aphasia using resource - constrained creation – to enhance further versatility and creativity 7 [ 51 , 52 , 69 ] . Whilst , more broadly amongst older adults , Lindsay et al . ’s OASIS approach employed playful video prompt creation and invisible design artefacts fol - lowed by exploratory meetings and low - fidelity prototyping – to effortlessly communicate the very purposes of the technology [ 39 ] . 3 DESIGNING THREE DISCREET AND WEARABLE AAC PROTOTYPES We developed the three high - fidelity discreet and wearable AAC prototypes harnessing user - centred design activities with a broad demographic of communities with CCNs , specialists and stakehold - ers – the prototypes explore and afford the user differing levels of public visibility and areas of placement on the body [ 7 ] . Specifically , we built the three high - fidelity prototypes to initially explore the potential benefits of ( in ) visible , discreet and wearable AAC for a wide range of communities with CCNs . During the user - centred de - sign process , we collaborated with SLTs that work with people with aphasia , specialists from a Center for Children with Behavioural Disorders and ASD and members of the DHH community . Eventu - ally , we would also use the three high - fidelity prototypes to serve as a tangible medium for our participants with aphasia to analyti - cally evaluate via tangible design languages during the convergent second focus group in Section 4 . 6 [ 83 ] . 3 . 1 Prototype 1 : Prompt Me Out - An AAC Prompter to Assist Public Speaking Prompt Me Out is a discreet application developed for people with aphasia that experience challenges with public speaking and illus - trated in Figure 2 . The Prompt Me Out prototype was iterated on the basis of feedback solicited from two SLTs during the develop - ment process and a supplementary graphical user interface ( GUI ) developed . The design of the GUI and program was influenced by previous research from Ghai et al . , which explored providing prompts for people who stutter [ 25 ] . In much the same way , Prompt Me Out supports users with aphasia if they get stuck in specific parts of their dialogue and struggle to proceed . On command , it will prompt the next word of any prepared dialogue via leveraging speech recognition libraries 8 and Google’s text - to - speech API 9 . Ini - tially , the prototype is computer - based and accessed via an almost invisible 10 Bluetooth connected earable [ 62 ] – the word prompt is received discreetly to the user’s ear unbeknownst to the con - versation partner . During operation of this AAC prototype , users must pre - prepare dialogue , click for a prompt , utter the current word reached and then receive an immediate prompt for the very next word . The goal was to encourage and support people with aphasia’s dialogue and expression when public speaking . Much like previous research from Boyd - Graber et al . [ 7 ] , the prototype was 7 This methodology assisted the development of a variety of accessible creative tech - nologies including : Comic Spin , the MakeWrite and CreaTable . 8 https : / / pypi . org / project / SpeechRecognition / 9 https : / / cloud . google . com / text - to - speech 10 We should note , here , that during testing using this as an ‘earable’ was not always practical as we wished for multiple people to experience the technology for demon - stration purposes . In this case , we used laptop speakers . Envisioning the ( In ) Visibility of Discreet and Wearable AAC Devices CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany I have a dream that one day even the state of Mississippi , a state sweltering with the heat of injustice , sweltering with the heat of oppression , will be transformed into an oasis of freedom and justice . Last word spoken Stuck word * S q u e e z e * Mississippi A B C Figure 2 : Prompt Me Out conceptualisation : ( a ) the graphical GUI is depicted , ( b ) the associated almost invisible earable hardware interacted with squeeze gesture and ( c ) the final discreet verbal prompt . ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) Figure 3 : My Speech OS conceptualised and deployed : ( a ) the homepage , ( b ) the page for requesting food and drink , ( c ) the page for personal care requests and ( d ) My Speech OS deployed on two Apple Smart Watches during focus group two detailed in Subsection 4 . 6 . built in collaboration with two experienced SLTs who work with people with aphasia . Initially , a proof of concept was built and this prototype was iterated on the basis of feedback solicited from the SLTs including the finalisation of the front - end GUI . Following this , a final version of the prototype underwent a small round of user - testing with the two SLTs – both qualitative data via think - aloud protocol and quantitative data ( i . e . , task completion metrics ) was used to make final changes to the prototype . 3 . 2 Prototype 2 : My Speech OS – An AAC Smartwatch Prototype My Speech OS is a wearable and discreet smartwatch application , which enables users to construct sentences and dialogue on the ba - sis of ordering images , symbols and sounds . My Speech OS affords low levels of visibility and was developed in collaboration with specialists , young adults and children with learning disabilities . Influenced by pre - existing high - tech AAC technology and depicted in Figure 3 , My Speech OS provides non - verbal users with a com - fortable , discreet and wearable SGD or VOCA that can supplement or even replace their speech – provided they require support to make requests or for indiscriminate dialogue . Unlike traditional SGDs and VOCAs , a key motive for the smartwatch form factor in - cludes its discreetness – it importantly does not physically obscure user’s pathways for non - verbal communication and expression through gestural body language [ 32 ] . My Speech OS was developed using user - centred design techniques in collaboration with 3 in - terviewed specialists from a Center for Children with IDD and ASD – specifically , a child psychologist , therapist and psychothera - pist . Furthermore , the application was also shaped by secondary results from a questionnaire delivered to eighteen stakeholders and students from the centre . To ensure rapid development , the My Speech OS prototype was simulated in Adobe XD and exported to a smartwatch . Once a final version of the prototype had been built , the prototype was iterated on the basis of further suggestions and feedback from user - testing of the prototype with 5 specialists from the centre . User - testing involved both recorded quantitative data on prototype usability ( i . e . , task completion metrics ) and qualita - tive suggestions for improvement ( i . e . , think - aloud protocol and subsequent observations from the specialists ) . CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Curtis et al . ( a ) ( b ) Figure 4 : The STT Badge conceptualised and deployed : ( a ) initial graphics of the STT Badge and ( b ) the STT Badge prototype with lapel microphone , 3D printed encasing and portable power bank . 3 . 3 Prototype 3 : Speech - to - Text ( STT ) Badge – A Wearable AAC Badge Unlike mainstream AAC approaches , which predominantly har - ness an independence frame of assistive technology – the STT Badge embraces Bennett et al . ’s interdependent frame of assistive tech - nology by subverting normalised roles and instead has a disabled person’s interlocutor wear the AAC . With this setup , pictured in Figure 4 , the relatively visible badge can provide live transcription and subtitles of the wearer’s dialogue for any DHH individuals including in noisy environments . Envisaged contexts for the STT Badge are face - to - face services consequently the device could be worn by – bank tellers , shop clerks , teachers in schools and doctors . The STT Badge was initially conceived based on the third author’s autoethnographic experiences , having been deaf throughout child - hood . Furthermore , the prototype was built using a user - centred design process with survey results from 9 DHH participants to determine the custom - built GUI preferences ( i . e . , optimal font type , number of lines , colour contrast , font size and word speed ) coupled with iterative feedback from a specialist during the development process . During user testing , both quantitative data from partici - pants’ multiple choice survey data and qualitative suggestions for improvement were harnessed to make changes to the prototype . For instance , a key qualitative finding from this user - centred design process included that , participants desired a slower word speed from the STT Badge so that they could simultaneously , “lip read to some extent” . The eventual prototype was built using a variety of hardware – including a Raspberry Pi 4 with mounted HyperPixel Display and encased in a custom 3D printed box . Equally , the pro - totype’s software used open - source speech recognition libraries 11 and the Coqui STT AI deep learning toolkit 12 – enabling the badge to successfully function completely offline . 11 https : / / pypi . org / project / SpeechRecognition / 12 https : / / github . com / coqui - ai / STT 4 FOCUS GROUPS WITH PEOPLE WITH APHASIA Following the user - centred development of three high - fidelity pro - totypes in collaboration with a broad demographic ( i . e . , Section 3 ) , we then held two complementary focus groups with people living with aphasia and SLTs . Depicted in Figure 1 , the two focus groups were complementary and spaced one week apart . The first focus group leveraged divergent co - design approaches enabling people with aphasia to extensively ideate and prototype ideas for AAC . Whilst , in contrast , the second focus group transitioned to acces - sible convergent approaches – including , people with aphasia’s evaluation of the three tangible high - fidelity prototypes . The par - ticipants with aphasia were deliberately blind to the development process and had strictly no prior involvement in the design of the three prototypes – promoting honest evaluation and reflection . 4 . 1 Research Environment Participants were recruited from an aphasia charity and exclusively , research sessions were held at familiar facilities – to avoid bur - dening participants with travel costs to a central research site or university lab . The charity , Aphasia Re - Connect supports people with aphasia by providing a social community and group speech and language therapy . We conducted our research during the weekly face - to - face group drop - in at the Robert Williams Speech and Lan - guage Therapy Centre . All participants were familiar with the lo - cation for weekly therapy and most arrived independently using public transport . 4 . 2 Focus Group Participants Collectively , we had 12 participants with aphasia and 3 SLT par - ticipants across both focus groups – presented in Tables 1 and 2 . Participants had a range of aphasic language difficulties , which is representative of the wider population of people living with aphasia . To make the focus groups more accessible we followed Mack et al . Envisioning the ( In ) Visibility of Discreet and Wearable AAC Devices CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany [ 44 ] guidelines throughout the research process – we operated in a familiar space for participants , used accessible consent procedures , monitored participants’ needs and endorsed flexible attendance . All participants were at least six months post - stroke , had spoken Eng - lish fluently prior to their stroke and 5 participants had hemiplegic limb weakness which restricted the use of their right arm and leg . 4 . 3 Procedures The focus groups met one week apart and each lasted two hours . Ethical approval for this research was granted by the Health Facul - ties Research Ethics Subcommittee at King’s College London . One week prior to the first focus group , participants were provided with an accessible information sheet and completed a consent form – participants with aphasia were also supported to access these mate - rials by SLTs . Furthermore , participants with aphasia were provided with a week to discuss the information sheet and study with trusted friends and family . The focus group sessions used video and au - dio recording to collect qualitative data from discussions . Initially , participants freely seated themselves then the first author and an SLT initiated proceedings with an introduction and answered par - ticipants’ questions . Following this , participants were assigned to take part in focus group activities on two tables . Subsequently , the first and fifth authors each supported the focus group proceedings concurrently with prepared materials on each table . 4 . 4 Data Analysis Both focus groups were analysed for structured observation of the video data , transcribed and organised using NVivo 12 . After - wards we applied inductive Thematic Analysis – an iterative process whereby qualitative data is restructured into themes [ 8 , 9 ] . In line with Braun and Clarke’s original interpretation , the coding pro - cess was initially carried out by solely the first author 13 [ 8 , 9 , 74 ] . Following this , all the authors met and collectively refined and discussed the themes together to mitigate individual bias . In total , we found 459 instances of statements and discussion relevant to this study . For focus group one , the low - fidelity AAC prototypes are evaluated and discussed . Whilst , for focus group two qualitative data was categorised into positive / negative evaluations of the three high - fidelity prototypes : Prompt Me Out , My Speech OS and STT Badge plus ancillary findings for future research . 4 . 5 Focus Group One : Divergent Design Thinking and Prototyping of Discreet and Wearable AAC Focus group one supported participants’ discussions on regularly encountered communication challenges and then the co - design of low - fidelity discreet and wearable AAC prototypes – that af - ford different levels of public visibility . In the vein of divergent design thinking , we wanted participants to be empowered to dis - cuss frequently encountered communication problems , provide a high volume of solutions and take creative risks [ 13 , 27 ] . Yet , we immediately recognised the pressures and demands of on - the - spot creativity – particularly for participants with aphasia . Consequently , we harnessed Lindsay et al . ’s video prompts [ 39 ] to facilitate easier 13 The first author attended both focus groups . communication , better discussion and improved ideation . Discus - sions after each video prompt were improvised with the researchers and SLTs jointly encouraging many disparate ideas . 4 . 5 . 1 Video Prompts . We developed six video prompts to be played during the focus group . These prompts were curated from open - source video footage – supporting participants to recollect experi - ences , and personal communication challenges and ideate potential technologies for discreet and wearable AAC support . The final six video prompt contexts are generic locations where communica - tion is needed – coffee shops , visiting the doctors , taking public transport , supermarket shopping , visiting friends / family and eating out . These contexts were derived from ethnographic data collected by Parr [ 57 ] , which tracked the livelihoods of people with apha - sia and the first author’s prior knowledge of participants’ daily routines . Additionally , we provided ample time for participants to propose and discuss further unprompted contexts . Collectively , the video prompts resulted in 3 minutes and 14 seconds of footage . Dur - ing the focus group , we played each video prompt and supported approximately 10 minutes of subsequent group discussion . 4 . 5 . 2 Low - fidelity Exploratory Prototyping . After the video prompt discussions , we then invited participants to envision their own dis - creet and wearable high - tech AAC device . Participants were given approximately 60 minutes to build their low - fidelity prototypes , whilst the prototyping activities were directly scaffolded by the video prompts as participants could ideate solutions for the com - munication challenges of the prompted contexts . All participants were familiar with mainstream discreet and wearable technologies and some of the participants were smartwatch users . Initially , we verbally explained to participants the process of low - fidelity pro - totyping accompanied by a small demonstration of using the craft materials . If necessary , participants were supported and assisted during the low - fidelity prototyping process . For instance , the three SLT participants and two researchers supported participants with Hemiplegia / paralysis through appropriate closed ‘yes / no’ question - ing ( e . g . , “Do you want to use this coloured card ? ” ) and performing some of the dexterous building activities on their behalf ( e . g . , cut - ting card with scissors or drawing ) . Some participants felt more comfortable building collectively as a small group rather than on their own with the support of an SLT or researcher mediating dis - cussions . Equally , during building we extemporaneously prompted participants to reflect on device visibility , social acceptability , form factors , placement on the body and types of communication support from the AAC device . Participants were given space to imagine and discuss different discreet and wearable AAC devices – providing personalised solutions for their varying communication challenges . Importantly , participants were free to make either paper proto - types or use the craft materials provided at the session ( i . e . , fabric , coloured card and wool etc . ) . Throughout , we were supportive , positive and politely enquiring over participants’ design choices . The low - fidelity building process naturally finished once partic - ipants were satisfied and many proud of their final low - fidelity prototypes . Lastly , we finished with a small group demonstration of each prototype and its functionality . CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Curtis et al . Table 1 : Overview of focus group participants with aphasia . PWA , F1 and F2 serve as acronyms for people with aphasia , focus group 1 and 2 . Assessed by an SLT are participants’ aphasia , speaking , reading , hearing , and writing – scaled : Mild , Moderate and Severe . Also , we noted participants’ Hemiplegia and personal technology refers to participants’ day - to - day devices or AAC . PWA ( Gender - Age ) Aphasia Attendance Difficulties Personal Technology Grace ( F - 83 ) Mild F1 , F2 Speaking : Moderate Reading : Moderate Writing : Moderate SmartphoneTablet Julia ( F - 50 ) Severe F1 Speaking : Severe Reading : Severe Writing : Severe Physical : Hemiplegia SmartphoneTablet Gavin ( M - 75 ) Severe F1 , F2 Speaking : Severe Reading : Severe Writing : Severe SmartphoneSmartwatchCommunication book Josh ( M - 65 ) Moderate F1 Speaking : Moderate Reading : Moderate Writing : Severe Smartphone Rick ( M - 51 ) Moderate F1 , F2 Speaking : Moderate Reading : Moderate Writing : Severe SmartphoneSmartwatch Steven ( M - 52 ) Moderate F1 , F2 Speaking : Moderate Reading : Severe Writing : Severe Physical : Hemiplegia Smartphone Joanna ( M - 53 ) Severe F1 , F2 Speaking : Severe Reading : Severe Writing : Severe Physical : Hemiplegia SmartphoneSmartwatch Peter ( M - 73 ) Mild F2 Speaking : Moderate Reading : Moderate Writing : Moderate Smartphone Thomas ( M - 72 ) Severe F2 Speaking : Severe Reading : Severe Writing : Severe SmartphoneTablet Graeme ( M - 58 ) Mild F2 Speaking : Mild Reading : Severe Writing : Severe Physical : Hemiplegia Smartphone Alex ( M - 64 ) Severe F2 Speaking : Severe Reading : Severe Writing : Severe Physical : Hemiplegia Smartphone Olivia ( F - 82 ) Moderate F2 Speaking : Moderate Reading : Moderate Writing : Moderate Smartphone Envisioning the ( In ) Visibility of Discreet and Wearable AAC Devices CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Table 2 : Overview of SLT Focus Group participants . Respectively , F1 and F2 serve as shorthand acronyms for focus group 1 and 2 . Lastly , professional experience refers to SLTs time spent working with people with aphasia . SLT ( Gender ) Attendance Professional Experience Sophia ( F ) F1 40 years Kendall ( F ) F1 , F2 2 years Harriet ( F ) F1 3 years Figure 5 : Photos of focus group one . On the left , we have materials used for the low - fidelity prototyping and the research environment . On the right , we have two photos of engaged participant tables during the divergent prototyping session . 4 . 6 Focus Group Two : Convergent Design Thinking and Evaluation of High - Fidelity Prototypes Focus group two favoured a convergent design thinking method - ology – we wanted participants to analytically critique the three discreet and wearable high - fidelity AAC prototypes from the user - centred design process in Section 3 : Prompt Me Out , My Speech OS and the STT Badge [ 13 , 27 ] . This methodology is advocated by Wil - son et al . [ 83 ] , high - fidelity prototypes can empower participants with aphasia through tangible design and minimise conceptual de - mands . In terms of procedure , participants were introduced to the prototypes with a two - minute video demonstration and provided with each prototype to explore and test . Importantly , the partici - pants with aphasia had no involvement in the initial user - centred design of the three prototypes – promoting honest evaluation . After approximately 10 minutes of prototype usage , we then facilitated a recorded group discussion using a methodical approach – whereby researchers had a predefined list of analytical questions to ask participants . In particular , participants’ consensus was gathered concerning refinements to each prototype . 5 RESULTS FROM FOCUS GROUPS Results are drawn from qualitative analysis of the two focus groups including Thematic Analysis of transcripts and video footage ( i . e . , Figure 6 ) . The complementary focus groups occurred one week apart . Using divergent design thinking approaches , focus group one provided Thematic Analysis of responses to the six video prompts and participants constructed seven low - fidelity discreet and wear - able AAC prototypes . In contrast , focus group two transitioned to convergent design thinking approaches in which participants critiqued the three discreet and wearable high - fidelity AAC proto - types from the user - centred design process in Section 3 : Prompt Me Out , My Speech OS and the STT Badge [ 13 , 27 ] . CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Curtis et al . Having aphasia within everyday social environments Theme 1 : Psychological and contextual factors restrain people with aphasia ' s communication Negative emotions and trauma of past communication experiences Exasperation of unpredictable verbal communication Challenges of an invisible disability Themes Sub - themes Reticence to communicate true needs and desires Anxiety and fear from social pressures and crowds Moments of confusion and frustration onset by aphasia Internal positive emotions and habits Theme 2 : Positive emotions and externally visible supports can empower communication Externally visible technology and human supports Preparation for future dialogues is an important tool Confidence is essential for communication Habits and routines improve communication and create access Accessible technologies become integral else low - tech options are favoured Family members and considerate audiences improve communication Figure 6 : The structure of themes and associated sub - themes from Thematic Analysis of focus group one . 5 . 1 Divergent Focus Group One 5 . 1 . 1 Theme 1 : Psychological and contextual factors constrain people with aphasia’s communication . This theme describes participants’ feelings and emotions harboured from public communication with an invisible disability . Crafted sub - themes are : ( 1 ) having aphasia within everyday social environments , ( 2 ) the negative emotions and trauma of past communication experiences . Exasperation of unpredictable verbal communication . Par - ticipants identified verbal communication and word finding as a prominent yet unpredictable challenge day - to - day . In some situ - ations , word finding with aphasia can be more challenging than others : “Rick : Yeah ! Yeah ! its like ummm . . . if I don’t you know like . . . like when I meet new people . . . that’s like when its worst ! Yeah . . . mhm . . . you can’t get the words out at all ! ” . Meeting and engaging with strangers can lead to stumbling blocks and make on - the - spot word finding more challenging – particularly as strangers are completely unfamiliar with their personal communication needs and strategies . Participants mentioned ordering specific memorised café menu items and avoiding lengthy dialogues as strategies : “Rick : Yeah . . . Yeah . . . Just . . . like ummm . . . I couldn’t get the words out . . . I wanted you know like . . . there is all types of coffee and all I can say is black coffee” . One non - verbal participant during ordering shows his low - tech AAC communication book which provides a picture of ‘Double Espresso’ on a page , yet if further questioned by oblivious café staff he struggles to find the words to express his desires and needs : “Researcher 2 : So you go in with your book and say double espresso ? Gavin : Yes , that’s right ! . . . Sophia : What if someone says . . . do you want milk [ i . e . , with your coffee ] ? Gavin : Ahhh . . . [ confused look ] . . . hmm . . . ummm . . . I don’t know ! ” . Challenges of an invisible disability . Participants without noticeable paralysis / hemiplegia or a visible assistive technology ( e . g . , walking stick ) expressed their frustration at suffering from an invisible disability . Frequently , strangers are not accommodating or empathetic – such as providing a seat on public transport or patient and considerate communication partners . Therefore , participants emphasised the importance of wearing an Aphasia / Stroke badge 14 : “Rick : Yeah . . . Yeah . . . You wouldn’t believe that I have . . . no paralysis ! [ Throws arms in the air ] . . . Researcher 1 : Oh really . . . so sometimes people don’t believe you ? [ . . . ] Rick : not even knowing . . . that I’ve had a stroke ! Because physically I look normal . . . Because they look at you like . . . erm why do you need a seat ? Yeah . . . yeah . . . you’ve got to either . . . have a badge on . . . or . . . or . . . erm a card that says I have apha - sia . . . say that I’ve had a stroke” . Moreover , an SLT and participant with aphasia reminisced about the difficulties of communicating in public before the wearable badges existed : “Sophia : Now Julia throw your mind back to the supervision . . . you had many years ago , when you came in very hot under the collar because you had gone to the coffee shop and you’d tried to order ! [ . . . ] and they just wouldn’t listen ! Julia : Yeah ! Yeah ! That’s it ! [ . . . ] so yeah we made a badge . . . [ brushing chest where badge would be ] you know ? ” . Importantly , participants also stressed times when they don’t want there disability openly revealed : “Grace : Yes ! Particularly young people [ with aphasia ] don’t want their hidden disability always revealed ! ” . Turning to the second sub - theme , which considers the negative emotions and trauma of past communication experiences . Aphasia made participants anxious and reticent to communicate their true 14 Thedaypriortothefocusgroup , Rickwaswronglydeniedaccesstoapublicdisabled bathroom by inattentive transport staff as he forgot his disability badge . Envisioning the ( In ) Visibility of Discreet and Wearable AAC Devices CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Prompt Me Out AAC Pendant AAC Badge My Speech OS STT Badge Steven ' s Smartphone Minimalist Navigation App Joanna ' s AAC Smartwatch Rick ' s AAC Smartwatch Voice Operated Smartwatch ( a ) ( b ) Figure 7 : Study prototypes placement on the body – affording different levels of visibility : ( a ) user - centered designed high - fidelity prototypes from Section 3 and ( b ) low - fidelity prototypes built by participants from Subsection 5 . 1 . 3 . desires and needs , keen to avoid crowds and experience general moments of confusion and frustration . Reticence to communicate true needs and desires . Partici - pants expressed that they often felt reticent to communicate their true thoughts and feelings in public and with friends / family . Over long periods , this can become deeper emotions of feeling ignored or misunderstood . In one example , a participant expressed reluc - tance about complaining if his order was wrong in a café due to his invisible disability : “Rick : If you have to complain its a no ! no ! Just . . . get it ! ” . The same participant will not request modifications to his medication and prefers to live with the burden of too low blood pressure and fainting : “Rick : You see . . . they change the medication . . . and they won’t change it . . . I have to live with fainting” . Whilst an - other participant always orders either vegetarian or chicken dishes at restaurants because they don’t want to explain their CCNs to the waiter : “Julia : Well I can just say I like chicken because its easier . . . Starters – no ! Main course – yes ! And chicken or the vegetarian” . Anxiety and fear from social pressures and crowds . Regu - larly , public dialogues caused our participants to feel trepidation , social anxiety and fear – particularly in busy environments . One participant presents her anxiety about ordering in busy bars : “Grace : And if there is sort of a queue behind you sort of tutting ! That makes it [ communicating ] really worse ! . . . And sort of sighing ! ” . Furthermore , participants admitted that they struggle to understand and follow dialogue in very noisy environments . Consequently , participants revealed that they actively avoids crowds – never using the Under - ground at certain times of the day : “Steven : With the . . . Underground you’ve got too many people on top of you . . . I’ll only use it at certain times of the day” . From further discussion , we found Steven fears being unable to communicate to people that he has a disability , needs personal space and a seat . Moments of confusion and frustration onset by aphasia . Participants admitted that they could find experiences confusing ( e . g . , solo navigation on public transport ) and equally acknowledged that aphasia was generally very frustrating and inhibiting in these contexts . On the topic of public transport , a participant revealed she sometimes felt lost and confused : “Grace : You’ll be surprised at how many things are dependent on word finding ! If you can’t find the word [ . . . ] You rummage about ! And if you can’t find the word you’re just a bit lost ! ” . Despite the frustrations of struggling to communicate , when speaking with her daughter one participant really appreciated just being listened to – even if she could not get the message across : “Joanna : It’s erm . . . it’s difficult . . . but it’s difficult . . . it’s like ohhh God ! [ clenches fists with frustration ] But it’s very nice as well . . . it’s my dearest [ . . . ] Oh ! Wow ! You listen to me ! ” . 5 . 1 . 2 Theme 2 : Positive emotions and externally visible supports can empower communication . This theme considers factors that enable participants to be empowered and communicate more successfully . CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Curtis et al . The crafted sub - themes are : ( 1 ) internal positive emotions and habits , ( 2 ) externally visible technology and human supports . Preparation for future dialogues is an important tool . Par - ticipants emphasised the helpfulness of mental and physical prepa - ration for future anticipated dialogues . For instance , mental prepa - ration for dialogues and communication notebooks allows partic - ipants to have more effective communication exchanges : “Grace : [ whenever at the doctors ] I would always have a notebook . . . Umm . . . Umm . . . and sketch what I wanted to say ! [ . . . ] Yes ! I’ve got my questions already written . . . And I write down what the doctor has said to me ! ” . In addition to a considerate doctor , participants also noted that they felt more confident when properly prepared with notes / lists . For instance , one participant even preferred phone calls to face - to - face dialogue because it let her freely read and write mid - conversation in a notebook without judgement . Confidence is essential for communication . Put simply , par - ticipants with more confidence communicated day - to - day more successfully 15 . For public transport , participants had more success communicating their needs to members of the public when confi - dent : “Rick : When she gets on the Tube [ metro train service ] she’s like I need a seat – so whose gonna get up ? Researcher 1 : How come you don’t do that ? Rick : Confidence ! ” . Indeed , participants with more confidence will never hesitate to communicate that their order is wrong or if they need further assistance : “ [ In response to complain - ing about a wrong order ] Joanna : I will ! . . I will ! . . I will ! [ . . . ] Can I have my say please ! [ To café staff ] ” . In contrast , some participants readily admitted that they desired more confidence , which would help with there overall ability to communicate : “Researcher 1 : Would you want a confidence app ? [ . . . ] Rick : Yeah ! A kick up the backside ! ” . Habits and routines improve communication and create ac - cess . Participants felt more comfortable and communicated better following extensive habitual practice and routinisation of daily ac - tivities / environments . Familiarity and awareness of their expected environment and context instilled them with more confidence to communicate . For example , one participant was comfortable speak - ing to people in stores because of his previous work : “Rick : I used to work in a store . . . I would . . . erm . . . speak to anybody in a store ! ” . In particular , routine enables participants to repeatedly practice anticipated dialogues and exchanges : “Grace : And its practice ! Prac - tice ! Practice ! And now I can order my coffee ! Its always the same ! Americano without any milk” . For unfamiliar locations , participants rely on family or group outings with other people with aphasia to support their communication needs . Turning to the second sub - theme , which considers externally visible technology and human supports . We consider the communi - cation affordances of key technology and the significance of human support including family members . Accessible technologies become integral else low - tech op - tions are favoured . The participants are all smartphone users and several have smartwatches . Despite this , some apps are immedi - ately more accessible than others . Accessible technologies become integral once learnt and adopted – whilst inaccessible technologies are quickly abandoned . For example , for many participants , Google Maps is imperative for planning trips and logistics : “ [ On Google 15 Participants expressed dislike for self - checkout and ticket machines because they rob participants of tangible and positive human interactions . ( a ) ( b ) Figure 8 : Initial outputs from low - fidelity prototyping : ( a ) Steven’s smartphone drawn on the left piece of card and ( b ) the minimalist compass navigation app built with wool and a popsicle stick . Maps ] Steven : Yeah , on my phone when I want to get to know an area . . . I always use that thing” . Yet when it comes to eventually purchasing travel tickets – participants prefer to book in - person at the ticket office because the online booking website is wordy and complicated . In a similar vein , currently , there is no accessible health and medical information app so participants instead favour visible and tangible low - tech resources . For example , one participant uses a low - tech communication book with several pages of personalised medical information – to support communication at the doctors . Family members and considerate audiences improve com - munication . Family are an integral human support for participants’ needs and general communication 16 . Almost all participants rely on family members for supported communication within challeng - ing contexts : “Steven : I just see my family . . . and I’m just like they know what I like . . . They do the ordering and talk for me . . . Cos I’m easy - going ! ” . Aside from family , having a considerate audience that will listen can also make participants feel more confident to commu - nicate effectively : “Grace : because I’m so old . . . I think that old age is a component ! Sophia : It buys you a ticket does it ? Grace : Yes ! Yes ! Poor old lady you know ! She’s got aphasia [ . . . ] I get a great deal of sympa - thy cards” . Participants even noted that they communicated better during weekly therapy and group outings with an understanding collective of fellow people with aphasia and SLTs . 5 . 1 . 3 Low - fidelity discreet and wearable AAC prototypes . Proceed - ing the discussions on contextual communication challenges we delved into divergent prototyping of low - fidelity discreet and wear - able AAC with the participants . Illustrated in Figure 7 , participants built 7 AAC prototypes with varying form - factors and visibility : 2 mobile phone apps , 3 smartwatch apps , 1 pendant device and 1 wearable badge . Steven’s Smartphone . Steven desired to customise a new smart - phone as his current 5 - year - old smartphone had almost run out of memory and the battery did not last for his daily needs . Over time he said he would like a more discreet smartwatch – but for now , he wanted the familiar smartphone form factor . Key features of the 16 Participants often have small social circles and consequently rely on family to help communicate their needs : “Rick : They don’t . . . to lose . . . The quickest way to lose friends is to have a stroke ! You don’t . . . don’t its like . . . you’ve got the err . . the plague ! Steven : Yeah I know what you mean . . . I knew a lot of people . . . all gone ! All I’ve got now is my family” . Envisioning the ( In ) Visibility of Discreet and Wearable AAC Devices CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Figure 9 : Participants prototyping of AAC smartwatch technology : ( a ) low - fidelity mockup , ( b ) Joanna’s envisaged AAC smartwatch crafted on A4 page with bullet point instructions and ( c ) Rick’s drawn AAC smartwatch and instructions on card . phone include Google Maps and the Contact List to reach his family . Indeed , for any challenging communication context , Steven prefers to be supported by a network of considerate family members that recognise his disability . In terms of interaction , Steven was keen to use primarily a vocal interface for control : “Steven : see over there her phone can do talk . . . [ . . . ] but I’d like it in the new one I can talk ‘Islington’ [ neighbourhood in London ] and ‘Up the Arsenal’ [ football team ] – and it opens the map and where I want to go” . A Minimalist Navigation App . Collectively , the participants built a minimalist compass navigation app to help support their ability to travel to new environments . Initially an earable was con - sidered before participants pivoted towards the more visible and minimalist compass to provide directions via pointing . This was designed to solve the confusion of Google Maps at the start of jour - neys : “Grace : Sometimes I look at Google Maps and I can’t find what way up I’m meant to be” . A Voice Operated Smartwatch . Collectively , participants con - sidered an AAC smartwatch app . However , they stressed the im - portance of better voice operation : “Sophia : better than Siri ! ” . Touch on a smartwatch was quite inaccessible for those with paralysis from right - side hemiplegia : “Sophia : So yeah you wear it on your left hand [ . . . ] you don’t have to touch it . . . you can speak into it ! ” . Features of the smartwatch wearable included that it would read emails and provide useful information when told things – such as directions and assist with finding supermarket items . Joanna’s AAC Smartwatch . As an existing smartwatch user , Joanna built a personalised smartwatch device that provides plenty of customised functionality . Notable features include the smart voice assistant , which makes the device one - hand friendly and its ability to support communication in social settings – Joanna’s right arm is in a brace and sling , which restricted her ability to use the touchscreen . Plus , the stretchable material of the watch strap is key for enabling the device to be easily worn , adjusted or taken off . Rick’s AAC Smartwatch . As an existing smartwatch user , Rick also built a personalised smartwatch device with custom functional - ity . Initially , he wanted the device to properly understand his voice commands – currently , Siri is immensely frustrating and does not provide enough time for voice commands , “Rick : I can say the name Siri and erm . . . I can’t get the words out and it cuts off ! ” . He would like the AAC smartwatch to notify members of the public that he has an invisible disability via a highly visible display on the screen if he forgets his Aphasia / Stroke badge at home . Plus , notify his brother at times if he is too condescending and patronising : “Researcher 1 : Would you like it to tell your brother anything ? Rick : Yeah , I’m not a baby ! ” . Furthermore , the smartwatch can help Rick manage his fainting by providing notifications if his blood pressure is getting too low – boosting his day - to - day confidence . AAC Pendant . Initially , participants collectively proposed a pendant form factor because it was discreet , less visible and enabled one - hand usage . In particular , they wanted the device to be plain but built with high - quality precious metals , “Grace : The sort of thing designed by Tiffany’s” . AAC Badge . Following the proposal of the pendant , participants then collectively designed an ( in ) visible AAC badge . The badge could be highly visible in public – large , dazzling , flashing and technicolor to display ‘I have a disability’ , ‘I have aphasia’ and , ‘I have a stroke’ . Yet when turned off , the badge could blend into the colour of the user’s clothing – altering its visibility – becoming discreet and unobtrusive . The badge interface could be controlled by the user via their phone : “Sophia : [ The badge is ] flagging that you have a disability and you want people to be aware ! ” . Other playful ideas for the badge’s public display included that it could potentially express communicative emojis – so that , “Sophia : When someone gives you a seat – you can give them a big smile ! ” or conversely , “Sophia : When someone doesn’t give you a seat you can give them an angry face ! ” . Participants then proposed other visible public displays for the badge , “Josh : It could say Eagles ! The band or the team ! ” – becoming an emblem of the user’s personality ( like a ‘traditional’ badge ) . On top of this , Josh also proposed that it could say just say , “Josh : Crystal Palace” – to provide a display of the location the wearer is trying to reach and helping support dialogue if the user was lost or needed assistance on public transport . CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Curtis et al . ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) Figure 10 : Participants envisaged pendant and badge : ( a ) participants initial construction of pendant form factor , ( b ) participants proceeding consideration of an AAC smart badge to be worn on the breast pocket and ( c ) finally participants proposal of display features – the blue blends well into clothing and can display : ‘Crystal Palace’ , ‘Aphasia’ , ‘The Eagles’ and aesthetically desirable star or artwork . 5 . 2 Convergent Focus Group Two 5 . 2 . 1 Prompt Me Out . Prompt Me Out was considered useful for supporting participants’ solo reading practice : “Grace : Good for reading to yourself and for reading out loud” . Others saw the pro - totype as being useful for public speaking engagements : “Peter : Possibly being useful with public speaking . . . just needs to be quicker” . Interestingly , Peter was keen for the earable AAC device to be more visible and less discreet – even providing a supplementary GUI on his phone to display paragraphs of prepared text : “Peter : On my bad days I can’t do that . . . I just write something on my phone and show it to people” . Participants envisaged future iterations of Prompt Me Out to be available in more tangible form factors – some envisaged it working well with a smart pen that could scan text and even in a pair of smart glasses . Paul even wanted the device to work with photos of text so : “Peter : It would read it all out to you” . Collective recommendations for Prompt Me Out from participants included that , some people with aphasia would potentially struggle with writing pre - prepared dialogues to be prompted upon . Equally , some participants were critical of the current latency and discreet form factor of the earable device – they would want the device to deliver language prompts instantaneously to the wearer’s ear given the limited device visibility . Whilst , some participants had the verbal capacity to instantaneously substitute words and therefore believed they did not need language prompts . Equally , a few participants expressed that they would prefer family deliver public speeches on their behalf : “Rick : Get one of my kids to do it” . 5 . 2 . 2 My Speech OS . My Speech OS was positively evaluated by participants with aphasia that were younger and more non - verbal . Some of the participants were smartwatch adopters – they particu - larly liked the health and fitness features that came with a smart - watch ( i . e . , activity , steps , heart health and temperature sensors ) . Many felt My Speech OS would be very useful to have contextual , personalised vocabulary and built - in reminders : “Rick : I find I’m going to the doctors . . . I forget what I’m going to the doctor’s for” . Additionally , the accessible form factor was seen as useful instead of having to rely on a larger phone : “Rick : I just go into my watch and see whats going on [ . . . ] Joanna : It does yeah ! ” . Some partici - pants envisaged the potential of using a smartwatch AAC app via the voice assistant and were not alarmed about speaking verbal commands to the watch – thereby making the AAC more publicly visible . Critiques of My Speech OS predominantly came from older Envisioning the ( In ) Visibility of Discreet and Wearable AAC Devices CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany and more verbal participants . Many felt the watch screen / text was too small and suggested fewer buttons : “Grace : I would like it to read my texts and emails ! Yep – but one button ! Or at the most two buttons ! [ . . . ] Graeme : Less functions per screen . . . so the text can be bigger” . Some felt nervous about wearing a smartwatch due to the potential anxiety from the health features : “Grace : it will encour - age my hypochondria ! ” – and felt it was more suited to a younger generation . 5 . 2 . 3 The STT Badge . The STT badge was considered very useful in multiple public contexts – particularly visiting the doctors and at public bars . Many participants mentioned that they struggled with busy environments with plenty of background noise and following longer multi - threaded discussions often in groups – in both cases , the STT badge was seen as a very useful AAC intervention : “Re - searcher 1 : difficulties with following the many different interweaving conversations at once [ . . . ] Alex : Me umm . . . umm . . . yes I have diffi - culty with that . . . and I raise my hand and then speak” . Suggested adaptations for the STT badge include its potential in a much more visible iPad form factor – letting users scroll and re - read parts of the conversation : “Researcher 1 : So if this was in iPad form would this be helpful ? [ . . . ] Peter : Yes it would be very useful” . Adding to this , participants suggested potentially an option for symbols or pictures and highlighting of the current word in a different colour would also serve as beneficial improvements to the interface . Some even considered potentially receiving receipts of recorded conversations to review afterwards – a few hours after the dialogue exchange . Critiques of the system included the consideration that some people with aphasia would not be able to read the text of the STT badge and a larger screen size for more visibility . 6 DISCUSSION In this section , we discuss the efficacy and visibility of discreet and wearable AAC . Secondly , in light of our findings , we offer consider - ations for future high - tech AAC research . Finally , we briefly reflect on our adopted divergent and convergent focus group methods . 6 . 1 The Efficacy of ( In ) Visible Discreet and Wearable AAC The present study focused on discreet and wearable AAC devices to support those with CCNs , yet our work also renews previous nuanced academic discussions on ( in ) visible assistive technolo - gies [ 19 ] . In response to the video prompts , the first theme from focus group one in Section 4 . 5 considered the unpredictable chal - lenge of living with fluctuating CCNs , difficulties encountered with an invisible disability and associated negative emotions from trau - matic communication experiences . From this initial theme , it is clear that high - tech AAC interventions must be designed to serve users with evolving communication needs and that AAC devices , which provide increased visibility are inherently useful in specific circumstances ( e . g . , on busy public transport with limited seats ) . Consequently , discreet and wearable AAC must provide users with the autonomy to control the visibility of their assistive technology dependent on the setting and communication partners . Likewise in theme two , most of our participants felt empowered to communi - cate successfully when imbued with positive emotions and accessi - ble plus visible supports ( i . e . , low - tech resources , family members and empathetic audiences ) . Yet , most pre - existing high - tech AAC devices are inaccessible because the large and heavy form factor is a major impediment to comfortable usage in public . Indeed , some of our participants with aphasia had right - side hemiplegic paralysis and used a walking stick – consequently , they expressed a desire to carry very little each day [ 5 ] – even tablets and smartphones might be challenging to operate with hemiplegia , especially when ‘on the go’ , where AAC might be of the most use . Therefore , discreet and wearable AAC should be designed with an accessible and comfort - able form factor – supporting seamless one - handed , ambidextrous input , using sensors to unobtrusively gain relevant contextual data and supportive of discreet modes of input . Following video prompts , participants with aphasia successfully co - designed low - fidelity discreet and wearable AAC prototypes in Subsection 5 . 1 . 3 . Most notably , the voice - controlled AAC smart - watch , AAC pendant which supports one - handed usage and finally the AAC badge that blends into clothing or can visibly attract atten - tion to disclose key information to members of the public . These discreet and wearable AAC prototypes have the advantage of being always on , readily available and customisable – without necessarily visibly revealing the underlying disability of the user by ‘blend - ing’ into clothing – preventing potential unwanted attention and stigmas [ 56 ] . Indeed , research has previously considered camou - flaging methods for hand - held ‘chameleon’ devices to limit their visibility [ 59 ] . Yet , on the other end of the spectrum , our partici - pants also wanted these AAC prototypes to become socially visible – even becoming public displays of information [ 58 ] . People with invisible disabilities like aphasia , frequently face disability denial and illegitimacy – the assistive technology becomes a key social marker that they may need further assistance and communication support from others [ 19 ] . Furthermore , the visible AAC device can in fact enhance the user’s communication abilities , making it easier for the user to start conversations and set conversational expectations – with strangers encouraged to be more considerate , patient and empathetic during conversations with a person they recognise has CCNs . Indeed , many with CCNs are social and keen to actively engage in communication [ 61 , 66 ] . Adding to findings from previous research on smartwatches as public displays [ 58 ] , our participants with aphasia even requested a desire to personalise the display of the assistive technology ( e . g . , the AAC Badge displays their favourite band or football team ) and thus control what the AAC device communicates about them to the outside world [ 19 ] . On top of this creative ideation , a wide range of communities suc - cessfully engaged with the three high - fidelity discreet and wearable AAC prototypes from Section 3 . Notably , the STT Badge was most popular amongst our focus group participants and even reversed normalised roles by embracing the Bennett et al . [ 4 ] interdepen - dent frame of assistive technology . Furthermore , our work has also reiterated the importance of discreet and wearable AAC that does not visibly detract from users’ pre - existing communication abilities such as non - verbal communication . In our previously pub - lished systematic review , we previously found just 1 . 4 % of AAC devices enhance non - verbal forms of communication [ 14 ] . Indeed , many people living with CCNs like aphasia have extraordinary non - verbal communication abilities through paralinguistics , ges - ture , body language , personal space , eye gaze , appearance and the use of low - tech artifacts [ 73 ] . Discreet and wearable AAC could CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Curtis et al . enhance these embodied and often faster forms of communicative expression [ 6 ] . In contrast , pre - existing high - tech AAC is often prominently external and separate from the user’s body – fostering slow communication rates 17 and creating a visible physical barrier with the communication partner 18 – leading to eventual commu - nication breakdowns and misalignments [ 6 , 31 , 32 ] . In contrast , discreet and wearable devices can circumvent debilitating physical prominence with a less visible form factor . Equally , this finding builds upon the larger objective of high - tech AAC that augments rather than automates [ 54 ] . Indeed , many of our participants ac - knowledged the importance of preparation , routinizing and not wanting technology to impact their daily autonomy . Discreet and wearable AAC can certainly serve communities with CCNs without overstepping personal boundaries and disrupting habits – with the less visible AAC form factor augmenting and supporting users’ communication discreetly [ 54 ] . Potentially even allowing users to practice and rehearse future interactions rather than perform these human interactions on behalf of the user . Reflecting on the outcomes of the complementary two focus groups together – participants with aphasia did not advocate for the most invisible AAC designs like the Prompt Me Out earable and instead preferred the more visible and tangible badge and smart - watch form factors . However , the STT Badge output from the user - centred design process and AAC Badge built - in co - designed with participants with aphasia had very different functionality . Initially , the STT Badge was conceptualised to be worn by service staff and provide live transcription of their dialogue for members of the public – promoting accessibility , interdependence and discretion . Nonetheless , participants with aphasia instead advocated for their own visible and wearable AAC badge and public display – fully cus - tomisable to support communication of their personal needs with the wider public ( e . g . , selectively output the wearers underlying disability , personality traits and desired location ) . Importantly , par - ticipants with aphasia specified that they wanted the AAC badge to blend into clothing and become invisible at the users discre - tion . Turning to the smartwatch AAC form factor , the user - centred design process resulted in My Speech OS : a wearable symbolic SGD or VOCA . However , some participants with aphasia during the co - design process expressed discomfort with the smartwatch form - factor and My Speech OS small symbol size – instead advo - cating for more augmentative AAC , operation via voice input and features based on smart sensing . Indeed , participants co - designed smartwatch features were collectively more understated versus My Speech OS – they desired a smartwatch to support notifications to close family , make the public aware of the wearer’s aphasia and use smart sensing for personal health data ( i . e . , activity , sleeping and blood pressure ) . 6 . 2 Considerations for Future High - tech AAC Research This work provides further evidence for more direct engagement with communities with CCNs and co - design of human - centred 17 TheFiannacaetal . [ 20 ] AACrobat triestospeedupcommunicationratesviaamobile companion app . 18 TheSobeletal . [ 68 ] AACAwarenessDisplays presentsanovelpathwaytocircumvent this problem . high - tech AAC technologies . During the focus groups we made numerous key findings , which were only realised through partic - ipatory design activities . For example , several participants with aphasia regularly displayed an unexpected preference for voice input to control AAC technologies rather than the touch screen . Despite this , mainstream voice assistants such as Siri typically deny access because they do not provide enough time for people with aphasia to utter key vocal commands . These findings bolster sup - port for initiatives to design more accessible voice interfaces , such as the work of Clark et al . [ 11 ] . Consequently , future high - tech AAC research should use participatory design techniques to ex - plore the input / output interaction of high - tech AAC devices with communities . Multiple different input modalities can support ac - cessible control and more long - term AAC adoption . Altogether , our participants wanted AAC devices that use touch , camera , con - textual , gestural and vocal inputs . Recent research has initially explored novel forms of input to discreet and wearable technolo - gies such as smartwatch frameworks that support customisable hand gestures [ 84 ] and leverage biosignals for communication [ 40 ] – these modalities could be leveraged to improve high - tech AAC . Equally , research should explore a variety of AAC outputs – less information - dense and more subtle channels can still communicate meaning ( e . g . , motion outputted from AAC Sidekicks ) [ 70 ] . Indeed , during the focus groups , participants playfully suggested an AAC badge that used bright technicolour to draw public attention when necessary and outputs emojis to communicate the user’s current emotion . These novel outputs beyond the audio output of typical SGDs – can help communicate meaning quickly and augment the user’s own pre - existing communication abilities [ 54 ] . Many of the participants with aphasia were non - verbal but still communicate profoundly each day . Based on our themes , it would also be more ef - fective if high - tech AAC tools were designed to improve people with CCNs confidence with communication and self - esteem [ 10 ] . Dur - ing our focus group participants with aphasia repeatedly stressed the importance of confidence for communication . Indeed , as ar - gued by Dietz et al . [ 15 ] , AAC should serve as an empowering tool to encourage people with CCNs to pursue further independence and life - affirming activities – whilst providing support during any potential communication breakdowns . 6 . 3 Reflection on Divergent and Convergent Methods During the first focus group , which leveraged divergent design methods – we were initially concerned that the prepared materi - als would be too abstract , and limited and that participants with aphasia would consequently struggle to ideate creative solutions following the video prompts [ 83 ] . However , as previously noted by Valencia et al . , often in the co - design process less is indeed more [ 70 ] . Eventually , the first focus group was very productive with plenty of effective ideation and ultimately seven tangible low - fidelity AAC prototypes . Following this process , much like previous research , we also strongly recommend designing a high volume of solutions [ 28 , 70 ] , even building ideas with participants that do not feasibly work and encouraging participants to take creative risks . Envisioning the ( In ) Visibility of Discreet and Wearable AAC Devices CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Turning to the second focus group , the convergent co - design meth - ods employed were also broadly successful . In particular , the tangi - ble mediums of the three high - fidelity discreet and wearable AAC prototypes really supported participants’ ability to compellingly communicate the pros and cons of each device plus subsequent key amendments . Equally , the prototypes helped the research team seamlessly communicate to all participants the many possibilities of feasible discreet and wearable technologies . Transitioning from divergent to convergent design methods between two focus groups separated by a week was successful and did not confuse or cogni - tively burden participants . Divergent approaches employed much more participant creativity and effort . Importantly , divergent ap - proaches were greatly enriched by the contextualisation of familiar scenarios from the video prompts and scaffolding of the SLTs during eventual low - fidelity prototyping . Subsequently , during the second convergent focus group participants were much more vocal and keen to critique the high - fidelity prototypes because they were po - tentially imbued with greater confidence from the first focus group . In light of these findings , we can clearly see the merits of previ - ous AAC research , which has successfully deployed and iterated co - designed technology directly with people with CCNs [ 54 ] . 7 LIMITATIONS This study represents an initial exploration into ( in ) visible discreet and wearable AAC technologies to support people with CCNs . In terms of limitations , the work reflects a relatively small sample size and limited context – therefore results should be interpreted on the basis of a Western context and densely populated region with good public infrastructure . Amongst the small group , there was a wide spread in terms of technology literacy – all owned a smartphone – yet some participants were more comfortable with technology than others . Indeed , not all communities globally would have equivalent personal technology access . As previously acknowledged , people with disabilities are very diverse versus the general population [ 60 ] – consequently , not all people with CCNs and aphasia would be able to successfully use the high - fidelity prototypes and produce equivalent results . In terms of methods , we had two separate and distinct focus groups which transitioned between divergent and convergent co - design approaches . Perhaps future research may want to perform the iteration between divergent and convergent co - design within a singular longer focus group – directly feeding ideas from the divergent into the convergent phase . However , our study design deliberately suited the needs of our participants by maintaining flexible attendance for both focus groups and favouring weekly shorter focus groups to mitigate cognitive exertion . 8 CONCLUSION Discreet and wearable technologies are becoming ubiquitous – over time these ‘smart’ technologies and environments will only become more unobtrusive , immersive and intelligent [ 78 , 79 ] . Consequently , it is essential to leverage these technologies to support people with disabilities such as CCNs in their nascent phases . In this work , we envision the ( in ) visibility of potential discreet and wearable AAC technologies with communities with CCNs . We initially used user - centred design principles to build three high - fidelity technologies with people with disabilities , specialists and experts . Following this , we employed divergent and convergent co - design methods during two focus groups with 12 people living with aphasia and 3 SLTs . Our work contributes new knowledge regarding the ( in ) visibility of discreet and wearable AAC technologies – importantly , AAC users want control over the visibility of their devices and highly visible AAC is very useful in certain circumstances . We also provide considerations for future research on AAC form factors , embodied communication , user autonomy and communication confidence . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Many thanks to our focus group participants and Dr Sally McVicker from Aphasia Re - Connect . We would also like to thank Dr Rita Borgo for her support , comments and advice throughout the estab - lishment and writing of the paper . Many thanks to both Dr Alfie Abdul - Rahman and Ms Mubashara Akhtar for their helpful critiques of earlier drafts of this paper . We also thank the anonymous CHI 2023 reviewers for their valuable input . This work was supported in part by a UKRI EPSRC Studentship . AUTHORSHIP STATEMENT HC led the work , with guidance from TN . HC and TN conceptu - alised the work . WD developed the STT badge , with guidance from TN and HC . M - IT developed My Speech OS , with guidance from TN and HC . ZY developed Prompt Me Out , with guidance from TN and HC . HC and TN designed and led the main Focus Groups . HC conducted the main analysis of the focus groups , with feedback from all authors . HC wrote the paper , with guidance from TN . REFERENCES [ 1 ] In North America , Pure Offices Plato Close , Tachbrook Park , and Leamington Spa . 2014 . DynaVox T10 / T15 User’s Guide . ( 2014 ) . [ 2 ] Caroline Baker , Linda Worrall , Miranda Rose , Kyla Hudson , Brooke Ryan , and Leana O’Byrne . 2018 . A systematic review of rehabilitation interventions to prevent and treat depression in post - stroke aphasia . Disability and rehabilitation 40 , 16 ( 2018 ) , 1870 – 1892 . [ 3 ] Erin Beneteau . 2020 . Who are you asking ? : Qualitative methods for involving AAC users as primary research participants . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 13 . [ 4 ] Cynthia L Bennett , Erin Brady , and Stacy M Branham . 2018 . Interdependence as a frame for assistive technology research and design . In Proceedings of the 20th international acm sigaccess conference on computers and accessibility . 161 – 173 . [ 5 ] MarceloLBerthier . 2005 . Poststrokeaphasia . Drugs & aging 22 , 2 ( 2005 ) , 163 – 182 . [ 6 ] Filip Bircanin , Bernd Ploderer , Laurianne Sitbon , Andrew A Bayor , and Margot Brereton . 2019 . ChallengesandopportunitiesinusingAugmentativeandAlterna - tive Communication ( AAC ) technologies : Design considerations for adults with severe disabilities . In Proceedings of the 31st Australian Conference on Human - Computer - Interaction . 184 – 196 . [ 7 ] Jordan L Boyd - Graber , Sonya S Nikolova , Karyn A Moffatt , Kenrick C Kin , Joshua Y Lee , Lester W Mackey , Marilyn M Tremaine , and Maria M Klawe . 2006 . Participatory design with proxies : developing a desktop - PDA system to support people with aphasia . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in computing systems . 151 – 160 . [ 8 ] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke . 2012 . Thematic analysis . American Psycho - logical Association . [ 9 ] VirginiaBraunandVictoriaClarke . 2019 . Reflectingonreflexivethematicanalysis . Qualitative research in sport , exercise and health 11 , 4 ( 2019 ) , 589 – 597 . [ 10 ] Kyla Brown , Linda Worrall , Bronwyn Davidson , and Tami Howe . 2011 . Exploring speech – language pathologists’ perspectives about living successfully with apha - sia . International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders 46 , 3 ( 2011 ) , 300 – 311 . [ 11 ] Leigh Clark , Benjamin R . Cowan , Abi Roper , Stephen Lindsay , and Owen Sheers . 2020 . Speech Diversity and Speech Interfaces : Considering an Inclusive Future through Stammering ( CUI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 24 , 3 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3405755 . 3406139 [ 12 ] ChrisCode , GayleHemsley , andManfredHerrmann . 1999 . Theemotionalimpact ofaphasia . In Seminarsinspeechandlanguage , Vol . 20 . ©1999byThiemeMedical CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Curtis et al . Publishers , Inc . , 19 – 31 . [ 13 ] Arthur Cropley . 2006 . In praise of convergent thinking . Creativity research journal 18 , 3 ( 2006 ) , 391 – 404 . [ 14 ] Humphrey Curtis , Timothy Neate , and Carlota Vazquez Gonzalez . 2022 . State of the Art in AAC : A Systematic Review and Taxonomy . State of the Art in AAC : A Systematic Review and Taxonomy ( 2022 ) , 23 pages . [ 15 ] Aimee Dietz , Sarah E Wallace , and Kristy Weissling . 2020 . Revisiting the role of augmentativeandalternativecommunicationinaphasiarehabilitation . American journal of speech - language pathology 29 , 2 ( 2020 ) , 909 – 913 . [ 16 ] Elizabeth Ellcessor . 2010 . Bridging disability divides : A critical history of web content accessibility through 2001 . Information , communication & society 13 , 3 ( 2010 ) , 289 – 308 . [ 17 ] Annette Estes , Vanessa Rivera , Matthew Bryan , Philip Cali , and Geraldine Daw - son . 2011 . Discrepanciesbetweenacademicachievementandintellectualabilityin higher - functioning school - aged children with autism spectrum disorder . Journal of autism and developmental disorders 41 , 8 ( 2011 ) , 1044 – 1052 . [ 18 ] Kelly Farquharson , Michelle Therrien , Andrea Barton - Hulsey , and Ann F Brandt . 2022 . How to recruit , support , and retain speech - language pathologists in public schools . Journal of School Leadership 32 , 3 ( 2022 ) , 225 – 245 . [ 19 ] Heather A Faucett , Kate E Ringland , Amanda LL Cullen , and Gillian R Hayes . 2017 . ( In ) visibility in disability and assistive technology . ACM Transactions on Accessible Computing ( TACCESS ) 10 , 4 ( 2017 ) , 1 – 17 . [ 20 ] Alexander Fiannaca , Ann Paradiso , Mira Shah , and Meredith Ringel Morris . 2017 . AACrobat : Using mobile devices to lower communication barriers and provide autonomy with gaze - based AAC . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing . 683 – 695 . [ 21 ] Amanda Fleury , Gloria Wu , and Tom Chau . 2019 . A wearable fabric - based speech - generating device : system design and case demonstration . Disability and Rehabilitation : Assistive Technology 14 , 5 ( 2019 ) , 434 – 444 . [ 22 ] The Tavistock Trust for Aphasia . 2022 . Tavistock Trust Homepage . ( 2022 ) . [ 23 ] Christopher Frauenberger . 2015 . Disability and technology : A critical realist perspective . In Proceedings of the 17th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers & Accessibility . 89 – 96 . [ 24 ] RosemarieGarland - Thomson . 2017 . Buildingaworldwithdisabilityinit . Culture – theory – disability : encounters between disability studies and cultural studies ( 2017 ) , 51 – 62 . [ 25 ] Bhavya Ghai and Klaus Mueller . 2021 . Fluent : An AI Augmented Writing Tool for People who Stutter . In The 23rd International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility . 1 – 8 . [ 26 ] CarolHeinsGonzalesa , GondyLeroya , andGianlucaDeLeob . 2009 . Augmentative and Alternative Communication Technologies . ( 2009 ) , 1 – 17 . [ 27 ] Joy P Guilford . 1967 . Creativity : Yesterday , today and tomorrow . The Journal of Creative Behavior 1 , 1 ( 1967 ) , 3 – 14 . [ 28 ] Florian Güldenpfennig . 2018 . Tailor - made Accessible Computers : An Interac - tive Toolkit for Iterative Co - Design . In Proceedings of the Twelfth International Conference on Tangible , Embedded , and Embodied Interaction . 231 – 236 . [ 29 ] D Jeffery Higginbotham , Howard Shane , Susanne Russell , and Kevin Caves . 2007 . Access to AAC : Present , past , and future . Augmentative and alternative communication 23 , 3 ( 2007 ) , 243 – 257 . [ 30 ] Gareth Iacobucci . 2017 . A service under pressure . BMJ 356 ( 2017 ) , 2 pages . [ 31 ] Seray Ibrahim , Asimina Vasalou , and Michael Clarke . 2017 . Rethinking technol - ogy design for and with children who have severe speech & physical disabilities . Communication Matters 2017 National AAC Conference 32 ( 2017 ) , 29 – 31 . [ 32 ] Seray B Ibrahim , Asimina Vasalou , and Michael Clarke . 2018 . Design opportu - nities for AAC and children with severe speech and physical impairments . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 13 . [ 33 ] IDC . 2020 . Worldwide wearables market forecast to maintain double - digit growth in 2020 and through 2024 . https : / / www . idc . com / getdoc . jsp ? containerId = prUS46885820 [ 34 ] Dhruv Jain , Hung Ngo , Pratyush Patel , Steven Goodman , Leah Findlater , and Jon Froehlich . 2020 . SoundWatch : Exploring smartwatch - based deep learning approaches to support sound awareness for deaf and hard of hearing users . In The 22nd international ACM SIGACCESS conference on computers and accessibility . 1 – 13 . [ 35 ] Shaun K Kane , Barbara Linam - Church , Kyle Althoff , and Denise McCall . 2012 . What we talk about : designing a context - aware communication tool for people with aphasia . In Proceedings of the 14th international ACM SIGACCESS conference on Computers and accessibility . 49 – 56 . [ 36 ] Saili S Kulkarni and Jessica Parmar . 2017 . Culturally and linguistically diverse student and family perspectives of AAC . Augmentative and Alternative Commu - nication 33 , 3 ( 2017 ) , 170 – 180 . [ 37 ] Janice Light and David McNaughton . 2012 . The changing face of augmentative and alternative communication : Past , present , and future challenges . Augmenta - tive and Alternative Communication 28 , 4 ( 2012 ) , 197 – 204 . [ 38 ] Janice Light , David McNaughton , David Beukelman , Susan Koch Fager , Melanie Fried - Oken , Thomas Jakobs , and Erik Jakobs . 2019 . Challenges and opportuni - ties in augmentative and alternative communication : Research and technology development to enhance communication and participation for individuals with complex communication needs . Augmentative and Alternative Communication 35 , 1 ( 2019 ) , 1 – 12 . [ 39 ] Stephen Lindsay , Daniel Jackson , Guy Schofield , and Patrick Olivier . 2012 . En - gaging older people using participatory design . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1199 – 1208 . [ 40 ] Fannie Liu , Chunjong Park , Yu Jiang Tham , Tsung - Yu Tsai , Laura Dabbish , Geoff Kaufman , andAndrésMonroy - Hernández . 2021 . Significantotter : Understanding theroleofbiosignalsincommunication . In Proceedingsofthe2021CHIConference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 15 . [ 41 ] Liberator Ltd . 2022 . Liberator Homepage . ( 2022 ) . [ 42 ] Lingraphica Ltd . 2022 . Lingraphica Homepage . ( 2022 ) . [ 43 ] Stephen J Macdonald , Lesley Deacon , Jackie Nixon , Abisope Akintola , Anna Gillingham , Jacqueline Kent , Gillian Ellis , Debbie Mathews , Abolaji Ismail , Sylvia Sullivan , et al . 2018 . ‘The invisible enemy’ : disability , loneliness and isolation . Disability & Society 33 , 7 ( 2018 ) , 1138 – 1159 . [ 44 ] Kelly Mack , Emma McDonnell , Venkatesh Potluri , Maggie Xu , Jailyn Zabala , Jeffrey Bigham , Jennifer Mankoff , and Cynthia Bennett . 2022 . Anticipate and Adjust : Cultivating Access in Human - Centered Methods . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 18 . [ 45 ] Azeem Majeed , Edward John Maile , and Andrew B Bindman . 2020 . The primary care response to COVID - 19 in England’s National Health Service . Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine 113 , 6 ( 2020 ) , 208 – 210 . [ 46 ] David McNaughton , Diane Bryen , Sarah Blackstone , Michael Williams , and Pamela Kennedy . 2012 . Young adults with complex communication needs : Re - search and development in AAC for a “diverse” population . Assistive Technology 24 , 1 ( 2012 ) , 45 – 53 . [ 47 ] David McNaughton and Janice Light . 2013 . The iPad and mobile technology revolution : Benefits and challenges for individuals who require augmentative and alternative communication . , 107 – 116 pages . [ 48 ] Sally Millar , Janet Scott , et al . 1998 . What is augmentative and alternative com - munication ? An introduction . Augmentative Communication in Practice 2 ( 1998 ) , 1 – 92 . [ 49 ] KarynMoffatt , GolnooshPourshahid , andRonaldMBaecker . 2017 . Augmentative and alternative communication devices for aphasia : the emerging role of “smart” mobile devices . Universal Access in the Information Society 16 , 1 ( 2017 ) , 115 – 128 . [ 50 ] Alison Moorcroft , Nerina Scarinci , and Carly Meyer . 2020 . ‘We were just kind of handed it and then it was smoke bombed by everyone’ : How do external stake - holders contribute to parent rejection and the abandonment of AAC systems ? InternationalJournalofLanguage & CommunicationDisorders 55 , 1 ( 2020 ) , 59 – 69 . [ 51 ] Timothy Neate , Aikaterini Bourazeri , Abi Roper , Simone Stumpf , and Stephanie Wilson . 2019 . Co - createdpersonas : Engagingandempoweringuserswithdiverse needs within the design process . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1 – 12 . [ 52 ] TimothyNeate , AbiRoper , StephanieWilson , JaneMarshall , andMadelineCruice . 2020 . CreaTable content and tangible interaction in Aphasia . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 14 . [ 53 ] ChristopherSNorrie , AnnaluWaller , andElizabethFSHannah . 2021 . Establishing Context : AACDeviceAdoptionandSupportinaSpecial - EducationSetting . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 28 , 2 ( 2021 ) , 1 – 30 . [ 54 ] Mmachi God’sglory Obiorah , Anne Marie Marie Piper , and Michael Horn . 2021 . Designing AACs for people with aphasia dining in restaurants . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 14 . [ 55 ] Eliada Pampoulou . 2019 . Speech and language therapists’ views about AAC system acceptance by people with acquired communication disorders . Disability and Rehabilitation : Assistive Technology 14 , 5 ( 2019 ) , 471 – 478 . [ 56 ] Phil Parette and Marcia Scherer . 2004 . Assistive technology use and stigma . Education and Training in Developmental Disabilities 39 , 3 ( 2004 ) , 217 – 226 . [ 57 ] Susie Parr . 2007 . Living with severe aphasia : Tracking social exclusion . Aphasiol - ogy 21 , 1 ( 2007 ) , 98 – 123 . [ 58 ] Jennifer Pearson , Simon Robinson , and Matt Jones . 2015 . It’s About Time : Smart - watches as public displays . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1257 – 1266 . [ 59 ] Jennifer Pearson , Simon Robinson , Matt Jones , Anirudha Joshi , Shashank Ahire , Deepak Sahoo , and Sriram Subramanian . 2017 . Chameleon devices : investigat - ing more secure and discreet mobile interactions via active camouflaging . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 5184 – 5196 . [ 60 ] Helen Petrie . 1997 . User - centred design and evaluation of adaptive and assistive technology for disabled and elderly users . it - Information Technology 39 , 2 ( 1997 ) , 7 – 12 . [ 61 ] Kathryn E Ringland , Christine T Wolf , Heather Faucett , Lynn Dombrowski , and GillianRHayes . 2016 . " WillIalwaysbenotsocial ? " Re - ConceptualizingSociality in the Context of a Minecraft Community for Autism . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1256 – 1269 . [ 62 ] Tobias Röddiger , Christopher Clarke , Paula Breitling , Tim Schneegans , Haibin Zhao , Hans Gellersen , and Michael Beigl . 2022 . Sensing with Earables : A Sys - tematic Literature Review and Taxonomy of Phenomena . PACM on Interactive , Envisioning the ( In ) Visibility of Discreet and Wearable AAC Devices CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Mobile , Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 6 , 3 ( 2022 ) , 135 . [ 63 ] Robert J Ruben . 2000 . Redefining the survival of the fittest : communication disorders in the 21st century . The Laryngoscope 110 , 2 ( 2000 ) , 241 – 241 . [ 64 ] Tom Shakespeare et al . 2006 . The social model of disability . The disability studies reader 2 ( 2006 ) , 197 – 204 . [ 65 ] Howard C Shane , Sarah Blackstone , Gregg Vanderheiden , Michael Williams , and Frank DeRuyter . 2012 . Using AAC technology to access the world . Assistive technology 24 , 1 ( 2012 ) , 3 – 13 . [ 66 ] Kristen Shinohara and Jacob O Wobbrock . 2011 . In the shadow of misperception : assistive technology use and social interactions . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 705 – 714 . [ 67 ] Kristen Shinohara and Jacob O Wobbrock . 2016 . Self - conscious or self - confident ? A diary study conceptualizing the social accessibility of assistive technology . ACM Transactions on Accessible Computing ( TACCESS ) 8 , 2 ( 2016 ) , 1 – 31 . [ 68 ] Kiley Sobel , Alexander Fiannaca , Jon Campbell , Harish Kulkarni , Ann Paradiso , Ed Cutrell , and Meredith Ringel Morris . 2017 . Exploring the design space of AAC awareness displays . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 2890 – 2903 . [ 69 ] Carla Tamburro , Timothy Neate , Abi Roper , and Stephanie Wilson . 2020 . Ac - cessible creativity with a comic spin . In The 22nd International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility . 1 – 11 . [ 70 ] StephanieValencia , MarkSteidl , MichaelRivera , CynthiaBennett , JeffreyBigham , and Henny Admoni . 2021 . Aided Nonverbal Communication through Physical Expressive Objects . In The 23rd International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility . 1 – 11 . [ 71 ] Mieke van de Sandt - Koenderman . 2004 . High - tech AAC and aphasia : Widening horizons ? Aphasiology 18 , 3 ( 2004 ) , 245 – 263 . [ 72 ] W Mieke E van de Sandt - Koenderman , Jiska Wiegers , Sandra M Wielaert , Hugo J Duivenvoorden , and Gerard M Ribbers . 2007 . High - tech AAC and severe aphasia : Candidacy for TouchSpeak ( TS ) . Aphasiology 21 , 5 ( 2007 ) , 459 – 474 . [ 73 ] Ineke van der Meulen , W Mieke E van de Sandt - Koenderman , Hugo J Duiv - envoorden , and Gerard M Ribbers . 2010 . Measuring verbal and non - verbal communication in aphasia : reliability , validity , and sensitivity to change of the Scenario Test . International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders 45 , 4 ( 2010 ) , 424 – 435 . [ 74 ] Dimitri Vargemidis , Kathrin Gerling , Vero Vanden Abeele , Luc Geurts , and Katta Spiel . 2021 . Irrelevant Gadgets or a Source of Worry : Exploring Wearable Ac - tivity Trackers with Older Adults . ACM Transactions on Accessible Computing ( TACCESS ) 14 , 3 ( 2021 ) , 1 – 28 . [ 75 ] Jaipreet Virdi . 2020 . Hearing happiness : deafness cures in history . University of Chicago Press . [ 76 ] Annalu Waller . 2019 . Telling tales : unlocking the potential of AAC technologies . Internationaljournaloflanguage & communicationdisorders 54 , 2 ( 2019 ) , 159 – 169 . [ 77 ] Peter Washington , Catalin Voss , Nick Haber , Serena Tanaka , Jena Daniels , Carl Feinstein , Terry Winograd , and Dennis Wall . 2016 . A wearable social interaction aid for children with autism . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 2348 – 2354 . [ 78 ] Mark Weiser . 1993 . Hot topics - ubiquitous computing . Computer 26 , 10 ( 1993 ) , 71 – 72 . [ 79 ] Mark Weiser . 1999 . The computer for the 21st century . ACM SIGMOBILE mobile computing and communications review 3 , 3 ( 1999 ) , 3 – 11 . [ 80 ] Anne Werner and Kirsti Malterud . 2003 . It is hard work behaving as a credible patient : encounters between women with chronic pain and their doctors . Social science & medicine 57 , 8 ( 2003 ) , 1409 – 1419 . [ 81 ] Joshua M Wiener and Jane Tilly . 2002 . Population ageing in the United States of America : implications for public programmes . International journal of epidemiol - ogy 31 , 4 ( 2002 ) , 776 – 781 . [ 82 ] Kristin Williams , Karyn Moffatt , Jonggi Hong , Yasmeen Faroqi - Shah , and Leah Findlater . 2016 . The cost of turning heads : A comparison of a head - worn display to a smartphone for supporting persons with aphasia in conversation . In Pro - ceedings of the 18th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility . 111 – 120 . [ 83 ] StephanieWilson , AbiRoper , JaneMarshall , JuliaGalliers , NiamhDevane , Tracey Booth , and Celia Woolf . 2015 . Codesign for people with aphasia through tangible design languages . CoDesign 11 , 1 ( 2015 ) , 21 – 34 . [ 84 ] Xuhai Xu , Jun Gong , Carolina Brum , Lilian Liang , Bongsoo Suh , Shivam Kumar Gupta , Yash Agarwal , Laurence Lindsey , Runchang Kang , Behrooz Shahsavari , et al . 2022 . Enabling hand gesture customization on wrist - worn devices . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 19 .