A functional basis for engineering design : Reconciling and evolving previous efforts Julie Hirtz , Robert B . Stone , Daniel A . McAdams , Simon Szykman , Kristin L . Wood Abstract In engineering design , all products and artifacts have some intended reason behind their existence : the product or artifact function . Functional modeling provides an abstract , yet direct , method for understanding and representing an overall product or artifact function . Functional modeling also strategically guides design ac - tivities such as problem decomposition , physical model - ing , product architecting , concept generation , and team organization . A formal function representation is needed to support functional modeling , and a standardized set of function - related terminology leads to repeatable and meaningful results from such a representation . We refer to this representation as a functional basis ; in this paper , we seek to reconcile and integrate two independent research efforts into a signiﬁcantly evolved functional basis . These efforts include research from the National Institute of Standards and Technology and two US universities , and their industrial partners . The overall approach for inte - grating the functional representations and the ﬁnal results are presented . This approach also provides a mechanism for evaluating whether future revisions are needed to the functional basis and , if so , how to proceed . The integration process is discussed relative to differences , similarities , insights into the representations , and product validation . Based on the results , a more versatile and comprehensive design vocabulary emerges . This vocabulary will greatly enhance and expand the frontiers of research in design repositories , product architecture , design synthesis , and general product modeling . Keywords Functional modeling , Functional languages , Design representation 1 Introduction 1 . 1 Scope In engineering design , the end goal is the creation of an artifact , product , system , or process that performs a function or functions to fulﬁll customer need ( s ) . Concep - tualizing , deﬁning , or understanding an artifact , product , or system , in terms of function , is a fundamental aspect of engineering design ( Pahl and Beitz 1984 ; Hubka et al . 1988 ; Ulrich and Eppinger 1995 ; Ullman 1997 ; Otto and Wood 2001 ) . Figure 1 illustrates two products with functional labels associated with their physical embodiments . This type of representation provides an abstraction to concep - tualize and evolve designs and also applies to many stages of the product or artifact development process : product architecture , concept generation , and physical modeling as examples . In this paper , we extend the basic understanding of function in engineering design . Speciﬁcally , we explore the differences and similarities among two prior efforts to create a functional basis ( Little et al . 1997 ; Szykman et al . 1999a ; Stone and Wood 2000 ) . Our hypothesis for this research is that , though developed independently with different immediate goals , these efforts toward under - standing function explored the same fundamental issues , and thus should have discernable similarities and com - plementary and resolvable differences . In addressing this hypothesis , the potential exists to evolve our understand - ing of functional modeling , and , importantly , to converge to a functional basis that will cover engineering design activities at many scales of product complexity . In the remainder of this paper , we present the moti - vation , background , approach , results and conclusions of this research . As speciﬁc motivation , we present several immediate and exciting applications for a common func - tional design vocabulary . As background , we brieﬂy summarize the most recent and independent efforts of the authors ( Szykman et al . 1999a ; Stone and Wood 2000 ) . The methodology , approach , and speciﬁcs of a comparison and resolution effort are then presented . The resulting Received : 1 April 2001 / Revised : 28 November 2001 / Accepted : 29 November 2001 / Published online : 2 February 2002 (cid:1) Springer - Verlag 2002 J . Hirtz , R . B . Stone ( & ) Design Engineering Laboratory , Department of Basic Engineering , University of Missouri - Rolla , Rolla , MO 65409 - 0210 , USA E - mail : rstone @ umr . edu Tel . : + 1 - 573 - 3414086 Fax : + 1 - 573 - 3416593 D . A . McAdams Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering and Engineering Mechanics , University of Missouri - Rolla , Rolla , MO 65409 - 0050 , USA S . Szykman Manufacturing Systems Integration Division National Institute of Standards and Technology , Building 220 , Room A356 , 100 Bureau Drive , Stop 8263 , Gaithersburg , Md . 20899 - 8263 , USA K . L . Wood Manufacturing and Design Research Laboratory , Department of Mechanical Engineering , University of Texas , Austin , TX 78712 - 1063 , USA Research in Engineering Design 13 ( 2002 ) 65 – 82 DOI 10 . 1007 / s00163 - 001 - 0008 - 3 65 functional basis is fully documented , and the paper con - cludes with insights gained from the research process . 1 . 2Motivation and applications Several factors motivate the creation of a functional basis for mechanical design . What follows are several speciﬁc uses for functional modeling . These practical applications serve both as motivation for , and contributions to , the development of a clear and concise functional basis ; as the functional basis is used , weaknesses are identiﬁed and improvements are made . 1 . 2 . 1 Design repository The NIST Design Repository Project is an ongoing project at the National Institute of Standards and Technology ( NIST ) < 001 > 1 that involves research toward providing a technical foundation for the creation of design repositories – repositories of heterogeneous knowledge and data that are designed to support representation , capture , sharing , and reuse of corporate and general design knowledge . The infrastructure being developed consists of formal repre - sentations for design artifact knowledge and web - based interfaces for creating repositories . Through the course of this project , a variety of research issues have arisen that will in the long term affect the way in which design repositories are implemented and used . These issues include : 1 . Development of an information - modeling framework to support modeling of engineering artifacts to provide a more comprehensive knowledge representation than traditional CAD systems . 2 . Implementation of interfaces for creating , editing , and browsing design repositories that are easy to use and effective in conveying information that is desired . 3 . The use of standard representations , when possible , and contribution to long - term standards development where standards currently do not exist ( e . g . , represen - tation of engineering function ) . 4 . Development of taxonomies of standardized terminol - ogy to help provide consistency in , and across , design repositories , as well as to facilitate indexing , search , and retrieval of information from them . The degree to which these issues have been addressed , to date , varies within the NIST Design Repository Project . However , these issues are all important to the role of design repositories in industry , and ultimately all will have to be resolved by the research community before a successful transition of design repositories into engi - neering industrial practice is achieved . Other issues , such as security of communications and protection of intel - lectual property when sharing or exchanging design knowledge , have been recognized but are beyond the scope of this paper . Within efforts directed toward the development of knowledge representations and vocabularies in this pro - ject , there has been a particular focus in the area of en - gineering function and associated ﬂows . This focus has been driven by requirements articulated at an industry workshop held at NIST , where discussion of the needs associated with representation of engineering function arose in three different breakout sessions . Speciﬁc state - ments indicated ( 1 ) a need for representation of function in CAD , in addition to geometry , ( 2 ) a need for a ﬁxed representation scheme for modeling function , and ( 3 ) a need for a commonly agreed set of functions performed by mechanical systems ( Szykman et al . 1998 ) . 1 . 1 . 2 Design for Six Sigma with Ford Motor Company Besides the NIST application , the authors are also working with Ford Motor Company to develop methods for assuring the quality of their products . One such effort is the ‘‘Design for Six Sigma’’ program . The intent of this program is to develop and implement a repeatable process for producing Fig . 1 . Example Skil cordless screwdriver and automobile seat with functional labels . ( Use of any commercial product or company names in this paper is intended to provide readers with information regarding the implementation of the research described , and does not imply recommendation or endorsement by the authors or their organizations ) 1 NIST is a national lab under the US Department of Commerce . It is responsible for identifying standards and emerging technologies as they apply to US commerce . Res Eng Design 13 ( 2002 ) 66 six - sigma designs with respect to customer needs . An integral component of the program is to create ‘‘transfer functions , ’’ either analytically or experimentally , that di - rectly measure the customer needs . Functional modeling , as adopted in the program , is a key tool used in the de - velopment of these programs . At recent training sessions with engineers across Ford’s organization , participants described functional modeling , and associated represen - tations , as a fundamental tool that will greatly assist in the practical implementation of Design for Six Sigma . 1 . 2 . 3 General engineering design and product development The need for formalized representations in function - based design is often overlooked in the literature ; however , it is an issue of critical importance for a number of reasons . The ﬁrst reason is the need to reduce ambiguity at the modeling level . Ambiguities can occur when multiple terms are used to mean the same things , or when the same term is used with multiple meanings . The distillation of a large body of terms into a concise basis does not eliminate this problem entirely , but it signiﬁcantly lessens its occurrence . A related issue is that of uniqueness , not at the level of individual terms as with synonyms , but at the concept level . The larger the number of terms there are in a vocabulary , the more different ways there are to model or describe a given design concept . This makes processing of information that has been represented more difﬁcult , whether it be a human trying to interpret information modeled by somebody else , or whether it be algorithms developed for function - based reasoning or design auto - mation . This problem is mitigated by taking a minimalist approach regarding terminology and formal vocabularies . In practice , it is impractical to have a vocabulary that allows all concepts to be modeled in only one unique way because it is the ﬂexibility required for representation of a broad set of concepts that results in multiple ways of expressing the same concept . However , to whatever extent ambiguity problems at the concept level can be reduced , interpreting information that is represented can be made easier . A third reason for developing a functional basis is that it increases the uniformity of information within func - tional models . This uniformity will facilitate the exchange of function information among distributed researchers and developers , and will greatly simplify the task of indexing and retrieving information for the purposes of function - based searches and query capabilities . Several other justiﬁcations exist for formal represen - tations of function for engineering design . These include increasing the expressiveness of designers for exploring and communicating designs , creating early and repeat - able physical models of products at a high - level of abstraction , decomposing design problems into realizable sub - problems , systematically searching for analogies to solve design problems , and synthesizing designs with computable formulations ( Antonsson and Cagan 2001 ) . These justiﬁcations underscore the expanding frontiers offered by the continued development of a functional basis . 2Background and related work 2 . 1 Functional modeling research The functional basis research draws its inspiration from prior work in Value Engineering dating back to the 1940s ( Miles 1972 ; Akiyama 1991 ; VAI 1993 ) . Value Engineering assigns a fraction of the product’s cost to each of the elemental functions describing the overall product function to redesign high - cost functions to reduce manu - facturing cost . Active verb – object descriptions are given for different product domains to describe a product’s function , though no single comprehensive list exists . Other researchers have recognized the importance of a common vocabulary for broader issues of design . To ac - curately archive and retrieve helicopter failure informa - tion , Collins et al . ( 1976 ) develop a list of 105 unique descriptions of mechanical function . Here , the mechanical function descriptions are limited to helicopter systems , do not utilize any classiﬁcation scheme nor do they discrim - inate between function and ﬂow . In modern , systematic , function - based design meth - odologies , the search for a consistent functional vocabu - lary is motivated by the related needs of a clear stopping point in the functional modeling process and a consistent level of functional detail . Pahl and Beitz ( 1984 ) list ﬁve generally valid functions and three types of ﬂows at a very high level of abstraction . Hundal ( 1990 ) formulates six function classes with more speciﬁc functions in each class , but does not exhaustively list mechanical design functions . Another approach uses the 20 subsystem representations from living systems theory to represent mechanical design functions ( Koch et al . 1994 ) . Kirschman and Fadel ( 1998 ) propose four basic mechanical functions groups , but vary from the standard verb – object sub - function description popular with most methodologies . A further review of function classiﬁcation is found in Hubka and Eder ( 2001 ) . In a separate development , Soviet Union researchers created the Theory of Inventive Problem Solving ( TIPS ) , which describes all mechanical design with a set of 30 functional descriptions ( Altshuller 1984 ) . The TIPS work represents a credible source owing to its study of over 2 million patents to formulate its theory and the functional descriptions . Malmqvist et al . ( 1996 ) compare TIPS with the Pahl and Beitz methodology and note that the detailed vocabulary of TIPS would beneﬁt from a more carefully structured class hierarchy using the Pahl and Beitz func - tions at the highest level . More recently , the authors of this paper have worked on two independent research efforts to develop a consis - tent functional vocabulary which are reviewed next . 2 . 2 The NIST research effort In 1999 , as part of work involving the development of a generic representation for product knowledge , researchers at NIST undertook an effort to develop generic taxonomies of engineering functions and associated ﬂows ( Szykman et al . 1999a ) . In this context , a taxonomy is a hierarchical classiﬁcation of terms . The intent of these taxonomies of J . Hirtz et al . : A functional basis for engineering design 67 terms was to provide a classiﬁcation of types that would be associated with various knowledge entities ( which can be thought of as data structures ) within the product knowl - edge representation . In addition to engineering functions and associated ﬂows , other knowledge entities include artifacts , behaviors , forms , and others ( Szykman et al . 2001 ) . This paper focuses on that portion of the NIST research that involved the concepts of function and ﬂow . The aim of that work was to generate taxonomies that are as atomic as possible , yet generic enough to allow modeling of a broad variety of engineering artifacts . An excerpt of the NIST function taxonomy is shown in Fig . 2a . The representation was developed to provide an infrastructure to facilitate the capture and exchange of function information , among researchers at present , and eventually in industry by contributing to interoperability between design systems , be they commercial or developed internally within a company . The organization of the NIST ﬂow taxonomy follows a traditional approach set forth by Pahl and Beitz ( 1984 ) , whereby ﬂows are divided into material , energy and signal ﬂows . It is important to note that the categorizations used in the taxonomies are not unique , but are rather a matter of convenience . The organization of the taxonomy is a particular instance of a view of the terminology it contains . For example , the ﬂow taxonomy is broken down by domain ( mechanical , electrical , thermal , etc . ) , each having various terms hierarchically below them . However , an alternative categorization could have organized them by the mapping of variable types across domains . The importance is placed on the content of the taxonomy rather than the speciﬁc approach to organizing the terms . An extensive review of the literature ( over 40 articles from researchers across four continents ) yielded a large body of function - and ﬂow - based terminology within the context of engineering function . From these bodies of ter - minology , an extensive list of functions and related ﬂows was extracted . The lists of functions and ﬂows were then distilled into considerably smaller ones by removing syn - onyms , by eliminating functions that were specializations of more generic functions , and by eliminating ﬂows that were specializations of more generic types of ﬂows . The lists of functions and ﬂows were then categorized hierarchically and organized into taxonomies . The taxonomies developed at NIST contain over 130 functions and over 100 ﬂows . Additional details regarding the process of developing these taxonomies are presented in ( Szykman et al . 1999a ) , as are the full function and ﬂow taxonomies themselves . 2 . 3 The functional basis effort The functional basis research grew out of various researchers’ needs to describe and compare products functionally , and to create a formal function representa - tion that would advance design methods and lead to repeatable models . To describe a product’s functionality , an extension to the Pahl and Beitz function structure approach was developed . However , different researchers would represent the same product’s functionality with a different set of terms , making design communication , modeling , and computation difﬁcult . To alleviate this problem , Little et al . ( 1997 ) ﬁrst proposed a function and ﬂow representation as part of a product comparison method ( refer to Fig . 2b ) . This representation was developed empirically through the study of over 100 products . The ﬂow set adopted the Pahl and Beitz ﬂows of material , energy , and signal as their highest level and further speciﬁed them into two more detailed categorizations . The function set built on the previous work of Value Analysis and later Pahl and Beitz - inspired functional categorizations to include eight func - tion classes . As with the ﬂow set , the function classes were further broken down into two more detailed levels . The function and ﬂow sets were eventually given the name functional basis . The choice of the word basis was moti - vated by the authors’ desire to associate the qualities of a mathematical basis – linear independence and spanning the space – with a functional vocabulary of design . Stone et al . ( 2000a , 2000b ) and Stone and Wood ( 1999 ) applied and evolved the functional basis as part of a method to identify modular product architectures . Here the basis gave functional models a common vocabulary and identiﬁed a stopping point for decomposition by Fig . 2 . Excerpts ( partial listings ) of the NIST and Functional Basis Representations Res Eng Design 13 ( 2002 ) 68 specifying that function and ﬂow words be chosen from a certain level . Deﬁnitions for the ﬂow set were ﬁrst intro - duced in this work as well ( Stone 1997 ) . McAdams et al . ( 1999 ) applied the functional basis to product similarity computations . Later , the basis was used as part of a design - by - analogy method ( McAdams and Wood 2000 ) and a functional tolerancing method ( McAdams and Wood 1999 ) . The functional basis , complete with deﬁni - tions for functions and ﬂows , was presented by Stone and Wood ( 1999 , 2000 ) after reviewing over 30 articles from researchers on four continents . In addition , a study dem - onstrating the functional basis’ ability to improve repeat - ability of functional models among different designers was conducted ( Kurfman et al . 2000 ) . To date , the functional basis is founded on empirical studies of over 100 existing and original products repre - senting a broad variety of intended use . ( Figure 3 shows a past comparison with the general research ﬁeld . ) This foundation has greatly assisted the development of a number of design methods and solutions to industry design problems . Each new research endeavor adds to existing knowledge and enables this work to converge toward a more complete and defendable result . The research described in the following section demonstrates a signiﬁcant step towards this convergence . Through the cooperative and critical integration of two independent efforts , an important evolution of the functional basis is obtained . The positioning of the research among NIST , two universities , and industrial collaborators provides a conduit for its immediate application in practice . 3Reconciliation of the NIST taxonomy and the functional basis Examination of the two functional vocabularies reveals a high degree of similarity ( excerpts in Fig . 2 ) . Both research Fig . 3 . Comparison of earlier function representations with the functional basis J . Hirtz et al . : A functional basis for engineering design 69 efforts independently attempt to derive a standard list of functions and ﬂows that completely describe the electro - mechanical design space . In order to meet those goals , the authors agreed to take a critical look at both vocabularies and to reconcile and integrate the differences . 3 . 1 General approach The intent of the integrated functional basis is that the set of terms at a given level should provide complete coverage of all concepts within that category . For example , it should be possible to classify any ﬂow into material or signal or energy , and it should be possible to classify any solid material into object , particulate , composite , or aggregate . During the reconciliation process , a new term is added when it is necessary to do so in order to provide coverage to some area that is not currently fully covered . A new term should appear at the highest level possible such that the new terms and existing terms at that level provide as complete coverage as possible for the category under which the terms appear . This idea is illustrated in Fig . 4 . The new term must also be mutually exclusive with other terms at that level . If the term is not mutually exclusive but instead overlaps to some degree with a term at that level , then the following categorization algorithm is employed : 1 . The new term might be a subset of the existing term it overlaps with , and would therefore be bumped down to the next lower level . 2 . The new term might be a superset of the existing term it overlaps with , in which case the new term might replace the existing term and the existing term would be bumped down to the next lower level . 3 . The new term might be similar enough to an existing term that it might be categorized as a comparable term ( synonym ) rather than entering the basis as a new item . For example , the NIST ﬂow taxonomy did not include ‘‘Biological Energy’’ in its original formulation . It was clear where this ﬂow type would enter the representation . It would not go at the top level , because we do not expect to classify all ﬂows into material OR signal OR energy OR biological energy . Biological energy is a subset of Energy . We would expect to classify all energy ﬂows into Human OR Acoustic OR Biological OR [ . . . ] . So it is inserted at the second level of representation . By developing functional models at varying levels of granularity or reﬁnement , different levels of speciﬁcation are possible . These different levels of functional speciﬁ - cation are important for several reasons . In the design of new products , the customer needs , and thus functional requirements , are more difﬁcult to ascertain than in a redesign or evolutionary design effort . In general , ambig - uous customer needs result in the use of higher - level functions . More speciﬁc customer needs lead to the use of more speciﬁc types of functions . As in all modeling efforts in design , models should provide sufﬁcient precision to give designers the information necessary to make a design speciﬁcation , analysis , or decision . The two original functional vocabularies differ in the naming schemes employed for the levels of speciﬁcation . Stone and Wood offer a class / basic / ﬂow - restricted ( func - tions ) or sub - basic ( ﬂow ) level identiﬁcation scheme . In contrast , Szykman et al . do not name the levels to avoid differentiating between the signiﬁcance of terms at dif - ferent levels . In both vocabularies , the distinction between the levels has largely the same intent . Therefore , in the reconciled basis we label the three levels ( in descending order ) as class ( or primary ) , secondary and tertiary . Note that we retained the top - level categorization of class that is commonly used in functional modeling literature , but also recognize that this usage of the word class is different from that in other ﬁelds . As the level number increases , so does the speciﬁcation of the level . The tertiary level , for exam - ple , provides a more speciﬁc function and deﬁnition than the class or secondary levels , leading to speciﬁc technol - ogies or physical principles . In the previous functional basis efforts , the secondary level is referred to as basic . The secondary functions are intended to be used in the majority of engineering design as well as impart a mathematical connotation of a basis to the second level of functional decomposition . In other words , the basic functions are the smallest functional set spanning the functional space while remaining practical for use . Recognition and inclusion of the tertiary level of functions alters this view . Thus the classiﬁcation for both functions and ﬂows is uniﬁed and presented here as class , secondary , and tertiary . 3 . 2 Specific approach Our speciﬁc approach to reconciling the two functional vocabularies followed a three - step algorithm consisting of review , union , and reconciliation steps . The approach is shown schematically in Fig . 5 and the steps are described below . Fig . 4 . The hierarchical relationship between levels of speciﬁcation in the functional basis Fig . 5 . Speciﬁc approach followed to reconcile the two functional vocabularies Res Eng Design 13 ( 2002 ) 70 • Step 1 : Review . The latest versions of the functional basis ( Stone and Wood 2000 ) and the NIST function and ﬂow taxonomies ( Szykman et al . 1999a ) are reviewed , and deﬁnitions for each of the function and ﬂow terms are formulated ( within a product design context ) . • Step 2 : Union and intersection . The union of the two vocabularies is generated , creating a combined list of terms . Those terms that fall in the inter - section of the two sets form a core set of terms that are common to both . This unioning process is carried out at each level of the two vocabu - laries ( functions and ﬂows ) . At this point , a check is made to ensure that the core function and ﬂow terms do not overlap in meaning at each level . The function and ﬂow words that emerge in the difference of the two sets are temporarily placed in a holding category termed ‘‘suspense . ’’ Here suspense is used in the book - keeping sense to indicate a term that is set aside for further review before it is accepted or re - jected to the reconciled functional basis . • Step 3 : Reconciliation . Using the deﬁnitions , each sus - pense word is initially evaluated at the level it occupied in its original vocabulary . There are two possibilities : ( 1 ) If the suspense term is mutually exclusive ( i . e . , the deﬁnition is different from the other words’ meanings at that level ) , then it is added to the reconciled functional basis at that level . ( 2 ) If the meaning of the suspense term overlaps with other words at that level , the categorization algorithm of Sect . 3 . 1 is applied to ﬁnd its proper location . In all cases , the comparison is carried out with respect to product examples . Speciﬁcally , we judge a function term’s suitability based on whether or not it describes an operation that a product or device carries out on a ﬂow . This ensures that the reconciled functional basis will consist of only device functions , as opposed to user func - tions . For instance , a coffee maker ( the device ) imports the ﬂow of water while a person ( the user ) pours water into the coffee maker . 4Results A review of Szykman et al . yields three class ( primary ) ﬂows and six class ( primary ) functions , whereas Stone and Wood yields three class ( primary ) ﬂows and eight class ( primary ) functions . On the surface , the two works appear very similar . However , the differences emerge in the number of secondary and tertiary categories . Tables 1 and 2 detail the number of initial secondary and tertiary terms in the two lists of ﬂow ( Table 1 ) and function ( Table 2 ) representations and compare it with the reconciled count . In the two tables , the NIST taxonomies are denoted by NT , the Stone and Wood functional basis is denoted by FB , and the reconciled functional basis is denoted by RFB . As can be seen in Table 2 , in some instances one category in the NIST taxonomy corresponded to two separate categories in the original and reconciled function bases . In general , the NIST function and ﬂow terms at the lowest level are more detailed than the lowest level of the functional basis . The secondary level of the functional basis function set proved to be complete , in the sense of spanning a broad set of concepts and remaining non - repetitive , while the NIST taxonomy had more complete secondary ﬂows in terms of material . Through the process of integration , deﬁnitions for each representation were compared . Additions to the functional basis resulted in new or evolved deﬁnitions . Overlapping ﬂows and func - tions created integrated deﬁnitions or simple reﬁnements . The reconciled functional basis , resulting from the comparison and combination of the two vocabularies , is shown in Tables 3 , 4 , 5 . The reconciled ﬂow set in Table 3 still contains three class ( primary ) ﬂows : material , signal and energy . The material level has ﬁve further speciﬁed secondary categories with an expanded list of tertiary categories . The signal class has two further speciﬁed sec - ondary categories with an expanded list of tertiary cate - gories . The energy class has 13 further speciﬁed secondary categories with an expanded list of tertiary categories . Table 4 is a more speciﬁc breakdown of the energy class . To achieve more detail when specifying product infor - Table 1 . Level comparisons between the NIST taxonomy , the func - tional basis , and the reconciled functional basis ﬂow set Class ( Primary ) Secondary Tertiary Material ( NT ) 8 20 Material ( FB ) 4 0 Material ( RFB ) 6 11 Energy ( NT ) 11 7 Energy ( FB ) 12 5 Energy ( RFB ) 12 4 Signal ( NT ) 3 4 Signal ( FB ) 2 5 Signal ( RFB ) 2 7 Table 2 . Level comparisons between the NIST taxonomy , the functional basis , and the reconciled functional basis function set Class ( Primary ) Secondary Tertiary Usage - function ( NT ) 3 0 Provide ( FB ) 3 0 Provision ( RFB ) 2 2 Combination / distribution - function ( NT ) 10 0 Branch ( FB ) 4 0 Connect ( FB ) 2 0 Branch ( RFB ) 3 5 Connect ( RFB ) 2 3 Transformation - function ( NT ) 10 0 Convert ( FB ) 1 0 Convert ( RFB ) 1 0 Conveyance - function ( NT ) 13 0 Channel ( FB ) 4 0 Channel ( RFB ) 4 5 Signal / Control - function ( NT ) 32 0 Signal ( FB ) 4 0 Control Magnitude ( FB ) 3 0 Signal ( RFB ) 3 4 Control magnitude ( RFB ) 4 8 Assembly - function ( NT ) 21 0 Support ( FB ) 4 0 Support ( RFB ) 3 0 J . Hirtz et al . : A functional basis for engineering design 71 Table 4 . Power conjugate complements for the energy class of ﬂows Class ( Primary ) Secondary Tertiary Power conjugate complements Effort analogy Flow analogy Energy Effort Flow Human Force Velocity Acoustic Pressure Particle velocity Biological Pressure Volumetric ﬂow Chemical Afﬁnity Reaction rate Electrical Electromotive force Current Electromagnetic Effort Flow Optical Intensity Velocity Solar Intensity Velocity Hydraulic Pressure Volumetric ﬂow Magnetic Magnetomotive force Magnetic ﬂux rate Mechanical Effort Flow Rotational Torque Angular velocity Translational Force Linear velocity Pneumatic Pressure Mass ﬂow Radioactive / Nuclear Intensity Decay rate Thermal Temperature Heat ﬂow Table 3 . Functional basis reconciled ﬂow set Class ( Primary ) Secondary Tertiary Correspondents Material Human Hand , foot , head Gas Homogeneous Liquid Incompressible , compressible , homogeneous Solid Object Rigid - body , elastic - body , widget ParticulateComposite PlasmaMixture Gas – gas Liquid – liquid Solid – solid Aggregate Solid – liquid Liquid – gas Solid – gas Solid – liquid – gas Colloidal Aerosol Signal Status Auditory Tone , word OlfactoryTactile Temperature , pressure , roughness TasteVisual Position , displacement Control Analog Oscillatory Discrete Binary Energy HumanAcousticBiologicalChemicalElectricalElectromagnetic OpticalSolar HydraulicMagneticMechanical RotationalTranslational PneumaticRadioactive / Nuclear Thermal Overall increasing degree of speciﬁcation from left to right Res Eng Design 13 ( 2002 ) 72 mation , the power conjugate complements of effort and ﬂow can be used . The reconciled function set in Table 5 has been modiﬁed from having categories of class , basic , and ﬂow restricted ( in the original functional basis ) to class ( primary ) , secondary , tertiary , and Correspondents . The column labeled as ‘‘Correspondents’’ is provided as an aid for mapping from terms that are not in the rec - onciled functional basis to terms that are . In other words , the terms rigid - body , elastic - body or widget in some other representation would all be mapped to the term object in a representation built upon the recon - ciled functional basis . The words contained within the Correspondents category are merely a means of com - parison and are not considered to be a fourth level of terms in the reconciled functional basis . The italicized words in Table 5 are repeated correspondents . For example , allow is a correspondent for both the sec - ondary functions import and regulate . The combined function set now contains eight class ( primary ) cate - gories with an expanded list of secondary categories and the creation of new tertiary categories . The eight secondary categories are branch , channel , connect , control magnitude , convert , provision , signal , and support . Clear deﬁnitions have been developed for all ﬂow and function categories ( see Appendices A and B ) . An illustrative example for each term is also included for clarity . Table 5 . Functional basis reconciled function set Class ( Primary ) Secondary Tertiary Correspondents Branch Separate Isolate , sever , disjoin Divide Detach , isolate , release , sort , split , disconnect , subtract Extract Reﬁne , ﬁlter , purify , percolate , strain , clear Remove Cut , drill , lathe , polish , sand Distribute Diffuse , dispel , disperse , dissipate , diverge , scatter Channel Import Form entrance , allow , input , capture Export Dispose , eject , emit , empty , remove , destroy , eliminate Transfer Carry , deliver Transport Advance , lift , move Transmit Conduct , convey Guide Direct , shift , steer , straighten , switch Translate Move , relocate Rotate Spin , turn Allow DOF Constrain , unfasten , unlock Connect Couple Associate , connect Join Assemble , fasten Link Attach Mix Add , blend , coalesce , combine , pack Control Actuate Enable , initiate , start , turn - on Regulate Control , equalize , limit , maintain Increase Allow , open Decrease Close , delay , interrupt Magnitude Change Adjust , modulate , clear , demodulate , invert , normalize , rectify , reset , scale , vary , modify Increment Amplify , enhance , magnify , multiply Decrement Attenuate , dampen , reduce Shape Compact , compress , crush , pierce , deform , form Condition Prepare , adapt , treat Stop End , halt , pause , interrupt , restrain Prevent Disable , turn - off Inhibit Shield , insulate , protect , resist Convert Convert Condense , create , decode , differentiate , digitize , encode , evaporate , generate , integrate , liquefy , process , solidify , transform Provision Store Accumulate Contain Capture , enclose Collect Absorb , consume , ﬁll , reserve Supply Provide , replenish , retrieve Signal Sense Feel , determine Detect Discern , perceive , recognize Measure Identify , locate Indicate Announce , show , denote , record , register Track Mark , time Display Emit , expose , select Process Compare , calculate , check Support Stabilize Steady Secure Constrain , hold , place , ﬁx Position Align , locate , orient Overall increasing degree of speciﬁcation from left to right J . Hirtz et al . : A functional basis for engineering design 73 5Usage and validation of earlier efforts 5 . 1 Discussion of usage Both of the earlier efforts ( the NIST taxonomies and the original functional basis ) were not developed solely as an information - organizing exercise , but to actively support manual and software - based applications of functional modeling methods . Since these initial efforts emerged from projects that addressed different engineering design issues and evolved separately , they both were involved with different modes of usage . This section describes how the reconciled functional basis ﬁts within the context of the two different approaches to using vocabularies for functional modeling . The reconciled functional basis is ﬂexible enough to form functional descriptions that follow the standard verb – object format as well as other formats . In the case of the Pahl and Beitz verb – object format , a function term occupies the verb spot , while a ﬂow term ﬁlls the object spot . Other formats are possible as long as the function and ﬂow terms are expressed correctly at the desired level of speciﬁcation . Speciﬁcally , a function term can be selected from any of the three levels , depending on the speciﬁcation desired . Flow terms may be formed at all levels as well . A class ( primary ) ﬂow is simply the class term , such as material . A secondary ﬂow is described by a secondary term plus a class term . For example , human energy is a secondary ﬂow . Tertiary ﬂows are described by a tertiary term plus a class term . An example is the ﬂow auditory signal . If additional energy ﬂow speciﬁcation is needed at the level of performance variables , then power conjugate complements may be used . Power conjugates are part of a system modeling technique known as bond graphs ( or multi - port elements ) where the connection between system elements is represented by power ﬂow . The power ﬂow consists of two conjugates – the effort and ﬂow variables – with their product equaling power . A list of power conjugate complements for the energy ﬂow category is given in Table 4 . Here the ﬂow description is formed by a secondary or tertiary term plus a power conjugate term . A more speciﬁc description of human energy used by a product such as a power screwdriver is human force . A few special cases exist where comple - ments stand alone in describing a ﬂow . Stand - alone power conjugate complements are denoted by a gray background in Table 4 . Taking an engine , for example , we may be interested in the torque produced by the engine instead of the more cumbersome rotational torque . The degree of speciﬁcation depends on the type of design and customer needs . Using a more general ﬂow description produces a generic function structure and a wider range of concept variants . However , if customer needs dictate concreteness in ﬂows , then an increasingly speciﬁc level is more valuable . The NIST work in developing taxonomies was part of a larger effort aimed at developing a standardized repre - sentation of function . The work was done in order to enable the implementation of software tools that support functional modeling , and to provide a common basis for the exchange of function - based information among indi - viduals or teams involved in distributed collaborative product development . The need for a standardized repre - sentation of function was motivated in part by industry needs ( as described in Sect . 1 . 2 ) , and also by a desire to provide a common basis for exchange of information associated with product function , in an attempt to reduce costly interoperability problems in next - generation prod - uct development tools . The NIST research set forth an initial speciﬁcation for a standardized representation of engineering artifact function . This includes schemata ( information models ) for representation of function and associated ﬂows , as well as an initial attempt at developing taxonomies of functions and ﬂows . These taxonomies had been developed in order to support the standardized representation and to provide a basis for knowledge indexing and retrieval , allowing better access to information for the purpose of design reuse . Additional information regarding representation and associated schemata for representing function and ﬂow can be found in ( Szykman et al . 1999a ) . Since computational design knowledge is typically stored in some kind of database rather than in plain text ﬁles , the generic schemata and taxonomies introduced in Szykman et al . ( 1999a ) may not be best - suited for exchange of information between software systems . To address this issue , mappings of the generic function representation models into the Extensible Markup Language ( XML ) were developed ( Szykman et al . 1999b ) . The XML speciﬁcation imposes guidelines on how to structure a document ( in this case function data ) , how to represent schemata , how to make references , etc . , providing advantages over , say , a plain text ﬁle format for artifact function models . Subsequent research within the NIST Design Repository Project has led to a more expanded representation for product knowledge . This work extends beyond function and ﬂow to also include representation of artifacts and their form , physical decompositions , capture of the mappings between physical structures , functions , and ﬂows , as well as various kinds of relationships among these entities . This product knowledge representation is described in greater detail in ( Szykman et al . 2001 ) . 5 . 2 Supporting cases and validation A number of research and industrial partnership ef - forts are under way to support our research on the functional basis . Two examples are a NIST Design Repository Project and a new program at Ford Motor Company . NIST researchers have been validating work under the NIST Design Repository Project both at the interface development level and the knowledge representation level by modeling existing artifacts using prototype interfaces and a web - based communications architecture . The artifacts modeled at NIST include several power tools ( e . g . , a power drill , a detail sander , an electric saw ) , an ultra - Res Eng Design 13 ( 2002 ) 74 high vacuum artifact transport system , 2 and the new en - casements for the Charters of Freedom . 3 Ford Motor Company has also participated in recent efforts to implement the functional basis . A new program in Design for Six Sigma uses the functional basis as a method of developing critical and repeatable ‘‘transfer functions’’ to create robust designs . Functional modeling has been received with great enthusiasm , and the results show that the functional basis can model the large - scale systems developed by Ford . 6Conclusions In engineering design , functional modeling provides a direct method for understanding and representing an overall artifact function without reliance on physical structure . In practice , to achieve repeatable and mean - ingful results from functional modeling , a formal func - tional representation is needed . This paper represents the reconciliation of two independent efforts to create such formal representations of function . Both of these efforts were initiated and progressed independently , but were founded on common assump - tions . Both groups believed that : • It was possible to identify a comprehensive set of functions and ﬂows that could be used to model engi - neering artifacts , products and systems , • Each of these sets of terms could be distilled to a more fundamental set that would ideally ( as it was reﬁned and validated ) lead to a minimal set of terms that did not overlap , and yet provided complete coverage of the space of designed products . • Identifying these sets of terms would be very valuable to engineers , both by providing a basis to support the use of more formal design methods by people , and to sup - port the development of computer - aided software tools developed for use during conceptual design . Examining some statistics that came out of the recon - ciliation effort provides revealing insights as to the validity of these assumptions . One would expect that if there were a fundamental set of functions and ﬂows , two unrelated efforts would begin to converge to the same sets . On the other hand , if there were not one fundamental set of ﬂows but many alternative sets , two independent efforts would more likely converge to different sets . At the gross level , one can examine the independently developed sets of functions and ﬂows ( Stone and Wood 2000 ; Szykman et al . 1999a ) and note that there is a high degree of similarity at the top levels of the hierarchies . One can also do a more detailed comparison by examining the commonality between the reconciled functional basis and the earlier works . Of the 42 terms in the reconciled ﬂow set ( Table 3 ) , 34 are present in the NIST function taxonomy as either exact matches or equivalent terms . A signiﬁcant portion of this discrepancy can be attributed to the fact that the earlier NIST work considered the human as being ‘‘outside of the system , ’’ resulting in the absence of the Human terms and all of the terms associated with human senses ( i . e . , Auditory , Olfactory , Tactile , Taste , Visual ) . Other than the human and human - related terms , there are only two terms in the new ﬂow set that did not appear in the earlier NIST work . Similarly , 27 of the terms in the reconciled ﬂow set appear in the original functional basis work . Of the 53 terms in the reconciled function set ( Table 5 ) , 46 are present in the NIST function taxonomy as exact matches or equivalent terms ; in the original functional basis work , 47 of them are present . From this perspective , it can be seen that the terms in the reconciled function and ﬂow sets were covered by both sets of earlier work to a signiﬁcant degree . Among the more signiﬁcant differences between the two earlier efforts themselves ( as opposed to the reconciled basis and earlier work ) was the size of the sets of terms , the NIST taxonomies being considerably larger than the original functional basis . This is primarily due to a fundamental difference in approach ; the NIST effort at - tempted to provide a comprehensive list of function and ﬂow terms used by engineers , whereas the original and reconciled functional basis attempt to minimize terms . Many of the terms that were originally in the NIST taxonomies are now listed among the correspondents . Thus , while these terms are not counted when tallying the total number of fundamental function and ﬂow terms in the reconciled basis , the breadth of terminology used by engineers and information about the relationships between terminology and the fundamental sets of terms , is still preserved . There are a number of important contributions of this research . By combining these two function vocabularies , we have evolved our understanding of functional modeling and created a taxonomy that supports engineering design at many scales . Also , the rigorous review of the previous function taxonomies has sharpened the distinctions between the function and ﬂow terms . Another important contribution , and the key goal of this paper , is the evolved deﬁnitions included in the appendices . These deﬁnitions result from a number of empirical studies over a wide range of existing and original products , a number of person - years of effort , and inde - pendent research efforts . The formality of the reconciled functional basis facilitates engineering design education in both university and industry settings . Functional models are more easily reviewed for either similarity or correct - ness . Also , they can be developed at different levels of precision , offering enough abstraction for original design problems and enough detail for redesign or documenta - tion of existing products . Though additional research at a basic level would be likely to contribute to the functional taxonomy presented here , we see the next evolution of the reconciled functional basis to occur through usage . The reconciled functional 2 The NIST Artifact Transport System was designed and built at NIST in order to transport atomically accurate specimens created in a molecular beam epitaxy laboratory to a scanning tunnel microscope laboratory across the NIST campus , where metrologists verify atomic - scale measurements . 3 These encasements were designed and fabricated in a collaboration between the National Archives and several operating units at NIST to house the Charters of Freedom – the Declaration of Independence , the Constitution , and the Bill of Rights . J . Hirtz et al . : A functional basis for engineering design 75 basis offers a foundation for design repositories , support for new knowledge - based design methods such as design by analogy , design for manufacturing and product archi - tecture , and a teaching tool for design education and training . As it is used in these endeavors , we expect the reconciled functional basis to slowly evolve and mature . Thus , one of the important results of the research presented here is a process for adding new terms to the reconciled functional basis . Appendix A : Flow definitions 1Material a . Human All or part of a person who crosses the device boundary . Example : Most coffee makers require the ﬂow of a human hand to actuate ( or start ) the electricity and thus heat the water . b . Gas Any collection of molecules characterized by random motion and the absence of bonds between the molecules . Example : An oscillating fan moves air by rotating blades . The air is transformed as gas ﬂow . c . Liquid A readily ﬂowing ﬂuid , speciﬁcally having its molecules moving freely with respect to each other but , because of cohesive forces , not expanding indeﬁnitely . Example : The ﬂow of water through a coffee maker is a liquid . d . Solid Any object with mass having a deﬁnite , ﬁrm shape . Example : The ﬂow of sandpaper into a hand sander is transformed into a solid entering the sander . i . Object . Material that can be seen or touched that occupies space . Example : The box of scrap paper for recycling is represented as the ﬂow object . ii . Particulate . Substance containing minute separate particles . Example : Granular sugar and powdered paint are particulates . iii . Composite . Solid material composed of two or more substances having different physical characteristics and in which each substance retains its identity while contributing desirable properties to the whole unit . Any class of high - strength , lightweight engineering materials consisting of various combinations of alloys , plastics , and ceramics . Example : Materials such as wood , ﬁberglass combined with metals , ceramics , glasses , or polymers together are considered a com - posite . Kevlar cloth combined with paper honeycomb by means of a resin is considered a composite . e . Plasma A collection of charged particles that is electrically neutral exhibiting some properties of a gas , but differing from a gas in being a good conductor of electricity and in being af - fected by a magnetic ﬁeld . Example : Plasma cutting focuses an intense beam of ionized air , known as plasma , produced by an electric arc , which melts the material to be cut . f . Mixture A substance containing two or more components which are not in ﬁxed proportions , do not lose their individual characteristics and can be separated by physical means . Example : Expected precipitation for this evening is a mixture of rain , sleet , and snow . i . Liquid – liquid . A readily ﬂowing combination of two or more ﬂuids , speciﬁcally having its molecules moving freely with respect to each other , but because of cohesive forces , not expanding indeﬁnitely . Ex - ample : Machine oil and gasoline is a common liquid – liquid mixture used in yard maintenance machines . ii . Gas – gas . A collection of molecules containing two or more components , which are characterized by random motion and the absence of bonds between the molecules . Example : The mixture of argon and carbon dioxide , a gas - gas ﬂow , is commonly used in welding . iii . Solid – solid . A combination of two or more objects with mass having a deﬁnite , ﬁrm shape . Example : Pebbles , sand , gravel , and slag can be used to form concrete , mortar , or plaster . After it cures , concrete is a solid – solid . iv . Solid – liquid . A combination of two or more compo - nents containing at least one solid and one liquid . Example : Iced tea is a solid – liquid mixture of ice ( solid ) , water ( liquid ) , and tea grounds ( solid ) . v . Solid – gas . A combination of two or more components containing at least one solid and one gas . Example : Fog is a solid – gas mixture of frozen ice particles ( solid ) in air ( gas ) . vi . Liquid – gas . A combination of two or more compo - nents containing at least one liquid and one gas . Example : Carbonated drinks are liquid – gas mixtures of ﬂavored syrup ( liquid ) , puriﬁed water ( liquid ) , and carbon dioxide ( gas ) . vii . Solid – liquid – gas . A combination or three or more components containing at least one each of a solid , liquid , and gas . Example : In a cup of soda and ice cubes , the cup contains the solid – liquid – gas ﬂow . viii . Colloidal . A solid , liquid , or gaseous substance made up of very small , insoluble non - diffusible particles that remain in suspension in a surrounding solid , liquid , or gaseous medium of a different matter . Example : Aerosols , smoke , and mist can all be con - sidered colloids . Mist is a combination of very ﬁne water droplets suspended in air . 2Energy a . Generic Complements i . Effort . Any component of energy used to accomplish an intended purpose . Res Eng Design 13 ( 2002 ) 76 ii . Flow . Any component of energy causing the intended object to move or run freely . b . Human Work performed by a person on a device . Example : An automobile requires the ﬂow of human energy to steer and accelerate the vehicle . i . Force . Human effort that is input to the system without regard for the required motion . Example : Human force is needed to actuate the trigger of a toy gun . ii . Velocity . Activity requiring movement of all or part of the body through a prescribed path . Example : The track pad on a laptop computer receives the ﬂow of human velocity to control the cursor . c . Acoustic Work performed in the production and transmission of sound . Example : The motor of a power drill generates the ﬂow of acoustic energy in addition to the torque . i . Pressure . The pressure ﬁeld of the sound waves . Example : A condenser microphone has a diaphragm , which vibrates in response to acoustic pressure . This vibration changes the capacitance of the diaphragm , thus superimposing an alternating voltage on the direct voltage applied to the circuit . ii . Particle velocity . The speed at which sound waves travel through a conducting medium . Example : Sonar devices rely on the ﬂow of acoustic particle velocity to deter - mine the range of an object . d . Biological Work produced by or connected with plants or animals . Example : In poultry houses , grain is fed to chickens , which is then converted into biological energy . i . Pressure . The pressure ﬁeld exerted by a compressed biological ﬂuid . Example : The high concentration of sugars and salts inside a cell causes the entry , via osmosis , of water into the vacuole , which in turn expands the vacuole and generates a hydrostatic bio - logical pressure , called turgor , that presses the cell membrane against the cell wall . Turgor is the cause of rigidity in living plant tissue . ii . Volumetric ﬂow . The kinetic energy of molecules in a biological ﬂuid ﬂow . Example : Increased metabolic activity of tissues such as muscles or the intestine automatically induces increased volumetric ﬂow of blood through the dilated vessels . e . Chemical Work resulting from the reactions by which substances are produced from or converted into other substances . Ex - ample : A battery converts the ﬂow of chemical energy into electrical energy . i . Afﬁnity . The force with which atoms are held together in chemical bonds . Afﬁnity is proportional to the chemical potential of a compound’s constituent species . Example : An internal combustion engine transforms the chemical afﬁnity of the gas into a mechanical force . ii . Reaction rate . The speed or velocity at which chemical reactants produce products . Reaction rate is propor - tional to the mole rate of the constituent species . Example : Special coatings on automobile panels stop the chemical reaction rate of the metal with the environment . f . Electrical Work resulting from the ﬂow of electrons from a negative to a positive source . Example : A power belt sander imports a ﬂow of electrical energy ( electricity , for convenience ) from a wall outlet and transforms it into a rotation . i . Electromotive force . Potential difference across the positive and negative sources . Example : Household electrical receptacles provide a ﬂow of electromotive force of approximately 110 V . ii . Current . The ﬂow or rate of ﬂow of electric charge in a conductor or medium between two points having a difference in potential . Example : Circuit breakers trip when the current exceeds a speciﬁed limit . g . Electromagnetic Energy that is propagated through free space or through a material medium in the form of electromagnetic waves ( Britannica Online , 1997 ) . It has both wave and particle - like properties . Example : Solar panels convert the ﬂow electromagnetic energy into electricity . i . Generic Complements 1 . Effort . Any component of electromagnetic energy used to accomplish an intended purpose . 2 . Flow . Any component of electromagnetic energy causing the intended object to move or run freely . ii . Optical . Work associated with the nature and proper - ties of light and vision . Also , a special case of solar energy ( see solar ) . Example : A car visor reﬁnes the ﬂow of optical energy that its passengers receive . 1 . Intensity . The amount of optical energy per unit area . Example : Tinted windows reduce the optical intensity of the entering light . 2 . Velocity . The speed of light in its conducting medium . Example : NASA developed and tested a trajectory control sensor ( TCS ) for the space shuttle to calculate the distance between the payload bay and a satellite . It relied on the constancy of the optical velocity ﬂow to calculate distance from time of ﬂight measurements of a reﬂected laser . iii . Solar . Work produced by or coming from the sun . Example : Solar panels collect the ﬂow of solar energy and transform it into electricity . 1 . Intensity . The amount of solar energy per unit area . Example : A cloudy day reduces the solar intensity available to solar panels for conversion to electricity . 2 . Velocity . The speed of light in free space . Example : Unlike most energy ﬂows , solar velocity is a well - known constant . J . Hirtz et al . : A functional basis for engineering design 77 h . Hydraulic Work that results from the movement and force of a liq - uid , including hydrostatic forces . Example : Hydroelectric dams generate electricity by harnessing the hydraulic en - ergy in the water that passes through the turbines . i . Pressure . The pressure ﬁeld exerted by a compressed liquid . Example : A hydraulic jack uses the ﬂow hy - draulic pressure to lift heavy objects . ii . Volumetric ﬂow . The movement of ﬂuid molecules . Example : A water meter measures the volumetric ﬂow of water without a signiﬁcant pressure drop in the line . i . Magnetic Work resulting from materials that have the property of attracting other like materials , whether that quality is naturally occurring or electrically induced . Example : The magnetic energy of a magnetic lock is the ﬂow that keeps it secured to the iron - based structure . i . Magnetomotive force . The driving force which sets up the magnetic ﬂux inside a core . Magnetomotive force is directly proportional to the current in the coil sur - rounding the core . Example : In a magnetic door lock , a change in magnetomotive force ( brought about by a change in electrical current ) allows the lock to disen - gage and the door to open . ii . Magnetic ﬂux rate . Flux is the magnetic displacement variable in a core induced by the ﬂow of current through a coil . The magnetic ﬂow variable is the time rate of change of the ﬂux . The voltage across a magnetic coil is directly proportional to the time rate of change of magnetic ﬂux . Example : A magnetic relay is a transducer that senses the time rate of change of magnetic ﬂux when the relay arm moves . j . Mechanical Energy associated with the moving parts of a machine or the strain energy associated with a loading state of an object . Example : An elevator converts electrical or hydraulic energy into mechanical energy . i . Generic Complements . 1 . Effort . Any component of mechanical energy used to accomplish an intended purpose . 2 . Flow . Any component of mechanical energy caus - ing the intended object to move or run freely . ii . Rotational energy . Energy that results from a rotation or a virtual rotation . Example : Customers are pri - marily concerned with the ﬂow of rotational energy from a power screwdriver . 1 . Torque . Pertaining to the moment that produces or tends to produce rotation . Example : In a power screwdriver , electricity is converted into rotational energy . The more speciﬁc ﬂow is torque , based on the primary customer need to insert screws easily , not quickly . 2 . Angular velocity . Pertaining to the orientation or the magnitude of the time rate of change of angular position about a speciﬁed axis . Example : A centri - fuge is used to separate out liquids of different den - sities from a mixture . The primary ﬂow it produces is that of angular velocity , since the rate of rotation about an axis is the main concern . iii . Translational energy . Energy ﬂow generated or required by a translation or a virtual translation . Example : A child’s toy , such as a projectile launcher , transmits translational energy to the projectile to propel it away . 1 . Force . The action that produces or attempts to produce a translation . Example : In a tensile testing machine , the primary ﬂow of interest is that of a force which produces a stress in the test specimen . 2 . Linear velocity . Motion that can be described by three component directions . Example : An elevator car uses the ﬂow of linear velocity to move between ﬂoors . k . Pneumatic Work resulting from a compressed gas ﬂow or pressure source . Example : A BB gun relies on the ﬂow of pneumatic energy ( from compressed air ) to propel the projectile ( BB ) . i . Pressure . The pressure ﬁeld exerted by a compressed gas . Example : Certain cylinders rely on the ﬂow of pneumatic pressure to move a piston or support a force . ii . Mass ﬂow . The kinetic energy of molecules in a gas ﬂow . Example : The mass ﬂow of air is the ﬂow that transmits the thermal energy of a hair dryer to damp hair . l . Radioactive ( Nuclear ) Work resulting from or produced by particles or rays , such as alpha , beta and gamma rays , by the spontaneous dis - integration of atomic nuclei . Example : Nuclear reactors produce a ﬂow of radioactive energy which heats water into steam and then drives electricity generating turbines . i . Intensity . The amount of radioactive particles per unit area . Example : Concrete is an effective radioactive shielding material , reducing the radioactive intensity in proportion to its thickness . ii . Decay rate . The rate of emission of radioactive particles from a substance . Example : The decay rate of carbon provides a method to date prehistoric objects . m . Thermal A form of energy that is transferred between bodies as a result of their temperature difference . Example : A coffee maker converts the ﬂow of electricity into the ﬂow of thermal energy , which it transmits to the water . Note : A pseudo bond graph approach is used here . The true effort and ﬂow variables are temperature and the time rate of change of entropy . However , a more practical pseudo - ﬂow of heat rate is chosen here . i . Temperature . The degree of heat of a body . Example : A coffee maker brings the temperature of the water to boiling in order to siphon the water from the holding tank to the ﬁlter basket . Res Eng Design 13 ( 2002 ) 78 ii . Heat rate . ( Note : this is a pseudo - ﬂow . ) The time rate of change of heat energy of a body . Example : Fins on a motor casing increase the ﬂow heat rate from the motor by conduction ( through the ﬁn ) , convection ( to the air ) and radiation ( to the environment ) . 3Signal a . Status A condition of some system , as in information about the state of the system . Example : Automobiles often measure the engine water temperature and send a status signal to the driver via a temperature gage . i . Auditory . A condition of some system as displayed by a sound . Example : Pilots receive an auditory signal , often the words ‘‘pull up , ’’ when their aircraft reaches a dangerously low altitude . ii . Olfactory . A condition of some system as related by the sense of smell or particulate count . Example : Carbon monoxide detectors receive an olfactory signa l from the environment and monitor it for high levels of CO . iii . Tactile . A condition of some system as perceived by touch or direct contact . Example : A pager delivers a tactile signal to its user through vibration . iv . Taste . A condition of some dissolved substance as perceived by the sense of taste . Example : In an electric wok , the taste signal from the human chef is used to determine when to turn off the wok . v . Visual . A condition of some system as displayed by some image . Example : A power screwdriver provides a visual signal of its direction through the display of arrows on the switch . b . Control A command sent to an instrument or apparatus to regulate a mechanism . Example : An airplane pilot sends a control signal to the elevators through movement of the yoke . The yoke movement is transformed into an electrical signal , sent through wiring to the elevator , and then transformed back into a physical elevator deﬂection . i . Analog . A control signal sent by direct , continuous , measurable , variable physical quantities . Example : Turning the volume knob on a radio sends an analog signal to increase or decrease the sound level . ii . Discrete . A control signal sent by separate , distinct , unrelated or discontinuous quantities . Example : A computer sends discrete signals to the hard disk con - troller during read / write operations . Appendix B : Function definitions Note that certain functions are limited to operate on cer - tain types of ﬂows . This restriction is typically given in the function deﬁnition and applies to all functions at sub - levels of the given function . 1Branch To cause a ﬂow ( material , energy , signal ) to no longer be joined or mixed . a . Separate To isolate a ﬂow ( material , energy , signal ) into distinct components . The separated components are distinct from the ﬂow before separation , as well as each other . Example : A glass prism separates light into different wavelength components to produce a rainbow . i . Divide . To separate a ﬂow . Example : A vending ma - chine divides the solid form of coins into appropriate denominations . ii . Extract . To draw , or forcibly pull out , a ﬂow . Example : A vacuum cleaner extracts debris from the imported mixture and exports clean air to the environment . iii . Remove . To take away a part of a ﬂow from its preﬁxed place . Example : A sander removes small pieces of the wood surface to smooth the wood . b . Distribute To cause a ﬂow ( material , energy , signal ) to break up . The individual bits are similar to each other and the undis - tributed ﬂow . Example : An atomizer distributes ( or sprays ) hair - styling liquids over the head to hold the hair in the desired style . 2Channel To cause a ﬂow ( material , energy , signal ) to move from one location to another location . a . Import To bring in a ﬂow ( material , energy , signal ) from outside the system boundary . Example : A physical opening at the top of a blender pitcher imports a solid ( food ) into the system . Also , a handle on the blender pitcher imports a human hand . b . Export To send a ﬂow ( material , energy , signal ) outside the sys - tem boundary . Example : Pouring blended food out of a standard blender pitcher exports liquid from the system . The opening at the top of the blender is a solution to the export sub - function . c . Transfer To shift , or convey , a ﬂow ( material , energy , signal ) from one place to another . i . Transport . To move a material from one place to another . Example : A coffee maker transports liquid ( water ) from its reservoir through its heating chamber and then to the ﬁlter basket . ii . Transmit . To move an energy from one place to another . Example : In a hand - held power sander , the housing of the sander transmits human force to the object being sanded . d . Guide To direct the course of a ﬂow ( material , energy , signal ) along a speciﬁc path . Example : A domestic HVAC system guides gas ( air ) around the house to the correct locations via a set of ducts . J . Hirtz et al . : A functional basis for engineering design 79 i . Translate . To ﬁx the movement of a ﬂow by a device into one linear direction . Example : In an assembly line , a conveyor belt translates partially completed products from one assembly station to another . ii . Rotate . To ﬁx the movement of a ﬂow by a device around one axis . Example : A computer disk drive rotates the magnetic disks around an axis so that the head can read data . iii . Allow degree of freedom ( DOF ) . To control the move - ment of a ﬂow by a force external to the device into one or more directions . Example : To provide easy trunk access and close appropriately , trunk lids need to move along a speciﬁc degree of freedom . A four bar linkage allows a rotational DOF for the trunk lid . 3Connect To bring two or more ﬂows ( material , energy , signal ) together . a . Couple To join or bring together ﬂows ( material , energy , signal ) such that the members are still distinguishable from each other . Example : A standard pencil couples an eraser and a writing shaft . The coupling is performed using a metal sleeve that is crimped to the eraser and the shaft . i . Join . To couple ﬂows together in a predetermined manner . Example : A ratchet joins a socket on its square shaft interface . ii . Link . To couple ﬂows together by means of an inter - mediary ﬂow . Example : A turnbuckle links two ends of a steering cable together . b . Mix To combine two ﬂows ( material , energy , signal ) into a sin - gle , uniform homogeneous mass . Example : A shaker mixes a paint base and its dyes to form a homogeneous liquid . 4Control magnitude To alter or govern the size or amplitude of a ﬂow ( material , energy , signal ) . a . Actuate To commence the ﬂow of energy , signal , or material in response to an imported control signal . Example : A circuit switch actuates the ﬂow of electrical energy and turns on a light bulb . b . Regulate To adjust the ﬂow of energy , signal , or material in response to a control signal , such as a characteristic of a ﬂow . Example : Turning the valves regulates the ﬂow rate of the liquid ﬂowing from a faucet . i . Increase . To enlarge a ﬂow in response to a control signal . Example : Opening the valve of a faucet further increases the ﬂow of water . ii . Decrease . To reduce a ﬂow in response to a control signal . Example : Closing the value further decreases the ﬂow of propane to the gas grill . c . Change To adjust the ﬂow of energy , signal , or material in a prede - termined and ﬁxed manner . Example : In a hand - held drill , a variable resistor changes the electrical energy ﬂow to the motor , thus changing the speed at which the drill turns . i . Increment . To enlarge a ﬂow in a predetermined and ﬁxed manner . Example : A magnifying glass increments the visual signal ( i . e . , the print ) from a paper docu - ment . ii . Decrement . To reduce a ﬂow in a predetermined and ﬁxed manner . Example : The gear train of a power screwdriver decrements the ﬂow of rotational energy . iii . Shape . To mold or form a ﬂow . Example : In the auto industry , large presses shape sheet metal into con - toured surfaces that become fenders , hoods and trunks . iv . Condition . To render a ﬂow appropriate for the desired use . Example : To prevent damage to electrical equip - ment , a surge protector conditions electrical energy by excluding spikes and noise ( usually through capaci - tors ) from the energy path . d . Stop To cease , or prevent , the transfer of a ﬂow ( material , en - ergy , signal ) . Example : A reﬂective coating on a window stops the transmission of UV radiation through a window . i . Prevent . To keep a ﬂow from happening . Example : A submerged gate on a dam wall prevents water from ﬂowing to the other side . ii . Inhibit . To signiﬁcantly restrain a ﬂow , though a por - tion of the ﬂow continues to be transferred . Example : The structures of space vehicles inhibits the ﬂow of radiation to protect crew and cargo . 5Convert To change from one form of a ﬂow ( material , energy , signal ) to another . For completeness , any type of ﬂow conversion is valid . In practice , conversions such as con - vert electricity to torque will be more common than con - vert solid to optical energy . Example : An electrical motor converts electricity to rotational energy . 6Provision To accumulate or provide a material or energy ﬂow . a . Store To accumulate a ﬂow . Example : A DC electrical battery stores the energy in a ﬂashlight . i . Contain . To keep a ﬂow within limits . Example : A vacuum bag contains debris vacuumed from a house . ii . Collect . To bring a ﬂow together into one place . Example : Solar panels collect UV sun rays to power small mechanisms . b . Supply To provide a ﬂow from storage . Example : In a ﬂashlight , the battery supplies energy to the bulb . Res Eng Design 13 ( 2002 ) 80 7Signal To provide information on a material , energy , or signal ﬂow as an output signal ﬂow . The information providing ﬂow passes through the function unchanged . a . Sense To perceive , or become aware , of a ﬂow . Example : An audiocassette machine senses if the end of the tape has been reached . i . Detect . To discover information about a ﬂow . Example : A gauge on the top of a gas cylinder detects proper pressure ranges . ii . Measure . To determine the magnitude of a ﬂow . Example : An analog thermostat measures temperature through a bimetallic strip . b . Indicate To make something known to the user about a ﬂow . Example : A small window in the water container of a coffee maker indicates the level of water in the machine . i . Track . To observe and record data from a ﬂow . Example : By tracking the performance of batteries , the low efﬁciency point can be determined . ii . Display . To reveal something about a ﬂow to the mind or eye . Example : The xyz - coordinate display on a ver - tical milling machine displays the precise location of the cutting tool . c . Process To submit information to a particular treatment or method having a set number of operations or steps . Example : A computer processes a login request signal before allowing a user access to its facilities . 8Support To ﬁrmly ﬁx a material into a deﬁned location , or secure an energy or signal into a speciﬁc course . a . Stabilize To prevent a ﬂow from changing course or location . Ex - ample : On a typical canister vacuum , the center of gravity is placed at a low elevation to stabilize the vacuum when it is pulled by the hose . b . Secure To ﬁrmly ﬁx a ﬂow path . Example : On a bicycling glove , a Velcro strap secures the human hand in the correct place . c . Position To place a ﬂow ( material , energy , signal ) into a speciﬁc location or orientation . Example : The coin slot on a soda machine positions the coin to begin the coin evaluation and transportation procedure . References Function analysis : systematic improvement of quality performance . Productivity Press , Portland , Ore . Altshuller G ( 1984 ) Creativity as an exact science . Gordon & Breach , Luxembourg Antonsson E , Cagan J ( eds ) ( 2001 ) Formal Engineering Design Syn - thesis , Cambridge University Press , NY Collins J , Hagan B , Bratt H ( 1976 ) The failure - experience matrix – a useful design tool . J Eng Ind 98 : 1074 – 1079 Hubka V , Eder W ( 2001 ) Functions revisited . Proceeding of the In - ternational Conference on Engineering Design , ICED 01 - C586 / 102 , Glasgow , Scotland , 21 – 23 August . Professional Engineering Pub - lishing ( for IMechE ) London , pp 69 – 76 Hubka V , Andreasen M , Eder W , Hills P ( advisory ed ) ( 1988 ) Practical studies in systematic design . Butterworths , London Hundal M ( 1990 ) A systematic method for developing function structures , solutions and concept variants . Mech Mach Theory 25 : 243 – 256 Kirschman C , Fadel G ( 1998 ) Classifying functions for mechanical design . J Mech Des 120 : 475 – 482 Koch P , Peplinski J , Allen J , Mistree F ( 1994 ) A method for design using available assets : identifying a feasible system conﬁguration . Behav Sci 30 : 229 – 250 Kurfman M , Stone R , VanWie M , Wood K , Otto K ( 2000 ) Theoretical underpinnings of functional modeling : preliminary experimental studies . Proceedings of DETC2000 , DETC2000 / DTM - 14563 , Baltimore , Md . ASME , New York Little A , Wood K , McAdams D ( 1997 ) Functional analysis : a funda - mental empirical study for reverse engineering , benchmarking and redesign . Proceedings of the ASME Design Theory and Methodology Conference , Sacramento , Calif . ASME , New York Malmqvist J , Axelsson R , Johansson M ( 1996 ) Comparative analysis of the theory of inventive problem solving and the systematic ap - proach of Pahl and Beitz . Proceedings of the 1996 ASME Design Engineering Technical Conference and Computers in Engineering Conference , Irvine , Calif . ASME , New York McAdams D , Wood K ( 1999 ) Methods and principles for concurrent functional tolerance design . Proceedings of the 1999 ASME Design for Manufacturing Conference , 99 - DETC / DFM49 , Las Vegas , Nev . ASME , New York McAdams D , Wood K ( 2000 ) Quantitative measures for design by analogy . Proceedings of the 2000 ASME Design Theory and Methodology Conference , DETC2000 / DTM - 14562 , Baltimore , Md . , September . ASME , New York McAdams D , Stone R , Wood K ( 1999 ) Functional interdependence and product similarity based on customer needs . J Res Eng Des 11 : 1 – 19 Miles L ( 1972 ) Techniques of value analysis engineering . McGraw - Hill , New York Otto K , Wood K ( 2001 ) Product design : techniques in reverse engineering and new product development . Prentice Hall , Upper Saddle River , NJ Pahl G , Beitz W ( 1984 ) Engineering design : a systematic approach . Design Council , London Stone R ( 1997 ) Towards a theory of modular design . Doctoral Thesis , The University of Texas at Austin Stone R , Wood K ( 1999 ) Development of a functional basis for design . Proceedings of DETC99 , DETC99 / DTM - 8765 , Las Vegas , Nev . ASME , New York Stone R , Wood K ( 2000 ) Development of a functional basis for design . J Mech Des 122 : 359 – 370 Stone R , Wood K , Crawford R ( 2000a ) A heuristic method for iden - tifying modules for product architectures . Design Studies 21 : 5 – 31 Stone R , Wood K , Crawford R ( 2000b ) Using quantitative functional models to develop product architectures . Design Studies 21 : 239 – 260 . Szykman S , Sriram RD , Smith SJ ( eds ) ( 1998 ) Proceedings of the NIST Design Repository Workshop , Gaithersburg , Md . , November 1996 . NIST , Gaithersburg , Md . Szykman S , Racz JW , Sriram RD ( 1999a ) The representation of function in computer - based design . Proceedings of the 1999 ASME Design Engineering Technical Conferences ( 11th Interna - tional Conference on Design Theory and Methodology ) , Paper No . DETC99 / DTM - 8742 , Las Vegas , Nev . , September . ASME , New York Szykman S , Senfaute J , Sriram RD ( 1999b ) The use of XML for describing functions and taxonomies in computer - based design . J . Hirtz et al . : A functional basis for engineering design 81 Proceedings of the 1999 ASME Design Engineering Technical Conferences ( 19th Computers in Engineering Conference ) , Paper No . DETC99 / CIE - 9025 , Las Vegas , Nev . , September . ASME , New York Szykman S , Fenves SJ , Shooter SB , Keirouz W ( 2001 ) A foundation for interoperability in next - generation product development systems . Computer - Aided Des 33 : 545 – 559 Ullman D ( 1997 ) The mechanical design process , 2nd edn . McGraw - Hill , New York Ulrich KT , Eppinger S ( 1995 ) Product design and development . McGraw - Hill , New York VAI ( 1993 ) Value analysis , value engineering , and value management . Value Analysis Inc . , Clifton Park , New York Res Eng Design 13 ( 2002 ) 82