DOI : 10 . 1007 = s004530010074 Algorithmica ( 2001 ) 29 : 610 – 637 Algorithmica © 2001Springer - VerlagNewYorkInc . Reactive Local Search for the Maximum Clique Problem 1 R . Battiti 2 and M . Protasi 3 Abstract . A new Reactive Local Search ( RLS ) algorithm is proposed for the solution of the Maximum - Clique problem . RLS is based on local search complemented by a feedback ( history - sensitive ) scheme to determine the amount of diversiﬁcation . The reaction acts on the single parameter that decides the temporary prohibition of selected moves in the neighborhood , in a manner inspired by Tabu Search . The performance obtained in computational tests appears to be signiﬁcantly better with respect to all algorithms tested at the the second DIMACS implementation challenge . The worst - case complexity per iteration of the algorithm is O . max f n ; m g / where n and m are the number of nodes and edges of the graph . In practice , when a vertex is moved , the number of operations tends to be proportional to its number of missing edges and therefore the iterations are particularly fast in dense graphs . Key Words . Maximum - clique problem , Heuristic algorithms , Tabu search , Reactive search . 1 . Introduction . Maximum Clique ( MC for short ) is a paradigmatic combinatorial optimization problem with relevant applications and , because of its computational in - tractability , it has been extensively studied in the last years [ 34 ] . Let G D . V ; E / be an arbitrary undirected graph , let V D f 1 ; 2 ; : : : ; n g be its vertex set , let E (cid:181) V £ V be its edge set , and let G . S / D . S ; E \ S £ S / be the subgraph induced by S , where S is a subset of V . A graph G D . V ; E / is complete if all its vertices are pairwise adjacent , i . e . , 8 i ; j 2 V , . i ; j / 2 E . A clique K is a subset of V such that G . K / is complete . The MC problem asks for a clique of maximum cardinality . MC is an NP - hard problem , furthermore , strong negative results have been shown about its approximation properties ( for a survey on the approximability of NP - hard problems see [ 1 ] ) . In particular , if P 6D NP , MC is not approximable within n 1 = 4 ¡ " for any " > 0 , n being the number of nodes in the graph [ 12 ] , and it is not approximable within n 1 ¡ " for any " > 0 , unless co - RP D NP [ 25 ] . In this paper a new reactive heuristic is proposed for the MC problem : Reactive Local Search ( RLS ) . RLS complements local - neighborhood - search with prohibition - 1 This work has been partially funded by Special Project “Algorithms and Software for Optimization , and Models of Complex Systems” of the University of Trento , MURST Project “Efﬁcienza di algoritmi e progetto di strutture informative , ” CNR Grant “Strutture informative e teoria degli algoritmi” and Esprit Basic Research Actionno . 1741 ( ALCOMII ) . TheworkofthesecondauthorwaspartiallydonewhilevisitingtheInternational Computer Science Institute , Berkeley , CA . 2 Dipartimento di Matematica , Universit´a of Trento , Via Sommarive 14 , 38050 Povo ( Trento ) , Italy . battiti @ science . unitn . it . 3 Dipartimento di Matematica , Universit´a di Roma “Tor Vergata” , Roma , Italy . Marco died on February 1 , 1998 . Received September 11 , 1997 ; revised February 5 , 1998 . Communicated by F . P . Preparata . Online publication December 15 , 2000 . Reactive Local Search for the Maximum Clique Problem 611 based diversiﬁcation techniques , where the amount of diversiﬁcation is determined in an automated way through a feedback scheme . Local search is a well - known technique that can be very effective in searching for good locally optimal solutions . On the other hand , local search can be trapped in local optima and be unable to reach a global optimum or even good approximate solutions . Many improvements have been proposed , in particular Glover’s Tabu Search [ 20 ] ( TS for short ) has been successfully applied to a growing number of problems , including MC [ 35 ] . TS is based on prohibitions : some local moves are temporarily prohibited in order to avoid cycles in the search trajectory and to explore new parts of the total search space . Similar ideas have been used in the past for the Traveling Salesman [ 36 ] and Graph Partitioning [ 31 ] problems . Reactive schemes aim at obtaining algorithms with an internal feedback ( learning ) loop , so that tuning is automated . In addition , tuning acts on - line , while the algorithm runs on a single instance . Therefore properties of the task and local properties of the portion of the conﬁguration space that is being visited can be taken into account . Reactive schemes need memory : information about past events is collected and used in the future part of the search algorithm . A TS - based reactive scheme ( RTS ) has been introduced in [ 9 ] . RLS adopts a reactive strategy that is appropriate for the neighborhood structure of MC : the feedback acts on a single parameter ( the prohibition period ) that regulates the search diversiﬁcation and an explicit memory - inﬂuenced restart is activated periodically . The quality of the experimental results obtained by RLS is very satisfactory . Stan - dard benchmark instances and timing codes for MC have been designed as part of the international Implementation Challenge , organized in 1993 by the Center for Dis - crete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science to study effective optimization and approximation algorithms for Maximum Clique , Graph Coloring , and Satisﬁabil - ity . Thirty - seven signiﬁcant MC instances were selected by the organizers to provide a “snapshot” of the algorithm’s effectiveness , and the results obtained by the participants on a benchmark containing a wide spectrum of graphs were presented at a DIMACS workshop [ 30 ] . The results obtained by RLS on these instances are as follows : if one considers the best among all values found by the 15 heuristic algorithms presented at the DIMACS workshop , RLS reaches the same value or a better one in 36 out of 37 cases . In two instances corresponding to large graphs RLS ﬁnds new values ( in one case better by one , in the other by three vertices ) . In the single cases where the current best value is not obtained , the difference is of one vertex . As a comparison , when the same set of 37 graphs is considered , the best four competi - tors obtained the best value in a range from 23 to 27 instances ( in a range from 21 to 25 after considering the two new values found by RLS ) . The scaled times needed by three of them are larger than RLS times by at least a factor of ten . The fourth algorithm is slightly faster than RLS but found only 24 best values ( 22 if the new values are considered ) , by executing hundreds of runs for most tasks . The experimental efﬁcacy and efﬁciency of RLS is strengthened by an analysis of the complexity of a single iteration . It is shown that the worst - case cost is O . max f n ; m g / where n and m are the number of nodes and edges , respectively . In practice , the cost analysis is pessimistic and the measured number of operations tends to be a small constant times the average degree of nodes in G , the complement of the original graph .