Agile Development : Opportunity or Fad ? Abstract Helen Sharp The Open University Walton Hall Milton Keynes , MK7 6AA , UK h . c . sharp @ open . ac . uk Robert Biddle Human Oriented Technology Lab Carleton University 1125 Colonel By Drive Ottawa , ON K1S 5B6 Canada robert _ biddle @ carleton . ca Phil Gray Department of Computing Science University of Glasgow GLASGOW G12 8QQ Scotland pdg @ dcs . gla . ac . uk Lynn Miller Director of User Interface Development Alias 210 King Street East Toronto , ON , Canada M5A 1J7 lmiller @ alias . com Jeff Patton Architect , Interaction Designer Thoughtworks 651 W . Washington Blvd . Suite 600 Chicago , IL 60661 , USA jpatton @ thoughtworks . com The importance of integrating software engineering and HCI methods has been recognised for many years . Agile development is a new approach to software engineering that explicitly champions an active role for the customer . Indeed , eXtreme Programming ( XP ) , one of the most popular agile development methods , strives to include a real user ( s ) in the team who is located ' on - site ' with software developers . In this panel we will debate whether or not agile software development provides an opportunity to integrate HCI and software engineering concerns . The panel members represent a wide cross - section of experiences in this area and will consider how agile development can help improve the current situation , consider specific example scenarios provided by the audience , and , with the audience’s help , will decide whether agile development is an opportunity not to be missed , or just another fad that will pull the two communities further apart . Keywords Agile development , process , user - centered design Copyright is held by the author / owner ( s ) . CHI 2006 , April 22 – 27 , 2006 , Montréal , Québec , Canada . ACM Classification Keywords D . 2 . 1 [ Software Engineering ] : Requirements / Specifications – elicitation methods , methodologies ; ACM 1 - 59593 - 298 - 4 / 06 / 0004 . CHI 2006 • Panel • Agile Development : Opportunity or Fad ? April 22 - 27 , 2006 • Montréal , Québec , Canada 32 D . 2 . 2 [ Software Engineering ] : Design Tools and Techniques – user interfaces ; Human Factors . Introduction User involvement is a top success factor for IT projects ( e . g . Baroudi et al , 1986 ; Kujala , 2003 ) . The importance of knowing who the users are , understanding their priorities and goals , and actively involving them in uncovering requirements is well - understood in software engineering and HCI circles ( e . g . Kotonya and Sommerville , 1998 ; Preece et al . , 2002 ) . Integrating software engineering and user - centred methods has been the focus of on - going research for many years ( e . g . the work of IFIP WG 2 . 7 / 13 . 4 ) . But despite this effort and recognition , there are still difficulties in integrating these two communities , and in producing viable methods and techniques that satisfy the demands of the software engineer and the usability professional ( e . g . Seffah and Metzker , 2005 ) . This panel will focus on a new approach to software engineering – agile software development – and consider whether it can provide a bridge between these two communities . Agile ( lightweight ) software development is currently attracting much attention in software engineering . For example , Agile 2005 , held in July 2005 was sold out weeks before it started , with over 700 participants , a plethora of books on Agile Software Development and associated methods has flooded into the market since the year 2000 , and traditional software engineers are arguing for and against the benefits of taking an agile approach ( e . g . Boehm and Turner , 2004 ) . The potential for eXtreme Programming ( XP ) ( Beck , 2000 ) to provide a bridge between software engineering and HCI has been discussed before ( e . g . Nelson ( 2002 ) ) , and there are several similarities between XP and HCI concerns ( Sharp et al , 2004 ) . There are also published case studies describing experiences of combining agile development with user involvement ( e . g . Hansson et al ( 2004 ) , Rittenbruch et al , 2002 ) . These signs are encouraging , but does agile development really provide a good basis for integration or is it just another myth ? Areas of potential synergy include : 1 . Agile development is highly iterative ; 2 . Agile development argues for frequent communication and rapid feedback with the customer ; 3 . Agile developers seek to provide value to the customer Areas of potential contention include : 1 . What role does the customer of an agile project play ? Is this an end user ? A budget holder ? A domain expert ? The product owner ? Or all of these ? 2 . Agile development focuses on developing real software from the start – it does not explicitly support prototyping . 3 . Agile development does not like ‘big design up front’ but rather focuses on evolutionary development . So do agile methods have the potential to overcome problems we have faced in the past for successfully integrating HCI and software engineering ? The purpose of this panel is to explore , debate and illuminate these and related questions . CHI 2006 • Panel • Agile Development : Opportunity or Fad ? April 22 - 27 , 2006 • Montréal , Québec , Canada 33 Panel Member statements Robert Biddle ( Carleton University , Canada ) : Our work on agile process has concentrated on the customer role in Extreme Programming ( XP ) . XP makes a virtue of programmers taking responsibility only for technical issues , while business issues are the responsibility of the on - site customer . The software is then developed in an atmosphere of negotiation and collaboration . From an HCI perspective , it is a weakness that XP says little about users or usability ; but the customer role provides an important and promising opportunity . Unlike other more unified approaches , XP explicitly recognises that there are different forces that shape software , including the technical and the business forces , and usability would fit well into this framework . Our work in studying XP projects has found that this approach is already being applied with success . However , while XP describes many techniques for the technical roles in the process , it is quiet about the other roles , leading for a need for guidance from elsewhere . Phil Gray ( University of Glasgow , UK ) : The similarities between Agile Methods and User - Centred Design methods originating from the HCI community provide several possible bridges across the differences of culture , education , techniques and tools that separate software engineers and usability practitioners . I will present an overview of the efforts of IFIP WG 2 . 7 / 13 . 4 ( User Interface Engineering ) over the past few years to address the problem of bringing software engineering and usability engineering together , comparing approaches that focus on Agile methods with other proposed approaches . I’ll also draw on my personal experiences ( in academia and industry ) at the software engineering / HCI boundary to reflect on the obstacles to collaboration , integration and cross - fertilization presented by differing cultures , differing goals , and differing education and the potential of Agile Methods to bridge them . Lynn Miller ( Alias , Canada ) : I am the founder and manager of the UX team at Alias , with over 12 years of experience in the human factors field . Since agile development was introduced to Alias , I have been working on making UX and agile development work successfully together . I also work as an interaction designer so have hands - on experience . Agile development practices can make UX even more powerful if UX professionals are willing to change the way we work to be more agile ourselves . This includes designing for short 2 - week cycles instead of doing upfront design , interacting daily with developers instead of authoring documents , and frequently getting feedback from end users even on incomplete features . Jeff Patton ( Thoughtworks , USA ) : Over the past 5 years I’ve been working to adapt approaches found in UCD methods into everyday use in Agile contexts . Currently at ThoughtWorks we blend some traditional analysis approaches with UCD approaches , and agile planning and story writing techniques . The result is a person in an Agile customer role armed with effective techniques and a user - centred value system that allows them to more comfortably guide the development process . Agile approaches lack guidance on requirements elicitation , user interaction , and user interface design . Traditional analysis approaches don’t seem to work well in Agile contexts . I see User Centred Design approaches as offering a viable toolkit for Agile customers . Where HCI approaches have failed to gain traction in traditional software development approaches CHI 2006 • Panel • Agile Development : Opportunity or Fad ? April 22 - 27 , 2006 • Montréal , Québec , Canada 34 they’re more ideally suited for adaptation into Agile approaches . Helen Sharp ( The Open University , UK ) : Over the last 4 years we have been conducting ethnographic - based studies of XP teams . To date , we have visited 6 different teams . In each organisation we have spent at least one week with the team , observing their day - to - day rhythm , activities and interactions ( in our teams , one week represents one iteration of software development ) . We have found that developers value the input from customers , and are motivated by seeing useful software delivered to end users . However it has also been striking that the teams we visited do not use any techniques from HCI or user - centred development in order to maximise the interactions they have with their users . I have organised this panel ( as well as other events at other locations ) in order to rouse both communities , to stimulate discussion , increase understanding , and maximise the potential of the opportunity presented by this new approach . Panel Format The panel will begin with a brief introduction to agile software development , in order to provide some common ground for members of the audience . This will be followed by brief position statements from each of the panel members . The rest of the time ( the majority ) will be spent in addressing specific case studies and questions from the audience . Case studies and questions will be collected prior to the panel and / or during the introductory session . Case studies should identify specific barriers to SE / HCI integration preferably within a particular context , and the panel members will consider the effect an agile development approach might have on this barrier , e . g . might it be overcome ? make the situation worse ? etc In this sense the panel will have a flavour of a ‘clinic’ . References [ 1 ] Baroudi , JJ , Olson , MH & Ives , B ( 1986 ) An empirical study of the impact of user involvement on system usage and information satisfaction , Communications of the ACM 29 ( 3 ) 232 - 238 . [ 2 ] Beck , K . ( 2000 ) eXtreme Programming Explained : embrace change , Addison - Wesley . [ 3 ] Boehm , B . & Turner , R . ( 2004 ) . Balancing Agility and Discipline . Addison - Wesley [ 4 ] Hansson , C . Dittrich , Y . & Randall , D . ( 2004 ) Agile Processes Enhancing User Participation for Small Providers of Off - the - Shelf Software , in Proceedings of XP2004 , eds J . Eckstein & H . Baumeister , 175 - 183 [ 5 ] Kotonya , G . & Sommerville , I . ( 1998 ) Requirements Engineering : processes and techniques , John Wiley & Sons . [ 6 ] Kujala , S . ( 2003 ) User involvement : a review of the benefits and challenges , Behaviour & Information Technology , 22 ( 1 ) 1 - 16 . [ 7 ] Nelson ( 2002 ) eXtreme Programming vs Interaction Design . An interview with Alan Cooper and Kent Beck , www . fawcette . com / interviews / beck _ cooper . [ 8 ] Preece , J . , Rogers , Y . and Sharp , H . ( 2002 ) Interaction Design , Wiley . [ 9 ] Rittenbruch , M . McEwan , G . Ward , N . Mansfield , T . & Bertenstein , D . ( 2002 ) Extreme Participation - Moving extreme programming towards participatory design in Proceedings of PDC 02 , pp 29 - 41 [ 10 ] Seffah , A . and Mtezker , E . ( 2005 ) ‘The Obstacles and Myths of Usability and Software Engineering’ , Communications of the ACM , 47 ( 12 ) , 71 - 76 . [ 11 ] Sharp , H . C . , Robinson , H . M . and Segal , J . A . ( 2004 ) " eXtreme Programming and User - Centred Design : friend or foe ? " in HCI2004 Design for Life , Vol 2 . CHI 2006 • Panel • Agile Development : Opportunity or Fad ? April 22 - 27 , 2006 • Montréal , Québec , Canada 35