How living cells are able to sense their environment and adequately respond by adjusting their shape , migration , proliferation , differentiation potential and survival remains an open question . In tissues , cells do not exist in isolation but are surrounded by other cells as well as the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) , through which they can migrate . During morphogenesis and tissue repair , such multicellular assemblies rearrange or actively migrate to ensure the proper formation and repair of organs . These behaviours are tightly biomechanically regulated and depend on the coupling between neighbouring cells 1 . Collective migration ( crawling ) is particularly impor‑ tant during development , as exemplified by migration of border cells in Drosophila melanogaster 2 , migration in the primordium of the zebrafish lateral line 3 and specifi cation of the anterior – posterior axis in mice ( see Supplementary information S1 ( box ) ) . During these processes , cohesive cell groups display front‑to‑back polarity with the specification of polarized leading cells at the front edge that coordinate the migration . The organization of these polarized cell clusters may be seen as a scaled‑up version of a single cell , a ‘giant migrating cell’ . Similar mechanisms of collective cell migration also seem to be employed by cancer cells during metastasis 4 – 6 . Collective cell rearrange ments are driven by coordinated contractile processes of entire epithelial sheets — driven by contractions of an actomyosin belt 7 — which are as important as collective migration for tissue shaping . An example of such rearrangements is epiboly during gastrulation in zebra fish embryos ( see Supplementary information S1 ( box ) ) . Importantly , the two mech anisms , collective migration and actomyosin‑driven contractions , are not mutually exclusive and can coexist , as is the case during epithelial wound closure , for example 8 . Bearing in mind the complex 3D topological organiza tion and constant remodelling of the ECM and the cell – cell environment , in vivo analysis of cell collec‑ tives is difficult . Moreover , even though techniques have recently been developed to measure forces in vivo 9 , 10 , the precise analysis of mechanical forces in biologi‑ cal phenom ena remains challenging . Thus , in vitro approaches are particularly useful for multiscale analysis ( from molecular to multicellular levels ) . Complementary to experiments , various physical models have been developed to understand collective cell behaviours ( for a complete perspective , see REFS 11 , 12 and Supplementary information S2 ( box ) ) . Single cell deformation and movement are complex processes that rely on actin polymerization , cell con‑ tractility and dynamics of adhesion complexes at the ECM interface : cells apply traction forces to the substrate through the formation of adhesive structures and the 1 Institut Jacques Monod ( IJM ) , Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique ( CNRS ) Unité Mixte de Recherche ( UMR ) 7592 and Université Paris Diderot , Paris 72505 , France . 2 Mechanobiology Institute , National University of Singapore , 5A Engineering Drive 1 , Singapore 117411 . benoit . ladoux @ ijm . fr ; rene - marc . mege @ ijm . fr doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm . 2017 . 98 Published online 8 Nov 2017 Border cells In Drosophila melanogaster , a cluster of six to eight migratory cells migrating in the egg chamber from the follicular epithelium towards the oocyte . Mechanobiology of collective cell behaviours Benoit Ladoux 1 , 2 and René - Marc Mège 1 Abstract | The way in which cells coordinate their behaviours during various biological processes , including morphogenesis , cancer progression and tissue remodelling , largely depends on the mechanical properties of the external environment . In contrast to single cells , collective cell behaviours rely on the cellular interactions not only with the surrounding extracellular matrix but also with neighbouring cells . Collective dynamics is not simply the result of many individually moving blocks . Instead , cells coordinate their movements by actively interacting with each other . These mechanisms are governed by mechanosensitive adhesion complexes at the cell – substrate interface and cell – cell junctions , which respond to but also further transmit physical signals . The mechanosensitivity and mechanotransduction at adhesion complexes are important for regulating tissue cohesiveness and thus are important for collective cell behaviours . Recent studies have shown that the physical properties of the cellular environment , which include matrix stiffness , topography , geometry and the application of external forces , can alter collective cell behaviours , tissue organization and cell - generated forces . On the basis of these findings , we can now start building our understanding of the mechanobiology of collective cell movements that span over multiple length scales from the molecular to the tissue level . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 18 | DECEMBER 2017 | 743 M e c h a n o b i o l o g y © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Lateral line A system of sense organs found in fish , allowing the detection of movement , vibration and pressure gradients in the water . Traction forces Forces exerted by cells on their underlying surfaces during adhesion or migration . Velocity fields Maps of the flows of tissues by measuring the displacement field of natural tracers inside the tissues between successive images . Reynolds number Dimensionless quantity used in hydrodynamics that represent the ratio between inertial forces and viscous forces . Laminar flows occur at low Reynolds number , whereas turbulent flows appear at high Reynolds number . Cell extrusion An expulsion of apoptotic , non - apoptotic or transformed cells from a cell monolayer ( apically or basally ) . transmission of internal forces produced within their cytoskeleton 13 – 15 ( FIG . 1a ) . These endogenous forces can be modulated by numerous external factors such as matrix physical properties 16 , external forces 17 and bio‑ chemical factors 18 . In addition to cell – ECM coupling , neighbouring cells ( and their cytoskeletons ) are also mechanically coupled by various junctions ( BOX 1 ; Supplementary information S3 , S4 ( boxes ) ) , and this intercellular coupling adds another layer of complexity 19 ( FIG . 1b ) . Fortunately , many collective behaviours can be reproduced in vitro ( FIG . 1c ) ; we now know that these pro‑ cesses require , and are regu lated by , mechanical forces exerted by individual cells on their underlying substrate 20 , stresses at the cell – cell contacts 21 , cell contractions 7 and cellular protrusions 22 , as well as the physical proper‑ ties of the cellular environment , including its stiffness , topography and porosity 23 , 24 . In this Review , we discuss our current understanding , based on these in vitro sys‑ tems , of the role of mechanical forces and cell coupling in collective cell rearrangement and migration . We focus here on cadherin‑based adherens junctions ( BOX 1 ) , as the mechanobiology of these junctions has been most exten‑ sively studied . Other junctions , namely , tight junctions and desmosomes , are briefly discussed in Supplementary information S3 ( box ) and S4 ( box ) , respectively . Mechanisms of collective motion One of the most intriguing questions regarding collective cell behaviours is how cells are coordinated to form multi‑ cellular systems at the mesoscale . Two main mechanisms that support collective dynamics are at play : polarized collective cell migration and coordinated contractility of actin cables . Studying collective cell behaviours . As stated in the 1960s by M . Abercrombie 25 , “it is a well‑known principle that epithelium will not tolerate a free edge . Given a suit‑ able substrate , a free edge will advance by movement of the epithelial sheet behind it” . Hence , wound healing is a particularly good model to study collective cell behavi‑ ours , and various assays have been developed to mimic wound‑healing processes in vitro ( BOX 2 ) . Quantify‑ ing the dynamics of collective cell behaviours ( FIG . 1c ) requires the measurement of physical para meters such as speed , forces and stresses . These measurements are very challenging — measurement of collective motion requires simultaneous recording of the displacement of each single cell over the entire population , which is difficult to achieve . To overcome some of these difficul‑ ties , particle image velocimetry ( PIV ) has been used to map local displacements within cellular subpopulations , thereby providing velocity fields of multicellular assem‑ blies without relying on the trajectories of individ ual cells 26 ( FIG . 1c ) . From these velocity fields , the spatial corre lation of cellular movements can be calculated together with correlation lengths , which provide infor‑ mation on the range over which movements are coordin‑ ated within the tissue 27 . These measurements provide information about the local ordering of cells , which is a good descriptor of the polarity of cell clusters as well as of dynamic cellular flows in the sheet ( FIG . 1c ) . Collective cell migration in epithelial cells . Epithelial cell monolayers are useful model systems to character‑ ize collective cell behaviours and cell – cell interactions . When an epithelial monolayer is exposed to an empty edge , it starts to move into that empty space , forming a protruding , finger‑like structure encompassing tens of cells in diameter , within which cells acquire migratory behaviour 26 . Cells at the tip of these structures , called leader cells , form large lamellipodia and maintain strong connections via cadherin‑based adhesions with follower cells , dragging a small cluster of the followers along ( FIG . 1c ) . The establishment of the migrating leading front observed in vitro shares strong similarities with in vivo developmental processes 2 , 3 , 28 . The leading edge is a polarized structure in which each single cell has a velocity vector pointing in the migrating direction of the leader 29 . Actin staining reveals the assembly of thick actin bundles over multi‑ ple cells ( the actin belt ) , connecting the leaders to the followers along the edges of these finger‑like struc‑ tures and showing pluricellular mechanical coupling 26 ( FIG . 1c ) . In addition , the mechanical perturbation of leader cells using laser ablation strongly supports the role of leader cells in providing local guidance cues for follower cells . Cell motion and multicellular coordination of cellular movements occur not only at the migrating front but also in the bulk of cell monolayers ( FIG . 1c ) . Of note , cell movements occur at low Reynolds number 30 ( meaning that viscous drag of the surrounding medium , which tends to slow down the movement , dominates over inertia , which tends to maintain the movement once it has started ) and are reminiscent of fluid dynamics . Nevertheless , cell behaviours in the bulk of the sheet cannot be described just by simple laminar flows : the cells often display coordinated swirling motions extend‑ ing over tens of cells , which cause ‘chaotic’ motion within monolayers 31 . The unexpected diversity of these movements arises partly from the complex mechanical behaviour of biological tissues ( that is , cells can deform or exchange neighbours ) and their active nature ( that is , cells can modify their contractility or their adhesive properties ) . Consequently , living tissues can be seen as complex viscoelastic materials that behave as solids on short timescales and as liquids on long timescales 32 , 33 . They actively respond to mechanical stimuli exerted by their environment by adjusting their actomyosin net‑ work and adhesion complexes to fine‑tune contractility and forces they apply on their surroundings 19 , 34 . To add to the complexity , other cell biological pro‑ cesses occurring within the tissue can disturb the dynamic organization of cell monolayers ( FIG . 1c ) . For example , cell division can generate a dipolar flow field , whereby the tissue flow is pushed outwards in the axis in which the bodies of the two daughter cells are con‑ nected 35 . The appearance of new daughter cells can ‘stir’ the tissue and lead to ordered flows over large distances away from the division site . In addition , cell extrusion events are preceded by a coordinated , long‑range flow of cells towards the eventual location of the extrusion . The group of cells that participates in these coordinated R E V I E W S 744 | DECEMBER 2017 | VOLUME 18 www . nature . com / nrm R E V I E W S © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . flows induces defects in the physical arrangement of cell monolayers 36 . This misalignment of cells causes con‑ siderable bending of cells , leading to high compressive stresses that are sufficient to trigger the extrusion of a nearby cell . The computation of velocity fields using the PIV method ( see above ) 37 helps with understanding the physical nature of tissues through the characterization of their collective movements , including the coordination and the degree of cell – cell rearrangements . For instance , Figure 1 | Cell movements from single to collective dynamics . a | Single cells move by exerting traction forces ( driven by actomyosin contractility ) on the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) at the integrin - based adhesions ( inset ) both at the front and at the back . The protrusive activity at the front is driven by actin polymerization and retrograde actin flows . b | In the case of collective cell movements , the external substrate with which the individual cell interacts is either the ECM or the neighbouring cells . Cell – cell and cell – ECM adhesions are mechanically connected . Transmission of intercellular forces results from the coupling of cell – cell junctions to actomyosin ( mainly mediated by mechanosensitive cadherin complexes ; inset ) , while traction forces propagate deep into the monolayer ( with leader cells exerting the highest traction forces , helping to orient the followers ) c | As in single cells , cells in collectively migrating monolayers extend lamellipodia at their contact with the substrate at the edge 26 but also underneath other cells in the bulk ( cryptic lamellipodia ; not shown ) 42 , leading to large - scale polarization . Leader cells at the edge of the monolayer organize followers into finger - like structures , within which cells are coupled by actin cables to preserve the mechanical integrity of the leading edge 68 . Local displacements within the tissue are mapped by particle image velocimetry ( PIV ) , which allows a complete analysis of cellular movements , including the magnitude and the orientational field of velocity vectors ( shown by black arrows ) 26 , 27 . Coordinated movements can be deduced from the spatial correlation of these velocity vectors : the larger the velocity correlation length , the more cells ‘feel’ the interactions with distant neighbours ( the stronger the coordination ) . In addition to simple laminar flows , swirling motions of cell clusters and vortices are also observed 31 . Other events , such as cell division and extrusion , can also alter tissue flows . Strain and velocity waves propagate from the edge towards the bulk of cellular monolayers . These waves are driven by mechano - biochemical signals 75 . Leader cells at the edge of the migrating tissue adhere and migrate over the substrate through focal adhesion assembly and the extension of a large lamellipodium . Actomyosin - based structures ( contractile belts ) reminiscent of the ones observed in epithelial gap closure 107 are formed along the finger - like structures that emerge from the leader cells 68 and , more generally , along concave regions of the migrating front . These contractile cables are connected between cells through adherens junctions and can also be coupled to focal adhesions 44 . Strain wave Leadercell Myosin II Myosin II β - Catenin α - Catenin F - actin F - actin Cytoplasm Cytoplasm ECM Plasmamembrane Plasma membrane Cadherin Adhesivepatch Towardsouter cell Towardssubstrate Force exerted by the cell Swirlingmotion Mitosis Extrusion Parallelmotion Actomyosincontractility Intercellular force Traction force Tractionforce Tension Actin retrograde ﬂow Direction of migration a b c Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Traction force Actin Integrins Mechanical connection between adhesions Centripetal forces at the edges Integrin - based adhesion Cadherins Externalforce R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 18 | DECEMBER 2017 | 745 M e c h a n o b i o l o g y © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . monolayers of human skin 38 , 39 and of Madin – Darby canine kidney 26 , 39 epithelial cells both show velocity correlation extending over 10 – 12 cells . The emergence of such large‑scale coordination remains to be clarified at the molecular level , but it involves mechanical , bio‑ mechanical and biochemical signalling : building up of intercellular stress through cell – cell contacts 40 , co‑ alignment of the traction forces of individual cells 41 , for‑ mation of cryptic lamellipodia 42 and activation of signalling by RHO GTPases at cell – cell contacts 43 . Importantly , this long‑range coordination vanishes when cadherin‑based adhesions are disrupted , highlighting the crucial role of adherens junctions in biomechanical cell coupling . Contraction of an actin belt . The formation of contrac‑ tile actin cables spanning multiple cells is an alternative mechanism to collective , active cell migration for driving collective cell displacement . For example , constricting actomyosin rings are observed during zebrafish epiboly ( Supplementary information S1 ( box ) ) as well as dur‑ ing wound healing and closure of epithelial gaps 7 , 8 , 44 , 45 . Also in vivo , a contractile actomyosin ring‑like structure ( referred to as a purse‑string structure ) assembles and contracts at the wound margins 46 . The contraction of the actomyosin cable progressively brings the marginal cells close together to seal the gap . These actomyosin rings are reminiscent of actin cables observed at the leading edge of migrating monolayers ( FIG . 1c ) . Actomyosin structures are linked between neighbour‑ ing cells through adherens junctions 47 or tight junctions 48 ( BOX 1 ; Supplementary information S3 ( box ) ) . Adherens junctions are particularly well suited for mechanical coupling of cells , as they also serve as signalling centres that recruit RHO GTPases and regulate the actomyosin assembly 43 to propagate tension . In in vitro experiments in which epithelial gaps close over non‑ adherent patches , the closure of the wound is driven solely by actomyosin purse‑string contractility . In classical wound‑healing assays and other experiments mimicking the closure of epithelial gaps ( see BOX 2 for details ) , epithelial cells display both active cellular protrusions and actin cable formation along the void 49 , 50 ( see also below ) . The cable part is contractile and under tension , as shown by laser ablation experiments 50 , and it shares strong similarities with the purse‑string structures previously described in vivo . The role of cell – cell interactions in coordinated dynam - ics . The coordinated movements of cells are known to strongly depend on the interactions between cells through cell – cell junctions 31 , 37 , 51 , 52 . Supporting the role of cell – cell junctions in mediating collective behaviours , migrat‑ ing fibroblast‑like cells , which , in contrast to epithelial cells , do not form strong cadherin‑based junctions , have a correlation length of only 20 μm ( approximately two cell diameters ) ; this is ten times smaller than described for epithelial cells 37 . Although three types of intercellular junction — adherens junctions ( BOX 1 ; FIG . 1b ) , tight junc‑ tions ( Supplementary information S3 ( box ) ) and desmo‑ somes ( Supplementary information S4 ( box ) ) — are necessary to maintain the cohesiveness and physical Box 1 | Cell – cell coupling at adherens junctions Adherens junctions are dynamic structures that are remodelled and turned over in response to cell - autonomous and environmental changes such as mechanical stresses 43 , 93 . They are the primary sites of intercellular mechanical coupling . They are populated by two families of adhesion molecules : cadherins 43 and nectins 142 , which mediate adhesion of neighbouring cells via their ectodomains , while their intracellular regions interact with actomyosin ( see figure part a ) . Functional cadherin receptors result from the association of the cadherin ( E - cadherin in epithelia ) with cytoplasmic p120 ( also known as catenin δ 1 ) , α - catenin and β - catenin , which are responsible for the association of cadherin receptors with F - actin 93 . This coupling is required for both efficient cell – cell adhesion and force transmission 80 . The establishment of adherens junctions results from a complex interplay between interactions of cadherin ectodomains in cis and in trans , their clustering and / or oligomerization 143 – 148 and dynamic molecular interactions of the F‑actin‑binding proteins α - catenin and vinculin with F - actin , which depend on myosin II‑generated tension 93 . Cadherins are the major force - bearing proteins in adherens junctions 34 , 43 , 93 . Their complexes are tension - adaptive , multi - protein assemblies that respond to external load and tensile force produced by intracellular actomyosin 78 , 79 , 89 , 99 , 145 , 149 and allow morphogenesis 34 , 43 and collective cell migration in vitro 31 , 54 , 118 and in vivo 150 , 151 to proceed . Nectins , although recognized as obligatory components of adherens junctions , are less studied 142 . They also dimerize in cis and in trans 152 , but unlike cadherins , nectin trans dimers are unable to support strong cell – cell adhesion and can form homophilic and heterophilic interactions with related family members , which can be an inbuilt mark of junctional polarization . Nectins and cadherins form distinct microclusters co‑aligned along actin bundles 153 ; however , nectin – nectin interactions in trans could initiate or strengthen cadherin trans interactions 142 , 154 . The adaptation of the cadherin complexes to forces is mediated by a force - dependent conformational switch in α - catenin : when stretched ( at forces of ~ 5 pN or greater ) , α - catenin molecules unfold , which triggers vinculin binding and inhibits α - catenin refolding after force is released ( see figure part b ) . Physiologically relevant forces may also stabilize vinculin in an open conformation that is able to bind F‑actin , as well as enhance α - catenin binding to F - actin , thereby contributing to junctional mechanosensitivity . Afadin Myosin II β - Catenin α - Catenin F - actin a Cytoplasm Plasmamembrane Cadherin Nectin α - Catenin ( closed ) α - Catenin ( open ) p120 b Vinculin ( open ) Vinculin ( closed ) Force > 5 pN Cadherin dimers Nectin dimers trans trans cis cis Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology R E V I E W S 746 | DECEMBER 2017 | VOLUME 18 www . nature . com / nrm R E V I E W S © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Cryptic lamellipodia Short lamellipodia forming under neighbouring cells in a migrating monolayer . Neural crest cells In vertebrates , a group of migrating cells that arises from the border between the neural plate and the non - neural ectoderm . integrity of epithelial cell sheets 53 , only adherens junc‑ tions are crucial to maintain coordinated cell behaviour . Accordingly , the disruption of E‑cadherin ( also known as cadherin 1 ) ‑based adhesions in epithelial cells — without affecting close cell packing 31 , 54 — leads to highly uncoordin ated motion at the single cell level , thereby leading to lower migration velocity of the groups . Migration of cells that exhibit ‘weak’ cell – cell adhe‑ sion can be organized by means other than stable cad‑ herin junctions . A notable example is the phenomenon of contact inhibition of locomotion ( CIL ) , whereby two colliding cells change direction after coming into con‑ tact 55 . This repulsion is driven by cell repolarization in the opposite directions upon contact . CIL has been used to explain the collective migration of loose clusters of neural crest cells 56 , 57 , where it involves the formation of N‑cadherin ( also known as cadherin 2 ) contacts 58 . In the context of more‑adhesive cells , mechanisms governing CIL likely also operate but are restrained by strong cell – cell contacts ( ‘frustrated’ CIL ) . Indeed , myo‑ blastic or endothelial cells in doublets show polariza‑ tion reminiscent of CIL , at the same time maintaining cadherin‑ mediated adhesions 59 , 60 . Still , it remains to be clarified whether these mechanisms contribute to collective migration in epithelia . Cell density is also an important regulator of collec‑ tive cell dynamics 61 – 63 . The average velocity of epithelial cells seeded in a dish stabilizes only after cell mono‑ layers reach confluence and decreases as density further increases , leading to a switch from a fluid‑like to a more solid‑like state 64 . This decrease in cell dynamics is reminis cent of a phenomenon called ‘cell jamming’ ( REF . 65 ) — as cell density increases , each cell within the population becomes increasingly trapped by its neighbours . Hence , the friction between cells increases , leading to reduced motion but at the same time greater correlation of motion ( larger clusters of cells that migrate together ) 66 . The increase in cluster size leads to a decrease in cellular rearrangements , and the system eventually becomes ‘frozen’ . However , the phenomenon of cell jamming is far from understood , and cell density may not be the ( only ) relevant parameter that results in jamming . Accordingly , recent studies indicate that relative changes in cell – cell adhesion and cortical tension or the crosstalk between cell – cell and cell – ECM interactions could be sufficient to explain jamming – unjamming transitions in cellular assemblies 63 , 65 , 67 . Forces in collective cell behaviours The characterization of forces remains crucial to understand how cells interact with their environment . Various techniques have been developed to infer forces and stresses in vivo and in vitro at the molecular , cellu‑ lar and tissue scales ( FIG . 2 ) , and we now have a much better understanding of their contributions to collective cell behaviours . Forces exerted on the ECM and propagated across cellu lar assemblies . Mechanical traction forces exerted by cells on their substrate are classically measured by plating cells on soft , deformable substrates ( FIG . 2B ) . In the context of monolayer migration over a free edge , traction force measurements reveal that leader cells exert high traction forces 68 , as expected , although fol‑ lower cells , even at positions far away from the leading edge , are shown to exhibit considerable traction forces 69 . This is correlated with the formation of larger focal adhesions by the leading cell than by the followers 26 , 69 , 70 . Maximal traction forces are localized at the tip of lead‑ er‑cell positions and directed from the tip of the finger towards its base ( opposite to the direction of migration ) , whereas at the back of followers within finger‑like struc‑ tures , opposite retraction forces are observed on aver‑ age . This suggests that these multicellular structures Box 2 | In vitro experimental methods to study collective cell behaviours Cells migrate when exposed to an empty space , and there are several techniques that allow the controlled generation of free edges in the cell monolayer . First , a microfabricated barrier can be used to physically confine cells . Upon removal of this barrier , cells are unconfined and free to migrate 26 , 49 , 155 . The barrier is often made of silicone elastomer ( polydimethylsiloxane , PDMS ) by soft lithography techniques . Various types of micropatterned barriers can be produced , including slabs , micropillars and microstencils ( see figure , parts a – c ) . In addition to micropatterns , microfluidic devices have been developed that allow a localized application of cell‑detaching chemicals to selectively remove cells cultured in microchannels , creating a locally free edge ( see figure , part d ) 156 . A recent approach used photo - switchable surfaces to allow collective cell migration from precisely confined cell sheets after the removal of a non - adherent polymer layer . In this technique , a non - adherent surface is prepared by covalent binding of polymer brushes to glass substrates via a photocleavable group , which is sensitive to UV light . Cells seeded on these micropatterned substrates are first able to adhere only inside the confined adhesive geometries , and the confinement can then be released by irradiation with UV light ( see figure , part e ) . These different methods can be easily combined with time - lapse videomicroscopy to observe cell movements , measure flows and forces and extract quantitative parameters , and they have been successfully used to study epithelial cell migration and endothelial wound closure 157 . Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Cell seeding e c a b d UV exposure Chemicals to detach cells Cellmedia Laminarﬂows ‘Model wound’ assay Adhesivesurface Non - adhesive surface R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 18 | DECEMBER 2017 | 747 M e c h a n o b i o l o g y © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . present mechanical signatures similar to those of single migrating cells , such as a force contraction dipole . Though leader cells exert large traction forces that could destabil ize cell – cell contacts , they maintain stable cadherin‑ based adhesions with the following cells 26 . This is facilitated by the presence of the actin cables along the leading edge ; these structures generate mechanical forces directed inwards to preserve the integrity of the finger‑like structures ( FIG . 1c ) . Traction force measurements have also been used to analyse epithelial wound closure 44 , and these in vitro experiments helped to understand closing of finite gaps in vivo 71 . As a wound closes , epithelial cells exhibit two types of traction force : forces pointing away from the gap , as classically observed during cell migration , and forces pointing towards the gap . Interestingly , these forces can be respectively attributed to lamellipodial protrusions and actomyosin cable contraction 44 , 72 . At late stages of gap closure , the purse‑string mechanism takes over , with traction forces mostly pointing towards the gap . This reveals spatiotemporal cooperation between these two processes , producing efficient wound closure . Forces exerted at cell – cell contacts . The measurements of cellular traction forces on the underlying substrate can be used to calculate the forces at cell – cell junctions or , more generally , the intercellular stress within cell mono‑ layers , in an approach often called ‘monolayer stress micro scopy’ ( REFS 66 , 73 ) ( FIG . 2Bc ) . Migrating cell sheets exert the largest forces at their edges ( FIG . 1c ) , but impor‑ tant forces exerted on the substrate are also observed far away from the edge . The transmission of forces depends on cell interactions not only with the substrate but also with neighbouring cells ( FIG . 2Bc ) . This leads to a ‘tug of war’ between the two types of adhesion — signals from the substrates tend to induce migration of cells away from each other , whereas a stronger mechanical input from cell – cell interactions maintains the cohe‑ sion of cell sheets . Analysis of the mechanical balance of these forces within migrating cell sheets shows that the inter cellular stress accumulates within the sheet from the edge to the interior , leading to higher tension on cell – cell junctions 31 , 69 . Migrating cell sheets can thus be seen as tissues under tension . This long‑range cooperative process is driven by the trans mission of forces through cell – cell junctions ( FIG . 1b ) . This tensile stress state in epi‑ thelia has also been observed in vivo using laser ablation experiments 74 . The measure ments of stress ( or stress rate ) inferred from traction forces ( FIG . 2Bc ) and strain ( or strain rate ) obtained from velocity maps can be used to reveal the rheology of cell monolayers . Interestingly , a linear relationship has been found between monolayer tension and strain , reminiscent of the behaviour of elastic materials 75 ( as for a spring , in which force is proportional to deformation ) . This surprising finding suggests that stress dissipation ( through cell – cell rearrangements , for example ) either does not substantially contribute to mechanical properties of cell monolayers or is compen‑ sated for by active forces generated by the cells . In addi‑ tion , the measurements of stress transmission within cellular mono layers have revealed that cells preferentially Figure 2 | Methods of force measurement . A | Measuring intercellular tensions . Aa | Laser ablation has been extensively used to estimate tensions 169 . After ablation , the immediate recoil velocity of the structure is measured ( red arrows ) , but the inferred tension is the product of the velocity and the viscosity coefficient of the surrounding environment , which is usually unknown . As such , this method can be used to measure only relative tensions within cell structures . Ab | Promising methods such as optical tweezers 10 or deformable particles 9 have also been developed to capture intercellular forces in vivo . In the latter , liquid droplets can be embedded to measure local pressures inside tissues . The pressure can be extracted from the deformation of a droplet of defined rigidity . Ac | Förster resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) - based tension sensors have been developed to measure cell – cell tension 94 . Briefly , a polypeptide of known stiffness is inserted in a particular domain of a protein to measure the tension experienced by this protein . This approach has revealed in a direct manner that cadherins have an important role in the transmission of mechanical forces at cell – cell junctions in vivo 110 . B | Measuring traction forces ( red arrows ) . Ba | Traction forces are classically measured by plating cells on soft , deformable gels in which small markers ( such as beads ) are embedded to track deformation patterns ( an approach known as traction force microscopy ( TFM ) ) 170 . By inverting the displacement field of these markers , the force field can be calculated 69 . Bb | As an alternative method , cells are grown on arrays of micron - sized flexible polydimethylsiloxane ( PDMS ) pillars , deflection of which gives direct information on local forces exerted by cells 171 . Bc | From TFM experiments , the intercellular stresses in a monolayer , σ , are inferred in 1D or 2D configurations . In 2D these stresses can be tensile or compressive , σ xx and σ yy , in the normal direction of the intercellular junctions or correspond to shear forces , σ xy and σ yx , in the tangential direction and can be deduced from cell traction forces ( t x , t y ) using force – balance relation 66 . h denotes the average height of the monolayer . Laser ablation Aa Ab Deformable droplet Ba Bb Bc Ac FRET sensor TFM Micropillars t ( x ) h [ σ ( x + dx ) – σ ( x ) ] = t ( x ) dx σ ( x + dx ) σ ( x ) h t y t x x y z σ xx σ xy σ yx σ yy Soft gel Tissue Bead Plasmamembrane Cadherin Tensilestress Sh e a r s t r e ss Tensilestress Sh e a r s t r e ss F - actin Cytoplasm Low force ( pink ﬂuorescence ) Force High force ( blue ﬂuorescence ) FRET measures force Tension - sensing module Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology R E V I E W S 748 | DECEMBER 2017 | VOLUME 18 www . nature . com / nrm R E V I E W S © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Confluence In cell culture , the state in which 100 % of the surface is covered by cells ; also called 100 % confluence . Cortical tension The force per unit length exerted on a part of the cortex , which is a thin layer mainly composed of actin - based proteins and myosin attached to the cell membrane , by the network around it . Focal adhesions Integrin - mediated adhesion structures formed at the cell – ECM interface , at the anchorage points of stress fibres . Optical tweezers Highly focused laser beams that attract small objects to the centre of the beam . Stress The force per unit area . Strain A measure of deformation representing the length change in a body relative to a reference length . Shear Local stresses exerted tangentially to a defined surface . Normal stress Forces perpendicular to a defined surface , such as a cell – cell interface . Catch bond A noncovalent bond that shows an increased lifetime with increasing amounts of tensile force applied to the bond . Förster resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) . When applied to optical microscopy , a method allowing the determination of the distance ( or dynamic changes in the proximity ) between two fluorescent molecules within several nanometres . migrate in a collective manner along defined directions dictated by their mechanical interactions . Within the monolayer , intercellular interactions experience two types of stress : shear and normal stress ( tension or com‑ pression generated by cell pulling or pushing , respec‑ tively ) ( FIG . 2Ac ) . It appears that cells tend to migrate along stress orientations that minimize shear stresses and thus may limit potential neighbour exchanges 66 , and the disruption of cell – cell junctions reduces this corre‑ lation between the orientation of stresses and cellular motions . Even though the importance of stress‑guided collective movements has not yet been addressed in vivo , these mechanisms can help explain cell differentiation and pattern formation in multicellular assemblies 76 , 77 . Mechanical coupling between cells is also character‑ ized by the emergence of mechanical waves of velocity and stress during collective cell migration . Upon the release of a physical obstacle , the spreading and migra‑ tion of cell monolayers lead to cellular movements and force transmission from cell to cell that progressively penetrate deeper into the monolayer , towards its centre 75 ( FIG . 1c ) . The appearance of these waves may be partly explained by pulling forces of front cells on their neigh‑ bours , leading to strain , which is propagated and results in the build‑up of mechanical tension due to the active response of the cytoskeleton . At the molecular level , the transmission of mechan‑ ical signals through cell sheets ( at least for epithelia and endothelia ) occurs mainly through adherens junctions , which have been shown to be mechanosensitive 78 – 80 ( BOX 1 ) . High‑throughput screening assays have indeed identified cadherins and other junctional proteins as major players in collective migration 40 , 51 ( see the following section for more details ) . Mechanisms of cell coupling A major challenge in understanding collective cell behaviours is to link these behaviours to the action and dynamics of molecular cell components . Various cellular components , including the elements of the cytoskeleton , as well as components of cell – ECM and intercellular adhesions , are mechanically active and / or mechano‑ sensitive , and they contribute to the mechanics of col‑ lective cell behaviours by providing necessary force for motion and mechanical coupling between cells . Internal force generation and its roles in cell motion . The cytoskeleton is an active material that generates mechanical work while consuming energy from ATP hydrolysis ( whereas adhesions are mostly passive systems allowing force transmission ) . Actomyosin is the major driving force for single and collective cell migration . Traction forces , which propel cells , are mainly gener ated by myosin II motors , whereas the polymeriza tion of polar actin filaments generates pushing forces on cell mem‑ branes , thereby enabling the leading edge of the cell to protrude 81 . Actomyosin applies forces on cell – ECM adhesions and intercellular junctions , enabling cells to migrate through the substrate and pull on their neigh‑ bours , respectively 19 ( FIG . 1a , b ) . Cell‑generated forces have been shown to be regulated by various components , including mechanosensitive channels , acto myosin cyto‑ skeleton and adhesion complexes between cells and their substrate , as well as intercellular adhesions 82 – 84 . These various components are themselves mechanosen‑ sitive and are important for the regulation of collective cell behaviours : density fluctuations within cell mono‑ layers can generate areas of lower density , leading to cell stretching and the activation of mechano sensitive chan‑ nels and subsequently to increased cell proliferation 84 ; reduced activity of actomyosin promotes streamlined movements of cell monolayers , thereby preventing the formation of swirls and reducing neighbour exchanges 31 and also leading to the disappearance of the mechanical waves propagating into the monolayer 75 ; finally , acto‑ myosin‑based forces can be exerted at both sites , cell – matrix and cell – cell adhesions , and their mechanical crosstalk can regulate cell traction forces , the shape of cell assemblies and even cell scattering 85 – 87 . Cadherin - dependent force transmission and sensing . The molecular link between cadherins and F‑actin is essential for the cohesion of cell ensembles , and perturb‑ ing this coupling suppresses cell coordination during col‑ lective cell migration 31 , 54 . This link is mechanosensitive , and central to this property are two junctional proteins that bind F‑actin : α‑catenin and vinculin . As observed at the single molecule level 88 , 89 and in cells 79 , 90 – 92 , α‑catenin unfolds under force , thereby enabling the recruitment of vinculin ( BOX 1 ) . Upon binding to α‑catenin , vinculin may also unfold , abolishing a head‑to‑tail auto‑ inhibition and favouring its association with F‑actin 88 , 89 , 93 . The bind‑ ing of α‑catenin to F‑actin is itself governed by a catch bond 78 , which could also contribute to force sensing 93 . It has been shown — using tension sensors designed for Förster resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) — that E‑cadherin 94 , α‑catenin 92 and vinculin 95 are under tension at cell – cell contacts . However , there is no consistency between molecular tension in E‑cadherin and E‑cadherin engagement at junctions , as stretched E‑cadherin is also detected outside cell – cell junctions 94 . There is also no timely concordance between α‑catenin opening and vin‑ culin recruitment 92 , nor is there concomi tant opening of α‑catenin and vinculin 95 , suggesting a complex molecu‑ lar mechanism of force‑sensing along with the coexist‑ ence of multiple molecular architectures of the adhesion complexes . This architecture may vary in different cellu‑ lar contexts in relation to the organization of junctional actin bundles 95 ( FIG . 3Aa , Ab ) . For example , in ‘immature’ adherens junctions ( also called focal adherens junctions ) of epithelial 96 , endothelial 97 or myogenic cells 98 , where traction forces applied on cadherins may be high 95 , 99 , actin bundles are oriented perpendicular to the junctions . However , in mature epithelial junctions ( zonulae adhe‑ rens ) , contractile actomyosin bundles run adjacent to a ring of E‑cadherin , and the contractile tension is paral‑ lel to the cell – cell contact 34 , 97 . These contractile bundles may apply shearing forces on E‑cadherin complexes and serve to protect them from normal pulling forces , which are generated by the intracellular acto myosin network 100 . As such , zonulae adherens are not passive integrators of force but instead are active mechanical structures R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 18 | DECEMBER 2017 | 749 M e c h a n o b i o l o g y © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology PACSIN2 Ba Static monolayers Bb Migration fronts Junctional components Actomyosin Focal adhesions Crypticlamellipodium Ab Aa Cryptic lamellipodium Merlin Merlin Merlin Desmosomal cadherins Keratins Contractileactomyosin Contractileactomyosin Dendriticactin Contractileactomyosin Myosin IIA Myosin IIA ROCK RHO GAP RHOA GEF RHOA RAC1 RAC1 , CDC42 RAC1 RAC1 RHOA RHOA Cadherins ( catenins , vinculin and afadin ) β - Pix WAVEARP2 / 3 Integrins Protrusion Cadherinﬁnger Cadherin ﬁnger RAC1 Figure 3 | Molecular coupling at intercellular contacts . Topologies of intercellular junctions , focal adhesions , contractile actin fibres and protrusive lamellipodia in migrating monolayered epithelia ( part Aa ) and in endothelium - like cell monolayers ( part Ab ) . For clarity , tight junctions , desmosomes and intermediate filaments are not represented . Major molecular players regulating cell – cell coupling in cohesive monolayers ( Ba ) and governing coordinated cell polarization in collective migration ( Bb ) . Positive - feedback loops between cadherin engagement and RHOA activity , involving the recruitment of RHO GEF ( guanine exchange factor ) and inhibition of RHO GAP ( GTPase activating protein ) by the activity of RHO - associated protein kinase ( ROCK ) allow the activation of myosin II , thereby ensuring high stability of zonulae adherens 34 , 104 , 105 . At the same time , RAC1 activity is inhibited in a Merlin - dependent manner ( part Ba ) . At the free edges of cellular monolayers , integrin engagement by the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) activates a PI3K – RAC1 – CDC42 pathway , dendritic actin polymerization ( through the activity of Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein family member ( WAVE ) and actin - related protein 2 / 3 ( ARP2 / 3 ) and lamellipodial protrusion in leading cells . β - Pix is a major GEF downstream of early integrin activation 28 , 172 , 173 . At the rear of the lamellipodium , RHOA is activated by more - mature integrin complexes , promoting myosin II activity and generation of traction forces 108 . Cell – cell contacts at the rear of leading cells provide instructive cues to maintain high levels of active RHOA and low levels of RAC1 through a positive - feedback loop between cadherin engagement , activation of RHO GEFs , RHOA activation and increased tension reinforcing adherens junctions 28 , 34 , 59 , 60 . At their front , upon Merlin release from cell - cell contact , follower cells extend reduced lamellipodia ( cryptic lamellipodia ) in a RAC1 - dependent manner ( REF . 39 ) . In endothelial cells , additional structures known as cadherin fingers extend from the rear of leading cells and are engulfed by the following cells . Protein kinase C and casein kinase substrate in neurons protein 2 ( PACSIN2 ) might be involved in the extension of these fingers 111 , 112 ( part Bb ) . Horizontal red arrows indicate vectors of forces applied at cell – ECM and cell – cell contacts . R E V I E W S 750 | DECEMBER 2017 | VOLUME 18 www . nature . com / nrm R E V I E W S © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Cancer - associated fibroblasts ( CAFs ) . Stromal fibroblasts closely associated with primary tumour cells and participating in the neoplastic process . displaying contractile tension parallel to the cell – cell contact 34 , 101 . The contractility of junctions is an impor‑ tant determinant of their function and has been shown to be important for morphogenesis 102 , 103 . Zonulae adherens have been shown to be under tension in static mono‑ layers in vitro 91 , 101 . This contractility is sustained by an ensemble of molecular components that are recruited to the junctional cortex in response to E‑cadherin ( FIG . 3Ba ) . This includes the components of RHOA signalling and activation of myosin II ( REFS 34 , 104 , 105 ) . In addition , proteins that control actin polymerization and branching are important for the maintenance of effective contractile tension and mechanosensing at cell – cell junctions 34 , 91 , 106 . Mechanical cell – cell coupling is also regulated by key constituents of junctions ( including cadherin sub‑ types ) , and their expression markedly affects junctional mechanobiology and monolayer cohesion ( BOX 3 ) . Cell – cell coupling , intercellular tension and coordin ated cell polarization . An important aspect of cell migration is cell polarization , which involves specifi cation of front and back . This polarization needs to be propagated throughout the migrating monolayer to ensure collec‑ tive , organized motion . An interesting consideration is the contribution of cell – cell adhesions and the force transmission at these contacts to cell polarization during collective cell behaviours 107 . The front polarization of cells at the leading edge of monolayers and the formation of migratory pro‑ trusions are induced by the presence of the free edge ( lack of junctions ) , whereas their rear is instructed and maintained by tension‑resistant intercellular cadherin adhesions 28 . At the edges of cellular colonies , integrin engagement activates RAC1‑dependent protrusions ( in a mechanism involving the guanine exchange factor β‑Pix ( also known as RHO guanine nucleotide exchange factor 7 ) ) ( FIG . 3Bb ) , in a process equivalent to the activ‑ ation of migration in single cells 108 . This pathway is also responsible for the polarization of the leading cells during anterior vascular endoderm migration in mouse embryos 109 . RHOA activated by focal adhesions at the rear of the lamellipodium is then responsible for myo‑ sin II activation and the generation of traction forces 108 . During the migration of single cells , RHOA is activated at the rear of the cell , leading to disassembly of focal adhesions , which is needed for efficient cell migration . RAC1 activity is reduced at the cell rear by the combined effects of inhibition by high tension and cross inhibition by RHOA 108 , leading to the establishment of opposing gradients of RAC1 and RHOA activity along the front‑ to‑rear axis . Similar gradients have been proposed to drive the migration of front cells during collective cell migration 28 ( FIG . 3Bb ) . Cell – cell contacts at the rear of leading cells may provide additional instructive cues to maintain high levels of active RHOA and low levels of RAC1 , through the positive‑feedback loop between cadherin engagement and activation of RHOA at adhe‑ rens junctions 28 , 34 , 59 , 60 . Thus , intercellular stress medi‑ ated by cell – cell junctions is critical for maintaining the front‑to‑rear polarization of leader cells in the first row of the collectively migrating sheet . Mechanical coupling mediated by cadherin‑based cell – cell junctions also Box 3 | Regulation of mechanical cell coupling by junctional components Junctional cadherins exist in various isoforms , including the best‑known epithelial ( E ) - cadherin but also neuronal ( N ) - cadherin , placental ( P ) ‑cadherin and vascular – endothelial ( VE ) ‑cadherin ( also known as cadherins 1 , 2 , 3 and 5 , respectively ) , as well as cadherin 6 , cadherin 7 and cadherin 11 ( REF . 158 ) . E - cadherin and P - cadherin are expressed in compact tissues such as skin , mammary gland and kidney epithelia , and VE - cadherin is expressed in endothelial cells that show a milder degree of intercellular compaction 159 . N - cadherin is expressed in neuronal and mesenchymal cells , which are more loosely connected to each other . N - cadherin is upregulated in invasive cancer cells in combination with a downregulation of E - cadherin following epithelial – mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) 159 . Switching from E - cadherin to N - cadherin is also observed in neural crest cells before EMT 58 and is involved in their contact inhibition of locomotion ( CIL ) behaviours 56 . E - cadherin 31 , 37 , 51 , 52 , P - cadherin 40 , 160 and VE - cadherin 112 all contribute to force transmission during collective cell migration in vitro in cells that express them . However , they may contribute differently to building and sustaining intercellular stress 40 . Their ectodomains have been shown to differentially resist force , with E - cadherin resisting more than N - cadherin 161 . Different responses to force have been noted for P - cadherin and E - cadherin in normal breast epithelial ( MCF10A ) cells , in which P - cadherin responds to the level of force , whereas E‑cadherin is more sensitive to the rate at which the intercellular stress builds up 40 . It was subsequently shown that P - cadherin may sustain higher tension as a result of activating the β - Pix – CDC42 signalling pathway , and P‑cadherin expression has been linked to the invasive potential of cancer cells 160 . In addition to homotypic junctions , heterotypic contacts have also been described . One example is a mechanically active heterotypic N - cadherin – E - cadherin adhesion between cancer - associated fibroblasts ( CAFs ) and cancer cells that is important in driving cancer cell invasion 162 . In contrast to CIL , where N - cadherin homotypic contacts are unstable , heterotypic N - cadherin – E - cadherin contacts are stable and withstand similar forces to homophilic E‑cadherin junctions . They are similarly mechanosensitive , engaging similar tension - regulated α - catenin – vinculin interactions . These heterotypic adhesions repolarize CAFs away from the cancer cells and enable them to guide cancer cell migration by regulating cancer cell trajectories and leader – follower patterns . In addition to cadherins , other junctional proteins are implicated in regulating mechanical coupling of cells . For example , in Drosophila melanogaster , Canoe ( afadin in vertebrates ) , which interacts with another component of adherens junctions , nectins ( BOX 1 ) , has been implicated in maintaining tissue integrity during morphogenesis and collective cell migration 163 – 165 . In mice , the absence of afadin is associated with the detachment of actomyosin from the zonulae adherens , leading to developmental defects that indicate that afadin may have similar roles in vertebrates 166 , 167 . In vitro , it has been reported that Madin – Darby canine kidney epithelial cells presenting increased contractility at zonulae adherens show elevated levels of junctional afadin 101 . Removal of afadin alters cell shape and favours large - scale movement across the monolayer , suggesting that afadin acts as a robust protein scaffold that maintains zonulae adherens architecture and tissue cohesion 101 . Interestingly , nectins and afadin are recruited to the N - cadherin – E - cadherin interface between cancer cells and CAFs , and CAF repolarization is afadin dependent 162 . In addition , tight junctions and their constituents zonula occludens proteins ZO1 , ZO2 and ZO3 ( REF . 101 ) , as well as desmosomes and associated intermediary filaments 168 , have been reported to regulate intercellular mechanocoupling and cell polarization ( see also Supplementary information S3 , S4 ( boxes ) ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 18 | DECEMBER 2017 | 751 M e c h a n o b i o l o g y © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Hippo pathway Also known as the Salvador – Warts – Hippo pathway , this pathway controls organ size in animals through the regulation of cell proliferation and apoptosis . ERM family A protein family that is named for three closely related proteins : ezrin , radixin and moesin . BAR domain A highly conserved protein dimerization domain that occurs in many proteins involved in cellular membrane dynamics . The BAR domain is banana - shaped , binds to membranes and is capable of sensing membrane curvature by binding preferentially to curved membranes . establishes extended vectorial signalling throughout the monolayer , involving coordinated , polarized activation of RAC1 and RHOA on a multicellular‑ length scale , which is essential for collective cell migration 52 , 68 , 110 . The first demonstration of such a multi cellular polariza‑ tion has been produced by the observation of cryptic lamellipodia that extend in the direction of migration by cells distant from the edge and that potentially guide the migration of cell clusters 42 . However , how symmetric cell – cell junctions can support asymmetric signal transduction whereby one cell can direct the movement of its follower remains elusive . Two recent studies 39 , 111 have provided clues about two alternative molecular strategies for propa‑ gating RAC1 and RHOA gradients throughout a sheet ( FIG . 3Bb ) . In epithelial cells , Merlin , a Hippo pathway regulator and tumour suppressor protein belonging to the ERM family , has been reported to shuttle from adhe‑ rens junctions to the cytoplasm , coordinating collec‑ tive migration of monolayers spanning tens of cells in diameter . In a stationary monolayer , Merlin localizes to cell – cell junctions and contributes to RAC1 inhib‑ ition . During migration , Merlin relocalizes to the cytoplasm in follower cells owing to the intercellular pulling force developed by the leading cell , contributing to polarized activation of RAC1 and formation of cryp‑ tic lamellipodia ; these events are then coordinated on a multicellular‑length scale 39 . Recent studies revealed that apart from canonical cadherin‑ based cell – cell junctions , cells in migrating monolayers ( at least in endothelial sheets ) form additional cadherin‑based structures , which appear as fingers link‑ ing the back of one moving cell to the front of its follower in a tension‑dependent manner 111 ( FIG . 3Ab , Bb ) . These ‘cadherin fingers’ are present throughout the mono‑ layer , even hundreds of micrometres into the cell sheet , in strands of cells that display sequential polariza tion within the mono layer . These structures are extended from the rear of leading cells and are engulfed by fol‑ lowers at their front , thereby generating opposite plasma membrane curvatures in the two cells 111 . In follower cells , engulfment of cadherin fingers occurs along with the formation of a lamellipodia‑ like zone with the low acto myosin and high dendritic actin polymeriza‑ tion typical of RAC1 activation . Interestingly , local activ ation of RHOA was sufficient to trigger the for‑ mation of cadherin fingers at the rear of leading cells . An asymmetric recruitment of membrane‑bending and curvature‑ sensing BAR domain ‑containing proteins such as protein kinase C and casein kinase substrate in neu‑ rons protein 2 ( PACSIN2 ) to the front of follower cells has been described 111 , 112 . These proteins , recruited asym‑ metrically at junctions , are good candidates to instruct RAC1 and RHOA activity gradients . Interestingly , PACSIN2 inhibits internalization of cadherin complexes from the membranes at trailing ends of endothelial cells and is important for endothelial monolayer integrity 112 . Although very different , the two mechanisms may contrib ute — perhaps to different extents in different contexts — to the coupling of cell polarization at the level of an entire monolayer . Regulation by physical constraints In vivo , collective cell behaviours occur under a broad range of external constraints . These include external forces such as shear flows on endothelial cells 113 or con‑ tractile forces of surrounding cells 114 , confinement 23 , such as that imposed by tissue architecture or growth , physical properties of the ECM and ECM remodelling 20 . In this section , we discuss the impact of some of these physical constraints on collective cell dynamics and the impor‑ tance of cell – cell interactions in responding to them . We focus here on in vitro studies that aim to reproduce in vivo conditions in more‑controlled environments , thereby helping to predict the emergence of overlooked or hidden features not apparent in in vivo studies . Confinement . The use of micropatterning tech‑ niques 31 , 115 , 116 ( BOX 2 ) , such as stripes of ECM printed at various widths , helped to impose well‑controlled confine ment , enabling the study of how this constraint , which has well‑established roles in vivo ( for example , during neural crest migration or cancer cell invasion 23 , 117 ) , affects collective behaviours . It has been revealed that confinement increases the migration speed of epithelial cell sheets , in particular for geometries smaller than the expected correlation length for the cell type measured under unconfined conditions ( FIG . 4a ) . Under high con‑ finement , velocity vectors mostly point in the direction of migration , leading to the disappearance of swirling motions with a high ordering in the direction of migra‑ tion and an increase in the velocity of the cell front . Cell polarity and actin fibres are also preferentially oriented in the direction of movement under these conditions . However , when cell monolayers are constrained without any free space to expand , they can still display surprising dynamics . For example , when a confluent epithelium is constrained in a circular adherent pattern , the dimensions of which are smaller than the correlation length of the unconstrained epithelium , the coordination of cell motions leads to the establishment of a persistent whole‑tissue rotational motion 118 . This persistent rotation may be reminiscent of coordinated rotational movements of morphogenetic events such as the formation of epi‑ thelial acini 119 or the elongation of D . melanogaster egg chambers 120 . This collective behaviour is substantially altered when E‑cadherin‑based contacts are blocked , in cancerous cells and in cells that have undergone epithelial – mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) 118 , 119 , under‑ lining the essential role of cell – cell junctions in maintain‑ ing the collective behaviour . The large‑scale coordination is also reduced as cell density increases over time , because displacements are gradually frozen in a mechanism reminis cent of cell jamming . Other studies have shown surprising oscillatory movements of epithelial cells plated on circular confined substrates . These oscillations corres pond to phases in which outward cell movements of the whole epithelial monolayer alternate with inward movements in the radial direction of the pattern 64 , 121 . These oscillations may share similarities with the propa‑ gation of mechanical waves during monolayer expan‑ sion described above ( FIG . 1c ) . A plausible mechanism for the oscillations may involve coordination between cell R E V I E W S 752 | DECEMBER 2017 | VOLUME 18 www . nature . com / nrm R E V I E W S © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . contractility and polarity to enable synchronization of cellular deformations , that is , compression and extension , over the entire monolayer . However , molecular details of how this coordination could be achieved are lacking . Curvature sensing and collective cell migration . The migrating front of cell sheets spontaneously displays large shape fluctuations associated with changes in the curva‑ ture of the edge of the cell sheet 122 . Such shape changes are associated with cytoskeletal reorganization that can promote the assembly of either cellular protrusions or contractile actomyosin cables 8 , 68 , 123 ( FIG . 4b ) . As expected , forward protrusions of cell monolayers that can spon‑ taneously emerge during migration or be induced by micropatterning techniques ( BOX 2 ) are associated with the formation of leader cells 124 that exert large traction forces directed towards the bulk of the collective ( FIG . 1c ) . Microfabricated stencils made of pillars of various geometries 49 ( BOX 2 ) have also been used to probe the relationship between collective cell migration and the curvature of monolayer edges . This revealed that neg ative curvature is related to actin cable assembly and purse‑string‑based closure , whereas positive curva‑ ture favours cell migration and the formation of leader cells 72 ( FIG . 4b ) . The speed at which cells along the gap edge move depends on the local curvature with cells at concave edges ( negative curvature ) moving in more quickly than those at convex edges ( positive curvature ) . Force measurements and the analysis of the distribution of cell – ECM adhesions revealed that forces coming from lamellipodia and actin cable contractility are additive in concave regions , leading to faster migration , whereas in convex regions , cell migration is the only force that pushes the monolayer forward . This reveals unexpected coupling between these mechanisms and a regulatory role of actomyosin cables to coordinate epithelial gap closure . In vivo , the interplay between the two mech‑ anisms may be important to regulate cell migration processes that occur on surfaces with heterogeneous properties in terms of adhesiveness , stiffness or topo‑ graphy 125 – 127 . For instance , the re‑epithelialization that restores tissue integrity during wound healing requires the migration of cells over damaged areas with spatially disorganized ECM composition . Whereas cells migrate with lamellipodial protrusions over adherent substrates , the absence of ECM induces concave cell edges associated with the formation of contractile actin bundles 122 . Physical properties of the substrate . The development of deformable substrates to measure cell traction forces led to the discovery that living cells sense and respond to substrate stiffness 128 . The impact of substrate stiffness on single cell migration has been reported in vitro 16 , and recently in vivo 129 , in the context of embryonic brain development , where axon growth is guided towards softer tissue . Thus , it is not surprising that physical proper‑ ties of the substrates are also important for collective cell motion . On deformable soft substrates , the stress is likely transmitted not only through the cell – cell interactions but also through the substrate itself , which may not be Figure 4 | Physical constraints influencing collective cell behaviours . a | Confinement into stripes of various widths induces changes in flow in the bulk of the migrating monolayer 23 , 31 . Vortices and rotational movements are observed in wide channels , whereas narrow channels favour parallel coordinated and polarized movements in the longitudinal direction of the stripe . b | Substrate geometry influences the mode of collective migration . In areas of positive curvature ( for example , the tips of finger - like structures pointing into the gap ) , cells predominantly move by active crawling 72 . In areas of negative curvature ( that is , where the gap bows into the tissue ) , prominent actomyosin cables are formed . Actomyosin contractility and active cell crawling operate additively in gap closure , leading to faster tissue velocity in regions of negative curvature . c | Coupling of cells in cell collectives promotes durotactic motion 54 , whereby cell colonies move collectively more quickly in the direction of high stiffness ( top panel ) , which is not the case for single cells under similar conditions . This collective durotactic motion can be explained by the impact of force transmission across the monolayers ( bottom panel ) . Soft edges ( on the left ) present similar traction forces to stiff edges ( on the right ) . Consequently , substrate deformations are larger on the soft side than on the stiff side ( since a force of equal amplitude will deform a soft material more than a stiff one ) , inducing a net movement towards the high stiffness . This simple explanation is confirmed by an integrated model that couples substrate stiffness , focal adhesion dynamics and actin polymerization ( see REF . 54 for further explanation ) . Stencil Stencil Initialposition Initialposition Low stiﬀness High stiﬀness Cell monolayer Conﬁnement a Stiﬀness gradient Strain – F F Strain Removalof stencil Higher substrate deformation Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Direction of migration Migration Migration Velocity vectors Curvature b c Lamellipodium Actin cable Large channel Narrow channel R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 18 | DECEMBER 2017 | 753 M e c h a n o b i o l o g y © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . the case on extremely stiff surfaces traditionally used for in vitro experiments , such as glass or plastic . Hence , substrate deformability feeds into the mechanical cross‑ talk between cell – cell and cell – substrate adhesions , modulating collective movements . Indeed , cells can detect and respond to substrate strains created by the traction stresses of a neighbouring cell , having the abil‑ ity to communicate through the underlying deformable matrix 130 , 131 . This may in turn affect intercellular forces and affect cell coordination during collective behaviours . Accordingly , it has been shown that on soft , deformable substrates , cell coordination is increased , and cells are able to migrate in larger groups . This has been further linked to long‑distance substrate deformations 131 . Traction forces and contractility of epithelial cell colo nies increase with substrate stiffness 52 , 132 . On sub‑ strates composed of local anisotropic stiffness , the migration of epithelial colonies ( as well as the scattering of individ ual cells during EMT ) is promoted in the direc‑ tion of the highest stiffness 133 . Similarly , the behaviour of cells within 3D cellular aggregates varies with substrate stiffness : on stiff substrates , cells disperse from aggre‑ gates , covering the surface , whereas on soft substrates , the aggregates are maintained and can even coalesce to form multicellular tissue‑like structures 134 , 135 . These observations may be explained by mechanical compe‑ tition between forces exerted at cell – substrate and cell – cell adhesion sites , whereby excessive traction forces on the substrate generated on stiff substrates can compro‑ mise cell – cell adhesion and may reduce cohesiveness and promote cell scattering . However , these effects will clearly differ between cells , depending on adhesion type , architecture of the adhesions and cell contractility character istic of the cell type ( and cell state ) , and they may not be relevant in all situations . Another important phenomenon linked to sensing substrate stiffness is durotaxis — the ability of cells to follow gradients of ECM stiffness — which is well estab‑ lished for single cells 16 , 136 . Recent experiments have also reported collective durotaxis of epithelial monolayers 54 . In wounds performed on a substrate with a stiffness gradient , cell monolayers expanded more on the stiffer side ( FIG . 4c ) . This long‑range mechanism was shown to involve the transmission of cell‑generated forces across the cell collective , as the inhibition of myosin II blocked this durotactic expansion . Similarly , perturbation of cell – cell contacts by knocking down α‑catenin also abro‑ gated durotaxis . Interestingly , durotaxis emerges in cell collectives , even if isolated constituent cells are unable to durotax , suggesting that mechanical cell coupling by cell – cell adhesions has a large impact on the overall mechanics of migration . The changes in the mechanical properties of the substrate modulate the cell – substrate adhesions , which in turn may affect the cell – cell adhe‑ sions . This mechanical feedback appears to be crucial to understand tissue shape and dynamics . When looking at in vivo tissues , it turns out that the elasticity of environ‑ ment can vary by orders of magnitude between tissues from brain ( hundreds of pascals ) to bones ( ~ GPa ) . Thus , collective cell dynamics may differ considerably from one tissue to another . Conclusions and perspective Cellular coordination , which is at the basis of various phenomena , most prominently including tissue shaping during morphogenesis , is a mechanoregulated , multiscale process integrating events on the molecular , cellular and multicellular scales that can be observed at a wide range of timescales , from milliseconds to days . The continued development of microfabricated tools ( BOX 2 ) over the past 10 years and the accompanying development of in vitro cellular models ( Supplementary information S2 ( box ) ) have enabled the links between cellular mechanics and the underlying molecular pathways to be studied for the first time . Despite being limited in terms of complexity , these in vitro approaches , owing to their amenability and ease of manipulation , support molecular , biochemical , physical and mechanical analyses on cellular and multi‑ cellular scales . Accordingly , they have provided valu‑ able know ledge of the various scales of cell coordination and can now support or inspire more complex analysis in in vivo studies at the tissue or organism scale . This is illustrated , for example , by a recent study describing neural crest collective cell migration in vivo 23 that follows a mode of regulation described previously for epithelial cells migrating in confined geometries in vitro 31 . Future discoveries are sure to follow in various in vivo scenarios , provided that physical and mechanical parameters can be reproducibly measured and analysed in these situations . The next frontier for the application of the in vitro models is to investigate the impact of extrinsic forces on the mechanics and biomechanical responses of cell collec‑ tives . There are numerous physiologically relevant forces that could be investigated , including traction forces gener‑ ated by the migration or deformation of other tissues and pushing forces generated by cell division , intercalation and delamination . It will also be interesting to study in more detail the role of physical properties of the substrate in driving collective cell behaviours . For instance , the recent insights into the responsiveness of cell collectives to stiffness and the process of collective durotaxis can help to take a different view on studies of morphogenesis , wound healing and cancer cell invasion . As an example , differential deposition and composition of ECM during morphogenesis 20 , 137 may lead to changes in substrate stiff‑ ness that can regulate coordination between cells in col‑ lective processes during tissue shaping . Matrix deposition during wound healing can also be associated with changes in stiffness 138 , 139 , which in turn may promote coordinated collective migration for re‑epithelialization . Moreover , the impact of substrate stiffness on coordinated cellular responses could be an important factor in the increased tumour invasion associated with matrix stiffening 140 , 141 . Lastly , it is important to consider that cells and cell collectives respond also to other non‑mechanical‑based cues and gradients , such as gradients of diffusible factors , adhesive cues or electrical fields , eliciting chemotactic , haptotactic or galvanotactic cell responses , respectively . Fortunately , the in vitro model systems are by now sophis‑ ticated enough to reproduce all these combinations of gradients to gain a more complete insight into collective cell behaviours and how they shape tissues , organs and whole organisms . R E V I E W S 754 | DECEMBER 2017 | VOLUME 18 www . nature . com / nrm R E V I E W S © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . 1 . Friedl , P . & Gilmour , D . Collective cell migration in morphogenesis , regeneration and cancer . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 445 – 457 ( 2009 ) . 2 . Bianco , A . et al . Two distinct modes of guidance signalling during collective migration of border cells . Nature 448 , 362 – 365 ( 2007 ) . 3 . Lecaudey , V . , Cakan - Akdogan , G . , Norton , W . H . & Gilmour , D . Dynamic Fgf signaling couples morphogenesis and migration in the zebrafish lateral line primordium . Development 135 , 2695 – 2705 ( 2008 ) . 4 . Nabeshima , K . , Inoue , T . , Shimao , Y . , Kataoka , H . & Koono , M . Cohort migration of carcinoma cells : differentiated colorectal carcinoma cells move as coherent cell clusters or sheets . Histol . Histopathol . 14 , 1183 – 1197 ( 1999 ) . 5 . Einenkel , J . , Braumann , U . D . , Horn , L . C . , Kuska , J . P . & Hockel , M . 3D analysis of the invasion front in squamous cell carcinoma of the uterine cervix : histopathologic evidence for collective invasion per continuitatem . Anal . Quantitative Cytol . Histol . 29 , 279 – 290 ( 2007 ) . 6 . Giampieri , S . et al . Localized and reversible TGF β signalling switches breast cancer cells from cohesive to single cell motility . Nat . Cell Biol . 11 , 1287 – 1296 ( 2009 ) . 7 . Behrndt , M . et al . Forces driving epithelial spreading in zebrafish gastrulation . Science 338 , 257 – 260 ( 2012 ) . 8 . Abreu - Blanco , M . T . , Verboon , J . M . , Liu , R . , Watts , J . J . & Parkhurst , S . M . Drosophila embryos close epithelial wounds using a combination of cellular protrusions and an actomyosin purse string . J . Cell Sci . 125 , 5984 – 5997 ( 2012 ) . 9 . Campas , O . et al . Quantifying cell - generated mechanical forces within living embryonic tissues . Nat . Methods 11 , 183 – 189 ( 2014 ) . In this paper , the authors develop a method to measure the mechanical forces that cells exert while building tissues . They insert calibrated oil droplets in living embryos in contact with other cells . When cells push and pull on an oil droplet , they deform it , and this deformation provides a direct readout of the pressure they exert . 10 . Bambardekar , K . , Clement , R . , Blanc , O . , Chardes , C . & Lenne , P . F . Direct laser manipulation reveals the mechanics of cell contacts in vivo . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 112 , 1416 – 1421 ( 2015 ) . 11 . Hakim , V . & Silberzan , P . Collective cell migration : a physics perspective . Reports on progress in physics . Phys . Soc . 80 , 076601 ( 2017 ) . 12 . Marchetti , M . C . et al . Hydrodynamics of soft active matter . Rev . Modern Phys . 85 , 1143 ( 2013 ) . 13 . Parsons , J . T . , Horwitz , A . R . & Schwartz , M . A . Cell adhesion : integrating cytoskeletal dynamics and cellular tension . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 , 633 – 643 ( 2010 ) . 14 . Kanchanawong , P . et al . Nanoscale architecture of integrin - based cell adhesions . Nature 468 , 580 – 584 ( 2010 ) . 15 . Sarangi , B . R . et al . Coordination between intra - and extracellular forces regulates focal adhesion dynamics . Nano Lett . 17 , 399 – 406 ( 2017 ) . 16 . Lo , C . M . , Wang , H . B . , Dembo , M . & Wang , Y . L . Cell movement is guided by the rigidity of the substrate . Biophys . J . 79 , 144 – 152 ( 2000 ) . 17 . Sniadecki , N . J . et al . Magnetic microposts as an approach to apply forces to living cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 14553 – 14558 ( 2007 ) . 18 . Saxena , M . et al . EGFR and HER2 activate rigidity sensing only on rigid matrices . Nat . Mater . 16 , 775 – 781 ( 2017 ) . 19 . Ladoux , B . , Mège , R . M . & Trepat , X . Front - rear polarization by mechanical cues : from single cells to tissues . Trends Cell Biol . 26 , 420 – 433 ( 2016 ) . 20 . Cetera , M . et al . Epithelial rotation promotes the global alignment of contractile actin bundles during Drosophila egg chamber elongation . Nature Commun . 5 , 5511 ( 2014 ) . During the elongation of the D . melanogaster egg chamber into an ellipsoidal shape , the follicular epithelial cells undergo a collective migration that causes the egg chamber to rotate within its surrounding basement membrane . This study demonstrates that collective rotation plays a critical role in building up the actin - based component of a corset that forms during the elongation , in which actin bundles in the epithelium and fibrils in the basement membrane are all aligned perpendicular to the elongation axis . 21 . Bertet , C . , Sulak , L . & Lecuit , T . Myosin - dependent junction remodelling controls planar cell intercalation and axis elongation . Nature 429 , 667 – 671 ( 2004 ) . 22 . Dona , E . et al . Directional tissue migration through a self - generated chemokine gradient . Nature 503 , 285 – 289 ( 2013 ) . 23 . Szabo , A . et al . In vivo confinement promotes collective migration of neural crest cells . J . Cell Biol . 213 , 543 – 555 ( 2016 ) . Combining computational and experimental approaches , the authors show that the in vivo collective migration of neural crest cells depends on confinement and geometrical constraints . They demonstrate that such confinement promotes directional migration of cell groups in vivo . 24 . Haeger , A . , Krause , M . , Wolf , K . & Friedl , P . Cell jamming : collective invasion of mesenchymal tumor cells imposed by tissue confinement . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1840 , 2386 – 2395 ( 2014 ) . 25 . Abercrombie , M . & Ambrose , E . J . The surface properties of cancer cells : a review . Cancer Res . 22 , 525 – 548 ( 1962 ) . 26 . Poujade , M . et al . Collective migration of an epithelial monolayer in response to a model wound . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 15988 – 15993 ( 2007 ) . 27 . Deforet , M . et al . Automated velocity mapping of migrating cell populations ( AVeMap ) . Nat . Methods 9 , 1081 – 1083 ( 2012 ) . 28 . Mayor , R . & Etienne - Manneville , S . The front and rear of collective cell migration . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 17 , 97 – 109 ( 2016 ) . 29 . Reffay , M . et al . Orientation and polarity in collectively migrating cell structures : statics and dynamics . Biophys . J . 100 , 2566 – 2575 ( 2011 ) . 30 . Purcell , E . M . Life at low Reynolds number . Am . J . Phys . 45 , 3 – 11 ( 1977 ) . 31 . Vedula , S . R . K . et al . Emerging modes of collective cell migration induced by geometrical constraints . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 12974 – 12979 ( 2012 ) . In this study , the authors show that collective cell migration can be regulated by confinement . Cells migrate more quickly on narrow lines of the size of a single cell than on larger stripes of several cell diameters , and the mode of migration varies depending on the width of the micropatterned lines , consistent with different patterns of force transmission through cell – cell junctions . 32 . Foty , R . A . & Steinberg , M . S . The differential adhesion hypothesis : a direct evaluation . Dev . Biol . 278 , 255 – 263 ( 2005 ) . 33 . Ranft , J . et al . Fluidization of tissues by cell division and apoptosis . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 20863 – 20868 ( 2010 ) . 34 . Lecuit , T . & Yap , A . S . E - Cadherin junctions as active mechanical integrators in tissue dynamics . Nat . Cell Biol . 17 , 533 – 539 ( 2015 ) . 35 . Rossen , N . S . , Tarp , J . M . , Mathiesen , J . , Jensen , M . H . & Oddershede , L . B . Long - range ordered vorticity patterns in living tissue induced by cell division . Nature Commun . 5 , 5720 ( 2014 ) . In this study , the authors analyse the dynamic movements of endothelial cells induced by cell division . Cell divisions induce long - range reorganization of cells together with the formation of vortex patterns that extend far away from the division site . 36 . Saw , T . B . et al . Topological defects in epithelia govern cell death and extrusion . Nature 544 , 212 – 216 ( 2017 ) . This paper shows that epithelial cells are elongated and closely packed , which means that they can spontaneously align in a similar way to the molecules in nematic liquid crystals . Accordingly , compressive stresses induced by oriented ordering and defects in the epithelium provide a physical trigger for cell extrusion and death . 37 . Petitjean , L . et al . Velocity fields in a collectively migrating epithelium . Biophys . J . 98 , 1790 – 1800 ( 2010 ) . 38 . Vedula , S . R . K . et al . Epithelial bridges maintain tissue integrity during collective cell migration . Nat . Mater . 13 , 87 – 96 ( 2014 ) . 39 . Das , T . et al . A molecular mechanotransduction pathway regulates collective migration of epithelial cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 17 , 276 – 287 ( 2015 ) . In this study , the authors show that the protein Merlin is involved in coordinating motility forces from the edge into the bulk of the monolayer . 40 . Bazellieres , E . et al . Control of cell - cell forces and collective cell dynamics by the intercellular adhesome . Nat . Cell Biol . 17 , 409 – 420 ( 2015 ) . The paper analyses the role of molecules at desmosomes , tight junctions and adherens junctions involved in cell – cell interactions in the establishment of forces and stresses during collective cell migration . It also shows that E - cadherins and P - cadherins respond to the level of force or to the rate at which the intercellular stress builds up , respectively , which allows for a particularly efficient control of mechanosensation at cadherin - based junctions . 41 . Basan , M . , Elgeti , J . , Hannezo , E . , Rappel , W . J . & Levine , H . Alignment of cellular motility forces with tissue flow as a mechanism for efficient wound healing . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 110 , 2452 – 2459 ( 2013 ) . 42 . Farooqui , R . & Fenteany , G . Multiple rows of cells behind an epithelial wound edge extend cryptic lamellipodia to collectively drive cell - sheet movement . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 51 – 63 ( 2005 ) . 43 . Takeichi , M . Dynamic contacts : rearranging adherens junctions to drive epithelial remodelling . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 15 , 397 – 410 ( 2014 ) . 44 . Brugues , A . et al . Forces driving epithelial wound healing . Nat . Phys . 10 , 684 – 691 ( 2014 ) . 45 . Vedula , S . R . K . et al . Mechanics of epithelial closure over non - adherent environments . Nat . Commun . 6 , 6111 ( 2015 ) . 46 . Clark , A . G . et al . Integration of single and multicellular wound responses . Curr . Biol . 19 , 1389 – 1395 ( 2009 ) . 47 . Wood , W . et al . Wound healing recapitulates morphogenesis in Drosophila embryos . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 907 – 912 ( 2002 ) . 48 . Tamada , M . , Perez , T . D . , Nelson , W . J . & Sheetz , M . P . Two distinct modes of myosin assembly and dynamics during epithelial wound closure . J . Cell Biol . 176 , 27 – 33 ( 2007 ) . 49 . Anon , E . et al . Cell crawling mediates collective cell migration to close undamaged epithelial gaps . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 10891 – 10896 ( 2012 ) . 50 . Cochet - Escartin , O . , Ranft , J . , Silberzan , P . & Marcq , P . Border forces and friction control epithelial closure dynamics . Biophys . J . 106 , 65 – 73 ( 2014 ) . 51 . Vitorino , P . & Meyer , T . Modular control of endothelial sheet migration . Genes Dev . 22 , 3268 – 3281 ( 2008 ) . 52 . Ng , M . R . , Besser , A . , Danuser , G . & Brugge , J . S . Substrate stiffness regulates cadherin - dependent collective migration through myosin - II contractility . J . Cell Biol . 199 , 545 – 563 ( 2012 ) . 53 . Gumbiner , B . Generation and maintenance of epithelial cell polarity . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 2 , 881 – 887 ( 1990 ) . 54 . Sunyer , R . et al . Collective cell durotaxis emerges from long - range intercellular force transmission . Science 353 , 1157 – 1161 ( 2016 ) . In this study , the authors show that collective cell migration can be regulated by substrate stiffness , with cells moving towards stiff substrates — cells on a stiffer substrate have more resistance , enabling them to generate higher traction forces , so they win the tug of war with cells on the softer part . They further show that even cells that do not show durotaxis as single cells can durotax as a collective . 55 . Abercrombie , M . & Heaysman , J . E . Observations on the social behaviour of cells in tissue culture : I . Speed of movement of chick heart fibroblasts in relation to their mutual contacts . Exp . Cell Res . 5 , 111 – 131 ( 1953 ) . 56 . Carmona - Fontaine , C . et al . Contact inhibition of locomotion in vivo controls neural crest directional migration . Nature 456 , 957 – 961 ( 2008 ) . 57 . Theveneau , E . et al . Chase - and - run between adjacent cell populations promotes directional collective migration . Nat . Cell Biol . 15 , 763 – 772 ( 2013 ) . In this paper , the authors show the importance of multiple cellular interactions of different cell types for collective cell migration . They study the interactions between neural crest cells and placode cells , an epithelial tissue , identifying a mechanism based on a coupling between chemotaxis and mechanical forces that promotes the correct migration of neural crest cells . 58 . Bahm , I . et al . PDGF controls contact inhibition of locomotion by regulating N - cadherin during neural crest migration . Development 144 , 2456 – 2468 ( 2017 ) . 59 . Desai , R . A . , Gao , L . , Raghavan , S . , Liu , W . F . & Chen , C . S . Cell polarity triggered by cell - cell adhesion via E - cadherin . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 905 – 911 ( 2009 ) . 60 . Ouyang , M . et al . N - Cadherin regulates spatially polarized signals through distinct p120ctn and β - catenin - dependent signalling pathways . Nat . Commun . 4 , 1589 ( 2013 ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 18 | DECEMBER 2017 | 755 M e c h a n o b i o l o g y © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . 61 . Kocgozlu , L . et al . Epithelial cell packing induces distinct modes of cell extrusions . Curr . Biol . 26 , 2942 – 2950 ( 2016 ) . 62 . Park , J . A . , Atia , L . , Mitchel , J . A . , Fredberg , J . J . & Butler , J . P . Collective migration and cell jamming in asthma , cancer and development . J . Cell Sci . 129 , 3375 – 3383 ( 2016 ) . 63 . Garcia , S . et al . Physics of active jamming during collective cellular motion in a monolayer . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 112 , 15314 – 15319 ( 2015 ) . 64 . Deforet , M . , Hakim , V . , Yevick , H . , Duclos , G . & Silberzan , P . Emergence of collective modes and tri - dimensional structures from epithelial confinement . Nat . Commun . 5 , 3747 ( 2014 ) . This paper shows that cellular confinement of epithelial cells in vitro can lead to spontaneous modes of collective oscillatory movements . A simple mathematical model , in which cells are described as persistent random walkers that adapt their motion to their neighbours , with an additional term that mimics cell adhesion , captures the essential characteristics of these oscillatory modes . 65 . Sadati , M . , Qazvini , N . T . , Krishnan , R . , Park , C . Y . & Fredberg , J . J . Collective migration and cell jamming . Differentiation 86 , 121 – 125 ( 2013 ) . 66 . Tambe , D . T . et al . Collective cell guidance by cooperative intercellular forces . Nat . Mater . 10 , 469 – 475 ( 2011 ) . 67 . Bi , D . P . , Lopez , J . H . , Schwarz , J . M . & Manning , M . L . A density - independent rigidity transition in biological tissues . Nat . Phys . 11 , 1074 – 1079 ( 2015 ) . 68 . Reffay , M . et al . Interplay of RhoA and mechanical forces in collective cell migration driven by leader cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 16 , 217 – 223 ( 2014 ) . In this paper , the authors analyse the mechanical role of leader cells during collective cell migration . They measure the forces exerted by finger - like structures composed of multiple cells at the migrating front and correlate the mechanical forces with RHOA activity . 69 . Trepat , X . et al . Physical forces during collective cell migration . Nat . Phys . 5 , 426 – 430 ( 2009 ) . 70 . du Roure , O . et al . Force mapping in epithelial cell migration . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 2390 – 2395 ( 2005 ) . 71 . Jacinto , A . , Martinez - Arias , A . & Martin , P . Mechanisms of epithelial fusion and repair . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , E117 – E123 ( 2001 ) . 72 . Ravasio , A . et al . Gap geometry dictates epithelial closure efficiency . Nat . Commun . 6 , 7683 ( 2015 ) . To analyse epithelial gap closure , the authors experimentally implemented microscopic gaps of defined geometries and curvatures into confluent epithelial sheets . Their study clarifies the roles of two gap - closing mechanisms — cell migration and actomyosin - based contractile cable dynamics — and describes how the relative contributions of the two mechanisms are affected by gap geometry . 73 . Nier , V . et al . Inference of internal stress in a cell monolayer . Biophys . J . 110 , 1625 – 1635 ( 2016 ) . 74 . Hutson , M . S . et al . Forces for morphogenesis investigated with laser microsurgery and quantitative modeling . Science 300 , 145 – 149 ( 2003 ) . 75 . Serra - Picamal , X . et al . Mechanical waves during tissue expansion . Nat . Phys . 8 , 628 – 634 ( 2012 ) . 76 . Nelson , C . M . et al . Emergent patterns of growth controlled by multicellular form and mechanics . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 11594 – 11599 ( 2005 ) . 77 . Warmflash , A . , Sorre , B . , Etoc , F . , Siggia , E . D . & Brivanlou , A . H . A method to recapitulate early embryonic spatial patterning in human embryonic stem cells . Nat . Methods 11 , 847 – 854 ( 2014 ) . 78 . Buckley , C . D . et al . The minimal cadherin - catenin complex binds to actin filaments under force . Science 346 , 1254211 ( 2014 ) . In this paper , the authors use single molecule assays to analyse cadherin – α - catenin complexes and their interaction with actin filaments under force . They show that tension is required to stabilize a linkage between the cadherin – catenin complex and actin filaments , and they clarify how the cadherin – catenin complex could interact directly with the actin cytoskeleton in cells . 79 . Yonemura , S . , Wada , Y . , Watanabe , T . , Nagafuchi , A . & Shibata , M . α - Catenin as a tension transducer that induces adherens junction development . Nat . Cell Biol . 12 , 533 – 542 ( 2010 ) . 80 . Ladoux , B . et al . Strength dependence of cadherin - mediated adhesions . Biophys . J . 98 , 534 – 542 ( 2010 ) . 81 . Blanchoin , L . , Boujemaa - Paterski , R . , Sykes , C . & Plastino , J . Actin dynamics , architecture , and mechanics in cell motility . Physiol . Rev . 94 , 235 – 263 ( 2014 ) . 82 . Plotnikov , S . V . , Pasapera , A . M . , Sabass , B . & Waterman , C . M . Force fluctuations within focal adhesions mediate ECM - rigidity sensing to guide directed cell migration . Cell 151 , 1513 – 1527 ( 2012 ) . 83 . Gupta , M . et al . Adaptive rheology and ordering of cell cytoskeleton govern matrix rigidity sensing . Nat . Commun . 6 , 7525 ( 2015 ) . 84 . Gudipaty , S . A . et al . Mechanical stretch triggers rapid epithelial cell division through Piezo1 . Nature 543 , 118 – 121 ( 2017 ) . 85 . Kaliman , S . , Jayachandran , C . , Rehfeldt , F . & Smith , A . S . Novel growth regime of MDCK II model tissues on soft substrates . Biophys . J . 106 , L25 – 28 ( 2014 ) . 86 . de Rooij , J . , Kerstens , A . , Danuser , G . , Schwartz , M . A . & Waterman - Storer , C . M . Integrin - dependent actomyosin contraction regulates epithelial cell scattering . J . Cell Biol . 171 , 153 – 164 ( 2005 ) . 87 . Mertz , A . F . et al . Cadherin - based intercellular adhesions organize epithelial cell - matrix traction forces . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 110 , 842 – 847 ( 2013 ) . 88 . Maki , K . et al . Mechano - adaptive sensory mechanism of α - catenin under tension . Sci . Rep . 6 , 24878 ( 2016 ) . 89 . Yao , M . et al . Force - dependent conformational switch of α - catenin controls vinculin binding . Nat . Commun . 5 , 4525 ( 2014 ) . 90 . Barry , A . K . et al . α - Catenin cytomechanics — role in cadherin - dependent adhesion and mechanotransduction . J . Cell Sci . 127 , 1779 – 1791 ( 2014 ) . 91 . Acharya , B . R . et al . Mammalian diaphanous 1 mediates a pathway for E - cadherin to stabilize epithelial barriers through junctional contractility . Cell Rep . 18 , 2854 – 2867 ( 2017 ) . 92 . Kim , T . J . et al . Dynamic visualization of α - catenin reveals rapid , reversible conformation switching between tension states . Curr . Biol . 25 , 218 – 224 ( 2015 ) . 93 . Mège , R . M . & Ishiyama , N . Integration of cadherin adhesion and cytoskeleton at adherens junctions . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 9 , a028738 ( 2017 ) . 94 . Borghi , N . et al . E - Cadherin is under constitutive actomyosin - generated tension that is increased at cell - cell contacts upon externally applied stretch . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 12568 – 12573 ( 2012 ) . 95 . Bertocchi , C . et al . Nanoscale architecture of cadherin - based cell adhesions . Nat . Cell Biol . 19 , 28 – 37 ( 2017 ) . 96 . Vasioukhin , V . , Bauer , C . , Yin , M . & Fuchs , E . Directed actin polymerization is the driving force for epithelial cell - cell adhesion . Cell 100 , 209 – 219 ( 2000 ) . 97 . Twiss , F . et al . Vinculin - dependent cadherin mechanosensing regulates efficient epithelial barrier formation . Biol . Open 1 , 1128 – 1140 ( 2012 ) . 98 . Causeret , M . , Taulet , N . , Comunale , F . , Favard , C . & Gauthier - Rouviere , C . N - Cadherin association with lipid rafts regulates its dynamic assembly at cell - cell junctions in C2C12 myoblasts . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 2168 – 2180 ( 2005 ) . 99 . le Duc , Q . et al . Vinculin potentiates E - cadherin mechanosensing and is recruited to actin - anchored sites within adherens junctions in a myosin II - dependent manner . J . Cell Biol . 189 , 1107 – 1115 ( 2010 ) . 100 . Ladoux , B . , Nelson , W . J . , Yan , J . & Mège , R . M . The mechanotransduction machinery at work at adherens junctions . Integr . Biol . 1109 – 1119 ( 2015 ) . 101 . Choi , W . et al . Remodeling the zonula adherens in response to tension and the role of afadin in this response . J . Cell Biol . 213 , 243 – 260 ( 2016 ) . 102 . Mason , F . M . , Xie , S . , Vasquez , C . G . , Tworoger , M . & Martin , A . C . RhoA GTPase inhibition organizes contraction during epithelial morphogenesis . J . Cell Biol . 214 , 603 – 617 ( 2016 ) . 103 . Martin , A . C . & Goldstein , B . Apical constriction : themes and variations on a cellular mechanism driving morphogenesis . Development 141 , 1987 – 1998 ( 2014 ) . 104 . Acharya , B . R . & Yap , A . S . Pli selon pli : mechanochemical feedback and the morphogenetic role of contractility at cadherin cell - cell junctions . Curr . Top . Dev . Biol . 117 , 631 – 646 ( 2016 ) . 105 . Priya , R . & Yap , A . S . Active tension : the role of cadherin adhesion and signaling in generating junctional contractility . Curr . Top . Dev . Biol . 112 , 65 – 102 ( 2015 ) . 106 . Jodoin , J . N . et al . Stable force balance between epithelial cells arises from F - actin turnover . Dev . Cell 35 , 685 – 697 ( 2015 ) . 107 . Begnaud , S . , Chen , T . , Delacour , D . , Mège , R . M . & Ladoux , B . Mechanics of epithelial tissues during gap closure . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 42 , 52 – 62 ( 2016 ) . 108 . Lawson , C . D . & Burridge , K . The on - off relationship of Rho and Rac during integrin - mediated adhesion and cell migration . Small GTPases 5 , e27958 ( 2014 ) . 109 . Omelchenko , T . et al . β - Pix directs collective migration of anterior visceral endoderm cells in the early mouse embryo . Genes Dev . 28 , 2764 – 2777 ( 2014 ) . 110 . Cai , D . et al . Mechanical feedback through E - cadherin promotes direction sensing during collective cell migration . Cell 157 , 1146 – 1159 ( 2014 ) . This paper illustrates the importance of E - cadherin during border cell migration in D . melanogaster , showing that E - cadherin adhesions maintain the cohesion and polarity of the group through mechanical feedback . 111 . Hayer , A . et al . Engulfed cadherin fingers are polarized junctional structures between collectively migrating endothelial cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 18 , 1311 – 1323 ( 2016 ) . This paper shows the formation of cadherin fingers along moving endothelial cell monolayers , which are cadherin - rich protrusions that are extended from leading migrating cells and engulfed by follower cells to guide collective migration . 112 . Dorland , Y . L . et al . The F - BAR protein pacsin2 inhibits asymmetric VE - cadherin internalization from tensile adherens junctions . Nat . Commun . 7 , 12210 ( 2016 ) . 113 . Davies , P . F . Flow - mediated endothelial mechanotransduction . Physiol Rev . 75 , 519 – 560 ( 1995 ) . 114 . Solon , J . , Kaya - Copur , A . , Colombelli , J . & Brunner , D . Pulsed forces timed by a ratchet - like mechanism drive directed tissue movement during dorsal closure . Cell 137 , 1331 – 1342 ( 2009 ) . 115 . Segerer , F . J . , Thuroff , F . , Piera Alberola , A . , Frey , E . & Radler , J . O . Emergence and persistence of collective cell migration on small circular micropatterns . Phys . Rev . Lett . 114 , 228102 ( 2015 ) . 116 . Rolli , C . G . et al . Switchable adhesive substrates : revealing geometry dependence in collective cell behavior . Biomaterials 33 , 2409 – 2418 ( 2012 ) . 117 . Friedl , P . , Locker , J . , Sahai , E . & Segall , J . E . Classifying collective cancer cell invasion . Nat . Cell Biol . 14 , 777 – 783 ( 2012 ) . 118 . Doxzen , K . et al . Guidance of collective cell migration by substrate geometry . Integr . Biol . 5 , 1026 – 1035 ( 2013 ) . 119 . Tanner , K . , Mori , H . , Mroue , R . , Bruni - Cardoso , A . & Bissell , M . J . Coherent angular motion in the establishment of multicellular architecture of glandular tissues . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 1973 – 1978 ( 2012 ) . 120 . Haigo , S . L . & Bilder , D . Global tissue revolutions in a morphogenetic movement controlling elongation . Science 331 , 1071 – 1074 ( 2011 ) . 121 . Notbohm , J . et al . Cellular contraction and polarization drive collective cellular motion . Biophys . J . 110 , 2729 – 2738 ( 2016 ) . 122 . Grasso , S . , Hernández , J . A . & Chifflet , S . Roles of wound geometry , wound size , and extracellular matrix in the healing response of bovine corneal endothelial cells in culture . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 293 , C1327 – C1337 ( 2007 ) . 123 . Klarlund , J . K . Dual modes of motility at the leading edge of migrating epithelial cell sheets . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 15799 – 15804 ( 2012 ) . 124 . Rausch , S . et al . Polarizing cytoskeletal tension to induce leader cell formation during collective cell migration . Biointerphases 8 , 32 ( 2013 ) . 125 . Watt , F . M . & Fujiwara , H . Cell - extracellular matrix interactions in normal and diseased skin . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 3 , a005124 ( 2011 ) . 126 . Goodwin , K . et al . Basal cell - extracellular matrix adhesion regulates force transmission during tissue morphogenesis . Dev . Cell 39 , 611 – 625 ( 2016 ) . 127 . Paszek , M . J . et al . Tensional homeostasis and the malignant phenotype . Cancer Cell 8 , 241 – 254 ( 2005 ) . 128 . Pelham , R . J . & Wang , Y . L . Cell locomotion and focal adhesions are regulated by substrate flexibility . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 13661 – 13665 ( 1997 ) . 129 . Koser , D . E . et al . Mechanosensing is critical for axon growth in the developing brain . Nat . Neurosci . 19 , 1592 – 1598 ( 2016 ) . 130 . Reinhart - King , C . A . , Dembo , M . & Hammer , D . A . Cell - cell mechanical communication through compliant substrates . Biophys . J . 95 , 6044 – 6051 ( 2008 ) . R E V I E W S 756 | DECEMBER 2017 | VOLUME 18 www . nature . com / nrm R E V I E W S © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . 131 . Angelini , T . E . , Hannezo , E . , Trepat , X . , Fredberg , J . J . & Weitz , D . A . Cell migration driven by cooperative substrate deformation patterns . Phys . Rev . Lett . ( 2010 ) . 132 . Saez , A . , Buguin , A . , Silberzan , P . & Ladoux , B . Is the mechanical activity of epithelial cells controlled by deformations or forces ? Biophys . J . 89 , L52 – L54 ( 2005 ) . 133 . Saez , A . , Ghibaudo , M . , Buguin , A . , Silberzan , P . & Ladoux , B . Rigidity - driven growth and migration of epithelial cells on microstructured anisotropic substrates . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 8281 – 8286 ( 2007 ) . 134 . Guo , W . H . , Frey , M . T . , Burnham , N . A . & Wang , Y . L . Substrate rigidity regulates the formation and maintenance of tissues . Biophys . J . 90 , 2213 – 2220 ( 2006 ) . 135 . Douezan , S . , Dumond , J . & Brochard - Wyart , F . Wetting transitions of cellular aggregates induced by substrate rigidity . Soft Matter 8 , 4578 – 4583 ( 2012 ) . 136 . Raab , M . et al . Crawling from soft to stiff matrix polarizes the cytoskeleton and phosphoregulates myosin - II heavy chain . J . Cell Biol . 199 , 669 – 683 ( 2012 ) . 137 . Williams , C . M . , Engler , A . J . , Slone , R . D . , Galante , L . L . & Schwarzbauer , J . E . Fibronectin expression modulates mammary epithelial cell proliferation during acinar differentiation . Cancer Res . 68 , 3185 – 3192 ( 2008 ) . 138 . Tomasek , J . J . , Gabbiani , G . , Hinz , B . , Chaponnier , C . & Brown , R . A . Myofibroblasts and mechano - regulation of connective tissue remodelling . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 3 , 349 – 363 ( 2002 ) . 139 . Chao , C . Y . et al . In vivo and ex vivo approaches to studying the biomechanical properties of healing wounds in rat skin . J . Biomechan . Engineer . 135 , 101009 – 101008 ( 2013 ) . 140 . Levental , K . R . et al . Matrix crosslinking forces tumor progression by enhancing integrin signaling . Cell 139 , 891 – 906 ( 2009 ) . 141 . Odenthal , J . , Takes , R . & Friedl , P . Plasticity of tumor cell invasion : governance by growth factors and cytokines . Carcinogenesis 37 , 1117 – 1128 ( 2016 ) . 142 . Takai , Y . , Miyoshi , J . , Ikeda , W . & Ogita , H . Nectins and nectin - like molecules : roles in contact inhibition of cell movement and proliferation . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 , 603 – 615 ( 2008 ) . 143 . Wu , Y . , Kanchanawong , P . & Zaidel - Bar , R . Actin - delimited adhesion - independent clustering of E - cadherin forms the nanoscale building blocks of adherens junctions . Dev . Cell 32 , 139 – 154 ( 2015 ) . 144 . Truong Quang , B . A . , Mani , M . , Markova , O . , Lecuit , T . & Lenne , P . F . Principles of E - cadherin supramolecular organization in vivo . Curr . Biol . 23 , 2197 – 2207 ( 2013 ) . 145 . Hong , S . , Troyanovsky , R . B . & Troyanovsky , S . M . Binding to F - actin guides cadherin cluster assembly , stability , and movement . J . Cell Biol . 201 , 131 – 143 ( 2013 ) . 146 . Strale , P . O . et al . The formation of ordered nanoclusters controls cadherin anchoring to actin and cell - cell contact fluidity . J . Cell Biol . 210 , 333 – 346 ( 2015 ) . 147 . Wu , Y . , Vendome , J . , Shapiro , L . , Ben - Shaul , A . & Honig , B . Transforming binding affinities from three dimensions to two with application to cadherin clustering . Nature 475 , 510 – 513 ( 2011 ) . 148 . Harrison , O . J . et al . The extracellular architecture of adherens junctions revealed by crystal structures of type I cadherins . Structure 19 , 244 – 256 ( 2011 ) . 149 . Thomas , W . A . et al . α - Catenin and vinculin cooperate to promote high E - cadherin - based adhesion strength . J . Biol . Chem . 288 , 4957 – 4969 ( 2013 ) . 150 . Niewiadomska , P . , Godt , D . & Tepass , U . DE - cadherin is required for intercellular motility during Drosophila oogenesis . J . Cell Biol . 144 , 533 – 547 ( 1999 ) . 151 . Bruce , A . E . Zebrafish epiboly : spreading thin over the yolk . Dev . Dyn . 245 , 244 – 258 ( 2016 ) . 152 . Harrison , O . J . et al . Nectin ectodomain structures reveal a canonical adhesive interface . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 19 , 906 – 915 ( 2012 ) . 153 . Troyanovsky , R . B . , Indra , I . , Chen , C . S . , Hong , S . & Troyanovsky , S . M . Cadherin controls nectin recruitment into adherens junctions by remodeling the actin cytoskeleton . J . Cell Sci . 128 , 140 – 149 ( 2015 ) . 154 . Honda , T . et al . Antagonistic and agonistic effects of an extracellular fragment of nectin on formation of E - cadherin - based cell - cell adhesion . Genes Cells 8 , 51 – 63 ( 2003 ) . 155 . Nikolic , D . L . , Boettiger , A . N . , Bar - Sagi , D . , Carbeck , J . D . & Shvartsman , S . Y . Role of boundary conditions in an experimental model of epithelial wound healing . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 291 , C68 – C75 ( 2006 ) . 156 . Murrell , M . , Kamm , R . & Matsudaira , P . Tension , free space , and cell damage in a microfluidic wound healing assay . PLoS ONE 6 , e24283 ( 2011 ) . 157 . van der Meer , A . D . , Vermeul , K . , Poot , A . A . , Feijen , J . & Vermes , I . A microfluidic wound - healing assay for quantifying endothelial cell migration . Am . J . Physiol . Heart Circ . Physiol . 298 , H719 – H725 ( 2010 ) . 158 . Gul , I . S . , Hulpiau , P . , Saeys , Y . & van Roy , F . Evolution and diversity of cadherins and catenins . Exp . Cell Res . 358 , 3 – 9 ( 2017 ) . 159 . van Roy , F . Beyond E - cadherin : roles of other cadherin superfamily members in cancer . Nat . Rev . Cancer 14 , 121 – 134 ( 2014 ) . 160 . Plutoni , C . et al . P - Cadherin promotes collective cell migration via a Cdc42 - mediated increase in mechanical forces . J . Cell Biol . 212 , 199 – 217 ( 2016 ) . 161 . Chu , Y . S . et al . Prototypical type I E - cadherin and type II cadherin - 7 mediate very distinct adhesiveness through their extracellular domains . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 2901 – 2910 ( 2006 ) . 162 . Labernadie , A . et al . A mechanically active heterotypic E - cadherin / N - cadherin adhesion enables fibroblasts to drive cancer cell invasion . Nat . Cell Biol . 19 , 224 – 237 ( 2017 ) . This paper shows that cancer - associated fibroblasts ( CAFs ) form heterotypic E - cadherin – N - cadherin contacts with tumour cells , exerting a physical force on cancer cells that enables their collective invasion . 163 . Sawyer , J . K . et al . A contractile actomyosin network linked to adherens junctions by Canoe / afadin helps drive convergent extension . Mol . Biol . Cell 22 , 2491 – 2508 ( 2011 ) . 164 . Sawyer , J . K . , Harris , N . J . , Slep , K . C . , Gaul , U . & Peifer , M . The Drosophila afadin homologue Canoe regulates linkage of the actin cytoskeleton to adherens junctions during apical constriction . J . Cell Biol . 186 , 57 – 73 ( 2009 ) . 165 . Mandai , K . et al . Afadin : a novel actin filament - binding protein with one PDZ domain localized at cadherin - based cell - to - cell adherens junction . J . Cell Biol . 139 , 517 – 528 ( 1997 ) . 166 . Ikeda , W . et al . Afadin : a key molecule essential for structural organization of cell - cell junctions of polarized epithelia during embryogenesis . J . Cell Biol . 146 , 1117 – 1132 ( 1999 ) . 167 . Zhadanov , A . B . et al . Absence of the tight junctional protein AF - 6 disrupts epithelial cell - cell junctions and cell polarity during mouse development . Curr . Biol . 9 , 880 – 888 ( 1999 ) . 168 . Weber , G . F . , Bjerke , M . A . & DeSimone , D . W . A mechanoresponsive cadherin - keratin complex directs polarized protrusive behavior and collective cell migration . Dev . Cell 22 , 104 – 115 ( 2012 ) . 169 . Mayer , M . , Depken , M . , Bois , J . S . , Julicher , F . & Grill , S . W . Anisotropies in cortical tension reveal the physical basis of polarizing cortical flows . Nature 467 , 617 – 621 ( 2010 ) . 170 . Dembo , M . , Oliver , T . , Ishihara , A . & Jacobson , K . Imaging the traction stresses exerted by locomoting cells with the elastic substratum method . Biophys . J . 70 , 2008 – 2022 ( 1996 ) . 171 . Tan , J . L . et al . Cells lying on a bed of microneedles : an approach to isolate mechanical force . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 1484 – 1489 ( 2003 ) . 172 . Yamaguchi , N . , Mizutani , T . , Kawabata , K . & Haga , H . Leader cells regulate collective cell migration via Rac activation in the downstream signaling of integrin β 1 and PI3K . Sci . Rep . 5 , 7656 ( 2015 ) . 173 . Osmani , N . , Peglion , F . , Chavrier , P . & Etienne - Manneville , S . Cdc42 localization and cell polarity depend on membrane traffic . J . Cell Biol . 191 , 1261 – 1269 ( 2010 ) . Acknowledgements The authors thank all members of the Institut Jacques Monod ( IJM ) and Mechanobiology Institute ( MBI ) teams and T . Chen , D . Delacour , P . Marcq , T . B . Saw and R . Voituriez for helpful discussions and / or critical reading of the manuscript . The authors also thank D . Pitta de Araujo , C . X . Wong and S . Wolf from MBI Science Communication Core for their substantial help with the illustrations . The authors receive financial support from the National University of Singapore / Université Sorbonne Paris Cité ( NUS / USPC ) and Le Projet International de Coopération Scientifique ( PICS ) Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique ( CNRS ) programmes , the European Research Council under the European Union’s Seventh Framework Program ( FP7 / 2007 – 2013 ) / European Research Council ( ERC ) ( grant agreement number 617233 ) , the LABEX ‘Who am I ? ’ and the Mechanobiology Institute ( Singapore ) . Author contributions The authors contributed equally to all aspects of the article ( researching data for the article , substantial contribution to discussion of content and writing , review and editing of manuscript before submission ) . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing interests . Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION See online article : S1 ( box ) | S2 ( box ) | S3 ( box ) | S4 ( box ) ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 18 | DECEMBER 2017 | 757 M e c h a n o b i o l o g y © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved .