Recon ﬁ guring Evidence : Interacting with Digital Objects in Scienti ﬁ c Practice Marko Monteiro Science and Technology Policy Department , State University of Campinas ( UNICAMP , Brazil ) , P . O . Box 6152 , University of Campinas - UNICAMP , 13083 - 970 , Campinas , SP , Brazil ( Phone : + 55 - 19 - 35214555 ; E - mail : markosy @ uol . com . br ) Abstract . This paper analyzes how scientists working in a multidisciplinary team produce scienti ﬁ c evidence through building and manipulating scienti ﬁ c visualizations . The research is based on ethnographic observations of scientists ’ weekly work meetings and the observation of videotapes of these meetings . The scientists observed work with advanced imaging technologies to produce a 4D computer model of heat transfer in human prostate tissues . The idea of ‘ digital objects ’ is proposed in order to conceptually locate their ‘ materiality ’ , observed in the practices of producing evidence through the handling of three - dimensional renderings of data . The manipulation of digital objects seeks to establish meaningful differences between parameters of interest , both when building and when analyzing them . These digital objects are dealt with as part of the empirical evidence used in the course of practices of visualizing and modeling natural phenomena . This process , which can be contextualized historically in terms of the development of imaging technologies , becomes crucial in understanding what counts as empirical evidence in current scienti ﬁ c work . Key words : cyberinfrastructures , ethnography , modeling , prostate cancer , representation in science , scienti ﬁ c visualization , STS 1 . Introduction : researching cyberinfrastructures Digital technologies are becoming ubiquitous in contemporary science , enabling research to explore areas once seen as pertaining only to science ﬁ ction . At the same time , these technologies enable ( and sometimes require ) novel collaborative relationships between once disparate disciplines . These collaborative projects are pushing the limits of what science can accomplish and are promising to revolutionize research in many areas of inquiry . Cyberinfrastructures embody this promise like few other technical systems , being adopted by scienti ﬁ c teams across different areas in order to broaden the scope of questioning and enable cooperative work once seen as impossible ( Bement Jr . , 2007 ) . The promises of cyberinfrastructures have captured the imagination of scientists and policy makers ( Bement Jr . , 2007 ; Hey and Trefethen 2004 ) , and the adoption of advanced computing infrastructures is perceived by scientists as one important solution for innovative interdisciplinary research , as described also by the scientists analyzed for this paper . According to one interviewee , a Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( 2010 ) 19 : 335 – 354 © Springer 2010 DOI 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 010 - 9115 - x professor of computational mechanics , computers have become a “ third pillar of science and engineering ” , changing the once dual basis of science : theory and observation . According to this same scientist , the Principal Investigator ( PI ) of the group analyzed in this paper , “ modeling and computation provides the only real way to look into the future ” , referring to the predictive power of simulations , enabled by advanced computing infrastructures and their adoption by science and engineering . Cyberinfrastructures make possible the use of digital visualizing technologies in research , as well as the incorporation of modeling to unprecedented degrees . The growing use of modeling and imaging technologies is changing not only the nature of the questions scientists ask , but shifts the practices of producing and analyzing evidence . This makes the understanding of such impacts an important task for studies of scienti ﬁ c practice : how are the relationships between what is considered empirical , theoretical and the result of observation changing as scienti ﬁ c teams adopt cyberinfrastructures in their research ? What are the implications of using modeling and simulation to the practice of science and the envisioning and production of new technologies ? How can we understand the meaning of cyberinfrastructures as a “ third pillar of science ” ? This paper seeks to contribute to this debate by presenting results from ethnographic observations of such a collaborative effort , where a cyberinfras - tructure is crucial to their aims . The paper analyzes how scientists working in a multidisciplinary team produce scienti ﬁ c evidence through embodied 1 interaction with digital objects in various research - related situations . The analysis is based on data from participant observations of scientists ’ weekly work meetings and the analysis of videotapes of these meetings . The scientists observed work with advanced imaging technologies to produce a computer model of heat transfer in human prostate tissues . My analysis will focus on how this team of scientists works to produce and analyze evidence pertaining to the study of heat transfer in living tissues . Speci ﬁ cally , the paper will show that scientists derive observations and insights from digital objects , treating them as part of what is considered ‘ empirical ’ to their work . This is crucial to the way the meetings observed work to produce truth about the data analyzed , which depends on a shared understanding of these digital objects as reliable renderings ( and sometimes replacements ) of natural objects or phenomena . 2 The idea of ‘ digital objects ’ seeks to conceptually locate their ‘ materiality ’ in the relationship established by scientists between the phenomena they seek to explain / represent / model and the digital objects they work with during their research practices . The paper concludes by arguing that ‘ evidence ’ is produced not only through direct observation and measuring of natural objects , but also through the ‘ handling ’ of and interacting with digital objects . 3 These interactions not only build digital objects from data acquired through MRI scans and other imaging devices ; the very practices of building the objects can be seen as 336 Marko Monteiro instances where their meaning as evidence of processes of interest is constructed . This process , which can be contextualized historically in terms of the development of imaging technologies , becomes crucial in understanding how knowledge is produced in contemporary science and what counts as empirical evidence in scienti ﬁ c work . The team analyzed in this paper is involved in developing a computer model of bioheat transfer in prostate tissues , with the aim of producing a novel intervention procedure for prostate cancer . This involved collaboration with a research hospital , which provided the team with magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) and magnetic resonance thermal imaging ( MRTI ) data . These data were used in the production of 2D and 3D digital objects and also in modeling processes of interest . In other papers focused on this same group I discussed , with a colleague , the dif ﬁ culties of communicating across disciplinary boundaries ( Monteiro and Keating 2009 ) ; I also analyzed how embodied interactions with digital objects in their research practices was crucial in how the team produced knowledge ( Monteiro 2010 ) . The following main arguments will be the focus of the discussion to follow : a ) Digital objects are constructed through embodied practices of interpreting and ‘ visualizing ’ numerical evidence ; it is also through these practices that these objects become meaningful as evidence in themselves ; b ) The work of building and analyzing digital objects depends on the de ﬁ nition and interpretation of meaningful contrasts between different parameters . Thus , visual and perceptual differences relate to variables of interest to scienti ﬁ c analysis ; c ) Although seen as important forms of evidence in themselves , digital objects are ultimately only useful when referred back to a perceived ‘ natural ’ reality ; this is achieved through validation experiments . Manipulations of digital objects ( through bodily interaction or mediated “ tweaking ” through computer software ) in scienti ﬁ c meetings compose logical steps towards arriving at understanding during the interactions observed . Insofar as these manipulations and relationships are present in collaborative scienti ﬁ c work which relied on cyberinfrastructures , they require further investigation in themselves , due to the novel ways they allow evidence to be built and tested . This novelty seems to be directly related to the changing ways scientists understand the ‘ materiality ’ of digital renderings and models , as discussed below . Embodied interactions with scienti ﬁ c visualizations is an emerging topic of interest in ethnographic studies of scienti ﬁ c practice ( Becvar et al . 2005 ; Myers 2008 ; Ochs et al . 1994 , 1996 ) . These works analyze the importance of bodily engagement with visual and other representations during interactions between scientists . This paper seeks to contribute to these discussions by showing how , from the study of one group involved in scienti ﬁ c research using grid technologies , we can begin to clarify issues concerning digital technologies , 337 Reconfiguring Evidence cyberinfrastructures in science and the changing notions of “ evidence ” and “ data ” . 2 . Practices of representation in science : beyond visualizations Studies of representation in science have , historically , been focused on the relationships between visual objects ( graphs , photographs , x - rays and other inscriptions ) and knowledge , scienti ﬁ c practice or truth ( Daston and Galison 1990 ; Goodwin 1994 ; Latour 1990 ; Lynch 2006 ; Lynch and Woolgar 1990b ) . Elsewhere I have discussed the limitations of these understandings of representation in order to make sense of the practices I observed in the ﬁ eld ( Monteiro 2010 ) , which also apply to the discussion in this paper . The limitations mainly concern the idea of an image that ‘ represents ’ something in nature ; this approach usually focuses on the images , but not on how they relate to the objects they make visible . It also fails to fully convey the interactivity present in scienti ﬁ c practices , and to clarify how digital objects become meaningful not only visually , but in and trough embodied interactions . The focus of my observations will be on how scientists , during their practice , seem to concede a materiality to the digital objects they manipulate during their meetings . As such , they are doing much more than looking at images : they are actively relating to these digital objects , and producing knowledge from these relationships . Studies of representation in science have been a relevant sub ﬁ eld of Science Studies since at least the early 1990s ( Daston and Galiston 1990 ; Knorr - Cetina and Amann 1990 ; Latour 1990 ; Lynch 1990 ; Lynch and Woolgar 1990a ) . The study of visual aspects of scienti ﬁ c practice as central to ‘ constructing knowledge ’ about natural objects has , since that time , been ﬁ rmly established in the ﬁ eld ( Latour 1995 ; Lynch 2006 ; Pauwels 2006b ) . What is less common is the study of 3D models as a central part in the process of research ( Chadarevian and Hopwood 2004 ) , the way knowledge is constructed in interaction with such digital objects and the emerging ﬁ eld of 4D computer models , which incorporate a temporal perspective . Scienti ﬁ c visualizations are central to how natural objects are ‘ revealed ’ and made analyzable ( Lynch 1990 ) . They are not simple visual renderings of the object , but claim to show that object ’ s internal order and essential qualities ( Lynch and Woolgar 1990a ) , a characteristic which has to withstand questioning . Making the natural object visible , in this context , also means making it measurable ( Latour 1990 ; Lynch 1990 ; Pauwels 2006a ) , through representational means which , to be ‘ objective ’ , must retain stability , manipulability and reproducibility ( Latour 1990 ) . While the idea of objectivity ( meaning a match between inscription and natural phenomenon ) is always at play in scienti ﬁ c representations , the computer model ’ s reliability is related to its expression of a mechanical objectivity ( Daston and 338 Marko Monteiro Galiston 1990 ) , whereby machine - generated reproduction processes were seen , from the late 19th Century on , to guarantee a more reliable and objective rendering of a natural object and its qualities than other processes involving human interference ( such as drawing ) . Beaulieu ( 2001 ) has suggested that digital technologies give rise to a new “ digital objectivity ” , which in many ways deepens the erasure of the subject ’ s role in interpreting knowledge mandated by mechanical objectivity . This becomes clear in the example of brain sciences , where a shift has taken place from optic to informational paradigms in image production and analysis ( Beaulieu 2002a , 2002b ) . The consequent automation of many aspects of knowledge production associated with digital objectivity , Beaulieu adds , deeply changes notions of science and discovery . While the concept of digital objectivity raises important issues to the discussion of this paper , the examples discussed here show that the erasure of the subject of knowledge , at least where digital objects are concerned , may not be as drastic as suggested , a topic I will explore further in the conclusion . Models are speci ﬁ c forms of scienti ﬁ c representations because they aim to show the natural object in a more holistic fashion , enabling a visualization of internal relationships ( Lynch 1990 ) , but also adding other characteristics , such as a tactile and spatial perception of the object ( Hopwood and Chadarevian 2004 ) . A model ’ s speci ﬁ city as a representational object also derives from its ability to simulate nature : it must enable the scientist to visualize the referent and a possible world ( Pauwels 2006a ) , through a correct rendering of fundamental properties of that object that can be represented through time . The tactile and spatial perception of models is also a factor in manipulating 3D images , as the examples below will show . Scienti ﬁ c practice has been shown to involve both a conceptual and a perceptual aspect ( Becvar et al . 2005 ) . Conceptual because ideas and theories are built and tested , and perceptual due to the fact that scientists rely on spatial and other cues to interpret data represented in the form of 3D digital objects , as well as relying on interactions with them to derive meaning . These meanings then can become knowledge that is deemed purely theoretical or conceptual . The idea of immutable mobiles ( Latour 1990 ) is crucial to understanding how these digital objects can be analyzed . According to Latour , the relevance of inscriptions in scienti ﬁ c practice is their ability to represent in unchanging and stable terms the central relationships of a natural object . While embodying the premises of the theory or apparatus that produced them , these inscriptions can circulate , allowing for debate and analysis by other groups , being crucial also in the reproducibility of an experiment . The idea of ‘ digital objects ’ draws from the concept of immutable mobiles , in this sense , expanding its de ﬁ nition to mean those digital renderings of objects that propose to be stable and objective representations of a natural object or process . Digital objects are , thus , ‘ digital immutable mobiles ’ , which circulate from equipment such as the MRI to the labs and of ﬁ ces of multidisciplinary scienti ﬁ c 339 Reconfiguring Evidence teams ( such as the one discussed here ) , while retaining a stable relationship to the natural object in question . This digital object is then analyzed by the team as enabling insights just as powerful as those enabled by the direct observation of nature . In fact , these insights become more powerful in the case of digital objects , as they make possible the observation of characteristics imperceptible to the naked eye . They thus start to effectively become ‘ empirical evidence ’ in their own right . Analysis of these digital objects derives observations that , while thoroughly based on the 3D digital visualizations , are interpreted to pertain to ‘ nature ’ itself . This is closely related to the idea of mechanical objectivity : since the advent of technologies of mechanical production and reproduction of images ( x - rays , ﬁ lm and photography ) , these have shifted the concepts of objectivity ( Daston and Galison 1990 ) . In the case of 3D MRI images and 4D models , we can see an aggregation of mechanical objectivity , as models become “ quantitative descriptions ” of physical phenomena , as Dr . Lewis ( project PI ) stated in an interview . The “ validation ” stage of modeling , where the digital object is compared to a natural object in the laboratory , becomes the last step in a long line of iterations . Albeit its fundamental place in con ﬁ rming knowledge derived from the digital objects , natural objects are displaced in the process of knowledge production . Natural objects become a source of inscriptions ( in the case of this project , 3D MRI and MRTI images ) , which will be processed into digital objects and simulations . These will , in turn , be used to produce knowledge about physical realities . This indicates that they retain , to the scientists , a high degree of correspondence to the natural objects they refer to , enough so that they are able to participate in scienti ﬁ c practice as reliable and stable representations of these objects . 2 . 1 . Witnessing through cyberinfrastructures ‘ Cyberinfrastructure ’ , or ‘ e - science ’ , are terms which are still in ﬂ ux in academic literature ( Schroeder 2008 ) , an uncertainty which re ﬂ ects the novelty of the ﬁ eld . While some authors ( and scientists ) see in these new technologies ways of enabling the overcoming of usual spatial and even disciplinary constraints that have limited scienti ﬁ c collaboration , others have discussed the dif ﬁ culty of observing these drastic shifts in practice ( Schroeder 2008 ) . In terms of coordinating large multidisciplinary teams , aside from issues of language and communication ( Monteiro and Keating 2009 ) that play out during research , the question of physical interaction and presence has been discussed in the literature ( Cummings and Kiesler 2005 ) as a factor constraining the adoption of computer mediated interaction in science . In the emerging discussion of how these grid technologies impact research practice , the question of “ virtual witnessing ” has also been raised as crucial to a 340 Marko Monteiro Science , Technology and Society ( STS ) perspective of cyberinfrastructures , providing a means to analyze the shifting relationships between what counts as research and data ( Woolgar and Coopmans 2006 ) . Virtual witnessing emerged as a crucial feature of how modern science de ﬁ ned the nature of the production of evidence ( Shapin and Schaffer 1985 ) , ensuring that an event or experiment occurring in a laboratory was witnessed ( and thus validated as ‘ true ’ ) by a group larger than the individual conducting the experiment . These parameters of adequacy of research may be changing with the adoption of cyberinfrastructures , as suggested by Woolgar : the basis for what was once thought as ‘ raw data ’ has shifted , as has the idea of witnessing ( Woolgar and Coopmans 2006 ) . It is in this direction that my own ethnographic observations point to : in everyday scienti ﬁ c practice , the meaning of empirical is beginning to encompass digital objects as part of what can be considered evidence . Digital objects then become themselves points of departure for research and observation . 3 . The ﬁ eld : modeling bioheat transfer in prostate tissues The scienti ﬁ c team discussed in this paper is based at a major public university in the southern U . S . They work with data acquired at a research hospital located in a different city 257 km away , also making use of a supercomputing facility belonging to their university to help process the data and render the models . The team is made up of professors , postdoctoral researchers and graduate students . Their areas of expertise include computer science , biomedical and civil engineering , applied mathematics , computational mechanics , scienti ﬁ c visualiza - tion , biomedical engineering and medicine . The team ’ s scienti ﬁ c goal is to produce a system that will enable accurate computer predictions of heat - induced cell damage to be computed and made available to doctors performing surgery in real - time . This technology will , they hope , result in a new paradigm for minimally - invasive thermal therapy for prostate cancer using lasers . The ultimate goal is to provide an operating room surgeon a reliable predictive tool to be used in cancer therapies . This tool would be able to predict the behavior of cancer and healthy cells when heated , thus enabling the surgeon to make better informed decisions on how to conduct the intervention , effectively automating parts of the surgical procedure . Ethnographic research was conducted between November 2006 and March 2008 . This consisted of attending and videotaping weekly team meetings , interviewing all active members of the team and doing observations in the facilities where team members work . Thirty - two meetings of the group were observed . Video tapes of these meetings were analyzed . All members of the team were interviewed at least once . Observations were made at two talks and 341 Reconfiguring Evidence one international conference attended by the team , and at the supercomputing facility . Two trips were also made to the research hospital . 4 4 . Producing evidence from digital objects In this section I wish to analyze speci ﬁ c examples of the principles discussed in the previous sections . These examples , extracted from my ﬁ eld notes , interviews and the videotapes of the meetings , help illustrate the materialization of the digital objects in scientists ’ everyday practices . They include my own experience manipulating digital objects through an advanced computing interface , as well as the analysis of how members of the team explained their ﬁ ndings to others in weekly meetings . The way visual and spatial cues participate in the construction of meaning in these practices helps to make explicit the ‘ materialization ’ of digital objects as part of what counts as evidence . Visual cues , for example , are used to create compelling 3D digital models , but also to derive knowledge about speci ﬁ c relationships under scrutiny . In fact it is very hard to separate the analytic aspect of these visualizations from the process of producing compelling images . They become ‘ compelling ’ not only because they enthrall the viewer , but also because they embody the necessary objectivity , i . e . , they demonstrate a direct relationship to a natural object and ‘ reveal ’ some of its characteristics . What colors will allow me to perceive a contrast between different mass densities , and their relationship ? What textures better convey a certain variable , be it in a pictorial or abstract visual rendering ? How can I convince the viewer that these relationships are in fact what they are seeing , and not just a beautiful image ? This work of deciphering the digital object is crucial to make it meaningful to the scientists . Some of the hardest tasks in this project involved producing such meaningful or “ usable ” visualizations . This demanded weeks , maybe months of manipulation of the software and its different parameters , in order to bring forth those variables of interest to the project . These tasks were assigned to different graduate students , and many times the failure to produce such workable objects was a source of great frustration and irritation , not to mention delays in the project as a whole . On the other hand , working with images was seen by some as very appealing and exciting work : So this was a very interesting project in the sense that we used looking , very good images , things like that , you know , people that were around , and they came and they looked at the screen , and said “ ah , you must be doing some cool work ! ” because we had the images of the human skulls , and things like that . And we could rotate them , and translate them , and mesh them , and things like that . So yeah , visually this [ . . . ] work was very appealing . And you know , you could see actually whatever you ’ re doing , whatever mathematical functions you ’ re putting into your program , they ’ re actually performing on the screen [ . . . ] ( interview with Clark , a PhD student in Computer Science ) 342 Marko Monteiro The supposed ‘ transparency ’ of these images , insofar as they were seen as direct visual translations of hard numerical data , is a sensation many had while working with and manipulating digital objects . While the appeal of images relates to our visually centered culture , in scienti ﬁ c practice it has also to do with their perceived mechanical objectivity . The manipulation of these digital objects presents itself as a way to directly handle data once available only through numbers . These manipulations become appealing exactly because the digital objects in question are seen to materialize the variables and relationships expressed in the raw data . Handling the objects becomes a part of the process of ‘ scienti ﬁ c observation ’ , i . e . , of producing evidence . The idea of ‘ handling ’ the digital objects , which evokes the notion of manually interacting with them , gives us a sense of how important the materiality of these digital objects is to the process of arriving at meaning . They are seen by this group of scientists as powerful expressions of the properties of interest ( e . g . the heat as it travels in the tissues ) . Because of this , the scientists can manipulate them in order to produce meaning or check for data reliability . It is thus through manipulating these digital objects that new evidence and new understandings of the processes in question are produced , and not through direct interaction or observation of the natural objects themselves . Much of the work of actually building a digital object is done by individuals , at their cubicles , or at different places on campus . Because the data are remotely stored , the person manipulating them is not really bound to a place , and other concerns will de ﬁ ne the precise routine they undertake : ease of access to a good Internet connection , convenience , personal preferences , etc . In this project , most of the imaging / modeling code work was done by a graduate student in computational mechanics , Luke . Nick - named the “ keeper of the code ” by some of his colleagues , Luke took a considerable amount of his time to show me the details of his individual work in modeling and in manipulating visualizations . These digital objects , produced using contributions from many other different team members , are then used in Luke ’ s presentations to the team . Meetings where such digital objects were discussed were the most frequent , and were the ones where broader project goals and results were debated and calibrated for the group . So [ . . . ] right now there are , [ . . . ] about four different data sets that combine to give you the overall visualization of what [ the project ] is . There ’ s , number one is the MRI anatomical images , number two are the MRTI thermal images , three is the ﬁ nite element images , and then hum four is another little , it ’ s kind of like a helper image , that just tells me where the laser is with respect to the ﬁ nite element calculation . That ’ s just another little box , but it ’ s pretty , it ’ s come to be very useful . ( interview with Luke ) 343 Reconfiguring Evidence The MRI anatomical images and the thermal images are acquired at the research hospital , and sent over to the group online . These data are used to build ﬁ nite element meshes , which are 3D renderings of the geometry of the object being represented . A mesh is a simpli ﬁ ed rendering if compared to the complex geometry of a living organ , but helps to de ﬁ ne and delimit the shape of it which , in turn , enables the scientists to have a reference of the position of the laser ( the fourth data set ) . The mesh and the helper image are the examples of digital objects actually manipulated by the scientists of this project , while the MRI and MRTI images were treated as “ raw data ” . Luke works with a software called AVS . This software uses “ modules ” , which are different commands applied to the digital object . Each module signi ﬁ es a manipulation of a certain aspect of the digital object , and a set of these modules compose a “ network ” ( Figure 1 ) . Such a network embodies all of the manipulation work done by Luke to arrive at a “ workable image ” , as he puts it . By “ workable ” he means an object that is not only visually understandable , but also that makes perceptible the variables he is interested in showing . According to Luke , much of the manipulations needed to achieve a workable image are arrived at by “ trial and error ” . This means that to arrive at an understandable digital object , there ’ s considerable input from the individual actually enacting the manipulations . The same information was given to me by another informant 5 who taught techniques of scienti ﬁ c visualization . Since there are no clear and universally accepted parameters to de ﬁ ne such an object , it is built based on the interpretations of the scientist and his perception of how that object will express the variables of interest . This entails paying attention not only to the visual appeal of the digital object , but to the convincing power it will have in the meeting , where it will be discussed with the group . Figure 1 . An example of an AVS network . 344 Marko Monteiro “ Tweaking ” was a term extensively used by the scientists . It means manipulating the image in order to make it signi ﬁ cant , and it is a crucial aspect of the construction of meaning from these digital objects . There is no ‘ right ’ way to achieve this : building a good digital object depends on the questions being asked , the phenomena being investigated , and the relationships one tries to establish between the variables of interest . More than relaying knowledge through visual means , building and manipulating digital objects seems to allow for the construction of new knowledge through a corporeal engagement with these different renderings of natural objects . 4 . 1 . Building digital objects The sense of handling a digital object is hard to grasp without some form of direct contact with the computer interface that enables these manipulations . The experience of rotating a digital object , for example , enables the sense of exploration of a solid surface , of a polygon , akin to the handling of an object in order to grasp its roughness , its weight or its texture . This means that the engagement of spatial and sensory cues , not usually thought of as part of the analysis of computer models or digital objects , are actually central to how one makes sense of these objects . The following is an excerpt from my own ﬁ eld notes ( dated 08 / 17 / 2007 ) , where I re ﬂ ect on the experience I had while manipulating data during a 1 week workshop I attended at the supercomputing facility used by the research team . Those participating in the workshop 6 had many such ‘ hands - on ’ classes , where we interacted with the advanced computing infrastructure and created our own scienti ﬁ c visualizations and digital objects . In this excerpt I comment on my own experience of embodied interaction with the visualizations . The class , taught by an expert in scienti ﬁ c visualization , sought to cover the ﬁ rst steps of using Paraview , a software widely used in many scienti ﬁ c projects . Most were inexperienced in interfacing with these machines , as was I . The module on scienti ﬁ c visualization involved manipulating a sample data set . These sample data referred to astronomical phenomena , more speci ﬁ cally electrons . Through my own engagement with the software and the data set , I came to realize the intense ‘ physical ’ work required to understand and interpret the data once it was ‘ visualized ’ . In the form of numbers , the data was impossible to understand . Translated into 3D renderings through the computer , the data begins to be interpretable as a digital object . In fact , the very process of creating a digital rendering is a complex set of manipulations , whereby the data are already being interpreted as scienti ﬁ c evidence . This interpretation is relies on spatial cues provided by such aspects as texture , shadow and lighting , position , opacity and color . Excerpt 1 : The embodied experience of digital objects As we opened the data set , we could already see the Cartesian grid , but in 3D shape , which was able to be rotated according to our mouse commands . 345 Reconfiguring Evidence This ﬁ rst engagement with the virtual space in the program served as a way to gain footing : in a new place , it helps to spatially explore the terrain , see where one can step , explore the novel sensory capabilities enabled by this virtual space . Limits differ : while the space is limited , I can rotate in ways impossible in physical reality . The place where the object is contained can be seen as an outline of a cube , giving me spatial and volume cues . [ . . . ] . Once I gained my footing , I started to actually render the data . We create a rendering of electrons according to one numerical value . What look like blobs appear , ﬁ xed in relation to the grid [ . . . ] , but amenable to rotation . Rotating these renderings is central to any understanding of the object in question . Like a sculpture , the relationships between the volumes need to be seen and explored in full , from different angles . Next we create another rendering of electrons at a different numerical value , thus establishing a relationship with the ﬁ rst rendering . [ . . . ] The second rendering superimposes itself on the ﬁ rst one , thus we have a 3D composite image representing the electrons at different scales ; we can not only perceive in 3D the relationships ( spatial , etc . ) between different concentra - tions of electrons , but we can rotate the rendering around , change colors , change lighting , texture , opacity , so that we can better perceive how they relate . If one surface is too opaque , then we can ’ t see the objects underneath , which represent different concentration of gases or electrons . Make it less opaque , and other objects reveal themselves . ( ﬁ eld notes , 08 / 17 / 07 , pg . 3 ) The experience of producing my own scienti ﬁ c visualization was very powerful in terms of providing an embodied ( in the sense that I myself interacted with the objects , instead of merely observing the scientists while they did it ) understanding of how the scientists interpret the data . In fact , their ‘ material ’ characteristic ( as opposed to a strictly visual interpretation , which might seem more common sense ) started to become clear to me only once I actually created such an object from scratch . The appearance of the ‘ blobs ’ and clouds that composed the visualization we all looked at seem to emerge ‘ naturally ’ from the data , which made it easy to forget that the digital object was in fact a product of concepts and premises black - boxed in the software ; besides that , the numbers fed into the software are themselves data created by other black - boxed equipment and measuring devices . This apparently ‘ naturally emerging ’ digital object is a heavily processed , third or fourth - order rendering of some far off ‘ natural phenomenon ’ : a meta - inscription . 4 . 2 . Building meaningful difference In Figure 2 we can see how the problem of opaqueness can play into the interpretation of a digital object . The scientists I observed conducted several 346 Marko Monteiro “ dry runs ” , heating objects in order to test the predictions and models before using live models ( e . g . dogs ) . These dry runs involved building 3D renderings of objects embedded in gel , to test the relationship of a round prostate embedded in the body , for example . The building of a usable digital object from this involved setting the parameters such that the round shaped object is visible inside the gel . This was done through manipulation of the colors and the opacity of the different materials , impossible in nature but enabled by the digital environment . The manipulation of such digital objects is always done through the computer , and may or may not have spatial characteristics resembling those of the natural object . In this case , the objective was to make the round shaped object visible through the gel . This image was ﬁ rst obtained as an information package , generated by the MRI machine at the research hospital . The 3D data generated by the MRI is originally in black - and white , and contains readings that refer to the physical characteristics of the materials ( plastic , gel , etc . ) in question . The contrasts obtained are thus the basis for the initial work of deciphering what is being represented . This work is marked , thereafter , by manipulation of the image . One obvious manipulation is the color of the different areas of the image . Different physical characteristics are thus assigned different colors , so as to visually mark them and thus begin to establish meaningful contrasts . Other such manipulations , which are highly dependent on the interaction with the computer , are the different densities of the materials . The gel , for example , has a different density than the egg - shaped object contained inside it . Thus , to make that object visible through the gel , so that a workable digital object can be generated , the visual rendering of these different characteristics can be Figure 2 . Rendering of a round object embedded in a plastic container ﬁ lled with gel . 347 Reconfiguring Evidence manipulated through the visualization software . The gel , in this case , is made less opaque while the embedded object is made more so . This enables the viewer to clearly discern a meaningful difference between them that , in turn , enables the digital object to ‘ become ’ an image of a round - shaped object embedded in gel . Creating difference and contrast is basic to the manipulations of the digital object . In Figure 2 , where the objective is to visualize the round shaped object , the differences in color and opacity seek to create that contrast in a way that is perceptible to the eye . Without contrast , the image becomes impossible to interpret and does not contain any analytical value . The creation of difference depends , as discussed above , on the personal ‘ interpretations ’ of the scientist : there are no mandatory colors or opaqueness values that can be applied . There are important constraints , nonetheless : the difference being sought must be clear , the image must be understandable to the other group members , and it must be visually interesting . There could be ‘ customary ’ colors and reference values that would also impinge on these interpretation practices , although these were not mentioned by the scientists and were not the object of this particular study . The following excerpt comes from a meeting where Luke explains to the rest of the team a visualization of a mathematical function ( Figure 3 ) . The results of this function are thus described in terms of a manipulable digital object . Excerpt 2 : Physical intuitions Luke : So , this position ( ( switches to brain images and uses cursor to show position ) ) 7 is , roughly this right here . In this small dip ( ( switches projection back to mountain rendition and points to a place at the base of the “ mountain ” ) ) and hum this is what we ’ re trying to minimize over and , ( ( switches to brain images ) ) with , so I mean if you look at a cutline through this MRTI data ( ( uses cursor to show a graph at the projection , which is beside the brain slice images ) ) projected , or interpolated on a mesh , you see the dips right here and all this noise right here . Mark : You have a physical , intuition why , the mountains have uh two hills and etcetera ? Luke : I have … Mark : Because ( ? ) that is X is because is , uh : you are saying this , is a minimization with respect to the ( . ) ( XZ ) or XY . Luke : The … Mark : … so it has to have some , Luke : I attribute the maximums to noise . I mean so , if you just look at , hum ( ( walks to screen and points to the graph ) ) , this dip in temperature value , I mean this is being integrated , hum over space . 348 Marko Monteiro In the excerpt , we see that Mark , a professor in engineering and computational mechanics , tries to understand the digital object also in terms of its perceptual characteristics . When he asks about “ physical intuition ” , this means the possible match between the mathematical function being displayed and actual physical events . However , the interpretation of this object is only achieved through manipulation and bodily engagement with the “ mountains ” and “ hills ” that compose it . Once the numerical data are transposed into this form , it becomes the privileged form of interpretation , and the relationships established with ‘ physical ’ realities are dependent on these interpretations . 4 . 3 . From natural to digital object , and back again The digital object resulting from the scientists ’ manipulations is thus a ‘ meta - inscription ’ , constructed from the inscriptions acquired by the team and manipulated by Luke and other team members . As such , the object embodies the intense interpretation work that comprises what the scientists themselves call “ visualizing ” , or “ building a visualization ” , as well as the coding work that enables the model and its predictions . In terms of the modeling work described , however , the meaning they attain must refer back to ‘ nature ’ or a natural object . Only this correspondence will make it truly ‘ objective ’ , through what they term the “ validation ” of the model . The construction of meaning and evidence through the handling or “ tweaking ” of digital objects does not mean an erasure of a connection to natural objects , which Figure 3 . Three - dimensional visualization used in the meetings . 349 Reconfiguring Evidence were the source of the inscriptions used to build the digital objects . It simply means that the scienti ﬁ c work of deriving data and rendering it in 3D form is dependent on meaning and interpretation on several different levels , as discussed before . The building of meaningful digital objects must ultimately be compared against the natural phenomena they aim to represent , as a ﬁ nal stage of interpretation . Luke : So in theory once we have all this temperature data , and time history of the temperature at every cell , or every voxel , or every hum , node , then we can take that data and compute the … tell the physician where the damage … where the Heat Shock Protein are being expressed according to what Laura is working on , according to the data … Me : Ok , the validation . L : Laura ’ s , the in vitro studies that Laura has gotten . ( interview with Luke ) Luke mentions here Laura , a PhD student in biomedical engineering , who was developing in vitro studies of cells . Her work involves growing cell cultures , which were then heated in order to assess how actual cells behaved under these conditions . When compared to the model ’ s predictions , these results would then “ validate ” them . Validation means here that the model would be considered an objective and reliable prediction of natural behavior . One could argue , of course , that the model was being compared to another highly controlled experiment and not to actual ‘ nature ’ . While this may be true , the interesting aspect of this , for the sake of the argument of this article , is how digital objects are referred back to actual cells . In other words , while there is very crucial interpretive work being done with and through digital objects , the scienti ﬁ c work being developed by this group cannot ( and does not wish to ) do away with actual manipulation of natural objects . Current theory on modeling would not prescind with the comparison of this model with the ( scienti ﬁ cally ordered ) analysis of the behavior of actual cells . While that may be a possibility for future scienti ﬁ c work related to modeling , given the trends observed in this group , we currently observe a feedback between laboratorial studies with biological phenomena and computer mediated manip - ulations of digital objects . 5 . Conclusions As discussed above , the work of building and interpreting visualized data in scienti ﬁ c practice is much more ‘ embodied ’ than merely ‘ visual ’ , as a growing number of works are beginning to explore ( Ala č 2008 ; Myers 2008 ; Ochs et al . 1994 , 1996 ) . This interpretation work is embodied on two levels : one , when the 350 Marko Monteiro digital objects are produced ; two , when they are handled in weekly meetings . Meaning about natural phenomena is thus being continually constructed in these various processes . It is impossible to separate the ‘ manual labor ’ of constructing workable visualizations from the work of establishing meaningful difference between variables of interest . As I argued above , digital objects are built through embodied manipulation of numerical data rendered in 3D format . The very process of building “ workable ” digital objects , I argued , is also where scientists begin to interpret the data contained therein . In the process of making a usable object , scientists seek to establish meaningful differences in color , shapes , opacity and other attributes of the objects . These differences are meaningful on a perceptual level ( i . e . they are visible and perceptible as such ) , and on a conceptual level , as they refer to variables of scienti ﬁ c interest that help them build theories and interpretations of nature that are ‘ scienti ﬁ cally valid ’ and ‘ objective ’ . In that sense , they become a crucial part of what is considered empirical evidence , even as they are always referred ( and must remain referable ) back to ‘ nature ’ . The perceptual aspect involved in digital objects refers back to an interactive characteristic of digital technologies , drawing in the user instead of promoting passive observation . The digital objects in question were built and are interpreted in a much more embodied fashion than images , suggesting that the subject of knowledge production is a crucial element in the whole process . This means that , if digital objects can be said to be very objective because they are built on data acquired through automated means ( e . g . MRI data ) , they contain in themselves a quantum of interpretation and manipulation by the user / scientist that is fundamental in processes of building meaningful analyses . This argument does not seek to invalidate digital objects as a reliable means of producing knowledge , nor claim that such manipulations ( read in a negative sense ) are ‘ deviations ’ from a scienti ﬁ c ideal of objectivity . Digital objects , no matter how manipulated , are always referred back to natural objects by the scientists ( e . g . cell experiments ) in order to be validated as ‘ objective ’ . Nonetheless , they remain important sources of analytical insights into the realities they render visible and manipulable . The perceptual factors that play a role in the construction and interpretation of such objects , however , and the way they participate in the derivation of insights from inscriptions suggests novel ways of relating to natural objects and to scienti ﬁ c representations , that deserve further explorations by STS scholars . Acknowledgments I want to thank the Science , Technology and Society Program at the University of Texas at Austin for funding the research presented in this paper . I also wanted to thank Prof . Elizabeth Keating , for making the ethnography that provided the data analyzed here possible . 351 Reconfiguring Evidence Notes 1 . The term embodied used here seeks to offer a description of the way scientists engage with the digital objects in question that is more relational than a mere passive looking at images . In this sense , I use the term “ object ” in place of “ image ” , as a means to elicit this relationship , through which scienti ﬁ c evidence is produced and analyzed . 2 . The paper will not engage in a discussion about the ontological status of ‘ natural ’ versus ‘ digital ’ objects , as this is not the focus of this research . Also , I believe that this question is not answerable through the data collected and analyzed herein . In terms of the premises used in the discussion that follows , it is worth mentioning , however , that I remain agnostic about the ontological materiality of either natural or digital objects analyzed . The paper will address these forms of existence as they pertain to the practices observed , and will not explore whether the digital objects are actually empirical or not . I believe this sort of symmetrical approach ( Latour 1993 ; Latour and Woolgar 1986 ) , geared to the scientists ’ practice ( Bourdieu 1997 ; Sterne 2003 ) , is a more adequate stance , given the ethnographic nature of the methods used to gather my own data . This does not , however , invalidate such philosophical discussions by other authors . 3 . The natural vs . digital object dichotomy used here relates to Latour ’ s ( 1990 ) discussion of immutable mobiles and how they construe a relationship between natural and representational realms ; it also refers to the scientists ’ perceptions as observed in ﬁ eldwork . Natural thus refers to what is present in nature , the phenomena they seek to model ; and digital here means that which pertains to the processed images and digital objects constructed by the scientists , which reference the natural objects . To the scientists observed , the digital objects are the closest possible renderings of natural phenomena they can possibly achieve , given the technologies and methods used . Their value as knowledge and evidence is dependent on how close they are thought to resemble the natural . This dichotomy is basic to the practices observed throughout this research : the idea of a ‘ match ’ between natural and digital rendering is what is sought through the various modeling and visualization practices . 4 . This ethnographic study was approved by the University of Texas at Austin ’ s Institutional Review Board , having met all requirements for the ethical study of human subjects ( UT IRB Study No . 2006 - 11 - 0040 ) . All names have been substituted for by pseudonyms to protect the privacy of the scientists . 5 . A specialist in scienti ﬁ c visualization , during a workshop I participated in , offered by the advanced computing facility available on the campus where the team I observed was located . 6 . Primarily members of the university ’ s research community , with some visitors from other institutions and from overseas . I was the only one from a humanities or social science background during this particular week . 7 . Transcript conventions : ( . ) a gap of approximately one tenth of a second ; . full stop , stopping fall in tone , not necessarily end of sentence ; ( ? ) unintelligible ; ( word ) dubious hearing ( ( ) ) transcriber ’ s descriptions rather than or in addition to transcriptions . References Ala č , M . ( 2008 ) . Working with brain scans : digital images and gestural interaction in fMRI laboratory . Social Studies of Science , 38 ( 4 ) , 483 – 508 . Beaulieu , A . ( 2001 ) . Voxels in the brain : neuroscience , informatics and changing notions of objectivity . Social Studies of Science , 31 ( 5 ) , 635 – 680 . Beaulieu , A . ( 2002a ) . A space for measuring mind and brain : interdisciplinarity and digital tools in the development of brain mapping and functional imaging , 1980 – 1990 . Brain and Cognition , 49 , 13 – 33 . 352 Marko Monteiro Beaulieu , A . ( 2002b ) . Images are not the ( only ) truth : brain mapping , visual knowledge and iconoclasm . Science , Technology & Human Values , 27 ( 1 ) , 53 – 86 . Becvar , L . A . , Hollan , J . , & Hutchins , E . ( 2005 ) . Hands as molecules : representational gestures used for developing theory in a scienti ﬁ c laboratory . Semiotica , 156 ( 4 ) , 89 – 112 . Bement , A . , Jr . ( 2007 ) . Cyberinfrastructure visions for 21st century discovery . Arlington : National Science Foundation . Bourdieu , P . ( 1997 ) . Outline of a theory of practice . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Chadarevian , S . D . , & Hopwood , N . ( 2004 ) . Models : the third dimension of science . Stanford : Stanford University Press . Cummings , J . , & Kiesler , S . ( 2005 ) . Collaborative research across disciplinary and organizational boundaries . Social Studies of Science , 35 ( 5 ) , 703 – 722 . Daston , L . , & Galison , P . ( 1990 ) . The image of objectivity . Representations , 40 , 81 – 128 . Daston , L . , & Galiston , P . ( 1990 ) . The image of objectivity . Representations , 40 , 81 – 128 . Goodwin , C . ( 1994 ) . Professional vision . American Anthropologist , 96 ( 3 ) , 606 – 633 . Hey , T . , & Trefethen , A . ( 2004 ) . UK E - science programme : next generation grid applications . International Journal of High Performance Computing Applications , 18 ( 3 ) , 285 – 291 . Hopwood , N . , & Chadarevian , S . D . ( 2004 ) . Dimensions of modeling . In models : the third dimension of science . Stanford : Stanford University Press . Knorr - Cetina , K . , & Amann , K . ( 1990 ) . Image dissection in natural scienti ﬁ c inquiry . Science , Technology and Human Values , 15 ( 3 ) , 259 – 283 . Latour , B . ( 1990 ) . Drawing things together . In M . Lynch & S . Woolgar ( Eds . ) , Representation in scienti ﬁ c practice ( pp . 19 – 68 ) . Cambridge : MIT . Latour , B . ( 1993 ) . We have never been modern . Cambridge : Harvard University Press . Latour , B . ( 1995 ) . The ‘ Pedo ﬁ l ’ of Boa Vista : a photo - philosophical montage . Common Knowledge , 4 ( 1 ) , 144 – 187 . Latour , B . , & Woolgar , S . ( 1986 ) . Laboratory life : The construction of scienti ﬁ c facts . Princeton : Princeton University Press . Lynch , M . ( 1990 ) . The externalized retina : Selection and mathematization in the visual documentation of objects in the life sciences . In M . Lynch & S . Woolgar ( Eds . ) , Representation in scienti ﬁ c practice ( pp . 153 – 186 ) . Cambridge : MIT Press . Lynch , M . ( 2006 ) . The production of scienti ﬁ c images : Vision and re - vision in the history , philosophy and sociology of science . In L . Pauwels ( Ed . ) , Visual cultures of science : Rethinking representational practices in knowledge building and science communication ( pp . 26 – 41 ) . Hanover : Dartmouth College Press . Lynch , M . , & Woolgar , S . ( 1990a ) . Introduction : Sociological orientations to representational practice in science . In M . Lynch & S . Woolgar ( Eds . ) , Representation in scienti ﬁ c practice ( pp . 1 – 19 ) . Cambridge : MIT . Lynch , M . , & Woolgar , S . ( 1990b ) . Representation in scienti ﬁ c practice . Cambridge : MIT . Monteiro , M . ( 2010 ) . Beyond the merely visual : interacting with digital objects in interdisciplinary scienti ﬁ c practice . Semiotica . Monteiro , M . , & Keating , E . ( 2009 ) . Managing misunderstandings : the role of language in interdisciplinary scienti ﬁ c collaboration . Science Communication , 31 ( 1 ) , 6 – 28 . Myers , N . ( 2008 ) . Molecular embodiments and the body - work of modeling in protein crystallography . Social Studies of Science , 38 ( 2 ) , 163 – 199 . Ochs , E . , Jacoby , S . , & Gonzales , P . ( 1994 ) . Interpretive journeys : how physicists talk and travel through graphic space . Con ﬁ gurations , 2 ( 1 ) , 151 – 171 . Ochs , E . , Jacoby , S . , & Gonzales , P . ( 1996 ) . “ When I come down I ’ m in the domain state ” : grammar and graphic representation in the interpretive activity of physics . In E . Ochs , E . Schlegloff , & S . Thompson ( Eds . ) , Interaction and grammar ( pp . 328 – 369 ) . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . 353 Reconfiguring Evidence Pauwels , L . ( 2006a ) . A theoretical framework for assessing visual representational practices in knowledge building and science communications . In L . Pauwels ( Ed . ) , Visual cultures of science : Rethinking representational practices in knowledge building and science communica - tion ( pp . 1 – 26 ) . Hanover : Dartmouth College Press . Pauwels , L . ( Ed . ) . ( 2006b ) . Visual cultures of science : Rethinking representational practices in knowledge building and science communication . Hanover : Dartmouth College Press . Schroeder , R . ( 2008 ) . e - Sciences as research technologies : recon ﬁ guring disciplines , globalizing knowledge . Social Science Information , 47 ( 2 ) , 131 – 157 . Shapin , S . , & Schaffer , S . ( 1985 ) . Leviathan and the air - pump : Hobbes , Boyle and the experimental life . Princeton : Princeton University Press . Sterne , J . ( 2003 ) . Bourdieu , technique and technology . Cultural Studies , 17 ( 3 / 4 ) , 367 – 389 . Woolgar , S . , & Coopmans , C . ( 2006 ) . Virtual witnessing in a virtual age : A prospectus for social studies of e - science . In C . Hine ( Ed . ) , New infrastructures for knowledge production : Understanding e - science ( pp . 1 – 26 ) . Hershey : Information Science Publishing . 354 Marko Monteiro