Volume 27 January 1 , 2016 1 Single - filament kinetic studies provide novel insights into regulation of actin - based motility Shashank Shekhar and Marie - France Carlier Cytoskeleton Dynamics and Cell Motility , Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique , 91198 Gif - sur - Yvette , France ABSTRACT Polarized assembly of actin filaments forms the basis of actin - based motility and is regulated both spatially and temporally . Cells use a variety of mechanisms by which intrinsi - cally slower processes are accelerated , and faster ones decelerated , to match rates observed in vivo . Here we discuss how kinetic studies of individual reactions and cycles that drive actin remodeling have provided a mechanistic and quantitative understanding of such processes . We specifically consider key barbed - end regulators such as capping protein and formins as illustrative examples . We compare and contrast different kinetic approaches , such as the traditional pyrene - polymerization bulk assays , as well as more recently developed single - fila - ment and single - molecule imaging approaches . Recent development of novel biophysical methods for sensing and applying forces will in future allow us to address the very important relationship between mechanical stimulus and kinetics of actin - based motility . INTRODUCTION Motile processes develop on time scales of 1 s to several tens of seconds , which reflects the range of relevant kinetic parameters governing intracellular actin assembly dynamics . The chemotactic ability of a cell to respond rapidly to environmental changes de - pends entirely on the rapid remodeling of its actin cytoskeleton ( Carlier et al . , 2015 ) . By means of kinetic regulation , intrinsically slower processes are accelerated , and faster ones decelerated , to match rates observed in vivo . Identifying these kinetic mechanisms is therefore a principal step in reconstituting motile processes from individual cell components and mathematical modeling of cellular behavior for gaining a quantitative understanding of biological pro - cesses ( Shekhar et al . , 2014 ) . A simple example of kinetic regulation of actin dynamics is the 100 - fold difference in rate of turnover / treadmilling of actin filaments in vitro compared with the in vivo rate in motile processes . Similar to the acceleration of the rate - limiting step in the ATPase cycle of myo - sin by actin ( Lymn and Taylor , 1971 ) , actin - depolymerizing factor ( ADF ) / cofilin enhances pointed - end depolymerization , which is the rate - limiting step of the filament turnover cycle . ADF cooperatively binds to and destabilizes actin – actin bonds in ADP – F - actin , result - ing in enhanced disassembly of ADP – F - actin from pointed ends ( Figure 1 ) . ADF / cofilin thus establishes a larger stationary pool of polymerizable ATP – actin monomers ( C SS ) , leading to higher mono - mer flux associating to barbed ends ( k + B . C SS , where k + B is the as - sociation rate constant of actin monomers at the barbed end and C SS is the steady - state actin monomer concentration ) and hence faster protrusion rates . The destabilization of actin – actin bonds also facilitates filament severing ( Maciver et al . , 1991 ) . Note , however , that severing by itself ( e . g . , mediated by sonic vibration or by a po - tent severer like Cordon - bleu ) does not affect the value of C SS . If a kinetic screen for a protein - enhancing treadmilling had been de - signed before ADF / cofilin’s discovery , ADF / cofilin would certainly have been found ( Le Clainche and Carlier , 2008 ) . It has recently been shown that ADF further enhances filament disassembly by syn - ergizing with other factors like Aip1 ( Nadkarni and Brieher , 2014 ; Gressin et al . , 2015 ) , Coronin ( Mikati et al . , 2015 ) , and Twinfilin and Srv2 / CAP ( Johnston et al . , 2015 ) . Other examples of differences between in vivo and in vitro rates include dissociation of capping protein ( CP ) from barbed ends , which is intrinsically very slow but three orders of magnitude faster in lamellipodia ( Miyoshi et al . , 2006 ) , consistent with a lowered affin - ity . This was demonstrated by the discrepancy between apparent K d ( ∼ 100 nM ) of Dictyostelium CP in whole - cell extracts and 100 - fold Monitoring Editor Laurent Blanchoin CEA Grenoble Received : Jul 29 , 2015 Revised : Oct 1 , 2015 Accepted : Oct 26 , 2015 DOI : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E15 - 06 - 0352 Address correspondence to : Shashank Shekhar ( shashank . shekhar @ i2bc . paris - saclay . fr ) , Marie - France Carlier ( marie - france . carlier @ i2bc . paris - saclay . fr ) . © 2016 Shekhar and Carlier . This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell Biology under license from the author ( s ) . Two months after publication it is available to the public under an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported Creative Commons License ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 ) . “ASCB ® , ” “The American Society for Cell Biology ® , ” and “Molecular Biology of the Cell ® ” are registered trademarks of The American Society for Cell Biology . Abbreviations used : ADF , actin depolymerizing factor ; ADP , adenosine diphos - phate ; ATP , adenosine triphosphate ; CapZIP , CapZ - interacting protein ; CARMIL , capping protein Arp2 / 3 myosin i linker ; CP , capping protein ; C SS , steady - state actin monomer concentration ; F - actin , filamentous actin ; FH2 , formin - homology 2 domain ; G - actin , globular ( monomeric ) actin ; k + B , association rate constant of actin monomers at the barbed end ; K d , equilibrium dissociation constant ; WH2 , WASP - homology 2 domain . MBoC | PERSPECTIVE 2 | S . Shekhar and M . - F . Carlier Molecular Biology of the Cell A search for cellular factors to enhance dissociation of CP from barbed ends first led to polyphosphoinositides like phosphatidylino - sitol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( Schafer et al . , 1996 ) . Recently a class of pro - teins referred to as “uncappers” have been shown to rapidly release CP from capped filaments . By allosterically binding CP bound to the barbed end , uncappers reduce CP’s affinity for the barbed end , thus enhancing its dissociation ( Figure 2a ) . Proteins containing the un - capper CapZIP motifs include CARMIL , CIN85 , Duboraya , and FAM21 . These proteins act in a site - directed manner ( Fujiwara et al . , 2014 ) in close association with machineries assembling branched filaments with Arp2 / 3 complex . Another recently discovered uncapping mechanism is via the formation of a transient ternary complex , in which CP and a barbed end – tracking protein simultaneously bind a barbed end . In the process , each of them lowers the other’s affinity , thus en - hancing CP’s dissociation from the barbed end ( Figure 2b ) . This form of uncompetitive inhibition , opposed to the mutually exclu - sive binding scheme , is kinetically effective in displacing CP by other barbed end trackers . Examples include uncapping of CP by WH2 domain – containing VopF and Enabled / vasodilator - stimu - lated phosphoprotein or of FH2 domain – containing formins ( Pernier et al . , 2013 ; Bombardier et al . , 2015 ; Shekhar et al . , 2015 ) . In a reciprocal manner , CP can also displace formin from the barbed end . This recent discovery disproved the previously held view that CP and formin bind to barbed ends in a mutually exclusive manner ( Zigmond et al . , 2003 ; Moseley et al . , 2004 ; Kovar et al . , 2005 ; Bartolini et al . , 2012 ) . Formin - anchored fila - ment elongation is essential in organelles like filopodia . However , formin detachment from filaments has to be accelerated to pre - vent uncontrolled elongation of filaments due to the long dwell times of formins on barbed ends . In yeast , Bud14 rapidly dis - places formin Bnr1 from growing barbed ends ( Chesarone et al . , 2009 ) , and Smy1 dampens elongation by interacting with the FH2 domain of formin Bnr1 ( Chesarone - Cataldo et al . , 2011 ) . Similarly , CP association to a formin - bound barbed end has recently been shown to accelerate formin dissociation from the barbed end ( Bombardier et al . , 2015 ; Shekhar et al . , 2015 ) . This reaction may underlie the reported filopodial regulation by CP ( Sinnar et al . , 2014 ) . Another unexpected and interesting case is the synergy be - tween Formin2 and Spire in actin assembly . These two proteins should antagonize and compete at barbed ends . Spire uses its WH2 domains to cap barbed ends . Formin2 by itself is a poor nu - cleator of actin filament and associates to barbed ends unusually slowly . However , Formin2 nucleates efficiently in the presence of Spire . When Spire is bound to barbed ends , its exposed N - termi - nal KIND domain associates with the C - terminal tail of Formin2 , which allows fast recruitment of Formin2 at barbed ends and im - mediate onset of processive assembly coupled to displacement of Spire from barbed ends ( Montaville et al . , 2014 ) . The group of Bruce Goode has reported other examples of such a synergy be - tween a nucleation - promoting factor and an elongator , including pairs of mDia1 and APC ( Breitsprecher et al . , 2012 ) , Bud6 and formin Bni1 ( Graziano et al . , 2011 ) . Whereas some reactions need to be speeded up to match in vivo rates , others need to be slowed down . Proteins like CP or formins often associate extremely rapidly to filament barbed ends in a diffusion - limited manner . Their rate of association can be re - duced by an inhibitor that binds in rapid equilibrium to barbed ends . Our recent experiments identified this function in the ubiqui - tous protein profilin . Profilin binds both G - actin ( with high affinity ) and F - actin ( with lower affinity ) . Profilin binds barbed ends of lower K d for purified Dictyostelium CP ( Schafer et al . , 1996 ) . Similarly , formins exhibit long dwell times at the barbed ends in vi - tro , resulting in much longer filaments than observed in formin - me - diated cellular processes . We will show examples in which kinetic control of the duration of formin and CP residence at the barbed end is elicited either by an allosteric mechanism or competition be - tween various actin - binding motifs present in a variety of proteins . The regulation of rates at the single - filament level has profound implications for defining the functional diversity of filament net - works . Coordinated turnover of various actin arrays in the same cell suggests the existence of timers , phasing kinetic steps , and retroac - tive loops . It is therefore very important to study the kinetics of indi - vidual reactions before exploring how they are integrated into more complex cycles . Here we present appropriate kinetic approaches for analysis of the mechanisms that govern reactivity of actin fila - ment barbed ends , comparing their respective strengths and draw - backs and providing a few illustrative cases . We also discuss the role of kinetics in quantitative understanding of motile processes . EXAMPLES OF PROCESSES THAT NEED ACCELERATION OR DECELERATION Some intrinsic reactions occurring at the barbed end of an actin fila - ment are so slow that their kinetic up - regulation must occur to ex - plain faster dynamics seen in vivo . For example capping protein binds barbed ends with very high affinity , dissociating from barbed ends with half - life of ∼ 25 min in vitro ( Schafer et al . , 1996 ) . Long dwell times can be both an advantage and a disadvantage . In the bulk cytoplasm and in quiescent nonmotile cells , stable capping prevents unproductive energy consumption due to actin monomer – polymer exchange . In motile regions of the cell , however , a more dynamic interaction of CP with barbed ends is required to allow ef - ficient growth of dendritic filament arrays . FIGURE 1 : ADF enhances filament turnover rate . ADF enhances the rate - limiting of step of filament depolymerization during the treadmilling cycle . It does so by cooperatively binding the ADP – F - actin subunits and enhancing their disassembly at pointed ends by destabilizing actin – actin bonds in the filament . Similarly , ADF enhances spontaneous filament fragmentation . As a result of enhanced depolymerization , ADF enhances the stationary pool of monomeric ATP – actin , leading to a faster elongation rate . Volume 27 January 1 , 2016 Role of kinetics in actin motility | 3 proportional to total polymer mass and therefore provides quan - titative evaluation of time - dependent rate of assembly of G - actin into F - actin . Rate parameters can then be extracted using appro - priate mathematical modeling of the assembly kinetics . Notwithstanding its immense contributions to kinetics , this tech - nique has certain limitations . First , some proteins , such as ADF or profilin , bind labeled actin with reduced affinity and may affect its fluorescence ( Malm , 1984 ; Carlier et al . , 1997 ) . Second , because this method only measures the amount of polymerized actin , it is diffi - cult to identify events like nucleation , annealing , and severing . The method applies to reactions in which F - actin is a soluble polymer . However , reaction rates may differ when the polymer is side bound or end anchored to a membrane . Third and most important , bulk - solution “self - averaging” approaches fall short of identifying mole - cular mechanisms that occur at the scale of individual filaments ( like length fluctuations ) or in analysis of vectorial / processive reactions . Their application is also limited when nonhomogeneous popula - tions ( or rare subpopulations ) exist . In these cases , what was an ad - vantage turns out to blur the real thing . Single - filament studies , which emerged in the cytoskeleton field 15 years ago , overcame these limitations using total internal reflection fluorescence micros - copy for observing real - time branching of actin filaments ( Amann and Pollard , 2001 ; Mahaffy and Pollard , 2006 ) and assembly dynam - ics at barbed and pointed ends ( Kuhn and Pollard , 2005 ) . ADP - F - actin filaments with K d = 1 – 25 μM ( Kinosian et al . , 2002 ; Jegou et al . , 2011 ) and enhances depolymerization ( Bubb et al . , 2003 ) . Similar K d values have been found for profilin binding to ATP and ADP - Pi barbed ends ( Jegou et al . , 2011 ) , and a higher value of ∼ 225 μM was found for AMPPNP barbed ends ( Courtemanche and Pollard , 2013 ) . Thus profilin competes with CP and barbed end – tracking proteins ( Pernier et al . , 2016 ) , thus slowing down their association to barbed ends . BULK - SOLUTION KINETICS AND SINGLE - FILAMENT KINETICS : COMPLEMENTARY APPROACHES TO ADDRESS THE SAME QUESTIONS Traditionally , bulk kinetic assays have been used for quantifying rate constants of interaction between two or more proteins . Com - monly used bulk approaches include changes in light scattering , fluorescence intensity , and anisotropy . The behavior of all mole - cules is averaged out in the monitored output . The advantage of these methods is that rate constants are easily and rapidly de - rived , assuming that all molecules are identical . A commonly used assay for F - actin assembly exploits the 20 - fold increase in fluores - cence intensity of pyrenyl - labeled actin ( Kouyama and Mihashi , 1981 ) or 7 - chloro - 4 - nitrobenzeno - 2 - oxa - 1 , 3 - diazole – labeled actin ( Detmers et al . , 1981 ) associated with the transition from the G - actin to the F - actin state . The increase in fluorescence intensity is FIGURE 2 : Two mechanisms for rapid uncapping of CP - capped barbed ends . ( a ) Scheme 1 : uncapping by uncappers . Filament barbed ends ( B ) bind CP ( C ) with high affinity ( K C = 0 . 1 nM ) . CP makes a complex , CZ , with CapZIP ( Z ) , which also caps barbed ends , albeit with affinity lower than CP ( K CZ = 38 nM ) . CP dissociates very slowly from barbed ends , k - C = 0 . 0003 s −1 , whereas CZ dissociates much more rapidly , k B - CZ = 0 . 095 s −1 ( Fujiwara et al . , 2010 ) . Although K CZ was not experimentally determined , since the other equilibrium constants were measured , K CZ was calculated from detailed balance ( K C K ′ Z = K Z K CZ ) . At low concentration of CP , addition of Z to capped filaments ( BC ) leads to formation of a transient BCZ complex , followed by dissociation of CZ , leaving free uncapped barbed ends . At higher CP concentrations , adding Z leads to formation of CZ in amounts sufficient to bind barbed ends , and barbed ends stay capped by CZ ( BCZ ) in a more dynamic equilibrium than by C alone . Red indicates paused state , and green indicates elongating state . Arrow thickness signifies the magnitude of the reaction rate . ( b ) Scheme 2 : uncapping by a barbed - end tracker like formin . Barbed ends ( B ) bind CP ( C ) and formin ( F ) with high affinity and slow dissociation rates . Both proteins can be bound simultaneously in the ternary complex BFC , with enhanced dissociation rates of both F ( k ′ - F ) and C ( k ′ - C ) within this complex . On addition of either C to BF or F to BC , the distribution of conformational states after transient formation of BFC depends on the relative values of k ′ - F and k ′ - C ( Shekhar et al . , 2015 ) . Note that in the standard mutual exclusion scheme ( direct competition ) only B , BC , and BF states exist . 4 | S . Shekhar and M . - F . Carlier Molecular Biology of the Cell FUTURE OF SINGLE - FILAMENT KINETIC ASSAYS Combining the microfluidics approach with multicolor single - mole - cule imaging should prove invaluable in the future . Transient expo - sure of filaments to high concentrations of labeled molecules will be possible , and the ability to wash out the unbound labeled molecules will eliminate the background of free labeled molecules . Several fluorescently labeled proteins may be monitored simultaneously ( Smith et al . , 2013b ) , taking in vitro systems ever closer to in vivo – like situation in which multiple proteins work together . To achieve this , improved passivation and labeling methodologies will have to be developed . More sophisticated designs of microfluidic devices will also be required . Data collected in complex schemes will foster novel modeling approaches that need quantitative assessments of rate constants . Along this line , a successful prediction of the spatio - temporal dynamics of filopodia was made using reaction rate con - stants of barbed - end regulators ( Mogilner and Rubinstein , 2005 ) . The single - filament assays and bulk - solution assays allow the study of actin assembly dynamics at two extreme size scales . A novel approach might be found at the crossover of the two scales . Observing rare labeled filaments in solutions containing unlabeled filaments has been used to understand actin rheology ( Kas et al . , 1994 ; Murrell and Gardel , 2012 ) . Inspired by this assay , the kinetic behavior of individual labeled filaments placed in a flow containing unlabeled actin and a cocktail of defined regulatory proteins is now at hand and would reveal how individual filaments behave when placed in in vivo mimicking conditions . Single - filament assays have also enabled the study of mechanical properties at the scale of individual filaments ( Jegou et al . , 2013 ) . Biophysical methods designed both to measure and apply forces in the pico - to nano - Newton range have renewed the interest in the mechanochemical basis of cell motility , allowing studies of force - dependent binding strengths . A number of actin - binding proteins interact with the sides of the filaments , either stabilizing ( e . g . , tropo - myosin ) or destabilizing ( e . g . , ADF / cofilin ) the polymer . Most single - filament kinetic measurements have been done in the absence of load , on unstretched / uncompressed filaments . However , filaments in cells often grow under tension . Tensile forces might affect actin assembly , as well as the association / dissociation reactions of regula - tors with filaments . Specifically , the elongation rate of a formin - bound barbed end increases under a pulling force ( Jegou et al . , 2013 ) . How the complexes dissociate upon application of force will provide insights into the molecular mechanism of complex forma - tion : either a simple bimolecular reaction or a two - step process in which isomerization of a first low - affinity complex in rapid equilib - rium strengthens the interaction . Corresponding slip bonds and catch bonds have been defined ( Marshall et al . , 2003 ) , as well as catch – slip bonds ( Sundd et al . , 2011 ) , which govern actin disassem - bly ( Lee et al . , 2013 ) . Applying a pulling force on the filament in - creases the dissociation of formin from the barbed end ( unpublished results ) . In contrast , applying a pulling force on cadherin – catenin complexes on filaments stabilizes the binding ( Buckley et al . , 2014 ) . Tension generated in the actin cytoskeleton can have secondary in - direct effects on the kinetics of interaction between filaments and other actin - binding proteins . For example , applying tension to an actin filament has been shown to cause reduction in severing by ADF ( Hayakawa et al . , 2011 ) . As another example , tension gener - ated by actomyosin stretches talin in focal adhesions , enhancing its binding to vinculin ( Ciobanasu et al . , 2014 ) . In exploring how the binding kinetics of other important side - binding proteins such as tropomyosins or the formin processive walk are affected by mechan - ical strain on the filament , either tension or torque should reveal as - yet - unknown aspects of their binding mode to actin . Gelsolin and Over the years , single - filament kinetics has evolved into a choice tool to analyze how individual regulators regulate barbed ends . Ei - ther the presence of a regulator at the barbed end can be identified by its effect on the elongation rate or the protein can be directly la - beled fluorescently and observed by single - molecule fluorescence approaches . Each approach has its strengths and limitations . In the first approach , changes in filament elongation rate provide a kinetic probe to detect the binding of a ligand . These changes are used to characterize the underlying kinetic mechanisms . A detailed kinetic analysis at several ligand concentrations is required to estab - lish whether the monitored change in growth rate is strictly coupled to association - dissociation of the ligand at filament ends or occurs in a subsequent isomerization step . Thus a wealth of information is derived regarding the molecular mechanism of interaction of the li - gand with barbed ends . However , not all barbed end – binding pro - teins cause a drastic change in elongation rate , making their detec - tion difficult . Examples include barbed end – tracking proteins such as VopF , which does not exhibit a detectable change in elongation rate but is detected by its uncapping activity ( Pernier et al . , 2013 ) . The classical use of competitive inhibitors thus can reveal the inter - action of a “mute” ligand with barbed ends . In addition , two pro - teins bound simultaneously to the barbed end might show the same phenotype as when only one of them is bound ; for example , simul - taneous binding of CP and formin to barbed ends arrests filament growth in the same manner as CP alone does ( Shekhar et al . , 2015 ) . In the second approach , single - molecule fluorescence imaging is used to visualize interaction of fluorescently labeled proteins with the filaments ( Smith et al . , 2013a ) . Direct observation of uncapping of CP - capped filaments by a labeled CARMIL fragment ( Fujiwara et al . , 2010 ) and measurement of filament branching kinetics by Arp2 / 3 ( Smith et al . , 2013a , b ) have exploited this approach . How - ever , it should be kept in mind that due to lack of single actin sub - unit – level resolution ( resolution limited to 160 nm or 50 subunits ) , just visualizing a fluorescent spot at the end of a filament by itself does not necessarily mean that the protein is actually interacting at the barbed face of the last terminal subunits at the barbed end . The protein could actually be bound in a 50 subunits – range away from the end , on the side of the filament . In addition , fluorescence label - ing by itself might affect the protein’s binding activity to actin . Finally , in single - molecule imaging , only low amounts of labeled protein can be used to avoid nonspecific adsorption of molecules to the coverslip , as well as to ensure that there is only one fluorescent molecule per unit diffraction - limited detection volume ( approxi - mately nanomolar concentration ; Loveland et al . , 2012 ) . These drawbacks limit its application . In standard open - flowcell setups , analysis of rapid reactions is prevented by the large dead time ( tens of seconds ) between perturbing the sample conditions and record - ing observations . Microfluidics - assisted fluorescence microscopy has helped over - come majority of these limitations and facilitated a high - throughput study of actin kinetics , in particular elucidating the mechanism of inorganic phosphate release in ATP hydrolysis on F - actin ( Jegou et al . , 2011 ) . First , the biochemical conditions to which the filaments are being exposed can be changed in < 1 s dead time , at least 10 - fold faster than in a traditional open - flowcell ; second , growth rates can be monitored in a large range of ligand concentrations . The rapid simultaneous observation of a large filament population ( n > 100 ) leads to straightforward and accurate evaluation of rate constants . Compared to single - molecule fluorescence imaging , this approach also allows working at higher concentrations , except with proteins that strongly adsorb to the surface and may artifactually bind filaments . Volume 27 January 1 , 2016 Role of kinetics in actin motility | 5 Spire , the actin filament cappers , bind the side of a filament , fol - lowed by filament severing and capping of the newly formed barbed end . It will be interesting to know whether applying tension on the filament affects association of gelsolin to the filament . Alternatively , filaments can be bent mechanically . Local filament curvature was found to affect Arp2 / 3 based filament branching ( Risca et al . , 2012 ) . In conclusion , a wealth of new information is expected to come from the application of novel and more extensive kinetic approaches to actin dynamics . Obvious consequences in the structural biology of actin and quantitative modeling of normal and pathological cell processes are anticipated . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Guillaume Romet - Lemonne , Antoine Jégou , Christophe Le Clainche , Sonja Kühn , and Jeff Gelles for helpful discussions . We acknowledge the support of European Research Council Advanced Grant “forcefulactin” 249982 to M . - F . C . REFERENCES Amann KJ , Pollard TD ( 2001 ) . Direct real - time observation of actin filament branching mediated by Arp2 / 3 complex using total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98 , 15009 – 15013 . Bartolini F , Ramalingam N , Gundersen GG ( 2012 ) . Actin - capping protein promotes microtubule stability by antagonizing the actin activity of mDia1 . Mol Biol Cell 23 , 4032 – 4040 . Bombardier JP , Eskin JA , Jaiswal R , Corrêa IR , Xu M - Q , Gelles J , Goode BL ( 2015 ) . Single - molecule visualization of a formin - capping protein “decision complex” at the actin filament barbed end . Nat Commun 6 , 8707 . Breitsprecher D , Jaiswal R , Bombardier JP , Gould CJ , Gelles J , Goode BL ( 2012 ) . Rocket launcher mechanism of collaborative actin assembly defined by single - molecule imaging . Science 336 , 1164 – 1168 . Bubb MR , Yarmola EG , Gibson BG , Southwick FS ( 2003 ) . Depolymerization of actin filaments by profilin . Effects of profilin on capping protein func - tion . J Biol Chem 278 , 24629 – 24635 . Buckley CD , Tan J , Anderson KL , Hanein D , Volkmann N , Weis WI , Nelson WJ , Dunn AR ( 2014 ) . Cell adhesion . The minimal cadherin - catenin complex binds to actin filaments under force . Science 346 , 1254211 . Carlier MF , Laurent V , Santolini J , Melki R , Didry D , Xia GX , Hong Y , Chua NH , Pantaloni D ( 1997 ) . Actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF / cofilin ) en - hances the rate of filament turnover : implication in actin - based motility . J Cell Biol 136 , 1307 – 1322 . Carlier MF , Pernier J , Montaville P , Shekhar S , Kuhn S , Cytoskeleton Dynam - ics and Motility Group ( 2015 ) . Control of polarized assembly of actin filaments in cell motility . Cell Mol Life Sci 72 , 3051 – 3067 . Chesarone M , Gould CJ , Moseley JB , Goode BL ( 2009 ) . Displacement of formins from growing barbed ends by bud14 is critical for actin cable architecture and function . Dev Cell 16 , 292 – 302 . Chesarone - Cataldo M , Guerin C , Yu JH , Wedlich - Soldner R , Blanchoin L , Goode BL ( 2011 ) . The myosin passenger protein Smy1 controls actin cable structure and dynamics by acting as a formin damper . Dev Cell 21 , 217 – 230 . Ciobanasu C , Faivre B , Le Clainche C ( 2014 ) . Actomyosin - dependent forma - tion of the mechanosensitive talin - vinculin complex reinforces actin anchoring . Nat Commun 5 , 3095 . Courtemanche N , Pollard TD ( 2013 ) . Interaction of profilin with the barbed end of actin filaments . Biochemistry 52 , 6456 – 6466 . Detmers P , Weber A , Elzinga M , Stephens RE ( 1981 ) . 7 - Chloro - 4 - nitroben - zeno - 2 - oxa - 1 , 3 - diazole actin as a probe for actin polymerization . J Biol Chem 256 , 99 – 105 . Fujiwara I , Remmert K , Hammer JA 3rd ( 2010 ) . Direct observation of the uncapping of capping protein - capped actin filaments by CARMIL ho - mology domain 3 . J Biol Chem 285 , 2707 – 2720 . Fujiwara I , Remmert K , Piszczek G , Hammer JA ( 2014 ) . Capping protein regu - latory cycle driven by CARMIL and V - 1 may promote actin network as - sembly at protruding edges . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111 , E1970 – E1979 . Graziano BR , DuPage AG , Michelot A , Breitsprecher D , Moseley JB , Sagot I , Blanchoin L , Goode BL ( 2011 ) . Mechanism and cellular function of Bud6 as an actin nucleation - promoting factor . Mol Biol Cell 22 , 4016 – 4028 . Gressin L , Guillotin A , Guerin C , Blanchoin L , Michelot A ( 2015 ) . Architec - ture dependence of actin filament network disassembly . Curr Biol 25 , 1437 – 1447 . Hayakawa K , Tatsumi H , Sokabe M ( 2011 ) . Actin filaments function as a tension sensor by tension - dependent binding of cofilin to the filament . J Cell Biol 195 , 721 – 727 . Jegou A , Carlier MF , Romet - Lemonne G ( 2013 ) . Formin mDia1 senses and generates mechanical forces on actin filaments . Nat Commun 4 , 1883 . Jegou A , Niedermayer T , Orban J , Didry D , Lipowsky R , Carlier MF , Romet - Lemonne G ( 2011 ) . Individual actin filaments in a microfluidic flow reveal the mechanism of ATP hydrolysis and give insight into the properties of profilin . PLoS Biol 9 , e1001161 . Johnston AB , Collins A , Goode BL ( 2015 ) . High - speed depolymerization at actin filament ends jointly catalysed by Twinfilin and Srv2 / CAP . Nat Cell Biol 17 , 1504 – 1511 . Kas J , Strey H , Sackmann E ( 1994 ) . Direct imaging of reptation for semiflex - ible actin filaments . Nature 368 , 226 – 229 . Kinosian HJ , Selden LA , Gershman LC , Estes JE ( 2002 ) . Actin filament barbed end elongation with nonmuscle MgATP - actin and MgADP - actin in the presence of profilin . Biochemistry 41 , 6734 – 6743 . Kouyama T , Mihashi K ( 1981 ) . Fluorimetry study of N - ( 1 - pyrenyl ) iodoacet - amide - labelled F - actin . Local structural change of actin protomer both on polymerization and on binding of heavy meromyosin . Eur J Biochem 114 , 33 – 38 . Kovar DR , Wu JQ , Pollard TD ( 2005 ) . Profilin - mediated competition be - tween capping protein and formin Cdc12p during cytokinesis in fission yeast . Mol Biol Cell 16 , 2313 – 2324 . Kuhn JR , Pollard TD ( 2005 ) . Real - time measurements of actin filament polymerization by total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy . Biophys J 88 , 1387 – 1402 . Le Clainche C , Carlier MF ( 2008 ) . Regulation of actin assembly associ - ated with protrusion and adhesion in cell migration . Physiol Rev 88 , 489 – 513 . Lee CY , Lou J , Wen KK , McKane M , Eskin SG , Ono S , Chien S , Rubenstein PA , Zhu C , McIntire LV ( 2013 ) . Actin depolymerization under force is governed by lysine 113 : glutamic acid 195 - mediated catch - slip bonds . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110 , 5022 – 5027 . Loveland AB , Habuchi S , Walter JC , van Oijen AM ( 2012 ) . A general ap - proach to break the concentration barrier in single - molecule imaging . Nat Methods 9 , 987 – 992 . Lymn RW , Taylor EW ( 1971 ) . Mechanism of adenosine triphosphate hydroly - sis by actomyosin . Biochemistry 10 , 4617 – 4624 . Maciver SK , Zot HG , Pollard TD ( 1991 ) . Characterization of actin filament severing by actophorin from Acanthamoeba castellanii . J Cell Biol 115 , 1611 – 1620 . Mahaffy RE , Pollard TD ( 2006 ) . Kinetics of the formation and dissociation of actin filament branches mediated by Arp2 / 3 complex . Biophys J 91 , 3519 – 3528 . Malm B ( 1984 ) . Chemical modification of Cys - 374 of actin interferes with the formation of the profilactin complex . FEBS Lett 173 , 399 – 402 . Marshall BT , Long M , Piper JW , Yago T , McEver RP , Zhu C ( 2003 ) . Direct observation of catch bonds involving cell - adhesion molecules . Nature 423 , 190 – 193 . Mikati MA , Breitsprecher D , Jansen S , Reisler E , Goode BL ( 2015 ) . Coronin enhances actin filament severing by recruiting cofilin to filament sides and altering F - actin conformation . J Mol Biol 427 , 3137 – 3147 . Miyoshi T , Tsuji T , Higashida C , Hertzog M , Fujita A , Narumiya S , Scita G , Watanabe N ( 2006 ) . Actin turnover - dependent fast dissociation of capping protein in the dendritic nucleation actin network : evidence of frequent filament severing . J Cell Biol 175 , 947 – 955 . Mogilner A , Rubinstein B ( 2005 ) . The physics of filopodial protrusion . Biophys J 89 , 782 – 795 . Montaville P , Jegou A , Pernier J , Compper C , Guichard B , Mogessie B , Schuh M , Romet - Lemonne G , Carlier MF ( 2014 ) . Spire and Formin 2 synergize and antagonize in regulating actin assembly in meiosis by a ping - pong mechanism . PLoS Biol 12 , e1001795 . Moseley JB , Sagot I , Manning AL , Xu Y , Eck MJ , Pellman D , Goode BL ( 2004 ) . A conserved mechanism for Bni1 - and mDia1 - induced actin as - sembly and dual regulation of Bni1 by Bud6 and profilin . Mol Biol Cell 15 , 896 – 907 . Murrell MP , Gardel ML ( 2012 ) . F - actin buckling coordinates contractility and severing in a biomimetic actomyosin cortex . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109 , 20820 – 20825 . 6 | S . Shekhar and M . - F . Carlier Molecular Biology of the Cell Shekhar S , Zhu L , Mazutis L , Sgro AE , Fai TG , Podolski M ( 2014 ) . Quantita - tive biology : where modern biology meets physical sciences . Mol Biol Cell 25 , 3482 – 3485 . Sinnar SA , Antoku S , Saffin JM , Cooper JA , Halpain S ( 2014 ) . Capping pro - tein is essential for cell migration in vivo and for filopodial morphology and dynamics . Mol Biol Cell 25 , 2152 – 2160 . Smith BA , Daugherty - Clarke K , Goode BL , Gelles J ( 2013a ) . Pathway of actin filament branch formation by Arp2 / 3 complex revealed by single - molecule imaging . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110 , 1285 – 1290 . Smith BA , Padrick SB , Doolittle LK , Daugherty - Clarke K , Correa IR Jr , Xu MQ , Goode BL , Rosen MK , Gelles J ( 2013b ) . Three - color single mol - ecule imaging shows WASP detachment from Arp2 / 3 complex triggers actin filament branch formation . Elife 2 , e01008 . Sundd P , Pospieszalska MK , Cheung LS , Konstantopoulos K , Ley K ( 2011 ) . Biomechanics of leukocyte rolling . Biorheology 48 , 1 – 35 . Zigmond SH , Evangelista M , Boone C , Yang C , Dar AC , Sicheri F , Forkey J , Pring M ( 2003 ) . Formin leaky cap allows elongation in the presence of tight capping proteins . Curr Biol 13 , 1820 – 1823 . Nadkarni AV , Brieher WM ( 2014 ) . Aip1 destabilizes cofilin - saturated actin filaments by severing and accelerating monomer dissociation from ends . Curr Biol 24 , 2749 – 2757 . Pernier J , Orban J , Avvaru BS , Jegou A , Romet - Lemonne G , Guichard B , Carlier MF ( 2013 ) . Dimeric WH2 domains in Vibrio VopF promote actin filament barbed - end uncapping and assisted elongation . Nat Struct Mol Biol 20 , 1069 – 1076 . Pernier J , Shekhar S , Jegou A , Guichard B , Carlier M - F ( 2016 ) . Profilin interaction with actin filament barbed end controls dynamic instability , capping , branching and motility . Dev Cell ( in press ) . Risca VI , Wang EB , Chaudhuri O , Chia JJ , Geissler PL , Fletcher DA ( 2012 ) . Actin filament curvature biases branching direction . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109 , 2913 – 2918 . Schafer DA , Jennings PB , Cooper JA ( 1996 ) . Dynamics of capping protein and actin assembly in vitro : uncapping barbed ends by polyphos - phoinositides . J Cell Biol 135 , 169 – 179 . Shekhar S , Kerleau M , Kuhn S , Pernier J , Romet - Lemonne G , Jegou A , Carlier MF ( 2015 ) . Formin and capping protein together embrace the actin filament in a “ménage à trois . ” Nat Commun 6 , 8730 .