Quantifying How Hateful Communities Radicalize Online Users Matheus Schmitz Information Sciences Institute University of Southern California Marina del Rey , USA mschmitz @ usc . edu Goran Muric Information Sciences Institute University of Southern California Marina del Rey , USA gmuric @ isi . edu Keith Burghardt Information Sciences Institute University of Southern California Marina del Rey , USA keithab @ isi . edu Abstract —While online social media offers a way for ignored or stiﬂed voices to be heard , it also allows users a platform to spread hateful speech . Such speech usually originates in fringe communities , yet it can spill over into mainstream channels . In this paper , we measure the impact of joining fringe hateful communities in terms of hate speech propagated to the rest of the social network . We leverage data from Reddit to assess the effect of joining one type of echo chamber : a digital community of like - minded users exhibiting hateful behavior . We measure members’ usage of hate speech outside the studied community before and after they become active participants . Using Interrupted Time Series ( ITS ) analysis as a causal inference method , we gauge the spillover effect , in which hateful language from within a certain community can spread outside that community by using the level of out - of - community hate word usage as a proxy for learned hate . We investigate four different Reddit sub - communities ( subreddits ) covering three areas of hate speech : racism , misogyny and fat - shaming . In all three cases we ﬁnd an increase in hate speech outside the originating community , implying that joining such community leads to a spread of hate speech throughout the platform . Moreover , users are found to pick up this new hateful speech for months after initially joining the community . We show that the harmful speech does not remain contained within the community . Our results provide new evidence of the harmful effects of echo chambers and the potential beneﬁt of moderating them to reduce adoption of hateful speech . I . I NTRODUCTION Social media has recently been implicated in a host of soci - etal dysfunctions , such as extremism , polarization , anti - science rhetoric and dissemination of hate . By allowing individuals with particular interests to connect irrespective of physical distances , the web allowed for the creation of countless niches , some of which can be problematic . Reddit ( www . reddit . com ) is a social media platform that has become one of the most popular meeting places for such interest - based niche groups , where people create thematic forums called “subreddits . ” One negative externality caused by the ease of congregation in the digital world is that users with racist , misogynist , and similarly uncivil views are able to ﬁnd others just like them and form communities dedicated to those harmful stances . The formation of such groups can then serve as breeding ground for further deplorable opinions , which , through an echo chamber between community members , may become even more extreme and alienated from reality and good - citizenry , potentially including ofﬂine hateful behavior . This study aims to answer the following research question : Does becoming active in a hateful subreddit increase a person’s usage of hate speech outside of that subreddit ? Answering that questions will help us understand the impact of hateful communities as originators of hate speech in the platform as a whole . We create a case - controlled quasi - experimental causal study through Interrupted Time Series ( ITS ) design and control - treatment user matching . We generate high - precision hate speech lexicons for multiple communities and domains , which are utilized to obtain the measures of hate speech over time . We then ﬁnd an immediate increase in a user’s hate speech as soon as the user becomes active in the hateful subreddit . The causal nature of ITS models implies that becoming active in a hateful community is the factor leading to an increase in hate speech . We observe a repeated pattern of pre - join ramping up in hate speech , and post - join ramping down in hate speech . These ﬁndings help us understand whether halting access to the most extreme communities can break the pathway in which users , despite being hateful enough to join a hate community , get even further radicalized after becoming active in such communities . II . R ELATED W ORK Hate Speech in Social Media . While it is difﬁcult to devise a uniform deﬁnition of hate speech that is both implementable as a computer program while also satisfying critics [ 34 ] , it has been shown that the main targets for hate speech are groups based on race , behavior ( i . e . insecure people , sensitive people ) and physical appearance [ 29 ] , [ 34 ] . Analysis of both directed and generalized hate speech on Twitter has found that directed hate speech is angrier than generalized hate speech , which in turn is angrier than general tweets [ 12 ] . One measurement of hate speech in politically fringe digital communities estimates that one - quarter of all posts contain some form of hate speech , with 13 . 7 % of posts containing explicit hate speech and 15 . 5 % containing implicit hate speech [ 33 ] . There is a positive association between time spent on Gab ( a far - right social media ) and hate speech [ 13 ] . Further exploration of extremist subreddits reveals how those groups a r X i v : 2209 . 08697v2 [ c s . S I ] 2 O c t 2022 combine the the up - vote / down - vote system , Reddit’s feed algorithm , governance structure , and anonymity , to surface the extremist content within them and promote extreme discourse against opposing groups , while self - validating their views [ 14 ] , [ 16 ] , [ 26 ] . In - Group and Out - Group Behavior on Social Media . Subreddits are distinctive enough that research has shown it is possible to identify subreddits’ posts based on both their style ( 86 . 5 % accuracy ) and topic ( 71 . 1 % accuracy ) [ 36 ] . Moreover , ”the presence of directed political incivility in interactions between dissimilar users tends to discourage further cross - ideological engagement . Conversely , interactions in which ideologically like - minded users engage in derogation of the out - group are less likely to be sustained in the short term” [ 25 ] . Contrasting the aforementioned ﬁndings , in Facebook and Twitter posts about the political out - group were shared more than posts about the in - group , and the number of terms about the out - group increases the odds of a post being shared [ 32 ] . We note group dynamics are not unique to social media , as a singular analog example , research has shown in - group favoritism and out - group derogation among Europeans and Maoris , but for different reasons : ethnic identity for Maoris and social dominance orientation for Europeans [ 19 ] . Hate Speech Identiﬁcation and Prediction . Another direc - tion of research seeks to leverage machine learning to classify and predict hate speech at scale . Successful approaches have leveraged transfer learning [ 1 ] and moderation - minded work [ 17 ] . Multiple researches have built datasets for hate speech identiﬁcation [ 10 ] , [ 27 ] , [ 28 ] , [ 31 ] , in addition to building a dataset , De Gilbert et al . [ 10 ] used Pointwise Mutual Infor - mation ( PMI ) comparison between hateful and non - hateful sentences , ﬁnding the most hateful words are derogatory or refer to targeted groups of hate speech . Moderation of Hate Speech . Various moderation ap - proaches could help reduce the amount of hate speech , in - cluding the banning of high - proﬁle communities on Reddit [ 7 ] , as well as employing somewhat softer alternatives to bans , such as quarantines [ 6 ] , [ 9 ] . Quarantines also led a portion of the communities’ members to leave Reddit for more lightly regulated platforms , which merely forwards the issue of handling hate speech to another platform [ 9 ] . Those ﬁndings corroborate with previous study showing that sub - reddits inﬂuence one another , and thus intervention in one subreddit can be expected to have additional effects on other subreddits , especially those with a large shared user - base [ 39 ] . After a subreddit’s ban , top users become less active while most users reduced their community - derived language without a reduction in activity . Moreover explicitly racist communities had a stronger reduction in activity from bans than dark humor communities [ 37 ] . Previous research also shows that hateful users differ from regular users , e . g . , in their vocabulary as well as engagement [ 8 ] , hence to the extend top users of hateful subreddits are the most hateful users , this can at least partly explain the diverging fates of the top users in relation to regular members . III . M ETHODS A . Identifying Communities of Interest To select the communities of interest we identify subreddits that were known to be a breeding ground for hateful speech . We used previously published research on hateful communities on Reddit and selected the following subreddits : r / GreatApes , r / CoonTown , r / Incels and r / fatpeoplehate as they appear to be the most notorious ones [ 7 ] , [ 16 ] , [ 22 ] . All the selected subreddits were already banned when we started our analysis . B . Hate Speech Lexicons We employ a pragmatic deﬁnition of hate speech , with the intent of making hate speech detection a problem that can be deﬁned in algorithms and computational tasks . We broadly deﬁne hate speech as usage of words that direct hate and derogation towards a speciﬁc group of people based on their gender , appearance , or some other characteristic . We create a corpus of candidate hate words by employing Sparse Additive Generative Models of Text ( SAGE ) [ 11 ] to compare all posts within each studied subreddit versus a global sample corpus for all of Reddit . The global Reddit corpus contains a sampling of content published through the entire platform to serve as a baseline of speech over all of Reddit . It consists of 10GB of randomly crawled posts , which were obtained directly through the Reddit API’s “fetch random“ functionality , and includes both submissions and comments . The subreddit speciﬁc corpus contains all posts made inside the studied subreddit . We remove stopwords from both corpora . Many hate words are slangs which are not well handled by stemming or lemmatizing , hence we do not apply any such techniques . SAGE then calculates the most distinctive words for the target corpus , which provides a list of unigrams mostly characterizing of each subreddit . We select the top 300 candidate words and use a 3 - rater system , where the authors of this paper served as the raters . Each rater independently classiﬁed each candidate word as “0 - Not a hate word” , “1 - Might be a hate word” , and “2 - Always a hate word” . The purpose of this approach is to reﬂect that certain speech cannot be certainly classiﬁed as hateful in the absence of context [ 5 ] , [ 30 ] . We then sum up the ratings and select only words which score 4 or above to form each subreddits’ hate speech lexicon , ensuring words are likely to be hate words . These lexicons allows us to calculate the level of hate speech - the number of hate words divided by the number of all words used by a user . The level of hate speech is calculated for each user for each day the user has been active on the platform . This approach to lexicon construction has the upside of allowing us to capture hate speech that is unusual and in - group speciﬁc , thus oftentimes being encrypted to the general population and hence masked from generalized lexicons [ 15 ] , [ 38 ] . C . Data Collection Treatment Data . To obtain the post history for all active members of each hateful subreddit we used the PushShift API [ 3 ] to crawl all available submissions and comments made on each subreddit . Once all available data was obtained , we then parse through the data and obtain the usernames of all users who posted on each subreddit , those will be the treatment samples for our analysis . Having the usernames we once again leverage PushShift to now crawl the entire posting history for those users . We seek to remove automated posting bots from our sample by searching usernames for the following keywords : ”bot” , ”auto” , ”transcriber” , ”gif” , ”link” , ”twitter” , which were obtained by manual inspection of usernames in the largest ﬁles crawled . We manually analyze the usernames matching those keywords by inspecting a sample of their Reddit posts and subsequently remove accounts identiﬁed as bots . For each subreddit this resulted in the removal of few accounts ( < 1 % ) , yet always at least the top 5 accounts by activity levels were removed , as they were consistently bots . The resulting dataset contain 3140 members of r / GreatApes , 8927 members of r / CoonTown , 17859 members of r / Incels , and 21465 members of r / fatpeoplehate . Control Data . To increase the probability of choosing ”similar” users in the control sample , the control candidates are selected from users who are likely to share the topics of interest with the treatment users . Therefore , we select control candidates from the users who are the members of the subreddits frequently visited by the treatment candidates as well , but not members of the studied hateful subreddit itself . We refer to them as the ”control subreddits” 1 . To identify the ”control subreddits” we ﬁnd subreddits that have the high proportion of already identiﬁed treatment users . That way we select the top 30 ”control subreddits” . We then gather all users active on those subreddits as the set of candidate control users . Banned Subreddits . With the goal of producing additional analyses , we obtain a non - exhaustive list of banned subreddits . Reddit does not divulge its bans , and hence all information comes from user generated content and self - reports . The gath - ering process was entirely manual and consisted of browsing Reddit itself for posts compiling subreddit bans . Given the nature of the data gathering process , prominent bans and bans of large subreddits are more likely to be featured in our set . In total we obtained 3515 subreddits reported to be banned . D . Matching Using Mahalanobis distance - based matching [ 35 ] , we ﬁnd a 1 : 1 pairing between treatment users and control candidates , such that the control candidates which are most similar to treatment users are selected . We limit our set of treatment users to 15k users , randomly chosen amongst all active subreddit members , and limit the control candidates to a 5 : 1 ratio on the actual number of treatment users obtained . We considered the following set of features : account cre - ation date , Reddit karma ( sum of all up - votes minus all down - votes ) , total number of submissions , total number of comments , and the count of posts made in each of the top 50 subreddits ( those with the highest ratio of treatment members , as per 1 Not to be confused with the control users . ”control subreddits” are used as an aid to identify control users that are likely to match with the treatment users . the list generated when deﬁning the subreddits from which to sample control candidates ) . To ensure that the matching procedure does not inﬂuence the later analyses , matching only considers users’ behavior ( i . e . features ) prior to the moment they join the hateful subreddit , as joining is akin to beginning treatment [ 18 ] . The matching algorithm uses the following procedure : ( 1 ) select a treatment user , ( 2 ) check in which month that user became active on the hateful subreddit , ( 3 ) consider that user’s features and the control candidates’ features on the month prior to the activation month , ( 4 ) ﬁnd the most similar control candidate via Mahalanobis distance matching , ( 5 ) store a triplet of ( treatment , control , distance ) , ( 6 ) move to next treatment user . Once the algorithm stops we have obtained a set of control users that equals the treatment users in number and is as similar to the pre - treatment treatment users as possible . We center treatment user data such that day 0 is the day each user became active in the hateful subreddit ( i . e . , when the treatment began ) . For control users their day 0 is the same as that assigned to their matched treatment user . This means both users in a given { treatment user , control user } pair have the same day 0 , but the centering date differs between pairs . E . Interrupted Time Series ITS is a subset of Regression Discontinuity Design models which emphasizes speciﬁcally the modelling of effects over a continuous time period . It is well established and regarded for its usage in causal modeling in various ﬁelds . [ 4 ] , [ 18 ] , [ 23 ] . Throughout this analysis , for the treatment user data we consider only the posts outside the studied subreddit , as we seek to understand the effects that joining one community has in the users’ behavior outside of that community , and to control for in - group speciﬁc behavior . Additionally , the hate speech lexicons are overﬁt to each studied subreddit , which could affect results if the target subreddit was not removed from the treatment users data . The treatment subreddit is by deﬁnition not present in the data for control users . ITS requires deﬁning how many days around the treatment date ( before and after ) will be considered by the model . This analysis period is known as the bandwidth and current best - practices involve the use of cross - validation to ﬁnd the optimal bandwidth [ 20 ] , [ 24 ] . Since we must be careful not to overﬁt the bandwidth choice to the treatment being analyzed , this procedure is done only on data prior to the treatment date ( day 0 ) . The cross - validation procedure consists of selecting several bandwidths to try ( e . g . 30 , 50 , or 100 days ) , deﬁning how many cross - validation rounds to run ( e . g . 10 , 25 , 100 ) , and an evaluation metric suitable for leave - one - out samples , with RMSE being the recommended choice and the one used in this analysis [ 21 ] . Then the cross - validation process works as follows : For a bandwidth of 50 days , with 10 cross - validation rounds , we would then ﬁt a linear regression to days - 51 to - 2 and use the model to predict the proportion of hate speech on day - 1 , then ﬁt a regression on days - 52 to - 3 and predict on day - 2 , repeated up to predicting on day - 10 [ 2 ] . From that set of predictions and known truth values we can then calculate the cross - validation RMSE for a given bandwidth . After iterating though all bandwidths , we select the one with the smallest RMSE . Under this procedure , testing bandwidths in the range [ 30 , 365 ] in increments of 5 days , and using 100 cross - validation rounds , we ﬁnd the optimal bandwidths for each of the studied subreddits to be : r / GreatApes = 85 days ; r / CoonTown = 30 days ; r / fatpeoplehate = 55 days ; r / Incels = 310 days . Bandwidths below 30 days were not studied due to their lower statistical power . Model Construction . We ﬁt a single Ordinary Least Squares ( OLS ) regression model to the entire dataset while using dummy variables to indicate which samples belong to the treatment and control groups , and which samples belong to the pre - and post - treatment groups [ 21 ] . In ITS lingo the treatment group is referred to as exposed , such that exposed = 0 means control group and exposed = 1 means treatment group . The break - point in the time dimension when users begin to be treated is represented by the variable interrupted , such that interrupted = 0 means pre - treatment and interrupted = 1 means post - treatment . In our case all samples up to but not including day 0 are pre - treatment samples ( interrupted = 0 ) , and all samples from day 0 ( inclusive ) onward are post - treatment samples ( interrupted = 1 ) . The OLS regression also includes the continuous time variable , as well as all possible interaction terms between the three aforementioned variables ( exposed , interrupted , and time ) . The resulting set of coefﬁcients is shown in Table I . Wald’s F - test shows all ﬁtted models are statistically signiﬁcant ( p - value < 10 − 20 ) . Parameter Meaning const Pre - treatment baseline time Pre - treatment trend expos Incremental baseline for the treatment group inter Incremental baseline after treatment time × expos Incremental trend for the treatment group time × inter Incremental trend after treatment expos × inter Incremental baseline on treatment group after treatment time × expos × inter Incremental trend for the treatment group after treatment TABLE I : Interpretation of coefﬁcients obtained from the ITS model Model Interpretation . The coefﬁcients in Table I can be used to measure the relative increase in hate speech , deﬁned as the difference between pre - treatment and post - treatment hate speech divided by the pre - treatment hate speech . For treatment users , the pre / post gap can be measured by inter + expos × inter , whereas the pre - treatment hate speech is deﬁned as const + expos . This relative measure looks at the instantaneous effect of joining the treatment subreddit , that is , it leverages the ITS’s best estimate for the immediate increase that happens as a result of joining , while being unaffected by time - related trends in the data . Sensitivity Analysis . We perform sensitivity analysis by ﬁtting several OLS regression models using all bandwidths in the [ 30 , 365 ] range and then observing the coefﬁcients for each of the ITS features as well as the corresponding p - values . This helps ensure that the results being considered are not outliers resultant from a very speciﬁc bandwidth size , and shows that all measured coefﬁcients converge to consistent values regardless of bandwidth size . Sensitivity analysis conﬁrms one challenge of ITS which was already to be expected : When using a small bandwidth the model is built with few samples , resulting in large variance and thus high p - values on the t - tests of individual coefﬁcients . Then , as the bandwidth size increases the conﬁdence intervals and p - values shrink . IV . R ESULTS The initial analyses show that the users who joined hateful subreddits will increase their usage of hateful speech outside of that subreddit by an average of ≈ 30 % immediately after joining . This estimate was made by using the indi - vidual coefﬁcients obtained from the ITS model , and the pre / post gap measurement explained in the Model Analysis section under Methods . In more detail , users who joined r / CoonTown show the smallest increase in hate speech outside of r / CoonTown with just 3 % average increase , while the users who joined other three subreddits display substantially larger increase in hate speech usage with 38 % , 40 % , and 30 % for r / fatpeoplehate , r / GreatApes and r / Incels respectively . The relative increase in hate speech immediately after users join the hateful subreddit is illustrated in Figure 1 . Values are measured as the percentage increase of the users’ hate speech immediately post - join compared to their immediately pre - join hate speech levels . Fig . 1 : Relative increase in the rates of hate speech immedi - ately after users join the hateful subreddit , as obtained from ITS model In addition to the immediate increase measured , there are further insights to be observed from plotting the results of the ITS model over time , as shown in Figure 2 . For each studied subreddit , combining the dummy variables ( see Methods ) through all possible interaction terms allows a single ITS model to generate four regression best - ﬁt estimates of hate speech , both for treatment and control users , on both pre - and post - treatment periods . It is not surprising that the users in the treatment group ( those who joined hateful subreddits ) already had a relatively high rate of hate speech before joining the hateful subreddits compared to the control users . Still , the treatment groups show signiﬁcant increase in rates of hate speech after joining the hateful subreddits , while the control users show no change . Such difference in trends suggests that joining the hateful subreddit has a major effect on the rate of hate speech expressed by the users who joined . - 10 - 5 0 5 10 0 . 00 % 0 . 10 % 0 . 20 % 0 . 30 % H a t e Sp ee c h GreatApes - 4 - 2 0 2 4 0 . 00 % 0 . 05 % 0 . 10 % 0 . 15 % 0 . 20 % CoonTown - 40 - 20 0 20 40 Week 0 . 00 % 0 . 02 % 0 . 04 % 0 . 06 % H a t e Sp ee c h Incels - 8 - 6 - 4 - 2 0 2 4 6 Week 0 . 00 % 0 . 01 % 0 . 02 % 0 . 03 % 0 . 04 % fatpeoplehate Treatment Users ( Model ) Control Users ( Model ) User Joined Subreddit Treatment Users Control Users Fig . 2 : Interrupted Time Series plots for the studied subreddits . From the plots we observe that , with varying intensities , treatment groups were already ramping up their hate speech before they joined the hateful subreddit . ITS design still allows us to conclude that the joining of that hate subreddit increases the user’s hate speech immediately , but this trend nevertheless raises questions regarding what drives users to become members of hateful communities at the ﬁrst place . From the ITS model , we observe a post - join downwards trend , indicating that the immediate post - join hate speech spike wanes over time , although at the end of the analysis period all subreddits were still above the hate speech values observed at the beginning of the analysis period . Fixing the hate speech baseline to the start of the analysis period , the end - of - period hate speech values saw increases of 189 % , 10 % , 25 % and 320 % for r / GreatApes , r / CoonTown , r / Incels , and r / fatpeoplehate respectively . To ensure the ITS model shows robust results regardless of the time bandwidth , we additionally performed a Sensitivity Analysis ( see Methods ) . Here , we vary the bandwidth and observe the change of various model coefﬁcients . Across all bandwidths we observe a high p - value ( > 0 . 05 ) in the three parameters that measure external effects occurring on all users : time , inter , and time × inter . Those high p - values suggest that the we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the true values of aforementioned variables are zero . Since the three coefﬁcients obtained by ITS model are statistically indistinguishable from zero , we assume that we do not have evidence for any signiﬁcant global ( external ) effects acting on all users , as those effects would be captured by the three aforementioned variables . Hence we conclude the control users express no change in their hate speech over time . This implies all measured effects are resultants of treatment users joining the hateful subreddit . The action of joining , denoted as the expos variable and its interaction terms , is the only difference between treatments and controls . In summary , thanks to the sensitivity analysis we show that the observed results are replicable across bandwidths , and not merely a by - product of an overﬁt optimal bandwidth . We can observe a downwards trend in the treatment group post - joining . Given Reddit’s active role in moderation , this downwards trend can , at least partially , result from Reddit’s banning of individual users , which likely targets the most egregious offenders - those that most elevate the group’s hate speech . Considering this common practice of banning users who express uncivil behavior , the average hate speech for the group is expected to decrease over time as only samples for the non - banned less - hateful members are still available . To test this hypothesis we analyze the link between hate speech level and account lifespan – the time an account is active on Reddit . We measure the average post - join hate speech for users who quit Reddit in less than one year after joining the studied subreddit and compare them to the users who stay longer . We observe that accounts with a longer lifespan have a lower average hate speech , as shown in Table II . Subreddit Up to 365 days Over 365 days r / GreatApes 0 . 421 % 0 . 140 % r / CoonTown 0 . 465 % 0 . 101 % r / fatpeoplehate 0 . 130 % 0 . 001 % r / Incels 0 . 083 % 0 . 029 % TABLE II : Average post - join hate speech for users with short and long lifespans on Reddit , as measured by the date of their last post in all of Reddit in relation to their becoming active on the hateful subreddit . Complementarily , we leverage our data to explore hate speech trends over time for an expanded set of contexts in which treatment users can be found . We analyze the hate speech in the following scenarios : in all subreddits , inside the treatment subreddit , outside the treatment subreddit , inside banned subreddits and inside non - banned subreddits . The plots illustrating the rate of hate speech of treatment users over time are shown in Figure 3 . While effect sizes vary based on each subreddit and its unique lexicon , we generally observe that treatment users al - ready had higher hate speech levels in the “banned subreddits“ category , and that after joining the studied hateful subreddit , their hate speech displays a visually noticeable increase in the banned subreddits category . It also increases in the “all“ category , which is to be expected since this includes the hateful subreddit itself . Hate speech trends in the non - banned set closely tracks that of the outside set , which is to be expected as those are highly overlapping . Yet it is noteworthy that the time - series of both sets are still visually above that of the control set . 0 . 0 % 1 . 0 % 2 . 0 % 3 . 0 % GreatApes 0 . 0 % 0 . 5 % 1 . 0 % 1 . 5 % 2 . 0 % CoonTown - 20 - 10 0 10 20 Week 0 . 0 % 0 . 1 % 0 . 2 % 0 . 3 % 0 . 4 % Incels - 20 - 10 0 10 20 Week 0 . 0 % 0 . 2 % 0 . 4 % 0 . 6 % fatpeoplehate Treatment Users Inside Subreddit Treatment Users Outside Subreddit Treatment Users in All Subreddits Treatment Users in Not Banned Subreddits Treatment Users in Banned Subreddits Control Users User Joined Treatment Subreddit Fig . 3 : Temporal characteristics of expressed hate speech for treatment and control users in various scenarios . All analysis were done based on the custom lexicons developed during this study . Figure 4 illustrates the lexi - cons’ most frequently written hate words in the in - group and out - group settings , considering posts after the users became active members of the hateful subreddit . We compare both distributions via a Spearman Rank Correlation test , which measures the monotonicity of the relationship between two datasets , here represented as the in - group and out - group word distributions . For all four subreddits studied the test obtained a p - value below 0 . 05 , meaning we can reject the hypothesis that both word distributions are generated by the same underlying system . This conﬁrms there is a difference in the distributions with which hate words are chosen when communicating to the in - group versus out - group . When looking at racism lexicons , the usage of the n - word nearly doubles when members are communicating with the in - group . Similarly signiﬁcant increases happen with other highly offensive words such as “obeast“ in the fat - shaming context . We also observe a reduction in group slang such as “sheboon“ and “roastie“ when speaking outside the hateful community . This effect happens across all categories of hate speech studied . Conversely , the out - group data shows an in - crease in derogatory - yet - not - as - societally - shunned terms such as “fatlogic“ and “fag“ . In summary , discoursing in the out - group displays a relative toning - down of the most offensive words and of insider slangs , counter - weighted by a relative increase in milder hate words . Inside Outside GreatApes n * * * r nig groid negro sheboon nigga faggot retard bitches other Inside Outside CoonTown n * * * r nig dindu faggot sheboon nigga niglet fag other Inside Outside fatpeoplehate fattie hams obeast haes lard fatass fatlogic fas other 0 % 20 % 40 % 60 % 80 % 100 % Inside Outside Incels whore slut cunt roastie fho slutty fag other Fig . 4 : Distributions of the most frequent hate words used inside and outside of each observed subreddit V . D ISCUSSION Through a robust ITS analysis we were able to identify a signiﬁcant increase in hate speech resulting from joining subreddits known for their toxicity . This increase was observed outside of the community which incited it , thus implying a spread of hate arising from joining hateful communities . When analyzing the ITS models in Figure 2 , we noted that there is an upwards trend in hate speech that predates the moment when treatment users become active members of the hate community . It seems probable that that users were already becoming attracted to that speciﬁc thematic , perhaps already being passive members of the studied community , known in Reddit lingo as ”lurkers” , or users who read a subreddit’s forum but do not engage in discussion . Due to dataset lim - itations , we measure the treatment start as the date in which a user made a ﬁrst post in the studied subreddit . There is a looming possibility that treatment users were already lurkers before becoming active , and thus their external behavior had already began reﬂecting their increasing extremism . Additionally , we observe a downward trends in the treatment group post - joining . We ﬁnd an evidence for a link between the decreased hate speech and the accounts’ lifespan . The lifespan is affected by either a voluntary abandonment of accounts created for usage on the hateful community , or banning by Reddit , although our data does not permit to differentiate amongst those possibilities . Besides the effects of Reddit’s banning polices , that were brieﬂy explored in this study , there could be other reasons for such phenomenon . A commonplace explanation could be a simple regression to the mean – a phenomenon in which those performing extremely well or extremely poorly ( outliers ) tend to move closer to the mean over time . Further research is needed to conﬁrm this hypothesis . When looking at the percentage of hate speech produced by the members of the studied hateful subreddits in various contexts , it is observable that those users’ hate speech also increases in other subreddits that were also eventually banned at a later date as illustrated in Figure 3 . We can see an expected connection between a subreddit adopting hateful words , and a probability of it being banned . Moreover , since a subreddit cannot adopt hate words after it is already banned , it must be that the adoption of hate words precedes the ban , although this analysis cannot necessarily prove that the adoption causes the ban . Regarding hate speech vocabulary , in Figure 4 we observe clear differences in hate word choices when subreddit mem - bers express themselves inside versus outside the community . Those differences were conﬁrmed by a Spearman Rank Corre - lation test . We observe that users choose more “insider“ hate words within their community , but less frequently bring these slang to the outside world , which is in line with some previous ﬁndings [ 37 ] . Such behavior might be one way of evoking group membership , by displaying knowledge of the group’s unique vocabulary , which has been shown to entice greater responsiveness from the community [ 36 ] . The converse is also true , where users who employ more obscure in - group language outside of their group might simply ﬁnd low engagement in other forums , either due to the out - group’s disinterest in a foreign cause , or simply due to others inability to comprehend messaging laden with group - speciﬁc language . Both scenarios would discourage the usage of group - speciﬁc language in favor of a more commonplace vocabulary and style when communicating outside of the users’ community . From a qualitative perspective , in both the racist and the fat - shaming communities there appears to be a toning - down on the relative usage of the most egregiously offensive words , such as the n - word and “obeast“ , when communicating out - of - community . A possible reason to explain this is that even hate group members are still somewhat affected by society’s pressure towards civility . A secondary factor might once again be moderation , as those who chose the most offensive words in the out - group would be at higher likelihood of having their posting ability blocked , thus halting their spread of such vocabulary . From observing four different subreddits , covering three categories of hate speech , we have shown a causal relationship between a user becoming active in the community and the user’s hate speech increasing immediately after . Such negative externality that arises from the growth of hateful communities makes a case for stronger moderation of such communities , an area where quarantining subreddits shows some promise . In general these ﬁndings corroborate with previous research [ 7 ] , [ 37 ] that suggests positive hate reducing effects can be obtained by restraining such hateful communities . VI . C ONCLUSION In this paper we presented a causal inference analysis of the impact that joining a hateful subreddit has on a user’s ensuing hate speech in other subreddits . We looked at Reddit , one of the major social media platforms , and discover that the hate speech increases as an effect of joining hateful subreddits . We ﬁnd the positive effects in three different categories of hate speech : racism , misogyny and fat - shaming . This study displays novelty for using causal modeling to understand the inﬂuence of social media in hate speech , especially by leveraging ITS design to identify the effects . Additionally , we perform the sensitivity analyses by exploring the optimal time bandwidths and assessing the modulating effects of different time bandwidths on calculated effect sizes . However , potential limitations warrant consideration . Our ﬁndings indicate that despite the matching technique em - ployed , there were still pre - existing differences between the treatment and control groups , which stem at least in part from the need of matching without using the target variable , as commonly expected from such approaches [ 18 ] . This causes the treatment group to have a higher baseline hate speech level , measured as const + expos . Nevertheless the ITS model utilized is robust to different baselines by including a control group precisely to allow measurement of such extraneous effects . The approach to lexicon construction or the choice of lexicon usage can also have an impact in the analyses as hate speech is not binary , but rather covers an entire spectrum , from positively talking about the out - group , passing through mild - offenses and ending in a toxic discourse . Certain outlets might be more conducive to different extents of hate speech and thus differences could be found when lexicons differ . We were also limited in our data availability , as it is only possible to measure a user’s active actions , namely posting and commenting . This constraint makes analysing the effects of passive content consumption challenging . Similarly , we only study four subreddits , and the additional analyses is needed to assess the generality of our conclusions in Reddit and other social media platforms . Given the inability to obtain data regarding when a user formally chooses to become member of a subreddit , nor data regarding which posts were being read by a user , the current approach could not investigate if those relate to the observed pre - join upwards trend , thus leaving opportunity for future work . The mirror case is also true , exploration of what is driving the treatment users speech downwards after joining the hateful subreddit could unearth additional information to be leveraged in combating hate speech . A CKNOWLEDGEMENTS Funding for this work is provided through the USC - ISI Exploratory Research Award and through DARPA ( Award # HR0011260595 and # HR001121C0169 ) C ONFLICTS OF I NTEREST The authors declare no conﬂicts of interest . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] Hind Almerekhi , Supervised by Bernard J Jansen , and co - supervised by Haewoon Kwak . Investigating toxicity across multiple reddit com - munities , users , and moderators . In Companion proceedings of the web conference 2020 , pages 294 – 298 , 2020 . [ 2 ] Katherine Baicker and Theodore Svoronos . Testing the validity of the single interrupted time series design . ERN : Hypothesis Testing ( Topic ) , 2019 . [ 3 ] Jason Baumgartner , Savvas Zannettou , Brian Keegan , Megan Squire , and Jeremy Blackburn . The pushshift reddit dataset . CoRR , abs / 2001 . 08435 , 2020 . [ 4 ] Matias D . Cattaneo , Nicol´as Idrobo , and Roc´ıo Titiunik . A Practical In - troduction to Regression Discontinuity Designs : Foundations . Elements in Quantitative and Computational Methods for the Social Sciences . Cambridge University Press , 2020 . [ 5 ] Carmen Cervone , Martha Augoustinos , and Anne Maass . The language of derogation and hate : Functions , consequences , and reappropriation . Journal of language and social psychology , 40 ( 1 ) : 80 – 101 , 2021 . [ 6 ] Eshwar Chandrasekharan , Shagun Jhaver , Amy Bruckman , and Eric Gilbert . Quarantined ! examining the effects of a community - wide moderation intervention on reddit . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . , 29 ( 4 ) , mar 2022 . [ 7 ] Eshwar Chandrasekharan , Umashanthi Pavalanathan , Anirudh Srini - vasan , Adam Glynn , Jacob Eisenstein , and Eric Gilbert . You can’t stay here : The efﬁcacy of reddit’s 2015 ban examined through hate speech . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , 1 ( CSCW ) , dec 2017 . [ 8 ] Despoina Chatzakou , Nicolas Kourtellis , Jeremy Blackburn , Emiliano De Cristofaro , Gianluca Stringhini , and Athena Vakali . Hate is not binary : Studying abusive behavior of # gamergate on twitter . In Proceed - ings of the 28th ACM Conference on Hypertext and Social Media , HT ’17 , page 65 – 74 , New York , NY , USA , 2017 . Association for Computing Machinery . [ 9 ] Simon Copland . Reddit quarantined : Can changing platform affordances reduce hateful material online ? Internet Policy Review , 9 ( 4 ) : 1 – 26 , 2020 . [ 10 ] Ona De Gibert , Naiara Perez , Aitor Garc´ıa - Pablos , and Montse Cuadros . Hate speech dataset from a white supremacy forum . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1809 . 04444 , 2018 . [ 11 ] Jacob Eisenstein , Amr Ahmed , and Eric P . Xing . Sparse additive generative models of text . In ICML , 2011 . [ 12 ] Mai ElSherief , Vivek Kulkarni , Dana Nguyen , William Yang Wang , and Elizabeth Belding . Hate lingo : A target - based linguistic analysis of hate speech in social media . In Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media , volume 12 , 2018 . [ 13 ] John Gallacher and Jonathan Bright . Hate contagion : Measuring the spread and trajectory of hate on social media . ArXiv , 2021 . [ 14 ] Tiana Gaudette , Ryan Scrivens , Garth Davies , and Richard Frank . Upvoting extremism : Collective identity formation and the extreme right on reddit . New Media & Society , 23 ( 12 ) : 3491 – 3508 , 2021 . [ 15 ] Ysabel Gerrard . Beyond the hashtag : Circumventing content moderation on social media . New Media & Society , 20 ( 12 ) : 4492 – 4511 , 2018 . [ 16 ] Kelly C Gothard . Exploring incel language and subreddit activity on reddit . University of Vermont , 2020 . [ 17 ] Hussam Habib , Maaz Bin Musa , Fareed Zaffar , and Rishab Nithyanand . Are proactive interventions for reddit communities feasible ? arXiv preprint arXiv : 2111 . 11019 , 2021 . [ 18 ] Dae Woong Ham and Luke Miratrix . Beneﬁts and costs of matching prior to a difference in differences analysis when parallel trends does not hold , 2022 . [ 19 ] Logan Hamley , Carla A Houkamau , Danny Osborne , Fiona Kate Bar - low , and Chris G Sibley . Ingroup love or outgroup hate ( or both ) ? mapping distinct bias proﬁles in the population . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 46 ( 2 ) : 171 – 188 , 2020 . [ 20 ] Guido W . Imbens and Thomas Lemieux . Regression discontinuity designs : A guide to practice . Journal of Econometrics , 142 ( 2 ) : 615 – 635 , 2008 . The regression discontinuity design : Theory and applications . [ 21 ] Robin T . Jacob , Pei Zhu , Marie - Andr ´ ee Somers , and Howard S . Bloom . A Practical Guide to Regression Discontinuity , 2012 . [ 22 ] Kaitlyn Ko , Keith Burghardt , and Goran Muric . Enter at your own risk : The impacts of joining a hateful subreddit . In 2021 IEEE 18th International Conference on Mobile Ad Hoc and Smart Systems ( MASS ) , pages 657 – 658 , 2021 . [ 23 ] David S Lee and Thomas Lemieux . Regression discontinuity designs in economics . Working Paper 14723 , National Bureau of Economic Research , February 2009 . [ 24 ] Jens Ludwig and Douglas L Miller . Does head start improve children’s life chances ? evidence from a regression discontinuity design . Working Paper 11702 , National Bureau of Economic Research , October 2005 . [ 25 ] Nahema Marchal . The polarizing potential of intergroup affect in online political discussions : Evidence from reddit r / politics . Politics ( July 10 , 2020 ) , 2020 . [ 26 ] Adrienne Massanari . # gamergate and the fappening : How reddit’s algorithm , governance , and culture support toxic technocultures . New Media & Society , 19 ( 3 ) : 329 – 346 , 2017 . [ 27 ] Binny Mathew , Punyajoy Saha , Seid Muhie Yimam , Chris Biemann , Pawan Goyal , and Animesh Mukherjee . Hatexplain : A bench - mark dataset for explainable hate speech detection . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2012 . 10289 , 2020 . [ 28 ] Ioannis Mollas , Zoe Chrysopoulou , Stamatis Karlos , and Grigorios Tsoumakas . Ethos : an online hate speech detection dataset . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2006 . 08328 , 2020 . [ 29 ] Mainack Mondal , Leandro Ara´ujo Silva , and Fabr´ıcio Benevenuto . A measurement study of hate speech in social media . In Proceedings of the 28th ACM Conference on Hypertext and Social Media , HT ’17 , page 85 – 94 , New York , NY , USA , 2017 . Association for Computing Machinery . [ 30 ] S¨unje Paasch - Colberg , Christian Strippel , Joachim Trebbe , and Martin Emmer . From insult to hate speech : Mapping offensive language in german user comments on immigration . Media and Communication , 9 ( 1 ) : 171 – 180 , 2021 . [ 31 ] Jing Qian , Anna Bethke , Yinyin Liu , Elizabeth Belding , and William Yang Wang . A benchmark dataset for learning to intervene in online hate speech . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1909 . 04251 , 2019 . [ 32 ] Steve Rathje , Jay J Van Bavel , and Sander van der Linden . Out - group animosity drives engagement on social media . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 118 ( 26 ) , 2021 . [ 33 ] Diana Rieger , Anna Sophie K¨umpel , Maximilian Wich , Toni Kiening , and Georg Groh . Assessing the extent and types of hate speech in fringe communities : A case study of alt - right communities on 8chan , 4chan , and reddit . Social Media + Society , 7 ( 4 ) : 20563051211052906 , 2021 . [ 34 ] Leandro Silva , Mainack Mondal , Denzil Correa , Fabr´ıcio Benevenuto , and Ingmar Weber . Analyzing the targets of hate in online social media . In Tenth international AAAI conference on web and social media , 2016 . [ 35 ] Elizabeth A . Stuart . Matching methods for causal inference : A review and a look forward . Statistical science : a review journal of the Institute of Mathematical Statistics , 25 1 : 1 – 21 , 2010 . [ 36 ] Trang Tran and Mari Ostendorf . Characterizing the language of online communities and its relation to community reception . In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro - cessing , pages 1030 – 1035 , Austin , Texas , November 2016 . Association for Computational Linguistics . [ 37 ] Milo Z Trujillo , Samuel F Rosenblatt , Guillermo de Anda J´auregui , Emily Moog , Briane Paul V Samson , Laurent H´ebert - Dufresne , and Allison M Roth . When the echo chamber shatters : Examining the use of community - speciﬁc language post - subreddit ban . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2106 . 16207 , 2021 . [ 38 ] Tamara van der Does , Mirta Galesic , Zackary Okun Dunivin , and Paul E . Smaldino . Strategic identity signaling in heterogeneous networks . Pro - ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 119 ( 10 ) : e2117898119 , 2022 . [ 39 ] Savvas Zannettou , Tristan Caulﬁeld , Emiliano De Cristofaro , Nicolas Kourtelris , Ilias Leontiadis , Michael Sirivianos , Gianluca Stringhini , and Jeremy Blackburn . The web centipede : Understanding how web communities inﬂuence each other through the lens of mainstream and alternative news sources . In Proceedings of the 2017 Internet Measurement Conference , IMC ’17 , page 405 – 417 , New York , NY , USA , 2017 . Association for Computing Machinery .