Molecular mechanism of membrane constriction and tubulation mediated by the F - BAR protein Pacsin / Syndapin Qi Wang a , Marcos V . A . S . Navarro a , Gary Peng a , Evan Molinelli a , Shih Lin Goh a , Bret L . Judson b , Kanagalaghatta R . Rajashankar c , and Holger Sondermann a , 1 a Department of Molecular Medicine , College of Veterinary Medicine , Cornell University , Ithaca , NY 14853 ; b Weill Institute for Cell and Molecular Biology , Cornell University , Ithaca , NY 14853 ; and c Northeastern Collaborative Access Team , Building 436 , Argonne National Laboratory , Argonne , IL 60439 Edited by Pietro V . De Camilli , Yale University School of Medicine , New Haven , CT , and approved April 30 , 2009 ( received for review March 19 , 2009 ) Peripheral membrane proteins of the Bin / amphiphysin / Rvs ( BAR ) and Fer - CIP4 homology - BAR ( F - BAR ) family participate in cellular membrane trafﬁcking and have been shown to generate mem - brane tubules . The degree of membrane bending appears to be encoded in the structure and immanent curvature of the particular protein domains , with BAR and F - BAR domains inducing high - and low - curvature tubules , respectively . In addition , oligomerization and the formation of ordered arrays inﬂuences tubule stabiliza - tion . Here , the F - BAR domain - containing protein Pacsin was found to possess a unique activity , creating small tubules and tubule constrictions , in addition to the wide tubules characteristic for this subfamily . Based on crystal structures of the F - BAR domain of Pacsin and mutagenesis studies , vesiculation could be linked to the presence of unique structural features distinguishing it from other F - BAR proteins . Tubulation was suppressed in the context of the full - length protein , suggesting that Pacsin is autoinhibited in solution . The regulated deformation of membranes and promotion of tubule constrictions by Pacsin suggests a more versatile function of these proteins in vesiculation and endocytosis beyond their role as scaffold proteins . endocytosis (cid:1) membrane trafﬁcking (cid:1) protein structure P acsins ( also known as Syndapins or FAP52 ) comprise a conserved family of peripheral membrane proteins in eu - karyotes that play a central role in synaptic vesicle recycling and receptor - mediated endocytosis , ultimately controlling the cell surface expression of transmembrane proteins ( 1 – 4 ) . The 3 isoforms of Pacsin in higher eukaryotes differ in their expression pattern , cargo selectivity , and recruitment of other proteins involved in endocytosis . Pacsin 1 is a brain - specific isoform and has been implicated in neuronal transmission and the neuropa - thology of Huntington’s disease , whereas Pacsin 2 and 3 are more widely expressed ( 2 , 5 , 6 ) . On a molecular level , Pacsins bind to Dynamin and Eps15 homology domain ( EHD ) - containing pro - teins , nucleotide - dependent enzymes with membrane remodel - ing and fission activities , as well as the actin cytoskeleton via neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( N - WASP ) , linking membrane trafficking and cytoskeletal rearrangements ( 4 , 7 , 8 ) . Although Pacsin isoforms bind a specific subset of proteins via the central linker region and their SH3 domain , they all share a highly conserved Fer - CIP4 homology - BAR ( F - BAR ) domain at their N terminus ( 9 ) . F - BAR domains constitute a subfamily of Bin / amphiphysin / Rvs ( BAR ) domains , protein modules that stabilize or induce membrane curvature ( 9 – 13 ) . In contrast to N - BAR domains that prefer highly curved membrane tubules , F - BAR domains usually stabilize membrane structures with larger diameter ( 9 , 14 , 15 ) . Such curvature preference can be attributed in part to the structures of the particular proteins ( 11 , 14 – 16 ) . Both BAR and F - BAR domains consist of a 3 - helix bundle and form extended , crescent - shaped dimers . The concave surface of the arc presents an overall positive electrostatic potential that allows for inter - actions with the plasma membrane . To some degree , the intrinsic curvature of the dimer correlates with the preference for a particular membrane tubule or vesicle size ( 9 , 11 , 14 , 15 ) . N - terminal , amphipathic helices in N - BAR domains contribute to the driving force required to deform membranes , an ener - getically expensive process ( 17 – 19 ) . The amphipathic helix in F - BAR domain - containing proteins appears to be dispensable for their tubulation activity ( 14 ) . Instead , F - BAR dimers can form ordered arrays on membranes , predominantly driven by electrostatic and intermolecular interactions ( 15 , 20 ) . BAR and F - BAR domain - containing proteins encoded in eukaryotic genomes cluster into distinct branches , but little is known with regard to the functional relevance of such complex - ity ( 9 ) . Elucidating the morphogenic potential and molecular mechanism of these proteins will provide insight into their role in membrane trafficking and endocytosis . Here , we show that Pacsin proteins stabilize tubules of both large and narrow diameter , but also facilitate membrane constriction in vitro , suggesting unanticipated diversity in the family of F - BAR do - main - containing proteins . Structural studies elucidate the mo - lecular mechanism and unique motifs in Pacsin that contribute to its distinct membrane remodeling potential . Results and Discussion Pacsin - Mediated Membrane Deformation . The F - BAR domain of human Pacsin 1 and 2 were overexpressed in Escherichia coli and purified to homogeneity . Analytical ultracentrifugation revealed a predominantly dimeric state of the isolated domain ( Fig . S1 A ) . Using the purified proteins , we analyzed their morphogenic potential in a membrane tubulation assay using negative stain electron microscopy . Large multilamellar vesicles ( LMVs ) gen - erated from isolated brain lipids ( Folch fraction I ) were incu - bated with the F - BAR domain of Pacsin 1 . Unlike the homo - geneous and distinctive tubule morphology induced by other BAR and other F - BAR proteins ( Endophilin , Sorting nexin 9 , and Toca - 1 ) , the F - BAR domain of Pacsin 1 generated a broad spectrum of membrane structures ( Fig . 1 A and Fig . S2 ) . We observed 2 classes of tubules with shallow curvature , striated and featureless , with a mean diameter of 53 (cid:1) 18 nm and 98 (cid:1) 34 nm , respectively , and average length of 1 . 3 – 1 . 4 (cid:1) M ( Fig . 1 and Fig . S2 B and C ) . Given the size of LMVs , the observed Author contributions : Q . W . and H . S . designed research ; Q . W . , G . P . , and S . L . G . performed research ; B . L . J . contributed new reagents / analytic tools ; Q . W . , M . V . A . S . N . , E . M . , S . L . G . , K . R . R . , and H . S . analyzed data ; and Q . W . and H . S . wrote the paper . The authors declare no conﬂict of interest . This article is a PNAS Direct Submission . Datadeposition : Theatomiccoordinatesandstructurefactorshavebeendepositedinthe RCSB Data Bank , www . rcsb . org ( PDB ID codes 3HAH , 3HAI , and 3HAJ ) . 1 To whom correspondence should be addressed . E - mail : hs293 @ cornell . edu . This article contains supporting information online at www . pnas . org / cgi / content / full / 0902974106 / DCSupplemental . 12700 – 12705 (cid:1) PNAS (cid:1) August 4 , 2009 (cid:1) vol . 106 (cid:1) no . 31 www . pnas . org (cid:2) cgi (cid:2) doi (cid:2) 10 . 1073 (cid:2) pnas . 0902974106 tubules were likely to originate from a single vesicle , not requiring fusion events . Occasionally , tubes were associated with vesicular structures ( Fig . S2 B and C , arrows ) . Featureless tubules were comparable with structures observed with other F - BAR proteins and showed a wider distribution with regard to diameter , both across an individual tubule , as well as between tubules , which in part may be attributed to flattening effects during negative staining ( Fig . 1 B Middle ) ( 9 ) . The striated tubules induced by Pacsin had an invariable diameter and regular staining pattern , suggesting that these structures were more rigid and ordered ( Fig . 1 B Left and Fig . S2 B ) . Striation has been reported for Dynamin assemblies on membranes , as well as for the BAR domain - containing proteins endophilin and amphiphy - sin , but the staining pattern generated by Pacsin was distinct in that its repeat units were perpendicular to the long tube axis ( 10 , 12 , 21 ) . A similar pattern has been observed on 40 - nm tubules formed with Sorting Nexin 9 ( 22 ) , but the significance and molecular basis for such patterns awaits further elucidation . In contrast to the morphologies observed with the majority of F - BAR domain - containing proteins , the F - BAR domain of Pacsin also induced narrow tubules with high curvature ( d (cid:2) 17 (cid:1) 3 nm ) ( Fig . 1 A and B Middle ) . Such structures were comparable with the ones observed with Endophilin or Amphiphysin and were slightly narrower than those obtained with the F - BAR domain of FCHo2 ( 11 , 14 ) . With both Pacsin and FCHo2 , narrow tubules occurred at the same conditions as broader tubes . Variations in the higher - order assemblies of F - BAR domains on the membranes might contribute to the stabilization of different degrees of curvature ( 14 , 20 ) . In addition , narrower and broader tubes may originate from liposomes with different properties , such as in bilayer tension , membrane stiffness , or intrinsic curvature . Most strikingly though , the background of the electron mi - crographs was dominated by small vesicle structures ( d (cid:2) 35 (cid:1) 5 nm ) that often were connected and clustered together resem - bling beads on a string ( Fig . 1 and Fig . S2 D ) . These structures occurred at protein concentrations at which tubulation was observed , suggesting that this activity was not because of excess F - BAR domains , unlike the vesiculation activity described for samples containing an excess of BAR domains ( 11 ) . Both narrow tubules and tube constrictions were absent in the LMV prepa - rations in the absence of protein and significantly less abundant in samples containing other BAR and F - BAR domain , indicating a Pacsin - specific effect ( Fig . 1 A and Fig . S2 A ) . In contrast to isolated vesicles with irregular diameters found in LMV prepa - rations , the Pacsin - induced morphologies were regular and significantly more abundant . The tight clustering of vesicular structures and their occasional association with narrow tubes suggested a pathway where constrictions emerge on highly curved tube structures ( Fig . 1 A and Fig . S2 D ) . Comparable results regarding the occurrence of the various membrane morphologies were obtained by using large vesicles that were generated by extrusion through a 400 - nm filter ( Fig . S3 A ) . Usage of smaller vesicles with diameters between 50 and 200 nm abolished the formation of wider tubules , but vesiculation remained apparent . Formation of tubules and vesicles was rapid , being visible and fully developed after short incubation times ( Fig . S3 B ) . Incu - bation at 4 °C as opposed to 25 °C or 37 °C prevented formation of tubules with large diameters , and an increased abundance of high - curvature tubules was apparent , suggesting that bilayer de - formability and lipid order may play a role for the membrane sculpting potential ( Fig . S3 B ) . In addition , Pacsin - mediated vesic - ulation was observed with inner - leaflet lipid mixtures comprising phosphatidylserine , phosphatidylcholine , and phosphatidylethano - lamine instead of brain lipid extracts ( Fig . S3 C ) . Structures of the F - BAR Domain of Pacsin 1 and 2 . To elucidate the molecular basis for the generation of Pacsin - specific membrane morphologies , we determined the crystal structures of the F - BAR domain of Pacsin 1 and 2 ( see SI Appendix and Table S1 for details ) . Screens using the full - length proteins yielded crys - tals of the F - BAR domains because of limited proteolysis over the course of the crystallization . The structure of the F - BAR domain from human Pacsin 1 was solved by single anomalous dispersion ( SAD ) phasing , using data collected on a crystal grown from selenomethionine - derivatized protein . The model was refined to a maximum resolution of 2 . 9 Å in the space group P2 1 ( Fig . 2 A ) . Final refinement steps were aided by determining the structure of the isolated F - BAR domain ( residues 1 – 325 of human Pacsin 1 ) at 2 . 8 Å in space group C2 using SAD phasing . The structure of the F - BAR domain of Pacsin 2 was solved by molecular replacement in space group P2 1 2 1 2 1 and was refined to a maximum resolution of 2 . 8 Å . The F - BAR domains of Pacsin 1 and 2 are very similar ( rms deviation of 1 . 4 Å between all main chain atoms ) and resemble the structure of F - BAR domains from CIP4 , FBP17 , and FCHo2 regarding overall fold and dimeric state , with a central 6 - helix bundle and distal tips composed of a helix - turn - helix motif ( Fig . 2 A and Fig . S4 A ) ( 14 , 15 ) . All F - BAR domains display a rather shallow concave B A Fig . 1 . Pacsin - mediated liposome tubulation . ( A ) Negative - stain EM . LMVs from Folch fraction I lipids were incubated with the isolated F - BAR domain of human Pacsin 1 ( residues 1 – 325 ) . Two representative micrographs are shown inlowmagniﬁcation . Thebottom - rightimageshowshighermagniﬁcationsof the 4 main membrane morphotypes induced by Pacsin . ( B ) Statistical analysis . Diameters of the different morphotypes shown in A were quantiﬁed by determining their size on at least 3 independently prepared EM grids . Diam - eters ( especially for wider tubules ) may appear larger because of ﬂattening effects during negative staining . Wang et al . PNAS (cid:1) August 4 , 2009 (cid:1) vol . 106 (cid:1) no . 31 (cid:1) 12701 B I O C H E M I S T R Y surface that is enriched in positively charged residues that form the major membrane interaction interface ( Fig . 2 A ) . Distinct Features of the F - BAR Domain of Pacsin . A striking differ - ence to previously determined structures of F - BAR proteins is the extreme degree of lateral kinking at the tip regions relative to the central dimerization region in Pacsin . Whereas the Toca - related F - BAR domains ( from CIP4 and FBP17 ) are rather straight molecules and the one from FCHo2 has moder - ately kinked tips ( 14 , 15 ) , Pacsin’s tips are bent away from its central body in a (cid:3) 61° angle , giving the dimeric molecule a pronounced twisted S - shape ( Fig . 2 A and Fig . S4 A ) . Although the curvature of the concave surface remains shallow similar to other F - BAR domains , it adds a second degree of curvature to the Pacsin F - BAR dimer . Interaction with the membrane will require that both principle curvatures of the protein will be satisfied , indicating that Pacsin may have the tendency to bind to or stabilize membranes with higher curvature or vesicular struc - ture . In contrast , other BAR and F - BAR domain - containing proteins may predominantly stabilize radial curvature , e . g . , that of a tube ( see SI Appendix ) . In this conformation , positively charged residues that mediate interactions with the negatively charged lipid head groups are concentrated at the concave surface but are arranged in a slight pitch lining the bending point and the tip regions , which results in the display of a twisted , nonflat surface with positive elec - trostatic potential ( Fig . 2 A ) . The pitch and presence of both curvatures suggests a mechanism by which Pacsin not only tubulates bilayers , but also may introduce or stabilize vesicular structures and potentially saddle points . Such regions of negative curvature occur during fission at the bud - neck and the plasma membrane - neck junctions during vesicle fission , and the inter - connected , Pacsin - induced vesicles observed in vitro resemble such topologies ( Fig . 1 A and Fig . S2 D ) . Another feature that distinguishes Pacsin’s F - BAR domain from that of other F - BAR domain - containing proteins is a unique , 8 - residues - long insertion in helix 2 of Pacsin that forms a flexible loop in the crystal structures . The loops are located at the end of the central 6 - helix bundle close to the bending points of the tips and protrude from the membrane interaction surface ( Fig . 2 B and Fig . S4 B ) . At the base of the loop , there are 2 bulky hydrophobic residues , isoleucine 125 - methionine 126 ( I 125 - M 126 ) or a double - methione 123 – 124 ( M 123 - M 124 ) motif in Pacsin 1 and 2 , respectively . The loop is flanked by lysines on either side ( arginines in Pacsin 3 ) and contains a double - glycine motif next to the central hydrophobic residues . Given the nature , position , and protrusion depth of the loop ( (cid:3) 12 Å ) , we proposed a function equivalent to an amphipathic helix that would interca - late into a bilayer leaflet and would work as a wedge for membrane bending . We will refer to this motif as a wedge loop . Similar motifs are of functional importance in proteins involved in fusion and fission . Wild - type protein and site - directed mutants were analyzed with regard to their tubulation activity and membrane binding affinity . Protein binding to liposomes was assessed in a pelleting assay by detection of protein in the pellet or supernatant fraction after high - speed centrifugation . Replacing either isoleucine or methionine in the wedge loop of Pacsin 1’s F - BAR domain with a negatively charged residue ( I 125 E or M 126 E ) decreased the overall affinity of the protein for membranes accompanied by the loss of its membrane sculpting potential ( Fig . 3 A – C ) . In contrast , introduction of positively charged or tryptophan resi - dues at those positions ( I 125 K , M 126 K , I 125 W , or M 126 W ) main - tained near wild - type membrane affinity of the mutant proteins ( Figs . 3 D and E Inset ) . Although tryptophan is hydrophobic , its indole nitrogen may prevent it from deeply inserting into the membrane . In all cases except for the mutation I 125 W , vesicu - lation was largely suppressed ( Fig . 3 D and E ) . Instead , predom - inantly wide tubes ( M 126 K ) or thin tubules ( I 125 K , M 126 W ) , similar to morphologies that have been observed at low tem - perature , formed when LMVs were incubated with the mutant proteins . In samples prepared with proteins containing a tryp - tophan instead of the wedge loop isoleucine ( I 125 W ) , vesiculation dominated , coinciding with a loss of tubular structures ( Fig . 3 E ) . The results are consistent with a model in which the methionine functions as a wedge that acts close to the acyl chains of a membrane leaflet and drives vesiculation . The adjacent isoleu - Fig . 2 . Structure of Pacsin’s F - BAR domain . ( A ) Ribbon and surface presen - tation of the F - BAR domain dimer of Pacsin 1 . Two perpendicular views are shown . Only 2 protomers are shown and are colored in green and orange , respectively . Asterisks denote the termini of the second protomer . The elec - trostatic potential of the F - BAR domain was mapped onto its molecular surface , with red representing negative potential and blue representing positive potential ( (cid:4) 4 to (cid:5) 4 k B T ) . Electrostatic potentials were calculated by using the program adaptive Poisson - Boltzmann solver ( APBS ) . ( B ) Close - up view of the wedge loop . The blue and red maps in the left image show a ( 2Fo - Fc ) omit map ( contoured at 1 . 6 (cid:2) ) and an anomalous map ( contoured at 3 (cid:2) ) around the wedge loop , respectively . The data collected on a selenome - thionine - derivatized Pacsin 1 crystal ( space group P2 1 ) were used . The right imageshowsthesameviewwiththewedge - loopresiduespresentedassticks . 12702 (cid:1) www . pnas . org (cid:2) cgi (cid:2) doi (cid:2) 10 . 1073 (cid:2) pnas . 0902974106 Wang et al . cine serves a supporting role , but may be closer to the lipid head group - acyl chain junction , explaining the bilateral sensitivity to tryptophan or lysine mutations at that site . Decreased salt - sensitivity of the wild - type protein compared with the lysine mutants ( I 125 K , M 126 K ) in binding and tubulation assays support a wedge - loop - insertion mechanism ( Fig . S5 ) . Taken together , the structural and mutational analyses identified the wedge loop as a motif that contributes to membrane affinity and determines Pacsin’s unique vesiculation activity . Also , our data suggest that vesicles originated from tubules , which can form in the absence of loop insertions . Higher - Order Arrangements Observed in Crystals of the F - BAR Domain of Pacsin . Previous studies revealed that the F - BAR domains of CIP4 and FBP17 could form ordered arrays that cover the mem - brane tube and that distinct membrane curvatures can be attributed to different lattice arrangements ( 15 , 20 ) . Both tip - to - tip and lateral intermolecular interactions are responsible for the assembly of protein lattices ( 20 ) . Given the laterally curved state and distinct structural motifs of Pacsin , membrane engagement , lattice prop - erties , and spacing will be different from those of the more straight F - BAR domains studied thus far . In our crystallographic studies of Pacsin 1 and 2 , the F - BAR domains pack in unique , primitive lattices that may provide insight into the Pacsin - specific membrane sculpting activities . A detailed description of these lattices is pro - vided in the SI Appendix and Fig . S6 . The 2 different types of higher - order arrangements observed with Pacsin 1 and 2 , respec - tively , suggest a loose packing mode with lower density of F - BAR domains ( Pacsin 1 , space group P2 1 ) ( Fig . S6 A and B ) that may be responsible for the stabilization of wide tubes and a tight spiral - like assembly ( Pacsin 2 , space group P2 1 2 1 2 1 ) ( Fig . S6 C ) that at high protein density may induce narrow tubule formation and possibly vesiculation . Suppressed Activities in Full - Length Pacsin . Experiments so far were carriedoutwiththeisolatedF - BARdomain . Itsdomainboundaries were determined based on limited proteolysis and the available crystal structures . We next determined how the central linker and C - terminal SH3 domain affect Pacsin’s membrane sculpting activ - ity . When the linker ( Pacsin 1 (cid:6) SH3 ) or linker - SH3 module ( Pacsin 1 full - length ) was included in the construct , Pacsin’s membrane defor - mation activity was significantly impaired , suggesting an autoin - hibitory role of these units in Pacsin ( Fig . 4 A and Fig . S7 A ) . In the case of the protein containing the linker region , full activity comparable with that of the isolated F - BAR domain could be achieved at a higher protein concentration used in the tubulation assays . In contrast , the autoinhibition in the full - length protein including the SH3 domain appeared stronger and could not be compensated for by high protein concentration ( Fig . S7 B ) . In addition , we analyzed the curvature preference of the different constructs . Folch liposomes were extruded using filters with pore sizes raging from 50 – 400 nm , and protein binding was determined by using a vesicle pelleting assay ( Fig . 4 B ) . The isolated F - BAR domain showed no curvature preferences , bind - ing equally well to vesicles of all sizes and comparable with LMVs . In contrast , the full - length protein bound preferentially to LMVs and liposomes extruded through a 400 - nm filter . Pacsin 1 (cid:6) SH3 yielded intermediate results . It still bound fairly well to liposomes with an average diameter of 200 nm , but binding to smaller vesicles was weaker . For the F - BAR domain of FCHo2 , curvature - insensitive binding has been linked to the presence of an intact N - terminal amphipathic helix ( 14 ) . In Pacsin , domains located at the C terminus of the protein altered its curvature preference and overall membrane deformation potential . The dissociation constant for the F - BAR domain and full - length dimer in solution were comparable as determined by analytical ultracentrifugation ( 2 . 1 (cid:1) M and 1 . 2 (cid:1) M , respectively ) , indicating that different dimerization propensities or additional intermolecular contacts via the additional domains are unlikely to contribute to the attenuated activity of full - length Pacsin ( Fig . S1 ) . Small angle X - ray scattering ( SAXS ) studies revealed that the overall size ( maximum diameter and radius of gyration ) of the F - BAR domain dimer was comparable with the dimensions of the full - length protein , suggesting that the SH3 domains were positioned in close proximity to the F - BAR domains in solution ( Fig . 4 C ) . Modeling of SAXS data has been used successfully to determine the position of the SH3 domain of Endophilin in the context of the full - length protein and to reconstruct the PX - BAR domain module of Sorting Nexin 9 ( 23 ) . Yet , a similar approach indicated that the SH3 domains of Pacsin may be linked flexibly to a rigid F - BAR domain dimer in solution , because their position relative to the F - BAR domain could not be determined unambiguously ( Fig . S8 ) . The shape of the F - BAR domain in A B C D E Fig . 3 . Mutational analysis of the wedge - loop motif . ( A ) Negative - stained micrograph of LMVs . ( B – E ) Tubulation activity and membrane binding of wild - type and mutant Pacsin 1 F - BAR . LMVs were incubated with wild - type Pacsin 1 F - BAR ( B ) or proteins with glutamate ( C ) , lysine ( D ) , or tryptophan ( E ) substitutionsatpositions125and126locatedatthecenterofthewedgeloop . Small arrows point to thin tubular structures . Insets show results from vesicle copelleting assays assessing the binding of proteins to the liposomes . Super - natant ( S ) and pellet ( P ) fractions were analyzed by SDS / PAGE followed by Coomassie staining . ( Scale bars , 500 nm . ) Wang et al . PNAS (cid:1) August 4 , 2009 (cid:1) vol . 106 (cid:1) no . 31 (cid:1) 12703 B I O C H E M I S T R Y full - length Pacsin modeled from the SAXS data were compa - rable with the structure obtained by X - ray crystallography , indicating that the domain is indeed rigid in solution . We speculate that flexibility between the F - BAR and SH3 domains may interfere with efficient lattice or oligomer formation . Al - though intramolecular occlusion of certain motifs cannot be ruled out , this model would suggest that membrane deformation may not be determined by a single F - BAR domain , but may require F - BAR domain multimers . Activation may be achieved by the binding of protein ligands to the SH3 or linker domains of Pacsin , or by posttranslational modifications . Energetic and Geometric Considerations for Pacsin - Mediated Mem - brane Deformation . Calculations estimating the energy density requirements and geometrical constraints for Pacsin - mediated membrane deformation provided a quantitative assessment of the factors that contribute to the various liposome morphologies ( see SI Appendix for a detailed description of the calculations and Fig . S9 ) . The energy required to bend a membrane is in part dependent on the degree of curvature . Although the stabiliza - tion of wide tubes ( d (cid:2) 60 nm ) requires only a small energy density ( (cid:3) 0 . 011 k B T / nm 2 ) , the generation of narrow tubules ( d (cid:2) 18 nm ) or vesicles ( d (cid:2) 30 nm ) is energetically expensive ( (cid:3) 0 . 125 k B T / nm 2 or (cid:3) 0 . 18 k B T / nm 2 , respectively ) ( Fig . S9 A ) . Considering the electrostatic interactions between proteins and the mem - brane , a single F - BAR domain could contribute (cid:3) 0 . 133 k B T / nm 2 at most . Based on these estimations , the generation of wide tubes may only call for 10 % – 20 % of membrane coverage by protein . In contrast , the generation of thin tubules would require densely packed F - BAR domains on the membrane . The narrow tubules observed in the tubulation assays may be the highest degree of curvature that can be achieved by F - BAR domains ( Fig . S9 E ) . In addition , vesiculation cannot be rationalized solely by protein packing and is likely to involve other mechanisms such as the insertion of a wedge to increase local curvature ( 19 , 24 ) . Pacsin’s unique S - shaped conformation is likely to play a pivotal role in determining the total ( Gaussian ) membrane curvature preferred by this F - BAR domain . According to our estimations , rather straight F - BAR domains with mainly one - dimensional in - trinsic curvature may preferably orient on a membrane tube ( close to ) vertical to the long tube axis and appear optimized to maintain tubes with radii close to the radius imposed by the curvature of an F - BAR dimer ( Fig . S9 C ) . In contrast , the F - BAR domain of Pacsin constitutes a scaffold that is optimized for the stabilization of a high degree of membrane curvature because of its two - dimensional curvature profile ( Fig . S9 D ) . The Pacsin fold may also accommo - date vesicular structures better than the F - BAR domains of CIP4 , FBP17 , and FCHo2 . Conclusions The generation and stabilization of high membrane curvature is of fundamental biological importance for cellular membrane trafficking and maintenance of organellar structures , for exam - ple the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) ( 19 ) . In the tubular ER , Reticulons , membrane - associated proteins , maintain such high curvature by the stable insertion of helical elements into a leaflet of the bilayer , providing a more permanent anchorage ( 25 , 26 ) . In contrast , endocytosis and membrane trafficking relies on the reversible association of proteins at the lipid bilayer , resulting in its deformation , fission , or fusion . From our structural and functional data , we propose a model in which tubulation and Pacsin - specific membrane bulging ac - tivities rely on the distinct curvatures and particular distribution of positively charged residues within a Pacsin dimer , in addition to the insertion of the wedge loops into the membrane . Similar to other F - BAR domain - containing proteins , Pacsin’s full de - formation potential is likely to rely on higher - order packing on the membrane , tunable and alternative lattices stabilizing dif - ferent degrees of curvature . At the same time , the association of Pacsin with itself and the membrane is rather labile , based on the weak interactions observed crystallographically and its salt and dilution sensitivity in tubulation assays . The wedge loop is crucial for the vesiculation activity , and we speculate that Pacsin may contribute more directly to fission by the insertion of this motif that resembles fusion and fission loops in other proteins . Recently , it has been shown that Dynamin - mediated fission proceeds through a hemi - fission event ( 27 , 28 ) . Scission suc - ceeded spontaneously on GTPase - triggered disassembly of Dy - namin coats that initially introduced an unstable intermediate . Pacsin may facilitate initial steps that will aid Dynamin - mediated vesicle scission or may play a regulatory role by forming meta - stable lattices on the membrane while stressing the bilayer via wedge - loop insertion . It has been shown that perturbing Pacsin function under intense action potential stimulation decreases the pool of endocytic vesicles and increases the number of cisternae at the synapse ( 29 ) . Although Pacsin’s role in recruiting Dynamin may explain such an effect on vesicle recycling , it may also suggest a more central role for Pacsin under these conditions . In A B C Fig . 4 . AutoinhibitionofhumanPacsin1 . ( A ) Negative - stainEM . LMVswere incubated with Pacsin 1 F - BAR , Pacsin 1 (cid:6) SH3 , or Pacsin 1 full - length . Samples were analyzed by negative - stain EM . ( B ) Membrane binding of Pacsin to liposomes of different size . LMVs or LUVs that were extruded through ﬁlters with pore sizes of 400 , 200 , or 50 nm were incubated with the 3 different Pacsin 1 construct . Samplesweresubjectedtohigh - speedcentrifugation . Pellet ( P ) and supernatant ( S ) fractionwereanalyzedonaCoomassie - stainedSDS / PAGE . ( C ) Solution conformation of Pacsin 1 (cid:6) SH3 and Pacsin 1 full - length . SAXS data were collected on homogeneous solutions of Pacsin 1 (cid:6) SH3 and Pacsin 1 full - length . Basedonthescatteringproﬁleinsolution , thedistancedistributionfunctions , P ( R ) , were computed and compared to the P ( R ) function calculated from the crystal structure of Pacsin 1 F - BAR . ( Scale bars , 500 nm . ) 12704 (cid:1) www . pnas . org (cid:2) cgi (cid:2) doi (cid:2) 10 . 1073 (cid:2) pnas . 0902974106 Wang et al . Drosophila , the F - BAR domain of Pacsin was recently shown to be required for the expansion of the postsynaptic membrane system , whereas the SH3 domain serves both an inhibitory as well as a targeting role ( 30 ) . These results are consistent with our findings and support our model . It remains to be investigated whether there is an apparent redundancy in the activities of Pacsin and other factors involved in endocytosis such as BAR domain - containing proteins , Dynamin , and EHD - type ATPases and how their activities are coordinated and used in the cell to drive vesicle fission . Materials and Methods Protein Expression and Purification . Human full - length Pacsin 1 and 2 , Pacsin 1 F - BAR ( residues1 – 325 ) , Pacsin1 (cid:6) SH3 ( residues1 – 381 ) , andPacsin2 F - BAR ( residues 1 – 324 ) were produced following standard molecular biology and liquid chro - matography techniques . A detailed protocol is provided in the SI Appendix . Crystallization , X - Ray Data Collection , and Structure Solution . Crystallization conditions , crystalmorphologies , andstructuresolutionaredescribedindetail inthe SIAppendix . Datasetswerecollectedusingsynchrotronradiationatthe Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source ( CHESS ) ( beamline A1 ) and Argonne Photon Source . Liposome Preparation . Folch fraction 1 lipids ( Sigma Aldrich ) were dissolved in chloroform and stored at (cid:4) 20 °C . For liposome preparations , chloroform was evaporated under a nitrogen atmosphere for 15 min , and the samples were subjected to vacuum desiccation for 2 h at 60 mtorr . Dry ﬁlms were hydrated inlowsaltbuffer [ 25mMTris - HCl ( pH7 . 4 ) and50mMNaCl ] toaconcentration of 10 mg / mL . ToprepareLMVs , hydratedliposomesweresonicatedfor15min , followed by 8 freeze – thaw cycles using liquid nitrogen . For most applications , lipo - somesweredilutedtoaconcentrationof2mg / mLinlow - saltbufferandwere incubatedinaheatblockat30 °Cfor1hbeforeexposuretoproteinsolutions . This method yields LMVs with an average diameter of 300 – 600 nm and the occasional occurrence of larger vesicles ( (cid:3) 1 (cid:1) m ) . For the preparation of large unilamellar vesicles ( LUVs ) , hydrated liposomes were subjected to 6 freeze – thaw cycles , followed by extrusion through ﬁlters with pore sizes ranging from 50 nm to 400 nm . LUV preparations were diluted to a concentration of 2 mg / mL and used immediately after extrusion . Liposome Copelleting Assay . Liposome samples ( 1 mg / mL ) were incubated in the presence or absence of protein ( 10 (cid:1) M ) in 40 (cid:1) L of low - salt buffer ( corresponding to a 1 : 1 lipid – protein ratio ) for 20 min at room tempera - ture . Samples were centrifuged in a Optima MAX - E ultracentrifuge ( Beck - man ) equipped with a TLA - 100 rotor at 329 , 200 (cid:7) g at 4 °C for 45 min . Pelletsandsupernatantswereseparated , pelletswereresuspendedin40 (cid:1) L of low - salt buffer , and both fractions were analyzed by SDS / PAGE and Coomassie Blue staining . Negative - Stain Electron Microscopy ( EM ) . Liposome samples ( 2 mg / mL ) were incubated in the presence or absence of protein ( 0 . 2 – 1 mg / mL or 4 – 20 (cid:1) M ) in low - saltbufferfor1minat25 °C , ifnotindicatedotherwise . Thesample ( 8 (cid:1) L ) wasappliedtoaCarbon - formvar - coatedcoppergrid ( EMS ) andincubatedfor 2 min . Excess liquid was carefully removed by using a wet absorbent tissue ( Kimwipes ; KimberlyClark ) . Thegridswereincubated3timeswith2 % ﬁltered uranyl acetate solution for 5 sec and air - dried . Negative staining was per - formed at 25 °C ( except for samples prepared at 4 °C , which were stained in the cold room ) . Membrane morphologies were examined on a FEI Morgagni Transmission Electron Microscope ( TEM ) and a FEI Tecnai G2 F20 TEM / STEM withtheelectronenergysetto80kVand200kV , respectively . Representative images were taken on an AMT camera with a direct magniﬁcation of 11kx – 36kx . Distance and size measurements were taken by using the program ImageJ ( National Institutes of Health ) . SAXS . SAXS data were collected at the Advanced Photon Source ( APS ) , beam - line 12 - IDC at the electron energy of 12 KeV and 4 °C on homogeneous samples of Pacsin 1 (cid:6) SH3 and Pacsin 1 full - length . Samples of Pacsin 1 F - BAR showed a high sensitivity to radiation damage and were not considered in this study . Data reduction , analysis , and free - atom modeling of the SAXS data were carried out by using the program package ATSAS ( 31 ) . A detailed description is provided in the SI Appendix . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . We thank John Grazul and Huolin Xin at the Cornell Center for Materials Research for their assistance with scanning transmission electronmicroscopyandJimSethna , BenMachta , ScottEmr , andRickCerione for helpful discussion . This work is based on research conducted at the Northeastern Collaborative Access Team beamlines of the Advanced Photon Source and at the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source . The facilities are supportedbyNationalCenterforResearchResourcesattheNationalInstitutesofHealthAwardRR - 15301 ( to Advanced Photon Source ) , National Science Foundation Award DMR - 0225180 ( to Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source ) , and National Institutes of Health Award RR - 01646 ( to Cornell High EnergySynchrotronSource ) . ThisworkwassupportedbyaPEWScholaraward in Biomedical Sciences ( to H . S . ) . 1 . AnggonoV , etal . ( 2006 ) SyndapinIisthephosphorylation - regulateddynaminIpartner in synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Nat Neurosci 9 : 752 – 760 . 2 . Modregger J , Ritter B , Witter B , Paulsson M , Plomann M ( 2000 ) All three PACSIN isoforms bind to endocytic proteins and inhibit endocytosis . J Cell Sci 113 : 4511 – 4521 . 3 . Qualmann B , Kelly RB ( 2000 ) Syndapin isoforms participate in receptor - mediated endocytosis and actin organization . J Cell Biol 148 : 1047 – 1062 . 4 . Qualmann B , Roos J , DiGregorio PJ , Kelly RB ( 1999 ) Syndapin I , a synaptic dynamin - bindingproteinthatassociateswiththeneuralWiskott - Aldrichsyndromeprotein . Mol Biol Cell 10 : 501 – 513 . 5 . DiProspero NA , et al . ( 2004 ) Early changes in Huntington’s disease patient brains involve alterations in cytoskeletal and synaptic elements . J Neurocytol 33 : 517 – 533 . 6 . ModreggerJ , DiProsperoNA , CharlesV , TagleDA , PlomannM ( 2002 ) PACSIN1interacts with huntingtin and is absent from synaptic varicosities in presymptomatic Hunting - ton’s disease brains . Hum Mol Genet 11 : 2547 – 2558 . 7 . BraunA , etal . ( 2005 ) EHDproteinsassociatewithsyndapinIandIIandsuchinteractions play a crucial role in endosomal recycling . Mol Biol Cell 16 : 3642 – 3658 . 8 . Kessels MM , Qualmann B ( 2004 ) The syndapin protein family : Linking membrane trafﬁcking with the cytoskeleton . J Cell Sci 117 : 3077 – 3086 . 9 . ItohT , etal . ( 2005 ) Dynaminandtheactincytoskeletoncooperativelyregulateplasma membrane invagination by BAR and F - BAR proteins . Dev Cell 9 : 791 – 804 . 10 . Farsad K , et al . ( 2001 ) Generation of high curvature membranes mediated by direct endophilin bilayer interactions . J Cell Biol 155 : 193 – 200 . 11 . PeterBJ , etal . ( 2004 ) BARdomainsassensorsofmembranecurvature : Theamphiphysin BAR structure . Science 303 : 495 – 499 . 12 . Takei K , Slepnev VI , Haucke V , De Camilli P ( 1999 ) Functional partnership between amphiphysin and dynamin in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat Cell Biol 1 : 33 – 39 . 13 . Tsujita K , et al . ( 2006 ) Coordination between the actin cytoskeleton and membrane deformation by a novel membrane tubulation domain of PCH proteins is involved in endocytosis . J Cell Biol 172 : 269 – 279 . 14 . HenneWM , etal . ( 2007 ) StructureandanalysisofFCHo2F - BARdomain : Adimerizing and membrane recruitment module that effects membrane curvature . Structure 15 : 839 – 852 . 15 . Shimada A , et al . ( 2007 ) Curved EFC / F - BAR - domain dimers are joined end to end into a ﬁlament for membrane invagination in endocytosis . Cell 129 : 761 – 772 . 16 . Weissenhorn W ( 2005 ) Crystal structure of the endophilin - A1 BAR domain . J Mol Biol 351 : 653 – 661 . 17 . Gallop J , et al . ( 2006 ) Mechanism of endophilin N - BAR domain - mediated membrane curvature . EMBO J 25 : 2898 – 2910 . 18 . Masuda M , et al . ( 2006 ) Endophilin BAR domain drives membrane curvature by two newly identiﬁed structure - based mechanisms . EMBO J 25 : 2889 – 2897 . 19 . Zimmerberg J , Kozlov M ( 2006 ) How proteins produce cellular membrane curvature . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 7 : 9 – 19 . 20 . FrostA , etal . ( 2008 ) StructuralbasisofmembraneinvaginationbyF - BARdomains . Cell 132 : 807 – 817 . 21 . TakeiK , McPhersonPS , SchmidSL , DeCamilliP ( 1995 ) Tubularmembraneinvaginations coated by dynamin rings are induced by GTP - gamma S in nerve terminals . Nature 374 : 186 – 190 . 22 . Yarar D , Surka MC , Leonard MC , Schmid SL ( 2008 ) SNX9 activities are regulated by multiple phosphoinositides through both PX and BAR domains . Trafﬁc 9 : 133 – 146 . 23 . WangQ , KaanHY , HoodaRN , GohSL , SondermannH ( 2008 ) Structureandplasticityof Endophilin and Sorting Nexin 9 . Structure 16 : 1574 – 1587 . 24 . CampeloF , McMahonHT , KozlovMM ( 2008 ) Thehydrophobicinsertionmechanismof membrane curvature generation by proteins . Biophys J 95 : 2325 – 2339 . 25 . Hu J , et al . ( 2008 ) Membrane proteins of the endoplasmic reticulum induce high - curvature tubules . Science 319 : 1247 – 1250 . 26 . Voeltz GK , Prinz WA , Shibata Y , Rist JM , Rapoport TA ( 2006 ) A class of membrane proteins shaping the tubular endoplasmic reticulum . Cell 124 : 573 – 586 . 27 . Bashkirov PV , et al . ( 2008 ) GTPase cycle of dynamin is coupled to membrane squeeze and release , leading to spontaneous ﬁssion . Cell 135 : 1276 – 1286 . 28 . PucadyilTJ , SchmidSL ( 2008 ) Real - timevisualizationofdynamin - catalyzedmembrane ﬁssion and vesicle release . Cell 135 : 1263 – 1275 . 29 . Andersson F , Jakobsson J , Lo¨w P , Shupliakov O , Brodin L ( 2008 ) Perturbation of syndapin / PACSIN impairs synaptic vesicle recycling evoked by intense stimulation . J Neurosci 28 : 3925 – 3933 . 30 . Kumar V , et al . ( 2009 ) Syndapin promotes formation of a postsynaptic membrane system in Drosophila . Mol Biol Cell 20 : 2254 – 2264 . 31 . Petoukhov MV , Konarev PV , Kikhney AG , Svergun DI ( 2007 ) ATSAS 2 . 1 - towards automated and web - supported small - angle scattering data analysis . J Appl Cryst 40 : S223 – S228 . Wang et al . PNAS (cid:1) August 4 , 2009 (cid:1) vol . 106 (cid:1) no . 31 (cid:1) 12705 B I O C H E M I S T R Y