© 2009 John Wiley & Sons A / S Trafﬁc2009 ; 10 : 894 – 911 doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1600 - 0854 . 2009 . 00910 . x The Single ENTH - Domain Protein of Trypanosomes ; Endocytic Functions and Evolutionary Relationship with Epsin Carme Gabernet - Castello 1 , Joel B . Dacks 1 , 2 and Mark C . Field 1 , * 1 DepartmentofPathology , UniversityofCambridge , TennisCourtRoad , Cambridge , CB21QP , UK 2 DepartmentofCellBiology , UniversityofAlberta , 6 - 30 MedicalScienceBuilding , Edmonton , Alberta , Canada ∗ Correspondingauthor : MarkC . Field , mcf34 @ cam . ac . uk Epsin N - terminal homology ( ENTH ) domains occur in proteins of either the epsin or epsin - related ( epsinR ) form . They principally function in clathrin - mediated trafﬁcking and membrane deformation . Both epsin and epsinR possess clathrin - binding motifs , but only epsin incorporates a ubiquitin - interaction motif ( UIM ) . To better understand the origins of ENTH - domain proteins and their functions , we performed detailed comparative genomics and phylogenetics on the epsin family . The epsin ENTH - UIM conﬁguration is an architecture restricted to yeast and animals . Further , we undertook functional analysis in Trypanosoma brucei ( T . brucei ) , a divergent organism possessing a single ENTH - domain protein ( TbEpsinR ) . TbEpsinR has a cellular location similar to both epsin and epsinR at plasma membrane clathrin budding sites and endosomal compartments , and associates with clathrin , as demonstrated by coimmunoprecipitation . Knockdown of TbEpsinR leads to a signiﬁcant decrease in the intracellular pools of multiple surface antigens , without affecting bulk membrane internalization . Therefore , despite lacking the UIM , TbEpsinR maintains a similar role to metazoan epsin in endocytosis and participates as a clathrin - associated adaptor . We suggest that recruitment of a UIM to the ENTH - domain proteins was not essential for participation in endocytosis of ubiquitylated molecules , and is presumably a speciﬁc innovation restricted to higher eukaryotes . Key words : endocytosis , ENTH , epsin , trypanosomes , ubiquitylation , vesicle transport Received 4 September 2008 , revised and accepted for publication 5 March 2009 , uncorrected manuscript published online 17 March 2009 , published online 8 April 2009 Endocytosis is the mechanism by which material at the cell surface is internalized and subsequently sorted . Multiple distinct modes of endocytosis have been described , deﬁned by dependence on various protein factors , e . g . clathrin , caveolin and ﬂotillin ( 1 ) . Endocytosis is essential for nearly all eukaryotic cells and required for the efﬁcient uptake of nutrients , signal transduction and maintenance of composition of the plasma membrane , amongst other functions ( 2 – 5 ) . Several mechanisms have arisen through eukaryotic evolution to mark and sort endocytic cargo proteins . These include linear peptide motifs embedded in the cytoplasmic region of a polypeptide ( 6 ) and post - translational signals , in particular phosphorylation , glycosylation and / or ubiquitylation ( 7 ) . A large number of cytoplasmic factors are required to accurately recognize these various endocytic signals and to drive trafﬁc to the correct destination . Determining the identity and role of these accessory proteins has been the focus of much effort , based primarily in animals and fungi , and has revealed a highly complex network of protein – protein and protein – lipid interactions ( 8 ) . One set of clathrin - associated sorting proteins ( CLASPs ) is deﬁned by the presence of an epsin N - terminal homology ( ENTH ) domain at the N - terminus , and is named Eps15 - interacting proteins ( epsin ) , after a subgroup of this class of alternative adaptors ( 9 ) . Initial studies in mammalian cells led to the classiﬁcation of members of the family as epsin or epsin - related ( epsinR ) based on function [ endo - cytosis of ubiquitylated cargo ( epsin ) , or sorting / recycling of cargo within intracellular compartments ( epsinR ) ] , domain architecture [ based on the presence of ubiquitin - interacting motif ( UIM ) within the C - terminus of the sequence ( epsin ) or not ( epsinR ) ] and cellular location , i . e . plasma membrane or intracellular compartments respec - tively ( 10 , 11 ) . Epsins are involved in endocytosis in both mammals and fungi ( 9 , 12 ) . In mammalian systems , a role for epsinR in retrograde transport has been reported ( 13 ) . In Arabidopsis , ENTH proteins are implicated in vacuolar trafﬁcking ( 14 ) and transport from the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) by speciﬁcally interacting with SNAREs functioning in vesicle fusion at the TGN ( 15 ) as also observed in yeast and mammals ( 16 ) . In Dictyostellium , epsin is reported to directly inﬂuence HIP1r ( 17 ) , a clathrin - associated protein that performs a regulatory role in actin dynamics . The actin cytoskeleton is also a vital component of the endocytic process , regulating both the initial endocytic event by facilitating inward membrane deformation and also participating in subsequent pathways for transport of endocytosed vesicles to intracellular compartments ( 18 ) . Interestingly , recent work has uncovered an interaction of epsin - like adaptors with factors that regulate the status of the actin cytoskeleton , suggesting a major role in this process ( 17 , 19 ) . 894 www . trafﬁc . dk Function and Evolution of the Epsin Family From previous comparative genomic analysis it was suggested that the ENTH module is conserved amongst genomes representing all major eukaryotic supergroups ( 20 ) . A duplication and specialization appeared to have occurred in fungal and metazoan lineages producing the non - redundant epsin and epsinR subtypes , where the major innovation is the inclusion of a UIM , in addition to the common ENTH and clathrin - recognition boxes . The UIM appears essential for sorting of ubiquitylated cargo and potentially is involved in coupling endocytosis to actin dynamics . The bulk of functional information on epsin - like adaptors derives from cell models where both epsin and epsinR coexist . Hence , the question arises as to which roles ascribed to the two types exist in the ancestral ENTH - containing adaptor lacking the UIM , i . e . epsinR , and more signiﬁcantly , in a lineage where the epsin form has never been present ? Comparative genomics also suggests that caveolin - dependent endocytosis is a recent acquisition , restricted to metazoans , while clathrin - dependent endocytosis and associated adaptor complexes are signiﬁcantly more conserved across the eukaryotes ( 20 ) . Furthermore , within the endosomal sort - ing complex required for transport ( ESCRT ) system , which sorts ubiquitylated cargo , the ESCRT 0 complex appears to be opisthokont speciﬁc ( 21 ) , representing a signiﬁcant innovation . Non - animal / fungal taxa indeed appear to have less complexity in their repertoire of adaptor proteins , i . e . CLASPs , and other accessory proteins ( 20 ) . Trypanosoma brucei ( T . brucei ) is an extracellular protozoan parasite , belonging to the supergroup Excavata . Consequently trypanosomes are distantly related to the well - studied model organisms of animals and fungi and are thus a tractable organism from which to compare function across deep evolutionary time . To more fully understand the evolution , diversity and functions of the epsin family , we extended our earlier comparative genomic analysis by deeper taxon sampling , using phylogenetics to reconstruct epsin evolutionary history . There is evidence for both lineage - speciﬁc epsin architecture , and accessory factors operating with epsins , suggesting a major difference in the mechanisms by which ENTH - domain proteins function in opisthokonts and other taxa . Further , T . brucei has a single ENTH - domain epsin - related protein encoded by the genome ( Tb11 . 50 . 0006 ) , which we exploited as an opportunity for functional analysis in an evolutionary context . We ﬁnd that TbEpsinR is essential and functions in clathrin - mediated endocytosis of ubiquitylated cargo despite the lack of conservation in domain architecture found in epsin adaptors . Results Phylogeneticsandcomparativegenomicsof epsin - likeadaptorproteins ENTH - domain protein sequences were obtained using the basic local alignment search tool ( BLAST ) from complete genome databases representing the 5 of the 6 recognized eukaryotic supergroups with genomic sampling publicly available ; orthology was conﬁrmed by reverse BLAST . Interestingly , while multiple homologues were obtained from metazoa , fungi and Arabidopsis thaliana ( A . thaliana ) , most organisms contain only a single unambiguous homologue . Phylogenetic analysis of a dataset encompassing all the putative epsin / epsinR homologues identiﬁed lineage - speciﬁc expansions in A . thaliana , but otherwise little resolution was obtained ( supporting information ) . This was likely due to inclusion of divergent sequences , some of which do not retain all the canonical ENTH - domain features , resulting in poor conservation and long - branch effects . Therefore , a selected dataset containing those sequences with canonical ENTH domains and still representing all ﬁve supergroups was analyzed ; this reconstructed clades for epsinR homologues from chromalveolates , kinetoplastids , animals and fungi ( Figure 1 ) . Importantly , a separate , clade containing exclusively opisthokont lineages , and only the epsins , was also recovered . This result is consistent with the hypothesis that epsinR , rather than epsin , is the ancient and hence more general eukaryotic ENTH - domain protein conﬁguration ( 20 ) and suggests that association of the UIM with the ENTH domain is speciﬁc to the opisthokonts . Alignment of selected ENTH domain predicted amino acid sequences demonstrated high levels of conserva - tion across divergent species , with several completely conserved residues ( Figure 2A ) . In most cases , predicted clathrin - binding motifs are retained within this sequence , α - adaptin and γ - adaptin binding short peptide motifs also occur in several sequences ( Figure 2B ) . The number of motifs and their positions varies considerably between species ( data not shown ) . Importantly , the DPW and DFG α - adaptin and γ - adaptin binding motifs are absent from the T . brucei TbEpsinR sequence , which may reﬂect the absence of Golgi - localizing , gamma - adaptin ear domain homology ARF - binding adaptors ( GGAs ) from non - opisthokont taxa ( 20 ) and also the selective secondary loss of AP - 2 from African trypanosomes ( 20 ) . Most signiﬁcantly , none of the epsin homologues in the non - opisthokonts harbors the ENTH - UIM domain architecture ( Figure 2B ) . Within the ENTH domain , basic residues that participate in binding to phosphatidylinositol phosphate ( PtdInsP ) lipids are well conserved . Variations within these residues may reﬂect altered afﬁnity or PtdInsP speciﬁcity ( Figure 2C ) . TbEpsinRislocatedatendosomes Co - evolution of epsin and epsinR within fungi and animals potentially confounds determination of original epsinR function . Hence , we considered a lineage that never possessed epsin and potentially retains the ancestral ENTH - domain family conﬁguration . We chose T . bruceifor analysis based on a well - characterized endocytic system , including the presence of an endosomal ubiquitylation system ( 24 – 26 ) . Trafﬁc 2009 ; 10 : 894 – 911 895 Gabernet - Castello et al . Bioinformatic searches identiﬁed Tb11 . 50 . 0006 on chro - mosome 11 as the sole ENTH - domain encoding open reading frame ( ORF ) in T . brucei . The predicted gene product is a protein of 55 . 2 kDa , pI6 . 5 and a member of the epsinR family ( Figures 1 and 2 ) . The ENTH domain of Tb11 . 50 . 0006 is 34 % identical to both Homosapiens N . gruberi EpsR C . elegans Eps D . melanogaster Eps ( Lqf ) C . intestinalis Eps H . sapiens Eps2A H . sapiens Eps2B H . sapiens Eps1 H . sapiens Eps3 C . neoformans Eps U . maydis Eps S . cerevisiae Ent1p S . cerevisiae Ent2p C . elegans EpsR C . intestinalis EpsR D . melanogaster EpsR H . sapiens EpsR C . reinhardtii EpsR O . tauri EpsR L . major EpsR T . brucei EpsR T . cruzi EpsR T . vaginalis EpsR C . neoformans EpsR U . maydis EpsR S . cerevisiae Ent3p C . merolae EpsR D . discoideum EpsR A . thaliana EpsR3 A . thaliana EpsR1A A . thaliana EpsR2 C . parvum EpsR T . gondii EpsR T . thermophila EpsR P . ramorum EpsR T . pseudonana EpsR 1 . 00 / 95 / 95 0 . 95 / 80 / 80 0 . 80 / 50 / 50 Statistical support 0 . 2 1 . 00 / 86 / 63 Figure 1 : Phylogenetic reconstruction of the epsin ENTH - domain family . Selected completed eukaryotic genomes were searched for ENTH - domain epsin - like proteins ( see Methods ) , sequences were aligned , edited for regions of poor alignment and subjected to phylogenetic analysis using Baysian inference and maximum - likelihood methods . The topologies in all cases were identical . Statistical support is shown for important nodes either as raw values or as colored dots—values are Bayesian / PhyML / RaxML . Taxa are color coded for membership of eukaryotic supergroups ; Opisthokonta—light blue , Plantae—green , Amoebozoa—pink , Chromalveolata—orange , Excavata—purple . Note that the epsin sequences are all derived from Opisthokonta ( shaded ) , whereas epsinR contains taxa representing all supergroups . 896 Trafﬁc 2009 ; 10 : 894 – 911 Function and Evolution of the Epsin Family TbEpsinR LmEpsinRTcEpsinRTvEpsinRPrEpsinRDdEpsinRScEnt3p EpsinR Epsin A a 1 a 2 a 3 a 4 a 5 a 6 a 7 a 8 ScEnt4p DmEpsinRHsEpsinRHsEpsin1DmLqfScEnt1pScEnt2p TbEpsinR LmEpsinRTcEpsinRTvEpsinRPrEpsinRDdEpsinRScEnt3p EpsinR Epsin ScEnt4p DmEpsinR HsEpsinR HsEpsin1DmLqfScEnt1pScEnt2p B HsEpsinR HsEpsin1 TbEpsinR ENTH 505 625 548 C TbEpsinR LmEpsinRTcEpsinRTvEpsinRPrEpsinRDdEpsinRScEnt3pScEnt4p dEpsinRhEpsinRhEpsin1dLqfScEnt1pScEnt2p a 0 a 1 a 2 a 3 a 4 14 5 5 4 PI ( 1 , 4 , 5 ) P specificity 5 1 4 UIM ENTH ENTH DPW ( a − binding motifs ) DxF NPF EpsinR Epsin DFG / DFXDF ( γ− binding motifs ) ClathrinBS Figure 2 : Conservation of ENTH - domain structure and TbEpsinR domain architecture . Panel A : Sequence comparison of ENTH domains in epsin and epsin - related proteins in taxa representative of the main eukaryotic supergroups , based on a ClustalW sequence alignment . The graphic was assembled with Easy Sequencing in Postscript ( ESPRIPT ) ( 22 ) . Residues on a black background are strictly conserved , boxed residues are conserved in more than 70 % of included sequences . Secondary struc - ture features based on the crystal struc - ture of H . sapiens Epsin are shown above the aligned sequences ( 23 ) . Panel B : Ribbon representations of H . sapiens Epsin , H . sapiens EpsinR andT . bruceiEpsinR . TheENTHdomain is shown as a black box , ubiquitin - interaction motifs as open boxes and adaptor binding motifs are indicated in black , gray or white . The overall length of the predicted polypeptide is also shown . The carboxy - terminal segments possess very limited homol - ogy with the exception of the pres - ence of the clathrin - and adaptin - binding motifs . Panel C : ENTH sequence alignment highlighting differences in the residues deﬁning PtdInsP - binding speciﬁcity . Secondary structural ele - ments are indicated as in Panel A , while residues in H . sapiens Epsin implicated in the interaction with the phosphate groups in PtdIns ( 1 , 4 , 5 ) P are highlighted . Color coding is black for conserved residues and gray for semi - conserved residues , boxed residues designate speciﬁcity for PtdIns ( 1 , 4 , 5 ) phosphate headgroups as in HsEpsin . Note that this alignment differs from the optimal global alignment in Panel A . ( H . sapiens ) epsin and epsinR ENTH domains , but 33 % overall to H . sapiensepsinR and 26 % to H . sapiensepsin . Based on these data we designated Tb11 . 50 . 0006 as TbEpsinR . While T . brucei has a high developmentally regulated endocytic system , spanning alterations in ﬂux of endocytic cargo and expression of several factors , TbEpsinR mRNA is present at near equivalent levels in the mammalian and insect forms ( Figure 3 ) ( 27 , 28 ) . To address expression and location of TbEpsinR at the protein level , we raised polyclonal antibodies in rabbits against a bacterially expressed TbEpsinR - glutathione S - transferase ( GST ) fusion protein , followed by afﬁnity puriﬁcation . Western analysis of lysates from bloodstream stage [ bloodstream form ( BSF ) ] cells indicated recognition of a single polypeptide that migrated with an apparent molecular weight of ∼ 75 kDa ( Figure 3A , right panel ) . While larger than the predicted molecular weight of 55 kDa , Rattus norvegicus ( R . norvegicus ) epsin has an apparent size of ∼ 95 kDa on SDS - PAGE despite a predicted 65 kDa molecular weight , suggesting aberrant mobility is a general feature of this family ( 9 ) . To ensure that the antibody was indeed speciﬁc , in light of the anomalous migration on SDS - PAGE this was veriﬁed as recognition was competed with soluble recombinant TbEpsinR - GST ( Figure S2 ) , and also subsequently by knockdown ( Figure 8 ) . TbEpsinR antibodies recognized structures at the posterior end of the trypanosome cytoplasm in both life stages , between the nucleus and kinetoplast , a location consistent with a role in the endomembrane system ( 29 ) ( Figure 3A ) . Trafﬁc 2009 ; 10 : 894 – 911 897 Gabernet - Castello et al . 2 μ M Figure 3 : TbEpsinR is expressed at equivalent levels in BSF and PCF trypanosomes , and located to the posterior region of the cell . Panel A : Bloodstream and PCF parasites were ﬁxed and prepared for immunoﬂuorescence analysis using anti - TbEpsinR ( red ) in BSF ( upper panels ) and PCF ( lower panels ) , DNA is visualized with 4’ , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ( DAPI ) ( blue ) . Left ; merge of TbEpsinR and DAPI ﬂuorescence . Right ; ﬂuorescence channels merged with phase contrast . Extensive staining of membrane structures by TbEpsinR antibody can be observed between the kinetoplast and the nucleus in both life stages . Side panel shows a western blot of BSF cell lysates indicating that a single band is recognized at ∼ 75 kDa by the anti - TbEpsinR antibody . Migration positions of molecular weight markers are shown at right . Panel B : TbEpsinR levels in bloodstream and PCFs as assessed by western blot analysis of cell lysates . Membranes were stripped and reprobed with anti - TbBiP to show equivalence of loading . Bars , 2 μ M . Interestingly the intensity of staining appeared rather similar in both stages , and this equivalent expression level was conﬁrmed by western blotting of whole cell lysates ( Figure 3B ) . Although some level of developmental variation in TbEpsinR function cannot be ruled out , we restricted further analyses to the BSF where endocytosis is upregulated and superior molecular markers and assays are available . TbEpsinRispresentonendosomalmembranes To investigate the distribution of TbEpsinR , we conducted a number of immunoﬂuorescence - based analyses using the majority of markers currently available for the trypanosome endocytic pathway . Initially , we stained the endocytic pathway with Concanavalin A - FITC ( ConA - FITC ) . Allowing the cells to accumulate the lectin at 4 ◦ C speciﬁcally labels the ﬂagellar pocket and at 12 ◦ C labels the early endosomes , the latter corresponds to Rab5A - positive compartments ( 30 , 31 ) . Cells were counterstained for TbEpsinR . A minor population of TbEpsinR was found in a region in close association with the ﬂagellar pocket ( Figure 4A , top panels ) , but the majority of the population localized to membrane structures that intersect more closely with the early endosome ( Figure 4A , middle panels ) . To investigate the relationship of TbEpsinR to recycling endosomes we costained cells with a combination of TbEpsinR and TbRab11 antibodies . TbEpsinR did not colocalize with the TbRab11 antigen , indicating that TbEpsinR does not have a major presence on recycling endosomes ( Figure 4A , bottom panels ) . EpsinR adaptors have also been implicated in transport between the TGN and endosomal compartments in metazoans and fungi ( 13 , 16 , 32 , 33 ) . To investigate possible TbEpsinR presence at the Golgi complex we stained a cell line expressing TbGRASP - GFP with the TbEpsinR antibody . A population of TbEpsinR antibody labeled a membrane domain juxtaposed to TbGRASP - GFP ( 34 ) ( Figure 4B , top panels ) , but the staining was clearly distinct , suggesting no signiﬁcant presence on the trypanosome Golgi apparatus . Finally , to ascertain if TbEpsinR were associated with deep endosomal compartments , we costained cells for TbEpsinR and the lysosomal marker p67 ( Figure 4B , bottom panels ) . No colocalization was observed . Further , we previously reported that TbEpsinR does not colocalize with TbVps28 , an ESCRT I component and a marker for the multi - vesicular body ( MVB ) ( 21 ) . Hence TbEpsinR seems to not be associated with the later compartments of the endocytic system that lead to the terminal lysosome and marks an apparently novel subpopulation of structures in trypanosomes . To extend these studies we performed immunoelectron microscopy on BSF parasites . Consistent with our ﬁndings from immunoﬂuorescence , cryosections of bloodstream cells showed the presence of TbEpsinR at internal membrane bounded compartments ( Figure 5A , B and E ) . Occasional gold particles also decorated clathrin - coated membrane both at , and budding from , the ﬂagellar pocket , consistent with the weaker staining seen at the light level near this structure ( Figure 5C , D ) . Signiﬁcantly , we never found a gold particle on bulk ﬂagellar pocket membrane 898 Trafﬁc 2009 ; 10 : 894 – 911 Function and Evolution of the Epsin Family 2 μ M 2 μ M Figure 4 : TbEpsinR localizes to distinct endosome - associated compartments . Panel A ; top and middle panels : BSF cells were incubated with the lectin Concanavalin A ( ConA ) ( green ) at 4 ◦ C and 12 ◦ C for 20 min to label for the ﬂagellar pocket and early endosomes , cells were then ﬁxed , permeabilized and stained with TbEpsinR antibody ( red ) and DAPI for DNA ( blue ) . Lower panels ; BSF cells were counterstained with TbEpsinR ( red ) and TbRab11 ( green ) . Panel B ; top panels : A BSF strain expressing the Golgi matrix protein TbGRASP , fused to GFP ( green ) , was counterlabeled with TbEpsinR antibody ( red ) . Lower panels ; cells were counterstained with TbEpsinR antibody ( red ) and p67 antibody ( green ) . DNA was visualized with DAPI . Bars , 2 μ M . suggesting an exclusive association with clathrin at this organelle . No staining of electron dense disk - like shape exocytic carriers that recycle endocytosed variant surface glycoprotein ( VSG ) back to the ﬂagellar pocket was found ( 35 ) , precluding a major presence on the recycling system , consistent with lack of association with Rab11 . Staining with anti - TbEpsinR antibody only ever detected a minority of endosomal compartments , indicating a highly speciﬁc and restricted location . These observations are in agreement with the results from the immunoﬂuorescence analysis and indicate that TbEpsinR has a cellular location with similarity to ENTH - domain adaptors of higher eukaryotes . The ultrastructural data suggest that TbEpsinR has preferential associations with membranes also bearing clathrin , and a putative clathrin - binding box is retained in the TbEpsinR sequence ( Figure 2B ) . We sought to conﬁrm this directly and obtain evidence for a functional connection . The TbEpsinR antibody was used to stain cells expressing the trypanosome clathrin - light chain ( CLC ) genomically tagged at the C - terminus . Fluorescence microscopy uncovered extensive colocalization between clathrin - associated structures and TbEpsinR ( Figure 6A ) . To investigate whether clathrin contributes to targeting or binding of TbEpsinR onto the membrane fraction , we use RNAi to knockdown the trypanosome clathrin heavy chain ( CLH ) . Knockdown results in a complete endocytic block with enlargement of the ﬂagellar pocket , the Big Eye morphology ( 27 ) . We selected for analysis only cells where an enlarged pocket was evident , but prior to onset of gross morphological abnormalities . Knockdown of clathrin resulted in reduction of T . brucei clathrin heavy chain ( TbCLH ) staining as expected ( Figure 6B , upper panel ) . Signiﬁcantly , reduction of clathrin levels resulted in both decrease of TbEpsinR antibody binding and redistribution of TbEpsinR punctate staining to a diffuse location all over the cell ( Figure 6B , lower panels ) . These data suggest that TbEpsinR requires expression of clathrin for correct targeting to membranes . To further examine interactions between TbEpsinR and clathrin , we used TbEpsinR and TbCLH antibody to immunoprecipitate TbCLH from lysates of BSF parasites . As speciﬁcity controls we used binding protein ( BiP ) antibody or no antibody . Lysates were added to protein A beads , the beads washed and the presence of bound protein assessed by western blotting . Clathrin was immunoprecipitated together with TbEpsinR . This interaction appears speciﬁc as no clathrin could be Trafﬁc 2009 ; 10 : 894 – 911 899 Gabernet - Castello et al . Figure 5 : TbEpsinR immunogold electron microscopy . BSF parasites were prepared for immunoelectron microscopy ( see Methods ) . Thawed cryosections were stained with afﬁnity - puriﬁed anti - TbEpsinR antibody followed by gold - conjugated secondary antibody . Labeling for TbEpsinR was found primarily on the cytoplasmic face of , or in close proximity to , intracellular vesicles ( panels A , B and E ) , clathrin - coated pits budding from the ﬂagellar pocket membrane ( panel B ) and clathrin - coated areas of the ﬂagellar pocket ( panel C ) . Gold was not observed associated with non – clathrin - coated vesicles associated with the ﬂagellar pocket membrane , indicating no detectable presence at recycling endosomal structures . In all cases only a minority of vesicular structures close to the ﬂagellar pocket were labeled suggesting either selective loading onto vesicles or transient association only . Bar in panel A is 500 nm . Panels B , D and E were taken under the same magniﬁcation as panel A . Bar in panel C is 100 nm . detected in the BiP or no antibody control ( Figure 6C ) . Taken with the ultrastructural evidence , these data suggest that TbEpsinR associates in a complex with clathrin , and that this association is required for faithful targeting to membranes . RecruitmentofTbEpsinRtothemembraneis dependentonPtdInsmembranecomposition Residues implicated in PtdInsP recognition are retained in TbEpsinR ( Figure 2C ) . To determine if the ENTH domain of TbEpsinR inﬂuences membrane targeting of TbEpsinR , we carried out immunoﬂuorescence studies under conditions expected to perturb phosphoinositide lipid synthesis and dephosphorylation . An initial subcellular fractionation using hypotonic lysis of trypanosome cells indicated that TbEpsinR is present at equivalent levels as both cytosolic and membrane - associated populations ( Figure 7A ) . In H . sapiens Rab5 serves as a master regulator for endosomal synthesis of PtdIns ( 3 ) P , both via recruitment of PI3K - β and Vps34 and of phosphatases that convert higher order PtdInsP lipids to PtdIns ( 3 ) P ( 36 ) . Knock down of TbRab5A resulted in increased intracellular staining of TbEpsinR ( Figure 7B , left panels ) as quantitated by single cell immunoﬂuorescence analysis of cells that retained a normal morphology ( Figure 7C , left ) . In cells with an enlarged ﬂagellar pocket , TbEpsinR accumulated around the ﬂagellar pocket area on structures that did not correlate to any endocytic vesicles as visualized by electron microscopy ( EM ) ( Figure S3 ) . TbEpsinR levels in TbRab5A knock down cells were increased overall as assessed by western blot analysis of TbRab5A RNAi cells ( Figure S4 ) . The role of TbPI4KIII - β in trafﬁcking has been previously characterized ( 37 ) ; Similar to the TbRab5A knockdown , TbEpsinR intracellular staining in an induced TbPI4KIII - β RNAi BSF cell line was increased ( Figure 7B and C , middle panels ) and resulted in accumulation of TbEpsinR in cells that presented an enlarged ﬂagellar pocket , similar to as observed for TbRab5A RNAi . To assess whether the increase in TbEpsinR intracellular staining was result of an impairment in PtdIns ( 3 ) P synthesis on endosomal membranes we used the PI3K inhibitor wortmannin , previously shown by us to act in a 900 Trafﬁc 2009 ; 10 : 894 – 911 Function and Evolution of the Epsin Family Figure 6 : TbEpsinR association with clathrin . Panel A : BSF cells expressing green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) genomic - tagged ( CLC - GFP ) ( green ) were counterstained with anti - TbEpsinR antibody ( red ) . TbEpsinR labeling shows extensive overlap with CLC - GFP . Panel B : RNAi against ( TbCLH ) was induced with 1 μ g mL − 1 tetracycline for 12 h ( + TET ) . Cells were then ﬁxed and further processed for labeling with anti - TbCLH ( green ) ( upper panels ) or anti - TbEpsinR ( red ) ( lower panels ) antibodies . TbEpsinR becomes mislocalized in the clathrin knockdown in cells with a Big Eye morphology when compared with uninduced cells ( – TET ) . Cells were counterstained with DAPI to visualize the nucleus and kinetoplast . Panel C : Clathrin heavy chain can be co - immunoprecipitated with anti - TbEpsinR antibody and anti - TbCLH antibody . As speciﬁcity controls anti - TbBiP and no antibody ( Con ) were used . Lysates were probed with afﬁnity - puriﬁed antibody to TbCLH . Bars , 2 μ M . similar manner in trypanosomes as in higher eukaryotes ( 38 ) . BSF cells treated with wortmannin showed no signiﬁcant increase in membrane - associated TbEpsinR in cells with a normal morphology ( Figure 7B and C , right panels ) , although a small increase in TbEpsinR staining of endosomal structures was , however , observed in cells that presented an enlarged ﬂagellar pocket ( Figure 7B ) . Overall these data suggest an accumulation of intracellular TbEpsinR under circumstances of perturbed phosphoinositide levels ( 39 ) . TbEpsinRexpressionisessentialinBSFcells To directly address the roles of TbEpsinR in endocytosis and membrane trafﬁcking , we used RNAi . Expression of double - stranded RNA from p2T7TbEpsinR in an inducible BSF cell line ( 40 ) caused a severe growth defect manifest at early time points of induction ( Figure 8A ) , which correlated with a rapid loss of TbEpsinR protein levels as seen by western blot ( Figure 8B ) and immunoﬂuorescence ( Figure 8C ) analysis at 6 and 12 h post induction . Moreover , no effect on expression levels of clathrin , Rab5A , Rab11 or BiP were observed , suggesting that any alterations were speciﬁc and not due to secondary effects , as observed , for example , in knockdown of TbRab5A on clathrin expression ( 41 ) . Furthermore , the locations of clathrin and TbRab5A were unaffected , and suggest that endosome maintenance either does not require TbEpsinR or utilizes multiple Trafﬁc 2009 ; 10 : 894 – 911 901 Gabernet - Castello et al . Figure 7 : Role of the ENTH - domain and PtdInsP in TbEpsinR localization . Panel A : BSF cells were grown to log - phase and lysed under hypotonic conditions . Supernatant ( SN ) and pellet ( P ) fractions were recovered , concentrated to normalize loading and analyzed by western blotting . TbEpsinR is present at equivalent levels as cytosolic and membrane - bound populations ( upper panel ) . As expected , the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) chaperone TbBiP is restricted to the pellet fraction ( middle panel ) , the majority of TbRab11A is in the pellet and a small proportion can also be detected in the SN , consistent with previous work ( bottom panel ) . Panel B : Immunoﬂuorescence detection of TbEpsinR in TbRab5A ( left panels ) , TbPI4KIII - β ( middle panels ) RNAi cells induced with 1 μ g mL − 1 tetracycline for 24 h and 72 h respectively , and BSF treated with wortmannin 30 μ M for 1 h ( right panels ) . Treated cells were ﬁxed and further labeled with anti - TbEpsinR antibody ( red ) . Cells were counterstained with DAPI to visualize the nucleus and kinetoplast . Panel C : Histograms represent quantitation of intracellular immunoﬂuorescence , values are expressed in percentage of treated to untreated and represent mean values of at least n = 30 cells . Bars , 2 μ M . and redundant mechanisms that can compensate for the loss of TbEpsinR . These data also indicate that the effects of clathrin knockdown on TbEpsinR location are not reciprocal , suggesting that clathrin acts upstream of TbEpsinR in recruitment to the membrane . The presence of a signiﬁcant proportion of the cell population with multiple nuclei and kinetoplasts is indicative of a severe disruption of membrane transport that affects completion of cytokinesis ( Figure S5 ) . Finally , the Big Eye enlarged ﬂagellar pocket phenotype was only seen in an extremely small percentage of the population as scored by light microscopy of ﬁxed TbEpsinR RNAi cells at 24 h of induction ( Figure S5 ) , suggesting that TbEpsinR does not have a major role in bulk membrane endocytosis , and consistent with the absence of an effect on either clathrin protein levels or localization . An enlarged vacuole , seen in a slightly higher proportion of induced cells compared with controls had neither the morphology nor the correct position for the BigEye ( Figure S5 ) . These observations are consistent with a role of TbEpsinR as a transport adaptor , and not a structural component of the endosomal machinery . TbEpsinRisrequiredforendocytosisofboth trans - membranedomainandGPI - anchoredsurface proteins To uncover any speciﬁc roles of TbEpsinR in endocytosis we measured total and intracellular levels of several well - characterized molecules following TbEpsinR silencing . We included ESAG6 / 7 transferrin receptor ( TfR ) , and invariant surface glycoproteins ISG65 and ISG75 ; TfR is a GPI - anchored molecule restricted to the ﬂagellar pocket ( 42 ) , while ISG65 and ISG75 are trans - membrane domain proteins internalized by a ubiquitin and ESCRT - dependent mechanism [ ( 21 , 26 ) , Leung and MCF unpublished data ] . 902 Trafﬁc 2009 ; 10 : 894 – 911 Function and Evolution of the Epsin Family Figure 8 : TbEpsinR expression is required for growth . Panel A : Growth curves for bloodstream trypanosomes transformed with p2T7TbEpsinR RNAi plasmid . Cell cultures were grown in triplicate in the presence ( open squares ) or absence ( closed squares ) of 1 μ g mL − 1 tetracycline and main - tained under mid - logarithmic growth conditions by periodic dilution ( indi - cated by breaks in the growth curves ) . Cell density was assessed by Coulter Counter . Data points are mean val - ues . Panel B : Aliquots of induced and non - induced cultures were taken at the indicated times and analyzed by western blot . A decrease in TbEpsinR protein levels can be observed at an early time ( 6 h ) and by 12 h , protein levels are reduced to < 30 % when compared to the non - induced con - trol . No signiﬁcant change to pro - tein levels of the endocytic mark - ers TbRab5A , TbCLH , the recycling endosome marker TbRab11A or the ER marker TbBiP could be detected . Quantitation of WB data is shown on the left . Panel C : Immunoﬂuorescence analysis of endocytic factors under the same conditions as in panel B indicates that there are no major struc - tural alterations of these membrane domains . TbEpsinR , TbRab5A and p67 in red , TbCLH and TbRab11 in green . Cells were counterstained with DAPI to visualize the nucleus and kineto - plast . Bars , 2 μ M . Immunoﬂuorescence - based quantitation of TfR , ISG65 and ISG75 in TbEpsinR RNAi induced permeabilized cells shows that depletion of TbEpsinR caused a signiﬁcant decrease to the intracellular pool of TfR , ISG65 and ISG75 ( Figure 9A ) . No mislocalization was observed for any of the markers studied ( Figure 9A ) . The decrease in intracellular levels was quantitated by single cell analysis ; intracellular levels of the GPI - anchored TfR were reduced by ∼ 60 % in induced cells and by ∼ 40 % for the trans - membrane antigens ISG65 and ISG75 ( Figure 9C ) . To ensure that this effect was not due to decreased synthesis of the antigens western blot analysis of whole lysates was also performed . No major variations in total protein levels of TfR , VSG , ISG65 or ISG75 were obtained upon knock down of TbEpsinR , while TbEpsinR itself was clearly decreased ( Figure 9B ) . Quantitation conﬁrmed this result , with a small protection of TfR , ISG65 and ISG75 observed , also consistent with prevention of uptake ( Figure 9C ) . A small decrease to VSG levels was not consistently observed , and may be due to toxicity of the TbEpsinR knockdown or other effects and was not investigated further . The decrease in the intracellular pool of these surface antigens , both GPI - anchored and trans - membrane domain anchored , is similar to that seen for ISG65 and ISG75 intracellular levels when clathrin is knocked down ( 26 ) . Hence , these data clearly support a role of TbEpsinR in endocytosis of surface proteins , but as ﬂagellar pocket morphology remains normal without obvious effects on bulk membrane internalization . Finally , as VSG is the overwhelming mannose - containing surface protein of trypanosomes we monitored VSG endo - cytosis by ConA accumulation together with receptor - mediated endocytosis by accumulation of transferrin . Fluorescence microscopy clearly showed that accumu - lation of FITC - ConA was compromised by TbEpsinR knockdown ( Figure 10A ) . No mislocalization of ConA was observed , again indicating no major defects in the endomembrane system morphology . Some trafﬁc to late endosomes / lysosomes is observed ; these ﬁndings are distinct to the effects obtained for clathrin knockdown , but consistent with previous studies in mammalian cells where epsinR suppression does not lead to missorting of lysosomal enzymes ( 33 ) and cathepsin D trafﬁcking is only impaired upon epsinR overexpression ( 13 ) . Trafﬁc 2009 ; 10 : 894 – 911 903 Gabernet - Castello et al . Figure 9 : TbEpsinR is required for endocytosis of multiple surface proteins . Panel A : Immunoﬂuorescence analysis of the transferrin receptor ( TfR ) , ISG65 and ISG75 in TbEpsinR RNAi cells . Cells were induced with 1 μ g mL − 1 tetracycline for 24 h and then ﬁxed and labeled with antibodies against the indi - cated markers . For each panel antigen is red , DAPI ( DNA ) is blue . Note that no mislocalization of the intracellular pool was observed for any of the antigens studied , but that the level of protein detected was signiﬁcantly decreased . Panel B : western analysis of total pro - tein for the above antigens in uninduced ( – ) and induced ( + ) RNAi cells under the same con - ditions as in panel A . TbBiP is used as a loading control . Panel C : Histograms show quantitation of intracellular ﬂuorescence ( left ) and total protein abundance ( right ) from the analyses in panels A and B and additional replicates . Filled bars are uninduced and open bars are the induced cell lev - els . Immunoﬂuorescence values are expressed in percentage of induced to uninduced conditions and represent mean values from at least 30 cells . ImageJ was used for western blot quantitation and reproducibility was conﬁrmed in two independent experiments . Bars , 2 μ M . We used ﬂuorescence - activated cell sorter ( FACS ) analysis to quantitate accumulation of both FITC - ConA and Alexa633 - Tf in large numbers of cells , and also separated the data for interphase and post S - phase cells based on Hoechst staining . Uptake of both markers was reduced by approximately 50 % in the induced cells when compared to the non - induced cultures . The observed endocytosis defect was similar in interphase and post - mitotic cells suggesting that the impairment in uptake was not cell – cycle - dependent ( Figure 10B ) . Discussion The basic conﬁguration of the endomembrane system appears to be very ancient and predates establishment of the major eukaryote lineages ( 43 ) . Major organellar categories , including the ER , Golgi apparatus , endosomes , ( MVBs ) and the lysosome / vacuole all appear to have been present in the last common eukaryotic ancestor ( LCEA ) ( 20 , 21 , 43 , 44 ) . This remarkable level of early sophistication in eukaryote evolution also extends to multiple molecular systems , encompassing the core fusion machinery ( 45 , 46 ) , coat proteins ( 47 ) and trafﬁcking of ubiquitylated cargo ( 26 ) . In contrast , several aspects of the endocytic system were probably simpler in the ancestral eukaryote ( 47 ) , while examples of lineage - speciﬁc features are now known , including multiple clathrin - independent endocytic pathways , features of 904 Trafﬁc 2009 ; 10 : 894 – 911 Function and Evolution of the Epsin Family Figure 10 : Receptor - mediated endocyto - sis is dependent on TbEpsinR RNAi . Panel A : Induced and non - induced bloodstream TbEpsinR RNAi cells were incubated with ConA at 37 ◦ C for the indicated periods prior to quenching on ice and further processing for ﬂuorescence microscopy . In the unin - duced cells , at 0 min , most of the ConA is at the ﬂagellar pocket , at 5 min some stain - ing of endomembrane compartments can be observed , the ﬂuorescence distribution is more extensive at 10 min . By 20 min , cells present a strong staining of the lysosome due to accumulation of ConA in this compart - ment . In the induced cells , the path followed by endocytosed ConA is similar to the one observed for the non - induced culture but the labeling intensity is much reduced . Note that the major mannose - bearing structure , i . e . ConA - binding ligand , at the cell surface is VSG . Panel B : Flow cytometric analysis of ConA and transferrin uptake . BSF parasites were incubated with Alexa633 - transferrin or FITC - Concanavalin A at 37 ◦ C , for the indi - cated periodoftime . Samples werequenched by adding ice - cold PBS , 3 μ g mL − 1 Hoechst to stain DNA and taken for FACS analysis . Data for each marker are presented as his - tograms of Transferrin uptake ( left ) and ConA uptake ( right ) in the 1K1N and 2K2N popula - tions , at an incubation time 20 min . Relative ﬂuorescence median values were used to calculate percent of ligand uptake . Relative ﬂuorescence values for non - induced were set to 100 % and ﬂuorescence values for the induced cells were normalized to these val - ues . Error bars represent the standard error of the ﬂuorescence distribution . Bars , 2 μ M . the MVB / ESCRT system and other lineage - speciﬁc elaborations ( 20 , 21 , 48 ) . The presence of lineage - speciﬁc features was suggested earlier by us for the epsin ENTH domain - containing family of proteins , where preliminary analysis indicated that higher eukaryotes possessed true UIM - containing epsins but other lineages do not ( 20 ) . The ENTH domain is highly conserved , where it is present along with binding motifs for clathrin and adaptins , suggesting an ancient role for the ENTH domain in clathrin - mediated transport . Most studies on ENTH domain proteins have focused on higher eukaryotes where two types coexist , epsin , with a role in endocytosis ( 9 ) and epsinR , principally involved in retrograde and TGN transport ( 13 ) . We ﬁnd that the major innovations to epsins are ubiquitin interacting motifs ( UIMs ) downstream of the ENTH domain that participate in endocytosis of ubiquitylated cargo ( 11 ) and NPF sequences that bind to Eps15 homology ( EH ) domains occurring in factors affecting actin dynamics ( 9 , 10 , 32 , 49 ) . Apart from the presence of NPF motifs in a few non - opisthokont epsins , these domain architectures are absent from ENTH - domain proteins outside of the Opisthokonta . Further , in these taxa , ENTH - domain protein genes exist mainly as single copy . These ﬁndings are in agreement with previous analyses showing that components of the clathrin network linking endocytosis to actin dynamics and sorting of ubiquitylated cargo in metazoans and fungi are not fully conserved with the remaining eukaryotes ( 50 ) . These observations indicate a simple evolutionary history for the ENTH - domain family . The most parsimonious view is that the ancestral eukaryote had a single gene encoding an epsinR - like factor . This gene expanded in a few lineages , for example , A . thaliana ( 51 ) and opisthokonts , and may be partly , but not exclusively , associated with multicellularity and tissue differentiation . This pattern is reminiscent of that seen for three other endocytic - speciﬁc membrane - trafﬁcking family paralogues ( Rab5 , the endocytic anterograde syntaxins and the β - subunit of AP1 and AP2 ) . Epsin and epsinR likely represent a fourth example of a protein associated with the endocytic system that was simpler in the LCEA and that gained complexity in parallel in multiple lineages ( 47 ) . A single Trafﬁc 2009 ; 10 : 894 – 911 905 Gabernet - Castello et al . gene duplication event early in the opisthokont lineage , for example , allowed acquisition of the UIM by one of the resulting paralogues , and hence diversiﬁcation of function . Signiﬁcantly this appears to be a unique event , while expansion of the resulting epsin and epsinR genes is more common and there are multiple genes in metazoan and yeast genomes . As essentially all studies have been in opisthokonts , and epsin / epsinR have coevolved for hundreds of millions of years , the modern functions of epsinR are unlikely to reﬂect the ancestral roles . We used trypanosomes , which only ever possessed epsinR , to uncover the roles that epsinR plays in intracellular transport in non - Opisthokonta . TbEpsinR has a localization characteristic of both epsin and epsinR adaptors . In mammalian cells epsin and epsinR are present within two distinct pools ; epsin associates with clathrin at the plasma membrane and epsinR colocalizes with a perinuclear clathrin population ( 10 ) . TbEpsinR is present at the ﬂagellar pocket , superposes with early endocytic compartments , is in close juxtaposition to the Golgi complex but is absent from lysosomes and MVBs . TbEpsinR is intimately associated with clathrin , colocalizes with GFP - tagged CLC , is present in clathrin - coated pits at the ﬂagellar pocket and can be isolated in a complex with clathrin by coimmunoprecipitation . TbEpsinR contains a putative clathrin - binding box that , as in H . sapiensepsinR , overlaps with one of the DxF adaptin - binding motifs near the carboxy terminus ; the presence of clathrin - binding motifs in TbEpsinR suggests that the interaction is direct . TbEpsinR is not found associated with the exocytic carrier cisternae that are part of the Rab11 recycling system ( 35 ) . Based primarily on in vitro studies the distributions of epsin and epsinR are believed to be determined partly by recognition of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 at the plasma membrane by epsin and PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P or PtdIns ( 4 ) P by Saccharomyces cerevisiae ( S . cerevisiae ) or mammalian epsinR respectively at intracellular compartments ( ( 10 , 33 , 52 ) , reviewed in ( 53 ) ) . At these sites both factors act by inducing membrane curvature and clathrin assembly ( 52 , 54 ) . However , clathrin and adaptor appendage - binding motifs are also present in both H . sapiens epsin and epsinR ( 10 , 52 ) , and these additional interactions are likely to contribute to subcellular localization . Basic residues along the ﬁrst four helices of the ENTH domain co - ordinate binding to phospholipids ( 52 ) . Conserved changes in these residues and variations in their positions within the ENTH domain in TbEpsinR compared to H . sapiens epsin and epsinR suggest differences in afﬁnity of TbEpsinR for membrane phospholipids . TbEpsinR recruitment to membranes was lost by suppression of TbCLH , and the protein redistributed from endocytic puncta to diffuse staining , indicating that targeting requires clathrin . The near complete overlap between clathrin and TbEpsinR locations suggests that the TbEpsinR - clathrin interaction is a dominant targeting mechanism , and certainly , as there is a single epsin family protein , differential targeting is impossible . However , it is also apparent that PtdIns levels are important in TbEpsinR membrane association , as knockdown of TbRab5A and TbPI4KIII - β ( 36 , 38 , 41 ) lead to signiﬁcantly increased recruitment of TbEpsinR to endosomal membranes . Taken together these data indicate that PtdInsP composition of trypanosomal endosomal membranes can modulate TbEpsinR recruitment . While this cannot contribute to differential targeting , our ﬁndings demonstrate that the ancestral ENTH domain likely retains the ability to recognize speciﬁc membranes based on PtdInsP composition . In terms of function , TbEpsinR clearly contributes to endocytosis , and participates in the uptake of multiple surface factors , including GPI - anchored andtrans - membrane proteins . Signiﬁcantly this also includes the superabundant VSG and proteins with a more modest copy number . Knockdown however , despite being lethal , did not result in an enlarged ﬂagellar pocket in the vast majority of cells , but did produce cell - cycle defects . It is most probable that the broad effects on protein endocytosis contribute to both the lethality and cell - cycle perturbation , by considerable mistargeting of multiple factors . Similar defects have been observed for other endocytic factors in trypanosomes ( 55 ) . Epsin family adaptors are proposed to bridge the membrane and clathrin coat , based on direct interaction with clathrin and the ability of epsin adaptors to promote clathrin assembly ( 52 , 54 ) . Live cell imaging of endocytic coat assembly indicates that clathrin precedes epsin recruitment ( 39 , 56 ) . TbEpsinR cellular distribution is dependent on clathrin expression but no effect on clathrin localization is observed upon TbEpsinR knockdown , consistent with this view . While we cannot rule out a role for TbEpsinR in clathrin polymerization , which may in part explain the role of TbEpsinR in endocytosis , the absence of clathrin mislocalization or an enlarged ﬂagellar pocket is strong evidence that TbEpsinR is not essential for clathrin assembly . Fungi and animals possess several factors absent from non - opisthokont taxa , including the GGAs , caveolin , several ESCRT components and numerous additional factors ( 20 , 43 ) . Trypanosomes also lack AP - 2 , and endocytosis is independent of dynamin ; the former is a unique feature and potentially reﬂects unusual aspects of the trypanosome surface ( 29 , 57 ) . The absence of GGAs is signiﬁcant as this interaction is important to speciﬁc targeting of epsinR to the TGN ; the absence of this interaction suggests that this is a derived characteristic that was absent from the LCEA . Actin also participates in trypanosome endocytosis ( 50 ) and the absence of an enlarged ﬂagellar pocket in TbEpsinR knockdown cells is distinct to both clathrin and actin RNAi phenotypes ( 27 , 50 ) . This suggests that TbEpsinR is not responsible for bulk ﬂow of endocytic membrane and suggests that TbEpsinR must act downstream of actin and clathrin . 906 Trafﬁc 2009 ; 10 : 894 – 911 Function and Evolution of the Epsin Family However , it is signiﬁcant that in metazoa and fungi the role of epsin or epsinR in bulk ﬂow has not been assessed as studies used exclusively protein markers and ligands and hence the importance of epsin / epsinR in lipid ﬂow remains unknown . Further , while PtdInsP speciﬁcity is suggested to contribute to membrane targeting , in the ancestral eukaryote this was presumably less precise as the need to discriminate between epsin and epsinR was not present . Evolution of additional speciﬁcity likely accompanied differentiation between these two isoforms and differences in PtdInsP speciﬁcity detected in several species ( 53 ) may be the result of lineage - speciﬁc divergence . How does the function of TbEpsinR compare to epsin family proteins from other systems ? There is clear evidence for functional discrimination between epsin and epsinR in Opisthokonts . In yeasts , there are several epsin family genes ; Ent1p and Ent2p are true epsins and are clearly implicated in endocytosis ( 12 ) and also bind ubiquitin ( 58 ) . By contrast S . cerevisiae Ent3p and Ent5p are assigned as epsinR , locate to the Golgi complex and bind GGA adaptins ( 32 , 59 ) . These pairs of gene products are partially redundant as , for example , Ent3 and Ent5 are synthetic lethal , but single knockouts viable ( 59 ) . This functional pattern is conserved with metazoa , and epsin is a player in clathrin - mediated endocytosis , but epsinR intimately associated with trans - Golgi events ( 60 ) ; association with distinct adaptin complexes has also been reported for both epsin and epsinR , speciﬁc binding to GGA for epsinR ( 61 ) , and a lack of association with caveolin , suggesting that epsins are indeed restricted in function to clathrin - dependent pathways ( 11 ) , which may be the only endocytic pathway present in non - opisthokonts . However , epsinR in Drosophila melanogaster is essential , whereas epsin , which is required for both Delta and Notch signaling and hence implicated in endocytosis , is not an essential gene ( reviewed in ( 62 ) ) . Signiﬁcantly , a role for epsinR in Golgi - mediated trafﬁcking is supported for Arabidopis thaliana , which lacks epsin . There are potentially three epsinR proteins in A . thaliana , two of which locate at the TGN ( 15 ) . However , while AtEpsinR1 has a clear role in TGN to vacuole transport ( 14 ) , AtEpsinR2 also binds AP - 2 , suggesting a role in endocytosis . Moreover , only a minor proportion of AtEpsinR2 is located at the Golgi complex and the majority appears associated with an as yet undeﬁned compartment . The contribution of AtEpsinR2 to clathrin - mediated endocytosis has not been described . Overall , our data suggest the major function of TbEpsinR is as an adaptor in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . While we are unable to assess the contribution of TbEpsinR in TGN - mediated trafﬁcking directly due to the absence of sensitive assays or markers , the absence of effects on the lysosomal protein p67 are suggestive that any such role is minor , and is unlike the disruption observed inS . cerevisiae ( 32 ) . We suggest that opisthokonts have increased their emphasis on ubiquitylation as a mechanism for endocytosis , consistent with the expansion of distinct endocytic pathways described for mammalian cells . Clearly , acquisition of the UIM by epsin would recruit this factor into the endocytic pathway , and provide increased scope for modulation of clathrin - mediated transport . This is consistent with the evidence here that the ancestral role for the ENTH - domain proteins was likely in endocytosis , and subsequent evolution has served to elaborate this family within the higher eukaryotes into two distinct families with differing roles . Materials and Methods Bioinformatics ENTH - containing proteins were identiﬁed by BLAST analysis of complete genome databases of representative taxa in ﬁve of the six major eukaryotic supergroups using S . cerevisiae and metazoan sequences as initial queries ( 63 ) . No complete genome database for a representative Rhizarian ( the sixth supergroup ) was available . T . brucei , Plasmodium falciparum ( P . falciparum ) , Entamoeba histolytica ( E . histolytica ) and Dictyostelium discoideum ( D . discoideum ) data were obtained from geneDB ( www . genedb . org ) . Thalassiosira pseudonana ( T . pseudonana ) , Phytophthora ramorum ( P . ramorum ) , Ostreococcus tauri ( O . tauri ) , Naegleriagruberi ( N . gruberi ) , Chlamydomonasreinhardtii ( C . reinhardtii ) and Ciona intestinalis ( C . intestinals ) data were from the joint genomeinitiative ( genome . jgi - psf . org ) . Trichomonasvaginalis ( T . vaginalis ) , Tetrahymena thermophila ( T . thermophila ) , Theileria parva ( T . parva ) , Cryptococcus neoformans ( C . neoformans ) and A . thaliana data were from TIGR ( www . tigr . org ) . Giardia lamblia ( G . lamblia ) data were obtained from GiardiaDB ( www . mbl . edu / Giardia ) , Toxoplasma gondii ( T . gondii ) data from ToxoDB ( www . toxodb . org ) , Cryptosporidium parvum ( C . parvum ) data from CryptoDB ( www . cryptodb . org ) and Cyanidioschyzon merolae ( C . merolae ) data were retrieved from the C . merolae genome BLAST server ( merolae . biol . s . u - tokyo . ac . jp ) . Fungal data was obtained from the Munich Information Center for Protein Sequences ( MIPS ) database ( mips . gsf . de ) and Drosophilamelanogaster data was at FlyBase ( www . ﬂybase . org ) . All remaining genomic data were retrieved through National Center for Biotechnology Information ( NCBI ) ( blast . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / Blast . cgi ) . This procedure identiﬁed Tb11 . 50 . 0006 as an ENTH - domain protein , and the sole representative in T . brucei . Retrieved sequences were aligned using MUltiple Sequence Comparison by Log - Expectation ( MUSCLE ) ( 64 ) and adjusted by eye . Only regions of unambiguous homology were retained for phylogenetic analysis . An initial alignment contained all 49 sequences collected . Long branches , i . e . divergent sequences , were identiﬁed in the initial tree topology and from the presence of regions incongruous with the overall alignment , including non - canonical features within the ENTH domain . A sub - dataset , with these divergent data removed , contained 35 sequences but retained representativesfromallﬁveeukaryoticsupergroups ( 63 ) . Prot - test1 . 3 ( 65 ) was used to select the appropriate model of sequence evolution in both cases ; for the initial dataset a Whelan and Goldman ( WAG ) model ( 66 ) plus a gamma ( G ) correction of 2 . 62 was used , while for the second dataset a WAG + I ( 0 . 01 ) + G ( 2 . 62 ) model was applied . Phylogenetic analysis was performedusing MrBayesVersion 3 . 1 . 2 ( 10 6 generations ) ( 67 ) and PhyML ( 68 ) and RAxML ( 69 ) ( 100 pseudoreplicates ) . All alignments are available upon request . Celllinesandpropagation T . bruceiBSFandprocyclicform ( PCF ) Lister427laboratory - adaptedstrains were cultured in HMI9 and SDM79 media respectively supplemented with 10 % fetalbovineserumasdescribedpreviously ( 70 ) . ForRNAinterference experiments , the tetracycline - responsive single marker bloodstream - form Trafﬁc 2009 ; 10 : 894 – 911 907 Gabernet - Castello et al . ( SMB ) cell line was cultured as described ( 40 ) . BSF cells expressing GRASP - GFP were maintained in the presence of 2 . 5 μ g mL − 1 geneticin . The genomic - tagged CLC - GFP cell line was maintained in the presence of 0 . 2 μ g mL − 1 puromycin . RNAinterference A 438bp fragment of Tb11 . 50 . 0006 was selected and veriﬁed by RNAit software to speciﬁcally target the gene product in RNAi experiments ( 71 ) . This fragment was PCR - ampliﬁed from T . brucei genomic DNA using speciﬁc primers ( FOR , GGCCAAATTGAGTGGTGAG ; REV , CTAGGCTCTGCCTTTGGATG ) and inserted into the p2T 7 TABlue plasmid . An AMAXA nucleofector was used to transfect tetracycline - responsive log - phase SMB with NotI digested p2T7 - TbEpsinR following the manufacturer’s procedure and as previously described ( 28 ) . Single clones were selected and maintained in the presence of 5 μ g mL − 1 hygromycin and 2 . 5 μ g mL − 1 geneticin . To generate the TbPI4KIII - β RNAi cell line a fragment of Tb927 . 4 . 1140 ( 37 ) was cloned into p2T 7 TABlue plasmid and SMB cells were transfected as described earlier . TbCLH RNAi and TbRab5A RNAi were as described previously ( 27 , 41 ) . For growth curves , cultures were inoculated to a concentration of 10 4 cells mL − 1 in triplicate with or without tetracycline at 1 μ g mL − 1 . To monitor cell numberscell densitywas assessed using a Z2 CoulterCounter ( Beckman ) . Antibodies The full - length TbEpsinR ORF was ampliﬁed from T . brucei genomic DNA using the selected primers ; FOR , ACTTGGATCCATGTCATTTCC - GACTTCTC and REV , AGTGGATCCCTACTGACCTAACCGGCGACC , and cloned downstream and in frame with GST into the BamHI site of pGEX6P . GST - TbEpsinR was expressed in BL21 ( DE3 ) transformed E . coli with pGEX6P . TbEpsinR in L - broth and induced with 1 . 0 m M isopropyl - β - D - thiogalactopyranoside . Recombinant protein was afﬁnity puriﬁed on glutathione - sepharose - 4B ( GE Healthcare ) according to the manufacturer’s procedure . Purity of isolated GST - TbEpsinR was estimated at ∼ 95 % by SDS - PAGE and Coomassie Blue staining . Protein yield was quantitated by OD 280 nm at ∼ 2 mg L − 1 . TbEpsinRantiserumwasraisedinrabbitsagainst the full - length fusion protein ; rabbits were immunized four times with a total of 2 mg recombinant protein in Freund’s complete adjuvant ( Cov - alab ) . For antibody afﬁnity puriﬁcation , GST - TbEpsinR was immobilized on cyanogen bromide - activated agarose ( Sigma ) following the manufacturer’s procedure and antibody puriﬁed by standard procedures . Anti - TbEpsinR puriﬁed antibody was stored in 50 % glycerol / PBS at − 20 ◦ C . The puri - ﬁed antibody was tested by western blotting and competition assays using excess soluble GST - TbEpsinR conﬁrmed the antibody to be spe - ciﬁc ( Figure S2 ) . Monoclonal Mab280 to the lysosomal protein p67 and rabbit anti - TbBiP antibodies were a gift of James D . Bangs ( University of Wisconsin , Madison ) , afﬁnity - puriﬁed anti - 221 VSG , anti - ISG75 and anti - ISG65 antibodies were a gift of Mark Carrington ( University of Cambridge ) , anti - transferrin receptor was a gift of Piet Borst ( The Netherlands Can - cer Institute , Amsterdam ) , mouse anti - TbRab11A and rabbit anti - TbRab5A , anti - TbRab11A and anti - TbCLH antibodies were as described previously ( 72 – 74 ) . Proteinelectrophoresisandwesternblotting For western analysis lysates of 10 6 – 10 7 trypanosome cells per lane were separated by 12 % SDS - PAGE and transferredonto ImmobilonP ( Millipore ) . Membranes were blocked and processed following standard procedures . The rabbit polyclonal TbEpsinR , TbRab5A and TbRab11A antibodies were used at a dilution of 1 : 2000 . All the other antibodies were at 1 : 10 000 . Detection used enhanced chemiluminescence and exposure to X - ray ﬁlm . Films were scanned and exposures quantitated using ImageJ software ( NIH ) ; data are expressed in arbitrary units and normalized to TbBiP , following reprobing , as a loading control . Immunoelectronmicroscopy Cells were ﬁxed with 4 % paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) and 0 . 05 % glutaralde - hyde in PBS bufferon ice for an hour and washed with PBS . The cells were incubatedin0 . 1 M PIPES buffercontaining5 % BSAand20 % polypropylene glycol , concentrated by centrifugation at 800 g ( Hermle Z 160 M , Hermle Laboratecnic ) and the supernatant was removed . Small droplets ( 5 μ L ) of the cells were mounted onto aluminium foil and quench frozen , by plunging them into melting propane cooled in liquid nitrogen . After freez - ing the cells were transferred into a Leica automatic freeze substitution apparatus ( AFS ) freeze substitution unit ( Leica ) in vials of frozen , dry methanol , containing0 . 5 % uranylacetate . Theyweremaintainedat − 90 ◦ C for 24 h followed by 24 h at − 70 ◦ C and another 24 h at − 50 ◦ C . They were inﬁltrated with Lowicryl HM20 over 3 days and polymerized by irradia - tion with ultraviolet ( UV ) light for 48 h . Thin sections were cut using a Leica Ultracut S ( Leica ) and mounted on Formvar coated nickel grids . The sections were incubated overnight in rabbit anti - TbEpsinR primary antibod - ies , diluted 1 : 50 in PBS at pH 7 . 4 containing 0 . 001 % Tween - 20 , 0 . 001 % Triton - X - 100 , 2 % BSA . Theywerewashed fourtimesin PBSand incubated with goat anti - rabbit immunoglobulins conjugated to 10 nm gold particles ( British Biocell , GB ) , diluted 1 : 200 in the diluent for the primary antibody for 1 h ( 75 ) . They were rinsed four times in PBS and twice in deionized water and stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate before viewing in a Philips CM100 ( FEI - Philips ) transmission EM . Immunoﬂuorescence Cells were grown to log - phase , ﬁxed in 3 % paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) in Voorheis’smodiﬁedPBS ( vPBS ) andadheredtopoly - L - lysineslides ( Sigma ) . For immunostaining , cells were permeabilized with 0 . 1 % Triton - X - 100 and blocked in foetal bovine serum . Slides were incubated with antibodies as described previously ( 76 ) and mounted with Vectashield containing DAPI to stain DNA ( Vectalabs ) . Primary antibody working dilutions were 1 : 500 for rabbit anti - TbEpsinR , 1 : 250 for TbRab5A and TbRab11A , and 1 : 1000 for all other antibodies . Cells were examined on Nikon Eclipse 400 epiﬂuorescence microscope ﬁtted with a Hamamatsu CCD digital camera . Image acquisition was performed with Metamorph software ( Molecular Devices , Version 6 ) and processing in Photoshop ( Adobe ) . All quantitation was done using identical exposures as appropriate and using the raw data within Metamorph . Subsequent image processing for presentation purposes only was performed with Photoshop . Incubationwithwortmannin BSF cells were treated with wortmannin at a ﬁnal concentration of 30 μ M for 60 min in DMSO and further processed for immunostaining with anti - TbEpsinR antibody as described earlier . ConcanavalinAstainingofﬂagellarpocketand endomembranecompartments Bloodstream parasites were grown to log - phase and washed once with serum - free HMI - 9 medium supplemented with 1 % BSA , cells were then resuspended to a density of 10 7 cells mL − 1 and incubated in this media at 4 ◦ C or 12 ◦ C for 20 min . FITC - conjugated ConA was added to a ﬁnal concentration of 0 . 1 mg mL − 1 ( Vectalabs ) and cells were incubated at these temperatures for another 20 min to label ﬂagellar pocket or early endosomes . FITC - ConA uptake was stopped by placing the cells on ice prior to processing further for immunoﬂuorescence as described earlier . Anti - TbEpsinRimmunoprecipitation BSF cells were harvested by centrifugation , washed with PBS and resuspended with lysis buffer [ 20 m M Hepes - KOH , pH 7 . 5 , 110 m M KAc , 75 m M NaCl , 0 . 1 % NP40 and complete protease inhibitor cocktail ( Roche ) ] and centrifuged in a microfuge at 16 000 g for 10 min , 4 ◦ C . Anti - TbEpsinR , anti - CLH , or anti - BiP were added to aliquots of the cell lysates and incubated for 2 h at 4 ◦ C . Immune complexes were isolated by incubating with 20 μ L of protein A Sepharose beads for 1 h at 4 ◦ C . The beads were washed ﬁve times with ice - cold lysis buffer , resuspended in 1xSDS - PAGE loading buffer and boiled for 5 min . Samples were subjected to western blot analysis as described earlier . 908 Trafﬁc 2009 ; 10 : 894 – 911 Function and Evolution of the Epsin Family Subcellularfractionation Cells were grown to logarithmic phase and washed twice in PBS , resuspended in cold hypotonic lysis buffer ( 10 m M TRIS - HCl , pH 7 . 5 plus protease inhibitors ) and then incubated on ice for 5 min . The cell lysate was centrifuged in a refrigerate microfuge at 16000 g at 4 ◦ C for 10 min . The pellet fraction was washed once with cold hypotonic lysis buffer , resuspended in sample buffer and incubated on ice for 25 min prior to taking for SDS - PAGE . Equivalent amounts of SN , wash and pellet fractions were analyzed by western blotting . AnalysisofConcanavalinAandtransferrin endocytosis Cells containing the p2T7 - TbEpsinR RNAi plasmid were grown to logarithmic phase and induced for 24 h . Control cultures were uninduced . Cells were then washed and resuspended in serum - free HMI - 9 / 1 % BSA to a ﬁnal concentration of 10 7 cells mL − 1 . Aliquots of washed cells were then transferred to a 37 ◦ C incubator and equilibrated for 20 min . ConA - ﬂuorescein or transferrin - Alexa Fluor 633 conjugate ( Molecular Probes ) were added to a concentration of 5 μ g mL − 1 or 25 μ g mL − 1 respectively . At 0 , 5 , 10 and 20 min , 1 mL aliquots were withdrawn and added to ice - cold PBS to prevent further ligand uptake . Cells were washed thoroughly to remove excess ﬂuor , and resuspended in PBS with Hoechst to stain DNA . Cells were ﬁxed in 1 % formaldehyde and analyzed . Cell - associated ﬂuorescence from 30 000 to 50 000 cells was measured for ﬂuorescein at 530 / 540 nm or Alexa633 at 665 / 720 nm using Cyan ADP ( DakoCytomation ) . Data were analyzed with Summit software ( Cytomation ) . All ﬂuorescence data was scaled using log ampliﬁers except for cell - cycle data where linear ampliﬁers were used . Ampliﬁer gains were adjusted to untreated cells to control for autoﬂuorescence . Acknowledgments This work was supported by a program grant from the Wellcome Trust ( to MCF ) , and beneﬁted from equipment support through CamPOD . JBD was supported by fellowships from the Parke - Davis Foundation and the Wellcome Trust . ImmunoEM data were gathered at the Multi - imaging Unit , University of Cambridge , with thanks to Jeremy Skepper , while phylogenetic analyses were performed using the CamGrid computational resource . We thank James Bangs ( Madison ) and Mark Carrington ( Cambridge ) for antibodies , Senthil Natesan ( Cambridge ) for the GFP - tagged clathrin - light chain trypanosomes and Graham Warren ( Vienna ) for the GRASP - GFP construct . We also thank Markus Engstler ( W¨urzburg ) for discussions . Supporting Information Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article : Figure S1 : Phylogenetic analysis of Epsin / EpsinR families . The topologies generated from three different algorithms are shown . A ) MrBayes , B ) RaxML and C ) PhyML . In each case numbers against the internodes indicate statistical support , either posterior probability ( A ) or bootstrap values ( B and C ) . Figure S2 : TbEpsinR antibody veriﬁcation . BSF cell lysate and puriﬁed recombinant GST - TbEpsinR from E . coli were fractionated by SDS - PAGE in duplicate , and analyzed by western blotting with anti - TbEpsinR antibody ( left panels ) , or anti - TbEpsinR antibody pre - incubated with recombinant puriﬁed GST - TbEpsinR ( right panels ) . Note that the signal is lost when the antibody is pre - incubated with the recombinant protein . Figure S3 : Absence of morphological abnormalities following TbRab5A RNAi . Cells were induced for RNAi of TbRab5A as described in Methods . Cells were prepared for thin section transmission EM as described ( 27 ) . Scale bars are 2 um ( panel A ) and 5 um ( panels B – D ) . Apart from the apparent compression of internal membrane - bound compartments , there is no evidence for proliferation , enlargement or other abnormal endosomal structures under these conditions . Figure S4 : TbEpsinR expression levels in TbRab5A RNAi cells . TbRab5A RNAi was induded in cells with 1 μ g mL − 1 tetracycline for 24 h and whole cell lysates analyzed by western blotting for TbEpsinR and TbRab5A . TbBiP was used as a loading control . Histograms show quantitation of total protein , ﬁlled bars are expression levels in uninduced cells and open bars are expression levels in induced cells . Figure S5 : Cell - cycle analysis of TbEpsinR knockdown cells . p2T7 - TbEpsinR cells were induced for 24 h with tetracycline , ﬁxed with 4 % paraformaldehyde and stained with DAPI . Panel A : To determine position in the cell - cycle , the numbers of nuclei and kinetoplasts per cell were counted for at least 200 cells for uninduced and induced cultures . Panel B : Light microscopy was used to determine incidence of cells with abnormal morphologies and cells presenting the Big Eye phenotype ; at least 200 cells were counted . FigureS6 : TbEpsinRproteincopynumber . Lysatesof 10 7 BSFcells , and aliquotsof puriﬁedGST - TbEpsinRequivalentto 10 11 , 10 12 and 10 13 copies of recombinant protein , estimated based on protein concentration , were analyzed by western blotting with anti - TbEpsinR antibody . The TbEpsinR copy number in BSF was estimated to be between 10 4 and 10 5 copies per cell . Table S1 : Accessions for Epsin and EpsinR candidates retrieved from various databases and as used in the phylogenetic analysis ( see Methods for sources of these data ) . Please note : Wiley - Blackwell are not responsible for the content or functionality of any supporting materials supplied by the authors . Any queries ( other than missing material ) should be directed to the corresponding author for the article . References 1 . Glebov OO , Bright NA , Nichols BJ . Flotillin - 1 deﬁnes a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway in mammalian cells . Nat Cell Biol 2006 ; 8 : 46 – 54 . 2 . Roth AF , Davis NG . Ubiquitination of the PEST - like endocytosis signal of the yeast a - factor receptor . J Biol Chem 2000 ; 275 : 8143 – 8153 . 3 . Overstreet E , Fitch E , Fischer JA . Fat facets and Liquid facets promote Delta endocytosis and Delta signaling in the signaling cells . Development 2004 ; 131 : 5355 – 5366 . 4 . Tian X , Hansen D , Schedl T , Skeath JB . Epsin potentiates Notch pathway activity in Drosophila and C . elegans . Development 2004 ; 131 : 5807 – 5815 . 5 . Newpher TM , Smith RP , Lemmon V , Lemmon SK . In vivo dynamics of clathrin and its adaptor - dependent recruitment to the actin - based endocytic machinery in yeast . Dev Cell 2005 ; 9 : 87 – 98 . 6 . Tan PK , Howard JP , Payne GS . The sequence NPFXD deﬁnes a new class of endocytosis signal in Saccharomycescerevisiae . J Cell Biol 1996 ; 135 : 1789 – 1800 . 7 . Roth AF , Davis NG . Ubiquitination of the yeast a - factor receptor . J Cell Biol 1996 ; 134 : 661 – 674 . 8 . Praefcke GJ , Ford MG , Schmid EM , Olesen LE , Gallop JL , Peak - Chew SY , Vallis Y , Babu MM , Mills IG , McMahon HT . Evolving nature of the AP2 alpha - appendage hub during clathrin - coated vesicle endocytosis . EMBO J 2004 ; 23 : 4371 – 4383 . Trafﬁc 2009 ; 10 : 894 – 911 909 Gabernet - Castello et al . 9 . Chen H , Fre S , Slepnev VI , Capua MR , Takei K , Butler MH , Di Fiore PP , De Camilli P . Epsin is an EH - domain - binding protein implicated in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nature 1998 ; 394 : 793 – 797 . 10 . Mills IG , Praefcke GJ , Vallis Y , Peter BJ , Olesen LE , Gallop JL , Butler PJ , Evans PR , McMahon HT . EpsinR : an AP1 / clathrin interacting protein involved in vesicle trafﬁcking . J Cell Biol 2003 ; 160 : 213 – 222 . 11 . Hawryluk MJ , Keyel PA , Mishra SK , Watkins SC , Heuser JE , Traub LM . Epsin 1 is a polyubiquitin - selective clathrin - associated sorting protein . Trafﬁc 2006 ; 7 : 262 – 281 . 12 . Wendland B , Steece KE , Emr SD . Yeast epsins contain an essential N - terminal ENTH domain , bind clathrin and are required for endocytosis . EMBO J 1999 ; 18 : 4383 – 4393 . 13 . Saint - Pol A , Yelamos B , Amessou M , Mills IG , Dugast M , Tenza D , Schu P , Antony C , McMahon HT , Lamaze C , Johannes L . Clathrin adaptor epsinR is required for retrograde sorting on early endosomal membranes . Dev Cell 2004 ; 6 : 525 – 538 . 14 . Song J , Lee MH , Lee GJ , Yoo CM , Hwang I . Arabidopsis EPSIN1 plays an important role in vacuolar trafﬁcking of soluble cargo proteins in plant cells via interactions with clathrin , AP - 1 , VTI11 , and VSR1 . Plant Cell 2006 ; 18 : 2258 – 2274 . 15 . Lee GJ , Kim H , Kang H , Jang M , Lee DW , Lee S , Hwang I . EpsinR2 interacts with clathrin , adaptor protein - 3 , AtVTI12 , and phosphatidylinositol - 3 - phosphate . Implications for EpsinR2 function in protein trafﬁcking in plant cells . Plant Physiol 2007 ; 143 : 1561 – 1575 . 16 . Chidambaram S , Mullers N , Wiederhold K , Haucke V , von Mollard GF . Speciﬁc interaction between SNAREs and epsin N - terminal homology ( ENTH ) domains of epsin - related proteins in trans - Golgi network to endosome transport . J Biol Chem 2004 ; 279 : 4175 – 4179 . 17 . Repass SL , Brady RJ , O’Halloran TJ . DictyosteliumHip1r contributes tosporeshapeandrequiresepsinforphosphorylationand localization . J Cell Sci 2007 ; 120 : 3977 – 3988 . 18 . Roth MG . Integrating actin assembly and endocytosis . Dev Cell 2007 ; 13 : 3 – 4 . 19 . Maldonado - Baez L , Dores MR , Perkins EM , Drivas TG , Hicke L , Wendland B . Interaction between Epsin / Yap180 adaptors and the scaffolds Ede1 / Pan1 is required for endocytosis . Mol Biol Cell 2008 ; 19 : 2936 – 2948 . 20 . Field MC , Gabernet - Castello C , Dacks JB . Reconstructing the evolution of the endocytic system : insights from genomics and molecular cell biology . Adv Exp Med Biol 2007 ; 607 : 84 – 96 . 21 . Leung KF , Dacks JB , Field MC . Evolution of the multivesicular body ESCRT machinery ; retention across the eukaryotic lineage . Trafﬁc 2008 ; 9 : 1698 – 1716 . 22 . Gouet P , Courcelle E , Stuart DI , Metoz F . ESPript : analysis of multiple sequence alignments in PostScript . Bioinformatics1999 ; 15 : 305 – 308 . 23 . Miller SE , Collins BM , McCoy AJ , Robinson MS , Owen DJ . A SNARE - adaptor interaction is a new mode of cargo recognition in clathrin - coated vesicles . Nature 2007 ; 450 : 570 – 574 . 24 . Field MC , Carrington M . Intracellular membrane transport systems in Trypanosomabrucei . Trafﬁc 2004 ; 5 : 905 – 913 . 25 . Engstler M , Pfohl T , Herminghaus S , Boshart M , Wiegertjes G , Heddergott N , Overath P . Hydrodynamic ﬂow - mediated protein sorting on the cell surface of trypanosomes . Cell 2007 ; 131 : 505 – 515 . 26 . Chung WL , Leung KF , Carrington M , Field MC . Ubiquitylation is required for degradation of transmembrane surface proteins in trypanosomes . Trafﬁc 2008 ; 9 : 1681 – 1697 . 27 . Allen CL , Goulding D , Field MC . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis is essential in Trypanosomabrucei . EMBO J 2003 ; 22 : 4991 – 5002 . 28 . Koumandou VL , Natesan SK , Sergeenko T , Field MC . The trypanosome transcriptome is remodelled during differentiation but displays limited responsiveness within life stages . BMC Genomics 2008 ; 9 : 298 . 29 . Morgan GW , Hall BS , Denny PW , Field MC , Carrington M . The endocytic apparatus of the kinetoplastida . Part II : machinery and components of the system . Trends Parasitol 2002 ; 18 : 540 – 546 . 30 . Brickman MJ , Balber AE . Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense blood - stream forms : surface ricin - binding glycoproteins are localized exclu - sively in the ﬂagellar pocket and the ﬂagellar adhesion zone . J Protozool 1990 ; 37 : 219 – 224 . 31 . Brickman MJ , Cook JM , Balber AE . Low temperature reversibly inhibits transport from tubular endosomes to a perinuclear , acidic compartment in African trypanosomes . J Cell Sci 1995 ; 108 ( 11 ) : 3611 – 3621 . 32 . Duncan MC , Costaguta G , Payne GS . Yeast epsin - related proteins required for Golgi - endosome trafﬁc deﬁne a gamma - adaptin ear - binding motif . Nat Cell Biol 2003 ; 5 : 77 – 81 . 33 . Hirst J , Motley A , Harasaki K , Peak Chew SY , Robinson MS . EpsinR : an ENTH domain - containing protein that interacts with AP - 1 . Mol Biol Cell 2003 ; 14 : 625 – 641 . 34 . He CY , Ho HH , Malsam J , Chalouni C , West CM , Ullu E , Toomre D , Warren G . Golgi duplication in Trypanosoma brucei . J Cell Biol 2004 ; 165 : 313 – 321 . 35 . Grunfelder CG , Engstler M , Weise F , Schwarz H , Stierhof YD , Morgan GW , Field MC , Overath P . Endocytosis of a glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchoredprotein via clathrin - coated vesi - cles , sorting by default in endosomes , and exocytosis via RAB11 - positive carriers . Mol Biol Cell 2003 ; 14 : 2029 – 2040 . 36 . Shin HW , Hayashi M , Christoforidis S , Lacas - Gervais S , Hoepfner S , Wenk MR , Modregger J , Uttenweiler - Joseph S , Wilm M , Nystuen A , Frankel WN , Solimena M , De Camilli P , Zerial M . An enzymatic cascade of Rab5 effectors regulates phosphoinositide turnover in the endocytic pathway . J Cell Biol 2005 ; 170 : 607 – 618 . 37 . Rodgers MJ , Albanesi JP , Phillips MA . Phosphatidylinositol 4 - kinase III - beta is required for Golgi maintenance and cytokinesis in Trypanosomabrucei . Eukaryot Cell 2007 ; 6 : 1108 – 1118 . 38 . Hall BS , Gabernet - Castello C , Voak A , Goulding D , Natesan SK , Field MC . TbVps34 , the trypanosome orthologue of Vps34 , is required for Golgi complex segregation . J Biol Chem 2006 ; 281 : 27600 – 27612 . 39 . Toret CP , Lee L , Sekiya - Kawasaki M , Drubin DG . Multiple pathways regulate endocytic coat disassembly in Saccharomycescerevisiaefor optimal downstream trafﬁcking . Trafﬁc 2008 ; 9 : 848 – 859 . 40 . Wirtz E , Leal S , Ochatt C , Cross GA . A tightly regulated inducible expression system for conditional gene knock - outs and dominant - negative genetics in Trypanosoma brucei . Mol Biochem Parasitol 1999 ; 99 : 89 – 101 . 41 . Hall B , Allen CL , Goulding D , Field MC . Both of the Rab5 subfamily small GTPases of Trypanosomabruceiare essential and required for endocytosis . Mol Biochem Parasitol 2004 ; 138 : 67 – 77 . 42 . Borst P , Fairlamb AH . Surface receptors and transporters of Trypanosomabrucei . Annu Rev Microbiol 1998 ; 52 : 745 – 778 . 43 . Dacks JB , Field MC . Evolution of the eukaryotic membrane - trafﬁcking system : origin , tempo and mode . J Cell Sci 2007 ; 120 : 2977 – 2985 . 44 . Dacks JB , Davis LA , Sjogren AM , Andersson JO , Roger AJ , Doolittle WF . Evidence for Golgi bodies in proposed ‘Golgi - lacking’ lineages . Proc Biol Sci 2003 ; 270 ( Suppl . 2 ) : S168 – 171 . 45 . Pereira - Leal JB , Seabra MC . Evolution of the Rab family of small GTP - binding proteins . J Mol Biol 2001 ; 313 : 889 – 901 . 46 . Koumandou VL , Dacks JB , Coulson RM , Field MC . Control systems for membrane fusionin the ancestral eukaryote ; evolutionof tethering complexes and SM proteins . BMC Evol Biol 2007 ; 7 : 29 . 47 . Dacks JB , Poon PP , Field MC . Phylogeny of endocytic components yields insight into the process of nonendosymbiotic organelle evolution . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008 ; 105 : 588 – 593 . 48 . Rutherford S , Moore I . The ArabidopsisRab GTPase family : another enigma variation . Curr Opin Plant Biol 2002 ; 5 : 518 – 528 . 49 . AguilarRC , WatsonHA , WendlandB . TheyeastEpsinEnt1isrecruited tomembranesthroughmultipleindependentinteractions . JBiolChem 2003 ; 278 : 10737 – 10743 . 50 . Garcia - Salcedo JA , Perez - Morga D , Gijon P , Dilbeck V , Pays E , Nolan DP . A differential role for actin during the life cycle of Trypanosoma 910 Trafﬁc 2009 ; 10 : 894 – 911 Function and Evolution of the Epsin Family brucei . EMBO J 2004 ; 23 : 780 – 789 . 51 . Holstein SE , Oliviusson P . Sequence analysis of Arabidopsis thaliana E / ANTH - domain - containing proteins : membrane tethers of the clathrin - dependent vesicle budding machinery . Protoplasma 2005 ; 226 : 13 – 21 . 52 . Ford MG , Mills IG , Peter BJ , Vallis Y , Praefcke GJ , Evans PR , McMahonHT . Curvatureofclathrin - coatedpitsdrivenbyepsin . Nature 2002 ; 419 : 361 – 366 . 53 . ItohT , DeCamilliP . BAR , F - BAR ( EFC ) andENTH / ANTHdomainsinthe regulation of membrane - cytosol interfaces and membrane curvature . Biochim Biophys Acta 2006 ; 1761 : 897 – 912 . 54 . Wasiak S , Legendre - Guillemin V , Puertollano R , Blondeau F , Girard M , de Heuvel E , Boismenu D , Bell AW , Bonifacino JS , McPherson PS . Enthoprotin : a novel clathrin - associated protein identiﬁed through subcellular proteomics . J Cell Biol 2002 ; 158 : 855 – 862 . 55 . Hall BS , Smith E , Langer W , Jacobs LA , Goulding D , Field MC . Developmental variation in Rab11 - dependent trafﬁcking in Trypanosomabrucei . Eukaryot Cell 2005 ; 4 : 971 – 980 . 56 . Kaksonen M , Toret CP , Drubin DG . A modular design for the clathrin - and actin - mediated endocytosis machinery . Cell 2005 ; 123 : 305 – 320 . 57 . Morgan GW , Goulding D , Field MC . The single dynamin - like protein of Trypanosoma brucei regulates mitochondrial division and is not required for endocytosis . J Biol Chem 2004 ; 279 : 10692 – 10701 . 58 . Shih SC , Katzmann DJ , Schnell JD , Sutanto M , Emr SD , Hicke L . EpsinsandVps27p / Hrscontainubiquitin - bindingdomainsthatfunction in receptor endocytosis . Nat Cell Biol 2002 ; 4 : 389 – 393 . 59 . Costaguta G , Duncan MC , Fernandez GE , Huang GH , Payne GS . DistinctrolesforTGN / endosomeepsin - likeadaptorsEnt3pandEnt5p . Mol Biol Cell 2006 ; 17 : 3907 – 3920 . 60 . Kalthoff C , Alves J , Urbanke C , Knorr R , Ungewickell EJ . Unusual structural organization of the endocytic proteins AP180 and epsin 1 . J Biol Chem 2002 ; 277 : 8209 – 8216 . 61 . Legendre - Guillemin V , Wasiak S , Hussain NK , Angers A , McPherson PS . ENTH / ANTH proteins and clathrin - mediated membrane budding . J Cell Sci 2004 ; 117 : 9 – 18 . 62 . Fischer JA , Eun SH , Doolan BT . Endocytosis , endosome trafﬁcking , and the regulationofDrosophiladevelopment . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2006 ; 22 : 181 – 206 . 63 . Adl SM , Simpson AG , Farmer MA , Andersen RA , Anderson OR , Barta JR , Bowser SS , Brugerolle G , Fensome RA , Fredericq S , James TY , Karpov S , Kugrens P , Krug J , Lane CE et al . The new higher level classiﬁcation of eukaryotes with emphasis on the taxonomy of protists . J Eukaryot Microbiol 2005 ; 52 : 399 – 451 . 64 . Edgar RC . MUSCLE : multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and high throughput . Nucleic Acids Res 2004 ; 32 : 1792 – 1797 . 65 . Abascal F , Zardoya R , Posada D . ProtTest : selection of best - ﬁt models of protein evolution . Bioinformatics 2005 ; 21 : 2104 – 2105 . 66 . Whelan S , Goldman N . A general empirical model of protein evolution derived from multiple protein families using a maximum - likelihood approach . Mol Biol Evol 2001 ; 18 : 691 – 699 . 67 . Ronquist F , Huelsenbeck JP . MrBayes 3 : Bayesian phylogenetic inference under mixed models . Bioinformatics 2003 ; 19 : 1572 – 1574 . 68 . Guindon S , Gascuel O . A simple , fast , and accurate algorithm to estimate large phylogenies by maximum likelihood . Syst Biol 2003 ; 52 : 696 – 704 . 69 . Stamatakis A . RAxML - VI - HPC : maximum likelihood - based phyloge - netic analyses with thousands of taxa and mixed models . Bioinfor - matics 2006 ; 22 : 2688 – 2690 . 70 . Field H , Field MC . Tandem duplication of rab genes followed by sequence divergence and acquisition of distinct functions in Trypanosomabrucei . J Biol Chem 1997 ; 272 : 10498 – 10505 . 71 . Redmond S , Vadivelu J , Field MC . RNAit : an automated web - based tool for the selection of RNAi targets in Trypanosoma brucei . Mol Biochem Parasitol 2003 ; 128 : 115 – 118 . 72 . Field H , Farjah M , Pal A , Gull K , Field MC . Complexity of trypanoso - matid endocytosis pathways revealed by Rab4 and Rab5 isoforms in Trypanosomabrucei . J Biol Chem 1998 ; 273 : 32102 – 32110 . 73 . JeffriesTR , MorganGW , FieldMC . Adevelopmentallyregulatedrab11 homologue inTrypanosomabruceiis involved in recycling processes . J Cell Sci 2001 ; 114 : 2617 – 2626 . 74 . Morgan GW , Allen CL , Jeffries TR , Hollinshead M , Field MC . Developmental and morphological regulation of clathrin - mediated endocytosis in Trypanosomabrucei . J Cell Sci 2001 ; 114 : 2605 – 2615 . 75 . SkepperJN . Immunocytochemicalstrategiesforelectronmicroscopy : choice or compromise . J Microsc 2000 ; 199 : 1 – 36 . 76 . Field MC , Allen CL , Dhir V , Goulding D , Hall BS , Morgan GW , Veazey P , Engstler M . New approaches to the microscopic imaging of Trypanosomabrucei . Microsc Microanal 2004 ; 10 : 621 – 636 . Trafﬁc 2009 ; 10 : 894 – 911 911