An invasion - related complex of cortactin , paxillin and PKC m associates with invadopodia at sites of extracellular matrix degradation Emma T Bowden 1 , Mara Barth 1 , Dianne Thomas 1 , Robert I Glazer 2 and Susette C Mueller * , 1 1 Department of Cell Biology , Lombardi Cancer Center , Georgetown University Medical School , Washington DC 20007 , USA ; 2 Department of Pharmacology , Lombardi Cancer Center , Georgetown University Medical School , Washington DC 20007 , USA Invasive breast cancer cells have the ability to extend membrane protrusions , invadopodia , into the extracel - lular matrix ( ECM ) . These structures are associated with sites of active matrix degradation . The amount of matrix degradation associated with the activity of these membrane protrusions has been shown to directly correlate with invasive potential . We demonstrate here that microinjection of polyclonal anti - cortactin antibo - dies blocks matrix degradation at invadopodia support - ing the hypothesis that cortactin has a direct role in invasive behavior . MDA - MB - 231 , invasive breast cancer cells were sheared from the surface of a gelatin matrix to isolate invadopodia . Cortactin , paxillin and protein kinase C ( PKC ) m , a serine kinase , were co - immunopre - cipitated as a complex from invadopodia - enriched membranes . We conﬁrmed the subcellular distribution of these proteins by immunolocalization and Western blotting . We also determined that , in contrast to its presence in invasive cells , this complex of proteins was not detected in lysates from non - invasive cells that do not form invadopodia . Taken together , these data suggest that the formation of this cortactin - containing complex correlates with cellular invasiveness . We hypothesize that this complex of molecules has a role in the formation and function of invadopodia during cellular invasion . Keywords : invasion ; cortactin ; paxillin ; PKC m ; breast cancer Introduction When invasive cells such as Rous sarcoma virus - transformed chicken embryo ﬁbroblasts or metastatic cancer cell lines are cultured on ECM , actin - containing protrusions , called invadopodia , extend into the matrix and participate in matrix degradation ( Chen , 1989 ; Coopman et al . , 1996 ; Monsky et al . , 1994 ; Mueller and Chen , 1991 ) . There is a correlation between the ability of cells to locally degrade the matrix at invadopodia , and their invasive potential as measured in other in vitro and in vivo assays for motility and invasion ( Coopman et al . , 1998 ) . Membrane - associated proteases including seprase , membrane type - 1 matrix metalloproteinase , and matrix metalloproteinase - 2 are thought to mediate ECM degradation at sites of invadopodial extension ( Nakahara et al . , 1996 , 1997 ; Monsky et al . , 1993 , 1994 ) . Actin and actin - associated molecules such as a - actinin , talin , tensin and paxillin concentrate in or around invadopodia ( Mueller et al . , 1992 ; Chen , 1989 ) . A number of lines of evidence suggest that cortactin may have an important role in modulating invasive cell behavior . Cortactin binds to F - actin in vitro , co - localizes with cortical actin at ru(cid:130)ing membranes , and possesses actin - bundling activity that is modulated by c - Src , suggesting a role in membrane motility ( Wu and Parsons , 1993 ; Huang et al . , 1997 ) . In v - Src - activated ﬁbroblasts transformed by Rous sarcoma virus , cell motility and invasiveness are increased , cortactin becomes phosphorylated on tyrosine residues enabling an association with v - Src in podosomes ( Okamura and Resh , 1995 ) . Overexpression of cortactin in NIH3T3 ﬁbroblasts or endothelial cells increases cell motility in vitro ( Patel et al . , 1998 ; Huang et al . , 1998 ) . Cortactin overexpression has also been implicated in breast cancer progression . The human homologue of the cortactin gene , EMS1 ( Schuuring et al . , 1992 ) is overexpressed in a number of breast cancer cell lines ( Schuuring et al . , 1993 ; Campbell et al . , 1996 ) . In human breast carcinoma , the majority of tumors showing an 11q13 overampliﬁcation , also show an increase in expression of cortactin , and this has been correlated with poor patient prognosis ( Schuuring et al . , 1992 ) . In cells with this ampliﬁcation , cortactin has been shown to redistribute to contact sites at the margins of cells , concurrent with an increase in its levels of phosphorylation ( van Damme et al . , 1997 ) . In untransformed cells , cortactin is a downstream target for tyrosine phosphorylation following cell adhesion to ﬁbronectin ( Vuori and Ruoslahti , 1995 ) . As a consequence of this , it has been suggested that cortactin also may have a role in the regulation and remodeling of the cytoskeleton in response to speciﬁc extracellular stimuli ( Vuori and Ruoslahti , 1995 ) . Paxillin , a focal adhesion protein ( Turner et al . , 1990 ) , is phosphorylated in response to integrin - mediated adhesion ( Burridge et al . , 1992 ) . V - Src transformation causes a partial redistribution of paxillin from focal adhesions to invadopodia in Rous sarcoma virus - transformed chicken embryo ﬁbroblasts grown on a gelatin matrix ( Mueller et al . , 1992 ) . Viral transformation also causes a signiﬁcant increase of both paxillin expression and tyrosine phosphorylation in invasive and metastatic cervical tumors ( McCormick et al . , 1997 ) . Since tyrosine phosphorylation of paxillin increases in response to migratory stimuli , a direct role in motility has been suggested ( Abedi et al . , 1995 ) . However , the functional role of paxillin both in transformed and normal cell types remains largely unidentiﬁed . * Correspondence : SC Mueller Received 26 October 1998 ; revised 11 March 1999 ; accepted 11 March 1999 Oncogene ( 1999 ) 18 , 4440 – 4449 ª 1999 Stockton Press All rights reserved 0950 – 9232 / 99 $ 12 . 00 http : / / www . stockton - press . co . uk / onc Another downstream response to integrin - mediated adhesion includes activation of PKC . PKC activity is involved in integrin - mediated responses including adhesion , motility and membrane ru(cid:130)ing ( Lewis et al . , 1996 ; Klemke et al . , 1994 ; Yebra et al . , 1995 ; Miyata et al . , 1989 ) . It can also a(cid:128)ect invasive behavior ( Ways et al . , 1995 ) . PKC activation has been demonstrated as a controlling factor in the reabsorb - tion activity exhibited by osteoclasts , a non - trans - formed cell type , responsible for bone remodeling ( Moonga et al . , 1996 ) . PKC activity is also implicated in certain breast cancers where expression is higher in tumors compared with normal tissue ( O’Brian and Ward , 1989 ) . In this report , we describe that in invasive human breast cancer cells , cortactin , paxillin and the PKC isoform PKC m , are associated as an invasion - related complex in invadopodia . We describe a correlation between formation of this complex of molecules and the invasive phenotype in breast cancer cells . These data identify a novel invadopodia associated distribu - tion for both cortactin and PKC m . We conﬁrm the colocalization of cortactin , paxillin and PKC m at invadopodia by immunoﬂuorescence . We report that microinjection of the anti - cortactin poyclonal antibody ( pAb ) disrupts invadopodia function , blocking the matrix degradation associated with these structures . This suggests that cortactin has a direct role in the coordination of local invasion mediated by the formation of invadopodia . The interaction of cortactin with paxillin and PKC m at invadopodia suggests that these molecules have a direct role in the regulation of invadopodia activity . Results Invasive breast cancer cells extend invadopodia into the matrix Ultrathin vertical sections of MDA - MB - 231 cells grown on crosslinked gelatin beads were examined by transmission electron microscopy . Invasive breast cancer cells extend long protrusions , or invadopodia , into the surface of the bead from their ventral membrane surface ( Figure 1a and b , arrows ) . The region of interest examined in the electron micrograph ( Figure 1b ) is highlighted in the schematic diagram ( Figure 1a , shaded box ) . Frequently , there are clear areas around the extending protrusions where invado - podia - associated proteolytic activity presumably has perturbed the crosslinked gelatin bead . Invasion is often concentrated in an area at the ventral membrane under or near the nucleus . Microinjection of anti - cortactin pAbs blocks local invasion To test the hypothesis that cortactin is required for the invasive function of invadopodia , MDA - MB - 231 cells were cultured on ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate ( FITC ) - crosslinked gelatin matrices . Cells were microinjected with either preimmune IgG or the anti - cortactin pAb ( # 170 - 10 ) . As previously described , these cells locally degrade an FITC matrix to leave dark areas , easily detectable by immunoﬂuorescence microscopy ( Coop - man et al . , 1996 ) . We have demonstrated previously that the in vitro invasive behavior of cells grown on gelatin and measured by phagocytosis is similar to their behavior in this assay when grown on collagen I and Matrigel ( Coopman et al . , 1998 ) . We have also demonstrated that transformed cells will make invadopodia on a range of ECM substrates including ﬁbronectin , collagen type I , collagen type IV and laminin ( Kelly et al . , 1994 ) . We use crosslinked gelatin in our in vitro assays because it is easily handled and because in these assays , it allows a rapid and visual di(cid:128)erentiation between non - invasive and invasive cells . Initially , we cultured cells in the absence of serum in order to block matrix degradation prior to microinjec - tion . Following a period of recovery after microinjec - tion , serum free culture media was replaced with serum containing media . This released the serum dependant block in matrix degradation and the cells were allowed to invade into the ﬁlms for 5 h . Microinjected antibody was visualized using Texas red conjugated anti - rabbit secondary antibody and nuclei were visualized by co - injected 4 , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ( DAPI ) . Micro - injection with the preimmune IgG did not signiﬁcantly inhibit matrix degradation ( Figure 2 , preimmune ) . Microinjection of the anti - cortactin pAb ( # 170 - 10 ) signiﬁcantly inhibited hole formation ( Figure 2 , Immune versus preimmune cells , P = 0 . 006 ) . An examination by both phase contrast and immunofluor - escence microscopy revealed that microinjected cells remained well spread and that there were no signiﬁcant morphological changes . Therefore , we conclude that cortactin function is required for either the formation Figure 1 Invasive breast cancer cells produce invadopodia that invade and extend into the matrix substratum . Bar = 1 m m . ( a ) A cartoon representation shows the localization of invadopodia on the ventral surface of an invasive cell in vertical cross section . The shaded area corresponds to an area similar to that shown in the electron micrograph in ( b ) . ( b ) Electron micrograph of an ultrathin vertical section through an MDA - MB - 231 cell cultured on gelatin crosslinked beads shows the ultrastructure of invadopodia . Invadopodia form long thin protrusions associated with the disruption of the gelatin bead surface ( arrows ) Complex of cortactin , paxillin and PKC m in invadopodia ET Bowden et al 4441 and / or function of invadopodia as measured by matrix degradation . An immunoprecipitable complex of cortactin , paxillin and PKC m To identify the components of MDA - MB - 231 invado - podia that interact with cortactin , we isolated invadopodia - enriched subcellular fractions . Cell bodies were sheared away from the surface of a crosslinked gelatin matrix to obtain a fraction enriched in invadopodia ( INV ) ( Mueller et al . , 1992 ) . The cell bodies were further fractionated by centrifugation to yield two fractions , one containing the cell body membranes ( CBM ) and the other the cytosol ( CYT ) . b 1 integrin localized predominantly to the CBM and INV membane containing fractions , demonstrating an e(cid:129)cient separation of membranes and cytosol ( Figure 3a , b 1 integrin : CBM and INV ) . The presence of b 1 integrin in the INV fraction is consistent with a previously described localization to invadopodia ( Mueller et al . , 1992 ; Coopman et al . , 1996 ) . We used immunoﬂuorescence to visualize structures associated with the gelatin after shearing ( Figure 3b ) . Phalloidin staining of F - actin revealed clusters of punctate structures in association with the gelatin ( Figure 3b , solid arrows ) . There were , however , few if any , streak like structures . Staining with an anti - vinculin antibody that recognizes focal adhesions demonstrated that there was no vinculin staining material associated with the gelatin matrix suggesting that focal adhesions have been removed from the surface of the gelatin ( data not shown ) . This is consistent with immunoblotting experiments in which focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) was detected in the CBM but not the INV fraction and suggests that focal adhesions have been scraped away from the surface of the gelatin ( data not shown ) . We performed immunoprecipitation experiments from each of the fractions in order to identify molecules that interact with cortactin . Cortactin immunoprecipitations and supernatants were exam - ined by Western blot analysis . Cortactin was immuno - precipitated e(cid:129)ciently from each of the fractions , CBM , INV , and CYT , leaving only trace amounts detected in the supernatant from the immunoprecipita - tion ( Figure 3c , Cortactin Blot , compare IP versus IP SUP ) . The blot was then stripped and reprobed for the presence of potential interacting molecules including vinculin , FAK , PKC a , PKC d and PKC m . We found that paxillin and PKC m co - immunoprecipitated with cortactin from the INV and CYT fractions ( Figure 3c , IP Cortactin , Reblot Paxillin and PKC m : INV and CYT ) . The supernatants clearly showed that although there were signiﬁcant amounts of both paxillin and PKC m in the CBM there was little , if any , co - immunoprecipitation of either with cortactin ( Figure 3c , Paxillin Reblot and PKC m Reblot , compare CBM from IP versus IP SUP ) . There was also a fraction of the total pool of paxillin and PKC m that was associated with the CYT that did not co - immunopre - cipitate with cortactin ( Figure 3c , compare CYT from IP and IP SUP ) . Thus , a complex of cortactin , paxillin , and PKC m co - immunoprecipitated predominantly from the INV and CYT fractions of MDA - MB - 231 cultured on crosslinked gelatin . We also examined a time course of cells fractionated at 6 , 24 and 48 h on gelatin ( Figure 3d ) . We wanted to determine if there was any shift in the localization of the complex over time and with increasing cell density . Again , we performed cortactin immunoprecipitations from each fraction at each time point and analysed the results by SDS – PAGE and Western blotting . Initially , we examined the immunoprecipitation of cortactin to determine the level of immunoprecipitation from each fraction ( Figure 3d , Cortactin Blot , 6 , 24 and 48 h : CBM , INV and CBM ) . The Western blots were then stripped and reprobed for paxillin and PKC m . Co - immunoprecipitation was evident between cortactin , paxillin and PKC m in the INV fraction ( Figure 3d , Paxillin and PKC m Reblots , 6 , 24 and 48 h : INV ) . However , although there was co - immunoprecipitation at 6 and 24 h in the CYT fraction , the interaction was no longer detected at 48 h although cortactin was present in this fraction ( Figure 3d , Paxillin and PKC m Reblots , 6 , 24 and 48 h : CYT , Cortactin Blot , 48 h : CYT ) . We also wanted to explore the possibility that there was a correlation between an invasive phenotype and formation of the complex . We examined both invasive and non - invasive breast cancer cell lines for the presence of the complex . Non - invasive breast cancer cell lines form few or no invadopodia compared with invasive breast cancer cell lines ( Table 1 ) ( Coopman et Figure 2 Microinjection of anti - cortactin pAb ( # 170 - 10 ) blocks matrix degradation at invadopodia . MDA - MB - 231 cells grown overnight in serum free media were microinjected with either preimmune IgG or anti - cortactin pAb ( # 170 - 10 ) . Injected cells were allowed to recover before being transferred to serum containing media . Cells were ﬁxed and processed as described for immunoﬂuorescence microscopy . An equal number of injected ( preimmune or immune ) and non - injected cells were examined . Cells were scored as invasive if a cluster of at least four holes in the FITC - gelatin matrix was present underneath the cell body . Cortactin pAb ( # 170 - 10 ) injected cells showed approximately a sevenfold decrease in the percentage of invasive cells compared to cells injected with the preimmune sera ( P = 0 . 006 ) Complex of cortactin , paxillin and PKC m in invadopodia ET Bowden et al 4442 Figure 3 Subcellular fractionation of MDA - MB - 231 cells and coimmunoprecipitation of cortactin , paxillin and PKC m . ( a ) After 24 h , cells were fractionated by shearing away the cell bodies to leave invadopodia - enriched membranes ( INV ) embedded in the matrix . The cell bodies were further fractionated into cell body membranes ( CMB ) and cytosol ( CYT ) fractions . Ten m g of lysate , INV , CBM , and CYT fractions were analysed by 10 % SDS – PAGE . b 1 integrin was detected by Western blotting . ( b ) After shearing away cell bodies , as described above , a gelatin plate was washed once in YPP bu(cid:128)er and , after ﬁxation , the clusters of invadopodia that remained embedded in the gelatin matrix were visualized by staining with Texas red phalloidin ( closed arrows ) . Bar = 10 m m . ( c ) Protein from each fraction ( 300 m g ) was used to immunoprecipitate cortactin . Twenty m g of the supernatant from each immunoprecipitation was concentrated and Western blotted ( IP SUP ) together with the immunoprecipitated samples ( IP ) . Immunoprecipitates were analysed by 8 % SDS – PAGE and Western blotting . Paxillin ( Paxillin Reblot ) and PKC m ( PKC m Reblot ) co - immunoprecipitate with cortactin ( Cortactin Blot ) from the INV and CYT fractions ( IP , INV and CYT ) . ( d ) 300 m g of protein from each fraction at 6 , 24 and 48 h was used to immunoprecipitate cortactin . Immunoprecipitations were analysed by 8 % SDS – PAGE and Western blotting . Paxillin and PKC m co - immunoprecipitate with cortactin from the INV fraction at 6 , 24 and 48 h , but only from the CYT fraction at 6 and 24 h Table 1 Characterization of invasiveness of breast cancer cell lines Cell line MCF - 7 MDA - MB - 468 MDA - MB - 453 SKBR3 MCF - 7 ADR MDA - MB - 231 HS578T Cell outgrowth in Matrigel a Behavior in nude mice a Chemoinvasion assay a Chemotaxis a Film degradation b Sph c P + + + + 7 SphP + + + + + SphN + + 7 SphN + + 7 InvP + + + + + + + InvLi + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + InvHM + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + a The invasion assay data of ‘Cell Outgrowth in Matrigel’ , ‘Behaviour in Nude Mice’ , ‘Chemoinvasion’ , and ‘Chemotaxis’ of breast cancer cells are from a previous study ( Thompson et al . , 1992 ) . b The invasion assay data of ‘Film Degradation’ is from Coopman et al . ( 1998 ) . c Table abbreviations include : Sph , spherical colony / non - invasive cluster formation in Matrigel ; Inv , invasive colony formation ; P , primary tumor only ; N , non - tumorigenic ; Li , local invasion ; HM , hematogenous metastases to lungs . The chemoinvasive and chemotaxis assays are all graded in terms of a percentage of the measured activity of MDA - MB - 231 cells , i . e . , + , 0 – 20 % ; + + , 20 – 40 % ; + + + , 40 – 60 % ; + + + + , 60 – 80 % and + + + + + , 80 – 100 % . The ﬁlm degradation assay is graded in terms of a percentage of the highest measured activity ; + , 0 – 20 % ; + + , 20 – 40 % ; + + + , 40 – 60 % ; + + + + , 60 – 80 % ; + + + + + , 80 – 100 % Complex of cortactin , paxillin and PKC m in invadopodia ET Bowden et al 4443 al . , 1998 ) . Paxillin immunoprecipitates from total cell lysate of cell lines grown on tissue culture treated plastic were analysed by SDS – PAGE and Western blotting ( Figure 4a ) . The Western blot was ﬁrst probed for paxillin to establish the level of paxillin that was immunoprecipitated from lysates of the cell lines examined ( Figure 4a , Paxillin Blot ) . Cortactin and PKC m co - immunoprecipitated with paxillin from the whole cell lysates of only those cell lines characterized as having a more motile and invasive nature , MCF - 7 - ADR , MDA - MB - 231 , and HS578T ( Figure 4a , Cortactin and PKC m Reblots and Table 1 ) ( Thomp - son et al . , 1992 ) . Vinculin , FAK , PKC a and PKC d did not co - immunoprecipitate with paxillin under these conditions ( data not shown ) . We examined the expression levels of each of the proteins screened for co - immunoprecipitation with paxillin . In every case , there was easily detectable expression of each protein ( Figure 4b ) . Thus , we conclude that co - immunopreci - pitation of cortactin and PKC m with paxillin does not correlate with the expression levels of these proteins in breast carcinoma cell lines , but rather with their invasive and / or motile behavior . Since the complex was isolated from cells grown on plastic , we also conclude that the cells do not require exogenous ECM to generate the complex . Cortactin , paxillin and PKC m co - localize at invadopodia by immunoﬂuorescence To conﬁrm the co - distribution of cortactin with paxillin and PKC m at invadopodia , we immunoloca - lized these molecules in intact cells cultured on crosslinked gelatin . Cortactin localized with F - actin , identifying invadopodia as punctate sites of labeling ( Figure 5a and b , solid arrows ) . This puntcate staining represents short protrusions that extend into the gelatin matrix beneath the cells perpendicular to the plane of view ( Figure 5a , cortactin ( red ) and Figure 5b , cortactin colocalizing with actin ( yellow ) ) . We con - ﬁrmed this using confocal microscopy ( data not shown ) . Cortactin also colocalized with actin at ru(cid:130)ing membranes ( Figure 5a and b , arrowhead ) , whereas it did not colocalize with actin stress ﬁbers . To verify that the membrane protrusions identiﬁed by labeling with cortactin were associated with ECM degrading activity , we utilized an immunoﬂuorescent assay that demonstrates membrane - associated degrada - tion . When MDA - MB - 231 cells are cultured on crosslinked FITC - gelatin , the cells produce dark holes of degradation against a background of bright ﬂuorescent matrix . We used two - color ﬂuorescence microscopy to visualize either the FITC - gelatin matrix ( Figure 5c , e and f ) or cortactin localization ( Figure 5d , e and f ) . Anti - cortactin monoclonal antibodies ( mAbs ) localized cortactin to ru(cid:130)ing membranes ( Figure 5d , arrowhead ) and areas of punctate staining ( Figure 5d , solid arrow ) . The sites of punctate cortactin staining co - localized with sites of invasion identifying these structures as invadopodia ( Figure 5e and f , solid arrows ) . Image analysis was used to detect cortactin and this overlay image , outlining cortactin staining , was merged with the two - color image to visualize the areas of overlap ( Figure 5f ) . We also performed double labeling experiments with antibodies against cortactin and paxillin on cells plated onto crosslinked gelatin . Paxillin localized to focal adhesions ( Figure 5g , open arrow ) as well as punctate sites where it colocalized with cortactin ( Figure 5g and g ’ , closed arrows ) . PKC m has previously been described as a Golgi localized protein ( Prestle et al . , 1996 ) . The association of PKC m with cortactin and paxillin in the INV fraction indicates a novel plasma membrane localiza - tion . We conﬁrmed this previously unreported localiza - tion for PKC m by immunoﬂuorescence . First , we examined the immunoﬂuorescence localization of PKC m using a number of commercially available mAbs and pAbs . Anti - PKC m mAb ( clone P26720 ) produced a perinuclear , Golgi - like staining ( Figure 5h , solid arrow ) consistent with the Golgi associated localization previously reported in the literature ( Prestle et al . , 1996 ) . However , using two commer - cially available pAbs , we observed staining of the cell membrane , particularly at ru(cid:130)es ( Figure 5i , arrow - head ) , as well as a perinuclear staining ( Figure 5i , closed arrow ) . Staining , however , was particularly sensitive to detergent extraction . We conﬁrmed the speciﬁcity of one of the pAbs using a synthetic peptide antigen to block speciﬁc binding . The peptide eliminated the staining of both the Golgi and plasma membrane components , conﬁrming the speciﬁcity of the antibody for PKC m ( data not shown ) . The extensive membrane staining and Golgi localization of PKC m rendered it extremely di(cid:129)cult to observe immunoﬂuorescent staining at invadopodia . However , we were able to detect the presence of PKC m in invadopodia after shearing away cell bodies . We ﬁxed cells in formaldehyde and then scraped the cell bodies from the surface of the FITC - gelatin matrix . Figure 4 ( a ) Immunoprecipitation of a complex of cortactin , paxillin and PKC m from invasive breast cancer cell lines . Breast cancer cell lines were seeded into tissue culture ﬂasks and lysates prepared after 24 h of culture . The invasion - related complex was isolated by immunoprecipitation of paxillin followed by SDS – PAGE and Western blotting as described in Materials and methods . The complex immunoprecipitated with anti - paxillin antibodies contained cortactin , paxillin and PKC m and was isolated from the invasive cell lines MCF - 7 ADR , MDA - MB - 231 and HS578T . ( b ) Breast cancer cell lines all express paxillin , cortactin and PKC m . Western blots of equal protein loading of total cell lysates from each of the cell lines were probed with anti - paxillin , cortactin , or PKC m mAbs . The characteristics of the breast cancer cell lines have been reported previously ( Thompson et al . , 1992 ; Coopman et al . , 1998 ) Complex of cortactin , paxillin and PKC m in invadopodia ET Bowden et al 4444 After a brief Triton X - 100 extraction , the remaining cellular material was immunostained with anti - PKC m antibodies . This process is in contrast to the cell fractionation protocol where there was no ﬁxation before shearing the cells . Fixation leaves ru(cid:130)es ( Figure 5j , arrowhead ) and invadopodia ( Figure 5j , solid arrows ) in contact with the matrix . Using this technique we conﬁrmed that PKC m staining co - localized with sites of matrix degradation ( Figure 5j , solid arrows ) . Discussion In the present study , we demonstrate by immunofluor - escence , cell fractionation and Western blotting that cortactin , paxillin , and PKC m form a novel complex associated with invadopodial membranes that extend into a crosslinked matrix . Its presence in both invasive cell lines and its association with subcellular protru - sions at sites of matrix degradation suggest that the formation and membrane association of this complex contribute to the invasive phenotype of these cells . The inhibition of localized matrix degradation following microinjection of anti - cortactin antibodies supports the hypothesis that cortactin , in particular , plays a major role in mediating cellular invasion . Cortactin is an actin - bundling protein ( Huang et al . , 1997 ) . Therefore , one role of cortactin might be to participate in ﬁlopodia formation by bundling actin . Alternatively , since cell surface associated proteases mediate matrix degradation , an association of cortactin with the membrane , as a component of the complex , may participate in the localization of matrix degrading proteases to invadopodia . Our working model illus - trates these two potential mechanisms leading to the formation of an active invadopodium ( Figure 6 ) . Our data currently cannot distinguish between these possibilities . The speciﬁc function of cortactin in invadopodia may be modulated by its interactions with paxillin and the protein serine kinase , PKC m . The invasion - related complex of cortactin / paxillin / PKC m was isolated from invadopodia - enriched fractions and was not present at signiﬁcant levels in the CBM fraction although the component molecules were present . Since all three proteins , cortactin , paxillin , and PKC m also localize to invadopodia using immunoﬂuorescence microscopy , we conclude that the complex is localized to the membranes of invadopodia . Using a variety of Figure 5 Immunoﬂuorescent localization of actin , cortactin , paxillin and PKC m at invadopodia . MDA - MB - 231 cells were cultured on FITC labeled or unlabeled gelatin ﬁlms coated onto glass coverslips . Primary antibodies were detected using either Texas red ( red ) or FITC ( green ) secondary antibodies . Actin was detected using FITC - phalloidin ( green ) and nuclei were detected using DAPI ( blue ) . Images were collected by conventional wide ﬁeld ﬂuorescence microscopy ( a – f , h – j ) or confocal microscopy ( g ) . ( a – f ) Actin and cortactin co - localized in invadopodia . ( a ) Cortactin localized to invadopodia in punctate spots ( closed arrows ) and at the cell margin in ru(cid:130)ing membranes ( arrowhead ) . ( b ) A three color overlay of DAPI - stained nuclei , cortactin and actin illustrates co - localization of cortactin and actin at both ru(cid:130)ing membranes ( arrowhead ) and invadopodia ( solid arrows ) . Invadopodia are visualized as a yellow color produced by the colocalization of red and green . ( c – f ) The anti - cortactin mAb labeled invadopodia at sites of invasion in an FITC - gelatin matrix . ( c ) Invasive MDA - MB - 231 cells degrade areas of the FITC - gelatin ( green ) to leave dark spots in the matrix ( solid arrow ) . ( d ) Immunoﬂuorescence localization of cortactin in the same cells highlighted invadopodia ( solid arrow ) , and ru(cid:130)ing membranes ( arrowhead ) . ( e ) A two - color overlay of ( c ) and ( d ) showed co - localization of cortactin staining at sites of invasion into the FITC - gelatin matrix ( closed arrow ) . ( f ) Image analysis can be used to highlight areas of cortactin staining ( white outline ) superimposed onto the two - color image . The formation of invadopodia changes over time however , and holes in the matrix leave a record of their activity . Therefore , some areas of degradation are not associated with cortactin labeled invadopo - dia . ( a – f ) Scale bars = 10 m m . ( g ) Paxillin ( Texas - Red ) and cortactin ( FITC ) colocalization at invadopodia . Paxillin predo - minantly stained adhesions ( open arrow ) . Cortactin and paxillin colocalized at invadopodia ( g , closed arrow , and at higher magniﬁcation in g ’ ) . Again , invadopodia are identiﬁed by the yellow produced by the colocalization of red and green . Note that cortactin did not stain focal adhesions . ( g ) Scale bar = 10 m m . ( g ’ ) Scale bar = 2 . 5 m m . ( h ) MDA - MB - 231 cells grown on a glass coverslip were probed with anti - PKC m mAb P26720 . Golgi - like staining was observed in the perinuclear area ( solid arrow ) . ( i ) Cells grown on a glass coverslip were probed with anti - PKC m polyclonal D20 . This staining was representative of that seen using either the D20 or N20 anti - PKC m pAbs and showed ru(cid:130)ing membranes ( arrowhead ) and bright perinuclear staining ( closed arrow ) . ( h and i ) Scale bar = 10 m m . ( j ) Fixed cells were sheared from the surface of the FITC gelatin matrix as described in Materials and methods . Punctate sites of invadopodia labeled with PKC m pAbs ( red ) and co - localized with areas of degradation ( closed arrows ) . Scale bar = 5 m m Complex of cortactin , paxillin and PKC m in invadopodia ET Bowden et al 4445 techniques we established that focal adhesions and focal adhesion associated proteins including FAK and vinculin , are not present in our invadopodia enriched fractions . We were somewhat surprised that FAK failed to associate with the complex of proteins at invadopodia as FAK binds to paxillin ( Hildebrand et al . , 1995 ; Tachibana et al . , 1995 ) . However , although we did detect the co - association of paxillin and FAK following immunoprecipitation of paxillin from the CBM fraction , we did not detect this association in the INV fraction ( data not shown ) . We conclude that FAK and FAK - paxillin complexes are not prominent components of invadopodia . In summary , our data suggest that FAK associates with paxillin in focal adhesions but not in invadopodia . Paxillin may therefore engage in di(cid:128)erential signaling pathways based upon its subcellular localization . We hypothe - size that the association of paxillin with cortactin in invadopodia inﬂuences a downstream signaling path - way that is related to invasion and matrix degrada - tion . All three proteins from the complex localized to the CYT fraction , and the complex could also be immunoprecipitated from this fraction . Isolation of the complex from the cytosol might simply reﬂect a release from the membrane during the fractionation procedure . Alternatively , it is possible that the complex is in equilibrium between the cytosol and membrane . It is unlikely that the complex detected in the INV fraction represents complex formed in the cytosol that non - speciﬁcally sticks to the INV membranes . In support of this interpretation , the time course of distribution of the complex between the fractions demonstrated that there is no longer any complex associated with the CYT fraction at 48 h although it is present in the INV fraction . Previously , we and others , have demonstrated that with increasing time and cell density , there is a decrease in invasive behavior in vitro ( Coopman et al . , 1998 ; Tamaki et al . , 1996 ; Xie et al . , 1994 ) . The absence of the complex from the CYT at 48 h suggests that the association of the complex with the invadopodia fraction is speciﬁc and supports our theory that the association of the complex with the CYT fraction is more transitory in nature . The loss of the complex in the CYT fraction therefore correlates with a decrease in invasive capacity suggesting that the cytosolic pool of the complex may be depleted . The role of the protein serine kinase PKC m in metastatic breast disease is unknown . However , several PKC isoforms have been directly implicated in the aggressive behavior of a number of tumor types , including PKC a in glioblastoma cells , where antisense oligonucleotide therapy inhibited tumor growth ( Yazaki et al . , 1996 ) . The presence of PKC m in these complexes was initially puzzling given its previously reported localization to the Golgi ( Prestle et al . , 1996 ) . However , the association of PKC m with invadopodia - localized complexes was demonstrated by co - immuno - precipitation with paxillin and cortactin from lysates of invasive cell lines and from invadopodia - enriched membrane fractions . This association was speciﬁc , other PKC isoforms including PKC a and PKC d were not co - immunoprecipitated . We found that the immunoﬂuorescence localization of PKC m at invado - podia was di(cid:129)cult to detect because of sensitivity to detergent extraction . However , our results suggest that polyclonal antibodies directed against PKC m , more sensitively detect other sites of subcellular localization including a punctate staining at the plasma membrane . Even under optimized ﬁxation conditions , the mono - clonal anti - PKC m antibody failed to recognize mem - brane and cytosolic PKC m . We speculate that the role of PKC m in invadopodia may be as a regulator of invasive function via speciﬁc serine phosphorylation events . Thus , one role of PKC m may be to modulate either complex formation or activity at invadopodia . Finally , to reiterate , our data support the conclusion that the formation of a complex comprising cortactin , paxillin and PKC m is associated with the invasive phenotype of breast cancer cells and that cortactin is required for invadopodia mediated matrix degradation . We suggest that the activity of this complex may be to coordinate the aggregation and / or activation of matrix Figure 6 A model for the role of the cortactin - containing complex in the formation of invadopodia . The formation of an active invadopodium involves a coordination of cytoskeletal rearrangements to form a membrane protrusion and the localization and activation of ECM - degrading proteases at this protruding membrane . Two possible sequences of events are illustrated . The cortactin - containing complex may ﬁrst bind to the membrane , coupling the actin cytoskeleton to the membrane to generate a membrane protrusion . The protease becomes linked to the assembling membrane protrusion by interaction with a transmembrane protein , e . g . an integrin or activating transmem - brane protease . Alternatively , the complex may associate with the membrane protein ﬁrst and this complex might recruit ECM - degrading proteases . Then , the coupling of the actin cytoskeleton to this complex would activate clustering of the complexes at sites of membrane protrusion Complex of cortactin , paxillin and PKC m in invadopodia ET Bowden et al 4446 degrading proteases together with cytoskeletal rearran - gements at forming invadopodia . Protein kinase activity may regulate multiple steps during this process that results in the formation of matrix degrading competent invadopodia . These points of regulation remain to be elucidated and will be the subject of further studies . Materials and methods Cell culture All cell lines were obtained from the Lombardi Cancer Center Tissue Culture Shared Resource and originated from the American Type Culture Collection ( ATCC , Rockville , MD , USA ) . Cells were maintained in Falcon ﬂasks ( Becton and Dickinson Labware , Plymouth , UK ) in a 1 : 1 mixture of RPMI 1640 : DMEM ( Mediatech , Washington , DC , USA ) supplemented with 10 % bovine calf serum ( Hyclone Laboratories Inc . , Logan , Utah , USA ) and 5 % NU - serum ( Becton Dickinson Labware , Franklin Lakes , NJ , USA ) and 2 m M L - glutamine ( Gibco BRL , Gaithersburg , MD , USA ) . Cells were grown in the presence of 7 . 5 % CO 2 and passaged regularly to avoid post - conﬂuent growth . Cells were examined regularly for the presence of Mycoplasma contam - ination . Antibodies Mouse anti - cortactin mAbs ( clone 4F11 ) were generously provided by Dr T Parsons ( Department Of Microbiology , University of Virginia , Charlottesville , VA , USA ) or were obtained from Upstate Biotechnology ( Lake Placid , NY , USA ) . Polyclonal antibodies ( pAb ) to chicken cortactin were prepared by injecting a glutathione S - transferase ( GST ) - cortactin fusion protein into rabbits . The constructs used to generate GST - cortactin were also the kind gift of Dr Tom Parsons . Fusion proteins were bacterially expressed and IgG was puriﬁed from both immune and preimmune rabbit sera using Protein A chromatography ( Pierce , Rockford , IL , USA ) . Anti - GST antibodies were removed from both preparations by a(cid:129)nity chromatography using GST - Sephar - ose as described by the manufacturer ( Pierce ) . We veriﬁed that the anti - cortactin pAb ( # 170 - 10 ) recognized the same protein as the anti - cortactin mAb ( 4F11 ) by immunoprecipi - tation and immunoﬂuorescence experiments . Cortactin , immunoprecipitated by the mAb ( 4F11 ) was Western blotted using either the pAb ( # 170 - 10 ) or the mAb ( 4F11 ) . Both of these antibodies recognized protein bands at p80 / p85 , corresponding to the molecular weight of cortactin ( data not shown ) . The anti - cortactin pAb ( # 170 - 10 ) also immu - nostained invadopodia , co - localizing with immunostaining of the anti - cortactin mAb ( 4F11 ) in double labeling experiments ( data not shown ) . The mouse anti - paxillin ( clone 349 ) , anti - FAK ( clone 2A7 ) and anti - PKC m ( clone P26720 ) mAbs were from Transduc - tion Laboratories ( Lexington , KY , USA ) . The rat anti - b 1 integrin antibody ( mAb 13 ) was a kind gift from Dr Steven Akiyama ( National Institute of Environmental Health Science ) . Mouse anti - phosphotyrosine ( clone 4G10 ) and anti - vinculin mAbs were from Upstate Biotechnology . Rabbit D20 , C20 and N20 anti - PKC m polyclonal antibodies ( pAb ) were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . , ( Santa Cruz , CA , USA ) . D20 epitope binding - site blocking peptide was also from Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . We determined that the anti - PKC m mAb recognized the same antigen as the pAbs D20 , C20 and N20 by immunoprecipitation and Western blotting . PKC m , immunoprecipitated by the mAb ( P26720 ) was Western blotted using either the pAbs or the mAb ( P26720 ) . All of these antibodies recognized a protein band at p115 , corresponding to the molecular weight of PKC m ( data not shown ) . Fluorescently labeled and unlabeled , a(cid:129)nity puriﬁed anti - mouse and anti - rat IgG + IgM secondary antibodies were from Jackson Laboratories ( West Grove , PA , USA ) and HRP - conjugated secondary antibodies were from Rockland ( Gilbertsville , PA , USA ) . Transmission electron microscopy Cells ( 5 6 10 5 / ml ) in complete culture medium were incubated overnight with approximately 2 6 10 6 large ( 4 100 m m ) gelatin beads at 37 8 C . The mixture was rotated continuously , end - over - end , to promote the even attachment and spreading of cells on the surface of the beads . The pellet of gelatin beads coated with cells was ﬁxed with 2 % glutaraldehyde / 3 % paraformaldehyde in PBS ( 150 m M NaCl , 1 . 9 m M NaH 2 HPO 4 , pH 7 . 2 ) for 2 h . Post - ﬁxation was in 1 % osmium tetroxide in distilled water for 1 h before processing for conventional ultrathin section electron microscopy as previously described ( Coopman et al . , 1996 ) . Sections were post - stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate and photographed with a JEOL 1200EX - transmission electron microscope operated at 60 kV . Microinjection MDA - MB - 231 cells were seeded onto Eppendorf grided coverslips in serum - free media ( Fisher , Rockville , MD , USA ) previously coated with FITC - crosslinked gelatin ﬁlms . After culture overnight at 37 8 C in a CO 2 incubator , cells were microinjected using the Eppendorf microinjection system ( Fisher ) with either puriﬁed preimmune IgG or the anti - cortactin IgG ( # 170 - 10 ) at 1 mg / ml , mixed 1 : 1 with 40 m g / ml DAPI in sterile PBS . Coverslips were returned to the CO 2 incubator for a 1 h recovery period . After an exchange from serum - free , to serum - containing media , the cells were cultured for an additional 5 h . Finally , cells were ﬁxed as described previously ( Mueller et al . , 1992 ) . Injected IgG was visualized by staining the coverslips with secondary Texas Red goat anti - rabbit IgG ( Jackson Laboratories ) . Microinjected cells were identiﬁed using a Zeiss Photo - scope II equipped with a 63 6 Neoﬂuor 1 . 4 Zeiss lens . Injected cells were identiﬁed as positive by the presence of DAPI stained nuclei and cytosolic IgG immunolabeling . Coverslips were analysed blind , and individual cells were classiﬁed as invasive if a cluster of at least four holes in the FITC - gelatin matrix was present underneath the cell body . 20 – 50 non - microinjected cells and 20 – 50 microinjected cells were counted per coverslip . The data are presented as a percentage of invasive cells relative to total cells and the mean and standard error were calculated from three experiments carried out on separate days . Cell fractionation and Western blotting MDA - MB - 231 cells were cultured at 5 6 10 6 cells / 30 cm diameter plate on crosslinked gelatin ﬁlms for 6 , 24 or 48 h , according to a previously described protocol ( Mueller et al . , 1992 ) . At 6 and 24 h cells were 60 – 70 % conﬂuent . At 48 h post plating , cells were conﬂuent . At each time point cell bodies were sheared from the surface of the plates to leave an invadopodia - enriched fraction embedded in the gelatin . The cell body fraction was further separated into the cell body membranes and cytosol fractions ( Mueller et al . , 1992 ) . Brieﬂy , each plate was washed in TBS and rinsed in tyrosine phosphorylated protein ( YPP ) bu(cid:128)er ( 10 m M MOPS , pH 6 . 8 , 100 m M KCl , 2 . 5 m M MgCl 2 , 1 m M CaCl 2 , 0 . 3 M sucrose , 1 m M vanadate , 2 m M PMSF , 2 m g / ml leupeptin , 2 m g / ml aprotinin and 0 . 02 % NaN 3 ) . Cell bodies were sheared with a glass rod into a small volume of YPP bu(cid:128)er . CBM were separated from the CYT by centrifugation at 9000 g for 20 min at 4 8 C . The invadopodial membranes , embedded in the gelatin matrix , were rinsed in YPP bu(cid:128)er before being Complex of cortactin , paxillin and PKC m in invadopodia ET Bowden et al 4447 scraped up with the crosslinked gelatin into immunoprecipi - tation bu(cid:128)er ( 50 m M Tris , pH 8 . 0 , 50 m M NaCl , 0 . 005 % deoxycholate , 1 % NP40 , 1 m M vanadate , 50 m M NaF , 2 m M PMSF , 2 m g / ml leupeptin , 2 m g / ml aprotinin ) . Each fraction was solubilized in immunoprecipitation bu(cid:128)er at 4 8 C for 20 min and samples were taken for protein determination ( bicinchoninic acid assay , Pierce ) . For immunoprecipitation experiments 500 m g of each fraction was incubated with 2 m g of either anti - cortactin or anti - paxillin mAbs for 2 h at 4 8 C . A 15 m l suspension of Protein A - Sepharose beads ( Boehringer Mannheim , Indianapolis , IN , USA ) was incubated with 2 m g unlabeled a(cid:129)nity - puriﬁed rabbit anti - mouse IgG + IgM for 2 h at 4 8 C . After the preincubation period , beads were added to the lysate and primary antibody mixture , and incubated overnight at 4 8 C . Beads were washed six times in immunoprecipitation bu(cid:128)er and proteins eluted from the beads by boiling in SDS – PAGE sample bu(cid:128)er under reducing conditions . Protein immuno - complexes were sepa - rated by SDS – PAGE in 6 % gels and analysed by Western blot analysis . To characterize the invadopodia fraction morphologically , representative plates were also processed for immunofluores - cence . After shearing , and a brief wash in YPP bu(cid:128)er , gelatin plates and their embedded invadopodia were ﬁxed according to the described protocol for immunoﬂuorescence . The plates were stained with either Texas - Red phalloidin to visualize F - actin , or anti - vinculin antibodies to visualize focal adhesions . Finally , the plates were ﬂooded with PBS and examined using a Zeiss 40 6 water immersion lens . For total protein lysates , cells were grown in tissue culture ﬂasks to 70 – 80 % conﬂuency , washed in ice - cold TBS ( 150 m M NaCl , 50 m M Tris / HCl , 50 m M Tris pH 7 . 5 ) and suspended in 4 ml of immunoprecipitation bu(cid:128)er . Cells were solubilized for 15 min at 4 8 C and samples taken for protein determination . Five hundred m g of total protein lysate was used in immunoprecipitation experiments as described above . Also Western blots of lysate and cell fractions were run using 10 m g of protein per lane . Immunoﬂuorescence microscopy MDA - MB - 231 cells were cultured on crosslinked gelatin or FITC - labeled , crosslinked gelatin ﬁlms overnight as pre - viously described ( Mueller et al . , 1992 ) . Cells ( 7 6 10 4 per 18 mm gelatin coated coverslip ) were incubated overnight at 37 8 C , then ﬁxed and labeled by indirect immunoﬂuorescence as previously described ( Mueller et al . , 1992 ) . To assist in the visualization of invadopodia , cell bodies were mechanically sheared from the surface of the gelatin , after the cells had been ﬁxed , using a glass rod . Indirect immunoﬂuorescence was performed using a range of mAbs and immunostaining was visualized using a(cid:129)nity - puriﬁed Texas red goat anti - mouse antibodies . All primary antibodies were used at 1 : 50 – 1 : 300 dilution in PBS and all secondary antibody incuba - tions were at a 1 : 200 dilution in PBS . Actin was localized using FITC labeled phalloidin ( Molecular Probes , Inc . , Eugene , OR , USA ) at a dilution of 1 : 400 . Nuclei were stained with 4 , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ( DAPI ) at a ﬁnal concentration of 80 ng / ml . Coverslips were mounted using the ProLong antifade kit ( Molecular Probes , Inc . ) . Conven - tional immunoﬂuorescence images were digitized using Image Pro Plus from Media Cybernetics ( Silver Spring , MD , USA ) and a Toshiba integrating camera from I - Cube ( Crofton , MD , USA ) . Confocal images were collected on a Zeiss 410 confocal microscope at a resolution of 0 . 1323 pixels per micron using a 63 6 / 1 . 4 Zeiss immersion lens . Acknowledgements We gratefully acknowledge Tom Parsons for mouse mAb anti - cortactin clone 4F11 and the GST - cortactin constructs used to generate fusion protein for pAb production . We would like to thank Carolyn L Smith and the Light Imaging Facility ( National Institute for Neurological Disorders and Stroke ) for assistance with confocal microscopy . We also thank Sandra McLeskey and Steven Byers for critical reading of the manuscript and Donna Almario and Maozheng Dai for technical assistance . This work was supported in part by the National Institutes of Health grants R01DK48910 , R21CA62232 and R01CA61273 to SCM , R01CA57244 and R01NS34431 to RIG and by the Lombardi Cancer Center Microscopy / Imaging and Tissue Culture shared resources supported by US Public Health Service Grant 1P30CA51008 . References Abedi H , Dawes KE and Zachary I . ( 1995 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 270 , 11367 – 11376 . Bellis SL , Perrotta JA , Curtis MS and Turner CE . ( 1997 ) . Biochem . J . , 325 , 375 – 381 . Burridge K , Turner CE and Romer LH . ( 1992 ) . J . Cell Biol . , 119 , 893 – 903 . Campbell DH , de Fazio A , Sutherland RL and Daly RJ . ( 1996 ) . Int . J . Cancer , 68 , 485 – 492 . Chen W - T . ( 1989 ) . J . Exp . Zool . , 251 , 167 – 185 . Coopman PJ , Do MTH , Thompson EW and Mueller SC . ( 1998 ) . Clin . Cancer Res . , 4 , 507 – 515 . Coopman PJ , Thomas DM , Gehlsen KR and Mueller SC . ( 1996 ) . Mol . Biol . Cell , 7 , 1789 – 1804 . Hildebrand JD , Schaller MD and Parsons JT . ( 1995 ) . Mol . Biol . Cell , 6 , 637 – 647 . Huang C , Lui JL , Haudenschild CC and Zhan X . ( 1998 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 273 , 25770 – 25776 . Huang C , Ni YS , Wang T , Gao YM , Haudenschild CC and Zhan X . ( 1997 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 272 , 13911 – 13915 . Kelly T , Mueller SC , Yeh Y and Chen W - T . ( 1994 ) . J . Cell Physiol . , 158 , 299 – 308 . Klemke RL , Yebra M , Bayna EM and Cheresh DA . ( 1994 ) . J . Cell Biol . , 127 , 859 – 866 . Lewis JM , Cheresh DA and Schwartz MA . ( 1996 ) . J . Cell Biol . , 134 , 1323 – 1332 . McCormick SJ , Brazinski SE , Moore JL , Werness BA and Goldstein DJ . ( 1997 ) . Oncogene , 15 , 265 – 274 . Miyata Y , Nishida E , Koyasu S , Yahara I and Sakai H . ( 1989 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 264 , 15565 – 15568 . Monsky WL , Kelly T , Lin C - Y , Yeh Y , Stetler - Stevenson WG , Mueller SC and Chen W - T . ( 1993 ) . Cancer Res . , 53 , 3159 – 3164 . Monsky WL , Lin C - Y , Aoyama A , Kelly T , Mueller SC , Akiyama SK and Chen W - T . ( 1994 ) . Cancer Res . , 54 , 5702 – 5710 . Moonga BS , Stein LS , Kilb JM and Dempster DW . ( 1996 ) . Calcif . Tiss . Int . , 59 , 105 – 108 . Mueller SC and Chen W - T . ( 1991 ) . J . Cell Sci . , 99 , 213 – 225 . Mueller SC , Yeh Y and Chen W - T . ( 1992 ) . J . Cell Biol . , 119 , 1309 – 1325 . Nakahara H , Howard L , Thompson EW , Sato H , Seiki M , Yeh YY and Chen W - T . ( 1997 ) . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 94 , 7959 – 7964 . Nakahara H , Nomizu M , Akiyama SK , Yamada Y , Yeh Y and Chen W - T . ( 1996 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 271 , 27221 – 27224 . Complex of cortactin , paxillin and PKC m in invadopodia ET Bowden et al 4448 O’Brian CA and Ward NE . ( 1989 ) . Cancer Metast . Rev . , 8 , 199 – 214 . Okamura H and Resh MD . ( 1995 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 270 . 26613 – 26618 . Patel AS , Schecter GL , Wasilenko WJ and Somers KD . ( 1998 ) . Oncogene , 16 , 3227 – 3232 . Prestle J , Pﬁzenmaier K , Brenner J and Johannes FJ . ( 1996 ) . J . Cell Biol . , 134 , 1401 – 1410 . Schuuring E , Verhoeven E , Litvinov S and Michalides RJ . ( 1993 ) . Mol . Cell Biol . , 13 , 2891 – 2898 . Schuuring E , Verhoeven E , Mooi WJ and Michalides RJ . ( 1992 ) . Oncogene , 7 , 355 – 361 . Tachibana K , Sato T , D’Avirro N and Morimoto C . ( 1995 ) . J . Exp . Med . , 182 , 1089 – 1099 . Tamaki M , McDonald W and Del MR . ( 1996 ) . J . Neurosurg . , 84 , 1013 – 1019 . Thompson EW , Paik S , Brunner N , Sommers CL , Zugmaier G , Clarke R , Shima TB , Torri J , Donahue S , Lippman ME , Martin GR and Dickson RB . ( 1992 ) . J . Cell Physiol . , 150 , 534 – 544 . Turner CE , Glenney Jr JR and Burridge K . ( 1990 ) . J . Cell Biol . , 111 , 1059 – 1068 . van Damme H , Brok H , Schuuring - Scholtes E and Schuuring E . ( 1997 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 272 , 7374 – 7380 . Vuori K and Ruoslahti E . ( 1995 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 270 , 22259 – 22262 . Ways DK , Kukoly CA , de Vente J , Hooker JL , Bryant WO , Posekany KJ , Fletcher DJ , Cook PP and Parker PJ . ( 1995 ) . J . Clin . Invest . , 95 , 1906 – 1915 . Wu H and Parsons JT . ( 1993 ) . J . Cell Biol . , 120 , 1417 – 1426 . Xie B , Bucana CD and Fidler JJ . ( 1994 ) . Am . J . Pathol . , 144 , 1058 – 1067 . Yazaki T , Ahmad S , Chahlavi A , Zylber - Katz E , Dean NM , Rabkin SD , Martuza RL and Glazer RI . ( 1996 ) . Mol . Pharmacol . , 50 , 236 – 242 . Yebra M , Filardo EJ , Bayna EM , Kawahara E , Becker JC and Cheresh DA . ( 1995 ) . Mol . Biol . Cell , 6 , 841 – 850 . Complex of cortactin , paxillin and PKC m in invadopodia ET Bowden et al 4449