Book Reviews HOWARD E . GRUBER , Darwin on man . A psychological study of scientific creativity , together with Darwin ' s early and unpublished notebooks , transcribed and annotated by Paul H . Barrett , London , Wildwood House , 1974 , 8vo , . pp . xxv , 495 , illus . , £5 . 00 . In the first part ( pp . 1 - 257 ) , Professor Gruber , a developmental psychologist and follower of Piaget who provides a forward , analyses the way in which Darwin gradually assembled his theory of evolution by natural selection . The second part contains mainly the notes that Darwin recorded concerning man and his relationship with other animals , and on mind , emotions and free will . The background to the period when Darwin was amassing his data ( 1838 - 1859 ) is dealt with , for a knowledge of it is essential if the novelty of his idea is to be appre - ciated . At a time when man was thought to be the Creator ' s prize product , quite separate from animals , and when the materialistic approach to human brain function was unacceptable , Darwin was continually concerned with including man in his scheme . Other influences on him , from parents and teachers , are discussed , but Professor Gruber ' s main task is to show how a genius takes a mass of evidence , theories , ideas , suppositions , and welds them into a biological law . Here we learn not only about Darwin , but the attributes of genius in general , and the methods of scientific thought . The original thinker uses stored , previously obtained evidence and insights , each in different contexts . He can discard or modify his ideas ruthlessly and is , therefore , never enslaved by them . He has an infinite capacity for taking pains and he has the ability clearly to maintain in his mind a variety of ideas , isolated one from the other and yet immediately available for comparative enterprises , and all constantly ready to be incorporated into the overall model . Such was Darwin ' s mode of thought . The only possible criticism of this impressive study is that more consideration could have been given to Darwin ' s psychoneurosis , which itself had an important role to play in his creativity by protecting him from society and so allowing him to give all his attention to his studies . It may be that the long delay in publishing On the origin of species was a direct result of it : anxiety and fear evoked by the possibility of a public reaction to a revolutionary notion that would bring upon him condemnation and ridicule . Darwin ' s notebooks make fascinating reading and they constantly remind one of Harvey ' s Praelectiones . Each was acutely aware of the world about him and would record any fact that seemed at the time to add to a corpus of knowledge necessary to establish , confirm , and sustain his biological concepts . The long delay between revela - tion and publication is also strikingly similar . A detailed comparative study may prove to be a rewarding exercise , and a contribution to the anatomy of genius ; but on the other hand Darwin presents observations on sociological issues which Harvey does not . Professors Gruber and Barrett have produced an important book which will appeal to a variety of readers : biologists , psychologists , historians of science and medicine , philosophers of science , sociologists , and theologians . It can be warmly recom - mended , and at the price it is a bargain . 309