1316 | B . Morén et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell MBoC | ARTICLE EHD2 regulates caveolar dynamics via ATP - driven targeting and oligomerization Björn Morén a , Claudio Shah b , Mark T . Howes c , Nicole L . Schieber c , Harvey T . McMahon d , Robert G . Parton c , Oliver Daumke b , and Richard Lundmark a a Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics , Laboratory for Molecular Infection Medicine , Sweden , Umeå University , 901 87 Umeå , Sweden ; b Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine , Crystallography , 13125 Berlin , Germany ; c Institute for Molecular Bioscience and Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis , University of Queensland , Brisbane , Queensland 4072 , Australia ; d MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology , Cambridge CB2 0QH , United Kingdom ABSTRACT Eps15 homology domain – containing 2 ( EHD2 ) belongs to the EHD - containing protein family of dynamin - related ATPases involved in membrane remodeling in the endo - somal system . EHD2 dimers oligomerize into rings on highly curved membranes , resulting in stimulation of the intrinsic ATPase activity . In this paper , we report that EHD2 is specifically and stably associated with caveolae at the plasma membrane and not involved in clathrin - mediated endocytosis or endosomal recycling , as previously suggested . EHD2 interacts with pacsin2 and cavin1 , and ordered membrane assembly of EHD2 is dependent on cavin1 and caveolar integrity . While the EHD of EHD2 is dispensable for targeting , we identified a loop in the nucleotide - binding domain that , together with ATP binding , is required for caveolar localization . EHD2 was not essential for the formation or shaping of caveolae , but high levels of EHD2 caused distortion and loss of endogenous caveolae . Assembly of EHD2 stabilized and constrained caveolae to the plasma membrane to control turnover , and depletion of EHD2 , resulting in endocytic and more dynamic and short - lived caveolae . Thus , following the identification of caveolin and cavins , EHD2 constitutes a third structural component of cave - olae involved in controlling the stability and turnover of this organelle . INTRODUCTION Internalization and recycling of cell surface receptors involves mul - tiple membrane sculpting and budding events in the cell . Proteins within the Eps15 homology domain – containing protein family ( EHDs ) have been shown to participate in the remodeling of mem - branes in the endosomal system ( reviewed in Naslavsky and Caplan , 2011 ) . The mammalian genome encodes four EHDs , EHD1 – 4 , while Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila each has a single EHD gene , rme - 1 and Past - 1 , respectively . EHDs contain an amino ( N ) - terminal GTPase ( G ) domain , followed by a helical domain , a linker region , and a C - terminal EHD known to bind to linear Asn - Pro - Phe peptide ( NPF ) motifs ( Figure 1A ) . We previously solved the crystal structure of EHD2 , revealing that EHDs are dynamin - related pro - teins involved in nucleotide - dependent membrane remodeling ( Daumke et al . , 2007 ) . EHD2 dimerizes via a conserved interface within the G domain and a highly curved membrane - binding site is created by the tips of the two opposing helical domains ( Figure 1A ) . In addition to residues enforcing sterical hindrance , binding of the EHD to the top of the opposing G domain makes the G domain bind and hydrolyze ATP rather than GTP . We found that ATP hydro - lysis was stimulated by liposome binding and oligomerization of EHD2 into ring - like structures on a membrane surface , causing re - modeling of liposomes into highly curved membrane tubules ( Daumke et al . , 2007 ) . Monitoring Editor Sandra Lemmon University of Miami Received : Sep 15 , 2011 Revised : Jan 31 , 2012 Accepted : Feb 2 , 2012 This article was published online ahead of print in MBoC in Press ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E11 - 09 - 0787 ) on February 9 , 2012 . The authors declare no competing interests . Address correspondence to : Richard Lundmark ( Richard . lundmark @ medchem . umu . se ) . © 2012 Morén et al . This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell Biology under license from the author ( s ) . Two months after publication it is avail - able to the public under an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported Creative Commons License ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 ) . “ASCB ® , “ “The American Society for Cell Biology ® , ” and “Molecular Biology of the Cell ® ” are registered trademarks of The American Society of Cell Biology . Abbreviations used : BHK , baby hamster kidney ; CTxB - HRP , cholera toxin B - sub - unit – horseradish peroxidase ; DAB , diaminobenzidine ; DTT , dithiothreitol ; EHD2 , Eps15 homology domain – containing 2 ; EMCCD , electron - multiplying charge - coupled device ; FRAP , fluorescence recovery after photobleaching ; G , GTPase domain ; GFP , green fluorescent protein ; GST , glutathione S - transferase ; ICQ , intensity correlation quotient ; immunoEM , immunoelectron microscopy ; ITC , isothermal titration calorimetry ; M6PR , mannose 6 - phosphate receptor ; M β CD , methyl β - cyclodextrin ; MHC - 1 , major histocompatibility complex I ; NA , numerical aperture ; NPF , Asn - Pro - Phe peptide ; PBS , phosphate - buffered saline ; RFP , red fluorescent protein ; siRNA , small interfering RNA ; SNX9 , sorting nexin 9 ; TfnR , transferrin receptor ; TIRF , total internal reflection fluorescence . Volume 23 April 1 , 2012 EHD2 regulates caveolar dynamics | 1317 EHD1 as part of the machinery for recycling of the transferrin receptor ( TfnR ) and major histocompatibility complex I ( MHC - I ; Lin et al . , 2001 ; Caplan et al . , 2002 ; Naslavsky et al . , 2004 ) . Much less is known about the cellular roles of the other EHDs . Various re - ports have suggested that EHDs may form heterodimers ( Galperin et al . , 2002 ; Lee et al . , 2005 ; Sharma et al . , 2008 ) , and in - deed both distinct and overlapping func - tions have been reported for the different EHDs ( Naslavsky and Caplan , 2011 ) . Se - quence comparisons indicate EHD2 is the most distal member of the EHD family , and previous studies suggested an involvement in endocytosis of the insulin - responsive glucose transporter GLUT4 and the TfnR ( Guilherme et al . , 2004 ) . Interestingly , en - dogenous EHD2 was identified as being associated with caveolae in a mass spec - trometry – based screen ( Aboulaich et al . , 2004 ) . Caveolae are characteristic small in - vaginations of the plasma membrane found abundantly in many cell types ( reviewed in Bastiani and Parton , 2010 ) . They are en - riched in cholesterol , sphingolipids , and the proteins caveolin1 – 3 and cavin1 – 4 and have been implicated in various cellular processes as signaling domains , endocytic carriers , and sensors of membrane tension . In this study , we aimed to further charac - terize the cellular function of EHD2 . We found that EHD2 specifically bound and lo - calized to caveolae to stabilize and control the dynamics of such invaginations at the cell surface . The ability of EHD2 to oligomer - ize and remodel and stabilize membrane surfaces was shown to be regulated by ATP binding and hydrolysis , which probably re - flects a common mechanism for the target - ing and action of EHD proteins . RESULTS Endogenous EHD2 specifically binds and localizes to caveolae To identify the precise site of action and cel - lular role of EHD2 , we generated affinity - purified antibodies against full - length EHD2 that specifically detected recombinant EHD2 , but not EHD1 , - 3 , and - 4 , in immuno - blotting ( see Supplemental Figure S1A ) . In HeLa cells , the antibodies specifically recog - nized overexpressed green fluorescent pro - tein ( GFP ) - EHD2 in tubules and punctate structures ( Figure S1B ) . No colocalization was seen in cells overexpressing GFP - tagged EHD1 , but , as in untransfected cells , punctate structures were labeled . To vali - date that these structures represent endog - enous EHD2 , we used small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) to deplete EHD2 in HeLa cells , which indeed resulted in ablation of the distinct punctate labeling pattern ( Figure S1 , C and D ) . To elucidate the In C . elegans , RME - 1 was shown to be required for recycling of the yolk receptor ( Grant et al . , 2001 ) . A similar involvement in exit from the endosomal recycling compartment has been ascribed to FIGURE 1 : EHD2 localizes specifically to caveolin1 - positive caveolae . ( A ) Schematic domain representation , with the positions of specific sequence motifs indicated . The three - dimensional structure of dimeric EHD2 ( pdb 2QPT ) is shown as a cartoon representation with key residues discussed in this study shown as red sticks and the nonhydrolyzable ATP analogue as green balls . ( B ) Fluorescence micrograph of HeLa cells stained for endogenous EHD2 and caveolin1 . Scale bar : 10 μm . In the table , colocalization between EHD2 and indicated proteins is quantified from three individual merged images for each experiment ( see also Figure S1 , E and G , for representative images ) . ( C ) Equal protein amounts of different tissue lysates were analyzed by SDS – PAGE and immunoblotting using antibodies against EHD2 , cavin1 , and caveolin2 . ( D ) Immunoprecipitations of EHD2 and SNX9 from a lysate of lung membranes were separated on SDS – PAGE , which was followed by Western blotting with the indicated antibodies . The bottom panel shows the Coomassie blue – stained gel . ( E ) Gallery of images showing immunoEM localization of endogenous EHD2 in 3T3 - L1 cells . EHD2 associates with vesicular elements with the morphology of caveolae ( arrows ) , including characteristic groups of caveolae at the cell surface . N , nucleus ; PM , plasma membrane . The boxed area in the top panel is shown at higher magnification below . Top , right , magnification of EHD2 - labeled caveolar structures . Bottom , right , double - labeling of EHD2 ( 10 - nm gold ) and cavin1 - positive membranes ( 15 - nm gold ) . Bottom , left , the immunoEM localization of EHD2 on plasma membrane lawns of 3T3 - L1 adipocytes . EHD2 associates with vesicular profiles of 55 - to 70 - nm diameter characteristic of caveolae . Note the low labeling of flat plasma membrane and negligible labeling of clathrin - coated pits ( double arrows ) . 1318 | B . Morén et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell To clarify whether EHD2 had a preference for association with internal or surface - associated caveolin1 - positive structures , we de - termined the three - dimensional localization of caveolin1 - RFP and GFP - EHD2 in living cells using confocal microscopy and image re - constructions . EHD2 was specifically found at the plasma mem - brane , at which it colocalized with the surface pool of caveolin1 , al - though caveolin1 - RFP was also detected in internal structures ( Figure 2B ) . To confirm this observation , we used total internal re - flection fluorescence ( TIRF ) microscopy combined with epifluores - cence microscopy and followed the localization of caveolin1 - RFP and GFP - EHD2 within the cell . Indeed , EHD2 was mainly detected at the cell surface , together with caveolin1 ( Figure S3B ) . Although a subset of EHD2 - and caveolin1 - positive structures were endocy - tosed , the majority of such structures appeared limited in their lat - eral diffusion and stably associated with the cell surface over time ( Figure 2C ) . To determine whether EHD2 molecules were in continu - ous exchange or firmly bound to caveolae , we used fluorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) microscopy to deplete the fluorescence signal in individual caveolae and follow the recovery of EHD2 and caveolin1 . As previously shown ( Thomsen et al . , 2002 ) , caveolin1 did not recover significantly from bleaching within 10 min . In contrast , although the recovery of EHD2 fluorescence was also limited , EHD2 recovered considerably faster than caveolin1 within this time frame ( Supplemental Movie S1 and Figure 2D ) . This finding indicates that caveolae - bound EHD2 has a slow exchange rate and rather stably associates with caveolae under these conditions . Ordered membrane assembly of EHD2 is dependent on cavin and intact caveolae Our data suggested that the membrane structure of caveolae , or proteins exposed in this environment , are required for EHD2 recruit - ment . We therefore used methyl β - cyclodextrin ( M β CD ) , which is known to diminish caveolae , by decreasing the cholesterol content in the membrane ( Rothberg et al . , 1992 ) . This treatment resulted in loss of both endogenous and overexpressed EHD2 , cavin , and ca - veolin1 in punctate structures , showing that cholesterol and caveo - lar integrity is crucial for higher - order assemblies of EHD2 ( Figures 3A and S4 , A – C ) . Note that the monoclonal antibody against caveo - lin1 reacted poorly toward caveolin1 in mouse 3T3 - L1 cells , preclud - ing detection of endogenous EHD2 and caveolin1 in the same cell . Shorter treatments with M β CD sometimes shifted the localization of endogenous and overexpressed EHD2 to larger tubular structures totally separated from caveolin1 - positive structures ( Figures 3B and S4D ) . This indicates that EHD2 can temporally bind and remodel membranes in the absence of intact caveolae , similar to EHD2 ex - pression in cells without caveolae . Biochemical determination of the amount of membrane - bound and cytosolic EHD2 showed that simi - lar amounts of EHD2 were bound to the membrane in control and M β CD - treated cells ( Figure S4E ) . This indicates that ordered EHD2 assembly , but not EHD2 membrane binding per se , is dependent on cholesterol , in agreement with previous liposome - binding experi - ments using purified EHD2 ( Daumke et al . , 2007 ) . Following deple - tion of cholesterol , or other perturbations of caveolar assembly , ca - veolin1 was recently shown to disperse and become endocytosed into endosomes and degraded ( Hill et al . , 2008 ; Hayer et al . , 2010b ) ; however , our data suggest that EHD2 is not involved in this uptake due to the lack of colocalization with internalized caveolin1 follow - ing M β CD treatment . EHD2 interacts and colocalizes with cavins and pacsin2 The special lipid composition and presence of structural integral membrane proteins , such as caveolin , render caveolae difficult to nature of the punctate location of EHD2 , we colabeled cells using the EHD2 antibody and antibodies against markers of various com - partments . We found extensive colocalization between EHD2 and caveolin1 - positive punctate structures , indicating that most of the membrane - associated EHD2 is found in caveolae ( Figure 1B ) . In contrast , we found no colocalization with flotillin ( quantified in Figures 1B and S1E ) , which generates specific subdomains in the membrane in a manner similar to caveolin1 ( Glebov et al . , 2006 ) . EHD2 has been suggested as functioning in both exit from endo - somes and clathrin - dependent endocytosis ( Guilherme et al . , 2004 ; George et al . , 2007 ) . However , we found no colocalization with re - cycling MHC - I molecules or mannose - 6 - phosphate receptors ( M6PR ) . Neither did we observe any colocalization with AP - 2 – coated structures or endocytosed transferrin ( Figure S1 , F and G ) . We also assayed markers for the endoplasmic reticulum , Golgi , and early and late endosomes without finding any significant colocalization ( Figure S1G ) . Consistent with a role of EHD2 at caveolae , EHD2 was highly expressed in tissues known to have abundant caveolae , such as lung and adipose tissue , in which caveolin and cavin1 are also highly ex - pressed ( Figure 1C ) . To test whether markers of caveolae can be pulled down together with EHD2 , immunoprecipitations from a membrane pool of mouse lung enriched for caveolin1 were per - formed . Indeed , caveolin1 was coimmunoprecipitated with EHD2 from this lysate , showing that EHD2 interacts with caveolin1 - positive membranes ( Figure 1D ) . To prove that EHD2 is associated with ca - veolae on the surface , sections of cells were gold - immunolabeled with antibodies against EHD2 and cavin1 ( Figure 1E ) . EHD2 associ - ated with cavin - positive pits and vesicular profiles with the morphol - ogy of caveolae ( Figure 1E , arrows ) , including characteristic groups of caveolae connected to the plasma membrane . This was con - firmed using plasma membrane lawns labeled with antibodies against EHD2 . This technique clearly demonstrated the presence of EHD2 on caveolae and the absence of EHD2 on flat plasma mem - brane and clathrin - coated pits ( Figure 1E , bottom , left ) . EHD2 is firmly and specifically associated with stable caveolae on the plasma membrane Overexpressed EHD2 in HeLa cells localizes to both punctae and membrane tubules ( Daumke et al . , 2007 ; Figure S1B ) . The tubular localization could be explained by the fact that HeLa cells have only low levels of caveolin1 and caveolae , leading to mislocaliza - tion and membrane tubulation by overexpressed EHD2 . To deter - mine whether caveolin1 expression drives EHD2 to caveolae , we analyzed the localization of overexpressed caveolin1 – red fluores - cent protein ( RFP ) and GFP - EHD2 in HeLa cells . When coex - pressed , the two proteins showed striking colocalization in punc - tae , with almost all EHD2 found in caveolae but not in tubules ( Figures 2A and S2A ) . GFP - tagged EHD1 , - 3 , and - 4 did not colo - calize with caveolin1 - RFP , showing that caveolar localization is a specific feature of EHD2 ( Figure S3A ) . Interestingly , the expression of GFP - or myc - tagged EHD2 , but not a membrane binding – defi - cient EHD2 mutant ( EHD2 K328D ) , increased the localization of caveolin1 - RFP , together with cavin1 , on the cell surface ( Figures 2A and S2 , C and D ) . When expressed at high levels , caveolin1 - RFP is known to accumulate in the endoplasmic reticulum and lysosomes and to aggregate due to improper sorting and assembly at the plasma membrane . Following ubiquitylation , unassembled caveo - lin1 is rapidly internalized for degradation ( Hayer et al . , 2010b ; Figure 2A ) . Our results indicate that membrane - bound EHD2 con - fines caveolin1 to the surface via recycling or retention at the plasma membrane . Volume 23 April 1 , 2012 EHD2 regulates caveolar dynamics | 1319 FIGURE 2 : EHD2 is stably associated with steady caveolae on the plasma membrane . ( A ) Epifluorescence micrographs of HeLa cells expressing caveolin1 - RFP together with myc - EHD2 ( top ) or the membrane binding – deficient mutant myc - EHD2 K328D ( bottom ) . ( B ) Confocal sections of living 3T3 - L1 cell transfected with GFP - tagged EHD2 and RFP - tagged caveolin1 . Bottom and side projections show slices of the merged maximum projections at position indicated by yellow cross - hairs at 90° rotation . Note the colocalization at the cell surface . ( C ) Representative fluorescence micrographs of 3T3 - L1 cells transfected with GFP - EHD2 and caveolin1 - RFP and analyzed by TIRF microscopy for 4 min with images taken every second . Structures positive for EHD2 and caveolin1 were schematically tracked at the indicated time points ( green circles ) and overlaid on the schematic illustration of structures at time zero ( gray circles ) . Disappearing structures symptomatic of endocytosis are indicated by red arrowheads . ( D ) FRAP microscopy of 3T3 - L1 cell transfected with GPF - EHD2 and caveolin1 - RFP . Distinct caveolae enriched in both proteins were bleached ( yellow circle ) and the time - dependent recovery of the fluorescence signal in this area was traced as indicated in the diagram below . Bar graph showing FRAP of GFP - EHD2 and caveolin1 - RFP after 8 min as quantified from three independently bleached regions . Error bars represent SD . All scale bars : 10 μm . analyze with traditional biochemical approaches . However , EHD2 and cavin1 are peripheral membrane proteins , which allowed us to determine whether these proteins interacted using immunoprecipi - tation . We prepared membranes from mouse lung and dissolved them in 0 . 5 % NP40 and high salt to wash EHD2 off the caveolar membrane ; this was followed by immuno - precipitation of EHD2 and sorting nexin 9 ( SNX9 , a control protein that associates with clathrin - coated pits ) . Cavin1 was immuno - precipitated together with EHD2 but not together with SNX9 ( Figure 3C ) . In agree - ment with this , we found that recombinant EHD2 coupled to beads could specifically pull down cavin1 from a lung lysate ( Figure 3D ) . In addition , we identified pacsin2 as an EHD2 - associated protein . Pacsin2 was re - cently found to remodel caveolar mem - branes and influence the shape of caveolae ( Hansen et al . , 2011 ; Senju et al . , 2011 ) . Using the EHD of EHD2 as bait , we con - firmed that this domain is responsible for binding to pacsin2 , which in pull - downs from lung lysates is the major interaction partner of the EHD ( Figure 3E ) . Using iso - thermal titration calorimetry ( ITC ) , we found that one EHD2 dimer binds to one pacsin2 molecule with an affinity of 37 μM ( Figures 3F and S5 , A – D ) . This interaction did not de - pend on the SH3 domain of pacsin2 but on the integrity of the three NPF motifs , which is in agreement with previous studies show - ing that EHDs of EHD proteins interact with the NPF motifs of pacsins ( Braun et al . , 2005 ) . Furthermore , two isolated EHDs also bound to one pacsin2 molecule with some - what lower affinity , indicating that dimeriza - tion of EHD2 can increase the avidity for its substrate . Pacsin2 and all four members of the cavin protein family ( cavin1 – 4 ) localize to ca - veolae and have partially overlapping func - tions ( Hill et al . , 2008 ; Bastiani et al . , 2009 ; Hansen et al . , 2009 ; McMahon et al . , 2009 ; Senju et al . , 2011 ) . To test whether EHD2 localizes to caveolae together with pacsin2 and the cavins , we coexpressed EHD2 to - gether with individual cavins and stained for pacsin2 or caveolin1 ( Figures 3G and S5E ) . We found a robust colocalization of EHD2 with all four cavins on caveolae . Interest - ingly , we observed that pacsin2 only colo - calized with a subset of EHD2 - and caveo - lin1 - positive structures , but , in addition , decorated structures devoid of both EHD2 and caveolin1 ( Figure 3G ) . Taken together , these results suggest a tight interplay of EHD2 , cavins , and pacsin2 at caveolae . However , while EHD2 and cavins can be considered as general components , pacsin2 appears to be only temporary recruited or localized to a specific subset of caveolae . The KPF loop , but not the EHD , is required for caveolar targeting Oligomerization of EHD2 as a result of membrane binding and in - teractions between the G domains of EHD2 dimers ( Figure 4A ) was proposed to activate ATP hydrolysis ( Daumke et al . , 2007 ) . The 1320 | B . Morén et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell EHDs were shown to localize to the “top binding site” of the opposing G domain , at which they also bind to a GPF motif in the linker region between the helical do - main and EHD . At that position , the EHDs sterically block oligomerization of the G domains . It was suggested that switching of the EHDs to a KPFxxxNPF motif ( resi - dues 120 – 128 ) in a disordered loop at the side of the G domain releases autoin - hibition and promotes oligomerization . ( Daumke et al . , 2007 ; Figure 4A ) . To assay whether transition of the EHD to the KPFxxxNPF motif is indeed required for caveolar localization , we expressed a mu - tant in the motifs ( EHD2 F122A / F128A ) that was previously shown to lack mem - brane - stimulated ATPase activity ( Daumke et al . , 2007 ) . Surprisingly , this mutant was unable to localize to caveolae and did not affect the localization of endogenous ca - veolin1 ( Figure S6A ) . We further assayed the F122A and F128A mutations individu - ally , as well as mutations in nearby amino acids in the unstructured loop . The F128A mutant behaved in a manner similar to wild - type EHD2 , whereas the F122A and K120N mutants were found in punctate and tubular structures distinct from caveo - lin1 - positive structures ( Figures 4B and S6B ) . We conclude that the KPF motif is required for caveolar targeting . In one possible scenario , binding of the EHD to the KPF loop relieves an autoinhibi - tory interaction and / or promotes stable oli - gomerization of the adjacent G domains . Alternatively , the KPF loop is directly in - volved in caveolar targeting by binding to another caveola - specific protein . To distin - guish between these possibilities , we gen - erated EH deletion mutants in the context of wild - type EHD2 ( EHD2 Δ EH 1 – 416 ) or the F122A mutant ( EHD2 F122A / Δ EH 1 – 416 ) . Strikingly , the Δ EH mutant localized to cav - eolae in a manner similar to wild - type EHD2 indicating that , in contrast with other EHDs ( Caplan et al . , 2002 ; Galperin et al . , 2002 ; George et al . , 2007 ; Sharma et al . , 2008 ) , the EHD of EHD2 is not required for proper targeting . Interestingly , EHD2 F122A / Δ EH did not colocalize with caveolin1 ( Figure 4 , C and D ) , indicating that it is not the release of an autoinhibitory action of the EHD from the top site that is responsible for the miss - ing membrane targeting of the F122A mu - tant . To determine whether the KPF loop is directly involved in caveolar targeting , we assayed whether recombinant EHD2 and EHD2 F122A attached to beads could bind to caveolae from detergent - solubilized membranes . EHD2 , but not glutathione S - transferase ( GST ) , bound to caveolae , and FIGURE 3 : EHD2 interacts and colocalizes with pacsin2 and cavin1 , and caveolar membrane integrity is required for ordered membrane assembly of EHD2 . ( A and B ) Fluorescence micrographs of 3T3 - L1 cells coexpressing GFP - EHD2 and caveolin1 - RFP and treated with 15 mM M β CD for 5 or 15 min or PBS ( control ) . Insets in ( B ) show magnifications of the boxed area . ( C ) Immunoprecipitates of EHD2 and SNX9 from mouse lung lysates were analyzed by SDS – PAGE and immunoblotting with antibodies against the indicated proteins . ( D and E ) Pull - down experiments from lung lysate using purified GST , EHD2 , or GST - tagged EHD of EHD2 coupled to Sepharose beads were analyzed by SDS – PAGE Coomassie blue staining and immunoblotting with antibodies against cavin1 and pacsin2 . * indicates degraded EHD2 protein . ( F ) Table showing the dissociation constants and stoichiometry for the interaction of EHD2 with pacsin2 obtained by ITC . See also Figure S5 . ( G ) Fluorescence micrographs of 3T3 - L1 cells coexpressing myc - EHD2 and GFP - cavin1 and costained for endogenous caveolin1 ( top panel ) , or GFP - EHD2 and caveolin1 - RFP and costained for endogenous pacsin2 ( bottom panel ) . Insets show merged image magnifications of areas indicated by yellow rectangles . White arrowheads indicate structures positive for all three proteins . All scale bars : 10 μm . Volume 23 April 1 , 2012 EHD2 regulates caveolar dynamics | 1321 Nucleotide binding is required for caveolar localization of EHD2 , and ATP hydrolysis promotes remodeling of caveolae The ATP - dependent membrane - remodeling activity of EHD2 suggested that EHD2 could be involved in the dynamics and turnover of caveolae . To clarify the role of ATP binding for caveolar targeting , we overexpressed an EHD2 mutant of the phosphate - binding loop ( EHD2 T72A ) , which is unable to bind nucleotides ( Daumke et al . , 2007 ) . Indeed , this mutant was incapable of binding mem - branes and localizing to caveolae ( Figure 5 , A and B ) . This is in agreement with previous work in which we showed that oligomeriza - tion of EHD2 and subsequent membrane remodeling requires nucleotide binding in vivo and under stringent in vitro conditions ( Daumke et al . , 2007 ) . To address the role of ATP hydrolysis for the function of EHD2 at caveolae , we assayed the effect on caveolin1 following expression of EHD2 or EHD2 mutants with no or decreased ATPase activity ( EHD2 T94A , EHD2 H192D , and EHD2 K193D ) or EHD2 F122A ( Daumke et al . , 2007 ) . Interestingly , using immunob - lotting , we found that endogenous caveo - lin1 was significantly down - regulated in EHD2 - overexpressing cells ( Figures 5 , C and D , and 7C ) . EHD2 , however , localized spe - cifically to the remaining caveolin1 - positive structures , and showed colocalization com - parable with that of caveolin1 - RFP ( Figures 5 , A and B ) . The level of endogenous EHD2 or cavin1 was not notably altered by the overexpression of GFP - tagged EHD2 vari - ants ( Figure 5C ) . Expression of EHD2 T94A also lowered the amount of endogenous ca - veolin1 to 58 % of control cells and , in addi - tion , affected the localization of both en - dogenous and overexpressed caveolin1 , with fewer and larger aggregated structures or tubules ( Figure 5A ) . Expression of other mutants with decreased ATPase activity ( EHD2 K193D and EHD2 H192D ) also showed this distortion of caveolae ( Figure S7A ) . This indicates that in the absence of stimulated ATPase activity , caveolar mor - phology is disturbed by an increased mem - brane - remodeling activity of EHD2 . Indeed , we observed that caveolin1 - positive membranes were heavily tubu - lated by EHD2 T94A protein in some cells ( Figure 5E ) . To investigate the effect of EHD2 overexpression at the ultrastructural level , baby hamster kidney ( BHK ) cells , which enable high transfection effi - ciency , were transfected with GFP - EHD2 , GFP - EHD2 T94A , or GFP as a control . All constructs were expressed in more than 80 % of cells , as judged by light microscopy . The cell surface was labeled with ruthenium red to allow the identification of surface - connected structures in thin sections . Caveolae were readily identified in con - trol BHK cells as single pits or characteristic rosettes ( Figure 6A ) . Expression of GFP - EHD2 and GFP - EHD2 T94A caused a consistent the F122A mutant was drastically impaired in caveolar binding , indi - cating that the KPF motif , but not oligomerization , is directly required for caveolar binding ( Figure 4E ) . We next assayed the stability of the EHD2 F122A assemblies devoid of caveolin using FRAP microscopy . Membrane assembly of this mutant in tubules and punctae was found to be strikingly dynamic in comparison with wild - type EHD2 , with al - most complete recovery after 15 s ( Supplemental Movie S2 and Figure 4F ) . Taken together , our data suggest that loop - mediated tar - geting and further assembly of EHD2 leads to stable association with caveolae . Without this specificity , EHD2 demonstrates dynamic mem - brane binding and membrane remodeling . FIGURE 4 : The KPF loop in EHD2 mediates targeting to caveolae and stable membrane assembly of EHD2 . ( A ) Schematic illustration of the previously proposed oligomerization model of EHD2 and subsequent stimulation of ATP hydrolysis . Top views of three EHD2 dimers shows the proposed transition of the EHDs from the top site of the GTPase domain to the KPF loop of the GTPase domain . ( B and C ) Fluorescence micrographs of 3T3 - L1 cells coexpressing GFP - tagged EHD2 variants and caveolin1 - RFP . The Δ EH mutant comprises residues 1 – 416 . ( C ) Colocalizing pixels are shown on the right panels . ( D ) Bar graph showing quantification of the extent of colocalization between GFP - tagged EHD2 variants and caveolin1 - RFP using three individual merged images for each construct . Error bars represent SD . ( E ) Pull - down experiments from caveolae - enriched membranes using purified GST , EHD2 , or EHD2 - F122A coupled to Sepharose beads were analyzed by SDS – PAGE and immunoblotting with antibodies against caveolin1 and EHD2 . ( F ) FRAP microscopy of 3T3 - L1 cell transfected with GPF - EHD2 F122A and caveolin1 - RFP . The indicated area ( yellow circle ) was bleached and the time - dependent recovery of the fluorescence signal in this area was traced as shown in the diagram below . Bar graph showing FRAP of GFP - EHD2 and GFP - EHD2 F122A after 15 s as quantified from three independently bleached regions for each protein . Error bars represent SD . All scale bars : 10 μm . 1322 | B . Morén et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell decrease in the density of surface caveolae ( Figures 6 , A and B ) . The remaining caveolae in the majority of cells showed normal mor - phology . However , highly expressing GFP - EHD2 cells showed striking accumulations of tubules , some of which were ruthenium red – labeled and therefore surface - con - nected ( Figure 6A , black arrows ) , while oth - ers were of similar morphology but appar - ently disconnected from the cell surface ( Figure 6A , white arrows ) . Caveolae still form in cells depleted of EHD2 Loss of cavin1 has been shown to result in ablation of caveolae . To assay whether loss of EHD2 affected caveolae in 3T3 - L1 cells , we used siRNA to deplete the levels of EHD2 and cavin1 ( Figure 7A ) . We verified that we had at least 98 % knockdown effi - ciency of EHD2 using siRNA by immunopre - cipitating EHD2 from cells before immunob - lotting ( Figure 7A ) . When siRNA - treated cells were assayed by immunofluorescence , we found that the characteristic EHD2 stain was completely ablated ( Figure 7B ) . Strik - ingly , caveolin1 localization and intensity ap - peared similar to that of cells treated with control siRNA . To verify that caveolin1 and cavin1 still localized to detergent - resistant caveolar membranes , we used siRNA to de - plete EHD2 or cavin1 , lysed the cells in 1 % ice - cold Triton - 100 , and separated the membrane microdomains from dissolved membranes and cytosol by centrifugation . The pellet fraction ( membrane microdo - mains ) and supernatant were analyzed by immunoblotting to detect EHD2 , cavin1 , and caveolin1 . As expected , depletion of cavin1 drastically reduced the amount of both caveolin1 and EHD2 in the pellet frac - tion due to the loss of caveolae ( Figure 7 , C and D ) . The total amount of caveolin1 was reduced , as previously shown ( Hill et al . , 2008 ) . However , when EHD2 was depleted , we detected a slight increase ( 32 % ) in cave - olin1 levels . ( Figure 7C ) . These data suggest that caveolae can still form in the absence of EHD2 or that the already formed caveolae were stable . To assay whether cells depleted of EHD2 were able to form new caveolae , FIGURE 5 : ATP - binding is required for EHD2 targeting , and ATP hydrolysis regulates the membrane - remodeling activity of EHD2 . ( A ) Fluorescence micrographs of 3T3 - L1 cells expressing GFP - tagged EHD2 variants and costained for endogenous caveolin1 . ( B ) Quantification of the extent of colocalization between GFP - tagged EHD2 variants and endogenous caveolin1 or caveolin1 - RFP . Three individual merged images from each experiment were normalized and the percentage of EHD2 structures that colocalized with caveolin1 or caveolin1 - RFP were determined . ICQ values representing the extent of correlation in staining intensity ( − 0 . 5 [ minimum ] to 0 . 5 [ maximum ] ) between GFP - tagged EHD2 variants and caveolin1 - RFP were determined as described in Materials and Methods . ( C ) Immunoblot analysis of total protein levels in 3T3 - L1 cells following overexpression of indicated GFP - tagged EHD2 variants . ( D ) Quantification of the levels of endogenous EHD2 and caveolin1 from three independent experiments as in ( C ) . Error bars indicate the SD . ( E ) Fluorescence micrograph of cells coexpressing the ATP hydrolysis – deficient mutant GFP - EHD2 T94A and caveolin1 - RFP showing heavily tubulated caveolin1 - positive membranes colabeled with GFP - EHD2 T94 . Insets show magnifications of indicated areas . All scale bars : 10 μm . Volume 23 April 1 , 2012 EHD2 regulates caveolar dynamics | 1323 oxidase ( CTxB - HRP ) for 1 min and then quantification of budded caveolae ( defined as 55 - to 75 - nm uncoated profiles ) via the diamin - obenzidine ( DAB ) reaction in the presence of a surface - quenching agent ( Kirkham , 2005 ) . Interestingly , in comparison with control cells , EDH2 - depleted cells displayed 2 . 5 times more internalized caveolae at this time point ( Figure 8 , A and B ) . Using dynasore treat - ment to block dynamin resulted in greatly reduced caveolar endo - cytosis , as previously described ( Figure 8B ; Boucrot et al . , 2011 ) . We observed that the total number of surface - connected caveolae was slightly increased in cells lacking EHD2 , in contrast with cells overexpressing EHD2 ( Figure 8C ) . These data suggest that the more dynamic endocytic caveolae might fuse back to the plasma mem - brane more efficiently in the absence of EHD2 , resulting in more caveolae at the surface . We detected no obvious morphological phenotypic changes in caveolae following EHD2 depletion ( unpub - lished data ) . To address whether EHD2 stabilized caveolae at the plasma membrane , we used TIRF microscopy to look at the dynam - ics of surface - associated caveolin1 - RFP following expression of GFP - EHD2 or GFP - EHD2 K328D . Strikingly , cavolin1 - RFP was highly dynamic on the surface when expressed together with the mem - brane binding – deficient GFP - EHD2 K328D , which likely functions to sequester endogenous EHD2 ( Supplemental Movie S3 , A and B , and Figure 8D , bottom ) . However , in cells expressing GFP - EHD2 , caveolin1 - RFP was found together with EHD2 in structures that were very stable and did not show any apparent membrane diffusion ( Supplemental Movie S4 , A and B , and Figure 8D , top ) . These re - sults indicate that EHD2 is needed to stabilize caveolae at the sur - face and suggested that such structures are spatially constrained , possibly through coupling to the cytoskeleton . On the basis of our results , we propose a model in which ATP binding and the KPF loop target EHD2 to caveolae , and subsequent oligomerization of EHD2 sculpts the caveolar membrane to stabilize caveolae at the cell sur - face and control scission from the membrane ( Figure 8E ) . DISCUSSION EHDs are widely used in trafficking processes throughout the cell , but little is known about their detailed cellular function and the de - terminants that mediate specificity in their recruitment to particular trafficking pathways . In this paper , we show that EHD2 , but not other EHDs , is specifically associated with caveolae at the cell sur - face . Ordered membrane assembly of EHD2 was dependent on ATP binding and caveolar integrity . Interestingly , the unstructured KPF loop at the periphery of the G domain is directly involved in targeting of EHD2 dimers to caveolae . Recruitment could be medi - ated via proteins exposed on the surface of caveolae and influenced by the specific lipid composition and membrane curvature of cave - olae . Immobilized EHD2 was able to pull down caveolae in vitro , demonstrating that EHD2 dimers are sufficient for caveolar binding . Due to the biochemical properties of caveolin1 , analysis of direct interactions with EHD2 was precluded . However , EHD2 was found to interact with cavin1 and pacsin2 , suggesting a direct association with core components of caveolae . Binding to pacsin2 was medi - ated via the EHD , but targeting of EHD2 to caveolae was indepen - dent of the EHD , indicating that pacsin2 is not responsible for re - cruiting EHD2 . In contrast to other EHDs ( Kieken et al . , 2010 ) , the EHDs might rather be involved in the intramolecular control of EHD2 activity and , possibly , subsequent protein interactions at caveolae . Consistent with these findings , Hansen et al . recently reported that GFP - EHD2 localized to morphologically defined caveolae as seen by immunoelectron microscopy ( immunoEM ; Hansen et al . , 2011 ) . At the plasma membrane , caveolin1 - enriched domains adopt the typical invaginated structure of caveolae in a cholesterol - , caveolin1 - , we removed caveolae by M β CD treatment and analyzed the recov - ery of caveolae after washing away the drug . In control cells , as well as in EHD2 - depleted cells , caveolae started to reappear after 30 min and had fully recovered after 2 h ( Figure 7E ) . Taken together , these data showed that caveolae are present in cells lacking EHD2 and that caveolar structures can re - form in the absence of EHD2 after restoration of cholesterol levels . Caveolae are more dynamic in cells lacking EHD2 Caveolae have been described as relatively stable structures with the ability to undergo stimulated fission and endocytosis ( Thomsen et al . , 2002 ; Hommelgaard et al . , 2005 ) . However , in stable caveo - lin1 - GFP – expressing cells , a pool of caveolae was observed to be much more dynamic and to display a kiss - and - run behavior ( Pelkmans and Zerial , 2005 ; Boucrot et al . , 2011 ) . To assay whether EHD2 was involved in regulating the dynamics of caveolae , we first used an ultrastructural assay ( Kirkham , 2005 ; Howes , 2010 ; Boucrot et al . , 2011 ) to quantify the number of budded caveolae . This assay relies on internalization of cholera toxin B - subunit – horseradish per - FIGURE 6 : Ultrastructural characterization showing loss of surface - connected caveolae following overexpression of EHD2 . ( A ) BHK cells were transfected with the indicated constructs , surface - labeled with ruthenium red , and then processed for Epon embedding . Caveolae were defined as ruthenium red – labeled , uncoated , circular profiles of 55 - to 75 - nm diameter . High expression of GFP - EHD2 causes formation of surface - connected tubules of ∼ 45 - nm diameter ( arrows ) . In addition , tubules within the cytoplasm that are not surface connected are also evident ( white arrows ) . Some tubules appeared coated ( double arrows ) . Cells expressing the GFP - EHD2 T94A mutant ( T94A ) showed a range of morphologies , including caveolae similar to GFP control cells , small tubular caveolae , and in highly expressing aggregate - containing cells , loss of caveolae . PM , plasma membrane . ( B ) Bar graph showing the quantification of the number of surface - connected caveolae per cell profile in GFP - EHD2 – or GFP - EHD2 T94A – expressing cells compared with GFP control cells as the mean of three independent quantifications . Error bars represent SEM . Highly expressing GFP - EHD2 cells , containing prominent aggregates , were excluded . 1324 | B . Morén et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell FIGURE 7 : EHD2 is not required for the formation of caveolae . ( A ) 3T3 - L1 cells were treated with siRNA against EHD2 or three different cavin1 siRNAs or control siRNA . Cell lysates ( top , left and bottom panels ) or immunoprecipitates ( top , right ) obtained using EHD2 antibodies antibodies ( top , right panel ) were subjected to SDS – PAGE and analyzed by immunoblotting with the indicated antibodies . ( B ) Fluorescence micrographs of cells treated with siRNA against EHD2 or control siRNA and stained for EHD2 or caveolin1 . Note that the monoclonal antibody against caveolin1 reacted poorly toward caveolin1 in mouse 3T3 - L1 cells , so we were not able to detect endogenous EHD2 and caveolin1 in the same cell . ( C ) Cells treated as in ( A ) , or overexpressing GFP - EHD2 , were lysed and either boiled directly in sample buffer ( total ) or detergent - resistant membranes ( DRM ) were separated from cytosol and soluble membranes ( supernatant ) by centrifugation . Fractions were analyzed by immunoblotting using the indicated antibodies . The total level of caveolin1 in EHD2 - depleted cells was 132 ± 18 % compared with control cells , as determined from three independent experiments . Error values represent SEM . ( D ) Bar graph showing quantification of the EHD2 and cavin1 fraction in detergent - resistant membranes in control cells and cells depleted of EHD2 or cavin1 . Immunoblots of EHD2 and cavin1 from three individual experiments as in ( C ) were quantified and scored as percentage of total protein . Error bars show SD . ( E ) Control cells and cells depleted of EHD2 were treated with 10 mM M β CD for 20 min to deplete caveolae . M β CD was washed out , and cells were fixed and stained for EHD2 or caveolin1 at the indicated time points . Note that caveolin1 staining recovered similarly in the absence and presence of EHD2 . All scale bars : 10 μm . Volume 23 April 1 , 2012 EHD2 regulates caveolar dynamics | 1325 and cavin - dependent manner ( Bastiani and Parton , 2010 ) . While ca - veolin1 might induce membrane curvature of caveolae via oligomer - ization and its stable integration in the membrane ( Parton and Si - mons , 2007 ; Hayer et al . , 2010a ) , cavin1 – 4 form peripherally associated multiprotein complexes that regulate the morphology and dynamics of caveolae ( Hill et al . , 2008 ; Bastiani et al . , 2009 ; Hansen et al . , 2009 ; McMahon et al . , 2009 ) . Together with pacsin2 , EHD2 is the first - described caveola - associated peripheral protein with biochemically defined , membrane - remodeling activity . Interest - ingly , EHD2 oligomers in vitro were found to adopt rings of varying diameter that closely matched the distinct size of caveolae ( Daumke et al . , 2007 ) . We show that caveolar membranes are remodeled into long tubules in the complete absence of ATP hydrolysis in EHD2 . In addition , overexpression of EHD2 , without overexpression of caveo - lin1 , resulted in loss and distortion of endogenous surface caveolae . This indicates that without the restraints of other proteins and ATP hydrolysis , the membrane - sculpting activity of EHD2 affects caveolar morphology . However , we found no effect on caveolar morphology following EHD2 depletion , suggesting that EHD2 is not essential for shaping caveolae . EHD2 specifically associates with cell surface – connected caveo - lae . Such structures are formed even in the absence of EHD2 , indi - cating that EHD2 is not required for the generation of caveolae , but rather is involved in stabilizing or controlling the dynamics of cave - olae . We found that overexpression of EHD2 results in higher levels of overexpressed caveolin1 at the cell surface . In addition , depletion of EHD2 increased the number of internalized caveolae , supporting a stabilizing role of EHD2 at the plasma membrane . Caveolae can be endocytosed , but these structures appear to be very stable when compared with other invaginations , such as clathrin - coated pits ( Thomsen et al . , 2002 ; Hommelgaard et al . , 2005 ) . The nearly 1000 - fold - slower nucleotide hydrolysis rate of EHD2 , as compared with dynamin ( Daumke et al . , 2007 ) , might be optimized for the slow dynamics of caveolar turnover . Assembly of EHD2 oligomeric rings around caveolae might function as a cap to temporally control dy - namin spiral formation and fission , as suggested for lamprey EHD1 in the synapse ( Jakobsson et al . , 2011 ) . A distinct pool of caveolae in stably expressing caveolin - GFP cells has been described to be highly dynamic ( Pelkmans and Zerial , 2005 ; Boucrot et al . , 2011 ) . These short - lived caveolae were shown to contain cavin and to have a residence time of only a few seconds at the plasma membrane . It is plausible that EHD2 is required to stabilize the kiss - and - run be - havior of such caveolae . Indeed , we found that without functional EHD2 , caveolin1 - RFP formed numerous short - lived structures at the surface . However , expression of EHD2 constrained caveolin1 - RFP into structures that were very stable spatially and temporally . Taken together , our observations suggest that EHD2 is involved in stabilizing caveolar assemblies and regulating subsequent turn - over of caveolae . EHD2 might cooperate with dynamin , which was previously shown to localize to caveolar necks and to promote ca - veolar fission , thereby controlling the stability of caveolae at the cell surface ( Henley et al . , 1998 ; Oh et al . , 1998 ; Boucrot et al . , 2011 ) . Indeed , pacsin2 and other membrane - remodeling , BAR domain – containing proteins have been shown to interact and function both with EHDs and dynamin ( Braun et al . , 2005 ; Pant et al . , 2009 ; Senju et al . , 2011 ) and might coordinate the suggested functional cross - talk . While EHD2 , cavin , and caveolin1 were stably associated at the membrane , pacsin2 only colocalized with a subset of these struc - tures , indicating that the interaction between EHD2 and pacsin2 is temporally regulated and might be important for specific events in caveolar dynamics . EHD2 has also been described as binding other NPF - containing proteins , including rabenosyn - 5 ( Naslavsky et al . , 2004 ) , prohibitin ( Ande and Mishra , 2010 ) , EHDBP1 ( Guilherme et al . , 2004 ) , myoferlins ( Doherty et al . , 2008 ; Posey et al . , 2011 ) , and epsin1 / 3 ( Ko et al . , 2010 ) . Our observation that EHD2 - positive caveolae are limited in diffusion in the membrane suggests that these invaginations might be coupled to the cytoskeleton via such binding partners . Further definition of the proteome network around EHD2 will clarify its precise role at caveolae . In summary , the presented data , together with previous work , support a model in which ATP - loaded EHD2 dimers are recruited to plasma membrane – associated caveolae to stabilize and control membrane curvature and fission of caveolae in an ATP hydrolysis – dependent manner . This novel caveolar marker provides mechanis - tic support for the process involved in the dynamics of such invagi - nations , knowledge of which is vital for our general understanding of the physiological significance of caveolae . MATERIALS AND METHODS Reagents and constructs Polyclonal antibodies against full - length EHD2 were generated and affinity - purified using recombinant EHD2 . Purchased antibodies were : mouse anti - myc clone 9E10 and rabbit anti - myc from Cell Sig - naling Technology ( Danvers , MA ) ; rabbit anti - caveolin1 ( ab2910 ) , rabbit anti - cavin1 / PTRF , mouse anti - EEA1 ( ab2900 ) , and mouse anti - calnexin ( ab22595 ) from Abcam ( Cambridge , MA ) ; mouse anti - caveolin1 clone 2234 from BD Transduction Laboratories ( Franklin Lakes , NJ ) ; mouse anti – AP - 1 from Sigma - Aldrich ( St . Louis , MO ) ; mouse anti - MHC class I ( w6 / 32 ) from the American Type Culture Collection ( Manassas , VA ) ; mouse anti - MPR6R and mouse anti - AP - 2 ( AP6 ) from Affinity BioReagents ( Golden , CO ) ; and rabbit anti - pac - sin2 from BioSite , Mira Mesa , CA . All secondary antibodies were conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488 , 546 , or 647 ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) . cDNA constructs encoding human and mouse EHD2 and de - rivatives were described previously ( Daumke et al . , 2007 ) , except for the mutants F122A and Δ EH F122A , which were created using PCR - directed mutagenesis ( Stratagene ; Agilent , Santa Clara , CA ) . cDNAs from EHD1 , EHD3 , and EHD4 ( a kind gift of M . Plomann , University of Cologne ) were cloned into the pSKB - LNB vector for expression as N - terminal His fusions in Escherichia coli , and into the pEGFP - C3 vector for overexpression in eukaryotic cell culture . Constructs of GFP - tagged cavin1 – 4 were previously described ( Bastiani et al . , 2009 ) . RFP - tagged caveolin1 ( 14434 ; Tagawa et al . , 2005 ) and DSred - tagged Rab9 ( 12677 ) , Rab11 ( 12662 ) , and Rab7 ( 12680 ; Choudhury et al . , 2002 ) were purchased from Addgene ( Cambridge , MA ) . GFP - flotillin was a kind gift from Ben Nichols ( Laboratory of Molecular Biology , Cambridge ) . Stealth technology siRNA for EHD2 and Cavin1 knockdown was purchased from Invitrogen . Human EHD2 siRNA : ACAAGAUCCGCGUGGUGCUCAA - CAA ; mouse EHD2 siRNA : UUGAGUUUGCGGAAGGGCUUCU - CUG ; control siRNA : CAGCGAAUUCCCGCCCAAAUGACAA ; mouse Cavin1 siRNAa : CCGCUGUCUACAAGGUGCCGCCUUU ; mouse Cavin1 siRNAb : GCCGCAACUUCAAAGUCAUGAUCUA ; mouse Cavin1 siRNAc : CACACGCUGGAGAAGCGCAUGAACA . Protein purification , biochemical analysis , and ITC EHD constructs were expressed in a BL21 ( DE3 ) Rosetta E . coli strain as N - terminal His fusions and purified via affinity chromatography , as previously described ( Daumke et al . , 2007 ) . Pacsin2 constructs were expressed as N - terminal GST fusions , followed by a thrombin cleavage site in Rosetta DE3 cells ( Modregger et al . , 2000 ) . Cells were lysed in 50 mM HEPES ( pH 7 . 5 ) , 400 mM NaCl , 2 . 5 mM dithio - threitol ( DTT ) , 1 mM Pefablock ( Roth , Karlsruhe , Germany ) , 1 μg / ml DNAseI ( Sigma ) using a microfluidizer . A soluble extract , prepared 1326 | B . Morén et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell FIGURE 8 : Caveolae are more dynamic in cells depleted of EHD2 . ( A ) Representative images of 3T3 - L1 cells transfected with scrambled siRNA or EHD2 siRNA and incubated with CTxB - HRP as in ( B ) . Arrows show 55 - to 75 - nm , CTxB - HRP – positive budded caveolae containing the electron - dense DAB reaction product . Scale bar : 200 nm . Inset shows higher magnification of labeled and unlabeled caveolae . ( B ) 3T3 - L1 cells were transfected with scrambled siRNA control or EHD2 siRNA , or left untransfected and treated with dynasore before addition of CTxB - HRP on ice and incubation at 37°C for 1 min . The number of electron - dense , CTxB - HRP – positive carriers was quantified per cell across 29 – 32 cells in three independent experiments and distinguished based on size ( 55 – 75 nm being caveolae and 80 – 120 nm being clathrin - coated vesicles ) and morphology ( caveolae being uncoated ) . Error bars show SEM . Two - tailed t tests were performed for each set of data to determine significance . * * = p < 0 . 01 . ( C ) Ruthenium red – stained 3T3 - L1 cells were Volume 23 April 1 , 2012 EHD2 regulates caveolar dynamics | 1327 a VP - ITC ( MicroCal , Piscataway , NJ ) in 20 mM HEPES ( pH 7 . 5 ) , 300 mM NaCl , 2 . 5 mM DTT , 2 mM MgCl 2 , and 1 mM CaCl 2 at the indi - cated protein and ligand concentrations . Binding isotherms were fitted , and equilibrium dissociation constants were calculated using MicroCal ORIGIN software . Cell culture , protein overexpression , and siRNA knockdown 3T3 - L1 BHK , and HeLa cells were grown in DMEM medium ( GIBCO , Grand Island , NY ) supplemented with 10 % fetal calf serum and transfected using Lipofectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen ) for transient pro - tein expression . For EHD2 and cavin depletion , HeLa and 3T3 - L1 cells were transfected with stealth siRNA specific against human or mouse EHD2 and cavin1 , respectively , using Lipofectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen ) , according to manufacturer’s instructions . If not other - wise mentioned , 3T3 - L1 cells were retransfected for optimal knock - down and supplied with fresh DMEM medium every day . Optimal knockdown was achieved after 2 – 3 d , as identified by SDS – PAGE and immunoblotting . Cholesterol was depleted from 3T3 - L1 cells using 10 mM M β CD ( Sigma - Aldrich ) in DMEM medium for indicated time intervals . To observe regrowth of caveolae , cells were incu - bated with 10 mM M β CD in DMEM medium for 15 min and then washed out by using fresh DMEM medium and cells were incubated at 37°C , as indicated . Immunofluorescence microscopy For immunofluorescence analysis , HeLa and 3T3 - L1 cells were fixed in 3 % paraformaldehyde in phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) for 20 min at room temperature , then washed and blocked in 5 % goat se - rum with 0 . 05 % saponin in PBS before staining with the appropriate antibodies in 1 % goat serum , 0 . 05 % saponin in PBS using standard protocols . For immunofluorescence trafficking assays in HeLa cells , Alexa Fluor 568 – conjugated transferrin ( Invitrogen ) was diluted in prewarmed media , added to cells , and incubated for the indicated time periods and temperatures . After washing , cells were fixed and subjected to immunofluorescence analysis , as described above . Epifluorescence images were taken using a Zeiss Axio Imager Z1 system with AxioVision software ( Zeiss , Jena , Germany ) . For live - cell confocal microscopy , cells were grown and transfected according to standard protocols on uncoated MatTek dishes , and then placed in a temperature - controlled chamber at 37°C with 95 % air / 5 % CO 2 and 100 % humidity ( Okolab , Ottaviano , Italy ) . Live - cell imaging data were acquired using a fully motorized inverted microscope ( Nikon A1R Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope ) with a 60 × oil immersion lens ( Plan Apochromat VC ; Nikon , Tokyo , Japan ) under control of the NIS - Elements microscope imaging software ( Nikon ) . For FRAP experiments , the region of interest was photobleached for 10 s using a 488 laser . Single images were taken every 10 s before and after photobleaching , and recovery intensity was measured for a total of 10 min . TIRF microscopy was performed using a Plan Apo - chromat 100 × oil objective lens , numerical aperture ( NA ) 1 . 49 . Im - ages were acquired with an iXon - 897 electron - multiplying charge - coupled device ( EMCCD ) camera ( Andor , Belfast , Northern Ireland ) . by centrifugation at 50 , 000 × g for 45 min at 4°C , was applied on a glutathione - Sepharose column , which was extensively washed with washing buffer I ( 20 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 5 , 300 mM NaCl , 2 . 5 mM DTT ) and later with 20 mM HEPES ( pH 7 . 5 ) , 700 mM NaCl , 2 . 5 mM DTT , 5 mM KH 2 PO 4 , 5 mM K 2 HPO 4 , 0 . 5 mM ATP , to remove Hsp70 contaminations . The GST tag was removed by addition of 500 U Thrombin ( Serva , Heidelberg , Germany ) in washing buffer 1 and overnight cycling at slow speed at 4°C . Cleaved protein was con - centrated using ultrafiltration concentrators ( molecular weight cutoff 50 kDa ; Millipore , Billerica , MA ) and applied on a Superdex200 26 / 60 gel - filtration column equilibrated with 20 mM HEPES ( pH 7 . 5 ) , 300 mM NaCl , 2 . 5 mM DTT for final purification . To obtain lung lysates and membranes enriched for caveolae , mouse lungs were homogenized using a motor - driven glass homog - enization in a HN150 ( HEPES 25 mM , NaCl 150 mM ) buffer supple - mented with protease inhibitors . After initial centrifugation for 5 min at 800 × g to remove cell debris , the supernatant was centrifuged for 1 h at 60 , 000 rpm , and the supernatant was used as lung lysate . To obtain caveolae - enriched membranes , the pellet fraction ( P1 ) was dissolved in HN150 supplemented with ice - cold 1 % Triton X - 100 for 30 min at 4°C and centrifuged for 10 min at 800 × g . The supernatant was adjusted to 40 % sucrose , overlaid with 30 and 5 % sucrose cushions , and centrifuged for 3 h at 39 , 000 rpm , and the 30 – 5 % interphase was collected . The P1 pellet fraction was solubi - lized in HEPES 25 mM supplemented with 0 . 5 % NP - 40 and 300 mM NaCl , 1 mM DTT , and 5 mM EDTA and centrifuged at 20 , 000 × g for 20 min to obtain membrane extract . For immunoprecipitations and pull - down experiments , antibodies or proteins were coupled to to - sylactivated Dynabeads ( Invitrogen ) . Beads were incubated with the indicated lysate at 4°C for 2 – 4 h , washed twice in NH150 buffer with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 and once in NH150 , boiled in sample buffer , and analyzed by SDS – PAGE and Coomassie stain or immunoblotting . For analysis of protein expression and efficiency of knockdown , 3T3 - L1 or HeLa cells were lysed using 1 % Triton and HN150 buffer sup - plemented with protease inhibitors for 30 min on ice , then centri - fuged 20 min at 14 , 000 rpm at 4°C . Supernatants or pellets ( detergent - resistant membranes ) were analyzed by SDS – PAGE and immunoblotting . For analysis of total protein expression following overexpression of EHD variants , cells were sedimented , washed , and boiled directly in sample buffer before analysis by immunoblot - ting . For determination of cytosolic and membrane - bound fractions , control or M β CD - treated 3T3 - L1 cells were harvested , washed , and frozen / thawed twice in buffer containing 25 mM HEPES , 85 mM sucrose , 1 mM MgCl , and 100 mM potassium acetate . Disrupted cells were assessed by trypan blue stain . Cells were centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 5 min , the pellet was washed and centrifuged again , and supernatants were pooled and boiled in sample buffer ( cytosol ) . The pellet was dissolved in 1 % NP40 and centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 5 min to spin down nuclei . The supernatant was centrifuged at 60 , 000 rpm for 1 h , and the pellet was boiled in sample buffer ( total membranes ) . Mouse tissue lysates were generated as described above for lung lysates . ITC experiments were carried out at 10°C in transfected with scrambled siRNA control or EHD2 siRNA , or left untransfected and treated with dynasore . The number of ruthenium red – labeled , and thus surface - connected , caveolae and clathrin - coated vesicles ( Surface profiles ) were counted per cell in 30 – 32 cells across three independent experiments . Error bars show SEM . Two - tailed t tests were performed for each set of data to determine significance . * = p < 0 . 05 ; * * = p < 0 . 01 ; ns , not significant . ( D ) Representative images from TIRF microscopy movie of cells cotransfected with GFP - EHD2 and caveolin - RFP or GFP - EHD2 K328 and caveolin1 - RFP . Images were taken every 50 ms . Scale bars : 1 μm . ( E ) Proposed model for specific ATP - driven recruitment of EHD2 to caveolae via the KPF loop and subsequent oligomerization to stabilize caveolae at the surface . ATP hydrolysis – dependent disassembly of EHD2 is proposed to control oligomerization and thereby the dynamics of caveolae . 1328 | B . Morén et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell Single images were taken every 0 . 05 s . TIRF microscopy with com - bined epifluorescence microscopy experiments was performed with an Axio Observer Z1 TIRF3 system ( Zeiss ) with motorized TIRF - slider , using a Plan Apochromat 100 × oil objective , NA 1 . 46 . Images were acquired and analyzed by AxioVision software and a quantEM 512SC EMCCD camera ( Photometrics , Tucson , AZ ) . Single images were taken every 0 . 2 s . Electron microscopy Samples were processed for Tokuyasu embedding and immuno - gold labeling using modifications of standard methods ( Slot and Geuze , 2007 ) , as described previously ( Martin and Parton , 2008 ) . Preparation and immunogold labeling of plasma membrane lawns from differentiated 3T3 - L1 adipocytes were performed as described previously ( Parton et al . , 2002 ) . For analysis and quantification of the effect of overexpression or depletion of EHD2 on surface ultrastruc - ture , BHK cells were transfected with GFP , GFP - EHD2 , or GFP - EHD2 T94A and assayed after overnight incubation , or 3T3 - L1 cells were transfected with scrambled siRNA or EHD2 siRNA , or were left un - transfected and were treated with 80 μM dynasore ( Sigma - Aldrich ) for 30 min at 37°C . For quantification of caveolar density , BHK or 3T3 - L1 cells were washed twice in PBS before fixation in 2 . 5 % glu - taraldehyde and 1 mg / ml ruthenium red for 1 h at room tempera - ture to highlight the cell surface . Cells were washed in 0 . 1 M caco - dylate buffer before fixation in 1 % osmium tetroxide with 1 mg / ml ruthenium red for 3 h at room temperature and processed by con - ventional methods for Epon embedding . Ultrathin sections ( 55 – 60 nm ) were cut perpendicular to the substratum ( vertical sections ) to give an unbiased representation of the entire plasma membrane . Quantification of surface caveolae was performed on random areas along the monolayer . Surface caveolae were defined as ruthenium red – labeled 55 - to 75 - nm uncoated circular profiles , as in previous studies . By these criteria , caveolae are absent from Cav1 − / − cells . Each area was then used for quantification by moving along the monolayer in a random manner . For BHK cells , the results are from two independent transfections with four separate areas of the monolayer selected for analysis , with a total of > 45 cell profiles ana - lyzed for each condition . For 3T3 - L1 cells , the results are from three independent transfections with four separate areas of the mono - layer selected for analysis , with a total of > 30 cell profiles analyzed for each condition . For CTxB - HRP uptake assays , 3T3 - L1 cells were transfected with scrambled siRNA or EHD2 siRNA , or were left un - transfected and were treated with 80 μM dynasore ( Sigma - Aldrich ) for 30 min at 37°C . Cells were cooled on ice in ice - cold washing buf - fer ( CO 2 - independent media [ Life Technologies , Grand Island , NY ] supplemented with 1 % BSA ) before being bound with 10 μg / ml CTxB - HRP ( Invitrogen ) in ice - cold washing buffer for 30 min at 4°C . Samples were washed twice in washing buffer before incubation in prewarmed growth media ( DMEM [ Life Technologies ] ) , 10 % fetal bovine serum , 2 mM l - glutamine ) for 1 min at 37°C . Cells were placed back on ice , washed in ice - cold washing buffer , and incu - bated with 1 mg / ml DAB with 50 μM ascorbic acid for 10 min . DAB solution was exchanged with DAB , ascorbic acid with 0 . 012 % H 2 O 2 for a further 20 min prior to fixation in 2 . 5 % glutaraldehyde . Samples were processed for conventional LX112 / epon ( ProSciTech , Townsville , Queensland , Australia ) embedded transmission electron microscopy , as previously described ( Howes et al . , 2010 ) . Image and statistical analysis For quantification of colocalization , 3 – 10 separate images of each condition were thresholded for the brightest areas ; overlapping areas were then transferred into a new channel , and the percent colocalization area was calculated using Adobe Photoshop ( San Jose , CA ) . To quantify the correlation of different stains , the Intensity Correlation Analysis plug - in for ImageJ was used to generate PDM ( product of the differences from the mean ) images and intensity correlation quotient ( ICQ ) correlation values . Schematic tracking of EHD2 and caveolin1 structures captured by TIRF microscopy was done manually using Adobe Photoshop . Measuring and counting of EHD2 - positive tubules was done using AxioVision software . FRAP experiments were analyzed and processed using the NIS - Elements microscope imaging software . Intensity of bands identified by immunoblotting was quantified using ImageJ . Bar graphs and statis - tical analysis were performed using GraphPad Prism ( La Jolla , CA ) . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by the Swedish Cancer Society ; the Swed - ish Medical Research Council ; the Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research ; the Medical Faculty , Umeå University ; the Magn Bergvall Foundation ; the Harald Jeansson Foundation ; the Åke Wiberg Foundation ( R . L . ) ; the National Health and Medical Research Coun - cil of Australia ( R . G . P ) ; and the Collaborative Research Center 740 and the Leibnitz Graduate School of Molecular Biophysics ( O . D ) . The authors thank Robert Luetterforst for technical assistance and Michele Bastiani for performing preliminary experiments . REFERENCES Aboulaich N , Vainonen JP , Stralfors P , Vener AV ( 2004 ) . Vectorial proteomics reveal targeting , phosphorylation and specific fragmentation of poly - merase I and transcript release factor ( PTRF ) at the surface of caveolae in human adipocytes . Biochem J 383 , 237 – 248 . Ande SR , Mishra S ( 2010 ) . Palmitoylation of prohibitin at cysteine 69 facili - tates its membrane translocation and interaction with Eps 15 homology domain protein 2 ( EHD2 ) . Biochem Cell Biol 88 , 553 – 558 . Bastiani M , et al . ( 2009 ) . MURC / Cavin - 4 and cavin family members form tissue - specific caveolar complexes . J Cell Biol 185 , 1259 – 1273 . Bastiani M , Parton RG ( 2010 ) . Caveolae at a glance . J Cell Sci 123 , 3831 – 3836 . Boucrot E , Howes MT , Kirchhausen T , Parton RG ( 2011 ) . Redistribution of caveolae during mitosis . J Cell Sci 124 , 1965 – 1972 . Braun A , Pinyol R , Dahlhaus R , Koch D , Fonarev P , Grant BD , Kessels MM , Qualmann B ( 2005 ) . EHD proteins associate with syndapin I and II and such interactions play a crucial role in endosomal recycling . Mol Biol Cell 16 , 3642 – 3658 . Caplan S , Naslavsky N , Hartnell LM , Lodge R , Polishchuk RS , Donaldson JG , Bonifacino JS ( 2002 ) . A tubular EHD1 - containing compartment involved in the recycling of major histocompatibility complex class I molecules to the plasma membrane . EMBO J 21 , 2557 – 2567 . Choudhury A , Dominguez M , Puri V , Sharma DK , Narita K , Wheatley CL , Marks DL , Pagano RE ( 2002 ) . Rab proteins mediate Golgi transport of caveola - internalized glycosphingolipids and correct lipid trafficking in Niemann - Pick C cells . J Clin Invest 109 , 1541 – 1550 . Daumke O , Lundmark R , Vallis Y , Martens S , Butler PJ , McMahon HT ( 2007 ) . Architectural and mechanistic insights into an EHD ATPase involved in membrane remodelling . Nature 449 , 923 – 927 . Doherty KR , Demonbreun AR , Wallace GQ , Cave A , Posey AD , Heretis K , Pytel P , McNally EM ( 2008 ) . The endocytic recycling protein EHD2 interacts with myoferlin to regulate myoblast fusion . J Biol Chem 283 , 20252 – 20260 . Galperin E , Benjamin S , Rapaport D , Rotem - Yehudar R , Tolchinsky S , Horowitz M ( 2002 ) . EHD3 : a protein that resides in recycling tubular and vesicular membrane structures and interacts with EHD1 . Traffic 3 , 575 – 589 . George M , Ying G , Rainey MA , Solomon A , Parikh PT , Gao Q , Band V , Band H ( 2007 ) . Shared as well as distinct roles of EHD proteins revealed by biochemical and functional comparisons in mammalian cells and C . elegans . BMC Cell Biol 8 , 3 . Glebov OO , Bright NA , Nichols BJ ( 2006 ) . Flotillin - 1 defines a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway in mammalian cells . Nat Cell Biol 8 , 46 – 54 . Volume 23 April 1 , 2012 EHD2 regulates caveolar dynamics | 1329 Martin S , Parton RG ( 2008 ) . Characterization of Rab18 , a lipid droplet - associated small GTPase . Methods Enzymol 438 , 109 – 129 . McMahon KA , Zajicek H , Li WP , Peyton MJ , Minna JD , Hernandez VJ , Luby - Phelps K , Anderson RG ( 2009 ) . SRBC / cavin - 3 is a caveolin adapter protein that regulates caveolae function . EMBO J 28 , 1001 – 1015 . Modregger J , Ritter B , Witter B , Paulsson M , Plomann M ( 2000 ) . All three PACSIN isoforms bind to endocytic proteins and inhibit endocytosis . J Cell Sci 113 , 4511 – 4521 . Naslavsky N , Boehm M , Backlund PS , Jr . , Caplan S ( 2004 ) . Rabenosyn - 5 and EHD1 interact and sequentially regulate protein recycling to the plasma membrane . Mol Biol Cell 15 , 2410 – 2422 . Naslavsky N , Caplan S ( 2011 ) . EHD proteins : key conductors of endocytic transport . Trends Cell Biol 21 , 122 – 131 . Oh P , McIntosh DP , Schnitzer JE ( 1998 ) . Dynamin at the neck of cave - olae mediates their budding to form transport vesicles by GTP - driven fission from the plasma membrane of endothelium . J Cell Biol 141 , 101 – 114 . Pant S , Sharma M , Patel K , Caplan S , Carr CM , Grant BD ( 2009 ) . AMPH - 1 / Amphiphysin / Bin1 functions with RME - 1 / Ehd1 in endocytic recycling . Nat Cell Biol 11 , 1399 – 1410 . Parton RG , Molero JC , Floetenmeyer M , Green KM , James DE ( 2002 ) . Characterization of a distinct plasma membrane macrodomain in dif - ferentiated adipocytes . J Biol Chem 277 , 46769 – 46778 . Parton RG , Simons K ( 2007 ) . The multiple faces of caveolae . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8 , 185 – 194 . Pelkmans L , Zerial M ( 2005 ) . Kinase - regulated quantal assemblies and kiss - and - run recycling of caveolae . Nature 436 , 128 – 133 . Posey AD , Pytel P , Gardikiotes K , Demonbreun AR , Rainey M , George M , Band H , McNally EM ( 2011 ) . Endocytic recycling proteins Ehd1 and Ehd2 interact with Fer - 1 - like - 5 ( Fer1l5 ) and mediate myoblast fusion . J Biol Chem 286 , 7379 – 7388 . Rothberg KG , Heuser JE , Donzell WC , Ying YS , Glenney JR , Anderson RG ( 1992 ) . Caveolin , a protein component of caveolae membrane coats . Cell 68 , 673 – 682 . Senju Y , Itoh Y , Takano K , Hamada S , Suetsugu S ( 2011 ) . Essential role of PACSIN2 / syndapin - II in caveolae membrane sculpting . J Cell Sci 124 , 2032 – 2040 . Sharma M , Naslavsky N , Caplan S ( 2008 ) . A role for EHD4 in the regulation of early endosomal transport . Traffic 9 , 995 – 1018 . Slot JW , Geuze HJ ( 2007 ) . Cryosectioning and immunolabeling . Nat Protoc 2 , 2480 – 2491 . Tagawa A , Mezzacasa A , Hayer A , Longatti A , Pelkmans L , Helenius A ( 2005 ) . Assembly and trafficking of caveolar domains in the cell : cave - olae as stable , cargo - triggered , vesicular transporters . J Cell Biol 170 , 769 – 779 . Thomsen P , Roepstorff K , Stahlhut M , van Deurs B ( 2002 ) . Caveolae are highly immobile plasma membrane microdomains , which are not in - volved in constitutive endocytic trafficking . Mol Biol Cell 13 , 238 – 250 . Grant B , Zhang Y , Paupard MC , Lin SX , Hall DH , Hirsh D ( 2001 ) . Evidence that RME - 1 , a conserved C . elegans EH - domain protein , functions in endocytic recycling . Nat Cell Biol 3 , 573 – 579 . Guilherme A , Soriano NA , Bose S , Holik J , Bose A , Pomerleau DP , Furcinitti P , Leszyk J , Corvera S , Czech MP ( 2004 ) . EHD2 and the novel EH domain binding protein EHBP1 couple endocytosis to the actin cytoskeleton . J Biol Chem 279 , 10593 – 10605 . Hansen CG , Bright NA , Howard G , Nichols BJ ( 2009 ) . SDPR induces mem - brane curvature and functions in the formation of caveolae . Nat Cell Biol 11 , 807 – 814 . Hansen CG , Howard G , Nichols BJ ( 2011 ) . Pacsin 2 is recruited to caveolae and functions in caveolar biogenesis . J Cell Sci 124 , 2777 – 2785 . Hayer A , Stoeber M , Bissig C , Helenius A ( 2010a ) . Biogenesis of caveolae : step - wise assembly of large caveolin and cavin complexes . Traffic 11 , 361 – 382 . Hayer A , Stoeber M , Ritz D , Engel S , Meyer HH , Helenius A ( 2010b ) . Caveolin - 1 is ubiquitinated and targeted to intralumenal vesicles in endolysosomes for degradation . J Cell Biol 191 , 615 – 629 . Henley JR , Krueger EW , Oswald BJ , McNiven MA ( 1998 ) . Dynamin - medi - ated internalization of caveolae . J Cell Biol 141 , 85 – 99 . Hill MM et al . ( 2008 ) . PTRF - Cavin , a conserved cytoplasmic protein required for caveola formation and function . Cell 132 , 113 – 124 . Hommelgaard AM , Roepstorff K , Vilhardt F , Torgersen ML , Sandvig K , van Deurs B ( 2005 ) . Caveolae : stable membrane domains with a poten - tial for internalization . Traffic 6 , 720 – 724 . Howes MT et al . ( 2010 ) . Clathrin - independent carriers form a high capacity endocytic sorting system at the leading edge of migrating cells . J Cell Biol 190 , 675 – 691 . Jakobsson J , Ackermann F , Andersson F , Larhammar D , Low P , Brodin L ( 2011 ) . Regulation of synaptic vesicle budding and dynamin function by an EHD ATPase . J Neurosci 31 , 13972 – 13980 . Kieken F , Sharma M , Jovic M , Giridharan SS , Naslavsky N , Caplan S , Sorgen PL ( 2010 ) . Mechanism for the selective interaction of C - terminal Eps15 homology domain proteins with specific Asn - Pro - Phe - containing partners . J Biol Chem 285 , 8687 – 8694 . Kirkham M , Fujita A , Chadda R , Nixon SJ , Kurzchalia TV , Sharma DK , Pagano RE , Hancock JF , Mayor S , Parton RG ( 2005 ) . Ultrastructural iden - tification of uncoated caveolin - independent early endocytic vehicles . J Cell Biol 168 , 465 – 476 . Ko G , Paradise S , Chen H , Graham M , Vecchi M , Bianchi F , Cremona O , Di Fiore PP , De Camilli P ( 2010 ) . Selective high - level expression of epsin 3 in gastric parietal cells , where it is localized at endocytic sites of apical canaliculi . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107 , 21511 – 21516 . Lee DW , Zhao X , Scarselletta S , Schweinsberg PJ , Eisenberg E , Grant BD , Greene LE ( 2005 ) . ATP binding regulates oligomerization and endosome association of RME - 1 family proteins . J Biol Chem 280 , 17213 – 17220 . Lin SX , Grant B , Hirsh D , Maxfield FR ( 2001 ) . Rme - 1 regulates the distribu - tion and function of the endocytic recycling compartment in mammalian cells . Nat Cell Biol 3 , 567 – 572 .