THE INFLUENCE OF FOUNDING TEAM COMPANY AFFILIATIONS ON FIRM BEHAVIOR • CHRISTINE M . BECKMAN The Paul Merage School of Business University of California , Irvine Irvine , CA 92697 Tel : ( 949 ) 824 - 3983 Fax : ( 949 ) 725 - 2869 Email : cbeckman @ uci . edu Conditional Acceptance , Academy of Management Journal • I am grateful to Diane Burton , Cristina Gibson , James G . March , Damon Phillips , and the seminar participants at UCLA , Emory , and University of Washington for helpful comments on earlier versions of this paper . I would also like to thank the editor , Christina Shalley , and three anonymous reviewers for their constructive feedback . This research was supported by the Stanford Project on Emerging Companies ( SPEC ) at the Graduate School of Business , Harvard Business School Division of Research , MIT Entrepreneurship Center , and UC Irvine . The remaining errors are my own . THE INFLUENCE OF FOUNDING TEAM COMPANY AFFILIATIONS ON FIRM BEHAVIOR Abstract This paper argues that founding team composition , in particular prior company affiliations , shapes new firm behaviors . Results show that founding teams whose members have worked at the same company ( and thus share an affiliation ) pursue exploitation strategies and ship products more quickly than other firms . Conversely , founding teams whose members have worked at a wide range of different companies pursue exploration strategies and are more likely to change which ideas to pursue . Firms whose founding teams have both common and diverse prior company affiliations are more likely to grow . The results suggest team composition is an important antecedent of exploitative and explorative behavior and firm ambidexterity . 1 The terms ‘exploration’ and ‘exploitation’ have been used broadly to capture a wide array of firm actions and behaviors . The concepts are central to studies of adaptation , organizational learning and technical innovation ( Abernathy , 1978 ; Benner & Tushman , 2002 ; Benner & Tushman , 2003 ; Katila & Ahuja , 2002 ; Levitt & March , 1988 ; March , 1991 ) . Exploratory behaviors are those that are variance - increasing and generate internal variety ( McGrath , 2001 ; Tushman & Smith , 2002 ) ; exploration involves radical innovation , creating new markets and products , experimentation , broad search , frequent change , and discovery ( Katila & Ahuja , 2002 ; Miner , Bassoff & Moorman , 2001 ; Rosenkopf & Nerkar , 2001 ) . Exploitation , in contrast , is variance - decreasing and efficiency - oriented ( March , 1991 ) ; exploitation involves incremental innovation , implementation , refinement , routinization , local search , and efficiency ( Beckman , Haunschild & Phillips , 2004 ; Benner & Tushman , 2003 ; March , 1991 ) . Although there are benefits to being able to do both ( He & Wong , 2004 ) , organizations that explore may have processes , strategies , structures and capabilities quite distinct from organizations engaging in exploitation ( Benner & Tushman , 2002 ; McGrath , 2001 ; Katila & Ahuja , 2002 ; Rosenkopf & Almeida , 2003 ) . Existing research suggests an important antecedent to exploration and exploitation : managers who create the right structures or develop a supportive context ( Brown & Eisenhardt , 1997 ; Gibson & Birkenshaw , 2004 ; Tushman & O’Reilly , 1996 ; Smith & Tushman , 2005 ) . How do managers decide which structures or processes to adopt ? Despite the presumed rationality around these choices , managers bring ideas with them when they move across firm boundaries , and an executive’s career experiences shape the range of firm actions considered ( Baty , Evan , & Rothermel , 1971 ; Boeker , 1997 ; Kraatz & Moore , 2002 ; Sørensen , 1999 ) . This paper examines the group of early executives that comprise a firm’s founding team and argues that prior 2 experiences predispose a firm to engage in explorative or exploitative behaviors . In a broader sense , this suggests that team composition both informs and constrains later firm action . A founding team’s past company affiliations are an important and understudied component of team composition . Much of the existing research focuses on how the functional experience and key relationships among founding team members influence firm strategy and action ( Beckman et al . , forthcoming ; Boeker , 1988 ; Roure & Maidique , 1986 ; Shane & Stuart , 2002 ) . Yet , affiliations are important because the past companies in which managers have worked offer employees’ models for what an organization should look like and how it should act . Following Burton et al . ( 2002 ) , the focus here is not on the what of the experience but the where . To take a simple example , compare a three person team where everyone had prior experience at Apple Computer and a three person team with one member from Apple , one from Intel , and one from Hewlett - Packard . Regardless of any overlap in functional or industry experience , the two teams bring with them different company affiliations , contacts , and ideas from their prior jobs . The all - Apple team shares a language and set of tacit understandings even if the managers were not at Apple at the same time ; whereas the team from three different firms has a variety of experiences and diverse sources of information . These affiliations are a critical source of ideas , frames of reference , and contacts that shape the behaviors in which a new firm is likely to engage . And , unlike the stark example above , teams can both share common affiliations and bring multiple unique affiliations to the firm ( for example , if the people from Intel and Hewlett - Packard in the above example also had prior experience at Apple ) . In general , I argue that prior team affiliations should shape firm exploration and exploitation behaviors . Teams with some common prior company affiliations share a language and vision ( Nahapiet & Ghoshal , 1998 ) which allows teams to easily implement and routinize 3 activities . Thus , firms whose teams have shared affiliations should be more likely to pursue exploitative behaviors such as improving on existing processes and moving new products or processes quickly to market . In contrast , founding teams that come from a wide array of past companies bring diverse knowledge and contacts to the firm , and a variety of perspectives stimulates innovation and the discovery of new alternatives ( Amabile , et al . , 1996 ) . Thus , firms whose teams have diverse affiliations should be more likely to pursue explorative behaviors such as investigating multiple ideas and becoming technical pioneers . Furthermore , teams should benefit from diverse and common prior company affiliations because these firms engage in behaviors that support both implementation and innovation . Thus , having a mix of both diverse and common team affiliations should be a precursor to organizational ambidexterity . Overall , this paper develops the concept of team affiliations as an important antecedent to firm exploration and exploitation . THEORY AND HYPOTHESES To understand how prior founding team affiliations shape firm behaviors , it is first important to discuss how new firms are created . What brings founders and ideas together ? At the extreme , the founding team comes together without a clear idea of what the potential firm will do . For example , Bill Hewlett and Dave Packard decided they wanted to start a company together , then decided what type of firm to create ( Collins & Porras , 1994 : 24 ) . Their prior experiences and affiliations informed the early activities pursued and ideas generated . Indeed , the process of idea generation cannot be separated from the experiences of the founders . In many cases , an individual’s experiences shape which technological opportunities are recognized ( Shane 2000 ) ; thus , the characteristics , experiences , and affiliations of the team members shape the ideas and opportunities that are eventually pursued . Together an idea and the founders evolve 4 into a firm ( Clarysse & Moray , 2004 ) . Imagine two engineers from the same company deciding they should exploit an innovation that their current employer is not . Or imagine two sales representatives from different firms comparing notes and deciding to take advantage of a market opportunity that neither firm has acknowledged . The team and initial idea emerge in a dynamic , reciprocal fashion such that the idea is embedded in the context and experience of the founders ( e . g . , the firm and market experiences of founders shape the type of new firm created ) . 1 Indeed , prior work on new ventures has shown that founders and the founding team shape a firm’s initial strategies , structures , actions and performance ( e . g . , Beckman et al . , forthcoming ; Boeker , 1988 ; Burton et al . , 2002 ; Eisenhardt & Schoonhoven , 1990 ; Gompers , Lerner & Scharfstein , 2005 ; Roure & Maidique , 1986 ) . Routines and competencies are embedded in managerial experiences , and these routines are passed to new firms through employee mobility ( McKelvey , 1982 ; Phillips , 2002 , 2005 ) . Consistent with this literature , the general argument of this paper is that shared understandings and unique knowledge are embedded in prior team affiliations which shape firm exploitation and exploration . Common Company Affiliations and Exploitation Distinct from the commonalities that come from a shared discipline or a prior relationship , founding teams that have worked at the same company share an understanding of how organizational work should be managed and coordinated . Founding teams with common prior company affiliations have a shared language , culture , and narratives . A shared language suggests a common perspective and trustworthiness ( Tsai & Ghoshal , 1998 ) . A shared organizational culture provides a common frame of reference , a shared vision and set of goals , 1 Thanks to an anonymous reviewer for making this point . 5 and a conceptual filter that helps generate expectations about work ( Nahapiet & Ghoshal , 1998 ) . A shared narrative suggests that people from the same company will have many of the same stories and examples of appropriate and inappropriate behaviors . In fact , common work experiences affect the development of shared beliefs and culture as well as firm performance ( Baron , Burton & Hannan , 1996 ; Chattopadhay , Glick , Miller & George , 1999 ) . Eisenhardt and Schoonhoven ( 1990 ) find that founding teams with joint prior work experience have higher levels of growth than teams with less overlapping experience . These studies discuss the cohesion stemming from having worked together in the past ; but I argue that this cohesion may result from shared affiliations rather than direct experience with one another . When founding teams share some common prior company affiliations , they share routines that aid the firm in “the exploitation of old certainties” ( March , 1991 : 71 ) . Commonality will help teams be efficient and improve incrementally on existing processes or practices . Routinization and implementation is faster and easier when team members have shared understandings because team members will quickly agree on what needs to be done and how to do it . Of course , people from different companies will have some shared understandings ( e . g . , if they are from companies with similar strategies ) , but the level of mutual understanding and shared tacit knowledge will be greater when teams have shared affiliations . When two founders come from the same prior company , they are more likely to talk to each other about the firm - specific knowledge that they share . This is consistent with the common knowledge effect : people talk about what they have in common ( Stasser , Taylor , & Hanna , 1989 ) . Firm - specific shared knowledge among founders encourages local search because team members find discussion straightforward , disagreements minimal , and the appropriate actions 6 relatively clear . Taken together , this suggests common prior company affiliations among the founding team will encourage incremental innovation or , in other words , exploitation . Exploitative behaviors are those that build upon existing products and technologies and seek competitive advantage through technical enhancements or cost advantages . Exploitation requires the efficiency and consistent implementation that common understandings facilitate . If all founders come from a similar starting point ( e . g . , the same company ) , a narrower range of experience and knowledge suggests firms are more limited in their routines and competencies and thus less likely to discover an innovation that is not readily apparent ( Levinthal , 1997 ) . Firms pursuing exploitation will bring a product to market more quickly because they have the required routinization and standardization to move swiftly . In addition , the trust that arises from shared understandings will increase the speed of strategic decision making ( Talaulicar , Grundei & Werder , 2005 ; Tsai & Ghoshal , 1998 ) . Common understandings facilitate the execution and implementation of ideas ( Williams & O’Reilly , 1998 ) ; indeed , Schoonhoven , Eisenhardt & Lyman ( 1990 ) argue that joint work experience increases trust , common goals and mutual understandings , thereby decreasing the time inefficiencies of learning new roles and expectations . This , they argue , should translate into a shorter time to first product shipment . Similarly , Reagans , Zuckerman , and McEvily ( 2004 ) find that shared work experience results in shorter project duration . The argument of this paper is that having worked at the same company , even if not together , will also result in faster time to market because of the language and understandings that founders share from their prior company affiliations . Counter examples exist of spin - offs pursuing exploration strategies ( like from Fairchild Semiconductor ) , but these examples , as the analysis demonstrates , are not typical . Generally , a group of founders breaks off from their employer to fill a particular competency niche . The 7 innovativeness achieved by the founding team with common prior experiences may be quite high if the founding team spins off from parents that themselves have innovator strategies ( Christensen , 1993 ) , but spin offs generally exploit existing technologies rather than introduce new innovations ( Klepper , 2001 ) . A founding team from the same parent is more often involved in extending and utilizing knowledge that the parent company has little interest in pursuing – not in pursuing a technology at the knowledge frontier . It is also important to point out that not all teams with common prior company affiliations are spin - offs because team members may not come directly from that company and they may not have been there at the same time . Hypothesis 1 . Founding teams with common prior company affiliations are likely to engage in exploitative behaviors . Diverse Company Affiliations and Exploration Although common company affiliations may give a team shared understandings , firms also need access to external social capital to improve the amount of available information . External social capital refers to the actual and potential resources , outside information , and new ideas obtained through external ties ( Adler & Kwon , 2002 ) . External social capital can come from a wide range of places , such as alliances , joint ventures , and professional associations , but the prior company affiliations of founding teams are likely to be an important source of such social capital at firm founding ( Burton et al . , 2002 ) . Consider again the earlier example of an all - Apple team and a team from three different companies . The team from three different firms has access to significantly more external social capital . While common prior affiliations build internal communication , diverse prior affiliations provide new insights and knowledge that allow firms to pursue explorative , innovative behavior . External social capital increases the heterogeneity of available information , encourages deeper deliberations and discussions about 8 the reasons for variety , and can result in debate and the surfacing of new alternatives ( Beckman & Haunschild , 2002 ) . Innovation often comes from bringing together knowledge from disparate places ( Damanpour , 1991 ; Hargadon , 2003 ; Rodan & Galunic , 2004 ; Schumpeter , 1934 ) . Katila ( 2002 ) finds innovation comes from old extraindustry knowledge . The creativity literature suggests that access to diverse information , ideas and alternatives stimulates creativity and ground breaking advancement ( Amabile et al . , 1996 ; Perry - Smith & Shalley , 2003 ) . Thus , access to information , contacts , and perspectives from a diverse set of company affiliations should encourage and facilitate exploration and innovation . These firms will have the internal variety and external reach to develop new technologies and markets . As Kanter ( 1988 ) argues , “ [ c ] ontact with those who see the world differently is a logical prerequisite to seeing it differently ourselves” ( 175 ) . This ability to gather information , adapt and innovate is consistent with the pursuit of technical innovation . Explorative behaviors are those that seek to win a technology race in a new niche or attempt to gain competitive advantage by being the first to develop new , hitherto unproven , technologies . Innovators develop routines and competencies that are different from existing organizations ( Aldrich & Martinez , 2001 ) , and teams with a diverse network are more likely to engage in innovative activities ( Ruef , 2002 ) . When founders come from a range of prior companies , the common knowledge they share includes broader market issues . Sharing broad - based market knowledge will encourage innovation and the development of new technologies more than a discussion of narrow firm - specific knowledge because teams with a variety of former company affiliations have different understandings about technical procedures , customer requirements , productive organizational cultures , and appropriate routines and processes . In fact , unique knowledge is more likely to be shared and integrated in teams where people are not 9 familiar with one another ( Phillips , 2003 ) . Thus , founding teams that draw on diverse prior company affiliations are more likely to pursue explorative behaviors because they have the knowledge and capacity to innovate . Founding teams with a broad range of prior company affiliations have , in addition to a wealth of collective internal knowledge , a wide range of potential contacts and diverse relationships on whom to draw . Access to diverse contacts may increase firm centrality , which further privileges the firm to a variety of information . In fact , an “exploration” trap refers to the pattern of behavior where firms continue to seek new and different ideas , without fully exploiting earlier ideas ( March , 1991 ) . Entrepreneurial firms are often trapped in this type of exploration ( Aldrich , 1999 ) . This suggests that firms with diverse affiliations will not be tied to a particular idea , and different ideas will be pursued . Not only will diversity of affiliations encourage new and innovative behaviors , but , consistent with the nature of innovation , frequent change . Thus : Hypothesis 2 . Founding teams with diverse prior company affiliations are likely to engage in explorative behaviors . Managing Exploration and Exploitation The paper thus far suggests that the prior company affiliations of the founding team shape exploitative and explorative firm behavior , but it has not addressed the outcomes associated with these behaviors . Research on organizational ambidexterity suggests that firms capable of both exploring and exploiting do better than firms rooted in either one ( Gibson & Birkinshaw , 2004 ; Katila & Ahuja , 2002 ; Tushman & O’Reilly , 1996 ) . For example , He and Wong ( 2004 ) find firms that have both exploitative and explorative innovation strategies have higher growth rates than other firms . 10 Existing research focuses on the structural and cognitive requirements for a firm to both explore and exploit ( Tushman & O’Reilly , 1996 ; Smith & Tushman , 2005 ) . For example , Tushman and O’Reilly ( 1996 ) describe organizations with ambidextrous organizational forms . Loosely coupled units maintain different selection and search criteria , which allow both exploration units and exploitation units to operate . It is the group or individual at the top that must manage across these subunits ( Smith & Tushman , 2005 ) . Within a larger ambidextrous organization , where some units explore and others exploit , this can lead to exploration and exploitation at the organization level . In entrepreneurial firms , however , the organization is more likely to exist as a single business unit . The question that surfaces , then , is whether the same team can engage in both explorative and exploitative behaviors . Brown and Eisenhardt ( 1997 ) observe entrepreneurial firms that shift from exploration and exploitation through sequential attention or rhythmic pacing . This is distinct from contextual ambidexterity ( Gibson & Birkinshaw 2004 ) where organizations manage to simultaneously reinforce adaptation and alignment tendencies ( akin to exploration and exploitation ) within the same organizational subunit . Contextual ambidexterity and rhythmic pacing both suggest that the same organizational units , and thus the same organizational personnel , can engage in both explorative and exploitative behaviors either sequentially or simultaneously with the right organizational context . Despite this possibility , in the studies above the numbers of ambidextrous business units and firms are small . This suggests engaging in both exploration and exploitation may be particularly difficult . I argue the pattern of affiliations on a founding team may be important in understanding which firms are able to do both and thus be important in understanding firm performance . 11 If founding team affiliations predict exploitation and exploration , firms should see performance benefits when their founding teams have both common and diverse prior company affiliations . Diversity of prior affiliations alone will not improve performance because diversity encourages innovation but not implementation . Common prior affiliations alone will not improve performance because shared affiliations promote efficiency but not new discoveries . Teams with both common and diverse prior company affiliations will have the shared understandings to efficiently transmit knowledge and the unique perspectives to support innovation and change . This performance benefit should be maintained over time for several reasons . First , the founding team creates the initial structures and processes that shape future actions ( e . g . , Beckman & Burton , 2005 ) . This suggests the founding team will leave a lasting imprint , and a team with both common and diverse founder affiliations will leave an imprint that provides the basis for both exploration and exploitation . In addition , although the founding team is eventually replaced or supplemented with other managers , evolutionary arguments of path dependence and inertia find that subsequent teams are shaped by the founding team ( Aldrich , 1999 ; Baron , Burton & Hannan , 1996 ; Beckman & Burton , 2005 ; Phillips , 2002 , 2005 ) . Through an attraction - selection - attrition cycle ( Schneider , 1987 ) , founders select managers like them , and managers that do not fit the existing organization leave . Thus , patterns of founding team affiliations will be perpetuated over time . As a result , firms whose founding teams have both types of affiliations will be more likely to recruit managers with both types of affiliations . Taken together , this suggests that founding teams with both common and diverse affiliations will both explore and exploit over time . He and Wong ( 2004 ) point to performance benefits for those firms that explore and exploit , thus : 12 Hypothesis 3 . Firms whose founding teams have both common and diverse prior company affiliations will have higher levels of performance . DATA AND METHODS Sample Data for this study were drawn from a longitudinal study of more than 170 young high - technology firms in California ' s Silicon Valley ( for sampling details , see Baron et al . , 1996 ) . The sample focused on a subset of high technology industries : computer hardware and / or software , telecommunications ( including networking equipment ) , medical and biological technologies , manufacturing , research , and semiconductors . By focusing on firms within a single region and a narrow range of similar industries , constant key labor market and environmental conditions are held constant . Sampled firms had at least 10 employees and were no more than 10 years old at the time of first contact in 1994 - 95 ( Certo , Covin , Daily & Dalton , 2001 , use a similar age cutoff ) . About half of the firms were founded before 1989 , with a range of 1982 to 1995 . Interview , survey , and archival data were collected to gather data on the founding and evolution of these companies . Trained MBA and doctoral students conducted semi - structured interviews with a member of the founding team to gather information about the firm formation and early practices . From the interviews , data on the background and experience of the founding team were obtained . The interview was supplemented with archival data on the firm and initial founding team . Data were collected for all firms from founding until they were acquired , died , disappeared , or until July 2001 . At the point of the last observation , the median firm was thirteen years old , with a range of four to 21 years . Of the 173 firms in the initial sample , I dropped 14 firms from the analysis because of missing data on key variables and an additional 18 because they were founded by solo entrepreneurs , giving a final sample of 141 firms . I eliminated solo 13 entrepreneurs because , although a solo entrepreneur can have narrow or diverse prior company affiliations , the notion of shared understandings is more consistent with a team . Although a team of two may operate differently than a larger team , two founders were considered a team because they exhibit team characteristics : ongoing interaction , interdependence , shared responsibility and identification as a social entity ( Cohen & Bailey , 1997 ) . 2 To account for differences in team dynamics as a result of team size , I included the number of founders as a control in all analyses . I constructed the key study variables from the career histories of individual team members . Career backgrounds were hand collected for every founder and executive who held the role of vice president or higher from a variety of sources including : interviews , internal company documents , SEC documents , Lexis / Nexis news searches , Dow Jones Interactive , Edgar Archives , The San Jose Mercury News , and extensive web searches . The human resources department was contacted for 20 % of the firms to confirm the founder’s prior place of employment . It was confirmed that at least 38 founders started the company directly after school , so their prior employment experience was non - existent . For founders with no background experience , it was difficult to ascertain whether there was no data because the founder had no prior jobs , or whether the experience was simply not reported in available sources . There is likely some bias toward large , established firms being mentioned in press accounts ( although the local paper tracks the personnel of a good number of large and small companies in a regular column ) . However , since job history interviews were not administered to every executive , these data are imperfect records of entrepreneurs’ career histories . That said , at least four complete searches were conducted for 2 Similar results are obtained when including the 18 firms with solo entrepreneurs and when excluding the 52 two - person teams . 14 each person and thousands of person - hours were spent searching for career data on all team members . The career data were updated monthly ( for the analyses presented here , data are collapsed to yearly team - level observations ) for the entire time frame . A mean of two positions for each executive was collected , including employer identity and job title , with a maximum of six positions . The resulting dataset contains 1 , 948 distinct employers and 6 , 643 person - positions . To investigate the sequence of events leading to firm formation , I coded and analyzed interviews with founders where stories of firm formation were recounted . The data is consistent with the idea that the founding team and initial idea evolve together in the early days of a firm’s life . This is contrasted with established firms where managerial selection is often driven by the needs and espoused strategy of the firm ( Fligstein , 1987 ) . In reporting key events on a founder survey , 62 % of the firms reported that employees were hired before product development or legal incorporation . The sequence of firm formation was coded from the interviews by two people blind to study conditions ( kappa - statistic . 69 ; ICC . 78 ) . For example , firms could be coded as a spin - off , as a restart , as a firm that began with a team that wanted to be entrepreneurs , or as a solo entrepreneur that began with a specific idea then sought out team members . In the 100 interviews where there was enough data to code the sequence , 64 % of the firms reported the team evolved before or with the idea . In the remaining firms , one founder often had a specific idea before bringing on other founders . As other founders are brought in , the idea is fine - tuned and a strategy developed . Again , ideas develop in the social context in which they operate . To argue that firm strategy drives team selection ignores the dynamic process of firm formation where these decisions co - evolve . A t - test indicates that the sequence variable varies neither by the type of prior company affiliations nor by whether the firm has an exploration strategy . Interestingly , firms with an 15 exploitation strategy are more likely to have a founding team that was formed prior to the firm idea . This points to a subset of firms where a group of entrepreneurs come together first , then decide which idea to exploit or pursue . The sequence variable was included as a control in supplementary analyses . The results described below remain significant ( with the exception of firm growth which becomes marginally significant at p < . 10 ) despite the significantly reduced number of observations . Taken together , this supports team formation and idea generation as a dynamic , reciprocal process . Dependent Variables In order to predict whether founding team prior company affiliations are associated with explorative or exploitative behaviors ( H1 and H2 ) , several outcomes are examined . Maximum - likelihood logistic regression is used to predict whether the firm pursues an exploration strategy and changes initial ideas ( change is consistent with pursuing an exploration strategy ) . ML logistic regression is also used to predict the pursuit of an exploitation strategy , and event - history analysis is used to examine time to first product ( speed of product shipment is consistent with pursuing an exploitation strategy ) . For Hypotheses 1 and 2 , the strategic behaviors and intentions that comprise firm strategy are examined . Most of the organizational strategy typologies employed by empirical scholars allow for the distinction between innovators and incrementalists ( e . g . Miles & Snow , 1978 ; Porter , 1980 ) . A theme across all of the typologies is the importance of differentiating firms that are exploiting an existing market from those that are exploring or creating a new market . In the interviews , founders reconstruct early firm actions . Each founder was asked to describe the core competence of the firm at founding . The open - ended response ( supplemented by early press reports , product announcements , business plans and prospectuses ) comprised the raw data that 16 was used to categorize each of the firms into one of four strategic archetypes : Innovators , Enhancers , Marketers and Low - Cost Producers ( see Hannan , Burton & Baron , 1996 ) . Innovators seek to gain first - mover advantages by winning a technology race . Firms that explore may also pursue other strategies , but here the focus is on exploration through technical innovation . Exploration strategy is equal to 1 if the firm had a technical innovator strategy and 0 otherwise ( 48 % of the sample firms ) . Enhancer firms seek to produce a product similar to other companies but develop a general modification or enhancement to gain competitive advantage . Low Cost Producers are firms that seek cost advantages through efficient production techniques , relationships with low cost suppliers , or economies of scale . The Enhancer and Cost strategies both revolve around extending existing products or services and are coded as pursuing an exploitation strategy ; exploitation strategy is equal to 1 if the firm had an enhancer or cost strategy and 0 otherwise ( 25 % of the sample firms ) . Firms with marketing strategies seek competitive advantage through superior sales , marketing or customer service , and this does not clearly fall into an exploration or exploitation strategy . The remaining 27 % of the sample firms had marketing or hybrid strategies . There is reason to be confident that the strategy measures capture differences in firm behavior with a high degree of accuracy . Respondents were not asked to classify the strategies themselves ; rather two people independently coded strategies in an iterative fashion based on the interview and archival research . A list of phrases and words were created to assist in coding . For instance , firms with exploration strategies used words like “forefront” , “pioneer” , “first - mover” , “innovation” when discussing their activities . Firms with exploitation strategies used words and phrases such as “clone” , “low cost” , “better design” , and “feature - rich . ” Disagreements were reconciled through discussion with both coders by a third person . Hellmann and Puri ( 2000 ) 17 perform a number of post - hoc analyses of these same firms , linking patenting activity to these firm strategies . They find that innovators accumulate larger patent portfolios , generating further confidence that the measure captures actual firm behaviors . These strategies describe the initial activities and behaviors of the firm as recounted by the founder and early press releases . In later interviews , it was determined whether the initial firm strategy changed ( e . g . , from innovator to incremental ) . Although not the focus of this paper , these initial strategies were relatively stable in the early years of a firm’s life ( Hannan , Burton & Baron , 1996 ) . In addition to the above coding , I used two additional measures of exploitation and exploration . Firms with exploitation strategies are likely to ship products more quickly . The date of product shipment comes from a founder survey . Not all founders completed the survey , but interviews and other company data were used to supplement when possible . Firms with exploration strategies are likely to change ideas or direction more often than other firms . In fact , changing products or marketing channels is an important part of exploration . In order to measure whether the founding idea changed , two independent coders examined the interview transcripts . The interview did not contain enough information to adequately code this dependent variable for a sizeable number of firms . Thus , there are 68 observations for Model 3 in Table 4 ( Hypothesis 2 ) . The coders examined ten transcripts to develop and agree on a coding scheme then independently coded the other transcripts . Differences were resolved through discussion , and the initial agreement was substantial ( . 76 kappa - statistic ; . 83 ICC ) . The coding scheme for the founding idea included “stable” , “elaborated” , “one major restart” , “multiple ideas pursued” , and “multiple ideas considered . ” The variable was coded 1 if the initial idea changed and 0 if the idea was stable or elaborated . 18 Hypothesis 3 predicts firm performance . In new ventures , firm growth is an important marker of success ( Eisenhardt & Schoonhoven , 1990 ) . Particularly in this time period and region , firms desire growth . Thus , new ventures founded with both types of affiliations should grow more quickly because the resources , routines and behaviors of these founding teams support both exploitative and explorative behaviors . Firm growth is measured as growth in employees . A proportional firm growth measure was created : G i , t = log ( Emp i , t + 1 / Emp i , t ) where Emp is the number of employees for the i th firm and t represents the yearly time period . The number of employees was measured at the end of a given year and was collected through survey and archival sources . Independent Variables Using the career histories described above , the most recent three firms for which each founder had worked were identified . Three past company affiliations were used although results are similar when using one prior company affiliation for each team member and all available data . Diverse prior company affiliation is a count of the number of discrete prior firms across all members of the founding team . Common prior company affiliation is a count of the number of firms at which more than one member of the founding team worked . For example , if one founder had worked at Apple , another founder at Global Village and Apple , and a third at Fairchild Semiconductor , Apple , and Applied Materials , the founding team was coded as having one common ( Apple ) and four diverse ( Apple , Global Village , Fairchild , Applied Materials ) prior company affiliations . Results are the same if diverse affiliations only include those firms where there was no overlap ( three in the above example ) , but I include all discrete firms because ideas come from the full range of prior companies in which founders have worked . There was a . 15 19 correlation between common prior company affiliation and diverse prior company affiliation at founding . These measures are calculated at founding and thus are not time - varying because imprinting arguments suggest that these founders will have a lasting impact even when those founders leave and new managers join the firm . This impact occurs through subsequent recruiting of similar others and established routines and practices that will remain past the founder’s employment at the firm ( Beckman & Burton , 2005 ; Phillips , 2005 ) . Control Variables Industry . Some industries may be more likely to adopt a particular strategy or develop a product quickly . For example , biotechnology firms are more likely to have exploration strategies and ship products late in the firm’s lifecycle . Preliminary analyses revealed that the medical - related industry ( including medical devices and biotechnology ) , networking and telecommunications industry , and the manufacturing industry were significantly different from other industries ( results available from author ) . Those industry dummy variables that were significantly different from the other industries were included in each set of analyses . Venture capital . An important external factor to consider when predicting speed to product shipment is whether the firm obtained venture capital ( VC ) backing . VC financing data was collected via a combination of public and proprietary databases , SEC filings and annual reports , internal company documents and a survey instrument that was sent to the most senior finance executive at each of the firms ( see Hellmann & Puri , 2000 ) . The number of cumulative VC rounds obtained by the firm in each year is included in Table 3 and 4 . Firm Controls . Exploration and exploitation strategies are used as control variables when examining firm performance and time to product shipment , and they are described above . Product shipment speed and growth may depend on firm size , so number of employees is 20 included in Tables 3 and 4 . Firm growth may also be a function of firm age , so firm age ( in months ) is included in Table 4 . Team Controls . Larger founding teams have the potential for both more diverse and more common past company affiliations . Founding team size was coded as part of the interview process and corroborated with the career history data . Founding team size ranged from two to twelve ( with a mean team size of 3 . 3 ) and was included in all analyses . I included the proportion of founders currently employed by the firm for Tables 3 and 4 to account for changes in the founding team over time . Hypothesis 3 examines firms over time , so it is important to control for changes in the top management team from founding . I include top management team size , cumulative executive entrances and exits in Table 4 . In so doing , I can be certain there are lasting effects of the founding team over time , regardless of how these teams have changed over time . RESULTS Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics and correlations among the study variables . Although cumulative entrances and exits are highly correlated with firm age , firm size , and top management team size ( ranging from . 4 to . 8 ) , the effects for team affiliations do not change with these variables in the model . Table 2 examines the effect of founding team prior company affiliation on firm - level strategy . The Pearson ? 2 goodness - of - fit test suggests a reasonable model fit for all models ( not reported ) . Model 1 presents the control variables . The medical industry ( biotechnology and medical devices ) is 7 . 8 times more likely to have an exploration ( i . e . , innovator ) strategy . As predicted , Model 2 demonstrates that founding teams with diverse prior company affiliations are more likely to have an exploration strategy . Model 3 replicates the finding in Model 2 and also finds that founding teams with prior common company affiliations are less likely to have an 21 exploration strategy ( which is not hypothesized but is consistent with the theory ) . Odds - ratios are reported , so Model 3 suggests teams with one more diverse prior company affiliation are 1 . 22 times more likely to have an exploration strategy . The pseudo R 2 in Model 3 is . 126 , and the overall hit rate of the model is 67 % . This suggests , although industry is the largest predictor of an exploration strategy , there is also strong support for Hypothesis 1 . Model 4 , with the control variables , shows that firms in the manufacturing industry are significantly more likely to have an exploitation ( i . e . , incremental ) strategy . 3 Model 5 demonstrates that firms with prior common company affiliations are more likely to have an exploitation strategy . Model 6 adds diverse prior company affiliations to be sure that the relationships are consistent with the theory ( which means not significant in this model ) . Model 6 confirms Model 5 and thus Hypothesis 2 is supported . The overall hit rate of the model is 75 % , and teams with one additional common prior company affiliation are 1 . 41 times more likely to adopt an exploitation strategy . Although the pseudo R 2 is only 5 % , results do show that common prior company affiliations predict exploitation rather than exploration strategies . This is consistent with prior work on spin - offs ( Klepper , 2001 ) although not all teams with common prior company affiliations are spin - offs . In sum , founding teams that have worked for some of the same prior companies are more likely to pursue an exploitation strategy and less likely to pursue an exploration strategy ; whereas the behavior of founding teams from different prior companies are more likely to support an exploration strategy . Models 7 - 9 examine the effects of team affiliations on the stability of the initial idea . Model 7 includes the control variables . Large founding teams are 60 % more likely to change the 3 The medical industry drops out because no firms in that industry pursue an incremental strategy . 22 basic firm concept . Model 8 supports Hypothesis 2 and shows that when firms have an additional diverse prior company affiliation , the initial idea is 38 % more likely to change , and the overall hit rate of the model is 88 % . Although no industries are significant , industry is included for consistency with earlier models . 4 Thus , founding teams with diverse prior affiliations are more likely to explore and change ideas . Table 3 examines the effect of founding team common prior company affiliation on time to first product shipment , another indicator of an exploitation strategy . Model 1 reports the control variables and the most important predictor of time to market is industry . Hazard ratios are reported , so firms in the biotechnology / medical industry have a 61 % lower hazard rate for product to market ( biotech firms take much longer to bring a product to market ) . Firms with an exploitation strategy and firms that are larger bring a product to market more quickly , and large founding teams are slower to bring a product to market . In support of Hypothesis 1 , Model 2 shows that founding teams with prior common company affiliations bring a product to market more quickly . The effects are not as large as the other variables in the model , but an additional common prior company affiliation increases the hazard rate by 9 % . Model 3 demonstrates that it is common prior affiliations , not diverse prior affiliations that increases speed to market . Table 4 presents the results of panel random - effects GLS regression with robust standard errors clustered by firm to examine whether founding team affiliations have a long - term impact on the firm ( Hypothesis 3 ) . Model 1 presents the control variables alone . Firms in the telecommunications industry are more likely to grow , and teams with high levels of TMT exit 4 The manufacturing industry drops out of the model because the idea never changed for any firm in the manufacturing industry . 23 are less likely to grow . In addition , older firms are less likely to grow . The next model examines whether founding teams with diverse and common prior company affiliations are more likely to grow . There are no interaction effects between the continuous diverse and common prior company affiliation variables . I examined the distribution of the continuous variables and found that common prior company affiliations were often zero . I then created variables using a median split for both affiliation variables . The median founding team in the sample had no common affiliations and had prior experience in three companies , so founding teams above the median on both dimensions were coded as having both high diverse and common affiliations . To be clear , common prior company affiliation was coded one if any of the founders had worked at the same prior company . Diverse prior company affiliation was coded one if the founding team had worked at three or more unique prior companies . I then created four additional dummy variables : founding teams with both high diverse and common affiliations ; common and low diverse affiliations ; high diverse and no common affiliations ; and low diverse no common affiliations . 22 % of the firms were coded in the high prior diverse and common company affiliations , and 32 % were coded as low prior diverse and no common company affiliations . By creating dummy variables , it is clear that only firms that have both diverse and common prior company affiliations receive performance benefits . Model 2 includes the high diverse / common category with all other founding teams as the omitted category . Founding teams with common and high diverse prior company affiliations are more likely to grow . This offers support for Hypothesis 3 . I calculated the growth rate from coefficients in Model 2 and found that firms whose teams have common and high diverse prior company affiliations have a 19 % higher growth rate than other firms . Model 3 confirms that these effects hold when low diverse / no common prior company affiliations are the omitted 24 category . Despite the small change in R 2 , the hypothesized variables significantly increase model fit . These results give us some evidence that firms with both common and high diverse prior affiliations ( those teams that engage in explorative and exploitative behaviors at founding ) are more likely to grow . It is important to note that these founding team variables are significant despite controlling for changes to the team over time . The founding team leaves a lasting impact that shapes firm growth . In supplementary analyses , I also control for functional diversity and later team affiliations . None change the hypothesized effects . I also examined whether founding teams need aligned experience and strategy ( e . g . , do founding teams with common prior affiliations do better when the firm also has an exploitation strategy ? ) . In supplementary analyses , there was no evidence that firms benefited from founding teams with prior company affiliations and a consistent strategy ( e . g . , exploration strategy with diverse affiliations ) . This suggests that , although prior company affiliations shape the likelihood of engaging in one pattern of activities or another , it does not necessarily shape the success of those particular activities over time . Yet it is those firms with both types of founding team affiliations that do better . The results in Table 4 suggest that initial team affiliation is linked to overall firm growth . Perhaps prior founding team affiliations that are both diverse and common may allow a firm to hire the personnel most necessary for the firm to succeed ( Beckman & Burton , 2005 ) or to engage in exploration and exploitation behaviors that are not examined here . DISCUSSION Overall , the results suggest that founding team prior company affiliations predict whether a firm pursues exploratory and exploitative behavior , and they also suggest that firms whose founding teams have both types of affiliations are more likely to grow over time . In general , these results support a strong relationship between founding team affiliations and consistent 25 patterns of firm behavior . The mechanisms suggested for these linkages are the shared understandings that emerge from common prior company affiliations and the creativity associated with diverse prior company affiliations . Shared understanding suggests easier implementation and speed whereas unique knowledge is associated with innovation and change . This paper challenges and extends recent work on exploration and exploitation . I examine the antecedents of exploration , exploitation , and organizational ambidexterity , and the results question how a manager might help a firm develop an “ability” to manage exploration and exploitation ( Smith & Tushman , 2005 ) . These results suggest that both exploring and exploiting may require teams to draw on both the common and unique experiences of the team , but to date research seems to advocate managerial insight and planning rather than choosing team members with the best set of experiences . This paper suggests that teams are more constrained by history than current work suggests and that differences in firm exploration and exploitation are built in at team formation . Thus , ambidextrous firms may be those firms whose teams have significant common and diverse experience at founding . For learning theories , these results confirm that initial starting positions shape the potential for change and growth ( Levinthal , 1997 ) . The link between firm growth and founding team affiliation is consistent with the path dependencies of learning . Furthermore , research suggests founding teams are generally formed for reasons of convenience not strategy ( Ruef , Aldrich & Carter , 2003 ) . This suggests the founding team’s ability to support innovation and incremental learning may be an accident of founding . These findings also contribute to network theory in important ways . The benefits of common and diverse company affiliations are similar to network arguments for cohesion and structural holes . In network theory , dense connections between team members may hinder 26 exploration but aid exploitation ( Coleman , 1988 ) . In contrast , structural holes , where actors have access to disconnected others with non - redundant information , increase a firm’s ability to explore and reach diverse information ( Burt , 1992 ) . However , past company affiliations do not align with network concepts in several important ways . First , networks may exist without an affiliation . Second , founding team members with the same affiliation may not have a prior relationship because they worked in different divisions or at different times for the organization . In fact , in this data the correlation between whether the founding team members knew each other previously and whether the founding team was from a common set of past companies was . 17 . The correlation was much higher when founders were co - workers ( because by definition at least some of the founders simultaneously shared company experience ) , but including coworkers as a control does not change the pattern of reported results . This demonstrates that , in addition to shared norms developing through close relationships , shared values and understandings develop through identification and experience with a common former organization . The affiliations that I examine are similar in concept to the study of affiliation or membership networks , where individuals are connected through events ( Wasserman and Faust , 1994 ) . But even in this work the focus is on the direct ties formed through shared affiliations . Company affiliations offer an alternative means of developing cohesion or obtaining diverse knowledge without assuming prior dyadic relationships . For managers , this research suggests that more attention might be usefully spent at founding creating a team with both common and unique prior company affiliations . This is not to say that , without such initial team planning , history dictates firm outcomes . The multiple means by which shared understandings and diverse knowledge can be obtained should be acknowledged . However , rather than focus solely on functional experience , race , or gender , this 27 research suggests a more subtle experience that shapes perceptions and alters team dynamics – prior company affiliations . These affiliations are important for managers to consider as are the more general benefits of accessing unique knowledge and having shared understandings . Limitations and Future Research To be certain , this analysis does not capture all exploration and exploitation behaviors . I focus on behaviors associated with exploitation and exploration strategies , but affiliations may lead to broader patterns of exploration and exploitation . For example , there is evidence that a key means by which firms engage in exploration is through maintaining relationships with other firms ( Brown & Eisenhardt , 1997 ; Rosenkopf & Almeida , 2003 ) . In supplementary analyses team - level affiliations are unrelated to the initial number and range of external advisors ; but , prior company affiliations may be influential in predicting specific external relationships . A longitudinal study of external partnerships is a promising topic for future research . Future research should also examine these issues in other samples of firms . For two key reasons , this sample is success - biased . First , the sample of firms is observed during the 1980s and 1990s . The latter half of the 1990s was an extraordinary economic time in general , and in particular in Silicon Valley . Thus some of the sampled firms may have survived longer than they would have in another time period , buoyed by the optimistic financial markets . Second , the nature of the sampling frame ( i . e . , at least ten employees ) means that the firms under investigation have achieved some minimum scale . Despite this data limitation , the sample has some noteworthy advantages for the purposes of this study . The sample spans a range of industries , includes firms that do and do not receive venture capital , go public , become successful . This in itself is quite unusual . Due to data limitations , much of the research in this 28 vein looks only at firms that receive VC or have gone public . Although many valuable things can be learned from that type of research , this sample gives a much broader range of firms . It is important to acknowledge that the firm strategy may emerge with the team itself . I control for variables that might plausibly drive both founding team selection and firm strategy ( i . e . , industry and team size ) . Additionally , supplementary analyses suggest firm strategy does not predict later top management team affiliation . This suggests the causality more often works in the direction hypothesized : founding teams shape firm strategy and / or the strategy and team evolve together . By examining other behaviors that indicate explorative and exploitative behavior that clearly happen after team formation ( product shipment , changing the idea pursued by the firm ) , the analysis demonstrates a broad pattern consistent with the hypothesized causality . Yet future research on firm and team formation could further illuminate these causal processes . The concept of a common affiliation with an organization , even though the actors may have had no direct contact , is an important contribution of this work . Future research should examine the influence of these types of “connections” or affiliations that are neither actual relationships nor between structurally equivalent actors . Network theory needs to expand the study of networks beyond strong ties ( see Lawrence , forthcoming ) and to revisit affiliation networks as institutional affiliations rather than precursors to dyadic relationships . Take , for example , two individuals who went to the same college several decades apart . Although the two individuals did not meet at school , they share a language about people , places and things , as well as often a feeling about the cultural experience , that gives them a common bond . Thus , the shared understandings that develop through common past affiliations are similar but distinct from bonds that develop through direct relationships . These types of connections may be formed 29 through common schooling or company affiliation , or through intense professional training ( e . g . , advanced educational degrees ) . The relevance of these common past affiliations may vary depending on the other relationships and attributes salient on the team . This research also informs research on spin - offs . Although not all founders with common prior company affiliations are creating a spin - off from a parent firm , it is the case that all spin - offs have founders with common prior company affiliations . Although research has often suggested that spin - offs are the source of new innovations ( e . g . , Christensen , 1993 ) , there is more evidence consistent with spin - offs as exploiters of existing technology ( Klepper , 2001 ) . The results of this study are consistent with those of Klepper ( 2001 ) and raise the question of whether , in spin - offs , exploitation comes from the team’s shared understandings or the technology available to exploit from the parent . This paper finds that teams with common prior company affiliations are more likely to have an exploitation strategy , and these teams are also likely to have been formed before the idea was settled on . Future research could help better understand the mechanisms that lead spin - offs to exploit and examine details about the parent firm . For example , does the innovativeness of the parent moderate the effects found here ? In conclusion , by examining the antecedents of explorative and exploitative behavior in organizations , this paper develops links between the team and firm level of analysis . Team - level prior company affiliations , and experiences more generally , influence firm - level choices and behaviors . I find that common founding team affiliations are related to faster product shipment and an exploitation strategy ; whereas diverse team affiliations predict an exploration strategy and change in the founding ideas . Those firms that have founding teams with both diverse and common affiliations are more likely to grow over time , which suggests team composition is an important component of firm ambidexterity . By examining new ventures , this link can be 30 demonstrated without the confounding influence of prior firm actions and expectations . The study both points to the importance of people and the constraints faced by people in the creation and growth of organizations . 31 REFERENCES Abernathy , W . J . 1978 . The productivity dilemma . Baltimore , MD : Johns Hopkins Press . Adler , P . S . & Kwon , S . W . 2002 . Social capital : Prospects for a new concept . Academy of Management Review , 27 ( 1 ) : 17 - 40 . Aldrich , H . E . 1999 . Organizations evolving . Sage . Aldrich , H . E . & Martinez , M . A . 2001 . Many are called , but few are chosen : An evolutionary theory for the study of entrepreneurship . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , Summer : 41 - 56 . Amabile , T . M . , Conti , R . , Coon , H . , Lazenby , J . , & Herron , M . 1996 . Assessing the work environment for creativity . Academy of Management Journal , 39 : 1154 - 1184 . Baron , J . N . , Burton , M . D . , & Hannan , M . T . 1996 . The road taken : Origins and evolution of employment systems in emerging companies . Industrial and Corporate Change , 5 : 239 - 275 . Baty , G . B . , Evan , W . M . , & Rothermel , T . W . 1971 . Personnel flows as interorganizational relations . Administrative Science Quarterly , 16 : 430 - 443 . Beckman , C . M . & Burton , M . D . 2005 . Founding the future : The evolution of top management teams from founding to IPO , Working Paper , University of California , Irvine : 35 . Irvine , CA . Beckman , C . M . , Burton M . D . , & O ' Reilly , C . Forthcoming . Early teams : The impact of team demography on VC financing and going public . Journal of Business Venturing . Beckman , C . M . & Haunschild , P . 2002 . Network learning : The effects of partners ' heterogeneity of experience on corporate acquisitions . Administrative Science Quarterly , 47 : 92 - 124 . Beckman , C . M . , Haunschild , P . & Phillips , D . 2004 . Friends or strangers ? Firm - specific uncertainty , market uncertainty , and network partner selection . Organization Science , 15 : 259 - 275 32 Benner , M . J . & Tushman , M . 2002 . Process management and technological innovation : A longitudinal study of the photography and paint industries . Administrative Science Quarterly , 47 : 676 - 706 . Benner , M . J . & Tushman , M . L . 2003 . Exploitation , exploration , and process management : The productivity dilemma revisited . Academy of Management Review , 28 : 238 . Boeker , W . 1988 . Organizational origins : Entrepreneurial and environmental imprinting at time of founding . G . R . Carroll , ed . Ecological Models of Organizations . Ballinger , Cambridge , MA , 33 – 51 . Boeker , W . 1997 . Executive migration and strategic change : The effect of top manager movement on product - market entry . Administrative Science Quarterly , 42 ( 2 ) : 213 . Brown , S . L . & Eisenhardt , K . M . 1997 . The art of continuous change : Linking complexity theory and time - paced evolution in relentlessly shifting organizations . Administrative Science Quarterly , 42 : 1 - 34 . Burt , R . 1992 . Structural holes : The social structure of competition . Cambridge : Harvard Press . Burton , D . M . , Sorensen , J . B . , & Beckman , C . 2002 . Coming from good stock : Career histories and new venture formation . In M . Lounsbury & M . Ventresca , eds . , Research in the sociology of organizations , Vol . 19 : 229 - 262 . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press , Inc . Certo , S . T . , Covin , J . G . , Daily , C . M . , & Dalton , D . R . 2001 . Wealth and the effects of founder management among IPO - stage new ventures . Strategic Management Journal , 22 : 641 - 658 . Chattopadhay , P . , Glick , W . , Miller , C . , & George , H . 1999 . Determinants of executive beliefs : Comparing functional conditioning and social influence . Strategic Management Journal , 20 : 763 - 789 . 33 Christensen , C . M . 1993 . The rigid disk drive industry : A history of commercial and technical turbulence . Business History Review , Winter : 531 - 588 . Clarysse , B , & Moray , N . 2004 . A process study of entrepreneurial formation : the case of a research - based spin - off . Journal of Business Venturing 19 : 55 - 79 . Cohen , S . G . , & Bailey , D . E . 1997 . What makes teams work : Group effectiveness research from the shop floor to the executive suite . Journal of Management , 23 : 239 - 290 . Coleman , J . S . 1988 . Social capital in the creation of human capital . American Journal of Sociology , 94 Supplement : S95 - S120 . Collins , J . C . & Porras , J . I . 1996 . Built to Last : Successful Habits of Visionary Companies . New York : HarperCollins . Damanpour , F . 1991 . Organizational innovation : A meta - analysis of effects of determinants and moderators . Academy of Management Journal , 34 ( 3 ) : 555 - 590 . Eisenhardt , K . M . & Schoonhoven , C . B . 1990 . Organizational growth : Linking founding teams , strategy , environment and growth among U . S . Semi - conductor ventures . Administrative Science Quarterly , 28 : 274 - 291 . Fligstein , N . 1987 . The intraorganizational power struggle : Rise of finance personnel to top leadership in large corporations , 1919 - 1979 . American Sociological Review , 52 : 44 - 58 . Gibson , C . B . & Birkinshaw , J . 2004 . The antecedents , consequences and mediating role of organizational ambidexterity . Academy of Management Journal , 47 ( 2 ) : 209 - 226 . Gompers , P . A . , Lerner , J . , & Scharfstein , D . S . 2005 . Entrepreneurial spawning : Public corporations and the genesis of new ventures , 1986 - 1999 . Journal of Finance : 60 : 577 - 614 . 34 Hannan , M . T . , Burton , M . D . , & Baron , J . N . 1996 . Inertia and change in the early years : Employment relations in young , high technology firms . Industrial and Corporate Change , 5 : 503 - 536 . Hargadon , A . 2003 . How breakthroughs happen : The surprising truth about how companies innovate . Boston , MA : Harvard Business School . He , Z . L . & Wong , P . K . 2004 . Exploration vs . Exploitation : An empirical test of the ambidexterity hypothesis . Organization Science , 15 ( 4 ) : 481 - 494 . Hellmann , T . & Puri , M . 2000 . The interaction between product market and financing strategy : The role of venture capital . Review of Financial Studies , 13 ( 4 ) : 959 - 984 . Kanter , R . M . 1988 . When a thousand flowers bloom : Structural , collective , and social conditions for innovation . Research in Organizational Behavior 10 : 169 - 211 . Katila , R . 2002 . New product search over time : Past ideas in their prime ? Academy of Management Journal , 45 : 995 - 1010 . Katila , R . & Ahuja , G . 2002 . Something old , something new : A longitudinal study of search behavior and new product introduction . Academy of Management Journal , 45 : 1183 - 1194 . Klepper , Steven . 2001 . Employee startups in high - tech industries . Industrial and Corporate Change , 10 : 639 - 674 . Kraatz , M . S . , & Moore , J . H . 2002 . Executive migration and institutional change . Academy of Management Journal 45 : 120 - 143 . Levinthal , D . A . 1997 . Adaptation on rugged landscapes . Management Science 43 : 934 - 950 . Levitt , B . & March , J . G . 1988 . Organizational learning . Annual Review of Sociology , 14 : 319 - 40 . March , J . G . 1991 . Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning . Organization Science , 2 ( 1 ) : 71 - 87 . 35 McGrath , R . G . 2001 . Exploratory learning , innovative capacity , and managerial oversight . Academy of Management Learning , 44 : 118 - 131 . McKelvey , B . 1982 . Organizational systematics : Taxonomy , evolution , classification . Berkeley : University of California Press . Miles , R . E . & Snow , C . C . 1978 . Organizational strategy , structure and process . New York : McGraw - Hill Book Company . Miner , A . S . , Bassoff , P . , & Moorman , C . 2001 . Organizational improvisation and learning : A field study . Administrative Science Quarterly , 46 : 304 - 337 . Nahapiet , J . & Ghoshal , S . 1998 . Social capital , intellectual capital , and the organizational advantage . Academy of Management Review , 23 ( 2 ) : 242 - 266 . Perry - Smith , J . E . , C . E . Shalley . 2003 . The social side of creativity : A static and dynamic social network perspective . Academy of Management Review , 28 : 89 - 106 . Phillips , D . J . 2002 . A genealogical approach to organizational life chances : The parent - progeny transfer among Silicon Valley law firms , 1946 - 1996 . Administrative Science Quarterly , 47 : 474 - 506 . Phillips , D . J . 2005 . Organizational genealogies and the persistence of gender inequality : the case of Silicon Valley law firms . Administrative Science Quarterly , 50 : 440 - 472 . Phillips , K . W . 2003 . The effects of categorically based expectations on minority influence : The importance of congruence . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 29 : 3 - 13 . Porter , M . E . 1980 . Competitive strategy ( 1998 ed . ) . New York : The Free Press . Reagans , R . , Zuckerman , E . , & McEvily , B . 2004 . How to make the team : Social networks vs . demography as criteria for designing effective teams . Administrative Science Quarterly , 49 : 101 - 133 . 36 Rodan , S . & Galunic , C . 2004 . More than network structure : How knowledge heterogeneity influences managerial performance and innovativeness . Strategic Management Journal , 25 : 541 - 562 . Rosenkopf , L . & Nerkar , A . 2001 . Beyond local search : Boundary - spanning , exploration , and impact in the optical disk industry . Strategic Management Journal , 22 ( 4 ) : 287 - 306 . Rosenkopf , L . & Almeida , P . 2003 . Overcoming local search through alliances and mobility . Management Science , 49 ( 6 ) : 751 . Roure , J . & Maidique , M . 1986 . Linking prefunding factors and high - technology venture success : An exploratory study . Journal of Business Venturing , 1 : 295 - 306 . Ruef , M . 2002 . Strong ties , weak ties and islands : structural and cultural predictors of organizational innovation . Industrial and Corporate Change , 11 : 427 - 449 . Ruef , M . , Aldrich , H . E . , & Carter , N . M . 2003 . The structure of founding teams : Homophily , strong ties , and isolation among U . S . entrepreneurs . American Sociological Review , 68 : 195 - 222 . Schneider , B . 1987 . The people make the place . Personnel Psychology , 40 : 437 - 453 . Schoonhoven , C . B . , Eisenhardt , K . M . , & Lyman , K . 1990 . Speeding products to market : Waiting time to first product introduction in new firms . Administrative Science Quarterly , 35 : 177 - 207 . Schumpeter , J . A . 1934 . Theory of economic development . Cambridge , MA : Harvard Press . Shane , S . 2000 . Prior knowledge and the discovery of entrepreneurial opportunities . Organization Science , 11 ( 4 ) : 448 - 469 . Shane , S . , & Stuart , T . 2002 . Organizational endowments and the performance of university start - ups . Management Science , 48 : 154 - 170 . Smith , W . K . , & Tushman , M . L . 2005 . Managing strategic contradictions : A top management team model for managing innovation streams . Organization Science , 16 : 522 - 536 . 37 Sorensen , J . B . 1999 . Executive migration and interorganizational competition . Social Science Research , 28 : 289 - 315 . Stasser , G . , Taylor , L . A . , & Hanna , C . 1989 . Information sampling in structured and unstructured discussions of three - and six - person groups . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 57 : 67 - 78 . Talaulicar , T . , Grundei , J . , & Werder , A . V . 2005 . Strategic decision making in start - ups : the effect of top management team organization and processes on speed and comprehensiveness . Journal of Business Venturing , 20 : 519 - 541 . Tsai , W . & Ghoshal , S . 1998 . Social capital and value creation : The role of intrafirm networks . Academy of Management Journal , 41 ( 4 ) : 464 - 476 . Tushman , M . L . & O Reilly , C . A . 1996 . Ambidextrous organizations : Managing evolutionary and revolutionary change . California Management Review , 38 ( 4 ) : 8 . Tushman , M . L . , & Smith , W . 2002 . Organizational technology . In J . Baum ed . , Companion to Organizations . Blackwell , Malden , MA . 388 - 414 . Wasserman , S . & Faust , K . 1994 . Social network analysis : Methods and applications . Cambridge , England : Cambridge University Press . Williams , K . & O ' Reilly , C . A . I . 1998 . Demography and diversity in organizations : A review of 40 years of research . In B . M . Staw & R . I . Sutton ( Eds . ) , Research in organizational behavior , Vol . 20 : 77 - 140 : JAI Press , Inc . 38 Table 1 . Descriptives and Correlations Mean S . D . Min Max ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) ( 9 ) ( 10 ) ( 11 ) 1 . FT Diverse Aff . 3 . 333 1 . 992 0 11 1 . 000 2 . FT Common Aff . 1 . 021 1 . 355 0 7 0 . 149 1 . 000 3 . Exploration Strategy 0 . 482 0 . 501 0 1 0 . 069 - 0 . 072 1 . 000 4 . Exploitation Strat . 0 . 248 0 . 434 0 1 - 0 . 105 0 . 067 - 0 . 520 1 . 000 5 . Medical Industry 0 . 156 0 . 364 0 1 - 0 . 098 - 0 . 184 0 . 350 - 0 . 250 1 . 000 6 . Telecom Ind . 0 . 206 0 . 406 0 1 0 . 167 - 0 . 076 - 0 . 155 0 . 076 - 0 . 236 1 . 000 7 . Manufacturing Ind . 0 . 057 0 . 232 0 1 - 0 . 194 - 0 . 104 - 0 . 207 0 . 141 - 0 . 100 - 0 . 121 1 . 000 8 . FT Size 3 . 326 1 . 610 2 12 0 . 021 0 . 460 0 . 105 - 0 . 078 0 . 071 - 0 . 054 - 0 . 077 1 . 000 9 . Firm Size 2 . 473 14 . 798 0 380 0 . 048 0 . 049 0 . 029 - 0 . 016 - 0 . 040 0 . 106 - 0 . 033 - 0 . 030 1 . 000 10 . Idea Change 0 . 129 0 . 337 0 1 0 . 224 0 . 342 - 0 . 099 0 . 165 - 0 . 097 0 . 256 - 0 . 066 0 . 331 0 . 062 1 . 000 11 . VC Financing 2 . 618 2 . 623 0 11 0 . 003 - 0 . 052 0 . 189 - 0 . 056 0 . 122 0 . 023 - 0 . 216 0 . 012 0 . 044 - 0 . 089 1 . 000 12 . Executive Exits 3 . 278 5 . 471 0 43 0 . 031 0 . 163 0 . 046 0 . 022 - 0 . 007 0 . 064 - 0 . 129 0 . 091 0 . 425 0 . 000 0 . 297 13 . Exec . Entrances 6 . 743 6 . 250 0 44 0 . 046 0 . 199 0 . 089 0 . 021 - 0 . 022 0 . 082 - 0 . 172 0 . 081 0 . 442 - 0 . 020 0 . 344 14 . TMT Size 4 . 290 3 . 378 0 29 0 . 103 0 . 171 0 . 053 - 0 . 006 - 0 . 011 0 . 102 - 0 . 161 0 . 065 0 . 192 - 0 . 024 0 . 251 15 . Firm Age 6 . 998 4 . 284 1 21 - 0 . 032 0 . 042 - 0 . 087 0 . 010 - 0 . 012 0 . 074 - 0 . 051 - 0 . 007 0 . 214 0 . 129 0 . 352 16 . Firm Growth 0 . 244 0 . 447 - 4 . 025 3 0 . 062 0 . 023 0 . 022 - 0 . 043 - 0 . 011 0 . 030 - 0 . 010 - 0 . 027 - 0 . 042 - 0 . 054 - 0 . 094 17 . % Founders in Firm 0 . 688 0 . 376 0 1 - 0 . 042 - 0 . 004 - 0 . 036 0 . 034 - 0 . 110 0 . 024 0 . 119 - 0 . 050 - 0 . 182 - 0 . 140 - 0 . 315 ( 12 ) ( 13 ) ( 14 ) ( 15 ) ( 16 ) ( 17 ) 12 . Executive Exits 1 . 000 13 . Exec . Entrances 0 . 876 1 . 000 14 . TMT Size 0 . 285 0 . 677 1 . 000 15 . Firm Age 0 . 603 0 . 509 0 . 195 1 . 000 16 . Firm Growth - 0 . 203 - 0 . 121 - 0 . 014 - 0 . 274 1 . 000 17 . % Founders in Firm - 0 . 593 - 0 . 470 - 0 . 066 - 0 . 557 0 . 172 1 . 000 Correlations greater than . 17 are significant at p < . 05 39 Table 2 . Results of Logistic Regression Analysis Predicting Firm Strategy and Idea Change ab ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) ( 9 ) Medical Industry 7 . 797 * * * 8 . 657 * * * 7 . 425 * * * 0 . 666 0 . 412 0 . 541 ( 5 . 126 ) ( 5 . 775 ) ( 5 . 038 ) ( 0 . 835 ) ( 0 . 608 ) ( 0 . 804 ) Telecom Industry 0 . 564 0 . 505 0 . 443 * 1 . 667 1 . 774 1 . 951 3 . 491 2 . 734 2 . 619 ( 0 . 256 ) ( 0 . 235 ) ( 0 . 213 ) ( 0 . 780 ) ( 0 . 845 ) ( 0 . 952 ) ( 3 . 135 ) ( 2 . 580 ) ( 2 . 538 ) Manufacturing Industry 3 . 622 * 4 . 338 * 3 . 611 * ( 2 . 718 ) ( 3 . 314 ) ( 2 . 816 ) Founding Team Size 1 . 083 1 . 079 1 . 217 0 . 953 0 . 84 0 . 826 1 . 601 * * 1 . 646 * * 1 . 448 ( 0 . 126 ) ( 0 . 126 ) ( 0 . 168 ) ( 0 . 126 ) ( 0 . 133 ) ( 0 . 130 ) ( 0 . 344 ) ( 0 . 346 ) ( 0 . 374 ) FT Diverse Affiliations 1 . 167 * 1 . 220 * * 0 . 874 1 . 376 * * 1 . 411 * * ( 0 . 113 ) ( 0 . 125 ) ( 0 . 104 ) ( 0 . 264 ) ( 0 . 285 ) FT Common Affiliations 0 . 754 * 1 . 352 * * 1 . 414 * * 1 . 389 ( 0 . 121 ) ( 0 . 224 ) ( 0 . 245 ) 0 . 452 Exploration Strategy 0 . 640 0 . 539 0 . 66 ( 0 . 571 ) ( 0 . 510 ) ( 0 . 653 ) Observations 141 141 141 141 141 141 68 68 68 Log likelihood - 88 . 31 - 87 - 85 . 39 - 77 . 1 - 75 . 43 - 74 . 75 - 21 . 74 - 20 . 29 - 19 . 76 Pseudo R 2 0 . 096 0 . 109 0 . 126 0 . 024 0 . 045 0 . 054 0 . 182 0 . 236 0 . 256 a Odds - Ratios reported ; Standard errors in parentheses . b One - tailed test for hypothesized variables . * significant at 10 % ; * * significant at 5 % ; * * * significant at 1 % Exploration Strategy Exploitation Strategy Idea Change 40 Table 3 . Results of Event History Analysis Predicting Speed of Product to Market ab ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) Exploitation Strategy 1 . 113 1 . 124 1 . 11 - 0 . 194 - 0 . 188 - 0 . 178 Medical Industry 0 . 389 * * * 0 . 414 * * * 0 . 413 * * * - 0 . 096 - 0 . 104 - 0 . 103 Telecommunications Industry 1 . 146 1 . 191 1 . 202 - 0 . 149 - 0 . 154 - 0 . 157 Venture Capital Financing 1 . 100 * 1 . 092 * 1 . 094 * - 0 . 057 - 0 . 057 - 0 . 056 Firm Size 1 . 233 * * * 1 . 253 * * * 1 . 251 * * * - 0 . 081 - 0 . 08 - 0 . 081 Founding team size 0 . 925 * 0 . 894 * * 0 . 894 * * - 0 . 039 - 0 . 042 - 0 . 041 Proportion of founders in firm 1 . 518 1 . 43 1 . 438 - 0 . 706 - 0 . 715 - 0 . 719 Common FT Affiliations 1 . 093 * 1 . 099 * - 0 . 058 - 0 . 059 Unique FT Affiliations 0 . 987 - 0 . 036 Observations 417 417 417 Log likelihood - 547 . 66 - 546 . 94 - 546 . 9 a Hazard ratios ; Robust standard errors in parentheses ; n = 138 ; 129 failures b One - tailed test for hypothesized variables 41 Table 4 . Panel Regression Analysis Predicting Firm Growth ab ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) Medical Industry 0 0 . 015 0 . 015 - 0 . 035 - 0 . 034 - 0 . 033 Manufacturing Ind . - 0 . 041 - 0 . 018 - 0 . 021 - 0 . 031 - 0 . 032 - 0 . 033 Telecom Industry 0 . 050 * 0 . 056 * * 0 . 053 * * - 0 . 026 - 0 . 025 - 0 . 026 Exploration Strategy - 0 . 007 - 0 . 008 - 0 . 013 - 0 . 026 - 0 . 026 - 0 . 025 Executive Exits - 0 . 027 * * - 0 . 028 * * - 0 . 028 * * - 0 . 012 - 0 . 012 - 0 . 012 Executive Entrances 0 . 016 0 . 017 0 . 018 - 0 . 013 - 0 . 012 - 0 . 013 TMT Size 0 . 003 0 0 - 0 . 011 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 01 VC Financing - 0 . 003 - 0 . 002 - 0 . 002 - 0 . 006 - 0 . 006 - 0 . 006 FT Size - 0 . 006 - 0 . 007 - 0 . 007 - 0 . 006 - 0 . 006 - 0 . 005 Proportion of founders in firm - 0 . 004 - 0 . 001 - 0 . 004 - 0 . 058 - 0 . 057 - 0 . 057 Firm Age - 0 . 030 * * * - 0 . 029 * * * - 0 . 030 * * * - 0 . 003 - 0 . 003 - 0 . 003 Firm Size 0 0 0 - 0 . 001 - 0 . 001 - 0 . 001 Founding Team : High 0 . 050 * * 0 . 075 * * Common / High Diverse - 0 . 024 - 0 . 032 Founding Team : High 0 . 045 Common / Low Diverse - 0 . 034 Founding Team : Low 0 . 032 Common / High Diverse - 0 . 035 Constant 0 . 398 * * * 0 . 375 * * * 0 . 357 * * * - 0 . 071 - 0 . 069 - 0 . 072 Observations 1368 1368 1368 Wald ? 2 165 . 72 169 . 6 166 . 87 R 2 0 . 100 0 . 102 0 . 103 a Robust standard errors in parentheses ; random effects ; clustered by firm ; n = 141 b One - tailed test for hypothesized variables * significant at 10 % ; * * significant at 5 % ; * * * significant at 1 % 42