Participatory Design : the will to succeed Dan Shapiro Department of Sociology Lancaster University Lancaster LA1 4YD , UK + 44 1524 594175 d . shapiro @ lancaster . ac . uk ABSTRACT The paper reviews some aspects of the procurement and development of large scale systems and finds that there is still a high failure rate , which is especially visible in the public sector . It argues that the Participatory Design ( PD ) perspective offers cogent explanations for these failures , and can plausibly claim that it would do much better if its paradigm is given a serious chance . Yet members of the PD community seem mostly reluctant to become engaged in such developments , and the actual involvement of PD in these areas remains limited . The paper argues for PD’s collective engagement and proposes a two - stage strategy for achieving this . It reviews this agenda from the perspective of PD as a political movement , and argues that this kind of involvement is ‘reformist’ but defensible . It will be difficult to persuade governments to take on this experimental strategy , but it should be possible . Keywords Participatory Design , ethnography in design , large - scale information systems , public sector information systems , commercialisation , politics of information systems . INTRODUCTION In novels such as Sense and Sensibility ( 1811 ) , Pride and Prejudice ( 1813 ) , Mansfield Park ( 1814 ) and Emma ( 1815 ) , Jane Austen played a key role in the invention of the classic realist text , a trajectory continued by such other great nineteenth century women writers as Elizabeth Gaskell ( 1810 - 65 ) and George Eliot ( 1819 - 80 ) . By the classic realist novel is meant , of course , not that they are more ‘realistic’ than other forms , but that they invented the literary and stylistic devices of seeming to convey an unmediated reality , a God’s - eye view ( devices now passé in literature but still absolutely central to the visual culture of film and television ) [ 34 ] . Among many other things , their narratives may be understood as allegories of the displacement in England of the feudal landowning class and the ascendancy of the middle class [ 17 , p . 115 ] . This is accompanied by the decline of an aristocratic ethic of ‘honour’ – manifesting primarily in idleness and vice – and the rise of a bourgeois , meritocratic ethic of virtue and industry – Weber’s Protestant spirit of capitalism [ 49 ] . In the non - fiction world this was represented in England by momentous struggles such as over the Corn Laws that imposed import tariffs on grain , introduced in 1815 , modified in 1828 and finally abolished in 1846 , marking the shift of political dominance from landowners , with an interest in protecting the price of wheat , to industrialists , with an interest in cheap food to keep down wages ; and the Great Reform Act of 1832 which extended suffrage to the middle class and abolished Parliamentary seats ‘owned’ by feudal families . This is a weighty context , but the realist novel in this period was primarily a comic form , and Jane Austen’s tone is shrewd , amused , controlled , oblique , ironic and understated [ 17 , p . 106 ] . Being relatively poor , and being a woman , she was doubly vulnerable to the caprice and cruelty of more powerful members of her own class , and her wry smile reflects her powerlessness . While she may have felt that she occupied both the moral and the rational high ground ( ‘sense’ ) , she could do no more than satirise the self - indulgent romanticism ( ‘sensibility’ ) and the self - serving arrogance of power that surrounded her . I suggest below that we may ( with some license ) find parallels between this and the relationship of Participatory Design ( PD ) to the mainstream software industry . 1 FAILURES IN SYSTEMS PROCUREMENT Despite the development of software engineering in response to the 1968 ‘software crisis’ [ 37 ] , many software development projects still end in failure . 25 % of software projects are cancelled outright and 80 % over - run their budgets , with the average software project exceeding its budget by 50 % , at an annual cost in the US alone of $ 59 billion for over - runs and $ 81 billion for cancellations ( in 1995 ) . It is estimated that 75 % of large systems are 1 The reader puzzled by the references to Jane Austen should know that this paper was written for a conference entitled ‘Critical Computing : Between Sense and Sensibility’ . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage , and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , to republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . AARHUS’05 8 / 21 - 8 / 25 / 05 Århus , Denmark © 2005 ACM ISBN 1 - 59593 - 203 - 8 / 05 / 008… $ 5 . 00 5 . 0 0 29 operational failures because they do not function as specified or are not used [ 16 , 21 , 31 , 43 ] . The public sector has become especially notorious for attempts to introduce large - scale and ambitious information systems that have either foundered altogether , at great expense , or that have been delivered very late , hugely over - budget , and with grossly inadequate functionality . The situation in private industry may be no better but commercial confidentiality and the lack of public accountability may make it less visible . In the UK there are several infamous public sector examples , though they probably have their equivalents in most countries ( prompting , for example , the 1996 US Clinger - Cohen Act which requires government departments to make contem - porary reports to Congress on IT project progress and deviations . ) One case that achieved great notoriety , attracting academic as well as worldwide media and administrative attention , was the failure of a new computer - aided despatch system for the London Ambulance Service in 1992 [ 5 , 18 ] . This service , and its control centre , are reportedly the largest in the world , having responsibility for an area of 1 , 600 square kilometres with a population of 7 . 5m residents and 2 . 5m visitors and commuters . 350 control room staff handle 1m emergency calls and 900 , 000 patient journeys annually , deploying the service’s 3 , 000 paramedic staff and 800 vehicles [ 48 ] . When the new system went live it was quickly overwhelmed , with some ambulances taking hours to arrive , by contrast with the service specification of arrival within 14 minutes on 95 % of occasions and within 8 minutes on 50 % of occasions ; while in other cases more than one ambulance was sent to the same incident [ 39 ] . It was claimed that 20 - 30 people may have died as a result . The background included a long period of bad industrial relations , in the context of the government imposing market or pseudo - market disciplines on the public services . A ‘macho’ management was using the introduction of the system to force changes in work practices onto staff , with minimal consultation : the Chief Executive , who later resigned , reportedly said that the service could be operated by 8 - year - old children with the new system . There were warning signs ( the opposition party demanded a public inquiry into the system one month before it went live ) but these were disregarded . Despite its high profile , however , this was not a financial procurement scandal . The cost of the system was a tiny £1 . 5 million ( €2 . 2 million ) , and one of the criticisms was that too low a bid had been accepted from an inexperienced company ( actually , an Apricot PC distributor ) who was said to have designed and implemented the system in a wholly undisciplined manner . A current case concerns the UK Child Support Agency , whose main task is to make maintenance payments to single - parent families and extract contributions from the absent parent . An earlier IT system was abandoned before implementation and its successor , supposedly a simpler system at a cost of £465m ( c . €650m ) , was rolled out 2 years late and was still not functioning correctly , with the backlog of cases increasing at a rate of 10 , 000 per month . The Chief Executive of the Agency resigned over the matter in November 2004 , and the government could not exclude the possibility that this system would also have to be abandoned . There have even been recent calls for the Child Support Agency to be abolished altogether largely as a result of these failures [ 35 ] . However , these are just the most celebrated instances , and it seems that barely a month goes by without a fresh public sector information system procurement scandal – a recent speech in the UK Parliament Public Accounts Committee referred to 18 examples [ 1 , see also 19 ] . An important current case concerns what is reportedly the biggest civil IT project in the world , to provide new information systems for the UK National Health Service . It is budgeted to cost more than £6 billion ( €8 . 6 billion ) though some critics estimate it will ultimately cost £31 billion ( €44 billion ) . Some doctors who will have to use the new systems complain that they will be forced to abandon systems that are better , that the new systems may actually be dangerous in some areas , and that they have not been adequately consulted [ 2 ] . A major component is due to go live by the end of 2005 but a survey commissioned by the UK Parliament National Audit Office found that 45 % of GPs knew ‘a little’ and 49 % ‘very little’ about it ; that 92 % said they had not had the opportunity to feed into the consultation process ; 97 % said there had not been adequate consultation on the timetable for introduction ; and 61 % felt either ‘very negative’ or ‘a little negative’ about the system [ 36 ] . Doctors have also expressed concerns about patient confidentiality in the planned systems and the British Medical Association , representing doctors , may boycott them [ 22 ] . On the other hand , system managers and government Ministers insist that that the project is progressing well and will be a great success . Time will tell who is right . Most of the systems in contention in these and other instances were provided by a small number of very large and very well known software houses . When Ministers and civil servants are challenged about why they give further contracts to these companies despite their lamentable record they reply , forlornly , that there is a limited number of such companies to choose from , and all of them have skeletons in their closets [ 23 ] . If governments try to get tough , the companies may have the power to starve them out . For example , a recent article in Computer Weekly reports that the UK Office of Government Commerce has introduced IT contract terms that prohibit making milestone payments until projects ‘go live’ , and that only pay profit on the development phase via payments over the lifetime of service delivery . In response , some of the larger companies have decided not to bid on billion - pound projects [ 6 ] . On the other hand , reports also blame government department clients for adopting contracts that externalise all project 30 risk onto suppliers , and then giving priority to avoiding culpability instead of establishing an effective partnership [ 28 , p . 16 ] . LARGE SCALE SYSTEMS AND PARTICPATORY DESIGN PD responses to procurement failures In the Participatory Design research community , when we hear of these disasters they do not surprise us , for we think we understand them very well . In most cases we would expect the problems to arise not from technical errors or incompetence as such , but from a failure properly to understand the nature of users’ activities and what they need . This failure is in part political and in part analytic . First , in terms of political economy , technological innovation , including that of information systems , takes place in the context of the labour process [ 8 ] . Though it may sometimes be intended to achieve wholly new processes that would not otherwise be possible , the key motivation is to displace both skills and jobs . On this argument , the tendency of managements systematically to undervalue the complexity of the work that people do and the initiative that they exercise is not an accident or oversight , but is built into the struggle over the control of work . Where divisions of gender or ethnicity compound divisions of class then the work and those who do it are even more likely to be devalued . Developments such as the recent fashion for business process re - engineering are manifestations of this general tendency . Hence , systems procurement reflects power not reason so that , for example , specifications are derived from those who manage the work rather than those who do it . To the extent that these politicised characterisations of work are myths and fictions , they can be quietly circumvented and accommodated through the ordinary negotiations of working life . However , when they are ‘hard - coded’ into information systems , their inherent contradictions will cause havoc [ 41 ] . The London Ambulance System failure discussed above would seem to be an obvious example of this . As is well known , the origins of PD in the 1970s lie in engaging on the side of labour in these struggles concerning industrial democracy . The failures of analysis , secondly , lie in systematically misunderstanding the sociality of work . Ethnographic analyses , documented with video and audio records , reveal the complexity , intricacy and variability of practices that may at first have seemed straightforward and easily ‘specified’ . They also reveal that work is rarely carried out in isolation but has a rich social organisation and densely - choreographed interconnections . Examples of this in the CSCW literature include : that the work of control room staff depends on overhearing and overseeing the work of others in a collective environment , even when their work may appear to be independent [ 26 ] ; that the ‘trustability’ of an air traffic control system is located in the overlapping engagement of collaborating staff [ 45 ] ; that a defining feature of customer - oriented work , especially in small offices , is that it is subject to constant interruption [ 42 ] ; and that work in the aesthetic design professions is partly constituted by the constant , collaborative , dynamic spatial realignment and juxtaposition of working materials [ 9 ] . The claims of ethnographic analysis can be put forward either in a pragmatic or in a more radical form . Prag - matically , it may be claimed simply that ethnography reveals important aspects of work and other activities that are not amenable to other methods and that should be taken into account in systems design . Some may claim that ethnography is better ‘in the negative’ at pointing out pitfalls and giving guidance on what not to do than ‘in the positive’ at establishing what should go into a design . The more radical claim , coming from phenomenology and ethnomethodology , is that the conventional sciences , including mainstream computer science and psychology , fundamentally misconceive the nature of human action by following the Cartesian errors of locating it in the isolated individual , and separating ‘mind’ from ‘body’ [ 14 ] . They therefore understand , for example , work activities as a sequence of separate , mainly intentional steps carried out by individual actors . The steps of different actors are connected , if at all , through interfaced sequencing procedures using communicative ‘exchanges’ . By contrast , phenomenological and ethnomethodological perspectives see human practice as inherently social , carried out in constant inter - relation and calibration with others . Further , they see the fine - grained , contextual , situated character of practice as so infinite in its variability that in practice nothing is ever exactly repeated , but is enacted ‘another next first time’ every time . 2 It follow , too , that activities do not pre - exist their enactment and are not the instantiation of some prior scheme , but are contemporaneously produced ‘in the doing’ . Since the behaviour at present of information systems conforms more closely to the former ( Cartesian ) set of descriptions than to the latter ( phenomenological ) , there is an inherent difficulty in meshing machine and human activity which lies at the root of many systems failures and should not be glossed over . If these , briefly , are the causes of the failings of the established information systems industry , then what has been the response from critical computing ? Despite our conviction that we too occupy both the moral and the rational high ground , like Jane Austen our reaction is more likely to be a wry smile than a concerted challenge . It seems just too daunting to fight to have our perspective heard and to displace a very powerful established industry . 2 In fact , it can of course happen that an activity is exactly repeated , for a given means of observation . The point , however , is that might have been enacted differently if contingencies had required , so that even its identity is uniquely produced . 31 There are many reasons for standing back : there are too many vested interests , it would be too compromising of our ethical or academic principles , we do not have the financial standing to offer guarantees or to stand behind extended contractual obligations , it is not really our business . Perhaps , too , we have a sneaking suspicion that we might not actually be able to do any better in such complex settings . ( In the early 1990s , shortly after our research on Air Traffic Control , a large package arrived in the Department . It contained an invitation to tender for the replacement air traffic control system for the UK – which later became another IT procurement scandal . Of course , we ran a mile . ) Proactive Participatory Design It would be wrong , however , to suppose that Participatory Design has always kept its distance from large scale or commercial systems . There are successful examples of small or medium scale systems that were implemented in commercial contexts , such as the MUST team’s suite of systems for Danish Radio [ 33 ] . Indeed , Kensing has also proposed a conceptual framework for PD in a commercial context , though his focus is more on how to achieve successful design in that situation than on how to gain access to it in the first place ( the two are obviously not unrelated ) [ 32 , see also 7 ] . Another medium - scale example that has been commercialised , and that includes ethnography and participation in a broader mix of theory and methods , is the French SAMU - 91 groupware system for handling calls to medical emergency centres [ 40 ] . There is also quite a long list of commercial examples where PD or ethnographic contributions have had a limited impact or one that is difficult to isolate from a much larger context . Probably the most thorough operation to ‘commercialise’ PD and ethnographic approaches is through Holtzblatt and Beyer’s ‘contextual design’ in the US company InContext Enterprises , founded in 1992 [ 4 ] . They draw on the classics of PD and the ethnographic engagement with design , e . g . [ 24 , 46 ] , and their list of recommended readings would not look out of place in the references section of any paper at this conference . They have described their approach as adapting ethnographic research methods to fit the time and resource constraints of engineering , and this typically involves a limited number of worksite interviews of 2 - 3 hours each , team data sessions for analysis , and getting to the point of commencing system design in around a month [ 27 ] . They work with more than 20 designers from various disciplines , and have a client list that includes Microsoft , SAP , Hewlett Packard , IBM , Motorola , Nokia , Novell , Deutsche Bank and Lexis Law [ 29 ] . One very large scale system based on participatory design and ethnography that came close to implementation was a global customer service system for the Maersk shipping line , the prototype for which was undertaken by members of the computer science department at Aarhus University [ 12 ] . The system was to service the highly complex needs of quoting , booking , routing , pricing , documenting , tracing and re - routing containerised transport for a global company with 250 offices in 70 countries on 6 continents [ 13 ] . The cost of prototyping accounted for less than 1 % of what was eventually a very large budget for the full system . According to the designers , they had produced prototypes of more than a dozen modules , and they were very well received at all levels in the company , though further work was needed to complete some of them . The main additional work needed to make the transition from the prototype to a deployed system was the design and implementation of an enterprise - scale architecture for the database and server connections , and integration with existing legacy systems – both substantial tasks . Understandably , the clients decided it was too great a risk to assign the development of the full system to a team of researchers , and it passed into a conventional procurement process . There , it suffered from the ensuing ‘paradigm misfit’ , with the developers treating the prototypes as if they were ‘specifications’ , and trying to introduce a number of changes that were not compatible with the design philosophy ( as examples , abandoning the multi - threading that made it possible for staff to respond to customers’ issues in the order in which they raised them , and changing from a ‘thick client’ to a ‘thin client’ which necessitated rewriting the main functionality for a server platform . ) Thereafter , the procurement ran into some of the classic difficulties described earlier . This case clearly highlights the kind of issues that would need to be faced . ENGAGING PUBLIC SECTOR PROCUREMENT This paper proposes that Participatory Design as a community of practitioners 3 should seriously consider claiming an engagement in the development of large scale systems , and more particularly an engagement with the procurement and development of systems in the public sector , and should devise a collective strategy for doing so . I return to ethical and political considerations in a later section , but I make an initial claim that this would be a public good . Unquestionably , any likely reader of this paper lives and works in a capitalist market economy . Equally , however , they are likely to live and work in a mixed economy . Total tax receipts as a percentage of GDP in 2001 were 49 . 8 % in Denmark , 46 . 1 % in Finland , 45 . 4 % in Austria , 45 % in France , 38 . 4 % in the Czech Republic , 36 . 8 % in Germany , 35 . 1 % in Canada and 27 . 3 % in Japan [ 38 ] . Even in the USA they were 28 . 9 % ( though one may query what proportion of this is dedicated to public welfare and what to military - industrial clientilism ) . These revenues exist supposedly to correct market failures or to supply collective goods that markets cannot of themselves be expected to provide – though , again , the practice may diverge from the principle . Through their investment in 3 I admit that it is not clear what or who this is . Any use of the term ‘community’ probably indicates an unexamined issue , even the term ‘community of practice’ . 32 research , states foster innovation and facilitate conceptual leaps , such as interdisciplinary research that brings together ( for example ) phenomenological understandings of work practice , participatory design , and object - oriented programming . Governments cannot force private companies to take advantage of the advances in knowledge that they have funded , but it ought to be possible to persuade them to do so themselves . We would be reversing the message . Usually , governments say to us , your academic research is not sufficiently useful . Now , we would be saying to them , our research is useful , but you are not letting us apply it . The extent to which these are realistic expectations is discussed towards the end of the paper . If the PD community is to achieve this breakthrough , then we must set out a convincing agenda and programme of action . We would have to retain control and leadership of these , otherwise we must expect them to be diluted to the point of being useless . We can think of this as taking place in two phases . The first would involve a thorough critical review of the premises of our engagement , so that we can put our claims forward with confidence – putting our own house in order before we approach others . The second phase would involve an experimental strategy for putting our alternative approach into practice . Critical self - reflection It is perhaps too easy for its practitioners to assume that PD has both the explanation and the cure for information systems failures . Matters to be established , and not only to our own satisfaction , include the following . The validity of our paradigm claims As with any research area , there is no general consensus and many issues are hotly contested . This makes it hard for us to claim we have all the answers . I have implied throughout that there is an affinity between participatory design and ethnographically - informed design , but this can be disputed from either direction [ 15 ] . There is the distinction , already mentioned , between ‘weak’ claims for ethnographic studies – that they are revealing and informative – and ‘strong’ claims – that they represent a paradigm shift in the understanding of human action that undermines the premises of conventional information systems . The most cogent , rigorous and detailed sociological analyses of work practice derive from ethnomethodology , but this perspective is ( for good reasons to do with its insistence on describing not theorising ) the most reluctant in drawing consequences for design . Without attempting to rehearse the arguments here , one might caricature it by saying that purism is useless , but pragmatism is incoherent [ 44 ] . Specific causes of failure It will also be necessary to look critically at whether specific instances of failure can accurately be attributed to ‘paradigm’ errors , i . e . to failing to understand the situation of use , rather than the infinity of other kinds of things that can go wrong , ranging from the mundane to the exotic . For example , one government department was reported to have purchased 11 , 000 PCs with ‘associated support’ for £20 , 000 ( c . €30 , 000 ) each , which would appear to be more a simple rip - off than any kind of paradigm error [ 1 ] . This may be hard to detect from available reports , since we cannot expect them to tell us in an unmediated way what went wrong , since if we are correct that it is the underlying paradigm that is at fault , such reports may be like an inquiry into the failure of the rain - dance to produce rain , that concludes there were deficiencies in the execution of the dance steps . On the other hand , some contributors well known within the PD research perspective , such as Kalle Lyytinen , have specialised in researching information system failures [ 16 , 43 ] . Specific attributions of costs Similarly , it will be necessary to examine the detailed attribution of costs , to be able to say what proportion of the massive ( and , by implication , ‘rip - off’ or ‘paradigm folly’ ) costs are attributable to software development , as opposed to other items that would require expenditure anyway , such as hardware infrastructures , training , support and maintenance . An experimental strategy If the claims for PD engagement in large - scale public sector systems survive a phase of critical self - reflection , then an experimental strategy will be required to put it into effect . This should include at least the following elements . Working consensus If it is correct that PD engagement on this scale can only happen as a collective endeavour , then it is highly desirable to achieve a workable and provisional public consensus . Other disciplines manage to pursue fundamental debates without giving the impression that the whole field cannot be trusted . Clarity Formulate a clear , concise and persuasive statement for a general audience of the paradigm advantages , with clear case illustrations of the benefits it can deliver . Integration Obviously , we will not have all the answers . We need to critically review other developments in best practice and the management of large system procurement , and find means to integrate with those that are valid from our perspective , and to delegate where possible . Taking the Maersk case discussed above as an exemplar , the view from the designers is that integration with the legacy systems and , to a degree , the design and implementation of the enterprise - scale architecture for the database and server connections , could both have been contracted out with ap - propriate degrees of oversight and integration . An experienced and suitably sympathetic project management organisation could be formed or converted , provided this did not conflict with ‘ownership’ , below . 33 Procurement In response to the repeated failures of information systems in the public sector , most governments have implemented increasingly rule - bound and prescriptive procurement regimes for tendering for and executing IT projects . While these may not have helped very much to fix the problems they are aimed at , they may make it very difficult to accommodate unconventional proposals . We would need to explore the details of these restrictions and negotiate experimental contract alternatives where necessary . Pilot Choose one or more initial pilot projects which are important and challenging , but not critical ( so that failure can be admitted as a possibility ) . They should be on a modest scale , but with the capacity to scale up . They should have clearly adequate resources , but which are nevertheless competitive with the cost of conventional systems . Escalation If the pilots are successful , pursue a pathway of pro - gressively larger scale and more critical trials . Ownership Place a sponsor of the users’ perspective in overall charge of the projects , including charge of expenditure . Otherwise , it will be very hard to prevent them becoming sidelined by conventional pressures , and will negate the experiment . Competition We would have to anticipate and be prepared to withstand a furious onslaught from challenged vested interests – academic , professional and administrative as well as commercial . It would mean recruiting and maintaining powerful allies with ( partially ) coincident interests such as government departments , media , major IS client rather than provider companies , consumer groups , trade unions , professional bodies , and perhaps some consultancy com - panies . We would have to become skilled actor - network practitioners , working to dislodge the ‘obligatory passage points’ of conventional procurement and development , and to establish our own [ 11 ] . WOT , NO POLITICS ? 4 Jane Austen herself belonged to a minor branch of the gentry , though one that had fallen financially on relatively hard times [ 10 ] . By contrast with later realist writers , her gentle critique was aimed at encouraging the ruling class to mend its ways to secure its survival rather than at sweeping it away [ 17 , p . 118 ] . In Pride and Prejudice , Darcy , owner of the finest estate in Derbyshire , appears proud , arrogant , snobbish and quick to abuse his power and social standing . As the novel unfolds , however , this is revealed as an illusion ( prejudice ) , and Darcy emerges as the model of 4 This is a World War II idiom , typically chalked on a wall together with a cartoon to satirise shortages as in , ‘Wot , no sugar ? ’ responsibility , generosity , compassion , and consideration for others ; while Wickham , the attractive anti - hero of humble origins , turns out to be the real villain after all . Darcy only seemed to be unworthy ; the dustbin of history does not quite beckon yet . Austen’s agenda was a reformist one . Undoubtedly , the agenda I have proposed here is also a reformist one . But what kind of reformist ? The political environment has changed massively – obviously , from Jane Austen’s time , when the issue was the conduct of the aristocracy , to today , when the issue is the conduct of the bourgeoisie – but also from the time of the inception of PD in the 1960s , with its ‘syndicalist’ emphasis on furthering industrial democracy in a world that seemed simple : organised primarily around class struggle , and with open possibilities for radical change . In a very thoughtful paper , Eevi Beck has assessed the politics in and of PD at present [ 3 ] . She acknowledges a steady dilution of the political focus of PD , and argues that PD should be narrowed to exclude work that uses participation just as a design tool without contributing to understanding or challenging patterns of dominance . But she also argues that this apparent dilution in some ways misperceives recent social change . PD was arguably premised on the ‘externality’ of computing as a powerful but confined and esoteric sphere , peopled only by specialists . Now , life is penetrated through and through by computing : both in micro terms , in the everyday experience of most people in wealthy societies – at work , at leisure , for entertainment , and in civil society – and in macro terms , as the core of economic , social and political organisation in the ‘network society’ . From this perspective , Beck calls for a realignment of PD that would shift the focus away from participation as such and broaden it to a concern with power , dominance and the position of marginalised groups . This relegates participation in design to something of a side issue ( perhaps necessary , but certainly not sufficient ) . It also works to dissolve the distinction between PD and science and technology studies , and critical studies more generally . A dilemma is that while it is certainly true that ‘there can be no innocent positions’ [ 25 , quoted in 3 , p . 77 ] , I would claim that it is not always easy to pin down their guilt , or to know how to act appropriately when one has . As computing becomes mundane , so too do its designers , and it is harder to see why or how they should be able to exercise more leverage for change than anyone else . It would be strange to expect political intervention by computer professionals through the ‘back door’ of systems design to be more effective than other , more direct means of political engagement . Or rather , if this were the case , it would only be in particular conjunctures , e . g . of extreme demand for their work . This might have applied in the 1970s , with the rapid expansion of mainframe systems , and in the 1990s , with the Internet and . com booms . But such openings will be temporary , and probably mostly illusory . 34 If firms can only have successful IT systems if they abandon capitalism , we may be sure they will choose to do without the systems ( though this may not hold in the same way for all governments , or for cooperative movements ) . Small rather than bold interventions may be all that is possible , though they may also be valuable . Beck’s argument is , in effect , that while one cannot know the outcome , the obligation of work that claims to belong to PD is to give serious and sustained consideration to these issues in each instance . How would the involvement of PD in the development of large - scale public sector systems stand up to scrutiny of this kind ? Part of the point , of course , is that one cannot know in the abstract , but some elements can be anticipated . First , it would have to be accepted that the effectiveness of such interventions depends on demonstrating that , in these instances , they are consistent with the real interests of employers – that is exactly what makes them reformist . A core question that would have to be confronted is whether designing and introducing information systems that will increase labour productivity should be accepted or resisted . Clearly , to accept them is complicit with power . But is it against the interests of labour ? One can argue that this has changed from a question with a definite answer , that can be read off straight from labour process theory , in its heyday in the 1970s [ 8 ] , to an empirical question with open possibilities today . While labour process theory retains its power to explain the motives and strategies of management , it is less obvious that the interests of labour lie in simply resisting all aspects of them . Steadily increasing productivity has been accompanied with steadily increasing overall prosperity and ( in most advanced economies ) with relatively full employment . In this , it has accorded more closely with neoclassical than with either Marxist or , more recently , Keynesian economic theory ( see below ) . Income inequalities have certainly increased , but absolute standards of living have also increased in these economies for almost all . This is further complicated by the global integration and distribution of activities . The export of jobs from industrialised to industrialising economies , facilitated by information technology , is a threat to the former and an opportunity for the latter , while also deepening the latter’s subjection to global power . But the long - term trajectories for all these societies are unknowable and there is no guarantee that they will continue in their present form . There may be various tipping points in different places between virtuous and vicious circuits . Deindustrialised , service - based economies such as that of the UK do seem at present to be able to generate steadily increasing prosperity founded , apparently , on froth ( I write this in the week that the Rover car company has finally collapsed ) , while it is the recently successful first - world advanced industrial economies such as that of Germany ( where BMW briefly owned Rover ) that are ( temporarily ? ) in difficulty . Lastly , information systems may be introduced with the motive of reducing labour , but they rarely actually do so . If they instead increase the quality of the work that people can do then most organisations , ( a ) will be lucky , and ( b ) will be satisfied . Systems design from a PD perspective and using ethnographic methods can certainly be expected to reclaim and to emphasise the complex , multi - faceted and resourceful ways in which all forms of work are carried out , regardless of how they may be officially or conventionally characterised , and so to retrieve respect for its accomplishment . The exploration by Suchman and her colleagues of the coding of legal documents provides a very clear example of this , critiquing and deconstructing the identification of ‘objective’ ( so implicitly low skilled work ) and ‘subjective’ ( so implicitly high skilled work ) features of documents [ 47 ] . She shows that , to the extent that these distinctions are meaningful , the work both of lawyers and of coding clerks is rich in both of these features , and is densely populated with both mundane and judgemental activities . We can also see very clearly from this what a failure would result from designing a document or information system that enshrined the fictions about the difference . We must hope to be able to achieve such realisations for any setting that we are involved in , and this may involve stepping back several stages from the initial design brief . If we cannot , then there would indeed be no point in our engagement . To make sense , this approach would have to be carried back to considering what tasks or objectives may benefit from information systems , not just how to construct already - chosen systems , which would complicate further the ‘political’ negotiations required . We would have , at the limit , to be prepared to walk away from a project where such matters are not negotiable . We would also have to be prepared to exercise critical judgement about where large - scale systems are simply not appropriate or not feasible . All these would , in Beck’s terms , be small interventions in the reproduction of marginalisation but , as she also says , these may be valuable [ 3 ] . WHAT CAN BE EXPECTED FROM THE STATE ? The proposals in this paper depend on being able to persuade relevant areas of government to try out system procurement and development on our terms . Is this a reasonable expectation , or is it naïve ? It can plausibly be objected that , in its relation to the labour process , the state is likely to behave in the same way as any other employer . Its motive in introducing information systems will usually be to reduce labour costs and / or to increase labour productivity , it will be equally vulnerable to management fads and fashions , and we may expect business process re - engineering to characterise its approach . Indeed , the UK budget of July 2004 was predicated on the abolition of 104 , 000 civil service jobs , with information technology promoted as one of the main ways of achieving this . Assessing what governments may do depends on an understanding of the changing role of the state in advanced capitalist societies . This is a vast topic that I can only attempt to address very briefly here . 35 Jessop [ 30 ] argues that in the postwar period what he calls Atlantic Fordism ( North America , northwestern Europe and Australasia ) was characterised by the ‘Keynesian welfare national state’ ( KWNS ) . Ideal - typically , this involved a virtuous circuit with demand management , full employment , mass production and mass consumption ( K ) ; with the expansion of welfare rights ( W ) ; with the primacy of the national scale ( N ) ; and with market and state forming a mixed economy in which the state was expected to compensate for market failures ( S ) [ 30 , p . 59 ] . This virtuous circuit fell increasingly into crisis in the 1970s and 1980s as the one - off benefits of the shift to Fordism became exhausted . This produced ever more persistent stagflation , which states were increasingly unable to counter with conventional Keynesian policies , especially as the progressive internationalisation of economies meant that reflation was as likely to generate imports as growth [ 30 , p . 81 ] . Jessop argues that in response states of all nominal political colours are shifting towards ‘Schumpeterian workfare post - national regimes’ ( SWPR ) . Ideal - typically , this is characterised by states trying to promote permanent innovation and flexibility in relatively open economies , with particular strategic emphasis on the knowledge - based economy ( S ) ; by a shift from a welfare to a ‘workfare’ regime through subordinating social to economic policy ( W ) ; by a shift from the national to other spatial scales , as policy functions are shifted upwards ( supranationally ) , downwards ( locally and regionally ) , and sideways ( with cross - border cooperation among non - national bodies ) ( P ) ; and by a shift from government or ‘governance’ ( direct state intervention ) to ‘metagovernance’ ( self - organizing , network based and mixed private - public forms of intervention ) ( R ) [ 30 , pp . 250 - 254 ] . These are tendencies , still in process , and with many possible variations . As regards the open - ness of the state to radical shifts in information systems procurement and design , one might argue that the KWNS of the earlier period might have been more willing to intervene , but more conventional in its orientation ; whereas the SWPR may be more selective in its interventions , but has a radical modernising agenda especially linked to the knowledge - based economy , and a strong ‘policing project’ in pursuit of the collective interests of capital of forcing such modernisation as the key to global competitiveness . Recent debates concerning ‘long waves’ ( Kondratieff waves ) of economic development emphasise that they do not just come about through innovation in technical infrastructures , but depend on corresponding institutional and social arrangements to do with the labour process , education , training , etc . [ 20 ] . It could even be argued that the attempt , in conventional information systems , to ‘hard - code’ motivated fictions about how work is organised and achieved , is exposing truths about its social and situated accomplishment ; and that recognising and acting on this is a material precondition for the success of the fifth ( ICT ) Kondratieff . Inescapably , though , this rests on accepting the logic of increasing productivity discussed above . Be that as it may , the motives for the state to experiment with new forms of systems procurement and development remain plausible , and we are at least entitled to claim that doing so would not be a threat to the ‘ecological dominance’ [ 30 , pp . 24 - 28 ] of capitalism over modern states , though possibly a threat to the ‘economic domination’ [ 30 , pp . 28 - 30 ) of large international systems houses . While achieving this may be difficult , there is no warrant to regard it as impossible or as structurally excluded by the nature and functions of the modern state . While the balance of probability must be that it will fail , there is a risk that it will be only too successful . And , as we saw earlier , even the SWPR state still , so far , spends substantial proportions of GDP . CONCLUSIONS The record of the information systems industry in designing and deploying large scale systems remains poor . This is especially visible in the public sector . The Participatory Design community has good grounds for claiming that it understands the reasons for these failures , and could systematically do better . Yet it has , for the most part , been reticent in putting itself forward . I argue that there is now scope for the PD community to make a collective effort to place itself at the centre of the design of large - scale information systems in the public sector . This represents a ‘reformist’ agenda within participatory design , with many ambiguities and uncertainties , but which may nevertheless be socially useful . It will only be achieved through a concerted strategy . Those aspects described above under the sub - heading ‘critical self - reflection’ – assessing the validity of our paradigm claims , identifying the specific causes of failure in conventional procurement , and analysing the costs and benefits – may be best addressed through a pilot research project to investigate these issues more thoroughly and establish a sound platform for moving forward . On that basis , an experimental strategy for real engagement could be rolled out . That would , among other things , involve achieving a working consensus within the community , providing clarity about what is on offer , integrating with other best practice that is consistent with our perspective , negotiating experimental procurement regimes and contracts , carrying out a pilot project in relatively protected conditions , escalating to progressively larger and more critical systems , retaining overall control of how the work is carried out , and preparing to face fierce competition from threatened rivals . There is nothing particularly startling about this strategy . The main significance would lie in forming the collective will to attempt it . Considering the changing role of the modern state , we may claim that this strategy would be challenging but should be achievable . 36 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This paper is written broadly in the context of the European Union Framework Programme 6 Information Society Technologies , Disappearing Computer II Programme , project 002057 ‘Palpable Computing – A new perspective on Ambient Computing’ and I am grateful to the EU for funding support . I am very grateful to Liam Bannon , Christian Heath , Paul Luff , David Randall , Ian Sommerville and Peter Tolmie for responding to my request for information about examples of large - scale systems informed by Participatory Design and ethnographic methods ; to Michael Christensen and Preben Mogensen for describing their experience with the Maersk project ; and to three anonymous reviewers . REFERENCES 1 . Bacon , Richard , MP . Speech in the UK Parliament Public Accounts Committee ( 29 Jun 2004 ) . Available at www . richardbacon . org . uk / speeches / it _ disasters . htm 2 . BBC Radio . ‘No confidence’ in new NHS computer . File on Four , broadcast 19 October 2004 , transcript at : http : / / news . bbc . co . uk / nol / shared / bsp / hi / pdfs / fileon4 _ 20041019 _ nhs _ it . pdf 3 . Beck , Eevi . P for Political : Participation is Not Enough . Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems 14 , 1 ( 2002 ) , 77 - 92 . 4 . Beyer , H . & K . Holtzblatt . Contextual Design : Defining Customer - Centered Systems . Morgan Kaufmann , San Francisco CA , 1998 . 5 . Beynon - Davies , P . Human error and information systems failure : the case of the London ambulance service computer - aided despatch system project . Interacting with Computers 11 ( 1999 ) , 699 - 720 . 6 . Bickerstaff , R . Thought for the day : the IT contracts hammer . ComputerWeekly . com ( 23 Nov 2004 ) . 7 . Blythin , S . , J . Hughes & M . Rouncefield . ‘Never mind all that ethno stuff : what does it mean and what do we do now ? ’ Ethnography in a Commercial Context . Interactions 4 , 3 ( May / June 1997 ) , 38 - 47 . 8 . Braverman , Harry . Labor and Monopoly Capital . Monthly Review Press , N . Y . , 1974 . 9 . Büscher , M . , P Mogensen & D Shapiro . Spaces of Practice , in Proceedings of ECSCW 2001 ( Bonn , September 2201 ) Kluwer Academic Press , Dordrecht , Netherlands , 139 - 158 . 10 . Butler , Marilyn . Austen , Jane ( 1775 - 1817 ) . Oxford Dictionary of National Biography , Oxford University Press , Oxford , 2004 . 11 . Callon , Michel . Some elements of a sociology of translation : domestication of the scallops and the fishermen of St Brieuc Bay , in John Law ( ed . ) Power , action and belief : a new sociology of knowledge ? Routledge , London , 1986 , 196 - 223 . 12 . Centre for Object Technology . Case 5 : Dragon – Object - Oriented Architecture of a Global Customer Service System , n . d . Available at http : / / www . cit . dk / COT / case5 - eng . html . 13 . Christensen , M . , A . Crabtree , C . Damm , K . Hansen , O . Madsen , P . Marqvardsen , P . Mogensen , E . Sandvad , L . Sloth & M . Thomsen . The M . A . D . Experience : Multiperspective Application Development in evo - lutionary prototyping , in Proceedings of ECOOP ' 98 , Brussels , Belgium , July 1988 . Springer - Verlag , Berlin . 14 . Coulter , J . Mind in Action . Polity Press , Cambridge , 1989 . 15 . Crabtree , A . Ethnography in Participatory Design , in Proceedings of PDC’98 ( Seattle WA , November 1998 ) , CPSR , Palo Alto CA , 93 - 105 . 16 . Cule , P . , Schmidt , R . , Lyytinen , A . & Keil , M . Strategies for heading off IS project failure . Information Systems Management 17 , 2 ( Spring 2000 ) , 65 - 73 . 17 . Eagleton , Terry . The English Novel : an Introduction . Blackwell Publishing , Oxford , 2005 . 18 . Finkelstein , A . & J . Dowell . A Comedy of Errors : the London Ambulance Service case study , in Proceedings of IWSSD - 8 ( 1996 ) , IEEE CS Press , 2 - 4 . 19 . Flowers , S . Software Failure / Management Failure : Amazing Stories and Cautionary Tales . Wiley , Chichester , 1996 . 20 . Freeman , Christopher & F . Louçã . As time goes by : from the industrial revolutions to the information revolution . Oxford University Press , Oxford , 2001 . 21 . Gibbs , W . W . Software’s chronic crisis . Scientific American 271 , 3 ( September 1994 ) , 86 - 95 . 22 . Goodwin , Bill . GPs may boycott NHS appointment system . ComputerWeekly . com ( 23 Nov 2004 ) . 23 . Granger , Richard , Director General for IT in the UK National Health Service , interviewed by the BBC ( broadcast 19 October 2004 ) , transcript at : http : / / news . bbc . co . uk / 1 / shared / spl / hi / programmes / file _ on _ 4 / transcripts / transcript _ richard _ granger . txt 24 . Greenbaum , J . & M . Kyng . Design at Work : Cooperative Design of Computer Systems . Lawrence Erlbaum , Mahwah NJ , 1991 . 25 . Haraway , Donna . Situated Knowledges : The science question in feminism and the privilege of partial perspective , in Symians , Cyborgs and Women : The Reinvention of Nature . Routledge , London , 1991 . 26 . Heath , C . & P . Luff . Collaboration and Control : Crisis management and multimedia technology in London Underground Line Control Rooms . Computer - Supported Cooperative Work : The Journal of Collaborative Computing 1 , 1 - 2 ( 1992 ) , 69 - 94 . 37 27 . Holtzblatt , K . & H . Beyer . Making Customer - Centered Design Work for Teams . Commun . ACM 36 , 10 ( October 1993 ) , 92 - 103 . 40 . Pavard , Bernard . A Cognitive Engineering Method - ology . ARAMIIHS - CNRS ( n . d . ) Available at http : / / www - sv . cict . fr / cotcos / pjs / MethodologicalApproaches / 28 . House of Commons Work and Pensions Committee . The Performance of the Child Support Agency , HC44 - 1 ( 19 Jan 2005 ) . 41 . Randall , D . , M . Rouncefield & J . Hughes . Chalk and Cheese : BPR and ethnomethodologically informed ethnography in CSCW . Proceedings of ECSCW ’95 ( Stockholm , September 1995 ) , Kluwer Academic Press , Dordrecht , Netherlands , 325 - 340 . 29 . InContext Enterprises Inc , http : / / www . incent . com / . 30 . Jessop , Bob . The Future of the Capitalist State . Polity , Oxford , 2002 . 42 . Rouncefield , M . , J . Hughes , T . Rodden & S . Viller . Working with ‘constant interruption’ : CSCW and the small office . The Information Society 11 , 3 ( 1995 ) , 173 - 188 . 31 . Johnson , J . Chaos : the dollar drain of IT project failures . Application Development Trends 2 , 1 ( January 1995 ) , 41 - 47 . 43 . Schmidt , R . , Lyytinen , K . , Keil , M . & Cule P . Identifying software project risks : an international Delphi study . J . Management Information Systems 17 , 4 ( Spring 2001 ) , 5 - 36 . 32 . Kensing , F . Participatory Design in a Commercial Context – a conceptual framework , in Proceedings of PDC2000 ( New York NY , November 2000 ) , CPSR , Palo Alto CA , 116 - 126 . 44 . Shapiro , D . The Limits of Ethnography : Combining Social Sciences for CSCW , in Proceedings of CSCW ’94 ( Chapel Hill NC , October 1994 ) ACM , New York NY , 417 - 428 . 33 . Kensing , F . , J . Simonsen & K . Bødker : Participatory Design at a Radio Station . Computer - Supported Cooperative Work : The Journal of Collaborative Computing 7 , 3 - 4 , 1998 , 243 - 271 . 34 . MacCabe , Colin . Realism and the Cinema : Notes on Some Brechtian Theses . Screen 15 , 2 ( Summer1974 ) , 7 - 27 . 35 . McCue , A . EDS under fire over £456m child support IT fiasco . silicon . com ( 18 Nov 2004 ) , http : / / management . silicon . com / government / 0 , 39024677 , 39126001 , 00 . htm 45 . Shapiro , D . , J . Hughes , D . Randall & R . Harper . Visual Re - Representation of Database Information : The Flight Data Strip in Air Traffic Control , in M . Tauber , D . Mahling & F . Arefi ( eds ) Cognitive Aspects of Visual Languages and Visual Interfaces . Elsevier Science , Amsterdam , 1994 , 349 - 376 . 46 . Suchman , Lucy . Plans and Situated Actions . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , 1988 . 36 . National Audit Office . Department of Health : Patient Choice at the Point of GP Referral . HC180 . The Stationery Office , London ( 19 Jan 2005 ) . 47 . Suchman , Lucy . Making a case : ‘knowledge’ and ‘routine’ work in document production , in P . Luff , J . Hindmarsh & C . Heath ( eds ) Workplace Studies : Recovering Work Practice and Informing System Design . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , 2000 , 29 - 45 . 37 . Naur , P . & B . Randell , ( eds ) . Software Engineering : Report on a Conference sponsored by the NATO Science Committee , Garmisch , Germany , 7 - 11 October 1968 . NATO Scientific Affairs Division , Brussels , 1969 . 48 . Tighe , I . 999 Rescue . Computer Bulletin 9 ( October 1997 ) . Available at www . bcs . org . 38 . OECD . Basic Structural Statistics ( January 2005 ) . Available at www . oecd . org . 49 . Weber , M . The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism . Routledge , London , 1992 ( 1904 ) . 39 . Page , D . , P . Williams & D . Boyd . Report of the public inquiry into the London ambulance service . UK South West Regional Health Authority , 1993 . 38