http : / / tso . sagepub . com Teaching Sociology DOI : 10 . 1177 / 0092055X09353890 2010 ; 38 ; 18 Teaching Sociology Stefanie Mollborn and Angel Hoekstra Large Sociology Classes " A Meeting of Minds " : Using Clickers for Critical Thinking and Discussion in http : / / tso . sagepub . com / cgi / content / abstract / 38 / 1 / 18 The online version of this article can be found at : Published by : http : / / www . sagepublications . com On behalf of : American Sociological Association can be found at : Teaching Sociology Additional services and information for http : / / tso . sagepub . com / cgi / alerts Email Alerts : http : / / tso . sagepub . com / subscriptions Subscriptions : http : / / www . sagepub . com / journalsReprints . nav Reprints : http : / / www . sagepub . com / journalsPermissions . nav Permissions : at UNIVERSITY COLORADO on February 4 , 2010 http : / / tso . sagepub . com Downloaded from ‘‘A Meeting of Minds’’ : Using Clickers for Critical Thinking and Discussion in Large Sociology Classes Stefanie Mollborn 1 and Angel Hoekstra 1 Abstract Because lecture - based teaching limits student learning , many instructors are interested in pedagogical strategies that support critical thinking , student participation , and group discussion in large classrooms . Audience response systems , or ‘‘clickers , ’’ are an emerging tool for addressing this problem , but predom - inant pedagogical models for clicker use developed in the natural sciences often do not encourage the ‘‘inquiry - guided learning’’ that is useful in sociology . This article introduces readers to clicker technology and outlines a new pedagogical model for clicker use designed to address sociological learning goals , including critical thinking , applications of concepts to real - life experiences , and critiques of sociological methods . The authors discuss the effects of clickers for classroom interaction and students’ experiences in three undergraduate sociology courses , using quantitative and qualitative data about students’ percep - tions of the effects of this pedagogical model on learning . The results suggest that the model positively affects participation , critical thinking , and classroom interaction dynamics . The authors conclude with practical suggestions for instructors considering implementing clickers in sociology courses . Keywords clickers , student response systems , active learning , student learning , critical thinking Many instructors struggle to improve students’ participation , understanding of course concepts , and critical thinking within the context of large classes , in which lecturing seems to represent the only practical option . The limitations of lectur - ing for student learning have been documented ( Boud 1981 ; McKeachie and Hofer 2002 ) , and recently scholars have begun turning to active , ‘‘inquiry - guided learning’’ ( Atkinson and Hunt 2008 ) . But how can teachers implement active learning in large classes ? Instructors across disci - plines have increasingly begun relying on a new technological tool , audience response systems , or ‘‘clickers , ’’ to increase attendance , participa - tion , engagement , and learning . However , learn - ing goals important to many sociologists , such as fostering critical thinking , applying course concepts to real - life experiences , and critiquing sociological methods , are not addressed by many of the clicker - based pedagogical models currently in use in the natural sciences . In this article , we describe how clickers work and introduce a new pedagogical model that sociologists can use to address discipline - specific learning goals . To illus - trate the model , we provide examples of clicker questions and discuss how they can be implemented 1 University of Colorado at Boulder Corresponding Author : Stefanie Mollborn , University of Colorado at Boulder , Sociology and Institute of Behavioral Science , 483 UCB , Boulder , CO 80309 - 0483 ; Email : mollborn @ colorado . edu Research Articles Teaching Sociology 38 ( 1 ) 18 – 27 (cid:2) American Sociological Association 2010 DOI : 10 . 1177 / 0092055X09353890http : / / ts . sagepub . com at UNIVERSITY COLORADO on February 4 , 2010 http : / / tso . sagepub . com Downloaded from in lectures . We present students’ assessments of the model’s effectiveness for learning on the basis of quantitative and qualitative data collected in three undergraduate sociology courses , and we conclude with practical tips for instructors . BACKGROUND Many college and university courses , like the three studied here , maintain large enrollments of 50 to several hundred students . In large classes , structural constraints challenge instructors who wish to teach in any manner other than a lecture format . Lecturing can sometimes be interspersed with discussions in which some students ask questions or make com - ments , but typically , few opportunities are available for students to critically evaluate , discuss , or apply what they are learning during class ( Trees and Jackson 2007 ) . Although it is easy to assume that the quiet , attentive audience before us is learning while we are teaching , some have argued that lectur - ingalonemaynotbeeffectiveenoughformakingourstudents’learning‘‘stick’’inthelongterm ( e . g . , Duncan 2005 ; Mazur 1997 ) . Instructors who teach large courses face additional challenges compared with smaller , seminar - style courses : It is more diffi - cult to track attendance , and students who miss class may have trouble learning course material and keep - ing up with assigned readings . Other basic learning goals , such as keeping students engaged ( Hoekstra 2008 ) and encouraging critical thinking during class ( Cooper and Robinson 2000 ) , are also difficult to facilitate in thelargegroup . In response to thesechal - lenges , sociology instructors are increasingly turning to ‘‘active learning’’ strategies or inquiry - guided learning ( Atkinson and Hunt 2008 ) . In the context of a traditional course , this often leads to pedagogical strategiesthat‘‘breakup’’lectureswithquestionsanddiscussion . In the past , some have asked students to answer questions by holding up colored cards , in an effort to encourage undergraduates to think actively during class , instead of remaining in a passive , infor - mation - receivingrole . However , recentresearchsug - gests that the use of audience response systems , popularly known as clickers , may be more effective for fostering participation and active learning in the social sciences ( Stowell and Nelson 2007 ) . A clicker is a battery - powered device containing buttons ( for example , marked A , B , C , D , and E ) that can be used to ask students questions during class . The instructor attaches a receiver unit to a computer and projector , and clicker software runs simultaneously with a slide show program such as Microsoft PowerPoint . When an instructor wants to ask a clicker question , he or she projects a slide con - tainingthequestionandstartsatimer . Underexisting pedagogical models for clicker useinthe natural sci - ences , students are usually encouraged to talk with one another about clicker questions before submit - ting their answers . A receiver unit compiles the re - sponses , and the instructor can then project a histogram or bar chart onto a screen to display the breakdown of students’ votes . Depending on the pedagogical strategy used with an audience response system , this learning tool can be used to add variety to the learning environment ( by increas - ing audiovisual stimulation ) , encourage critical thinking ( by discussing clicker voting patterns ) , reward regular attendance ( by giving students credit for answering clicker questions ) , and motivate stu - dents to read and learn course material . Although clickers are a promising new technol - ogy , they are simply a pedagogical tool . Instructors who use clickers must think carefully about the pedagogical strategies they will use . Standard pedagogical strategies for clicker use have evolved in the natural sciences ( e . g . , Duncan 2005 ; Mazur 1997 ) , using peer discussion of course concepts through ‘‘ConcepTests . ’’ ConcepTest questions are multiple - choice clicker questions that ask students to apply course material . Designed to fos - ter problem - based learning , ConcepTests prompt students to use what they are learning during class instead of waiting for homework or exams to do so ( Hoekstra 2008 ) . In a recent book , Bruff ( 2009 ) provided an overview of much of what we have learned about clickers thus far ; readers can consult this book for general information about clicker pedagogy . Overall , clickers provide effective opportunities for applied learning in large courses . Recent research suggests that clicker use may be beneficial for enhancing students’ understanding of course concepts ( Gauci et al . 2009 ) , even when none of the students in a peer discussion group originally knew the correct answer ( Smith et al . 2009 ) . A PEDAGOGICAL MODEL FOR CLICKER USE IN SOCIOLOGY When teaching with clickers for the first time , the first author wrote several ConcepTest - style questions assessing students’ correct application of sociological theories and concepts . Students Mollborn and Hoekstra 19 at UNIVERSITY COLORADO on February 4 , 2010 http : / / tso . sagepub . com Downloaded from worked hard at answering these questions , but they seemed intensely focused on getting the cor - rect answer at the expense of thinking critically about the concepts they were applying . Using ConcepTest - style questions in sociology resulted in a learning community that felt examination ori - ented , rather than a cooperative exploration of course material , and these questions seemed too ‘‘detached’’ from real - life experience . This initial attempt to apply a pedagogical model developed in the natural sciences to clicker use in a sociology course fell short because the pedagogy attached to clicker use must be designed to address discipline - specific learning goals . Many sociology instruc - tors support constructivist approaches to learning , which argue that students should regularly prac - tice applying , discussing , evaluating , and critiqu - ing course concepts in the classroom ( Anderson 1987 ) . The pedagogical model for clicker use described below outlines clicker question types specifically designed to help students use their sociological imaginations . Following Mills’s ( 2000 : 213 ) original directive , our pedagogical model pushes students to resist resting ‘‘content with existing classifications’’ by encouraging them to ‘‘criticize and clarify’’ their existing cog - nitive schemas for sociological concepts . The model does this by interspersing clicker questions with lecture segments , small - and large - group discussions of course concepts , and instructor metanarratives about why clickers are being used . As we will show , our pedagogical model for clicker use follows several of the strat - egies offered by Bean ( 1996 ) for encouraging crit - ical thinking , by conceptualizing clicker questions as ‘‘tasks’’ that ( 1 ) ‘‘let students link concepts in Figure 1 . Learning Goals , Clicker Question Types , and Sample Questions LEARNING GOAL QUESTION TYPES ADDRESSING IT SAMPLE QUESTIONS Attendance and participation □ All question types Understanding course material □ Reading quiz questions □ Concept test - like questions Critical thinking about theories and concepts □ Opinion questions □ Past experience questions □ Student - designed questions Reading quiz question : In the reading , what gender combination led to the lowest likelihood of negotiating , as well as a poor evaluation if the job candidate does negotiate ? A . Female evaluator , female candidate B . Female evaluator , male candidate C . Male evaluator , female candidate D . Male evaluator , male candidate E . There were no differences Relating material to real - life experiences and data □ Demographic questions □ Past experience questions □ Student - designed questions Opinion question : How much do you personally think cultural factors explain differences in evidence of violent behaviors between men and women ? A . Not much at all B . A little C . They are sometimes useful D . They explain most of what we see E . Don’t know / other Critiquing sociological theories and methods □ Student - designed questions □ Demographic questions □ Past experience questions Past experience question When you were growing up , which of your parents earned the most money ? □ Opinion questions A . Don’t have two opposite - sex parents / one or both didn’t work / varied from year to year B . Dad usually earned a lot more C . Dad usually earned a little more D . Mom usually earned a little more E . Mom usually earned a lot more Improving the learning experience □ Instant feedback questions □ Reading quiz questions □ Concept test - like questions □ Past experience questions □ Opinion questions Concept test - style question : Does the sex labeling of occupations affect supply - side gender discrimination , demand - side gender discrimination , or both ? A . Supply side only B . Demand side only C . Both ( correct answer ) D . Neither E . Don’t know / other Figure 1 . Learning goals , clicker question types , and sample questions 20 Teaching Sociology 38 ( 1 ) at UNIVERSITY COLORADO on February 4 , 2010 http : / / tso . sagepub . com Downloaded from [ a ] course to their personal experiences , ’’ 2 ) pro - vide opportunities for ‘‘students to teach difficult concepts to [ other ] new learners , ’’ 3 ) ‘‘have stu - dents role - play unfamiliar points of view , ’’ and 4 ) result in ‘‘raw data’’ that can be used to foster critical analysis of what is being learned ( p . 131 ) . Although every instructor has a different set of learning goals , many sociologists would likely support a core set of teaching and learning goals for sociology . In Figure 1 , we outline basic learning goals , such as wanting students to attend , participate , and develop thorough knowledge of course material . We also articulate more advanced goals , such as fostering critical thinking , critiquing sociological methods , helping students relate course material to real - life experiences , and encouraging discussions of clicker questions . As advocated by Atkinson and Hunt’s ( 2008 ) inquiry - guided learning , our pedagogical model envisions clicker use as a means to cultivate ‘‘increasingly indepen - dent questioning and constructing’’ of conceptual knowledge . For clickers to be useful in sociology , the ped - agogy attached to them must move beyond a ‘‘problem - based’’ model to incorporate disci - pline - specific learning goals . Figure 1 introduces seven types of clicker questions , which can be used to address the specific goals listed in the figure . Our pedagogical model consists not only of specific types of clicker questions but is designed to promote critical sociological thinking ( Grauerholz and Bouma - Holtrop 2003 : 491 , 493 ) by using clicker questions to help students ‘‘eval - uate , reason , and question ideas and information . ’’ By examining clicker question response data within a small group or large class , participation is encouraged in a manner that helps students apply sociological concepts and fosters greater awareness for how social and cultural contexts shape beliefs and behavior . The pedagogical model does this by interweaving clicker questions during class with a combination of short lectures , small - group discussions , large - group discussions , and instructor metanarratives about why clickers are used so as to foster active learning and inde - pendent critical thinking . Question Types Similar to the ConcepTests used in the natural sci - ences , concept test questions are typically used after ideas or theories have been introduced in lec - ture . Accompanied by small - group discussion , these questions encourage students to solidify their knowledge by applying course concepts or theories to new empirical situations . Examples of these and other question types can be found in Figure 1 . Note that when students are given par - ticipation credit for answering clicker questions , it is important to write as fully inclusive a set of response options as possible , so that everyone can ‘‘click in’’ an answer . Reading quiz questions evaluate students’ knowledge of material from assigned readings . Although any course material is fair game , our pedagogical model promotes assessing students’ knowledgeofthemostimportantconceptsandfind - ings from assigned readings . With this approach , the dual purposes of motivating students to do the reading and teaching them to read carefully to iden - tify major themes and concepts are met . A sample question about an article by Bowles , Babcock , and Lai ( 2007 ) can be found in Figure 1 . With these questions , response options need not be exhaustive , because students are given credit only for correct answers . Opinion questions solicit students’ perceptions of sociological ideas and findings to initiate dis - cussion in a manner that encourages critical think - ing of course concepts . Opinion questions can be asked before starting a new unit , after a lecture , or both to ascertain whether students’ opinions have changed . They can also be used to teach stu - dents how to critique survey question wording or evaluate a theoretical explanation for an empirical finding ; the latter approach is addressed by the sample question in Figure 1 . Opinion questions never have correct answers . Instead , the histo - grams of response data that emerge are used to prompt large - group discussions about the break - down of opinions , beliefs , and values that exist in the learning community . In this way , the response data generated by the clicker question can be used to push students to thoughtfully con - sider the social and cultural contexts that have shaped their beliefs . The next two question types capitalize onthe fact thataclassfullofstudentsisavalidsociologicaldataset , from which instructors can gather useful infor - mation as fodder for discussion . Demographic ques - tions canbeusedtoillustratedifferencesbetweenthe student population and the U . S . population , to relate course material to personal data , or to critique research methods . For example , using a modified question from the 2000 U . S . census , we asked stu - dents to use clickers to indicate their race . Because Mollborn and Hoekstra 21 at UNIVERSITY COLORADO on February 4 , 2010 http : / / tso . sagepub . com Downloaded from the 2000 U . S . census question design didnot include the term Hispanic or Latino / a in the question about race , we were able to use this question to prompt in - class discussion about the social construction of racial and ethnic categories . By displaying a slide containing the actual 2000 U . S . census data and overlaying the histogram of newly collected student responses , we were able to hold an effective discus - sion about the nature of research methodology and survey question design . By answering past experience questions and viewing the resulting histogram of responses , stu - dents can determine how their experiences com - pare with those of others in the class . When used to assess theories , past experience questions allow for real - time hypothesis testing in a manner that fosters critical thinking about the generaliz - ability ( or lack thereof ) of sociological theories to different study populations . The sample ques - tion in Figure 1 pushes students to critique theo - ries about the household division of labor by soliciting data on students’ own families of origin . Sometimes the limit of five response options nec - essarily forces a diverse catchall category ( see Figure 1 ) , but this limitation can be used to foster critical thinking if the class discusses the implica - tions of survey methodology for potentially mar - ginalizing atypical groups . Response options for opinion , demographic , and past experience clicker questions can be further divided by social catego - ries ( e . g . , age , gender ) to test ideas about group differences . For example , we have divided yes - or - no questions by gender ( resulting in four response options ) . Ensuing in - class discussions of the relative proportions of ‘‘yes’’ and ‘‘no’’ responses in each gender category are used to reveal similarities and differences in gendered experiences . In this way , clicker questions can be used to help students ‘‘perceive and understand that their individual life choices , circumstances , and troubles are shaped by larger [ social ] forces , ’’ such as race , class , and gender ( Grauerholz and Bouma - Holtrop 2003 : 493 ) . In upper - level classes , instructors can encour - age students to design their own clicker questions to further explore ideas learned in class . This can be done in the form of an assignment in which students write their own clicker questions or as a standing invitation whereby students are invited to create clicker questions ‘‘on the fly’’ ( most clicker technologies allow instructors to write and run questions on the spot ) . Student - designed questions can be used to support the learning goals of encouraging critical thinking , relating course material to real - life experiences , and empirically testing hypotheses discussed in class . Finally , instant feedback questions can be used to gather information useful for improving a course . When instructors want feedback from students , clickers provide an efficient means for soliciting anony - mous information . Instructors can choose to dis - play the histogram of students’ responses and hold a discussion about how the instructor or stu - dents could improve the class , or they can choose to keep the response information private . A Demonstration of the Model How can these various question types be inte - grated into a single class session ? An example from an introductory sociology of gender class illustrates the interweaving of lecture , clicker questions , and discussions . The instructor starts a unit on gender and the household division of labor with a 5 - minute lecture segment relating household labor to an earlier unit on the work - place . Students then collaborate in large - group discussion to create an inclusive definition of household labor . Responses are listed on the black - board , and students are encouraged to include ‘‘invisible’’ types of labor , such as kin - keeping . Next , the instructor uses a past experience question asking students to report which of their parents does more household labor on the basis of the definition the class just created , discussing their families’ situations with their neighbors . Revealing the distribution of responses , the instructor leads a large - group discussion of gender inequality in household labor . Students are encouraged to offer real - life information about why the divisions of labor might have been ineq - uitable in their families ( e . g . , families trying to maximize income ) . The instructor uses this dis - cussion as a springboard for 10 minutes of lecture on human capital explanations for who does the housework . Then , a concept test question is used to test students’ understanding of this theory by applying it to a new empirical situation in which the woman outearns the man . To cap off the lesson , an opinion question encompassing small - group discussions of students’ answers prompts students to consider how useful they personally think human capital explanations are for explaining who does housework . The concluding large - group discussion helps students identify shortcomings in the human capital explanation . Lasting about 45 22 Teaching Sociology 38 ( 1 ) at UNIVERSITY COLORADO on February 4 , 2010 http : / / tso . sagepub . com Downloaded from minutes , this example addresses all but the last of the goals from Figure 1 . ASSESSMENT Four sources of data , gathered from three under - graduate sociology classes at a large public uni - versity in 2007 and 2008 , offer initial evidence for the effectiveness of this pedagogical model . Methods included ( 1 ) participant observation of student and instructor behaviors pertaining to clicker use ; ( 2 ) survey questions soliciting anony - mous data on student attitudes about the course , the use of clickers , and the specific types of ques - tions used in our pedagogical model ( n = 350 , a 75 percent response rate ) ; ( 3 ) anonymous one - page free - writes asking students to assess clicker use and specific types of clicker questions ( n = 456 ) ; and ( 4 ) in - depth , semistructured qualitative interviews ( n = 10 ) with randomly selected stu - dents exploring a variety of topics related to click - ers . This multimethod approach to data collection generated a wealth of information on the effects of clickers with this pedagogical model , only some of which is presented here because of space constraints . More than three quarters of the students had used clickers in a previous course . Students’ per - ceptions of the overall pedagogical model being used with clickers were frequently positive . A sur - vey in four sections of an introductory sociology of gender course ( n = 294 ) asked , ‘‘How do you feel about answering questions using clickers in this class ? ’’ Within each section , about half of the respondents liked or loved using clickers , and another third were neutral . Sixteen to 25 per - cent disliked using clickers somewhat or a lot . Given that these students were required to use clickers to answer reading quiz questions in every class , these findings are surprisingly positive . In another course on the sociology of friendship that did not use graded quiz questions , we found students to be even more positive about clickers . The pedagogical model proposed here views clicker questions as ‘‘jumping - off points’’ for crit - ical thinking , discussion , and collaborative analy - sis . For sociology students , a key benefit of using clickers is the public display of student responses . When histograms of responses are displayed , their implications can be discussed , and students can get real - time feedback on their understanding of course concepts . Opinion and past experience questions are particularly effective at prompting whole - class discussions , because students see instant results from their own demographic con - firming or refuting the ideas they are studying . One interviewee described this powerful effect : [ Histograms ] show where everybody’s at and give us real specifics . Like , we read statistics in books all the time . . . [ but ] where are they getting their information from ? Who are their subjects ? We are sit - ting in this classroom right now , discussing this question , and [ the graph of responses ] is giving us real data . Although the responses generated by a socioeco - nomically privileged group of young people may not reflect the U . S . population , students are still prompted to think critically about the extent to which sociological theories and concepts fit the experiences of ‘‘people like me . ’’ Our pedagogical model strives to foster atten - dance and participation by awarding students points for answering clicker questions . As a result , the number of students attending these ‘‘clicker classes’’ was high . The clicker survey ( n = 294 ) asked , ‘‘How has the use of clickers affected your attendance in this class ? ’’ Across four sec - tions of the gender course , 50 percent to 55 per - cent of respondents felt that clicker use had a strong or somewhat strong positive effect on attendance . Data from a third course on drugs in society asked this same question . Across three sections , 53 percent of these students ( n = 90 ) said that clickers had a strong or somewhat strong positive effect on their desire to attend class regu - larly . However , instructors implementing clickers should be aware that student ‘‘backlash’’ against attendance tracking was rare but consistent in our findings ( 1 percent to 7 percent of the sample said that clickers had a negative effect on their attendance , depending on course section ) . Socially , clicker use alters the learning envi - ronment because it brings more students to class and encourages them to take the course more seriously . Observation confirms that clicker use affects the learning community by generating greater participation during class . Clicker use increases participation in two ways : ( 1 ) It allows shyer students who might never contribute ver - bally to actively participate as they answer clicker questions and see their opinions reflected in the resulting histograms of clicker responses , and ( 2 ) these histograms reveal diversity in students’ Mollborn and Hoekstra 23 at UNIVERSITY COLORADO on February 4 , 2010 http : / / tso . sagepub . com Downloaded from views and experiences , prompting students to speak up to explain their responses . One student wrote , ‘‘The use of clickers gave me a chance to express my opinion . I am shy and don’t like to speak in front of large groups , so using clickers gave me the opportunity to feel like I contrib - uted . ’’ In interviews , students claimed time and again that clickers fundamentally change large - group interaction to foster a more active learning environment : More bodies are present , more voi - ces are being heard , and students are interacting with one another about what they are learning during class . Overall , many students felt that using clickers under this pedagogical model increases engage - ment in the class and fosters feelings of solidarity in the learning community . As a student wrote , ‘‘Using clickers made the class feel more per - sonal , as you could actually see people’s opin - ions , anonymously and immediately . I really enjoyed the ‘safe’ feeling to the environment . ’’ Another student related this community feeling back to the learning process : ‘‘That’s what col - lege is supposed to be about , a meeting of minds , not just one mind . ’’ Because large classes can feel isolating when students are not given oppor - tunities to interact , clickers and other pedagogi - cal tools that can turn large classes into ‘‘meetings of minds’’ are particularly useful for fostering critical thinking within our discipline . Many students identified the positive effect clicker use has on their ability to think critically and apply sociological ideas to their own experi - ences . Across two sections of the introductory gender course ( n = 155 ) , 60 percent to 80 percent replied that opinion and past experience ques - tions were very or somewhat useful ‘‘for helping you to think and learn . ’’ An interview quotation illustrates the power of clicker questions for helping students use their sociological imagina - tions to critique personal experiences : I use it for the purpose of looking at my own life and being like , ‘‘Hey , this is gen - dered . ’’ ’Cause even though people say this is no - brain stuff [ and ] they see it every day . . . they don’t really think about these things in terms of their own lives . They might think about it for other people . . . but they don’t think of themselves as being gendered or playing a role at all . I like [ using clickers ] because it makes me look at my family and be like , ‘‘Hey , we’re very gendered , we’re structured the way society says we’re sup - posed to be structured . ’’ Overall , we believe the prompting of both small - and large - group discussions about course concepts is the most important strength of the proposed pedagogical model for clicker use in sociology . In our discipline , the crucial stage for critical thinking and discussion occurs after the histogram of student responses is posted , because viewing histograms of response data facilitates critical thinking and discussion of sociological concepts . In our observations , the posting of clicker question response data creates a useful ‘‘space’’ for critical thinking that is highly beneficial to the learning process . Students want to examine ( and , for some , explain ) the responses they have chosen , and dis - cussing the class’s responses reveals similarities , diversity , norms , social change , and so on . Facilitating effective clicker - prompted discussion requires the instructor to be vigilant , both in encouraging students to participate verbally and in seeking to elicit a diversity of views , but we feel that the resulting discussions are more pro - ductive than relying on a simple lecture method . In a free - write , one student in the drugs course summarized the effectiveness of clicker - prompted discussions for learning : I think asking people to offer explanations for their clicker choices is important and should be done even more . Although people weren’t always eager to speak up , when discussions started on controversial issues , it led to some of the most enlightening moments of the course . STRATEGIES FOR INCREASING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF CLICKERS In this final section , we highlight specific behav - iors and strategies sociology instructors can use to make clickers more effective . For a more complete list of suggestions , download Hoekstra and Mollborn ( 2009 ) . First , the critical thinking encouraged by clicker use is only as good as the clicker questions instruc - tors write and the teaching plans they embed them in . Faculty members must set aside adequate time to write questions and decide how they will be 24 Teaching Sociology 38 ( 1 ) at UNIVERSITY COLORADO on February 4 , 2010 http : / / tso . sagepub . com Downloaded from usedtoachieve teaching goals . Writingclickerques - tions can be time - consuming , because it is some - times difficult to determine how to construct response options . However , questions and response options need not be flawless : Imperfect question wording can be used to spur critical thinking about surveyquestiondesign . Becauseteachingwithclick - ers usually involves reducing nuanced answers to five categories , students’ critical thinking about clicker question design echoes larger debates among sociologists about the usefulness of survey method - ology . Here , instructors can create useful ‘‘teaching moments’’byencouragingstudentstodiscussthead - vantages and disadvantages of using quantitative methods that feature closed - ended responses . Second , our pedagogical model promotes the regular use of instructor metanarratives to appro - priately frame the use of clickers for students , explaining why clickers are being used . This is particularly important for social science instruc - tors who are using clickers for the first time , as many students have been socialized to use clickers under the ‘‘problem - based’’ clicker pedagogy used in the natural sciences . In our experience , students benefit most from clicker use when instructors explain how clicker - prompted class discussions may help them learn concepts more effectively . Citing research on the benefits of clicker use may be helpful . Instructors should strive to help students recognize the value of active learning and the specific learning goals that clicker ques - tions are designed to achieve . Third , the second author’s supplemental obser - vations of a variety of courses featuring clicker use under different pedagogical strategies suggest that students respond most positively to clickers when their role in evaluating students is clearly delineated ahead of time . See Hoekstra and Mollborn ( 2009 ) for helpful suggestions for eval - uation using clickers . Fourth , the syllabus should state that having another student ‘‘click in’’ responses when a stu - dent is absent is considered cheating . Data col - lected for the second author’s dissertation suggest that this behavior occurs in clicker courses across disciplines . Because clickers are a relatively new technology , many students do not yet con - sider ‘‘clicking in for someone else’’ a form of academic dishonesty , so instructors need to make this expectation explicit . Fifth , instructors will need to think through whether to include questions with right and wrong answers in their models for clicker use . When students are awarded additional points for correct responses , this affects classroom interaction dynamics because the amount of stress that stu - dents attach to clicker use rises . Finally , instructors must consider issues of confidentiality and ethics , especially with regard to past experience questions . Students said that clicker questions asking about anonymous but highly personal information ( e . g . , past sexual experiences or drug use ) were often the most interesting , memorable , and useful questions for learning in sociology . However , because such questions can evoke strong emotions for some stu - dents , instructors need to take care to always include a response option that offers participation credit for those who prefer not to respond . For example , when introducing a unit on gender and violence , the first author used an anonymous clicker question asking how many students per - sonally knew a woman who had been physically abused by an intimate partner . When the majority of the class answered ‘‘yes , ’’ the histogram of re - sponses made a strong impression about the ubiq - uity of intimate partner violence in our society . In cases such as these , instructors should work to ensure that students’ responses to sensitive ques - tions remain private . This can be done either by using an anonymous polling option ( available on some clicker systems ) or by asking students to trade clickers with a neighbor . CONCLUSION Audience response systems , or clickers , are powerfully changing the learning process in many natural science courses . Many instructors in the social sciences are beginning to take note of these benefits and considering using clickers in sociology , but they should carefully contemplate how to implement this technology in a manner that will be most beneficial for learn - ing in our discipline . To be effective in sociology , the pedagogy attached to clickers should incorpo - rate students’ own voices during the learning pro - cess by means of a wider variety of clicker question types than is typically used in the natural sciences . In this article , we identify a variety of clicker question types , which can be combined with small - and large - group discussions and instructor metanarratives to create a useful peda - gogical model for clicker use in sociology . We also offer preliminary evidence that this model Mollborn and Hoekstra 25 at UNIVERSITY COLORADO on February 4 , 2010 http : / / tso . sagepub . com Downloaded from fosters learning and critical thinking in large under - graduate sociology courses . Although we chose to focus on students’ own assessments of the peda - gogical model’s effectiveness for their learning , objective measures of the effects of clickers on learning in sociology are still needed . Assessments of the potential effects of clicker use for other learning environments within sociology , such as smaller , more advanced classes , will help clarify the potential benefits of this pedagogical model . In conclusion , clicker technologies are an especially good fit for the discipline because a class full of students represents a valid socio - logical data set that can be used to prompt dis - cussion and critical thinking of sociological theories and concepts . If an instructor is already using a form of slideshow technology , clicker questions can be integrated into existing course formats with relative ease . Although some in - structors may not consider all of the learning goals we identified to be important for their courses , whenever a pedagogical framework consisting of closed - ended clicker questions is appropriate , instructors can use this flexible tool to address any learning goal they choose . Effective use of clickers moves students away from feeling like ‘‘just one mind , ’’ isolated in a sea of strangers . Combined with effective pedagogy , clickers can be used to ‘‘transform everyday [ experiences and ] consciousness into sociological self - consciousness’’ ( Dandaneau 2009 : 9 ) in a manner that is powerfully effective for the teaching and learning of sociology . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS An earlier version of the research was presented at the 2008 meeting of the Society for the Study of Social Problems . We thank Devon Thacker for her comments . NOTES Reviewers for this article were , in alphabetical order , Michael Decesare and Matthew Oware . REFERENCES Anderson , Charles W . 1987 . ‘‘Strategic Teaching in Science . ’’ Pp . 73 - 91 in Strategic Teaching and Learning : Cognitive Instruction in the Content Areas . Alexandria , VA : Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development . Atkinson , Maxine P . and Andrea N . Hunt . 2008 . ‘‘Inquiry - Guided Learning in Sociology . ’’ Teaching Sociology 36 ( 1 ) : 1 - 7 . Bean , John C . 1996 . Engaging Ideas : The Professor’s Guide to Integrating Writing , Critical Thinking , and Active Learning in the Classroom . San Francisco , CA : Jossey - Bass . Boud , David . 1981 . Developing Student Autonomy in Learning . London : Kogan Page . Bowles , Hannah Riley , Linda Babcock and Lei Lai . 2007 . ‘‘Social Incentives for Gender Differences in the Propensity to Initiate Negotiations : Sometimes It Does Hurt to Ask . ’’ Organizational Behavior And Human Decision Processes 103 ( 1 ) : 84 - 103 . Bruff , Derek . 2009 . Teaching with Classroom Response Systems : Creating Active Learning Environments . San Francisco , CA : Jossey - Bass . Cooper , James L . and Pamela Robinson . 2000 . ‘‘The Argument for Making Large Classes Seem Small . ’’ Pp . 5 - 16 in Strategies for Energizing Large Classes : From Small Groups to Learning Communities , edited by MacGregor , J . San Francisco , CA : Jossey - Bass . Dandaneau , Steven P . 2009 . ‘‘Sisyphus Had It Easy : Reflections of Two Decades of Teaching the Sociological Imagination . ’’ Teaching Sociology 37 ( 1 ) : 8 - 19 . Duncan , Douglas . 2005 . Clickers in the Classroom : How to Enhance Science Teaching Using Classroom Response Systems . San Francisco , CA : Pearson Education . Gauci , Sally A . , Arianne M . Dantas , David A . Williams and Robert E . Kemm 2009 . ‘‘Promoting Student - Centered Active Learning in Lectures with a Personal Response System . ’’ Advances in Physiology Education 33 ( 1 ) : 60 - 71 . Grauerholz , Liz and Sharon Bouma - Holtrop . 2003 . ‘‘Exploring Critical Sociological Thinking . ’’ Teaching Sociology 31 ( 4 ) : 485 - 96 . Hoekstra , Angel . 2008 . ‘‘VibrantStudentVoices : Exploring Effects of the Use of Clickers in Large College Courses . ’’ Learning , Media and Technology 33 ( 4 ) : 329 - 41 . Hoekstra , Angel and Stefanie Mollborn . 2009 . ‘‘A Practical Guide to Implementing Clickers in the Sociology Classroom . ’’ Available at http : / / www . colorado . edu / ibs / hb / mollborn / papers / Practical % 20 Guide % 20to % 20Implementing % 20Clickers . doc . Mazur , Eric . 1997 . Peer Instruction : A User’s Manual . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Prentice Hall . McKeachie , Wilbert James and Barbara K . Hofer . 2002 . McKeachie’s Teaching Tips : Strategies , Research , and Theory for College and University Teachers . Boston : Houghton Mifflin . Mills , C . Wright . 2000 . The Sociological Imagination . Oxford , UK : Oxford University Press . Smith , M . K . , W . B . Wood , W . K . Adams , C . Wieman , J . K . Knight , N . Guild , and T . T . Su . 2009 . ‘‘Why Peer 26 Teaching Sociology 38 ( 1 ) at UNIVERSITY COLORADO on February 4 , 2010 http : / / tso . sagepub . com Downloaded from Discussion Improves Student Performance on In - Class Concept Questions . ’’ Science 323 ( 5910 ) : 122 - 24 . Stowell , Jeffrey R . and Jason M . Nelson . 2007 . ‘‘Benefits of Electronic Audience Response Systems on Student Participation , Learning , and Emotion . ’’ Teaching of Psychology 34 ( 4 ) : 253 - 58 . Trees , April and Michelle Jackson . 2007 . ‘‘The Learning Environment in Clicker Classrooms : Student Processes of Learning and Involvement in Large University - Level Courses Using Student Response Systems . ’’ Learning , Media and Technology 32 ( 1 ) : 21 - 40 . Bios Stefanie Mollborn is an assistant professor in the Department of Sociology and a faculty member in the Health and Society Program of the Institute of Behavioral Science at the University of Colorado at Boulder . Her research on teenage childbearing and the life course has been published in Social Psychology Quarterly , the Journal of Marriage and Family , and the Journal of Health and Social Behavior . She teaches social psychology , gender , and health , and she is partic - ularly interested in researching strategies to improve stu - dents’ active learning in large classes . Angel Hoekstra is a doctoral candidate in the Department of Sociology at the University of Colorado at Boulder . Her research on the effects of clickers for active engagement and student learning has also been published in the British peer - reviewed journal Learning , Media , and Technology . Angel enjoys teaching sociology courses , including Self in Modern Society , Drugs in US Society , and Sex and Gender . Her chief theoretical interests include classical sociological theory , postmodern theory , and sociological social psychology . Mollborn and Hoekstra 27 at UNIVERSITY COLORADO on February 4 , 2010 http : / / tso . sagepub . com Downloaded from