Scanning Probe Evolution in Biology J . K . H . Ho¨rber 1 and M . J . Miles 2 * Twenty years ago the ﬁrst scanning probe instrument , the scanning tunneling micro - scope , opened up new realms for our perception of the world . Atoms that had been abstract entities were now real objects , clearly seen as distinguishable individuals at particular positions in space . A whole family of scanning probe instruments has been developed , extending our sense of touching to the scale of atoms and molecules . Such instruments are especially useful for imaging of biomolecular structures because they can produce topographic images with submolecular resolution in aqueous environments . Instruments with increased imaging rates , lower probe - specimen force interactions , and probe conﬁgurations not constrained to planar surfaces are being developed , with the goal of imaging processes at the single - molecule level—not only at surfaces but also within three - dimensional volumes—in real time . T he importance of the development of scanning probe microscopy ( SPM ) is comparable to that of electron micros - copy and even optical microscopy . SPM measures the near - field physical interactions between the scanning probe tip and the atoms that lie beneath it as it moves . Atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) ( 1 ) , a member of the SPM family , has become particularly impor - tant for the study of biological systems . AFM produces three - dimensional ( 3D ) images of a surface at atomic resolution ; even subatomic resolution has been reported for atomic orbit - als on a silicon surface ( 2 ) . Its major advan - tage is that it can produce high - resolution topographic images in aqueous and physio - logically relevant environments without the need to stain the specimen ; the AFM contrast mechanism does not depend on atomic num - ber , but simply senses the specimen surface through the force between it and a sharp probe that scans the surface . Local probes , the central feature of all scanning probe instruments , are small - sized objects such as the ends of sharp tips ; the interaction of the tip with the surface of a sample can be sensed at selected positions . Proximity to or contact with the sample is required for high spatial resolution . The prin - cipal idea is quite old and had appeared in literature from time to time , in the context of bringing a source of electromagnetic radia - tion in close contact with a sample , but was not pursued until recently . Nanoscale local probes require atomically stable tips and high - precision manipulation devices . The latter are based on mechanical deforma - tions of springlike struc - tures by given forces— piezoelectric , mechanical , electrostatic , or magnetic— to ensure continuous and re - producible displacements with precision down to the pico - meter level . They also re - quire effective acoustic , ther - mal , and vibration isolation . The resolution that can be achieved with local probes is primarily a function of the effective probe size , its dis - tance from the sample , and the distance dependence of the interaction between probe and sample measured . The last can be considered to cre - ate an effective aperture by selecting a small feature of the overall geometry of the probe tip , which then corre - sponds to the effective probe . The ability of AFM to yield images under ambient conditions or in solution was considered from the outset to provide an ideal tool for physical studies of biological specimens un - der physiological condi - tions . Contact - mode , con - stant - force AFM imaging could show processes in - duced by viral infection on live cells ( 3 ) and has achieved atomic - scale resolution images of cellu - lose microfibrils ( 4 ) . In re - cent years , high - resolution AFM imaging has also been achieved on bacterial mem - brane proteins ( 5 ) . Recently , the analysis of AFM images of 2D crystals of membrane proteins such as aquaporin - Z ( Fig . 1 ) has been developed to the extent that the free energy landscape can be derived for do - mains within single protein molecules . From the raw AFM data ( Fig . 1A ) , an average topograph for a single protein molecule is calculated ( Fig . 1B ) with pro - cessing techniques more commonly used in transmission electron microscopy . From this , the conformational space of the pro - tein can be derived by calculating the 1 Department of Physiology , Wayne State University School of Medicine , 5229 Scott Hall , 540 East Can - ﬁeld Avenue , Detroit , MI 48201 , USA . 2 H . H . Wills Physics Laboratory , University of Bristol , Tyndall Av - enue , Bristol BS8 1TL , UK . * To whom correspondence should be addressed . E - mail : m . j . miles @ bristol . ac . uk Fig . 1 . ( A ) High - resolution raw data AFM image of aquaporin - Z ( AqpZ ) 2D crystal . The circles indicate individual extracellular protein molecule surfaces . Scale bar , 10 nm ; full grayscale , 1 nm . ( B ) Topograph of a single protein from average of 1477 aligned trimers . Scale bar , 1 nm ; grayscale range , 0 . 01 to 0 . 07 nm . ( C ) Standard deviation map about the averaged structure in ( B ) . ( D ) Probability position map . Scale bar , 1 nm . ( E ) Free energy landscape calculated from ( D ) . ( F ) A monomer of the porin AqpZ atomic model with overlay of the full width at half - maximum outline . Crosses indicate high - probability positions ; the red line is the top prob - ability tracing line of loop C . Transmembrane helices are numbered in italics . Helices 1 and 2 are connected by loop A1 ; helices 3 and 4 are connected by loop A3 . Contour A2 corresponds to the protruding end of helix 3 out of the membrane surface . The colors of the helices indicate the pairing to form the loops . R EVIEW 7 NOVEMBER 2003 VOL 302 SCIENCE www . sciencemag . org 1002 standard deviation from this av - erage structure of all the protein topographs ( Fig . 1C ) . Similarly , the probability distribution of topographic peaks in the protein domains under thermal motion can be calculated ( Fig . 1D ) , and from this the free energy land - scape ( Fig . 1E ) can be derived . A comparison of this landscape can then be correlated with the atomic structure of the pro - tein ( Fig . 1F ) . In the application of AFM to live cells , the instrument has re - vealed new cellular structures and their function ( e . g . , an exo - cytotic fusion pore ) . Fusion of membrane - bound secretory ves - icles at the cell plasma mem - brane and consequent expulsion of vesicular contents is a funda - mental cellular process regulat - ing neurotransmission , enzyme secretion , and hormone release . Secretory vesicles dock and fuse at defined plasma membrane locations , following secretory stimuli . Electrophysiological stu - dies on single cells suggest the presence of fusion pores at the cell plasma membrane , which become continuous with the se - cretory vesicle membrane after stimulation of secretion . AFM performed at nanometer resolu - tion on live pancreatic acinar cells by Jena’s group ( 6 ) re - vealed the presence of the fusion pore at the apical plasma mem - brane , as well as its structure and dynamics . These studies showed pit - like structures containing typically three or four “depressions , ” 150 nm in diameter , at the apical plasma membrane in live pancre - atic acinar cells . The stimulation of secre - tion causes these depressions to dilate and to return to their resting size after complet - ing the process . Exposure of acinar cells to the actin depolymerizing agent cytochala - sin B results in decreased depression size and a loss in stimulable secretion , a process that can be followed by AFM observation . Zymogen granules , the membrane - bound secretory vesicles in exocrine pancreas , contain the starch - digesting enzyme amy - lase . Using amylase - specific immunogold labeling together with AFM , Jena’s group has also demonstrated localization of amy - lase at depressions after stimulation of se - cretion . These experiments confirm depres - sions to be the fusion pores in pancreatic acinar cells . Further studies in several lab - oratories reveal the presence of similar fu - sion pores in neuroendocrine cells . Fusion pores are the first cellular structures to have been identified by AFM as permanent structures at the cell plasma membrane of secretory cells , where membrane - bound se - cretory vesicles dock and fuse to release vesicular contents ( Fig . 2 ) . However , most biological structures are relatively soft and delicate , and typical imaging forces of tens of nanonewtons can distort or permanently destroy such structures . Recently , two complemen - tary approaches to imposing lower imag - ing forces have been developed . The first approach is based on increasing the effective quality factor ( Q ) of an oscillating cantilever in a liquid environ - ment . ( Q is the ratio of energy input and energy dissipation in a resonant sys - tem ; it is also a measure of the sharp - ness of the resonant peak amplitude . ) The second approach involves the de - velopment of an entirely new SPM known as photonic force microscopy ( PFM ) . Increased Force Sensitivity in Liquid The introduction of the intermittent - contact mode , often referred to as tapping mode , was an important development because it greatly reduced the shear forces on the specimen and , as a dynamic technique , also offered the pos - sibility of phase imaging . At each point in an image , the phase difference between the driv - ing force supplied to the cantilever and the response of the cantilever is related to the interaction between the tip of the probe and the specimen . The relationship between the phase shift and the nature of the tip - specimen interaction is complex ; however , images con - structed from the phase information are often of practical value in identifying regions of a similar chemical nature . The tapping mode was initially devel - oped for operation in air , and its eventual application in liquid brought the advantag - es of the technique to biologically relevant environments . However , oscillation of the cantilever in liquid incurs some disadvan - tages associated with damping of the can - Fig . 2 . AFM image of fusion pores at the apical plasma membrane of pancreatic acinar cells . Inset : schematic depiction of secretory vesicle docking and fusion at the fusion pore . Fusion pores or “depressions” ( blue arrow ) , 100 to 180 nm wide and 15 to 25 min in relative depth , are present with “pits” ( yellow arrows ) . ZG , zymogen granule . R E V I E W www . sciencemag . org SCIENCE VOL 302 7 NOVEMBER 2003 1003 tilever motion by the liquid . Higher forces are needed to drive the cantilever in liquid , and the damping of the motion results in a decreased Q factor . Thus , the resonant am - plitude peak of the cantilever is broadened so that the value of Q ranges from typically a few hundred in air to around 1 in liquid . Sensitivity to the nature of the tip - specimen interaction is greatly reduced , and the phase contrast becomes much weaker . The recent development of active reso - nance control when applied to the oscillat - ing cantilever in tapping mode in liquid ( 7 , 8 ) enables an increase in the effective value of the Q fac - tor so that tip - specimen forc - es are greatly reduced . The higher effective Q value of the cantilever in liquid is achieved by electronically amplifying and phase - shift - ing the cantilever position in - formation and feeding this back to the cantilever drive transducer in such a manner as to counteract the damping forces of the liquid . The use of this active - resonance ( ac - tive - Q ) technique reduces the deformation of soft biologi - cal and organic specimens , resulting in images that have higher resolution or would otherwise be unattainable ; the phase contrast in such im - ages is also greatly improved . The application of this tech - nique to the imaging of a gel of polystyrene in dekalin is shown in Fig . 3 . The gel was imaged swollen in dekalin in tapping mode . The image in Fig . 3A was obtained with - out the active - Q mode enabled and shows signs of the AFM tip deforming the gel . An image of the same area of the gel , acquired minutes later with the same tip but with the active - Q feedback enabled ( Fig . 3B ) , shows higher resolution features and essen - tiallynosignsofthetipdeformingthe gel . AFM in Three Dimensions Living cells are 3D structures , whereas AFM is a surface tool whose performance is directly coupled to the flatness of the surface investigated . Imaging inside cells is totally impossible because of the instrument’s me - chanical connection to the imaging tip . Therefore , a scanning probe microscope without a mechani - cal connection to the tip , working with ex - tremely small loading forces , would be an ideal complementary technique for AFM in studies of live cells . A PFM instrument with these attributes was recently developed at the European Molecular Biology Laboratory ( EMBL ) in Heidelberg . For PFM , the mechanical cantilever is replaced by the 3D trapping potential of a laser focus . The possibility of trapping and manipulating micrometer - sized particles ( beads ) with a laser focused into a fluid chamber was first described by Ashkin in 1986 ( 9 ) , the same year that AFM was introduced . The strength and 3D shape of the trapping potential can be determined from the difference in the refractive index between the bead and the fluid medium , the bead diameter , and the laser intensity and 3D profile . Depending on the application , the trapping potential—which is harmonic and therefore can be described by its spring constant—can be adjusted by changing the laser power . Usually its spring constant is two to three orders of magnitude lower than that of any commercially available AFM cantilevers . The beads used as tips can be as small as (cid:1) 10 nm in the case of high refractive index materials such as metals . PFM uses a 3D detection system for bead position with respect to trapping potential , allowing measurement of the value and direction of the force acting on the bead with subpiconewton precision on a time scale of microseconds . Beads used as scan - ning probe tips can be moved along a surface to make interaction force measurements between the tip and the surface in the pico - and subpico - newton force range . If latex or glass beads are used as tips , many standard chemical surface modifications are commercially available ; with a bead size of 200 to 400 nm , the objective used to focus the laser provides a good optical con - trol for the measurements . Fig . 3 . AFM images of a 30 % isotactic polystyrene gel in dekalin ( decahy - dronaphthalene ) imaged under dekalin , taken without ( A ) and with ( B ) active - Q feedback . Below each image is a line proﬁle ( the variation in height across a horizontal line taken across each image ) showing the higher spatial frequencies and thus resolution when the effective Q factor is enhanced . Scale bars , 1 (cid:2) m ; full grayscale , 75 nm . Fig . 4 . ( Left ) A 3D thermal noise image of an agar network , showing the volume from which a bead moving under thermal excitation is excluded . ( Right ) The trajectory of a bead trapped in an optical potential well within a gel , from which the local viscoelastic properties can be calculated . The start and latest positions in the trajectory of the particle are indicated by the red dot and arrow , respectively . R E V I E W 7 NOVEMBER 2003 VOL 302 SCIENCE www . sciencemag . org 1004 The image resolution obtained with these beads by scanning them across a surface while measuring the interaction forces is lim - ited by the interaction area between bead and sample and is also limited by thermal fluctu - ations , which can be up to 100 nm depending on the trapping potential . With a detection system giving a spatial resolution of better than 1 nm and a time resolution of 1 (cid:2) s , this limitation can be easily overcome by using the thermal fluctuations as a random scan generator for the exploration ( within millisec - onds ) of a small 3D volume of several tens of nanometers . Such a strategy opens up many new applications because the position proba - bility measured for a certain volume reflects the presence of other objects in this volume , the interaction potential with these objects , and the interaction with the surrounding me - dium . In this way , 3D polymer networks can be imaged ( Fig . 4 ) ( 10 ) , the mechanical properties of single molecules binding the bead to a surface ( 11 ) can be measured , and the viscosity of the membrane of living cells in areas smaller than 100 nm in diameter can be measured if beads are linked to single membrane components such as , for example , the LDL ( low - density lipoprotein ) receptor membrane protein . Such measurements were used to provide evi - dence for the existence of so - called “membrane raft structures , ” about 40 nm in diameter , which had long been proposed on the basis of biochem - ical evidence ( 12 ) . Ultrafast SPM Imaging Because scanning probe techniques enable control over environmental conditions , they can be used to follow processes in situ , in real time . A good example of this is the new understanding of polymer crystalliza - tion that has been gained by temporal res - olution of this process ( 13 ) . As the crystal - lization of an individual lamella is followed in a series of images ( 14 ) , the rate of growth is seen to vary in time for each lamella , as well as from lamella to lamella during the same time period . When follow - ing processes , the time resolution of any scanning probe microscope is hindered by the serial nature of the data collection—the very factor that allows the technique to bypass the diffraction limit that applies to conventional microscopes that use lenses . Two factors limit how fast an image can be collected : the response time of the in - teraction ( e . g . , of the cantilever in AFM ) and the resonant frequency of the scan stage . In the case of AFM , electronic control of the Q factor of the cantilever as described above can be used to reduce the effective Q of the cantilever in air ( 15 ) and hence reduce its response time ; this tech - nique was used to collect the images in movie S1 ( 14 ) . Complementary to this ap - proach , the mechanics of the microscope can be redesigned and optimized for rapid imaging with the use of smaller cantilevers and high – resonant frequency scan stages ( 16 ) . This has pushed the image rate of conventional AFM to (cid:1) 10 frames / s ( 17 ) , al - lowing remarkable temporal resolution of the mo - tion of motor proteins . Recently , the possibility of obtaining SPM images with millisec - ond resolution has been real - ized ( 18 ) , giv - ing access to macromolecu - lar relaxation time scales . Thisnewtech - nique uses the resonance of a microscan - ner to provide the fast scan axis of the image . Each line consists of one resonant sweep of the scanner with an amplitude of several mi - crometers , using the high stability and well - understood behavior of a resonator to provide the scan system rather than fighting against resonance ( as in the conventional approach ) . The first microscope to use this technique monitors a near - field optical in - teraction with the sample . Figure 5 shows a near - field optical image of part of a poly - mer spherulite collected with a convention - al SPM in (cid:1) 20 min and an image collected by the resonant scanning technique in just 8 . 3 ms . Microfabricated probes are being devel - oped to increase imaging rates and to lower probe - specimen force interactions . Such probes also allow the combination of dif - ferent instrument types—for instance , con - ventional AFM and a scanning electro - chemical microscopy ( SECM ) . The integra - tion of an electroactive area at an exactly defined distance above the apex of the atomic force microscope tip allows the dis - tance between electrode and probe to re - main constant regardless of the surface to - pography , which enables simultaneous electrochemical and AFM imaging in tap - ping mode . Because many biochemically relevant processes are based on electro - chemical conversion of molecules , tech - niques for gathering laterally resolved in - formation on coupled oxidation - reduction processes are of particular interest . As re - cently shown , the application of such di - functional tips ( 19 ) allows electrochemical images to also be recorded in AFM tapping mode , which reveals a current response and lateral resolution comparable to the electro - chemical images of the same probe record - ed in contact mode . Recent developments in SPM are pro - ducing new and fundamental insights across a broad spectrum of scientific disci - plines , providing key tools for the emerging fields of nanotechnology and biotechnolo - gy . These are exciting times not only for the application of SPM but also for the development of the technique and its ability to answer new questions . References and Notes 1 . G . Binnig , C . F . Quate , C . Gerber , Phys . Rev . Lett . 56 , 930 ( 1986 ) . 2 . F . J . Giessibl , Science 267 , 68 ( 1995 ) . 3 . W . Ha¨berle , J . K . H . Ho¨rber , F . Ohnesorge , D . P . E . Smith , G . Binnig , Ultramicroscopy 42 – 44 , 1161 ( 1992 ) . 4 . A . A . Baker , W . Helbert , J . Sugiyama , M . J . Miles , Biophys . J . 79 , 1139 ( 2000 ) . 5 . S . Scheuring , D . J . Mu¨ller , H . Stahlberg , H . - A . Engel , A . Engel , Eur . Biophys . J . 31 , 172 ( 2002 ) . 6 . A . Jeremic , M . Kelly , S . - J . Cho , M . H . Stromer , B . P . Jena , Biophys . J . 85 , 2035 ( 2003 ) . 7 . J . Tamayo , A . D . L . Humphris , M . J . Miles , Appl . Phys . Lett . 77 , 582 ( 2000 ) . 8 . J . Tamayo , A . D . L . Humphris , R . J . Owen , M . J . Miles , Biophys . J . 81 , 526 ( 2001 ) . 9 . A . Ashkin , Opt . Lett . 11 , 288 ( 1986 ) . 10 . C . Tischer et al . , Appl . Phys . Lett . 79 , 3878 ( 2001 ) . 11 . S . Jeney , E . - L . Florin , J . K . H . Ho¨rber , in Kinesin Protocols , I . Vernos , Ed . , vol . 164 of Methods in Molecular Biology ( Humana , Totowa , NJ , 2000 ) , pp . 91 – 108 . 12 . A . Pralle , P . Keller , E . - L . Florin , K . Simons , J . K . H . Ho¨rber , J . Cell Biol . 148 , 997 ( 2000 ) . 13 . J . K . Hobbs , A . D . L . Humphris , M . J . Miles , Macromol - ecules 34 , 5508 ( 2001 ) . 14 . Supplementary movies are available on Science On - line . 15 . T . Sulchek et al . , Appl . Phys . Lett . 76 , 1473 ( 2000 ) . 16 . D . A . Walters et al . , Rev . Sci . Instrum . 67 , 3583 ( 1996 ) . 17 . T . Ando et al . , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 98 , 12468 ( 2001 ) . 18 . A . D . L . Humphris , J . K . Hobbs , M . J . Miles , Appl . Phys . Lett . 83 , 6 ( 2003 ) . 19 . A . Lugstein , E . Bertagnolli , C . Kranz , A . Kueng , B . Mizaikoff , Appl . Phys . Lett . 81 , 349 ( 2002 ) . 20 . The authors thank A . D . L . Humphris , J . K . Hobbs , and T . J . McMaster for valuable discussions during the preparation of this review and A . D . L . Humphris and J . K . Hobbs for their assistance with Movies S1 and S2 . Supporting Online Material www . sciencemag . org / cgi / content / full / 302 / 5647 / 1002 / DC1Movies S1 and S2 Fig . 5 . Near - ﬁeld scanning optical microscope images of part of a PHB / V [ poly ( hydroxybutyrate - co - hydroxyvalerate ) ] polymer spherulite showing optical banding . ( A ) Image collected in (cid:1) 20 min with a conventional scanning system . ( B ) Image collected in 8 . 3 ms with a high - speed resonant scanning system . Scale bars , 1 (cid:2) m . R E V I E W www . sciencemag . org SCIENCE VOL 302 7 NOVEMBER 2003 1005