Hydrodynamics of soft active matter M . C . Marchetti * Physics Department and Syracuse Biomaterials Institute , Syracuse University , Syracuse , New York 13244 , USA J . F . Joanny Physicochimie Curie ( CNRS - UMR168 and Universite´ Pierre et Marie Curie ) , Institut Curie Section de Recherche , 26 rue d’Ulm , 75248 Paris Cedex , 05 France S . Ramaswamy Department of Physics , Indian Institute of Science , Bangalore , 560 12 India and TIFR Centre for Interdisciplinary Sciences , Tata Institute of Fundamental Research , 21 Brundavan Colony Narsingi , Hyderabad 500 075 India T . B . Liverpool School of Mathematics , University of Bristol , Bristol , BS8 1TW United Kingdom J . Prost Physicochimie Curie ( CNRS - UMR168 and Universite´ Pierre et Marie Curie ) , Institut Curie Section de Recherche 26 rue d’Ulm , 75248 Paris Cedex , 05 France and E . S . P . C . I , 10 rue Vauquelin , 75231 Paris Cedex 05 France Madan Rao Raman Research Institute , Bangalore , 560 080 India and National Centre for Biological Sciences ( TIFR ) , Bangalore , 560065 India R . Aditi Simha Department of Physics , Indian Institute of Technology Madras , Chennai 600 036 India ( published 19 July 2013 ) This review summarizes theoretical progress in the ﬁeld of active matter , placing it in the context of recent experiments . This approach offers a uniﬁed framework for the mechanical and statistical properties of living matter : bioﬁlaments and molecular motors in vitro or invivo , collections of motile microorganisms , animal ﬂocks , and chemical or mechanical imitations . A major goal of this review is to integrate several approaches proposed in the literature , from semimicroscopic to phenomenologi - cal . In particular , ﬁrst considered are ‘‘dry’’ systems , deﬁned as those where momentum is not conserved due to friction with a substrate or an embedding porous medium . The differences and similarities between two types of orientationally ordered states , the nematic and the polar , are clariﬁed . Next , the active hydrodynamics of suspensions or ‘‘wet’’ systems is discussed and the relation with and difference from the dry case , as well as various large - scale instabilities of these nonequilibrium states of matter , are highlighted . Further highlighted are various large - scale insta - bilities of these nonequilibrium states of matter . Various semimicroscopic derivations of the continuum theory are discussed and connected , highlighting the unifying and generic nature of the continuum model . Throughout the review , the experimental relevance of these theories for describing bacterial swarms and suspensions , the cytoskeleton of living cells , and vibrated granular material is discussed . Promising extensions toward greater realism in speciﬁc contexts from cell biology to animal behavior are suggested , and remarks are given on some exotic active - matter analogs . Last , the outlook for a quantitative understanding of active matter , through the interplay of detailed theory with controlled experiments on simpliﬁed systems , with living or artiﬁcial constituents , is summarized . DOI : 10 . 1103 / RevModPhys . 85 . 1143 PACS numbers : 05 . 65 . + b , 87 . 18 . Hf , 82 . 70 . ! y , 87 . 16 . Ln CONTENTS I . Introduction 1144 II . Dry Active Matter 1148 A . Polar active systems : Toner and Tu continuum model of ﬂocking 1148 1 . Homogeneous steady states 1150 2 . Properties of the isotropic state 1151 3 . Properties of the ordered state 1151 B . Systems with nematic interactions on a substrate 1154 1 . Active nematic 1155 2 . Self - propelled hard rods : A system of ‘‘mixed’’ symmetry ? 1157 * mcm @ phy . syr . edu REVIEWS OF MODERN PHYSICS , VOLUME 85 , JULY – SEPTEMBER 2013 1143 0034 - 6861 = 2013 = 85 ( 3 ) = 1143 ( 47 ) ! 2013 American Physical Society C . Current status of dry active matter 1160 III . Active Gels : Self - driven Polar and Apolar Filaments in a Fluid 1161 A . Hydrodynamic equations of active gels 1161 1 . Entropy production 1161 2 . Conservation laws 1161 3 . Thermodynamics of polar systems 1162 4 . Fluxes , forces , and time reversal 1162 B . Linear theory of active polar and nematic gels 1163 1 . Constitutive equations 1163 2 . Microscopic interpretation of the transport coefﬁcients 1163 3 . Viscoelastic active gel 1164 C . Active polar gels 1164 1 . Polarity effects 1164 2 . Noise in active gels 1164 3 . Multicomponent active gels 1164 D . Active defects 1165 E . Current status on active gels 1166 IV . Hydrodynamic Consequences of Activity 1167 A . Instabilities of thin liquid active ﬁlms 1167 1 . Spontaneous ﬂow of active liquid ﬁlms 1167 2 . Instabilities of thin ﬁlms 1168 B . Polar active suspensions with inertia 1171 C . Rheology 1171 1 . Linear rheology of active isotropic matter 1172 2 . Linear rheology of active oriented matter 1174 3 . Nonlinear rheology of active nematics 1175 D . Applying the hydrodynamic theory to phenomenainlivingcells 1176 V . Derivation of Hydrodynamics from Microscopic Models of Active Matter 1177 A . Microscopic models 1177 1 . Self - propelled particles 1178 2 . Motors and ﬁlaments 1179 B . From stochastic dynamics to macroscopic equations 1179 1 . Smoluchowski dynamics 1180 2 . From Smoluchowski to hydrodynamics 1181 3 . An example : Derivation of continuum equations for aligning Vicsek - type particles 1181 4 . Hydrodynamic interactions 1182 C . Current status of microscopic theories of active matter 1183 VI . Conclusions , Outlook , and Future Directions 1184 Acknowledgments 1185 References 1185 I . INTRODUCTION The goal of this article is to introduce the reader to a general framework and viewpoint for the study of the me - chanical and statistical properties of living matter and of some remarkable nonliving imitations on length scales from subcellular to oceanic . The ubiquitous nonequilibrium con - densed systems that this review is concerned with ( Toner , Tu , and Ramaswamy , 2005 ; Ju¨licher et al . , 2007 ; Joanny and Prost , 2009a ; Ramaswamy , 2010 ) have come to be known as active matter . Their unifying characteristic is that they are composed of self - driven units , active particles , each capable of converting stored or ambient free energy into systematic movement ( Schweitzer , 2003 ) . The interaction of active par - ticles with each other , and with the medium they live in , gives rise to highly correlated collective motion and mechanical stress . Active particles are generally elongated and their direction of self - propulsion is set by their own anisotropy , rather than ﬁxed by an external ﬁeld . Orientational order is thus a theme that runs through much of the active - matter narrative as can be seen , for instance , in the image of a swarm of myxobacteria , shown in Fig . 1 . The biological systems of interest to us include in vitro mixtures of cell extracts of bioﬁlaments and associated motor proteins ( see Fig . 2 ) , the whole cytoskeleton of living cells , bacterial suspensions ( see Fig . 3 ) , cell layers ( see Fig . 4 ) , and terrestrial , aquatic ( see Fig . 5 ) , and aerial ﬂocks . Nonliving active matter arises in layers of vibrated granular rods , colloidal or nanoscale par - ticles propelled through a ﬂuid by catalytic activity at their surface ( see Fig . 6 ) , and collections of robots . A distinctive , indeed , deﬁning feature of active systems compared to more familiar nonequilibrium systems is the fact that the energy input that drives the system out of equilibrium is local , for example , at the level of each particle , rather than at the FIG . 1 ( color ) . Liquid - crystalline order in a myxobacterial ﬂock . Figure from Gregory Velicer ( Indiana University Bloomington ) and Juergen Bergen ( Max - Planck Institute for Developmental Biology ) . FIG . 2 . Patterns organized in vitro by the action of multimeric kinesin complexes on microtubules , imaged by dark - ﬁeld micros - copy . The concentration of motor proteins increases from left to right . ( a ) A disordered array of microtubules . The other two images display motor - induced organization in ( b ) spiral and ( c ) aster patterns . The bright spots in the images correspond to the minus end of microtubules . These remarkable experiments from Surrey et al . ( 2001 ) led the way to the study of pattern formation in active systems . Adapted from Surrey et al . , 2001 . 1144 M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 system’s boundaries as in a shear ﬂow . Each active particle consumes and dissipates energy going through a cycle that fuels internal changes , generally leading to motion . Active systems exhibit a wealth of intriguing nonequilibrium prop - erties , including emergent structures with collective behavior qualitatively different from that of the individual constituents , bizarre ﬂuctuation statistics , nonequilibrium order - disorder transitions , pattern formation on mesoscopic scales , unusual mechanical and rheological properties , and wave propagation and sustained oscillations even in the absence of inertia in the strict sense . Living systems , of course , provide the preeminent example of active matter , exhibiting extraordinary properties such as reproduction , adaptation , spontaneous motion , and dynamical organization , including the ability to generate and to respond in a calibrated manner to forces . A theoretical description of the general properties of living matter is not currently achievable because of its overall complexity , with the detailed state of a cell determined by a hopelessly large number of variables . In a given living or - ganism there are at most 300 different cell types , which may appear as a relatively small number . The behavior of each cell is , however , affected by a myriad of internal and external signals and stimuli , rendering the accessible parameter space immense . Perhaps , therefore , global principles such as conservation laws and symmetries constrain the possible dynamical behaviors of cells or , indeed , of organisms and populations , such as collections of bacteria ( see Fig . 3 ) , ﬁsh schools ( see Fig . 5 ) , and bird ﬂocks . Quantifying the sponta - neous dynamical organization and motion of living systems is the ﬁrst step toward understanding in a generic way some of these principles , by focusing on speciﬁc questions that are accessible to theory . This has proven to be the case for the long - wavelength behavior of active membranes ( Prost and Bruinsma , 1996 ; Ramaswamy , Toner , and Prost , 2000 ; Manneville et al . , 2001 ; Ramaswamy and Rao , 2001 ) , the general theory of ﬂocking ( Toner and Tu , 1995 , 1998 ; Toner , Tu , and Ramaswamy , 2005 ) , and the macroscopic mechanical properties of the cytoskeleton as an active gel ( Kruse et al . , 2005 ; Ju¨licher et al . , 2007 ) . Agent - based models offer a minimal approach to the study of active systems , with an emphasis on order and ﬂuctuations rather than forces and mechanics . In such a setting , seminal studies of ﬂocking as a phase transition were ﬁrst carried out by Vicsek et al . ( 1995 ) [ see also the computer - animation work of Reynolds ( 1987 ) ] , with important modiﬁcations and extensions by Gre´goire and Chate´ ( 2004 ) , Chate´ , Ginelli , and Montagne ( 2006 ) , and Chate´ , Ginelli , Gre´goire , Peruani , and Raynaud ( 2008 ) . These models describe point particles with ﬁxed speed moving on an inert background . The direction of motion changes according to a noisy local rule that requires particles to align with their neighbors at each time step . This family of models displays a well - deﬁned transition from a disordered to an ordered phase with decreasing noise strength or increasing density . In the context of the cytoskeleton activated by motor proteins , detailed simula - tions of ensembles of semiﬂexible ﬁlaments on which motor bundles can exert force dipoles have also been carried out by several authors ( Mogilner and Oster , 1996 ; Ne´de´lec et al . , 1997 ; Pinot et al . , 2009 ; Head , Briels , and Gompper , 2011 ) . In this article we will not review the agent - based models and the wealth of results obtained by numerical simulations , but rather focus on identifying generic aspects of the large - scale behavior of active systems and characterizing their material properties . Many of the macroscopic properties FIG . 4 . A disclination defect of strength m ¼ ! 1 = 2 formed by human melanocytes on a plastic surface . The bars are 100 ! m . The three images show three different situations : ( i ) the core of the defect is an area free of cells ( left ) , ( ii ) the core of the disclination is an area with isotropically distributed cells ( center ) , and ( iii ) the core of the defect is occupied by a star - shaped cell ( right ) . The cells that form the nematoid order are in an elongated state . From Kemkemer et al . , 2000 . FIG . 5 ( color ) . A remarkable demonstration of polar order in a sardine school . Figure from Jon Bertsch , from underwater images from the Sea of Cortez : http : / / www . thalassagraphics . com / blog / ? p = 167 . FIG . 3 . Bacterial ‘‘turbulence’’ in a sessile drop of Bacillus sub - tilis viewed from below through the bottom of a petri dish . Gravity is perpendicular to the plane of the picture , and the horizontal white line near the top is the air - water - plastic contact line . The central fuzziness is due to collective motion , not quite captured at the frame rate of 1 = 30 s . The scale bar is 35 ! m . Adapted from Dombrowski et al . , 2004 . M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter 1145 Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 of active systems are universal , in the sense that systems operating at widely differing length scales , with signiﬁcant differences in their detailed dynamics at the microscopic level , display broadly similar properties . Visually similar ﬂocking phenomena are seen in ﬁsh shoals ( Parrish and Hamner , 1997 ) and collections of keratocytes ( Szabo´ et al . , 2006 ) . Contractile stresses are evident on a subcellular scale in the cytoskeleton ( see Fig . 7 ) ( Bendix et al . , 2008 ; Joanny and Prost , 2009a ) , as well as on a scale of many cells in swimming algae ( Rafaı¨ , Jibuti , and Peyla , 2010 ) . The hope is to be able to classify active matter in a small number of universality classes , based on considerations of symmetry and conservation laws , each with a well - deﬁned macroscopic behavior . We consider here four classes of active matter according to the nature of the broken symmetry of the ordered phase and the type of momentum damping . First the broken symmetry : elongated self - propelled objects are in general polar entities with distinct heads and tails , which can coop - eratively order either in a polar ( ferromagnetic ) phase or in a nematic phase . In a polar phase , all the microscopic objects are on average aligned in the same direction ; this is the case for bacteria or ﬁsh . The polar order is described by a vector order parameter p , known as the polarization . Nematic order - ing can be obtained in two ways , either in systems where polar self - propelled objects are parallel but with random head - tail orientations or in systems where the self - propelled particles are themselves head - tail symmetric such as the melanocytes that distribute pigment in the skin . Nematic order is described by a tensor order parameter Q , known as the alignment tensor . The polar - apolar distinction in the context of living matter is brought out clearly by contrasting the pattern of microtubules and kinesin shown in Fig . 2 to those formed by melanocytes shown in Fig . 4 . Next , the nature of damping : in a bulk ﬂuid , active or otherwise , viscosity damps the relative motion of neighboring regions , which means that the total momentum of the system is conserved . In systems in contact with a substrate , e . g . , re - stricted to lie on a surface or between two closely spaced walls , or moving through a porous medium , the drag due to the substrate dominates , simply either through no slip or through binding and unbinding of constituents of the systems to the conﬁning medium , and the momentum of the ﬂuid is not conserved . 1 Active particles in a viscous ﬂuid of viscosity " and experiencing a frictional drag # can in general be described as a system with or without momentum conserva - tion , depending on the physical parameters , such as the density of active particles , and the length scales of interest . If the ﬂuid can be treated as an inert medium , providing only friction , then the collection of active particles that transfer momentum to the ﬂuid can be modeled as a system with overdamped dynamics and no momentum conservation . We refer below to systems that can be described by models with no momentum conservation as ‘‘dry . ’’ In contrast , when solvent - mediated hydrodynamic interactions are important , the dynamics of the suspending ﬂuid must be incorporated in the model and one must develop a description of the suspen - sion of active particles and ﬂuid , with conserved total mo - mentum . We refer to systems described by models with momentum conservation , where ﬂuid ﬂow is important , as ‘‘wet . ’’ Although below we often refer to various systems as wet or dry , we stress that this distinction refers to the model used , rather than to the system itself , and also to the length scales of interest , as in general hydrodynamic ﬂows can be neglected only on length scales larger than ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ " = # p . For instance , actin ﬁlaments in motility assays as in the experi - ments by Schaller et al . ( 2010 ) have been described as dry systems , where momentum is not conserved , as the ﬁlaments exchange momentum with the cover slip , but hydrodynamic FIG . 7 ( color online ) . Measurement of contractile stresses in cell ( Xenopus oocyte ) extracts and a reconstituted actomyosin gel made using skeletal muscle myosin II thick ﬁlaments : ( a ) Schematic of active gel in a narrow glass capillary ( inner diameter , 400 ! m ) sandwiched between two oil droplets . ( b ) Confocal ﬂuorescence images of the network at ﬁve different time points show that the active gel ﬁrst pulls away from the capillary walls and deforms the oil droplets as it contracts before reaching a breaking point when the gel collapses . ( c ) Dark - ﬁeld images of contracting cell extract shows the same behavior . Analysis of the deformation of the oil droplet gives an estimate of the contractile force exerted by the actin gel , which consists of bundles of actin ﬁlaments cross - linked by $ - actinin . This force is around 1 ! N or 100 pN per actin bundle . Adapted from Bendix et al . , 2008 . FIG . 6 . Colloids that swim : Hydrogen peroxide is oxidized to generate protons in solution and electrons in the wire on the platinum end of micron - sized gold - platinum wires . The protons and electrons are then consumed with the reduction of H 2 O 2 on the gold end . The resulting ion ﬂux induces an electric ﬁeld and motion of the particle relative to the ﬂuid , propelling the particle toward the platinum end at speeds of tens of microns a second . On longer time scales the rods tumble due to thermal or other noise ; the resulting motion is thus a persistent random walk . From Paxton et al . , 2004 . 1 Of course the momentum of the entire system consisting of ﬂuid plus substrate is always conserved . 1146 M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 interactions may be important on some length scales ( Schaller , Weber , Frey , and Bausch , 2011 ) . Conversely , it was recently argued that the complex turbulent ﬂows of dense bacterial suspensions are well described by a model of an incompressible ﬂuid with overdamped dynamics , effectively equivalent to what is referred to as a dry model in this review ( Wensink et al . , 2012 ) . Table I summarizes various examples of active systems classiﬁed according to symmetry and to whether they may be described by models with or without momentum conservation ( wet or dry ) . A useful theoretical framework to describe the macro - scopic properties of active matter is provided by the methods of nonequilibrium statistical mechanics . In a generalized hydrodynamic approach , 2 a coarse - grained description of the large - scale , long - time behavior of the system is given in terms of a small number of continuum ﬁelds . The evolution of these ﬁelds is written in terms of a set of continuum or hydrodynamic equations that modify the well - known liquid - crystal hydrodynamics ( Martin , Parodi , and Pershan , 1972 ; de Gennes and Prost , 1993 ) to include new nonequilibrium terms that arise from the activity . Generalized hydrodynamic theories have been very successful in the description of many condensed matter systems , such as superﬂuids ( Dzyaloshinskii and Volovick , 1980 ) , liquid crystals ( Martin , Parodi , and Pershan , 1972 ) , polymers ( Milner , 1993 ) , as well as , of course , simple ﬂuids . One approach to obtain a hydrodynamic theory of active systems is to start from a microscopic model and use the tools of statistical physics to coarse grain the model and obtain the long - wavelength , long - time scale equations ( Kruse and Ju¨licher , 2003 ; Liverpool , 2003 ; Ahmadi , Marchetti , and Liverpool , 2005 ; Aranson and Tsimring , 2005 ; Ahmadi , Marchetti , and Liverpool , 2006 ) . This task is difﬁcult if the microscopic description is realistic and it can be carried out only at the cost of approximations , such as low - density or weak interactions . It allows one to relate the parameters in the macroscopic equations to speciﬁc physical mechanisms ( albeit in a model - dependent manner ) and to estimate them in terms of experimentally accessible quantities . The low - density limit has been worked out for several models , initially without and later including the effect of the embedding solvent . Some speciﬁc examples are discussed in Sec . IV . D . An alternative , more pragmatic approach is to directly write hydrodynamic equations for the macroscopic ﬁelds including all terms allowed by symmetry as pioneered for dry ﬂocks by Toner and Tu ( 1995 , 1998 ) and extended to the case of self - propelled particles suspended in a ﬂuid by Simha and Ramaswamy ( 2002a ) and more generally to active - ﬁlament solutions ( Hatwalne et al . , 2004 ) . As one might expect in hindsight , novel terms , of a form ruled out for thermal equilibrium systems , appear in these ‘‘pure - thought’’ versions of the equations of active hydrodynamics . A more systematic implementation of the phenomenologi - cal hydrodynamic approach is to treat the nonequilibrium steady state of an active system as arising through the im - position of a nonvanishing but small driving force on a well - deﬁned parent thermal equilibrium state whose existence is not in question ( de Groot and Mazur , 1984 ) . For example , in the biological case of systems composed of cytoskeletal ﬁlaments and motor proteins , such as the cell cytoskeleton , the driving force is the difference ! ! between adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) and its hydrolysis products . If ! ! is assumed to be small , the macroscopic hydrodynamic equa - tions can be derived in a systematic way following the Onsager procedure . One identiﬁes thermodynamic ﬂuxes and forces and writes the most general linear relation between them that respects the symmetries of the problem . The novel terms mentioned above that arose by directly writing down the hydrodynamic equations of active matter are then seen to be a consequence of off - diagonal Onsager coefﬁcients and an imposed constant nonzero ! ! . Generalized hydrodynamic theories have been very successful in the description of complex and simple ﬂuids ( Martin , Parodi , and Pershan , 1972 ) . The advantage is that the equations are expanded around a well - deﬁned state . The drawback is that many active systems , biological ones being particularly pertinent ex - amples , are far from equilibrium and one might , for example , miss some important physics by the restriction to the linear nonequilibrium regime . This phenomenological approach can , however , be very useful , especially when coupled to microscopic derivations for speciﬁc model systems . Regardless of the choice of hydrodynamic framework , the reasons for the choice of variables remain the same . When an extended system is disturbed from equilibrium by an external TABLE I . Examples of active systems classiﬁed according to symmetry and to the relevance of momentum conservation ( wet or dry ) . Nematic Polar Dry Migrating animal herds ( Parrish and Hamner , 1997 ) Melanocytes ( Kemkemer et al . , 2000 ) Migrating cell layers ( Serra - Picamal et al . , 2012 ) Vibrated granular rods ( Narayan , Ramaswamy , and Menon , 2007 ) Vibrated asymmetric granular particles ( Kudrolli et al . , 2008 ) Films of cytoskeletal extracts ( Surrey et al . , 2001 ) Wet Cell cytoskeleton and cytoskeletal extracts in bulk suspensions ( Bendix et al . , 2008 ) Suspensions of catalytic colloidal rods ( Paxton et al . , 2004 ) Swimming bacteria in bulk ( Dombrowski et al . , 2004 ) Pt catalytic colloids ( Palacci et al . , 2010 ) 2 In this review the word ‘‘hydrodynamics’’ refers to any contin - uum model where a system of many interacting constituents can be described at large scales in terms of the dynamics of a small number of ﬁelds , generally corresponding to conserved variables and , when applicable , broken - symmetry ﬁelds , but possibly ampliﬁed to in - clude the amplitude of the order parameters ( Chaikin and Lubensky , 2000 ) . This general approach holds for both systems with over - damped dynamics and with momentum conservation . M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter 1147 Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 perturbation , its relaxation is controlled by the microscopic interactions among constituents . It is useful to divide the relaxation processes into fast and slow , and to build a theory of the slow dynamics in which the fast processes enter as noise and damping . Such a division is unambiguous when there are collective excitations with relaxation rates ! ð q Þ that vanish as the wave vector q goes to zero ; these are the hydrodynamic modes of the systems ( Martin , Parodi , and Pershan , 1972 ; Forster , 1975 ) . Familiar examples are diffusion and sound waves in ﬂuids . A formulation in terms of hydrodynamic ﬁelds provides a generic description of the nonequilibrium large - scale physics that relies only on general properties and local thermodynamics , and does not depend strongly on micro - scopic details of the interactions . In order to build a hydro - dynamic theory , whether phenomenologically or by deriving it from a microscopic model , the ﬁrst task is to identify the slow variables , which are the local densities of conserved quantities , the ‘‘broken - symmetry’’ variables which have no restoring force at zero wave number , and , in the vicinity of a continuous phase transition , the order parameter ( Martin , Parodi , and Pershan , 1972 ; Forster , 1975 ) . From there on , the procedure is well deﬁned and systematic . Conserved quantities are fairly easy to identify . Momentum conservation for wet systems means that the momentum density is a slow , conserved vari - able , while for dry systems it is a fast variable . Identifying the type of order ( polar or nematic , in the cases that we will examine ) yields both the nature of the order parameter and the broken - symmetry modes . Several useful reviews on various aspects of the behavior of ﬂocks and active systems have appeared in the recent literature ( Toner , Tu , and Ramaswamy , 2005 ; Ju¨licher et al . , 2007 ; Joanny and Prost , 2009a ; Ramaswamy , 2010 ; Romanczuk et al . , 2012 ) , as well as on the properties of swimmers ( Ishikawa , 2009 ; Lauga and Powers , 2009 ; Koch and Subramanian , 2011 ) and bacterial suspensions and colo - nies ( Ben - Jacob , Cohen , and Levine , 2000 ; Murray , 2003 ; Cates , 2012 ) . This review aims at highlighting the unity of various approaches and at providing a classiﬁcation of active systems . It demonstrates the link between microscopic deri - vations and continuum models , showing that the hydrody - namic equations derived from different microscopic models with the same general symmetry have the same structure and only differ in the details of parameter values , and that the continuum models proposed and used in the literature can all be formulated in a uniﬁed manner . It is hoped that this review will provide a useful and self - contained starting point for new researchers entering the ﬁeld . This review is organized as follows . We ﬁrst consider dry active systems focusing on the ordering transition , the prop - erties of the ordered phase , and the differences between polar and nematic active matter . We also discuss in Sec . II a system ﬁrst analyzed theoretically by Baskaran and Marchetti ( 2008a , 2008b ) , where the self - propelled particles are polar in their movement but nematic in their interaction and hence in the nature of their macroscopic order . In Sec . III we discuss orientable active particles suspended in a ﬂuid , or active gels , for short . We give a systematic derivation of the constitutive equations of a nematic active gel , for a system weakly out of equilibrium , and dwell brieﬂy on the effects of polar order , viscoelasticity , and the presence of multiple components . In Sec . IV we present some applications of the hydrodynamic theory of active matter to speciﬁc geometries that could arise in experiments . We focus on instabilities of thin ﬁlms and on the rheological properties of active matter . Section IV . D gives a brief account of microscopic theories of active matter . We offer examples to show how microscopic theories allow one to determine in principle the phenomenological transport parameters introduced in the hydrodynamic theories and to estimate their order of magnitude . The concluding Sec . VI presents open questions related to hydrodynamic theories of active matter and gives some perspectives . II . DRY ACTIVE MATTER In this section we consider active systems with no momen - tum conservation . This class includes bacteria gliding on a rigid surface ( Wolgemuth et al . , 2002 ) , animal herds on land ( Toner and Tu , 1998 ) , or , in the artiﬁcial realm , vibrated granular particles on a plate ( Ramaswamy , Simha , and Toner , 2003 ; Yamada , Hondou , and Sano , 2003 ; Aranson and Tsimring , 2006 ; Narayan , Ramaswamy , and Menon , 2007 ; Kudrolli et al . , 2008 ; Deseigne , Dauchot , and Chate´ , 2010 ) in all of which momentum is damped by friction with the substrate . It is also plausible that models without an explicit ambient ﬂuid contain the main physics of concentrated col - lections of swimming bacteria ( Drescher et al . , 2011 ) and motor - ﬁlament suspensions ( Liverpool , 2003 ) , where steric and stochastic effects could for most purposes overwhelm hydrodynamic interactions . Minimal ﬂocking models have also been employed to interpret observations on aerial displays by large groups of birds where , despite the much lower con - centration in comparison to bacterial suspensions ( presumably inertial ) , long - range interactions seem negligible ( Ballerini et al . , 2008 ) and metric - free interactions , as investigated by Ginelli and Chate´ ( 2010 ) , may dominate . We refer to these systems as dry active systems . In this case the only conserved quantity is the number of particles ( ne - glecting , of course , division and death ) and the associated hydrodynamic ﬁeld is the local density of active units . Overdamped active particles that can order in states with polar and nematic symmetries are described below . The ﬁrst class consists of polar or self - propelled units with interactions that tend to promote polar order , i . e . , explicitly align the particles head to head and tail to tail , as in the classic Vicsek model ( Vicsek et al . , 1995 ) . The second class consists of active particles that may themselves be apolar , such as melanocytes , the cells that distribute pigments in the skin , where activity induces nondirected motion on each cell ( Gruler , Dewald , and Eberhardt , 1999 ) or polar , such as self - propelled hard rods ( Peruani , Deutsch , and Ba¨r , 2006 ; Baskaran and Marchetti , 2008b ; Yang , Marceau , and Gompper , 2010 ) , but with interactions that tend to align particles regardless of their polarity , so that the ordered state , if present , has nematic symmetry . A cartoon of the different cases is shown in Fig . 8 . A . Polar active systems : Toner and Tu continuum model of ﬂocking A continuum effective theory for the ﬂocking model of Vicsek et al . ( 1995 ) was proposed in 1995 by Toner and Tu 1148 M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 ( 1995 , 1998 ) [ seealsoToner , Tu , andRamaswamy ( 2005 ) ] . The Vicsek model describes a collection of self - propelled particles with ﬁxed speed and noisy polar aligning interactions and displays a nonequilibrium phase transition from a disordered state at low density or high noise to an ordered , coherently moving state at high densityor low noise strength . TonerandTu formulated the continuum model phenomenologically solely on the basis of symmetry considerations . Recently , the Toner - Tu model was derived by Bertin , Droz , and Gre´goire ( 2006 , 2009 ) and Ihle ( 2011 ) by coarse graining the microscopic Vicsek model . These derivations provide a microscopic basis for the hydrodynamic theory , yielding explicit values for es - sentially all the parameters in the Toner - Tu model , except for the noise strength in the latter . The Boltzmann - equation ap - proach of Bertin , Droz , and Gre´goire ( 2006 ) and Ihle ( 2011 ) leads to a deterministic coarse - grained description , with the stochasticity of the Vicsek model reﬂected in an average sense through the diffusion and relaxation terms . In this section we introduce the continuum equations in their simplest form and analyze their consequences . Since the particles are moving on a frictional substrate , the only conserved ﬁeld is the number density % ð r ; t Þ of active particles . In addition , to describe the possibility of states with polar orientational order , one must consider the dynamics of a polarization vector ﬁeld p ð r ; t Þ . These continuum ﬁelds can be deﬁned in terms of the position r n ð t Þ of each active particle and a unit vector ^ ! n ð t Þ denoting the instantaneous orientation of the velocity of each particle as % ð r ; t Þ ¼ X n & ð r ! r n ð t Þ Þ ; ( 1a ) p ð r ; t Þ ¼ 1 % ð r ; t Þ X n ^ ! n ð t Þ & ð r ! r n ð t Þ Þ : ( 1b ) Although we are dealing with a nonequilibrium system , it is convenient and instructive to write the dynamical equations in a form in which terms that can be viewed as arising from a free - energy functional F p ( hence would also be present in an equilibrium system ) are separated out from truly nonequilib - rium ones : @ t % þ v 0 r & ð % p Þ ¼ ! r & " ! 1 # % r & F p & % þ f % # ; ( 2a ) @ t p þ ’ 1 ð p & r Þ p ¼ ! 1 # & F p & p þ f ; ( 2b ) where v 0 is the self - propulsion speed of the individual active particles , # % and # kinetic coefﬁcients . The ﬁrst term inside the brackets on the right - hand side ( rhs ) of Eq . ( 2a ) yields a familiar diffusive current , and f % is the associated noise . For simplicity and consistency with Toner and Tu ( 1998 ) and with the derivation of Bertin , Droz , and Gre´goire ( 2006 ) of the Toner - Tu equations from the model of Vicsek et al . ( 1995 ) , both will be neglected in the following . 3 The parameter ’ 1 controlling the strength of the advective term on the left - hand side of Eq . ( 2b ) has dimensions of speed . This term resembles the familiar advective nonlinearity in the Navier - Stokes equa - tion . Unlike the ﬂuid , the nonequilibrium ﬂocking model does not possess momentum conservation , as the particles are moving relative to a substrate , and is not constrained by Galilean invariance that would require ’ 1 ¼ v 0 . As a result , ’ 1 is a nonuniversal phenomenological parameter determined by microscopic properties . Derivations of the continuum equations from microscopic models , such as that of Bertin , Droz , and Gre´goire ( 2009 ) , yield a ð p & r Þ p term with coef - ﬁcient different from that of the r & ð % p Þ term in the density equation . In the Toner - Tu picture p is both a current and an orientational order parameter , and thus acts on itself by advection and ﬂow alignment , both of which contribute to ð p & r Þ p in the p equation . In the density equation only the velocitylike character of p enters . The fact that ’ 1 ! v 0 allows for density and polarization ﬂuctuations to be con - vected at different speeds . Finally , the last term on the right - hand side of Eq . ( 2b ) captures the ﬂuctuations and is taken to be white , Gaussian noise , with zero mean and correlations h f $ ð r ; t Þ f ( ð r 0 ; t 0 Þ i ¼ 2 ! & $ ( & ð r ! r 0 Þ & ð t ! t 0 Þ : ( 3 ) In Eq . ( 2 ) and everywhere in the following we have taken the noise terms to be purely additive , ignoring dependence on the local values of % [ see , e . g . , Dean ( 1996 ) ] or of the order parameter ( here p ) . This approximation is adequate for the present purposes of calculating two - point correlators in a linearized theory , but is actively under discussion ( Mishra , 2009 ; Gowrishankar and Rao , 2012 ; Mishra et al . , 2012 ) for FIG . 8 ( color online ) . Schematic of the various types of active particles and orientationally ordered states . Polar active particles ( top left image ) , such as bacteria or birds , have a head and a tail and are generally self - propelled along their long axis . They can order in polar states ( bottom left ) or nematic states ( bottom center ) . The polar state is also a moving state with a nonzero mean velocity . Apolar active particles ( top center image ) are head - tail symmetric and can order in nematic states ( bottom right ) . Self - propelled rods ( top right image ) are head - tail symmetric , but each rod is self - propelled in a speciﬁc direction along its long axis . The self - propulsion renders the particles polar , but for exclusively apolar interactions ( such as steric effects ) , self - propelled rods can order only in nematic states ( bottom center ) . 3 This approximation is justiﬁed in both the disordered and ordered phases of the ﬂocking model because the thermal contri - bution to density diffusion is small compared to the effective diffusion constant ’ v 0 v 1 = D r that arises when fast variables are eliminated in favor of % in each phase . M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter 1149 Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 situations of strong inhomogeneity such as the coarsening of active nematics . Note that in the continuum ﬂocking model p plays a dual role : on the one hand , p is the orientational order parameter of the system , and on the other hand , v 0 p represents the particle velocity ﬁeld . This duality is crucial in determining the large - scale behavior of this nonequilibrium system . The free - energy functional used in Eq . ( 2 ) is given by F p ¼ Z r $ ~ $ ð % Þ 2 j p j 2 þ ~ ( 4 j p j 4 þ ~ K 2 ð @ $ p ( Þð @ $ p ( Þ þ w 2 j p j 2 r & p ! w 1 r & p & % % 0 þ A 2 " & % % 0 # 2 % ; ( 4 ) where % 0 is the average density and & % ¼ % ! % 0 is the ﬂuctuation in the density about its mean value % 0 . Such ﬂuctuations are penalized by the compression modulus A . The ﬁrst two terms on the right - hand side of Eq . ( 4 ) control the mean - ﬁeld continuous order - disorder transition that takes place as the parameter ~ $ goes through zero . In the derivation of Bertin , Droz , and Gre ´ goire ( 2006 ) , ~ $ depends on the local density % and the noise strength in the underlying microscopic model and turns negative at sufﬁciently large % . A reasonable phenomenological approach to describe the physics near the transition is to take ~ $ ð % Þ ¼ a 0 ð 1 ! % = % c Þ , changing sign at a characteristic density % c . Forstability reasons the coefﬁcient ~ ( is positive . The ratio D r ¼ a 0 = # is a rotational diffusion rate with dimensions of frequency . In the following we use it to set our unit of time by letting D r ¼ 1 . The third term in the free energy describes the energy cost for a spatially inhomogene - ous deformation of the order parameter . The Frank constant ~ K is positive . For simplicity we employ a one - elastic constant approximation and use the same value for the stiffness asso - ciated with splay and bend deformations of the order parameter ﬁeld , as also for gradients in its magnitude . Splay and bend anisotropy can , however , play an important role in active systems as demonstrated , for instance , by Voituriez , Joanny , and Prost ( 2006 ) . The ﬁrst two terms on the second line of Eq . ( 4 ) are allowed in equilibrium systems with polar symme - try [ see , e . g . , Kung , Marchetti , and Saunders ( 2006 ) ] ; they give the density and j p j 2 contributions to the spontaneous splay . Upon integration by parts , they can be seen to enable gradients in % or in the magnitude j p j of the order parameter to provide a local aligning ﬁeld for p . Alternatively , the w term can be viewed as a splay - dependent correction to ~ $ ð % Þ : splay of one sign enhances and of the other sign reduces the local tendency to order . By using Eq . ( 4 ) for the free energy , the equation for p takes the form @ t p þ ’ 1 ð p & r Þ p ¼ ! ½ $ ð % Þþ ( j p j 2 ) p þ K r 2 p ! v 1 r % % 0 þ ’ 2 r j p j 2 ! ’ p ð r & p Þþ f ; ( 5 ) where v 1 ¼ w 1 = # and ’ ¼ w = # have dimensions of velocity and all quantities without tilde are obtained from those with tilde by dividing by # . The terms proportional to v 1 and ’ would also be present in an equilibrium polar or ferroelectric liquid crystal and describe the coupling between density variation and local order . It is instructive to compare Eq . ( 5 ) with the Navier - Stokes equation for a simple ﬂuid . If we think of p as proportional to a ﬂow velocity , the second term on the right - hand side represents the effects of viscous forces . The third and fourth terms of Eq . ( 5 ) can be rewritten in an approximate pressure - gradient form as ! ð 1 = % 0 Þ r P with a pressure P ð % ; j p j Þ ’ v 1 % ! ð ’ % 0 = 2 Þ j p j 2 . This high - lights the parallel and the contrast with the Navier - Stokes equation : in the latter , an equation of state determines the thermodynamic pressure in terms of density and temperature and not the velocity ﬁeld . The ﬁrst term on the right - hand side of Eq . ( 5 ) arises from the role of p as an order parameter for a polarized state and does not have an analog in equilibrium ﬂuid ﬂow . There is , however , an equilibrium analog in the context of electrostriction , a property of all dielectric mate - rials that causes them to change their shape under the appli - cation of an electric ﬁeld , although in this case polarization does not correspond to velocity , but rather to reactive polarity . General symmetry arguments given by Toner , Tu , and Ramaswamy ( 2005 ) and Mishra , Baskaran , and Marchetti ( 2010 ) allow for more general polar terms in Eq . ( 5 ) : ð ’ 3 = 2 Þ r j p j 2 þ ’ 2 p ð r & p Þ . The derivation based on the free energy ( 4 ) using Eq . ( 2b ) yields ’ 3 ¼ ! ’ 2 ¼ ’ . For the out - of - equilibrium system considered here the coefﬁcients of these two terms are not generally related , but the microscopic derivation of Bertin , Droz , and Gre´goire ( 2006 , 2009 ) also yields ’ 3 ¼ ! ’ 2 as well as ’ i ’ v 20 and v 1 ¼ v 0 = 2 . Finally , we highlight the fact that a modiﬁed version of the Toner - Tu model that includes higher order spatial gradients in the local polarization - ﬂow velocity has been used recently to describe quantitatively turbulent ﬂows in dense bacterial suspensions in quasi - 2D and 3D geometries ( Wensink et al . , 2012 ) . The fact that the observed statistical properties of turbulent ﬂow can be ﬁt by a dry model suggests that at high concentrations the collective motion of the bacteria is dominated by short - range repulsive interactions , while hydro - dynamic couplings are negligible . 1 . Homogeneous steady states The dynamical model described by Eqs . ( 2a ) and ( 2b ) exhibits by construction , in a mean - ﬁeld treatment of homo - geneous conﬁgurations , a continuous transition from a dis - ordered to an ordered state . For $ > 0 , corresponding to an equilibrium density % 0 < % c , the homogeneous steady state of the system is disordered or isotropic , with p ¼ 0 and a corresponding zero mean velocity . For $ < 0 , corresponding to % 0 > % c , the system orders in a state with uniform orienta - tional order , with j p 0 j ¼ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ! $ 0 = ( p , where $ 0 ¼ $ ð % 0 Þ . In the ordered state , which is also a moving state , with v ¼ v 0 p 0 , continuous rotational symmetry is spontaneously broken . This mean - ﬁeld analysis survives ﬂuctuation corrections even in two dimensions ( Toner and Tu , 1995 , 1998 ) , evading the Mermin - Wagner theorem forbidding ( at equilibrium ) the spontaneous breaking of a continuous symmetry in two spa - tial dimensions ( Mermin and Wagner , 1966 ; Hohenberg , 1967 ; Chaikin and Lubensky , 2000 ) . In the present nonequi - librium system , however , the theorem does not apply . The escape from the Mermin - Wagner theorem is primarily due to the advective nonlinearities in Eq . ( 2 ) which effectively generate long - range interactions in the system , even if density variations are ignored as shown recently by Toner ( 2012a ) . 1150 M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 The ordered phase itself , especially near the transition , is exceedingly complex as a result of coupling to the density . Although the mean density is an important control parameter for the transition to a ﬂock , the local propensity to order depends , via $ ð % Þ in Eq . ( 4 ) , on the local density % ð r ; t Þ . This is analogous to the density - dependent exchange coupling in a compressible magnet in Milosˇevic´ , Sasva´ri , and Tadic´ ( 1978 ) . The analogy ends there : unlike in the magnet , the order parameter feeds back strongly into the density dynamics via the current on the right - hand side of Eq . ( 2b ) . See Sec . II . A . 3 of Toner and Tu ( 1998 ) , and the review by Toner , Tu , and Ramaswamy ( 2005 ) for a more complete discussion of this point . 2 . Properties of the isotropic state To study the linear stability of the homogeneous steady states we examine the dynamics of spatially inhomogeneous ﬂuctuations & % ¼ % ! % 0 and & p ¼ p ! p 0 from the values % 0 and p 0 in each of the homogeneous states . The isotropic state is characterized by % 0 < % c and p 0 ¼ 0 . The equations for the dynamics of linear ﬂuctuations about these values are @ t & % ¼ ! v 0 % 0 r & p ; ( 6a ) @ t p ¼ ! $ 0 p ! v 1 % 0 r & % þ K r 2 p þ f ; ( 6b ) where $ 0 > 0 . Fourier transforming Eq . ( 6 ) in space and time to look at modes of the form exp ð i q & r ! i ! t Þ leads to dispersion relations between the frequency ! and wave vector q for small ﬂuctuations about the uniform isotropic phase . Polarization ﬂuctuations transverse to q decouple and decay at a rate $ 0 þ Kq 2 . The relaxation of coupled ﬂuctua - tions of density and longitudinal polarization is controlled by coupled hydrodynamic modes with frequencies ! I * ð q Þ¼ ! i 2 ð $ 0 þ Kq 2 Þ * i 2 ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ð $ 0 þ Kq 2 Þ 2 ! 4 v 0 v 1 q 2 q : ( 7 ) Linear stability requires that ﬂuctuations decay at long times so that Im ½ ! ð q Þ ) < 0 . The isotropic state is linearly stable for all parameter values , provided v 0 v 1 > 0 . The parameter v 1 enters Eq . ( 6b ) like an effective compressional modulus . Microscopic derivations of the continuum model yielded v 1 ¼ v 0 = 2 at low density ( Bertin , Droz , and Gre´goire , 2006 , 2009 ; Baskaran and Marchetti , 2008b ; Ihle , 2011 ) . In this case v 1 > 0 and the isotropic state is always stable . At high density , however , caging effects can result in a density dependence of v 1 , which can in turn lead to a density instability of the isotropic state as shown by Tailleur and Cates ( 2008 ) and Fily , Baskaran , and Marchetti ( 2012 ) . Here we restrict our discussion to the situation where the isotropic state is linearly stable . Even in this case , it has unusual properties : approaching the mean - ﬁeld ordering transition , i . e . , decreasing $ 0 , is like decreasing friction . As argued by Ramaswamy and Mazenko ( 1982 ) for equilibrium ﬂuids on a substrate , the dispersion relations can acquire a real part for $ 0 + v 0 v 1 = K and a range of wave vectors , q c ! + q + q c þ , with ( Baskaran and Marchetti , 2008b ) q 2 c * ¼ 2 v 0 v 1 K 2 2 4 1 ! K $ 0 2 v 0 v 1 * ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 1 ! K $ 0 v 0 v 1 s 3 5 : ( 8 ) Density ﬂuctuations then propagate as waves rather than diffuse . Near the transition , where $ 0 ! 0 þ , we ﬁnd q c ! ! 0 and q c þ ’ 2 ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ v 0 v 1 p = K and the propagating waves resemble sound waves , with ! I * ’ * q ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ v 0 v 1 p . These propa - gating soundlike density waves are ubiquitous in collections of self - propelled particles . We stress , however , that if the limit q ! 0 is taken ﬁrst , density ﬂuctuations always decay diffusively . 3 . Properties of the ordered state We now examine the linear stability of the ordered state by considering the linear dynamics of ﬂuctuations about % 0 > % c and p 0 ¼ p 0 ^ x . The detailed analysis below is in two dimen - sions , but the general conclusions including the instability of the uniform ordered state just past threshold hold in all dimensions . It is useful to write the order parameter in terms of its magnitude and direction , by letting p ¼ p ^ n , where ^ n is a unit vector pointing in the direction of local orientational order . Fluctuations in the polarization can then be written as & p ¼ ^ n 0 & p þ p 0 & n . The condition j ^ n j 2 ¼ 1 requires that to linear order ^ n 0 & & n ¼ 0 . For the chosen coordinate system ^ n 0 ¼ ^ x . Then in two dimensions & n ¼ & n ^ y and & p ¼ ^ x & p þ ^ y p 0 & n . The linearized equations are ð @ t þ v 0 p 0 @ x Þ & % ¼ ! v 0 % 0 r & & p ; ( 9a ) ð @ t þ ’ 1 p 0 @ x Þ & p ¼ ! 2 j $ 0 j ^ x & p þ a p 0 & % þ ’ 2 p 0 ð r & & p Þ ! ð v 1 = % 0 Þ r & % þ ’ 3 p 0 r & p þ K r 2 & p þ f ; ( 9b ) where a ¼ ! ð $ 0 þ ( 0 p 20 Þ ¼ $ ( 0 = ( ! $ 0 > 0 , and the primes denote derivatives with respect to density , e . g . , $ 0 ¼ ð @ % $ Þ % ¼ % 0 . For the analysis it is useful to explicitly display the three coupled equations for the ﬂuctuations . For compact - ness , we introduce a vector with elements " ¼ f & % ; & p ; & n g and write them in a matrix form as @ t " q ð t Þ ¼ M ð q Þ & " q ð t Þ þ F q ð t Þ ; ( 10 ) where the matrix M is given by M ð q Þ ¼ ! iq x v 0 p 0 ! iq x v 0 % 0 ! iq y v 0 % 0 p 0 ap 0 ! iq x v 1 = % 0 ! 2 j $ 0 j ! iq x " ’ p 0 ! Kq 2 iq y ’ 2 p 20 ! iq y v 1 = ð % 0 p 0 Þ iq y ’ 3 p 0 ! iq x ’ 1 p 0 ! Kq 2 0 B @ 1 CA : ( 11 ) The sign of the combination " ’ ¼ ’ 1 ! ’ 2 ! ’ 3 is impor - tant in controlling the nature of the instabilities in the ordered phase . Notice that all microscopic derivations of the continuous equations for various systems of self - propelled particles ( Bertin , Droz , and Gre´goire , 2006 , 2009 ; Baskaran and Marchetti , 2008b ) yield " ’ > 0 . Finally , the noise vector F q ð t Þ has compo - nents F q ð t Þ ¼ f 0 ; f L q ð t Þ ; f T q ð t Þ g , with f L q ð t Þ ¼ ^ q & f q ð t Þ , M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter 1151 Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 f T q ð t Þ¼ f q ð t Þ ! ^ q f L q ð t Þ , and ^ q ¼ q = q . The dispersion rela - tions of the hydrodynamic modes are the eigenvalues of the matrix M . The solution of the full cubic eigenvalue prob - lem is not , however , very instructive . It is more useful to discuss a few simpliﬁed cases ( Bertin , Droz , and Gre´goire , 2009 ; Mishra , Baskaran , and Marchetti , 2010 ) . a . Linear instability near the mean - ﬁeld order - disorder transition We ﬁrst consider the behavior of ﬂuctuations as the mean - ﬁeld transition is approached from the ordered phase , i . e . , for $ 0 ! 0 ! and p 0 ! 0 þ . Fluctuations & p in the magnitude of polarization decay at rate ’ j $ 0 j and become long lived near the transition . In fact , in this limit one can neglect the coupling to director ﬂuctuations and consider only the coupled dynamics of & % and & p . This decoupling becomes exact for wave vectors q along the direction of broken symmetry q ¼ q ^ x . The decay of director ﬂuctuations is described by a stable , propagating mode ! n ¼ ! q ’ 1 p 20 ! iKq 2 . For small q the imaginary part of the frequencies ! p * ð q Þ of the modes describing the dynamics of density and order parameter magnitude takes the form Im ½ ! p þ ) ¼ ! ½ s 2 q 2 þ s 4 q 4 þ O ð q 6 Þ ) ( 12 ) with s 2 ¼ v 0 v 1 2 j $ 0 j & 1 ! v 0 a 2 % 20 4 v 1 j $ 0 j ( ’ ; implying an instability at small q when s 2 < 0 , corresponding to j $ 0 j + v 0 % 20 a 2 = 4 v 1 ( . Microscopic calculations yield $ 0 ’ v 0 and v 1 ’ v 0 ( Bertin , Droz , and Gre´goire , 2006 , 2009 ) , indicating that the instability exists for arbitrarily small v 0 and in a narrow region of densities above the mean - ﬁeld order - disorder transition . The O ð q 4 Þ term in Eq . ( 12 ) stabilizes ﬂuctuations at large wave vectors . In detail , near the mean - ﬁeld transition ( $ 0 ! 0 ! ) s 2 ’ ! a 2 = 8 ( $ 20 and s 4 ’ 5 a 4 = 128 ( 2 $ 50 and the mode is unstable for q < q c ’ 4 ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ( j $ 0 j 3 = 5 a 2 p ’ ð % c ! % 0 Þ 3 = 2 . Numerical solutions of the nonlinear hydrodynamic equations with and without noise have shown that in this region the uniform polarized state is replaced by complex spatiotemporal structures . In the ab - sence of noise , one ﬁnds propagating solitary waves in the form of ordered bands aligned transverse to the direction of broken symmetry and propagating along ^ x amidst a disor - dered background ( Bertin , Droz , and Gre´goire , 2009 ; Mishra , Baskaran , and Marchetti , 2010 ) . As discussed below , these bands have been observed in numerical simulations of the Vicsek model ( Gre´goire and Chate´ , 2004 ; Chate´ , Ginelli , Gre´goire , and Raynaud , 2008 ) and are shown in Fig . 9 . b . Sound waves Deep in the ordered phase , i . e . , for large negative $ 0 , ﬂuctuations & p in the magnitude of the order parameter decay on nonhydrodynamic time scales . We assume & p has relaxed to zero on the time scales of interest and let for simplicity p 0 ’ 1 . In addition , we include a diffusive current and the associated noise that were neglected in the density equation ( 2a ) . The coupled equations for density and polar director ﬂuctuations & % and & n take the form ð @ t þ v 0 @ x Þ & % ¼ ! v 0 % 0 @ y & n þ D r 2 & % þ r & f ! ; ( 13a ) ð @ t þ ’ 1 @ x Þ & n ¼ ! v 1 @ y " & % % 0 # þ K r 2 & n þ f y ; ( 13b ) where D is a diffusion constant and f % and f y describe white , Gaussian noise . The hydrodynamic modes , obtained from Eqs . ( 13a ) and ( 13b ) , are stable propagating soundlike waves , with the dispersion relation ! s * ¼ qc * ð ) Þ ! iq 2 K * ð ) Þ þ O ð q 3 Þ ; ( 14 ) with speeds and dampings c * ð ) Þ and K * ð ) Þ , whose detailed forms are given in Toner , Tu , and Ramaswamy ( 2005 ) and depend on the angle ) between q and the direction ^ x of broken symmetry . For ) ¼ * = 2 , i . e . , q along y , we ﬁnd c * ¼ * ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ v 0 v 1 p and K * ¼ ð K þ D Þ = 2 , while for ) ¼ 0 , corre - sponding to q along x , the two modes are decoupled and ! s þ ¼ qv 0 ! iDq 2 and ! s ! ¼ ! q ’ 1 ! iKq 2 . The difference in the propagation speeds is due to the lack of Galilean invariance . In a normal ﬂuid , sound waves propagate because of mass and momentum conservation and inertia . In contrast , the presence of propagating long - wavelength density disturbances here is a signature of the spontaneously broken orientational symmetry which renders & n ‘‘massless’’ ( Ramaswamy , 2010 ) . Going back to the full form of the matrix M in Eq . ( 11 ) , we notice that to leading order in q the relaxation of & p is governed by the @ t & p q ; ! ¼ ! 2 j $ 0 j & p q ; ! þ ap 0 & % q ; ! þ O ð q Þ : ( 15 ) This reminds us to be precise about what it means for a mode to be ‘‘fast’’ : ﬂuctuations in the magnitude of the order parameter cannot be neglected , but rather are slaved to density ﬂuctuations on long time scales & p q ; ! ’ ð ap 0 = 2 j $ 0 j Þ & % q ; ! . Inserting this into Eq . ( 10 ) yields an effective dynamics for & n and % with an instability of splay ﬂuctuations if ’ 3 > 2 v 1 ( = % 0 p 0 a > 0 ( Mishra , Baskaran , and Marchetti , 2010 ) . An analysis of the eigenvalues of the full matrix M conﬁrms this result . FIG . 9 ( color online ) . Typical snapshots in the ordered phase of the Vicsek model . Points represent the position of individual particles and the arrow points along the global direction of motion . Note that in the simulations sharp bands can be observed only if the system size is larger than the typical width of the bands . Adapted from Chate´ , Ginelli , Gre´goire , Peruani , and Raynaud , 2008 . 1152 M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 c . Giant density ﬂuctuations The linearized equations with noise can also be used to calculate correlation functions . Of particular interest is the static structure factor S ð q Þ ¼ 1 % 0 V h & % q ð t Þ & % ! q ð t Þ i ¼ Z 1 ! 1 d ! 2 * S ð q ; ! Þ ; ( 16 ) where S ð q ; ! Þ ¼ 1 % 0 V Z 1 0 dt exp ð i ! t Þ h & % q ð 0 Þ & % ! q ð t Þ i ( 17 ) is the dynamic structure factor . We are interested in calculat - ing density ﬂuctuations in the region away from the mean - ﬁeld transition , where the ordered state is linearly stable . Equations ( 13a ) and ( 13b ) yield S ð q ; ! Þ . For a reader wanting to work through the calculation , note that to leading order in the wave vector the noise f % in the density equations can be neglected , except for q along the direction of broken sym - metry ( ) ¼ 0 ) . Integrating over frequency as in Eq . ( 16 ) , again to leading order in q , one obtains S ð q Þ¼ v 20 % 0 ! sin 2 ) ð v 0 þ ’ 1 Þ 2 cos 2 ) þ 4 v 0 v 1 sin 2 ) , & 1 K þ ð ) Þþ 1 K ! ð ) Þ ’ 1 q 2 : ( 18 ) For ) ¼ 0 the leading 1 = q 2 singularity displayed in Eq . ( 18 ) vanishes ; to determine the ﬁnite value of S ð q Þ in that limit requires going to higher order in q which we will not do here . As we see below , the divergence of the static structure function at large wavelengths ( as 1 = q 2 in the present line - arized treatment ) is a remarkable and robust property of uniaxially ordered active systems , whether polar or nematic , and follows generally from the orientational order that devel - ops in a sufﬁciently dense collection of self - driven particles with anisotropic body shape ( Toner and Tu , 1995 , 1998 ; Simha and Ramaswamy , 2002a , 2002b ; Ramaswamy , Simha , and Toner , 2003 ; Toner , Tu , and Ramaswamy , 2005 ) . The 1 = q 2 term is also a dimension - independent prop - erty of our linearized theory ; the numerical prefactors do , however , depend on the dimensionality d . The divergence of the static structure function for q ! 0 implies an important violation of the familiar scaling of number ﬂuctuations in equilibrium . In the limit of vanishing wave vector the struc - ture factor is simply a measure of number ﬂuctuations , with lim q ! 0 S ð q Þ ¼ ! N 2 h N i ; ( 19 ) where N and h N i are the instantaneous and average number of particles in a region of size V , respectively , and ! N 2 ¼ h ð N ! h N i Þ 2 i is the variance of number ﬂuctuations . In an equilibrium system , ! N ’ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ h N i p , so that ! N = h N i ’ 1 = ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ h N i p ! 0 as h N i ! 1 . The ’ 1 = q 2 divergence of S ð q Þ for q ! 0 predicted by Eq . ( 18 ) implies that in an active system ! N grows faster than ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ h N i p . To understand this we rewrite Eq . ( 18 ) as ! N ’ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ h N i S ð q ! 0 Þ p . Assuming that the smallest accessible wave vector is of the order of the inverse of the system size V ! 1 = d , with d the space dimension , we ﬁnd S ð q ! 0 Þ ’ V 2 = d ’ h N i 2 = d . This gives ! N ’ h N i a ; a ¼ 1 2 þ 1 d : ( 20 ) The linear theory reviewed above predicts a strong enhance - ment of density ﬂuctuations in the ordered state , with an exponent a ¼ 1 in two dimensions ( Toner and Tu , 1995 ; Toner , Tu , and Ramaswamy , 2005 ) . We see in Sec . II . B that a similar linear theory also predicts the same scaling in the ordered state of active apolar nematic . In general , we expect the exponent to be substantially modiﬁed as compared to the theoretical value by ﬂuctuation effects arising from the cou - pling of modes at different wave numbers as a result of nonlinear terms in the equations of motion . ‘‘Giant density ﬂuctuations’’ have now been seen experimentally in both polar and apolar vibrated granular matter , with reported measured values of the exponent a of 2 a polar ¼ 1 : 45 * 0 : 05 ( Deseigne , Dauchot , and Chate´ , 2010 ) and a apolar ’ 1 ( Narayan , Ramaswamy , and Menon , 2007 ) . See Sec . II . B . 1 for a more detailed discussion of the apolar case . The scaling exponents , although measured over a limited dynamical range , are consistent , for the apolar case , with the linearized treatment presented here and in Ramaswamy , Simha , and Toner ( 2003 ) , and with the renormalization - group treatment ( Toner and Tu , 1995 , 1998 ; Toner , Tu , and Ramaswamy , 2005 ) in d ¼ 2 for polar ﬂocks . Giant number ﬂuctuations have also been seen in simulations of Vicsek - type models by Chate´ and collaborators ( Chate´ , Ginelli , and Montagne , 2006 ; Chate´ , Ginelli , Gre´goire , Peruani , and Raynaud , 2008 ; Chate´ , Ginelli , Gre´goire , and Raynaud , 2008 ) . Much remains to be understood about number ﬂuctuations in ﬂocks as revealed , for instance , by the experiments of Zhang et al . ( 2010 ) ( see Fig . 10 ) . Recent work also revealed mechanisms that can yield true phase separation ( hence large number ﬂuctuations ) in active systems in the absence of an ordered state ( Tailleur and Cates , 2008 ; Cates , 2012 ; Fily , Baskaran , and Marchetti , 2012 ) . We refer the interested reader to Sec . II . C for further discussion of this point . Recall that in thermal equilibrium the thermodynamic sum rule relates S ð q ¼ 0 Þ to the isothermal compressibility + T ¼ ! ð 1 = V Þ ð @ V = @ p Þ T according to S ð q ! 0 Þ ¼ % 0 k B T + T , with FIG . 10 ( color ) . Swimming bacillus subtilis bacteria exhibit strong polar order and ﬂuctuations that are smaller at low density ( left frame ) than at high density ( right frame ) . Nearby bacteria with arrows of the same color belong to the same dynamic cluster ; the arrows indicate a bacterium’s speed and direction . At high density ( right frame , corresponding to N ¼ 718 bacteria in the imaging window of 60 ! m , 60 ! m ) the measured number ﬂuctuations scale with an exponent a ¼ 0 : 75 * 0 : 03 , smaller than predicted by theory in d ¼ 2 [ Eq . ( 20 ) ] , but substantially larger than the value obtained for a thermal system . Adapted from Zhang et al . , 2010 . M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter 1153 Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 % 0 ¼ h N i = V the mean number density . One might then be tempted to say that orientationally ordered active systems are characterized by a diverging effective compressibility . This would in general be wrong . Augmenting the free - energy functional ( 4 ) with a linear coupling R U ð r ; t Þ & % ð r ; t Þ d d r and calculating the response function ð & h % i = & U Þ q ; ! can read - ily be shown to yield a ﬁnite result for q , ! ! 0 . The giant density ﬂuctuations seen in the ordered state of active systems are an excess noise from the invasion of the density dynamics by the soft Goldstone mode of orientational order , not an enhanced response to perturbations . This invasion occurs in active systems and not in passive ones because orientational curvature in an active system leads to a local polarity and hence to a current . In an equilibrium system , such a distortion would simply relax via the interplay of elasticity and viscosity . d . Long - range order of dry polar active matter in 2D The ordered polar state is remarkable in that it exhibits long - range order of a continuous order parameter in two dimensions . This has been referred to as a violation of the Mermin - Wagner theorem , although it is important to keep in mind that the latter holds only for systems in thermal equi - librium . From Eqs . ( 13a ) and ( 13b ) one can immediately obtain the correlation function of ﬂuctuations in the direction & n of polar order , with the result hj & n q ð t Þ j 2 i ’ 1 = q 2 . Taken literally , this result implies quasi - long - range order in two dimensions in analogy with the equilibrium XY model . It has been shown , however , that nonlinearities in Eqs . ( 13a ) and ( 13b ) are strongly relevant in d ¼ 2 and lead to a singular renormalization of the effective stiffness of the polar director at small wave numbers q , so that hj & n q ð t Þ j 2 i diverges more slowly than 1 = q 2 for most directions of q , thus preserving long - range order ( Toner and Tu , 1995 , 1998 ; Toner , Tu , and Ramaswamy , 2005 ) . A qualitative explanation of how this happens is given in Ramaswamy ( 2010 ) , but a quantitative account can be found in Toner ( 2009 ) . Exact arguments for scaling exponents in two dimensions are given by Toner ( 2012a ) in the limit where the particle number is fast , i . e . , not conserved locally . e . Numerical simulation of Vicsek - type models Although a review of numerical simulations of agent - based models is beyond the scope of this paper , for completeness we summarize the main ﬁndings . Quantitative agreement has been found between numerical experiments on microscopic models and the predictions of the coarse - grained theory , including long - range order in d ¼ 2 , the form of the prop - agating modes , anomalous density ﬂuctuations , and super - diffusion of tagged particles ( Gre´goire and Chate´ , 2004 ; Toner , Tu , and Ramaswamy , 2005 ) . Early numerical studies ( Vicsek et al . , 1995 ) and some later variants ( Aldana et al . , 2007 ; Go¨nci , Nagy , and Vicsek , 2008 ; Baglietto and Albano , 2009 ) found a behavior consistent with a continuous onset of ﬂocking , as a mean - ﬁeld solution would predict . However , the currently agreed picture , in systems where particle num - ber is conserved , is of a discontinuous transition ( Gre´goire and Chate ´ , 2004 ; Chate ´ , Ginelli , and Montagne , 2006 ; Chate ´ , Ginelli , and Gre´goire , 2007 ; Chate´ , Ginelli , Gre´goire , and Raynaud , 2008 ) . It was found in fact that in a large domain of parameter space , including the transition region , the dynam - ics is dominated by propagating solitary structures consisting of well - deﬁned regions of high density and high polar order in a low - density , disordered background . The ordered regions consist of stripes or bands aligned transverse to the direction of mean order and traveling along the direction of mean motion with speed of order v 0 as shown in Fig . 9 . Away from the transition , for weak noise strengths , a homogeneous ordered phase is found , although with anomalously large density ﬂuctuations . Numerical solution and simpliﬁed ana - lytical analysis of the nonlinear continuum model described by Eq . ( 2 ) has also yielded traveling wave structures ( Bertin , Droz , and Gre´goire , 2009 ; Mishra , Baskaran , and Marchetti , 2010 ; Gopinath et al . , 2012 ) . Finally , traveling density waves have been observed in actin motility assays at very high actin density ( Schaller et al . , 2010 ) as shown in Fig . 11 . Although it is tempting to identify these actin density waves with the traveling bands seen in simulations of the Vicsek model , the connection is at best qualitative at the moment . In particular , it remains to be established whether these actin suspensions can indeed be modeled as dry systems , or hydrodynamic interactions are important , as suggested by Schaller , Weber , Frey , and Bausch , 2011 . B . Systems with nematic interactions on a substrate Nematic order is the simplest kind of orientational order , with a spontaneously chosen axis which we designate as the ^ x direction , and no distinction between ^ x and ! ^ x . Lacking a permanent vectorial asymmetry , the system , although driven , has no opportunity to translate its lack of time - reversal symmetry into an average nonzero drift velocity . One would be forgiven for thinking that such a nonmoving state cannot possibly display any of the characteristics of a ﬂock . FIG . 11 . Density waves in a dense actin motility assay . The left image is a snapshot of the traveling wave fronts of actin observed in motility assays for actin density above about 20 filaments = ! m 2 . Adapted from Schaller et al . , 2010 . The right image ( courtesy of V . Schaller ) is obtained by overlaying maximal intensity projections of 20 consecutive images , corresponding to a total time of 2 . 5 s . The time overlay allows one to trace the trajectory of the ﬁlaments , showing that ﬁlaments in the high - density regions move collectively with high orientational persistence , while ﬁlaments lying outside the bands perform uncorrelated persistent random walks . The elongated density modulation travels in the direction of the ﬁlaments’ long direction at a speed that remains approximately constant over the time scale of the experiment . 1154 M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 Remarkably , however , some of the most extreme ﬂuctuation properties of ordered phases of active particles are predicted ( Ramaswamy , Simha , and Toner , 2003 ) and observed in experiments ( Narayan , Ramaswamy , and Menon , 2007 ) and earlier in simulations ( Chate´ , Ginelli , and Montagne , 2006 ; Mishra and Ramaswamy , 2006 ) on this ﬂock that goes no - where on average . As with polar active systems , several levels of description are possible for an active nematic – minimal agent - based stochastic model ( Chate´ , Ginelli , and Montagne , 2006 ) and Fokker - Planck treatments thereof ( Shi and Ma , 2010 ) , more detailed dynamical models that generalize rod - like - polymer dynamics to include the physics of motors walking on cytoskeletal ﬁlaments ( Ahmadi , Marchetti , and Liverpool , 2005 , 2006 ) , or direct continuum approaches based on partial differential equations for the slow variables ( Simha and Ramaswamy , 2002a ) . The microscopic models can in turn be coarse grained ( Ahmadi , Marchetti , and Liverpool , 2006 ; Mishra , 2009 ; Shi and Ma , 2010 ; Mishra et al . , 2012 ; Bertin et al . , 2013 ) to yield the continuum equations in averaged ( Ahmadi , Marchetti , and Liverpool , 2005 ; Shi and Ma , 2010 ) or stochastic ( Mishra , 2009 ; Mishra et al . , 2012 ; Bertin et al . , 2013 ) form . 1 . Active nematic In this section we construct the equations of motion for active apolar nematics and discover their remarkable proper - ties . We continue to work in a simpliﬁed description in which the medium through or over which the active particles move is merely a momentum sink , without its own dynamics . Effects associated with ﬂuid ﬂow are deferred to a later section . We consider again a collection of elongated active particles labeled by n , with positions r n ð t Þ and orientation described by unit vectors ^ ! n ð t Þ . As in the case of polar systems on a substrate , the only conservation law is that of a number . The slow variables of such a formulation are thus the number density % ð r ; t Þ at location r and time t , as deﬁned in Eq . ( 1a ) , and the apolar nematic orientational order pa - rameter , a traceless symmetric tensor Q with components Q $ ( ð r ; t Þ¼ 1 % ð r ; t Þ X n " ^ , n $ ð t Þ ^ , n ( ð t Þ ! 1 d & $ ( # & ð r ! r n ð t Þ Þ ( 21 ) measuring the local degree of mutual alignment of the axes of the constituent particles , without distinguishing head from tail . In constructing the equations of motion we keep track of which terms are permitted in a system at thermal equilibrium and which arise strictly from nonequilibrium activity . As we are ignoring inertia and ﬂuid ﬂow , the dynamics of the orientation is governed by @ t Q ¼ ! 1 # Q & F Q & Q þ f Q ( 22 ) describing the balance between frictional torques governed by a rotational viscosity # Q and thermodynamic torques from a free - energy functional F Q ¼ Z r & $ Q ð % Þ 2 Q : Q þ ( Q 4 ð Q : Q Þ 2 þ K Q 2 ð r Q Þ 2 þ C Q Q : rr & % % 0 þ A 2 " & % % 0 # 2 ’ ( 23 ) that includes a tendency to nematic order for $ Q < 0 and ( Q > 0 , Frank elasticity as well as variations in the magni - tude of Q via K Q , bilinear couplings of Q and % , and a compression modulus A penalizing density ﬂuctuations & % , as in Eq . ( 4 ) . Note that all parameters in Eq . ( 23 ) can depend on % , as indicated explicitly for $ Q . We also stress that this form of the free energy applies only in two dimensions . For active nematic in three dimensions terms of order Q 3 also need to be included . We included in Eq . ( 22 ) a spatiotempor - ally white statistically isotropic tensor noise f Q to take into account ﬂuctuations of thermal or active origin . It is implicit that all terms in Eq . ( 22 ) are traceless and symmetric . We ignored several possible terms in the equation of motion for Q —additional couplings to % via off - diagonal kinetic coef - ﬁcients , nonlinear terms not expressible as the variational derivative of a scalar functional , and terms of subleading order in gradients—none of which plays an important role in our analysis . The unique physics of the self - driven nematic state ( Ramaswamy , Simha , and Toner , 2003 ) enters through active contributions to the current J in the conservation law @ t % ¼ ! r & J ; ( 24 ) where J ¼ ! 1 # % r & F Q & % þ J active ; ( 25 ) with a mobility # ! 1 % controlling the passive contribution to the density current . There are several ways of generating the active current : one can write it down on the grounds that nothing rules them out in a nonequilibrium state ( Simha and Ramaswamy , 2002a ; Ramaswamy , Simha , and Toner , 2003 ) , derive it from speciﬁc microscopic models involving motors and ﬁlaments ( Ahmadi , Marchetti , and Liverpool , 2005 , 2006 ) or apolar ﬂocking agents ( Chate´ , Ginelli , and Montagne , 2006 ; Mishra , 2009 ; Mishra et al . , 2012 ; Bertin et al . , 2013 ) , or frame it in the language of linear irreversible thermodynamics ( de Groot and Mazur , 1984 ; Ju¨licher et al . , 2007 ) . This last we will do later , in Sec . III . For now , Fig . 12 provides a pictorial argument . In a system with only an apolar order parameter , curvature r & Q implies a local polarity and hence in a nonequilibrium situation maintained by a nonzero activity must in general give a current J active ¼ - Q r & Q ; ( 26 ) FIG . 12 ( color online ) . Curvature generates temporary polarity in a nematic . Activity gives rise to a current in a direction determined by this polarity . M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter 1155 Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 where - Q is a phenomenological active parameter . Graphic experimental evidence of curvature - induced current can be found in Fig . 13 ; for details see Narayan , Ramaswamy , and Menon ( 2007 ) . As shown by Ramaswamy , Simha , and Toner ( 2003 ) and reiterated below , this - Q term leads to giant number ﬂuctuations in active nematics . This is despite the fact that Eq . ( 26 ) has one more gradient than the current in the polar case in Eq . ( 2 ) . We comment below on this subtlety after we summarize the calculation and the relevant experi - ments and simulations . Using Eq . ( 23 ) in Eq . ( 22 ) , and including both active and passive contributions to the current J given in Eqs . ( 25 ) and ( 26 ) , leads to @ t % ¼ D r 2 % þ B r 2 rr : Q þ - Q rr : Q þ r & f % ; ( 27 ) with D ¼ A = % 20 # % , B ¼ C Q = % 0 # % . We have treated - Q as constant , and we have introduced number - conserving ﬂuctuations through the random current f % which , again , we take to be statistically isotropic and delta correlated in space and time . Despite its apparent structural simplicity the apolar active nematic state has been explored less than its polar counter - part . The ordering transition appears numerically ( Chate´ , Ginelli , and Montagne , 2006 ) to be of the Kosterlitz - Thouless type , but analytical approaches must confront the difﬁculties of the coupling of order parameter and density and have not been attempted so far , beyond mean ﬁeld ( Ahmadi , Marchetti , and Liverpool , 2005 , 2006 ) which predicts a con - tinuous transition in two dimensions . Working with equations similar to Eqs . ( 22 ) and ( 27 ) , Shi and Ma ( 2010 ) obtained in a Boltzmann - equation approach from the model of Chate ´ , Ginelli , and Montagne ( 2006 ) , with a ﬁnite - wave number instability of the uniform nematic state just past onset , and a ‘‘perpetually evolving state . ’’ Note that similar behavior has been obtained by Giomi and collaborators for wet nematic ﬂuids ( Giomi et al . , 2011 , 2012 ) and has been observed in recent experiments on in vitro suspensions of microtubule - kinesin bundles ( Marchetti , 2012 ; Sanchez et al . , 2012 ) . Finally , there are preliminary numerical indications ( Mishra , 2009 ; Mishra et al . , 2012 ; Bertin et al . , 2013 ) of anomalous growth kinetics of active nematic order following a quench from the isotropic phase , with a strong clumping of the density . We will not pursue these issues further in this review . In the remainder of this section we restrict ourselves to a simple understanding of the statistics of linearized density ﬂuctuations deep in a well - ordered active nematic . Tests of the resulting predictions , through experiments and numerical studies , will be discussed thereafter . For the purposes of this section it is enough to work in two dimensions denoted ( x ; y ) , so that Q has components Q xx ¼ ! Q yy ¼ Q ¼ S cos2 ) , Q xy ¼ Q yx ¼ P ¼ S sin2 ) . We take $ Q < 0 , ( Q > 0 in Eq . ( 23 ) , yielding a phase with uniform nematic order and density % 0 in mean - ﬁeld theory , and choose our basis so that this reference state has ) ¼ 0 . Expressing Eqs . ( 22 ) and ( 27 ) to linear order in perturbations about the reference state , % ¼ % 0 þ & % ð r ; t Þ , Q ¼ diag ð S ; ! S Þ þ & Q , where & Q xy ¼ & Q yx ’ 2 S ) and & Q xx ¼ ! & Q yy ¼ O ð ) 2 Þ , and working in terms of the space - time Fourier transforms & % q ! , ) q ! , it is straightforward to calcu - late the correlation functions S % q ! ¼ ð 1 = % 0 V Þ hj & % q ! j 2 i , S ) q ! ¼ð 1 = V Þ hj ) q ! j 2 i , and S % ) q ! ¼ð 1 = V Þ h & % q ! ) - q ! i . Rather than dwelling on the details of this calculation FIG . 13 ( color ) . Curvature gives rise to self - propulsion in an apolar active medium , illustrating Eq . ( 26 ) . A disclination of strength þ 1 = 2 ( circled in red ) in a nematic phase of a vibrated layer of rods . The locally polar director structure , together with the absence of time - reversal symmetry in a driven state , leads to directed motion . The curvatures around a nearby defect of strength ! 1 = 2 ( circled in green ) lack a preferred direction ; that defect does not move . Adapted from Narayan , Ramaswamy , and Menon , 2007 . 1156 M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 ( Ramaswamy , Simha , and Toner , 2003 ) , we suggest that one can verify for themselves a few essential facts . ( a ) Parameter ranges of nonzero measure can be found such that the real parts of the eigenvalues of the dynamical matrix for this coupled problem are negative , i . e . , active nematics are not generically unstable . ( b ) Terms involving C Q from Eq . ( 23 ) are irrelevant—subdominant in wave number in Eq . ( 27 ) and leading only to a ﬁnite renormalization of parameters in Eq . ( 22 ) . ( c ) Ignoring C Q , the dynamics of Q through Eq . ( 22 ) becomes autonomous , independent of % . In the nematic phase it is straightforward to show that ) q has equal - time correlations S ) q ¼ R ð d ! = 2 * Þ S ) q ! / 1 = q 2 , and a lifetime / 1 = q 2 . The term rr : Q through which ) q ! appears in the density equation ( 27 ) can be reexpressed as @ x @ y ) . This autonomy of ) means that this term can be viewed as colored noise with variance / q 2 x q 2 y = q 2 , and relaxation time ’ 1 = q 2 . The zero - frequency weight of this noise is thus ’ q 2 x q 2 y = q 4 , i . e . , of order q 0 but anisotropic . By contrast , the conserving noise r & f % has zero - frequency weight that vanishes as q 2 and is thus irrelevant in the face of the active contribution rr : Q , whose long - time , long - distance effects are now re - vealed to be analogous to those of a number - non - conserving noise . The deterministic part of the dynamics of % , on the other hand , is diffusive and hence number conserving . This combination implies immediately that the equal - time corre - lator S % q ’ ð noise strength Þ , ð relaxation time Þ ’ q 2 x q 2 y = q 6 , i . e . , direction dependent but of order 1 = q 2 , as argued in greater detail in Sec . II . A . 3 . c for a linearized description of density ﬂuctuations in a polar ﬂock . There is a puzzle here at ﬁrst sight . We remarked that the apolar contribution to the active current ( 26 ) is 1 order higher in gradients than the polar term . Why then do density ﬂuctu - ations in the linearized theory for polar and apolar ﬂocks show equally singular behavior ? The reason is that in polar ﬂocks density gradients act back substantially on the polar - ization p through the pressurelike term v 1 r % = % 0 in Eq . ( 5 ) , reducing the orientational ﬂuctuations that engendered them . The effect of density gradients on ) in the apolar case is far weaker , a quadrupolar aligning torque ’ @ x @ z % which does not substantially iron out the orientational curvature that engendered the density ﬂuctuations . It should be possible to check , on a living system , the rather startling prediction that ﬂocks that go nowhere have enormous density ﬂuctuations . Melanocyte suspensions at high concentration show well - ordered nematic phases when spread on a substrate as seen by Gruler , Dewald , and Eberhardt ( 1999 ) . However , we know of no attempts to measure density ﬂuctuations in these systems . The prediction of giant number ﬂuctuations has been tested and conﬁrmed ﬁrst in a computer simulation of an apolar ﬂocking model by Chate´ , Ginelli , and Montagne ( 2006 ) and then in an experi - ment on a vertically vibrated monolayer of head - tail sym - metric millimeter - sized bits of copper wire by Narayan , Ramaswamy , and Menon ( 2007 ) . Of particular interest is the fact that the experiment observed a logarithmic time decay of the autocorrelation of the local density , a stronger test of the theory than the mere occurrence of giant ﬂuctua - tions . Issues regarding the origin of the ﬂuctuations in the experiment were nonetheless raised by Aranson et al . ( 2008 ) , with a response by Narayan , Ramaswamy , and Menon ( 2008 ) . Faced with such large density ﬂuctuations , it is natural to ask whether the active nematic state is phase separated in the sense of Das and Barma ( 2000 ) . This idea was tested by Mishra and Ramaswamy ( 2006 ) in a simulation model in which particles were advected by the nematic curvature ( Lebwohl and Lasher , 1973 ) , and indeed the steady state showed the characteristics of Das and Barma ( 2000 ) ’s ﬂuctuation - dominated phase separation . 2 . Self - propelled hard rods : A system of ‘‘mixed’’ symmetry ? The Vicsek model contains an explicit alignment rule that yields an ordered polar , moving state . The alignment inter - action is in this case explicitly polar , in the sense that it aligns particles head to head and tail to tail . A different model of elongated self - propelled particles where the alignment inter - action has nematic , rather than polar , symmetry has been studied by Baskaran and Marchetti ( 2008a , 2008b , 2010 ) . They considered the dynamics of a collection of hard rods self - propelled at speed v 0 along their long axis , moving on a frictional substrate and interacting via hard core collisions . Numerical simulations of self - propelled hard rods have also been carried out by Kraikivski , Lipowsky , and Kierfeld ( 2006 ) , Peruani , Deutsch , and Ba¨r ( 2006 , 2008 ) , and Yang , Marceau , and Gompper ( 2010 ) and have revealed a rich behavior . Related models of self - propelled particles with nematic aligning rules have also been considered ( Ginelli et al . , 2010 ) . The analysis by Baskaran and Marchetti ( 2010 ) of the collisions of two self - propelled hard rods ( see Fig . 14 ) shows that , although self - propulsion enhances lon - gitudinal momentum transfer and effectively tends to align two colliding rods , the alignment is in this case ‘‘apolar , ’’ in the sense that it tends to align particles without distinguishing head from tail . Baskaran and Marchetti ( 2010 ) derived an Onsager - type theory of self - propelled hard rods , obtaining a Smoluchowski equation modiﬁed in several ways by self - propulsion . They then obtained hydrodynamic equations by explicit coarse graining of the kinetic theory . One result of this work is that self - propelled hard rods do not order into a polar moving state in bulk . In spite of the polarity of the individual particles , provided by the self - propulsion , the symmetry of the system remains nematic at large scales . Self - propulsion does , however , enhance nematic order , as shown earlier by Kraikivski , Lipowsky , and Kierfeld ( 2006 ) in a model of actin motility assays , where the propul - sion is provided by myosin motors tethered to the plane . It is well known ( in a mean - ﬁeld approximation neglecting FIG . 14 ( color online ) . The cartoon shows that the binary collision of self - propelled hard rods provides an apolar aligning interaction in the sense that it aligns rods regardless of their polarity . M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter 1157 Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 ﬂuctuations ) that thermal hard rods of length ‘ undergo a continuous isotropic - nematic transition in two dimension at a density % Ons ¼ 3 = ð 2 * ‘ 2 Þ ( Doi and Edwards , 1986 ) , as ﬁrst shown by Onsager ( 1949 ) . Self - propelled rods perform a persistent random walk ( Kareiva and Shigesada , 1983 ; ten Hagen , van Teeffelen , and Lo¨wen , 2009 ; Kudrolli , 2010 ) consisting of ballistic ﬂights randomized by rotational diffu - sion . At long time the dynamics is diffusive and isotropic , with effective diffusion constant D e ¼ D þ v 20 = 2 D r , where D is the longitudinal thermal diffusion coefﬁcient and D r is the rotational diffusion rate . Self - propelled rods of length ‘ then behave as rods with an effective length ‘ eff ’ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ D e = D r p ¼ ‘ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 1 þ v 20 = ½ 2 ð DD r Þ ) 1 = 2 q ( Kraikivski , Lipowsky , and Kierfeld , 2006 ) and undergo an isotropic - nematic transition at a density % IN ¼ % Ons ( " 1 þ v 20 2 ‘ 2 D 2 r # ; where we used D ’ ‘ 2 D r . The microscopic derivation carried out by Baskaran and Marchetti ( 2008a ) supports this estimate . The suppression of % IN from self - propulsion was veriﬁed recently via large - scale simulations of self - propelled hard rods ( Yang , Marceau , and Gompper , 2010 ) and particles with nematic aligning rules ( Ginelli et al . , 2010 ) . The statistical mechanics of self - propelled hard rods and the derivation of the modiﬁed Smoluchowski equations is described by Baskaran and Marchetti ( 2010 ) and will not be repeated here . Instead the hydrodynamic equations for this system are introduced phenomenologically and their con - sequences are discussed . Once again , the only conserved ﬁeld is the density % ð r ; t Þ of self - propelled rods . Theory and simulations indicated that although self - propelled particles with apolar interactions do not order in polar states , their dynamics is qualitatively different from that of active ne - matic and requires consideration of both the vector order parameter p deﬁned in Eq . ( 1b ) and the alignment tensor Q ij of Eq . ( 21 ) . In other words , although the polarization p does not describe a broken symmetry , it is necessary to incorporate its dynamics to capture the rich physics of the system into a continuum description . We then consider coupled equations for the conserved particle density % and the two coupled orientational order parameters p and Q . Once again , the equations can be written in terms of a ‘‘free energy’’ as 4 @ t % ¼ ! r & ð v 0 % p Þ þ D r 2 % þ 1 # % rr : & F pQ & Q þ r & f % ; ( 28a ) @ t p þ ’ 1 ð p & r Þ p ! & 1 p & Q þ & 2 Q : Qp ¼ ! 1 # p & F pQ & p þ f ; ( 28b ) @ t Q þ ’ 0 1 ð p & r Þ Q ¼ ! 1 # Q & & F pQ & Q ’ ST þ f Q ; ( 28c ) where the subscript ST denotes the symmetric , traceless part of any second order tensor T , i . e . , ½ T ) ST has components T STij ¼ 12 ð T ij þ T ji Þ ! 12 & ij T kk , and F pQ ¼ F Q þ Z r $ $ pQ 2 j p j 2 þ K 2 ð @ $ p ( Þð @ $ p ( Þ þ P ð % ; p ; S Þð r & p Þ ! v 2 Q $ ( ð @ $ p ( Þ % : ( 29 ) We grouped several terms [ including some that were made explicit , for instance , in Eq . ( 4 ) ] by writing a local sponta - neous splay in terms of a ‘‘pressure’’ P ð % ; p ; S Þ . Note that it is essential to retain the general dependence of this pres - sure on % , p , and S to generate all terms obtained from the microscopic theory . Here p ¼ j p j and the magnitude S of the alignment tensor has been deﬁned by noting that in uniaxial systems in two dimensions we can write Q $ ( ¼ 2 S ð n $ n ( ! 12 & $ ( Þ , with n as a unit vector . Then Q $ # Q # ( ¼ S 2 & $ ( . The kinetic theory of Baskaran and Marchetti yields $ pQ > 0 at all densities , indicating that no isotropic - polar transition occurs in the system . In con - trast , $ Q ð % Þ is found to change sign at a characteristic density % IN , signaling the onset of nematic order . The closure of the moments equations used in Baskaran and Marchetti ( 2008a , 2008b ) to derive hydrodynamics gives terms only up to quadratic in the ﬁelds in the continuum equations , but is sufﬁcient to establish the absence of a polar state and to evaluate the renormalization of the isotropic - nematic transition density due to self - propulsion . Cubic terms such as ’ ( Q Q 3 needed to evaluate the value of the nematic order parameter in the ordered state and the active ’ & 2 Q : Qp can be obtained from a higher order closure and are included here for completeness . A higher order closure also conﬁrms the absence of a term propor - tional to p 3 in the polarization equation , which could , if present , yield a bulk polar state . We note that a p & Q & p term in the free energy is permitted and would yield both the p & Q term on the left - hand side of the p equation and a pp term in the Q equation , with related coefﬁcients . 4 We note that there are some differences between the equations derived in the literature for long , thin self - propelled rods ( Baskaran and Marchetti , 2008a , 2010 ) and those for point particles with nematic aligning rules ( Peshkov et al . , 2012 ) . The differences arise because ( i ) the thin rod approximation yields only terms with nematic symmetry in the collision integral , and ( ii ) advective - type terms arising from the ﬁnite size of the rods are neglected in the point particle model . The continuum description of self - propelled entities with nematic interactions is still evolving . 1158 M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 The joint presence of these terms can lead to the existence of a polar ordered state . The hard - rod kinetic theory of Baskaran and Marchetti produces only the p & Q term . The fact that the theory does not generate the pp term , which would be obligatory had the dynamics been governed entirely by a free - energy functional , underlines the non - equilibrium nature of the dynamics we are constructing . It would be of great interest to ﬁnd the minimal extension of self - propelled hard - rod kinetic theory that could produce a phase with polar order . a . Homogeneous steady states and their stability The only homogeneous steady states of the system are an isotropic state with % ¼ % 0 and p ¼ Q ¼ 0 and a nematic state where p ¼ 0 , but Q is ﬁnite . The transition occurs at % IN where $ pQ ’ % IN ! % changes sign . As in the case of the active nematic , we work in two dimensions denoted x and y , so that Q has components Q xx ¼ ! Q yy ¼ S cos2 ) and Q xy ¼ Q yx ¼ S sin2 ) . In the nematic state $ Q < 0 , ( Q > 0 in Eq . ( 28c ) , yielding a phase with uniform nematic order and S ¼ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ! $ Q = ð 2 ( Q Þ q . We choose our coordinates so that this reference state has ) ¼ 0 . The phase transition line is shown in Fig . 15 as a function of density % 0 and self - propulsion speed v 0 for the microscopic hard - rod model discussed in Baskaran and Marchetti ( 2008a , 2008b ) . As in the case of polar and nematic active systems , the isotropic state is stable . It can also support ﬁnite - wave - vector propagating soundlike waves ( Baskaran and Marchetti , 2008b ) . The properties of the ordered state , on the other hand , are more subtle and not yet fully explored ( Baskaran and Marchetti , 2012 ; Peshkov et al . , 2012 ) . Numerical simulations of collections of self - propelled rods with steric repulsion recently revealed a rich behavior , quite distinct from that of polar Vicsek - type models . As predicted by theory , self - propelled rods with only excluded volume interactions do not order in a macroscopically polarized state , but exhibit only nematic order , which appears to be long ranged in two dimensions . Again , simulations also conﬁrmed that selfpropulsion enhances the tendency for nematic ordering as well as aggregation and clustering , in both self - propelled rods ( Ginelli et al . , 2010 ) and particles with nematic aligning rules ( Peruani , Deutsch , and Ba¨r , 2006 ; Yang , Marceau , and Gompper , 2010 ) . After an initial tran - sient , the particles form polar clusters that travel in a directed fashion , as shown in Fig . 16 . Large clusters can form by collisions of smaller ones and break up due to collisions with other clusters or due to noise . Eventually the system reaches a stationary state , in which the formation rate of any cluster size equals its breakup rate , and the rods and particles aggregate in large stationary clusters . Above the order - disorder transition , phase separation manifests itself with the formation of ne - matic bands , consisting of high - density regions where the particles are on average aligned with the long direction of the band , but move in both directions , exhibiting no polar order , as shown in Fig . 17 , although deeper in the ordered nematic phase , the bands seem to give way to a stable homogeneous nematic state ( Ginelli et al . , 2010 ) . Self - propulsion has also been shown to increase the segregation tendency in a mixture of self - propelled rods with distinctly different motilities FIG . 15 ( color online ) . The mean - ﬁeld isotropic - nematic transi - tion line for self - propelled hard rods . Adapted from Baskaran and Marchetti , 2008a . FIG . 16 ( color ) . Snapshots from simulations of self - propelled hard rods . The red dots mark the front end of the rods , i . e . , the direction of self - propulsion . The rods are otherwise head - tail sym - metric . The left image is for a density % rod L 2rods ¼ 0 : 7744 , where L rod is the length of the rod , and 1 = Pe ¼ 0 : 005 , where Pe ¼ L rod v 0 = D k is the Peclet number , with v 0 the self - propulsion speed of each rod and D k the diffusion coefﬁcient for motion along the long direction of the rod . The right image shows a close - up of clusters of sizes n ¼ 3 , 10 , and 22 , highlighting the partially blocked structure and the ‘‘smecticlike’’ ordering of rods within a cluster . The clusters are chosen from a simulation with parameters 1 = Pe ¼ 0 : 00095 and the same density as in the left image . Adapted from Yang , Marceau , and Gompper , 2010 . FIG . 17 . Typical snapshots of nematic bands above the order - disorder transition in the ordered phase . Arrows indicate the polar orientation of particles ; only a fraction of the particles are shown for clarity reasons . Adapted from Ginelli et al . , 2010 . M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter 1159 Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 ( McCandlish , Baskaran , and Hagan , 2012 ) . In closing this section , we remark that mixed - symmetry models of the sort just presented may well be the best description of the collec - tive crawling of rodlike bacteria such as those studied by Wu et al . ( 2011 ) . Cluster formation qualitatively similar to that observed in simulations of self - propelled ( SP ) rods has been observed in recent experiments in myxobacteria ( Peruani et al . , 2012 , Fig . 18 ) . Finally nematic aligning interactions have also been suggested to control the rich collective be - havior of microtubules propelled by dynein motor proteins grafted to a glass surface in recent in vitro motility assays ( Sumino et al . , 2012 ) . C . Current status of dry active matter Although much progress has been made in the understand - ing and classiﬁcation of dry active matter , a number of open questions remain . Clustering and phase separation , with associated giant number ﬂuctuations , are ubiquitous in active systems . It was ﬁrst suggested that giant number ﬂuctuations may be a distinct property of the ordered state ( nematic and polar ) of active systems , intimately related to the existence of a spon - taneously broken orientational symmetry ( Toner and Tu , 1998 ; Simha and Ramaswamy , 2002a ; Ramaswamy , Simha , and Toner , 2003 ) . In ordered states such large ﬂuctuations can indeed be understood as arising from curvature - driven active currents unique to the ordered state of active systems ( Narayan , Ramaswamy , and Menon , 2007 ) . More recently giant pretransitional ﬂuctuations in the number density , asso - ciated with the approach to a nonequilibrium critical point , consistent with a standard deviation growing linearly with the mean number N of particles , rather than the ﬃﬃﬃﬃ N p expected in situations where the central limit theorem applies , have been reported in active systems of symmetric disks with no align - ment rule that do not exhibit any orientational broken sym - metry ( Fily , Baskaran , and Marchetti , 2012 ) . In this case strong clustering ( with unavoidable large density ﬂuctua - tions ) and phase separation seem to arise from the general mechanism proposed by Tailleur and Cates ( 2008 ) and Cates et al . ( 2010 ) and reviewed recently by Cates ( 2012 ) associ - ated with the breaking down of detailed balance in systems that are driven out of equilibrium by a local input of energy on each constituent , as in self - propelled systems or bacterial suspensions . Strong density inhomogeneities leading to per - sistent clustering have also been seen in layers of vibrated granular spheres ( Prevost et al . , 2004 ; Aranson et al . , 2008 ) , as well as in collections of living ( Schwarz - Linek et al . , 2012 ) and artiﬁcial ( Theurkauff et al . , 2012 ) swimmers , where , however , attractive interactions may also be important . Again , although in this case other mechanisms such as the inelasticity of collisions may play a role , more work is needed to elucidate the generic aspect of this ubiquitous phenomenon . Although some controversy still remains ( Vicsek et al . , 1995 ; Aldana et al . , 2007 ; Go¨nci , Nagy , and Vicsek , 2008 ) , there is now strong numerical evidence ( Chate´ , Ginelli , and Gre´goire , 2007 ) that the order - disorder transition in dry active systems is discontinuous , with an associated wealth of coex - istence phenomena . One unusual aspect of the transition is that density ﬂuctuations destabilize the ordered state right at the mean - ﬁeld order transition . This behavior seems to be associated with a phenomenon that has been referred to as ‘‘dynamical self - regulation’’ ( Baskaran and Marchetti , 2012 ; Gopinath et al . , 2012 ) associated with the fact that in this class of active systems the parameter that controls the tran - sition , namely , the density of active particles , is not tuned from the outside , as in familiar equilibrium phase transitions , but rather it is dynamically convected or diffused by non - equilibrium active currents controlled by the order parameter itself . It would of course be interesting to attempt to use formal ﬁeld theory and renormalization - group methods to shed some light on this unusual nonequilibrium transition . The behavior of collections of self - propelled or active particles is strongly affected by the presence of boundaries and obstacles ( Wensink and Lo¨wen , 2008 ; Elgeti and Gompper , 2009 ) . Ratchet effects have been demonstrated experimentally and theoretically for active particles interact - ing with asymmetric obstacles or on asymmetric substrates , without any external forcing ( Angelani , DiLeonardo , and Giancarlo , 2009 ; DiLeonardo et al . , 2010 ) . For bacteria undergoing run - and - tumble dynamics or self - propelled parti - cles performing persistent random walks , the guiding effect of asymmetric boundaries can yield a variety of rectiﬁcation effects ( Galajda et al . , 2007 ; Wan et al . , 2008 ) , that can even power submillimiter gears , as demonstrated in recent experi - ments ( DiLeonardo et al . , 2010 ; Sokolov et al . , 2010 ) . Understanding the interaction of bacteria with obstacles and with passive particles is crucial for harnessing the collective power of these living systems and developing micron - scale mechanical machines powered by microorganisms . Whether these phenomena can be described in the dry limit discussed in this section or require a proper treatment of ﬂow as introduced in the next section and even hydrodynamic inter - actions is still an open question . Finally there has been a surge of recent interest in the properties of dense active matter and the living crystalline or glassy states that may be formed in these systems . The nonequilibrium freezing of active particles may be directly relevant to the behavior of suspensions of self - propelled Janus colloids or other artiﬁcial microswimmers ( Palacci et al . , 2010 ; Enculescu and Stark , 2011 ) . Recent work demonstrated that active particles form crystalline states , FIG . 18 . Cluster formation in myxobacteria mutants ( SA2407 ) that cannot reverse their gliding direction . At long times the dynamical clustering process reaches a steady state that depends on cell density . The images show the clusters obtained at two different packing fractions " ¼ % a , with % the two - dimensional cell density and a ¼ 4 : 4 ! m 2 the average area covered by a bacterium , with " ¼ 0 : 16 ( left ) and " ¼ 0 : 24 ( right ) . Adapted from Peruani et al . , 2012 . 1160 M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 but the freezing and melting is in this case a true nonequi - librium phenomenon that cannot be described simply in terms of an effective temperature for the system ( Bialke´ , Speck , and Lo¨wen , 2012 ) . In vitro experiments on conﬂuent monolayers of epithelial cells suggest that the displacement ﬁeld and stress distribution in these living systems strongly resemble both the dynamical heterogeneities of glasses and the soft modes of jammed packings ( Poujade et al . , 2007 ; Trepat et al . , 2009 ; Angelini et al . , 2010 , 2011 ; Petitjean et al . , 2010 ) . This observation has led to new interest in the study of active jammed and glassy states ( Henkes , Fily , and Marchetti , 2011 ) obtained by packing self - propelled particles at high density in conﬁned regions or by adding attractive interactions . In these models the interaction with the substrate has so far been described simply as frictional damping . Although a rich and novel dynamical behavior has emerged , it has become clear that a more realistic description of stress transfer with the substrate will be needed to reproduce the active stress distribution observed experimentally ( Trepat et al . , 2009 ) in living cellular material . III . ACTIVE GELS : SELF - DRIVEN POLAR AND APOLAR FILAMENTS IN A FLUID In this section we describe an alternative method for con - structing hydrodynamic theories for a class of active materials . This approach involves a systematic derivation of the hydro - dynamic equations based on a generalized hydrodynamic approach close to equilibrium closely following the work of Martin , Parodi , and Pershan for nemato hydrodynamics ( Martin , Parodi , and Pershan , 1972 ; de Gennes and Prost , 1993 ) . As in the previous sections , the theory is mostly based on symmetries and does not involve signiﬁcant microscopic considerations ; it is thus applicable to a whole range of sys - tems , which share the appropriate polar or nematic symmetries and which are liquid at long times . We focus here on an ‘‘active gel , ’’ deﬁned as a ﬂuid or suspension of orientable objects endowed with active stresses , with momentum damping com - ing from the viscosity of the bulk ﬂuid medium , rather than from friction with a substrate or a porous medium ( Simha and Ramaswamy , 2002a , 2002b ; Kruse et al . , 2004 ; Ju¨licher et al . , 2007 ) . The equations that emerge are those proposed by Simha and Ramaswamy ( 2002a ) for self - propelling organisms , but the development by Kruse et al . ( 2004 ) and Ju¨licher et al . ( 2007 ) was carried out in the context of the cytoskeleton of living cells , a network of polar actin ﬁlaments , made active by molecular motors that consume ATP . In Sec . III . B we consider an active system with a polar - ization ﬁeld p . It turns out that , for the linear Onsager theory that we propose , the ﬁnal equations are invariant under the change of p to ! p . At this linear order , the dynamical equations are therefore the same for a polar active gel and a nonpolar active nematic gel where p is the director . An alternative approach for a nematic gel is to describe the ordering not by a director ﬁeld but by a nematic alignment tensor Q . This approach , also part of the phenomenological treatment in Simha and Ramaswamy ( 2002a ) , is presented by Salbreux , Prost , and Joanny ( 2009 ) . A brief discussion of polar active gels and of the effects of polarity on the dynamics beyond the linear theory is given in Sec . III . C . A . Hydrodynamic equations of active gels For simplicity , in this section we discuss only a one - component active polar gel considering therefore that the complex composition of active materials such as the cytos - keleton can be described by an effective single component . The original formulation of Simha and Ramaswamy ( 2002a ) for the hydrodynamics of self - propelled orientable suspen - sions was already an explicitly multicomponent formulation of active liquid - crystal hydrodynamics , but without a formal link to the nonequilibrium thermodynamic approach to active systems of Ju¨licher et al . ( 2007 ) . Generalizations of the latter approach to multicomponent systems are possible and have been recently proposed by Joanny et al . ( 2007 ) and Callan - Jones and Ju¨licher ( 2011 ) . The multicomponent theory prop - erly takes into account the relative permeation between the various components which is neglected in the simpler one - component description . As in the previous sections , we retain as slow variables the number density % , the polarization p , and the momentum density g ¼ % m v , where v is the local velocity of the gel and m is the ( effective ) mass of the molecules . 1 . Entropy production The derivation of generalized hydrodynamic equations is based on the identiﬁcation of ﬂuxes and forces from the entropy production rate _ S as in de Groot and Mazur ( 1984 ) . We do not consider heat exchange here ; we assume that the active gel has a constant temperature , meaning that it is in contact with a reservoir at a ﬁnite temperature T . In this case , the entropy production rate is related to the rate of change in the free energy of the active gel T _ S ¼ ! dF = dt . For a passive gel at rest , the free - energy density f is a function of the two intensive variables , the density % and the polarization p , and its differential is df ¼ ! d % ! h $ dp $ . The ﬁeld conjugate to the density is the chemical potential ! and the ﬁeld conjugate to the polarization is the orientational ﬁeld h . For a passive system moving at a velocity v , the density of kinetic energy 12 % m v 2 must be added to the free energy . For an active gel one must also take into account the fact that energy is constantly locally injected into the gel . A simple intuitive way to introduce the energy injection is to assume that as in the case of the cytoskeleton , this is due to a nonequilibrium chemical reaction such as the consumption of ATP . If the energy gain per ATP molecule is denoted by ! ! , and the rate of advancement of the reaction ( the number of ATP molecules consumed per unit time and unit volume ) is denoted by r , then the associated rate of change of the free energy per unit volume is ! r ! ! . Taking into account all contributions , we ﬁnd the entropy production rate of an active gel at a constant temperature T ( Kruse et al . , 2004 , 2005 ) : T _ S ¼ Z d r $ ! @ @ t " 1 2 % m v 2 # ! ! @ % @ t þ h $ _ p $ þ r ! ! % : ( 30 ) 2 . Conservation laws The two conserved quantities in an active gel are the density and the momentum . The density conservation law reads M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter 1161 Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 @ % @ t þ r & ð % v Þ ¼ 0 : ( 31 ) The momentum conservation law can be written as @ g $ @ t þ @ ( # $ ( ¼ 0 ; ( 32 ) where the momentum ﬂux in the system is # $ ( ¼ % mv $ v ( ! . t $ ( , where the ﬁrst term is associated with the so - called Reynolds stress and . t $ ( is the total stress in the system . For most active gels , in particular , for biological systems , the Reynolds number is very small and we ignore the Reynolds stress contribution in the following . 3 . Thermodynamics of polar systems For generality , in this section we consider active gels in three dimensions . The polarization free energy of an active polar material is a functional of the three components of the polarization vector p . However , if the system is not in the vicinity of a critical point , there are only two soft modes associated with rotations of the polarization . The modulus of the polarization is not a hydrodynamic variable and is taken to be constant . Without any loss of generality , we assume that the polarization is a unit vector , and that the effect of its modulus is integrated in the phenomenological transport coefﬁcients . The polarization free energy of the active gel is then the classical Frank free energy of a nematic liquid crystal ( de Gennes and Prost , 1993 ) F p ¼ Z r & K 1 2 ð r & p Þ 2 þ K 2 2 ½ p & ð r , p Þ ) 2 þ K 3 2 ½ p , ð r , p Þ ) 2 þ v r & p ! 1 2 h 0 k p 2 ’ : ( 33 ) The ﬁrst three terms correspond to the free energies of splay , twist , and bend deformations . The three Frank constants K i are positive . We have also added in this free energy a Lagrange multiplier h 0 k to insure that the polarization is a unit vector . This free energy is very similar to the free energy of Eq . ( 4 ) , although in Eq . ( 4 ) we made the additional approximation that the Frank constants are equal . In the case where the polarization is a critical variable , one would also need to add to Eq . ( 33 ) a Landau expansion in powers of the polarization modulus as done in Eq . ( 4 ) . The orientational ﬁeld is obtained by differentiation of the free energy ( 33 ) . It is useful to decompose it into a component parallel to the polarization h k and a component perpendicular to the polarization h ? In the simple case where the system is two dimensional , the polarization can be characterized by its polar angle ) . In the approximation where the Frank constants are equal the perpendicular molecular ﬁeld is h ? ¼ K r 2 ) . In a nonisotropic medium the stress is not symmetric . There is an antisymmetric component of the stress associated with torques in the medium . As for nematic liquid crystals , this antisymmetric component can be calculated from the conservation of momentum in the ﬂuid ( de Gennes and Prost , 1993 ) and is given by . A $ ( ¼ 12 ð h $ p ( ! p $ h ( Þ ’ h ? . 4 . Fluxes , forces , and time reversal Using the conservation laws and performing integrations by parts , the entropy production can be written as T _ S ¼ Z d r f . $ ( v $ ( þ P $ h $ þ r ! ! g ; ( 34 ) where . $ ( is the symmetric deviatoric stress tensor deﬁned by . t $ ( ¼ . $ ( þ . A $ ( ! & $ ( P ; ( 35 ) with . t $ ( and . A $ ( the total and the antisymmetric part of the stress tensor , respectively , and P the pressure . We also intro - duced the strain - rate tensor v $ ( and the antisymmetric part of the velocity gradients associated with the vorticity ! $ ( de - ﬁned as v $ ( ¼ 12 ð @ $ v ( þ @ ( v $ Þ ; ( 36a ) ! $ ( ¼ 12 ð @ $ v ( ! @ ( v $ Þ : ( 36b ) Finally , P $ ¼ Dp $ = Dt , with Dp $ Dt ¼ @ p $ @ t þ v ( @ ( p $ þ ! $ ( p ( ( 37 ) the comoving and corotational derivative of the polarization . Note that if the system is chiral , kinetic momentum conser - vation must be properly taken into account and the local rotation is no longer given by ! $ ( ( Furthauer et al . , 2012 ) . This form of the entropy production allows for the identi - ﬁcation of three forces : v $ ( , which has a signature ! 1 under time reversal , h $ , which has a signature þ 1 under time reversal , and ! ! , which also has a signature þ 1 under time reversal . The conjugated ﬂuxes are . $ ( , P $ , and r , respectively . The ﬂuxes and associated driving forces that control the hydrodynamics of active gels are summarized in Table II . In a linear generalized hydrodynamic theory , the constitu - tive equations of the active gel are obtained by writing the most general linear relation between ﬂuxes and forces re - specting the symmetries of the problem , such as translational and rotational symmetries with one vector p $ and one tensor q $ ( ¼ p $ p ( ! 1 3 & $ ( in 3D . Particular care must be taken in considering the time - reversal symmetry . The ﬂuxes must all be separated into a reactive component with a signature opposite to that of the conjugate force and a dissipative component with the same signature as the conjugate force . As an example , the reactive component of the stress is the elastic stress and the dissipative component is the viscous stress . Only the dissipative component of each ﬂux contrib - utes to the entropy production . TABLE II . Fluxes and associated forces controlling the entropy production in a one - component nematic active gel . Flux Force . $ ( v $ ( P $ h $ r ! ! 1162 M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 B . Linear theory of active polar and nematic gels 1 . Constitutive equations We ﬁrst consider an active polar liquid for which the relationship between ﬂuxes and forces is local in time . It is convenient to split all tensors into diagonal and trace - less parts : . $ ( ¼ . & $ ( þ ~ . $ ( , with . ¼ ð 1 = 3 Þ . $ $ , ~ . $ $ ¼ 0 , and d the dimensionality . Similarly , we let v $ ( ¼ ð u = 3 Þ & $ ( þ ~ v $ ( , where u ¼ @ # v # is the divergence of the velocity ﬁeld . Finally all ﬂuxes are written as the sums of reactive and dissipative parts , . $ ( ¼ . r $ ( þ . d $ ( ; ( 38a ) P $ ¼ P r $ þ P d $ ; ( 38b ) r ¼ r r þ r d : ( 38c ) a . Dissipative ﬂuxes Only ﬂuxes and forces with the same time signature are coupled and . $ ( is coupled only to v $ ( . This leads to the constitutive equations . d ¼ " " u ; ( 39a ) ~ . d $ ( ¼ 2 " ~ v $ ( : ( 39b ) We ignore here the tensorial character of the viscosity and assume only two viscosities as for an isotropic ﬂuid : the shear viscosity " and the longitudinal viscosity " " . The two other ﬂuxes are coupled and the corresponding constitutive equa - tions read ( Kruse et al . , 2004 , 2005 ) P d $ ¼ h $ # 1 þ / p $ ! ! ; ( 40 ) r d ¼ $ ! ! þ / p $ h $ : ( 41 ) # 1 is the rotational viscosity and we use here the Onsager symmetry relation which imposes that the ‘‘dissipative’’ Onsager matrix is symmetric . b . Reactive ﬂuxes The reactive Onsager matrix is antisymmetric and couples ﬂuxes and forces of opposite time - reversal signatures , . r ¼ ! " - ! ! þ " , 1 p $ h $ ; ( 42a ) ~ . r $ ( ¼ ! - ! ! q $ ( þ , 1 2 " p $ h ( þ p ( h $ ! 2 3 p # h # & $ ( # ; ( 42b ) P r $ ¼ ! " , 1 p $ u 3 ! , 1 p ( ~ v $ ( ; ( 42c ) r r ¼ " - u 3 þ - q $ ( ~ v $ ( : ( 42d ) In most of the following we consider incompressible ﬂuids so that u ¼ r & v ¼ 0 . In this case the diagonal component of the stress can be included in the pressure which is a Lagrange multiplier ensuring incompressibility and one can set " - ¼ " , 1 ¼ " " ¼ 0 . To summarize , the hydrodynamic equations for an incom - pressible one - component active ﬂuid of nematic symmetry are given by m % ð @ t þ v & r Þ v ¼ ! r P þ r & # ; ( 43a ) ð @ t þ v & r Þ p $ þ ! $ ( p ( ¼ ! , 1 v $ ( p ( þ 1 # 1 h $ þ / ! ! p $ ; ( 43b ) to be supplemented with the incompressibility condition r & v ¼ 0 . Assuming the Frank constants are all equal to K , the molecular ﬁeld h $ is given by h $ ¼ K r 2 p $ þ h 0 k p $ ; ( 44 ) with h 0 k a Lagrange multiplier to be determined by the condition j p j ¼ 1 . Finally it is convenient for the following to write the deviatoric stress tensor given by the sum of trace and deviatoric parts of the dissipative and reactive compo - nents by separating out passive and active parts as . $ ( ¼ . p $ ( þ . a $ ( ; ( 45 ) with passive and active contributions given by . p $ ( ¼ 2 " ~ v $ ( þ , 1 2 " p $ h ( þ p ( h $ ! 2 3 p # h # & $ ( # ; ( 46a ) . a $ ( ¼ ! - ! ! q $ ( : ( 46b ) In many biological applications inertial effects are negli - gible and the Navier - Stokes equation ( 43a ) can be replaced by the Stokes equation obtained by simply neglecting all inertial terms on the left - hand side of Eq . ( 43a ) and corre - sponding to a force balance equation , given by ! r P þ r & # ¼ 0 : ( 47 ) 2 . Microscopic interpretation of the transport coefﬁcients The Onsager approach that we outlined introduces several transport coefﬁcients . Some of these coefﬁcients exist for passive nematic liquid crystals such as the viscosities , the rotational viscosity # 1 , or the ﬂow - coupling coefﬁcient , 1 . The two important new coefﬁcients are the transport coefﬁ - cients associated with the activity of the system , / and - . The active stress in the system is . active $ ( ¼ ! - ! ! q $ ( . In the case of the cytoskeleton this can be viewed as the stress due to the molecular motors , which tend to contract the gel . The sign of the activity coefﬁcient - is not imposed by theory . A negative value corresponds to a contractile stress as in the actin cytoskeleton . A positive value of - corresponds to an exten - sile stress as observed in certain bacterial suspensions . Conceptually , active stresses in living matter were ﬁrst dis - cussed by Finlayson and Scriven ( 1969 ) . They , however , speciﬁcally steered clear of uniaxial stresses arising from motor - protein contractility . The ﬁrst incorporation of self - propelling stresses into the generalized hydrodynamics of orientable ﬂuids was by Simha and Ramaswamy ( 2002a ) , although it has long been understood that the minimal de - scription of a single force - free swimmer is a force dipole ( Brennen and Winet , 1977 ; Pedley and Kessler , 1992 ) . The other active coefﬁcient / is an active orientational ﬁeld that tends to align the polarization when it is positive . In the limit where the modulus of the polarization is p ¼ 1 one can always consider that / ¼ 0 and introduce an effective activity M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter 1163 Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 coefﬁcient - þ / # 1 , 1 . In the following we therefore choose / ¼ 0 and use this effective value of the activity coefﬁcient - . 3 . Viscoelastic active gel An active gel is not in general a simple liquid but rather a viscoelastic medium with a ﬁnite viscoelastic relaxation time , which is liquid only at long time scales . In a passive visco - elastic medium the constitutive relation between stress and strain is nonlocal in time . The simplest description of a viscoelastic medium is the so - called Maxwell model where the system has only one relaxation time ( Larson , 1988 ) . Within this model the constitutive equation is D ~ . $ ( Dt þ 1 0 ~ . $ ( ¼ 2 E ~ v $ ( : ( 48 ) The Maxwell model involves two material constants , the viscoelastic relaxation time 0 and the shear modulus E . The long time viscosity of the medium is then " ¼ E 0 . In order to respect rotational and translational invariance , we use a con - vected Maxwell model with a convected time derivative of the stress tensor D ~ . $ ( Dt ¼ @ ~ . $ ( @ t þ v # @ # ~ . $ ( þ ! $ # ~ . # ( þ ~ . # $ ! ( # : Note that there are several ways of deﬁning the convective derivative of tensors . For simplicity we use the same notation D = Dt to denote convected derivatives of vectors and tensors . The generalization of the Onsager hydrodynamic approach of the previous section to a viscous elastic polar passive medium leads to the constitutive equations for an active gel ( Ju¨licher et al . , 2007 ) : 2 " v $ ( ¼ " 1 þ 0 D Dt # " ~ . $ ( þ - ! ! q $ ( ! , 1 2 ð p $ h ( þ p ( h $ Þ # ; ( 49a ) Dp $ Dt ¼ 1 # 1 " 1 þ 0 D Dt # h $ ! , 1 v $ ( p ( ; ( 49b ) where for simplicity we have considered only an incompress - ible active gel where the modulus of the polarization is unity . Note that the memory of the system not only plays a role for the stress but also for the dynamics of the orientation and that we have supposed that the two corresponding relaxation times are equal . It is important to note that the dynamical equation for the polarization is very similar to Eq . ( 2b ) , which has been obtained using the same symmetry arguments ; Eq . ( 2b ) ignores memory effects and therefore the viscoelasticity of the polarization response ; all the extra terms in Eq . ( 2b ) do not appear here because the Onsager approach that we use derives only the linear hydrodynamic theory . C . Active polar gels 1 . Polarity effects For simplicity , we presented here only the derivation of the hydrodynamic theory of active gels in the simplest case where the system is a single component ﬂuid and has nematic symmetry , p being the director , and ignore any type of noise . Several extensions of this theory have been proposed . For a polar system , there is an extra polar term in the free energy ( 33 ) , F p ¼ R d r v ð % Þð r & p Þ . This spontaneous splay term is a surface term if the coefﬁcient v is a constant . If v depends on the local density , this term , that was included in Eq . ( 4 ) , yields a ‘‘pressure - gradient’’ proportional to r % in the equation for the polarization . Other nonlinear polar terms that can be added on the right - hand side of the dynamical equation for the polarization ( 49 ) are proportional to p & r p , r p 2 , and p r & p . These terms have already been considered in Eq . ( 2b ) . The ﬁrst of these terms cannot be derived from a free energy and is therefore an active term proportional to ! ! . Its effect in a dynamics linearized about an ordered state was considered for active liquid - crystalline suspensions by Simha and Ramaswamy ( 2002a ) . The other two terms can be derived from a free energy and have both active and passive contributions . Within the Onsager linear hydrodynamics scheme , other polar terms in the equations show up only at nonlinear order or at subleading order in a gradient expan - sion . Active stresses proportional to ! ! ð @ i p j þ @ j p i Þ unique to polar ﬂuids are obtained from the microscopic theory ( Marchetti and Liverpool , 2007 ) , but are considered nonlinear in the driving forces in the context of the Onsager approach . The effect of these polar terms was studied in detail by Giomi , Marchetti , and Liverpool ( 2008 ) . In general these polar terms are important when describing an active suspen - sion as opposed to the one - component system considered here . In this case these terms yield spatial inhomogeneities in the concentration of active particles ( Tjhung , Cates , and Marenduzzo , 2011 ; Giomi and Marchetti , 2012 ) that are not obtained in active suspensions with nematic symmetry ( Giomi et al . , 2011 , 2012 ) . 2 . Noise in active gels The effect of noise in active polar gels can be studied by introducing random Langevin forces in the constitutive equa - tions . For treatments including thermal and active nonthermal noise sources in a systematic way , see Lau et al . ( 2003 ) , Hatwalne et al . ( 2004 ) , Chen et al . ( 2007 ) , Basu et al . ( 2008 ) , Lau and Lubensky ( 2009 ) , and Sarkar and Basu ( 2011 ) . The precise description of the statistics of active noise requires a microscopic description of the gel which is not generic and goes beyond the scope of this review ( Basu et al . , 2008 ) . Hatwalne et al . ( 2004 ) introduced the active noise in the isotropic phase of an active gel through the ﬂuctuating active stress in the Navier - Stokes equation and used scaling argu - ments to estimate the apparent temperature it would generate in a tracer diffusion measurement . 3 . Multicomponent active gels Most active systems described in the earlier sections are multicomponent systems containing a solvent and active objects . In many instances these systems can be described by an effective one - component theory as described here . However , in particular , when considering viscoelastic effects the one - component theory ignores the permeation of the solvent through the active gel . A detailed two - component theory of active gels that properly takes into account perme - ation effects is given by Callan - Jones and Ju¨licher ( 2011 ) . 1164 M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 The new main feature in a multicomponent gel is the existence of currents of the various components . We show here how the active currents in nematic ( Sec . II . B ) and polar ( Sec . II . A ) systems follow naturally from the forces - and - ﬂuxes framework . In this short treatment we ignore ﬂuid ﬂow . Consider a mesoscopic region in our active medium , in a chemical potential gradient r % corresponding to the concentration % , and subjected to a nonzero chemical poten - tial difference ! ! between a fuel ( ATP ) and its reaction products [ adenosine diphosphate ( ADP ) and inorganic phos - phate ] . For small departures from equilibrium , the ﬂuxes r ( the rate of consumption of ATP molecules ) and J must be linearly related to ! ! and r % . The presence of local orienta - tional order in the form of p and Q allows one to construct scalars p & r % and r & Q & r % ; thus r in general gets a contribution ð - p p þ " - Q r & Q Þ & r % , where - p and " - Q are kinetic coefﬁcients depending in general on % and other scalar quantities . The symmetry of dissipative Onsager co - efﬁcients then implies a contribution J active ¼ ð - p p þ " - Q r & Q Þ ! ! ( 50 ) to the current . In the presence of a maintained constant value of ! ! the current ( 50 ) rationalizes , through the - p and " - Q terms , the form of Eq . ( 2a ) ( with - p ! ! ! v 0 % ) and Eq . ( 26 ) ( with " - Q ! ! ! - Q ) . In particular , it underlines the fact that active currents do not require an explicit polar order parame - ter . Even without p , the term in " - Q in Eq . ( 50 ) tells us that curvature in the spatial arrangement of active ﬁlaments gives rise to particle motion . In retrospect this is not shocking : a splayed or bent conﬁguration of a nematic phase has a vectorial asymmetry , as argued through Fig . 12 . In a system out of equilibrium this asymmetry should reﬂect itself in a current . As shown by Ramaswamy , Simha , and Toner ( 2003 ) and discussed in Sec . II . B , " - Q leads to giant number ﬂuctua - tions in active nematics . D . Active defects Ordered phases of active matter , like their counterparts at thermal equilibrium , should exhibit topological defect con - ﬁgurations , generated through either speciﬁc boundary con - ditions or spontaneously in the bulk . As in equilibrium systems , the nature of these defects depends on whether the system has polar or apolar symmetry ( Palffy - Muhoray , Lee , and Petschek , 1988 ; de Gennes and Prost , 1993 ; Kung , Marchetti , and Saunders , 2006 ) . The selection criterion for the defect strength in active systems is not obvious , as one cannot a priori invoke free - energy minimization as in equilib - rium systems . However , it does appear that experiments see strength þ 1 and strength þ 1 = 2 defects , respectively , in polar ( Ne´de´lec et al . , 1997 ) and apolar ( Narayan , Ramaswamy , and Menon , 2007 ) active systems . Activity confers a particularly interesting property on defects , namely , rotational ( Ne ´ de ´ lec et al . , 1997 ; Kruse et al . , 2005 ) or translational ( Narayan , Ramaswamy , and Menon , 2007 ; Marchetti , 2012 ; Sanchez et al . , 2012 ) movement , with sense or direction determined by the chirality or polarity associated with the defect . The ﬁrst quantitative experiments which explicitly demon - strated how active mixtures of long rods ( microtubules ) and motors ( kinesin ) could spontaneously form defects such as asters and spirals were reported by Ne´de´lec et al . ( 1997 ) and Surrey et al . ( 2001 ) ; see Fig . 2 . These patterns showed a remarkable resemblance to the microtubule - based spindle patterns in the cell , thus suggesting that the gross features of spindle patterning could be understood as arising from a self - organization of simple elements . Several qualitative fea - tures of these experiments including the defect patterns could be simply understood using continuum models describing the polar orientation of the rigid ﬁlaments and the density of processive motors ( Lee and Kardar , 2001 ; Sankararaman , Menon , and Kumar , 2004 ) . A detailed study of the nature of defects and their phase transitions within the framework of the active gel theory was done by Kruse et al . ( 2004 , 2005 ) who showed that ﬂows arising from active stresses lead to systematic rotation of chiral defects . We summarize here the calculation , working as in Kruse et al . ( 2004 ) with the ordered state described by a vectorial order parameter p in two dimensions . Polarity enters nowhere in the analysis , except as justiﬁcation for working with a strength þ 1 defect . We parametrize a two - dimensional defect conﬁguration of the polarization ﬁeld p ( of unit mag - nitude ) with topological charge * 1 using polar coordinates ð r ; ) Þ . Thus charge þ 1 defects such as asters , vortices , and spirals may be represented by an angle c , with p r ¼ cos c and p ) ¼ sin c , such that c ¼ 0 ( or * ) is an aster , c ¼ * * = 2 a vortex , and c ¼ c 0 ( any other constant ) a spiral . At equilibrium , a situation corresponding to defect conﬁgura - tions in a ferroelectric nematic liquid crystal , the optimal value of c is obtained by minimizing the Frank free - energy functional F , Eq . ( 33 ) , with K 2 ¼ 0 ( no twist as we are working in two dimensions ) . With appropriate boundary conditions , it is easy to see that the stable defect conﬁgura - tions are ( i ) asters when K 1 < K 3 , so that splay is favored , ( ii ) vortices when K 1 > K 3 , i . e . , bend is favored , and ( iii ) spirals when K 1 ¼ K 3 . In the special case when K 1 ¼ K 3 , the energy is degenerate and asters , vortices , and spiral defects have the same energy . In an active system , however , the stability of defect conﬁgurations is obtained by solving the dynamical equations for the polarization p together with the conditions of force balance and overall incompressibility , as in Sec . III . B Suppose K 1 < K 3 , so that the aster is stable in the absence of activity ! ! ¼ 0 . Now introduce activity . Linear stability analysis shows that at sufﬁciently large contractile active stresses - ! ! < 0 the aster gets destabilized giving rise to a spiral with an angle c 0 set by the ﬂow - alignment parameter , 1 ( assuming stable ﬂow alignment ) . An entirely similar analysis , starting from a stable vortex for K 1 > K 3 , with ! ! ¼ 0 , shows again an instability for large enough ! ! . The reason this happens here and does not happen for systems without activity is that the active stresses associated with the perturbed director conﬁguration give rise to ﬂows whose effect on the director is to reinforce the perturbation . Figures 19 and 20 illustrate the ﬂow associated with the spiral instability and the stability domains of the defects , respec - tively . The active spiral has a sense of direction and will therefore rotate . The angular speed can be obtained by solv - ing the steady - state equations for c and v ) , leading to v ) ð r Þ ¼ ! 0 r log " r r 0 # ; ( 51 ) M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter 1165 Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 where , as is inevitable on dimensional grounds , ! 0 scales as the ratio of the active stress to a viscosity , with a detailed form that includes a dependence on the director kinetic coefﬁcient and the ﬂow - alignment parameter . In a ﬁnite system of size R , imposing a vanishing velocity at the outer boundary due to the presence of a wall , we can set the length scale r 0 ¼ R . In the above analysis we ignored the dynamics of the concentration ﬁeld % . This is probably acceptable when the active units are long and rigid or when their concentration is so high that excluded volume considerations do not permit signiﬁcant density inhomogeneities . We can include % ( Gowrishankar and Rao , 2012 ) through an extra term w 1 R d 3 r ð & % = % 0 Þ r & p in the free energy ( 33 ) [ see also Eq . ( 4 ) ] , with the form of a spontaneous splay that depends on the local concentration , and restore the concentration equation @ t % ¼ ! r & J , where the ﬁlament current J ¼ v 0 % p ! D r % has an active advective and a diffusive contri - bution . Now for large enough w 1 , the defect conﬁgurations are generated by the internal dynamics ( and insensitive to the boundary for large systems ) and so have ﬁnite size . When advection is negligible , the defect size is set by the ratio of the spontaneous splay coupling strength w 1 to a Frank modulus K as it would be in an equilibrium polar liquid crystal . On the other hand , when advection is appreciable so as to have density clumping in regions where p points inward toward a common center , the defect size is set by the ratio of diffusion to active advection D = v 0 . We note that since the advection current J / % p , a small perturbation of the vortex conﬁguration renders it unstable and the only stable defects are inward pointing asters and spirals ( Gowrishankar and Rao , 2012 ) . Since defects now have a ﬁnite size , it is possible to have an array of defects which interact with each other . Such studies have shown that , under certain conditions , one obtains a stable lattice of asters accompanied by a variety of phase transitions ( Ziebert and Zimmermann , 2005 ; Voituriez , Joanny , and Prost , 2006 ; Gowrishankar and Rao , 2012 ) . A detailed study of defect - defect interactions and the dynamics of defects and their merger in this active context are open problems for the future . So far we have discussed charge 1 defects generated in polar active media . Apolar active media , described by a local orientational tensor Q , exhibit * 1 = 2 strength disclinations , topologically identical to those obtained in equilibrium ne - matic liquid crystals ( see Fig . 7 ) . The orientation ﬁeld around a defect of strength þ 1 = 2 has a polarity , whereas that around a ! 1 = 2 has a threefold symmetric appearance . On general grounds , the þ 1 = 2 defect should move spontaneously , whereas the ! 1 = 2 defect should show no such tendency . Precisely this behavior seems to be observed in the active nematic phase in a vibrated granular - rod monolayer ( Narayan , Ramaswamy , and Menon , 2007 ) . E . Current status on active gels The nonequilibrium thermodynamic description of active systems is a systematic approach based on symmetries and , in particular , on invariance against time inversion . It is , how - ever , based on a linear expansion of ﬂuxes in terms of forces and can in principle describe only systems close to equilib - rium where ! ! tends to zero . One of the main applications though is to biological systems that are mostly far from equilibrium systems . There is no systematic extension of the theory to systems far from equilibrium . One must rely either on a microscopic description that generates nonlinear contributions by coarse graining to large length scales and long - time scales or on experimental results that emphasize speciﬁc nonlinear aspects , which can then be introduced in theory . Microscopic or mesoscopic descriptions of molecular motors are a good example of the ﬁrst case and lead to motor forces or velocities that are not linear in ! ! ( Ju¨licher and Prost , 1997 ; Liverpool et al . , 2009 ) . Several experiments suggest that the treadmilling associated with the polymeriza - tion and depolymerization of actin in a cell depends on the force applied on the ﬁlaments or the local stress in a nonlinear way ( Mogilner and Oster , 1999 ; Prost et al . , 2007 ) . 5 The force - dependent treadmilling is essential for many cellular processes such as cell migration or cell adhesion and a full description including these effects in the active gel theory has not yet been proposed ( Keren et al . , 2008 ) . FIG . 19 . Sketch of a rotating spiral defect in an active nematic ﬂuid with vanishing elastic anisotropy & K ¼ 0 . The gray arrows mark the director , and the solid lines show its spiral structure . The hydrodynamic velocity ﬁeld is in the azimuthal direction , and its proﬁle is indicated by the dark arrows . Adapted from Kruse et al . , 2004 . FIG . 20 . Stability diagram of topological defects in an active nematic ﬂuid . For small values of the activity - ! ! one gets asters and vortices , respectively , for & K ¼ K 1 ! K 3 < 0 and > 0 . When - ! ! is of sufﬁciently large magnitude both asters and spirals are unstable to the formation of a rotating spiral . Adapted from Ben - Jacob , Cohen , and Levine , 2000 . 5 In a cell actin ﬁlaments polymerize at the so - called barbed end and depolymerize at the so - called pointed end . This constant turnover of active ﬁlaments is called treadmilling . 1166 M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 Another intrinsic limitation of the current active gel theory is the assumption of linear rheology and the use of the Maxwell model with a single relaxation time . A large body of experimental work shows that for many types of cells as well as for actomyosin gels there is a broad distribution of relaxation times leading to a complex modulus decreasing as a power law of frequency with a small exponent between 0 . 1 and 0 . 25 ( Fabry et al . , 2001 ) . An ad hoc power - law distribu - tion of relaxation times could be introduced in the active gel hydrodynamic theory but despite some efforts , this type of law is not understood on general grounds ( Balland et al . , 2006 ) . The nonlinear rheology of actin networks has also been studied in detail , and actin networks in the absence of molecular motors have been found to strain thicken ( Gardel et al . , 2004 ) . This behavior can at least in part be explained by the inextensibility of the actin ﬁlaments . In the presence of myosin motors , the active stress induced by the molecular motors itself stiffens the active gel ( Koenderink et al . , 2009 ) . The hydrodynamic description of active polar or nematic gels is very close to that of nematic liquid crystals . Nevertheless the existence of an active stress leads to several nonintuitive and spectacular phenomena . The most spectacu - lar is the ﬂow instability described below that leads to spontaneously ﬂowing states . Other spectacular effects are associated with active noise in these systems . In all active systems the noise has a thermal component and a nonthermal active component . The properties of the active noise cannot be inferred from the macroscopic hydrodynamic theory and must be derived in each case from a speciﬁc microscopic theory . The study of tracer diffusion in a thin active ﬁlm , for example ( Basu et al . , 2012 ) , leads to an anomalous form of the diffusion constant that does not depend on the size of the particle but only on the thickness of the ﬁlm . We believe that there are still many unusual properties of active gels to be discovered and that in many cases , this will require detailed numerical studies of the active gel hydrodynamic equations such as the one performed by Marenduzzo , Orlandini , and Yeomans ( 2007 ) . Active gel models have also been used to describe cross - linked motor - ﬁlament systems that behave as soft solids at large scales ( MacKintosh and Levine , 2008 ; Levine and MacKintosh , 2009 ; Yoshinaga et al . , 2010 ; Banerjee and Marchetti , 2011 ) and also to understand the origin of sarco - meric oscillations , both from a microscopic and from a continuum viewpoint ( Gu¨nther and Kruse , 2007 ; Banerjee and Marchetti , 2011 ) . Further , active gel models have been shown to successfully account for the experimentally ob - served traction stresses exerted by cells and cell sheets on compliant substrates ( Banerjee and Marchetti , 2011 ; Edwards and Schwarz , 2011 ; Mertz et al . , 2012 ) . Finally a large part of the theoretical activity on active gels aims at a quantitative description of biological phenomena at the scale of the cell and of cellular processes involving the cytoskeleton . Some success has already been obtained in discussing lamellipodium motion ( Kruse et al . , 2006 ) or the formation of contractile rings during cell division ( Salbreux , Prost , and Joanny , 2009 ) . An important step is the connection of the parameters of the hydrodynamic theory with the more microscopic parameters that can be monitored experimentally which requires an explicit coarse - graining of the microscopic theories as discussed in Sec . IV . D . At larger scales one can build a hydrodynamic theory of tissues that shares many features with the active gel theory described here ( Ranft et al . , 2010 ) . IV . HYDRODYNAMIC CONSEQUENCES OF ACTIVITY In this section we describe a number of remarkable hydro - dynamic phenomena induced by activity . Most of the section is devoted to the description of material properties of active gels , such as thin ﬁlm instabilities and rheology . In Sec . IV . D we also highlight some of the remarkable successes of the hydrody - namic theory of active gels in describing phenomena observed in living cells . A more complete review of this latter class of phenomena can be found in Joanny and Prost ( 2009b ) . A . Instabilities of thin liquid active ﬁlms 1 . Spontaneous ﬂow of active liquid ﬁlms One generic property of active orientable liquids , whether polar or apolar , is the instability of any homogeneous non - ﬂowing steady state toward an inhomogeneous spontaneously ﬂowing state as shown by Simha and Ramaswamy ( 2002a ) . We illustrate this instability in the simple geometry of a thin active nematic liquid ﬁlm ( Voituriez , Joanny , and Prost , 2005 ) . We study a thin ﬁlm of thickness h supported by a solid substrate . For simplicity we consider only the two - dimensional geometry sketched in Fig . 21 where the substrate is along x and the normal of the ﬁlm is along y . We choose anchoring conditions parallel to the ﬁlm surface so that for y ¼ 0 , h the polarization is along x , p x ¼ 1 , and p y ¼ 0 . An obvious solution for the equations of motion of an active liquid is a nonﬂowing state v ¼ 0 with a constant polarization parallel to x . We now discuss the stability of this steady state . We look for a state of the system which is invariant by translation along x so that all derivatives with respect to x vanish and with a polarization that is not parallel to the ﬁlm surfaces p x ¼ cos ) ð y Þ , p y ¼ sin ) ð y Þ . The velocity is along the x direction and the shear rate tensor has only one non - vanishing component v xy . w ¼ 12 @ y v x . The total stress can be written as . t $ ( ¼ ! P & $ ( þ . A $ ( þ . $ ( where the last term is the deviatoric stress given by the constitutive equations ( 49 ) and the previous term is the anti - symmetric component of the stress . Force balance in the ﬁlm FIG . 21 ( color online ) . Spontaneously ﬂowing ﬁlm of active liquid . M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter 1167 Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 is written as @ y . tyx ¼ 0 . Taking into account the fact that on the free surface the shear stress vanishes , we obtain . tyx ¼ 0 . Using the constitutive equation , this leads to ! h ? ¼ 4 " w ! - ! ! sin2 ) þ , 1 ð h k sin2 ) þ h ? cos2 ) Þ ; ( 52 ) where we introduced the parallel and perpendicular compo - nents of the orientational ﬁeld h k ¼ h x cos ) þ h y sin ) and h ? ¼ h y cos ) ! h x sin ) . The constitutive equations for the polarization of Eq . ( 49 ) give ! w sin ) ¼ h x # 1 ! , 1 w sin ) ; w cos ) ¼ h y # 1 ! , 1 w cos ) : ( 53 ) Combining Eqs . ( 52 ) and ( 53 ) , we obtain the perpendicular ﬁeld and the velocity gradient h ? ¼ - ! ! sin2 ) ð 1 þ , 1 cos2 ) Þ 4 " = # 1 þ 1 þ , 21 þ 2 , 1 cos2 ) ; w ¼ - ! ! sin2 ) 4 " = # 1 þ 1 þ , 21 þ 2 , 1 cos2 ) : ( 54 ) In the approximation where the Frank constants are equal , the perpendicular molecular ﬁeld is h ? ¼ ! & F & ) ¼ K @ 2 ) @ y : If the angle ) is small , an expansion of Eq . ( 54 ) for the perpendicular ﬁeld to lowest order in ) gives r 2 ) þ ) = L 2 ¼ 0 where the characteristic length L is deﬁned by 1 L 2 ¼ ! 2 - ! ! ð 1 þ , 1 Þ K ½ 4 " = # 1 þ ð 1 þ , 1 Þ 2 ) : ( 55 ) Assuming 1 þ , 1 > 0 , if the activity coefﬁcient - is negative corresponding to a contractile stress , L 2 > 0 and the length L is indeed real . The polarization angle varies then as ) ¼ ) 0 sin ð y = L Þ . This satisﬁes the anchoring condition on the solid surface y ¼ 0 , but the anchoring condition on the free surface y ¼ h can be satisﬁed only if h ¼ * L . If the ﬁlm is thin h + * L ¼ L c , there is no solution with a ﬁnite ) and the nonﬂowing steady state is stable . For a ﬁlm thicker than the critical value h ¼ * L the nonﬂowing steady state is unstable and a stable solution with a ﬁnite value of the polarization angle ) exists . If h > L c there is spontaneous symmetry breaking and two possible solutions with amplitudes * ) 0 . The amplitude ) 0 can be obtained by expansion at higher order of Eq . ( 54 ) and vanishes if h ¼ * L . In this case the second equation of Eq . ( 54 ) gives a ﬁnite velocity gradient and the ﬁlm spontaneously ﬂows with a ﬁnite ﬂux . Note that in general the onset of spontaneous ﬂow is controlled by the sign of the combination - ð 1 þ , 1 Þ . The ﬂow coupling coef - ﬁcient ( also known as the ﬂow - alignment parameter ) , 1 can in general have both positive and negative values ( de Gennes and Prost , 1993 ) . It is controlled by the shape of the active units and the degree of nematic order . Deep in the nematic state , , 1 < ! 1 corresponds to elongated rodlike particles , while , 1 > 1 corresponds to disklike particles . The onset of spontaneous ﬂow is therefore controlled by the interplay of the contractile - tensile nature of the active forces and the shape of the active particles . A detailed description of this can be found in Giomi , Marchetti , and Liverpool ( 2008 ) and Edwards and Yeomans ( 2009 ) . This transition is very similar to the Frederiks transition of nematic liquid crystals in an external electric or magnetic ﬁeld ( de Gennes and Prost , 1993 ) . The active stress - ! ! plays the role of the external ﬁeld . If the thickness is larger than the critical value L c , a distortion of the polarization appears . Any distortion of the polarization creates a gradient of active stress that must be balanced by a viscous stress which implies the appearance of a ﬁnite ﬂow . The Frederiks transition could also be considered at a constant ﬁlm thickness varying the active stress - ! ! . The ﬁlm spontaneously ﬂows if the active stress is large enough ( in absolute value ) . Finally , to properly describe the spontaneous - ﬂow transi - tion for polar active ﬁlms one needs to consider a two - ﬂuid model that allows for variations in the concentration of active particles . In this case spontaneous ﬂow is accompanied by spatial inhomogeneities in the concentration or ‘‘banding’’ not seen in active nematics ( Giomi , Marchetti , and Liverpool , 2008 ) . In addition , for stronger values of activity in polar ﬁlms steady spontaneous ﬂow is replaced by oscillatory ﬂow that becomes increasingly complicated and even chaotic for strong polarity . 2 . Instabilities of thin ﬁlms The Fredericks active ﬁlm instability discussed in Sec . IV . A . 1 occurs in situations where the geometry of the ﬁlm is ﬁxed and its surface cannot deform , whereas many phenomena in thin ﬁlm ﬂow ( Oron , Davis , and Bankoff , 1997 ; Sarkar and Sharma , 2010 ) involve distortions of the free surface , as does the dynamics of the lamellipodium ( Verkhovsky , Svitkina , and Borisy , 1999 ; Small et al . , 2002 ) ( see Sec . IV . D ) , and the spreading of bacterial suspen - sions ( Bees et al . , 2000 , 2002 ) . However , we discuss here simpler situations where mechanisms such as cell division in the bacterial case and actin treadmilling in the lamellipodium case are not included and that in a ﬁrst step could be com - pared only to model experiments on reconstituted systems ( Marchetti , 2012 ; Sanchez et al . , 2012 ) . Despite these limi - tations , the problems of an active drop or ﬁlm are interesting as novel variants of classic ﬂuid mechanics problems and as settings for phenomena of relevance to biology . We review in this section the hydrodynamics of thin ﬁlms of ﬂuid containing orientable degrees of freedom and en - dowed with locally uniaxial active stresses , spread on a solid surface , with the upper surface free to undulate . We present in detail the case of a laterally unbounded ﬁlm ( Sankararaman and Ramaswamy , 2009 ) . Our system is a ﬂuid with suspended active particles , i . e . , in the language of the previous section , a multicomponent active ﬂuid . We assume that the polar ma - terial velocity with respect to the background ﬂuid ( related to the relative current between the two components ) is strictly slaved to the polar order and equals v 0 p . This assumption is meaningful in the case of bacterial colonies but would have to be reconsidered in the discussion of a cell lamellipodium . We 1168 M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 also sketch results for the case of a ﬁnite , partially wetting drop with small equilibrium contact angle and apolar orienta - tional order ( Joanny and Ramaswamy , 2012 ) , where topo - logical defects play a role . In both cases , we consider only planar alignment ( de Gennes and Prost , 1993 ) , where the local orientation ﬁeld is anchored parallel to the free surface and the rigid base , and free to point in any direction in the plane of anchoring . Our focus is of course on the effects speciﬁcally due to the active stresses and currents . Following Sankararaman and Ramaswamy ( 2009 ) , we considered a ﬂuid ﬁlm ( see Fig . 22 ) containing active parti - cles with number density % ð r ; t Þ and orientation ﬁeld p ð r ; t Þ as a function of time t and three - dimensional position r ¼ ð r ? ; z Þ , where z denotes the coordinate normal to the hori - zontal coordinates r ? ¼ ð x ; y Þ , and the solid surface lies at z ¼ 0 . In the case of the drop , where we consider only apolar order , we identify the vector p with the nematic director ﬁeld , with p ! ! p symmetry . The free surface is located at z ¼ h ð r ? ; t Þ . The ﬂow of the ﬁlm is characterized by the three - dimensional incompressible velocity ﬁeld v ð r ; t Þ . We focus on the case where the ﬁlm or drop has macroscopic order , i . e . , the mean h p i is nonzero , which means that variations in the direction , not the magnitude , of p play the central role . Our aim is to obtain an effective equation of motion for the thickness h and the z - averaged density and polarization . This requires solving the Stokes equation in the presence of stresses generated by the active particles . At the end of the section , we offer a qualitative physical explanation as well . The dynamics of the height h is related to the velocity through the kinematic condition _ h ¼ v z ! v ? & r ? h ( Stone , 2005 ) . The incompressibility of the suspension implies vol - ume conservation , so that the height dynamics becomes a local conservation law ( Stone , 2005 ) @ t h þ r ? & ð h " v ? Þ ¼ 0 ( 56 ) in the ? plane , where " v ? is the in - plane velocity ﬁeld averaged over the thickness of the ﬁlm . With our assump - tions , the ﬂux of active particles in the laboratory reference frame is j ¼ % ð v þ v 0 p Þ so that the concentration % obeys the continuity equation @ t % ¼ ! r & ½ % ð v þ v 0 p Þ ) ; ( 57 ) which simply generalizes Eq . ( 2a ) to the case where the particles are moving not through an inert background but through a suspension with velocity ﬁeld v . The velocity ﬁeld v obeys the Stokes equation " r 2 v ¼ r P ! r & ð # a þ # p Þ ; ( 58 ) with viscosity " and pressure P . The stresses # a ¼ ! - ! ! % p & p and # p arise , respectively , from the activity of strength - ! ! and from the nematic elasticity ( de Gennes and Prost , 1993 ) , as given in Eqs . ( 46a ) and ( 46b ) . Note that we imposed an explicit linear dependence of the active stress # a on the local concentration % of active parti - cles as expected in a bacterial suspension , whereas for ﬁlament - motor systems the active stress increases faster than linear with the ﬁlament density . The polar order parame - ter p obeys Dp $ Dt þ , 1 v $ ( p ( þ ’ 1 ð p & r Þ p $ ¼ ! & F p & p $ þ C h r ? $ h þ f $ ; ( 59 ) where D = Dt is deﬁned in Eq . ( 37 ) , , 1 is the ﬂow - alignment parameter introduced in Eq . ( 42b ) and familiar from liquid - crystal hydrodynamics ( de Gennes and Prost , 1993 ) , ’ 1 is the coefﬁcient of the advective nonlinearity in Eq . ( 2b ) , and v $ ( is the strain - rate tensor deﬁned in Eq . ( 36a ) . This is the liquid limit ( 0 ¼ 0 ) of Eq . ( 49 ) where the polar active term propor - tional to ’ 1 has been included . Finally , F p is the free - energy functional for p and % given in Eq . ( 4 ) , whose content will be discussed further . Equation ( 59 ) generalizes Eq . ( 5 ) to include a ﬂuid medium ( Simha and Ramaswamy , 2002a ) and a free surface . In a geometry of ﬁnite z thickness with a free surface , symmetry cannot rule out a term of the form ð C = h Þ r ? h , in the z - averaged equation of motion for p ( Sankararaman and Ramaswamy , 2009 ) . The coefﬁcient C encodes the prefer - ence of p to point uphill or downhill with respect to the tilt r ? h . From the discussion of possible microscopic mecha - nisms and estimates for C in Sankararaman and Ramaswamy ( 2009 ) we see , crucially , that such an effect , while allowed by symmetry , must explicitly involve properties of the free surface and the base and cannot emerge simply from a z averaging of bulk 3D hydrodynamics . We therefore add such a term to Eq . ( 59 ) . We now proceed to solve Eq . ( 58 ) for the velocity in terms of % , p , and h . We study perturbations about a reference conﬁguration of the ﬁlm with uniform concentration % 0 and height h 0 , sponta - neously ordered into a state with nonzero mean polarization h p i ¼ p 0 ^ x . As we have chosen the active - particle current relative to the medium in Eq . ( 57 ) to be entirely along p , with no explicit diffusive contribution , and as the particles cannot escape the ﬂuid ﬁlm , the normal components of p must vanish at the bounding surfaces at z ¼ 0 and z ¼ h in agreement with the planar alignment boundary condition . In a perturbed state with a nonuniform ﬁlm thickness , this means that p z ð z ¼ h Þ ’ @ x h to linear order in r h . The z direction being the smallest dimension in the problem , it is consistent to assume that the variation of p with respect to z is at instantaneous mechanical equilibrium via nematic elasticity , implying p z ¼ ð z = h Þ @ x h or , in a z - averaged description , p z ¼ ð 1 = 2 Þ @ x h and @ z p z ’ h ! 1 @ x h . We represent the perturbed state as p ? ¼ ^ x þ ) ^ y , ) / 1 and linearize the active stress in ) . In the lubrication approximation ( Oron , Davis , and Bankoff , 1997 ; Batchelor , 2000 ; Stone , 2005 ) v z ¼ 0 , j @ z v j 0 jr ? v j , we obtain the pressure and then the linearized expression for the in - plane velocity FIG . 22 ( color online ) . A ﬁlm of ordered polar active suspension , illustrating the anchoring boundary condition on the ﬁlaments , parallel to the free surface and the base . M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter 1169 Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 v ? ð z Þ ¼ hz ! z 2 = 2 " " # r ? r 2 ? h ! 1 2 - ! ! h @ 2 x r ? h ! f ? # ; ( 60 ) where f ? ¼ - ! ! ½ð @ y ) þ @ x % = % 0 þ h ! 1 @ x h Þ ^ x þ @ x ) ^ y ) contains the dominant contributions of activity . Inserting this result into the incompressibility condition ( 56 ) and lin - earizing h ¼ h 0 þ & h , % ¼ % 0 þ & % , leads to the dynamical equations @ t & h q ¼ ! - ! ! h 20 3 " & 2 h 0 q x q y ) q þ h 0 q 2 x & % q % 0 þ " 1 ! 1 2 h 20 q 2 # q 2 x & h q ’ ! # h 30 3 ! q 4 & h q ( 61 ) for the in - plane spatial Fourier transforms & h q ð t Þ , & % q ð t Þ , and ) q ð t Þ of the perturbations in height , concentration , and ori - entation . The group of terms multiplied by - ! ! on the right - hand side of Eq . ( 61 ) displays four consequences of activity , from right to left : ( i ) pumping by curvature ( see Fig . 23 ) , ( ii ) anisotropic osmotic ﬂow , ( iii ) splay - induced ﬂow from tilting the free surface , and ( iv ) an anisotropic active tension . One can see that ( iii ) and ( iv ) are , respectively , destabilizing and stabilizing for contractile stresses , and the other way around for extensile stresses . From Eq . ( 49 ) , the linearized , z - averaged , long - wavelength equation of motion for the ori - entation ) reads @ t ) q ¼ þ iC h 0 q y & h q ! ð D þ q 2 x þ D ! q 2 y þ i ’ 1 q x Þ ) q ! ð i - q y ! % q x q y Þ & % q ; ( 62 ) where D * ¼ D ! ð ’ 1 * 1 Þ h 20 - ! ! = 4 " , D ’ K = " being a director diffusivity with K a Frank constant and % ¼ ð , 1 ! 1 Þ h 20 - ! ! = 4 % 0 " . Linearizing the active - particle conservation law ( 57 ) about the ordered uniform state gives to leading order in wave number : @ t & % q ¼ ! i % 0 v 0 q y ) q ! iv 0 q x & % q þ O ð q 2 x & % q ; q 2 x & h q Þ : ( 63 ) The most accessible and interesting instability , arising from the combination of activity and the tilt coupling C , can be understood by ignoring the concentration and motility ( v 0 ¼ 0 ) , but retaining contractile or extensile active stresses ( - ! ! ! 0 ) . The dispersion relation has the following com - plex form : ! ¼ * 1 þ i sgn ð q x C - ! ! Þ ﬃﬃﬃ 2 p " h 20 3 " # 1 = 2 j C - ! ! q x j 1 = 2 j q y j : ( 64 ) The relative signs of - ! ! and C determine the direction ( * ^ x ) of propagation of the unstable mode . Figure 24 at - tempts to explain the mechanism of this intriguing instability . The effects of concentration ﬂuctuations , and the suppression of the instability as the motility v 0 is increased , are discussed in Sankararaman and Ramaswamy ( 2009 ) . So far we have assumed an unbounded ﬁlm . We now brieﬂy consider the spreading kinetics of a ﬁnite drop , as discussed by Joanny and Ramaswamy ( 2012 ) , containing apolar active ﬁlaments in a state of nematic order . We choose a planar anchoring condition as in the case of the unbounded ﬁlm , i . e . , no component normal to the free surface or base . The geometry of the drop forces a topological defect in the interior that itself induces a deformation of the drop . Two possible defect structures are two ‘‘boojums’’ with orienta - tion pattern as in Fig . 25 ( left ) and an aster as in Fig . 25 ( right ) . The simplest case to consider is the two - boojums pattern of Fig . 25 ( left ) , with the assumption that the drops spread uniaxially in the x direction . The active stress amounts to a peculiar kind of disjoining pressure P act ¼ - ! ! ln ð h = h 0 Þ , which can be rationalized on dimensional grounds by noting that the activity strength itself has units of stress so that the dependence on thickness has to be logarithmic . The resulting static shape of a drop depends on the sign of the active stress : the drop is ﬂat if the active stress is extensile , and elevated , if it is contractile . For a linear structure like Fig . 25 ( left ) , if we assume spreading only along FIG . 23 ( color online ) . Curvature of the director of an active liquid - crystalline phase gives rise to ﬂows . The arrows indicate direction of ﬂow if the active stresses are contractile . high low high low FIG . 24 . Tilt of the free surface leads to active ﬂow ; the arrow’s directions are for the contractile case . FIG . 25 ( color online ) . Left : Two half - strength defects ( boojums ) at the ends of a drop . Right : A radial strength - 1 aster defect . Both defects are viewed from above the plane in which the drop lies . The lines are the director orientation . 1170 M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 the long axis at ﬁxed width w the result , for a ﬁxed volume & and viscosity " , is a drop of linear dimension R ð t Þ ’ " - ! ! & 2 t w 2 " # 1 = 4 : ( 65 ) A drop of volume & with an aster defect as in Fig . 25 ( right ) spreads isotropically with R ð t Þ ’ " - ! ! & 2 t " # 1 = 6 : ( 66 ) Further details including the behavior of other defect con - ﬁgurations are discussed by Joanny and Ramaswamy ( 2012 ) . B . Polar active suspensions with inertia In Sec . III we summarized the continuum ﬂocking model of Toner and Tu ( 1995 , 1998 ) for polar self - propelling parti - cles moving on a frictional substrate . Deep in the ordered phase , the theory predicted novel propagating soundlike waves , coupling orientation and density ﬂuctuations , with direction - dependent wave speeds and giant density ﬂuctua - tions . The discussion thereafter , when the ambient ﬂuid medium was introduced , focused on destabilizing effects arising from the interplay of activity and the hydrodynamic interaction for bulk suspensions in the Stokesian regime where viscosity dominates . However , we claimed in Sec . I that our hydrodynamic approach applied to ﬂocks from sub - cellular to oceanic scales . Bacterial suspensions , cell aggre - gates , and the cytoskeleton or its extracts ( see Sec . III ) are well approximated in the Stokesian limit where inertia is altogether ignored . For collections of large swimmers , such as ﬁsh , where inertial effects are important and the role of viscosity can be ignored an alternative emphasis is appropri - ate . Simha and Ramaswamy ( 2002a ) originally formulated their general theory of ordered states and ﬂuctuations for active particles suspended in a ﬂuid with a view to describing both viscosity - and inertia - dominated ﬂows . We brieﬂy re - view the discussion of Simha and Ramaswamy ( 2002a ) in the case where inertia is taken into account through the accel - eration term in the momentum equation . We ignore the advective nonlinearity v & r v , so the treatment amounts to the unsteady Stokes equation , but this is precisely the level of description in which the propagating modes of translationally ordered crystalline or liquid - crystalline phases are discussed by Martin , Parodi , and Pershan ( 1972 ) . The slow variables in a polar active suspension are the number density , the broken - symmetry variable p for polar order ( deﬁned in Sec . II . A ) , and the momentum density of the suspension g . We proceed initially as in Sec . III . A . 2 , through the momentum equation ( 32 ) @ t g $ ¼ ! @ ( # $ ( , with the stress tensor # $ ( ¼ ! . t $ ( þ m % v $ v ( , where . t $ ( contains the various contributions listed in Eqs . ( 39 ) , ( 42a ) , ( 42b ) , and ( 45 ) , including the crucial active stress . In systems where inertia is important , it is essential to retain the acceleration @ t g even while ignoring the inertial contributions m % v $ v ( to the stress which are nonlinear in g . The equation for the vector order parameter p is as in Sec . III . The number density is governed by Eq . ( 57 ) . The hydrodynamic modes implied by these equations of motion are obtained by linearizing and Fourier transforming in space and time ( Simha and Ramaswamy , 2002a ) . Imposing overall incompressibilty with the condition r & g ¼ 0 , the number of modes is ﬁve . We brieﬂy state here the main results of this analysis ( Simha and Ramaswamy , 2002a ) . First , when viscosity is ignored and acceleration is included , polar ordered suspensions are not in general linearly unstable ; that is , a parameter range of nonzero measure exists for which stable behavior is found . The dynamic response displays a whole new range of propagating waves as a result of the interplay of hydrodynamic ﬂow with ﬂuctuations in orienta - tion and concentration : a pair of bend - twist waves and three waves , generalizations of those in Toner and Tu ( 1998 ) , coupling splay , concentration , and drift each with exceed - ingly complicated direction - speed wave relations ( Simha and Ramaswamy , 2002a ) . The bend and twist waves result from the interplay of r , p ? and r , v ? , which provides a qualitative difference with respect to dry ﬂocks . These prop - agating modes can be observed on length scales where it is reasonable to ignore their damping—due to viscosity for the total momentum and velocity ﬂuctuations , and diffusion for concentration ﬂuctuations . This gives a large range of length scales for large fast swimmers like ﬁsh . Possibly experiments like those of Makris et al . ( 2006 ) , which speak of ﬁsh density waves , could test the existence of these modes in detail . Second , within this linearized treatment , equal - time density correlations of the density show the same features in the ordered phase as already seen for dry systems in Sec . II . A . 3 . c , with the number variance , scaled by the mean N , predicted to diverge as N 1 = 2 þ 1 = d in d dimensions as in Eq . ( 20 ) . Presumably nonlinearities , which powercounting readily shows to be relevant below four dimensions , but which are even more painful to analyze than in dry ﬂocks , will change the exponents but not the essential fact of super - normal ﬂuctuations . It is not clear whether the power - law static structure factor seen by Makris et al . ( 2006 ) in shoals 6 is evidence for these giant ﬂuctuations ; a fair test of ﬂocking theories requires a school rather than a shoal . C . Rheology The active hydrodynamic framework of Sec . III not only allows us to predict spontaneous - ﬂow instabilities as in Secs . IV . A . 1 and IV . A . 2 but also the response of an active ﬂuid to an imposed ﬂow , i . e . , the rheology of active soft matter ( Hatwalne et al . , 2004 ; Liverpool and Marchetti , 2006 ; Haines et al . , 2009 ; Giomi , Liverpool , and Marchetti , 2010 ; Saintillan , 2010 ) . For concreteness , we associate the purely coarse - grained description of Sec . III with a microscopic picture of a suspen - sion containing active particles of linear size ‘ , at concentration % , each particle carrying a force dipole of strength f‘ , where f is the propulsive thrust , with the activity of an individual particle correlated over a time 0 0 , and collective ﬂuctuations in the activity correlated over length scales 1 and time scales 0 . 6 In biology , a shoal is any group of ﬁsh that stays together , for instance , for social reasons . If the group swims in the same direction in a coordinated manner , it is called a school . M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter 1171 Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 We apply this approach to the isotropic phase of active particles in a ﬂuid to extract linear rheological properties ( Hatwalne et al . , 2004 ; Liverpool and Marchetti , 2006 ) and theautocorrelationofspontaneousstressﬂuctuations ( Hatwalne et al . , 2004 ; Chen et al . , 2007 ) when noise is included . We consider an apolar system described by orientation order in terms of the tensor Q , deﬁned in Eq . ( 21 ) . We obtain predictions for the rheology of active suspensions through the coupled dynamics of Q and the hydrodynamic velocity ﬁeld v ¼ g = % tot , where g and % tot are the total densities of mo - mentum and mass of the suspension . Neglecting inertial contribution to the stress tensor , conservation of total mo - mentum of particles and ﬂuid is expressed by @ t g ¼ r & # t , where the stress tensor # t is as in Sec . III . B . 1 . In addition , we must allow for noise sources of thermal and nonthermal origin . The former , although mandated in the equilibrium limit by the ﬂuctuation - dissipation relation connecting them to the solvent viscosity in Eq . ( 39 ) , are quantitatively negli - gible in comparison to effects arising from activity . Such active ﬂuctuating stresses can further arise in two ways : directly , as additive white - noise contributions to the stress in Eqs . ( 39 ) – ( 45 ) , which we ignore as they add no new physics to the macroscopic rheology discussed below , or indirectly , via the stochastic dynamics of the orientation ﬁeld , which is the case of interest . Consistent with Sec . III , we write the active stress in terms of the alignment tensor in the form . a $ ( ¼ ! - ! ! Q $ ( : ( 67 ) We note for later reference that we eventually consider the concentration dependence of active stresses - / % , which is physically reasonable and also follows from an explicit real - ization in terms of dipolar force densities associated with the active particles ( Simha and Ramaswamy , 2002a ; Hatwalne et al . , 2004 ; Baskaran and Marchetti , 2009 ) . Note that we are dealing with force - free , neutrally buoyant , self - propelling particles . Thus there are no external forces on the system , so that the simplest active particle , on long time scales , is a permanent force dipole ( Brennen and Winet , 1977 ; Pedley and Kessler , 1992 ) . Although we already discussed the mag - nitude and sign of - ! ! in Sec . III , it is useful to note here that for a system with concentration % the quantity - ! ! = % ’ ‘f characterizes the strength of the elementary force dipoles associated with , for example , individual swimming organ - isms . Negative and positive - ! ! refer , respectively , to con - tractile swimmers , or ‘‘pullers , ’’ and extensile swimmers , or ‘‘pushers , ’’ whose distinct rheological behavior we outline below . The rheology is obtained from the momentum equation together with the equations of motion for the order parameter ﬁeld and particle concentration . We begin with a description of the linear rheology of active matter in the isotropic and orientationally ordered phases and follow it up with a brief survey of the nonlinear rheology of active matter . 1 . Linear rheology of active isotropic matter To appreciate what is unique about active - matter rheology , it is useful to recall the linear rheology of passive nemato - gens . The stresses arising from distortions of the orientational order parameter Q and concentration % are derived from a free - energy functional F Q ½ Q ; % ) [ Eq . ( 23 ) ] , giving rise to a passive deviatoric order parameter stress ( Forster , 1974 ) , # op ¼ 3 H ! H & Q ! Q & H ; ( 68 ) where H . ! & F Q = & Q þ ð 1 = 3 Þ I Tr & F Q = & Q is the nematic molecular ﬁeld . The mean deviatoric passive stress ( 68 ) is zero in the isotropic phase at equilibrium ( and in the nematic phase as well ) . In addition , ﬂuctuations of the deviatoric stress are small as one nears the transition to the nematic phase , as can be seen by making small perturbations & Q in the isotropic phase , leading to a change in the free energy F Q / ð $ Q = 2 Þ R Tr ð & Q Þ 2 , which in turn gives rise to stress ﬂuctuations ’ $ Q & Q with a coefﬁcient $ Q that decreases on approaching the isotropic - nematic ( IN ) transition to the or - dered phase . Thus even though ﬂuctuations of Q are large as one approaches the IN transition , their contribution to rheol - ogy is small , resulting simply in a renormalization of 0 , the order parameter relaxation time . As shown , this pretransi - tional feature is fundamentally different in active isotropic systems . In the following we take a purely coarse - grained approach and closely follow the work of Hatwalne et al . ( 2004 ) , Liverpool and Marchetti ( 2006 ) , and Giomi , Liverpool , and Marchetti ( 2010 ) ; for a more microscopic treatment see Haines et al . ( 2009 ) and Saintillan ( 2010 ) . For the active system , the deviatoric reactive stress has to be obtained from the equations of motion for the order parameter and concentration , rather than simply from the free - energy functional . The linearized equations for Q in the isotropic phase are of the form @ Q $ ( @ t ¼ ! 1 0 Q $ ( þ D r 2 Q $ ( þ , 1 v $ ( þ & & & þ f $ ( ; ( 69 ) where Eq . ( 69 ) can be regarded as the modiﬁcation of Eq . ( 22 ) to include the effect of shear ﬂow to linear order . Here 0 is the orientational relaxation time , which could , for example , be the run time in a collection of run - and - tumble bacteria , or the rotational diffusion time , perhaps modiﬁed by collective and / or active effects in an actomyosin extract , D is a diffusivity ( ’ ‘ 2 = 0 0 ) related to the ratio of a Frank constant to a viscosity , , 1 is a ‘‘reversible’’ kinetic coefﬁcient or ﬂow coupling parameter , taken for simplicity to be of the same order as the one entering the equation for polarization p ( Forster , 1974 ) , f $ ( is a traceless , symmetric , spatiotempor - ally white tensor noise representing active ﬂuctuations , and the dots include the coupling of orientation to ﬂow . Note that this form of the linearized equation is valid for the passive system too , with the time scale 0 Q given by the order pa - rameter relaxation time proportional to 1 = $ Q , which gets larger as one approaches the IN transition . One can now proceed to calculate the linear viscoelastic properties of the active suspension . In addition to the active deviatoric stress ( 67 ) , we include the contribution from the viscous dissipative stress . d $ ( given in Eqs . ( 39 ) . For sim - plicity we neglect the tensorial nature of the viscosity of ﬂuids with orientational order . Using Eqs . ( 67 ) – ( 69 ) , and applying them to spatially uniform ( q ¼ 0 ) oscillatory shear ﬂow at frequency ! in the x - y plane one obtains , to linear order in the ﬁelds , 1172 M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 . xy ð ! Þ ¼ & " þ ð $ Q ! - ! ! Þ , 1 ! i ! þ 0 ! 1 Q ’ v xy : ( 70 ) The rheological response is deﬁned by the complex modu - lus G ð ! Þ ¼ . xy ð ! Þ = / xy ð ! Þ , with / xy ð ! Þ ¼ v xy ð ! Þ = ð ! i ! Þ the strain . The corresponding storage ( in - phase ) and loss ( out - of - phase ) moduli G 0 ð ! Þ and G 00 ð ! Þ , deﬁned by G ð ! Þ ¼ G 0 ð ! Þ þ iG 00 ð ! Þ , characterize the elastic and viscous re - sponses of the system to an oscillatory shear ﬂow . These moduli can be readout from Eq . ( 70 ) . The active isotropic system is rheologically a Maxwell ﬂuid to linear order . This is best highlighted by the behavior of the apparent shear viscosity " app ¼ lim ! ! 0 G ð ! Þ = ð ! i ! Þ , which shows an active excess viscosity " act / ! - ! ! 0 Q , 1 , corresponding to either an enhancement or reduction , de - pending on the sign of - . This active thickening ( thinning ) can be understood as follows ( see Fig . 26 ) : in an imposed ﬂow , in the absence of activity , disks ( rods ) tend to align their symmetry axis along the compression ( extension ) axis of the ﬂow ( Forster , 1974 ) . When activity is switched on , the ﬂow induced by the intrinsic force dipoles clearly opposes the imposed ﬂow in Figs . 26 ( a ) and 26 ( b ) , and enhances it in Figs . 26 ( c ) and 26 ( d ) . Activity thus enhances viscosity in Figs . 26 ( a ) and 26 ( b ) , since - ! ! < 0 , and reduces it in Figs . 26 ( c ) and 26 ( d ) ( - ! ! > 0 ) . For - ! ! < 0 , Eq . ( 70 ) shows that the viscosity grows substantially as the system approaches a transition to orientational order as 0 Q is in - creased , and in fact should diverge if 0 Q could grow without bound . Even more strikingly , a system of pushers , i . e . , ex - tensile swimmers , should show a prodigious reduction in viscosity as 0 Q grows ; indeed , nothing rules out a negative viscosity ( although this is actually unstable in one dimension ) or even a negative yield stress ( Cates et al . , 2008 ; Fielding , Marenduzzo , and Cates , 2011 ) . Experiments by Sokolov and Aranson ( 2009 ) have indeed shown that the extensile activity of Bacillus subtilis , a pusher swimmer , can substantially lower the viscosity of a suspension . By contrast , in a passive , i . e . , thermal equilibrium , system approaching a continuous or weak ﬁrst - order transition to a nematic phase , the excess viscosity ’ $ Q 0 Q is roughly constant since 0 Q / 1 = $ Q as required by the constraints of thermal equilibrium . The active excess viscosity obtained within the linear theory should be compared to the well - known result of Einstein ( 1906 , 1911 ) that the fractional excess viscosity due to the addition of passive particles to a ﬂuid is propor - tional to the particle volume fraction 2 ¼ * % ‘ 3 = 6 , to lowest order in 2 , with a coefﬁcient 5 = 2 for spheres . For this purpose it is convenient to take the active coupling propor - tional to the concentration % and deﬁne an active stress per particle W as - ! ! ¼ f‘ % . W 2 ; ( 71 ) where W ¼ f = ‘ 2 . Then " act ¼ ! W 0 Q 2 : ( 72 ) Equation ( 72 ) can be viewed as an additive correction to the 5 = 2 , proportional to W 0 Q , which of course can be of either sign . Behavior consistent with these predictions is seen in recent experiments measuring the activity - induced thicken - ing in a system of Chlamydomonas algae ( pullers , W < 0 ) , as shown in Fig . 27 ( Rafaı¨ , Jibuti , and Peyla , 2010 ) , and extreme thinning in a system of Bacillus subtilis bacteria ( pushers , W > 0 ) ( Sokolov and Aranson , 2009 ) . In the case of chlamydomonas , there is some question as to the direct applicability of the mechanism discussed above , as recent experiments have shown that the ﬂow ﬁeld generated by these microorganisms , although contractile , is more complex than dipolar ( Drescher et al . , 2010 ; Guasto , Johnson , and Gollub , 2010 ) . In general the linear rheology is controlled by the interplay of the nature of the active stresses , determined by - , and the ﬂow - alignment coefﬁcient , 1 . A remarkable duality has been identiﬁed that shows that extensile ( - > 0 ) rod - shaped ﬂow - aligning particles ( j , 1 j > 1 ) are rheologi - cally equivalent ( to linear order in the strain rate ) to con - tractile ( - < 0 ) discotic ﬂow - tumbling particles ( j , 1 j > 1 ) ( Giomi , Liverpool , and Marchetti , 2010 ) . FIG . 26 ( color online ) . Disks ( a ) and ( c ) , and rods ( b ) and ( d ) with active force densities attached along their symmetry axes , under shear ( horizontal arrows ) . The parameter - ! ! < 0 in ( a ) and ( b ) and > 0 in ( c ) and ( d ) . FIG . 27 . The contractile activity of ‘‘puller’’ swimmers can in - crease the viscosity of a suspension . The data represent the effective viscosity of chlamydomonas suspensions relative to the viscosity " 0 of the culture medium as a function of the volume fraction of bacteria . Solid symbols represent live cell data and crossed symbols represent dead cell data . The mechanism producing ﬂow orientation , however , remains unclear . Adapted from Rafaı¨ , Jibuti , and Peyla , 2010 . M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter 1173 Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 Equation ( 70 ) also predicts strong viscoelasticity as 0 Q increases . For passive systems , - ! ! ¼ 0 and $ Q / 0 ! 1 Q , and so G 0 ð ! 0 Q 0 1 Þ decreases as , 1 " = 0 Q , suggesting as earlier that there is little viscoelasticity near an equilibrium IN transition . For active contractile ( - ! ! < 0 ) systems , by contrast , the active contribution is of O ð 1 Þ and indepen - dent of 0 Q even close to the IN transition . Thus , as 0 Q grows , G 0 ð ! 0 Q 0 1 Þ ’ ! - ! ! , 1 ( 73 ) independent of 0 Q . In addition to this enhanced elasticity , the dynamic range over which elastic behavior is seen increases . This is quite a dramatic rheological manifestation of activity , since at equilibrium one would expect such strong visco - elastic behavior from a ﬂuid or suspension near translational freezing , as at a glass transition , not near orientational ordering . Put more radically , the orientationally ordered phase of contractile active particles is a peculiar yield - stress material , with nonzero shear and normal stresses in the limit of zero shear rate ( Hatwalne et al . , 2004 ; Liverpool and Marchetti , 2006 ; Marenduzzo , Orlandini , and Yeomans , 2007 ; Giomi , Liverpool , and Marchetti , 2010 ) as discussed in Sec . IV . C . 3 . Another observable manifestation of activity is an en - hanced noise temperature as inferred , for example , from tracer diffusion measurements in bacterial suspensions ( Wu and Libchaber , 2000 ) , and frequency - dependent shear viscos - ity arising from ﬂuctuations in stress and concentration ( Hatwalne et al . , 2004 ; Chen et al . , 2007 ) . Activity is the transduction of chemical energy , say in the form of ATP hydrolysis equal to about 20 k B T per ATP molecule . This suggests that ﬂuctuations from this athermal noise are sig - niﬁcant . Following Hatwalne et al . ( 2004 ) , we estimate the strength of nonequilibrium stress ﬂuctuations that result from ﬂuctuations of the force generation of active particles , through the variance of the active stress at zero wave number and frequency . The divergence of the active stress # a ¼ ! - ! ! Q appears as a forcing term in the momentum equa - tion . Assuming the active objects , whether bioﬁlaments or bacteria , are collectively in a spatially isotropic state , this forcing can be viewed as a noise on scales large compared to the correlation length and time 1 and 0 Q deﬁned at the start of this section . Recall that in ﬂuctuating hydrodynamics ( Landau and Lifshitz , 1998 ) , for a thermal equilibrium ﬂuid with shear viscosity " and temperature T , the variance of the random stresses at zero frequency is " T . For an active ﬂuid , then , the apparent temperature as probed by the motion of a tracer particle can be estimated by the zero - frequency , zero - wave - number variance of the active stress " T eff ’ ð - ! ! Þ 2 , R d 3 rdt h Q ð 0 ; 0 Þ : Q ð r ; t Þ i . The simplest dimensional argument then gives T eff ’ ð - ! ! Þ 2 1 3 0 Q = " . An Ornstein - Zernike form ð ‘ = r Þ exp ð ! r = 1 Þ for the equal - time correlations of Q , which requires the introduction of a microscopic length which we take to be the active - particle size ‘ , gives instead T eff ’ ð - ! ! Þ 2 1 2 ‘ 0 Q = " . From Eq . ( 71 ) , using rough estimates for the bacterial system of Wu and Libchaber ( 2000 ) f ’ v = " ‘ with " ’ 10 ! 2 Poise , ‘ ’ 1 ! m , 2 ’ 0 : 1 1 ’ 20 ! m corresponding to a ‘‘run’’ for a time 0 Q ¼ 1 s and speed v ’ 20 ! m = s yields T eff about 400 times room temperature , consistent with the measurements of Wu and Libchaber ( 2000 ) . Note that this enhancement is independent of the sign of - ! ! , i . e . , the diffusivity increases regardless of whether the viscosity decreases or increases , a telltale sign of the nonequilibrium nature of the system . A further interesting consequence ( Hatwalne et al . , 2004 ) of this excess noise is a large enhancement of the amplitude of the well - known t ! d = 2 long - time tails in the autocorrelation of tagged - particle ve - locities . We know of no experiment that has probed this last feature . More extended analyses of ﬂuctuations in active systems , demarcating the dynamical regimes lying within and beyond the conventional ﬂuctuation - dissipation theorem , include work by Mizuno et al . ( 2007 ) and Kikuchi et al . ( 2009 ) . We now turn to nonlinear ﬂuctuation effects ( Hatwalne et al . , 2004 ; Chen et al . , 2007 ) . From Eq . ( 67 ) , the ﬂuctua - tions in the deviatoric stress get contributions from ﬂuctua - tions bilinear in the orientation Q and the concentration % . The stress autocorrelation is therefore a convolution of Q and % correlations . The former is evaluated from Eq . ( 69 ) , while the latter can be calculated from the linearized equations for the concentration @ t & % ¼ ! r & J , where the current J $ ¼ ! D @ $ & % ! W 0 % 0 @ ( Q $ ( þ f % $ , with D the diffusion con - stant , % 0 the mean concentration , f % $ a random noise , and W 0 an activity parameter . The resulting key ﬁndings of Chen et al . ( 2007 ) and Lau and Lubensky ( 2009 ) are an excess ﬂuctuation 2 ! ! 1 = 2 in the stress ﬂuctuations , and no excess response , i . e . , viscosity , in the range studied , again a sign of nonequilibrium behavior . Hatwalne et al . ( 2004 ) considered stress contributions nonlinear in Q and showed they should lead to excess viscosity as well as of a similar form , but the effect is presumably below detectable levels in the Chen et al . ( 2007 ) experiment . 2 . Linear rheology of active oriented matter In extending the study of rheology to active oriented matter , we immediately encounter a problem . As remarked in Sec . IV . A . 1 , long - range uniaxial orientational order , whether polar or apolar , in active Stokesian suspensions of polar particles is always hydrodynamically unstable to the growth of long - wavelength splay or bend ﬂuctuations , de - pending on the sign of - ! ! . This instability has no threshold in a spatially unbounded system ( Simha and Ramaswamy , 2002a ) , and the growth rate is highest at wave number q ¼ 0 . Frank elasticity with stiffness K stabilizes modes with q greater than q 0 / ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ j - ! ! j = K q ; ( 74 ) so that there is a band of unstable modes from 0 to q 0 . Note that q 0 is simply an approximate form of the length scale deﬁned by Eq . ( 55 ) . In any case , in the limit of inﬁnite system size there is no stable reference state , no ideal active nematic or polar liquid crystal whose rheology one can study as a geometry - independent material property . We must therefore ask what suppresses this generic instability ( Ramaswamy and Rao , 2007 ) . A mechanism for suppression of the instability is conﬁnement by boundary walls . The existence of a crossover wave number ( 74 ) implies that the instability exists only if 1174 M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 the sample’s narrowest dimension h > ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ K = j - ! ! j p ; equiva - lently , for ﬁxed h the activity must cross a threshold ’ K = h 2 . This is the essential content of the treatment of Voituriez , Joanny , and Prost ( 2005 ) discussed in Sec . IV . A . 1 . Conﬁnement along y , with the director spontaneously aligned along x and free to turn in an unbounded x - z plane , shows ( Ramaswamy and Rao , 2007 ) a similar threshold but with a q 2 dependence of the growth rate at small in - plane q . In either case , it is clear that conﬁnement can produce a stable active liquid crystal whose linear rheology one can study . Alternatively , the instability can be suppressed by imposing an external shear ﬂow or by the presence of partial translational order , either columnar or lamellar . Orientational stabilization can also be achieved in ﬂow - aligning systems ( j , 1 j > 1 ) by imposing a uniform shear ﬂow with shear rate _ # . This stabilizes those wave vectors whose growth rate is smaller than the shear rate _ # . As _ # is increased more and more modes are stabilized , until at a threshold _ # c , the oriented phase is completely stabilized by the shear ﬂow , yielding a stability diagram controlled by two variables , the ﬂow - alignment parameter , 1 and the ratio of the shear to active stress ( Muhuri , Rao , and Ramaswamy , 2007 ; Giomi , Liverpool , and Marchetti , 2010 ) . Translational order , either partial as in smectic or columnar liquid crystal or full as in three - dimensional crystalline systems , can also yield a stable active system , whose properties have been the subject of recent studies ( Adhyapak , Ramaswamy , and Toner , 2013 ) . Stabilizing the orientationally ordered phase of active matter now sets the stage for a study of its unusual rheology ( Hatwalne et al . , 2004 ; Liverpool and Marchetti , 2006 ; Giomi , Liverpool , and Marchetti , 2010 ) . We have already seen that , on approaching the orientationally ordered state from the isotropic ﬂuid , a suspension of active contractile elements ( W < 0 ) exhibits solidlike behavior without trans - lational arrest . In the orientationally ordered phase , the orientational order parameter h Q i ! 0 , which by Eq . ( 67 ) immediately leads to a nonzero steady - state average of the deviatoric stress , in the absence of any external deformation . This prestress is a truly nonequilibrium effect , and has no analog in a passive equilibrium nematic ﬂuid which has a purely isotropic mean stress , i . e . , a pressure , despite its orientational order . This prestress implies that in a ﬂow experiment , the shear stress will not vanish at zero deforma - tion rate . The same features of being ﬁrst order in shear rate and having a nonzero value at zero shear rate are exhibited by the normal stresses . yy ! . xx . We emphasize that this strange kind of yield stress is a manifestation of the rheology of an active oriented ﬂuid without any form of translational arrest . We conclude this section on the rheological properties of active oriented matter by drawing attention to an interest - ing analogy between active stress of contractile ﬁlaments with macroscopic orientational order and fragile jammed granular matter , as discussed by Ramaswamy and Rao ( 2007 ) . 3 . Nonlinear rheology of active nematics We now turn to the rheological properties of orientation - ally ordered active ﬂuids beyond the linear regime . As detailed in Sec . IV . C . 2 , the generic instability of orientation - ally ordered active suspensions ( Simha and Ramaswamy , 2002a ) can be suppressed by conﬁnement or by imposing an external shear ( Marenduzzo , Orlandini , and Yeomans , 2007 ; Muhuri , Rao , and Ramaswamy , 2007 ) . It is therefore meaningful to explore the dynamics and rheology of these phases in conﬁned geometries . Extensive numerical studies of active nematic and polar ﬁlms ( Marenduzzo , Orlandini , and Yeomans , 2007 ; Cates et al . , 2008 ; Giomi , Liverpool , and Marchetti , 2010 ; Fielding , Marenduzzo , and Cates , 2011 ) under shear reveal a rich variety of phenomena inﬂu - enced by boundary conditions and geometry . This complex behavior results again from the interplay between local stresses generated by activity ( quantiﬁed by the parameter - ) , the ﬂow - aligning property of these particles ( character - ized by the parameter , 1 ) , and the typical self - propulsion velocity v 0 in polar active ﬂuids . A complete understanding of their response to shear necessitates exploring the space spanned by these parameters under various boundary conditions . We present a summary only of the main results obtained in the literature . While detailed theoretical and numerical studies of linear active rheology including the effect of polarity can be found in Giomi , Marchetti , and Liverpool ( 2008 ) and Giomi , Liverpool , and Marchetti ( 2010 ) , the nonlinear rheology has so far been studied mainly for apolar systems . For contractile active ﬂuids in an orientationally ordered state , numerical studies of the hydrodynamic equa - tions ( Cates et al . , 2008 ) when only one - dimensional varia - tion is allowed show the onset of solidlike behavior of Hatwalne et al . ( 2004 ) and the existence of a yield shear stress as in Liverpool and Marchetti ( 2006 ) and Ramaswamy and Rao ( 2007 ) . Studies of extensile ﬂuids , allowing varia - tion in one ( Cates et al . , 2008 ) and two ( Fielding , Marenduzzo , and Cates , 2011 ) spatial directions display the onset of spontaneous ﬂowing states , with complex ﬂow states including bands in 1D and rolls and turbulence in 2D . Related experimental ﬁndings include large - scale chaotic ﬂows in bacterial systems ( Dombrowski et al . , 2004 ; Aranson et al . , 2007 ) , as remarked earlier . An important general feature ( Cates et al . , 2008 ; Fielding , Marenduzzo , and Cates , 2011 ) is that dimensionality matters : imposed restrictions to 1D spatial variation lead to signiﬁcantly dif - ferent rheology from that seen when 2D variation is allowed , for example . Active stresses generally appear to stabilize shear bands , but have the opposite effect close to the isotropic - nematic transition . In systems with free boundary conditions , the approach to the isotropic - nematic contractile transition shows ( Cates et al . , 2008 ) an active enhancement of viscosity . As claimed by Hatwalne et al . ( 2004 ) , orienta - tional ordering in active systems indeed resembles transla - tional arrest in equilibrium systems . The relation between the rheology of active ﬂuids in external shear and the onset of spontaneous ﬂow in the absence of shear is discussed by Giomi , Liverpool , and Marchetti ( 2010 ) . This work also analyzed in detail the non - linear rheology of active ﬂuids , revealing strongly nonmono - tonic stress versus strain - rate curves beyond a threshold value of activity , as suggested by Hatwalne et al . ( 2004 ) , with macroscopic yield - stress behavior and hysteresis . Finally , at M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter 1175 Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 even higher activity , the theoretical stress - strain curve has a discontinuous jump at zero strain rate , corresponding to a ﬁnite ‘‘spontaneous stress’’ in the absence of applied shear . In recent work , Foffano et al . ( 2012 ) compared microrheology and macrorheology in a numerical study of the continuum hydrodynamics equations of active ﬂuids . Among their key results is that the rheological properties are a strong function of the anchoring condition of the orientation at the surfaces of probe particles and container walls , and of the sizes of the system and the probe particle . An example of their results is seen in Fig . 28 . Given the complexity and richness of the nonlinear rheology of active ﬂuids , see the literature for further details . D . Applying the hydrodynamic theory to phenomena in living cells To demonstrate that the hydrodynamic theory of active gels described in the previous sections indeed provides generic tools for addressing questions relevant to living cells , we brieﬂy summarize a few examples of concrete successes of the theory . A more complete review can be found in Grill ( 2011 ) . The ﬁrst example is directly relevant to cell motility , in particular , to the migration of ﬁsh keratocytes , eukaryotic cells extracted from ﬁsh scales that are among the fastest moving cells , migrating on a substrate at a steady speed of about 10 ! m = min . These cells have a characteristic fan shape , with a large ﬂat region extending in front of their nucleus , toward the direction of forward motion , known as the lamellipodium . This region is ﬁlled with a cross - linked actin gel , where myosin motor complexes use the energy from ATP hydrolysis to grab on neighboring actin ﬁlaments and exert stress . Actin polymerization takes place at the leading edge of the lamellipodium , while the ﬁlaments disassemble in the rear region , in a process that plays a crucial role in driving the motility . Kruse et al . ( 2006 ) used active gel theory in two dimensions ( the thickness and one spatial dimension ) to calculate the shape of the lamellipo - dium , the actin velocity ﬁeld inside the lamellipodium , and the cell velocity . In agreement with experiments , at the front edge of the cell , the actin ﬂow is found to be retrograde in the direction opposite to the motion . The important result is that the cell velocity is mostly determined by the actin depolymerization velocity , and the retrograde ﬂow by the active contractile stress - ! ! . A direct comparison with the experiments of Vallotton et al . ( 2005 ) shown in Fig . 29 allows for an estimate of the active stress - ! ! ’ ! 1000 Pa . A second example is that of shape oscillations , observed ubiquitously in many cells when they do not adhere to the substrate . An example is shown in Fig . 30 . Salbreux et al . ( 2007 ) interpreted these oscillations as an instability of the cortical actin layer , which is itself an active actomyosin gel . The cortical layer is indeed unstable at large enough values of the active stress but does not show any oscillatory instability . Experimentally , the existence of oscillations depends cru - cially on the presence of calcium ions in the external medium and is inhibited upon addition of molecules blocking calcium channels . Salbreux et al . ( 2007 ) augmented the active gel theory by assuming a coupling of the active stress to calcium channels in the cell membrane that in turn are gated by the deformations in the actin cortical layer . Calcium concentra - tion couples to local myosin activity that in turn controls the stretching and compression of the actin layer , in a feedback loop that results in sustained oscillations . They calculated a stability diagram of the cortical actin layer which shows oscillatory instabilities in a large region of parameter space when the active stress is large enough . Assuming an active stress j - ! ! j ’ 1000 Pa , the period of the oscillation is of the same order as the experimental period ( 30 s ) and decreases with j - ! ! j as observed in the experiments . Although of course the active gel theory is a phenomenological model and contains several unknown parameters , the fact that the same value of activity - ! ! is consistent with the experimen - tally measured oscillation period of the cortical actin layer and the retrograde ﬂow of the lamellipodium is an important validation of the model . The active gel theory has also been used recently to model cortical ﬂow during the ﬁrst division of the C . elegans zygote ( Mayer et al . , 2010 ) , as shown in Fig . 31 . The experiments are based on laser ablation to measure the anisotropy of the local tension of the actin cortex . They used a simpliﬁed version of the active gel theory in one dimension to relate the cortical tension to the actin ﬂow . This allows them to identify two prerequisites for the existence of the large - scale cortical ﬂow FIG . 28 ( color online ) . Dependence of the apparent viscosity " eff that would be obtained in a microrheology experiment on the size R of the probe for ( a ) an active contractile and ( b ) an active extensile ﬂuid . Different symbols refer to different values of the activity parameter - ( see legend ) . Filled and open symbols correspond to probes pulled along and perpendicular to the direction of the far ﬁeld director , respectively , and dashed lines are to guide the eye . Adapted from Foffano et al . , 2012 . FIG . 29 . Velocity ﬁeld determined by speckle microscopy in a keratocyte lamellipodium . Adapted from Vallotton et al . , 2005 . 1176 M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 necessary to initiate the anteroposterior cell polarization which directs the asymmetry of the ﬁrst mitotic division : a gradient in actomyosin contractility to drive the ﬂow , and a sufﬁciently large viscosity of the cortex to allow ﬂow to be long ranged . Another recent success of active hydrodynamics has come from its application to the organization and dynamics of molecules on the surface of living metazoan cells ( Gowrishankar et al . , 2012 ) . The lateral compositional het - erogeneity of the plasma membrane at submicron scales , termed ‘‘lipid rafts , ’’ has been the subject of intense research ( Lingwood and Simons , 2010 ) . Most attempts to understand this heterogeneity are based on equilibrium thermodynamics . Using a variety of ﬂuorescence microscopy techniques , and conﬁrmed by other methods , it has been shown that the dynamics , spatial distribution , and statistics of clustering of a key raft component are regulated by the active dynamics of cortical actin ﬁlaments ( Goswami et al . , 2008 ) . Following this , Gowrishankar et al . ( 2012 ) developed a model for an active composite cell membrane based on active hydrody - namics , which shows how the dynamics of transient asterlike regions formed by active polar ﬁlaments ( actin ) can drive passive advective scalars ( molecules such as GPI - anchored proteins ) to form dynamic clusters . In addition to successfully explaining the many striking features of the dynamics and statistics of clustering of GPI - anchored proteins on the cell surface , this model makes several predictions , including the existence of giant number ﬂuctuations which have been veriﬁed using ﬂuorescence microscopy ( Gowrishankar et al . , 2012 ) . These studies suggest that rafts are actively constructed and that the active mechanics of the cortical cytoskeleton regulates local composition at the cell surface via active currents and stresses . Finally , Fig . 32 shows polarized actin waves propagating around the periphery of a Drosophila cell that has been ﬁxed to a substrate , preventing it from moving , under condition of enhanced actin polymerization ( Asano et al . , 2009 ) . In this case the hydrodynamic theory was used to model the cortical actin network as an active polar gel coupled to a stationary substrate and to determine the conditions under which wave propagation will occur . The theory predicts the existence of a critical value of polarity associated with ﬁlament treadmilling above which the polarization waves will occur as observed in experiments . V . DERIVATION OF HYDRODYNAMICS FROM MICROSCOPIC MODELS OF ACTIVE MATTER A . Microscopic models While the macroscopic equations of motion of active matter can be obtained from general considerations of FIG . 30 . Shape oscillations of nonadhering ﬁbroblasts . The second frame shows the periodic oscillation of the projected area of the cell and the associated Fourier spectrum . The period of the oscillation of these cells is very well deﬁned and of the order of 30 s . The oscillation period is found to decrease when myosin activity increases . The latter can in turn be modulated by the addition of various drugs . Adapted from Salbreux et al . , 2007 . FIG . 31 ( color ) . A display of the imaging of tension in the cortex of a C . elegans zygote obtained before and after cortical laser ablation ( COLA ) performed on the actomyosin meshwork . The left image shows a schematic of COLA performed with a pulsed ultraviolet laser along a 6 ! m line ( light blue in both images ) along the anterior - posterior ( AP ) axis , in the posterior of the cell . The center frames show the pre - ( top ) and post - cut image ( bottom ) of posterior COLA . The image to the right shows the tension mea - surement in the zygote’s actomyosin cortex upon laser ablation along the blue line . The black arrows are the displacements between precut ( purple ) and postcut images ( green ) . The average speed of this initial recoil measured in a direction orthogonal to the cut line is proportional to the normal component of the 2D tension tensor . The white bar is 4 ! m . Adapted from Mayer et al . , 2010 . M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter 1177 Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 symmetry , determination of the magnitude and often even the sign of the coefﬁcients requires additional physical assump - tions . Unlike for systems near equilibrium , the assumptions are not easily identiﬁed . Furthermore the relaxation of the constraints required by equilibrium allows the possibility of a much larger number of terms . Physical insight can be pro - vided by using the tools and methods of nonequilibrium statistical mechanics ( Zwanzig , 2001 ) to derive the contin - uum equations via systematic coarse graining of simpliﬁed microscopic models of the active processes driving the sys - tem ( Kruse and Ju¨licher , 2000 ; Kruse , Camalet , and Ju¨licher , 2001 ; Liverpool , Maggs , and Ajdari , 2001 ; Liverpool , 2003 ; Aranson and Tsimring , 2005 ; Bertin , Droz , and Gre´goire , 2006 , 2009 ; Kraikivski , Lipowsky , and Kierfeld , 2006 ; Baskaran and Marchetti , 2008a ) . While a comprehensive review of such approaches is beyond the scope of this paper , we present some speciﬁc examples that highlight one possible path for carrying out such a coarse graining . One approach is to start from stochastic equations for the microscopic dynam - ics and then systematically project the microscopic degrees of freedom on to macroscopic variables , such as the density % ð r ; t Þ and polarization p ð r ; t Þ , deﬁned in Eqs . ( 1a ) and ( 1b ) . This procedure yields hydrodynamic equations for the macroscopic variables on length scales long compared to the size ‘ of the individual active elements . For simplicity , we restrict ourselves to overdamped systems , where the medium through which the active particles may move ( ﬂuid or sub - strate ) is inert and provides only friction . In this case the momentum of the active particles is not conserved and the microscopic degrees of freedom are the positions r n ð t Þ and orientations ^ ! n ð t Þ of the active elements , plus possibly other microscopic degrees of freedom describing internal active processes . Of course medium - mediated hydrodynamic inter - actions can play a crucial role in controlling the dynamics of collections of swimmers . To incorporate such effects one needs to consider a two - component system and explicitly describe the exchange of momentum between particles and solvent . Both the translational and rotational velocities of each particle must be incorporated in the microscopic model , as well as the solvent degrees of freedom . This more general case is outlined brieﬂy in Sec . V . B . 4 . In general , approxima - tions are required both to identify a tractable microscopic model and to carry out the coarse - graining procedure to derive equations for the macroscopic variables . The form of the resulting equations is general , as it is dictated by symme - try , and the microscopic description allows a calculation of the phenomenological parameters and transport coefﬁcients involved in the hydrodynamic equations . This is important , for example , for biological systems because it allows one to predict the variation of the transport coefﬁcients with the biological parameters that can be changed in the experiments . The purpose of this section is to review a number of such derivations and summarize their similarities and differences . In equilibrium statistical mechanics there is a long tradition of simpliﬁed microscopic descriptions which have eventually led to a number of paradigmatic minimal models ( Ising , XY , Heisenberg ) that capture the essentials of the behavior of a variety of equilibrium systems . Similarly we describe some minimal microscopic descriptions of active matter that have provided insight into the complex physics of these systems . An interesting aspect of these microscopic realizations is that they allow one to identify the common behavior of different experimental systems . Two examples we focus on are ( 1 ) mix - tures of cross - linking motor constructs and protein ﬁlaments ( Ne´de´lec et al . , 1997 ; Ne´de´lec , 1998 ; Surrey et al . , 2001 ) and ( 2 ) collections of self - propelled particles . Experimental real - izations of the latter may be actin ﬁlaments in motility assays ( Kron and Spudich , 1986 ; Butt et al . , 2010 ; Schaller et al . , 2010 ) or suspensions of swimming microorganisms ( Dombrowski et al . , 2004 ; Zhang et al . , 2010 ) . 1 . Self - propelled particles A microscopic realization of active systems is provided by interacting self - propelled particles ( SPP ) . While these can be FIG . 32 ( color online ) . ( a ) A circular actin wave in the lamellipodium in a Drosophila cell ﬁxed to a substrate and treated to enhance polarization of actin ﬁlaments . The wave travels along the cell’s periphery , with the arrows marking the regions of maximum actin density at various times . ( b ) Phase contrast microscopy picture of a control Drosophila cell ﬁxed to a substrate with a typical circular shape . ( c ) In the theoretical model , the cell perimeter is represented by a circle of radius R . ( d ) The calculated concentration of active ﬁlaments as a function of the polar angle 2 and time . Adapted from Asano et al . , 2009 . 1178 M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 thought of as simpliﬁed agent - based models of ﬂocks of birds and shoals of ﬁsh ( Vicsek et al . , 1995 ) , they can also act as realistic models for less complexsystems , such as polar protein ﬁlaments ( e . g . , F actin ) in gliding motility assays on surfaces decorated with molecular motors ( e . g . , myosin ) ( Kron and Spudich , 1986 ; Schaller et al . , 2010 ) , suspensions of swim - ming microorganisms ( Dombrowski et al . , 2004 ; Zhang et al . , 2010 ) , or even layers of vibrated granular rods ( Narayan , Ramaswamy , and Menon , 2007 ) . It should be stressed , how - ever , that there have been suggestions that hydrodynamic interactions may be important in motility assays at high ﬁla - ment density ( Schaller , Weber , Hammerich et al . , 2011 ) . Each self - propelled particle has a position and an orienta - tion . It also has an individual self - propulsion velocity of magnitude v 0 and direction speciﬁed by the particle’s orien - tation . SPPs interact with neighboring particles via either a local rule ( Vicsek et al . , 1995 ) or physical ( steric or other ) interactions ( Baskaran and Marchetti , 2008a , 2008b , 2009 ; Leoni and Liverpool , 2010 ) . Mean - ﬁeld models for the sto - chastic dynamics of the particles can be expressed in terms of the one - particle density c ð r ; ^ ! ; t Þ . This measures the proba - bility of ﬁnding a self - propelled particle with position r and orientation ^ ! at time t . The equation of motion for c ð r ; ^ ! ; t Þ takes into account the interplay of ﬂuctuations ( diffusion ) , interactions , and self - propulsion . These mean - ﬁeld models are valid in the regime of weak interactions , low density , and weak density correlations . The kinetic equation for the one - particle density can then be solved directly either analytically or numerically for speciﬁc geometries and initial condition ( Saintillan , 2012 ) . Alternatively , to describe macroscopic behavior , the kinetic theory can also be further coarse grained by projecting on to macroscopic ﬁelds such as % ð r ; t Þ and p ð r ; t Þ to obtain the equivalent of Eq . ( 5 ) , where the parame - ters $ , ( , K , v 1 , and ’ 1 ; 2 ; 3 are expressed in terms of the microscopic parameters of the system ( Bertin , Droz , and Gre´goire , 2006 , 2009 ; Baskaran and Marchetti , 2008a , 2010 ; Ihle , 2011 ) . A concrete example of this procedure is given in Sec . V . B . 3 . 2 . Motors and ﬁlaments Another microscopic realization of active matter is pro - vided by suspensions of polar protein ﬁlaments cross - linked by active cross - links consisting of clusters of molecular motors ( Ne´de´lec et al . , 1997 ; Ne´de´lec , 1998 ; Surrey et al . , 2001 ; Backouche et al . , 2006 ; Mizuno et al . , 2007 ) . The motivation for this in vitro work is to provide an understand - ing of the mechanics of the eukaryotic cell cytoskeleton from the bottom up . Molecular motors are proteins that are able to convert stored chemical energy into mechanical work by hydrolyzing ATP molecules . The mechanical work is done by the motors moving in a unidirectional manner along the polar ﬁlaments . Particular motor proteins are associated with speciﬁc polar ﬁlaments , e . g . , kinesins ‘‘walk’’ on microtu - bules while myosins ‘‘walk’’ on ﬁlamentous actin . Since the ﬁlaments are polar , they can be characterized by a position and an orientation . Some workers ( Kruse and Ju¨licher , 2000 , 2003 , 2006 ; Liverpool , 2003 ; Liverpool and Marchetti , 2005 ; Ahmadi , Marchetti , and Liverpool , 2006 ) modeled the motor clusters as active cross - linkers ( see Fig . 33 ) capable of walk - ing along the ﬁlaments and exchange forces and torques among ﬁlament pairs , hence yielding additional , active , contributions to the translational and rotational velocities of ﬁlaments . Another model was proposed by Aranson and Tsimring ( 2005 , 2006 ) who described the ﬁlament dynamics via a stochastic master equation for polar rigid rods interacting via instantaneous inelastic ‘‘collisions . ’’ Both models express the stochastic dynamics of the active system in terms of the one - particle density of ﬁlaments c ð r ; ^ ! ; t Þ . The kinetic equa - tion for c ð r ; ^ ! ; t Þ takes account of the interplay of diffusion and active contributions induced by the cross - linking motor clus - ters or the inelastic collisions . The kinetic equations can again be further coarse grained by projecting on the continuum ﬁelds , such as % ð r ; t Þ and p ð r ; t Þ to obtain the equivalent of Eq . ( 5 ) , with microscopic expressions for all parameters . Although the parameter values depend on the speciﬁc micro - scopic model , the continuum equations obtained by these two approaches have the same structure . The work by Aranson and Tsimring ( 2005 , 2006 ) incorporates , however , terms of higher order in the gradients of the continuum ﬁelds neglected in Kruse and Ju¨licher ( 2000 , 2003 ) , Liverpool ( 2003 ) , and Ahmadi , Marchetti , and Liverpool ( 2006 ) . These models give rise to contracted states and propagating density - polarization waves in both one ( Kruse and Ju¨licher , 2000 ; Kruse , Camalet , and Ju¨licher , 2001 ) and higher dimensions ( Liverpool , 2003 ; Liverpool and Marchetti , 2005 ) , as well as aster and spiral patterns ( Aranson and Tsimring , 2005 , 2006 ) . Finally , a number of other mean - ﬁeld implementations of the dynamics of motor - ﬁlament suspensions , some including ex - plicitly motor dynamics or additional passive cross - linkers , have been used by others to understand pattern formation in these systems ( Lee and Kardar , 2001 ; Sankararaman , Menon , and Kumar , 2004 ; Ziebert and Zimmermann , 2004 , 2005 ; Ziebert , Aranson , and Tsimring , 2007 ) . In the next sections we brieﬂy outline one procedure for going from the ﬂuctuating microscopic dynamics to the mac - roscopic equations of motion . We restrict our discussion to dry systems . For wet systems , see published work ( Liverpool and Marchetti , 2006 ; Marchetti and Liverpool , 2007 ; Baskaran and Marchetti , 2009 ; Leoni and Liverpool , 2010 ) . B . From stochastic dynamics to macroscopic equations We consider a collection of N identical ( a simpliﬁcation ) anisotropic particles , each described by a position r n ð t Þ and + _ _ 2 l 1 _ _ 2 l r 2 r 1 2 ^ 1 ^ + 1 FIG . 33 ( color online ) . A schematic of a pair of ﬁlaments of length ‘ with midpoint positions and orientations r 1 , ^ ! 1 and r 2 , ^ ! 2 driven by an active cross - link . M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter 1179 Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 orientation ^ ! n ð t Þ , for particle n ( see Fig . 34 ) . The microscopic stochastic equations of motion for the positions and orienta - tions are given by @ t r n ¼ v n ð r n ; ^ ! n Þ þ $ n ð t Þ ; ( 75a ) @ t ^ ! n ¼ ! i ð r n ; ^ ! n Þ , ^ ! n þ ’ n ð t Þ : ( 75b ) The ﬁrst terms on the rhs are the deterministic contributions to the motion arising from both passive interactions ( e . g . , steric repulsion , attractive interactions , etc . ) and active veloc - ities . Their speciﬁc form depends on the particular model system considered . The second terms on the rhs of Eqs . ( 75 ) are stochastic forces arising from a variety of noise sources , including but not limited to thermal noise . They are assumed to be Gaussian and white , with zero mean and correlations 7 h 1 n $ ð t Þ 1 m ( ð t 0 Þ i ¼ 2 ! $ ( ð ^ ! n Þ & nm & ð t ! t 0 Þ ; ( 76a ) h ’ n $ ð t Þ ’ m ( ð t 0 Þ i ¼ 2 ! R & nm & $ ( & ð t ! t 0 Þ : ( 76b ) The translational noise correlation tensor is of the form ð ^ ! Þ ¼ ! k ^ ! ^ ! þ ! ? ð % ! ^ ! ^ ! Þ . In a thermal system ! k ¼ D k and ! ? ¼ D ? , with D k and D ? describing Brownian diffu - sion along the long direction of the particle and normal to it , respectively . Also in this case ! R ¼ D R , where D R is the rotational diffusion rate . In an active system the noise strengths are in general independent quantities . For particles with ﬁxed self - propulsion speed v 0 along their long axis the deterministic part of the velocities in Eqs . ( 75 ) has the form v n ð r n ; ^ ! n Þ¼ v 0 ^ ! n þ½ & ð ^ ! n Þ ) ! 1 & X m f ð r n ; r m ; ^ ! n ; ^ ! m Þ ; ( 77a ) ! n ð r n ; ^ ! n Þ¼ - ! 1 R X m ’ ð r n ; r m ; ^ ! n ; ^ ! m Þ ; ( 77b ) with & ð ^ ! Þ ¼ - k ^ ! ^ ! þ - ? ð % ! ^ ! ^ ! Þ a friction tensor and - R a rotational friction coefﬁcient . Again , in a Brownian system in thermal equilibrium at temperature T friction and diffusion ( which in this case is also the strength of the noise ) are related by the Stokes - Einstein relation D $ ( ¼ k B T ½ & ! 1 ) $ ( and D R ¼ k B T = - R . In active systems these relations do not in general hold and noise and friction should be treated as independent . The pairwise forces and torques in Eqs . ( 77 ) can be ex - pressed in term of the total passive and active interactions in the system . The case of particles propelled by internal torques has also been considered in the literature , but will not be discussed here ( Fily , Baskaran , and Marchetti , 2012 ) . 1 . Smoluchowski dynamics For simplicity , we again restrict ourselves to the case of particles with overdamped dynamics . Starting from the Langevin equations ( 75 ) for the individual ﬁlaments , standard techniques can be used to derive an equation for the one - particle probability distribution function ( Zwanzig , 2001 ) . One ﬁrst obtains an inﬁnite hierarchy of equations for the M ð + N Þ particle distribution functions c M ð r 1 ; ^ ! 1 ; r 2 ; ^ ! 2 ; . . . ; r M ; ^ ! M ; t Þ , the probability of ﬁnding M particles with positions and orientations f r 1 ; ^ ! 1 ; r 2 ; ^ ! 2 ; . . . ; r M ; ^ ! M g at time t , regardless of the position and orientation of the other N ! M particles ( Baskaran and Marchetti , 2010 ) . A closure approximation is then required to truncate the hierarchy . This is implemented by expressing a higher order distribution function in terms of the lower ones . The traditional method is to write the two - particle distribution function as a product of two one - particle densities ( Kruse and Ju¨licher , 2000 ; Liverpool , 2003 ; Aranson and Tsimring , 2005 ; Bertin , Droz , and Gre´goire , 2006 , 2009 ) , as in the familiar molecular chaos approximation used to obtain the Boltzmann equation . This procedure gives a nonlinear equation for the one - particle density c ð r ; ^ ! ; t Þ ¼ P n h & ð r ! r n Þ & ð ^ ! ! ^ ! n Þ i , where the bracket denotes a trace over all other degrees of freedom and an average over the noise , in the form of a conservation law , given by @ t c þ r & J c þ R & J c ¼ 0 ; ( 78 ) where R ¼ ^ ! , @ ^ ! is the rotation operator . The translational probability current J c ð r ; ^ ! ; t Þ and the rotational probability current J c ð r ; ^ ! ; t Þ are given by ( Doi and Edwards , 1986 ) J c ¼ v c ! ! & r c ; J c ¼ ! c ! ! R R c ; where v and ! are given in Eqs . ( 77 ) and ! and ! R are , respectively , the translational and rotational noise strengths introduced in Eqs . ( 76 ) . It should be stressed that this closure scheme may yield different physical approximations for different classes of microscopic dynamics ( Bialke´ , Speck , and Lo¨wen , 2012 ; Fily and Marchetti , 2012 ) . An illustrative example can be found in Baskaran and Marchetti ( 2010 ) , which systemati - cally derives a kinetic equation for self - propelled hard rods starting with a microscopic Langevin dynamics that includes inertia by ﬁrst obtaining a Fokker - Planck equation for the joint probability distribution of both position and orientation and velocities , and ﬁnally derive the Smoluchowski limit where friction is large relative to inertia at the level of the kinetic equation by making a nonthermal assumption on the local distribution of velocities . This procedure yields a differ - ent Smoluchowski equation from that obtained by simply taking the overdamped limit at the level of the Langevin equation . While the structure of the hydrodynamic equations obtained by coarse graining the one - particle kinetic equation FIG . 34 ( color online ) . An example of self - propelled particles : cartoon of a motility assay with ﬁlaments of length ‘ with positions and orientations r 1 , ^ ! 1 and r 2 , ^ ! 2 drivenby motors tethered to a plane . 7 Note that one must also enforce that ^ ! & ’ ¼ 0 . 1180 M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 is the same in both cases ( as it is dictated by symmetry considerations ) , the values of the parameters in the continuum equations and particularly their dependence on v 0 and noise strength depend on whether the overdamped limit is taken right at the outset , i . e . , at the level of the microscopic dynamics , or at the level of the kinetic equation . Much work remains to be done to understand this subtle point and therefore we will not discuss it further in this review . A further interesting open question is how to systematically obtain a stochastic equation for the one - particle density which properly includes the noisy dynamics of the density ﬂuctuations for active systems ( Dean , 1996 ) . We leave some of these interesting open questions and discuss how to use the Smoluchowski dynamics as described by Eqs . ( 78 ) in the derivation of hydrodynamic equations . 2 . From Smoluchowski to hydrodynamics One approach , explored extensively by Saintillan and Shelley ( 2007 , 2008a , 2008b ) , is to directly solve the Smoluchowski equations , either analytically or numerically . This work has been used to investigate the stability of both aligned and isotropic suspensions of active particles with hydrodynamic interactions ( see also below ) and has revealed a rich dynamics with strong density ﬂuctuations . This ap - proach will not be discussed further here . A recent review can be found in Saintillan ( 2012 ) . Here we focus instead on obtaining the description of the dynamics of the system in terms of a few macroscopic ﬁelds introduced phenomenologically in the ﬁrst part of this review . A crucial assumption in deriving this continuum or hydro - dynamic theory is the choice of the continuum ﬁelds as those whose ﬂuctuations are long lived on large length scales . They include ﬁelds associated with conserved quantities and pos - sible broken symmetries of the system . In a collection of active particles with no momentum conservation , the only conserved quantity is the number of particles and hence the density , deﬁned in Eq . ( 1a ) , is a slow variable . In addition , to allow for the possibility of broken orientational order , with either polar or nematic symmetry , we consider the dynamics of a polarization ﬁeld [ Eq . ( 1b ) ] and an alignment tensor [ Eq . ( 21 ) ] . The ﬁelds are deﬁned as moments of the one - particle distribution function as % ð r ; t Þ ¼ Z d ^ ! c ð r ; ^ ! ; t Þ ; ( 79a ) % ð r ; t Þ p ð r ; t Þ ¼ Z d ^ ! ^ ! c ð r ; ^ ! ; t Þ ; ( 79b ) % ð r ; t Þ Q ð r ; t Þ ¼ Z d ^ ! ^ Q ð ^ ! Þ c ð r ; ^ ! ; t Þ ; ( 79c ) with ^ Q ð ^ ! Þ ¼ ^ ! ^ ! ! 1 d 1 and d the system’s dimensionality . In general one could write an exact expansion of c ð r ; ^ ! ; t Þ in terms of all its moments and transform the Smoluchowski equation into an inﬁnite hierarchy of equations for the mo - ments . The hydrodynamic description is obtained by assum - ing that higher order moments relax quickly on the time scales of interest and by truncating this expansion to include only conserved quantities and order parameter ﬁelds . Equivalently , considering for simplicity the case of d ¼ 2 , one can write c ð r ; ^ ! ; t Þ ¼ % ð r ; t Þ 2 * f 1 þ 2 p ð r ; t Þ & ^ ! þ 4 Q ð r ; t Þ : ^ Q ð ^ ! Þ g ; ( 80 ) insert this ansatz into the Smoluchowski equation , Eq . ( 78 ) , and obtain the hydrodynamic equations for ﬁlament concen - tration , polarization , and alignment tensor . For details of the calculation , which also involves using a gradient expansion for the ﬁlament probability distribution and evaluating angu - lar averages , see the literature ( Liverpool , 2003 ; Ahmadi , Marchetti , and Liverpool , 2006 ; Baskaran and Marchetti , 2008a ; Bertin , Droz , and Gre´goire , 2009 ; Ihle , 2011 ) . The result is a set of coupled equations for the hydrodynamic variables % ð r ; t Þ , p ð r ; t Þ , and Q ð r ; t Þ that has the form given in Sec . II , with parameter values that are calculated explicitly in terms of microscopic properties of the system . In particular , one ﬁnds that the continuum equations gov - erning the dynamics of motor - ﬁlament systems and collec - tions of self - propelled particles have the same structure , with quantitative differences of the hydrodynamic parameters . In models of SPP the activating internal processes drive each individual unit and active contributions arise even at the single - particle level . In cell extracts of cytoskeletal ﬁlaments and associated motor proteins activity arises from interactions among the ﬁlaments mediated by motor clusters that act as active cross - linkers , exchanging forces among the ﬁlaments . As a result , the active parameters in the hydrodynamic equa - tions are proportional to the square of the density of ﬁlaments , resulting in different behavior at large scales . For this reason motor - ﬁlament suspensions have also been referred to as systems of ‘‘mutually propelled particles’’ ( Giomi et al . , 2012 ) to distinguish them from SPPs . 3 . An example : Derivation of continuum equations for aligning Vicsek - type particles To illustrate the method , we show in this section the derivation of the continuum equations for a simple model of self - propelled point particles on a substrate in two dimen - sions with a polar angular interaction that tends to align particles as in the Vicsek model . We consider N particles with polarity deﬁned by an axis ^ ! n ¼ ð cos ) n ; sin ) n Þ . The dynamics is governed by Eqs . ( 75 ) that now take the explicit form @ t r n ¼ v 0 ^ ! n ! - ! 1 X m @ V @ r n þ $ n ð t Þ ; ( 81a ) @ t ) n ¼ - ! 1 R X m @ V @ ) n þ ’ n ð t Þ ; ( 81b ) where v 0 is the ﬁxed self - propulsion speed and we have taken - $ ( ¼ - & $ ( . The noise is Gaussian and white , with zero mean , as given in Eqs . ( 76 ) and ! $ ( ¼ ! & $ ( . Forces and torques in Eq . ( 81a ) are expressed as derivatives of a pair potential , given by - ! 1 R V ð x n ; x m Þ ¼ ! # * R 2 ’ ð R ! j r n ! r m j Þ cos ð ) m ! ) n Þ ; that tends to align particles of the same polarity , with ’ ð x Þ the Heaviside step function and R the range of the interac - tion . Here we use the shorthand x n ¼ ð r n ; ) n Þ and # is the M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter 1181 Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 interaction strength with dimensions of length squared over time . As we are interested in a hydrodynamic model that describes spatial variations on length scales large compared to the range R of the interaction , we assume the interaction to be local . This polar aligning interaction was used recently in Farrell et al . ( 2012 ) in a related model that highlights the role of caging effects . As outlined in Sec . V . B . 1 , one can then use standard methods ( Zwanzig , 2001 ) to transform the coupled Langevin equations into a Smoluchowski equation for the one - particle distribution c ð r ; ) ; t Þ given by @ t c þ v 0 ! 1 & r 1 c ¼ ! r 21 c þ ! R @ 2 ) 1 c þ 1 - r 1 & c ð x 1 ; t Þ , Z x 2 r 1 V ð x 1 ; x 2 Þ c ð x 2 ; t Þ þ ! R @ 2 ) 1 c þ 1 - R @ ) 1 c ð x 1 ; t Þ Z x 2 @ ) 1 V ð x 1 ; x 2 Þ c ð x 2 ; t Þ : ( 82 ) To obtain hydrodynamic equations , we now proceed as out - lined in Sec . V . B . 2 and transform the kinetic equation into a hierarchy of equations for the angular moments of the one - particle probability density c . In two dimensions the moments are simply written by introducing an angular Fourier trans - form ( Bertin , Droz , and Gre´goire , 2009 ) in terms of the Fourier components f k ð r ; t Þ ¼ R 2 * 0 c ð r ; ) ; t Þ e ik ) d ) . By com - paring with Eqs . ( 79 ) it is easy to see that f 0 ¼ % , f 1 ¼ w x þ iw y , with w ¼ % p the polarization density , and the real and imaginary parts of f 2 are proportional to the two inde - pendent components of the alignment tensor Q . Using 2 * c ð r ; ) ; t Þ ¼ P k f k e ! ik ) and retaining for simplicity only terms up to linear order in the gradients , we obtain a hierarchy of equations @ t f k þ v 0 2 @ x ð f k þ 1 þ f k ! 1 Þ þ v 0 2 i @ y ð f k þ 1 ! f k ! 1 Þ ¼ ! k 2 ! R f k þ ik # 2 * X q f q V ! q f k ! q þ O ð r 2 Þ ; ( 83 ) where all discrete sums run from ! 1 to þ 1 and V q ¼ R d ) e iq ) sin ) ¼ i * ð & q ; 1 ! & q ; ! 1 Þ . We consider equations for f 0 and f 1 , assume that f 2 is a fast variable , so that @ t f 2 ’ 0 , and neglect all higher order Fourier components , i . e . , assume f k ¼ 0 for k 1 3 . Eliminating f 2 in favor of f 0 and f 1 , it is then straightforward to obtain ( Bertin , Droz , and Gre´goire , 2006 , 2009 ; Farrell et al . , 2012 ) 8 @ t % þ v 0 r & ð % p Þ¼ 0 ; ( 84a ) @ t p þ ’ 1 ð p & r Þ p ¼ ! ½ a ð % Þþ ( j p j 2 ) p ! v 1 & r % þ ’ 3 2 r j p j 2 þ ’ 2 p ð r & p Þþ O ð r 2 Þ ; ( 84b ) with a ð % Þ¼ ! R ! 12 # % ; ( 85a ) ( ¼ # 2 % 2 8 ! R ; ( 85b ) ’ 1 ¼ 3 v 0 # % 16 ! R ; ( 85c ) ’ 2 ¼ ! ’ 3 ¼ ! 5 v 0 # % 16 ! R ; ( 85d ) v 1 ¼ v 0 2 % " 1 ! 5 # % 8 ! R p 2 # % ! v 0 % " 1 ! # % 2 ! R # p & p : ( 85e ) Equations ( 84 ) have the same structure as Eq . ( 5 ) , although noise has been neglected here . The various coefﬁcients are expressed in terms of microscopic parameters and are in general found to depend on density and order parameter . In particular , the coefﬁcient v 1 of the r % term is now a tensor , describing anisotropic pressure gradients that can play a role in the ordered state . These effects were neglected for sim - plicity in the phenomenological model . We also stress that there is an important difference between the parameter values obtained in the present model and those obtained by Bertin , Droz , and Gre´goire ( 2006 , 2009 ) and Baskaran and Marchetti ( 2008a ) as in the latter models the effective interaction strength ( here # ) depends linearly on v 0 . As a result , Baskaran and Marchetti ( 2008a ) and Bertin , Droz , and Gre´goire ( 2009 ) found that ’ i ’ v 20 , while here ’ i ’ v 0 . This difference arises because in Baskaran and Marchetti ( 2008a ) and Bertin , Droz , and Gre´goire ( 2009 ) they system - atically described binary collisions , yielding an instantaneous change of direction with probability one in a small time interval , while the model of Farrell et al . ( 2012 ) presented here ( and chosen for illustrative purpose because of its sim - plicity ) considers a continuous evolution of the position due to the application of a force in the Langevin equation . These differences may of course be important for large values of v 0 . This example shows how the derivation of hydrodynamics from a microscopic model yields explicit values for the various parameters in the continuum equations in terms of microscopic parameters . Of course , as stressed , these values are model dependent . In addition , there is a price to be paid in that in the derivation one has made two important assump - tions . The ﬁrst is the assumption of low density that allows us to replace the two - particle probability distribution by the product of two one - particle distribution functions in the kinetic equation . The second is effectively an assumption of weak interaction that enters in the moment closure approxi - mation . The two assumptions are not independent and essen - tially amount to the so - called assumption of ‘‘molecular chaos’’ used for instance in the derivation of the familiar Boltzmann equation . 4 . Hydrodynamic interactions The examples presented ignore the momentum exchange between the active particles and the solvent that one would have for instance in suspensions of swimming organisms . This physical effect is important for understanding the properties of a wide variety of experiments and should be included for a complete microscopic description of active matter . 8 Microscopic derivations of continuum equations of the type presented naturally yield an equation for the polarization density w ¼ % p rather than the order parameter ﬁeld p . Of course it is straightforward to use the density equation to transform one into the other . 1182 M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 The coupling to the solvent has been treated in the litera - ture in at least two ways . One approach is to include an additional equation for the solvent velocity ﬁeld v ð r ; t Þ which is coupled to the micro - scopic equations of motion ( Liverpool and Marchetti , 2006 ; Marchetti and Liverpool , 2007 ) or to the corresponding Smoluchowski equation ( Saintillan and Shelley , 2008a ; Pahlavan and Saintillan , 2011 ) . The active particles are con - vected and rotated by the local ﬂuid ﬂow while also imparting additional forces ( stresses ) onto the ﬂuid . This gives rise to a coupled equation of motion for the concentration of ﬁlaments c ð r ; ^ ! ; t Þ and the velocity ﬁeld v ð r ; t Þ which can be solved directly ( Saintillan and Shelley , 2008a ; Pahlavan and Saintillan , 2011 ) or coarse grained as described above to give coupled equations for % ð r ; t Þ , p ð r ; t Þ , Q ð r ; t Þ , and v ð r ; t Þ . For the case where the suspension is incompressible ( % ¼ const ) , the momentum ( v ) equation has the form % ð @ t þ v & r Þ v ¼ r & # with r & v ¼ 0 . This equation may also be often treated in the Stokes approximation r & # ¼ 0 , appropriate for systems at low Reynolds number . The active forces due to the swimmers are incorporated as an additional ( active ) contribution to the stress tensor , so that . $ ( ¼ . p $ ( þ . a $ ( , where the passive contribution . p $ ( has the form obtained in equilibrium liquid crystals ( de Gennes and Prost , 1993 ) . The active contribution . a $ ( is evaluated by noting that , in the absence of external body forces , the force distribution exerted by the active particles on the ﬂuid can be written as a multipole expansion with lowest order nonvan - ishing term being a dipole . The active stress . a $ ( can then be identiﬁed with the active reactive ﬂuxes proportional to - ! ! [ see Eq . ( 42 ) ] . To leading order in a gradient expansion it contains two additive contributions . The ﬁrst term . a 1 $ ( / - ! ! q $ ( has nematic symmetry and is present in both polar and nematic systems , where it is written as . a 1 $ ( / - ! ! Q $ ( . In addition , for polar systems only , the active stress also contains terms . a 2 $ ( / - 0 ! ! @ $ p ( þ - 00 ! ! @ ( p $ ( Liverpool and Marchetti , 2006 ; Marchetti and Liverpool , 2007 ) . When the hydrodynamic equations are written on the basis of the entropy production formulation discussed in Sec . III . B , this term is discarded as one of higher order in the driving forces . It is also of higher order in the gradients as compared to . a 1 $ ( , although only of ﬁrst order , rather than quadratic , in the polarization ﬁeld . Finally , it is the leading nonvanishing contribution to the active stress that has polar ( as opposed to nematic ) symmetry and it plays a role in controlling the onset of oscillatory states in these systems ( Giomi , Marchetti , and Liverpool , 2008 ; Giomi and Marchetti , 2012 ) . Alternatively , one may integrate out the solvent velocity ﬁeld to generate effective hydrodynamic interactions at the two - body level which give rise to additional long - range pair - wise contributions to the deterministic velocities and angular velocities v n , ! n in Eqs . ( 75 ) ( Baskaran and Marchetti , 2009 ; Leoni and Liverpool , 2010 ) . These interactions arise from the forces generated on the ﬂuid by the active particles . The local force distribution due to the active elements can be expanded in a multipole expansion . The lowest nonvanishing term in this expansion is a dipole , which also gives the longest range interactions . The simplest static models of swimming organisms then are force dipoles which can be characterized as contractile or extensile depending on the direction of the forces making up the dipole . Coarse graining the equations leads to a set of coupled integral equations for % ð r ; t Þ , p ð r ; t Þ , and Q ð r ; t Þ which in extended domains can be used to obtain generalized linear hydrodynamic modes whose behavior is identical to those obtained when keeping an explicit velocity ﬁeld . Hydrodynamic equations for collections of static force dipoles have been obtained ( Baskaran and Marchetti , 2009 ) which show the phenomenology described before . Swimming objects , however , are dynamic , undergoing an internal cycli - cal motion that leads to self - propulsion . The collective be - havior of simpliﬁed dynamic models of swimmers with such internal cycles has also been studied and used to generate effective hydrodynamic equations ( Leoni and Liverpool , 2010 ) . Averaged over an internal cycle such dynamic models have an average force distribution that also has a multipolar expansion whose lowest term is generically a force dipole . The hydrodynamic equations obtained are then similar to those obtained for static dipoles . However , by tuning internal parameters one can also study self - propelled swimmers whose average force distribution starts at quadrupolar order . Here the symmetry broken between contractile and extensile objects is restored and , in the absence of any other interac - tions , only nematic phases are possible ( Leoni and Liverpool , 2010 , 2012 ) . C . Current status of microscopic theories of active matter Perhaps the most important open question in deriving active theories from microscopic or mesoscopic models con - cerns understanding the nature of the noise . Thermal noise is often negligible in active systems at low frequency , but noise is nonetheless ubiquitous and plays a crucial role in control - ling the large - scale behavior , as it can both act to destroy large - scale coherence or drive synchronization , depending on the speciﬁc situation . So far practically all work on active systems has either neglected noise or modeled it as a Gaussian , white random force , akin to thermal noise , but of unknown strength . In general one expects the noise to depend on activity . Multiplicative or non - Markovian random forces could also be at play in active systems . For instance , the multiplicative character of the noise introduces ( Mishra , 2009 ; Mishra et al . , 2012 ; Bertin et al . , 2013 ) singular features into the ﬂuctuation - driven phase separation ( Mishra and Ramaswamy , 2006 ) that characterizes a stable active nematic . Microscopic models are needed that attempt to take into account the stochastic nature of active forces and to derive a coarse - grained model where the effective noise amplitude is expressed in terms of local nonequilibrium processes that may lead to temporal or spatial correlations at large scales . An example is the work of Lacoste and Lau ( 2005 ) that couples the shot noise associated with the on and off switching of energy - dissipating pumps in active mem - branes to the membrane curvature and demonstrates that pump stochasticity plays a crucial role in controlling super - diffusive behavior in the membrane . Of great interest is also the detailed understanding of hydrodynamic interactions in bacterial suspensions and their role in controlling the large - scale behavior . Recent M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter 1183 Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 experiments probed for the ﬁrst time the ﬂow ﬁelds induced by swimming unicellular organisms . Measurements on Chlamydomonas revealed qualitative differences as com - pared to the puller stresslet conﬁguration that had been used in the literature ( Drescher et al . , 2010 ) and have further shown complex time - dependent oscillatory patterns . In con - trast it was found that the ﬂow ﬁeld of E . coli is well described by a pusher stresslet , but its strength is very small and it is washed out by rotational diffusion of the swimming direction ( Drescher et al . , 2011 ) . These results have important implications for the behavior of microorganisms near sur - faces and open the way to new quantitative investigations of the role of hydrodynamic interactions . Finally , an area that is receiving increasing attention is the study of active matter at high density , where active glassy or solid states may emerge . As mentioned in Sec . II . C the collective dynamics of conﬂuent layers of epithelial cells has been likened to that of glassy and supercooled systems . Mesoscopic models of interacting cell layers and tissues are beginning to emerge ( Henkes , Fily , and Marchetti , 2011 ) , although much more work remains to be done to understand the complex interplay of contractile stresses and substrate adhesion in controlling the buildup of cellular stresses in collective cell migration . VI . CONCLUSIONS , OUTLOOK , AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS In this review we discussed two - dimensional and three - dimensional active systems that are maintained out of equi - librium by a permanent energy consumption that takes place locally in each active unit . In these systems local polarity , when present , yields spontaneous motion . Typically , models of active matter describe the collective behavior of systems like ﬁsh shoals , birds ﬂock , or animals herds as well as vibrated granular matter , bacterial colonies , or the cellular cytoskeleton . From a spatial symmetry point of view these systems are not different from ferroelectric and nematic liquid crystals . The fundamental difference stems from the fact that active systems consume and dissipate energy at all times . This feature has a number of profound consequences which we have addressed in this review : 2 Polar ﬂocks on a substrate , e . g . , animal herds or kera - tocytes on a glass slide , display long - range order in two dimensions . This behavior is fundamentally different from that of equilibrium systems that are bound to obey the Mermin - Wagner theorem and can at best exhibit quasi - long - range order . 2 Nematic as well as polar ordered phases of systems on a substrate exhibit giant density ﬂuctuations , breaking the familiar ﬃﬃﬃﬃ N p equilibrium scaling of number ﬂuctuations in subregions with N particles on average . 2 The uniform ordered state of bulk momentum - conserving systems of polar and nematic symmetry is generically unstable in the Stokesian regime . 2 The end result of this instability for the typical active suspension appears to be turbulence at low Reynolds number ( Dombrowski et al . , 2004 ; Wolgemuth , 2008 ) driven by the competition between forcing by active stress and relaxation by orientational diffusion . 2 All these systems can support a new type of soundlike propagating waves with different propagation laws in opposite directions due to polarity . We described how the macroscopic hydrodynamic equa - tions for active systems can be obtained either from symmetry arguments , from generalized thermodynamics close to equi - librium , or from microscopic models . In each case we pre - sented the simplest description that highlights the generic features uniquely associated with activity . Our analysis is restricted to two and three dimensions and we deliberately left aside one - dimensional and quasi - one - dimensional sys - tems , which have already been extensively investigated ( Helbing , 2001 ; Reichenbach , Franosch , and Frey , 2006 ) . We note , however , that the mechanisms leading to the onset of trafﬁc jams are probably related to the giant density ﬂuctuations predicted in active systems in two dimensions [ see also Yang , Marceau , and Gompper ( 2010 ) and Fily , Baskaran , and Marchetti ( 2012 ) ] . All these unusual features have been either observed ex - perimentally or conﬁrmed in careful numerical simulations . It is difﬁcult to establish the existence of long - range order experimentally , but simulations with a large number of active particles show unambiguously its existence . This is an im - portant result that the statistical physics community was not inclined to believe . Giant density ﬂuctuations have now been observed ubiquitously in systems with both polar and nematic interactions via simulations ( Chate´ , Ginelli , and Montagne , 2006 ; Chate´ , Ginelli , Gre´goire , Peruani , and Raynaud , 2008 ; Ginelli and Chate´ , 2010 ) , experimentally in vibrated granular media ( Narayan , Ramaswamy , and Menon , 2007 ; Deseigne , Dauchot , and Chate´ , 2010 ) , and in bacterial suspensions ( Zhang et al . , 2010 ) . These observations conﬁrmed the theo - retically predicted scaling . We note , however , that this scaling was recently questioned by Toner ( 2012b ) . These large ﬂuc - tuations are also present in the cellular cytoskeleton and their role is starting to be recognized ( Gowrishankar and Rao , 2012 ) and their potential physiological relevance is beginning to be explored ( Goswami et al . , 2008 ; Chaudhuri et al . , 2011 ; Gowrishankar et al . , 2012 ) . The long - wavelength instability of momentum - conserving systems is conﬁrmed by numerical simulation and in fact can give rise to ‘‘low Reynolds number turbulence’’ in some instances ( Dombrowski et al . , 2004 ) . It is a good paradigm for explaining bacterial swirls but also the rotating micro - tubule spindles observed both in vivo and in vitro ( Ne´de´lec et al . , 1997 ; Ne´de´lec , 1998 ) . Furthermore , the existence of ‘‘low Reynolds number’’ waves have also been predicted in crystals moving without inertia through a dissipative medium , such as sedimenting colloids ( Lahiri and Ramaswamy , 1997 ) or drifting Abrikosov lattices ( Balents , Marchetti , and Radzihovski , 1998 ; Ling , Berger , and Prober , 1998 ; Simha and Ramaswamy , 1999 ) , and also observed and understood in microﬂuidic drifting drop arrays ( Beatus , Tlusty , and Bar - Ziv , 2006 ; Beatus , Bar - Ziv , and Tlusty , 2007 ) . Such waves prop - agating in only one direction have been observed in cell lamellipodia as expected from active gel theory ( Giannone et al . , 2004 ) . Eventually , one may be able to discuss with order of magnitude accuracy phenomena such as cell wound healing Petitjean et al . ( 2010 ) , cell division ( Salbreux , Prost , and 1184 M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 Joanny , 2009 ) , and cell oscillations ( Salbreux et al . , 2007 ) . One can thus say that we currently have a good qualitative understanding of active systems . What do we need to get to the next stage , that is , to get to real quantitative understand - ing ? One ingredient which we omitted on purpose up to now is signaling : biochemical signaling for cell biology or bacte - rial colonies external factors like food , smell , or sun in ﬂocks , shoals , and herds . Such factors have been discussed in bacte - rial colonies and shown to give rise to ordered structures ( Cates et al . , 2010 ) . A direction that looks particularly prom - ising is the coupling of active gel physics and chemical reactions in the context of cells and tissues , resulting , for instance , in increasing considerably the range of existence of Turing structures ( Giomi , Liverpool , and Marchetti , 2010 ; Bois , Ju¨licher , and Grill , 2011 ; Giomi et al . , 2012 ) , and in the spatiotemporal control and enhancement of chemical reaction rates in signaling and sorting ( Chaudhuri et al . , 2011 ) . A complete understanding of cell mechanics will require in - cluding detailed biochemical signaling networks . However , this cannot be achieved without extensive experimental input . Symmetry considerations and conservation laws are no longer sufﬁcient , and this task requires the cooperation of several disciplines . It is worth the effort though , since it could be extended to tissue dynamics and developmental biology . Another natural extension in the case of herds , ﬂocks , and shoal is the investigation of a putative leader role ( Couzin et al . , 2011 ; Leonard et al . , 2012 ) . Up to now , completely ‘‘democratic’’ rules have been assumed . Within this ap - proach , a leader could appear like a delta function , and its role involve the response function of the collection of indi - viduals . In another promising direction , Guttal and Couzin ( 2010 ) treated the parameters in a Vicsek - style model of ﬂocking and migration as heritable , selectable attributes , and studied their dynamics on evolutionary time scales , ﬁnd - ing a remarkable range of evolutionarily stable strategies including coexistence of distinct behaviors in a herd . Another frontier concerns active quantum systems . A clas - sical imitation was recently introduced ( Couder and Fort , 2006 ) and some Al - Ga - Se heterostructures gave rise to zero resistivity behavior described by equations similar to those of Toner and Tu ( Alicea et al . , 2005 ) . A general investigation of the type we present here would be very useful . Eventually working with living systems is necessary and important , but it is often difﬁcult . Artiﬁcial systems such as provided by layers of vibrated granular matter ( Narayan , Ramaswamy , and Menon , 2007 ; Kudrolli et al . , 2008 ; Deseigne , Dauchot , and Chate´ , 2010 ; Kumar , Ramaswamy , and Sood , 2011 ) , noisy walkers ( Kumar , Ramaswamy , and Rao , 2008 ) , artiﬁcial swimmers ( Dreyfus et al . , 2005 ; Bartolo and Lauga , 2010 ) , and colloids propelled by catalytic reac - tions ( Paxton et al . , 2004 ; Golestanian , Liverpool , and Ajdari , 2005 , 2007 ; Howse et al . , 2007 ; Golestanian , 2009 ; Palacci et al . , 2010 ; Gibbs and Zhao , 2011 ; Golestanian , 2012 ; Theurkauff et al . , 2012 ) are useful but are often restricted to two dimensions ( granular layers ) or have been studied only at relatively low density ( artiﬁcial self - propelled particles ) . A remarkable system of light - controlled active colloids was recently engineered that exhibits collective effects such as the formation of crystalline clusters ( Palacci et al . , 2013 ) . It would be nice to have three - dimensional active systems driven by light or chemical reactions ( Buttinoni et al . , 2012 ) . Attempts have been made ( Prost , 2010 ) to raise inter - est among chemists , but so far progress toward realizing artiﬁcial active gels has been limited . Such systems would allow one to vary parameters over a wide range and in a controlled manner and would therefore provide extremely valuable artiﬁcial realizations of active matter . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank many colleagues for invaluable discussions , suggestions and collaboration on some of the work summa - rized here , including Tapan Adhyapak , Shiladitya Banerjee , Aparna Baskaran , Andrew Callan - Jones , Yaouen Fily , Kripa Gowrishankar , Yashodhan Hatwalne , Silke Henkes , Frank Ju¨licher , Norio Kikuchi , Karsten Kruse , Marco Leoni , Ananyo Maitra , Satyajit Mayor , Gautam Menon , Narayanan Menon , Shradha Mishra , Vijay Narayan , Suropriya Saha , Guillaume Salbreux , Sumithra Sankararaman , Ken Sekimoto , John Toner , and Rafael Voituriez . M . C . M . was supported by the National Science Foundation Grants No . DMR - 0806511 , No . DMR - 1004789 , and No . DGE - 1068780 . J . F . J . , J . P . , S . R . , and M . R . acknowledge support from Grant No . 3504 - 2 of CEFIPRA , the Indo - French Centre for the Promotion of Advanced Research . T . B . L . acknowl - edges support of the EPSRC under Grant No . EP / G026440 / 1 . S . R . was supported in part by a J . C . Bose Fellowship . J . F . J . and J . P . acknowledge the support of the European Network Mitosys . REFERENCES Adhyapak , T . C . , S . Ramaswamy , and J . Toner , 2013 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 110 , 118102 . Ahmadi , A . , M . C . Marchetti , and T . B . Liverpool , 2005 , Phys . Rev . E 72 , 060901 ( R ) . Ahmadi , A . , M . C . Marchetti , and T . B . Liverpool , 2006 , Phys . Rev . E 74 , 061913 . Aldana , M . , V . Dossetti , C . Huepe , V . M . Kenkre , and H . Larralde , 2007 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 98 , 095702 . Alicea , J . , L . Balents , M . P . A . Fisher , A . Paramekanti , and L . Radzihovsky , 2005 , Phys . Rev . B 71 , 235322 . Angelani , L . , R . DiLeonardo , and R . Giancarlo , 2009 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 102 , 048104 . Angelini , T . E . , E . Hannezo , X . Trepat , J . J . Fredberg , and D . A . Weitz , 2010 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 104 , 168104 . Angelini , T . E . , E . Hannezo , X . Trepat , M . Marquez , J . J . Fredberg , and D . A . Weitz , 2011 , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 108 , 4714 . Aranson , I . S . , A . Snezhko , J . S . Olafsen , and J . S . Urbach , 2008 , Science 320 , 612 . Aranson , I . S . , A . Sokolov , J . O . Kessler , and R . E . Goldstein , 2007 , Phys . Rev . E 75 , 040901 ( R ) . Aranson , I . S . , and L . S . Tsimring , 2005 , Phys . Rev . E 71 , 050901 ( R ) . Aranson , I . S . , and L . S . Tsimring , 2006 , Phys . Rev . E 74 , 031915 . Asano , Y . , A . Jime´nez - Dalmaroni , T . Liverpool , M . Marchetti , L . Giomi , A . Kiger , T . Duke , and B . Baum , 2009 , HFSP J . 3 , 194 . Backouche , F . , L . Haviv , D . Groswasser , and A . Bernheim - Groswasser , 2006 , Phys . Biol . 3 , 264 . Baglietto , G . , and E . V . Albano , 2009 , Phys . Rev . E 80 , 050103 ( R ) . M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter 1185 Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 Balents , L . , M . Marchetti , and L . Radzihovski , 1998 , Phys . Rev . B 57 , 7705 . Balland , M . , N . Desprat , D . Icard , S . Fereol , A . Asnacios , J . Browaeys , S . Henon , and F . Gallet , 2006 , Phys . Rev . E 74 , 021911 . Ballerini , M . , et al . , 2008 , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 105 , 1232 . Banerjee , S . , and M . C . Marchetti , 2011 , Soft Matter 7 , 463 . Bartolo , D . , and E . Lauga , 2010 , Phys . Rev . E 81 , 026312 . Baskaran , A . , and M . C . Marchetti , 2008a , Phys . Rev . Lett . 101 , 268101 . Baskaran , A . , and M . C . Marchetti , 2008b , Phys . Rev . E 77 , 011920 . Baskaran , A . , and M . C . Marchetti , 2009 , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 106 , 15 567 . Baskaran , A . , and M . C . Marchetti , 2010 , J . Stat . Mech . P04019 . Baskaran , A . , and M . C . Marchetti , 2012 , Eur . Phys . J . E 35 , 95 . Basu , A . , J . - F . Joanny , F . Ju¨licher , and J . Prost , 2008 , Eur . Phys . J . E 27 , 149 . Basu , A . , J . - F . Joanny , F . Ju¨licher , and J . Prost , 2012 , New J . Phys . 14 , 115001 . Batchelor , G . K . , 2000 , An Introduction to Fluid Dynamics ( Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , England ) . Beatus , T . , R . Bar - Ziv , and T . Tlusty , 2007 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 99 , 124502 . Beatus , T . , T . Tlusty , and R . Bar - Ziv , 2006 , Nat . Phys . 2 , 743 . Bees , M . , P . Andresen , E . Mosekilde , and M . Givskov , 2000 , J . Math . Biol . 40 , 27 . Bees , M . , P . Andresen , E . Mosekilde , and M . Givskov , 2002 , Bull . Math . Biol . 64 , 565 . Bendix , P . M . , G . H . Koenderink , D . Cuvelier , Z . Dogic , B . N . Koeleman , W . M . Briehera , C . M . Fielda , L . Mahadevan , and D . A . Weitz , 2008 , Biophys . J . 94 , 3126 . Ben - Jacob , E . , I . Cohen , and H . Levine , 2000 , Adv . Phys . 49 , 395 . Bertin , E . , H . Chate , F . Ginelli , S . Mishra , A . Peshkov , and S . Ramaswamy , 2013 , arXiv : 1305 . 0772 . Bertin , E . , M . Droz , and G . Gre´goire , 2006 , Phys . Rev . E 74 , 022101 . Bertin , E . , M . Droz , and G . Gre´goire , 2009 , J . Phys . A 42 , 445001 . Bialke´ , J . , T . Speck , and H . Lo¨wen , 2012 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 108 , 168301 . Bois , J . S . , F . Ju¨licher , and S . Grill , 2011 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 106 , 028103 . Brennen , C . , and H . Winet , 1977 , Annu . Rev . Fluid Mech . 9 , 339 . Butt , T . , T . Mufti , A . Humayun , P . B . Rosenthal , S . Khan , S . Khan , and J . E . Molloy , 2010 , J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 4964 . Buttinoni , I . , G . Volpe , F . Ku¨mmel , and C . Bechinger , 2012 , J . Phys . Condens . Matter 24 , 284129 . Callan - Jones , A . C . , and F . Ju¨licher , 2011 , New J . Phys . 13 , 093027 . Cates , M . E . , 2012 , Rep . Prog . Phys . 75 , 042601 . Cates , M . E . , S . M . Fielding , D . Marenduzzo , E . Orlandini , and J . M . Yeomans , 2008 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 101 , 0618102 . Cates , M . E . , D . Marenduzzo , I . Pagonabarraga , and J . Tailleur , 2010 , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 107 , 11 715 . Chaikin , P . , and T . Lubensky , 2000 , Principles of Condensed Matter Physics , new edition ( Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , England ) . Chate´ , H . , F . Ginelli , and G . Gre´goire , 2007 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 99 , 229601 . Chate´ , H . , F . Ginelli , G . Gre´goire , F . Peruani , and F . Raynaud , 2008 , Eur . Phys . J . B 64 , 451 . Chate´ , H . , F . Ginelli , G . Gre´goire , and F . Raynaud , 2008 , Phys . Rev . E 77 , 046113 . Chate´ , H . , F . Ginelli , and R . Montagne , 2006 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 96 , 180602 . Chaudhuri , A . , B . Bhattacharya , K . Gowrishankar , S . Mayor , and M . Rao , 2011 , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 108 , 14825 . Chen , D . T . N . , A . W . C . Lau , L . A . Hough , M . F . Islam , M . Goulian , T . C . Lubensky , and A . G . Yodh , 2007 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 99 , 148302 . Couder , Y . , and E . Fort , 2006 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 97 , 154101 . Couzin , I . D . , C . C . Ioannou , G . Demirel , T . Gross , C . J . Torney , A . Hartnett , L . Conradt , S . A . Levin , and N . E . Leonard , 2011 , Science 334 , 1578 . Das , D . , and M . Barma , 2000 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 85 , 1602 . Dean , D . S . , 1996 , J . Phys . A 29 , L613 . de Gennes , P . G . , and J . Prost , 1993 , The Physics of Liquid Crystals ( Clarendon Press , Oxford ) . de Groot , S . R . , and P . Mazur , 1984 , Non - Equilibrium Thermodynamics ( Dover , New York ) . Deseigne , J . , O . Dauchot , and H . Chate´ , 2010 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 105 , 098001 . DiLeonardo , R . , L . Angelani , D . dell’Arciprete , G . Ruocco , V . Iebba , S . Schippa , M . P . Conte , F . Mecarini , F . D . Angelis , and E . D . Fabrizio , 2010 , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 107 , 9541 . Doi , M . , and S . F . Edwards , 1986 , The Theory of Polymer Dynamics ( Clarendon Press , Oxford ) . Dombrowski , C . , L . Cisneros , S . Chatkaew , R . E . Goldstein , and J . O . Kessler , 2004 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 93 , 098103 . Drescher , K . , J . Dunkel , L . H . Cisneros , S . Ganguly , and R . E . Goldstein , 2011 , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 108 , 10940 . Drescher , K . , R . E . Goldstein , N . Michel , M . Polin , and I . Tuval , 2010 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 105 , 168101 . Dreyfus , R . , J . Baudry , M . L . Roper , M . Fermigier , H . A . Stone , and J . Bibette , 2005 , Nature ( London ) 437 , 862 . Dzyaloshinskii , I . , and G . Volovick , 1980 , Ann . Phys . ( N . Y . ) 125 , 67 . Edwards , C . M . , and U . S . Schwarz , 2011 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 107 , 128101 . Edwards , S . A . , and J . M . Yeomans , 2009 , Europhys . Lett . 85 , 18008 . Einstein , A . , 1906 , Ann . Phys . ( Berlin ) 324 , 289 . Einstein , A . , 1911 , Ann . Phys . ( Berlin ) 339 , 591 . Elgeti , J . , and G . Gompper , 2009 , Europhys . Lett . 85 , 38 002 . Enculescu , M . , and H . Stark , 2011 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 107 , 058301 . Fabry , B . , G . N . Maksym , J . P . Butler , M . Glogauer , D . Navajas , and J . J . Fredberg , 2001 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 87 , 148102 . Farrell , F . , M . C . Marchetti , D . Marenduzzo , and J . Tailleur , 2012 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 108 , 248101 . Fielding , S . M . , D . Marenduzzo , and M . E . Cates , 2011 , Phys . Rev . E 83 , 041910 . Fily , Y . , A . Baskaran , and M . C . Marchetti , 2012 , Soft Matter 8 , 3002 . Fily , Y . , and M . C . Marchetti , 2012 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 108 , 235702 . Finlayson , B . A . , and L . E . Scriven , 1969 , Proc . R . Soc . A 310 , 183 . Foffano , G . , J . S . Lintuvuori , A . N . Morozov , K . Stratford , M . E . Cates , and D . Marenduzzo , 2012 , Eur . Phys . J . E 35 , 98 . Forster , D . , 1974 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 32 , 1161 . Forster , D . , 1975 , Hydrodynamic Fluctuations , Broken Symmetry , and Correlation Functions , Frontiers in Physics , a lecture note and reprint series ( W . A . Benjamin , New York ) , Advanced Book Program . Furthauer , S . , M . Neef , S . W . Grill , K . Kruse , and F . Ju¨licher , 2012 , New J . Phys . 14 , 023001 . Galajda , P . , J . Keymer , P . Chaikin , and R . Austin , 2007 , J . Bacteriol . 189 , 8704 . Gardel , M . , J . Shin , F . MacKintosh , L . Mahadevan , P . Matsudaira , and D . Weitz , 2004 , Science 304 , 1301 . 1186 M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 Giannone , G . , B . J . Dubin - Thaler , H . G . Do¨bereiner , N . Kieffer , A . R . Bresnick , and M . P . Sheetz , 2004 , Cell 116 , 431 . Gibbs , J . , and Y . Zhao , 2011 , Front Mat . Sci . 5 , 25 . Ginelli , F . , and H . Chate´ , 2010 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 105 , 168103 . Ginelli , F . , F . Peruani , M . Ba¨r , and H . Chate´ , 2010 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 104 , 184502 . Giomi , L . , T . B . Liverpool , and M . C . Marchetti , 2010 , Phys . Rev . E 81 , 051908 . Giomi , L . , L . Mahadevan , B . Chakraborty , and M . F . Hagan , 2011 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 106 , 218101 . Giomi , L . , L . Mahadevan , B . Chakraborty , and M . F . Hagan , 2012 , Nonlinearity 25 , 2245 . Giomi , L . , and M . C . Marchetti , 2012 , Soft Matter 8 , 129 . Giomi , L . , M . C . Marchetti , and T . Liverpool , 2008 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 101 , 198101 . Golestanian , R . , 2009 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 102 , 188305 . Golestanian , R . , 2012 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 108 , 038303 . Golestanian , R . , T . Liverpool , and A . Ajdari , 2005 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 94 , 220801 . Golestanian , R . , T . B . Liverpool , and A . Ajdari , 2007 , New J . Phys . 9 , 126 . Go¨nci , B . , M . Nagy , and T . Vicsek , 2008 , Eur . Phys . J . Special Topics 157 , 53 . Gopinath , A . , M . F . Hagan , M . C . Marchetti , and A . Baskaran , 2012 , Phys . Rev . E 85 , 061903 . Goswami , D . , K . Gowrishankar , S . Bilgrami , S . Ghosh , R . Raghupathy , R . Chadda , R . Vishwakarma , M . Rao , and S . Mayor , 2008 , Cell 135 , 1085 . Gowrishankar , K . , S . Ghosh , S . Saha , C . Ruma , S . Mayor , and M . Rao , 2012 , Cell 149 , 1353 . Gowrishankar , K . , and M . Rao , 2012 , ‘‘Nonequilibrium phase transitions in active contractile polar ﬁlaments , ’’ arXiv : 1201 . 3938 . Gre´goire , G . , and H . Chate´ , 2004 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 92 , 025702 . Grill , S . W . , 2011 , Current Opinion in Genetics & Development 21 , 647 . Gruler , H . , U . Dewald , and M . Eberhardt , 1999 , Eur . Phys . J . B 11 , 187 [ http : / / link . springer . com / article / 10 . 1007 % 2FBF03219164 # page - 1 ] . Guasto , J . S . , K . A . Johnson , and J . P . Gollub , 2010 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 105 , 168102 . Gu¨nther , S . , and K . Kruse , 2007 , New J . Phys . 9 , 417 . Guttal , V . , and I . D . Couzin , 2010 , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 107 , 16 172 . Haines , M . , A . Sokolov , I . S . Aranson , L . Berlyand , and D . A . Karpeev , 2009 , Phys . Rev . E 80 , 041922 . Hatwalne , Y . , S . Ramaswamy , M . Rao , and R . A . Simha , 2004 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 92 , 118101 . Head , D . A . , W . J . Briels , and G . Gompper , 2011 , BMC Biophysics 4 , 18 . Helbing , D . , 2001 , Rev . Mod . Phys . 73 , 1067 . Henkes , S . , Y . Fily , and M . C . Marchetti , 2011 , Phys . Rev . E 84 , 040301 ( R ) . Hohenberg , P . C . , 1967 , Phys . Rev . 158 , 383 . Howse , J . R . , R . A . L . Jones , A . J . Ryan , T . Gough , R . Vafabakhsh , and R . Golestanian , 2007 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 99 , 048102 . Ihle , T . , 2011 , Phys . Rev . E 83 , 030901 ( R ) . Ishikawa , T . , 2009 , J . R . Soc . Interface 6 , 815 . Joanny , J . F . , F . Julicher , K . Kruse , and J . Prost , 2007 , New J . Phys . 9 , 422 . Joanny , J . - F . , and J . Prost , 2009a , HFSP J . 3 , 94 . Joanny , J . - F . , and J . Prost , 2009b , in Poincare ´ Seminar 2009 , edited by B . Duplantier , and V . Rivasseau ( Birkhauser , Boston ) . Joanny , J . - F . , and S . Ramaswamy , 2012 , J . Fluid Mech . 705 , 46 Ju¨licher , F . , K . Kruse , J . Prost , and J . - F . Joanny , 2007 , Phys . Rep . 449 , 3 . Ju¨licher , F . , and J . Prost , 1997 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 78 , 4510 . Kareiva , M . , and N . Shigesada , 1983 , Oecologia 56 , 234 . Kemkemer , R . , D . Kling , D . Kaufmann , and H . Gruler , 2000 , Eur . Phys . J . E 1 , 215 . Keren , K . , Z . Pincus , G . Allen , E . Barnhart , A . Marriott , A . Mogilner , and J . Theriot , 2008 , Nature ( London ) 453 , 475 . Kikuchi , N . , A . Ehrlicher , D . Koch , J . A . Ka¨s , S . Ramaswamy , and M . Rao , 2009 , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 106 , 19 776 . Koch , D . L . , and G . Subramanian , 2011 , Annu . Rev . Fluid Mech . 43 , 637 . Koenderink , G . H . , Z . Dogic , F . Nakamura , P . M . Bendix , F . C . MacKintosh , J . H . Hartwig , T . P . Stossel , and D . A . Weitz , 2009 , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 106 , 15 192 . Kraikivski , P . , R . Lipowsky , and J . Kierfeld , 2006 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 96 , 258103 . Kron , S . J . , and J . Spudich , 1986 , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 83 , 6272 . Kruse , K . , S . Camalet , and F . Ju¨licher , 2001 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 87 , 138101 . Kruse , K . , F . Joanny , F . Ju¨licher , J . Prost , and K . Sekimoto , 2004 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 92 , 078101 . Kruse , K . , J . F . Joanny , F . Ju ¨ licher , and J . Prost , 2006 , Phys . Biol . 3 , 130 . Kruse , K . , J . F . Joanny , F . Ju¨licher , J . Prost , and K . Sekimoto , 2005 , Eur . Phys . J . E 16 , 5 . Kruse , K . , and F . Ju¨licher , 2000 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 85 , 1778 . Kruse , K . , and F . Ju¨licher , 2003 , Phys . Rev . E 67 , 051913 . Kruse , K . , and F . J . Ju¨licher , 2006 , Eur . Phys . J . E 20 , 459 . Kudrolli , A . , 2010 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 104 , 088001 . Kudrolli , A . , G . Lumay , D . Volfson , and L . S . Tsimring , 2008 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 100 , 058001 . Kumar , K . V . , S . Ramaswamy , and M . Rao , 2008 , Phys . Rev . E 77 , 020102 . Kumar , N . , S . Ramaswamy , and A . K . Sood , 2011 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 106 , 118001 . Kung , W . , M . C . Marchetti , and K . Saunders , 2006 , Phys . Rev . E 73 , 031708 . Lacoste , D . , and A . W . C . Lau , 2005 , Europhys . Lett . 70 , 418 . Lahiri , R . , and S . Ramaswamy , 1997 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 79 , 1150 . Landau , L . D . , and E . M . Lifshitz , 1998 , Fluid Mechanics ( Butterworth - Heinemann , Stoneham , MA ) . Larson , R . , 1988 , Constitutive Equations for Polymer Melts and Solutions ( Butterworths , London ) . Lau , A . W . C . , B . D . Hoffman , A . Davies , J . C . Crocker , and T . C . Lubensky , 2003 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 91 , 198101 . Lau , A . W . C . , and T . C . Lubensky , 2009 , Phys . Rev . E 80 , 011917 . Lauga , E . , and T . R . Powers , 2009 , Rep . Prog . Phys . 72 , 096601 . Lebwohl , P . , and G . Lasher , 1973 , Phys . Rev . A 7 , 2222 . Lee , H . Y . , and M . Kardar , 2001 , Phys . Rev . E 64 , 056113 . Leonard , N . E . , T . Shen , B . Nabet , L . Scardovi , I . D . Couzin , and S . A . Levin , 2012 , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 109 , 227 . Leoni , M . , and T . B . Liverpool , 2010 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 105 , 238102 . Leoni , M . , and T . B . Liverpool , 2012 , Phys . Rev . E 85 , 040901 ( R ) . Levine , A . J . , and F . C . MacKintosh , 2009 , J . Phys . Chem . B 113 , 3820 . Ling , X . S . , J . E . Berger , and D . E . Prober , 1998 , Phys . Rev . B 57 , R3249 . Lingwood , D . , and K . Simons , 2010 , Science 327 , 46 . Liverpool , T . B . , 2003 , Phys . Rev . E 67 , 031909 . Liverpool , T . B . , A . C . Maggs , and A . Ajdari , 2001 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 86 , 4171 . M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter 1187 Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 Liverpool , T . B . , and M . C . Marchetti , 2005 , Europhys . Lett . 69 , 846 . Liverpool , T . B . , and M . C . Marchetti , 2006 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 97 , 268101 . Liverpool , T . B . , M . C . Marchetti , J . - F . Joanny , and J . Prost , 2009 , Europhys . Lett . 85 , 18007 . MacKintosh , F . C . , and A . J . Levine , 2008 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 100 , 018104 . Makris , N . C . , P . Ratilal , D . T . Symonds , S . Jagannathan , S . Lee , and R . W . Nero , 2006 , Science 311 , 660 . Manneville , J . - B . , P . Bassereau , S . Ramaswamy , and J . Prost , 2001 , Phys . Rev . E 64 , 021908 . Marchetti , M . C . , 2012 , Nature ( London ) 491 , 340 . Marchetti , M . C . , and T . B . Liverpool , 2007 , in Cell Motility , edited by P . Lenz ( Springer - Verlag , Berlin ) . Marenduzzo , D . , E . Orlandini , and J . M . Yeomans , 2007 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 98 , 118102 . Martin , P . C . , O . Parodi , and P . Pershan , 1972 , Phys . Rev . A 6 , 2401 . Mayer , M . , M . Depken , J . S . Bois , F . Ju¨licher , and S . W . Grill , 2010 , Nature ( London ) 467 , 617 . McCandlish , S . R . , A . Baskaran , and M . F . Hagan , 2012 , Soft Matter 8 , 2527 . Mermin , N . D . , and H . Wagner , 1966 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 17 , 1133 . Mertz , A . F . , S . Banerjee , Y . Che , G . K . German , Y . Xu , C . Hyland , M . C . Marchetti , V . Horsley , and E . R . Dufresne , 2012 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 108 , 198101 . Milner , S . T . , 1993 , Phys . Rev . E 48 , 3674 . Milosˇevic´ , S . , L . Sasva´ri , and B . Tadic´ , 1978 , Z . Phys . B 29 , 139 . Mishra , S . , 2009 , Ph . D . thesis ( Indian Institute of Science , Bangalore ) . Mishra , S . , A . Baskaran , and M . C . Marchetti , 2010 , Phys . Rev . E 81 , 061916 . Mishra , S . , F . Ginelli , S . Puri , E . Bertin , H . Chate , and R . Ramaswamy , 2012 ( unpublished ) . Mishra , S . , and S . Ramaswamy , 2006 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 97 , 090602 . Mizuno , D . , C . Tardin , C . F . Schmidt , and F . C . MacKintosh , 2007 , Science 315 , 370 . Mogilner , A . , and G . Oster , 1996 , Biophys . J . 71 , 3030 . Mogilner , A . , and G . Oster , 1999 , Eur . Biophys . J . 28 , 235 . Muhuri , S . , M . Rao , and S . Ramaswamy , 2007 , Europhys . Lett . 78 , 48002 . Murray , J . D . , 2003 , Mathematical Biology Vol . II : Spatial Models and Biomedical Applications ( Springer , New York ) , 3rd ed . Narayan , V . , S . Ramaswamy , and N . Menon , 2007 , Science 317 , 105 . Narayan , V . , S . Ramaswamy , and N . Menon , 2008 , Science 320 , 612 . Ne´de´lec , F . , 1998 , Ph . D . thesis ( Universite´ Paris 11 ) , http : / / www . cytosim . org / reprints / these / index . html . Ne´de´lec , F . , T . Surrey , A . Maggs , and S . Leibler , 1997 , Nature ( London ) 389 , 305 . Onsager , L . , 1949 , Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 51 , 627 . Oron , A . , S . H . Davis , and S . G . Bankoff , 1997 , Rev . Mod . Phys . 69 , 931 . Pahlavan , A . A . , and D . Saintillan , 2011 , Phys . Fluids 23 , 011901 . Palacci , J . , B . Abe´cassis , C . Cottin - Bizonne , C . Ybert , and L . Bocquet , 2010 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 104 , 138302 . Palacci , J . , S . Sacanna , A . P . Steinberg , D . J . Pine , and P . M . Chaikin , 2013 , Science 339 , 936 . Palffy - Muhoray , P . , M . A . Lee , and R . G . Petschek , 1988 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 60 , 2303 . Parrish , J . K . , and W . M . Hamner , 1997 , Animals Groups in Three Dimensions : How Species Aggregate ( Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , England ) . Paxton , W . F . , K . C . Kistler , C . C . Olmeda , A . Sen , S . K . S . Angelo , Y . Cao , T . E . Mallouk , P . E . Lammert , and V . H . Crespi , 2004 , J . Am . Chem . Soc . 126 , 13 424 . Pedley , T . J . , and J . O . Kessler , 1992 , Annu . Rev . Fluid Mech . 24 , 313 . Peruani , F . , A . Deutsch , and M . Ba¨r , 2006 , Phys . Rev . E 74 , 030904 . Peruani , F . , A . Deutsch , and M . Ba¨r , 2008 , Eur . Phys . J . Special Topics 157 , 111 . Peruani , F . , J . Starruss , V . Jakovljevic , L . Sogaard - Anderseng , A . Deutsch , and M . Ba¨r , 2012 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 108 , 098102 . Peshkov , A . , I . S . Aronson , E . Bertin , H . Chate´ , and F . Ginelli , 2012 , arXiv : 1207 . 5751 . Petitjean , L . , M . Reffay , E . Grasland - Mongrain , M . Poujade , B . Ladoux , A . Buguin , and P . Silberzan , 2010 , Biophys . J . 98 , 1790 . Pinot , M . , F . Chesnel , J . Z . Kubiak , I . Arnal , F . J . Nedelec , and Z . Gueroui , 2009 , Curr . Biol . 19 , 954 . Poujade , M . , E . Grasland - Mongrain , A . Hertzog , J . Jouanneau , P . Chavrier , B . Ladoux , A . Buguin , and P . Silberzan , 2007 , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 104 , 15 988 . Prevost , A . , P . Melby , D . A . Egolf , and J . S . Urbach , 2004 , Phys . Rev . E 70 , 050301 ( R ) . Prost , J . , 2010 , in From Non - covalent Assemblies to Molecular Machines , edited by J . Sauvage , and P . Gaspard , Solvay Conference in Chemistry ( Wiley , New York ) , Vol . 21 . Prost , J . , and R . Bruinsma , 1996 , Europhys . Lett . 33 , 321 . Prost , J . , J . - F . Joanny , P . Lenz , and C . Sykes , 2007 , The Physics of Listeria Propulsion in Cell Motility , edited by P . Lenz ( Springer - Verlag , New York ) . Rafaı¨ , S . , L . Jibuti , and P . Peyla , 2010 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 104 , 098102 . Ramaswamy , S . , 2010 , Annu . Rev . Condens . Matter Phys . 1 , 323 . Ramaswamy , S . , and G . F . Mazenko , 1982 , Phys . Rev . A 26 , 1735 . Ramaswamy , S . , and M . Rao , 2001 , C . R . Acad . Sci . Paris , Se´rie IV 2 , 817 . Ramaswamy , S . , and M . Rao , 2007 , New J . Phys . 9 , 423 . Ramaswamy , S . , R . A . Simha , and J . Toner , 2003 , Europhys . Lett . 62 , 196 . Ramaswamy , S . , J . Toner , and J . Prost , 2000 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 84 , 3494 . Ranft , J . , M . Basan , J . Elgeti , J . - F . J . Joanny , J . Prost , and F . Ju¨licher , 2010 , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 107 , 20 863 . Reichenbach , T . , T . Franosch , and E . Frey , 2006 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 97 , 050603 . Reynolds , C . W . , 1987 , Computer Graphics 21 , 25 ( SIGGRAPH ’87 Conference Proceedings ) . Romanczuk , P . , M . Ba¨r , W . Ebeling , B . Lindner , and L . Schimansky - Geier , 2012 , Eur . Phys . J . Special Topics 202 , 1 . Saintillan , D . , 2010 , Exp . Mech . 50 , 1275 . Saintillan , D . , 2012 , in Natural Locomotion in Fluids and on Surfaces : Swimming , Flying , and Sliding , edited by S . Childress , A . Hosoi , W . W . Schultz , and Z . J . Wang ( Springer , New York ) . Saintillan , D . , and M . J . Shelley , 2007 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 99 , 058102 . Saintillan , D . , and M . J . Shelley , 2008a , Phys . Rev . Lett . 100 , 178103 . Saintillan , D . , and M . J . Shelley , 2008b , Phys . Fluids 20 , 123304 . Salbreux , G . , J . F . Joanny , J . Prost , and P . Pullarkat , 2007 , Phys . Biol . 4 , 268 . Salbreux , G . , J . Prost , and J . F . Joanny , 2009 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 103 , 058102 . 1188 M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013 Sanchez , T . , D . N . Chen , S . J . DeCamp , M . Heymann , and Z . Dogic , 2012 , Nature ( London ) 491 , 431 . Sankararaman , S . , G . I . Menon , and P . B . S . Kumar , 2004 , Phys . Rev . E 70 , 031905 . Sankararaman , S . , and S . Ramaswamy , 2009 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 102 , 118107 . Sarkar , J . , and A . Sharma , 2010 , Langmuir 26 , 8464 . Sarkar , N . , and A . Basu , 2011 , Eur . Phys . J . E 34 , 1 . Schaller , V . , C . Weber , E . Frey , and A . R . Bausch , 2011 , Soft Matter 7 , 3213 . Schaller , V . , C . Weber , C . Semmrich , E . Frey , and A . R . Bausch , 2010 , Nature ( London ) 467 , 73 . Schaller , V . , C . A . Weber , B . Hammerich , E . Frey , and A . R . Bausch , 2011 , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 108 , 19183 . Schwarz - Linek , J . , C . Valeriani , A . Cacciuto , M . E . Cates , D . Marenduzzo , A . N . Morozov , and W . C . K . Poon , 2012 , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 109 , 4052 . Schweitzer , F . , 2003 , Brownian Agents and Active Particles : Collective Dynamics in the Natural and Social Sciences ( Springer , Berlin ) . Serra - Picamal , X . , V . Conte , R . Vincent , E . Anon , D . T . Tambe , E . Bazellieres , J . P . Butler , J . J . Fredberg , and X . Trepat , 2012 , Nat . Phys . 8 , 628 . Shi , X . , and Y . Ma , 2010 , arXiv : 1011 . 5408 . Simha , R . A . , and S . Ramaswamy , 1999 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 83 , 3285 . Simha , R . A . , and S . Ramaswamy , 2002a , Phys . Rev . Lett . 89 , 058101 . Simha , R . A . , and S . Ramaswamy , 2002b , Physica ( Amsterdam ) 306A , 262 . Small , J . V . , T . Stradal , E . Vignal , and K . Rottner , 2002 , Trends Cell Biol . 12 , 112 . Sokolov , A . , M . Apadoca , B . A . Grzybowski , and I . S . Aranson , 2010 , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 107 , 969 . Sokolov , A . , and I . S . Aranson , 2009 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 103 , 148101 . Stone , H . , 2005 , Chem . Eng . Sci . 60 , 4838 . Sumino , Y . , K . H . Nagai , Y . Shitaka , D . Tanaka , K . Yoshikawa , H . Chate´ , and K . Oiwa , 2012 , Nature ( London ) 483 , 448 . Surrey , T . , F . J . Ne´de´lec , S . Leibler , and E . Karsenti , 2001 , Science 292 , 1167 . Szabo´ , B . , G . J . Szolosi , B . Gonci , Z . Juranyi , D . Selmeczi , and T . Vicsek , 2006 , Phys . Rev . E 74 , 061908 . Tailleur , J . , and M . E . Cates , 2008 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 100 , 218103 . ten Hagen , B . , S . van Teeffelen , and H . Lo¨wen , 2009 , Condens . Matter Phys . 12 , 725 . Theurkauff , I . , C . Cottin - Bizonne , J . Palacci , C . Ybert , and L . Bocquet1 , 2012 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 108 , 268303 . Tjhung , E . , M . E . Cates , and D . Marenduzzo , 2011 , Soft Matter 7 , 7453 . Toner , J . , 2009 , online lecture notes , Institut Henri Poincare´ . Toner , J . , 2012a , Phys . Rev . Lett . 108 , 088102 . Toner , J . , 2012b , Phys . Rev . E 86 , 031918 . Toner , J . , and Y . Tu , 1995 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 75 , 4326 . Toner , J . , and Y . Tu , 1998 , Phys . Rev . E 58 , 4828 . Toner , J . , Y . Tu , and S . Ramaswamy , 2005 , Ann . Phys . ( Amsterdam ) 318 , 170 . Trepat , X . , M . R . Wasserman , T . E . Angelini , E . Millet , D . A . Weitz , J . P . Butler , and J . J . Fredberg , 2009 , Nat . Phys . 5 , 426 . Vallotton , P . , G . Danuser , S . Bohnet , J . - J . Meister , and A . Verkhovsky , 2005 , Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 1223 . Verkhovsky , A . B . , T . M . Svitkina , and G . B . Borisy , 1999 , Curr . Biol . 9 , 11 . Vicsek , T . , A . Cziro´k , E . Ben - Jacob , I . Cohen , and O . Shochet , 1995 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 75 , 1226 . Voituriez , R . , J . F . Joanny , and J . Prost , 2005 , Europhys . Lett . 70 , 404 . Voituriez , R . , J . F . Joanny , and J . Prost , 2006 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 96 , 28102 . Wan , M . , C . O . Reichhardt , Z . Nussinov , and C . Reichhardt , 2008 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 101 , 018102 . Wensink , H . , J . Dunkel , S . Heidenreich , K . Drescher , R . Goldstein , H . L en , and J . Yeomans , 2012 , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 109 , 14 308 . Wensink , H . H . , and H . Lo¨wen , 2008 , Phys . Rev . E 78 , 031409 . Wolgemuth , C . , E . Hoiczyk , D . Kaiser , and G . Oster , 2002 , Curr . Biol . 12 , 369 . Wolgemuth , C . W . , 2008 , Biophys . J . 95 , 1564 . Wu , X . - L . , and A . Libchaber , 2000 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 84 , 3017 . Wu , Y . , Y . Jiang , A . D . Kaiser , and M . Alber , 2011 , Phys . Biol . 8 , 055003 . Yamada , D . , T . Hondou , and M . Sano , 2003 , Phys . Rev . E 67 , 040301 . Yang , Y . , V . Marceau , and G . Gompper , 2010 , Phys . Rev . E 82 , 031904 . Yoshinaga , N . , J . F . Joanny , J . Prost , and P . Marcq , 2010 , Phys . Rev . Lett . 105 , 238103 . Zhang , H . P . , A . Be’er , E . - L . Florin , and H . L . Swinney , 2010 , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 107 , 13 626 . Ziebert , F . , I . S . Aranson , and L . S . Tsimring , 2007 , New J . Phys . 9 , 421 . Ziebert , F . , and W . Zimmermann , 2004 , Phys . Rev . E 70 , 022902 . Ziebert , F . , and W . Zimmermann , 2005 , Eur . Phys . J . E 18 , 41 . Zwanzig , R . , 2001 , Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics ( Oxford University Press , Oxford , UK ) . M . C . Marchetti et al . : Hydrodynamics of soft active matter 1189 Rev . Mod . Phys . , Vol . 85 , No . 3 , July – September 2013