Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1996 ) . Two functions of analogical reasoning in design : A cognitive - psychology approach . Design Studies . Special Issue " Design Cognition and Computation " , 17 , 417 - 434 . 1 Two functions of analogical reasoning in design A cognitive - psychology approach Willemien Visser , Ergonomics Psychology Project , National Institute for Research on Computer Science and Automation ( INRIA ) , Rocquencourt B . P . 105 , 78153 Le Chesnay Cedex , France Abstract . On the basis of data collected in three empirical studies conducted on industrial designers , this paper identifies two different types of " spontaneous " use of analogy in design . Focus is on the first " stages " of analogical reasoning , i . e . construction of a target representation , and search and retrieval of a source . At the action - execution level , analogies are used in order to solve the current design problem ; at the action - management level , in order to make the action - execution process cognitively more economical . Differences between the uses concern their dependence on the routine character of the task , the distance between target and source , and their link with creativity and reuse ( or case - based reasoning ) . Keywords . Creative Design , Analogical reasoning , Case - Based Reasoning , Creativity , Industrial Design , Cognitive economy , Action - execution level , Action - management level , Control , Reuse This paper studies different functions that analogical reasoning may have in a particular form of " ill - defined " problem solving , i . e . design . It examines the question from a cognitive - psychology viewpoint : focus is on the psychological processes which are implemented by designers and the mental representations involved . Multiple links exist with computational approaches to analogical reasoning and to design : such models have a heuristic value , and our results have implications for them , e . g . in the domain of CBR ( case - based reasoning ) applied to design . Two characteristics of our research make it rather original with respect to other cognitive - psychology research on analogical reasoning . First , the retrieval of analogues by the designers studied is " spontaneous " : the analogous sources used by the designers are neither provided i n r i a - 00633822 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Author manuscript , published in " Design Studies 17 , 4 ( 1996 ) 417 - 434 " DOI : 10 . 1016 / S0142 - 694X ( 96 ) 00020 - 8 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1996 ) . Two functions of analogical reasoning in design : A cognitive - psychology approach . Design Studies . Special Issue " Design Cognition and Computation " , 17 , 417 - 434 . 2 explicitly , nor cued . ( In the analogical - reasoning vocabulary , a " source " is a problem / solution association related to a problem already solved , which constitutes the reference for the solution to the problem that is currently to be solved , the " target " . The term " problem / solutions " or " problem / solution representations " was proposed in order to refer to both " problem / solution schemata " - i . e . representations of classes of problems and their solutions - and " particular problem / solution associations " - i . e . mental representations corresponding to specific problems and their solutions 1 . ) In most research on analogical reasoning , the experimenters provide explicitly and / or cue the analogues to be exploited . Rare are the studies conducted on tasks in which the use of analogues would be helpful , but in which both this utility and the particular analogues themselves are not given , or at least suggested , to the subjects . Second , our studies have been conducted on use of analogy in a daily work context , whereas analogical reasoning has mostly been studied in artificially restricted tasks . Only very few data have been collected on the use of analogy in " real " tasks , e . g . in professional activities accomplished in their natural work context , or in learning in natural school or other educational environments . Data analysed in this paper come from several studies conducted on different sorts of industrial , professional design activities , both in routine and in nonroutine tasks . The main goal of this research is to understand how the first stages of analogical reasoning are conducted in human ( design ) problem solving , and which functions this form of reasoning may have in ( design ) problem solving , i . e . how and why a problem solver refers to analogical sources to solve a target problem . Knowing and understanding the cognitive aspects of an activity is one of the requirements for the development of both educational means and support systems . The use of analogies is indeed supposed to be a powerful means for design problem solving , and for the introduction of creative aspects in design . This assertion has to be made in a hypothetical form , because few empirical field studies have been conducted today on the topic . In this paper , three such studies are presented . i n r i a - 00633822 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1996 ) . Two functions of analogical reasoning in design : A cognitive - psychology approach . Design Studies . Special Issue " Design Cognition and Computation " , 17 , 417 - 434 . 3 The outset of the paper is as follows . Section 1 discusses the use of analogies . It puts our approach to analogical reasoning in design in the context of the main cognitive and computational models of analogical reasoning . Analogical reasoning in general will not be reviewed . The stages examined in this paper will be presented and confronted with those generally proposed . Section 2 presents three observational studies on professional designers working on real industrial design projects . The results are presented in section 3 : two different types of analogy use have been identified in these studies : analogical reasoning can be used at the action - execution level , in order to solve the current design subproblem ( referred to as " AE - analogies " ) , or at the action - management level , in order to make the entire action - execution process cognitively more economical ( referred to as " AM - analogies " ) . This second type of analogy use ( AM - analogies ) was not yet identified in the research literature in the domain . The results are discussed in terms of the different stages of action execution ( AE ) and action management ( AM ) in which reference may be made to analogical reasoning . " Cognitive economy " , which may function as a generative or as a critical constraint , is introduced and its role in the decision to search for an analogous problem / solution is presented . A comparison between the two types of analogy use , at a behavioural , descriptive level , shows that the differences concern the purpose of search for an analogue , the direction of analogue retrieval and the mode of search for an analogous solution to the current problem . One factor supposed to play a role in the different functions of these two uses is the routine character of the design task . The paper closes on a Conclusion , presenting an examination of the similarities and differences between analogical reasoning and reuse ( or case - based reasoning ) , identifying on this basis another difference between the two uses of analogy , and formulating some conclusions . 1 Use of analogy . Different approaches Research papers on analogical reasoning present this cognitive activity as frequently occurring and very important in both problem solving and understanding ( often in the context of learning , but also in that of exposition or explanation ) . Greiner 2 asserts that " the phenomenon of analogy appears ubiquitous , playing an important rôle in essentially all modes of reasoning " ( 1988 , p . 167 ) . i n r i a - 00633822 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1996 ) . Two functions of analogical reasoning in design : A cognitive - psychology approach . Design Studies . Special Issue " Design Cognition and Computation " , 17 , 417 - 434 . 4 According to Kedar - Cabelli 3 , " a remarkable ability of people is to easily understand new situations by analogy to old ones , to comprehend metaphors , and to solve problems based on previously solved , analogous problems " ( 1988 , p . 65 ) . These assertions , however , are rarely backed up by data on human reasoning in " real " tasks ( as opposed to the artificially restricted tasks used in most cognitive - science research , both in cognitive psychology and in A . I . ) . The available empirical data , besides , would not be of much use here . Most research in cognitive psychology in the domain of analogical reasoning uses sources provided by the experimenter , rather than generated by the " subjects " themselves - even if some authors study the " spontaneous noticing " of these sources , i . e . , their " noticing " which has not been " prompted " by the experimenter ( see e . g . 4 and 5 ) . So the results of the existing research as such cannot be used to draw conclusions about the role of analogical reasoning in real tasks , i . e . , tasks in the " real world " where there are no experimenters providing analogous sources , or even hinting that an analogy could be useful for the current task . Nonetheless , there are empirical studies on problem solving that may provide evidence for the spontaneous use of analogical reasoning in real tasks involving problem - solving activities . This paper examines such use in design problem solving , through data collected in observational studies on professional designers working on real industrial design projects . Reviews of the current cognitive and computational theories of analogical reasoning generally distinguish two main approaches , Gentner ' s " syntactic " 6 , and Holyoak ' s et al . " pragmatic " 7 approach . Recently , Keane et al . 8 have proposed , in their " solution generation theory " , a common metatheoretical framework in which the different theories can be unified . All these authors focus on the mapping stage ( Keane et al . also focus on adaptation 9 ) . As noticed already , due to experimental artefacts , few data exist on previous stages . Because we are interested by the earlier stages , we present these models only very briefly . Critical reviews and states of the art can be found , e . g . , in 3 , 10 and 11 . In Gentner ' s syntactic model ( and its computational version 12 ) , the structure of the source and the structure of the target determine if there is an analogical relationship between the two , and these i n r i a - 00633822 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1996 ) . Two functions of analogical reasoning in design : A cognitive - psychology approach . Design Studies . Special Issue " Design Cognition and Computation " , 17 , 417 - 434 . 5 structures guide the mapping which allows this relationship to be exploited . In the pragmatic approach , the structure of target and source is important , but the causal nature of the relations between the corresponding elements in these structures is the determining element in the definition of analogy —and in triggering off analogical reasoning . Because causal relations depend on the context and / or the use of target and source , this approach is qualified " pragmatic " . Convinced as we are that goals play a predominant role in human problem solving , we cannot adhere to Gentner ' s theory , and we advocate the type of model proposed by Holyoak et al . and Keane et al . If these main approaches differ on various points ( especially with respect to the nature of the constraints on analogical mapping ) , they rather concord on the main stages they distinguish : retrieval , mapping , adaptation and side - effects ( i . e . learning through induction , and / or other updating of memory ) . Some authors also mention the construction of a representation of the target , which plays , in our view , a very important role with respect to the analogical reasoning properly speaking . Wolstencroft 13 proposes as first stage " identification " , during which a person " [ identifies ] that analogical reasoning may prove useful " . This stage is rarely explicitly considered by other authors . After the representation - construction stage , we distinguish a search and a retrieval stage , or search as a first process in the retrieval stage . A person who has to solve a problem may look for similar , analogous problems ( after one has made out that one does not know the problem , or only if one does not find another way to solve the problem - see below , § 3 . 4 , and 14 for a brief discussion of the " conditions of reuse " ) . Holyoak and Thagard7 also propose that the attempt to solve the target problem initiates search , implemented , in their model , by rule - directed spreading activation . So , we propose the following stages : representation construction , search & retrieval , mapping , adaptation and side - effects . In this paper , focus is on the first stages , i . e . on representation construction , search and retrieval . The function of analogical reasoning is generally not stated explicitly : in problem solving , analogies are - implicitly - supposed to be used " to solve the problem " . In our studies , in addition to this use of i n r i a - 00633822 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1996 ) . Two functions of analogical reasoning in design : A cognitive - psychology approach . Design Studies . Special Issue " Design Cognition and Computation " , 17 , 417 - 434 . 6 analogy at the " action - execution " level , we identified its exploitation for " action management " . This second function of analogical reasoning served to organise the global problem - solving activity as economical as possible from a viewpoint of cognitive cost . The present text examines these two functions of analogical reasoning in design problem solving 2 Three field studies : how are analogies being used in design problem solving ? Through the years , we have conducted various observational studies on designers 15 . Three of these studies , which have provided data on use of analogy , will be referred to below . Even if , at the start , they did not focus especially on analogical reasoning , during data analysis the importance of this form of reasoning in design problem - solving was discovered . Table 1 presents the three studies at a glance . Only the more or less routine character of the different tasks and the data - collection method which has been used will be further described in the text . 2 . 1 Routine character of the tasks examined A . I . researchers working on design often distinguish " routine " ( or " familiar " ) and " nonroutine " design ( or " creative " , " insightful " or " innovative " design 16 , 17 . In cognitive psychology , the opposition routine - nonroutine is found in global analyses of problem solving . This text adopts a distinction made by Mayer 18 , that we judge particularly clear : " routine problems are familiar problems that , although not eliciting an automatic memorized answer , can be solved by applying a well - known procedure . Although the problem solver does not immediately know the answer to a routine problem , the problem solver does know how to arrive at an answer . For example , the problem 888 x 888 is a routine problem for most adults . In contrast , nonroutine problems are unfamiliar problems for which the problem solver does not have a well - known solution procedure and must generate a novel procedure . " ( p . 40 ) i n r i a - 00633822 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1996 ) . Two functions of analogical reasoning in design : A cognitive - psychology approach . Design Studies . Special Issue " Design Cognition and Computation " , 17 , 417 - 434 . 7 Note that the " routine " or " nonroutine " character of a design task depends on the designers ' knowledge with respect to the " problem " they are confronted with , and on other characteristics of the problem situation . A " nonroutine " task for a designer may constitute a " routine " task for a colleague . This second designer may retrieve pre - existing procedures leading to the answers , or may not even need to proceed with " problem solving " for the execution of the task , if " simple " retrieval of the required answers is sufficient for her or him to execute the task . Among the three tasks examined here , one tended to be nonroutine : it was the composite - structure design task ( CS ) . It indeed consisted in designing a completely new type of antenna for satellites , i . e . an " unfurling " antenna ( whereas before , antennas were rigid ) . The two other tasks ( Mech . - Mechanical , and SW - Software ) were rather routine tasks for the designers observed , even if they included various aspects ( subproblems ) which were new for them , and asked for innovation or creativity on their behalf . 2 . 2 Data collection : Observation and Simultaneous verbalisation All three studies used the same method . In each study , observations were conducted , during a period of several weeks , on a designer involved in his task ( all designers were male ) . These were full - time observations in the Mech . and SW studies ; in the CS study , observations were conducted at a rate of 3 to 4 days a week . The designers ' normal daily activities were observed without any intervention , other than that , before we started to observe a designer , we asked him to verbalise his thoughts , all during his problem - solving activity , as much as possible 19 . We took notes on these verbalisations and other actions , and collected all documents which a designer produced during his work . N . B . We took notes , because making audio or video tapes during the observations would have been possible , but the analyses of more than hundred hours of tapes would not ! i n r i a - 00633822 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1996 ) . Two functions of analogical reasoning in design : A cognitive - psychology approach . Design Studies . Special Issue " Design Cognition and Computation " , 17 , 417 - 434 . 8 Some remarks might be useful about the " verbalisation " technique . Researchers interested in mental activities often ask their subjects to " verbalise their thoughts " or to " think aloud " , i . e . , they ask them to report the information they take into consideration , the choices they are confronted with , the criteria used to take a decision , their reasoning , their hesitations , their questioning past decisions , etc 20 . There is an essential difference with " introspection " , the method used in psychology around the century - and still often used by researchers , even psychologists , thinking and stating that they do " protocol studies " using " verbalisation " . Introspection consists in commenting on one ' s own mental activity , or on the information used - whereas what is asked to be verbalised is the information attended to which has been generated by the task - directed processes one is involved in - in so far as this information may be made explicit , but that is another problem . If researchers are interested in a mental activity , e . g . , the problem - solving activity underlying a design activity , they do not want to collect designers ' comments or descriptions , which give opinions about , or rationalisations of , the designers ' mental activity . The data they want to obtain are the direct traces of the information used in the mental activity , which are indirect traces of the internal stages of the cognitive process underlying the activity . The next step is that the researcher analyses these data , according to strict rules and methods . One does not want the " subjects to speculate and theorize about their processes … [ One wants to leave ] the theory - building part of the enterprise to the experimenter . There is no reason to suppose that the subjects themselves will or can be aware of the limitations of the data they are providing [ when probed to proceed to introspection ] . " ( Ericsson & Simon23 , p . 221 ) Of course , the use of verbalisation is submitted to several conditions ( see 22 or , for a short presentation , 21 ) . 3 Two types of analogy use : " Action - Execution " ( AE ) and " Action - Management " ( AM ) analogies i n r i a - 00633822 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1996 ) . Two functions of analogical reasoning in design : A cognitive - psychology approach . Design Studies . Special Issue " Design Cognition and Computation " , 17 , 417 - 434 . 9 Analogies were used in two different ways in these studies . These two types of analogy use identified in the studies are called " Action - Execution " analogies ( AE ) and " Action - Management " analogies ( AM ) . The first one is the " classical " example of analogy use in problem solving ; the second one has not been described as such in the literature . Before presentation of these results in more detail , we need to describe the theoretical framework in which the main distinction introduced - i . e . between action execution and action management - finds its source . 3 . 1 Articulating design actions : two levels , action execution and action management A distinction is made between an execution level where design problem - solving actions are " proposed " and " executed " and another , control level where a " selection " is made among the actions proposed ; at this management level , control also makes " calls for action proposals " . The two levels are structured according to the iterative sequence presented in Table 217 . This approach underlying our " opportunistic model " of design ( it is the organisation of design that is " opportunistic " , not the model ! ) is inspired by Hayes - Roth et al . 22 , 23 ( for our model , see 17 , and , for some modifications , 24 ) . 3 . 2 " Cognitive cost " : the main selection criterion The analysis of the data obtained in Study Mech . 17 , led us to propose " cognitive cost " as control ' s main action - selection criterion : if several action proposals are made , control will select the action which is most economical from a cognitive - cost viewpoint . Next to functioning as a critical constraint , " cognitive economy " may also function as a generative constraint . If control policy favours cognitive economy , control might , in its call - for - action - proposals stage , make a call oriented towards cognitive economy . Let ' s have a look at control making such a call . Both control - knowledge sources and knowledge sources at the action - execution level may react ( these " knowledge sources " correspond to Hayes - i n r i a - 00633822 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1996 ) . Two functions of analogical reasoning in design : A cognitive - psychology approach . Design Studies . Special Issue " Design Cognition and Computation " , 17 , 417 - 434 . 10 Roth ' s " specialists " ) . A control - knowledge source proposing an economical action could be the heuristic " Exploit the just developed solution in order to solve related problems which remain to be solved " . If this heuristic is adopted , search for " related problems which remain to be solved " will occur . In parallel , action proposals are probably made by action - execution knowledge sources , e . g . global and local plans . For routine design tasks , designers may possess a - generally hierarchically structured - global - task plan17 . Even if the actions proposed by such plans may be supposed to be " economical " from a cognitive - cost viewpoint , there may be more economical actions , proposed by other knowledge sources . If accepted by the control , such action proposals then lead to " plan deviations " . Visser27 presents six of such sources of plan deviation , identified through the analysis of the specification actions which did not match the mechanical engineer ' s global plan . These plan - deviation sources underlay our analysis of the design activity as opportunistically organised . An example of such an opportunity is the following . Information looked up for the current design action may be used for another action because it is considered from a viewpoint other than the one required for the current action . Being able - but also prone - to adopt different viewpoints on the same information is characteristic for experts . Both types of analogy use are examples of another opportunity , i . e . exploiting mental representations of design objects activated by the representations used for the current design action . Indeed , analogy is one of the activation - guiding relationships which , if they exist between two sets of representations , may lead to a switch between the design - object representations ( the other activation - guiding relationships identified are prerequisites and interaction ) 27 . 3 . 3 " Action - Execution " ( AE ) and " Action - Management " ( AM ) analogies Thus , analogies were used in two different ways in the tasks studied . The first type , Action - Execution analogies ( AE ) , corresponds to the analogical reasoning which has already been identified often in the literature , even if mainly in experimental , restricted settings in which the analogous " source " was provided explicitly , or its existence was cued , to the subjects . It is the exploitation of an analogical relationship between two mental problem / solution representations , in order to solve i n r i a - 00633822 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1996 ) . Two functions of analogical reasoning in design : A cognitive - psychology approach . Design Studies . Special Issue " Design Cognition and Computation " , 17 , 417 - 434 . 11 the current target problem at the action - execution level . These AE - analogies have mostly been observed in the study conducted on the composite - structure design task ( Study CS ) 1 . The second type , Action - Management analogies ( AM ) , has been observed in the two other studies ( a mechanical functional specification task , Study Mech . 17 ; and a software design task , Study SW18 ) . It also consists in exploiting an analogical relationship between two problem / solution representations , and one may also consider that it is used in order to solve a " problem " - however , the problem in question is not at the action - execution level , but at the action - management level : it is a metaproblem which may be stated as follows : " How can I organise my activity as economical as possible ? " . Except when explicitly specified otherwise , the term " ( target ) problem " will be reserved in the rest of this text for " problems " at the action - execution level . These two types of analogy use are going to be described below . 3 . 4 Action - Execution ( AE ) analogies . Analogical reasoning for solving the current design problem This is the " classical " example of analogy use in problem solving . The designer has decided to solve a problem pbn ( see Figure 1 ) and looks in memory for an analogous problem already solved . N . B . It may seem strange that , despite the big amount of research conducted on analogical reasoning , psychologists do not know under which conditions problem solvers apply analogical reasoning to solve a problem : do they so as one of their first attempts , or only after having tried , without success , one or more other approaches , especially after having tried to reason on the basis of a problem - solving schema ? One may formulate the hypothesis that concrete , specific knowledge is used before abstract , general knowledge - an assertion which many authors in the domain of case - based reasoning ( CBR ) advance using no any empirical basis , or referring to not further specified " psychological data " . One may use as an argument for this hypothesis the result from research on i n r i a - 00633822 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1996 ) . Two functions of analogical reasoning in design : A cognitive - psychology approach . Design Studies . Special Issue " Design Cognition and Computation " , 17 , 417 - 434 . 12 analogical reasoning that surface attributes are more easily accessible than structural features - but there are no data directly concerning this precise question : What comes first : general or specific knowledge ? This is not surprising , given the late start of studies on tasks in domains where the use of specific knowledge is needed ; until recently , psychological studies nearly exclusively concerned tasks requiring people to refer to only general knowledge 25 , 26 . In any case , the designer referring to analogical reasoning was not able to retrieve the particular problem / solution association corresponding exactly to his problem , i . e . " the answer to his question " - that is why psychologists speak of " problem solving " ( cf . Mayer ' s21 definition of " routine problems " given above ) . We observe that he tries to find an analogous problem pbn - m for which he already knows the solution ( soln - m ) . This use of analogy has been observed in the CS study . The designer employed it especially in the conceptual - design stage . When elaborating conceptual solutions to design problems , he and his colleagues frequently were observed to be reminded of extra - design domain objects which implemented concepts ( principles , mechanisms ) which they judged might be useful for developing a solution to the current design problem . An example is the following . When he is developing , in a discussion with colleagues , " unfurling principles " for antennas , both the observed designer and colleagues came up with ideas for conceptual solutions such as " umbrella , " and other " folding " objects , such as " folding photo screen " , " folding butterfly net " , and " folding sun hat " . Note that all these " folding " objects satisfy not only the " unfurling " constraint , but also another constraint on the solution , that of having a trigger mechanism allowing a complete unfurling of the object into a surface which is rigid ( for another example , see 1 ) . i n r i a - 00633822 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1996 ) . Two functions of analogical reasoning in design : A cognitive - psychology approach . Design Studies . Special Issue " Design Cognition and Computation " , 17 , 417 - 434 . 13 3 . 5 Action - Management ( AM ) analogies . Analogical reasoning for making the action - execution process cognitively more economical In this case , analogy plays a role in the proposal , not of a solution , but of the next action to be executed . The designer has just developed a solution soln - 1 to solve the problem pbn - 1 . He then decides to take advantage of the fact that this solution is available at " low cognitive cost " , to solve an analogous problem pbn which is one of the subproblems of the global design problem which remain to be solved . This type of analogy use has a function at the metalevel of problem solving : if there is no analogical or other semantic relationship that can been exploited , solving the target design problem is not prevented , it will only be less economical than if such a relationship had been perceived . This use of analogy has often been observed in the studies Mech . and SW . The designers in these studies used it throughout their entire design task . Frequently they deviated from their action - execution plan in order to take advantage of the problem solving they had just accomplished . Thus , they used the solution procedure developed to solve the current target problem - taking advantage of it still being active in memory - in order to solve one , or sometimes even several , analogous problems which remained to be solved on the global design project . If they had stuck to their plan as regards its action - execution order , the solution would have had to have been constructed again later on , or possibly retrieved - but with difficulty - and then adapted . This construction , or retrieval + adaptation , would have a greater cognitive cost than adapting an already constructed solution that is still available . In conclusion : for AE - analogies , the problem which is solved by reference to an analogue is the target design problem currently under focus ; whereas for AM - analogies , it is a metalevel problem , i . e . the one of organising the action execution as economical as possible from the viewpoint of cognitive cost . i n r i a - 00633822 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1996 ) . Two functions of analogical reasoning in design : A cognitive - psychology approach . Design Studies . Special Issue " Design Cognition and Computation " , 17 , 417 - 434 . 14 3 . 6 A factor contributing to the observed differences between the two types of analogy use : the routine character of a task Table 3 confronts the two types of analogy use and shows the various aspects on which the two types differ . One may notice that the use of the terms of " target " and " source " in the case of AM analogies is somewhat counterintuitive . Generally the " target " is the " problem to be solved " , and the source is the " reference problem , already solved , and whose solution is adapted to solve the target " . At a higher level , however , the " target " is the element ( the problem ) currently under focus , the element from which starts the search for a " source " , i . e . another , related element , in memory or in another " inventory " . Thus , in the case of AM analogies , the target is a problem already solved , and the source is a problem not yet solved : the direction of search , and of retrieval , is the inverse of the one generally observed . The three studies in which the two types of analogy use were observed differ on various aspects . The studies were observational and not set up with the aim of comparing the tasks on the variable " type of analogy use " . Therefore , we can only formulate hypotheses to this respect . Among the task characteristics which may be relevant for the observed differences , we think that the routine - nonroutine character of the task was the most important one . AM - analogy use , i . e . exploiting the solution currently available in order to solve at low cognitive cost another problem , is only possible for a designer who knows which problems remain to be solved ; thus , only for a designer who knows the structure of the global design problem . This is the case of routine problems . Therefore , it would be the routine character of the software and functional - specification design tasks that made it possible for the designer to anticipate the problems still to be solved , and to identify among them a problem related to the problem which he has just solved so that its solution ( procedure ) is available at low cognitive cost . AE - analogy use ( exploitation of analogy in order to solve the current design problem ) does not seem to depend on the routine character of the task , but AE - analogies might contribute to the creative i n r i a - 00633822 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1996 ) . Two functions of analogical reasoning in design : A cognitive - psychology approach . Design Studies . Special Issue " Design Cognition and Computation " , 17 , 417 - 434 . 15 character of the activity in nonroutine tasks . Their use may indeed " invite " to develop new solutions if the analogical elements are retrieved from remote domains and / or if relations are established between domains not yet linked ( as illustrated , e . g . , by the example presented above of the " unfurling principles " for antennas ) . This might provide support for the relationship which is often presumed to exist between analogical reasoning and creativity ( concerning design 27 , 28 , 29 ) . 4 . Conclusion In this final section , we will examine the similarities and differences between analogical reasoning and reuse ( or case - based reasoning ) , identify on this basis another difference between the two uses of analogy , and formulate some , never final , conclusions . 4 . 1 Analogical reasoning and reuse : differences ? Reuse - or , in A . I . terms , case - based reasoning ( CBR ) - is the use of specific experiences —problem / solution associations if one restricts oneself to problem solving— or to be more precise : in order to solve a target problem , one uses problem / solution source elements at the same level of abstraction as the target . It is often said to be particularly well suited to design problem solving14 , 30 , 31 , 32 , 33 . On the basis of cognitive - psychology data , Visser and Trousse36 stressed the important role of exploiting specific experiences from the past in this type of problem solving , especially in nonroutine design ( cf . the workshop organised at IJCAI93 on " Reuse of designs : an interdisciplinary cognitive approach " 34 ) . The reasoning processes involved in the reuse of knowledge in problem solving are often related to , or even equated with , analogical reasoning - however , the nature of the relation ( s ) between the two is not yet clear . We see at least two important differences between reuse and analogical reasoning —or two important specificities of analogical reasoning compared to reuse . The first one concerns the relationship between target and source which may be exploited to retrieve a source . In analogical reasoning , this relationship is , by definition , one of analogy - or , according to i n r i a - 00633822 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1996 ) . Two functions of analogical reasoning in design : A cognitive - psychology approach . Design Studies . Special Issue " Design Cognition and Computation " , 17 , 417 - 434 . 16 the authors , of other types of similarity - whereas reuse can also be based on other target - source relationships . If , as claimed by several researchers in the CBR community , the main constraint on a case ( a source ) is " usefulness rather than similarity " ( see Kolodner 34 , p . 155 ) , a " useful " source can entertain another than an analogical relationship with the target . The second difference seems the most important one . It concerns the mechanisms and strategies used to retrieve a source . The opposition often established by researchers in the CBR community between analogy referring to inter - domain , CBR to intra - domain , relationships is only a definitional one if one does not add a precision . That is , one may suppose that , in human reasoning at least , the same mechanisms are used to access a source , independently of its distance to the target . However , retrieval of distant knowledge may be more difficult , and require different strategies , e . g . for search . Such retrieval may require , e . g . , that before one is able to establish that there is a relationship between the target and a source , one must construct a representation of the target at a more abstract level . The underlying idea is thus that the difficulty to establish an analogy ( or to reuse a source ) is a function of the " distance " between target and source , as convincingly advanced by Johnson - Laird 35 . One argument is the " classical " result obtained in analogical - reasoning research that novices generally establish only surface analogies , whereas one has to become an expert to be able to base an analogy on " deeper " , structural relationships . It is , however , difficult to evaluate the " distance " in question , which does not depend on target and source independently of ( the organisation of ) a person ' s memory . Rather than to conclude to differences between analogical reasoning and reuse , these two observations might be taken to sustain that analogical reasoning is a special case of reuse ( or case - based reasoning ) , i . e . reuse of sources 1 . whose relationship with the target is one of analogy ( or other types of similarity ) , and 2 . coming from a " remote " domain relative to the one of the target . i n r i a - 00633822 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1996 ) . Two functions of analogical reasoning in design : A cognitive - psychology approach . Design Studies . Special Issue " Design Cognition and Computation " , 17 , 417 - 434 . 17 4 . 2 The two uses of analogy and the distance between target and source With respect to the last point , analysing the two uses of analogy identified in our studies with respect to the plausible role of the distance between target and source in analogical reasoning ( and reuse ) leads to the identification of another distinction between these two uses . The AE - analogy use observed in experimental studies is generally " intra - design - project " use of a source , or reuse , i . e . use of a solution developed during the current design project . In " real " design , however , elements from other , previously developed design projects are also reused . In both the study Mech . 17 and the study SW18 , we indeed observed such " inter - design - project " reuse . With respect to the reasoning involved , one may formulate the hypotheses that , compared to intra - design - project reuse , inter - design - project reuse is cognitively more demanding , and thus less frequently performed by designers . Even if it is difficult to evaluate a " distance " between target and source , one may suppose that distances between design objects involved in one and the same design project ( intra - design - project reuse ) are smaller than those between design objects involved in different design projects ( inter - design - project reuse ) . That is why , even if analogical reasoning opens possibilities for creativity in problem solving , this creative aspect is not guaranteed : it is difficult to find solution elements from remote domains , or to establish new relations between elements . In AM - analogy use , reuse is always intra - design - project reuse : a just developed solution is exploited to solve one of the design subproblems which remain to be solved . This means that according to the rate of AM - analogy use , the final design will have a more or less homogeneous structure - as a result of using , more or less frequently , a same solution structure for solving two or more different problems . 4 . 3 AM - analogy use : more or less interesting aspects The homogeneity which may result from more or less AM - analogy use may be considered interesting for future reuse : indeed , the existence of different versions of a solution ( various instances of a schema ) offers several different , but similar sources , and may also provide various examples for adaptation of the solution32 . i n r i a - 00633822 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1996 ) . Two functions of analogical reasoning in design : A cognitive - psychology approach . Design Studies . Special Issue " Design Cognition and Computation " , 17 , 417 - 434 . 18 It is not only due to its consequences for future reuse that AM - analogy use is attractive . Our studies showed that its use during the design of specifications leads to specifications which - because of their homogeneity - are probably more easy to use : this may be reflected in the activities executed on their basis , i . e . the construction of the machine tool in the workshop ( study Mech . ) , and the design and coding of the corresponding control program ( study SW ) . A homogeneously structured program is besides especially interesting from comprehension and maintenance viewpoints . N . B . The software designer ' s desire to ensure homogeneity in his design stemmed from an explicit preoccupation with the future use of this software . It introduced a constraint on his activity which strongly guided his work18 . If this generation of homogeneous structure occasioned by the use of AM - analogies may be considered " interesting " in several respects , it turns out to be " uninteresting " from the viewpoint of creativity in design . This is due to the fact that it leads to maintain " old " , rather than to introduce " new " , possibly " creative " , solutions in the design . The conclusion that analogy is not always positively correlated with ( possibilities for ) innovation may seem surprising 36 , but it isn ' t : it is —was— based on analogy being equated with what has here been called " AE - analogy " , whereas the conclusion is based on AM - analogy . Let ' s briefly summarise the results and our interpretation of them . On the basis of data collected in three field studies on design , two types of use of analogy were identified : for AE - analogies , the problem which is solved by reference to an analogue is the target design problem currently under focus ; for AM - analogies , it is a metalevel problem , i . e . the one of organising the action execution as economical as possible from the viewpoint of cognitive cost . The possibility to use AM - analogies seems to depend on the routine character of the design task , whereas AE - analogies may be made in both routine and nonroutine tasks . AE - analogies may , however , contribute to the introduction of creative aspects in design . AM - analogies , to the contrary , introduce homogeneity in a design project , so remove a possibility of innovation , but present an opportunity for reuse . This observation was related to the distance existing between the domains of i n r i a - 00633822 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1996 ) . Two functions of analogical reasoning in design : A cognitive - psychology approach . Design Studies . Special Issue " Design Cognition and Computation " , 17 , 417 - 434 . 19 target and source : AE - analogies may come from both connected and remote domains ( cf . intra - and inter - design - project reuse ) , even if retrieval from a remote domain will be cognitively more demanding , and thus less frequent —or subject to more inaccuracy ; AM - analogies are between target and source from the same design project , thus rather connected . Analogy , which may be considered as a particular form of reuse , can contribute to the creative aspect of design , dependent on the type of analogy , at the action - execution or at the action - management level , which have different functions . In conclusion : through the identification and analysis of two functions that analogical reasoning may have in design , this paper hopes to constitute a contribution to the knowledge on cognitive aspects of this type of problem solving , and thus , indirectly , to the development of educational means and support systems for ( future ) designers . i n r i a - 00633822 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1996 ) . Two functions of analogical reasoning in design : A cognitive - psychology approach . Design Studies . Special Issue " Design Cognition and Computation " , 17 , 417 - 434 . 20 R EFERENCE Study CS Study Mech . Study SW P RESENTED IN Visser ( 1991 ) 1 Visser ( 1988 37 , 1990 38 ) Visser ( 1987 39 , 198816 ) T ASK design design design DOMAIN Composite - Structure design : unfurling antenna for satellite Mechanical design : functional specification of an automatic machine tool Software design : control program for an automatic machine tool ROUTINE - NONROUTINE rather nonroutine rather routine rather routine S UBJECT 1 designer specialised in composite - structure design 1 mechanical design engineer 1 software engineer WORKING IN TEAM - WORKING ALONE foreman of a team foreman of a team working alone D ATA COLLECTION Observation and Simultaneous verbalisation Observation and Simultaneous verbalisation Observation and Simultaneous verbalisation O BSERVATION PERIOD 9 weeks ( at a rate of 3 - 4 days a week ) 3 weeks ( full time ) 4 weeks ( full time ) R ESULTS T YPE OF ANALOGY USE AE - analogies AM - analogies AM - analogies Table 1 . The three Visser design studies at a glance i n r i a - 00633822 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1996 ) . Two functions of analogical reasoning in design : A cognitive - psychology approach . Design Studies . Special Issue " Design Cognition and Computation " , 17 , 417 - 434 . 21 ( i ) call for action proposals ( ii ) proposal of one or more actions ( iii ) evaluation of the proposed action ( s ) , leading to selection of one action ( iv ) execution of the selected action ( v ) back to ( i ) Table 2 . Articulating design actions : two levels , action execution and action management i n r i a - 00633822 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1996 ) . Two functions of analogical reasoning in design : A cognitive - psychology approach . Design Studies . Special Issue " Design Cognition and Computation " , 17 , 417 - 434 . 22 AE - analogy use action - execution level AM - analogy use action - management level target the current problem to be solved , pbn the problem just solved , pbn - 1 + its solution just developed , soln - 1 source a problem solved in a more or less distant past , pbn - m + its solution , soln - m a problem which remains to be solved , pbn search for an analogue purpose of search solve a particular design problem , i . e . the current design problem ( pbn ) solve the metaproblem of making the problem - solving activity economical search mode 1 . " do I know a related problem pbn - m already solved ? " if yes : retrieve pbn - m , and adapt soln - m to apply to pbn ( resulting in soln ) if not : 2 . [ other solution elaboration mode ] ( stay at problem - solving level ) 1 . " do I know a related problem pbn still to be solved ? " if yes : retrieve pbn , and adapt soln - 1 to apply to pbn ( resulting in soln ) if not : 2 . " which action next ? " ( return to control level ) direction of search from a problem to be solved to a problem already solved : from pbn to pbn - m from a problem solved to a problem still to be solved : from pbn - 1 to pbn Table 3 . Comparison AE - analogy use and AM - analogy use i n r i a - 00633822 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1996 ) . Two functions of analogical reasoning in design : A cognitive - psychology approach . Design Studies . Special Issue " Design Cognition and Computation " , 17 , 417 - 434 . 23 action - management level ( AM ) action - executionlevel ( AE ) which action next ? pb pb sol anal . type AE type AM executed action ( problem solved , solution developed , decision taken ) key : anal . b a analogical relationship between a and b current focus n - 1 n control flow nextaction pbn - m soln - m pb n anal . n - 1 b a a activates b action to be executed ( problem to be solved , decision to be taken ) Figure 1 . Two types of analogy use i n r i a - 00633822 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1996 ) . Two functions of analogical reasoning in design : A cognitive - psychology approach . Design Studies . Special Issue " Design Cognition and Computation " , 17 , 417 - 434 . 24 References 1 Visser W , Evocation and elaboration of solutions : Different types of problem - solving actions . An empirical study on the design of an aerospace artifact , In T Kohonen and F Fogelman - Soulié ( eds ) , COGNITIVA 90 . At the crossroads of Artificial Intelligence Cognitive science and Neuroscience . Proceedings of the third COGNITIVA symposium , Elsevier , Amsterdam ( 1991 ) 2 Greiner R , Abstraction - based analogical inference , In D H Helman ( ed ) , Analogical reasoning : Perspectives of artificial intelligence cognitive science and philosophy , Reidel , Boston ( 1988 ) 3 Kedar - Cabelli S T , Analogy - from a unified perspective ( Technical Report ML - TR - 3 ) New Brunswick NJ : Department of Computer Science Laboratory for Computer Science Research ( 1985 ) also In D H Helman ( ed ) , Analogical reasoning : Perspectives of artificial intelligence cognitive science and philosophy , Reidel , Boston ( 1988 ) 4 Clement J , Observed methods for generating analogies in scientific problem solving , Cognitive Science Vol 12 ( 1988 ) pp 563 - 586 5 Ross B H , The access and use of relevant information : a specific case and general issues , In R Freedle ( ed ) , Artificial Intelligence and the future of testing , Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ ( 1990 ) 6 Gentner D , The mechanisms of analogical learning , In S Vosniadou and A Ortony ( eds ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge ( 1989 ) 7 Holyoak K J and Thagard P R , A computational model of analogical problem solving , In S Vosniadou and A Ortony ( eds ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge ( 1989 ) 8 Keane M Ledgeway T and Duff S , Constraints on analogical mapping : a comparison of three models , Cognitive Science Vol 18 ( 1994 ) pp 387 - 438 9 Smyth B and Keane M T , Some experiments on adaptation - guided retrieval , In M Veloso and A Aamodt ( eds ) , Case - based reasoning . Research and development . First International Conference ICCBR - 95 , Sesimbra Portugal October 1995 . Proceedings , Springer , Berlin ( 1995 ) 10 Hall R P , Computational approaches to analogical reasoning : a comparative analysis , Artificial Intelligence Vol 39 ( 1989 ) pp 39 - 120 11 Keane M , Analogical problem solving , Horwood , Chichester ( 1988 ) 12 Falkenhainer B Forbus K and Gentner D , The structure - mapping engine : algorithm and examples , Artificial Intelligence Vol 41 ( 1989 ) pp 1 - 63 13 Wolstencroft J , Restructuring reminding and repair : What ' s missing from models of analogy ? Proceedings of the Scandinavian Conference on AI , Tampere , Finland ( 13 - 15 June 1989 ) 14 Visser W , Reuse of knowledge : empirical studies , In M Veloso and A Aamodt ( eds ) , Case - based reasoning . Research and development . First International Conference , ICCBR - 95 , Sesimbra , Portugal , October 1995 . Proceedings , Springer , Berlin ( 1995a ) pp 335 - 346 15 Visser W , Designers’ activities examined at three levels : organisation strategies & problem - solving , Knowledge - Based Systems , Vol 5 No 1 ( 1992b ) pp 92 - 104 i n r i a - 00633822 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1996 ) . Two functions of analogical reasoning in design : A cognitive - psychology approach . Design Studies . Special Issue " Design Cognition and Computation " , 17 , 417 - 434 . 25 16 Brown D C and Chandrasekaran B , Design problem solving . Knowledge structures and control strategies , Pitman , London ( 1989 ) 17 Navinchandra D , Exploration and innovation in design . Towards a computational model , Springer , New York ( 1991 ) 18 Mayer R E , Human nonadversary problem solving , In K J Gilhooly ( ed ) , Human and machine problem solving , Plenum , New York ( 1989 ) 19 Ericsson K A and Simon H A , Protocol analysis . Verbal reports as data , MIT Press , Cambridge Mass ( 1984 ) 20 Ericsson K A and Simon H A , Verbal reports as data , Psychological Review Vol 87 ( 1980 ) pp 215 - 251 21 Visser W , Data collection methods in cognitive psychology : A presentation through the example of design activity studies , Actas 1991 Programa Lingua ( Colecção " Temas Educacionais " ) , Universidade Aberta Centro de Estudos de Ensino a Distância , Lisboa ( 1992a ) 22 Hayes - Roth B and Hayes - Roth F , A cognitive model of planning , Cognitive Science Vol 3 ( 1979 ) pp 275 - 310 23 Hayes - Roth B Hayes - Roth F Rosenschein S and Cammarata S , Modeling planning as an incremental opportunistic process , Proceedings of the 6th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence , Tokyo 20 August 1979 24 Visser W , Organisation of design activities : opportunistic with hierarchical episodes , Interacting with Computers , Vol 6 No 3 ( 1994 ) pp 239 - 274 ( Executive summary : pp 235 - 238 ) 25 Hunt E , Some comments on the study of complexity , In R J Sternberg and P A Frensch ( eds ) , Complex problem solving : principles and mechanisms , Erlbaum , Hillsdale NJ ( 1991 ) 26 Medin D L and Ross B H , The specific character of abstract thought : categorization problem solving and induction , In R J Sternberg ( ed ) , Advances in the psychology of human intelligence Vol 5 , Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ ( 1989 ) 27 Bardasz T and Zeid I , Cognitive model of memory for mechanical - design problems , Computer - Aided Design Vol 24 No 6 ( June 1992 ) pp 327 - 342 28 Gero J S , Design prototypes : a knowledge representation schema for design , AI Magazine Vol 11 No 4 ( 1991 ) pp 26 - 36 29 Oxman R , Prior knowledge in design : a dynamic knowledge - based model of design and creativity , Design Studies Vol 11 No 1 ( 1990 ) pp 17 - 28 30 Pu P , Introduction : Issues in case - based design systems , AI EDAM Vol 7 No 2 ( 1993 ) pp 79 - 85 31 Visser W ( ed ) , Proceedings of the Workshop of the Thirteenth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence " Reuse of designs : an interdisciplinary cognitive approach " , Chambéry ( France ) August 29 1993 , INRIA , Rocquencourt ( 1993 ) i n r i a - 00633822 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1996 ) . Two functions of analogical reasoning in design : A cognitive - psychology approach . Design Studies . Special Issue " Design Cognition and Computation " , 17 , 417 - 434 . 26 32 Visser W , Use of episodic knowledge and information in design problem solving , Design Studies Vol 16 No 2 ( 1995b ) pp 171 - 187 33 Visser , W . , & Trousse , B . ( 1993 ) . Reuse of designs : Desperately seeking an interdisciplinary cognitive approach . In W . Visser ( Ed . ) , Proceedings of the IJCAI Thirteenth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence Workshop " Reuse of designs : An interdisciplinary cognitive approach " , Chambéry , France , August 29 , 1993 ( English ed . , pp . 1 - 14 ) . Rocquencourt , France : Institut National de Recherche en Informatique et en Automatique . Also accessible at http : / / hal . inria . fr / inria - 00117275 / en / . 34 Kolodner J , Selecting the best case for a case - based reasoner , Proceedings of the Eleventh Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society , University of Michigan , Ann Arbor , Michigan August 16 - 19 1989 , LEA , Hillsdale , NJ ( 1989 ) 35 Johnson - Laird P N , Analogy and the exercise of creativity , In S Vosniadou and A Ortony ( eds ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge ( 1989 ) 36 Visser W , Use of analogical relationships between design problem - solution representations : Exploitation at the action - execution and action - management levels of the activity , Studia Psychologica , Vol 34 No 4 - 5 ( 1992c ) pp 351 - 357 37 Visser W , Giving up a hierarchical plan in a design activity ( Research Report N° 814 ) , INRIA , Rocquencourt ( 1988 ) 38 Visser W , More or less following a plan during design : opportunistic deviations in specification , International Journal of Man - Machine Studies Special issue : What programmers know , Vol 33 ( 1990 ) pp 247 - 278 39 Visser W , Strategies in programming programmable controllers : a field study on a professional programmer , In G Olson S Sheppard and E Soloway ( eds ) , Empirical Studies of Programmers : Second Workshop , Ablex , Norwood , NJ ( 1987 ) i n r i a - 00633822 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11