PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW2 , Article 356 , Publication date : October 2023 . Reopening , Repetition and Resetting : HCI and the Method of Hope MATT RATTO , University of Toronto , Canada STEVEN J . JACKSON , Cornell University , USA This paper attempts to ( re ) theorize the nature and role of hope in collaborative and interventionist CSCW and HCI projects . Building on work in anthropology , STS , CSCW and HCI , and extended reflection on the 3Dprintability project – a multinational collaboration dedicated to the 3D printing of prosthetics in sub - Saharan Africa and Southeast Asia – it advocates for a more pluralistic and action - oriented understanding of hope built around moments of collaborative reopening , repetition and resetting . It then argues for a more robust and open - ended HCI method of hope that can change the way interventionist projects are conceived , documented , evaluated , and communicated , both in the HCI literature and in more public - facing accounts . CCS Concepts : • Human - centered computing → Interaction design ; Interaction design theory , concepts , and paradigms • Social and professional topics → User characteristics ; People with disabilities . Additional Key Words and Phrases : theory , method , ethnography , ICTD , prosthetics , 3D printing , uncertainty , emergence , hope ACM Reference format : Matt Ratto , Steven J . Jackson , 2023 . Reopening , Repetition and Resetting : HCI and the Method of Hope . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact , 7 , CSCW2 , Article 356 ( October 2023 ) , 30 pages , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3610205 1 INTRODUCTION What is the nature of hope , and what role does it play in interventionist CSCW and HCI projects ? How can we recognize and recover hope as mode and motivator of action , within our work and the work of our partners and respondents in the world ? Can a different understanding of hope lead us to different insights , and different practices , in collaborative and interventionist HCI today ? In this paper we work to define a version of hope that speaks to the ordinary , mundane , and everyday collective practices by and through which the future comes to be . We distinguish this pragmatic work from forms of hope which rest on simplistic definitions of optimism , prediction , or _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ This work is supported under the 3D PrintAbility Project funded by the Inclusive Design Institute , 2011 Canada Foundation for Innovation ; 2014 Canada Grand Challenges Stars in Global Health ; 2016 Canada Grand Challenges Transition to Scale ; 2016 Google Impact Award ; 2016 MITACS Award . Author’s addresses : M . Ratto , Faculty of Information , 140 St . George St . , Toronto , Ont , M5S 3G6 , Canada ; S . Jackson 110H Gates Hall , Cornell University , Ithaca , NY 14850 , USA . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . 2573 - 0142 / 2023 / 10 – Article # 356… $ 15 . 00 © Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3610205 356 356 : 2 Matt Ratto & Steven J . Jackson PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW2 , Article 356 , Publication date : October 2023 . solution , locating the power of hope not in a reliance on external forces ( whether god , fate , or technology ) but rather in a continued and sustained ‘staying with the trouble’ [ 24 ] by fallible and uncertain actors . Our goal is a method of hope which recognizes the non - predictive and non - linear nature of socio - technical intervention , while allowing more open and wide - ranging practices of storytelling to emerge . We argue that rethinking hope in this way opens up new possibilities for the design and practice of interventionist HCI projects and may help to recover and name forms of agency and open - endedness that can be lost under both functional and critical approaches that fail to account for the material , situated , and constructive possibilities of interventionist engagements . We also argue that an understanding of hope built along these lines has insights to bring to collaborative work in general , including what sustains it , how it evolves , how it is reported and described , and how it acknowledges ( or fails to ) the fundamental uncertainties and precarities of interventionist work in situations where new ( ish ) technological practices meet old ( ish ) problems and worlds . Hope is often suspect in critical studies of socio - technical systems , in part due to strong assumptive links between hope and optimism , including the manipulative forms of promise and speculation usefully critiqued by a growing range of scholars ( see , inter alia , Berlant [ 7 ] and Halpern [ 23 ] ) . In North American contexts , investments in digital agriculture and rural broadband networks are underwritten by promises of a revitalized and reintegrated rural sector , connecting visions of a past agrarian society with modern technological innovation [ 2 ] . Programs of investment in libraries and educational computing , including whole new schools and curricula that move technology to the purported center of the enterprise , promise to rescue ‘failing’ schools and rise above the racial , class , and other divides that challenge contemporary institutions [ 21 , 55 ] . Similar patterns are replicated elsewhere , sometimes with a colonial twist , as high - profile projects like One Laptop Per Child are rolled out ( and subsequently rolled back ) in various parts of the world [ 3 , 11 ] . Artificial intelligence is promised as a site for all sorts of romantic visions including ideas of ‘free’ labor , unbiased decision - making , and expert guidance ‘at the turn of a tap’ – visions deeply or uncannily reminiscent of previous generations of promise around computational systems ( cf . Licklider [ 37 ] ) . Such projects have complex sociopolitical and infrastructural effects that bely and often derail their transformative claims and the hopes that attend them . But as work in anthropology and STS has shown , investments in projects and infrastructure are always about more than the functional and economic logics which purport to explain them . Instead , they are caught up in and powered by a series of open - ended “promises” – of individual and collective security and wellbeing , of connection and equality , and of more abstract goals and imaginaries like “modernity , development , progress , and freedom” that are “critical both to differentiated experiences of everyday lif e and to expectations of the future” [ 4 , 30 ] . The hope that is leveraged in these contexts ( and critiqued in the fields above ) can reduce the visibility of work on the ground , obscure the local and situated nature of intervention and change , and emphasize the role and agency of some actors over others . These obfuscating effects are often amplified in the retelling , with stories of interventionist work and computational change becoming magical , following sociologist of science Harry Collins’ [ 12 ] long standing dictum that ‘distance lends enchantment’ . Rather than the mess and churn of real - world projects , we are left with a world of neatened and simplified ‘solutions’ which can then be repackaged for export , often to dubious or similarly mixed effects . These same dynamics help to keep projects locked on track , to the detriment of learning and adjustment vis - a - vis the complex and emergent worlds they engage . Reopening , Repetition and Resetting : HCI and the Method of Hope 256 : 3 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW2 , Article 356 , Publication date : October 2023 . One response to this situation is an HCI of critique and refusal , an important and necessary strain in HCI work that each of the authors here has contributed to in the past . But this stance neglects the real if modest gains that interventionist projects can also bring about in the world , if rarely in fully transformational , unalloyed and non - complicit ways . More to the point , it misses out on the complexities of the work that hope does , especially as these operate in the frame and practices of situated interventionist projects . As a more ordinary theory and practice of hope would acknowledge , designs of the new involve unmakings of established order , and the building of new capacities often involves the alteration or dislocation of the old [ 51 ] . In this messy and compromised world , hope operates in multiple ways : not only to anchor and advance transcendent ‘solutions’ confidently proffered , but also as a mode of ‘staying with the trouble’ through the complexities , setbacks and partial complicities of interventionist life . These forms of hope are modest and widely distributed , the differential property of a wide cast of actors associated with and / or affected by collaborative interventionist work . They are also heterogeneous and only partially aligned , with the hopes of various actors only partly and provisionally gathered under the unifying imprint of the project . Finally , they will shift and evolve over the course of interventionist projects , constituting an essential engine by which collaborations learn and change – an insight challenged by the more unified , linear and plan - centered accounts we typically give . The paper that follows is an attempt to take hope seriously and understand its operations in the world of HCI projects . We argue that understanding hope is key to the ongoing work of CSCW and HCI projects , insofar as they articulate socially informed , situated , and impact - oriented goals . We seek to answer not the critical / evaluative question of ‘ is hope real or justified ? ’ but rather the pragmatist one of ‘ what work does hope do ? ’ , especially in the imagination and practice of interventionist CSCW and HCI work . Drawing on an extended collaboration involving the 3D printing and fitting of prosthetics in Sub - Saharan Africa and Southeast Asia , we argue that HCI and HCI projects have their own complex and radically underarticulated relationship to hope ; that this relationship is central to both the ethics and the efficacy of the field ; and that hope as a rich and vastly understudied topic is best grasped by more robust and self - aware forms of HCI work that take to heart the presence and nature of hope as a method . 2 HOPE AND HCI Like many other fields , attention to hope in HCI to date has been limited , patchy , and uneven . A small but important body of work has begun to highlight what we’ll call the ‘empirical fact’ of hope – its presence as a complex and potentially powerful force in shifting sociotechnical environments . In “My Child Will Be Respected” , Pal et al . [ 46 ] call attention to the diffuse yearnings and aspirations that frequently characterize participation in technology and education projects and finds that it is these , more than the limited instrumental gains and benefits from these projects ( often elusive and in short supply ) that drive and sustain child and familial involvement . Toyama [ 64 ] argues for shifting from needs to aspirations as the orienting center of ICTD work , arguing that the latter provide a more positive , growth - centered , and open - ended frame than the “needs - based” approaches more commonly deployed ( especially under the limits of the “accommodationist” and frequently neo - liberal ethos of design ) . In studies of Facebook adoption among young male users in New Delhi [ 32 ] and an after - school center for girls in Baruipar [ 33 ] , Kumar and colleagues develop an ‘aspirations - avenues - agency’ framework built around three central arguments : that “aspirations are embedded in larger sociotechnical assemblages that are not entirely intrinsic to the individual in question” ; that aspirations exhibit complex and intersecting temporalities stretching from the 356 : 4 Matt Ratto & Steven J . Jackson PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW2 , Article 356 , Publication date : October 2023 . short term and near - to - hand to remote and unknown futures ; and that aspirations are mutable , changing and evolving over time . In their study of social conditions and ICT use among Rohingya refugees in camps along the Bangladesh - Myanmar border , Hussain and colleagues [ 26 ] call out the practices of solidarity , leadership and negotiation that manage and sustain hope under the conditions of loss , dislocation , and insecurity commonly found in the camps . A second line of HCI inquiry has sought to ( re ) engage the problem of hope in proposals for critical design and the elicitation of alternative futures . For Lindtner et . al [ 38 ] , while this constitutes a necessary response to the “ideological colonialism” expressed in naïve forms of ‘makerism’ and technosolutionism , “critical HCI scholarship on making has not replaced the technoutopian vision with an equally aspirational vision” ( ibid . pg . 1391 ) . Rosner’s [ 54 ] work on ‘critical fabulations’ has sought to re - engage largely forgotten actors and moments in computing history – for example , the craftwork of the ‘Little Old Ladies’ at NASA charged with weaving the core memory of the Apollo missions - in support of more heterogeneous futures that go beyond narrow and single track stories of technological agency and change . Drawing on A gre’s concept of ‘critical technical practice” , other scholars have sought to explore socio - material interventions as a site of reflexive learning and care , emphasizing design’s capacity to encourage embodied , concrete , and complicit engagements with what are often overly abstracted social concerns [ 48 , 49 , 58 ] . A more general set of experiments in critical and speculative design [ 16 , 17 , 40 , 41 ] have emphasized the open - ended quality of design engagements , and their capacity to suggest or imagine infrastructural and political futures that run against the grain of received sociotechnical form and practice . Beyond the immediacies of field sites and critique , hope also connects , in as - yet poorly articulated ways , to a wider set of HCI concerns around emergence , pluralism and uncertainty . The former has been called out in Gaver’s [ 20 ] recent insistence on the central role of emergence in design : the multiple fumblings , learnings , accumul ations , accountabilities , and ‘becoming with’s’ that characterize the ( actual ) course of practice - based design research . As this fact is often in tension with more linear and intentional notions of research celebrated and / or enforced within HCI , it produces an odd schism between how practice - based design research is accomplished versus described , producing a field that is very often emergent in practice , but linear in description . A similar critique of linearity and singular intention can be found in Wakkary [ 65 ] , who emphasizes design as a pluralistic and “ nomadic ” practice , with roots and accountabilities , sometimes conflictual ones , in multiple disciplinary fields . This practice also expresses and is pulled by design’s multiple relations with the “ more than human ” worlds around it ; a form of “ designing with ” that builds on this recognition would be at once expansive , open - ended and modest , expressing a speculative boldness and a practical humility grounded in the richness and surprise of our relations in and with the world . These positions connect in turn to recent HCI discussions around the problem and characterization of uncertainty , including Soden et . al . ’s [ 60 ] recent argumen t for a more generative model in which open - ended and doubt - embracing engagements with various “modes of uncertainty , ” as opposed to linear and control - centered efforts at “scoping , pinning down , measuring and predicting” ( p 144 ) function as a resource for the making of artifacts , systems , and sociotechnical worlds more generally . The same sensibility has been central to the collaborative and sometimes participatory ideals that define CSCW as an enterprise . From its earliest history , while working in the medium of tools , CSCW has pursued higher ideals of better teams and groups [ 22 , 39 ] , better organizations and Reopening , Repetition and Resetting : HCI and the Method of Hope 256 : 5 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW2 , Article 356 , Publication date : October 2023 . infrastructures [ 45 , 62 , 63 ] , and at the margin , better social orders [ 31 , 56 , 57 ] . Where these efforts are themselves collaborative and participatory in nature – oriented not only to fostering collaboration but also practicing this as a core value and method – they cross over into a space defined by participatory design , with its own visions and ideals of transformation , whether ( Scandinavian ) workplace democracy or more empowered and activated users , citizens , and communities [ 15 , 18 , 19 , 25 , 44 ] . This grounding and ambition , we would argue , provides much of the moral engine of the field and an important reservoir of care and commitment that moves CSCW , at its best , beyond a narrower and more purely functional orientation . And if important parts of the field address the limits of these efforts – often driven by the complexity of social and organizational life vis - à - vis the ‘brittleness’ of technical systems [ 1 ] – this is still for the most part undertaken on the basis of a foundational agenda of impact and change , even where operating as modest and stepwise improvement . Hope , we believe , is central to all these projects . The move from needs to aspirations in ICTD and related fields recognizes hope as a powerful ground and engine , adding depth and complexity to the narrower languages of needs , function , and affordances . Hope is also central to the projects of critical and speculative design and shares a deep kinship with the concepts of emergence and uncertainty above . And hope has been central to CSCW’s long - term commitment to building better teams , better groups , better infrastructures , and better and more inclusive social ( and socionatural ? ) orders . Taken collectively , this work suggests the presence and generativity of hope in CSCW and HCI , and its central if understated role as a force or actor behind many projects of transformation through technology , whether at the level of individual design or wider projects of social and infrastructural change . Drawing on work in anthropology , philosophy and HCI , this paper recenters the concept of hope to recognize its force and complexity in collaborative projects of sociotechnical transformation ( including interventionist CSCW and HCI work ) , but in ways consistent with the principles of emergence , uncertainty and pluralism sketched above . Under this approach , hope is heterogeneous in form , constituting multiple and divergent lines running into , through and beyond projects , rather than a fixed and singular line ( although some degree of convergence , however partial and temporary , is a likely outcome of the project form ) . Hope may also open up new ways of thinking and doing HCI projects , including in ways that open analysts and participants to the radical contingency of projects and design more generally . And hope may anchor a practical humility that recognizes collaboration , learning and adjustment , rather than bold and externally enforced ‘solutions’ , as the heart of interventionist practice . 3 A METHOD OF HOPE The theorization of hope offered here seeks to extend in the HCI project world a separate elaboration of ‘ordinary hope’ offered by one of the authors in [ 28 ] . Engaging work in philosophy , theology , environmental crisis and the social sciences , that work advances a number of propositions . Against notions of hope as a kind of rational and calculative bet on the future , it argues that “hope is not predictive ( and therefore cannot be falsified or disproved . ” Against salvationist or solutionist accounts of sociotechnical change , it argues for a more even - handed approach in which “hope may be expressed in change and transformation , but also more modest forms of patience and enduring . ” Against interpretations of hope as a kind of attitude or feeling , it emphasizes the essential linkage 356 : 6 Matt Ratto & Steven J . Jackson PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW2 , Article 356 , Publication date : October 2023 . between hope and action , arguing that “the measure of hope is not accuracy but efficacy : its ability to hold more meaningful forms of action in the world . ” The paper also observes the frequently modest and mundane character of hope , arguing that “while often called to the fore in moments of crisis and transition , hope is above all a property of ordinary work . ” Finally , it argues for the material and collaborative nature of hope : namely , that “hope is a collective accomplishment – something we do together in the world , in concert with others and with things” [ 28 ] . The paper also advances a number of key relationships : between hope and what philosopher Nelson Goodman has called ‘worldmaking’ ; between hope and the experience of pain , loss and struggle ( individual and collective , present and historical ) ; and between hope and our basic methods of research and knowledge - making themselves . It emphasizes what Ernst Bloch [ 8 ] insisted on as the ‘not yet - ness’ of hope : its world disclosing and world altering properties ; its odd and pluralistic relationship to time ( both past and future ) ; and its associated ability , per Frederic Jameson , to “ provincialize ” the present , “making current reality seem narrow , suspect and incomplete , rather than the iron cage limiting and dominating our possibilities it otherwise so often seems to be . ” Finally , it argues for hope’s natural relation to alterity : its commitment to “the continued proliferation of the strange and new , even under the compromised conditions of the present” [ 28 ] . Taken together , these points emphasize the action dispensation of hope , built around a recognition that hope grows and is maintained through ongoing interactions with the world ( and that it is the character of this hope - action relation , rather than predictive accuracy , that should most count in our assessments ) . This is one reason why externally offered ‘solutions’ , including ones associated with interventionist HCI work , can be simultaneously ‘good’ ( in the sense of addressing correctly identified needs an d problems ) and ‘bad’ ( in the sense of undermining or relocating long - term sense of efficacy and action ) . This perspective also recognizes the diversity or pluralism of hope , built around the multiple claims and orientations to the future running in and through our projects , however limited our accounts of these may be . The pluralism and action dispensation of hope hold special importance for CSCW and HCI projects precisely because of the radical dislocations and reconfigurations of agency so often involved in collaborative interventionist work . But what does it mean to speak of hope as a method ? This formulation depends on a distinct yet expansive notion of method itself – and one that must be distinguished from some of the ways that method is more commonly practiced and talked about in HCI . The first is a functional and mechanistic understanding , in which method is reduced to a set of stable and clearly defined operations that may be borrowed , applied , and mechanically described and reproduced ( including in principle by other researchers ) . This may be associated with a linear representation of the research process itself , wi th data collection followed by analysis followed by ‘writing it up’ . This runs counter to common experiences of ethnographic and interventionist projects however , where these stages often recur throughout the work , with loops back and forth that collectively comprise the evolving meaning and insight of the work . To address this , researchers have sometimes marked a distinction between method and methodology , in which the former means something small , specific , and mechanical or ‘technical’ in nature , and the latter something more reflective , holistic , or elevated – the Higher , Bigger , Deeper to method’s more machi ne - like limits and precision . But this two - level solution is itself problematic : both because in giving honor to the abstracted and esoteric while denigrating the ordinary and mundane , it reinforces unfortunate modes of hierarchy and privilege in knowledge production ( methodology for the PI , method for the grunts ! ) ; and Reopening , Repetition and Resetting : HCI and the Method of Hope 256 : 7 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW2 , Article 356 , Publication date : October 2023 . because it doesn’t match common experiences of research in the world ( including our own ! ) , where the engine of insight and discovery may appear chaotically and unpredictably across worlds falsely separated out under the method / methodology distinction . Finally , we note the limits of much methods talk , especially in the fraught and defensive contexts in which it often appears : what French sociologists Boltanski and Thevenot [ 9 ] have called “ contexts of justification . ” The frequently conflictual nature of such environments can give rise to a kind of defensive or offensive performativity , in which accounts of method get deployed as shield or cudgel : a way to fend off or prosecute attacks in ways that obscure rather than opening up worlds of research to more honest and generative , if also riskier and less certain , encounters . The result of all this is to leave published accounts of method – think the methods sections of many HCI papers , including our own – seeming at once thin , stepwise and overconfident , with little of the instructive churn and missteps , uncertainty and emergence , that we know actually went into the doing of the work . The more specific connection between hope and method offered in this paper is inspired by anthropologist Hirokazu Miyazaki . Miyazaki’s The Method of Hope [ 43 ] investigates the relationship between anthropological knowledge and hope , set against the backdrop of Fijian knowledge practices amidst the long - delayed quest for recognition of an ancestral homeland for the Suvavou people . Viewed in its disciplinary context , Miyazaki’s text was a response to what came to be called the crisis of representation in anthropology , a debate first and foremost around modes of anthropological expression : how ethnographic stories could best be told , including in alternative and experimental ways . In the process it posed questions that went to the core of anthropological work itself , including around who the proper subjects and authorities of culture could be ; how best to engage ‘informants’ and other collaborators in research ; what kinds of sites and practices co uld be made amenable to anthropological investigation ; and the uncertain and yearning – as opposed to secure and objective – nature of anthropological knowledge itself [ 13 ] . This last feature for Miyazaki opened a parallel to the Suvavou people themselves , and the various kinds of gift - giving , ritualistic , business , and documentary practices by which hope for a better future was sustained – a phenomenon in which documented ‘success’ in the form of legal victories and recognition , while remaining as a nominally orienting center of the enterprise , played very little role . This “prospective” orientation to Fijian knowledge practices ( which Miyazaki connects to the prospective orientation or ‘not yet - ness’ described by philosophers like Ernst Bloch , Walter Benjamin and Richard Rorty ) replaced the certainties sought by metaphysics and epistemology with a more patient and less certain orientation to desired outcomes , however distant and unlikely , that could anchor and sustain ongoing action under the sign and practice of hope . Within these processes , Miyazaki calls out three central moments . In moments of reopening , we see the perpetual return to an earlier moment of closure in which effective control of ancestral land passed from the Suvavou people to the Fijian state ( and often to subsequent domination and exploitation by domestic and foreign capital ) . This dispossession , as Miyazaki puts it , “ sets knowledge in motion , ” setting off a hundred + year history of documentary practice in which records , from migration narratives to ethnological studies , are carefully gathered , transmitted , and periodically submitted to government in an effort to establish the origin and consistency of Suvavou tenure on the land ) . In moments of repetition , we see the perpetual reiteration of claims to an alternative future , as played out through stories , rituals , religious observance , business transactions , and other forms of social encounter . With each retelling , these actions draw forward while updating the record of the past , constituting a form of “repeating without overlapping” in Miyazaki’s 356 : 8 Matt Ratto & Steven J . Jackson PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW2 , Article 356 , Publication date : October 2023 . terminology . They also continue and renew the chain of past such performances , keeping hope alive through “the performative inheritance of hope in the past . ” [ 43 , p 128 ] . In moments of resetting , present actions , including speech actions , re - index the past , assigning new forms of meaning and value that invoke a shared history ( for example , a history of widespread business failure ) while suggesting factors ( for example , the failure to invoke God’s blessing or assistance ) that might distinguish present undertakings from similar but negative experiences in the past . In this way , continuities with the past are both established and , in their strictest or most deterministic form at least , denied – a kind of “temporal incongruity” that is for Miyazaki “instrumental in the production of hope” [ 43 , p 108 ] . As indicated in the accounts of reopening , repetition , and resetting above , the prospective orientation of hope marks an open - ended and sometimes “incongruous” relationship to time itself . As conventionally understood , the multiplicity of available futures grounds both ongoing work and action in the present , and an irrevocable potency for change or difference that can never be fully extinguished , no matter how dark or constraining the circumstances . But this potency also extends to the past , which the present works and reworks no less radically – from a world of ‘dead’ material to a recuperable and reconfigurable world full of density , multiplicity and liveliness . That these acts of selection and invention acquire certain patterns and consistencies is itself an outcome of work , struggle and power . But these closures , no matter how seemingly complete and inevitable , remain always provisional and subject to revision . For every act of closure there remains an inevitable hope and risk of reopening ; for every innovation , a past and future chain of repetition ; for every setting , a future and creative moment of resetting . To make hope a method , for Miyazaki and for us , is to bring this recognition into the work and operations of scholarly knowledge itself : for him , anthropology ; for us , HCI . This involves going beyond studying hope as a topic or phenomenon in the world , to bringing this uncertainty and open - endedness into our own practices of design , intervention and knowledge making . It also embeds a principle of pluralism at the heart of interventionist projects themselves , and offers reopening , repetition and resetting as potential resources for reworking our own practice and storytelling around HCI work , perhaps especially in the context of extended and complex real - world interventions . The discussions that follow will center on the 3Dprintability project , a multi - year engagement undertaken by members of the Critical Making Lab at the Faculty of Information , University of Toronto , which uses 3D scanning and printing as a means of furthering access to prosthetic and orthotic devices in poor and marginalized communities in Uganda , Tanzania , and Cambodia . Working closely with local institutions and prosthetists , and with wider networks of funding and institutional support from Canada and the US , this project has existed in multiple forms since 2014 : first as an exploratory research endeavor , and later as a structured university research project , a production - grade operation , and a non - profit organization . In the pages that follow , we give an account of this work organized around the moments of reopening , resetting , and repetition . ( Alternative and more traditionally linear accounts of the project can be found at [ 50 , 51 , 52 , 53 ] ) . Our goal is to indicate what a method of hope might look like in one version of HCI practice ; how such an approach might disrupt the linear accounting and recounting that characterizes many HCI project descriptions ; and how a method of hope might multiply and pluralize our sense and appreciation of the actors and futures by and to which project - based work in HCI proceeds and Reopening , Repetition and Resetting : HCI and the Method of Hope 256 : 9 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW2 , Article 356 , Publication date : October 2023 . evolves . As interventionist work in the field continues to change and evolve , we hope that such insights can contribute to the development of more plausible , responsible , sustainable , and ultimately hopeful practices of HCI work . 4 PRINTING PROSTHETICS “I see a moving . I see a successful moving of 3D . Like every time I bring in a patient for 3D , I always see there’s success . There’s no stagnancy or there’s no people opposing but there’s always one step forward or still forward to success of 3D . ” ( prosthetist , exit interview ; June 13 , 2017 , CoRSU hospital , Uganda ) Since 2014 , one of the authors of this paper has been part of a project called ‘3Dprintability’ , developing 3D design and printing tools for use in rehabilitation clinics in low to middle income countries in Sub - Saharan Africa and Southeast Asia . Supported initially by a charitable organization and later through award - based funders including Grand Challenges Canada , Autodesk Foundation , and a Google Impact award , the team has created and deployed multiple versions of a software and hardware toolchain to produce pediatric prosthetic and orthotic devices . Over the last six years , the project has supported the fitting of approximately 500 children from three different countries with 3D printed prosthetics and orthotics . Additionally , more than 20 prosthetists and prosthetic technicians have been trained in 3D scanning , design , and printing technologies and new equipment has been installed in four clinical sites . Clinics that have partnered in this work include Comprehensive Rehabilitation Services for People with Disability in Uganda ( CorSU ) hospital , Comprehensive Community Based Rehabilitation Tanzania ( CCBRT ) and Tanzania Training Centre for Orthopaedic Technologists ( TATCOT ) , and the Cambodian School of Prosthetics and Orthotics ( CSPO ) . Fig . 1 . images of patients from Uganda and Tanzania , 2018 To support the use and development of the system , the Canadian - based team has traveled multiple times to rehabilitation clinic partners at CorSU Hospital near Entebbe , Uganda , CCBRT in Moshui , Tanzania , TATCOT in Dar E Salam , Tanzania , and CSPO in Phnom Penh , Cambodia . During each of these approximately nine - day trips , the system was installed or upgraded , prosthetists were trained , and the system trialed with 1 - 3 patients . Ethnographic interviews were also carried out and used for academic research as well as user experience insights . Equally importantly , technologies and potential interfaces were shown , discussed , and debated and while prosthetists and other stakeholders went about their day - to - day work , problems and issues were exposed , possible 356 : 10 Matt Ratto & Steven J . Jackson PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW2 , Article 356 , Publication date : October 2023 . workarounds were trialed , and trade - offs were made . Multiple sources of funding were secured , including two Grand Challenges Stars in Global Health grants , multiple grants from Autodesk Inc . , an industry partner on the project , and a Google Impact award . Three formal clinical trials were carried out during the project , an initial trial at CorSU in Uganda , followed by a multi - site trial that included each of the partner sites described above . A third and smaller trial was also conducted in Canada at St . John ’s Rehabilitation Clinic / Sunnybrook Hospital in Toronto . A more detailed description and accounting of this work can be found in [ 50 , 51 , 52 , 53 ] . Fig . 2 . prosthetists at work , Uganda and Tanzania , 2016 , 2018 . The quote that started this section is from one of the prosthetists at CorSU . Taken from an exit interview carried out by Canada - based members of the team in 2017 , it emphasizes the sense of 3D technologies as representing the future of prosthetics and a potential solution to challenges affecting prosthetic practices in low - and middle - income countries : notably issues with a lack of access to affordable devices . But from the start , the project has also faced tensions and challenges , some technical and addressable through engineering approaches , others organizational and historical in nature , requiring different and more socially informed responses . Machines broke and software glitched . Appointments were missed , networks went down , and shipments were held up in customs . Sockets rubbed and caused pain , and carefully manufactured materials were undone by their environments . Team members came and went , including project champions like CEOs of hospitals . Project leaders worried about repeating negative aspects long associated with practices of technology intervention in the Global South , including the reification of unequal power relations , the reduction or devaluing of local capacities , and the challenge of long - term sustainability and impact , including beyond periods of initial funding . The accounts that follow build from a reanalysis of the extensive archives of the 3dprintability project , covering documents generated during the period from 2013 to 2019 . This contains 1326 Reopening , Repetition and Resetting : HCI and the Method of Hope 256 : 11 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW2 , Article 356 , Publication date : October 2023 . separate files , including numerous grant applications , records of clinical trials , and IRB submissions and approvals ; instructional and training texts ; legal documents , contracts and collaboration agreements ; working documents including overviews of testing jigs and processes and material analyses ; technical schematics and assembly manuals ; copies of newspaper and magazine articles written about the project ; memos , notes , and agendas from project meetings ; multiple versions of software developed by the team ; presentations and reports to stakeholders and research conferences ; academic publications and preprints ; and over 500 photos and videos taken over more than six years of project operation . We also reviewed interview transcripts and survey documents from prosthetic users , prosthetists involved with the project , and over 2000 3D files , including patient residual limb scans , models of sockets , testing files , and the like . The archive also includes many material traces of the project , including customized 3D printers , random 3D printer parts , plaster casts of residual limbs , traditionally produced prosthetic and orthotic devices provided by clinical sites , and many , many 3D test prints of prosthetic sockets and orthotics . One of the authors was centrally involved in gathering and generating these materials at every stage of the project ( along with a wider set of partners , collaborators , and clinical practitioners ) ; the other arrived at this material fresh , after the conclusion of the period noted above and with no hand in initial document generation or execution of the project itself . Taken collectively , the materials assembled above ( like any thick or comprehensive record of practice ) constitute a diverse and heterogeneous assemblage – enough no doubt to populate a dozen or more only partially overlapping project accounts . Read sequentially and by standpoint , they also suggest another possibility : that the project itself has been many projects at different times and to different people and has been marked and shaped by significant moments of departure , transition , and reimagining . Human actors ( individuals and organizations ) have come and gone , places and material environments have changed in ways consequential to basic operations , and technical artifacts – both hardware and software – have changed and evolved , including in ways not readily anticipated from moment to moment or from the outset . The account that follows tries to retain some measure of this range and diversity . Rather than use the archive to construct a linear and retrospective narrative in which the project moves smoothly ( and in hindsight inevitably ) from a defined set of origins to the present moment , we adopt instead a more fractal and discontinuous strategy , selecting a more pluralistic set of moments where multiplicities are surfaced and alternately suppressed or preserved , establishing new lines for the project ( s ) moving forward : or alternatively , the path ( s ) not taken . The discussion that follows foregrounds three such moments : moments of reopening , where closed definitions , decided questions and completed projects were unpacked , taken apart and rethought ; moments of repetition , where routines , common practices and expectations were established , carried forward , or subtly adjusted ; and moments of resetting , in which early errors and mis - steps were corrected , translations to new contexts accomplished , and different design and organizational choices taken . While presented separately below , in practice these processes could ( and often did ) occur in combination , accounting for much of the temporal and practical complexity of the project . Nor was there any clear ordering in importance , scale , or time between them : no one of these was automatically first , larger , or more important . Finally , these were often recurrent events , giving the project a messy , emergent and recursive or ‘loopy’ quality . Throughout , the project remained always “in formation , ” [ 44 ] taken up , adjusted , and enacted anew in a way that now resists linear recounting and is marked 356 : 12 Matt Ratto & Steven J . Jackson PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW2 , Article 356 , Publication date : October 2023 . by the frictions of the multiple actors – human , material , and environmental – that participated in the work . 4 . 1 Reopening We begin with reopening : the process by which settled arrangements , material forms and basic understandings previously taken to be ‘closed’ were taken up and reconfigured . At its inception , 3Dprintability attempted to address a clear and defined humanitarian need : the shortage of prosthetics for children and inability to meet growing patient needs in Uganda and other LMIC contexts , and the high individual , community , and social costs associated with disabled children ( WHO report , 2003 . ) Initial work focused on how new digital technologies would make prosthetics more available . This began by highlighting the problem of supply as a particularly pernicious problem . figure 3 : slides from 2014 CBM board presentation from research team In the above slide from an initial 3Dprintability presentation , Justine , a bi - lateral amputee treated at CorSU hospital , represents statistics produced by the World Health Organization ( WHO ) regarding the lack of access to prosthetics . In the video from wh ich this image was taken , Justine’s need and her subsequent treatment and resulting life transformations highlight the importance of providing prosthetics to children in Uganda , but also the difficulty in doing so . This video , titled ‘Justine’s Story of Ho pe’ was created by CorSU hospital ( https : / / www . youtube . com / watch ? v = - OqXRv6CB4g ) as part of their fundraising efforts . Second , in order for 3Dprintability to be seen as a potential solution to the WHO issue , the space of the problem was changed and reopened . Financial resources alone would not be able to fully solve the lack of access . The prosthetic experts consulted by the project team included local prosthetists , the WHO , and representatives of the International Society for Prosthetics and Orthotics ( ISPO ) , all of whom estimated that it would take 50 years to train enough prosthetists to handle the current need , by which time the need would have increased . This was widely understood by other entities like the International Committee of the Red Cross ( ICRC ) , who remained focused on innovating the manual polypropylene prosthetic technologies they had originally developed in the 1980s and 90s , but who were also supportive of exploring adjunct digital processes . The proposed project therefore reopened the problem space by reinscribing it not just as an issue of resources , but also one of training and labor . The third and final step was to describe a new digital system that resolved the lack of trained labor able to carry out the manual process . Using digital scanning , modeling , and 3D printing , the argument ran , prosthetists could produce devices much more rapidly , turning a process which took Reopening , Repetition and Resetting : HCI and the Method of Hope 256 : 13 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW2 , Article 356 , Publication date : October 2023 . one week into one in which a device could be provided to the user within a day or two . This itself involved a kind of looping back , since proving this point , prior to evidence of the fact , involved calling out the manual and ‘old fashioned’ nature of the c urrent practice . figure 4 : Images of manual prosthetic production process , CorSU hospital , 2014 In presentations on the planned work , images of the traditional process ( figure 4 ) were compared to images associated with the new digital toolchain ( figure 5 ) , in which computers , digital images , and technologies replaced the plaster workrooms , drying models , and hand tools of the manual process . Figure 5 . slides from board presentation , 2014 These presentations noted the value of the manual process but also its limitations . The manual process took almost a week to complete , including time for casting , drying the plaster negative and positive models , rectification , and device fabrication . Replacing this with digital capture , design , and fabrication could dramatically speed this up . This acceleration of service was understood as resolving the lack of access to prosthetics by focusing on what was understood as the main issue : the lack of trained experts who could build prosthetics using current technologies and the difficulty in training enough additional experts to meet existing and future needs . This reopening of prosthetic practice entailed other reopenings . Reopening the production systems of prosthetics through a new digital workflow was seen as an attractive answer both because it addressed the problem , but also because it opened up valuable new associations – and challenges – for the institutions involved . 356 : 14 Matt Ratto & Steven J . Jackson PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW2 , Article 356 , Publication date : October 2023 . figure 6 . Ugandan and Canadian newspaper articles on the project , Weekly Observer , Kampala , Uganda , CBC News , Toronto , Canada Figure 6 shows two out of the hundreds of media reports generated by the project . Both have a similar structure : highlighting the novelty of the work and describing how it will serve unmet needs , while also emphasizing the innovative nature of the organizations performing the work . In some of the articles , including the one on the left , the Ugandan home of the project work is emphasized , and the capacity and care of the Ugandan hospital is described . But others ( such as the one on the right ) emphasize the e xternal nature of the team generating the results . Here , the ‘Canadian’ nature of the development team is highlighted despite the inclusion of a Uganda prosthetist prominently displayed scanning the Ugandan patient . While such media framings were often outside the control of project team members ( Canadian or Ugandan ) , these moments emphasize connections between reopening and the renegotiation of values . In reconsidering past decisions regarding prosthetic production and by developing digital alternatives , new relations between material processes and time were generated . But these changes also resulted in other reopenings – including importantly a potential challenge ( and response ) to the agency , self - determination , and capacity of the clinicians and hospital in Uganda . Reopening thus involves the negotiation of stakeholder hopes . The dominant hope articulated in the early materials of the project included the view that new technologies would have a positive impact on a pernicious and difficult problem , lack of access to prosthetic and orthotic devices . These initial materials included attempts to transfer this hope to others , particularly western funders who , if they accepted and agreed with the power of the proposed intervention , would support the next steps . This looks so far like a familiar story ; just as in the story of one laptop per child , a technical intervention was being ‘flown in’ to solve a complex and difficult social problem . And , ultimately , as the news articles reproduced above show , this hope was also accepted by many institutions including , problematically , media outlets who located hope in the presence and agency of the Canadian team , undermining the centrality of the clinical team in Uganda . But while such a thin hope in the power of the technological was certainly operating , the team on the ground was not so easily fooled . As interviews revealed , team members were well aware that making these interventions actually work required multiple forms of expertise , including the hard - won expertise of the Ugandan prosthetists , including embodied and tacit forms of knowledge not addressed or actually undermined in the typical technological intervention stories . For example , prosthetists trained with both the traditional and the 3D design and printing methods , emphasized that the conversion of the models of the patient’s stump captured through either plaster casting or 3D scanning required expert knowledge of how prosthetic devices work and human anatomy more generally . 3D printing did not reduce the complexity of this activity , as one of the prosthetists noted , it actually increased it . Asked to describe the differences between the processes , they noted : The difference there , in the traditional way , we’re using the POP ( plaster process ) . We’re using the POP , and the advantage there is that we are rectifying the model which has already been in the correct position . But in the 3D , we’re doing rectification t o the model which is not taken in the correct position . So we have to do more work to bring it to the correct position . ( prosthetist exit interview , CCBRT , Tanzania , July 27 , 2017 Reopening , Repetition and Resetting : HCI and the Method of Hope 256 : 15 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW2 , Article 356 , Publication date : October 2023 . Here , the prosthetist emphasizes how when using the plaster - based process , some of the manipulation of the stump or leg needed to create a good model could be done manually , by holding the stump or leg in the right position during casting . This was not possible with the scanning process which then required more work on the part of the prosthetist to make sure the final result worked well . These participants did not need to be told about the limits of the ‘technology as savior’ model . The Ugandan prosthetists clearly recognized the rhetorical power of such typical stories , and often actively and strategically supported their maintenance . But these were not their hopes . Embedded in the action , they understood their own importance and operated with a different set of goals and interests , including ones described in more detail below . 4 . 2 Repetition While news media , grants , and funder reports emphasized novelty and innovation , engagements with the prosthetists and front - line caregivers highlighted instead continuities with existing practices and forms of expertise . Such conservations of practice and knowledge are described here as repetition , where past practices and forms of life are brought back , providing important continuities and often mundane ways of preserving and maintaining action and value ; and novel patterns become grooved , standardized , and habituated through routinized repetition . Exit interviews with prosthetists , carried out at the end of each clinical trial , emphasize this conservation of past practices . When asked to describe whether 3D printing had changed their practice , one prosthetist noted : No , not really , it hasn’t changed the way my discipline or my profession works . In fact , it’s just added another way . It has actually given me another way of making artificial limbs and then splints differently from how I’ve been using previously . ( prosthe tist , exit interview , CorSU , Uganda . June 13 , 2017 ) Here we can see an alternative to the story of change and innovation . Rather than highlight differences , the interviewed prosthetists emphasized an ongoing and sustained connection to their previous ways of working . Such connections were supported by the development process which included co - design processes involving virtual and in - person site visits where the practitioners showed the development team the complexity and material nature of their work . Many of the images and videos from the project archive show this work , the expert manual processes necessary to good results , and the tools and systems currently in use . Equally , the ‘craft’ like nature of prosthetic work was emphasized , as well as the scientific and expert bio - mechanical and social knowledge required . 356 : 16 Matt Ratto & Steven J . Jackson PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW2 , Article 356 , Publication date : October 2023 . Figure 7 : photos from CorSU Uganda , 2015 In the above images , taken at CorSU hospital in 2015 , prosthetists and technicians gather around a workbench laden with tools . In the first one , a prosthetist holds up a 3D printed socket in which various measurement lines have been marked . They are evaluating this socket in much the same way they would a manually produced device , comparing it to their understanding of the patient’s morphology and considering manual adjustments to make it fit better . In the second image , one of the prosthetists is adjusting the socket using a table grinder , in the same way they would a manually produced socket . The workbench in front of him is littered with hand tools , 3D printed and manually produced sockets , highlighting the continuity of approach . figure 8 ; Images from CCBRT Tanzania , 2016 Similarly , in the images from a site in Tanzania , a prosthetist measures the residual limb of a patient prior to scanning and printing . These measurements are then later used to provide proper fitting to the patient . In the second image , prosthetists examine the alignment of a 3dprinted socket to the pylon , the part that connects the socket to the terminating foot of a prosthetic device . They use an alignment ‘jig’ in the same ways as they would with a traditionally produced device . Such images contradicted other representations of P & O currently in the media , such as those associated with the then perceived as ‘new’ use of 3dprinters . Even with the incorporation of 3Dprinting , much of the work remains similar - and manual - involving the use of grinding tools , ovens , hand tools , and the expert material labor the prosthetists and technicians were already familiar with . Equally , and importantly , making prosthetics and orthotics with or without 3D printers requires clinical expertise as well as expert manual work . In initial interviews , prosthetists described their sense of being undervalued as frontline health care workers . Because their work Reopening , Repetition and Resetting : HCI and the Method of Hope 256 : 17 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW2 , Article 356 , Publication date : October 2023 . involved extensive manual labor , they felt that hospital leadership and other care workers considered them to be simple ‘technicians’ , carrying out repetitive and non - expert practices . One prosthetist noted that his neighbors thought he was a painter since he often came home covered in the plaster generated through the manual sanding and customization of the plaster models used to generate prosthetic sockets . Their hopes , therefore , were not invested in the power of technology to solve problems on its own , but instead that the technological systems being developed would make more visible their existing knowledge , capacity , and expertise . Following initial training , the same prosthetist who complained about going home covered in plaster , noted that when the CEO of the hospital came by the rehabilitation facility , he would see the workers sitting and operating laptops rather than drill presses and power sanders . His hope was that this change would encourage the sense that prosthetists were knowledgeable experts and not just manual laborers . While the story often emphasized by outside agencies including funders and the media was one of innovation , change , and new technologies , the internal story was one of connection to the past , communication about the long history of digital technologies and prosthetic innovation , and the conservation of current forms of worker expertise . One way the development team supported this was by highlighting the origins of digital fabrication and prosthetics in work carried out by prosthetists themselves . Digging into the history of digital prosthetics revealed systems and interfaces which showed many similarities to the technologies the team was developing . Digital scanners were used to capture the shape of residual limbs , 3D models were visualized and manipulated via socket design software , and the resulting models were produced using digital fabrication systems . While these systems used subtractive CNC milling rather than 3D printing , the goals remained similar . figure 9 : images of early digital prosthetics software and hardware used in presentation to clinicians - CATCAM , computer - assisted design tool , laser scanner developed at Rehabilitation Engineering Laboratory ( REL ) , University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio Emphasizing this history and its connection to prosthetists themselves as developers and designers was particularly important given the media attention noted above and its relation to a corresponding 3D prosthetics project that had launched around the same time as 3Dprintability . Called ‘Project E - nable’ , this project focused on connecting children who would benefit from a specific upper extremity actuator – a prosthetic hand – to volunteers with 3D printers able to print a pre - designed hand model distributed as an open - source file . A key aspect often highlighted in popular media at the time was that this project ‘enabled’ prosthetic users to receive prosthetics without the need for prosthetist’ s expertise . 356 : 18 Matt Ratto & Steven J . Jackson PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW2 , Article 356 , Publication date : October 2023 . figure 10 : screen shot from project enable website , January , 2014 So while the 3Dprintability team was working to support the hopes of the prosthetist members of the team for 3Dprinting to reinforce and make visible their expertise , Project E - nable and its expansive coverage in the media actively downplayed their knowledge . Project E - nable inadvertently enhanced a typical story about digital technologies as reducing the need for current knowledge and expertise . Repositioning 3dprintability as part of an ongoing repeated cycle of technical development – not novel , but a return to and continuation of prior art – became a way for the project developers to maintain a strong working relationship with prosthetists and other clinical partners . An important part of this move included making sure the systems being developed connected to the models of practice and understanding of clinical labor held by the prosthetists themselves . As noted above , this was accomplished through close working relationships with the prosthetists who were the intended user of the systems being developed , deep dives into workplaces and clinical contexts , and the use of participatory design and co - design practices intended to pay strict attention to the preservation of expertise and forms of labor most valued within the community of users . Repetition thus served as a key to ensuring that new socio - technical developments were brought forward but also connected to the past . Repetition anchored prosthetist claims to knowledge and expertise through the reestablishment and continuation of habitual and routine forms of prosthetic practice despite changing technologies . This was necessary for two important reasons . First , the digital systems being developed were still weak and tenuous ( both socially and technically ) , breaking down , working incorrect ly , lacking ‘fit’ to the clinical and socio - cultural context . By linking the new socio - technical systems to previous patterns of work and care , these reopenings were made more solid and began to achieve some durability and consistency in the world . But additionally – and crucially ! – repetition also served to maintain and extend the agency and capacity of the prosthetists in Uganda undermined by media and popular accounts of 3Dprinting and its relation to existing practice and expertise ( some of which were also mobilized to find funding and support for the project ) . Attending to both reopenings and repetitions helps us highlight complex balancing acts in narratives of hope that may go unaddressed in more typical linear project accounts . 4 . 3 Resetting A third category of project work involved resetting , assigning new forms of meaning and attention that both invoked and reworked a shared history in order to correct current and past missteps . This work occupied something of a middle ground between reopening and repetition : lacking the more fundamental reworking associated with reopening and carrying forward ( while recalibrating ) a longer history of repetition , resetting became essential to the ongoing processes of articulation Reopening , Repetition and Resetting : HCI and the Method of Hope 256 : 19 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW2 , Article 356 , Publication date : October 2023 . [ 56 , 62 ] by which projects were made and kept viable within the complexities of the social and material worlds around them . There were many such moments in 3dprintability . One of these involved the choosing of materials to use in the 3d printing of prosthetic sockets . Thus far , our stories of hope have focused on the hopes of human stakeholders within the project , the development team , members of various institutions , including hospitals and charities , and the Ugandan prosthetists . The story of resetting below reminds us that there are many non - humans also operating within interventionist projects , including the materials used within the intervention and the environments within which they operate . While initial testing by the team used PLA , a commonly available 3D printing material , it was soon realized that a stronger , more durable material was required . Sockets printed in PLA tended to break , particularly with larger children , and a solution needed to be found . This was not unexpected , since PLA was known to be a strong but brittle material . A replacement for it needed to be similarly strong , but to provide more flexibility . As technical logs from the project highlight , working to match the needs and expectations of the prosthetists regarding 3D printing materials required continued exploratory work . For example , figures from an unpublished paper by the team ( figure 11 ) emphasize the extent of this work which included finite element analysis ( FEA ) on socket topologies and the tensile strength testing of hundreds of sample models . figure 11 : details of technical work done to characterize printing materials , unpublished paper , Toronto , Canada While such tests ultimately culminated in the selection of a material for use ( nylon ) , the needs of the prosthetists to modify the sockets meant that strength was not the only criteria needing to be considered . 356 : 20 Matt Ratto & Steven J . Jackson PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW2 , Article 356 , Publication date : October 2023 . figure 12 : images of broken PLA sockets following initial testing , CorSU , Uganda , 2015 It was harder than expected to choose a material for a variety of reasons . First , at that point , despite the well - characterized nature of plastics , little material research had been done testing the strength and flexibility of these plastics when 3D printed . This mattered since the process of 3D printing used in the project ( called FDM ) dramatically impacted the strength of the resulting object . Therefore , the team needed to test various materials , printed using different printer settings , in order to meet the requirements established by the prosthetists . Extensive testing included the development of custom testing jigs , multiple tensile strength tests ( specifically ISO 10328 : 2016 ) and a one million cycle automated step test ( figure 13 ) . The resulting data characterized the various available plastics and , as well , the specific printing settings ( called slicer settings ) that would have the best results . figure 13 : images of material testing equipment , Toronto , Canada and Mobilab facility , Belgium Another important characteristic to consider ; the material needed to be able to be worked with the tools and processes currently in use in the rehabilitation clinics that were the sites of use . These sites primarily used polypropylene in their manual prosthetic production process but at that time , there were no compatible polypropylene printer filaments available . So selection needed to address trade - offs between strength , flexibility , availability , and some similarities to the materials and tools the prosthetists were already using . Based on all of this , a specific form of nylon 3D printer filament produced by Talman3D , a US company , was chosen . While it was not able to be reworked in quite the same ways as the current materials , it was strong , flexible , and could be printed reliably using the customized 3D printer chosen for the project . Reopening , Repetition and Resetting : HCI and the Method of Hope 256 : 21 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW2 , Article 356 , Publication date : October 2023 . Additional trials at CorSU hospital were successful . The Nylon prosthetics held up well to ongoing use , and provided a good quality fit and comfort for the patient . The nylon material could be printed with the modified 3D printers developed within the project , and the resulting 3D printed devices could be integrated with the other prosthetic components used to create a fully usable lower - limb device . The CorSU site began producing and fitting Nylon prosthetic sockets as part of their treatment plans , and over the course of six months hundreds of devices were made and fitted . Other sites were also developed , including rehabilitation clinics in Tanzania and , eventually , one in Cambodia . The rehabilitation clinics in Tanzania integrated the 3Dprintability system with few changes . But there were issues at the Cambodia site , most notably with the nylon material . After installation and training , prosthetists at CSPO carried out a trial of the 3Dprinting technology . Following initial fitting and once devices were being used in the field , strange patterns of breakage began to occur ( figure 14 ) . These were unexpected since the nylon devices had held up very well at the other clinical sites . figure 14 : images of broken sockets at CSPO Analysis of the broken devices showed delamination of the socket and a kind of swelling and splintering that was very different from the patterns of breakage the team had seen with other materials , such as the early PLA sockets . An initial hypothesis noted that nylon , unlike the other materials used , was ‘hydrophilic’ – under exposure to water , the nylon material absorbed water and would eventually swell . This swelling would then cause the printed layers of the sockets to delaminate and eventually crack . Tests in the Canadian laboratory confirmed that this could occur but only when the sockets were submerged in water for extended periods of time . A follow up with the Cambodian clinics revealed that some of the prosthetic users worked in rice paddies where the legs were periodically submerged . Equally , the monsoon season in Cambodia meant that water exposure for all users was dramatically larger than for users in the other clinical sites . While in retrospect it is obvious that the environmental differences between sites needed to be considered , at the time it came as a shock , particularly given the amount of testing and evaluation the development team had performed on the nylon material . 356 : 22 Matt Ratto & Steven J . Jackson PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW2 , Article 356 , Publication date : October 2023 . The issues in Cambodia caused the team to reset their assumptions about the materials previously chosen and its relations to the specific environmental conditions at each clinical site . This kicked off a rethink and caused the team to do a scan of newly available 3D printing filaments . The team discovered a few companies had begun producing polypropylene - based filaments and after much testing , additional changes to the printing hardware , and new relationship building with filament manufacturers , they were able to validate polypropylene as a socket material . With this , the work came full circle : when the project had started , the team had wanted to use polypropylene since this was a polymer the prosthetists were already using in the more traditional prosthetic manufacturing process . But at the time , it was not available for printing . The moments of resetting described here are less heroic than typical stories of innovation and emphasize moments where unexamined generalizations and changing situations require transformations in focus , materials , and systems . Such instances highlight what happens when plans meet situated actions and the unexpected consequences that result [ 63 ] . Given the focus of this project with its distributed nature of development , such resettings are to be expected . And yet it is typical that stories of innovation do not highlight them or , if they do , they are reincorporated into the heroic form to show how the reset engendered a smart and productive shift or ‘pivot’ that held the key to ultimate success . In the account above , we focus instead on how the need to reset results from gaps in knowledge or perspective and a failure to account for changing conditions . It might also be usefully described as another conflict between the hopes and expectations of stakeholders , particularly if we include non - humans as potential stakeholders to be considered , as has been proposed by Wakkary [ 65 ] and others working in the areas of HCI , CSCW and the growing tradition of ‘more - than - human’ design . While the humans hoped that they had done their research and development properly and selected a filament that would appropriately operate , when confronted with a new environment , the chosen material refused to obey . If we ( the humans ) hoped that our material choices would continue to work , the materials ‘hoped’ that we wouldn’t throw them fo r a loop , expose them to new and challenging conditions , or change the environment in which they were expected to operate . In not attending to these conditions , the team opened an opportunity for disaster – one rescued only by a return to local and situated knowledge and a re - inscription of the standing and expertise of local actors . 5 DISCUSSION The above stories do not capture the complexity of the sustained and ongoing work required by all stakeholders to keep the project moving forward . Planned technical and operational changes had to be vetted and approved by clinicians and experts , systems needed to be shipped , installed and trialed in multiple country contexts . Funding also needed to be continually accrued , including through the reports and presentations to funders needed to keep the money flowing in . Sometimes , on arrival at the Ugandan , Tanzanian , or Cambodian airport , materials would be confiscated and held back until unexpected duty payments were made . Printers and other equipment would break , networks and power grids would go down , and all manner of other operational issues would present themselves . Rehabilitation staff , previously trained in how to use the system , would go on vacation , find other jobs , get sick or get fired . Each country site and clinic was different – socially , organizationally , and professionally – and these differences shaped and sometimes deflected or reoriented the nature of the project as whole . We were struck initially by how divergent the prosthetic practices were from the high - income Canadian rehabilitation sites to rehabilitation hospitals in the countries in which Reopening , Repetition and Resetting : HCI and the Method of Hope 256 : 23 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW2 , Article 356 , Publication date : October 2023 . we were engaged . We should not have also been surprised ( but we were ! ) to find the same held even between individual clinics within those countries . These differences necessitated constant changes to the system , new training protocols and procedures , and often the development of additional technical systems . And yet , throughout it all , prosthetic sockets were made , prosthetic devices were completed and fitted to children , and these children walked , ran , played games , teased , and in many cases left the clinics more capable than before . Engagement with the prosthetist community helped manage the enthusiasm for the project , including invited presentations at the ISPO World Congress in Cape Town , South Africa ( 2017 ) and in Kobe , Japan ( 2019 ) . As emerged from our many conversations with patients and caregivers , hope was a central driver for many who came to the clinic – the children , adults , and family members who came to the clinic seeking a tangible improvement in opportunity , life chances , and the ability to thrive and flourish in the varied circumstances of their local communities and worlds . The frontline caregivers , prosthetists , and technicians also hoped , seeing in the project an opportunity for advancement , to rework their professional status , or to be perceived as clinical experts and not just craftspeople . The academic researchers had hopes too : to translate academic research into real - world impact ; to find new ways to fund and support their work ; to leverage emerging digital technologies to reimagine global practices and stories of innovation ; and for the kinds of outcomes , from publications to future funding streams to successful doctoral dissertations , that could speak to the distinct and peculiar demands of academic research institutions . Thus , beyond any question of predictive accuracy – were these hopes reasonable to hold ? were they deployed in a fair or cynical way within the unequal landscape of project power and responsibility ? – hope functioned as a powerful empirical fact , widely if differentially distributed amongst the project’s varied participants , and serving as a powerful anchor and gathering point around which many different interests could converge . Indeed , if anything hope may have been a too powerful or charismatic presence in this scene , eclipsing important questions around power and inequality , and functioning as a ( too ? ) seductive target for funder , media , and institutional attention . Accounts of this work risked obliterating the complex details of individual lives and settings , reconstituting human actors as cardboard Figures ( but not real agents ) in a powerful drama of hope whose sense and audience lay elsewhere . All of these forces speak to the importance and centrality of hope as a topic . But what about hope as a ( CSCW and HCI ) method , and how might the stories of reopening , repetition and resetting above help us get there ? To begin , we note that these practices relate to moves already present , but less often acknowledged , in interventionist HCI work in general . As noted at the outset , the development team for 3Dprintability faced many tensions and challenges , both technical and social . They were concerned about their position as technical developers from Canada working in LMIC contexts not their own and potentially repeating long - standing tropes and pathologies from the history of technology interventions in the ( post ? ) colonial world . They worried that the project could reify and reinforce existing inequalities , and further perpetuate a dev elopmentalist mode in which ‘northern’ technical solutions were given as answers to ‘southern’ problems and challenges . The moments of reopening described above further exacerbated some of these concerns , with some media reports extolling the capacity of the Canadian development team and charismatic technologies like 3D printing to solve endemic challenges in LMIC clinics , while others ( more accurately ) highlighted the situated character of these interventions , and the central role of existing clinical expertise in the overall success of the project . We have tried to show that 356 : 24 Matt Ratto & Steven J . Jackson PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW2 , Article 356 , Publication date : October 2023 . attending to moments of reopening can help us call attention to how hope is leveraged in interventionist projects , including in ways that critical scholars have rightly critiqued . Other concerns regarded the potential for 3D design and printing to reduce local expertise and capacities , replacing these with distributed and / or automated forms of labor . Attending to repetition , with its emphasis on the extension or bringing back of historical patterns and habits , helped to combat these tendencies , conserving and in many ways revalorizing existing prosthetic knowledges and expertises . Attending to repetition helped concretize 3dprintability within clinical settings , suturing the novelty of digital work to established modes and rhythms of practice . In the process , emergent materialities , technologies and social arrangements were made consonant with and accountable to existing forms of value and expertise . This required the deep and collaborative attention by all members of the overall project , involving the communication of new possibilities and technical requirements ( initially , on the part of the Canadian development team ) but also past practices and modes of labor ( initially , on the part of local clinicians and workers ) . Understanding these points and the appropriate balance between them grew over time , shaped design choices and project trajectories , and were one of the more consequential outcomes of collaboration . Finally , moments of resetting called out the ongoing and continual revisiting and rethinking that in fact constituted the evolving life of the project ( and we would argue , CSCW and HCI projects in general , at least where given the time and the opportunity to learn ) . One such moment , as conveyed above , regarded an oversight or overgeneralization regarding the material conditions of prosthetic use ( dry in Uganda , wet in Cambodia ) . We described this above as a lack of attending to the ‘hopes’ of some of the non - human actors . The discovery of this misassumption caused a fundamental reset in the project necessitating a painful return to an earlier and hard - fought decision regarding the choice of prosthetic material . This story can be told as yet another example of the ignorance and lack of attention to situatedness that is typical of a certain kind of oft - criticized HCI project ( and rightfully so ! ) . But it also highlights the essential work of recursion and looping back that is central to project trajectories , and crucial to their malleability and learning over time . Taken collectively , these moments of reopening , repetition and resetting were essential to the forms of coordination and articulation work long central to the field of CSCW [ 56 , 57 ] . They helped sustain 3dprintability through the multiple challenges and frustrations that beset the project , including challenges of achieving funding , misunderstandings of the role and importance of local clinical knowledge , and stubborn or mismatched materials . In the process , they shaped and reshaped the nature of the project itself , reorienting basic goals , altering the roles of key actors , and adjusting the collaborative processes and patterns by which outcomes were achieved . A common ( ish ) set of hopes was both outcome and engine of these complex coordinative processes . Project challenges were navigated without foreknowledge or certainty on the basis of hopes that operated and sustained project organizers , collaborators , and participants well before the project itself could give any confidence of meaningful impact or success . These hopes were not singly grounded in optimism , reliance on external authority , or a confidence in technicity itself . In fact , there was no single hope but instead a complex , sometimes competing set of different stakeholder hopes , that through their negotiation grounded the project and worked to constitute the relations and shared commitments built up through modest and ongoing work ‘on the ground . ’ The work was ‘experimental’ not in the thin and disinterested sense sometime connoted by the term ( suggesting an indifference to desired outcomes ) , but in the richer sense of experimentalism advanced by scholars like Dewey [ 14 ] , Reopening , Repetition and Resetting : HCI and the Method of Hope 256 : 25 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW2 , Article 356 , Publication date : October 2023 . in which projects proceed by a logic of careful engagement , trial and error , inquiry and true uncertainty , and the exposure of plans and ideas to concrete situations with the real and acknowledged power to ‘push back’ on early imaginations and initial star ting points . It is also clear that meaningful engagement with a method of hope requires first and foremost the recognition of the complex constellation of stakeholder hopes that must be constantly surfaced , negotiated , and in some cases rethought and transformed . 5 . 3 Limits and prospects There are certain features of the case above that make it amenable to the kinds of analysis and speculation offered here . One such feature is its sustained quality , giving the project enough time to succeed and fail , for the technologies in question to begin to actually engage the worlds around them , and to see those worlds adjust and push back . This is a feature missed under the frequently short - term orientation of HCI scholarship , and its tendency to privilege early field or pre - field encounters : a story of first dates , rather than the long and complex relations that follow . The method of hope argued for here may require a kind of slow familiarity and engagement through time that is not always supported or rewarded under the publishing and funding structures of HCI work . Despite these efforts , a method of hope , like all methods , is bound to result in incomplete and partial results . The case of 3Dprintability is no exception . As already intuited above , some of these shortcomings are inherent in the project form itself , wh ere the problem is not ‘linearity’ per se , but rather the dominance of one line over a myriad set of others . The ability to impose this kind of hegemony – to make one line , at least for a while , travel along another – may be , as Latour [ 34 , 35 ] long ago observed , an essential marker of project success : the way collaborations and a common ( ish ) purpose are built , and the interests of multiple actors are brought into an alignment workable enough to effect some kind of action , change , or endurance . But the same act , in both the execution of projects and their subsequent description , carries deep risks of erasure and flattening that run against the method of hope advocated here . Put slightly differently : hope , including as it operates through the project form , has lines ( millions of them ! More than we can know or think to count ! ) but is not itself a line . The question then becomes how these lines are coordinated through the project form itself : what lines are made to cohere , what lines are made to run through others , what lines operate in shadow or the background , and what lines remain ( or are made ) stubbornly orthogonal , resistant or recalcitrant – something that in more abstracte d form we might call ‘difference’ . As anthropologist Tim Ingold [ 27 ] has observed , there are grand lines and small lines , straight and well - marked highways and uncertain and meandering side roads – many of which will disappear on any general and unifying map . Old lines stop , and new lines start . Some lines generated in the context of the project itself will become the starting point of lines whose import and efficacy will lead elsewhere , beyond the identifiable bounds of the project itself . The account detailed above , emerging as it does from an archive of material gathered by the Canadian team and with the explicit participation of the Canadian PI therefore emphasizes only a few lines among many – despite the guidance provided by our repurposing of Miyaza ki’s terminology . While reopening , repetition , and resetting may help guide a less obviously linear and singular story , these terms still do not do credit to the complex lines and intersections of all the players , those who benefited in expected and unexpected ways from the work , others that did not . We have only hints of many of these lines ; a prosthetist who successfully navigated the new digital knowledge and found new work opportunities ( and emailed the team 356 : 26 Matt Ratto & Steven J . Jackson PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW2 , Article 356 , Publication date : October 2023 . about this , ) a patient who was so interested in the 3Dprinting process that she decided to apply to an architecture program ( a team member wrote a letter of recommendation . ) And of course we have hints of less positive relations to the project : a staff member at a rehabilitation clinic who was fired , potentially due to the additional oversight caused by participation in the 3D printing project , a CEO of a hospital who was not able to generate the new funding they hoped for , patients who were unable to be fitted due to timing , congenital issues , staffing problems , or broken technology . The mixed stories above may begin to suggest why it is so difficult to assess the “impact” of projects , except on their own very narrowly prescribed grounds ( and why we have shied away from such assessments in the account above ) . It is in fact hard to det ermine the ‘success’ or ‘failure’ of 3dpintability , and it can plausibly be assessed as either . The project team failed to deploy the system more broadly and only a vanishingly small percentage of rehabilitation clinics ( three ) make use of it today . Conversely , three rehabilitation clinics do use it – and these are three out of the four where it was deployed . But there are other patterns of note that spill beyond the project form itself . Prosthetists affiliated with the project have taken their training and used it in new contexts , prosthetic users continue to walk using 3D printed prosthetic devices and , in at least one case , have chosen educational pathways in part based on their exposure to the project . The non - profit created by the project recently announced a new partnership with one of the largest rehabilitation hospitals in Canada to jointly develop a for - profit company to better support the development goals behind the project . And emails and messages continue to arrive from patients or prosthetists exposed to the project through scholarly or media works who are now working on their own prosthetic solutions . These unexpected outcomes highlight the fractal nature of sustained and collaborative interventionist work . There is a kind of fragile resilience attached to this recognition . In complex collaborative projects with multiple stakes and voices , certain lines will remain what Howard Becker [ 6 ] has called a ‘side bet’ , operating in the shadows of ‘official’ account s ( though still possibly anchoring the commitments of individual actors – ‘the goal of project X is fine , but why I really stick around is Y’ ) . But then they may push to the fore at moments of reopening and resetting , becoming the dominant line in a reconfigured understanding of the purpose and nature of the project ( a dynamic rather badly named in the current tech - speak of ‘pivots’ ) . Per Becker’s astute observations on the social world , collaborative work and endeavors always involve this multiplicity of lines and interests . Everyone has a side bet . Deployed prospectively , built into the setup of interventionist projects from the start ( rather than retrospectively , as a means of opening up and reinterpreting the course of established projects ) the method of hope might suggest some basic tenets and principles . It may prescribe extra work to maintain , repair , or cultivate mundane and everyday responses which sustain and uphold local forms of value and action , even when not directly tied to immediate project goals and interests . A method of hope should also remain sensitive to the fractal nature of interventions and modest and equivocal about its ability to predict or deliver secure and definitive outcomes . It should be leery of deterministic and single - point destinations , and open to the possibility of rerouting and refiguration – like Soden et al’s [ 60 ] uncertainty or Gaver et al’s [ 20 ] emergence – as time and projects move forward . It must also stay aware – as much as possible – of the myriad hopes of stakeholders , including potentially non - human ones . Finally , within the management and operation of projects , a method of hope should make extra effort to preserve alternative voice and difference , upholding a Reopening , Repetition and Resetting : HCI and the Method of Hope 256 : 27 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW2 , Article 356 , Publication date : October 2023 . commitment to a formative and irreducible pluralism that persists beyond the acts of closure and enrollment contained in moments of conception and design . This might involve a commitment to other kinds of documentation and curation in the memory practices [ 10 ] of projects themselves , to work against the tendency of alternative and orthogonal forms and perspectives to be erased under the gathering line of the project . In moments of reopening , a prospective method of hope might require a more thoughtful and expansive engagement with the context of work , and the people , meanings , values , and systems already present , asking the question “What existing activities and understandings currently support and sustain hope , and how might our reopenings foster and enhan ce , rather than reduce or displace , such hope ? ” In moments of repetition , this might involve drawing forward or calling back forms of knowledge , expertise , and identity in danger of being sidelined or eclipsed , asking the question “How can conserving past aspects while still innovating provide ways to maintain , repair , and recreate hope moving forward ? ” In moments of resetting , this might involve acknowledging moments of conflict and choice , asking “How might conflicts and issues be made sources of insight and new thinking , rather than merely problems to be managed or overcome ? ” 6 CONCLUSION There are unfortunately many ways of losing the method of hope . One of these concerns the frequent ( and in part endemic ) channeling nature of the project form itself : the fact that in building a new and consequential line , other more divergent lines may be – and perhaps , to some extent , must be – demoted , erased , or entrained . Another concerns the nature of the stories we tell around such encounters as we move out from immediate contexts of action , including through research reported in venues like HCI journals and conference proceedings . We begin with a world in its “buzzing , blooming confusion” [ 29 ] , and we move towards something resembling order , in which background noise is suppressed and through lines are emphasized . Over time and through reflection , collaboration and exchange , the tangle and cacophony of lines is reduced : like accomplices conferring after a crime , we have gotten our stories straight . The churn and potentialities are made to stand still , and a Project , as a neatened object of knowledge and reflection , emerges . But in this moment , something important has been lost , and the odds of a more supple , responsive , and even liberatory practice of HCI , one comfortable with the problems of pluralism , emergence and uncertainty , have been reduced . This matters especially because computing interventions have so often functioned as the opposite of this ideal , an agent of what John Law [ 36 ] has called the ‘one - world world’ , operating in tandem with forces that tend toward leveling , standardization , and the erasure of concrete and specific difference – a process whose real and complex stakes are all too often occluded under the simplistic and celebratory language of ‘scaling’ [ 47 ] . The limited positionalities of CSCW and HCI researchers themselves may play a role in this outcome . We enter a scene very much in action , and by virtue of the ( limited ) skills and orientations we bring , tend to align with certain interests over others . The residue we leave in the world – objects , systems , and their associated modes of practice – then have propensities and effects of their own , elevating certain modes and possibilities of practice while rendering others secondary and residual . People and groups may be variously elevated and demoted , in ways that uphold and extend hierarchies or in ways that flatten and undermine them . Most projects , like the one above , will in fact do both . If we’re not careful – and to some inevitable degree , even if we are – these effects will be mirrored and amplified in our methods themselves , embedded in the innocent / not - so - innocent choices that 356 : 28 Matt Ratto & Steven J . Jackson PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW2 , Article 356 , Publication date : October 2023 . confront every field - engaged researcher : who to listen and give voice to in our work ; how to handle non - participants and non - users ; what to make of entities ( including non - human ? ) whose ontologies , interests , or ways of being align badly with our own or no t at all ; what to do with ‘outliers’ – the instances or beings which stand against or disrupt common trends and patterns ; and in the communication of our ‘results , ’ where to pick the story up and where to put it down in a world that is always older and wilder than our reckoning , and will run far beyond our imagination and presence on the scene . Developing thoughtful and careful ( not perfect ! ) responses to these questions are an essential part of what Suchman [ 63 ] has called ‘accountable cuts’ : choices in research based not in an ideal of complete and objective knowledge , but the simple ethical idea that our starting and stopping choices should make sense and be chosen with care ; that these choices ( and their limits ) can at least in principle be communicated , justified and explained ; and that we retain the ability to change course as the world pushes back , leaving worse tracks for better ones . This is different from the defensive discussions and performances of method that can sometimes mar and limit HCI work , oriented to notions of rigor that seem as likely to lead in the end to rigor mortis . But it is essential to the method of hope , and the long - term efficacy of efforts to make computing meet the world in a slightly better way . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to acknowledge the key contributions of the developers , designers , doctors and scientists who participated in the work described in this paper , including ginger coons , Gabby Resch , Dan Southwick , Ryan Schmidt , and Jerry Evans . Most importantly , we thank the many prosthetists , prosthetic technicians , hospital caregivers , community health providers , patients and their families , who shared with us their time , energy , expertise , commitment and their hopes . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Mark S . Ackerman . 2000 . The intellectual challenge of CSCW : the gap between social requirements and technical feasibility . Hum . - Comput . Interact . 15 , 2 ( September 2000 ) , 179 – 203 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1207 / S15327051HCI15235 [ 2 ] Christopher Ali . 2021 . Farm Fresh Broadband : The Politics of Rural Connectivity . The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , USA . [ 3 ] Morgan Ames . 2019 . The Charisma Machine : The Life , Death and Legacy of One Laptop per Child . The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , USA . [ 4 ] Nikhil Anand , Akhil Gupta , and Hannah Appel ( Eds . ) . 2018 . The Promise of Infrastructure . Duke University Press , Durham , NC . [ 5 ] Bannon , L . ( 1992 ) . Perspectives on CSCW : From HCI and CMC to CSCW . Proceedings of EWHCI’92 , East – West International Conference on Human - Computer Interaction , St . Petersburg , Russia , pp . 148 - 158 . [ 6 ] Howard S . Becker . 1960 . Notes on the concept of commitment . American Journal of Sociology 66 , ( 1960 ) , 32 – 40 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1086 / 222820 [ 7 ] Lauren Berlant . 2011 . Cruel Optimism . Duke University Press , Durham , NC . [ 8 ] Bloch , E . ( 1995 ) The Principle of Hope , tr . S . Plaice , P . Knight , and N . Plaice , Cambridge MA : MIT Press . [ 9 ] Boltanski , L . , Thévenot , L . 2006 . On Justification : Economies of worth . Princeton : Princeton University Press . [ 10 ] Bowker , G . 2005 . Memory Practices in the Sciences , Cambridge MA : MIT Press . [ 11 ] Chan , A . S . 2014 . Networking Peripheries : Technological Futures and the Myth of Digital Universalism , Cambridge : MIT Press . [ 12 ] Collins , H . 1985 . Changing Order : Replication and Induction in Scientific Practice , Chicago : University of Chicago Press . [ 13 ] James Clifford and George E . Marcus ( Eds . ) . 2010 . Writing Culture : The Poetics and Politics of Ethnography , 25th Anniversary Edition ( 2nd ed . ) . [ 14 ] John Dewey . 1938 . Logic - The Theory of Inquiry . Henry Holt and Company , New York , NY USA . [ 15 ] Carl DiSalvo , Andrew Clement , and V Pipek . 2013 . Communities : Participatory Design for , with and by communities . In Routledge International Handbook of Participatory Design . Routledge . [ 16 ] Anthony Dunne . 2001 . Design noir : the secret life of electronic objects . August , London . Reopening , Repetition and Resetting : HCI and the Method of Hope 256 : 29 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW2 , Article 356 , Publication date : October 2023 . [ 17 ] Anthony Dunne . 2013 . Speculative everything : design , fiction , and social dreaming . The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . [ 18 ] Pelle Ehn . 1993 . Scandinavian Design : On Participation and Skill . In Participatory Design . CRC Press . [ 19 ] Pelle Ehn . 2008 . Participation in design things . In Proceedings of the Tenth Anniversary Conference on Participatory Design 2008 ( PDC ’08 ) , Indiana University , USA , 92 – 101 . [ 20 ] William Gaver , Peter Krogh , Andy Boucher , and David Chatting . 2022 . Emergence as a Feature of Practice - based Design Research . 517 – 526 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3532106 . 3533524 [ 21 ] Daniel Greene . 2021 . The promise of access : technology , inequality , and the political economy of hope . The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . [ 22 ] Jonathan Grudin . 1994 . Groupware and social dynamics : eight challenges for developers . Commun . ACM 37 , 1 ( January 1994 ) , 92 – 105 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 175222 . 175230 [ 23 ] Orit Halpern . 2017 . Hopeful resilience . E - Flux Architecture ; special issue ( 2017 ) . [ 24 ] Donna J . Haraway . 2016 . Staying with the Trouble : Making Kin in the Chthulucene . Duke University Press , Durham , NC . [ 25 ] Christina Harrington , Sheena Erete , and Anne Marie Piper . 2019 . Deconstructing Community - Based Collaborative Design : Towards More Equitable Participatory Design Engagements . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 3 , CSCW ( November 2019 ) , 216 : 1 - 216 : 25 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359318 [ 26 ] Faheem Hussain , Abdullah Safir , Dina Sabie , Zulkarin Jahangir , and Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed . 2020 . Infrastructuring Hope : Solidarity , Leadership , Negotiation , and ICT among the Rohingya Refugees in Bangladesh . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3392561 . 3394640 [ 27 ] Tim Ingold . 2015 . The life of lines . Routledge , Abingdon . [ 28 ] Steven J . Jackson . 2023 . Ordinary Hope . Maddalena Taccheti , Dimitris Papadopoulos , and Maria Puig de la Bellacasa , eds . Ecological Reparation : Repair , Remediation and Resurgence in Social and Environmental Conflict . Bristol University Press : Bristol , 2023 . [ 29 ] William James . 1890 . The principles of psychology , Vol I . Henry Holt and Co , New York , NY , US . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 10538 - 000 [ 30 ] Sheila Jasanoff and Sang - Hyun Kim ( Eds . ) . 2015 . Dreamscapes of Modernity : Sociotechnical Imaginaries and the Fabrication of Power . University of Chicago Press , Chicago , IL . [ 31 ] Rob Kling . 1991 . Cooperation , coordination and control in computer - supported work . Communications of the ACM 34 , 83 – 88 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 125319 . 125396 [ 32 ] Neha Kumar . 2014 . Facebook for self - empowerment ? A study of Facebook adoption in urban India . New media & society 16 , 7 ( 2014 ) , 1122 – 1137 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1461444814543999 [ 33 ] Neha Kumar , Marisol Wong - Villacres , Naveena Karusala , Aditya Vishwanath , Arkadeep Kumar , and Azra Ismail . 2019 . Aspirations - based design . In Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and Development , IC TD ’19 , Ahmedabad , India , January 4 - 7 , 2019 , ACM , 2 : 1 - 2 : 11 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3287098 . 3287117 [ 34 ] Bruno Latour . 1987 . Science in action : how to follow scientists and engineers through society . Open University Press , Milton Keynes . [ 35 ] Bruno Latour . 1996 . Aramis , or , The love of technology . Harvard University Press , Cambridge , Mass . [ 36 ] John Law . 2015 . What’s wrong with a one - world world ? Distinktion : Journal of Social Theory 16 , 1 ( January 2015 ) , 126 – 139 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 1600910X . 2015 . 1020066 [ 37 ] J . Licklider . 1960 . Man - Computer Symbiosis . IRE Trans . Human Factors in Electronics , Mar . 1960 , pp . 4 - 11 . [ 38 ] Silvia Lindtner , Shaowen Bardzell , and Jeffrey Bardzell . 2016 . Reconstituting the Utopian Vision of Making : HCI After Technosolutionism . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) , Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1390 – 1402 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858506 [ 39 ] Thomas W . Malone and Kevin Crowston . 1994 . The interdisciplinary study of coordination . ACM Comput . Surv . 26 , 1 ( March 1994 ) , 87 – 119 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 174666 . 174668 [ 40 ] Matthew Malpass . 2017 . Critical design in context : history , theory , and practices . Bloomsbury Academic , an imprint of Bloomsbury Publishing Plc , London ; [ 41 ] Ezio Manzini . 2009 . New design knowledge . Design Studies 30 , 1 ( January 2009 ) , 4 – 12 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2008 . 10 . 001 [ 42 ] Robert K . Merton . 1948 . The Self - Fulfilling Prophecy . The Antioch Review 8 , 193 – 210 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 4609267 [ 43 ] Hirokazu Miyazaki . 2004 . The Method of Hope : Anthropology , Philosophy , and Fijian Knowledge . Stanford University Press , Stanford . [ 44 ] Michael J . Muller and Sarah Kuhn . 1993 . Participatory design . Commun . ACM 36 , 6 ( June 1993 ) , 24 – 28 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 153571 . 255960 356 : 30 Matt Ratto & Steven J . Jackson PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW2 , Article 356 , Publication date : October 2023 . [ 45 ] Wanda J . Orlikowski . 1992 . Learning from Notes : organizational issues in groupware implementation . In Proceedings of the 1992 ACM conference on Computer - supported cooperative work ( CSCW ’92 ) , Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 362 – 369 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 143457 . 143549 [ 46 ] Joyojeet Pal , Meera Lakshmanan , and Kentaro Toyama . 2009 . “My child will be respected” : Parental perspectives on computers and education in Rural India . Inf Syst Front 11 , 2 ( April 2009 ) , 129 – 144 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10796 - 009 - 9172 - 1 [ 47 ] Sebastian Pfotenhauer , Brice Laurent , Kyriaki Papageorgiou , and and Jack Stilgoe . 2022 . The politics of scaling . Social studies of science 52 , 1 ( 2022 ) , 3 – 34 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 03063127211048945 [ 48 ] Matt Ratto . 2011 . Critical Making : Conceptual and Material Studies in Technology and Social Life . The Information society 27 , 4 ( 2011 ) , 252 – 260 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01972243 . 2011 . 583819 [ 49 ] Matt Ratto . 2016 . Making at the end of nature . interactions 23 , 5 ( August 2016 ) , 26 – 35 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2985851 [ 50 ] Matt Ratto . 2021 . Designing a digital toolchain for prosthetics : A retrospective . Canadian Prosthetics & Orthotics Journal . 2021 ; Volume 4 , Issue 2 , No . 16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 33137 / cpoj . v4i2 . 36188 [ 51 ] Matt Ratto , Qua Hiansen J . , Kaweesa M , , Taremwa J . , Heang T . , Kheng S . , Teap O . , Onesmo R . , Mchihiyo D . , Moshi B . , Mwaijande V . , Singh D . , Gotts K . , Southwick D . , and Evans , J . 2021 . “An International , Multi - Center Field Trial Comparison Between 3D Printed and ICRC Manufactured Transtibial Prosthetic Devices in Low - Income Countries” , Journal of Prosthetics and Orthotics . 33 ( 1 ) : 54 – 69 . [ 52 ] Matt Ratto , Qua Hiansen J . , Kaweesa M , , Taremwa J . , Heang T . , Kheng S . , Teap O . , Onesmo R . , Mchihiyo D . , Moshi B . , Mwaijande V . , Singh D . , Gotts K . , Southwick D . , and Evans , J . 2017 . An International Multi - Center Clinical Study : Gauging Patient Experience with Digitally Designing , 3D Trans - tibial Prosthetic Devices Compared to Manually Produced Prosthetic Devices . Int ’ l Society for Prosthetics and Orthotics World Congress 2017 , Capetown , SA , May 8 - 11 , 2017 . [ 53 ] Ryan Schmidt , ginger coons , Vincent Chen , Timotheius Gmeiner , and Matt Ratto . 2015 . 3D - printed prosthetics for the developing world . In SIGGRAPH 2015 : Studio ( SIGGRAPH ' 15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , Article 21 , 1 pages . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2785585 . 2792535 [ 54 ] Daniela Rosner . 2018 . Critical fabulations : reworking the methods and margins of design . The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . [ 55 ] Samar Sabie , Katherine W . Song , Tapan Parikh , Steven J . Jackson , Eric Paulos , Kristina Lindström , Åsa Ståhl , Dina Sabie , Kristina Andersen , and Ron Wakkary . 2022 . Unmaking @ CHI : Concretizing the Material and Epistemological Practices of Unmaking in HCI . CHI 2022 - Extended Abstracts of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( April 2022 ) , 105 : 1 - 105 : 6 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491101 . 3503721 [ 56 ] Kjeld Schmidt and Liam Bannon . 1992 . Taking CSCW seriously . Comput Supported Coop Work 1 , 1 ( March 1992 ) , 7 – 40 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / BF00752449 [ 57 ] Kjeld Schmidt and Liam Bannon . 2013 . Constructing CSCW : The First Quarter Century . Short Title : C S C W 22 , 4 – 6 ( August 2013 ) , 345 – 372 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 013 - 9193 - 7 [ 58 ] Phoebe Sengers , Kirsten Boehner , Shay David , and Joseph “Jofish” Kaye . 2005 . Reflective design . In Proceedings of the 4th decennial conference on Critical computing : between sense and sensibility ( CC ’05 ) , Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 49 – 58 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1094562 . 1094569 [ 59 ] Christo Sims . 2017 . Disruptive Fixation : School Reform and the Pitfalls of Techno - Idealism . Princeton University Press , Princeton , N . J USA . Retrieved August 6 , 2023 from https : / / press . princeton . edu / books / hardcover / 9780691163987 / disruptive - fixation [ 60 ] Charles Snyder . 2002 . Hope theory : Rainbows in the mind . Psychological Inquiry 13 , ( October 2002 ) , 249 – 275 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1207 / S15327965PLI1304 _ 01 [ 61 ] Robert Soden , Laura Devendorf , Richmond Wong , Yoko Akama , and Ann Light . 2022 . Modes of Uncertainty in HCI . HCI 15 , 4 ( August 2022 ) , 317 – 426 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1561 / 1100000085 [ 62 ] Susan Leigh Star and Karen Ruhleder . 1994 . Steps towards an ecology of infrastructure : complex problems in design and access for large - scale collaborative systems . In Proceedings of the 1994 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work ( CSCW ’94 ) , Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 253 – 264 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 192844 . 193021 [ 63 ] Lucy Suchman . 2006 . Human - Machine Reconfigurations : Plans and Situated Actions ( 2nd ed . ) . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / CBO9780511808418 [ 64 ] Kentaro Toyama . 2018 . From needs to aspirations in information technology for development . Information Technology for Development 24 , 1 ( January 2018 ) , 15 – 36 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 02681102 . 2017 . 1310713 [ 65 ] Ron Wakkary . 2021 . Things we could design : for more than human - centered worlds . The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Received January 2023 ; revised April 2023 ; accepted July 2023 .