Mycolactone enhances the Ca 2 + leakage from endoplasmic reticulum by trapping Sec61 translocons in a Ca 2 + permeable state Pratiti Bhadra 1 , 5 , Scott Dos Santos 2 , 5 , 7 , Igor Gamayun 3 , Tillman Pick 3 , Joy Ogbechi 2 , 8 , Belinda S . Hall 2 , Richard Zimmermann 4 , Volkhard Helms 1 , Rachel E . Simmonds 2 , 6 , * , Adolfo Cavalié 3 , 6 , * 1 Center for Bioinformatics , Saarland University , Saarland Informatics Campus , 66123 Saarbrücken , Germany 2 Department of Microbial Sciences , School of Biosciences and Medicine , University of Surrey , Guildford , Surrey GU2 7XH , UK 3 Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology , Saarland University , 66421 Homburg , Germany 4 Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , Saarland University , 66421 Homburg , Germany 5 These authors contributed equally 6 These authors contributed equally 7 Present address : Western College of Veterinary Medicine , University of Saskatchewan , Saskatoon , SK , Canada 8 Present address : Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology , University of Oxford , Roosevelt Drive , Headington , Oxford OX3 7FY , UK * Correspondence : rachel . simmonds @ surrey . ac . uk ( R . E . S . ) , adolfo . cavalie @ uks . eu ( A . C . ) Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  1 Abstract The Mycobacterium ulcerans exotoxin , mycolactone , is an inhibitor of co - translational translocation via the Sec61 complex . Mycolactone has previously been shown to bind to , and alter the structure of , the major translocon subunit Sec61α , and change its interaction with ribosome nascent chain complexes . In addition to its function in protein translocation into the ER , Sec61 also plays a key role in cellular Ca 2 + homeostasis , acting as a leak channel between the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) and cytosol . Here , we have analysed the effect of mycolactone on cytosolic and ER Ca 2 + levels using compartment - specific sensors . We also used molecular docking analysis to explore potential interaction sites for mycolactone on translocons in various states . These results show that mycolactone enhances the leak of Ca 2 + ions via the Sec61 translocon , resulting in a slow but substantial depletion of ER Ca 2 + . This leak was dependent on mycolactone binding to Sec61α because resistance mutations in this protein completely ablated the increase . Molecular docking supports the existence of a mycolactone - binding transient inhibited state preceding translocation and suggests mycolactone may also bind Sec61α in its idle state . We propose that delayed ribosomal release after translation termination and / or translocon “breathing” during rapid transitions between the idle and intermediate - inhibited states allow for transient Ca 2 + leak , and mycolactone’s stabilisation of the latter underpins the phenotype observed . Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  2 Introduction Mycolactone is the exotoxin produced by Mycobacterium ulcerans ( M . ulcerans ) that is central in the aetiology of Buruli ulcer ( BU ) , a chronic necrotizing skin infection [ 1 - 3 ] . Most pathogenic strains isolated from BU patients living in West Africa , where the disease is most prevalent , produce mycolactone A / B . Other congeners also exist , produced by pathogenic strains found in Australia ( mycolactone C ) and so - called “ancestral” strains . Mycolactone A / B is the most toxic in vitro and is a polyketide composed of an invariant 12 - membered lactone ring to which two polyketide - derived , unsaturated acyl side chains are attached [ 1 , 3 ] . The shorter “Northern” chain is invariant , while the longer “Southern” Chain gives rise to the various mycolactone congeners . Like all mycolactones , mycolactone A / B is a 3 : 2 rapidly - equilibrating mixture of isomers around the second double bond in the Southern fatty acid tails [ 4 ] . Structure - activity studies have proposed that mycolactone B is the active isoform [ 5 ] . Infection with M . ulcerans initially produces a painless swelling or nodule . The immunosuppressive properties of mycolactone enable the disease to progress without inflammation and fever , leading eventually to development of the necrotic lesions in cutaneous and subcutaneous tissues that are characteristic of BU [ 6 ] . Many reports support mycolactone as driving the pathogenic sequelae of BU that comprise skin ulceration , coagulative necrosis , local hypoesthesia and suppression of immune responses . Furthermore , molecular targets for mycolactone have been identified and proposed to be associated with its hallmarks [ 2 , 3 ] . Binding and activation of type 2 angiotensin receptors II initiates a signalling cascade that culminates in the activation of TWIK - related arachidonic acid - stimulated K + channel in neurons [ 7 ] . The resulting hyperpolarisation of neurons was proposed to mediate the analgesic effects of mycolactone . In cell free assays , mycolactone binds to the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) and neural WASP ( N - WASP ) , which are scaffold proteins involved in the remodelling of the actin cytoskeleton [ 8 , 9 ] . By interacting with WASP / N - WASP , mycolactone likely initiates an uncontrolled assembly of actin and defective cell - matrix adhesion , which may compromise skin integrity . Notably , the down regulation of multiple mediators of inflammation correlates solely with the continuous Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  3 presence of mycolactone even after completion of antibiotic therapy against M . ulcerans , providing a link between mycolactone and immunosuppressive effects [ 10 ] . Subsequently , investigations using cell - free protein synthesis showed that mycolactone inhibits the Sec61 - dependent protein translocation into the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) [ 11 ] . Furthermore , the blockade of Sec61 - dependent translocation by mycolactone has been linked to inhibition of T cell activation and antigen presentation , providing a molecular basis for the mycolactone - induced immunosuppression [ 12 , 13 ] . The effects of mycolactone on ER function are however much broader . For instance , it has been shown that mycolactone down - regulates luminal Hsp70 - type chaperone binding - immunoglobulin protein ( BiP ) in dendritic cells [ 14 ] . Furthermore , inhibition of Sec61 - mediated translocation by mycolactone induces an integrated stress response via translational activation of activating transcription factor 4 [ 15 ] . Thus , a consequence of the blockade of Sec61 translocons is a stress response that eventually induces apoptosis and underlies cytotoxic effects of mycolactone . A forward genetic screen in HCT116 cells [ 15 , 16 ] identified mutations at a number of sites in Sec61α ( D60 , R66 , S71 , G80 , S72 and Q127 ) that confer resistance to mycolactone - induced toxicity . Crucially , out of 33 resistant clones tested , all contained a mutation in at least one of these sites , suggesting that Sec61α is the prime target of mycolactone . Several of these mutations have been studied in detail and have been shown to reverse biological effects of mycolactone [ 12 , 15 - 17 ] . Sec61α plays a central role in the translocation of nascent polypeptides emerging from the translating ribosome . To accomplish translocation , the Sec61 complex undergoes substantial conformational changes . McKenna et al . ( 2016 ) provided the first biochemical evidence that the binding of mycolactone to Sec61α also induces conformational changes of the pore geometry [ 18 ] . Several crystal and cryo - electron microscopy structures have revealed the conformation of the native ribosome - Sec61 complex in the non - translocating ( idle ) state [ 19 - 21 ] . Here , the lateral gate of the Sec61α is closed and th e so - called ‘plug’ helix of Sec61α seals the channel toward the lumenal side [ 22 ] . During translocation , the conformation of ribosome - Sec61 complexes is significantly different . Here , the plug is displaced to enable translocation and the lateral gate remains open for membrane access of the signal peptide or transmembrane domains of the nascent precursor polypeptide [ 23 ] . Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  4 Recently , Gérard et al . [ 16 ] determined the structure of mammalian ribosome - Sec61 complexes inhibited by mycolactone via electron cryo - microscopy , where the Sec61α channel is trapped in a putative intermediate state . In this state , Sec61α is in a conformation where the cytosolic side of the lateral gate is open , whereas the plug still occupies the channel pore in the lumenal side . Notably this conformation closely resembles that of yeast Sec61 translocons bound to Sec62 and Sec63 [ 24 , 25 ] , suggesting that this pose is adopted during native translocation at least in lower eukaryotes . The structure provides novel insight into the molecular mechanism of mycolactone as an inhibitor . Notably , mycolactone binds with weaker affinity to translocon s from cells carrying resistance mutations in Sec61α [ 16 ] . Here , molecular dynamics simulations suggested that the single amino acid mutations modulate the conformational dynamics of Sec61α and thereby disfavour the mycolactone - bound conformation . It is striking that the molecular targets of mycolactone have been associated with key functions in the Ca 2 + homeostasis . For instance , Sec61α translocons behave as Ca 2 + permeable channels that support a Ca 2 + leakage from ER that is regulated by BiP [ 26 ] . Mycolactone may also interact with WASP / N - WASP leading to actin assembly [ 9 ] , potentially impacting Ca 2 + homeostasis because actin polymerisation in the cell periphery prevents the coupling between the ER and Ca 2 + - release activated Ca 2 + channels , reducing the Ca 2 + entry into the cell [ 27 ] . On the other hand , actin polymerisation enhances the Ca 2 + mobilisation from ER that is induced by the sarco / endoplasmic reticulum Ca 2 + - ATPase ( SERCA ) - inhibitor thapsigargin ( TG ) [ 28 ] . Finally , as a lipophilic substance , mycolactone interacts with phospholipids and hence may perturb cholesterol - rich membranes more generally [ 29 - 31 ] . Thus , while it can be hypothesised that mycolactone might distort Ca 2 + homeostasis in the cell , until now this area has been little explored . An early study reported a dose - dependent increase in cytosolic Ca 2 + levels in L929 cells exposed to mycolactone [ 32 ] . Later , it was shown that mycolactone - mediated hyperactivation of Lck in Jurkat cells resulted in depletion of intracellular Ca 2 + stores and T cell receptor downregulation [ 33 ] . As in the study with L929 cells , increased cytosolic Ca 2 + levels were also found in resting T cells exposed to mycolactone . Additionally , mycolactone reduced the store - operated Ca 2 + entry and the Ca 2 + mobilisation induced by the non - selective iononophore ionomycin ( IONO ) in these T cells Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  5 [ 33 ] . In the present study , we focused on the effects of mycolactone on Ca 2 + leakage from the ER . Using mycolactone - resistant mutants of Sec61  − , we show in Ca 2 + imaging experiments that mycolactone specifically enhances the Sec61 - mediated Ca 2 + leakage from ER . By docking analysis , we further explore potential interaction sites for mycolactone with Sec61 translocons at the molecular level . These analyses support the mechanistic model in which mycolactone stabilises the intermediate ( mycolactone - bound / mycolactone - inhibited ) conformation of the ribosome - translocon complex , which in turn generates a Ca 2 + leakage from the ER . Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  6 Materials and Methods Cell lines The experiments were done with a HEK - 293 cell line that stably expresses the FRET - based D1ER sensor in the ER lumen ( D1ER - HEK ) as well as with HCT116 cells that express Sec61α mutants ( D60G , R66K , S71F , S82Y , Q127K ) [ 15 , 16 , 34 ] . D1ER was kindly provided by R . Y . Tsien [ 35 ] and stably expressed in HEK - 293 cells to obtain the D1ER - HEK cell line [ 34 ] . D1ER - HEK cells were cultured under selection with G418 ( Minimal Essential Medium , MEM ( Gibco ) , 10 % FBS , 0 . 5 mg / ml G418 ) . For Ca 2 + imaging experiments , cells were transferred to poly - L - lysine coated cover slips and maintained in culture for 2 - 3 days . Wild type ( WT ) HCT116 cells and those expressing Sec61 mutants were maintained in McCoyS 5A Medium ( Gibco ) and 10 % FBS . HCT116 cells expressing Sec61 mutants ( D60G , R66K , S71F , S82Y , Q127K ) were generated by random mutagenesis with ENS in the DNA repair defective HCT116 cell line [ 15 ] . Prior to Ca 2 + imaging experiments , HCT116 cells were plated on poly - L - lysine coated cover slips and transfected with ER calcium sensor ER - GCaMP6 - 150 using FuGENE HD ( Promega Corp . ) . Experiments were carried out 1 - 2 days after transfection . ER - GCaMP6 - 150 was kindly provide by J . de Juan - Sanz and T . A . Ryan [ 36 ] . The murine macrophage cell line RAW264 . 7 was routinely cultured in high glucose Dulbecco ' s Modified Eagle ' s Medium ( DMEM ) supplemented with 10 % FBS [ 11 ] . Cell culture was carried at 37°C in a humidified environment with 5 % CO 2 . Reagents and cell treatment Synthetic mycolactone ( MYC ) A / B was kindly provided by Y . Kishi ( Harvard University ) [ 37 ] . Aliquots containing 0 . 5 mg / ml DMSO were maintained at - 80°C in the dark . Before the experiments , the mycolactone stock solution was diluted directly in complete culture medium or recording solution to the desired concentrations . Thapsigargin ( TG , Thermo Fisher Scientific ) and ionomycin ( IONO , Thermo Fisher Scientific ) were dissolved in DMSO to obtain 1 mM and 10 mM stocks , respectively . TG and IONO stock were maintained at - 20°C in the dark and dilutions to the desired concentrations were made directly in the recording solution just before experiments . Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  7 FURA - 2 AM ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) was dissolved in DMSO to obtain a 1 mM stock solution , which was subsequently dissolved to 4 µM in a Ca 2 + containing solution ( 140 mM NaCl , 5 mM KCl , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM CaCl 2 , 10 mM glucose , 25 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 2 ) . Cells were loaded with FURA - 2 prior imaging experiments by incubation with the solution containing 4 µM FURA - 2 AM for 20 min , washed and subsequent exposure to the bath solution . TG and IONO were routinely applied as 2x solutions to the bath at a ratio of 1 : 1 to avoid problems arising from slow mixing . MYC was added to the culture medium at the desired concentrations and cells were cultured for 6 and 18 h before imaging recordings . When cells were transfected with ER - GCaMP6 - 150 , MYC was present in the culture medium containing the transfection reagents during the last 6 h before imaging recordings . Mock treatments represent the application of 0 . 02 - 0 . 05 % v / v DMSO in bath solution or culture medium . Live Cell Ca 2 + Imaging Ca 2 + imaging experiments were carried out in the absence of Ca 2 + in the bath solution to prevent Ca 2 + entry from extracellular space . Thus , the bath solution contained 140 mM NaCl , 5 mM KCl , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 5 mM EGTA , 10 mM glucose and 10 mM HEPES - KOH ( pH 7 . 35 ) . Using a n iMIC microscope equipped with a polychromator V and the Live Acquisition Software ( Till Photonics ) , we imaged cytosolic Ca 2 + concentrations ( [ Ca 2 + ] cyt ) using FURA - 2 ( i ) and Ca 2 + concentrations in ER ( [ Ca 2 + ] ER ) with the Ca 2 + sensors D1ER ( ii ) and ER - GCaMP6 - 150 ( iii ) . i ) Imaging cytosolic Ca 2 + with FURA - 2 . FURA - 2 was excited at 340 and 380 nm alternately . The emitted fluorescence was captured at 510 nm to obtain FURA - 2 images at 340 and 380 nm excitation . FURA - 2 image pairs containing 40 – 50 cells / frame were obtained every 3 s at a magnification of 20x . FURA - 2 signals were measured in FURA - 2 image pairs as F340 / F380 , where F340 and F380 correspond to the background - subtracted fluorescence intensity at 340 and 380 nm excitation wavelengths , respectively . [ Ca 2 + ] cyt was calculated with the standard ratiometric equation [ Ca 2 + ] free =  K d , ( ( R - R min ) / ( R max - R ) ) , in which R = F340 / F380 [ 38 ] . Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  8  Kd , maximal and minimal F340 / F380 ( R min and R max ) were measured as previously described [ 34 ] . Results of FURA - 2 measurements are presented as [ Ca 2 + ] cyt . ii ) Imaging ER Ca 2 + with D1ER . D1ER - HEK cells were exposed to 433 nm and the emitted florescence was split at 469 / 23 nm and 536 / 27 nm to obtain the CFP and citrine components , respectively [ 35 ] . The cell fluorescence was additionally passed through a dichrotome and projected on the chip of the microscope camera to obtain simultaneous CFP and citrine images . Image pairs containing 10 - 15 cells / frame were obtained at 60x magnification every 10 s . The FRET ratios were calculated from background - subtracted CFP and citrine image pairs as F Citrine / F CFP , where F Citrine and F CFP represent the citrine and CFP fluorescence intensities at 536 nm and 469 nm , respectively [ 34 ] . Results of D1ER measurements that reflect the dynamic of [ Ca 2 + ] ER are presented as F Citrine / F CFP ratios . ii ) Imaging ER Ca 2 + with ER - GCaMP6 - 150 . Cells transfected with ER - GCaMP6 - 150 were exposed to 480 nm and the emitted fluorescence was collected at 515 nm ( de Juan - Sanz et al . , 2017 ) . Images with 3 - 10 cells / frame were recorded at a 60x magnification every 2 s . The ER - GCaMP6 - 150 fluorescence ( F ) was measured in background - subtracted images and normalised with respect to the fluorescence measured 2 min after starting recordings ( F 0 ) . Results of measurements with ER - GCaMP6 - 150 that reflect the dynamic of [ Ca 2 + ] ER are presented as F / F 0 ratios . Homology Modelling and Molecular Docking The 476 amino acids long protein sequence of human Sec61α isoform 1 was retrieved from Uniprot ( ID : P61619 ) . Using homology modelling , structural models of human Sec61α were constructed using the following electron microscopy ( EM ) structures of Sec61α from Canis lupus ( Uniport ID : P38377 ) as template ( 99 . 8 % sequence identity using global sequence alignment ) : idle conformation ( PDB code 3J7Q with resolution of 3 . 4 Å ) [ 21 ] ; open conformation ( 3JC2 with resolution of 3 . 6 Å ) [ 23 ] ; and the inhibited state of Sec61α in the presence of MYC ( 6Z3T with resolution 2 . 6 Å ) [ 16 ] . The structural information of the missing part of 6Z3T was obtained by homology modelling based on 2WWB ( EM structure with resolution 6 . 48 Å ) . Homology modelling was performed using MODELLER 9 . 21 [ 39 ] . After sequence alignment of target and template , MODELLER was run locally with the automodel Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  9 class to generate 50 different models . As structure 3JC2 is lacking structural information for the plug region , the plug region of the open conformation was modelled as loop . The homology model with the lowest discrete optimization of potential energy ( DOPE ) score was selected as the final model and subjected to 1000 steps of energy minimization , using the GROMACS package ( version 5 . 0 . 7 ) [ 40 ] to relax side chain atoms . For this , the protonation states of titratable amino acids were determined by the web server PDB2PQR [ 41 ] using the PROPKA method [ 42 ] . The total charge of Sec61α was + 4e . Two different isomers of MYC were used for docking , MYC B ( E - isomer ) and MYC A ( Z - isomer ) ( see Supplementary Figure S1 ) . Docking of MYC was conducted using AutoDock4 . 2 [ 43 ] to predict energetically favourable binding poses of the ligand inside or on the surface of WT human Sec61α in the idle , open and MYC - inhibited conformations . With respect to protein - ligand docking , MYC is a large compound containing 23 rotatable bonds . For each ligand , MYC A and B , the docking calculations were performed in two consecutive steps : in the first docking step , we adopted a relatively large grid box ( 100 Å × 100 Å × 126 Å ) ( see Supplementary Figure S2 ) covering the entire cavity of Sec61α in order to achieve an unbiased approach to determine potential binding sites . The Lamarckian genetic algorithm was employed to search for favourable binding poses , with a population size of 150 , 27 × 10 3 generations and 25 × 10 5 energy evaluations . All other docking parameters for protein and ligand were set to the default values of AutoDock . 2000 individual docking results were clustered according to a threshold for structural similarity of 2 . 0 Å RMSD . In each cluster , the representative conformation was set to the one with the lowest binding free energy for that cluster . Three independent sets of 2000 docking runs each were conducted in the first stage . In the second docking stage , the size of the grid box was reduced to 90 Å × 80 Å × 80 Å dimension ( idle conformation ) , 80 Å × 90 Å × 80 Å dimension ( intermediate conformation ) , and 80 Å × 80 Å × 90 Å ( open conformation ) , respectively . This was done based on the populations of the most stable binding positions of the ligand . In the fine docking runs , more stringent parameters were used , namely 0 . 5 × 10 6 generations and 100 × 10 6 energy evaluations per run . In this stage , we executed five independent fine docking runs for the idle and intermediate conformations of Sec61α . The first step of docking to the open conformation of Sec61α showed a larger conformational diversity of MYC within the Sce61α Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  10 channel pore than for the idle conformation , ten independent fine docking runs were performed for the open conformation . In each docking run we generated 50 docked conformations . Membrane - associated Polysome Profiling RAW264 . 7 cells grown to 80 % confluency on 15 cm dishes were incubated with 31 . 25 ng / ml MYC or DMSO carrier control for 4 h at 37°C . Membrane - associated polysomes were prepared following the methods described in Potter and Nicchitta , 2002 [ 44 ] , with modifications . Cyclohexamide ( CHX ) ( 100 μg / ml ) was added 5 min prior to harvesting . Cells were washed once with ice - cold PBS containing 100 μg / ml CHX then harvested in KHM buffer ( 25 mM K - Hepes , pH 7 . 2 , 400 mM KOAc , 25 mM Mg ( OAc ) 2 , 100 μg / ml CHX ) . Cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 280 x g for 3 min at 4°C , then resuspended in ice - cold KHM containing 0 . 03 % digitonin and incubated on ice for 5 min . After centrifugation again at 280 x g for 3 min at 4°C , pellets were solubilised by incubation with KHM containing 2 % digitonin , 1 mM PMSF and 40 U / ml RNase inhibitor . Lysates were centrifuged at 7500 g for 10 min at 4°C and layered onto a 10 - 50 % sucrose gradient in KMH containing 0 . 1 % digitonin and 100 μg / ml CHX . Polysome profiling was carried out as described previously [ 11 ] . Proteins in column fractions were acetone precipitated and separated by SDS PAGE on 4 - 15 % gradient gels ( Bio - Rad ) and blotted onto Immobilon PVDF membranes ( Merck ) . Blots were probed with mouse monoclonal anti - Sec61α ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) and rabbit polyclonal anti - Sec61β antibodies [ 45 ] and detected with ECL anti - mouse IgG and anti - rabbit IgG , HRP linked antibodies ( GE Healthcare ) , respectively . Statistical Analysis Single cell data has been obtained in independent Ca 2 + imaging recordings with 3 - 6 cover slips per experimental setting . Data was pooled and analysed with Excel 2010 , Prism5 and Sigma Plot 10 . 0 . The total number of analysed cells in each experimental setting is given in Figures 1 - 4 . Statistical significance of the Ca 2 + imaging data was assessed with the two sample Kolmogorov - Smirnov test . Statistical significance is given as n . s . , non - significant ; * , p < 0 . 05 ; * * , p < 0 . 01 and * * * , p < 0 . 001 . Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  11 Results Impact of mycolactone on the cellular Ca 2 + homeostasis Mycolactone has previously been shown to target the  subunit of Sec61 complexes in the ER membrane [ 12 , 16 ] . Biochemical evidence from translocation assays support its inhibition of Sec61  at a step after the engagement of ribosomes [ 18 ] , raising the possibility that one aspect of the cellular action of mycolactone is the disruption of the Ca 2 + homeostasis due to its interaction with Sec61α within the ER membrane . In order to explore this possibility , we analysed the Ca 2 + homeostatic mechanisms in cells treated with mycolactone . We imaged the cytosolic Ca 2 + concentration ( [ Ca 2 + ] cyt ) with FURA - 2 as well as the Ca 2 + concentration in ER ( [ Ca 2 + ] ER ) with the genetically encoded sensors D1ER and ER - GCaMP6 - 150 [ 34 , 36 ] . Since [ Ca 2 + ] ER is maintained around 100 - 800 µM by a dynamic equilibrium between the Ca 2 + leakage from the ER and the action of SERCA pumping Ca 2 + back into the ER , as well as by the Ca 2 + buffering of ER resident proteins [ 46 , 47 ] , the SERCA - inhibitor TG unmasks the Ca 2 + leakage producing a transient increase in [ Ca 2 + ] cyt . Typically , TG - induced Ca 2 + transients are characterised by a rapid onset and short duration in most mammalian cells [ 48 ] . Figure 1A and B illustrates the effects of 125 ng / ml mycolactone on the Ca 2 + mobilisation induced by TG in HCT116 cells . When Ca 2 + transients of mycolactone - treated cells were compared with the DMSO controls , we observed a pronounced mycolactone effect on the duration and peak amplitude of the Ca 2 + transients ( Figure 1A , B ) . Such effects on Ca 2 + transients are best quantified as the area under the curve ( AUC ) , which is calculated by integration of the Ca 2 + transients . Figure 1C shows that mycolactone significantly reduced the AUC of TG - induced Ca 2 + transients , indicating that the amount of Ca 2 + mobilised by TG from ER is lower in mycolactone - treated cells . However , ER Ca 2 + depletion as well as increased Ca 2 + leakage from ER can explain the attenuation of TG - induced Ca 2 + transients by mycolactone . Therefore , we next used IONO in order to estimate the total amount of Ca 2 + that can be mobilised in HCT116 cells . As shown in Figure . 1D , the IONO - induced Ca 2 + transients had a reduced amplitude and were shorter in mycolactone - treated cells than in DMSO controls . The AUC analysis revealed that HCT116 cells lost about 2 / 3 of the mobilisable Ca 2 + after 6 h treatment with 125 ng / ml mycolactone ( Figure 1E ) . Thus , mycolactone likely compromises Ca 2 + Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  12 homeostasis in the cell by reducing Ca 2 + storage levels , which in turn attenuates the Ca 2 + signalling in HCT116 cells . In HCT116 cells , less than 10 ng / ml mycolactone is sufficient to maximally reduce cell viability [ 15 ] . Since we used 125 ng / ml mycolactone in previous experiments ( Figure 1 ) , the question arises as whether low concentrations of mycolactone also induce attenuation of TG - induced Ca 2 + transients . Therefore , we next exposed HCT116 cells to a dilution series between 3 . 9 ng / ml and 125 ng / ml mycolactone for 6 h . Thereafter , cells were exposed to TG to induce Ca 2 + mobilisation from ER . As shown in Figure 2A , even 3 . 9 ng / ml mycolactone shortened the Ca 2 + transients without major effect on the amplitude of the Ca 2 + signals . Higher concentrations of mycolactone shortened the TG - induced Ca 2 + transients further and these displayed noticeably smaller amplitudes , with the consequence that the AUC of TG - induced Ca 2 + transients displayed a dose - dependent inhibition by mycolactone ( Figure 2B ) . Mycolactone enhances the Ca 2 + leakage from ER The magnitude of TG - induced Ca 2 + transients is determined by the Ca 2 + content of the ER as well as by the intensity of Ca 2 + leakage from ER . We found that the total amount of mobilisable Ca 2 + in HCT116 cells is reduced by mycolactone ( Figure 1D , E ) , suggesting that the ER Ca 2 + content may be compromised in mycolactone - treated cells . We hypothesised that an increased Ca 2 + leakage that leads to ER Ca 2 + depletion during the exposure to mycolactone likely contributes to the attenuation of Ca 2 + transients that were observed in HCT116 cells ( Figure 1A - C ) . In order to test this hypothesis , we therefore imaged the changes in [ Ca 2 + ] ER using the FRET - based ER Ca 2 + sensor D1ER [ 35 ] . In experiments with ER Ca 2 + sensors , TG typically induces an exponential depletion of ER Ca 2 + that reflects the unmasking of the Ca 2 + leakage from ER [ 34 ] . HEK - 293 cells stably expressing D1ER ( D1ER - HEK ) were exposed to mycolactone for 6 and 18 h before ER Ca 2 + imaging . As shown in Figure 3A , DMSO - treated cells display an exponential ER Ca 2 + depletion upon application of TG . When compared with controls , the ER Ca 2 + depletion was much faster in D1ER - HEK cells treated with mycolactone for 6 and 18 h ( Figure 3A , B ) . Analysis of the time to 50 % decay in ER Ca 2 + ( t 1 / 2 ) revealed a two times faster decay of Ca 2 + depletion in cells treated with mycolactone for 18 h ( Figure 3C ) . This fast decay of Ca 2 + depletion is indicative of a mycolactone - induced enhancement of the Ca 2 + leakage from ER . Additionally , we observed that the basal ER Ca 2 + levels decreased after Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  13 18 h mycolactone treatment ( Figure 3B ) , indicating that mycolactone enhances the Ca 2 + leakage from ER , which in the long term produces a continuous Ca 2 + depletion in the ER . Sec61 complexes are involved in the mycolactone effects on ER Ca 2 + leakage Since mycolactone targets the  subunit of Sec61 complexes in the ER membrane [ 12 , 16 ] and Sec61 complexes form a Ca 2 + leakage pathway from ER [ 49 ] , a distinct possibility is that mycolactone stabilises a conformation , in which Sec61 complexes are open and permeable for Ca 2 + . To test this hypothesis , we took advantage of a series of mycolactone - resistant HCT116 cell clones that have heterozygous non - synonymous mutations within the SEC61A1 gene encoding Sec61   . For our Ca 2 + imaging experiments , we selected the cell line expressing Sec61α D60G , which is located in the cytosolic loop ( CL ) 1 of Sec61  , as well as the cell lines expressing Sec61α S82Y and Q127K , which are located in the transmembrane segments ( TM ) 2 and 3 , respectively , and the mutations R66K and S71F which are located in the transition between CL1 and TM2 . Using the ER Ca 2 + sensor ER - GCaMP6 - 150 [ 36 ] , we have visualised the TG - induced depletion of ER Ca 2 + as a surrogate of Ca 2 + leakage in these cell lines . As expected , ER - GCaMP6 - 150 detected an exponential Ca 2 + depletion in wild type ( WT ) HCT116 cells exposed to DMSO for 6 h ( Figure 4A ) , as well as in all clones containing Sec61  mutants ( Figure 4B - F ) . Notably , the rate of Ca 2 + depletion was different in each clone as revealed by the t 1 / 2 values ( Figure 4G ) , particularly for D60G and S82Y . This suggests that the mutations themselves may impact the structure and function of Sec61 translocons , as expected as they are prl mutants . In WT HCT116 cells mycolactone reduced the t 1 / 2 by about 50 % ( Figure 4A , G ) , in line with the observation using the ER Ca 2 + sensor D1ER ( Figure 3C ) . However , the effects of mycolactone on cells expressing the Sec61  mutants varied slightly according to the mutation . For instance , mycolactone no longer caused any change to the t 1 / 2 with the Sec61  S71F mutant ( Figure 4D , G ) . Although not statistically significant , longer t 1 / 2 values were observed in the Sec61  D60G and Sec61  R66K mutants ( Figure 4B , C , G ) . Compared with the respective DMSO controls , significantly shorter t 1 / 2 values were detected in the Sec61  mutants S82Y and Q127K ( Figure 4E - G ) , although these mycolactone effects were Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  14 always less pronounced than the nearly 50 % reduction of t 1 / 2 in WT HCT116 cells . In the case of the Sec61  S82Y mutant , mycolactone reduced t 1 / 2 by about 12 % ( Figure 4E , G ) , a much milder effect . All in all , the direct analysis of the TG - induced ER Ca 2 + depletion provided evidence that mycolactone no longer enhances Ca 2 + leakage from ER in HCT116 cells expressing the mycolactone resistance mutations in Sec61α ( Figure 4 ) . Hence , our results strongly support the suggestion that Ca 2 + leakage from ER in the presence of mycolactone is mediated by Sec61α . Supporting this suggestion , siRNA knockdown of SEC61A1 in HeLa cells abolished the enhancing effects of mycolactone on Sec61α - mediated Ca 2 + leakage ( data not shown ) . Furthermore , the absent or weakened Ca 2 + leakage from the ER could be a contributing factor to the increased mycolactone resistance of these cell lines in cell survival assays [ 15 , 16 ] . Molecular Docking For our homology model of the idle conformation of human Sec61α within ribosome - Sec61 complexes , docking yielded favourable low - energy conformations where mycolactone A and B interacted with Sec61α with a binding energy of −7 . 25 ± 0 . 8 kcal / mol and −8 . 17 ± 0 . 5 kcal / mol ( on average ) , respectively . Both mycolactone isomers were placed near the cytosolic entrance of the idle WT Sec61α pore ( see Figures 5 and 6 , bottom left panels ) and mainly occupied the volume between cytosolic loops 6 and 4 ( CL6 and CL4 ) . The long acyl tails ( Southern tail ) of both mycolactones face towards the CL4 region . The docking results suggest that the Northern acyl side chain of both mycolactone A and B could potentially form hydrogen bonds with the CL6 region because residues from the region Pro280 - Ser287 ( CL6 - TM7 ( transmembrane helix 7 ) ) were predicted to strongly interact with both isomers of mycolactone . For the mycolactone - inhibited conformation , the docking results suggest that mycolactone occupies the groove between TM8 , TM2 and TM7 helices ( Figures 5 and 6 , bottom middle panels ) . The docking position of the lactone core of mycolactone compares well to the orientation of mycolactone determined in the EM structure [ 16 ] . In contrast to the EM structure , the longer acyl side chain ( southern chain ) of mycolactone is oriented towards the lateral gate ( Figures 5 and 6 , bottom middle panels ) , possibly due to the absence of lipids in the docking analysis . These docking results suggest that both mycolactones A and Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  15 B can interact with this conformation of Sec61α with similar binding energies of −8 . 21 ± 1 . 1 and −8 . 67 ± 0 . 6 kcal / mol , respectively . Residues from the region Leu89 - Lys98 ( TM2 ) strongly interact with both isomers of mycolactone . The most favourable final binding poses of mycolactone A and B are displayed in Figures 5 and 6 . For the open conformation of Sec61α , the docking results placed mycolactone inside the channel pore that would normally be the translocation path of substrate peptides . Mycolactone A was placed here in two main arrangements that we refer to as ‘ring - like’ or ‘extended’ conformations ( Figure 5 , bottom right panel ) . The ‘extended’ conformation was slightly more favourable with a binding energy of −9 . 02 ± 0 . 5 kcal / mol than the ‘ring - like’ conformation ( −8 . 21 ± 0 . 6 kcal / mol ) . In the ‘extended’ conformation , the acyl side chains of mycolactone A often formed hydrogen bonds with residues in CL6 , lumenal loop ( LL ) 9 and the plug region . In the ‘ring - like’ conformation , mycolactone A interacted with the N - terminal region of TM2 , LL9 and TM5 . mycolactone B also adopted the ‘extended’ conformation ( see Fig . 6 ) inside the channel pore and the ligand pose looked like a ‘bridge’ between the plug region and the loop CL6 similar to mycolactone A . The acyl side chains of mycolactone B often interacted with residues of CL6 , LL9 , plug and TM5 . The lowest binding energy of mycolactone B was −8 . 78 ± 0 . 6 kcal / mol . Functional consequences of Sec61α blockade by mycolactone Previous studies have shown that mycolactone causes an eIF2α - dependent reduction in overall protein translation rates , which reduces the abundance of polysomes and increases that of the 60S ribosomal subunit peak in the sub - polysomes [ 11 ] , albeit more mildly and more slowly than strong inducers of the integrated stress response , such as tunicamycin . Since puromycin , which disassembles ribosomal subunits leading to loss of polysomes [ 50 ] , increases the Sec61 - mediated Ca 2 + leakage from ER [ 51 ] , we next analysed the effects of mycolactone on polysomes . Polysome profiling is typically carried out in 1 % triton cell extracts , where cytosolic ribosomes predominate . In order to investigate the effect of mycolactone on polysomes at the ER , we analysed the membrane - associated polysome profile of cells exposed to mycolactone using digitonin extracts . This showed that mycolactone reduced the polysomal fractions and increased the 80S peak ( Figure 7A ) . In addition , immunoblotting of the polysome gradient fractions showed a shift of Sec61  from Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  16 the polysomal fraction in control cells to the 80S fraction in mycolactone - treated cells ( Figure 7B ) . This data suggests that the addition of mycolactone results in the disassembly of polyribosomes leaving isolated ribosome - Sec61 complexes in the ER membrane . Furthermore , it confirms previous data from extracted canine microsomes that mycolactone appears not to displace ribosomes from the ER [ 16 , 18 ] . Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  17 Discussion In this work , we present novel data from Ca 2 + imaging and show how application of the Sec61α inhibitor mycolactone affects Ca 2 + leakage through Sec61α . Also , we present results from molecular docking aimed at identifying putative binding modes of mycolactone to various conformational states of Sec61α . We will start this discussion section by summarizing the existing experimental data on how mycolactone affects Sec61α function . Then , we will connect this with the available structural data and docking results and , finally , suggest an integrated mechanistic model for mycolactone action on Sec61α . It has been known for some time that Sec61α can facilitate the Ca 2 + leakage from the ER to the cytosol [ 51 ] , which is normally pumped back into the ER by the SERCA pump . Application of the SERCA pump inhibitor TG prevents this and leads to a complete emptying of the ER Ca 2 + due to the Ca 2 + leakage . This is followed by partitioning of Ca 2 + to other compartments or release from cells . The time course of the TG - induced spike in [ Ca 2 + ] cyt is represented by the black curves in Figure 1 . Application of mycolactone decreases the peak and duration of this Ca 2 + release signal ( red curves in Figure 1 ) , hence indicating that the ER membrane becomes more permeable for Ca 2 + when mycolactone binds . The titration experiments shown in Figure 2 demonstrate that these effects on Ca 2 + leakage increase dose - dependently with increasing mycolactone concentration , presumably as the available Sec61 translocons become occupied with mycolactone , since their stoichiometry is approximated 1 : 1 [ 16 ] . Monitoring the [ Ca 2 + ] ER ( Figure 3 ) revealed that pre - incubation with mycolactone led to a faster Ca 2 + release from the ER than in the control , as expected based on [ Ca 2 + ] cyt measurements . Extending the pre - incubation time with mycolactone from 6 to 18 h led to a strong Ca 2 + depletion in ER , presumably due to increased leakage that SERCA could no longer control . Further analyses of the Ca 2 + depletion in HCT cells carrying mycolactone - resistant Sec61  mutations enabled us to pin down the role of Sec61 translocons in the effects of mycolactone on the Ca 2 + leakage from ER ( Figure 4 ) . We observed no statistically significant effects of mycolactone with the Sec61  mutants D60G , R66K and S71F , indicating that mycolactone has no effect on the Ca 2 + leakage supported by these Sec61  mutants . Mycolactone induced a slight increase of Ca 2 + leakage only in cells expressing the mutants Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  18 S82Y and Q127K , but these effects were by far less pronounced than that in control cells . This demonstrates that the effect of mycolactone on Ca 2 + leakage is extremely likely to be related to its interaction with Sec61α rather than its other reported targets , or a general disturbance of phospholipid bilayer integrity . The effects of mycolatone on the Ca 2 + leakage mediated by the S82Y and Q127K mutants may reflect differences in the effect of the mutations on the structure and function of the Sec61 translocon . This is not unexpected , since most have been previously associated with the prl phenotype , which alters the efficiency of translocation depending on the nature of the signal peptide . Further Ca 2 + imaging experiments are required to characterise the kinetic of the Ca 2 + leakage mediated by mycolactone - resistant Sec61 mutants . McKenna et al . ( 2016 ) found that ribosomes still bind to the Sec61 complex in the presence of mycolactone but observed discrete changes in the architecture of the ribosome – nascent chain ( RNC ) - Sec61 interaction , as evidenced by cross - linking of the nascent chain to Sec61 subunits [ 18 ] . Additionally , mycolactone treatment altered the trypsin sensitivity of CL6 and CL8 ( implicated in ribosome binding ) of Sec61α . On this basis , this biochemical analysis favoured a model where mycolactone perturbs the interaction between signal peptide and the ribosome - Sec61 complex that is necessary for co - translational translocation to progress . The recent analysis of the mycolactone - bound translocon shows that the conformation of the translocon is not long similar to that of the idle translocon , with Sec61α instead adopting a position that is wedged open at the lateral gate [ 16 ] . The lactone ring of mycolactone binds near the lateral gate and stabilises it in a partially open conformation . Molecular re - docking of mycolactone into a homology model of the EM structure of the mycolactone - bound state confirms the plausible position of the lactone ring identified by Gérard et al . ( 2020 ) . In these docking runs , the hydrophilic chains bound inside the Sec61α pore , presumably because the lipid bilayer was not present as an alternative hydrophobic surface . Previously , Aydin et al . ( 2019 ) characterized the orientational preference of mycolactone in a plain DPPC bilayer by molecular dynamics simulations [ 52 ] . They reported that the highly hydrophobic lactone ring prefers to be buried among the hydrophobic lipid tails of the phospholipid bilayer , whereas the hydroxyl groups that are found on the side chains either tend to stretch out to the hydrophilic lipid headgroups or interact with water Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  19 molecules . Hence , the more extended conformation of mycolactone reported by Gérard et al . ( 2020 ) appears more plausible than the compact conformation identified in the docking run [ 16 ] . Molecular docking of mycolactone to the idle state also revealed a novel potential binding site on the surface of Sec61α ( discussed in detail below ) . Molecular docking of mycolactone to the open state identified further putative binding positions in the channel pore . However , noting the just mentioned preference of mycolactone ' s lactone ring and its Northern and Southern chains for a patterned , mixed hydrophobic / hydrophilic environment [ 52 ] , these docking positions in the water - filled hydrophilic pore of the open state appear less likely . Also , there is so far no experimental evidence supporting such binding modes . Similar to Gerard et al . ( 2020 ) , these docking runs position mycolactone with the core and Northern chain within the translocon and the Southern chain extending from the translocon into the ER membrane . It has been known for some time that the Southern chain of mycolactone is important for cytotoxic and / or cytokine suppressing activity of mycolactone [ 3 ] . Since forward genetic screens have unambiguously linked these readouts to Sec61α [ 12 , 15 , 16 ] , this data can be used as a retrospective surrogate for Sec61α inhibition . Here , naturally occurring mycolactones with differing specific activities are invariant in the Northern chain and lactone core , but vary in the Southern chain methylation , hydroxylation and / or length . Furthermore , wide - ranging structure - function studies using synthetic variants of mycolactone [ 53 ] have revealed that variations in the Northern chain are generally well - tolerated , whereas the Southern chain is much more sensitive to even small perturbations in structure . After addition of even bulky functional groups to the Northern chain at C14 or C20 mycolactone retains cytotoxic activity . On the other hand , truncation of the Southern chain to C6′ or C2′ , or completely removing it results in a molecule with much reduced activity . A synthetic mycolactone produced by Scherr et al . ( 2013 ) , with no hydroxylation of the Southern chain , was found to retain minimal cytotoxic activity [ 54 ] . More specifically to translocation , structural variants of mycolactone lacking the Northern chain can still compete with cotransin ( CT7 ) for Sec61α binding , whereas those lacking the Southern chain or both chains cannot [ 12 ] . These data strongly suggest that the lactone core and Northern chain interacts directly with TM2 of the translocon , explaining the evolutionary conservation of these elements of the structure . On the other hand , we propose that the Southern chain has essential interactions with the lipid bilayer and ascribe the activity differences in Southern Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  20 chain variants to differing abilities to interact with the lipid bilayer . Interactions of the tail groups with phospholipid headgroups may serve to anchor the molecule , stabilising the inhibited conformation of the translocon . The idle state represents a non - translocating ‘primed’ state of Sec61α bound to ribosomes with closed lateral gate and the plug in place . This state is represented by the structure reported by Voorhees et al . ( 2014 ) and , so far , there is no evidence that Sec61 translocons support Ca 2 + leakage in this idle state [ 55 ] . After binding of the ribosome and shortly before engagement of the signal peptide within the lateral gate , we postulate that Sec61α rapidly transitions between this and an intermediate state , that closely resembles that of the yeast Sec62 / Sec63 - bound translocon required for post - translational translocation in that species . Bhadra et al . ( 2021 ) recently characterized by molecular dynamics simulations how Sec63 modulates opening of the lateral gate of Sec61 in yeast [ 56 ] . However , this transient structure has not yet been seen in the absence of mycolactone or other inhibitors [ 16 ] . It is plausible that the conformation of the intermediate state in Figure 8 may differ from that reported for the mycolactone - Sec61α complex , which has an open lateral gate , and the plug helix is intact but displaced . It is conceivable that “translocon breathing” could be associated with very transient states in which Ca 2 + ions can leak out of the ER . If so , mycolactone’s stabilisation of this state would clearly support the leak of Ca 2 + ions observed even at doses where all translocons are expected to be saturated with mycolactone . Considering the known three conformations of Sec61α ( idle , intermediate , open ) , we postulate that mycolactone preferentially binds to , and stabilises , the intermediate conformation , which is structurally similar to the inhibited conformation . Translocon breathing suggests a mechanism for mycolactone’s accessing of the translocon , as unbound mycolactone distributed in the ER membrane could penetrate the lateral gate during this step . This is in line with the structure – activity relationship data for mycolactone variants [ 54 , 57 , 58 ] . Alternatively , our docking analysis predicts that mycolactone could potentially bind on the cytosolic entrance of the Sec61α pore . Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  21 In the scheme of Figure 8 , nascent chain translocation occurs after the plug has moved out of the pore ( translocating state ) . Since the pore is entirely occupied by the translocating peptide , it is not thought that there is Ca 2 + leakage in this state . When translocation is completed , the channel pore is briefly left open ( post - translocation state ) by the exiting peptide making this state Ca 2 + permeable . Finally , the lateral gate and plug close again and the channel converts back to the idle state or ribosome - free state depending on whether the ribosome detaches from the translocon or not . While there is no evidence that Ca 2 + ions permeate through Sec61 translocons in the idle state [ 55 ] , functional studies in planar lipid bilayers demonstrated that Sec61 translocons support Ca 2 + leakage in the post - translocation state but not in the translocating and ribosome - free states [ 51 , 55 , 59 ] . The breakdown of the polysomes to a single 80S peak hints at effects of mycolactone on this stage of translocation that may also contribute to the Ca 2 + leakage . While translocation of secreted and Sec61α - dependent single - pass membrane proteins is blocked by mycolactone [ 60 ] , many multi - pass membrane proteins are still being synthesised , not all of which are thought to be substrates of the ER membrane protein complex [ 61 ] . We found that monomeric ribosomes accumulate in cells treated with mycolactone , and these are still associated with Sec61α . This scenario could be explained by altered conformation of the RNC complex delaying ribosome release following translation termination . Alternatively , the loss of the polysomes may slow the transition between the post - translocation and idle / ribosome - free states , allowing more time for Ca 2 + to leak out . Interestingly , this data is in line with a previously published study , which showed a similar effect in cells exposed to DTT or TG [ 62 ] . Like mycolactone , these compounds activate the integrated stress response pathways , and here the monosomal ribosomes continued to translate while associated with the membrane . Moreover , it agrees with our docking analysis that suggests that mycolactone can form hydrogen bonds with residues of CL6 on Sec61α , which interact directly with the ribosome . We speculate that the interaction of mycolactone with CL6 could change the conformation of these regions and consequently could alter the interaction and / or rate of release . This fits well with the changes in trypsin sensitivity of CL6 and CL7 observed by McKenna et al . ( 2016 ) . Other factors in the cellular response to mycolactone may further impact Ca 2 + homeostasis . For example , the gradual loss of ER chaperones , such as BiP , as well as oxidoreductases and other Ca 2 + regulators could also lead to enhanced leakage [ 14 ] . Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  22 In summary , binding of mycolactone to Sec61α is reminiscent of the “foot - in - the - door” mechanism suggested earlier for eeyarestatin compounds [ 34 ] . By stabilising the translocon in an intermediate state that is barely capable of Ca 2 + leakage and / or altering the efficiency with which the translocon can cycle through its various structural states , mycolactone promotes an enhanced Ca 2 + leakage from the ER that likely underpins its cytotoxic effects . Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  23 Data availability All supporting data in relation to the studies reported here are provided in this manuscript . Competing Interests The authors declare that there are no competing interests associated with the manuscript . Funding This work was supported in whole or part by a Santander Postgraduate Research Travel Grant ( to J . O . ) , Wellcome Trust Investigator Award in Science ( 202843 / Z / 16 / Z , to R . S . ) and by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft ( DFG ) via grants SFB 894 ( to A . C . , R . Z . ) and He3875 / 15 - 1 ( to V . H . ) CRediT Contribution Pratiti Bhadra : Investigation , Data curation , Formal analysis , Writing – review and editing . Scott Dos Santos : Investigation , Data curation , Formal analysis . Igor Gamayun : Investigation , Data curation , Formal analysis . Tillman Pick : Formal analysis , Writing – review and editing . Joy Ogbechi : Investigation , Formal analysis . Belinda S . Hall : Investigation , Formal analysis , Writing – review and editing . Richard Zimmermann : Conceptualization , Supervisor , Funding acquisition , Writing – review and editing . Volkhard Helms : Conceptualization , Supervisor , Funding acquisition , Writing – original draft , Writing – review and editing . Rachel E . Simmonds : Project administration , Conceptualization , Funding acquisition , Writing – review and editing . Adolfo Cavalié : Project administration , Conceptualization , Funding acquisition , Writing – original draft , Writing – review and editing . Acknowledgements We would like to thank Dr Yoshito Kishi ( Harvard University , USA ) for the gift of synthetic mycolactone A / B . We thank Roger Y . Tsien for kindly providing us the calcium sensor D1ER and to Jaime de Juan - Sanz and Timothy ( ICM - Institut du Cerveau , Paris , France ) and A . Ryan ( Weill Cornell Medicine , New York , USA ) for the ER - GCaMP6 - 150 construct , respectively . We acknowledge Heidi Löhr and Martin Simon - Thomas ( Saarland University ) for their excellent technical assistance . Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  24 Figures Figure 1 . Mycolactone attenuates the Ca 2 + mobilisation in HCT116 cells . Changes in cytosolic Ca 2 + ( [ Ca 2 + ] cyt ) were imaged with FURA - 2 . HCT116 cells were treated with 0 . 05 % DMSO or 125 ng / mL mycolactone ( MYC ) for 6 h ( A ) and 18 h ( B ) before FURA - 2 loading and Ca 2 + imaging . Thapsigargin ( 1 µM TG ) was added to the bath solution to unmask Ca 2 + leakage from ER ( A - B ) . The area under the curve ( AUC ) of the TG - induced Ca 2 + transients was used as a measure of the mobilisable Ca 2 + from TG - sensitive stores ( C ) . The total amount of mobilisable Ca 2 + was estimated by treating cells with ionomycin ( 10 µM IONO ) ( D ) . The AUC of the IONO - induced Ca 2 + transients reflect the amount of Ca 2 + that is stored within the cells ( E ) . The number of cells is given within the graph bars in C and E . Data is presented as means ± SEM ; * * * , p < 0 . 001 . Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  25 Figure 2 . Dose - dependent effects of mycolactone on Ca 2 + mobilisation in HCT116 cells . The dose - dependence of mycolactone ( MYC ) on the thapsigarin ( TG ) - induced Ca 2 + mobilisation was analysed by exposing HCT116 cells to 0 . 05 % DMSO and to a dilution series of mycolactone from 3 . 9 nm / ml to 125 ng / ml for 6 h . Ca 2 + signals were imaged with FURA - 2 ( A ) . The area under the curve ( AUC ) was calculated from TG - induced Ca 2 + transients ( B ) . The number of cells is given within the graph bars in B . Data is presented as means ± SEM ; * * * , p < 0 . 001 . Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  26 Figure 3 . Mycolactone enhances the Ca 2 + leakage and induces Ca 2 + depletion in the ER . Changes of the Ca 2 + concentration in ER ( [ Ca 2 + ] ER ) were imaged with the FRET - based D1ER sensor and are expressed as F Citrine / F CFP ratios . HEK - 293 cells expressing D1ER ( D1ER - HEK ) were exposed to mycolactone ( MYC ) for 6 and 18 h ( A , 6 h mycolactone , 100 ng / ml . B , 18 h mycolactone , 125 ng / ml ) . DMSO was used as a control ( A , 0 . 020 % . B , 0 . 025 % ) . Thapsigargin ( 1 µM TG ) was applied to unmask the Ca 2 + leakage form ER . The mycolactone exposure of 6 h produced a faster decrease of [ Ca 2 + ] ER after TG application , indicating an enhancement of Ca 2 + leakage from ER ( A ) . In cells that were exposed to mycolactone for 18 h , an additional decrease of basal [ Ca 2 + ] ER was observed , which is indicative of Ca 2 + depletion in ER ( B ) . The speed of TG - induced changes in [ Ca 2 + ] ER was measured as the time that D1ER ratios needed to decrease to 50 % ( C , t 1 / 2 ) . The number of cells is given within the graph bars in C . Data is presented as means ± SEM ; * * * , p < 0 . 001 . Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  27 Figure 4 . Mycolactone - resistant mutations in Sec61α abolish the effects of mycolactone on the Ca 2 + leakage from ER . The effects of mycolactone ( MYC ) on [ Ca 2 + ] ER were analysed in wild type HCT116 cells ( A , WT ) and in HCT116 cells containing point mutations in Sec61α ( B , D60G ; C , R66K ; D , S71F ; E , S82Y ; F , Q127K ) . In order to image [ Ca 2 + ] ER , cells were transfected with the ER Ca 2 + sensor ER - GCaMP6 - 150 . Changes in [ Ca 2 + ] ER are given as normalised fluorescence ( F / F 0 ) . Cells were treated with 0 . 05 % DMSO or 125 ng / ml mycolactone for 6 h before Ca 2 + imaging . Thapsigargin ( 1 µM TG ) was used to induce ER Ca 2 + depletion . Accordingly , the speed in the decrease of [ Ca 2 + ] ER is a measure of the Ca 2 + leakage from ER and was calculated as the time Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  28 to 50 % decrease in the normalised fluorescence F / F 0 ( G , t 1 / 2 ) . The number of cells is given within the graph bars in E . Data is presented as means ± SEM ; * , p < 0 . 05 ; * * * , p < 0 . 001 . Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  29 Figure 5 . Most favourable binding poses of mycolactone A ( MYC - A , blue ) in idle ( lower - left ) , mycolactone - inhibited ( lower - middle ) and open ( lower - right ) state - models of human WT - Sec61α . The mycolactone conformation from cryo - EM structure 6Z3T is super imposed on the docking result ( orange , ”inhibited state” ) . Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  30 Figure 6 . Most favourable binding poses of mycolactone B ( MYC - B , green ) in idle ( lower - left ) , inhibited ( lower - middle ) and open ( lower - right ) state - models of human WT - Sec61α . The mycolactone conformation from cryo - EM structure 6Z3T is super imposed on the docking result ( orange , ”inhibited state” ) . Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  31 Figure 7 . Mycolactone promotes the disruption of polysomes . Typical polysome profile of whole cell triton - x - 100 extracts from RAW264 . 7 cells treated with DMSO or 31 . 25 ng / ml mycolactone ( A ) and of membrane associated polysomes from RAW264 . 7 cells treated with DMSO or 31 . 25 ng / ml mycolactone for 4 h ( B ) . Membrane associated polysomes were isolated from semi - permeabilised cell extracts solubilised with 2 % digitonin and separated on a 10 - 60 % sucrose gradient as described in Material and Methods . Western blotting of column fractions shows translocon components associated with the 80S peak in digitonin solubilised RAW264 . 7 cell membrane fractions after mycolactone treatment ( C ) . Blots were probed with anti - Sec61α and anti - Sec61β antibody . This figure is representative of duplicate assays . Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  32 Figure 8 . Model for mycolactone ( MYC ) - induced Ca 2 + leak via Sec61 complexes . In normal translocation , idle translocons are engaged with ribosome nascent chain complexes , but co - translational translocation has not yet started . There is no evidence that idle translocons are Ca 2 + permeable . Translocons “breathe” along the lateral gate , rapidly transitioning between the idle and intermediate states . We propose that the intermediate state may become transiently Ca 2 + permeable due to its open structure and the partial displacement of the plug helix . Once the signal peptide of the nascent chain functionally engages with the lateral gate of Sec61 α , the protein - conducting channel facilitates the translocation of the nascent protein by complete unfolding of the plug into a disordered Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  33 state , but the translocating state is not permeable to Ca 2 + due to the peptide filling the resultant channel . After translocation , Sec61 complexes transiently remain in this fully open post - translocation state , but without a nascent chain , allowing Ca 2 + ions to permeate through the aqueous channel . The cycle is completed when the ribosomes de - attach and Sec61 complexes return to the ribosome - fre e or idle state , depending on whether the ribosome is released . Mycolactone traps translocons in an inhibited state , that resembles the intermediate state , but may also be able to bind Sec61 α in the idle state . This locks the Sec61 translocon in a Ca 2 + - permeable conformation and an inefficient cycling through the other states , resulting in enhanced Ca 2 + leakage from the ER . Mycolactone causes an increase in membrane - associated 80S ribosomal monosomes . Hence , another contributing factor to the enhanced Ca 2 + leakage could be sustained dwell time in the post - translocation state , due to decreased efficiency of ribosome release . Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  34 References 1 Demangel , C . , Stinear , T . P . , Cole , S . T . ( 2009 ) Buruli ulcer : reductive evolution enhances pathogenicity of Mycobacterium ulcerans . Nat . Rev . Microbiol . 7 , 50 - 60 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrmicro2077 2 Demangel , C . , High , S . ( 2018 ) Sec61 blockade by mycolactone : A central mechanism in Buruli ulcer disease . Biol . Cell 110 , 237 - 248 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / boc . 201800030 3 Sarfo , F . S . , Phillips , R . , Wansbrough - Jones , M . , Simmonds , R . E . ( 2016 ) Recent advances : role of mycolactone in the pathogenesis and monitoring of Mycobacterium ulcerans infection / Buruli ulcer disease . Cell . Microbiol . 18 , 17 - 29 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / cmi . 12547 4 Kishi , Y . ( 2011 ) Chemistry of mycolactones , the causative toxins of Buruli ulcer . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U S A 108 , 6703 - 6708 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1015252108 5 Gehringer , M . , Mäder , P . , Gersbach , P . , Pfeiffer , B . , Scherr , N . , Dangy , J . P . , Pluschke , G . , Altmann , K . H . ( 2019 ) Configurationally Stabilized Analogs of M . ulcerans Exotoxins Mycolactones A and B Reveal the Importance of Side Chain Geometry for Mycolactone Virulence . Org . Lett . 21 , 5853 - 5857 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acs . orglett . 9b01947 6 Yotsu , R . R . , Suzuki , K . , Simmonds , R . E . , Bedimo , R . , Ablordey , A . , Yeboah - Manu , D . , Phillips , R . , Asiedu , K . ( 2018 ) Buruli Ulcer : a Review of the Current Knowledge . Curr . Trop . Med . Rep . 5 , 247 - 256 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40475 - 018 - 0166 - 2 7 Marion , E . , Song , O . R . , Christophe , T . , Babonneau , J . , Fenistein , D . , Eyer , J . , Letournel , F . , Henrion , D . , Clere , N . , Paille , V . , Guérineau , N . C . , Saint André , J . P . , Gersbach , P . , Altmann , K . H . , Stinear , T . P . , Comoglio , Y . , Sandoz , G . , Preisser , L . , Delneste , Y . , Yeramian , E . , Marsollier , L . , Brodin , P . ( 2014 ) Mycobacterial toxin induces analgesia in buruli ulcer by targeting the angiotensin pathways . Cell 157 , 1565 - 1576 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2014 . 04 . 040 8 Chany , A . C . , Veyron - Churlet , R . , Tresse , C . , Mayau , V . , Casarotto , V . , Le Chevalier , F . , Guenin - Macé , L . , Demangel , C . , Blanchard , N . ( 2014 ) Synthetic variants of mycolactone bind and activate Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome proteins . J . Med . Chem . 57 , 7382 - 7395 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / jm5008819 9 Guenin - Macé , L . , Veyron - Churlet , R . , Thoulouze , M . I . , Romet - Lemonne , G . , Hong , H . , Leadlay , P . F . , Danckaert , A . , Ruf , M . T . , Mostowy , S . , Zurzolo , C . , Bousso , P . , Chrétien , F . , Carlier , M . F . , Demangel , C . ( 2013 ) Mycolactone activation of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome proteins underpins Buruli ulcer formation . J . Clin . Invest . 123 , 1501 - 1512 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1172 / JCI66576 10 Phillips , R . O . , Sarfo , F . S . , Landier , J . , Oldenburg , R . , Frimpong , M . , Wansbrough - Jones , M . , Abass , K . , Thompson , W . , Forson , M . , Fontanet , A . , Niang , F . , Demangel , C . ( 2014 ) Combined inflammatory and metabolic defects reflected by reduced serum protein levels in patients with Buruli ulcer disease . PLoS Negl . Trop . Dis . 8 , e2786 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pntd . 0002786 11 Hall , B . S . , Hill , K . , McKenna , M . , Ogbechi , J . , High , S . , Willis , A . E . , Simmonds , R . E . ( 2014 ) The pathogenic mechanism of the Mycobacterium ulcerans virulence factor , mycolactone , depends on blockade of protein translocation into the ER . PLoS Pathog . 10 , e1004061 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1004061 12 Baron , L . , Paatero , A . O . , Morel , J . D . , Impens , F . , Guenin - Macé , L . , Saint - Auret , S . , Blanchard , N . , Dillmann , R . , Niang , F . , Pellegrini , S . , Taunton , J . , Paavilainen , V . O . , Demangel , C . ( 2016 ) Mycolactone subverts immunity by selectively blocking the Sec61 translocon . J . Exp . Med . 213 , 2885 - 2896 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1084 / jem . 20160662 Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  35 13 Grotzke , J . E . , Kozik , P . , Morel , J . D . , Impens , F . , Pietrosemoli , N . , Cresswell , P . , Amigorena , S . , Demangel , C . ( 2017 ) Sec61 blockade by mycolactone inhibits antigen cross - presentation independently of endosome - to - cytosol export . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U S A 114 , E5910 - E5919 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1705242114 14 Morel , J . D . , Paatero , A . O . , Wei , J . , Yewdell , J . W . , Guenin - Macé , L . , Van Haver , D . , Impens , F . , Pietrosemoli , N . , Paavilainen , V . O . , Demangel , C . ( 2018 ) Proteomics Reveals Scope of Mycolactone - mediated Sec61 Blockade and Distinctive Stress Signature . Mol . Cell Proteomics 17 , 1750 - 1765 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1074 / mcp . RA118 . 000824 15 Ogbechi , J . , Hall , B . S . , Sbarrato , T . , Taunton , J . , Willis , A . E . , Wek , R . C . , Simmonds , R . E . ( 2018 ) Inhibition of Sec61 - dependent translocation by mycolactone uncouples the integrated stress response from ER stress , driving cytotoxicity via translational activation of ATF4 . Cell Death Dis . 9 , 397 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41419 - 018 - 0427 - y 16 Gérard , S . F . , Hall , B . S . , Zaki , A . M . , Corfield , K . A . , Mayerhofer , P . U . , Costa , C . , Whelligan , D . K . , Biggin , P . C . , Simmonds , R . E . , Higgins , M . K . ( 2020 ) Structure of the Inhibited State of the Sec Translocon . Mol . Cell 79 , 406 - 415 e407 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2020 . 06 . 013 17 Zong , G . , Hu , Z . , O ' Keefe , S . , Tranter , D . , Iannotti , M . J . , Baron , L . , Hall , B . , Corfield , K . , Paatero , A . O . , Henderson , M . J . , Roboti , P . , Zhou , J . , Sun , X . , Govindarajan , M . , Rohde , J . M . , Blanchard , N . , Simmonds , R . , Inglese , J . , Du , Y . , Demangel , C . , High , S . , Paavilainen , V . O . , Shi , W . Q . ( 2019 ) Ipomoeassin F Binds Sec61α to Inhibit Protein Translocation . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 141 , 8450 - 8461 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / jacs . 8b13506 18 McKenna , M . , Simmonds , R . E . , High , S . ( 2016 ) Mechanistic insights into the inhibition of Sec61 - dependent co - and post - translational translocation by mycolactone . J . Cell Sci . 129 , 1404 - 1415 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 182352 19 Gogala , M . , Becker , T . , Beatrix , B . , Armache , J . P . , Barrio - Garcia , C . , Berninghausen , O . , Beckmann , R . ( 2014 ) Structures of the Sec61 complex engaged in nascent peptide translocation or membrane insertion . Nature 506 , 107 - 110 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature12950 20 Pfeffer , S . , Burbaum , L . , Unverdorben , P . , Pech , M . , Chen , Y . , Zimmermann , R . , Beckmann , R . , Förster , F . ( 2015 ) Structure of the native Sec61 protein - conducting channel . Nat . Commun . 6 , 8403 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncomms9403 21 Voorhees , R . M . , Fernández , I . S . , Scheres , S . H . , Hegde , R . S . ( 2014 ) Structure of the mammalian ribosome - Sec61 complex to 3 . 4 Å resolution . Cell 157 , 1632 - 1643 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2014 . 05 . 024 22 Park , E . , Rapoport , T . A . ( 2011 ) Preserving the membrane barrier for small molecules during bacterial protein translocation . Nature 473 , 239 - 242 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature10014 23 Voorhees , R . M . , Hegde , R . S . ( 2016 ) Structure of the Sec61 channel opened by a signal sequence . Science 351 , 88 - 91 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . aad4992 24 Itskanov , S . , Park , E . ( 2019 ) Structure of the posttranslational Sec protein - translocation channel complex from yeast . Science 363 , 84 - 87 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . aav6740 25 Wu , X . , Cabanos , C . , Rapoport , T . A . ( 2019 ) Structure of the post - translational protein translocation machinery of the ER membrane . Nature 566 , 136 - 139 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41586 - 018 - 0856 - x 26 Schäuble , N . , Lang , S . , Jung , M . , Cappel , S . , Schorr , S . , Ulucan , O . , Linxweiler , J . , Dudek , J . , Blum , R . , Helms , V . , Paton , A . W . , Paton , J . C . , Cavalié , A . , Zimmermann , Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  36 R . ( 2012 ) BiP - mediated closing of the Sec61 channel limits Ca 2 + leakage from the ER . EMBO J . 31 , 3282 - 3296 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2012 . 189 27 Patterson , R . L . , van Rossum , D . B . , Gill , D . L . ( 1999 ) Store - operated Ca 2 + entry : evidence for a secretion - like coupling model . Cell 98 , 487 - 499 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / s0092 - 8674 ( 00 ) 81977 - 7 28 Wang , Y . , Mattson , M . P . , Furukawa , K . ( 2002 ) Endoplasmic reticulum calcium release is modulated by actin polymerization . J . Neurochem . 82 , 945 - 952 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1046 / j . 1471 - 4159 . 2002 . 01059 . x 29 Jacquemyn , J . , Cascalho , A . , Goodchild , R . E . ( 2017 ) The ins and outs of endoplasmic reticulum - controlled lipid biosynthesis . EMBO Rep . 18 , 1905 - 1921 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 15252 / embr . 201643426 30 López , C . A . , Unkefer , C . J . , Swanson , B . I . , Swanson , J . M . J . , Gnanakaran , S . ( 2018 ) Membrane perturbing properties of toxin mycolactone from Mycobacterium ulcerans . PLoS Comput . Biol . 14 , e1005972 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005972 31 Nitenberg , M . , Bénarouche , A . , Maniti , O . , Marion , E . , Marsollier , L . , Géan , J . , Dufourc , E . J . , Cavalier , J . F . , Canaan , S . , Girard - Egrot , A . P . ( 2018 ) The potent effect of mycolactone on lipid membranes . PLoS Pathog . 14 , e1006814 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 32 Snyder , D . S . , Small , P . L . ( 2003 ) Uptake and cellular actions of mycolactone , a virulence determinant for Mycobacterium ulcerans . Microb . Pathog . 34 , 91 - 101 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / s0882 - 4010 ( 02 ) 00210 - 3 33 Boulkroun , S . , Guenin - Macé , L . , Thoulouze , M . I . , Monot , M . , Merckx , A . , Langsley , G . , Bismuth , G . , Di Bartolo , V . , Demangel , C . ( 2010 ) Mycolactone suppresses T cell responsiveness by altering both early signaling and posttranslational events . J . Immunol . 184 , 1436 - 1444 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 0902854 34 Gamayun , I . , O ' Keefe , S . , Pick , T . , Klein , M . C . , Nguyen , D . , McKibbin , C . , Piacenti , M . , Williams , H . M . , Flitsch , S . L . , Whitehead , R . C . , Swanton , E . , Helms , V . , High , S . , Zimmermann , R . , Cavalié , A . ( 2019 ) Eeyarestatin Compounds Selectively Enhance Sec61 - Mediated Ca 2 + Leakage from the Endoplasmic Reticulum . Cell . Chem . Biol . 26 , 571 - 583 e576 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chembiol . 2019 . 01 . 010 35 Palmer , A . E . , Jin , C . , Reed , J . C . , Tsien , R . Y . ( 2004 ) Bcl - 2 - mediated alterations in endoplasmic reticulum Ca 2 + analyzed with an improved genetically encoded fluorescent sensor . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U S A 101 , 17404 - 17409 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0408030101 36 de Juan - Sanz , J . , Holt , G . T . , Schreiter , E . R . , de Juan , F . , Kim , D . S . , Ryan , T . A . ( 2017 ) Axonal Endoplasmic Reticulum Ca 2 + Content Controls Release Probability in CNS Nerve Terminals . Neuron 93 , 867 - 881 e866 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2017 . 01 . 010 37 Song , F . , Fidanze , S . , Benowitz , A . B . , Kishi , Y . ( 2002 ) Total synthesis of the mycolactones . Org . Lett . 4 , 647 - 650 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / ol0172828 38 Grynkiewicz , G . , Poenie , M . , Tsien , R . Y . ( 1985 ) A new generation of Ca 2 + indicators with greatly improved fluorescence properties . J . Biol . Chem . 260 , 3440 - 3450 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0021 - 9258 ( 19 ) 83641 - 4 39 Fiser , A . , Šali , A . ( 2003 ) Modeller : generation and refinement of homology - based protein structure models . Methods Enzymol . 374 , 461 - 491 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0076 - 6879 ( 03 ) 74020 - 8 40 Van Der Spoel , D . , Lindahl , E . , Hess , B . , Groenhof , G . , Mark , A . E . , Berendsen , H . J . ( 2005 ) GROMACS : fast , flexible , and free . J . Comput . Chem . 26 , 1701 - 1718 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jcc . 20291 Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  37 41 Dolinsky , T . J . , Nielsen , J . E . , McCammon , J . A . , Baker , N . A . ( 2004 ) PDB2PQR : an automated pipeline for the setup of Poisson - Boltzmann electrostatics calculations . Nucleic Acids Res . 32 , W665 - 667 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / nar / gkh381 42 Olsson , M . H . , Søndergaard , C . R . , Rostkowski , M . , Jensen , J . H . ( 2011 ) PROPKA3 : Consistent Treatment of Internal and Surface Residues in Empirical pKa Predictions . J . Chem . Theory Comput . 7 , 525 - 537 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / ct100578z 43 Morris , G . M . , Huey , R . , Lindstrom , W . , Sanner , M . F . , Belew , R . K . , Goodsell , D . S . , Olson , A . J . ( 2009 ) AutoDock4 and AutoDockTools4 : Automated docking with selective receptor flexibility . J . Comput . Chem . 30 , 2785 - 2791 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jcc . 21256 44 Potter , M . D . , Nicchitta , C . V . ( 2002 ) Endoplasmic reticulum - bound ribosomes reside in stable association with the translocon following termination of protein synthesis . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 23314 - 23320 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M202559200 45 Kelkar , A . , Dobberstein , B . ( 2009 ) Sec61beta , a subunit of the Sec61 protein translocation channel at the endoplasmic reticulum , is involved in the transport of Gurken to the plasma membrane . BMC Cell Biol . 10 , 11 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / 1471 - 2121 - 10 - 11 46 Camello , C . , Lomax , R . , Petersen , O . H . , Tepikin , A . V . ( 2002 ) Calcium leak from intracellular stores - - the enigma of calcium signalling . Cell Calcium 32 , 355 - 361 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / s0143416002001926 47 Prins , D . , Michalak , M . ( 2011 ) Organellar calcium buffers . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 3 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a004069 48 Carreras - Sureda , A . , Pihán , P . , Hetz , C . ( 2018 ) Calcium signaling at the endoplasmic reticulum : fine - tuning stress responses . Cell Calcium 70 , 24 - 31 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ceca . 2017 . 08 . 004 49 Lang , S . , Pfeffer , S . , Lee , P . H . , Cavalié , A . , Helms , V . , Forster , F . , Zimmermann , R . ( 2017 ) An Update on Sec61 Channel Functions , Mechanisms , and Related Diseases . Front . Physiol . 8 , 887 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fphys . 2017 . 00887 50 Blobel , G . , Sabatini , D . ( 1971 ) Dissociation of mammalian polyribosomes into subunits by puromycin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U S A 68 , 390 - 394 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 68 . 2 . 390 51 Lang , S . , Erdmann , F . , Jung , M . , Wagner , R . , Cavalié , A . , Zimmermann , R . ( 2011 ) Sec61 complexes form ubiquitous ER Ca 2 + leak channels . Channels ( Austin ) 5 , 228 - 235 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4161 / chan . 5 . 3 . 15314 52 Aydin , F . , Sun , R . , Swanson , J . M . J . ( 2019 ) Mycolactone Toxin Membrane Permeation : Atomistic versus Coarse - Grained MARTINI Simulations . Biophys . J 117 , 87 - 98 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2019 . 05 . 012 53 Gehringer , M . , Altmann , K . H . ( 2017 ) The chemistry and biology of mycolactones . Beilstein J . Org . Chem . 13 , 1596 - 1660 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3762 / bjoc . 13 . 159 54 Scherr , N . , Gersbach , P . , Dangy , J . P . , Bomio , C . , Li , J . , Altmann , K . H . , Pluschke , G . ( 2013 ) Structure - activity relationship studies on the macrolide exotoxin mycolactone of Mycobacterium ulcerans . PLoS Negl . Trop . Dis . 7 , e2143 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pntd . 0002143 55 Wirth , A . , Jung , M . , Bies , C . , Frien , M . , Tyedmers , J . , Zimmermann , R . , Wagner , R . ( 2003 ) The Sec61p complex is a dynamic precursor activated channel . Mol . Cell 12 , 261 - 268 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / s1097 - 2765 ( 03 ) 00283 - 1 56 Bhadra , P . , Yadhanapudi , L . , Romisch , K . , Helms , V . ( 2021 ) How does Sec63 affect the conformation of Sec61 in yeast ? PLoS Comput Biol 17 , e1008855 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1008855 Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  38 57 Chany , A . C . , Casarotto , V . , Schmitt , M . , Tarnus , C . , Guenin - Mace , L . , Demangel , C . , Mirguet , O . , Eustache , J . , Blanchard , N . ( 2011 ) A diverted total synthesis of mycolactone analogues : an insight into Buruli ulcer toxins . Chemistry 17 , 14413 - 14419 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / chem . 201102542 58 Guenin - Mace , L . , Baron , L . , Chany , A . C . , Tresse , C . , Saint - Auret , S . , Jonsson , F . , Le Chevalier , F . , Bruhns , P . , Bismuth , G . , Hidalgo - Lucas , S . , Bisson , J . F . , Blanchard , N . , Demangel , C . ( 2015 ) Shaping mycolactone for therapeutic use against inflammatory disorders . Sci Transl Med 7 , 289ra285 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / scitranslmed . aab0458 59 Simon , S . M . , Blobel , G . ( 1991 ) A protein - conducting channel in the endoplasmic reticulum . Cell 65 , 371 - 380 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 91 ) 90455 - 8 60 McKenna , M . , Simmonds , R . E . , High , S . ( 2017 ) Mycolactone reveals the substrate - driven complexity of Sec61 - dependent transmembrane protein biogenesis . J . Cell Sci . 130 , 1307 - 1320 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 198655 61 Chitwood , P . J . , Juszkiewicz , S . , Guna , A . , Shao , S . , Hegde , R . S . ( 2018 ) EMC Is Required to Initiate Accurate Membrane Protein Topogenesis . Cell 175 , 1507 - 1519 e1516 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2018 . 10 . 009 62 Stephens , S . B . , Dodd , R . D . , Brewer , J . W . , Lager , P . J . , Keene , J . D . , Nicchitta , C . V . ( 2005 ) Stable ribosome binding to the endoplasmic reticulum enables compartment - specific regulation of mRNA translation . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 5819 - 5831 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . e05 - 07 - 0685 Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  39 Supplementary Figures Fig . S1 . Conformations of mycolactone isomers . Mycolactone – Bhadra et al .  40 Fig . S2 . Docking regions in and around human Sec61α for ( a ) idle and inhibited states , and ( b ) for the open state . The black - dashed boxes represent the grid box ( 100 Å × 100 Å × 126 Å ) used for the first stage of docking and the red - dashed boxes show the grid box used in the second ( finer ) docking stage ( 90 Å × 80 Å × 80 Å ) , ( 80 Å × 90 Å × 80 Å ) and ( 80 Å × 80 Å × 90 Å ) for idle , intermediate and open state , respectively . The conformations in ( a ) and ( b ) are homology models of idle and open states , respectively .