The Framing of Decisions and the Psychology of Choice Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman Explanations and predictions of people ' s choices , in everyday life as well as in the social sciences , are often found - ed on the assumption of human rational - ity . The definition of rationality has been much debated , but there is general agree - ment that rational choices should satisfy some elementary requirements of con - sistency and coherence . In this article tional choice requires that the preference between options should not reverse with changes of frame . Because of imperfec - tions of human perception and decision , however , changes of perspective often reverse the relative apparent size of ob - jects and the relative desirability of op - tions . We have obtained systematic rever - Summary . The psychological principles that govern the perception of decision prob - lems and the evaluation of probabilities and outcomes produce predictable shifts of preference when the same problem is framed in different ways . Reversals of prefer - ence are demonstrated in choices regarding monetary outcomes , both hypothetical and real , and in questions pertaining to the loss of human lives . The effects of frames on preferences are compared to the effects of perspectives on perceptual appear - ance . The dependence of preferences on the formulation of decision problems is a significant concern for the theory of rational choice . we describe decision problems in which people systematically violate the re - quirements of consistency and coher - ence , and we trace these violations to the psychological principles that govern the perception of decision problems and the evaluation of options . A decision problem is defined by the acts or options among which one must choose , the possible outcomes or con - sequences of these acts , and the contin - gencies or conditional probabilities that relate outcomes to acts . We use the term " ' decision frame " to refer to the deci - sion - maker ' s conception of the acts , out - comes , and contingencies associated with a particular choice . The frame that a decision - maker adopts is controlled part - ly by the formulation of the problem and partly by the norms , habits , and personal characteristics of the decision - maker . It is often possible to frame a given de - cision problem in more than one way . Alternative frames for a decision prob - lem may be compared to alternative per - spectives on a visual scene . Veridical perception requires that the * perceived relative height of two neighboring moun - tains , say , should not reverse with changes of vantage point . Similarly , ra - SCIENCE , VOL . 211 , 30 JANUARY 1981 sals of preference by variations in the framing of acts , contingencies , or out - comes . These effects have been ob - served in a variety of problems and in the choices of different groups of respon - dents . Here we present selected illustra - tions of preference reversals , with data obtained from students at Stanford Uni - versity and at the University of British Columbia who answered brief question - naires in a classroom setting . The total number of respondents for each problem is denoted by N , and the percentage who chose each option is indicated in brackets . The effect of variations in framing is illustrated in problems 1 and 2 . Problem 1 [ N = 152 ] : Imagine that the U . S . is preparing for the outbreak of an unusual Asian disease , which is expected to kill 600 people . Two alternative programs to combat the disease have been proposed . Assume that the exact scientific estimate of the con - sequences of the programs are as follows : If Program A is adopted , 200 people will be saved . [ 72 percent ] If Program B is adopted , there is 1 / 3 probabil - ity that 600 people will be saved , and 2 / 3 probability that no people will be saved . [ 28 percent ] Which ofthe two programs would you favor ? The majority choice in this problem is risk averse : the prospect of certainly saving 200 lives is more attractive than a risky prospect of equal expected value , that is , a one - in - three chance of saving 600 lives . A second group of respondents was given the cover story of problem 1 with a different formulation of the alternative programs , as follows : Problem 2 [ N = 155 ] : If Program C is adopted 400 people will die . [ 22 percent ] If Program D is adopted there is 1 / 3 probabil - ity that nobody will die , and 2 / 3 probabili - ty that 600 people will die . [ 78 percent ] Which ofthe two programs would you favor ? The majority choice in problem 2 is risk taking : the certain death of 400 people is less acceptable than the two - in - three chance that 600 will die . The pref - erences in problems 1 and 2 illustrate a common pattern : choices involving gains are often risk averse and choices in - volving losses are often risk taking . However , it is easy to see that the two problems are effectively identical . The only difference between them is that the outcomes are described in problem 1 by the number of lives saved and in problem 2 by the number of lives lost . The change is accompanied by a pronounced shift from risk aversion to risk taking . We have observed this reversal in several groups of respondents , including univer - sity faculty and physicians . Inconsistent responses to problems 1 and 2 arise from the conjunction of a framing effect with contradictory attitudes toward risks in - volving gains and losses . We turn now to an analysis of these attitudes . The Evaluation of Prospects The major theory of decision - making under risk is the expected utility model . This model is based on a set of axioms , for example , transitivity of preferences , which provide criteria for the rationality of choices . The choices of an individual who conforms to the axioms can be de - scribed in terms of the utilities of various outcomes for that individual . The utility of a risky prospect is equal to the ex - pected utility of its outcomes , obtained by weighting the utility of each possible outcome by its probability . When faced with a choice , a rational decision - maker will prefer the prospect that offers the highest expected utility ( 1 , 2 ) . Dr . Tversky is a professor of psychology at Stan - ford University , Stanford , California 94305 , and Dr . Kahneman is a professor of psychology at the Uni - versity of British Columbia , Vancouver , Canada V6T IW5 . 0036 - 8075 / 81 / 0130 - 0453 $ 01 . 50 / 0 Copyright © 1981 AAAS 453 on M a y 27 , 20 10 www . sc i en c e m ag . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m As will be illustrated below , people ex - hibit patterns of preference which appear incompatible with expected utility theo - ry . We have presented elsewhere ( 3 ) a descriptive model , called prospect theo - ry , which modifies expected utility theo - ry so as to accommodate these observa - tions . We distinguish two phases in the choice process : an initial phase in which acts , outcomes , and contingencies are framed , and a subsequent phase of eval - uation ( 4 ) . For simplicity , we restrict the formal treatment of the theory to choices involving stated numerical probabilities and quantitative outcomes , such as mon - ey , time , or number of lives . Consider a prospect that yields out - come x with probability p , outcome y with probability q , and the status quo with probability 1 - p - q . According to prospect theory , there are values v ( . ) associated with outcomes , and decision weights 7r ( . ) associated with probabili - ties , such that the overall value of the prospect equals 7r ( p ) v ( x ) + ir ( q ) v ( y ) . A slightly different equation should be ap - plied if all outcomes of a prospect are on the same side of the zero point ( 5 ) . In prospect theory , outcomes are ex - pressed as positive or negative devia - tions ( gains or losses ) from a neutral ref - erence outcome , which is assigned a val - ue of zero . Although subjective values differ among individuals and attributes , we propose that the value function is commonly S - shaped , concave above the reference point and convex below it , as illustrated in Fig . 1 . For example , the dif - ference in subjective value between gains of $ 10 and $ 20 is greater than the subjective difference between gains of $ 110 and $ 120 . The same relation be - tween value differences holds for the corresponding losses . Another property of the value function is that the response to losses is more extreme than the re - sponse to gains . The displeasure associ - ated with losing a sum of money is gener - ally greater than the pleasure associated with winning the same amount , as is re - flected in people ' s reluctance to accept fair bets on a toss of a coin . Several stud - ies of decision ( 3 , 6 ) and judgment ( 7 ) have confirmed these properties of the value function ( 8 ) . The second major departure of pros - pect theory from the expected utility model involves the treatment of proba - bilities . In expected utility theory the utility of an uncertain outcome is weight - ed by its probability ; in prospect theory the value of an uncertain outcome is mul - tiplied by a decision weight 7r ( p ) , which is a monotonic function of p but is not a probability . The weighting function ir 454 Value Losses Fig . 1 . A hypothetical value function . has the following properties . First , im - possible events are discarded , that is , * 0 ) = 0 , and the scale is normalized so that r ( 1 ) = 1 , but the function is not well behaved near the endpoints . Second , for low probabilities 7r ( p ) > p , but r ( p ) + 7r ( 1 - p ) < 1 . Thus low proba - bilities are overweighted , moderate and high probabilities are underweighted , and the latter effect is more pronounced than the former . Third , 7r ( pq ) / ir ( p ) < 7r ( pqr ) / 7r ( pr ) for all 0 < p , q , r ' 1 . That is , for any fixed probability ratio q , the ratio of decision weights is closer to unity when the probabilities are low than when they are high , for example , ir ( . 1 ) / 7r ( . 2 ) > 7r ( . 4 ) / 7r ( . 8 ) . A hypothetical weighting function which satisfies these properties is shown in Fig . 2 . The major qualitative properties of decision weights can be extended to cases in which the probabilities of outcomes are subjective - ly assessed rather than explicitly given . In these situations , however , decision weights may also be affected by other characteristics of an event , such as am - biguity or vagueness ( 9 ) . Prospect theory , and the scales illus - trated in Figs . 1 and 2 , should be viewed as an approximate , incomplete , and sim - plified description of the evaluation of risky prospects . Although the properties of v and Xr summarize a common pattern of choice , they are not universal : the preferences of some individuals are not well described by an S - shaped value function and a consistent set of decision weights . The simultaneous measurement of values and decision weights involves serious experimental and statistical diffi - culties ( 10 ) . If Xr and v were linear throughout , the preference order between options would be independent of the framing of acts , outcomes , or contingencies . Because of the characteristic nonlinearities of ir and v , however , different frames can lead to different choices . The following three sections describe reversals of preference caused by variations in the framing of acts , contingencies , and outcomes . The Framing of Acts Problem 3 [ N = 150 ] : Imagine that you face the following pair of concurrent decisions . First examine both decisions , then indicate the options you prefer . Decision ( i ) . Choose between : A . a sure gain of $ 240 [ 84 percent ] B . 25 % chance to gain $ 1000 , and 75 % chance to gain nothing [ 16 percent ] Decision ( ii ) . Choose between : C . a sure loss of $ 750 [ 13 percent ] D . 75 % chance to lose $ 1000 , and 25 % chance to lose nothing [ 87 percent ] The majority choice in decision ( i ) is risk averse : a riskless prospect is pre - ferred to a risky prospect of equal or greater expected value . In contrast , the majority choice in decision ( ii ) is risk tak - ing : a risky prospect is preferred to a riskless prospect of equal expected val - ue . This pattern of risk aversion in choices involving gains and risk seeking in choices involving losses is attributable to the properties of v and 7r . Because the value function is S - shaped , the value as - sociated with a gain of $ 240 is greater than 24 percent of the value associated with a gain of $ 1000 , and the ( negative ) value associated with a loss of $ 750 is smaller than 75 percent of the value asso - ciated with a loss of $ 1000 . Thus the shape of the value function contributes to risk aversion in decision ( i ) and to risk seeking in decision ( ii ) . Moreover , the underweighting of moderate and high probabilities contributes to the relative attractiveness of the sure gain in ( i ) and to the relative aversiveness of the sure loss in ( ii ) . The same analysis applies to problems 1 and 2 . Because ( i ) and ( ii ) were presented to - gether , the respondents had in effect to choose one prospect from the set : A and C , BandC , AandD , BandD . The most common pattern ( A and D ) was chosen by 73 percent of respondents , while the least popular pattern ( B and C ) was chosen by only 3 percent of respondents . However , the combination of B and C is definitely superior to the combina - tion A and D , as is readily seen in prob - lem 4 . Problem 4 [ N = 86 ] . Choose between : A & D . 25 % chance to win $ 240 , and 75 . % chance to lose $ 760 . [ O per - cent ] B & C . 25 % chance to win $ 250 , and 75 % chance to lose $ 750 . [ 100 per - cent ] When the prospects were combined and the dominance of the second option became obvious , all respondents chose the superior option . The popularity of the inferior option in problem 3 implies that this problem was framed as a pair of SCIENCE , VOL . 211 on M a y 27 , 20 10 www . sc i en c e m ag . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m separate choices . The respondents ap - parently failed to entertain the possibility that the conjunction of two seemingly reasonable choices could lead to an un - tenable result . The violations of dominance observed in problem 3 do not disappear in the presence of monetary incentives . A dif - ferent group of respondents who an - swered a modified version of problem 3 , with real payoffs , produced a similar pat - tern of choices ( 11 ) . Other authors have also reported that violations of the rules of rational choice , originally observed in hypothetical questions , were not elimi - nated by payoffs ( 12 ) . We suspect that many concurrent de - cisions in the real world are framed inde - pendently , and that the preference order would often be reversed if the decisions were combined . The respondents in problem 3 failed to combine options , al - though the integration was relatively simple and was encouraged by instruc - tions ( 13 ) . The complexity of practical problems of concurrent decisions , such as portfolio selection , would prevent people from integrating options without computational aids , even if they were in - clined to do so . The Framing of Contingencies The following triple of problems illus - trates the framing of contingencies . Each problem was presented to a different group of respondents . Each group was told that one participant in ten , pre - selected at random , would actually be playing for money . Chance events were realized , in the respondents ' presence , by drawing a single ball from a bag con - taining a known proportion ofballs of the winning color , and the winners were paid immediately . Problem 5 [ N = 77 ] : Which ofthe following options do you prefer ? A . a sure win of $ 30 [ 78 percent ] B . 80 % o chance to win $ 45 [ 22 percent ] Problem 6 [ N = 85 ] : Consider the following two - stage game . In the first stage , there is a 75 % chance to end the game without winning anything , and a 25 % chance to move into the second stage . If you reach the second stage you have a choice between : C . a sure win of $ 30 [ 74 percent ] D . 8 % o chance to win $ 45 [ 26 percent ] Your choice must be made before the game starts , i . e . , before the outcome of the first stage is known . Please indicate the option you prefer . Problem 7 [ N = 81 ] : Which ofthe following options do you prefer ? E . 25 % chance to win $ 30 [ 42 percent ] F . 20 % o chance to win $ 45 [ 58 percent ] 30 JANUARY 1981 1 . 0 005 0 CD 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 Stated probability : p Fig . 2 . A hypothetical weighting function . Let us examine the structure of these problems . First , note that problems 6 and 7 are identical in terms of probabili - ties and outcomes , because prospect C offers a . 25 chance to win $ 30 and pros - pect D offers a probability of . 25 x . 80 = . 20 to win $ 45 . Consistency there - fore requires that the same choice be made in problems 6 and 7 . Second , note that problem 6 differs from problem 5 on - ly by the introduction of a preliminary stage . If the second stage of the game is reached , then problem 6 reduces to prob - lem 5 ; if the game ends at the first stage , the decision does not affect the outcome . Hence there seems to be no reason to make a different choice in problems 5 and 6 . By this logical analysis , problem 6 is equivalent to problem 7 on the one hand and problem 5 on the other . The participants , however , responded simi - larly to problems 5 and 6 but differently to problem 7 . This pattern of responses exhibits two phenomena of choice : the certainty effect and the pseudocertainty effect . The contrast between problems 5 and 7 illustrates a phenomenon discovered by Allais ( 14 ) , which we have labeled the certainty effect : a reduction ofthe proba - bility of an outcome by a constant factor has more impact when the outcome was initially certain than when it was merely probable . Prospect theory attributes this effect to the properties of ir . It is easy to verify , by applying the equation of pros - pect theory to problems 5 and 7 , that people for whom the value ratio v ( 30 ) / v ( 45 ) lies between the weight ratios 7r ( . 20 ) / ir ( . 25 ) and ir ( . 80 ) / ir ( 1 . 0 ) will pre - fer A to B and F to E , contrary to ex - pected utility theory . Prospect theory does not predict a reversal of preference for every individual in problems 5 and 7 . It only requires that an individual who has no preference between A and B pre - fer F to E . For group data , the theory predicts the observed directional shift of preference between the two problems . The first stage of problem 6 yields t . same outcome ( no gain ) for both act Consequently , we propose , people eval uate the options conditionally , as if the second stage had been reached . In this framing , of course , problem 6 reduces to problem 5 . More generally , we suggest that a decision problem is evaluated con - ditionally when ( i ) there is a state in which all acts yield the same outcome , such as failing to reach the second stage of the game in problem 6 , and ( ii ) the stated probabilities of other outcomes are conditional on the nonoccurrence of this state . The striking discrepancy between the responses to problems 6 and 7 , which are identical in outcomes and probabilities , could be described as a pseudocertainty effect . The prospect yielding $ 30 is rela - tively more attractive in problem 6 than in problem 7 , as if it had the advantage of certainty . The sense of certainty associ - ated with option C is illusory , however , since the gain is in fact contingent on reaching the second stage of the game ( 15 ) . We have observed the certainty effect in several sets of problems , with out - comes ranging from vacation trips to the loss of human lives . In the negative do - main , certainty exaggerates the aversive - ness of losses that are certain relative to losses that are merely probable . In a question dealing with the response to an epidemic , for example , most respond - ents found " a sure loss of 75 lives " more aversive than " 80 % o chance to lose 100 lives " but preferred " 10 % o chance to lose 75 lives " over " 8 % chance to lose 100 lives , " contrary to expected utility theo - ry . We also obtained the pseudocertainty effect in several studies where the de - scription of the decision problems fa - vored conditional evaluation . Pseudo - certainty can be induced either by a se - quential formulation , as in problem 6 , or by the introduction of causal contin - gencies . In another version of the epi - demic problem , for instance , respond - ents were told that risk to life existed on - ly in the event ( probability . 10 ) that the disease was carried by a particular virus . Two alternative programs were said to yield " a sure loss of 75 lives " or " 80 % chance to lose 100 lives " if the critical virus was involved , and no loss of life in the event ( probability . 90 ) that the dis - ease was carried by another virus . In ef - fect , the respondents were asked to choose between 10 percent chance of losing 75 lives and 8 percent chance of losing 100 lives , but their preferences were the same as when the choice was 455 on M a y 27 , 20 10 www . sc i en c e m ag . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m - ween a sure loss of 75 lives and 80 rcent chance of losing 100 lives . A inditional framing was evidently . - dopted in which the contingency of the noncritical virus was eliminated , giving rise to a pseudocertainty effect . The cer - tainty effect reveals attitudes toward risk that are inconsistent with the axioms of rational choice , whereas the pseudo - certainty effect violates the more funda - mental requirement that preferences should be independent of problem de - scription . Many significant decisions concern ac - tions that reduce or eliminate the proba - bility of a hazard , at some cost . The shape of Xr in the range of low probabili - ties suggests that a protective action which reduces the probability of a harm from 1 percent to zero , say , will be val - ued more highly than an action that re - duces the probability of the same harm from 2 percent to 1 percent . Indeed , probabilistic insurance , which reduces the probability of loss by half , is judged to be worth less than half the price of regular insurance that eliminates the risk altogether ( 3 ) . It is often possible to frame protective action in either conditional or uncon - ditional form . For example , an insurance policy that covers fire but not flood could be evaluated either as full protection against the specific risk of fire or as a re - duction in the overall probability of property loss . The preceding analysis suggests that insurance should appear more attractive when it is presented as the elimination of risk than when it is de - scribed as a reduction of risk . P . Slovic , B . Fischhoff , and S . Lichtenstein , in an unpublished study , found that a hypo - thetical vaccine which reduces the prob - ability of contracting a disease from . 20 to . 10 is less attractive if it is described as effective in half the cases than if it is pre - sented as fully effective against one of two ( exclusive and equiprobable ) virus strains that produce identical symptoms . In accord with the present analysis of pseudocertainty , the respondents valued full protection against an identified vi - rus more than probabilistic protection against the disease . The preceding discussion highlights the sharp contrast between lay responses to the reduction and the elimination of risk . Because no form of protective ac - tion can cover all risks to human welfare , all insurance is essentially probabilistic : it reduces but does not eliminate risk . The probabilistic nature of insurance is commonly masked by formulations that emphasize the completeness of pro - tection against identified harms , but the sense of security that such formulations 456 provide is an illusion of conditional fram - ing . It appears that insurance is bought as protection against worry , not only against risk , and that worry can be ma - nipulated by the labeling of outcomes and by the framing of contingencies . It is not easy to determine whether people value the elimination of risk too much or the reduction of risk too little . The con - trasting attitudes to the two forms of pro - tective action , however , are difficult to justify on normative grounds ( 16 ) . The Framing of Outcomes Outcomes are commonly perceived as positive or negative in relation to a refer - ence outcome that is judged neutral . Variations of the reference point can therefore determine whether a given out - come is evaluated as a gain or as a loss . Because the value function is generally concave for gains , convex for losses , and steeper for losses than for gains , shifts of reference can change the value dif - ference between outcomes and thereby reverse the preference order between options ( 6 ) . Problems 1 and 2 illustrated a preference reversal induced by a shift of reference that transformed gains into losses . For another example , consider a per - son who has spent an afternoon at the race track , has already lost $ 140 , and is considering a $ 10 bet on a 15 : 1 long shot in the last race . This decision can be framed in two ways , which correspond to two natural reference points . If the status quo is the reference point , the out - comes of the bet are framed as a gain of $ 140 and a loss of $ 10 . On the other hand , it may be more natural to view the present state as a loss of $ 140 , for the betting day , and accordingly frame the last bet as a chance to return to the refer - ence point or to increase the loss to $ 150 . Prospect theory implies that the latter frame will produce more risk seeking than the former . Hence , people who do not adjust their reference point as they lose are expected to take bets that they would normally find unacceptable . This analysis is supported by the observation that bets on long shots are most popular on the last race of the day ( 17 ) . Because the value function is steeper for losses than for gains , a difference be - tween options will loom larger when it is framed as a disadvantage of one option rather than as an advantage of the other option . An interesting example of such an effect in a riskless context has been noted by Thaler ( 18 ) . In a debate on a proposal to pass to the consumer some of the costs associated with the process - ing of credit - card purchases , representa - tives of the credit - card industry re - quested that the price difference be la - beled a cash discount rather than a credit - card surcharge . The two labels in - duce different reference points by implic - itly designating as normal reference the higher or the lower of the two prices . Be - cause losses loom larger than gains , con - sumers are less willing to accept a sur - charge than to forego a discount . A simi - lar effect has been observed in experimental studies of insurance : the proportion of respondents who preferred a sure loss to a larger probable loss was significantly greater when the former was called an insurance premium ( 19 , 20 ) . These observations highlight the labil - ity of reference outcomes , as well as their role in decision - making . In the ex - amples discussed so far , the neutral ref - erence point was identified by the label - ing of outcomes . A diversity of factors determine the reference outcome in everyday life . The reference outcome is usually a state to which one has adapted ; it is sometimes set by social norms and expectations ; it sometimes corresponds to a level of aspiration , which may or may not be realistic . We have dealt so far with elementary outcomes , such as gains or losses in a single attribute . In many situations , how - ever , an action gives rise to a compound outcome , which joins a series of changes in a single attribute , such as a sequence of monetary gains and losses , or a set of concurrent changes in several attributes . To describe the framing and evaluation of compound outcomes , we use the no - tion of a psychological account , defined as an outcome frame which specifies ( i ) the set of elementary outcomes that are evaluated jointly and the manner in which they are combined and ( ii ) a refer - ence outcome that is considered neutral or normal . In the account that is set up for the purchase of a car , for example , the cost of the purchase is not treated as a loss nor is the car viewed as a gift . Rather , the transaction as a whole is evaluated as positive , negative , or neu - tral , depending on such factors as the performance of the car and the price of similar cars in the market . A closely re - lated treatment has been offered by Tha - ler ( 18 ) . We propose that people generally evaluate acts in terms of a minimal ac - count , which includes only the direct consequences of the act . The minimal account associated with the decision to accept a gamble , for example , includes the money won or lost in that gamble and excludes other assets or the outcome of SCIENCE , VOL . 211 on M a y 27 , 20 10 www . sc i en c e m ag . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m previous gambles . People commonly adopt minimal accounts because this mode of framing ( i ) simplifies evaluation and reduces cognitive strain , ( ii ) reflects the intuition that consequences should be causally linked to acts , and ( iii ) matches the properties of hedonic expe - rience , which is more sensitive to desir - able and undesirable changes than to steady states . There are situations , however , in which the outcomes of an act affect the balance in an account that was pre - viously set up by a related act . In these cases , the decision at hand may be eval - uated in terms of a more inclusive ac - count , as in the case of the bettor who views the last race in the context of ear - lier losses . More generally , a sunk - cost effect arises when a decision is referred to an existing account in which the cur - rent balance is negative . Because of the nonlinearities of the evaluation process , the minimal account and a more in - clusive one often lead to different choices . Problems 8 and 9 illustrate another class of situations in which an existing account affects a decision : Problem 8 [ N = 183 ] : Imagine that you have decided to see a play where admission is $ 10 per ticket . As you enter the theater you discover that you have lost a $ 10 bill . Would you still pay $ 10 for a ticket for the play ? Yes [ 88 percent ] No [ 12 percent ] Problem 9 [ N = 200 ] : Imagine that you have decided to see a play and paid the admis - sion price of $ 10 per ticket . As you enter the theater you discover that you have lost the ticket . The seat was not marked and the ticket cannot be recovered . Would you pay $ 10 for another ticket ? Yes [ 46 percent ] No [ 54 percent ] The marked difference between the re - sponses to problems 8 and 9 is an effect of psychological accounting . We pro - pose that the purchase of a new ticket in problem 9 is entered in the account that was set up by the purchase of the original ticket . In terms of this account , the ex - pense required to see the show is $ 20 , a cost which many of our respondents ap - parently found excessive . In problem 8 , on the other hand , the loss of $ 10 is not linked specifically to the ticket purchase and its effect on the decision is accord - ingly slight . The following problem , based on ex - amples by Savage ( 2 , p . 103 ) and Thaler ( 18 ) , further illustrates the effect of em - bedding an option in different accounts . Two versions of this problem were pre - sented to different groups of subjects . One group ( N = 93 ) was given the val - ues that appear in parentheses , and the 30 JANUARY 1981 other group ( N = 88 ) the values shown in brackets . Problem 10 : Imagine that you are about to purchase ajacket for ( $ 125 ) [ $ 15 ] , and a calcu - lator for ( $ 15 ) [ $ 125 ] . The calculator salesman informs you that the calculator you wish to buy is on sale for ( $ 10 ) [ $ 1201 at the other branch of the store , located 20 minutes drive away . Would you make the trip to the other store ? The response to the two versions of problem 10 were markedly different : 68 percent of the respondents were willing to make an extra trip to save $ 5 on a $ 15 calculator ; only 29 percent were willing to exert the same effort when the price of the calculator was $ 125 . Evidently the respondents do not frame problem 10 in the minimal account , which involves on - ly a benefit of $ 5 and a cost of some in - convenience . Instead , they evaluate the potential saving in a more inclusive ac - count , which includes the purchase of the calculator but not of the jacket . By the curvature of v , a discount of $ 5 has a greater impact when the price of the cal - culator is low than when it is high . A closely related observation has been reported by Pratt , Wise , and Zeckhauser ( 21 ) , who found that the variability of the prices at which a given product is sold by different stores is roughly proportional to the mean price of that product . The same pattern was observed for both frequently and infrequently purchased items . Over - all , a ratio of 2 : 1 in the mean price of two products is associated with a ratio of 1 . 86 : 1 in the standard deviation of the respective quoted prices . If the effort that consumers exert to save each dollar on a purchase , for instance by a phone call , were independent of price , the dis - persion of quoted prices should be about the same for all products . In contrast , the data of Pratt et al . ( 21 ) are consistent with the hypothesis that consumers hardly exert more effort to save $ 15 on a $ 150 purchase than to save $ 5 on a $ 50 purchase ( 18 ) . Many readers will recog - nize the temporary devaluation of money which facilitates extra spending and re - duces the significance of small discounts in the context of a large expenditure , such as buying a house or a car . This paradoxical variation in the value of money is incompatible with the standard analysis of consumer behavior . Discussion In this article we have presented a se - ries of demonstrations in which seem - ingly inconsequential changes in the for - mulation of choice problems caused sig - nificant shifts of preference . The in - consistencies were traced to the inter - action of two sets of factors : variations in the framing of acts , contingencies , and outcomes , and the characteristic non - linearities of values and decision weights . The demonstrated effects are large and systematic , although by no means universal . They occur when the outcomes concern the loss of human lives as well as in choices about money ; they are not restricted to hypothetical questions and are not eliminated by mon - etary incentives . Earlier we compared the dependence of preferences on frames to the depen - dence of perceptual appearance on per - spective . If while traveling in a mountain range you notice that the apparent rela - tive height of mountain peaks varies with your vantage point , you will conclude that some impressions of relative height must be erroneous , even when you have no access to the correct answer . Similar - ly , one may discover that the relative at - tractiveness of options varies when the same decision problem is framed in dif - ferent ways . Such a discovery will nor - mally lead the decision - maker to recon - sider the original preferences , even when there is no simple way to resolve the in - consistency . The susceptibility to per - spective effects is of special concern in the domain of decision - making because of the absence of objective standards such as the true height of mountains . The metaphor of changing perspective can be applied to other phenomena of choice , in addition to the framing effects with which we have been concerned here ( 19 ) . The problem of self - control is natu - rally construed in these terms . The story of Ulysses ' request to be bound to the mast of the ship in anticipation of the ir - resistible temptation of the Sirens ' call is often used as a paradigm case ( 22 ) . In this example of precommitment , an ac - tion taken in the present renders inopera - tive an anticipated future preference . An unusual feature of the problem of inter - temporal conflict is that the agent who views a problem from a particular tem - poral perspective is also aware of the confficting views that future perspectives will offer . In most other situations , deci - sion - makers are not normally aware of the potential effects of different decision frames on their preferences . The perspective metaphor highlights the following aspects of the psychology of choice . Individuals who face a deci - sion problem and have a definite prefer - ence ( i ) might have a different preference in a different framing of the same prob - lem , ( ii ) are normally unaware of alterna - tive frames and of their potential effects on the relative attractiveness of options , 457 on M a y 27 , 20 10 www . sc i en c e m ag . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m ( iii ) would wish their preferences to be independent of frame , but ( iv ) are often uncertain how to resolve detected incon - sistencies ( 23 ) . In some cases ( such as problems 3 and 4 and perhaps problems 8 and 9 ) the advantage of one frame be - comes evident once the competing frames are compared , but in other cases ( problems 1 and 2 and problems 6 and 7 ) it is not obvious which preferences should be abandoned . These observations do not imply that preference reversals , or other errors of choice or judgment ( 24 ) , are necessarily irrational . Like other intellectual limita - tions , discussed by Simon ( 25 ) under the heading of " bounded rationality , " the practice of acting on the most readily available frame can sometimes be justi - fied by reference to the mental effort re - quired to explore alternative frames and avoid potential inconsistencies . How - ever , we propose that the details of the phenomena described in this article are better explained by prospect theory and by an analysis of framing than by ad hoc appeals to the notion of cost of thinking . The present work has been concerned primarily with the descriptive question of how decisions are made , but the psy - chology of choice is also relevant to the normative question of how decisions ought to be made . In order to avoid the difficult problem of justifying values , the modern theory of rational choice has adopted the coherence of specific prefer - ences as the sole criterion of rationality . This approach enjoins the decision - maker to resolve inconsistencies but of - fers no guidance on how to do so . It im - plicitly assumes that the decision - maker who carefully answers the question " What do I really want ? " will eventually achieve coherent preferences . However , the susceptibility of preferences to varia - tions of framing raises doubt about the feasibility and adequacy of the coher - ence criterion . Consistency is only one aspect of the lay notion of rational behavior . As noted by March ( 26 ) , the common conception of rationality also requires that prefer - ences or utilities for particular outcomes should be predictive of the experiences of satisfaction or displeasure associated with their occurrence . Thus , a man could be judged irrational either because his preferences are contradictory or because his desires and aversions do not reflect his pleasures and pains . The predictive criterion of rationality can be applied to resolve inconsistent preferences and to improve the quality of decisions . A pre - dictive orientation encourages the deci - sion - maker to focus on future experience and to ask " What will I feel then ? " rather than " What do I want now ? " The former question , when answered with care , can be the more useful guide in dif - ficult decisions . In particular , predictive considerations may be applied to select the decision frame that best represents the hedonic expenence of outcomes . Further complexities arise in the nor - mative analysis because the framing of an action sometimes affects the actual experience of its outcomes . For ex - ample , framing outcomes in terms of overall wealth or welfare rather than in terms of specific gains and losses may at - tenuate one ' s emotional response to an occasional loss . Similarly , the experi - ence of a change for the worse may vary if the change is framed as an uncompen - sated loss or as a cost incurred to achieve some benefit . The framing of acts and outcomes can also reflect the acceptance or rejection of responsibility for particular consequences , and the de - liberate manipulation of framing is com - monly used as an instrument of self - control ( 22 ) . When framing influences the experience of consequences , the adoption of a decision frame is an ethi - cally significant act . References and Notes 1 . J . Von Neumann and 0 . Morgenstern , Theory of Games and Economic Behavior ( Princeton Univ . Press , Princeton , N . J . , 1947 ) ; H . Raiffa , Decision Analysis : Lectures on Choices Under Uncertainty ( Addison - Wesley , Reading , Mass . , 1968 ) ; P . Fishburn , Utility Theory for Decision Making ( Wiley , New York , 1970 ) . 2 . L . J . Savage , The Foundations of Statistics ( Wiley , New York , 1954 ) . 3 . D . Kahneman and A . Tversky , Econometrica 47 , 263 ( 1979 ) . 4 . The framing phase includes various editing oper - ations that are applied to simplify prospects , for example by combining events or outcomes or by discarding negligible components ( 3 ) . 5 . Ufp + q = I and eitherx > y > Oorx < y < 0 , the equation in the text is replaced by v ( y ) + r * ) [ v ( x ) - v ( y ) ] , so that decision weights are not applied to sure outcomes . 6 . P . Fishburn and G . Kochenberger , Decision Sci . 10 , 503 ( 1979 ) ; D . J . Laughhunn , J . W . Payne , R . Crum , Manage . Sci . , in press ; J . W . Payne , D . J . Laughhunn , R . Crum , ibid . , in press ; S . A . Eraker and H . C . Sox , Med . Decision Making , in press . In the last study several hundred clinic patients made hypothetical choices between drug therapies for severe headaches , hyperten - sion , and chest pain . Most patients were risk averse when the outcomes were described as positive ( for example , reduced pain or increased life expectancy ) and risk taking when the out - comes were described as negative ( increased pain or reduced life expectancy ) . No significant differences were found between patients who actually suffered from the ailments described and patients who did not . 7 . E . Galanter and P . Pliner , in Sensation and Measurement , H . R . Moskowitz et al . , Eds . ( Reidel , Dordrecht , 1974 ) , pp . 65 - 76 . 8 . The extension of the proposed value function to multiattribute options , with or without risk , de - serves careful analysis . In particular , indif - ference curves between dimensions of loss may be concave upward , even when the value finc - tions for the separate losses are both convex , because of marked subadditivity between di - mensions . 9 . D . Ellsberg , Q . J . Econ . 75 , 643 ( 1961 ) ; W . Fell - ner , Probability and Profit - A Study of Eco - nomic Behavior Along Bayesian Lines ( Irwin , Homewood , III . , 1965 ) . 10 . The scaling of v and ir by pair comparisons re - quires a large number of observations . The pro - cedure ofpricing gambles is more convenient for scaling purposes , but it is subject to a severe an - choring bias : the ordering of gambles by their cash equivalents diverges systematically from the preference order observed in direct com - parisons [ S . Lichtenstein and P . Slovic , J . Exp . Psychol . 89 , 46 ( 1971 ) ] . 11 . A new group of respondents ( N = 126 ) was pre - sented with a modified version of problem 3 , in which the outcomes were reduced by a factor of 50 . The participants were informed that the gambles would actually be played by tossing a pair of fair coins , that one participant in ten would be selected at random to play the gambles of his or her choice . To ensure a positive return for the entire set , a third decision , yielding only positive outcomes , was added . These payoff conditions did not alter the pattern of prefer - ences observed in the hypothetical problem : 67 percent of respondents chose prospect A and 86 percent chose prospect D . The dominated com - bination ofA and D was chosen by 60 percent of respondents , and only 6 percent favored the dominant combination of B and C . 12 . S . Lichtenstein and P . Slovic , J . Exp . Psychol . 101 , 16 ( 1973 ) ; D . M . Grether and C . R . Plott , Am . Econ . Rev . 69 , 623 ( 1979 ) ; I . Lieblich and A . Lieblich , Percept . Mot . Skills 29 , 467 ( 1969 ) ; D . M . Grether , Social Science Working Paper No . 245 ( California Institute of Technology , Pasadena , 1979 ) . 13 . Other demonstrations of a reluctance to in - tegrate concurrent options have been reported : P . Slovic and S . Lichtenstein , J . Exp . Psychol . 78 , 646 ( 1968 ) ; J . W . Payne and M . L . Braun - stein , ibid . 87 , 13 ( 1971 ) . 14 . M . Allais , Econometrica 21 , 503 ( 1953 ) ; K . McCrimmon and S . Larsson , in Expected Util - ity Hypotheses and the Allais Paradox , M . All - ais and 0 . Hagan , Eds . ( Reidel , Dordrecht , 1979 ) . 15 . Another group of respondents ( N = 205 ) was presented with all three problems , in different orders , without monetary payoffs . Thejoint fre - quency distribution of choices in problems 5 , 6 , and 7 was as follows : ACE , 22 ; ACF , 65 ; ADE , 4 ; ADF , 20 ; BCE , 7 ; BCF , 18 ; BDE , 17 ; BDF , 52 . These data confirm in a within - subject design the analysis of conditional evaluation proposed in the text . More than 75 percent ofrespondents made compatible choices ( AC or BD ) in prob - lems 5 and 6 , and less than halfmade compatible choices in problems 6 and 7 ( CE or DF ) or 5 and 7 ( AE or BF ) . The elimination ofpayoffs in these questions reduced risk aversion but did not sub - stantially alter the effects of certainty and pseudocertainty . 16 . For further discussion of rationality in pro - tective action see H . Kunreuther , Disaster In - surance Protection : Public Policy Lessons ( Wiley , New York , 1978 ) . 17 . W . H . McGlothlin , Am . J . Psychol . 69 , 604 ( 1956 ) . 18 . R . Thaler , J . Econ . Behav . Organ . 1 , 39 ( 1980 ) . 19 . B . Fischhoff , P . Slovic , S . Lichtenstein , in Cog - nitive Processes in Choice and Decision Behav - ior , T . Wallsten , Ed . ( Erlbaum , Hillsdale , N . J . , 1980 ) . 20 . J . C . Hershey and P . J . H . Schoemaker , J . Risk Insur . , in press . 21 . J . Pratt , A . Wise , R . Zeckhauser , Q . J . Econ . 93 , 189 ( 1979 ) . 22 . R . H . Strotz , Rev . Econ . Stud . 23 , 165 ( 1955 ) ; G . Ainslie , Psychol . Bull . 82 , 463 ( 1975 ) ; J . Elster , Ulysses and the Sirens : Studies in Rationality and Irrationality ( Cambridge Univ . Press , Lon - don , 1979 ) ; R . Thaler and H . M . Shifrin , J . Polit . Econ . , in press . 23 . P . Slovic and A . Tversky , Behav . Sci . 19 , 368 ( 1974 ) . 24 . A . Tversky and D . Kahneman , Science 185 , 1124 ( 1974 ) ; P . Slovic , B . Fischhoff , S . Lich - tenstein , Annu . Rev . P - sychol . 28 , 1 ( 1977 ) ; R . Nisbett and L . Ross , Human Itference : Strate - gies and Shortcomings of Social Judgment ( Prentice - tIall , Englewood Cliffs , N . J . , 1980 ) ; H . Einhorn and R . Hogarth , Annu . Rev . Psy - chol . 32 , 53 ( 1981 ) . 25 . H . A . Simon , Q . J . Econ . 69 , 99 ( 1955 ) ; Psychol . Rev . 63 , 129 ( 1956 ) . 26 . J . March , Bell J . Econ . 9 , 587 ( 1978 ) . 27 . This work was supported by the Office of Naval Research under contract N00014 - 79 - C - 0077 to Stanford University . SCIENCE , VOL . 211 458 on M a y 27 , 20 10 www . sc i en c e m ag . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m