SPECIAL ISSUE Barbara Vollmayr Æ Magdalena M . Mahlstedt Æ Fritz A . Henn Neurogenesis and depression : what animal models tell us about the link Published online : 1 April 2007 j Abstract There is growing evidence that stress causes a decrease of neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus and antidepressant treatment in turn stimulates the cell proliferation in the dentate gyrus . This has led to the hypothesis that a decreased neurogenesis might be linked to the pathophysiology of major depression . The article reviews the relationship of depressive - like behavior and neurogenesis in three animal models of depression with high validity : learned helplessness , chronic mild stress and chronic psychosocial stress of the tree shrew . All animal models provide evidence that stress which can lead to depressive - like behavior , in parallel causes a decrease of neurogenesis ; vice versa , antidepressant treatment is able to revert not only behavioral changes but also to normalize neu - rogenesis . But the animal models argue against the notion that decreases of neurogenesis are the cause or the consequence of depressive - like behavior since depressive - like behavior can occur without impair - ments in neurogenesis and decreasing neurogenesis does not neccessarily lead to depressive - like behavior . This suggests that neurogenesis does not directly control affect but is tightly connected to the modu - lation of affect by stress and antidepressant measures . j Key words learned helplessness Æ animal model Æ depression Æ neurogenesis Introduction In the last 15 years , much has been learned about the mechanisms regulating and modulating the prolifer - ation , differentiation and integration of new neurons throughout adulthood . This new knowledge has gen - erated excitement and lively debates among scientists as well as in the interested public . The ﬁnding of adult neurogenesis opens the possibility of treating the loss of neurons from trauma or degenerative diseases with interventions stimulating the formation of new neu - rons . But much remains to be learned before we can use our knowledge to cure patients . There is agreement that in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus , stem cells retain the capacity to pro - liferate and differentiate into functional neuronal cells and are integrated into the existing neuronal networks within several weeks ( Palmer et al . 2000 ; Ming and Song 2005 ; Gage 2002 ) . In contrast , little is known about the impact of the newly formed cells on behavior . New neurons seem to contribute to some forms of learning and memory , for example hippo - campus dependent trace conditioning and spatial learning , and possibly episodic memory as well ( Ai - mone et al . 2006 ; Leuner et al . 2006 ) . There is indirect evidence to the hypothesis that neurogenesis might also have a function in mood regulation and may be reduced during depression ( Jacobs et al . 2000 ) . Recent reviews make the connections between neurogenesis and depression clear ( Dranovsky and Hen 2006 ; Duman and Monteggia 2006 ; Fuchs et al . 2004 ) . In brief , the argument is that stress plays a major role in depression where stress and stress hormones lead to reduced hippocampal volume and decrease the rate of neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus , E A P C N 734 B . Vollmayr ( & ) Æ M . M . Mahlstedt Æ F . A . Henn Central Institute of Mental Health , J5 University of Heidelberg 68159 Mannheim , Germany E - Mail : barbara . vollmayr @ zi - mannheim . de M . M . Mahlstedt School of Pharmacy University of Nottingham University Park Nottingham NG7 2RD , UK F . A . Henn Brookhaven National Laboratory Directorial Services New York , NY , USA Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci ( 2007 ) 257 : 300 – 303 DOI 10 . 1007 / s00406 - 007 - 0734 - 2 which could account for the hippocampal volume reduction which is also seen in depression . Antide - pressants appear to increase the rate of neurogenesis , and protect from adverse stress effects . These data lead to the conclusion that these medications may be working through an activation of neurogenesis and to the hypothesis that decreased rates of neurogenesis might be the ﬁnal common pathway leading to depression . Alternatively , neurogenesis could be an associated phenomenon which does not in fact trigger the behavioral changes leading to depression ( Henn and Vollmayr 2004 ) . Stress models With animal models we can address the question : is depressive - like behavior correlated with a decrease of neurogenesis and if so , which of the symptoms can be explained by a reduction of neurogenesis ? Ideally , in a perfect animal model one would like to have identical causative conditions to the human disease state ( = etiological validity ) , identical symptom proﬁles to those observed in the disease state ( = face validity ) , and identical treatment responses to those seen in the human disease ( = predictive validity ) . Etiological validity Most of the well established models for depression use stress to induce depressive - like states . These stress - models are particularly suitable to investigate the connection between neurogenesis and depression be - cause the neurogenesis hypothesis is based on the fact that stress decreases neurogenesis and can elicit depression . Among the stress models , learned help - lessness ( LH ) , chronic mild stress ( CMS ) , and psy - chosocial stress are best established . In the learned helplessness model , inescapable and uncontrollable stress is used to induce depressive - like learned help - lessness behavior , while escapable and controllable stress has no serious consequences . The central role of controllability in the learned helplessness paradigm was observed early on and appears to be a factor in the conditions leading to human depression ( Kendler et al . 2003 ) . As in humans , the rat medial prefrontal cortex is involved in detecting controllability and the pathogenesis of learned helplessness which supports the usefulness of this paradigm as an animal model for depression ( Amat et al . 2005 ) . In the CMS - model chronic unpredictable mild stress like soiled cages , changing cage mates or unpredictable feeding times is used to induce depressive – like behavior . In this model stressors are applied over a considerable time from 3 weeks to 3 months , thus mimicking long - lasting stress leading to human depression ( Willner et al . 1992 ) . Finally , the model of chronic psychosocial stress of the tree shrew combines uncontrollability and chronicity of the stressor in a paradigm of natural relevance . Male tree shrews defend their territories against intruders . When two adult males are housed together in one cage , they will ﬁght and establish a social hierarchy with a dominant and a subordinate male . The subordinate experiences chronic stress as long as it lives in visual and olfactory contact with the dominant male ( Fuchs and Flu¨gge 2002 ) . Assessment of depressive - like behavior in animals Learned helplessness is assessed 24 h after stress in an escape test probing the animal’s ability to learn an escape response . Learned helpless animals show in - creased escape latencies and more escape failures when compared to not - learned helpless or escapably stressed animals . Furthermore , helpless animals show a wide variety of symptoms seen in depressive illness such as anhedonia , motivational deﬁcits , autonomous and endocrine changes in analogy to major depres - sion . If stress of moderate intensity is used , the behavioral outcome after inescapable stress varies between individuals . Comparing helpless animals to those not developing helplessness after stress allows the separation of unspeciﬁc stress effects from those effects which are speciﬁc to behavioral changes . Animals exposed to CMS develop an anhedonic state , thought to be a hallmark of the depressive condition , which is usually assessed as decreased sensitivity to the rewarding properties of sweet solutions or by an increased threshold to brain stimulation . CMS also induces a wide variety of depressive - like vegetative and neuroendocrine symptoms . Finally , subordinate tree shrews exposed to chronic psychosocial stress develop affective behavior similar to depressed pa - tients with decreased grooming and marking behav - ior . In addition , they also show neuroendocrine changes of the stress responsive systems and vegeta - tive changes characteristic for depression such as disturbed sleeping patterns and decreased intake of food and water . Predictive validity Predictive validity requires a behavioral response to antidepressants that involves a time delay in onset of action and speciﬁcity only for clinically active an - tidepressants . In all three of the stress models , CMS , learned helplessness and chronic psychosocial stress of the tree shrew depressive - like behavioral , neuro - endocrine and vegetative changes are speciﬁcally responsive to a wide variety of tested antidepressants as well as electroconvulsive treatment ( Vollmayr and Henn 2003 ; Willner 1997 ; Fuchs and Flu¨gge 2002 ) . 301 Tests of depressive - like behavior In contrast to the animal models mentioned above , depressive - like behavior in the following paradigm is spontaneous and not stress - induced . The test assesses anxiety , an affective behavior related to depressive symptoms . Santarelli et al . ( 2003 ) introduced the novelty suppressed feeding ( NSF ) as a test of a behavior responsive to chronic ( 28 days ) but not subacute ( 5 days ) antidepressant treatment . In this paradigm an animal is placed in an open ﬁeld with a brightly illuminated center where food is placed and the animal must overcome its fear of the brightly lit spaces to reach the food . The latency to begin feeding has classically been used as a measure of anxiety to screen for anti - anxiety agents like benzodiazepines but , as demonstrated by Santarelli et al . ( 2003 ) , also has predictive validity for antidepressant action . It is important , however , to remember that it is not an animal model in a strict sense because novelty sup - pressed feeding is part of the species speciﬁc behavior under normal circumstances and is not a behavior induced by a severe or chronic stressor . As depressive episodes can be elicited by stressful experiences , for the etiological validity of an animal model a stress - induced change of behavior is necessary . If the etio - logical validity of a test of depressive - like - behavior is limited , conclusions to the pathophysiology of the disease must be drawn with caution . Neurogenesis in animal models Studies in all animal models conﬁrm the ﬁnding that stress decreases dentate gyrus cell proliferation and survival of newborn cells , whereby antidepressant measures increase neurogenesis : in all tested animal models a severe and long lasting decrease of dentate gyrus cell proliferation and neurogenesis was observed regardless of which stressor was used . Inescapable stress of the LH paradigm reduced proliferation and neurogenesis ( Malberg and Duman 2003 ; Vollmayr et al . 2003 ) , an effect repeated in the chronic psycho - social stress model ( see Czeh and Lucassen , this issue ) , whereby behavioral changes as well as decreases of neurogenesis after stress were reversed by antide - pressant treatment . CMS decreased the cell prolifera - tion and the survival of new - born cells in the dentate gyrus with escitalopram treatment restoring neuro - genesis only in those animals that recovered from anhedonia ( Alonso et al . 2004 ; Lee et al . 2006 ; Jaya - tissa et al . 2006 ) . Furthermore , Santarelli et al . ( 2003 ) demonstrated that an increase in neurogenesis was necessary for the antidepressants effect on behavior . The authors used x - ray treatment of the hippocampus to reduce neurogenesis by over 80 % and showed that this disrupted the behavioral effects of ﬂuoxetine and imipramine on novelty suppressed feeding . In the second approach , it was shown that serotonin receptor 1A ( 5 - HT 1A ) knockout mice were insensitive to the effects of ﬂuoxetine on behavior or neurogenesis , however both effects on neurogenesis and behavior were seen when imipramine , which acts via the nor - adreneric , as well as the serotonergic system , was utilized . Both ﬁndings suggest the drugs worked through increasing neurogenesis . At the ﬁrst glance , these data seem to strongly support the hypothesis that neurogenesis is associated with depressive - like behavior , perhaps is even caus - ative for depressive - like behavior . However , the above mentioned studies report several observations incompatible with this notion : Santarelli et al . ( 2003 ) noted that the 5 - HT 1A knockout mice had a greater latency to feed than wild type mice but had exactly the same rate of cell proliferation . Also , irradiated mice had virtually no neurogenesis but showed normal behavior in novelty suppressed feeding and grooming score . Likewise , we found that a decrease in cell proliferation after immobilisation stress does not predict helpless behavior ( Vollmayr et al . 2003 ) and Malberg and Duman ( 2003 ) reported that , not only did inescapable stress cause decreases of dentate gyrus cell proliferation , but also escapable stress that did not induce learned helplessness . We also noted that inescapable stress reduced the proliferation un - speciﬁcly in all stressed animals , even in those not responding helpless . Futhermore , learned helpless - ness was apparent 24 h after the stressor , before the cell proliferation was inhibited ( Vollmayr et al . 2003 ) . This clearly indicates that decreases of neurogenesis are not necessary for depressive - like behavior and decreased neurogenesis does not neccessarily lead to altered behavior in the tested paradigms . In summary , animal models of depression provide evidence that neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus and cell proliferation do not correlate with depressive - like behavior per se , but rather with factors modulating this behavior such as stress and antidepressant treatment . Most likely , neurogenesis is linked to functional changes in the neural systems from brain stem to fronto - limbic regions that convey negative stress effects as well as beneﬁcial pharmacological effects , but depression is complex and involves a complex neural system not connected to neurogenesis ( Goldapple et al . 2004 ) . One may object that neuro - genesis could be causally linked to a depressive symptom not captured by the existing animal models . In particular , newborn cells in the dentate gyrus seem to participate in learning and memory ( Wiskott et al . 2006 ; Leuner et al . 2006 ) and one might speculate that an impaired hippocampal function secondary to impairments in neurogenesis could be the cause of deﬁcits in episodic memory characteristic for depressive episodes . This speculation becomes even more intriguing by a recent report suggesting that young granule cells could contribute to the encoding of time in memories ( Aimone et al . 2006 ) . New par - 302 adigms to assess the association of temporal memory in rodents possibly will help to understand how temporal information is stored in memory and how this process is disturbed in depression . References Aimone JB , Wiles J , Gage FH ( 2006 ) Potential role for adult neu - rogenesis in the encoding of time in new memories . Nat Neu - rosci 9 : 723 – 727 Alonso R , Griebel G , Pavone G , Stemmelin J , Le Fur G , Soubrie P ( 2004 ) Blockade of CRF ( 1 ) or V ( 1b ) receptors reverses stress - induced suppression of neurogenesis in a mouse model of depression . Mol Psychiatry 9 : 278 – 286 Amat J , Baratta MV , Paul E , Bland ST , Watkins LR , Maier SF ( 2005 ) Medial prefrontal cortex determines how stressor controllability affects behavior and dorsal raphe nucleus . Nat Neurosci 8 : 365 – 371 Dranovsky A , Hen R ( 2006 ) Hippocampal neurogenesis : regulation by stress and antidepressants . Biol Psychiatry 59 : 1136 – 1143 Duman RS , Monteggia LM ( 2006 ) A neurotrophic model for stress - related mood disorders . Biol Psychiatry 59 : 1116 – 1127 Fuchs E , Czeh B , Flugge G ( 2004 ) Examining novel concepts of the pathophysiology of depression in the chronic psychosocial stress paradigm in tree shrews . Behav Pharmacol 15 : 315 – 325 Fuchs E , Flu¨gge G ( 2002 ) Social stress in tree shrews : effects on physiology , brain function , and behavior of subordinate indi - viduals . Pharmacol Biochem Behav 73 : 247 – 258 Gage FH ( 2002 ) Neurogenesis in the adult brain . J Neurosci 22 : 612 – 613 Goldapple K , Segal Z , Garson C , Lau M , Bieling P , Kennedy S , Mayberg H ( 2004 ) Modulation of cortical - limbic pathways in major depression : treatment - speciﬁc effects of cognitive behavior therapy . Arch Gen Psychiatry 61 : 34 – 41 Jacobs BL , Praag H , Gage FH ( 2000 ) Adult brain neurogenesis and psychiatry : a novel theory of depression . Mol Psychiatry 5 : 262 – 269 Jayatissa MN , Bisgaard C , Tingstrom A , Papp M , Wiborg O ( 2006 ) Hippocampal cytogenesis correlates to escitalopram - mediated recovery in a chronic mild stress rat model of depression . Neuropsychopharmacology 31 : 2395 – 2404 Henn FA , Vollmayr B ( 2004 ) Neurogenesis and depression : etiology or epiphenomenon ? Biol Psychiatry 56 : 146 – 150 Kendler KS , Hettema JM , Butera F , Gardner CO , Prescott CA ( 2003 ) Life event dimensions of loss , humiliation , entrapment , and danger in the prediction of onsets of major depression and generalized anxiety . Arch Gen Psychiatry 60 : 789 – 796 Lee KJ , Kim SJ , Kim SW , Choi SH , Shin YC , Park SH , Moon BH , Cho E , Lee MS , Choi SH , Chun BG , Shin KH ( 2006 ) Chronic mild stress decreases survival , but not proliferation , of new - born cells in adult rat hippocampus . Exp Mol Med 28 : 44 – 54 Leuner B , Gould E , Shors TJ ( 2006 ) Is there a link between adult neurogenesis and learning ? Hippocampus 16 : 216 – 224 Malberg JE , Duman RS ( 2003 ) Cell proliferation in adult hippo - campus is decreased by inescapable stress : reversal by ﬂuoxe - tine treatment . Neuropsychopharmacology 28 : 1562 – 1571 Ming GL , Song H ( 2005 ) Adult neurogenesis in the mammalian central nervous system . Annu Rev Neurosci 28 : 223 – 250 Palmer TD , Willhoite AR , Gage FH ( 2000 ) Vascular niche for adult hippocampal neurogenesis . J Comp Neurol 425 : 479 – 494 Santarelli L , Saxe M , Gross C , Surget A , Battaglia F , Dulawa S , Weisstaub N , Lee J , Duman R , Arancio O , Belzung C , Hen R ( 2003 ) Requirement of hippocampal neurogenesis for the behavioral effects of antidepressants . Science 301 : 805 – 809 Vollmayr B , Henn FA ( 2003 ) Stress models of depression . Clin Neurosci Res 3 : 245 – 251 Vollmayr B , Simonis C , Weber S , Gass P , Henn FA ( 2003 ) Reduced cell proliferation in the dentate gyrus is not correlated with the development of learned helplessness . Biol Psychiatry 54 : 1035 – 1040 Willner P , Muscat R , Papp M ( 1992 ) Chronic mild stress - induced anhedonia : a realistic animal model of depression . Neurosci Biobehav Rev 16 : 525 – 534 Willner P ( 1997 ) Validity , reliability and utility of the chronic mild stress model of depression : a 10 - year review and evaluation . Psychopharmacology ( Berl ) 134 : 319 – 329 Wiskott L , Rasch MJ , Kempermann G ( 2006 ) A functional hypothesis for adult hippocampal neurogenesis : avoidance of catastrophic interference in the dentate gyrus . Hippocampus 16 : 329 – 343 303