 Plasma Membrane Domains Specialized for Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis in Primary Cells . Karl D . Bellve 1 , 2 , Deborah Leonard 1 , 3 Clive Standley 2 , Lawrence M . Lifshitz 2 , Richard A . Tuft 2 , Akira Hayakawa 4 , Silvia Corvera 4 , 5 and Kevin E . Fogarty 2 . From : Biomedical Imaging Group , Departments of 2 Physiology , and 4 Molecular Medicine , and 3 Interdisciplinary Graduate Program University of Massachusetts Medical School , Worcester , Massachusetts . Running Title : Clathrin domains and Transferrin Uptake . 5 Corresponding Author at : Program in Molecular Medicine , University of Massachusetts Medical School , 373 Plantation Street , Worcester , MA 01605 . silvia . corvera @ umassmed . edu 1 These authors contributed equally to this work . Clathrin assembly at the plasma membrane is a fundamental process required for endocytosis . In cultured cells , the majority of clathrin is localized to large patches that display little lateral mobility . The functional role of these regions is not clear , and it has been thought that they may represent artefacts of cell adhesion of cultured cells . Here we have analyzed clathrin organization in primary adipose cells isolated from mice , which are non - adherent and fully differentiated . The majority of clathrin on the plasma membrane of these cells ( > 60 % ) is found in large clathrin patches that display virtually no lateral mobility and persist for many minutes , and a smaller amount is found in small spots that appear and disappear rapidly . Direct visualization of transferrin reveals it binding onto large arrays of clathrin , and internalizing through vesicles that emerge from these domains . High resolution imaging ( 50 images / second ) reveals fluorescence intensity fluctuations consistent with the formation and detachment of coated vesicles from within large patches . These results reveal that large clathrin assemblies are active regions of endocytosis in mammalian cells , and highlight the importance of understanding the mechanistic basis for this organization . INTRODUCTION Clathrin assembly at the plasma membrane is required for the endocytosis of many receptors and transmembrane proteins . Insights into the mechanism of clathrin assembly and coated vesicle formation was obtained initially from electron microscopy and biochemical studies . This information formed the basis for a well accepted model where individual clathrin - coated pits would form on the plasma membrane , grow and invaginate by progressive association of coat subunits , and detach to form free , short - lived vesicles enriched in endocytic cargo ( 1 - 6 ) . The availability of fluorescent derivatives of clathrin provided the opportunity to test this model in live cells . The first visualization of fluorescent clathrin generated several surprising findings , among which was the perception that clathrin - coated vesicles were produced recurrently from specific sites within the plasma membrane . In addition , many of these sites displayed a gradual loss of fluorescence , and not a sudden http : / / www . jbc . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M511370200 The latest version is at JBC Papers in Press . Published on March 13 , 2006 as Manuscript M511370200 Copyright 2006 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , Inc . by gu e s t on J un e 24 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m  catastrophic disappearance , suggesting that individual coated pits could form from within an expansive clathrin patch . Results consistent with the existence of large clathrin lattices harboring invaginated structures have also been captured by electron microscopy ( 4 ) . The use of total - internal reflection fluorescence microscopy ( TIRF - M ) has provided the additional technical advantage over confocal microscopy of being able to specifically see events occurring within 100 nm from the plasma membrane ( 7 , 8 ) . Images derived from TIRF - M of clathrin are consistent among many groups using either dsRed - clathrin or EGFP - clathrin , stable or transiently transfected cells , and also have provided unexpected results . Foremost among these is that the vast majority ( 80 % ) of the clathrin signal on the plasma membrane is present as a population that is static during the average period of observation , typically 60 sec . Only a small population of clathrin ( 10 - 20 % ) is present as small , rapidly disappearing structures , which would be the ones expected to predominate if the earlier model of clathrin - mediated endocytosis were occurring in live cells ( 9 - 16 ) . While these observations have been reported repeatedly , the significance of this organization has remained unclear , and the possibility has been suggested that may represent an artifact of cell adherence in culture ( 17 ) . To better define the physiological significance of these observations , we have analyzed the dynamics of clathrin assembly using three novel approaches . First , we have visualized clathrin dynamics in primary adipose cells isolated from mouse epididymal fat . Isolated adipocytes float in culture media due to the buoyancy conferred by their lipid content , and therefore artifacts due to adherence onto glass or plastic are eliminated . Moreover , this cell type has been used in studies of endocytic trafficking of GLUT4 , a transmembrane transporter known to internalize through a clathrin - mediated mechanism ( 18 , 19 ) . Second , we have used algorithms that incorporate the signal detected throughout the whole adherent surface of the cells , avoiding the potential bias introduced by the selection of single events for analysis . Third , we have developed an imaging platform consisting of a TIRF microscope equipped with two lasers and a high sensitivity , high speed camera that allows the capture of images at rates up to 50 Hz ( 50 images / second ) . Our results indicate that apparently static clathrin patches display small subregional intensity changes consistent with the formation of clathrin - coated pits from within these patches . Moreover , simultaneous imaging of transferrin and clathrin demonstrates that ligands are internalized from large clathrin patches . These results suggests a model in which defined regions of the plasma membrane are specialized for the assembly of large clathrin assemblies that functionally support endocytosis . MATERIALS AND METHODS Optical system : Coherent Innova 70C lasers are used ( Argon ion and an Argon - Krypton ion ) to produce the 488 and 568 nm light respectively . The combined beams are coupled into a single mode fiber using a KineFLEX fiber coupler ( Point Source ) . Modified Olympus IX81 inverted microscope , TIRF fiber illuminator , and Plan APO 60x objective with an NA of 1 . 45 are used . TIRF illumination is introduced through the edge of the objective at an angle set between 65 and 68 degrees giving a penetration depth of 90 - 121 nm at 488 nm and 105 - 141 nm at 568 nm . Light is collimated through the objective and a layer of immersion oil onto the cover - slip . The quality of the collimation is set half way between the best for 488 nm and 568 nm . Light from the fluorophores is collected and relayed onto a 640 x 448 pixel CCD camera developed with Lincoln Labs ( MIT ) . A Physik Instruments pifoc is used for fine focus control . The entire microscope is contained in a heated by gu e s t on J un e 24 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m  chamber held at 35 o C . Imaging Hardware and Software : The acquisition system uses the following components ; Intel L440GX + server motherboard with dual PCI buses ; two 800Mhz Pentium IIIs with 2 GB of RAM ; Instrutech ITC - 18 data acquisition system ; Bitflow Roadrunner Differential Camera Interface ; ATTO UL3D Ultra160 SCSI Raid controller and 4 Seagate Cheetah 18 GB Ultra 160 SCSI drives ( Model # ST318351LW ) . The Bitflow Roadrunner uses a 66 mhz PCI slot . The other components use the 33 Mhz PCI bus . The 4 Seagate Cheetah Drives are in a Raid - 0 configuration . Two drives are attached to each of the two controllers on the ATTO UL3D . Sustained read and write speeds are over 100 MB / sec . The acquisition software , called ScratchNG , is a custom multi - threaded Windows application designed for sustained image capture to RAM , a RAID disk or both . The Roadrunner streams incoming images into a primary double buffer in system memory . While one buffer is being addressed by the Roadrunner , the image from the other buffer is copied into a secondary buffer . The secondary buffer can vary in size , depending upon the number of images that need to be captured , or if the images are to be transferred directly to the RAID device . The software image capture capability is only limited by the size of the RAID device , which is 72 GB currently . ScratchNG uses the Instrutech ITC - 18 to generate camera read pulses , shutter openings , filter wheel changes and focus changes . Interactive 3D and 4D ( 3D + time ) visualization and co - localization analysis was performed using the Data Analysis and Visualization Environment software ( Lifshitz , 1994 ) . Curve fitting was done using Origin ( Origin Labs Corp . , Northampton , MA ) . Fluorescent Probes and Cells : Alexa 568 transferrin ( Molecular Probes ) was applied to the cells at 20 µg / ml . GFP - clathrin represents a N - terminal fusion of GFP with the clathrin light chain A , generated and generously provided by J . H . Keen ( Gaidarov et al . , 1999 ) . In the experiments described here , Cos cells were transfected using 1 - 4 µg of plasmid DNA using calcium phosphate transfection . For primary fat cell isolation epididymal fat pads from 10 week old male C57BL6 mice were weighed and cut into 0 . 03 cm 3 pieces with scissors and then resuspended in KRH ( NaCl ( 125 mM ) , KCl ( 5 mM ) , CaCl 2 ( 1 . 3 mM ) , MgSO 4 ( 1 . 2 mM ) , HEPES pH 7 . 4 ( 25 mM ) , sodium pyruvate ( 2 mM ) , and bovine serum albumin ( 2 . 5 % BSA ) containing 1mg / ml collagenase ( Worthington Biochemical Corp . , Lakewood , NJ ) . The fat pads were digested for 30 - 45 minutes at 37 o C in an orbital bath shaking at 100 rpm . The digested samples were squeezed through chiffon , and the isolated cells and washed three times in KRH buffer pH 7 . 4 + 0 . 5 % BSA , and immediately transfected by electroporation . Cells were then placed in DMEM supplemented with 10 % FBS , and visualized 18 hr later . RESULTS Isolated adipocytes transfected with GFP - clathrin were visualized by epifluorescence and TIRF - M . To enable contact between the adipocytes ( which float ) and the bottom coverslip , a 15 mm coverslip was placed over a 15 µl volume of the cell suspension , trapping the cells in the 84 µm space between the two coverslips ( Figure 1 , top diagrams ) . GFP - clathrin was seen in epifluorescence as a bright rim surrounding the single large lipid droplet . As the objective was lowered , a small adherent region could be visualized ( Figure 1 panels A - C ) . When visualized by TIRF - M the same region appeared smaller in diameter ( Figure 1 , compare panels D and F ) , due to the illumination of only 100 nm from the surface of the coverslip . Images were then acquired by gu e s t on J un e 24 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m  at 0 . 5 Hz ( one image every 2 seconds ) for a duration of 10 - 20 minutes . GFP - clathrin was observed in regions of heterogeneous size and intensity . To quantitatively analyze the distribution of clathrin within these regions we used the following strategy : first , raw images were corrected by subtracting the background fluorescence outside the cell ( Figure 2a , panel A ) . Second , a running average of three time points comprising a 4 second interval was generated , which removed slight speckling due to camera noise but had a negligible effect on the data ( Figure 2a , panel B ) . Third , to generate images in which structured fluorescence ( i . e pits and patches ) can be quantitatively analyzed without interference from background diffuse fluorescence , images were smoothed by convolving with a small , 2 - dimensional Gaussian spot ( s = 160 nm ) that preserved the mean intensity . In order to be able to separate the clathrin spots from the background based on their intensity , the local background was estimated by convolving with a larger , 2 - dimensional Gaussian ( s = 320 nm ) and subtracting this from the smoothed images . From this we generated a binary masking image by setting the intensity of all positive - valued pixels to one and all other pixels to zero ( Figure 2a , panel C ) . We then multiplied the mask by the original image ( Figure 2a , panel D ) to display areas in the image with intensity exceeding the average local background . The masked images can then be used to measure the size and intensity of clathrin pits or patches over the entire adherent surface of the cell . They can also be used to measure the average persistence of these regions over time , and their co - localization with cargo ( see below ) . To estimate the size distribution of clathrin assemblies , histograms of images from 16 time points / cell for 4 independent cells were averaged and shown in Figure 2B . A peak comprising small , diffraction - limited regions of 360 nm in diameter was seen . 30 % of total fluorescence was derived from regions smaller than 360 nm diameter , 60 % from regions 360 - 700 nm in diameter , and 10 % from regions larger than 700 nm in diameter . The resolution of the TIRF system was measured by imaging a 190 nm fluorescent ( green ) bead in 3 - D with 100 nm z - steps to obtain the best focus plane , and then switched to TIRF . The full - width of the image obtained was of 376 nm . Because single pits would be expected to have a real diameter of ~ 50 - 100 nm , and thus be visualized in TIRF as regions of < 376 nm , we conclude that in primary cells , the majority of clathrin is distributed in assemblies larger to those attributed to individual clathrin - coated pits . This distribution of clathrin regions is similar to that observed by others in either stably or transiently transfected cell lines ( Keyel et al . , 2004 ; Moskowitz et al . , 2005 ; Rappoport and Simon , 2003 ; Rappoport et al . , 2004 ; Rappoport et al . , 2003a ) . The behavior of these regions over time was quantified by the following procedure : First , the time series was projected as a 3 dimensional image , with the TIRF image defined by X and Y , and time defined by Z . Clathrin “objects” were defined as contiguous voxels in this 3 dimensional space ( Figure 3 , left panel ) . Second , for each time point in the series , the regions corresponding to objects present since t = 0 are labeled as “persistent” while those appearing de - novo are labeled as “new” ( Figure 3 , right panels ) . Third , the total amount of fluorescence in persistent or new regions at each time point was recorded ( Figure 3 , plot ) . This provides a measurement of how much clathrin is present in rapidly disappearing versus persistent regions throughout the whole adherent surface . When the plot was fitted with the sum by gu e s t on J un e 24 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m  of two exponentials , a fast time constant of 24 . 0 + 16 . 4 seconds ( 95 % confidence interval ) is observed , and this accounts for 40 % of the regions . A slow time constant of 537 + 222 seconds ( 95 % confidence interval ) accounts for the remaining 60 % of the regions . Thus , more than half of clathrin regions in the cell are long lived . A complementary measurement of the persistence of clathrin regions is shown in Figure 4 , in which the degree of co - localization of an image ( t = 0 , displayed in green ) with subsequent images ( t = n , displayed in red ) is quantified . Colocalized spots are displayed in white , and red and green voxels represent regions that appeared or disappeared outside the more stable areas , which remain white . For quantification , the loss of co - localization was measured as the percent of red voxels co - localized with green voxels over the whole adherent surface of the cell , using images acquired at 2 second intervals over a 2 . 5 minute period ( Figure 4 , right panel ) . When these plots are fitted with the sum of two exponentials , fast and slow time constants of 8 . 4 + 0 . 87 and 157 + 5 seconds ( 95 % confidence interval ) accounting for 43 % and 57 % of the regions are observed . These time constants are slightly faster than those derived from the procedure shown in Figure 3 , probably due to the fact that this alternative method does not account for cell shape changes that would lead to an artificial de - correlation of persistent regions . Nevertheless , the proportion of long lived clathrin - coated regions is still estimated to be higher than 50 % . A similar behavior was observed in cultured cell types , including differentiated 3T3 - L1 adipocytes ( not illustrated ) , or Cos cells ( Figure 5 ) . To estimate the size distribution of clathrin images , histograms from 18 images / cell from 3 independent cells were averaged . As in primary cells , a peak around the equivalent diameter of 360 nm is seen in , which possibly corresponds to single pits ( Figure 5A ) . Regions smaller than 360 nm , between 361 and 700nm , and larger than 700 nm accounted from 20 % , 60 % and 20 % of the total fluorescence , respectively . Analysis of the persistence of objects in time also corresponded well with that observed for primary cells ( Figure 5B ) . When the loss of co - localization over time was measured ( Figure 5C and D ) fast and slow time constants of 11 . 6 + 1 . 1 and 376 + 6 seconds ( 95 % confidence interval ) accounting for 40 % and 60 % of the regions were observed . Thus in both primary and cultured cells , the majority of clathrin is found in large assemblies that persist in the same region for prolonged periods of time . To determine whether these regions are static or actively exchange clathrin with the cytoplasm we analyzed the pattern of recovery of fluorescence following photo bleaching . After imaging by TIRF - M , the top left quadrant of the cell was bleached in epifluorescence mode for 2 min . Images were then acquired in TIRF mode for 20 additional minutes ( Figure 6A , panels A - C ) . Much of the signal appeared in regions that overlapped exactly with those visible prior to photo bleaching ( Figure 6A , panels D - F ) , revealing that these apparently static regions actively exchange clathrin with the cytoplasm . Measurements of the rate of recovery of fluorescence revealed a mean half - time of 479 + / - 145 seconds ( n = 3 ) ( Figure 6B ) . This slow rate of recovery may be due to the bleaching of a substantial proportion of the cytoplasmic pool of clathrin . However , the kinetics may be an accurate reflection of the rate of clathrin exchange in long - lived clathrin regions ( Figures 3 - 5 ) . To determine whether large , persistent clathrin assemblies are competent for endocytosis we simultaneously imaged GFP - by gu e s t on J un e 24 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m  clathrin and Alexa 568 - transferrin . Because only the fluorophore present within 100 nm from the coverslip surface is excited in TIRF mode , the fluorescence from transferrin bound to receptors at the plasma membrane is high enough relative to the fluorescence from transferrin in the buffer to provide an adequate signal to noise ratio . Rapidly after addition to the media , transferrin binding was observed both diffusely distributed and concentrated in regions of ~ 500 nm diameter over the entire surface ( Figure 7A , left panel top ) . Fluorescence in both areas increased steadily in the continuous presence of transferrin in the media ( Figure 7A , left panel , bottom ) . To determine the correspondence between regions of transferrin binding and regions of assembled clathrin , we superimposed masks of the clathrin images on corresponding transferrin images . Intense transferrin binding is seen in regions inside the mask which correspond to large areas of persistent clathrin assembly ( Figure 7B , upper panels , arrowheads ) . The transferrin signal outside these regions is less intense and very diffuse at early time points ( Figure 7C , upper panels ) . After 10 minutes the transferrin signal within the clathrin mask remains intense ( Figure 7B , lower panels , arrowheads ) but is now also seen in vesicular structures close to but outside the clathrin mask ( Figure 7C , lower panels , arrows ) . To quantify these observations , we recorded total transferrin fluorescence ( the product of total voxels and their mean intensity ) , as well as the concentration of transferrin ( total intensity / number of voxels ) inside and outside the clathrin mask over time ( Figures 7D and E , respectively ) . While the total amount of bound transferrin is higher in the larger area outside the mask , the concentration of transferrin is higher inside than outside the mask throughout the time series ( Figure 7E ) . The greatest difference in concentration ( ~ 6 fold ) is seen within the first few seconds ( Figure 7F ) , indicating that initial transferrin binding is on regions where clathrin is assembled ( Figure 7F ) . This is consistent with a higher concentration of transferrin receptors in clathrin - coated regions of the membrane at steady state . After a few minutes , vesicular structures containing transferrin are seen outside the clathrin mask ( Figure 7C , lower panels ) and appear to be emanating from regions of persistent clathrin assembly . Superimposition of clathrin and transferrin images illustrates this process ( Figure 8 ) . Stable patches of clathrin ( Figure 8 , arrows ) become labeled rapidly upon addition of transferrin to the media ( notice the whiter appearance of the clathrin patches after time = 0 , reflecting co - localization of GFP - clathrin and Alexa 568 - transferrin ) . Transferrin then appears in vesicular structures that emanate from the clathrin patches ( Figure 8 , arrowheads ) . Transferrin accumulation within the cell distal from the plasma membrane was seen in epifluorescence images of the cells during this time ( data not shown ) . When transferrin was removed from the media it gradually disappeared from clathrin patches , but the patches themselves remained present . ( Figure 8 , arrows , compare time 0 with time 18 min ) . These results demonstrate directly that transferrin endocytosis occurs through regions of persistent clathrin assembly . These results suggest that cargo - laden clathrin - coated vesicles are generated from within these larger clathrin assemblies . If so , fluorescence intensity fluctuations consistent with vesicle formation and detachment within these assemblies should be detectable at higher spacial and temporal resolution . To test this possibility we imaged clathrin patches at an optical resolution of 60 nm / pixel , and at a rate of 50 Hz ( 50 images / second ) for 60 continuous seconds . To rule out that observed intensity fluctuations might be due to non - by gu e s t on J un e 24 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m  biological fluctuations in signal intensity ( camra or laser noise ) we re - imaged the same cells after fixation with 4 % formaldehyde for 10 min followed by washes to remove the formaldehyde . Clear upward and downward fluctuations in intensity within clathrin patches were observed in live cells that were qualitatively different from the noise detected in the same patch after fixation ( Figure 9A - B ) . The fluctuations seen in live cell patches resembled those seen when the process of coated pit formation from within a large patch was mathematically modeled ( Figure 9C - F ) . These results are most consistent with the hypothesis that individual coated vesicles can bud off large clathrin arrays that form at specific sites on the plasma membrane . However , we cannot rule out that sites at the plasma membrane that support the assembly of compact clusters of many individual coated pits could also account for the data observed . Nevertheless , the results unambiguously demonstrate the existence of sites within the plasma membrane that preferentially support the formation of large clathrin assemblies competent for endocytosis . DISCUSSION Diverse classes of clathrin assemblies have been seen by several groups when imaging fluorescent clathrin by TIRF - M , but the functional relevance of these assemblies remains unclear . Importantly , whether these types of assemblies occur physiologically in cells , or are an aberrant response due to cell attachment to glass or plastic , is not known . To address this question , we used primary adipocytes , in which the buoyancy conferred by the fat globule renders it incapable of touching solid substrate . We find that the organization of clathrin on the membrane of isolated primary adipocytes is similar to that reported by others in cultured cells ( 10 , 13 - 16 , 20 ) , and is remarkable in that a large proportion of clathrin is found within large , apparently static assemblies . These results raise two important questions . First , whether these large apparently static structures are competent for endocytosis , and second , the molecular basis by which this organization is initiated and maintained . Experiments shown here indicate that large assemblies of clathrin support endocytosis . Our results are consistent with those Merrifield et al ( 15 ) , who used a pH sensitive transferrin receptor construct to determine the endocytic competence of cell surface clathrin assemblies and the timing of endocytosis relative to actin polymerization . Our results indicate that 60 % of all clathrin assemblies persist for 60 seconds or more . Furthermore , by visualizing transferrin we have been able to follow the fate of the ligand as it transfers from these large assemblies into the endocytic pathway . Our results demonstrate that vesicles containing transferrin emanate from clathrin patches that are not consumed as transferrin is internalized . These regions are not consumed because clathrin is being continuously replaced into the patch from a pool of cytoplasmic clathrin , as evidenced by the recovery of fluorescence after photobleaching . High temporal resolution imaging of clathrin patches also reveals fluorescence intensity fluctuations of several milliseconds within these assemblies that are qualitatively and quantitatively consistent with vesicle formation and detachment . Because both upward and downward regional fluctuations are observed , the results suggest that clathrin patches give rise to individual coated pits that form ( upward intensity fluctuations ) and detach ( downward fluctuations ) perhaps leaving small regions of uncoated membrane that can rapidly re - assemble clathrin ( Figure 9 ) . Whether clathrin patches contain a combination of flat arrays of clathrin as well as regions of coated pit clusters that by gu e s t on J un e 24 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m  rapidly assemble and disassemble cannot be distinguished at this point ( Figure 10 ) . Regardless of this distinction , our results indicate unambiguously that clathrin organizes at the plasma membrane in specific persistent regions that are dynamic and support endocytosis . Not all clathrin - mediated endocytic events take place from large assemblies ( 17 ) . In recent studies using spinning - disk confocal microscopy in which analysis was deliberately restricted to clathrin structures smaller than 3 pixels ( 600 nm ) , and which appear and disappear within the imaging period of 7 minutes , the presence of cargo appeared to stabilize the transient assemblies of clathrin . These results suggested a model where clathrin assembly at the plasma membrane occurs on random regions , which are then stabilized by the presence of cargo molecules . When restricted to the non - persistent population of clathrin structures , and accounting for the fact that TIRF - M does not detect vesicles beyond 90 - 100 nm from plasma membrane assembly sites , the analysis of our data is not inconsistent with that reported by Ehrlich et al ( 17 ) with regard to the kinetics of appearance and disappearance of this small subset of clathrin assemblies . However , our results demonstrating that large clathrin assemblies , which constitute the majority of the clathrin signal , are endocytically active underscores the importance of further investigating the mechanism for the initiation and maintenance of such assemblies . The physiological significance of the organization of clathrin into large assemblies is not known . One possibility may be that the interaction of both clathrin and actin assembly factors with phosphoinositides such as PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 may require organization around specific membrane regions enriched for these phospholipids . Further analysis of the spatial relationship between phospholipid metabolism and the different modalities of clathrin assembly may in the future shed light on this important aspect of cellular architecture . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This work was supported by NIH PO1 DK60564 to sc and kef . The authors wish to thank other members of the Corvera and Fogarty groups for helpful comments and support . In particular we wish to acknowledge the valuable help of Isabelle Fay in helping establish the focus control parameters during the early stages of development of the microscope . REFERENCES  . Schmid , S . L . , McNiven , M . A . , and De Camilli , P . ( 99 ) Curr Opin Cell Biol 0 , 0 -   . Sorkin , A . ( 00 ) Curr Opin Cell Biol  , 9 - 99  . Robinson , M . S . ( 00 ) Trends Cell Biol  ,  -   . Marsh , M . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 999 ) Science  ,  - 0  . Kirchhausen , T . ( 000 ) Annu Rev Biochem 9 , 99 -   . Brodsky , F . M . , Chen , C . Y . , Knuehl , C . , Towler , M . C . , and Wakeham , D . E . ( 00 ) Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol  ,  -  7 . Axelrod , D . ( 2001 ) Traffic 2 , 764 - 774  . Beaumont , V . ( 00 ) Biochem Soc Trans  , 9 -  9 . Rappoport , J . Z . , Benmerah , A . , and by gu e s t on J un e 24 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m 9 FIGURES AND FIGURE LEGENDS Figure 1 : Clathrin domains on the plasma membrane of primary adipocytes . Primary adipocytes were placed on a 25 mm coverslip and overlaid with a smaller coverlip as depicted in the diagrams over each panel . Images were immediately acquired . In epifluorescent mode , images were taken through the middle of the cell ( A ) , and progressively toward the bottom ( B ) , until the lowest in - focus plane was reached ( C and D ) . The single lipid droplet ( L ) and thin cytoplasmic rim ( c ) characteristic of the primary white adipocyte are clearly apparent . The laser was then switched to TIRF mode ( E ) , and images were obtained every 2 seconds for a period of 20 min ( F - H ) . The diameter of the cell footprint slighly increased during this period of acquisition ( double arrows under panels F - H ) , possibly due to slight evaporation of the buffer between the two coverslips during this period . by gu e s t on J un e 24 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m 0 Figure . 2 Size distribution of Clathrin regions in primary adipocytes . a ) Analysis steps . Regions of high intensity of varied size and shape ( arrows ) can be seen over the diffuse background of variable intensity in the images even after subtraction of the background outside the cell ( panel A ) . Image subjected to a 3 image running average ( panel B ) . Binary mask generated by deconvolution ( panel C ) . Product of the original data and the binary mask ( panel D ) . b ) Size distribution . Histogram of the size distribution of clathrin regions defined by the binary mask . Shown is the average histogram from 18 images / cell from 4 independent cells , which is similar to individual histograms before averaging . by gu e s t on J un e 24 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m  Figure 3 . Persistence of clathrin regions over time . A ) Time series were rendered in a three - dimensional space , and sets of contiguous voxels identified as objects . A clathrin object persistent throughout the 360 second time series is pseudocolored green , while several rapidly appearing and disappearing objects are pseudocolored red . B ) The population of objects present at t = 0 and persistent after 10 or 360 seconds are depicted in green , while those present at 10 or 360 seconds that were absent at t = 0 are depicted in red in three cross - sections corresponding to the position of the horizontal arrows in A , which represent three selected time points . C ) The number of new or persistent regions found at each time point is plotted . by gu e s t on J un e 24 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m  Figure 4 . Persistence of clathrin domains over time is independent of expression levels . A . Upper , middle and bottom rows exemplify cells expressing total clathrin concentrations within a ten - fold range ( evaluated by the total intensity of the signal in both TIRF and epifluorescence ) . For each , an image obtained at t = 0 ( green ) is overlaid with images of subsequent time points ( red ) as indicated in the upper left corner of each panel . Voxels co - localized between the two time points are displayed in white . B . Co - localization of clathrin over the entire adherent surface over a 2 . 5 minute period . Images were acquired every 2 seconds , and the co - localization between t = 0 and t = 2 sec is arbitrarily assigned the maximal value of 100 % . Plotted are results from 8 measurements from 4 independent cells ( one measurement is the co - localization of t = 0 with t = n , the second is the co - localization of t = n with t = 0 ) , the mean value of which is depicted in black . Spurious co - localization in a high and a low expressing cell was calculated using the t = 0 image flipped along the X axis . by gu e s t on J un e 24 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m  Figure 5 Clathrin distribution and dynamics in Cos cells . Cos cells expressing GFP - clathrin were imaged by TIRF - M . A . Histogram of size distribution of clathrin regions on the surface of a Cos cell . Shown is the average histogram from 18 images / cell from 3 independent cells , which is similar to individual histograms before averaging . B . Analysis of persistence of clathrin objects over a 7 minute time period . Analysis was done as described for Figure 3 . C . An image obtained at t = 0 ( green ) is overlaid with images of subsequent time points ( red ) as indicated in the lower left corner of each panel . Lower panels are magnifications of the areas depicted by the rectangles in the panels above . Arrows point to regions that appear and disappear rapidly . Voxels co - localized between the two time points are displayed in white . D . Co - localization of clathrin over the entire adherent surface over a 10 minute period . Images were acquired every 2 seconds , and the co - localization between t = 0 and t = 2 sec is arbitrarily assigned the maximal value of 100 % . Plotted are the results from 6 measurements from 3 independent cells , and the mean value is depicted in black . Spurious co - localization for each cell was calculated using the t = 0 image flipped along the X axis , and the mean value is depicted in red . by gu e s t on J un e 24 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m  Figure 6 . Turnover of clathrin on regions of assembly . Cells expressing GFP - clathrin were imaged by TIRF - M for approximately 10 minutes to establish a baseline fluorescence intensity value . A : A region of the cell delineated by the polygon ( panel A , magnified in panel D ) was bleached for 1 . 2 minutes . Images were then taken every 2 seconds for 25 minutes . Shown are images taken immediately before bleaching ( panel A ) , during bleaching ( panel D ) , immediately after bleaching ( panel B ) , and 20 minutes after bleaching ( panel C ) . The image in panel A was pseudo colored red , and those in B and C were pseudo colored green . Panel E is the overlap of the photo bleached area of panels A and B , and panel F that of panels A and C . Co localized voxels are in yellow , and reveal extensive co - localization of newly assembled clathrin patches with those visible before bleaching . B : Mean fluorescence intensity in the photo bleached area over the course of the experiment . The half time of recovery for this experiment was 638 seconds . by gu e s t on J un e 24 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m  Figure 7 . Transferrin binding and uptake imaged by TIRF - M . A ) Cos cells expressing GFP - clathrin were incubated in the continuous presence of Alexa  - Transferrin for the times indicated on the left . Shown are non - masked images of clathrin ( right panels ) or transferrin ( left panels ) . Masks of the clathrin images were superimposed on the transferrin images , and the signal inside the mask ( B ) or outside the mask ( C ) is shown . Magnifications of the areas demarcated by the rectangles are shown to the right of each panel . Arrowheads point to assemblies of clathrin persistent over the 0 min period of transferrin uptake , and arrows point to vesicular structures seen outside clathrin assemblies at 0 min after addition of transferrin . D , E and F ) The transferrin signal inside the clathrin mask ( red trace ) or outside the clathrin mask ( green trace ) was expressed as the product of all voxels times their mean intensity ( D ) as the average voxel intensity ( E ) , or as the ratio of voxel intensity inside and outside the masked areas . Arrows indicate the removal of fluorescent transferrin from the media . by gu e s t on J un e 24 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m  Figure 8 . Uptake of transferrin through stable clathrin assemblies . Cells expressing GFP - clathrin ( green pixels ) were continuously exposed to Alexa 568 - Transferrin ( red pixels ) for 10 minutes , and then washed to remove transferrin from the media . Shown are images from the time points indicated in the upper left corner . Arrows point to stable patches of clathrin that remain throughout the imaging period . Arrowheads point to examples of transferrin vesicles that form from within the clathrin patches . by gu e s t on J un e 24 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m  Figure 9 . High temporal resolution imaging of clathrin patches and Simulation of TIRF imaging of a single clathrin - coated pit within a patch . A . Cells expressing GFP - clathrin were imaged by TIRF - M at a rate of 50 Hz ( 50 images / second ) . The mean fluorescence intensity within an 180 x 180 nm box centered on two separate patches on the cell surface was recorded before ( top panel , geen rectangles ) or after ( bottom panel , red rectangles ) fixation with 4 % formaldehyde , and plotted in panel B . Clear upward and downward intensity fluctuations of several millisecond duration are seen within patches before fixation ( arrows ) , where only a steady decrease in intensity over time is seen after fixation , likely due to photobleaching . C . Model used for the simulation , where a single , 50 nm diameter , clathrin - coated pit forms within a 1 um diameter patch of clathrin ( green ) in the plasma membrane ( black line ) . The vesicle remains attached to the patch for 5 seconds and then moves out of the TIRF field . D . Simulation of the model in C imaged in TIRF with an exponential half - depth penetration of 90 nm , at a rate of 50Hz and scaled to match the intensities as in the data in A . The pit is faintly visible in the middle panel . E . Same images as in D but with photon and CCD readout noise added appropriate for the imaging conditions . The noise is large enough that the pit is no longer clearly visible in this single image . F . Fluorescence intensity over time of the 3 by 3 pixel ( 180 nm ) region centered over the pit ( green box ) for both the noiseless ( black ) and noisy ( red ) image sequences . The appearance of the pit causes a localized 8 . 7 % increase in intensity in the patch that is approximately twice the noise levels in the measurement , and similar to the fluctuations seen in the actual cellular data shown in A . by gu e s t on J un e 24 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m  Figure 10 . Model for Clathrin Organization . Based on the quantification of all events on the adherent surface of primary and cultured cells presented here , the following model is proposed , where a subset of events ( < 20 % ) may be “randomly” initiated and transient , and a larger subset ( 50 - 80 % ) occurs on defined , large regions on the plasma membrane . These regions may consist of flat lattices that give rise to individual coated vesicles ( left ) , or clusters of individual pits that form repeatedly on a defined region of the membrane ( right ) . by gu e s t on J un e 24 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Akira Hayakawa , Silvia Corvera and Kevin E . Fogarty Karl D . Bellve , Deborah Leonard , Clive Standley , Lawrence M . Lifshitz , Richard A . Tuft , cells Plasma membrane domains specialized for clathrin - mediated endocytosis in primary published online March 13 , 2006 J . Biol . Chem . 10 . 1074 / jbc . M511370200 Access the most updated version of this article at doi : Alerts : When a correction for this article is posted • When this article is cited • to choose from all of JBC ' s e - mail alerts Click here http : / / www . jbc . org / content / early / 2006 / 03 / 13 / jbc . M511370200 . citation . full . html # ref - list - 1 This article cites 0 references , 0 of which can be accessed free at by gu e s t on J un e 24 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m