Vol . : ( 0123456789 ) Natural Hazards ( 2021 ) 105 : 2283 – 2306 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11069 - 020 - 04400 - 2 1 3 ORIGINAL PAPER Geographic scale and probabilistic forecasts : a trade‑off for protective decisions ? Cassandra A . Shivers‑Williams 1 , 2 · Kimberly E . Klockow‑McClain 1 , 2 Received : 17 April 2020 / Accepted : 22 October 2020 / Published online : 3 November 2020 © Springer Nature B . V . 2020 Abstract This pilot study aimed to examine the impact of varying geographic scales , probabilities of tornado occurrence , and presentation formats within severe weather forecasts on individu - als’ protective decisions . This pilot was unique in its specific examination of the trade - off between highly localized geography and higher valued probabilistic threat information in weather - related decision making . This pilot utilized a 4 ( geographic scale ) × 12 ( probabil - ity ) × 3 ( forecast presentation format ) mixed , nested experimental design . Participants were 440 US adults who completed electronic questionnaires containing experimentally manip - ulated severe weather forecasts . A linear mixed model analysis revealed several findings . First , participants who saw only categorical forecasts made similar preparatory decisions across geographic scales . Additionally , they were more willing to take preparatory action as categorical risk increased . Second , when probabilities were presented , the propensity to take protective action was greater at higher probabilities and at larger geographic scales , affirming the regional geographic reference class selected by the Storm Prediction Center in today’s outlook system . Third , individuals’ propensity for action generally increased as scale and probability increased , but the pattern varied across presentation formats . Lastly , participants reported having a map to look at was moderately important to their decisions and having probabilistic and categorical risk information was highly important to their decisions . Taken together , the findings suggest a complex relationship between geographic scale and probability , which is further complicated by forecast presentation format . Keywords Geographic scale · Forecast uncertainty · Protective decisions · Forecast presentation format * Cassandra A . Shivers - Williams cs - w @ ou . edu 1 Cooperative Institute for Mesoscale Meteorological Studies , University of Oklahoma , Norman , OK , USA 2 National Severe Storms Laboratory , National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , Norman , OK , USA 2284 Natural Hazards ( 2021 ) 105 : 2283 – 2306 1 3 1 Introduction Protective decision making during severe weather is often complicated ; many factors must be considered before action is taken . The first factor people often think about is whether an impending storm will personally impact them , but even that decision is multifaceted as timing , likelihood , location , and intensity , among other things , are considered ( Johnson 2013 ) . The present research hones in on two key factors , namely likelihood and location , to explore their relative impact on individuals’ willingness to take preparatory action in response to a fictitious tornado . Each factor is described in more detail below . At present , a research program called Forecasting a Continuum of Environmental Threats ( FACETs ) aims to expand the ways forecast information is created and ultimately delivered to the public as a means of facilitating improved decision making ; a key attrib - ute of concern for this program is the creation and communication of forecast uncertainty products ( Rothfusz et al . 2018 ) . While the program aims to create new products , several uncertainty products already exist , and understanding how they were created and influence decisions can improve the concepts applied to new product creation . One of the signature uncertainty products currently in use in the National Weather Service ( NWS ) severe suite is the Storm Prediction Center ( SPC ) Convective Outlook , which contains probabilistic information about the likelihood of experiencing severe hazards like tornadoes , wind , and hail up to a day in advance . These products correspond to categorical risk levels , including High , Moderate , Enhanced , Slight , and Marginal categories . The SPC products were created in the mid - 1990s , when SPC Director Joe Shafer began to collaborate closely with noted statistician Alan Murphy ( personal communica - tion , Brooks 2019 ) . They wanted to create a product that could offer an at - a - glance view of the relative severe weather risks ( e . g . , for tornadoes , hail , and wind ) faced across the country on a given day beyond the categorical system that was in place at the time ( High , Moderate , Slight Risk categories ) . At the time , forecasters created these risk categories using somewhat subjective judgments , and the SPC desired to formalize the system with objective criteria . They recognized that this could involve at least two components : the coverage of storm reports , defined as the number of storm hazards reported per unit area , and the potential severity levels for each hazard . They initially experimented with a system that offered expected coverage for severe reports at two different intensity levels : mini - mum NWS severe criteria , and “hatched” areas that could incur significant severe threats ( EF2 + tornadoes , wind in excess of 65 kts , hail in excess of 2 ″ ) . With those severity crite - ria defined , the next major issue was to decide the spatial resolution / coverage that would define the reference class of the probability . The SPC could have made any choice ; they explored what would happen if they offered larger - radius coverage probabilities , for example in an area of approximately 37 mi ( 120km 2 coverage area ) , a more moderate range of approximately 25 mi ( 80km 2 cov - erage area ) , or a smaller neighborhood of approximately 12 mi ( 40km 2 coverage area ) . Going into this analysis , Brooks noted a desire to have probability values that could esca - late as an event unfolds . SPC wanted a probability value from the convective outlook that could be increased when a watch was issued , and then increased again when a warning was issued . Brooks noted in particular that SPC wanted numbers “large enough to feel , ” but small enough to still increase . When calculating the probability values that arose from these choices , Brooks found that the highest probability values achieved for High Risk days at the 37 mi radius could be 60 % or greater , which did not leave much room for additional inflation of the probability value . The highest probability values achieved for High Risk 2285 Natural Hazards ( 2021 ) 105 : 2283 – 2306 1 3 days at a 25 mi radius were approximately 25 % , leaving a lot of room for growth , but also offering values that “felt” meaningful . The highest probability values achieved for High Risk days at a 12 mi radius were approximately 6 % , which left a lot of room for growth , but also “felt” less meaningful . Thus , they determined that the 37 mi radius was too large and the 12 mi radius was too small , and they decided to implement a 25 mi radius for the coverage area . Implicit in these decisions were forecaster judgments about spatial resolutions that were meaningful . The resolution chosen offered probability values that forecasters found mean - ingful , but potentially at the expense of offering probabilities that were more local . A pri - mary challenge facing the FACETs program is knowing how to best connect probabilistic information , including in all of its potential formats , with user decisions . And while prob - ability value and format may play a role in this ( Joslyn and LeClerc 2012 , 2013 ) , in the spatial context of decisions , so may localness / nearness ( Klockow 2013 ; Nagele and Trainor 2012 ) . Thus , research should be conducted to explore the potential trade - offs between these effects . In other words , what is more important—a probability value that is relatively large , or a value that reflects an event that is likely to occur nearby ? While there is minimal research examining the potential psychometric trade - offs between scale and numerical value in the weather realm , this kind of relationship has been studied in other domains . For example , psychologists have found that bystanders , in both emergency and non - emergency situations , are less likely to help a person in need as the number of other onlookers increases ( e . g . , Darley and Latané 1968 ; Latané and Darley 1968 ) . At the same time , psychologists have also found that individuals are more likely to help a single , identifiable person in need than a larger number of statistical victims ( Jenni and Loewenstein 1997 ) . In both of these cases , the felt effect of helping decreases as the scale of other involved persons increases . Examining the influence of geographic scale , Severtson and Burt ( 2012 ) found that concern over an environmental pollutant may increase with distance from the hazard . This was the result of motivated reasoning ; those close to the hazard valued the economic benefits of industrial activity that gave rise to the pollution , while people living in urban areas farther away valued the pristine nature of the rural area . Thus , localness might not be the most significant determinant in personally con - necting to a hazard . Gibson - Graham ( 2002 ) argued it is traditionally assumed that forces operating on global scales are more powerful because they subsume the local ; however , processes occurring at local scales also have the power to bring global events to a halt . Thus , while larger scales may be assumed to have more power you can feel , the power of the smaller scale cannot be overlooked . Across these studies , the effect of scale appears mixed and subject to context . This research aims to bridge these studies that examine the power of various scales of influence with literature on weather decision making under con - ditions of uncertainty . 1 . 1 Communicating and understanding forecast uncertainty and the impact on protective decisions There has been a large vein of research examining how individuals use forecast uncer - tainty information to make various decisions . One of the most commonly provided forms of uncertainty information in modern United States ( US ) weather forecasts is the prob - ability of precipitation . Previous findings ( Gigerenzer et al . 2005 ; Murphy et al . 1980 ) have suggested that people do not properly understand probability of precipitation because the reference class—the class of event to which probabilistic forecast information refers—is 2286 Natural Hazards ( 2021 ) 105 : 2283 – 2306 1 3 often ambiguous . When the reference class is specified , however , recent studies have found that people can effectively use forecast uncertainty information to make better decisions ( Grounds and Joslyn 2018 ; Joslyn and LeClerc 2012 ; Joslyn et al . 2007 ; LeClerc and Joslyn 2015 ) even though they may not always understand the technical or meteorological definitions of the uncertainty information provided ( Morss et al . 2008 ) . In sum , research has shown that providing forecast uncertainty information could have benefits , though it is unclear whether very specific attributes of the reference class are particularly important . In the context of this research , we introduce a new kind of reference class : a geographic refer - ence class , or the scale attribute of the probabilistic information that arises when uncer - tainty information is mapped . One argument for why receiving uncertainty information helps improve decisions is people are better able to calibrate to the risk posed by the situation . This often leads to cor - rectly taking protective action during elevated risks and not taking protective action during lower risks . For example , Joslyn and LeClerc ( 2012 ) conducted a series of studies where college students engaged in cost – loss - driven decision tasks to assess whether receiving forecast uncertainty information improved their decision making . Participants were respon - sible for making decisions regarding whether to salt the roads in advance of icy conditions . In one study , one group of participants received only the nighttime low temperature ( i . e . , a typical deterministic forecast ) , while another group of participants received temperature along with the probability of freezing . Findings showed participants who received prob - ability of freezing information were more likely to correctly salt when the probability of freezing was above the rationally correct decision threshold and correctly withhold salt when the probability fell below the threshold . These results can vary based on the format of the probabilistic information , however . A format change would present the same reference class , e . g . , the probability of reaching a freezing temperature threshold , with a mathematically equivalent but different numeri - cal expression ( e . g . , percentage , odds ratio , frequency ) . Several studies have examined the effect of presenting forecast uncertainty with different expressions . Examples include presenting uncertainty information as odds ratios ( LeClerc and Joslyn 2012 ; Morss et al . 2008 ) , frequencies and percentages ( Joslyn et al . 2009 ; Morss et al . 2008 ) , intervals ( Grounds et al . 2017 ; Morss et al . 2008 ) , and verbal expressions ( Grounds and Joslyn 2018 ; Wallsten et al . 1993 ) . These studies revealed that each format has a particular influence on decision making ; for example , odds ratios increased the propensity to take protective action even when unwarranted , leading to a higher rate of false alarms ( LeClerc and Joslyn 2012 ; Morss et al . 2008 ) , and frequency representations improved decisions overall as compared to probability formats ( Joslyn et al . 2009 ; Morss et al . 2008 ) . Verbal formats have led to a wide array of interpretations , even though some studies have suggested these formats may be easier for non - experts to use ( Grounds and Joslyn 2018 ; Wallsten et al . 1993 ) . Addition - ally , the format could also interact with the decision task and produce particular effects on judgment . For example , if the decision a user must make relates to temperatures below freezing , but the uncertainty information is given as the probability of exceeding the freez - ing threshold , more errors in judgment may result ( Joslyn et al . 2009 ) . Importantly for the present work , all of these studies examined the likelihood of reach - ing particular thresholds of temperature or wind speed—forecast attributes that are com - monly experienced . LeClerc and Joslyn ( 2012 ) argued that presentation formats like odds ratios may be especially appropriate for rare , extreme weather , because they motivate more protective actions ; however , from a calibration perspective , these behaviors can also result in a large incidence of false alarms and , over time , reduced trust in the forecast . Care must then be taken to consider the most appropriate expressions for forecast information in very 2287 Natural Hazards ( 2021 ) 105 : 2283 – 2306 1 3 rare events like severe weather . Relevant to the present study , the SPC currently employs a system with both a verbal expression ( High , Moderate , Enhanced , Slight , and Marginal Risk ) and numeric probabilities . Forecasters do not know whether categories enhance or in some other way interact with individuals’ understanding of the probabilistic information . Further , scant research has examined how best to present forecast probabilities for severe convective storms on maps , specifically ( Klockow - McClain et al . 2019 ) . Previous research has also examined laypersons’ use and understanding of alternative forecast presentation formats such as visual forecasts for a variety of threats , including tor - nadoes and hurricanes ( e . g . , Boone et al . 2018 ; Lindell 2020 ; MacPherson - Krutsky et al . 2020 ; Millet et al . 2020 ; Padilla et al . 2017 ; Ruginski et al . 2016 ) . Lindell’s ( 2020 ) review of hazard map research showed individuals use heuristic shortcuts , in particular the prox - imity heuristic , to form risk judgments of tornadoes and hurricanes such that greater risk is perceived closer to storm tracks and comparatively lesser risk is perceived outside of a tornado warning polygon or hurricane uncertainty cone . Other studies ( e . g . , Liu et al . 2017 ; Padilla et al . 2017 ; Ruginski et al . 2016 ) have shown different hurricane forecast graphical visualization formats lead to different biases in laypersons’ interpretations of the size , intensity , and potential damage of a hurricane . For instance , summary displays such as the National Hurricane Center’s ( NHC ) “cone of uncertainty” have often led laypersons to erroneously assume the widening of the cone—which is meant to convey forecast uncer - tainty over time—conveys the hurricane growing in size or intensity ( Padilla et al . 2017 ; Ruginski et al . 2016 ) . However , by providing explicit instructions , Boone et al . ( 2018 ) found improved understanding of the graphic and reduced likelihood of endorsing size misconceptions . On the other hand , ensemble displays have been found to help users make more accurate risk estimates and reduce misconceptions of storm size ( Lui et al . 2017 ; Padilla et al . 2017 ) but have also biased users’ point - based judgments ( Padilla et al . 2017 ) . Taken together , researchers acknowledge it is important to consider the type ( s ) of task ( s ) users will complete while using visual forecasts because each visualization type has differ - ent inherent biases that affect decision making . Consequently , Millet et al . ( 2020 ) argued different risk communication strategies may be needed to meet the needs of different user groups because their tasks vary widely . 1 . 2 The role of personal geography in protective decisions While successfully communicating uncertainty can involve probability format , much of the forecast information presented to audiences comes in a mapped format , where geography adds another layer of complexity . The format considerations relevant to spatial informa - tion have seen less work . Geographical formats for probabilistic information , including mapped attributes of color and probability distributed over space , can also affect judg - ment ( Klockow - McClain et al . 2019 ; Miran et al . 2018 ) . Klockow - McClain and colleagues ( 2019 ) examined the complex interplay between warning boundaries , physical location , probabilistic forecasts , and cartographic coloring schemes on individuals’ protective deci - sions . This study found that protective decisions varied based on the length of the forecast guidance , the physical distance from the storm , the likelihood of the hazard , the expression of the probability ( in percentage or verbal formats ) , and the format aspects of the map such as color . In response to deterministic warnings , greater risk was perceived at points closer to the storm than at points further away . Also , protective decisions at equivalent distances varied depending on whether the warning was short or long . Moreover , these relationships were moderated by providing verbal guidance ; when respondents were told 2288 Natural Hazards ( 2021 ) 105 : 2283 – 2306 1 3 that the likelihood of a tornado was high , they responded more frequently than with deter - ministic warning information alone . Similarly , when responding to probabilistic informa - tion , participants responding from points closer to the storm were more likely to take pro - tective action than at points farther away , even at the same objective probability level . In other words , 60 % meant something different to respondents when they were close to the storm than when they were farther away ; distance framed the probability . However , when the roles of deterministic and probabilistic information were compared , participants were more likely to take protective action when needed and forego protective action when it was unnecessary after receiving probabilistic information . This study showed the relationship between geographic properties and protective decisions is more complex than previous research has assumed . This study heavily informed the design of the present research . As noted above , outstanding questions remain about how best to display probabilistic informa - tion in a geospatial context , for example , a key attribute of mapped information is its reso - lution ; the reference class in the Klockow et al . study ( 2019 ) was held constant , but varying spatiotemporal reference classes are possible . Examining the influence of spatial relationships between individuals and hazards in real - world decision contexts , Teigen ( 2005 ) showed individuals’ estimates of the likelihood of adverse outcomes were more strongly related to near - miss accidents compared to actual accidents . Across a series of studies , he showed that individuals based these estimates on a proximity heuristic , which is a mental shortcut in which a person judges the likelihood of a threat occurring using their physical proximity to the threat . Similarly , Aguirre and col - leagues ( 1991 ) examined the effects of geographic specificity in Texas residents’ responses to a tornado and their results showed the residents thought the broadly defined county risk information communicated in the warning messaging was hard to interpret . Another study by Nagele and Trainor ( 2012 ) suggested that people who are closer to a tornado threat are better able to experience the associated hazardous conditions ( i . e . , can see or feel the winds , hail , rain ) , which leads to increased belief that there is in fact a risk to safety and subsequent protective behavior . To test this proposition , they examined the impacts of warning polygon size and closeness to a tornado track—operationalizations of geographic specificity—on individuals’ willingness to seek additional information and shelter under tornadic conditions . Their study produced mixed results ; there was not a significant rela - tionship between being located within a warning polygon and seeking shelter , however , in situations where a warning polygon was smaller than 50 % of the county , people were more likely to seek shelter . Moreover , participants who were within five miles of the tor - nado track were more likely to seek shelter than do nothing in response to the threat . These researchers argued that , while storm - based warnings are helpful , larger polygons may not be specific enough to elicit protective action ; there may be critical geographic information missing from these larger polygons that leads to inaction . A meta - synthesis review of tor - nado response literature ( Johnson 2013 ) found that people did not decide how to act in the face of tornado threats solely on the warning and information contained therein ; instead , the protective decision - making process included people attempting to confirm the exist - ence of a threat and feeling some sense of danger from the threat before they decided to take protective action . 1 . 3 The present research The present research drew on the literature briefly discussed here , namely the cognitive geography , meteorology , and psychology research . This research constituted a pilot study 2289 Natural Hazards ( 2021 ) 105 : 2283 – 2306 1 3 aimed to fill gaps in existing literature by examining the impact of a potential trade - off between highly localized geographic tornado threat information and higher valued proba - bility information on individuals’ protective decisions , a relationship not previously studied within a mapped weather risk context . Several hypotheses guided this pilot study . First , individuals were hypothesized to be more likely to take protective action as the geographic scale , otherwise referred to as the geographic reference class , was more localized . It was expected that as a threat became more personally relevant , individuals would be more likely to respond . Second , individuals were hypothesized to be more likely to take protective action as the probability of a threat occurring increased . It was expected that as a threat became more likely to occur , indi - viduals would be more likely to respond . Third , there were no a priori expectations of how these two factors would interact , because when applied together to create different refer - ence classes , the effects are competing . Smaller , more localized reference classes will have correspondingly lower probability values . Lastly , there were no a priori expectations of how presentation format would interact with these factors as scant research has examined this interaction in the context of mapped information . 2 Methodology 2 . 1 Design This pilot study employed a 4 ( geographic reference class ) × 12 1 ( probability ) × 3 ( forecast presentation format ) mixed , nested experimental design ( see Fig . 1 ) where geographic ref - erence class and probability were both within - subjects variables and forecast presentation format was a between - subjects variable . Further , probability was a nested factor within the geographic reference class factor ; each geographic reference class contained a series of 12 severe weather forecasts containing unique probabilities of tornado occurrence . Geographic reference class consisted of four levels : city , county , region , and multi - region . Probability Fig . 1 Pictorial representation of the experimental nested design : 3 ( presentation format ) × 4 ( geographic reference class ) × 12 ( probability ) 1 The experimental design was not fully balanced for all combinations of geographic reference class , prob - ability , and presentation format . This will be discussed in the “Practical Limitations” section . 2290 Natural Hazards ( 2021 ) 105 : 2283 – 2306 1 3 consisted of 12 levels , adapted from the SPC Threat Scales for Convective Hazards “Day 1 Outlook Probabilities” product ( 2017 ) and scaled appropriately for each geographic refer - ence class ( 4 scales × 12 levels = 48 unique probability values ) . Presentation format con - sisted of three levels : probability forecasts , categorical forecasts , and combination prob - ability / categorical forecasts . Each manipulation will be described in greater detail below . 2 . 2 Participants and procedure Data discussed in this paper were collected as part of a larger study conducted that exam - ined several geographical , meteorological , and psychological variables posited to have influenced individuals’ protective decisions . The overall study was approved by the uni - versity’s institutional review board . Qualtrics sampled and managed online data collec - tion for 440 participants during October and November 2018 . Participants completed an electronic consent form and were administered questionnaires via Qualtrics . The median survey completion time was 25 . 5 min . Qualtrics screened for “fast responders”—partici - pants who completed the entire survey in one - half the median time or less—and terminated them for not responding thoughtfully . After survey completion , participants read an elec - tronic debriefing form and were paid for their time commensurate with the Qualtrics pay schedule . For the purposes of this paper , we focused on a subset of the overall study’s variables ( the independent and dependent variables described below ) and examined adults living across the US in the four continental US National Weather Service ( NWS ) Regions : East - ern , Southern , Central , and Western . These regions were chosen because they are the most severe weather - prone . Participants were sampled in representative proportions from each NWS region and similar to the 2018 US Census ( United States Census Bureau 2019 ) ( see Table 1 ) . 2 . 3 Stimulus materials Participants responded to a series of decision scenarios consisting of severe weather prob - ability forecasts and fictitious maps . Specifically , each scenario presented a severe weather forecast , modeled after the SPC convective outlook , describing the day’s chance of tornado risk at a given geographic reference class and a corresponding map of the geography ( see Fig . 2a – d ) . Further , the scenarios contained the experimental manipulations of geographic reference class , forecast probability , and presentation format ( explained in greater detail below ) as well as the primary dependent measure—a question assessing participants’ like - lihood of taking preparatory action . Scenarios were presented in sets , grouped together by geographic reference class , in a randomized order . Participants responded to every scenario for all geographic reference classes one reference class at a time . For example , a participant may have first been ran - domly assigned to view all forecasts for the city reference class . After completing all of these scenarios , this participant may have then been randomly assigned to view all of the forecasts for the region reference class , and then the county reference class , and finally the multi - region reference class . Again , the order in which participants viewed and responded to each reference class scenario set was randomized . Within each geographic reference class , the scenarios were presented in ascending probabilistic order such that the first sce - nario was the lowest chance of tornado occurrence and the last scenario was the highest chance of tornado occurrence ; this was done to minimize confusion . 2291 Natural Hazards ( 2021 ) 105 : 2283 – 2306 1 3 Table 1 Demographic information for participants compared with the 2018 US census a Nine ( 9 ) participants did not respond to all demographic items b Population estimates were obtained from the US Census 2018 popu - lation estimates by age , sex , race , and Hispanic origin Characteristic Participants a ( % ) US Adult population b ( % ) NWS region Eastern region 31 . 7 30 . 7 Southern region 27 . 1 27 . 2 Central region 20 . 7 20 . 6 Western region 20 . 5 20 . 6 Age group 18 – 24 12 . 2 12 . 0 25 – 34 18 . 1 18 . 0 35 – 44 16 . 3 16 . 3 45 – 54 16 . 3 16 . 4 55 – 64 16 . 7 16 . 7 65 and up 20 . 4 20 . 6 Gende r Female 51 . 4 50 . 8 Male 46 . 6 49 . 2 Fig . 2 Panel of geographic reference class variations . a depicts a sample forecast for the city scale , b depicts a sample forecast for the county scale , c depicts a sample forecast for the region scale , and d depicts a sample forecast for the multi - region scale 2292 Natural Hazards ( 2021 ) 105 : 2283 – 2306 1 3 2 . 4 Independent variables 2 . 4 . 1 Geographic reference class To assess the impact of “localness” on decision making , participants responded to sets of scenarios staged in four different geographic scales : a city ( 100 sq . mi ; see Fig . 2a ) , county ( 625 sq . mi ; see Fig . 2b ) , region ( 2500 sq . mi ; see Fig . 2c ) , and “multi - region” ( 10 , 000 sq . mi ; see Fig . 2d ) . This approach uses square grid cells to connote probabili - ties at each scale . 2 . 4 . 2 Probability To assess the impact of probabilistic information on decision making , participants responded to scenarios expressing different likelihoods of tornado occurrence . The probabilities and risk categories utilized were adapted from the current SPC Threat Scales for Convective Hazards “Day 1 Outlook Probabilities” ( 2017 ) product . Specifi - cally , the SPC probabilities were adapted and converted to mathematical equivalents for each geographic reference class . The SPC probabilities , as used today , refer to the likelihood an event will occur in a 24 - h period within 25 miles of any given point , which creates a region of 2500 sq . mi . Thus , the verbatim SPC probabilities were used for the region reference class scenarios . For the other reference class scenarios , mathematically equivalent SPC probabilities were computed by converting the probabilities based on scale differences . For example , the regional grid is 2500 sq . mi . , whereas the city grid is only 100 sq . mi . To compute the city - scale mathematically equivalent SPC probabilities , each region - scale probabil - ity was divided by 25 ( 2500 : 100 reduces to 25 : 1 ) . Similarly , the region - scale probabili - ties were divided by four to compute the county - scale probabilities ( 2500 : 625 ) and mul - tiplied by four to compute the multi - region probabilities ( 2500 : 10000 ) . See Table 2 for a complete breakdown of probability points , including corresponding severity levels and risk categories , used across geographic reference classes . 2 . 4 . 3 Presentation format To assess the impact of presentation format on decision making , participants were randomly assigned to receive all scenarios in one of three presentation formats . In the probabilistic format condition , forecast uncertainty was presented as percent chance ( e . g . , there is a 2 % chance of a tornado today ) and the accompanying maps were left uncolored ( see Fig . 3a ) . In the categorical format condition , forecast uncertainty was expressed as a color - coded risk category ( e . g . , there is a marginal risk of a tornado today ) and the accompanying maps and category text were colored according to the SPC ( 2017 ) scale ( see Fig . 3b ) . In the combination format condition , forecast uncertainty was expressed as both percent chance and risk category ( e . g . , there is a marginal risk of a tornado today , which corresponds to a 2 % chance ) and the accompanying maps and category text were colored ( see Fig . 3c ) . Table 2 also outlines the risk categories that accompanied each probability level across reference classes . 2293 Natural Hazards ( 2021 ) 105 : 2283 – 2306 1 3 T a b l e 2 B r ea kdo w n o f p r ob a b ilit y c onv e r s i on s by r i s k ca t e go r y , g e og r a ph i c r e f e r e n ce c l a ss , a nd s e v e r it y P r ob a b ilit y R i s k C a t e go r y G e o g r a ph i c R e f e r e n ce C l a ss S e v e r it y C it y ( % ) C oun t r y ( % ) R e g i on ( % ) M u lti - R e g i on ( % ) 1 M a r g i n a l 0 . 08 0 . 50 2 8 a 2 S li gh t 0 . 20 1 . 25 5 20 a 3 E nh a n ce d 0 . 40 2 . 50 10 40 a 4 E nh a n ce d 0 . 40 2 . 50 10 40 S i g . S e v e r e R i s k 5 E nh a n ce d 0 . 60 3 . 75 15 60 a 6 M od e r a t e 0 . 60 3 . 75 15 60 S i g . S e v e r e R i s k 7 M od e r a t e 1 . 20 7 . 50 30 100 b a 8 H i gh 1 . 20 7 . 50 30 100 b S i g . S e v e r e R i s k 9 H i gh 1 . 80 1 1 . 2 5 45 c a 10 H i gh 1 . 80 1 1 . 2 5 45 c S i g . S e v e r e R i s k 11 H i gh 2 . 40 1 5 . 0 0 60 c a 12 H i gh 2 . 40 1 5 . 0 0 60 c S i g . S e v e r e R i s k a S e v e r it y d e s i gn a ti on do e s no t e x i s t f o r t h i s p r ob a b ilit y po i n t b T h i s p r ob a b ilit y w a s t r un ca t e d a t 100 % f o r p r ac ti ca lit y ; t h e c on v e r s i on w a s g r ea t e r t h a n 100 % c T h i s p r ob a b ilit y c onv e r t e d t o a nu m b e r g r ea t e r t h a n 100 % a nd t h u s w a s no t s ho w n t o p a r ti c i p a n t s 2294 Natural Hazards ( 2021 ) 105 : 2283 – 2306 1 3 2 . 4 . 4 Practical limitations Two practical limitations led to an imbalance of probability scenarios across geographic reference classes and presentation formats . This is worth noting because it led to an une - qual number of stimuli presented to participants . In total , respondents viewed either 32 scenarios ( categorical forecast condition ) or 44 scenarios ( probabilistic forecast and combi - nation forecast conditions ) . First , there were an unequal number of probability scenarios across the four geographic reference classes . The probability and combination forecast conditions maintained all 12 SPC probability levels within the city , county , and region scenarios . The multi - region reference class , however , only retained 8 of the SPC probabilities . The two highest prob - abilities—45 % and 60 % —and their “significant severe” complements converted to prob - abilities greater than 100 % . Practically speaking , a tornado likelihood greater than 100 % is unfeasible so these probabilities were dropped . Additionally , the conversion of 30 % from the region to the multi - region was greater than 100 % . However , if the conversion of 15 % remained the highest probability used for the multi - region , the probabilities would have maxed out at 60 % . Thus , the conversion of 30 % , which was 120 % , was truncated at 100 % . The remaining lower probabilities were converted as previously described , which left 8 probability points for the multi - region reference class . These conversion issues were incon - sequential for the category condition because participants did not receive the probabilities underlying the risk categories . Second , there were an unequal number of scenarios across the three presentation for - mats . The probability and combination forecast conditions had 44 identical scenarios : 12 city scenarios , 12 county scenarios , 12 region scenarios , and 8 multi - region scenar - ios . However , the category condition only had 32 scenarios—8 per location . Practically speaking , it would have been redundant to ask participants in the category condition mul - tiple identical questions , which would have happened if the categories were repeated for Fig . 3 Panel of presentation format variations . a depicts a sample forecast with probability presentation for - mat , b depicts a sample forecast with the category presentation format , and c depicts a sample forecast with the combination presentation format 2295 Natural Hazards ( 2021 ) 105 : 2283 – 2306 1 3 balance . Therefore , category condition participants only received the meaningfully differ - ent categories for every geographic reference class . Both of these imbalances—the multi - region reference class having fewer scenarios than the other reference classes and the category presentation format having fewer scenarios than the other presentation formats—were addressed statistically . Specifically , missing data were estimated using a data imputation process in the Statistical Package for Social Sciences ( IBM SPSS version 26 ) . To correct the multi - region reference class imbalance , responses from the highest probability point used in the multi - region reference class ( i . e . , 100 % ) were imputed for the four probability points that were not administered in the prob - ability and combination conditions . It was expected that judgments and decisions between probability point 8 ( 100 % chance of occurrence ) and probability points 9 – 12 ( chances of occurrence greater than 100 % ) would not differ because respondents would have seen the same forecasts across these scenarios . Similarly , to correct the category presentation format imbalance , responses from parallel risk category scenarios were imputed for the four miss - ing scenarios ; it was expected that judgments and decisions between the risk categories participants saw and the parallel categories they did not see would not differ because they would have seen the same forecasts across these scenarios . As an example , participants responded to one scenario with a forecast for a high significant severe risk of a tornado , but the SPC Threat Scale has three levels that correspond to high significant severe risk . Par - ticipants’ responses to the presented high significant severe risk scenario were imputed for the two high significant severe risk scenarios that were not presented . This process ( using appropriately parallel categories ) was used to impute data for the remaining two missing categorical forecast scenarios . 2 . 5 Measures 2 . 5 . 1 Demographic items At the beginning of the study , prior to receiving experimental materials , participants com - pleted standard demographic items , some of which were used for sampling criteria . Sample items included age and gender . 2 . 5 . 2 Dependent variables 2 . 5 . 2 . 1 Willingness to take preparatory action After every scenario , participants responded to the question , “How likely are you to take preparatory action today in response to the potential tornado threat ? ” Responses were indicated on a 6 - point Likert scale , with options ranging from extremely unlikely to extremely likely . 2 . 5 . 2 . 2 Message evaluation After all decision trials for every geographic reference class were completed , several items assessed the extent to which different aspects of the forecast information impacted decisions . The message aspects evaluated were : ( 1 ) probabilistic fore - cast information in the text , ( 2 ) categorical / color - coded risk information in the text and on the map , ( 3 ) map coloring scheme , and ( 4 ) having a map to look at while making decisions . Participants only rated the aspects to which they were exposed . For example , participants in the probability condition rated the importance of having “numerical probabilistic forecast information . ” Similarly , all participants rated the importance of “having a map to look at while making decisions . ” Responses were indicated on 7 - point Likert scales , with options 2296 Natural Hazards ( 2021 ) 105 : 2283 – 2306 1 3 ranging from extremely unimportant / I did not consider this information at all when making decisions to extremely important / I heavily based my decisions on this information . Higher scores indicated greater importance to decision making . 2 . 6 Data analysis To investigate the research question , a linear mixed model ( LMM ) analysis and one - way analyses of variances ( ANOVAs ) were performed . Statistical package for social sciences ( IBM SPSS version 26 ) was used for all analyses . LMM was used because it allowed us to simultaneously account for variability across geographic reference classes and presentation formats as well as the nested effect of probability within geographic reference classes and the repeated measures of geographic reference classes and probabilities . Multiple responses from the same participant were expected to be more similar to each other than responses from other participants . Accounting for these fixed , random , and subject effects simultane - ously was expected to reduce the error in the model . A series of ANOVAs were performed to examine the effect of presentation format on evaluations of the message features ( e . g . , having a map , color - coded risk information ) . 3 Results 3 . 1 Impacts of geographic reference class , probability , and presentation format The overarching goals of this experiment were to determine the effects of geographic refer - ence class ( i . e . , scale ) , probability , and forecast presentation format on individuals’ will - ingness to take preparatory action . To examine these relations , LMM estimated through maximum likelihood was computed . In the LMM , participants’ willingness to take pre - paratory action served as the outcome variable and scale , presentation format , and prob - ability were the predictors . Scale and probability were both modeled as repeated measures . The main effects of scale and presentation format as well as their interaction were mod - eled as fixed effects . Following guidance from statistical resources ( e . g . , Keppel and Wick - ens 2004 , Chapter 25 ; Seltman 2018 , Chapter 15 ; Starkweather and Harrington 2018 ) , the nested effect of probability within scale was modeled as a random factor . The equation for the LMM is : where y ij is the willingness to take preparatory action for a particular ij case , 𝛽 1 and 𝛽 2 are fixed effect coefficients for geographic scale and presentation format ( respectively ) for observations j in groups i , b 1 is the random effect coefficient for probability , and 𝜀 ij is the error for case j in group i . 3 . 1 . 1 Fixed effects The main effects of both scale and presentation format were examined , and both reached statistical significance . Specifically , the effect of scale on preparatory action , F ( 3 , 47 . 89 ) = 4 . 85 , p = 0 . 005 , showed that participants’ willingness to take preparatory action y ij = 𝛽 1 ( scale ij ) + 𝛽 2 ( presentation ij ) + b 1 ( probability ij ) + 𝜀 ij 2297 Natural Hazards ( 2021 ) 105 : 2283 – 2306 1 3 significantly varied as a result of the geographic reference class to which they were responding ( see Fig . 4 ) . Using a Bonferroni correction ( to account for the number of simul - taneous comparisons ) , pairwise comparisons were computed and examined for group dif - ferences ; only two of the pairwise comparisons reached statistical significance . Namely , the mean preparatory action scores at the city scale ( M = 4 . 07 , − D = − 0 . 86 , SE = 0 . 24 , p = 0 . 005 ) and the county scale ( M = 4 . 23 , − D = − 0 . 70 , SE = 0 . 24 , p = 0 . 032 ) were both significantly lower than the mean multi - region scale score ( M = 4 . 93 ) . None of the region scale score ( M = 4 . 49 ) comparisons reached statistical significance . Looking across scales , participants’ willingness to take preparatory action was significantly lower in the smaller geographic scales ( i . e . , the city and county scales ) compared to the largest geographic scale . On the other hand , scales that were similar to each other in size ( i . e . , city / county , county / region , region / multi - region ) did not have preparatory action scores that varied sig - nificantly , which suggests participants were responding to these scales similarly . The main effect of presentation format on preparatory action was also statistically sig - nificant , F ( 2 , 19000 . 96 ) = 382 . 00 , p < 0 . 001 , showing that participants’ willingness to take preparatory action significantly varied as a result of the forecast presentation format they viewed ( see Fig . 5 ) . After the Bonferroni correction , all pairwise comparisons reached sta - tistical significance . First , the mean preparatory action score for those in the probability forecast condition ( M = 4 . 12 ) was significantly lower than the mean score for those in the categorical forecast condition ( M = 4 . 79 , − D = − 0 . 67 , SE = 0 . 02 , p < 0 . 001 ) and the combi - nation forecast condition ( M = 4 . 37 , − D = − 0 . 25 , SE = 0 . 02 , p < 0 . 001 ) . Further , the mean score for those in the combination forecast condition was also significantly lower than that of the categorical forecast condition ( − D = − 0 . 42 , SE = 0 . 02 , p < 0 . 001 ) . These results suggest categorical forecasts encouraged taking preparatory action , on average , while Fig . 4 Effect of geographic reference class on preparatory decisions 2298 Natural Hazards ( 2021 ) 105 : 2283 – 2306 1 3 probabilistic forecast information , even when coupled with categorical forecast informa - tion , seemed to lessen the propensity to take preparatory action by comparison . These find - ings could have implications for how risk was interpreted as a function of presentation format . The interactive effect of scale and presentation format on preparatory action was also statistically significant , F ( 6 , 10605 . 39 ) = 137 . 17 , p < 0 . 001 , showing the effect of scale on preparatory action varied as a function of forecast presentation format ( see Fig . 6 ) . In exam - ining the simple effects , a few trends emerged . First , the mean preparatory action score for those in the categorical forecast condition was consistent across scales . This makes sense because participants in this condition saw identical forecasts regardless of scale . Second , the mean preparatory action score for those in the probabilistic and combination forecast conditions both increased as scales increased in size . Interestingly , the mean score among combination forecast participants was higher than the mean score among probabilistic fore - cast participants for all scales except the multi - region ; at this scale , those who saw proba - bilistic forecasts were more likely to take preparatory action . Moreover , the multi - region scale was the only scale for which the mean score among those who received categorical forecasts was lower than both other groups . 3 . 1 . 2 Random effects The nested effect of probability within scale was modeled as a random effect . While we purposefully chose the SPC probabilities for use in this study , these probabilities are only some of the possible probabilities across a probability distribution and thus were treated as a random factor . Figure 7 shows the preparatory action score trends across probability points for each scale . First , across all scales , preparatory action willingness increased as Fig . 5 Effect of presentation format on preparatory decisions 2299 Natural Hazards ( 2021 ) 105 : 2283 – 2306 1 3 Fig . 6 Interactive effect of geographic reference class and presentation format on preparatory decisions probability increased . Participants were generally most willing to take preparatory action when responding to a potential tornado impacting a multi - region area and less willing to take action when responding to a potential tornado threat impacting a city , even though they were asked to imagine they lived in that specific city . Also , the propensity to take pre - paratory action across probability points ( i . e . , the slope of each line ) varied across scales ; people were not only more willing to take action when responding to scenarios within the multi - region , but they were also more willing to take action at a faster rate and lower probability point than when responding to any other scale . Propensity to take action at the other scales ( city , county , and region ) was fairly similar until the seventh probability point ( 1 . 20 % , 7 . 50 % , and 30 % , respectively ) . At these probability points , the likelihood of taking action in the city decreased slightly and mostly plateaued while the likelihood of taking action slightly but steadily increased in the county and increased much more steeply in the region scales . 3 . 1 . 3 Examining scale , presentation format , and probability in tandem While the statistical analysis does not formally test for a significant three - way interaction , we can still examine the trend of preparatory action willingness across the three factors simultaneously ( see Fig . 8a – d ) . The trend revealed the pattern of relations among scale , probability , and willingness to take action differed depending on forecast presentation format . Again , participants receiving the categorical forecasts were most willing to take preparatory action in response to a tornado threat in a city , county , and region at all prob - abilities of occurrence . More interesting is the comparison between those receiving com - bination and probabilistic forecasts . Participants receiving the combination forecasts were 2300 Natural Hazards ( 2021 ) 105 : 2283 – 2306 1 3 more willing to take preparatory action in a city and county at all probabilities of occur - rence . This pattern also held for the region scale until its eleventh probability point ( 60 % chance of occurrence ) and beyond when participants who received only probabilistic fore - casts became more willing to take preparatory action . The multi - region location , on the other hand , told a much different story . The only point at which participants who received the combination forecasts were more willing to take action was at the first probability point , or 8 % chance of a tornado occurring . Beyond that probability point , participants who received only probabilistic forecasts were more willing to take action . Moreover , the pro - pensity for taking preparatory action varied across locations . Participants were more likely to take action at a lower probability and at a much faster ( steeper ) rate for the region and multi - region locations than for the city and county locations . 3 . 2 The value of message features Participants were also asked to rate the importance of multiple aspects of the warn - ing information to their decision - making process . On average , participants who received probabilistic forecast information rated it as highly important to their decisions , M = 5 . 59 , SD = 1 . 59 , n = 279 . Similarly , participants who received color - coded categorical risk infor - mation also rated it as very important to their decisions , M = 5 . 44 , SD = 1 . 73 , n = 270 . Fig . 7 Nested effect of probability within geographic reference class on preparatory decisions 2301 Natural Hazards ( 2021 ) 105 : 2283 – 2306 1 3 Fig . 8 Panel of three - way interaction trend . Graphs show the interaction between probability and presenta - tion format separated by geographic reference class . a depicts the interaction at the city scale , b depicts the interaction at the county scale , c depicts the interaction at the region scale , and d depicts the interaction at the multi - region scale These same participants rated the map coloring scheme as moderately important to their decisions , M = 5 . 02 , SD = 1 . 96 , n = 270 , but less important than the categorical information itself . Lastly , all participants reported having a map to look at while making decisions was moderately important , M = 4 . 98 , SD = 1 . 94 , n = 407 ; this aspect received the lowest impor - tance rating . These means did not differ significantly as a function of presentation format , F ProbabilityInfo = 0 . 32 , p = 0 . 58 ; F CategoryInfo = 0 . 02 , p = 0 . 89 ; F MapColoring = 0 . 34 , p = 0 . 56 ; F HavingMap = 0 . 26 , p = 0 . 77 . In other words , for example , having a map to look at while mak - ing decisions was equally important to all participants regardless of the type of information they saw . 4 Discussion This paper examines the interplay between geographic reference classes and probabil - istic forecasts for individuals’ protective decisions . The results partially supported the hypotheses ; the first hypothesis , that information presented on local geographic scales might drive more protective actions , was not confirmed . However , the second hypoth - esis was confirmed—protective action was more likely as probabilities increased across any geographic scale . Further , when probabilities were presented , protective action was less likely as geographic scale decreased . Finally , individuals’ willingness to take 2302 Natural Hazards ( 2021 ) 105 : 2283 – 2306 1 3 preparatory action across probability points and scales varied in complex ways depend - ing on the format in which forecasts were presented . In particular , participants were more likely to take protective action when viewing the categorical forecasts—especially at higher risk categories—and least likely to take protective action when viewing proba - bilistic forecasts—across most probability points—with the likelihood of taking protec - tive action in response to combination forecasts falling in - between the two . However , this pattern depended on geographic scale with less separation in tendencies at larger geographic scales ( and even trend reversals ) . This suggests that probabilistic informa - tion alone was not enough to encourage protective action unless people were responding to larger geographic scales ; probabilistic information may have been more helpful for helping respondents calibrate to the risk that was presented and was most helpful when supplemented with categories . The novel contribution of this research was elucidating the interplay between geo - graphic reference class and probabilistic forecasts in this specific context , which has interesting theoretical and practical implications . Previous literature examining the role of geography in protective decisions suggests that people are more likely to take protec - tive action against personalized severe weather threats ; that is , threats that are impact - ing their particular geographic location ( e . g . , Lindell 2020 ) . Our results contradict this finding by showing that when probabilities are part of the risk information , participants were more likely to take protective action at larger geographic scales rather than more local scales . Our findings show tangible support for SPC’s desire to create meaningful “probabilities one can feel . ” People were more likely to act at the regional and multi - regional scales and correspondingly higher valued probabilities as compared to the smaller , more local scales with correspondingly lower probabilities . These findings sug - gest , then , that there is in fact a trade - off between personalized geographic scales and higher valued probabilistic forecasts . If the weather community wishes to provide fore - casts that are very local , it would make sense to create them in such a way that the val - ues could be relatively high ( e . g . , as in the storm - based , 1 km × 1 hr - scaled Probabilistic Hazard Information prototype ; Rothfusz et al . 2018 ) . Similar to past research , presentation format also played a significant role in partici - pants’ decisions . Moreover , presentation format also impacted the effects of geographic scale and probability . Generally speaking , the combination of categorical and proba - bilistic forecast information encouraged participants to take preparatory action beyond the effect of either categorical or probabilistic forecast information alone . However , this pattern was reversed when participants were responding to the multi - region scale ; in this case , only receiving probabilistic forecasts were more encouraging of preparatory action . It could have been that , at this scale , the categorical labels were not accurately capturing the risk perceived at the probability levels represented . In other words , maybe seeing 60 % does not mentally equate to an “Enhanced” risk . Even though participants in the combination forecast condition saw both types of information , and as a whole the sample rated probabilistic information as more important to decision making than categorical information , participants could have been anchoring on the category , or even the color coding of it , and placing less cognitive attention on the probabilistic informa - tion . Unfortunately , we did not include a measure to tease this possibility apart , but this would be good fodder for future research . There may also be individual differences in decision making and numerical ability ( e . g . , Grounds and Joslyn 2018 ) as well as spa - tial ability ( e . g . , MacPherson - Krutsky et al . 2020 ) that may play a role in the extent to which participants used the probabilistic information and understood the map graphics . Future research should explore these possibilities as well . Lastly , there is a possibility 2303 Natural Hazards ( 2021 ) 105 : 2283 – 2306 1 3 that these findings are generalizable to other point hazards and these relations should be replicated in other contexts . 4 . 1 Limitations and future research One major limitation of the present study was the design imbalance . Future work should aim to construct stimuli that vary in presentation format but maintain methodological bal - ance so direct comparisons across presentation format can be made . Second , the stimuli in this study were hypothetical . While participants were primed to consider the presented geographic reference classes as places where they lived , a study examining the proposed relations between scale and probability may be more informative if there was a feedback loop that enabled a person’s actual geography to be inserted into the materials . Third , using an online questionnaire for experimental control to address the constructs studied also has an impact on the ecological validity of the findings , i . e . , whether these results can be generalized to or expected to occur in real - life settings . Most significantly for this study , participants were all presented with locations that were unfamiliar , and thus , geography was a highly conceptual variable in ways it would not be for more naturalistic settings . As previously mentioned , future work should also assess the extent to which protective decisions , such as those made here , are impacted by individual psychological differences such as numerical ability and cognitive processing , account for more behavioral responses , and occur in response to actual severe weather events . Past work involving these types of factors has been minimal and produced mixed results . Also , as previously mentioned in Sect . 2 . 3 , the forecasts were presented in ascending order within each reference class , which may have led participants to anchor their decisions relatively ( as the probabilities increased ) instead of independently considering the forecast information in each scenario and then responding . Future research should work to fully randomize all stimuli materials to ensure a complete test of these types of decisions independent of the order in which the materials were presented . In addition , our experiment held risk levels constant , exploring responses to geographic scales that increased alongside probability values . This limits our ability to determine what drives increasing responses where they are found , scale or prob - ability . Future research could vary risk levels and hold probability values constant while increasing geographic scales , further isolating these effects . Lastly , this work studied indi - viduals’ responses to severe weather information using only one format for communicating probabilistic forecasts—using the existing SPC system . However , there are several ways to communicate probabilistic forecasts , some of which include climatological probabilities . One example would be to present odds ratios , which would account for climatology . This kind of format is beyond the scope of the present research but could be examined in future work . 4 . 2 Conclusion Taken together , this work offers a novel approach to examining the trade - off between geo - graphic reference class and probabilistic forecast information in weather - related protec - tive decisions . The relationship between these variables is complex and also impacted by the way in which forecast information is presented . These findings lend support for SPC’s notion of creating “probabilities one can feel” at a scale that might seem large and imper - sonal but has practical forecast importance . 2304 Natural Hazards ( 2021 ) 105 : 2283 – 2306 1 3 Acknowledgements Funding was provided by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research under NOAA - University of Oklahoma Cooperative Agreement # NA16OAR4320115 , US Department of Commerce . Author contributions Both authors contributed to the conception and design of the study , but that effort was led by Kimberly Klockow - McClain . Material preparation was primarily performed by Cassandra Shivers - Williams and then approved by Kimberly Klockow - McClain . Data collection was managed by Qualtrics , but that process was navigated by Cassandra Shivers - Williams . Analyses were also performed by Cassan - dra Shivers - Williams . The first draft of the manuscript was written by Cassandra Shivers - Williams , with Kimberly Klockow - McClain contributing heavily to the introduction , literature review , and discussion . Both authors commented on previous versions of this manuscript and have read and approved this final manuscript . Funding Funding was provided by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research under NOAA - University of Oklahoma Cooperative Agreement # NA16OAR4320115 , US Department of Commerce . Code availability Not applicable . Compliance with ethical standards Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest . Consent to participate Participants provided electronic informed consent before completing the online sur - vey used for data collection . Consent for publication Not applicable . Data availability and materials Data and materials are available upon request from authors . Ethics approval This study was approved by the University of Oklahoma institutional review board References Aguirre BE , Anderson WA , Balandran S , Peters BE , White MH ( 1991 ) Saragosa , Texas , Tornado May 22 , 1987 : An Evaluation of the Warning System . National Academic Press , Washington Boone AP , Gunalp P , Hegarty M ( 2018 ) Explicit versus actionable knowledge : the influence of explain - ing graphical conventions on interpretation of hurricane forecast visualizations . J Exp Psychol Appl 24 : 275 – 295 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / xap00 00166 Darley JM , Latané B ( 1968 ) Bystander intervention in emergencies : diffusion of responsibility . J Pers Soc Psychol 8 : 377 – 383 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / h0025 589 Gibson - Graham JK ( 2002 ) Beyond global vs . local : Economic politics outside the binary frame . In : Herod A , Wright MW ( eds ) Geographies of power : Placing scale . Blackwell , Oxford , pp 25 – 60 Gigerenzer G , Hertwig R , van den Broek E , Fasolo B , Katsikopoulos KV ( 2005 ) “A 30 % chance of rain tomorrow” : how does the public understand probabilistic weather forecasts ? Risk Anal 25 : 623 – 629 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1539 - 6924 . 2005 . 00608 . x Grounds MA , Joslyn SL ( 2018 ) Communicating weather forecast uncertainty : do individual differences matter ? J Exp Psychol Appl 24 : 18 – 33 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / xap00 00165 Grounds MA , Joslyn S , Otsuka K ( 2017 ) Probabilistic interval forecasts : an individual differences approach to understanding forecast communication . Adv Meteorol 2017 : 1 – 18 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1155 / 2017 / 39325 65 Jenni K , Loewenstein G ( 1997 ) Explaining the identifiable victim effect . J RiskUncertain 14 : 235 – 257 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1023 / A : 10077 40225 484 Johnson N ( 2013 ) How people respond : a meta - synthesis of post - tornado interviews and surveys . Mas - ter’s Thesis , North Carolina State University 2305 Natural Hazards ( 2021 ) 105 : 2283 – 2306 1 3 Joslyn SL , LeClerc JE ( 2012 ) Uncertainty forecasts improve weather - related decisions and attenuate the effects of forecast error . J Exp Psychol Appl 18 : 126 – 140 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0025 185 Joslyn S , LeClerc J ( 2013 ) Decisions with uncertainty : the glass half full . Curr Dir Psychol Sci 22 : 308 – 315 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 09637 21413 48147 3 Joslyn SL , Nadav - Greenberg L , Taing MU , Nichols RM ( 2009 ) The effects of wording on the under - standing and use of uncertainty information in a threshold forecasting decision . Appl Cogn Psychol 23 : 55 – 72 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / acp . 1449 Joslyn S , Pak K , Jones D , Pyles J , Hunt E ( 2007 ) The effect of probabilistic information on threshold forecasts . Weather Forecast 22 : 804 – 812 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1175 / WAF10 20 . 1 Keppel G , Wickens TD ( 2004 ) Design and analysis : a researcher’s handbook , 4th edn . Prentice Hall , Pearson Education Klockow K ( 2013 ) Spatializing tornado warning lead - time : Risk perception and response in a spatio - temporal framework . Dissertation , University of Oklahoma Klockow - McClain KE , McPherson RA , Thomas RP ( 2019 ) Cartographic design for improved decision making : Trade - offs in uncertainty visualization for tornado threats . Ann Am Assoc Geogr 110 : 314 – 333 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 24694 452 . 2019 . 16024 67 Latané B , Darley JM ( 1968 ) Group inhibition of bystander intervention in emergencies . J Pers Soc Psy - chol 10 : 215 – 221 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / h0026 570 LeClerc J , Joslyn S ( 2012 ) Odds ratio forecasts increase precautionary action for extreme weather events . Weather Clim Soc 4 : 263 – 270 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1175 / WCAS - D - 12 - 00013 . 1 LeClerc J , Joslyn S ( 2015 ) The cry wolf effect and weather - related decision making . Risk Anal 35 : 385 – 395 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / risa . 12336 Lindell MK ( 2020 ) Improving hazard map comprehension for protective action decision making . Front Comput Sci 2 : 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fcomp . 2020 . 00027 Liu L , Boone AP , Ruginski IT , Padilla L , Hegarty M , Creem - Regehr SH , Thompson WB , Yuksel C , House DH ( 2017 ) Uncertainty visualization by representative sampling from prediction ensembles . IEEE Trans Vis Comput Graph 23 : 2165 – 2178 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2016 . 26072 04 MacPherson - Krutsky CC , Brand BD , Lindell MK ( 2020 ) Does updating natural hazard maps to reflect best practices increase viewer comprehension to risk ? Int J Disaster Risk Reduct 46 : 101487 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijdrr . 2020 . 10148 7 Millet B , Carter AP , Braod K , Cairo A , Evans SD , Majumdar SJ ( 2020 ) Hurricane risk communica - tion : visualization and behavioral science concepts . Weather Clim Soc 12 : 193 – 211 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1175 / WCAS - D - 19 - 0011 . 1 Miran SM , Ling C , Gerard A , Rothfusz L ( 2018 ) The effect of providing probabilistic information about a tornado threat on people’s protective actions . Nat Hazards 94 : 743 – 758 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s1106 9 - 018 - 3418 - 5 Morss RE , Demuth JL , Lazo JK ( 2008 ) Communicating uncertainty in weather forecasts : a survey of the U . S . public . Weather and Forecasting 23 : 974 – 991 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1175 / 2008W AF200 7088 . 1 Murphy AH , Lichtenstein S , Fischhoff B , Winkler RL ( 1980 ) Misinterpretations of precipita - tion probability forecasts . Bull Am Meteor Soc 61 : 695 – 701 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1175 / 1520 - 0477 ( 1980 ) 061 % 3c069 5 : MOPPF % 3e2 . 0 . CO ; 2 Nagele DE , Trainor JE ( 2012 ) Geographic specificity , tornadoes , and protective action . Weather Clim Soc 4 : 145 – 155 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1175 / WCAS - D - 11 - 00047 . 1 Padilla LM , Ruginski IT , Creem - Regehr SH ( 2017 ) Effects of ensemble and summary displays on inter - pretations of geospatial uncertainty data . Cogn Res Princ Implic 2 : 1 – 16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / s4123 5 - 017 - 0076 - 1 Rothfusz L , Schneider R , Novak D , Klockow KE , Gerard A , Karstens C , Stumpf G , Smith T ( 2018 ) FACETs : a proposed next - generation paradigm for high - impact weather forecasting . Bull Am Meteor Soc 99 : 2025 – 2043 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1175 / BAMS - D - 16 - 0100 . 1 Ruginski IT , Boone AP , Padilla LM , Liu L , Heydari N , Kramer HS , Hegarty M , Thompson WB , House DH , Creem - Regehr SH ( 2016 ) Non - expert interpretations of hurricane forecast uncertainty visuali - zations . Spat Cogn Comput 16 : 154 – 172 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 13875 868 . 2015 . 11375 77 Seltman HJ ( 2018 ) Experimental design and analysis [ eBook ] . Carnegie Mellon University . https : / / www . stat . cmu . edu / ~ hselt man / 309 / Book / Book . pdf Severtson DJ , Burt JE ( 2012 ) The influence of mapped hazards on risk beliefs : a proximity - based mod - eling approach . Risk Anal 32 : 259 – 280 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1539 - 6924 . 2011 . 01700 . x Starkweather J , Herrington R ( 2018 , November 6 ) Linear mixed effects modeling [ SPSS Short Course ] . Data Science & Analytics @ UNT . https : / / bayes . acs . unt . edu : 8083 / Bayes Conte nt / class / Jon / SPSS _ SC / Modul e9 / M9 _ LMM / SPSS _ M9 _ LMM . htm 2306 Natural Hazards ( 2021 ) 105 : 2283 – 2306 1 3 Storm Prediction Center ( 2017 ) SPC products : Day 1 outlook probability to category conversion . https : / / www . spc . noaa . gov / misc / about . html Teigen KH ( 2005 ) The proximity heuristic in judgments of accident probabilities . Br J Psychol 96 : 423 – 440 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1348 / 00071 2605X 47431 United States Census Bureau ( 2019 ) 2018 population estimates by age , sex , race and Hispanic origin . https : / / www . censu s . gov / newsr oom / press - kits / 2019 / detai led - estim ates . html Wallsten TS , Budescu DV , Zwick R , Kemp SM ( 1993 ) Preferences and reasons for communicating proba - bilistic information in verbal or numerical terms . Bulletin Psychonom Soc 31 : 135 – 138 Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations .