© The Author 2014 . Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill . All rights reserved . Appendix B from Lynn , “Diffusing through Disciplines : Insiders , Outsiders , and Socially Influenced Citation Behavior” Social Forces 93 ( 1 ) 355 – 382 , September 2014 , doi : 10 . 1093 / sf / sou069 Coding Internal and External Citations The following analysis demonstrates how internal and external citations are coded in this study . This illustration is based on a sample of 900 articles published in the early 1980s ( 1981 – 1983 ) drawn from a subset of the flagship journals described earlier ( see appendix A ) . This appendix draws on a different sample from that used in the main study to show that the pattern of audience diversity is not unique to the 842 papers sampled from 1985 – 1987 . Table B summarizes the sample of 900 articles drawn from 1981 – 1983 . A total of 150 papers are drawn from each discipline ; column C of table B summarizes the number of citations received by all 150 articles as recorded by the Web of Science from the date of publication through December 2009 . Table B . Summary of articles and matched citations A B . C . D . Field and Journal JCR Focal Field a Total No . Citations Received Percentage of Citation Sources Matched with JCR Fields Cell Biology Cell Cell Biology 26 , 494 93 % Biochemistry & MCB b 31 % Biochemistry & MCB b Cell Biology 16 % Multidisciplinary Sciences 9 % Virology 6 % Economics American Economic Review Economics 15 , 697 96 % Economics 53 % Econometrica Business , Finance 9 % Mathematics Advances In Mathematics Mathematics 5 , 135 98 % Mathematics 85 % Inventiones Mathematicae Mathematics , Applied 7 % Philosophy Journal of Philosophy Philosophy 1 , 939 98 % Philosophy 59 % Philosophical Review History & Philosophy of Science 11 % Political Science American Journal of Political Science Political Science 5 , 649 96 % Political Science 57 % American Political Science Review Economics 6 % Sociology American Sociological Review Sociology 14 , 448 95 % Sociology 30 % American Journal of Sociology Management 10 % Notes : a . JCR = Journal Citation Reports ® b . MCB refers to Molecular Cellular Biology . E . Citations Received by Focal Field and Nearest Neighbor ( s ) Appendix B from Lynn , Diffusing through Disciplines The Journal Citation Reports ® ( JCR ) , which classifies journals by subject matter , is used to distinguish between within - field versus between - field citations . First , each core journal is classified by its JCR field , which is referred to as its focal field ( see column B ) . Each citation received is then tagged with a JCR field . As shown in column D , the vast majority of citations received could be matched with a JCR field . Some journals indexed in the Web of Science have yet to be classified in the JCR , and thus could not be tagged with a field ; this small group of citations is dropped from the analysis . A citation sent from a journal that is cross - listed in more than one field is weighted by 1 / f where f refers to the total number of fields associated with the journal . For example , if journal X is tagged by JCR as belonging to both “Sociology” and “Economics , ” a focal article receiving a citation from journal X is coded as receiving half a citation from sociology and half a citation from economics . Column E of table B summarizes , by discipline , the percentage of citations received by the focal field plus the field ( s ) sending the next highest number of citations . For example , of the 14 , 448 citations received by the sampled articles in the American Sociological Review and the American Journal of Sociology , 95 % ( n = 13 , 725 ) are matched with a JCR field . Roughly 30 % of those citations were sent from journals that the JCR classifies as “Sociology” journals ( i . e . , 30 % were sent from within its focal discipline ) . An additional 10 % were sent from journals that the JCR classifies as belonging to “Management , ” which was the field sending the next highest percentage of citations . Based on this definition of the highest citing neighbor , each citation received is then coded as being sent from ( a ) journals within the discipline ( i . e . , internal citations ) , ( b ) journals from the discipline sending the next highest number of citations ( i . e . , “nearest neighbor” ) , and ( c ) all other journals outside of the focal discipline ( i . e . , all other external citations ) . Cross listed journals are considered a focal field journal if at least one of its fields is the focal discipline . Similarly , cross listed journals are considered to belong to the nearest neighbor field if at least one of its fields is the nearest neighbor discipline . For example , for the 1981 - 1983 sample , figure B1 summarizes the percentage of citations that come from the focal field , nearest neighbor , and all others . Figure B2 displays the percentage of external citations over time . For each field , with the exception of mathematics , the external audience ( with or without the nearest neighbor ) is a non - trivial portion of the academic audience . In cell biology , economics , political science and philosophy , these data suggest that at least one - third of the citations received by their flagship journals are external citations . In sociology , it appears that at least one half of the citations received by the American Journal of Sociology and the American Sociological Review come from other journals that are considered ( by one of the only major journal classification schemes ) to be external to the discipline of sociology . Some might note that this could be an artificially low internal share in sociology given the way that the JCR defines various specialties in the social science ( e . g . Social Psychology Quarterly is listed under the category of “Social Psychology” and is not cross - listed with “Sociology” ) . But even if one employs a broader definition of internal ( e . g . , internal plus first 5 or 10 “nearest neighbors” ) , sociology’s internal share rises to only 53 % and 64 % respectively . More generally , it should be noted that the index of diversity ( i . e . , 1 − Herfindahl index ) for the external segment is greater than 0 . 85 for each field ( including mathematics ) , which indicates that the external audience Appendix B from Lynn , Diffusing through Disciplines constitutes a highly diverse set of disciplines . In sum , these data suggest that research published in a discipline’s core journals is being consumed by a broad audience , with external attention generally increasing as publications age . Using journal classifications to measure citer expertise has strengths and weaknesses . The first weakness is that expertise is theoretically continuous but treated coarsely as a dichotomous measure ( internal / external ) . A dichotomous measure clearly does not account for the fact that some external fields are closer to the internal fields than others ( Porter et al . 2007 ) . A second issue is that a journal - level measure of citation flow could introduce some amount of measurement error with respect to the internal / external divide . For example , in this analysis , a scholar trained in sociology who publishes in an economics journal but includes references “back” to core sociology journals is coded as an external audience member with respect to sociology . Similarly , sociologists citing that particular paper ( which has been published in an economics journal ) would be classified as part of the external audience with respect to economics . Another potential weakness is the boundary issue raised by Pudovkin and Garfield ( 2002 ) . The authors argue that the JCR’s subjective method of classifying journals produces only a crude mapping of journals by subject area . The authors recommend delineating subject areas by directly mapping journal - to - journal citation frequencies . Given that only select portions of this detailed network data is available to the public , JCR’s official categories are employed in this analysis . Moreover , even with citation - based measures of journal relatedness , researchers must still make the subjective decision as to how closely tied two journals should be before they are considered related . The main advantage of using the JCR journal classification scheme is that we can impose an exogenously defined definition of internal / external to study a large sample of papers across different fields . First , the potential crudeness of the measure is offset by the benefit that this indicator of expertise ( and thus the analysis overall ) is easier to replicate than had it been coded at the individual - level , which would have required a set of subjective decisions about matching specific individuals to certain levels of expertise ( e . g . how would a researcher code the expertise of an individual who was formally trained at a business school but publishes mainly in sociology ? ) . Second , if ( 1 ) the majority of papers in a field’s core journals are written by scholars trained in that focal field and that ( 2 ) the majority of scholars who are publishing in journals outside of a focal field are indeed not trained in the focal field , then the amount of measurement error should be limited . In the end , crudeness of the measure actually makes for a more conservative test of the effect of expertise given that the misclassification of experts and non - experts should minimize between - group differences ( i . e . , there will be some non - experts coded as internals and experts coded as externals ) . Appendix B from Lynn , Diffusing through Disciplines Figure B1 . Distribution of citation sources , by discipline Figure B2 . Percentage of citations from external sources per year , by discipline