Copyright 1996 by the American Medical Association . All Rights Reserved . Applicable FARS / DFARS Restrictions Apply to Government Use . American Medical Association , 515 N . State St , Chicago , IL 60610 . Volume 53 ( 12 ) December 1996 pp 1129 - 1136 The Great Smoky Mountains Study of Youth : Goals , Design , Methods , and the Prevalence of DSM - III - R Disorders [ Original Article ] Costello , E . Jane PhD ; Angold , Adrian MRCPsych ; Burns , Barbara J . PhD ; Stangl , Dalene K . PhD ; Tweed , Dan L . PhD ; Erkanli , Alaattin PhD ; Worthman , Carol M . PhD From the Developmental Epidemiology Program , Duke University Medical Center , Durham , NC ( Drs Costello , Angold , Burns , Stangl , Tweed , and Erkanli ) ; and the Department of Anthropology , Emory University , Atlanta , Ga ( Dr Worthman ) . Outline AbstractSUBJECTS AND METHODS SETTINGSAMPLING Screening Sample American Indian Participants MEASURES Construct 1 : Risk for Mental Health Service Use Construct 2 : Service Use , Access , and Barriers to Care Construct 3 : Family Resources Construct 4 : Family Functioning , Psychiatric Symptoms , and Family Burden Construct 5 : Child ' s Physical Health and Development Construct 6 : Adversity and Traumatic Events Construct 7 : Community Resources INTERVIEWERS AND INTERVIEWER TRAINING PROCEDURES FOR THE FIRST WAVE FOLLOW - UP TELEPHONE CONTACTS AND INTERVIEWS RESULTS PREVALENCE OF PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS COMORBIDITYDEMOGRAPHIC CORRELATES OF DIAGNOSIS Sex Age Race Income Place of Residence COMMENT LIMITATIONSPREVALENCECORRELATES OF PSYCHIATRIC DISORDER REFERENCES Graphics Table 1 Figure 1 Table 2 Figure 2 Abstract Background : The Great Smoky Mountains Study of youth focuses on the relationship between the development of psychiatric disorder and the need for and use of mental health services . Methods : A multistage , overlapping cohorts design was used , in which 4500 of the 11 758 children aged 9 , 11 , and 13 years in an 11 - county area of the southeastern United States were randomly selected for screening for psychiatric symptoms . Children who scored in the top 25 % on the screening questionnaire , together with a 1 in 10 random sample of the rest , were recruited for 4 waves of intensive , annual interviews ( n = 1015 at wave 1 ) . In a parallel study , all American Indian children aged 9 , 11 , and 13 years were recruited ( N = 323 at wave 1 ) . Results : The 3 - month prevalence ( + / - SE ) of any DSM - III - R axis I disorder in the main sample , weighted to reflect population prevalence rates , was 20 . 3 % + / - 1 . 7 % . The most common diagnoses were anxiety disorders ( 5 . 7 % + / - 1 . 0 % ) , enuresis ( 5 . 1 % + / - 1 . 0 % ) , tic disorders ( 4 . 2 % + / - 0 . 9 % ) , conduct disorder ( 3 . 3 % + / - 0 . 6 % ) , oppositional defiant disorder ( 2 . 7 % + / - 0 . 4 % ) , and hyperactivity ( 1 . 9 % + / - 0 . 4 % ) . Conclusions : The prevalence of psychiatric disorder in this rural sample was similar to rates reported in other recent studies . Poverty was the strongest demographic correlate of diagnosis , in both urban and rural children . Arch Gen Psychiatry . 1996 ; 53 : 1129 - 1136 The Great Smoky Mountains Study ( GSMS ) was designed to examine the development of , need for , and use of mental health services in children and adolescents in an area of the southeastern United States . The study addresses the extent of met and unmet need for mental health care ; the role played by education , primary care , child welfare , and juvenile justice in the provision of mental health care for children ; the interrelationship of diagnosis and functional impairment ; individual , family , and community predictors of need for mental health care ; the impact of different service delivery systems in urban and rural communities ; and the interplay of individual development and the development of need for and use of services . In this and companion articles [ 1 - 3 ] we present the baseline findings on these topics from the first wave of data collection . Analyses across later waves of data collection will address the developmental goals of the study . This article presents the sampling design and procedures common to the entire study , the baseline estimates of rates of psychiatric disorder in 9 - , 11 - , and 13 - year - olds , and the impact of sex , race , income , and rural or urban residence on those rates . SUBJECTS AND METHODS SETTING The southern Appalachian mountain region of North Carolina was chosen as the study site for the following reasons . ( 1 ) This sparsely populated area , with its 180 000 inhabitants spread over 12 194 km 2 , is representative of an understudied section of the United States : the rural areas of the south and southeast . ( 2 ) Almost all children attend public schools , which means that school records could be used to provide the initial sampling frame for the study . ( 3 ) Half the population live in the only sizable town in the area , while the rest live in the rural areas , providing the opportunity to compare psychiatric disorder and service provision in rural and urban settings . ( 4 ) The area contains the Qualla Boundary , a federal reservation that is home to the 8000 - strong Eastern Band of the Cherokee Nation , a community with to the 8000 - strong Eastern Band of the Cherokee Nation , a community with different traditions of dealing with mental illness and its own mental health service system . SAMPLING Like several epidemiologic studies , [ 4 - 6 ] the GSMS used a screening - stratified sampling design to maximize 3 study goals within a reasonable budget : ( 1 ) to understand the developmental pathways of a large sample of children with a high need for mental health care ( case finding ) ; ( 2 ) to estimate the prevalence of disorders and risk factors in the population ( prevalence estimation ) ; and ( 3 ) to map the identified cases onto the general population ( generalizability ) . A household sample would meet goal 2 but would need to be large ( and expensive ) to generate enough cases to meet goals 1 and 3 . Recruiting from service settings might achieve goal 1 , but generalizability would be hard to achieve because of referral bias and the fact that many children are seen in multiple service sectors . The screening questionnaire was designed to identify children with a high probability of mental health service use , ie , children with psychiatric symptoms . All children with scores above a cutoff point defined from pilot testing were recruited for the main study . In addition , a 1 in 10 random sample of the remainder were also recruited . Weights inversely proportional to probability of selection were attached to each subject ' s data , so that estimates of population prevalence could be made . [ 7 ] All prevalence estimates and statistical testing was carried out by means of SUDAAN , [ 8 ] a SAS - based software package for survey data analysis , which adjusts estimates and variances for the design characteristics . Power calculations for a range of exposure levels and outcome prevalence indicated that a household sample of 4000 would generate enough cases of the more common child psychiatric disorders ( > 1 % prevalence ) to permit , for example , tests of sex - by - age differences in rates . Screening Sample Children aged 9 , 11 , and 13 years at baseline were selected . Nine years was selected as the lowest age for 3 main reasons : ( 1 ) rates of professional mental health service use are low in younger children [ 9 ] ; ( 2 ) psychiatric epidemiologic methods for evaluating younger children are not well developed [ 10 , 11 ] ; and ( 3 ) we are interested in the impact of puberty on the onset of some psychiatric disorders . By the end of 4 annual interviews , the 9 - year - olds will be 12 years old , and the 11 - year - olds , 14 years old . This " overlapping cohorts " [ 12 ] design permits us to assess and , if necessary , control for cohort effects , while examining children across an 8 - year age range ( 9 - 16 years ) within 4 years . A multistep probability sampling procedure was used . The 12 000 children aged 9 , 11 , and 13 years in the public school ' s database were arranged by households and were selected with probability proportional to the total number of age - eligible children in the household . An age category ( 9 , 11 , or 13 years ) was drawn from each selected household , with the probability of selection being proportional to the number of children in the age group for that household . Within the selected age category , 1 child was selected on an equiprobability basis to generate a total screening sample of 4500 children ( 1570 were 9 - year - olds , 1590 were 11 - year - olds , and 1340 were 13 - year - olds ) . The parent or guardian of each child completed a brief screening questionnaire about the index child . If the parent could not be reached by telephone , contact was made by mail or , if necessary , by home reached by telephone , contact was made by mail or , if necessary , by home visits . The screening measure consisted of the " externalizing " broad - band scale items from the Child Behavior Checklist . [ 13 , 14 ] The substance abuse question in the Child Behavior Checklist was expanded to cover specific substances ( tobacco , cannabis , inhalants , etc ) , for a total of 57 questions . Previous studies have attested to the Child Behavior Checklist ' s reliability and ability to identify child mental health services users . [ 13 , 15 ] We used only parent - reported items for 3 reasons . ( 1 ) Pilot testing showed that screening 2 or more people ( eg , a parent and the child ) greatly increased refusals and incomplete data without much improvement in case identification . ( 2 ) Evidence from previous studies suggested that parental reports of behavioral problems best predict most types of psychiatric symptoms and service use . [ 14 - 16 ] ( 3 ) It was important to keep the screen as short as possible . A potential disadvantage of this approach was that it did not screen for anxiety , depression , and other nonexternalizing disorders . However , there is evidence that parents are often poor reporters of children ' s anxiety and depression , and that there is a considerable amount of comorbidity with behavioral problems . [ 5 , 15 - 17 ] Thus , a screen for behavioral symptoms was likely also to identify children with emotional problems . American Indian Participants American Indian children were not included in the random selection process because of our interest in oversampling this group . We were given permission by the Board of Education on the Qualla Boundary to recruit all 9 - , 11 - , and 13 - year - olds attending reservation schools , and extended the study to include all American Indian children attending public schools , to obtain a 100 % sample of age - appropriate enrolled members of any American Indian tribe . Because extra funding is available for American Indian students in public schools under Public Law 874 , or Title V of the Indian Education Act , records of ethnicity are carefully maintained by the schools . A total of 450 American Indian children were identified in either public or reservation schools . Apart from the sampling procedures , data collection and methods were identical for all ethnic groups . Results from the American Indian children will be reported in a separate article . MEASURES ( Table 1 ) shows the measures , their content area , the informant , and the occasions on which they are used . [ 18 - 30 ] The measures of each area are reviewed briefly below ; further details may be obtained from the first author ( E . J . C . ) . Table 1 . Content Areas and Instruments Construct 1 : Risk for Mental Health Service Use Diagnoses and Symptoms . The Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Assessment ( CAPA ) [ 18 , 19 ] is an interview that elicits information about symptoms that contribute to a wide range of diagnoses . The CAPA combines the characteristics of an " interviewer - based " and a " respondent - based " interview . [ 18 ] Like respondent - based interviews , the CAPA uses a highly structured protocol , with required questions and probes . However , as in an interviewer - based interview , the onus throughout is on the interviewer to ensure that subjects ( 1 ) understand the question being asked , ( 2 ) provide clear information on behavior or feelings relevant to the symptom , and ( 3 ) have the symptom at a prespecified level of severity as defined in an extensive glossary . Diagnoses are generated by computer algorithms . Separate algorithms are available for child and parent reports and " combined reports , " where a symptom is regarded as being present if either the parent or the child reports it . The DSM - III - R [ 20 ] was the taxonomy used for wave 1 ; subsequent waves will be analyzed by means of both DSM - III - R [ 20 ] and DSM - IV . [ 21 ] A test - retest reliability study of a clinical sample aged 10 to 17 years [ 19 ] found kappa = 0 . 52 for oppositional disorder , kappa = 0 . 61 for conduct disorder , kappa = 0 . 95 for substance abuse , kappa = 0 . 52 for separation anxiety , kappa = 0 . 77 for overanxious disorder , kappa = 0 . 65 for dysthymia , and kappa = 0 . 85 for major depression . Level of Functioning . The functional impairment or incapacities section of the CAPA , which follows the section on symptoms , relates the symptoms to the child ' s ability to function at a developmentally appropriate level in relationships with family , peers , and teachers , in activities at school , at home , and in the community . A test - retest study of the incapacities section with 77 children showed an intraclass correlation of 0 . 76 . [ 19 ] Four other measures of functioning were collected . Interviewers completed the Children ' s Global Assessment Scale , [ 22 ] for which the interviewer gives the child a single score ranging from 0 to 100 , and the Child and Adolescent Functional Assessment Scale , [ 23 ] which rates the child on role performance at school , ability to think clearly , behavior toward self and others , mood and emotional state , and caregiver ' s resources , needs , and level of social support . Both of these scales show reasonable reliability in clinic populations . [ 22 , 23 ] Parent and child completed the Social Interactions Survey , [ 24 ] which assesses the child ' s ability to relate well to peers , parents , teachers , and other adults . The Social Interactions Survey consists of 12 vignettes describing a social situation ( eg , rejection by peers ) . The subject marks on a 0 - to100 - point scale the extent to which the vignette describes the child in question . One - week retest reliability on a sample of 32 children aged 9 to 12 years yielded intraclass correlation coefficients of 0 . 86 for peer relationships and 0 . 85 for adult relationships . In the second and third waves of the study , 3 teachers for each child completed the and third waves of the study , 3 teachers for each child completed the Teacher Report Form , [ 25 ] a version for teachers of the Child Behavior Checklist that includes information on the child ' s academic and social functioning at school . Construct 2 : Service Use , Access , and Barriers to Care The Child and Adolescent Services Assessment ( CASA ) [ 26 ] is an interview about use of specialty mental health providers , pediatricians , other medical care providers , school counselors , probation officers , Department of Social Services staff , self - help groups , spiritual advisors , family , and friends . The CASA has 3 parts . First , a screen assesses the use of a list of providers . For each provider actually seen by the index child , probes are used to determine the onset , frequency , and duration of contacts , services provided , cost , who paid , and the recipient ' s level of perceived benefit . The CASA then asks about barriers to using services for mental health care : time , distance , lack of transportation , cost , lack of a common language , and fear that the child will be taken away or that parental rights will be lost . Reliability studies on the CASA [ 26 ] show that it has high retest reliability ( kappa > 0 . 80 ) for the more intensive services , such as inpatient hospitalization , good reliability ( kappa > 0 . 60 ) for less intensive professional mental health services , such as outpatient treatment and school services , and moderate to low reliability for nonprofessional services , such as consulting ministers and friends . A comparison of CASA parent reports of mental health service use with the records of local mental health agencies for 160 high - intensity service users showed complete agreement for inpatient services , 91 % agreement for outpatient services , and 79 % agreement overall . [ 26 ] Construct 3 : Family Resources Information is collected on family income , parental occupation and educational status , and health and mental health insurance . Construct 4 : Family Functioning , Psychiatric Symptoms , and Family Burden The CAPA includes a section on the quality of family relationships ( parent - child and parent - parent relationships , parenting style , etc ) . Retest reliability is good ( eg , intraclass correlation of 0 . 76 for the family relationships scale ) . A brief section also reviews the psychiatric problems of the index child ' s parents or primary caretakers . Questions cover history of treatment for psychiatric or substance abuse problems , and criminal convictions . Kappa statistics for individual items are all 0 . 60 or better . The caregiver completes the Child and Adolescent Burden Assessment , [ 2 ] a section in CAPA , for children with any identified psychiatric problems . This instrument covers such issues as the economic burden of having a child with mental health problems , the impact on family finances and relationships , restrictions on activities , including ability to work , parental psychological distress , and stigma . Construct 5 : Child ' s Physical Health and Development Each child is weighed and measured , and blood samples are assayed for luteinizing hormone , follicle - stimulating hormone , testosterone , dehydroepiandrosterone , and androstenedione in boys and girls , and estradiol in girls , by means of fluorometric immunoassay methods developed by Worthman and Stallings . [ 27 ] Children also complete a self - report measure of Tanner staging , [ 28 ] which provides a good self - report measure of Tanner staging , which provides a good approximation to physical examination for pubertal development , and answer a series of questions on self - perception of developmental status relative to other children and satisfaction with developmental status . In the second and third waves of data collection , parents complete the Childhood ( Medical ) Conditions section of the National Health Interview Survey Supplement Booklet , [ 29 ] which collects basic information about the child ' s physical health history . Construct 6 : Adversity and Traumatic Events The CAPA includes an extensive review of long - term adversity , such as poverty and living in an unsafe neighborhood , and life events that could contribute to posttraumatic stress disorder and other disorders . Construct 7 : Community Resources The network of services available in the area has been studied by members of the group ( E . J . C . , A . A . , and B . J . B . ) as part of another study in the same community , and a detailed analysis of the service system for children and adolescents is available . [ 30 ] INTERVIEWERS AND INTERVIEWER TRAINING Interviewers are residents of the area in which the study is taking place . Some , but not all , of the interviewers for the American Indian sample are American Indians . All interviewers have at least bachelor ' s - level degrees and receive 1 month of training . After training , quality control is maintained through postinterview reviews of each schedule , weekly staff meetings to review audiotapes of randomly selected field interviews , and regular refresher sessions with one of us ( A . A . ) . PROCEDURES FOR THE FIRST WAVE Children were screened and interviewed as close as possible to the birthday on which they became 9 , 11 , or 13 years old . Families recruited for the interview stage of the study were visited at home by 2 interviewers . After the informed consent and physical procedures , parent and child were interviewed in separate rooms . Each parent and child was paid $ 10 after the interview was completed . ( Figure 1 ) shows the completion rates for various stages of sample recruitment for the main study . Of the 4500 names selected , 433 were eliminated , either because the family had moved out of the study area or because errors in the database misclassified the child ' s age . It proved impossible to complete 56 of the 1071 interviews scheduled for the main sample within the window of 6 months from the child ' s birthday , because of severe weather in the mountains . These families remain in the study and form part of the wave 2 data collection but are treated as having missing data for wave 1 . The racial composition of the main sample at wave 1 was as follows : African American , 79 ; Hispanic , 6 ; Asian American , 3 ; mixed race , 11 ; and white , 916 . There were also 323 American Indians in the companion study . Figure 1 . Sampling design for the Great Smoky Mountains Study . The availability of screening data made it possible to check on potential differences between the interviewed sample and ( 1 ) the families who were selected for the main study but refused to participate and ( 2 ) families who agreed to participate but could not be interviewed at wave 1 . Comparisons were made , by chi squared or t tests , on age , sex , income , rural or urban residence , mean within - group screen score , percentage scoring in the high - risk range , percentage of children below grade for age , and the percentage who had sought help because of the child ' s emotional or behavioral problems . There were no statistically significant differences on any individual variable or combination of variables , with P < . 1 used as the criterion . We conclude that the results of the study are unlikely to be seriously biased by nonresponse . FOLLOW - UP TELEPHONE CONTACTS AND INTERVIEWS After the wave 1 interviews , families are contacted by telephone every 3 months . They report on any service use during the intervening period , as well as any change of address , school , or family structure . Thereafter , the parent and child are reinterviewed annually by means of a protocol almost identical to that used in wave 1 . RESULTS PREVALENCE OF PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS ( Table 2 ) shows the 3 - month weighted prevalence estimates and SEs in wave 1 , for DSM - III - R diagnoses and combinations of diagnoses , for boys , girls , and both . Diagnoses in parentheses are rare disorders that yielded fewer than 5 cases in the interviewed sample . Table 2 . Three - Month Prevalence of CAPA / DSM - III - R Diagnoses * The weighted 3 - month population prevalence rate ( + / - SE ) was 20 . 3 % + / - 1 . 7 % . The CAPA makes several diagnoses not commonly included in other community [ backslash - . ] studies , and some of these , notably tic disorders and enuresis , occurred at a fairly high rate . We calculated an overall prevalence rate for a set of " core " diagnoses made in several other studies ( Table 2 ) . Also , while strictly diagnosed DSM - III - R depressive disorders were rare , there was a substantial group of children ( 28 of the interviewed sample ) who had the core symptoms of mood disorder and anhedonia but did not quite reach the criterion either for duration ( for dysthymia ) or for number of other symptoms ( for major depression ) . It seemed appropriate to include this markedly symptomatic group , and they are designated in ( Table 2 ) under " depression not otherwise specified " and included in the overall and core prevalence rates . There were 307 children with a DSM - III - R diagnosis in the sample , whereas a prevalence rate of 20 . 3 % would yield 206 cases from a random population sample of 1015 . Thus , the screening process yielded a sample containing 49 % more cases . We discuss the cost - efficiency of 2 - stage sampling in detail in another article . [ 31 ] COMORBIDITY Comorbidity was not uncommon in the sample : 100 of the 307 children with a diagnosis had more than 1 . Some children had more than 1 diagnosis within 1 category ( eg , more than 1 anxiety disorder ) , while others had , for example , both an emotional and a behavioral disorder . ( Figure 2 ) shows the numbers of children interviewed with various types of comorbidity , while the percentages are weighted to reflect the population rates . Overall , 1 . 5 % of the population had both an emotional and a behavioral disorder . Comorbidity was more commonly associated with some diagnoses than others . Only 21 % ( weighted ) of children with an " other " disorder ( mainly tics and enuresis ) had an emotional or behavioral disorder , whereas 53 % of children with depression ( including depression not otherwise specified ) were comorbid , as were 38 % of children with a behavioral disorder and 28 % of those with an anxiety disorder . Figure 2 . Comorbidity among diagnostic areas , showing number of interviewed children with diagnoses and weighted 3 - month prevalence rates ( in parentheses ) . Associations between diagnostic categories , with odds ratio , 95 % confidence intervals , and associated P values , are as follows : depressive / anxiety disorders , 4 . 9 , 1 . 5 to 16 . 5 , and . 01 ; depressive / behavioral disorders , 6 . 6 , 2 . 1 to 20 . 5 , and . 001 ; depressive / other disorders ( chiefly enuresis and tic disorders ; see ( Table 2 ) ) , 0 . 8 , 0 . 2 to 3 . 8 , and . 79 ; anxiety / behavioral disorders , 3 . 2 , 1 . 5 to 6 . 7 , and . 002 ; anxiety / other disorders , 1 . 1 , 0 . 8 to 3 . 5 , and . 146 ; and behavioral / other disorders , 2 . 6 , 1 . 3 to 4 . 8 , and . 004 . DEMOGRAPHIC CORRELATES OF DIAGNOSIS The relationship between diagnosis and sex , age , race , income , and urban or rural location was examined by logistic regression . Since rates of disorder were similar in 11 - and13 - year - olds , and somewhat higher in 9 - year - olds , a dichotomous variable ( 9 vs 11 + 13 years ) was used in the logistic regressions . Income was dichotomized as being above or below the federal poverty line , and race as African American vs other . SUDAAN [ 8 ] was used to generate the odds ratios ( ORs ) , confidence intervals ( CIs ) , and probabilities . All ORs control for the other demographic correlates . Sex Boys were at higher risk for any psychiatric disorder ( 24 . 9 % + / - 2 . 6 % [ SE ] vs 15 . 5 % + / - 2 . 2 % ; OR , 1 . 8 ; 95 % CI , 1 . 3 - 2 . 5 ; P < . 001 ) . This was mainly the result of their higher rates of behavioral disorders ( 9 . 5 % vs 3 . 5 % ; OR , 2 . 9 ; 95 % CI , 1 . 6 - 5 . 1 ; P < . 001 ) and enuresis ( 7 . 7 % vs 2 . 5 % ; OR , 2 . 8 ; 95 % CI , 1 . 4 - 5 . 6 ; P = . 003 ) . Comorbidity of emotional and behavioral disorders was almost 3 times as common in boys as in girls ( 2 . 2 % vs 0 . 8 % ; OR , 2 . 7 ; 95 % CI , 0 . 9 - 7 . 7 ; P = . 06 ) . Age Rates of separation anxiety , tics , and enuresis fell significantly between 9 and 11 years of age , but there were no other significant age differences . Race The only comparison examined here was between African American children , who made up 8 . 1 % of the sample , and white children . African American children were more likely to have functional enuresis , but rates of all other disorders , and of comorbidity , were similar . Income The children from the poorest families were at increased risk of any disorder ( 33 . 4 % + / - 3 . 9 % vs 15 . 9 % + / - 1 . 7 % ; OR , 3 . 2 ; 95 % CI , 2 . 3 - 4 . 4 ; P < . 001 ) and of every type of diagnosis except for tic disorders . The highest risk was for behavioral disorders ( 11 . 0 % vs 4 . 4 % ; OR , 2 . 7 ; 95 % CI , 1 . 6 - 4 . 4 ; P < . 001 ) . Poor children had comorbid emotional and behavioral conditions at 3 times the rate of other children ( 6 . 5 % vs 2 . 0 % ; OR , 3 . 3 ; 95 % CI , 1 . 7 - 6 . 6 ; P < . 001 ) . Place of Residence Any differences between urban and rural children became nonsignificant when poverty was included in the model . COMMENT LIMITATIONS Limitations of the present study include the following : ( 1 ) Information is available for only 3 groups of children recruited at ages 9 , 11 , and 13 years . ( 2 ) This is a southern , rural , predominantly white sample , containing almost no Hispanic or Asian - American children . ( 3 ) Wave 1 of the GSMS collected information only from the index child and 1 parent . Other research has shown that parents often have different views of the same child , as do teachers and others in the child ' s immediate circle . [ 16 ] In the second and subsequent waves , questionnaire information is being collected from 3 teachers for each child , as well as from treatment settings . ( 4 ) The CAPA provides prevalence estimates only for the 3 months preceding the interview . However , data on service use is collected every 3 months between interviews , so complete longitudinal data will be available . ( 5 ) By screening for behavioral but not emotional or other problems , we may have increased the SEs of the estimates of depression , anxiety , tics , enuresis , etc ; however , the screen - low group was large enough ( N = 260 ) to prevent any significant distortion of the prevalence estimates . PREVALENCE The most important conclusion to be drawn from the data presented herein is that rates and correlates of childhood psychiatric disorder were similar in this remote , rural area of the United States to those found in studies in urban areas . [ 32 - 34 ] Poverty does not have to be accompanied by urban pressures to be associated with psychiatric symptoms . In a previous publication , [ 35 ] we summarized rates of child psychiatric disorders reported by several recent epidemiologic studies , finding that they fell within a fairly narrow range ( 17 . 6 % - 22 . 0 % ) . The overall prevalence rates of disorder and comorbidity found in the GSMS sample fell within the expected range . [ 6 , 32 - 34 , 36 - 39 ] From a public health point of view , the high rate of comorbidity illustrated in ( Figure 2 ) is a cause for concern . The Dunedin , New Zealand , longitudinal study has documented a high rate of learning difficulties and other problems in adolescents who had some types of psychiatric comorbidity in childhood . [ 37 , 40 ] Studies of adults have shown that those with multiple disorders in the course of a lifetime are at higher risk of having " severe " disorders ( psychoses or disorders requiring hospitalization or causing severe role impairment ) [ 41 ] and of substance abuse . [ 42 , 43 ] This study replicated others in finding that depression , in particular , is highly likely to be accompanied by other disorders . [ 44 ] CORRELATES OF PSYCHIATRIC DISORDER In general , the patterns linking rates of psychiatric disorder to differences in sex , age , race , and place of residence support those previously reported . [ 6 , 32 , 36 , 45 ] Thus , we found more behavioral disorders in boys than in girls , decreasing rates of separation anxiety , tics , and enuresis with age , and an increased risk in children from impoverished families . On the other hand , rates of disorder were high only in children living in the direst poverty ; children from families with even a modestly higher income , up to twice the federal poverty level , had rates of psychiatric disorders no higher than those of children from the highest income groups . Once we controlled for poverty , however , we did not find the higher rates of disorder in urban poverty , however , we did not find the higher rates of disorder in urban children that others have reported . [ 32 - 34 , 46 ] Nor were African - American children at higher risk for anything other than enuresis , controlling for poverty and urban residence . Adults in the southern United States appear to report fewer mental health problems than those in other areas of the country . In the National Comorbidity Survey of adults , Kessler et al [ 41 ] found marked regional differences in lifetime prevalence rates , with lower rates of all but affective disorders in the southern United States , although the odds ratios comparing other regions with the south did not reach significance . The North Carolina site of the adult Epidemiologic Catchment Area Study had the lowest rates of affective disorders , substance use or abuse , and antisocial personality disorders , but ranked highest in rates of somatization , panic , generalized anxiety , and obsessive - compulsive disorders . As George et al [ 47 ] pointed out , caution must be used in drawing inferences about the south on the basis of a single , highly urbanized site . Sampling procedures used in the National Comorbidity Study , on the other hand , were designed to yield regional estimates and probably provide the best basis for regional comparisons . The Isle of Wight - Inner City comparison by Rutter and colleagues [ 46 ] found twice as much psychopathology in urban youth , but they ascribed the difference to the higher rates of poverty and life stresses in the urban sample . A cautious inference from this study is that the lower rate in the south has more to do with poverty than with latitude or urbanization . Accepted for publication February 5 , 1996 . This project was supported by grant MH48085 from the National Institute of Mental Health , Bethesda , Md . Additional support was provided through a project grant ( Dr Worthman ) and Faculty Scholar awards ( Drs Costello , Angold , and Worthman ) from the William T . Grant Foundation and a Center grant from the Leon Lowenstein Foundation , New York , NY ( Dr Angold ) . We gratefully acknowledge support of the psychometric studies of the Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Assessment from the William T . Grant Foundation . The field work for this study was supervised by Teresa Sweeney . Stephen Messer , PhD , and Willie Ashley , PhD , assisted with clinical supervision and interviewing . Joe Morrissey , PhD , developed the institutional survey . Ralph Folsom , PhD , of Research Triangle Institute , Research Triangle Park , NC , assisted with the multistage sampling design . We wish to acknowledge with gratitude the help of the superintendents of schools in the 11 - county area of the study , Jonathan L . Taylor , the Principal Chief of the Eastern Band of the Cherokee Nation , James L . Sanders , MSW , the Bureau of Indian Affairs Director of Social Services on the Qualla Boundary , and Joyce Dugan , the Director of Education . The cooperation of the entire community of western North Carolina is warmly appreciated . Reprints : E . Jane Costello , PhD , Developmental Epidemiology Program , Duke University Medical Center , Box 3454 , Durham NC 27710 . REFERENCES 1 . Costello EJ , Angold A , Burns BJ , Erkanli A , Stangl DK , Tweed DL . The Great Smoky Mountains Study of youth : functional impairment and severe emotional disturbance . Arch Gen Psychiatry . 1996 ; 53 : 1137 - 1143 . [ Context Link ] 2 . Angold A , Messer SC , Stangl D , Farmer EMZ , Costello EJ , Burns BJ . Perceived parental burden and service use for child and adolescent psychiatric disorders . Am J Public Health . In burden and service use for child and adolescent psychiatric disorders . Am J Public Health . In press . [ Context Link ] 3 . Burns BJ , Costello EJ , Angold A , Tweed D , Stangl D , Farmer EMZ , Erkanli A . Children ' s mental health service use across service sectors . Health Affairs . 1995 ; 14 : 147 - 159 . [ Context Link ] 4 . Dohrenwend BP , Levav I , Schrout PE , Schwartz S , Naveh G , Link BG , Skodol AE , Stueve A . Socioeconomic status and psychiatric disorders : the causation - selection issue . Science . 1992 ; 255 : 946 - 952 . [ Context Link ] 5 . Rutter M , Tizard J , Whitmore K . Education , Health , and Behaviour . London , England : Longman ; 1970 . [ Context Link ] 6 . Bird HR , Canino G , Rubio - Stipec M , Gould MS , Ribera J , Sesman M , Woodbury M , Huertas - Goldman S , Pagan A , Sanchez - Lacay A , Moscoso M . Estimates of the prevalence of childhood maladjustment in a community survey in Puerto Rico : the use of combined measures . Arch Gen Psychiatry . 1988 ; 45 : 1120 - 1126 . Bibliographic Links [ Context Link ] 7 . Shrout PE , Newman SC . Design of two - phase prevalence surveys of rare disorders . Biometrics . 1989 ; 45 : 549 - 555 . [ Context Link ] 8 . Shah BV , Folsom RE , LaVange LM , Wheeless SC , Boyle KE , Williams RL . SUDAAN Software for the Statistical Analysis of Correlated Data : Statistical Methods and Mathematical Algorithms Used in SUDAAN . Research Triangle Park , NC : Research Triangle Institute ; 1995 . [ Context Link ] 9 . US Congress , Office of Technology Assessment . Mental health problems : prevention and services . In : Adolescent Health , Volume II : Background and the Effectiveness of Selected Prevention and Treatment Services . Washington , DC : Office of Technology Assessment ; 1991 : 433 - 496 . [ Context Link ] 10 . Costello AJ , Edelbrock CS , Dulcan MK , Kalas R , Klaric SH . Development and Testing of the NIMH Diagnostic Interview Schedule for Children in a Clinic Population : Final Report ( Contract No . RFP - DB - 81 - 0027 ) . Rockville , Md : Center for Epidemiologic Studies - National Institute of Mental Health ; 1984 . [ Context Link ] 11 . Breton JJ , Bergeron L , Valle JP , Lepine S , Houde L , Gaudet N . Do children aged 9 through 11 years understand the DISC version 2 . 25 questions ? J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry . 1995 ; 34 : 946 - 956 . [ Context Link ] 12 . Schaie KW . A general model for the study of developmental problems . Psychol Bull . 1965 ; 64 : 92 - 107 . [ Context Link ] 13 . Achenbach TM , Edelbrock CS . Behavorial problems and competencies reported by parents of normal and disturbed children aged four through sixteen . Monogr Soc Res Child Dev . 1981 ; 46 ( 1 , No . 188 ) : 1 - 82 . [ Context Link ] 14 . Achenbach TM , Edelbrock C . Manual for the Child Behavior Checklist and Child Behavior Profile . Burlington , Vt : University of Vermont ; 1983 . [ Context Link ] 15 . Bird HR , Gould MS , Rubio - Stipec M , Staghezza BM , Canino G . Screening for childhood psychopathology in the community using the Child Behavior Checklist . J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry . 1991 ; 30 : 116 - 123 . Bibliographic Links [ Context Link ] 16 . Achenbach TM , McConaughy SH , Howell CT . Child / adolescent behavioral and emotional problems : implications of cross - informant correlations for situational specificity . Psychol Bull . 1987 ; 101 : 213 - 232 . [ Context Link ] 17 . McConaughy SH , Achenbach TM . Comorbidity of empirically based syndromes in matched general population and clinical samples . J Child Psychol Psychiatry . 1994 ; 35 : 1141 - 1157 . [ Context Link ] 18 . Angold A , Prendergast M , Cox A , Harrington R , Simonoff E , Rutter M . The Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Assessment ( CAPA ) . Psychol Med . 1995 ; 25 : 739 - 753 . Bibliographic Links [ Context Link ] 19 . Angold A , Costello EJ . A test - retest reliability study of child - reported psychiatric symptoms and diagnoses using the Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Assessment ( CAPA - C ) . Psychol Med . 1995 ; 25 : 755 - 762 . Bibliographic Links [ Context Link ] 20 . American Psychiatric Association Committee on Nomenclature and Statistics . Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Revised Third Edition . Washington , DC : American Psychiatric Association ; 1987 . [ Context Link ] American Psychiatric Association ; 1987 . [ Context Link ] 21 . American Psychiatric Association Committee on Nomenclature and Statistics . Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fourth Edition . Washington , DC : American Psychiatric Association ; 1994 . [ Context Link ] 22 . Shaffer D , Gould MS , Brasic J , Ambrosini PJ , Fisher PW , Bird HR , Aluwahlia S . A Children ' s Global Assessment Scale ( CGAS ) . Arch Gen Psychiatry . 1983 ; 40 : 1228 - 1231 . [ Context Link ] 23 . Hodges K , Bickman L , Ring - Kurtz S , Rieter M . Multidimensional measure of level of functioning for children and adolescents . In : Algarian A , Friedman R , eds . A System of Care for Children ' s Mental Health : Expanding the Research Base . Tampa , Fla : Research Training Center for Children ' s Mental Health ; 1991 : 149 - 154 . [ Context Link ] 24 . DeRosier ME . Actual and perceived peer relationships : implications for children ' s academic , behavioral , and emotional adjustment problems . Presented at the Society for Research in Child Development Biennial Meeting ; March 30 , 1995 ; Indianapolis , Ind . [ Context Link ] 25 . Achenbach TM , Edelbrock CS . Manual for the Teacher ' s Report Form and Teacher Version of the Child Behavior Profile . Burlington , Vt : Department of Psychiatry , University of Vermont ; 1986 . [ Context Link ] 26 . Farmer EMZ , Angold A , Burns BJ , Costello EJ . Reliability of self - reported service use : test - retest consistency of children ' s responses to the Child and Adolescent Services Assessment ( CASA ) . J Child Fam Stud . 1994 ; 3 : 307 - 325 . Bibliographic Links [ Context Link ] 27 . Worthman CM , Stallings JF . Measurement of gonadotropins in dried blood spots . Clin Chem . 1994 ; 40 : 448 - 453 . [ Context Link ] 28 . Dorn LD , Susman EJ , Nottelmann ED , Inoff - Germain ED , Chrousos GP . Perceptions of puberty : adolescent , parent , and health care personnel . Dev Psychopathol . 1990 ; 26 : 322 - 329 . [ Context Link ] 29 . Public Health Service . National Health Interview Survey : Supplement Booklet . Washington , DC : US Dept of Commerce Bureau of the Census ; 1988 . [ Context Link ] 30 . Morrissey JP . An interorganizational network approach to evaluating children ' s mental health service systems . In : Bickman L , Rog D , eds . Evaluating Children ' s Mental Health Services : Methodological Issues . San Francisco , Calif : Jossey Bass ; 1992 : 85 - 98 . [ Context Link ] 31 . Erkanli A , Soyer R , Angold A . Optimal bayesian two - phase designs for prevalence estimation . J Stat Plann Inference . In press . [ Context Link ] 32 . Reinherz HZ , Giaconia RM , Lefkowitz ES , Pakiz B , Frost AK . Prevalence of psychiatric disorders in a community population of older adolescents . J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry . 1993 ; 32 : 369 - 377 . Bibliographic Links [ Context Link ] 33 . Offord DR , Boyle MH , Szatmari P , Rae - Grant NI , Links PS , Cadman DT , Byles JA , Crawford JW , Munroe - Blum H , Byrne C , Thomas H , Woodward CA . Ontario Child Health Study , II : six - month prevalence of disorder and rates of service utilization . Arch Gen Psychiatry . 1987 ; 44 : 832 - 836 . [ Context Link ] 34 . Rutter M , Yule B , Quinton D , Rowlands O , Yule W , Berger M . Attainment and adjustment in two geographical areas , II : some factors accounting for area differences . Br J Psychiatry . 1974 ; 125 : 520 - 533 . [ Context Link ] 35 . Costello EJ . Developments in child psychiatric epidemiology . J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry . 1989 ; 28 : 836 - 841 . Bibliographic Links [ Context Link ] 36 . Cohen P , Cohen J , Kasen S , Velez CN , Hartmark C , Johnson J , Rojas M , Brook J , Streuning EL . An epidemiological study of disorders in late childhood and adolescence , 1 : age - and gender - specific prevalence . J Child Psychol Psychiatry . 1993 ; 34 : 851 - 867 . [ Context Link ] 37 . Anderson JC , Williams S , McGee R , Silva PA . Cognitive and social correlates of DSM - III disorders in preadolescent children . J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry . 1989 ; 28 : 842 - 846 . Bibliographic Links [ Context Link ] 38 . McGee R , Feehan M , Williams S , Partridge F , Silva PA , Kelly J . DSM - III disorders in a large sample of adolescents . J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry . 1990 ; 29 : 611 - 619 . [ Context Link ] 39 . Graham P , Rutter M . Psychiatric disorders in the young adolescent : a follow - up study . Proc R Soc Med . 1973 ; 66 : 1226 - 1229 . [ Context Link ] 40 . Moffitt TE . Juvenile delinquency and attention deficit disorder : boys developmental trajectories from age 3 to age 15 . Child Dev . 1990 ; 61 : 893 - 910 . [ Context Link ] 41 . Kessler RC , McGonagle KA , Zhao S , Nelson CB , Hughes M , Eshleman S , Wittchen HU , Kendler KS . Lifetime and 12 - month prevalence of DSM - III - R psychiatric disorders in the United States : results from the National Comorbidity Study . Arch Gen Psychiatry . 1994 ; 51 : 8 - 19 . [ Context Link ] 42 . Regier DA , Farmer ME , Rae DS , Locke BZ , Keith SJ , Judd LL , Goodwin FK . Comorbidity of mental disorders with alcohol and other drug abuse : results from the Epidemiologic Catchment Area ( ECA ) study . JAMA . 1990 ; 264 : 2511 - 2518 . [ Context Link ] 43 . Helzer JE , Burnam A , McEvoy LT . Alcohol abuse and dependence : a diagnosis of alcoholism . In : Robins LN , Regier DA , eds . Psychiatric Disorders in America : The Epidemiologic Catchment Area Study . New York , NY : Free Press ; 1991 : 81 - 115 . [ Context Link ] 44 . Angold A , Costello EJ . Depressive comorbidity in children and adolescents : empirical , theoretical , and methodological issues . Am J Psychiatry . 1993 ; 150 : 1779 - 1791 . Bibliographic Links [ Context Link ] 45 . Lewinsohn PM , Hops H , Roberts RE , Seeley JR , Andrews JA . Adolescent psychopathology , I : prevalence and incidence of depression and other DSM - III - R disorders in high school students . J Abnorm Psychol . 1993 ; 102 : 133 - 144 . [ Context Link ] 46 . Rutter M , Yule B , Quinton D , Rowlands O , Yule W , Berger M . Attainment and adjustment in two geographical areas , III : some factors accounting for area differences . Br J Psychiatry . 1975 ; 126 : 520 - 533 . Bibliographic Links [ Context Link ] 47 . George LK , Landerman R , Blazer DG , Anthony JC . Cognitive impairment . In : Robins LK , Regier DA , Robins LN , eds . Psychiatric Disorders in America : The Epidemiologic Catchment Area Study . New York , NY : Free Press ; 1991 : 291 - 327 . [ Context Link ] Appalachian Region ; Child ; DSM - III - R ; Mental Disorders ; Mental Health Services ; Poverty ; Socioeconomic Factors Accession Number : 00000756 - 199612000 - 00007 Copyright ( c ) 2000 - 2004 Ovid Technologies , Inc . Version : rel9 . 2 . 0 , SourceID 1 . 9998 . 1 . 313