COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE It has been observed that prey animals increase their flight ini - tiation distance ( predator – prey distance at which they flee ) when intruders begin their approach from farther away ( Blumstein , 2003 ) . This observation challenges strictly economic decision models ( although Cooper et al . , 2009 has modeled this by assum - ing the prey animal has multiple “risk” functions and chooses one based on the predator behavior , which includes starting distance ) but may have a simple interpretation : when intruders approach from farther away , the animal has longer to detect and assess the threat , thus fleeing sooner . This “increased information” interpre - tation is also consistent with the observations that prey animals increase their flight initiation distance when an intruder has a higher approach speed ( Cooper , 2006 ) , and that odors ( Apfelbach et al . , 2005 ; Ylonen et al . , 2007 ) and shapes ( Hemmi and Merkle , 2009 ) are important in eliciting defensive behaviors – the approach speed may indicate that the intruder is likely to attack , while the odor and morphology may indicate that the intruder is a poten - tially dangerous one . The current models of escape decisions ( Ydenberg and Dill , 1986 ; Broom and Ruxton , 2005 ; Cooper , 2006 ; Cooper and Frederick , 2007 , 2010 ; and others ) have yet to incorporate factors such as olfaction and intruder morphology into their models . Such factors are difficult to include in economic models . For example , what is the cost associated with a particular smell ? Inspired by these observations , we propose a new approach for studying escape decisions in prey animals , namely that they are engaged in a decision - theoretic process , wherein they must decide , with imperfect information , whether the current environment is likely to pose a significant enough threat to their safety that they should flee . This view is supported by observations of active risk assessment behaviors in prey animals ( Schaik et al . , 1983 ; Creswell et al . , 2009 ; Hemmi and Pfeil , 2010 ) . 1 IntroductIon Prey animals frequently assess their surroundings to identify poten - tial threats to their safety . If an animal does not flee soon enough in the presence of a predator ( type I error ) , it may be injured or killed . If it flees when there is no legitimate threat ( type II error ) , it wastes metabolic energy , and loses mating or foraging opportuni - ties ( Nelson et al . , 2004 ; Creswell , 2008 ) . However , predators can be camouflaged and prey animals have limited sensory systems , so escape decisions must often be made with imperfect information . Previous studies have not investigated how escape decisions might be affected by prey animals’ degree of certainty about their environment . Indeed , the predominant assumption in the field appears to be that this uncertainty is not important , and that so long as the prey animal knows the most likely state of the environment ( or the expected value of the state ) , they can still make economically optimal decisions . We question this assumption . We explicitly consider the animal’s uncertainty in our model and subsequently demonstrate that , when a prey animal knows the environmental state with certainty , the optimal decision strategy is simply to flee whenever a threat is present . This strategy is inde - pendent of any “economic” factors – predator lethality , predator frequency , loss of mating opportunities , etc . When the state of the environment is less certain , the animal is bound to make errors , and the optimal balance between type I and II errors is determined by economic factors . This is in contrast with previous theoretical studies ( Ydenberg and Dill , 1986 ; Broom and Ruxton , 2005 ; Cooper , 2006 ; Cooper and Frederick , 2007 , 2010 ; and others ) , which have assumed that prey animals have perfect knowledge of their sur - roundings ( or , equivalently , that the uncertainty is unimportant , as discussed above ) and that their decisions are made on purely economic grounds . Our result suggests that uncertainty may play a key role in making economics relevant in decision making . How should prey animals respond to uncertain threats ? Joel Zylberberg 1 , 2 * and Michael Robert DeWeese 1 , 2 , 3 1 Department of Physics , University of California , Berkeley , CA , USA 2 Redwood Center for Theoretical Neuroscience , University of California , Berkeley , CA , USA 3 Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute , University of California , Berkeley , CA , USA A prey animal surveying its environment must decide whether there is a dangerous predator present or not . If there is , it may flee . Flight has an associated cost , so the animal should not flee if there is no danger . However , the prey animal cannot know the state of its environment with certainty , and is thus bound to make some errors . We formulate a probabilistic automaton model of a prey animal’s life and use it to compute the optimal escape decision strategy , subject to the animal’s uncertainty . The uncertainty is a major factor in determining the decision strategy : only in the presence of uncertainty do economic factors ( like mating opportunities lost due to flight ) influence the decision . We performed computer simulations and found that in silico populations of animals subject to predation evolve to display the strategies predicted by our model , confirming our choice of objective function for our analytic calculations . To the best of our knowledge , this is the first theoretical study of escape decisions to incorporate the effects of uncertainty , and to demonstrate the correctness of the objective function used in the model . Keywords : decision making , agent - based modeling , uncertainty , evolution , escape decision , probabilistic automata , constrained optimization Edited by : Hava T . Siegelmann , University of Massachusetts Amherst , USA Reviewed by : Thomas Boraud , Universite de Bordeaux , France Asa Ben - Hur , Colorado State University , USA * Correspondence : Joel Zylberberg , Redwood Center for Theoretical Neuroscience , University of California , 575A Evans Hall , MC 3198 , Berkeley , CA 94720 - 3198 , USA . e - mail : joelz @ berkeley . edu Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www . frontiersin . org April 2011 | Volume 5 | Article 20 | 1 Original research article published : 25 April 2011 doi : 10 . 3389 / fncom . 2011 . 00020 Sih ( 1992 ) has studied the decision to re - emerge from a burrow after flight , when the animal does not know if the predator is still present . Sih’s work is the closest in spirit to the current study , but it does not address how the initial escape decision is affected by uncertainty . No previous study satisfactorily addresses the issue of determining what objective function , when maximized , accurately predicts the escape decision strategy that is selected by evolution . We demonstrate through computer simulation that animals sub - ject to predation naturally evolve to display the strategy predicted by our model , confirming our choice of objective function . 2 Methods and Models 2 . 1 analytIcal calculatIons As a starting point , we will assume that the prey animal chooses the strategy S that maximizes its genetic contribution to subsequent generations ( see Janetos and Cole , 1981 ; Parker and Smith , 1990 for criticism and discussion of optimality models ) , defined by the intrinsic rate of increase in prevalence of strategy S in the popula - tion ( Hairston et al . , 1970 ; Parker and Smith , 1990 ) ; r ( S ) = [ N ( S ) − 1 ] dN ( S ) / dt , where N ( S ) is the number of animals adopting strategy S , and t is time ( note that we use the symbol r for the same quan - tity that Hairston et al . , 1970 call m ) . Since the large r strategies grow more quickly in terms of number of adherents , the popula - tion should evolve toward the strategy that maximizes r . We later verify this assumption . We stress that our objective function is rate of reproduction and not “survival of the fittest . ” A genotype that leads to long - lived animals , who fail to reproduce , is unlikely to significantly increase in prevalence over time . We formulate a probabilistic automaton ( Rabin , 1963 ) model of the life of a prey animal ( Figure 1 ) to compute r ( S ) . The model operates in discrete time , thus we are using the approximation r = [ N ( S ) − 1 ] dN ( S ) / dt ≈ [ N ( S ) − 1 ] ∆ N ( S ) / ∆ t . In every time step , every animal follows a complete path through the graph , beginning in the starting state ( “start” ) , and ending either back at the start , or in death . In each time step , the animal assesses a potential threat . For concreteness , we imagine the animal asking “Is that object likely to try to kill me ? ” Animals that do not flee from a real threat may be killed by a predator , while those that do flee , escape . Those animals that are not killed by predators may mate , and they may or may not die of causes other than predation . We group potential threats into discrete “zones” in predator – prey distance ; Figure 1 illustrates an example with four such zones . The model can utilize continuous distances without affecting our conclusions . The object the animal assesses may or may not be a real threat – the animal does not have access to the ground truth . We explicitly incorporate this uncertainty by assigning probabil - ity p i of correct threat detection in zone i , leading to flight , and probability q i of a false positive in zone i , leading to flight ; q i and p i are related by the receiver – operator - characteristic ( ROC ) curve [ p i = f i ( q i ) ; see Figure 2 ] . Qualitatively , our automaton model captures many features pertinent to real prey animals . Effects like periodicity of mating opportunities and threat frequency , maturation periods , learning during the lifetime of the animal ( Hemmi and Merkle , 2009 ; Rao , 2010 ) , and sexual reproduction ( as opposed to asexual ) , are omitted in the interest of simplicity , but our automaton could be amended to incorporate these considerations . We have confirmed with a computer simulation that our results are unchanged when the animals undergo sexual , rather than asexual reproduction ( results not shown ) . Figure 2 presents an example ROC curve , for the case in which the animal makes its choice based on a single , scalar parameter ( the “score” ) . The problem of choosing an escape strategy amounts to Figure 1 | Probabilistic automaton model of the life cycle of a prey animal . At each time step , every animal begins in the state “start , ” and follows a complete path , ending either back at the start , or in death . Each arrow is labeled with the conditional probability that the given event occurs ( die , survive , etc . ) , once the animal reaches the box at the tail of that arrow . The animal spots a potential threat in zone i with probability d i . Four zones ( groupings by predator – prey distance ) are shown in the diagram . The threat is real with probability a . If there is a threat the prey animal flees with probability p i . Those animals that do not flee are killed with probability L i , while those that do flee always escape . The animals that neither flee nor die mate with probability m , producing n progeny . The animals that do flee suffer a reduced mating rate of m ( 1 − R ) . In order to keep the population stable , some randomly selected animals are killed at the end of the time step with probability s . The probability of any path is obtained by multiplying the conditional probabilities of each subsequent step . A sample path is illustrated by the dashed arrows in the diagram : The animal spots a potential threat in zone 3 . This is not a real threat , but , with its imperfect information , the animal incorrectly decides to flee . It then mates , producing n progeny , which are added to the population for the next time step . The animal does not succumb to disease , starvation , or other non - predation - related causes of death , and lives on to the next time step . The probability of this path is d 3 ( 1 − a ) q i m ( 1 − R ) ( 1 − s ) . Zylberberg and DeWeese Prey animal escape decisions Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www . frontiersin . org April 2011 | Volume 5 | Article 20 | 2 is − 1 . Those animals that are not already killed by the predator die with probability s , which again has a value − 1 . Thus , our expectation value is E r q b q mn c q mn R a q a q i i i i i { } ( )   ≈ { } ( ) + { } ( ) − − { } ( ) − − { } ( ) ≈ [ ] 1 1 1 s −− { } ( )   − { } ( ) − { } ( ) − a q mn c q Rmn a q i i i s . ( 2 ) The second line follows from the first since a + b + c = 1 , and , since both s and a are expected to be small , the product s a can safely be ignored . Since the animals in our model assess one potential threat per unit time , the size of the “time steps” in our model is fairly short ( seconds , or possibly minutes ) . In the real - world , we expect that actual threats are relatively uncommon ( for example , the prob - ability of encountering a real threat in any given short time period is small ) : a should be a relatively small quantity . Thus , a is small for real prey animals . Furthermore , since the time steps are fairly short , the probability s of dying from starvation or disease in any time step is quite small . Thus , our s a < < 1 approximation ( above ) is reasonable . The anticipated escape response threshold maximizes the expec - tation value of the objective function E [ r ( { q i } ) ] , subject to the con - straints p i = f i ( q i ) imposed by the ROC curves for each zone . In the standard fashion ( Boas , 2006 ) , we utilize the method of Lagrange multipliers by defining a Lagrange function Ω = E [ r ] + Σ i j i ( p i − f i ( q i ) ) . The set { j i } , then , is then our set of ( unknown ) Lagrange multipliers , and we optimize by solving ( for all i ) ∂ ∂ = ∂ { } ( )   ∂ + = ∂ ∂ = ∂ { } ( )   ∂ − ′ ( ) Ω Ω p E r q p q E r q q q i i i i i i i i j j 0 f i = = ∂ ∂ = − ( ) = 0 0 Ω j i i i i p f q . ( 3 ) The last of these equations enforces the constraint . The first two equations yield j j i i i i i L mn Rmn f q Rmn = − + + ′ = − − a a a [ ] ( ) [ ] . 1 1 ( 4 ) And the solution to our optimization problem is ( for j i ≠ 0 ) ′ = − − [ ] + ( ) = ( ) f q Rmn mn L R L p f q i i i i i i i ( ) [ ] . 1 a a ( 5 ) Note that , were all of the threats in one distance zone , Eq . 5 still yields the optimal result . Thus , the globally optimal solution consists of making the locally optimal decision for each zone , as one might expect . For an explicit computation of where the decision threshold should lie , we require information about the ROC curve . As an exam - ple , we assume that the score is distributed as g i ( z | danger ) = N ( 0 , 1 ) in the presence of danger in zone i , where N ( m , Σ ) represents a choosing where on the ROC curve the decision rule should lie . It can be specified in each zone either by p i , q i , or a threshold t i ( see Figure 2 ) . To simplify our notation , we first define the variables a , b , c to be the probabilities , in a given time step , of being killed by a predator , of not fleeing , and not being killed by a predator , and of fleeing , respectively . By tracing paths in Figure 1 , we find that a p L b p L q c p i i i i i i i i i i i = − [ ] = − [ ] − [ ] + − [ ] − [ ] ( ) = + − ∑ ∑ d a d a a d a 1 1 1 1 1 1 aa d [ ] ( ) = + + = ∑ ∑ q a b c i i i i 1 1 ( 1 ) where a is the probability that a given object is actually a threat , and L i is the probability that failure to immediately flee a predator , initially in distance zone i , will be lethal . The expectation value of the objective function ( r = [ N ( S ) − 1 ] dN ( S ) / dt ≈ [ N ( S ) − 1 ] ∆ N ( S ) / ∆ t ) is given by multiplying the result of a given outcome by the probability of that outcome , and sum - ming over all possible outcomes . These outcomes are as follows : animals that do not flee will mate with probability m , producing n progeny , while those that do flee will suffer a reduced mat - ing rate m ( 1 − R ) , producing n progeny . Animals that die are removed from the population , thus the value of this outcome Figure 2 | Connection between rOC curves ( p vs . q ) and probability distributions . The probability distributions of some “score” parameter , conditioned on the presence ( solid curve ) or absence ( dashed curve ) of a threat are shown . A possible interpretation for this score is that it is the output of a neural network that assesses all of the information available to the animal , in an attempt to infer the danger of a given object . One possible decision threshold , t , is indicated , whereby the animal decides to flee from objects with scores above the threshold , and not to flee from those with scores below the threshold . By varying the threshold , the animal can alter the correct detection probability p , indicated by the area under the “threat” distribution ( solid curve ) to the right of the threshold ; at the same time , varying the threshold also affects the false positive probability q , given by the area under the “no threat” distribution ( dashed curve ) to the right of the threshold . The same threshold determines both p and q ; they are related by the ROC curve p = f ( q ) ( inset ) . Zylberberg and DeWeese Prey animal escape decisions Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www . frontiersin . org April 2011 | Volume 5 | Article 20 | 3 Gaussian ( or normal ) distribution with mean m and SD Σ . Now let the distribution of scores in the absence of danger in zone i be g i ( z | no danger ) = N ( v i , 1 ) for some v i < 0 . Note that , given a Gaussian - distributed variable y with arbitrary mean m and variance Σ , we can choose to operate on the variable x = ( y − m ) / Σ , which will be distributed as N ( 0 , 1 ) . Thus , within the realm of Gaussian - distributed scores , we are losing no generality by considering g i ( z | danger ) = N ( 0 , 1 ) . Choosing the variance of “no threat” score distribution to be the same as that of the distribution conditioned on the presence of danger does entail a loss of gener - ality , but it simplifies the analysis greatly and thus we do it for the purposes of this example . Given the distributions , we can define the values ( p i , q i ) as a function of the decision threshold t i . Let the animal decide that it is in danger for z > t i , and that it is not for z ≤ t i . Then p f q dz e q dz e i i i i z i i z i i i = ( ) ( ) = ( ) = − ∞ − − ∞ ∫ ∫ t p t p t v 2 2 2 2 2 2 / ( ) / . τ ( 6 ) We need the derivative ′ f q i i ( ) to implement the results of our optimization calculation . Using the chain rule , ′ ( ) ( ) = = −     f q dp d d dq i i i i i i i i i i t t t v v t exp 2 2 2 . ( 7 ) Therefore , the optimal threshold for the i th zone is t v v a a i i i i i Rmn mn L R L = − − − ( ) +       2 1 1 ln ( ) . ( 8 ) It is clear that as | v i | increases ( more obvious threats and thus less uncertainty ) , the second term , which contains all of the eco - nomic factors about the environment , becomes less important in determining the decision threshold . The decreasing importance of the “economic” term with increas - ing | v | is not true for all possible score distributions . We have dem - onstrated that this conclusion does apply to Gaussian distributions . Indeed , it also applies to any unimodal distribution in the expo - nential family g z e z ( ) | | ∝ − l n with even n ≥ 2 . This can be seen by noting that , if the distribution of scores in the presence of a threat is g z e z ( | ) , | | threat ∝ − l n and in the absence of a threat is g z e z ( | ) , | | nothreat ∝ − − l v n then the derivative of the ROC curve f ′ ( q ) is given by ′ = − − ( ) → ′ [ ] = − − f q f q ( ( ) ) | | | | ln ( ) | | | | . t l t l t v l t t v n n n n exp −1 ( 9 ) Solving for t is hard for general n . Consider , for example the case where t ≥ 0 and t ≥ v . Then we see that l −1 ln [ f ′ ( q ) ] = t n − ( t − v ) n . For n = 1 , this yields no solution for t because the derivative of the ROC curve is independent of t . This is peculiar to the exponential distribution , which is a pathological case in this sense . For even n , with no restrictions on t , we see that l − 1 ln [ f ′ ( q ) ] = t n − ( t − v ) n ( the absolute value signs disappear for even n ) . Expanding ( t − v ) n using binomial theorem , we find that l t t t v n n n n n − = − ′ = − − ∑ − 1 1 ln [ ( ) ] ( ) ( ) . f q j j j j Now , the t n terms cancel , and we can divide through by one power of v , yielding l v t v n n n − − = − − ′ = ∑ − 1 1 1 1 ln [ ( ) ] ( ) ( ) . f q j j j j As in the Gaussian ( n = 2 ) case , we see that increasing | v | de - weights the economic f ′ ( q ) term . Thus , we can be assured that the decreasing importance of the economic term with increasing | v | is true for all unimodal exponential distributions of the form g z e z ( ) | | ∝ − l n with even n ≥ 2 . For n > 1 and values of n that are not even integers , there are some regimes in which the leading - order terms in t still cancel , however it is difficult to prove that our result holds in the most general case . We note that , while it simplified our automaton model and our notation , nowhere was it necessary to assume that the danger occurs in discrete zones in distance . One could instead utilize a continuous distance measure by considering an infinitely large set of possible values of i , with each one corresponding to a particular point in space . 2 . 2 sIMulatIon experIMents To verify that our objective function is the one selected for by natu - ral evolution , we perform a computer simulation of a population of prey animals subject to predation . Our simulation contains a population of animals whose life cycles are described by the probabilistic automaton model ( Figure 1 ) . At each time step of the simulation , the animals are considered one - by - one . A pseudo - random number generator determines whether a prey animal will see a real threat ( with probability a ) or not . The threats are all in the same distance zone , since this simplifies the simulation , and we have shown that the optimal solution for many zones is to use the locally optimal solution in each separate zone ( Eq . 5 ) . The animal is then presented with a “score” variable , with which it makes its decision . As in our analytic example , the scores are randomly drawn from the N ( 0 , 1 ) distribution if the threat is real , or from the N ( v , 1 ) distribution if the threat is fake . If the “score” is above the animal’s threshold , it chooses to flee . Otherwise it does not . The determination of which animals get to mate , or get killed by a predator is also done with a pseudo - random number generator , and follows the description in Figure 1 . Those animals that do mate produce n progeny . Each offspring has a decision threshold that is equal to its parent’s , plus Gaussian noise of mean zero and fixed ( small ) SD . This variation allows the population to explore the strategy space . The population in our simulation thus has the two key features ( heritability , and vari - ability ) that allow for evolution . At the end of every time step , the population is trimmed so that it does not get too large . This is done by killing random individu - als , thus inducing no selection pressure . This is represented by the value s in our automaton model . We initialize the simulation with a population of animals whose decision thresholds are drawn from a uniform distribution . 3 results and dIscussIon 3 . 1 the optIMal decIsIon strategy depends on the envIronMent and varIes wIth the anIMal’s uncertaInty about the state of the envIronMent The strategy that maximizes the expectation value of r , subject to the p i = f i ( q i ) constraints imposed by the ROC curves , is given by ( for all zones i ) Zylberberg and DeWeese Prey animal escape decisions Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www . frontiersin . org April 2011 | Volume 5 | Article 20 | 4 3 . 2 an in silico populatIon of prey anIMals evolves to dIsplay the decIsIon strategy predIcted by our analytIcal calculatIons To verify our choice of objective function , and the approximations made in our calculation , we performed a computer simulation of a population of prey animals subject to predation . Unlike previous work ( Floreano and Keller , 2010 ) , we did not define an objective function in our simulation : the animals in our simulation had no indication of what we thought they should be accomplishing with their escape strategy . They simply mated , died of predation , and were killed by non - predation - related causes . Those animals that did mate produced children whose escape thresholds were copies of the parent’s threshold , with added Gaussian noise . We investigated how the evolutionarily favored escape response threshold varied as a function of the parameters of their life cycle , and various proper - ties of their predators . Some of the results of this experiment are shown in Figure 4 . For the results in the scatter plot , the simulation was repeated many times . For each run of the simulation , the parameters ( a , L , m , n , R , v ) were randomly selected from i . i . d . uniform distributions with the ranges specified in Table 1 . The population average threshold was recorded after each time step , and the result shown on the plot is the average over the last 10 3 time steps . This reduces the variance of the results that stems , in part , from the variance of the children with respect to their parents , and in part from the relatively small population ( N = 2 × 10 3 ) that was used in the simulation . This variance is depicted in Figure 4 . The results of the simulation ( Figure 4 ) demonstrate that a population of animals whose life cycle is well - described by the automaton model in Figure 1 will naturally evolve to display the strategy defined in Eqs . 10 and 11 . Much of the challenge in apply - ing our method to real prey animals will be in accurately modeling their life cycle with a probabilistic automaton model . ′ ( ) = − − ( ) +   f q Rmn L R mn L i i i i ( ) . 1 a a ( 10 ) Figure 2 shows that low thresholds yield small derivatives ′ f q i i ( ) ( for low thresholds , a small increase in t increases q much more than p ) , and vice versa . We observe that increased predator density and lethality leads to more timid prey animals ( low t ) , while increased reproductive flight cost Rmn leads to bolder ones . To investigate the influence of uncertainty on the decision strat - egy , we consider a specific example : the decision is made based on a single “score” variable z , which is distributed as g i ( z | danger ) = N ( 0 , 1 ) in the presence of danger in zone i , where N ( a , b ) is a Gaussian ( or normal ) distribution with mean a and SD b . This score may be , for example , the output of a neural net - work that takes into account all of the information available to the animal , including information about the predator behavior , odor , morphology , etc . The use of a single score for the decision can be understood as a dimensionality reduction step : the high - dimensional sensory data is reduced to a single scalar value , upon which the decision can be based . In the case of an animal with a “command neuron” ( e . g . , the Mauthner cell ; Rock et al . , 1981 ; Roberts , 1992 ; Zottoli and Faber , 2000 ; Korn and Faber , 2005 ) , the score we refer to may be related to the membrane potential , which is a function of all the synaptic inputs to that cell from the sensory processing network . Let the distribution of scores in the absence of danger in zone i be g i ( z | no danger ) = N ( v i , 1 ) for some v i < 0 . The absolute value of v i defines the reliability of the information available to the animal : larger | v i | implies more reliable information . Let the animal decide that it is in danger for z > t i , and that it is not in danger for z ≤ t i . The optimal threshold t i for zone i is t v v i i i i i f q = − ′ [ ] 2 1 ln ( ) , ( 11 ) and ′ f q i i ( ) , which incorporates all of the economic factors in the probabilistic automaton model , is given by Eq . 5 . For large | v i | , the dependence on the logarithmic term is small and , for ′ > f q i i ( ) 0 ( which is true , for example , when L i > R and a ≠ 1 ) , the threshold is t i ≈ v i / 2 . This strategy resembles a maxi - mum likelihood estimator ( MLE ) , which , in this example , would be given by t i = v i / 2 . As | v i | decreases , the economic factors become more important in determining the threshold t i . This conclusion ( demonstrated in Figure 3 ) is independent of the details of our probabilistic automaton model . The specifics of the automaton determine the optimal ′ f q i i ( ) , but Eq . 11 shows us that , independ - ent of ′ f q i i ( ) , the strategy still changes from maximum likelihood to economic cost reduction , as the amount of uncertainty in the information increases . This result is true for Gaussian - distributed score variables , but is not true for all distributions . However , it is straightforward to prove that the result holds for all unimodal distributions in the exponential family g z e z ( ) | | ∝ − l n for even n ≥ 2 . According to the central limit theorem , most variables that are weighted averages of many random components are Gaussian - distributed . Thus , our conclusion is likely to be applicable to many real - world examples . Figure 3 | The importance of economic factors in decision making increases with rising uncertainty about the environment . The departure of the optimal decision threshold ( t ) from a MLE ( described by t = v / 2 ) is shown as a function of v , the displacement between the means of the score distributions for threats and non - threats . The result is shown for several different values of f ′ ( q ) , which contains all the economic factors , and quantifies how bold ( large values ) or timid ( small values ) the strategy is ( see text ) . For large | v | , threats are easily identified , and the strategies all converge to a maximum likelihood decision strategy : flee if and only if danger is more likely than not . As the uncertainty increases ( small | v | ) , the strategies diverge in a manner dictated by the economic factors . Zylberberg and DeWeese Prey animal escape decisions Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www . frontiersin . org April 2011 | Volume 5 | Article 20 | 5 We conclude that , given sufficiently accurate and detailed ( probabilistic ) information about the life cycle of an animal , it may be possible ( although difficult ) to make quantitative behavioral predictions . dIscussIon and conclusIon We have found that a prey animal’s uncertainty about threats in its environment has a profound effect on the optimal escape strategy . Moreover , computer simulations of the evolution of populations of animals subject to predation demonstrate that the objective func - tion we assumed for our analytic calculations is , indeed , optimized by selection pressure . Interesting work has modeled the learning process in the pres - ence of uncertainty , in the context of optimal decision making ( Rao , 2010 ) . Our results focus instead on instinctual responses , and do not explicitly incorporate learning over the lifetime of the animal . Clearly , in the real - world , both innate and learned behaviors are important . We leave the issue of combining these two response types for future work . Whereas much previous work ( Ydenberg and Dill , 1986 ; Blumstein , 2003 ; Broom and Ruxton , 2005 ; Cooper , 2006 ; Cooper and Frederick , 2007 , 2010 ) has involved determining flight initia - tion distances , our model does not do so explicitly . In our model , the animal simply flees when the possibility of danger exceeds some threshold , the value of which is determined by the level of uncer - tainty , and , when that uncertainty is not small , by economic factors . However , we do have the ability to infer how such a strategy might vary when assessing threats at different distances . We expect that nearby threats will be more conspicuous : | v | should be a decreasing function of distance . Thus , the economic factors are more important for potential threats at large distances compared to small . Consequently , those economic factors that We stress that we made a specific choice of objective function for our analytic calculation , but that objective function was not available to the animals in our simulation . Had we made a different choice of objective function , our analytic calculations would have yielded different results , and those would necessarily not have been in agreement with the simulation results . For example , choosing longevity as an objective function , one would choose the strategy that maximizes lifetime . Given the struc - ture of our automaton model , that strategy is clearly to flee all of the time ; t = −∞ , regardless of the model parameters . That result is clearly in disagreement with our simulation results . Thus , we argue that the results of our simulation support our chosen objective function . It has previously been conjectured ( Cooper and Frederick , 2007 ) that , because the correct objective function is unknown , and prey animals have uncertain information about the envi - ronment , quantitative behavioral predictions are impossible . We have addressed both of these issues : the correct objective function , while hard to compute for real prey animals ( much information is required to correctly estimate r ) , is known , and we have explic - itly incorporated the effects of imperfect information into our decision model . Figure 4 | Computer simulation confirms that our objective function , r = N − 1 dN / dt , is indeed maximized by selection pressure . ( A ) , Time evolution of the distribution of escape response thresholds across a population of simulated prey animals . The time ( in units of time steps ) at which the histogram was measured is indicated on each histogram . The population was initialized at time t = 0 with a uniform distribution of escape strategies . The model parameters for this simulation were ( a , L , m , n , R , v ) = ( 0 . 15 , 0 . 8 , 0 . 02 , 4 , 0 . 5 , − 2 . 0 ) , and the threshold of each progeny was equal to that of its parent , plus Gaussian noise with mean 0 and SD 0 . 01 . ( B ) , Average escape threshold across this simulated population asymptotes to the predicted value . The shaded region extends one SD above and below the average . At the end of this simulation , the population mean is − 1 . 605 with SD 0 . 08 , in good agreement with the theoretical value ( Eq . 8 ) of − 1 . 645 . ( C ) , Repeating this simulation 50 times with randomly selected parameter values shows good agreement between the analytical prediction and simulation results across the full range of parameter values tested ( Table 1 ) . Population average thresholds ( after 10 4 time steps ) are plotted against the analytical prediction . The red line represents equality between the prediction and simulation . Table 1 | ranges of variables used in the simulation . Variable range a [ 0 . 05 , 0 . 6 ] L [ 0 . 5 , 1 . 0 ] m [ 0 . 01 , 0 . 5 ] n [ 3 , 8 ] R [ 0 . 1 , 0 . 7 ] v [ − 7 . 0 , − 0 . 5 ] Zylberberg and DeWeese Prey animal escape decisions Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www . frontiersin . org April 2011 | Volume 5 | Article 20 | 6 Luttbeg , B . , and Warner , R . ( 1999 ) . Reproductive decision - making by female peacock wrasses : flexible ver - sus fixed behavioral rules in variable environments . Behav . Ecol . 10 , 666 . Marshall , J . , Dornhaus , A . , Franks , N . , and Kovacs , T . ( 2006 ) . Noise , cost and speed - accuracy trade - offs : decision - making in a decentralized system . J . R . Soc . Interface 3 , 243 . Morris , J . ( 1987 ) . Autoimmunity : a deci - sion theory model . J . Clin . Pathol . 40 , 210 – 215 . Nelson , E . , Matthews , C . , and Rosenheim , J . ( 2004 ) . Predators reduce prey popu - lation growth by inducing changes in prey behavior . Ecology 85 , 1853 – 1858 . Neyman , J . , and Pearson , E . ( 1933 ) . On the problem of the most efficient tests of statistical hypotheses . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . A 231 , 289 – 337 . Parker , G . , and Smith , J . ( 1990 ) . Optimality theory in evolutionary biology . Nature 348 , 27 – 33 . Perkins , T . , and Swain , P . ( 2009 ) . Strategies for cellular decision - making . Mol . Syst . Biol . 5 , 326 . Rabin , M . O . ( 1963 ) . Probabilistic autom - ata . Inform . Control 6 , 230 – 245 . Rao , R . ( 2010 ) . Decision making under uncertainty : a neural model based on partially observable Markov decision processes . Front . Comput . Neurosci . 4 : 146 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fncom . 2010 . 00146 Roberts , B . ( 1992 ) . Neural mechanisms underlying escape behavior in fishes . Rev . Fish Biol . Fish . 2 , 243 – 266 . Rock , M . , Hackett , J . , and Brown , D . ( 1981 ) . Does the Mauthner cell con - form to the criteria of the command neuron concept ? Brain Res . 204 , 21 – 27 . references Adler , J . , and Wung - Wai , T . ( 1974 ) . Decision - making in bacteria : chem - otactic response of Escherichia coli to conflicting stimuli . Science 184 , 12921294 . Apfelbach , R . , Blanchard , C . , Blanchard , R . , Hayes , R . , and McGregor , I . ( 2005 ) . The effects of predator odors in mam - malian prey species : a review of field and laboratory studies . Neurosci . Biobehav . Rev . 29 , 1123 – 1144 . Benton , T . , and Evans , M . ( 1998 ) . Measuring mate choice using correla - tion : the effect of sampling behaviour . Behav . Ecol . Sociobiol . 44 , 91 – 98 . Bialek , W . , and Setayeshgar , S . ( 2005 ) . Physical limits to biochemical signal - ing . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 102 , 10040 – 10045 . Blumstein , D . ( 2003 ) . Flight - initiation dis - tance in birds is dependent on intruder starting distance . J . Wildl . Manage . 64 , 852 – 857 . Boas , M . ( 2006 ) . Mathematical Methods in the Physical Sciences . Danvers , MA : Wiley , 864 . Broom , M . , and Ruxton , G . ( 2005 ) . You can run – or you can hide : optimal strategies for cryptic prey against pur - suit predators . Behav . Ecol . 16 , 534 – 540 . Cooper , W . ( 2006 ) . Dynamic risk assess - ment : prey rapidly adjust flight initia - tion distance to changes in predator approach speed . Ethology 112 , 858 – 864 . Cooper , W . , and Frederick , W . ( 2007 ) . Optimal flight initiation distance . J . Theor . Biol . 244 , 59 – 67 . Cooper , W . , and Frederick , W . ( 2010 ) . Predator lethality , optimal escape behavior , and autonomy . Behav . Ecol . 21 , 91 – 96 . Cooper , W . , Hawlena , D . , and Perez - Mellado , V . ( 2009 ) . Interactive effect of starting distance and approach speed on escape behav - ior challenges theory . Behav . Ecol . 20 , 542 – 546 . Creswell , W . ( 2008 ) . Non - lethal effects of predation in birds . Ibis 150 , 3 – 17 . Creswell , W . , Butler , S . , Whittingham , M . , and Quinn , J . ( 2009 ) . Very short delays prior to escape from potential predators may function efficiently as adaptive risk - assessment periods . Behaviour 146 , 795 – 813 . Floreano , D . , and Keller , L . ( 2010 ) . Evolution of adaptive behaviour in robots by means of Darwinian selec - tion . PLoS Biol . 8 , e1000292 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 1000292 Hairston , N . G . , Tinkle , D . W . , and Wilbur , H . M . ( 1970 ) . Natural selection and the parameters of population growth . J . Wildl . Manage . 34 , 681 – 689 . Hemmi , J . , and Merkle , T . ( 2009 ) . High stimulus specificity characterizes anti - predator habituation under natural conditions . Proc . R . Soc . Lond . B Biol . Sci . 276 , 4381 – 4388 . Hemmi , J . , and Pfeil , A . ( 2010 ) . A multi - stage anti - predator response increases information on predation risk . J . Exp . Biol . 213 , 1484 – 1489 . Janetos , A . , and Cole , B . ( 1981 ) . Imperfectly optimal animals . Behav . Ecol . Sociobiol . 9 , 203 – 209 . Korn , H . , and Faber , D . ( 2005 ) . The Mauthner cell half a century later : a neurobiological model for decision - making ? Neuron 47 , 13 – 28 . Schaik , C . , van Noorwijk , M . , Warsono , B . , and Sutriono , E . ( 1983 ) . Party size and early detection of predators in Sumatran forest primates . Primates 24 , 211 – 221 . Sih , A . ( 1992 ) . Prey uncertainty and the balancing of antipredator and feeing needs . Am . Nat . 139 , 1052 – 1069 . Ydenberg , R . , and Dill , L . ( 1986 ) . The eco - nomics of fleeing from predators . Adv . Study Behav . 16 , 229 – 249 . Ylonen , H . , Kortet , R . , Myntti , J . , and Vainikka , A . ( 2007 ) . Predator odor rec - ognition and antipredatory response in fish : does the prey know the preda - tor diel rhythm ? Acta Oecol . 31 , 1 – 7 . Zottoli , S . , and Faber , D . ( 2000 ) . The Mauthner cell : what has it taught us ? Neuroscientist 6 , 26 – 38 . Conflict of Interest Statement : The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any com - mercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest . Received : 21 December 2010 ; accepted : 03 April 2011 ; published online : 25 April 2011 . Citation : Zylberberg J and DeWeese MR ( 2011 ) How should prey animals respond to uncertain threats ? Front . Comput . Neurosci . 5 : 20 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fncom . 2011 . 00020 Copyright © 2011 Zylberberg and DeWeese . This is an open - access article subject to a non - exclusive license between the authors and Frontiers Media SA , which permits use , distribution and reproduction in other forums , provided the original authors and source are credited and other Frontiers con - ditions are complied with . We propose that approaches based on optimal performance in the face of imperfect information are likely to be useful for study - ing further aspects of escape decisions in prey animals , as they have been in other areas of biology such as mate selection ( Benton and Evans , 1998 ; Luttbeg and Warner , 1999 ) , house - hunting ( Marshall et al . , 2006 ) , cellular - level decision processes ( Perkins and Swain , 2009 ) , and chemotaxis ( Adler and Wung - Wai , 1974 ; Bialek and Setayeshgar , 2005 ) . Our approach is easily generalized to include other areas where decisions must be made with imperfect infor - mation and the costs of type I and II errors are unequal ( when the costs of both error type are equal , there are simpler tools , such as the Neyman – Pearson lemma ( Neyman and Pearson , 1933 ) , for assessing the optimal strategy ) . Immunology is one such area : excessive type I errors by macrophages result in infection of the host , while exces - sive type II errors result in autoimmune disorders ( Morris , 1987 ) . acknowledgMents The authors are grateful to the William J . Fulbright Foundation and the University of California for funding this work . make the strategy more timid ( lower threshold ) will increase the flight initiation distance – they make the optimal threshold lower at large distances , but do not affect the small distance threshold as strongly . Similarly , when an intruder initiates its approach from further afield , the prey animal has more time to gain information about it . Thus , at a greater distance , the animal can correctly assess the threat , leading to a larger flight initiation distance , as observed in real prey animals ( Blumstein , 2003 ) . Finally , when an odor or shape is presented to the animal that is associated with common predators , the score of the intruder will be far from the mean of the “no threat” distribution . Thus , defensive behavior is likely to be trigered . Our decision - theoretic model for prey escape strategy can thus account for several observed behaviors ( Blumstein , 2003 ; Apfelbach et al . , 2005 ; Cooper , 2006 ) in a natural way . Indeed , to the best of our knowledge , ours is the first model to account ( qualitatively ) for the influence of all of these factors on escape decisions . Zylberberg and DeWeese Prey animal escape decisions Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www . frontiersin . org April 2011 | Volume 5 | Article 20 | 7