IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT , VOL . 57 , NO . 1 , FEBRUARY 2010 51 How do Latecomer Firms Capture Value From Disruptive Technologies ? A Secondary Business - Model Innovation Perspective Xiaobo Wu , Rufei Ma , and Yongjiang Shi Abstract —To ﬁll the research gap between extant theory of dis - ruptive technology and latecomer ﬁrms’ business - model innova - tionpracticesinemergingeconomies , weexplorethenewlatecomer advantage implied in the phenomena of overshooting and noncon - suming . Based on inductive theory building with a comparative case study , we ﬁnd that latecomer ﬁrms , though disadvantaged in technological capabilities and market resources , can success - fully introduce disruptive technologies from advanced economies into emerging economies through secondary business - model inno - vations . They provide cheaper , simpler , but good enough products or services that ordinary citizens in emerging economies can easily afford and access . How do latecomer ﬁrms capture value from dis - ruptivetechnologieswithintheemergingeconomiescontext ? While articulating an appropriate value proposition that is attractive for local customers is of great importance for those latecomer ﬁrms , they should also fully utilize strategic partners’ complementary assets to build a unique value network embedded within local in - frastructure . Thus , those latecomer ﬁrms tactfully bypass the sub - stantial ﬁrst - mover advantages and global advantages of multina - tional incumbents , and leverage their latecomer advantages such as low price and local savvy . Thus , latecomer ﬁrms should not ignore those disruptive growth opportunities within the large population of mass customers and nonconsumers in emerging economies . Index Terms —Business - model innovation , competitive advan - tage , disruptive technology , emerging economy , latecomer ﬁrm . I . I NTRODUCTION S INCE late 1980s and early 1990s , emerging economies are playing an increasingly prominent role and becoming the main engine of growth in the world economy [ 29 ] , [ 66 ] . Espe - cially in recent years , the innovation and internationalization of latecomer ﬁrms from emerging economies has attracted grow - ing attentions in the research ﬁeld of innovation and strategic management [ 28 ] , [ 35 ] , [ 40 ] , [ 44 ] , [ 51 ] , [ 62 ] , [ 67 ] , [ 70 ] , [ 71 ] . Manuscript received March 31 , 2008 ; revised June 11 , 2009 and February 1 , 2009 . Current version published January 20 , 2010 . This work was supported in part by the National Planning Ofﬁce of Philosophy and Social Science under Grant 07 & ZD022 , Shanghai Science and Technology Development Foundation under Grant 08692106700 , and by the Chinese Scholarship Council . The au - thors contributed equally to this work . Review of this manuscript was arranged by Department Editor C . Christensen . X . Wu is with the School of Management and National Institute for Innova - tion Management , Zhejiang University , Hangzhou 310058 , China . R . Ma is with the School of Economics and Management and Chinese Academy of Science and Technology Management , Tongji University , Shang - hai 200092 , China ( author to whom all correspondence should be addressed , e - mail : rufeima @ yahoo . com . cn ) . Y . Shi is with the Centre for International Manufacturing , Institute for Man - ufacturing , University of Cambridge , Cambridge CB3 0FS , U . K . Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available online at http : / / ieeexplore . ieee . org . Digital Object Identiﬁer 10 . 1109 / TEM . 2009 . 2033045 Some homegrown latecomer ﬁrms in China , like UTStar - com and Taobao , have successfully introduced disruptive technologies [ 5 ] , [ 12 ] from advanced economies into China through their secondary business - model innovations . They pro - vide cheaper , simpler , but good - enough products or services that ordinary Chinese citizens can easily afford and access , rather than expensive , complicated ones with excessive features . In the late 1990s , UTStarcom ﬁrst introduced the personal handyphone system ( PHS ) , a disruptive technology originated in Japan , into the emerging wireless communication market in China . UTStarcom’s personal access system ( PAS ) skillfully in - tegrates the emerging wireless access technology of PHS into the existing public switched telephone network ( PSTN ) infrastruc - ture , and economically meets the basic wireless communication needs of ordinary Chinese citizens . Since the ﬁrst PAS service in China was formally launched in 1998 , PAS service has not only gained momentum in small cities and rural areas , but also has ﬂourished in major cities in China . By the end of 2006 , the PAS subscriber count in China has surged over 91 127 000 , ac - cording to statistics from the Ministry of Information Industry of China . 1 Taobao , a member company of Alibaba , has successfully op - erated China’s largest online consumer - to - consumer ( C2C ) mar - ketplace and reached a transaction volume of CNY99 . 96 billion in 2008 , according to a data report of the Ministry of Commerce of China . 2 In 2005 , 2 - year - old Taobao took over the multina - tional incumbent eBay to lead the China market by leveraging its advantage on local savvy . In that year , Taobao dominated the China’s C2C online shopping market with up to 72 % market share . Until 2008 , Taobao has created an e - commerce ecosys - tem consisting of 80 million registered users and over 1 million sellers , third - party service providers in payment , logistics , and veriﬁcation , and a network of 400 000 web publishers in its afﬁliate marketing program . Why can those homegrown latecomer ﬁrms successfully cap - ture value from disruptive technologies and create their com - petitive advantages in emerging economies ? Do their successes merely rely on low costs advantage or local policy support ? How do they bypass the multinational incumbents’ substantial ﬁrst - mover advantages and global advantages and make the best of their limited latecomer advantages ? These questions are im - portant , and yet few studies have complete answers to them . 1 http : / / www . miit . gov . cn . 2 http : / / www . mofcom . gov . cn . 0018 - 9391 / $ 26 . 00 © 2009 IEEE 52 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT , VOL . 57 , NO . 1 , FEBRUARY 2010 Although the resource - based theory of the ﬁrm [ 3 ] , [ 4 ] , [ 25 ] , [ 60 ] provides a satisfactory account of how resource - rich ﬁrms sustain their existing competitive advantages , extant literature has paid inadequate attention to the question of how resource - poor latecomer ﬁrms from emerging economies over - come multinational incumbents’ advantages and create their competitive advantages [ 39 ] . In this paper , we , therefore , at - tempt to preliminarily explain how latecomer ﬁrms capture value from disruptive technologies and create their competi - tive advantages within the emerging economies context , from the perspective of secondary business - model innovation . II . T HEORETICAL B ACKGROUND AND F RAMEWORK A . Connecting Disruptive Technologies and Latecomer Firms To ﬁll the research gap between extant theory of disruptive technology [ 12 ] , [ 14 ] and latecomer ﬁrms’ business - model inno - vation practices in emerging economies , we attempt to connect the disruptive technology literature and the latecomer ﬁrm liter - ature , and to explore new source of latecomer advantage implied in the phenomena of overshooting and nonconsuming . 1 ) Latecomer Firms : Hobday [ 27 ] introduced the idea of “latecomer ﬁrm” in his seminal work and used two sets of com - petitive disadvantages to characterize a latecomer ﬁrm , which is dislocated from the main international sources of technology and research and development ( R & D ) , and dislocated from the mainstream international markets it wishes to supply . Accord - ing to Mathews’ deﬁnition [ 50 ] , the latecomer ﬁrm ( LCF ) is one that meets the following four conditions . 1 ) Industry entry : The LCF is a late entrant to an industry , not by choice but by historical necessity . 2 ) Resources : The LCF is initially resource - poor , e . g . , lack - ing technology and market access . 3 ) Strategic intent : The LCF is focused on catch - up as its primary goal . 4 ) Competitive position : The LCF has some initial competi - tive advantages , such as low costs , which it can utilize to leverage a position in the industry of choice . As most studies have been biased toward resource - rich ﬁrms , existing resource - based theories are inadequate to explain how those resource - poor latecomer ﬁrms from developing countries catch up with and successfully challenge the resource - rich in - cumbents from developed countries in their own domain [ 39 ] . Existing theories are less successful in accounting for how late - comer ﬁrms create their competitive advantages in the ﬁrst place , or how latecomer ﬁrms overcome resource - rich incumbents’ ad - vantages when they start with few resources [ 50 ] . How to acquire and leverage latecomer advantage [ 45 ] , [ 68 ] , [ 69 ] is a very important strategic issue for latecomer ﬁrms . Relevant literature on latecomer advantage and disadvantage can be found in many areas of study , but the most notable have been industrial economics [ 2 ] , [ 47 ] , [ 54 ] , strategic man - agement [ 41 ] , [ 42 ] , and marketing [ 34 ] . Kerin et al . [ 34 ] summa - rized that a latecomer ﬁrm may achieve cost and differentiation advantages arising from lower imitation costs , free - rider effects , scope economies , learning from the pioneer ﬁrms’ mistakes and the ability to inﬂuence and shape consumer preferences . On the basis of prior studies , Cho et al . [ 9 ] classiﬁed the sources of early - mover advantages ( latecomer disadvantages ) and latecomer advantages in Table I and grouped these sources into three areas : market , competition , and the ﬁrm itself . To exhibit the typical types of opportunities in acquiring and leveraging latecomer advantage , we connect Dosi’s techno - logical paradigm framework [ 17 ] and Foster’s S - curve frame - work [ 21 ] . Latecomer advantage implied in mature technology : As the dominant design matures in the speciﬁc stage [ 63 ] , latecomer ﬁrms in developing countries can import mature technologies from developed countries to reduce entry risks and R & D invest - ments . Moreover , it is possible , but difﬁcult , for latecomer ﬁrms to catch up and compete with those pioneer ﬁrms through their efforts in assimilation and improvement along the established technological paradigm . Latecomer advantage implied in emerging technology : The phenomena of technological paradigm shifts opens a win - dow of opportunity for latecomer ﬁrms to realize technolog - ical leapfrogging by importing emerging technologies from developed countries . However , pioneer ﬁrms may be path - dependency and hesitate to give up their past large investments within the earlier technological paradigm . Based on the technological paradigm and technology S - curve framework , those two typical types of latecomer advantages highly emphasize the process of technology advancement and partially ignore the importance of inherent mechanisms to cap - ture the value latent in the technology . 2 ) Disruptive Technologies : The term “disruptive technol - ogy” was ﬁrst coined by Christensen in his seminal works [ 5 ] , [ 12 ] . However , as several scholars [ 16 ] , [ 23 ] , [ 64 ] proposed , Christensen did not provide a precise and consistent deﬁnition of disruptive technology . According to Utterback and Acee [ 64 ] , the disruptive technology is a new technology that has lower cost and performance measured by traditional criteria , but has higher ancillary performance . Christensen [ 10 ] , [ 11 ] pointed out the limits of the tech - nology S - curve framework and distinguished advanced tech - nical attributes and the value that customers really need : tech - nological progress inevitably reaches a point where it is far above what customers actually need and use . Furthermore , Christensen and Rosenbloom [ 15 ] extended existing technologi - cal paradigm and technology S - curve framework , and identiﬁed two distinct trajectories—one which deﬁnes the performance demanded over time within a given value network and one which traces the performance achieved over time within a given tech - nological paradigm , depicted in Fig . 1 by the solid and dotted lines , respectively . While sustaining technologies preserve the existing trajectory of performance improvement and result in better products or services , disruptive technologies occasion - ally emerge when the level of technological progress is over and beyond what customers actually need and can use [ 12 ] , [ 30 ] . Christensen [ 12 ] suggested that technology S - curve framework can be used to explain the sustaining technologies , but is im - proper to explain the disruptive technologies since the Y - axis in the S - curve framework cannot present different value networks of different customer groups . WU et al . : HOW DO LATECOMER FIRMS CAPTURE VALUE FROM DISRUPTIVE TECHNOLOGIES ? 53 TABLE I E ARLY - M OVER A DVANTAGES V ERSUS L ATECOMER A DVANTAGES Fig . 1 . Christensen’s model of disruptive technology . Source : Christensen and Raynor [ 14 ] . The commercialization of disruptive technologies are even more important today than ever [ 33 ] , [ 38 ] , [ 43 ] , [ 53 ] . In many technology - intensive industries , discontinuous innovation based on disruptive technologies can creates new families of products and business , and offers the potential for competitive advan - tage [ 32 ] . A substantial body of literature has elaborated on the reasons for new entrant ﬁrms’ successes in commercializing dis - ruptive technologies [ 1 ] , [ 6 ] , [ 26 ] , [ 61 ] , [ 73 ] . One explanation is that new entrant ﬁrms have two advantages in commercializing disruptive technologies—ﬂexibility in marketing strategy and much shorter time to market [ 65 ] . Another argument is that new entrant ﬁrms are better than incumbent ﬁrms in commercializ - ing disruptive technologies because of their smaller size , shorter ( path - dependence ) histories , and more limited commitments to value networks and current technological paradigms [ 73 ] . Emerging economies are considered by some scholars [ 22 ] , [ 24 ] as the ideal target markets for disruptive technologies . In Hart and Christensen’s perspective [ 24 ] , for ﬁrms that attempted 54 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT , VOL . 57 , NO . 1 , FEBRUARY 2010 to capture value from disruptive technologies , the business - models forged in low - end markets can be proﬁtably applied more widely than the business - models deﬁned in high - end mar - kets . For the ordinary citizens poorly served by existing products or services in emerging economies , disruptive technologies en - able them to have a simpler , more modest version of what is available in high - end markets . Hang and Chen [ 22 ] proposed that radical innovation based on superior technologies has a very high failure rate and requires very substantial investment in time , funding and senior management attention . Alternatively , as they suggested , disruptive innovation is an effective approach for creating more affordable products for the developing mar - ketplace and could have a higher chance of success especially for emerging local enterprises . B . Business - Model Innovation 1 ) Business Model : A good business model answers Peter Drucker’s age - old questions : “Who is the customer ? What does the customer value ? ” It also answers the fundamental questions every manager must ask : “How do we make money in this business ? What is the underlying economic logic that explains how we can deliver value to the customer at an appropriate cost ? ” [ 46 ] . In Mitchell and Coles’ perspective [ 52 ] , a business - model comprises the combined elements of “who , ” “what , ” “when , ” “why , ” “where , ” “how , ” and “how much” that are involved in providing customers with products and services . In this paper , we use Ostenwalder et al . ’s [ 55 ] deﬁnition as the working deﬁnition for business model . A business model is a conceptual tool that contains a set of elements and their relationships and allows expressing the business logic of a speciﬁc ﬁrm . It is a description of the value a company offers to one or several segments of customers and of the architecture of the ﬁrm and its network of partners for creating , marketing , and delivering this value and relationship capital , to generate proﬁtable and sustainable revenue streams . 2 ) Business - Model Innovation : A 2005 survey by the Economist Intelligence Unit reported that , over 50 % of execu - tives believe business - model innovation will become even more important for success than product or service innovation [ 31 ] . Schumpeter [ 58 ] deﬁned innovation as “new combinations” of existing resources and classiﬁed ﬁve different types of innova - tion : new products , new methods of production , new sources of supply , exploitation of new markets , and new ways to orga - nizebusiness . AccordingtoSchumpeter’s original deﬁnition , the notion “innovation” not only refers to technological innovation but also involves other types of innovation such as business - model innovation . Markides [ 49 ] identiﬁed three distinct types of innovation : technological innovation , business - model inno - vation , and new - to - the - world product innovation . According to this classiﬁcation , business - model innovations do not discover new products or services but simply redeﬁne what an existing product or service is and how it is provided to the customers . However , the exact meaning and conceptual boundary of business - model innovation is still blurred and confusing . More - over , there are many similar notions such as strategic innova - tion [ 48 ] , which refers to a fundamental reconceptualization of what the business is all about that leads to a dramatically different way of playing the game in an existing business . In this paper , we use Santos et al . ’s [ 57 ] deﬁnition for business - model innovation that focuses on reconﬁguration as the working deﬁnition . Business - model innovation is a reconﬁguration of activities in the existing business - model of a ﬁrm that is new to the prod - uct / service market in which the ﬁrm competes . 3 ) Secondary Business - Model Innovation : Mitchell and Coles [ 52 ] distinguished the concepts of business - model in - novation and business - model catch - up : a business - model catch - up merely matches the competitor’s offerings , and a business - model innovation provides product or service offerings that were not previously available to customers . Fagerberg [ 20 ] put forward a discussion on the following question : “If A for the ﬁrst time introduces a particular innova - tion in one context , while B later introduces the same innovation in another , would we characterize both as innovators ? ” Although a widely used practice is to reserve the term innovator for A and characterize B as an imitator , it would be equally consistent to call B an innovator as well , since B is introducing the innovation for the ﬁrst time in a new context . Introducing an established business - model in a new market context often requires considerable adaptations and changes that may signiﬁcantly increase productivity and competitiveness . Therefore , we named the speciﬁc process of tailoring the origi - nal business - model from advanced economies to local customer preferences and market infrastructure in emerging economies as secondary business - model innovation . C . Business - Model Analysis Framework To identify the most common building blocks among business - models in the literature , as outlined in Table II , Ostenwalder et al . [ 55 ] compared the models mentioned most often and summarized nine building blocks of business model . According to Chesbrough and Rosenbloom’s framework [ 8 ] , the functions of a business model are to : articulate the value proposition ; identify a market segment and specify the revenue generation mechanism ( s ) ; deﬁne the structure of the value chain within the ﬁrm and determine the complementary assets needed ; estimate the cost structure and proﬁt potential of producing the offering ; describe the position of the ﬁrm within the value network ; formulate the competitive strategy . In Hwang and Christensen’s framework [ 30 ] , the starting point of a successful business - model is its value proposition : a product or service that helps customers gets a job done more ef - fectively , conveniently , and affordably . Furthermore , resources , processes , and proﬁt formula are required to deliver the value proposition and become ingrained in the business model . As shown in Fig . 2 , on the basis of prior studies , we pro - posed a business - model analysis framework . In the following , we will apply this framework to elaborate the speciﬁc process of leveraging latecomer advantages and capturing value from disruptive technologies in emerging economies . To facilitate the value proposition analysis , we use value curves , an analysis tool provided by Kim and Mauborgne [ 36 ] , [ 37 ] , to visualize WU et al . : HOW DO LATECOMER FIRMS CAPTURE VALUE FROM DISRUPTIVE TECHNOLOGIES ? 55 TABLE II N INE B USINESS - M ODEL B UILDING B LOCKS the latecomer ﬁrms’ opportunities in commercializing disrup - tive technologies in emerging economies . In the value network analysis , we will pay particular attention to such questions : How do latecomer ﬁrms build their unique value networks with com - petitive cost structures , ﬁtting their unique value propositions ? How do they sustain and consolidate their competitive value net - works through taking full advantages of their strategic partners’ complementary assets [ 56 ] , [ 59 ] ? III . M ETHODOLOGY A . Research Strategy Case study is a useful research method in building or extend - ing theories , and it is the preferred research strategy to explain “how” and “why” questions [ 18 ] , [ 72 ] . Building theory from case studies is a research strategy that involves using one or more cases to create theoretical constructs , propositions , and / or midrange theories from case - based , empirical evidence , accord - ing to Eisenhardt [ 18 ] . A major reason for the popularity and relevance of theory building from case studies is that it is one of the best ( if not the best ) of the bridges from rich qualitative ev - idence to mainstream deductive research . The theory - building process occurs via recursive cycling among the case data , the emerging theory , and the extant literature [ 19 ] . Carlile and Christensen [ 7 ] , [ 13 ] synthesized a model of the process of theory building and asserted that theory is built in two major stages : the descriptive stage and the normative stage . Within each of these stages , theory builders proceed through three steps—observation , categorization , and association . The theory - building process iterates through these three steps again and again . Our preliminary theory building process presented in this paper is still in the descriptive stage . B . Case Selection and Data Collection According to Yin [ 72 ] and Eisenhardt [ 18 ] , [ 19 ] , the theory is better grounded , more accurate , and more generalizable when it is based on multiple case experiments . Multiple cases enable comparisons that clarify whether an emergent ﬁnding is simply idiosyncratictoasinglecaseor consistentlyreplicatedbyseveral cases . Multiple cases also create a more robust theory because the propositions are more deeply grounded in varied empirical evidence . Constructs and relationships are more precisely delin - eated because it is easier to determine accurate deﬁnitions and appropriate levels of construct abstraction from multiple cases . Applying the theoretical ( replication ) sampling logic [ 18 ] , [ 19 ] , [ 72 ] , which means that cases are selected because they are particularly suitable for illuminating and extending rela - tionships and logic among constructs , we opt to follow two cases for the likelihood that they will offer theoretical insights into our understanding of latecomer ﬁrms’ commercialization of disruptive technologies in emerging economies . While iden - tifying and selecting case candidates , we have attached enough attention to both “virtual” technology such as Internet service , 56 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT , VOL . 57 , NO . 1 , FEBRUARY 2010 Fig . 2 . Business - model analysis framework . as well as “hard” technology such as wireless communication solution . Thus , we selected UTStarcom ( China ) with PAS wire - less communication technology , and Taobao with C2C online trading platform technology . We collected relevant data from semi - structured / open - ended interviews , ﬁeld observations , and secondary information sources including government reports , industrial studies , trade publications , company websites , and archived data . IV . C ASE O NE : U TSTARCOM Of the total potential users , the top 10 % , maybe 20 % , belong to the mobile companies , and the bottom 10 % would never use these phones anyway . But the 70 % in the middle do not have an economical , two - way wireless communications tool . Ying Wu , chairman of UTStarcom ( China ) UTStarcom’s PAS is an mobile local loop ( MLL ) - based personal wireless access system based on the global PHS standard to offer limited mobility solution to end users . When wireless access technology and emerging PHS technol - ogy were considered to be introduced from Japan to China , UTStarcom recognized that the existing business - model of PHS in Japan is impossible to work in the market circumstances of China . As shown in Fig . 3 , there was an explosive growth of PAS subscribers in China , especially during the period from 2003 to 2005 . How did UTStarcom achieve such an explosive growth through secondary business - model innovation ? A . Value Proposition Analysis As shown in Fig . 4 , convenience , voice quality , voice tariff , and handset price are the four attributes which Chinese cus - tomers value the most . In the introduction phase of PAS service in China , the price of mobile phone service was so high that ordinary Chinese citizens cannot afford it . For instance , a local mobile phone call was about CNY0 . 50 per minute at that time , Fig . 3 . Disruptive growth of PAS subscribers in China . whether it was an incoming or outgoing call . Meanwhile , the PAS charge for a local outgoing call was only about CNY0 . 10 per minute , and that for a local incoming call was free . PAS was charged a CNY25 monthly fee , while the monthly fee for mo - bile phone was CNY50 . Although PAS service lacks nationwide roaming capabilities , this intrinsic disadvantage in mobility does not affect the convenience of PAS subscribers in China , who al - ways move within a given city . Most PAS subscribers were attracted by the much cheaper voice tariff and handset price , although the voice quality did not fully satisfy them at that time . It is clear that the value curve of PAS service in the introduction phase is closer to that of ﬁxed - line phone service than to that of mobile phone service . Along with the aggressive market expansion of PAS service , the voice quality of PAS service improved substantially and became comparable with that of ﬁxed - line phone service . How - ever , facing the disruptive growth of PAS service , the mobile phone operators in China dramatically reduced the voice tariff of mobile phone service by offering a variety of special - service WU et al . : HOW DO LATECOMER FIRMS CAPTURE VALUE FROM DISRUPTIVE TECHNOLOGIES ? 57 Fig . 4 . Value proposition of PAS . Fig . 5 . Value network of PAS . packages . As low - end mobile phone services’ value curve be - came even closer to that of PAS service , the market attractiveness of PAS service weakened , and the increase in the number of PAS subscribers slowed down . B . Value Network Analysis 1 ) Customer Interface : Different from the complicated dis - tribution channel of mobile phone service and handsets , both PAS service and handsets were delivered and distributed by the telecommunication service operators themselves ( see Fig . 5 ) . Since the ﬁrst PAS service was launched by UTStarcom and China Telecom in the small city of Yuhang in 1997 , a close col - laboration between the equipment provider and service operator was developed . UTStarcom took upon the task of R & D , pro - duction , and technical support of PAS equipments , and China Telecom was in charge of the test , promotion , sales , and after - sale service . Thus , PAS subscribers only needed to interact with the telecommunication service operator in order to obtain the whole solution of PAS . This simple structure signiﬁcantly im - proved the operation efﬁciency and control effectiveness of the distribution of PAS service and handsets . As a result , telecommunication service operators were able to keep the handset price as low as that of the cheap PAS service ; otherwise , some price - sensitive customers may refuse to select the low - price service for the price consideration of handsets . On the other hand , UTStarcom as a chief handset manufacturer saved a large number of marketing and distribution fees . Cus - tomers also shared the beneﬁts of the savings in the distribution system . 2 ) Infrastructure Conﬁguration : Different from the business model of PHS in Japan , PAS is positioned as the supplement and expansion of ﬁxed - line phone service in China , and it fully utilized and leveraged existing ﬁxed - line resources . As PHS was conceived as a type of low - end mobile communication service in Japan , the mobile switching hardware used in the PHS network required a large investment , and the cost was about $ 250 per subscriber . PAS skillfully integrated the emerging wireless access technology of PHS into the existing PSTN via the V5 . 2 or two - wire interface without using expensive mobile switching hardware . As a result , telecommunication service operators can turn unused ﬁxed - line switching capacity into a new revenue - generating wireless communication service and quickly build the wireless access network at only 20 % of the costs in the Japanese method . Aside from the beneﬁts from PAS’ utilization of unused ﬁxed - line switching capacity , the business - model of PAS also deployed ﬁxed - line operators’ existing marketing and distribu - tion resources . The simple and integrated value chain structure also signiﬁcantly reduced the investment costs and risk of PAS service . To further leverage ﬁxed - line resources , UTStarcom intro - duced ﬁxed PHS convergence ( FPC ) telecommunication solu - tion QBOX , which is a new way to connect PAS handsets to the ﬁxed - line infrastructure . QBOX solution allows PAS handsets to work as a cordless extension of a ﬁxed - line phone when the user is at home or in the ofﬁce . With the convergence between wire - less and ﬁxed - line networks , ﬁxed - line operators can provide services to users regardless of their location , access technology , and terminal . V . C ASE T WO : T AOBAO EBay may be a shark in the ocean , but I am a crocodile in the Yangtze River . If we ﬁght in the ocean , we lose—but if we ﬁght in the river , we win . Jack Ma , Chairman of Alibaba 58 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT , VOL . 57 , NO . 1 , FEBRUARY 2010 Fig . 6 . Value proposition of Taobao . The disruptive business - model of a C2C Internet - based trad - ing platform for the sale of goods and services by a diverse community of individuals and small businesses was founded by eBay in 1995 . In 1999 , Eachnet was set up in Shanghai and ﬁrstly introduced the C2C business model of eBay in China . EBay entered China in 2002 by paying $ 30 million for a one - third stake in Eachnet and bought the rest for $ 150 million a year later . Before Taobao was established in May 2003 , eBay Eachnet did not make any signiﬁcant change or modiﬁcation in its original business model . Different from eBay Eachnet , Taobao proactively adopted and improved the US - based eBay model according to the spe - ciﬁc market circumstances of China , such as its emphasis on customer experience and community building . According to an iResearch report [ 31 ] , 3 the market share of Taobao increased from 7 . 8 % in 2003 to 58 . 6 % in 2005 , while eBay’s share de - creased from 72 . 4 % in 2003 to 36 . 4 % in 2005 . A . Value Proposition Analysis Different from eBay Eachnet , which mainly attracted high - income white - collar men who are fond of collection , Taobao mainly targeted the consumer group of young fashionable ladies who like operating small business . In Fig . 6 , we use value curves to illustrate the attractiveness of Taobao’s business - model for buyers and sellers . Convenience and low price / low cost are the most attractive advantages of C2C online shopping compared with traditional shopping . The con - venience of online shopping includes the overall ease of ﬁnding a product , reduced shopping time , 24 - h access , and minimized overall shopping effort and so on . However , online buyers and sellers have to take big risks in transaction fraud , which is the pri - mary discouragement for ordinary Chinese citizens from shop - ping online . As compared to eBay Eachnet , Taobao lured more buyers with its better online shopping experience , service , and guarantee while at the same time luring more sellers with its 3 http : / / www . iresearch . com . cn . Fig . 7 . Value network of Taobao . free and better service . Taobao was the ﬁrst to introduce the es - crow service in China to improve the convenience and safety in online payment , and was also the ﬁrst to provide instant messag - ing tool , recommended logistics service and online promotion service to improve its service for both sellers and buyers . B . Value Network Analysis To continuously improve the convenience in online trans - actions , Taobao made great efforts to create its e - commerce ecosystem including third - party service providers in payment , logistics , and advertisement , among others ( see Fig . 7 ) . 1 ) Customer Interface : Taobao’s success would not have been possible without its incredible community of buyers and sellers in China , the force behind its online trading platform . Unlike the business model of eBay Eachnet , which attempted to cut off the personal relationships between sellers and buy - ers , Taobao encouraged buyers and sellers to build personal relationships , which served as an important means of secur - ing and settling deals in China . In Taobao , sellers build their reputation not only through the ofﬁcial trust management rat - ings but also through active participation in communities of - fering helpful information and inﬂuencing purchase decisions . To facilitate the communication between buyers and sellers , Taobao provided the instant messaging tool Wangwang , where WU et al . : HOW DO LATECOMER FIRMS CAPTURE VALUE FROM DISRUPTIVE TECHNOLOGIES ? 59 Fig . 8 . Latecomer advantage implied in disruptive technology . buyers can directly and freely inquire and bargain with sell - ers . Moreover , interacting with users in its online community is an important means of Taobao to collect various customer demand data . 2 ) Infrastructure Conﬁguration : To resolve the issues of trust and payment in online transactions in China , Taobao launched the AliPay escrow system . Credit card - based pay - ment systems that succeeded in North America and Europe have proven ineffective in China , where credit card usage re - mains low . In China , the transactions are usually cash based , and the trust between buyers and sellers is based on personal rela - tionships . Different from eBay’s Paypal model , a Taobao buyer ﬁrst sends his / her payment to an AliPay account , where it is held in escrow . Once the buyer indicates that the product has been re - ceived , the money is transferred from AliPay to the seller . AliPay will reimburse any buyer or seller found to have been a victim of fraud using the system . With Taobao’s full guarantee for each AliPay transaction , buyers and sellers can transact online with conﬁdence . Additionally , Alimama , an online advertisement market - place , brought diversiﬁed user groups to Taobao and provided Taobao’s contracted sellers with an efﬁcient online promotion service . Taobao has already become the largest platform for China’s private logistics sector . The logistics operations from Taobao accounted for about 30 % of China’s privately owned logistics market . VI . D ISCUSSION A . Why can Latecomer Firms Capture Value from Disruptive Technologies ? As shown in Fig . 8 , the many technical attributes of new prod - ucts developed and provided by multinational incumbents from advanced economies have already been far above mainstream customers’ actual needs in advanced economies , and these tremendously surpassed mass customers’ demands in emerg - ing economies . Latecomer ﬁrms from emerging economies , like UTStarcom and Taobao , can seize the opportunities to shift the basis of competition in their home market away from technical performance , which is the primary barrier for them to compete with multinational incumbents , to other dimensions of product performance where they excel , such as quality and price . Thus , emerging businesses with disruptive technologies may scale up earlier and faster in the emerging economies’ mass market than those commercialized in the advanced economies’ mainstream market . However , in some cases , this kind of change in the rules of the game might be very difﬁcult for multinational incum - bents to make , according to Christensen’s [ 12 ] explanation for the innovator’s dilemma . Providing only a low - end prod - uct line without enough consideration of what customers in emerging economies actually need is the pervasive way used by some multinational incumbents from advanced economies , since emerging economies are not the core businesses from the view of their global strategies . Furthermore , the costs and risks of multinational incumbents in building new localized business models in emerging economies , which are fundamentally differ - ent from their existing business models in advanced economies , are rather high . This problem is a strategic barrier of multi - national incumbents to compete in emerging economies . As most of their products are not speciﬁcally designed for the actual demand of local customers , there exists a large space of business - model innovation opportunities , which serve mass customers in emerging economies with the appropriate value proposition . To conclude , in the phenomena of overshooting and noncon - suming described by Christensen , we identify a new type of latecomer advantage implied in disruptive technology as given in the following paragraphs . The multinational incumbents’ trap of overserving for main - stream customers in advanced economies provides latecomer ﬁrms opportunities to change existing competition basis and de - velop more appropriate business models for mass customers in emerging economies . Besides , Danneels [ 16 ] pointed out that disruptive technolo - gies tend to be associated with the replacement of incum - bents by entrants in Christensen’s existing theory . Utterback and Acee [ 64 ] proposed that Christensen’s theory of disruptive 60 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT , VOL . 57 , NO . 1 , FEBRUARY 2010 technology overemphasizes “attack from below” and the true importance of it is not that it may displace established products . In their own perspective , disruptive technology is a powerful means for enlarging and broadening markets and providing new functionality . In our opinion , replacing the incumbents in the ultimate is not the main objective of latecomer ﬁrms from emerging economies . In our perspective of secondary business - model in - novation , we emphasize much more the value creation , which competes against non - consumption , within the commercializa - tion of disruptive technologies in emerging economies . For ex - ample , although there is little evidence that can indicate the po - tential trend of PAS service to replace or surpass mobile phone service in China , the growing value created by the secondary business - model innovation of PAS service for the latecomer ﬁrm UTStarcom and mass customers is of great signiﬁcance . B . How do Latecomer Firms Capture Value From Disruptive Technologies ? From our above case analysis , we identify the typical ways of latecomer ﬁrms’ commercialization of disruptive technologies in emerging economies . First , articulating an appropriate value proposition that ap - peals to price - sensitive customers is of great importance for latecomer ﬁrms to commercialize disruptive technologies in emerging economies . Since different groups of customers may desire different latent attributes of the technology , the attributes of the technology valued by the mainstream customers in ad - vanced economies will not necessarily meet the demand of mass customers in emerging economies . Within an established tech - nological paradigm , different groups of customers may have fundamentally different value propositions . Thus , latecomer ﬁrms like UTStarcom , disadvantaged in developing new - to - the - world products but advantaged in sustaining a competitive cost structure , might achieve market success through targeting price - sensitive mass customers rather than technology - sensitive mainstream customers . Similarly , in Taobao case , the capability of tailoring the original business model to local customer tastes and local market infrastructure becomes vital and determinable in the intensiﬁed competition with multinational incumbents . Latecomer ﬁrms can also utilize their advantage in understand - ing and shaping local consumer tastes to bypass the multina - tional incumbents’ ﬁrst - mover advantage and global advantage . As proposed by Hwang and Christensen [ 18 ] , once the pieces of a business model have coalesced to deliver a particular value proposition , only those value propositions that ﬁt the existing resources , processes , and proﬁt formula of the organization can be successfully taken to the market . For instance , Taobao took over eBay Eachnet to lead the China market by leveraging its advantage on local savvy and quick response to local demand . The main reason why eBay Eachnet lagged behind is that eBay Eachnet is an arm of eBay International in China and faced the difﬁcult tradeoff between maintaining global uniformity and accomplishing local market adaptation . In other words , Taobao as a China - focused company is capable of freely adapting to the preferences of Chinese users . On the contrary , because eBay Eachnet conforms to the global platform of eBay International , it does not fully enjoy such beneﬁts . For instance , eBay Eachnet lagged behind Taobao in offering its payment system and instant messaging tool in China , although eBay International possessed the powerful payment system Paypal and instant messaging tool Skype . Second , apart from presenting a good value proposition , late - comer ﬁrms should build a unique value network with a new cost structure and unique complementary assets to deliver the value proposition . Due to the limited resources of latecomer ﬁrms from emerging economies , leveraging their strategic part - ners’ resources is crucial . The capability of latecomer ﬁrms to align with a value network might greatly inﬂuence their cost - efﬁciency and proﬁtability . In UTStarcom case , according to Christensen’s [ 12 ] perspective on the mechanism of resource allocation , it is very difﬁcult for PAS service to obtain enough resources from mobile phone operators , but ﬁxed - line operators can provide the necessary complementary assets to promote the development of PAS service . For ﬁxed - line operators without licenses to operate in the mobile communication business , PAS service would enhance their competence in ﬁxed - line business , making full use of their sprawling but largely redundant ﬁxed - line network . VII . C ONCLUSION Emerging economies , especially those with a large population of price - sensitive mass customers and nonconsumers , might be the fertile ground of disruptive technologies . Emerging busi - nesses with disruptive technologies may scale up earlier and faster in emerging economies’ mass market than those com - mercialized in advanced economies’ mainstream market . Late - comer ﬁrms in emerging economies should not ignore those disruptive growth opportunities in the large population of mass customers and nonconsumers , who lack the money or skills to enjoy the beneﬁts brought about by technological innovation . Due to multinational incumbents’ trap of overserving for main - stream customers in advanced economies , latecomer ﬁrms can create and capture value from disruptive technologies in emerg - ing economies through secondary business - model innovation : changing the existing competition basis and tailoring the original business model to ﬁt price - sensitive mass customers . Thus , artic - ulating a value proposition that is attractive for local customers and appropriate to local infrastructure is of great importance for latecomer ﬁrms to leverage their latecomer advantages . More - over , latecomer ﬁrms should also fully utilize strategic partners’ complementary assets to overcome their latecomer disadvan - tages and build a unique value network embedded within the emerging economies context . A CKNOWLEDGMENT The authors would like to thank G . Farris , C . Christensen , C . C . Hang , K . H . Chai , B . Guo , Q . Wang , M . Greeven and three anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments and insightful suggestions . WU et al . : HOW DO LATECOMER FIRMS CAPTURE VALUE FROM DISRUPTIVE TECHNOLOGIES ? 61 R EFERENCES [ 1 ] P . AndersonandM . L . Tushman , “Technologicaldiscontinuities , dominant designs : Acyclicalmodeloftechnologicalchange , ” Administ . Sci . Quart . , vol . 35 , pp . 604 – 633 , 1990 . [ 2 ] J . Bain , BarrierstoNewCompetition . Boston , MA : HarvardUniv . Press , 1956 . [ 3 ] J . B . Barney , “Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage , ” J . Manag . , vol . 17 , no . 1 , pp . 99 – 120 , 1991 . [ 4 ] J . B . Barney , “Resource - based theories of competitive advantage : A ten - year retrospective on the resource - based view , ” J . Manag . , vol . 27 , no . 6 , pp . 643 – 650 , 2001 . [ 5 ] J . L . Bower and C . M . Christensen , “Disruptive technologies : Catching the wave , ” Harvard Bus . Rev . , vol . 73 , no . 1 , pp . 43 – 53 , 1995 . [ 6 ] J . L . BowerandC . M . Christensen , “Customerpower , strategicinvestment , and the failure of leading ﬁrms , ” Strategic Manag . J . , vol . 17 , no . 3 , pp . 197 – 218 , 1996 . [ 7 ] P . R . Carlile and C . M . Christensen , “The cycles of theory building in management research , ” Harvard Bus . School Work . Paper no . 05 - 057 , 2005 . [ 8 ] H . Chesbrough and R . S . Rosenbloom , “The role of the business model in capturing value from innovation : Evidence from Xerox Corporation’s technology spin - off companies , ” Ind . Corporate Change , vol . 11 , no . 3 , pp . 529 – 555 , 2002 . [ 9 ] D . S . Cho , D . J . Kim , and D . K . Rhee , “Latecomer strategies : Evidence from the semiconductor industry in Japan and Korea , ” Org . Sci . , vol . 9 , no . 4 , pp . 489 – 505 , 1998 . [ 10 ] C . M . Christensen , “Exploring the limits of the technology S - curve , Part I : Component technologies , ” Prod . Oper . Manag . , vol . 1 , pp . 334 – 357 , 1992 . [ 11 ] C . M . Christensen , “Exploring the limits of the technology S - curve , Part II : Architectural technologies , ” Prod . Oper . Manag . , vol . 1 , pp . 358 – 366 , 1992 . [ 12 ] C . M . Christensen , The Innovator’s Dilemma : When New Technologies Cause Great Firms to Fail . Boston , MA : Harvard Bus . School Press , 1997 . [ 13 ] C . M . Christensen , “The ongoing process of building a theory of disrup - tion , ” J . Product Innovation Manag . , vol . 23 , pp . 39 – 55 , 2006 . [ 14 ] C . M . Christensen and M . E . Raynor , The Innovator’s Solution : Creating and Sustaining Successful Growth . Boston , MA : Harvard Bus . School Press , 2003 . [ 15 ] C . M . Christensen and R . S . Rosenbloom , “Explaining the attacker’s ad - vantage : Technologicalparadigms , organizationaldynamics , andthevalue network , ” Res . Policy , vol . 24 , no . 2 , pp . 233 – 257 , 1995 . [ 16 ] E . Danneels , “Disruptivetechnologyreconsidered : Acritiqueandresearch agenda , ” J . Product Innovation Manag . , vol . 21 , no . 4 , pp . 246 – 258 , 2004 . [ 17 ] G . Dosi , “Technological paradigms and technological trajectories : A sug - gested interpretation , ” Res . Policy , vol . 11 , pp . 147 – 162 , 1982 . [ 18 ] K . M . Eisenhardt , “Building theories from case study research , ” Academy Manag . Rev . , vol . 14 , pp . 532 – 550 , 1989 . [ 19 ] K . M . Eisenhardt and M . Graebner , “Theory building from cases : Oppor - tunities and challenges , ” Academy Manag . J . , vol . 50 , no . 1 , pp . 25 – 32 , 2007 . [ 20 ] J . Fagerberg , “Innovation : A guide to the literature , ” in Oxford Hand - book of Innovation , J . Fagerberg , D . C . Mowery , and R . R . Nelson , Eds . Oxford , U . K . : Oxford Univ . Press , 2005 , pp . 1 – 26 . [ 21 ] R . Foster , Innovation : The Attacker’s Advantage . New York : Summit Books , 1986 . [ 22 ] C . C . HangandJ . Chen , “Disruptiveinnovation : Anappropriateinnovation approach for developing countries , ” ETM Internal Rep . No . 1 / 08 , 2008 . [ 23 ] C . C . Hang , D . Yu , andK . H . Chai , “Anexploratorystudyonunderstanding the technological dimension in disruptive innovation , ” in Proc . 5th Int . Symp . Manag . Technol . ( ISMOT 2007 ) , pp . 262 – 266 . [ 24 ] S . L . Hart and C . M . Christensen , “The great leap : Driving innovation from the base of the pyramid , ” MIT Sloan Manag . Rev . , vol . 44 , no . 1 , pp . 51 – 56 , 2002 . [ 25 ] C . E . Helfat and M . A . Peteraf , “The dynamic resource - based view : Ca - pability lifecycles , ” Strategic Manag . J . , vol . 24 , no . 10 , pp . 997 – 1010 , 2003 . [ 26 ] R . M . Henderson and K . B . Clark , “Architectural innovation : The recon - ﬁguration of existing product technologies and the failure of established ﬁrms , ” Administ . Sci . Quart . , vol . 35 , pp . 9 – 30 , 1990 . [ 27 ] M . Hobday , “East Asian latecomer ﬁrms : Learning the technology of electronics , ” World Develop . , vol . 23 , no . 7 , pp . 1171 – 1193 , 1995 . [ 28 ] M . Hobday , “Firm - level innovation models : Perspectives on research in developed and developing countries , ” Technol . Anal . Strategic Manag . , vol . 17 , no . 2 , pp . 121 – 146 , 2005 . [ 29 ] R . E . Hoskisson , L . Eden , C . M . Lau , andM . Wright , “Strategyinemerging economies , ” Academic Manag . J . , vol . 43 , pp . 249 – 267 , 2000 . [ 30 ] J . Hwang and C . M . Christensen , “Disruptive innovation in health care delivery : A framework for business - model innovation , ” Health Affairs , vol . 27 , pp . 1329 – 1335 , 2008 . [ 31 ] M . W . Johnson , C . M . Christensen , and H . Kagermann , “Reinventing your business model , ” Harvard Bus . Rev . , vol . 86 , no . 12 , pp . 50 – 59 , 2008 . [ 32 ] S . K . Kassicieh , B . A . Kirchhoff , S . T . Walsh , and P . J . McWhorter , “The role of small ﬁrms in the transfer of disruptive technologies , ” Technova - tion , vol . 22 , pp . 667 – 674 , 2002 . [ 33 ] S . K . Kassicieh , S . T . Walsh , J . C . Cummings , P . J . McWhorter , A . D . Romig , and W . D . Williams , “Factors differentiating the commercializa - tionofdisruptiveandsustainingtechnologies , ” IEEETrans . Eng . Manag . , vol . 49 , no . 4 , pp . 375 – 387 , Nov . 2002 . [ 34 ] R . A . Kerin , P . R . Varadarajan , and R . A . Peterson , “First - mover advan - tage : A synthesis , conceptual framework , and research propositions , ” J . Marketing , vol . 56 , no . 4 , pp . 33 – 52 , 1992 . [ 35 ] L . Kim , Imitation to Innovation : The Dynamics of Korea’s Technological Learning . Cambridge , MA : Harvard Business School Press , 1997 . [ 36 ] W . C . Kim and R . Mauborgne , “Value innovation : The strategic logic of high growth , ” Harvard Bus . Rev . , vol . 82 , no . 7 / 8 , pp . 172 – 180 , 2004 . [ 37 ] W . C . Kim and R . Mauborgne , Blue Ocean Strategy . Cambridge , MA : Harvard Business School Press , 2005 . [ 38 ] B . A . Kirchhoff , S . K . Kassicieh , and S . T . Walsh , “Introduction to the special cluster on the commercialization of disruptive technologies and discontinuous innovations , ” IEEE Trans . Eng . Manag . , vol . 49 , no . 4 , pp . 319 – 321 , Nov . 2002 . [ 39 ] J . T . Li and R . K . Kozhikode , “Knowledge management and innovation strategy : The challenge for latecomers in emerging economies , ” Asia Paciﬁc J . Manag . , vol . 25 , no . 3 , pp . 429 – 450 , 2008 . [ 40 ] P . P . Li , “Toward an integrated theory of multinational evolution : The evi - dence of Chinese multinational enterprises as latecomers , ” J . Int . Manag . , vol . 13 , pp . 296 – 318 , 2007 . [ 41 ] M . B . Lieberman and D . B . Montgomery , “First - mover advantages , ” Strategic Manag . J . , vol . 9 , pp . 41 – 58 , 1988 . [ 42 ] M . B . Lieberman and D . B . Montgomery , “First - mover ( dis ) advantages : Retrospective and link with the resource - based view , ” Strategic Manag . J . , vol . 19 , no . 12 , pp . 1111 – 1125 , 1998 . [ 43 ] J . D . Linton , “Forecastingthemarketdiffusionofdisruptiveanddiscontin - uous innovation , ” IEEE Trans . Eng . Manag . , vol . 49 , no . 4 , pp . 365 – 374 , Nov . 2002 . [ 44 ] Y . Luo and R . Tung , “International expansion of emerging market enter - prises : Aspringboardperspective , ” J . Int . Bus . Stud . , vol . 38 , pp . 481 – 498 , 2007 . [ 45 ] R . F . Ma , X . B . Wu , and S . L . Zheng , “The evolution of technological capabilities at Chery Automobile : A dynamic resource - based analysis , ” in Proc . 31th Int . Conf . Manag . Sci . Eng . , 2006 , vol . 1 – 3 , pp . 1761 – 1766 . [ 46 ] J . Magretta , “Why business models matter , ” Harvard Bus . Rev . , vol . 80 , no . 5 , pp . 86 – 92 , 2002 . [ 47 ] E . Mansﬁeld , “Technicalchangeandtherateofimitation , ” Econometrica , vol . 29 , pp . 741 – 766 , 1961 . [ 48 ] C . Markides , “Strategic innovation in established companies , ” Sloan Manag . Rev . , vol . 39 , no . 3 , pp . 31 – 42 , 1998 . [ 49 ] C . Markides , “Disruptive innovation : In need of better theory , ” J . Product Innovation Manag . , vol . 23 , no . 1 , pp . 19 – 25 , 2006 . [ 50 ] J . A . Mathews , “Competitiveadvantagesofthelatecomerﬁrm : Aresource - based account of industrial catch - up strategies , ” Asia Paciﬁc J . Manag . , vol . 19 , no . 4 , pp . 467 – 488 , 2002 . [ 51 ] J . A . Mathews , “Dragon multinationals : New players in 21st century glob - alization , ” Asia Paciﬁc J . Manag . , vol . 23 , pp . 5 – 27 , 2006 . [ 52 ] D . MitchellandC . Coles , “Theultimatecompetitiveadvantageofcontinu - ingbusinessmodelinnovation , ” J . Bus . Strategy , vol . 24 , no . 5 , pp . 15 – 21 , 2003 . [ 53 ] D . R . Myers , C . W . Sumpter , S . T . Walsh , and B . A . Kirchhoff , “A prac - titioner’s view : Evolutionary stages of disruptive technologies , ” IEEE Trans . Eng . Manag . , vol . 49 , no . 4 , pp . 322 – 329 , Nov . 2002 . [ 54 ] R . Nelson and S . Winter , An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change . Cambridge , MA : Harvard Univ . Press , 1982 . [ 55 ] A . Osterwalder , Y . Pigneur , and C . L . Tucci , “Clarifying business models : Origins , present , and future of the concept , ” Commun . Assoc . Inf . Syst . , vol . 16 , pp . 1 – 25 , 2005 . 62 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT , VOL . 57 , NO . 1 , FEBRUARY 2010 [ 56 ] F . T . Rothaermel , “Incumbent’s advantage through exploiting comple - mentary assets via interﬁrm cooperation , ” Strategic Manag . J . , vol . 22 , no . 6 – 7 , pp . 687 – 699 , 2001 . [ 57 ] J . Santos , B . Spector , and L . V . Heyden , “Toward a theory of business model innovation within incumbent ﬁrms , ” INSEAD Working Paper , No . 2009 / 16 / EFE / ST / TOM , 2009 . [ 58 ] J . A . Schumpeter , The Theory of Economic Development . Cambridge , MA : Harvard Univ . Press , 1934 . [ 59 ] D . J . Teece , “Proﬁting from technological innovation : Implications for in - tegration , collaboration , licensing and public policy , ” Res . Policy , vol . 15 , pp . 285 – 305 , 1986 . [ 60 ] D . J . Teece , G . Pisano , and A . Shuen , “Dynamic capabilities and strategic management , ” Strategic Manag . J . , vol . 18 , no . 7 , pp . 509 – 533 , 1997 . [ 61 ] M . Tushman and P . Anderson , “Technological discontinuities and organi - zationalenvironments , ” Administ . Sci . Quart . , vol . 31 , no . 3 , pp . 439 – 466 , 1986 . [ 62 ] C . H . Tzeng , “Developing high - technology latecomer ﬁrms to compete internationally : A three - sector growth model , ” J . Int . Manag . , vol . 14 , no . 2 , pp . 190 – 206 , 2008 . [ 63 ] J . M . Utterback , Mastering the Dynamics of Innovation . Boston , MA : Harvard Business School Press , 1994 . [ 64 ] J . M . Utterback and H . J . Acee , “Disruptive technologies : An expanded view , ” Int . J . Innovation Manag . , vol . 9 , pp . 1 – 17 , 2005 . [ 65 ] S . T . Walsh , B . A . Kirchhoff , and S . Newbert , “Differentiating market strategies for disruptive technologies , ” IEEE Trans . Eng . Manag . , vol . 49 , no . 4 , pp . 341 – 351 , Nov . 2002 . [ 66 ] M . Wright , R . E . Hoskisson , andM . W . Peng , “Strategyresearchinemerg - ing economies : Challenging the conventional wisdom , ” J . Manag . Stud . , vol . 42 , no . 1 , pp . 1 – 33 , 2005 . [ 67 ] X . B . Wu , R . F . Ma , and G . N . Xu , “Accelerating secondary innovation through organizational learning : A case study and theoretical analysis , ” Ind . Innovation , vol . 16 , no . 4 – 5 , pp . 389 – 409 , 2009 . [ 68 ] X . B . Wu , R . F . Ma , and W . Zhang , “Innovating to create value for the mass customers in developing countries : New dimensions of secondary innovation , ”in Proc . PortlandInt . Conf . Manag . Technol . ( PICMET2006 ) , vol . 2 , pp . 941 – 950 . [ 69 ] X . B . WuandR . F . Ma , “Latecomeradvantageandsecondaryinnovationin the emerging service sector : A developing country perspective , ” presented at the 15th Int . Conf . Manag . Technol . ( IAMOT ) , Beijing , China , 2006 . [ 70 ] X . B . Wu , R . F . Ma , W . Zhang , and J . Du , “The emergence and evolution of latecomer multinationals’ international manufacturing networks , ” pre - sented at the Academy Manag . 2008 Annu . Meet . Proc . , Anaheim , CA , 2008 . [ 71 ] Q . R . Xu and X . B . Wu , “A model of ‘secondary innovation’ process , ” in Proc . Portland Int . Conf . Manag . Technol . ( PICMET 1991 ) , pp . 622 – 627 . [ 72 ] R . Yin , Case Study Research : Design and Methods , 2nd ed . Beverly Hills , CA : Sage Publishing , 1994 . [ 73 ] D . Yu and C . C . Hang , “A reﬂective review of disruptive innovation theory , ” in Proc . Portland Int . Conf . Manag . Eng . Technol . ( PICMET 2008 ) , pp . 402 – 414 . Xiaobo Wu received the Bachelor’s degree in elec - trical engineering in 1982 , and the Master’s and Doc - toraldegreesinmanagementrespectivelyin1989and1992fromZhejiangUniversity , Hangzhou , China . HeiscurrentlytheExecutiveDeanwiththeSchool of Management and the Director of National Institute for Innovation Management , Zhejiang University . He is the author or coauthor of several research papers published in refereed journals such as International Journal of Technology Management , Industry and In - novation and Management World ( in Chinese ) , and in international proceedings such as Academy of Management Annual Meeting , IEEE International Conference on Management of Innovation and Technology , and IEEE International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Engineer - ing Management . His research interests include technological innovation and management , global manufacturing and strategy , and information and commu - nication technology ( ICT ) and management change . Dr . Wu is a Member of the Steering Committee of Management Studies , State Education Ministry of China , and a founder Member of the Institute for Manufacturing , University of Cambridge , Cambridge , U . K . Rufei Ma received theBachelor’s degreein 2003and Ph . D . degree in 2009 in business administration from Zhejiang University , Hangzhou , China . He worked for the dissertation study with the In - stitute for Manufacturing , University of Cambridge , Cambridge , U . K . , as a joint Ph . D . candidate with a scholarshipfromChinaScholarshipCouncil , andwas also engaged in a China - U . K . joint research project under the supervision of Prof . X . Wu and Dr . Y . Shi . He is currently an Assistant Professor of innovation and strategic management with the School of Eco - nomics and Management and Chinese Academy of Science and Technology Management , Tongji University , Shanghai , China . He is the author or coauthor of several research papers published in refereed journals such as the Industry and Innovation , China Economic Journal , Industry and Higher Education and Management World ( in Chinese ) , as well as in several international proceedings such as Academy of Management ( AOM ) Annual Meeting , Portland Interna - tional Conference on Management of Engineering and Technology ( PICMET ) , and International Conference on Management of Technology . His research in - terests include latecomer ﬁrms’ innovation and internationalization , business model design , disruptive innovation , open innovation , and design - inspired in - novation . Dr . Ma is a Member of Academy of Management ( AOM ) , International As - sociation for Chinese Management Research ( IACMR ) , and Chinese Economic Association ( U . K . ) and a Reviewer of Academy of Management 2009 Annual Meeting . Yongjiang Shi received the Ph . D . degree in inter - national manufacturing network conﬁgurations from the University of Cambridge , Cambridge , U . K . , in 1997 . He is currently a University Lecturer of indus - trial systems in Engineering Department , and Re - search Director with the Centre for International Manufacturing , Institute for Manufacturing , Univer - sity of Cambridge . His research interests include global manufacturing strategy , network system de - sign , and technology transfer in the contexts of intra - company coordination and intercompany collaboration . He is also engaged in several research projects—global manufacturing virtual network ( GMVN ) to develop new manufacturing architecture for collaborative manufacturing net - work between companies , post mergers and acquisitions integration to help company achieve synergy , emerging nations’ multinational corporations devel - opment , and different countries’ culture characteristics and their impacts on global supply network development .