The Design Tensions Framework Deborah Tatar Virginia Tech ABSTRACT This article introduces the notion of design tensions as a paradigm . The concept of design tensions advances design decisions as a focus for analysis and reflection . It admits many paradigms of analysis but emphasizes the balancing of consider - ations in producing an entire system , emphasizing user or user group experience . This paradigm is presented in relationship to a particular design arena , the design of NetCalc , a system of handheld , wirelessly connected tools for math teach - ing / learning in classroom settings . Six intertwined project tensions are presented and explored for their technical , social , and cognitive antecedents and conse - quences , as they play out in relationship to achieving goals and system potential . Design tensions differ from design spaces in that they do not set boundaries or simplify the problem but rather provide a framework for creating a space of rele - vance . 1 . INTRODUCTION Kurt Lewin ( 1951 ) , the founder of modern social psychology , wrote that we must “draw on the totality of coexisting facts which are conceived of as mutu - ally interdependent” ( p . 240 ) to explain , predict , and influence human behav - ior and experience . He drew our attention not only to immediately visible conditions but also to the importance of locating channel factors , details of a HUMAN – COMPUTER INTERACTION , 2007 , Volume 22 , pp . 413 – 451 Copyright © 2007 , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Deborah Tatar is a psychologist interested in designing novel technologies for complex settings ; she is currently an Associate Professor of Computer - Science and Psychology and a Member of the Center for Human - Computer Interaction at Virginia Tech . situation that channel behavior and therefore have significant influence on outcomes . By identifying and utilizing channel factors , he was able to have significant influence on real - world behavior . In recent years , this charge has found voice in the high - technology world implicitly through the kinds of design practices implemented in participatory design ( Bodker , 1996 ; Ehn , 1992 ; Suchman , 1987 ) , through calls for the design of user experience as opposed to user interaction ( Beaudouin - Lafon , 2004 ) and for value - sensitive design , encompassing not only technical but also social as - pects of design ( Friedman , 2004 ; Friedman & Kahn , 2000 ) . The value sensi - tive design approach calls for the explicit identification of relevant values and system stakeholders during the design and analysis process . In education , people often conduct , as in the work reported here , design experiments ( A . 414 TATAR CONTENTS 1 . INTRODUCTION 2 . DESIGN TENSIONS 2 . 1 . Vision 2 . 2 . Approach 2 . 3 . Project Tensions 2 . 4 . As Created Scenario 3 . THE NETCALC CASE STUDY 3 . 1 . NetCalc Project Summary 3 . 2 . NetCalc Vision and Approach SimCalc Mathworlds™ : Representationally Innovative Infrastructure HCI and SimCalc Mathworlds™ Pedagogical Commitments 3 . 3 . Designing NetCalc Tension 1 : Math Versus Interaction Representations Tension 2 : Scripted Action Versus Bricolage Tension 3 : Handing Out Handheld - Based Work — Teacher Push or Stu - dent Pull ? Tension 4 : Workflow Versus Worksheets ( History vs . Ephemera ) Tension 5 : Private Content Versus Coordinating Multiple Machines Tension 6 : Planned Activity Versus Conversational - Style Coordination 4 . DISCUSSION 4 . 1 . Vision , Approach , and Project Tensions 4 . 2 . As Created Situations 4 . 3 . Design Tensions and Relevant Analytic Frameworks 4 . 4 . Reflection and Design Tensions 4 . 5 . Reflection , Design Tensions , and New Analytic Frameworks 4 . 6 . The Nature of Design Tensions 5 . CONCLUSION Brown , 1992 ; A . Brown & Campione , 1996 ; Collins , 1992 ; Sandoval & Bell , 2004 ) , which have many of the features of other practices , and agree with these in the attention given to participant needs and experience and to the ex - istence of multiple stakeholders . Such a comprehensive approach is precisely what is needed to understand mobile , handheld , wireless computing technology , especially that used in classrooms , which are complex , resource - limited environments with many direct and indirect stakeholders . The design of technology for such an envi - ronment must inevitably involve trade - offs and center on satisficing , finding decisions that are good enough ( Simon , 1982 , p . 27 ) . However , when many incommensurate dimensions are involved , the adequacy of any decision must be examined from a multiplicity of perspectives , and the exploration process may resemble optimization . This article presents the design tensions paradigm . Design tensions conceptualize design not as problem solving but as goal bal - ancing . They draw explicit attention to conflicts in system design that cannot be solved but only handled via compromise . This approach is motivated in part by contrast and comparison to the omnipresent notion of design spaces . The bulk of the article is then devoted to a case study of how the paradigm or - ganizes rationale about goals and consequential design choices in a particular design setting of interest in its own right . The design tensions in NetCalc re - volve around challenges inherent in porting SimCalc , a sophisticated , suc - cessful desktop system for teaching the math of change and variation , to handheld , wireless , mobile computing . Each of the six design tensions in the creation of handheld , networked the classroom system is discussed , specify - ing the ways the concerns are crosscutting and intertwined . 2 . DESIGN TENSIONS The idea of tensions in design is not unusual . At base , design exists because of the tension between what is and what ought to be . However , calling out the universe of tensions and their resolution as an organizing focus for analysis and reflection runs contrary to much contemporary human – computer inter - action ( HCI ) and Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) design practice . Many HCI and CSCW design paradigms have the function of directing the primary focus of concerned parties ( designers , participants ) toward a bounded universe of implicitly or explicitly distinct choices . For example , a central contribution of a CHI paper is often an implicit or explicit table of such distinctions in relationship to a particular design or design space ( cf . Card , MacKinlay , & Robertson , 1991 ) . Design spaces , sometimes called the Funda - mental Method of Design ( Jones , 1992 ; Matchett & Briggs , 1966 ) , have cer - tain properties . They are bounded and categorical . They emphasize the inde - DESIGN TENSIONS FRAMEWORK 415 pendence of choices , which is a strength in that they encourage more complete exploration of the elements and combinations of elements they de - scribe , but a weakness in that they move to the background any lack of equiv - alence amongst alternatives . Although they are easily extensible by adding new equivalent kinds of categories along existing dimensions , they are not easily extensible to describe a large number of dimensions or more complex interrelationships that crosscut categories . Among other drawbacks , they put into the background complex process interrelationships between social and technological aspects of system design . For example , Figure 1 shows a design space of sandwich solutions . Each solution involves a bounded choice of exactly one kind of bread , one kind of meat , and one kind of condiment . Populating the design space means filling out all the cells . Additional kinds of meat or condiments are easy to add , and unusual combinations such as relish on turkey will not be overlooked . How - ever , more complex relationships present a challenge . For example , Figure 1 has no place for ketchup and mayonnaise , nor is it easy to add cheeses , or oth - erwise move into the representation of n - dimensions , such as you might need for a club sandwich . Tabular representation seems to emphasize the equiva - lence and arbitrary nature of making any particular choice , encouraging ex - ploration of the design space at hand , but de - emphasizing the selection pro - cess for a particular design or exploration outside the space . Figure 1 shows a design space of sandwich solutions . With more difficulty , design spaces can also be used to represent problem spaces . So , if one were 416 TATAR Figure 1 . A design - space of sandwich solutions . ( Reprinted from “It’s Just a Method ! ” by Harrison , S . , Back , M . and Tatar , D . , 2006 , Proceedings of the 6th ACM Conference on De - signing Interactive Systems DIS ‘06 , p . 265 . Copyright 2006 by ACM Press . Reprinted by permission . ) designing information systems for the disabled , one might create a table specifying configurations of input devices , displays , and content consider - ations . A design tension identifies not a problem or a solution but rather a limited resource or choice across one or more criteria . Design tensions help us search the situation for channel factors , the few crucial emergent configurations that may make or break a system . In fact , a design tension perspective can coexist with a design space perspective . However , to contrast them for purposes of clarity , design tensions are unbounded , are noncategorical , are easily extensi - ble , and emphasize both the problem of active choice in design and the inter - relationship between the social and technological and different levels of examination . Design tensions admit many paradigms of analysis . That is , the require - ments and analysis that inform particular choices can come from any source : participatory design , scenario - based design , engineering require - ments analysis , activity theory , and so forth . Each of these methods sug - gests certain components of system design that are important , but none explicitly calls out the balancing of considerations in producing an entire system . Two made - up examples — world hunger and cell phone interruptions — in - troduce the system of thought and the central ideas of design tensions . 2 . 1 . Vision First , the issues can be divided into four levels , each explained next . The following examples invoke different levels of concern . At the highest level , as already said , design is driven by a tension between what is and what ought to be . This is the project vision or potential . In Figure 2 , this is the tension be - tween what is , “Some people go to bed hungry , ” and what ought to be , “We should solve world hunger . ” It is a fundamental expression of the values and interests of the project goals . DESIGN TENSIONS FRAMEWORK 417 Vision Is : “Some people go to bed hungry” Ought : “We should solve world hunger” Approach Project drivers : food production capabilities , distribution systems Values : succor the needy , distributive justice , procedural justice Project Tensions Redistribution of wealth vs . agrarian reform Keeping people on the land vs . moving them to distribution points As Created Situations Resentment creation , depletion of long - term resources , quality of life Figure 2 . An illustration of levels of concern in the context of the world hunger problem . 2 . 2 . Approach Below vision is approach , including project drivers , which is the expres - sion of an intended implementation . It is an attempt to bring goals and values ( what ought to be ) into relationship with pre - existing reality ( what is ) in a way that leads to action . In general , approaches are intended to narrow the focus ; however , because they may introduce complex systems , such as consider - ations of technical possibilities , assessments of what implementers are capa - ble of , or political realities , they may sometimes increase the complexity of the problem along relevant dimensions . In Figure 2 , the approach layer en - compasses , on one hand , realities such as the food production capabilities of different places in the world and the distributions systems currently in place and , on the other , the moral imperatives of succoring the needy , of distribu - tive justice , and of procedural justice . The designer adds the approach level as a conscious step toward project re - alization . The vision of feeding the hungry does not lead inevitably to any particular approach . For example , a personal , nonstructural approach to solv - ing world hunger might be to have a food drive or to volunteer in a soup kitchen . In this understanding , it is not necessary to consider larger issues of justice . One person might feel that this is a satisfactory approach ( “all that can be expected” ) , whereas another might consider the approach unacceptably naïve . The important components are to understand ( a ) the element of voli - tion in choosing an approach , ( b ) the consequences for the entire project , and ( c ) the potential for reconsideration of the approach in light of subsequent ideation . 2 . 3 . Project Tensions Below approach is the focus of this article , project tensions , actual deci - sions in implementing , such as redistribution of wealth versus agrarian re - form , or keeping people on the land versus moving them to urban distribu - tion sources . Project tensions are places in the project that ( a ) directly or indirectly fall within the designers’ scope of influence but ( b ) where means , ways , and values come into conflict . Enactment of the approach exposes the messiness and limitations of human control and ingenuity . This is where de - sign happens and it is value - laden both in itself and in relationship to the val - ues and goals at other levels . 2 . 4 . As Created Situations Last come the “as created” situations . These are the situations or dilemmas represented by the new reality and the consequences that flow from that new 418 TATAR reality . The enactment of any plan of action will have consequences . The pro - ject instigators and enactors by definition desire positive outcomes and some of the consequences may be positive . However , some outcomes may not rein - force the values or directions of the original vision . For example , project plan - ners may decide to feed everyone now , but in so doing cause soil depletion leading to future greater hunger , or cause resentment and war by upsetting the social order , leading to future greater hunger , or inadvertently deprive people of the cultural heritage that is intrinsic to quality of life , and so forth . 1 To understand any given conception of the problem fully , at each of these levels , the meaning of the initial charge of the narrowly conceived “is vs . ought” must be reconsidered . Each level introduces tensions and cross - cut - ting dependencies . The scope introduced in a level may change the problem radically and must also be considered . “Feed the hungry” is not intrinsically an economic problem , but once we bring in concepts like “redistribute wealth , ” it becomes an economic problem , subject to economic analysis . However , the economic analysis is not described in its entirety by the original terms of the problem “People are hungry , ” and “They ought to be fed . ” In - stead , each layer introduces its own set of concerns . Figure 3 illustrates a technological example of the relationship between levels in a design tension approach . As the problem first presents itself , the current state of affairs is that cell phones ring inappropriately in concert halls or classrooms . They do not have a sense of what’s going on and therefore in - DESIGN TENSIONS FRAMEWORK 419 1 Rittel ( 1972 ) long ago noted the strong dependence of solutions to “wicked” or in - tractable problems upon particulars of their formulation . However , design tensions do not depend on a “problem / solution” analysis of the design challenge . Vision Is : “Cell phones go off inappropriately in classes or concerts” Ought : “Cell phones ought to know how to avoid interruption” Approach Project drivers : presence or absence of cell phone features ; personal ownership of phones Values : user vs . machine control , theory of appropriate interruption Project Tensions Change user vs . cell phone behavior . Change interruption behavior vs . change who is interrupted . Change caller control vs . change receiver control . Change receiver control vs . change situation control As Created Situations The chance of missing an emergency call ; the phone company becomes a personal information database organization ; the phone interface is too complex and fragile for use Figure 3 . An illustration of levels of concern in the context of cell phone behavior / design . terrupt . The vision is then one in which they ought to know better . The prob - lem solver can solve this , at the approach level , within the context already es - tablished of the “is vs . ought , ” by asking people to turn their cell phones off when a call would interrupt . Alternatively , the problem solver can take an ap - proach not directly indicated by the terms of the “is vs . ought” statement , such as developing a theory of interruptions . The drivers are current states of cell phone affairs : phones have ringers ; they have timers ; they have vibrators ; they belong to individual users ; they do not belong to settings . The goal would be for the cell phone ( or system of cell phone and user ) to know when it is appropriate for the cell phone to ring or not . This conceptualization , which may be more or less complete and coherent , leads to tensions . For example , maybe the cell phone is put on a timer , which transforms the initial impera - tive of the conceptualization “the cell phone needs to know what’s going on” because neither it nor its user actually knows whether it’s appropriate or not to interrupt . Or perhaps the cell phone utilizes a vibrator , so that it does in fact interrupt , but this behavior is outside the very narrowest interpretation of in - terrupting . Last , the decision we make may lead to “as created” situations , such as mishandling the exceptional case of an emergency call , or the creation of a system that deals with all cases but is exceptionally fragile and difficult to use , or creating an unpredictable societal force by virtue of the huge amount of data in the possession of the phone company . One may naturally argue about the details of these examples , about the re - lationship or constituents of these layers . However , these two examples serve to illustrate several important points . They illustrate in familiar cases : 1 . Terms in which we may discuss balances in design decisions . 2 . A framework that can help both a . integrate disparate considerations and b . differentiate the ways that different instances of these considerations come into the design process . 3 . The ways in which issues that present themselves at one level may be separate from or interact with tensions or elements at other levels . 4 . That issues at one level may not be described entirely by tensions at other levels . 5 . The elements of volition at all levels . 6 . The origins of different kinds of felt necessity at different levels . 7 . The element of ingenuity or potential for novel design at the project tensions level . The outcome of such an analysis is an understanding of the kinds of com - plex interrelationships that designers and analysts need to be able to include in the planning or design of novel situations . Utilizing such an understanding , 420 TATAR they can anticipate complex multifaceted consequences of project commit - ments and design decisions . Next the article turns to a real and detailed example of a project informed by a design tensions analysis . It starts by giving an overview of the project , then discusses the vision and approach , before presenting the six project ten - sions actively encountered in project realization , how these tensions were un - derstood and eventually handled . 3 . THE NETCALC CASE STUDY 3 . 1 . NetCalc Project Summary The NetCalc project was a design experiment in integrating SimCalc , a powerful , flexible desktop system for teaching / learning the math of change and variation , with handheld computing . Project personnel included com - puter scientists , math educators , psychologists , math teachers , CSCW ex - perts , and the teacher from the target classrooms . Development of the system had several overlapping components : underlying infrastructure that permit - ted appropriate behavior of the different representations , methods for inte - grating wireless connectivity into the system , and tailoring both these for par - ticular in - class activities . 2 Limited participatory design was an important component of this project . The teacher was recruited ( through local district and professional develop - ment mailing lists and following 23 interviews ) to participate in this particular project . The project was tailored , often significantly , to her concerns and goals but not fundamentally reconceptualized . She met with project person - nel once a week for 2 years to codevelop integrated classroom plans , materi - als , and supporting technology for each class . The teacher was not involved in design discussions of underlying computer science issues such as threading on handhelds . All classes studied were the participating teacher’s throughout the school year , and all of her eighth - grade classes were studied . District and principle permission was given for participation . Students and parents were asked for and gave informed assent and consent at the beginning of each year of the study . The teacher taught all studied class periods from beginning to end . De - velopers and researchers were present in the classroom , taking notes and vid - eotaping . They gave no mathematics or other instruction . However , they did interact with students if there appeared to be a technical difficulty . Further , DESIGN TENSIONS FRAMEWORK 421 2 Lesson pieces and sequences are often called “activities” to emphasize that learn - ing is a larger matter . they conducted a semistructured interview with the teacher after every class session . Sometimes these debriefing sessions led to radical redesign of the subsequent class . Students each had a Palm IIIc handheld computer running the Palm OS , with basic NetCalc functionality loaded . In addition , the teacher had a cam - era that could be focused on the Palm to display her use of hard keys . She used this only once in the 1st year . She also had a projector connected to her desktop computer running NetCalc on the Palm emulator . She often pro - jected NetCalc onto the white board . She then asked students to draw predic - tions of functions or actions on the whiteboard that then could be seen in con - junction with screen activity . To date NetCalc has been used in twenty - eight 90 - min classes , over 2 school years , with five different sets of eighth graders in a design - experiment context . In addition to single classes attempting to introduce a given activity , a month - long intervention was conducted in a classroom in each of the 2 years . The primary outcomes of this design experiment were ( a ) the design , im - plementation and refinement of base technology , associated activity struc - tures , and support materials ; ( b ) the videotapes and machine logs of student activity ; and ( c ) the interviews and other forms of reaction of the teacher . In addition , however , a quasi - experimental pretest / posttest design was em - ployed in conjunction with the month - long interventions . As an aside , it is worth noting that the project reported here resulted in almost astonishing suc - cess by external criteria including performance on published qualitative problems from the Calculus Advanced Placement exam . Our eighth graders , at the beginning of the algebra learning sequence , outperformed high school takers of the test , all of whom have presumably studied calculus . Project de - tails and these results are reported in detail elsewhere ( Vahey , Tatar , & Roschelle , 2004 ) . 3 . 2 . NetCalc Vision and Approach The vision and approach layers of the NetCalc project are presented in enough detail to motivate a framework for looking at the project tensions in some depth . The state of affairs that the project started with was the existence and prior success of SimCalc Mathworlds™ . SimCalc Mathworlds is a flexible , power - ful representational tool that supports learning the mathematics of change and variation , that is , the strand of mathematics that finds its high school apex in Algebra for most U . S . students , and Calculus for a much smaller percent - age . In the past , SimCalc has received widespread use on desktop computers . SimCalc started from a rich set of intellectual commitments about math peda - 422 TATAR gogy and pedagogy founded in two strands of thought central to the cognitive revolution : ( a ) computational microworlds intended to address systematic misconceptions in learning ( cf . Abelson & DiSessa , 1981 ; J . S . Brown & VanLehn , 1980 ; DiSessa , 2000 ; Kaput & Sims - Knight , 1983a , 1983b ; Na - tional Research Council , 1999 , p . 127 ; Papert , 1980 ) and ( b ) the analysis of classroom learning processes as situated action ( cf . Hall , 2001 ; McDermott , 1974 ; Stevens , 2001 ) . These strands of thought reflect a widespread belief in education research that “four perspectives on the design of learning environ - ments — the degree to which they are student centered , knowledge centered , assessment centered and community centered — are important in designing these environments” ( National Research Council , 1999 , p . 141 ) . Research on misconceptions is often driven by concerns about excellence ( cf . Hesteness , Wells , & Swackhamer , 1992 ) . But it is also , arguably , deeply re - lated to equity . Social justice commitments , including the notion of “demo - cratizing access” to the math of change and variation , have been a central component of SimCalc from its origins . Through several research projects , SimCalc had been used to good effect in some of the most challenging educa - tional venues in the United States : public schools in Newark , NJ ; the worst performing high schools in Massachusetts ; urban San Diego middle schools ; as well as some less challenging venues ( Bowers & Nickerson , 2000 ; Hegedus & Kaput , 2003 ; Kaput & Hegedus , 2003 ; Nemirovsky , Kaput , & Roschelle , 1998 ; Nickerson , Nydam , & Bowers , 2000 ; Schorr & Kaput , 2007 ; Wilensky & Stroup , 2000 ) . Despite these successes and the strength of the central set of insights , SimCalc has not yet received widespread adoption . One of the most signifi - cant reasons for its neglect has to do with how computers get used in K – 12 schools in the United States today . Most schools have computer labs and the average classroom has three desktop computers , but computers are utilized primarily for writing , factual interest , and CD - ROM access ( Becker , 1998 ; Means , 2000 ) . Math teachers are less likely to use desktop computers than any other kind of teacher . Yet math teachers do use technology ; in 2000 , more than 80 % of high school math teachers used handheld graphing calculators in their classrooms ( Burrill et al . , 2002 ) . The NetCalc project decided to pursue the vision of democratizing access to the math of change and variation by bringing SimCalc to cheap , widely available computing platforms . The portion of the project housed at the time at SRI International chose to use an approach that built on the mechanisms of wirelessly - connected handheld computing ( PDAs ) . The University of Massa - chusetts Dartmouth component of the project chose to explore the re - purposing of calculators ( Hegedus & Kaput , 2003 ) and is not reported further here except to note ( a ) the legitimacy of alternative approaches to a shared vi - sion and ( b ) the considerable consequential effect on design issues . DESIGN TENSIONS FRAMEWORK 423 Like calculators , handhelds are cheap , easy to use , and easy to manage . At about $ 100 per unit , they provide powerful computing capacity inexpensive enough so that every child in a class can have one . No sophisticated support is required to set one up , or to perform such maintenance activities as , for exam - ple , providing power . There was an additional hope of finding novel synergis - tic learning opportunities through wireless connectivity . Thus , the vision was based in the tension between the fact that students are not learning sophisticated math and that project personnel believed that , if SimCalc was widespread , they could . The approach included the choice of wirelessly connected handheld technology in general and a particular kind of wirelessly connected devices as project drivers . Other components of the ap - proach included pragmatic and visionary commitments in the realms of SimCalc math pedagogy , HCI , and classroom interaction as described in the next three sections . SimCalc Mathworlds™ : Representationally Innovative Infrastructure SimCalc Mathworlds ( http : / / www . simcalc . umass . edu ) is a desktop sys - tem designed to teach the mathematics of change and variation . It stems from the emphasis during the cognitive revolution on the detailed analysis of mis - conceptions and using representational “microworlds” to address these mis - conceptions . The central contribution of SimCalc in terms of math pedagogy is that it ties different representations of change and variation to one another . Figure 4 shows us one configuration , in which the one - dimensional motion of characters in a simulated “world” is tied to a graph of the rates at different times of the characters in that world . The two characters , the momma duck and the baby duck , are shown in the world at time 0 and position 0 . The graph shows time on the x - axis and rate of progress on the y - axis . The straight line ( red in the original ) shows the momma’s rate in any given time interval and the segmented ( blue ) line shows the baby’s rate . This example is optimized to be used in teaching the concept , related to the Fundamental Theorem of Cal - culus , that no matter how much the baby duck speeds up or slows down , an average velocity can be created for the momma such that both creatures start and end at the same place at the same time . Two key opportunities to learn are in the foreground here . First , changing one representation changes linked aspects of other representations . In the example given next , the surprising fact for students is that dragging the start position of the ducks in the world from 0 to 10 does not change rate the func - tional representation at all ( because the functional representation is of veloc - ity ) . Starting rate is not tied to starting position . However , if we had a position instead of a velocity graph , the duck’s start position in the world would be the same as that represented in the position graph . The movement of character 424 TATAR and function line would be synchronized . This crucial feature allows students dynamically to pursue questions about the nature of what is represented in different forms and what is not represented . Second , students may enact or run the simulation and see how behavior in these different representations unfolds over time . In Figure 4 , of particular in - terest is predicting the motion of the baby duck during interval from 9 to 14 sec . Although theoretically familiar with the concept of negative velocity , many students will initially be surprised that the baby duck goes backward during that time . Student prediction followed by animation of the function is crucial in understanding what phenomena about rate and motion are being represented in different mathematical forms . Thus , the representative power of the computer can be summarized in that 1 . It presents the student with multiple , linked representations describing overlapping aspects of the same instance of change or variation ( e . g . po - sition and velocity graphs describing the same motion ) . 2 . It ties more abstract representations such as velocity and position graphs to less abstract representations of one - dimensional motion such as simulated elevators , cars , ducks swimming , or people walking . DESIGN TENSIONS FRAMEWORK 425 Figure 4 . Momma and Baby Duck end up at the same place at the same time . 3 . It supports dynamic alteration and visualization . Other affordances have to do with the relationship between mathematics as it appears to mathematicians and to support engage and extending the stu - dent’s interests and experiences . HCI and SimCalc Mathworlds Not surprisingly , learning in SimCalc Mathworlds is crucially abetted by the drag - and - drop , direct manipulation interface . The exact behavior of drag - ging - and - dropping interacts with details of the domain . For example , students can drag line segments on the graph shown in Figure 4 either by changing ve - locity , or changing acceleration , but they cannot make a line that goes straight up and down ( that would be an attempt to represent infinite velocity ) . Pedagogical Commitments Technology can legitimately be used to create an encompassing and absorb - ing unitary environment . This is often ( or even usually ) the case with desktop computing . However , our vision of classroom learning environments empha - sizes engagement with the learning activities over a particular curriculum or technology . Twofactorsconstantlytobearinmindare ( a ) thattheunityofexpe - rience is primary , whereas the design medium may be fragmented , and ( b ) the changing “zone of proximal development” of the student , that is , “the distance between the actual development level as determined by independent problem solvingandthelevelofpotentialdevelopmentasdeterminedthroughproblem solving under adult guidance or in collaboration with more capable peers” ( Vygotsky , Cole , John - Steiner , & Scribner , 1978 , p . 86 ) . Staying focused on learning and staying in that zone thus represent major commitments . A second kind of pedagogical commitment has to do with acknowledging , as Stevens ( 2001 ) urged us to do , the arc of work ( Strauss , 1985 , p . 4 ) as students move between desktop and paper technologies in support of projects . Stevens described how the affordances of the technology interact with classroom cir - cumstances to result in the allocation of work tasks to different students . In fact , he describes a tension in the classroom between work assignments as given , and work assignments as instantiated by students . This is related to examining the support social and technical systems pro - vide for the unofficial aspects of classroom work . In the classroom , learning activities and conversation represent the official goals and purposes . When people ask “What did you learn ( or do ) today ? ” the answer is usually framed in terms of the official goals or purposes . However , many unofficial goals and purposes affect classroom processes . Students spend years learning how to 426 TATAR behave in the classroom : when to speak and to whom , when to move or be still , and how to attend and to what . The practices that support these behav - iors and expectations are crucial to running the classroom . In the networked , wireless classroom that we envision , each student has his or her own device , and the teacher is able to project his or her screen for pub - lic display and discussion . Teachers are able to send problems to students , and students are able to send problems and problem components to teachers and to each other . In current practice , the class can move easily between whole - class work , small - group work , and “seat” or private work . The arc of work must be manageable , as must the unspoken assumptions about classroom behavior . 3 . 3 . Designing NetCalc Six project tensions ( see Figure 5 for a shorthand account ) arise in the con - struction of the system in relationship to this socio - technical situation , poten - tially affecting our approach and vision . Each tension represents choice points in system design . Each of the alternatives has impact on the distribu - tion of opportunities and costs for direct stakeholders , such as students and teachers , but also indirect stakeholders , such as people imagining what is pos - sible with connected computing . During the course of the project , frequent meeting were held to discuss and define design decisions . Most meetings consisted of computer scientists , math educators , and CSCW / HCI designers . Some included math teachers and curriculum designers . Proposals were mocked up through story boarding and DESIGN TENSIONS FRAMEWORK 427 Vision Is : Children do not have access to SimCalc technology that could help them learn complex math . Ought : Access to SimCalc on cheap , widely available computing media . Approach Project drivers : availability of handheld , wirelessly connected machines ; particular device affordances Commitments to : SimCalc math pedagogy , HCI and certain aspects of classroom level interaction . Project Tensions Tension 1 Math vs . Interaction Representations Tension 2 Scripted Action vs . Bricolage Tension 3 Handing Out Work—Teacher Push or Student Pull ? Tension 4 Workflow Handling vs . Worksheets Handing Tension 5 Private Display vs . Coordinating Multiple Machines Tension 6 Planned Activity vs . Conversation Figure 5 . NetCalc design tensions . prototyping . However , the dominant issues revolved around identifying the absolutely necessary , possible compromise positions within the tension , and entailments across tensions and other layers of concern . Tension 1 : Math Versus Interaction Representations Issue . The first question is what we show on the screen . Several factors are in contention . As with other computer systems ( Shneiderman & Plaisant , 2005 ) , there are five possible levels of accessibility at which to represent the control and repre - sentational aspects of the NetCalc system we have been describing . A system capacity or feature can be represented directly on the screen . Second , it can be represented through a menu function . Third , something represented on the screen or in a menu can initiate a mode . Fourth , it can be located on the handheld machine but require that a user leave the problem space to access the feature . Last , it can be located on a remote machine accessible from the current machine . Each of these represents progressively less transparency of use . Compared to the design of other computing systems , the small screen size and slow connectivity put extra stress on these choices . Small screen size creates difficult choices about what to represent mathe - matically , even considering NetCalc as a single - user system taken in isolation . There is room on the screen for the display of axes , unit markers , and about 14 unit segments on the x - axis that can still be seen and manipulated easily . Displaying a single coordinate system ( graph ) at a time , either a position graph or a velocity graph ( Figure 6a ) , gives the student room to experiment with line segments with a range of slopes and extents . If we display two coor - dinate systems side by side on the screen ( Figure 6b ) , as we frequently do in SimCalc activities , only 6 segments on the x - axis can be seen . It is impossible to display all the interesting mathematical phenomena in 6 single - unit seg - ments . Furthermore , although the simulation area or “world” of cars shown in Figure 6 , like the duck world in Figure 4 , illustrates horizontal motion , in desktop SimCalc , a frequently used simulation involves elevator motion . Be - cause elevators run up and down , the simulation area competes for space on the horizontal portion of the screen and further reduces the available length of the x - axis . Is it more important that the student sees velocity and position representations together , that the student is able to explore the wider range of phenomena in the graphical representation , or that the student is able to dis - entangle the motion phenomena of the graphs from the motion phenomena of the “world” by utilizing vertical simulation areas ? Thus , the decision whether to show one or two coordinate systems at a time , and whether to al - low vertical worlds , taken by themselves , may have serious repercussions for the kind of math learning encouraged within the system . However , all of 428 TATAR these choices militate for maximizing the screen space used for mathematical representations . 3 The challenge is increased when considering that four major systems con - tend for representation in NetCalc . The first is the math system , including the coordinate displays , simulation area , the graphs on the coordinates , the labels on the graphs , and the controls for running and changing the functions ( play , reset , add segment , delete segment , and so forth ) . The second is the manage - ment of activity - related connectivity , such as when a particular classroom ac - tivity requires the communication across machines of particular bits of repre - sentation - specific information . For example , in the Match - My - Graph class of activities , described later , one student repeatedly sends function information to another student . The display of the sent function is integrated with the re - ceiving student’s own display . The nature of the information displayed on the receiver’s screen depends on the exact point of the lesson . The third is more DESIGN TENSIONS FRAMEWORK 429 Figure 6 . ( a ) NetCalc with one coordinate system ( a position graph ) and the car world displayed . ( b ) NetCalc with two coordinate systems ( a position and a velocity graph ) dis - played . 3 In fact , there are many more design options , but each has its own effects on the math or the usability of the system . For example , we could change the scale of the graph so that each tick mark signified more units , but this might confuse a substantial number of students ( Moschkovich , 2001 ) . We could shrink all the text ( a little ) , but then the system becomes more difficult to share . Furthermore , when the units are too small , they become difficult to drag - and - drop using the stylus . general connectivity to support collaboration and communication across many contexts , and the last is workflow management . Support for connectiv - ity and workflow management is discussed in more depth later on as they also interact with Project Tensions 2 , 4 , 5 and 6 . The challenge is increased yet again when one considers the radical cur - tailment of available mechanisms for handling selection . When dragging - and - dropping in desktop SimCalc , the student can easily select any of the dis - played function segments , the length and the scale of each axis , the plane be - hind the functions , any object in the world , and the ruler in the world . In pre - tests , we found that we could only make one function at a time editable without causing student frustration and that we could allow direct manipula - tion of only the function or the associated object in the world . Therefore , all but the most basic manipulation functions had to be moved out of the direct manipulation space and onto menus . In addition , on desktop SimCalc as well as in , for example , Word or Excel , labels that run across the top of the screen name 10 or more menus . Each menu contains five to seven control functions . There is also separate , redun - dant window with icons controlling animations and yet another turning on and off various “Tools . ” In contrast , on the handheld , the stylus can be used to tap on the top tab ( the name of the student , “Nobody” , in Figure 6 ) to produce three menu la - bels . Each of these three labels yields a menu that can contain no more than eight items . Given Palm conventions , the top line also can contain access to one more visible menu ( “layout” in Figure 6 ) again allowing at most eight more items . Because the reason for the system to exist is mathematics , our project decided to push the balance of demands as far toward mathematical representation as possible . However , we also attempted to strip the mathe - matical representation back to the bare bones . One mathematical compro - mise was to confine our simulations to those with horizontal motion . In addi - tion , a comparison the SimCalc ducks in Figure 4 with the NetCalc cars in Figure 6 shows the decision to move to more iconic representations as a fur - ther concession to space . Of the remaining space on the screen , we found room for four icons . Three of these are also considered necessary for handling the central math - ematics learning system . Two are used for icons that handle animation ; however , these are reduced to the bare minimum . The green “play” arrow turns into a “pause” when pressed and “reset” when the activity is com - plete . This means animations must be run in their entirety before they can be reset . ( Without making a strong claim , this is probably good for the stu - dents . ) The small arrow with the stop bar is used to step through the paused animation . The step degrees must be set elsewhere . A third icon is also as - sociated directly with the SimCalc mathematical experience . The “Eq” icon 430 TATAR allows students to display algebraic equations representing the graphically displayed information . 4 Thus , of the information appearing directly on the screen , only one icon had to do with any activity not central to the SimCalc mathematical experi - ence . This last was a form of beaming ( infrared - based point - to - point distribu - tion of information ) . There are many contenders for what information should be beamed , but with room for only one icon , we choose to represent beaming associated with the distribution of activity specific information . 5 Despite the priority given to mathematical representations on the screen , more than half of the menu space is also occupied by functions that manage the visual display of mathematical information . For example , the menu that descends from the top left , marked “layout , ” turns on and off the simulta - neous display of position , velocity , and world information . One of the three hidden menus is titled “Graph” and contains eight functions for manipulating the graphs , including two “preference” setting modes . The “Problem” menu is used for communication , to open , save , beam , and exchange authored problems . The decision to prioritize the math representations has implications for other pedagogical and pragmatic decision in the design . Compared to design choices that spent less space on representation , more of the burden of remem - bering how to interact with the system , where the student is in the task , and how to share his or her work with others has to be taken up by less direct means than direct display on the screen . The burden either falls on the stu - dent , who has to remember where to look and what to do , or creates the ne - cessity of noncomputational supplementation , such as worksheets , to help with the issue . Tension 2 : Scripted Action Versus Bricolage Issue . To what extent is the student’s behavior to be dictated by a system designed to support only scripted action compared to bricologe ( tinkering ) ? DESIGN TENSIONS FRAMEWORK 431 4 Calling such formulations “equations” is controversial in mathematical and math - ematics pedagogy circles . However , several factors contributed to our choice of using it : the students were not familiar with f ( x ) notation , the teacher liked and used the term equation , and it took only two letters . 5 We might have squeezed in another icon in the available space , but in addition to looking crowded , this decision raised other issues . In particular , the difference be - tween beaming a problem and beaming a problem state is subtle and not easily ex - pressed in a concise iconic representation . The consequence of student confusion about which icon to use could have serious , as they included both interpersonal confu - sion or possibly overwriting material on the other person’s machine . On one hand , our commitments to HCI , pedagogy , and pragmatism sug - gest that the interface needs to be simple , students need to understand the re - quirements of the scripted activity , and teachers need to be sure that students are on task . On the other hand , our commitment to good pedagogy also sug - gests that a crucial component of learning is that students need to be able to play , make discoveries , and own the ideas themselves . They need to be able to act as scientists , and they need to be able to tinker ( Papert , 1980 ) . This is called bricolage . ( Furthermore , the authoring of problems should not involve onerous or difficult design decisions for the teacher . ) There are many mathematical features in SimCalc in addition to those al - ready mentioned . For example , in a given problem the simulation may drop tick marks every second , half second , or quarter second . Likewise , the scale of the axes may need to be zoomed to display more or less , and the problem may involve different graphics ( squares vs . cars ) . But when a particular activity is sent out and used , the display of that activ - ity needs to be appropriate . For example , the world has to be displayed so that the start position of the car or other icon is visible . At one extreme , supporting bricolage to the utmost , we could try to have available as many choices as possible somewhere , through nesting menus and more modes . At the other extreme , supporting only planned activity , we can have menus and buttons that are configured for and allow precisely the prob - lem the student is working on . 6 Our position on these matters balances the classroom behavior allowed by the student , the burden on the teacher during the authoring process ( fewer choices for the students means more advanced planning by the teacher ) , and the predictability of the interface ( if every problem provides different resources , every problem involves a slightly different presentation of the system ) . One design solution that we considered included a “tinkering” mode in which the students could alter display and conditions freely , as compared to an “activity” mode in which the display and conditions were confined to those sent by the teacher . However , there were three problems with this solu - tion . First , as reflected in the basic HCI argument against modes , we could not devise a way that the difference between these global states and the ways of moving between them would be sufficiently obvious . Second , when we contemplated a “tinkering” mode , we could not fit all the different ways of tai - loring the system onto the limited number of menu items and other represen - tational affordances we had available , leading to the unpleasant idea of 432 TATAR 6 This argument ties the problem of bricolage to the basic HCI problem of tailorability , but tailorability is only the technological element of it . “submodes . ” Third , we could imagine many activities that incorporated some elements of tailoring into base - level participation . The compromise that we ended up with differentiated between those ele - ments of tailoring that we considered most necessary , and subsidiary ele - ments . Most necessary was the direct manipulation of function and world ob - jects via drag - and - drop . In addition , scrolling the world was represented via arrows on the screen . Other elements , such as changing the axes , the display area of the graph , or how many functions were displayed , were relegated to menu items . Many elements , such as directly changing the bitmaps of objects shown in the world , were moved to desktop tailoring and became unchange - able from within the system . This decision prevented the full , local authoring of activities and contrib - uted to the necessity of downloading activities , discussed below under Ten - sion 3 . Together , these tensions led to the overloading of one precious menu item for restoring local system state to the state created by the current activity . “Open problem” both opened new problems and restored state . Tension 3 : Handing Out Handheld - Based Work — Teacher Push or Student Pull ? Issue . How much work does the teacher have to do to “hand out” work , how much control does the teacher want over the process , and when does the desire for such control change ? In observations of classrooms without technology , we see that the teacher usually develops worksheets ahead of time containing both the work and meta - information about process . Transitions between activities such as whole - class discussion and small - group work and seatwork are created and punctu - ated by her delivery of the handouts to the students and the student return of completed work . All of these are reinforced by the use of the whiteboard . The physical process of handing out or collecting work may be accompanied by further oral instruction about the activity including special emphasis , remind - ers , and questions . Sometimes the teacher passes the handouts to each student herself , and at other times students help out . Most activities have one associ - ated handout , which implicitly ( through layout ) or explicitly ( through written instructions ) serves to remind students of the progression of events with which they are involved . It is not unusual for an activity to end with a student query about whether the completed materials are to be turned in to the teacher , kept by the students , or thrown away . Adding technology to the classroom means adding the management of that technology . Materials include the initial setup of the screen , including what is modeled ( one object in one world ? two ? four ? ) , how it appears ( posi - tion graphs ? velocity graphs ? the world ? ) , and how connectivity works in the DESIGN TENSIONS FRAMEWORK 433 exercise at hand . For example , information exchanged could change the en - tire screen state , the entire system , or merely involve the transfer of elements for display within the existing screen state . When students are engaged in an activity , the necessity of each student specifying exactly how information should be set up or what information should be sent to others at different stages in the activity could be a serious distraction . Thus , a system of authoring activities is necessary , setting up screen and function state and specifying what elements are to be exchanged between stu - dents or between students and teacher when transfer occurs . How do these authored problems get to the students ? Networks offer many ways of distributing information . Files ( or database elements ) can be loaded onto machines ahead of time or can be distributed on the fly . If they are to be loaded ahead of time , the time and knowledge burden is pushed entirely onto the teacher . If files or databases are distributed during class , it saves the teacher time and allows her to change plans more flexibly . One possibility is to employ a system in which the student “pulls” the right information in , as if using FTP . The advantage of this approach is the distribu - tion of labor ; each student is responsible for knowing his or her own current state and purposes . The disadvantage is that each student must somehow come to know what he or she needs at each moment of the class , how to get it , whether he or she has succeeded in getting it , and what to start on his or her local machine . Opening a file on a computer system is an unremarkable activ - ity in the context of the work force . However , getting all students in a class , even sophisticated eighth graders , to download and open a particular file in a distributed computing environment is more complex . If too much time or complexity is entailed ( “I can’t connect ! ” “I can’t find activity3 . txt ! ” ) , the ped - agogical and pragmatic setup the teacher has given for the activity may be en - tirely forgotten . A different possibility is to have a “push” of the information from the teacher to the student via a centralized distribution center . A disadvantage is that the centralized machine that has the authored activity has to know the names and addresses of the other machines that need that activity . Further - more , in a “push” system , the central machine has to know which activity is desired by whom . The teacher is then needed to enable the next action of the students or to solve problems if the wrong thing has been loaded . If the stu - dents are for some reason out of step , or the teacher is busy , no progress can be made . Further disadvantages included the idea that the student might not understand his or her own machine state . As a compromise , we considered a “Get Current Activity” menu item or button on student machines . This would allow teachers to designate a current activity without students knowing what it was called and students to know 434 TATAR whether they had asked for the “next” activity . However , technical consider - ations about the Palm OS stopped us from pursuing this . It turned out that Palm OS would not let us manage the download while in the NetCalc pro - gram , nor could we transfer the name of the file containing the current activ - ity seamlessly to the NetCalc system . 7 The compromise we ended up with avoided the uncertainties of FTP - like systems and let students know what their own system state was . However , stu - dents had to proceed in lock - step with one another , downloading in a coordi - nated way , and they had to know the name of the relevant file . We utilized the peer - to - peer IR ( Infra - Red ) connectivity on the Palm system to create “beam - ing trees . ” The teacher would beam a problem setup to two students who would each beam that problem to two other students and so forth until every - one in the class had the activity . Students still had to know the names of the files to start up , which would be written on the board , written on the handout , and also discussed as the beaming was taking place . However , for some rea - son this compromise “worked” in the sense that students seemed to be able to get down to business in about 5 min without forgetting the activity structure and purpose . As we design , we must steer between the Scylla of making a system that is so limited that it can’t be used and the Charybdis of making a system that im - ports the daunting complexity of most current desktop computing paradigms and adds some of its own . Tension 4 : Workflow Versus Worksheets ( History vs . Ephemera ) Issue . To what extent should support for learning activities in the mo - ment be governed by the desire to automate the capture of student work , to what extent should student work be treated as ephemera , and to what extent should it be captured by nontechnological means ? Materials associated with classroom learning using technology are not con - fined to information about technology setup . A simple workflow system might preserve technology setup , blank worksheets , completed student work , and “meta” information about process . A more complex workflow might in - volve electronic handoff of marked - up documents between student and teacher . These offer the chance to record detailed progress of student work and for students to get improved . Many teachers are struggling with how to accurately assess their students’ progress in project - based work . Parents and administrators would like more demonstrations of progress . DESIGN TENSIONS FRAMEWORK 435 7 That is , we could not solve this problem within project resources . However , putting more documents on the handheld makes using the handheld more complex . In the simplest creation of activities , students need to be able to find and get materials appropriate for each moment of the class and teachers need assurance that students have the right work at the right time . When we add more workflow goals , students must be able to turn work in properly identified and know that the teacher will receive it . If teachers are to grade on the handheld , students need mechanisms for receiving annotated files or the equivalent . Computationally aided workflow , although desirable , adds other kinds of burdens . Handing in work on the computer changes the teacher’s life quite considerably . Not only does it mean handling the system , but also that the teacher has to be tied to the computer to give feedback or do grading . At the other end of the tension lies reliance on existing systems for manag - ing workflow . Physical worksheets have attractive affordances . Like all paper documents , they can easily be marked up , they are easily visible , and they are even more portable and less expensive than handhelds ( Sellen & Harper , 2002 ; Stevens , 2001 ) . They also have familiar distribution and collection pat - terns . Still , physical worksheets are not without a cost in this case . Worksheets employed to support handheld use mean that the teacher must prepare and coordinate materials in two different systems with different timeframes for production and distribution . Further , a choice exists about the extent to which work on the handhelds ought to be treated as lightweight or ephemeral versus heavy weight and per - manent . This choice reflects a real question about the usage the system will find . It reflects a theory about what makes technological innovations useful and attractive to teachers and students . From a very lightweight perspective , the work on the handheld is treated like that on a calculator , a tool that is used primarily to serve external purposes . Teachers bear the burden of creating worksheets and working in two systems ( word processing , handheld au - thoring ) to make sure the worksheets coordinate with the handheld activities . From a heavy - weight perspective , all work on the handheld is treated as hav - ing value in itself and worth keeping . Teachers still have to author activity structures and problems , but this is within the scope of the technology . Stu - dents have to know more about how to manage that system to turn in work and receive it back again . We chose a medium - weight design in which work was not kept and ex - changed for purposes of grading and storage but was exchanged and shared within the context of the class activity . Our decision to emphasize math repre - sentations plus concerns about complexity pushed us toward the decision not to attempt to include meta - information about the activity on the computer di - rectly but rather rely heavily on paper handouts . Although a tight integration 436 TATAR of workflow management and particular learning activities is highly to be de - sired , we came to feel that such an integration was a separate and complex problem from the central drivers of the project . Tension 5 : Private Content Versus Coordinating Multiple Machines Issue . To what extent should the handheld be treated as belonging to the student compared to as belonging to the class ? With its small size , the handheld intrinsically provides a private display , which is useful for private work and associated feelings of ownership ( Vahey , Tatar , & Roschelle , 2006 ) . In our official activities , we provide specific mecha - nisms for handling the relationship between viewing different displays in the course of different activities . But sometimes there is a more general need . Dyads may need to talk about something on the screen if , for example , two students are working together or if the teacher wants to show the student something . Teachers may want to know what students are actually doing at a particular moment . Students who have gone to get a drink of water or are oth - erwise distracted want to know what their partners are up to , or what other students have done that’s interesting . In theory , dyadic sharing can be accomplished by students handing or showing their screens to one another . But this may not be enough ; often shar - ing in nontechnological circumstances is initiated not by Person A showing Person B what he or she is doing , but rather by Person B commenting on something Person A is doing . Indeed , one of the powerful ways to enter into a conversation is to comment about something already mutually visible . Fur - thermore , it can be difficult to get someone’s attention when the thing they are looking at is very compelling or when a low - power person is trying to get a high - status person to show them something . Although ostensibly students are all at the same status , they may not experience one another as complete equals . Cole ( 1995 ) underscored how technology interacts with power in classroom workgroups . The construction of mouse use changes to reflect the relationships between the students . In one student’s hands , the mouse be - comes an instrument of control , whereas in another’s it becomes the mecha - nism by which the student is controlled . In general , visually supported shared reference is important to all conver - sations ( Clark , 1996 ; Clark & Brennan , 1991 ; Clark & Wilkes - Gibbs , 1986 ) , important in learning content ( Anderson , Clark , & Mullin , 1992 ; Clark & Brennan , 1991 ) , and especially important to learning deep content ( see all the shared reference in Roschelle , 1992 ) . Furthermore , other computer - sup - ported collaborative work systems have been known to founder because peo - ple could not see what the other was doing when they needed to ( Tatar , Fos - ter , & Bobrow , 1991 ) . Above and beyond understanding is being able to act in DESIGN TENSIONS FRAMEWORK 437 relationship to someone else’s representation : to add to it and modify it ( Bly & Minneman , 1991 ; Harrison & Minneman , 1996 ; Tang & Minneman , 1990 ) . Stevens ( 2001 ) referred to the need for shared representation as a criterion for sticking with paper versus employing a computational representation . Con - versation is key to convergent conceptual change ( Roschelle , 1992 ) . People have to do more work to maintain the interaction and make it successful when they cannot see what another person is looking at , and they frequently make mistakes ( Clark & Krych , 2004 ) . The shared representation to support such conversations is not something that should or can rise to the level of a cognitive burden in discourse without deep consequences ( Clark & Brennan , 1991 ; Clark & Krych , 2004 ) . It is , in - stead , a deep background condition for conversation to succeed . Sharing rep - resentations with others at the level that permits conceptual convergence ( Roschelle , 1992 ) should be practically effortless and rarely discussed . At the same time , one affordance of the handheld is that it is in part per - sonal and private . Other people are not looking . The student is free to make mistakes without external social judgments ( Penuel , Abrahamson , & Ros - chelle , 2006 ) . Furthermore , to move screen shots or deeper representations from screen - to - screen means that mechanisms must be in place and well un - derstood by the participants . The tension between private displays and shar - ing is between the need to share on one hand , and the desire for privacy and control , accompanied by any complexity introduced by the sharing process on the other . Once we open up the possibility of nonlocal display of informa - tion , then such display must be managed . To attain mutual reference by com - putational means implies that information must be moved around and either has to be named or found in a well - known location . Interaction support can also be pursued at different levels with different ef - fects on the activities , screen space demands , and other tradeoffs . One mecha - nism is to allow a partner lightweight access to the other’s screen in which the other could “Look” or “Glance” by receiving a screen snapshot on his or her machine which any action would erase . “Grab” is more heavyweight option , which opens up possibilities for the teacher to store interesting cases but re - quires more management . Another related feature might be a variant on the telepointer ( Stefik , Foster , Bobrow , Tatar , & Lanning , 1987 ) , whichwouldallow one person to in effect “point” to something on a screen and send it to someone else . Wehavebegunexperimentationwiththeseoptions ( Kim & Tatar , 2005 ) . Tension 6 : Planned Activity Versus Conversational - Style Coordination Issue . To what extent should the operations of the machines build upon or count upon “knowing” the social interactions of the students ? 438 TATAR Planned activities are the bones of the classroom and the focus of teacher attention . At one level , the project was one of creating activities and curricula . Yet another strongly felt pull was to refrain from excessive control . Effective , flexible mechanisms for sharing screen views , as previously discussed , are key to allowing the movement between planned activity and more spontane - ous conversation . However , another relevant tension between planned activ - ity and conversational - style coordination revolves around the extent of ma - chine knowledge compared to social control of group constitution and size . Activity planning includes not only the activity itself but also the size of the group involved in the activity and , frequently , who is supposed to work to - gether . Among the information that students might conceivably get from computerized support for workflow or from some other source is information about working arrangements . There are advantages to having the computer know who is working together . For example , in theory , the teacher could check whether all members of a team are making the same mistakes . The teacher might give the same written feedback to all the members of the team . The teacher may be able to assign people to working groups even more sys - tematically than now . However , planning is not everything . From a purely pragmatic standpoint , multiple obstacles arise to great reliance on planning groups and partnerships in the system . In early observations of the math classroom , we saw many ways and occasions in which workgroups changed in relationship to events . The teacher planned for certain students to work together , but one was ab - sent . A project had been planned for pairs , but there were an uneven number of students . The teacher had taken pains to put students into mixed achieve - ment groups , but one third of the class was called away to participate in a 15 - min meeting about a school event . In the face of these obstacles , the teacher’s priorities changed . For example , despite her hope of creating mixed achievement pairs , when one third of the class left , she simply looked up from the work she was doing with a particular student and said “Find another part - ner and move over . ” She then put her head down and resumed her prior fo - cus . Social , conversational - style control allows easy flexibility . If the system “knows” who is working together , then the system must be updated when there are changes . When a student uses a different machine be - cause his friend has handed it to him or because his requires charging , the sys - tem must also be updated . When a student moves over to work with someone else because their partners both left for a meeting , the new work arrangement may need some kind of approval . This , then , puts a burden on either students or teachers or both . This burden , like others , may cut into the focus that the students are maintaining on the work . If it rises to the level of a barrier , it may be quite complex indeed . Frequent mismatches between reality and system knowledge can create a procedural “black market” in which the official ( com - DESIGN TENSIONS FRAMEWORK 439 putational ) system is an obstacle to be worked around rather than a resource to aid effective action . We resolved this tension by going to the extreme of social control . We did ask students to check their names on a list when starting NetCalc for research purposes , so that we could have a good idea who was using the machine when . However , no activity required students to assert either roles or partner relationships . In activities with multiple roles , students assumed the roads by taking action appropriate to one role or the other . These specific tensions generalize to a broad class of activities outside the classroom that involve distributed control and competing demands on atten - tion . However , the primary purpose of the discussion is not to say that the par - ticular tensions that arise in this project are highly generalizable . It is instead to say that the process of identifying and balancing these tensions must be ne - gotiated in the creation of a new socio - technological system to design systems with largely new properties . A lack of mindfulness about design choices can artificially constrict system possibilities , allow unwarranted optimism about and investment in poorly de - signed systems , and encourage neglect of the constellation of factors associ - ated with deep success . 4 . DISCUSSION 4 . 1 . Vision , Approach , and Project Tensions We started this project with the simply stated vision of bringing SimCalc to cheap , widely available computing . This led to the approach , utilizing wire - lessly connected handhelds in a way consonant with deep student engage - ment in learning , and student and teacher ability to manage the arc of work . This approach led to six intertwined design tensions : choices about providing support for math versus interaction representations ; support for scripted ac - tion compared to bricolage ; centralized versus distributed control of work as - signment ; technical , computerized versus social , nontechnical responsibility for workflow ; private versus public ownership of screen displays ; and support for planned activity versus conversation . The design tensions framework al - lows us to see design decisions as located in a connected web of user experi - ence , stakeholder values , and pragmatic possibilities . 4 . 2 . As Created Situations A fourth layer in the design tensions framework contains the “as created situations . ” I call out three . Two are negative consequences and one is posi - 440 TATAR tive , but the three together demonstrate the wide range of considerations that may fall into this category . First , because our system utilized infrared beaming in core design deci - sions , we made system success dependent on the presence of a feature with less widespread availability than , say , radio - frequency communication . Second , the specifics of the design and design decisions created a divide between the experience and knowledge of project personnel , and that of ex - ternal project reviewers in HCI and CSCW . In particular , reviewers were im - patient discussion of the worksheets and the teacher’s behavior as a compo - nent of system success . Third , an emergent property of the system designed via this kind of re - flective consideration was the creation of four highly effective , radically new kinds of classroom pedagogical activities capitalizing the on the coordinative properties of the connected classroom ( Vahey et al . , 2004 ; see Figure 7 ) . Working through the design issues in considerable complexity helped us think through affordances in new ways . In a “foible - to - feature transform , ” we used aspects of the tensions in the creation of the classroom activities . For example , because communication was difficult , we make communicat - ing carefully selected pieces of information across students become a cru - cial part of the learning activity . Match - My - Graph , for example , takes ad - vantage of the fact that students had different information on their screens . Over several rounds , they work to align their mathematical ( function - re - lated ) information . One participant , the Grapher , draws a function . The other participant , the Matcher , has to guess what that function without see - ing it , based on verbal hints from the Grapher . The Matcher takes a guess at what the desired function is and beams that guess to the Grapher . The Grapher sees his original function and , depending on the exact pedagogical goal , some information in pre - specified form about the Matcher’s function . The Grapher must assimilate this information and provide a verbal hint to the Matcher . Students learn because explaining things in careful words to other people and interpreting their explanations has a pedagogically power - ful effect as well as being highly motivational for a broad section of the stu - dent population who might be inclined to give up without the presence of another student . These new ways of coordinating and managing coordination are impor - tant outcomes in their own right , but they , and the student improvement that we recorded , are also indicators of the benefits of the design process we en - gaged in . Regardless of system success or limitations , the essential point for a design tensions approach is that the resolution of project tensions does not create a representation in the “as created” state . As this level , as throughout , form does not necessarily follow tension . DESIGN TENSIONS FRAMEWORK 441 A c t i v i t y N a m e T y p e S t u d e n t E x p o s u r e P r i m a r y P r o c e ss G o a l C o n t e n t G o a l s E x c iti n g S a c k R a c e E x p r e s s i v e 2 c l a ss p e r i o d s : 30 m i n a nd 15 m i n R ea s o n i n g C l a ss 1 : C h a r a c t e r i s t i c s o f p o s i t i o n g r a ph s . C l a ss 2 : C h a r a c t e r i s t i c s o f v e l o c i t y g r a ph s , i n c l u d i n g b a c k w a r d a nd s t o pp e d m o t i o n s . S u m m a r y : S t u d e n t s m a k e a t w o - c a r r a c e t h a t e nd s i n a t i e a nd i s a s e x c i t i n g a s p o ss i b l e , w i t h a c o rr e s p o nd i n g n a rr a t i v e ; e x c h a n g e s t o r i e s a nd m a k e n e w g r a ph s t o f i t t h e o t h e r ’ s s t o r y ( S ee H e g e d u s & K a p u t , 2002 , f o r a n i nd i v i d u a l t o w h o l e - c l a ss v e rs i o n o f t h i s a c t i v i t y ) . M a t c h M y G r a p h H i dd e n i n f o r m a t i o n 3 c l a ss p e r i o d s , o f 30 m i n ea c h . C o mm u n i c a t i o n C l a ss 1 : C h a r a c t e r i s t i c s o f p o s i t i o n g r a ph s . C l a ss 2 : C h a r a c t e r i s t i c s o f v e l o c i t y g r a ph s . C l a ss 3 : T r a n s l a t i n g b e t w ee n p o s i t i o n a nd v e l o c i t y g r a ph s S u m m a r y : W o r k i n g i n p a i rs , o n e s t u d e n t ( t h e g r a ph e r ) c r ea t e s a f u n c t i o n t h a t i s h i dd e n f r o m t h e o t h e r ( t h e m a t c h e r ) . T h e m a t c h e r m a k e s a nd b ea m s a n i n i t i a l g u e ss o f t h e f u n c t i o n , a nd r e c e i v e s a v e r b a l c l u e f r o m t h e g r a ph e r . T h e m a t c h e r m a k e s m o r e r e f i n e d g u e ss e s b a s e d o n t h e c l u e s . I n t h i s a c t i v i t y s t u d e n t s s t r u gg l e t o c r ea t e a nd i n t e r p r e t c l u e s s u c h a s “ M i n e i s s t ee p e r ” a nd “ Y ou rs i s n o t a s f a s t . ” I n t h e f i rs t i n s t a n c e o f t h i s a c t i v i t y t h e g r a ph e r a nd m a t c h e r b o t h h a d p o s i t i o n g r a ph s , a nd t h e g r a ph e r r e c e i v e d t h e m a t c h e r ’ s p o s i t i o n g r a p h a nd m o t i o n . I n t h e s e c o nd i n s t a n c e t h e g r a ph e r a nd m a t c h e r b o t h h a d v e l o c i t y g r a ph s , a nd t h e g r a ph e r o n l y r e c e i v e d t h e m o t i o n ( n o t t h e g r a ph ) . I n t h e t h i r d i n s t a n c e , t h e g r a ph e r h a d a p o s i t i o n g r a ph a nd t h e m a t c h e r h a d a v e l o c i t y g r a ph , a nd t h e g r a ph e r r e c e i v e d b o t h t h e m o t i o n a nd t h e g r a ph . S l o t M a c h i n e I n c e n t i v i z e d p r a c t i c e 3 c l a ss p e r i o d s : 40 m i n , 30 m i n , a nd 20 m i n R e p r e s e n t a t i o n C l a ss 1 : R e l a t i o n s h i p b e t w ee n s i m p l e p o s i t i o n a nd v e l o c i t y g r a ph s . C l a ss 2 : R e l a t i o n s h i p b e t w ee n c o m p l e x p o s i t i o n a nd v e l o c i t y g r a ph s . C l a ss 3 : R e l a t i o n s h i p b e t w ee n p o s i t i o n g r a ph s a nd n o n - c o n s t a n t li n ea r v e l o c i t y g r a ph s . S u m m a r y : S t u d e n t s w o r k i n g i nd i v i d u a ll y a r e p r e s e n t e d w i t h a p o s i t i o n g r a ph , a v e l o c i t y g r a ph , a nd a n a n i m a t i o n . T h e y d e t e r m i n e w h i c h , i f a n y , o f t h e s e r e p r e s e n t a t i o n s d e s c r i b e t h e s a m e m o t i o n , a nd c li c k t h e c o rr e s p o nd i n g s e t o f c h e c k b ox e s ( t h e r e p r e s e n t a t i o n s a nd c h e c k b ox e s a r e c o l o r c o d e d , a nd a w h i t e c h e c k b ox i nd i c a t e s n o m a t c h ) . S t u d e n t s c a n h a v e t h e c o m p u t e r c h e c k t h e i r a n s w e rs a n d p r o v i d e f ee db a c k , o r c a n e x c h a n g e p r o b l e m s w i t h a p a r t n e r , w h o “ g r a d e s ” t h e o t h e r ’ s w o r k . S t u d e n t s r e c e i v e p o i n t s f o r g e tt i n g t h e i r i nd i v i d u a l p r o b l e m c o rr e c t , f o r g r a d i n g t h e p a r t n e r ’ s w o r k c o rr e c t l y , a nd r e c e i v e b o n u s p o i n t s f o r c o rr e c t l y a n s w e r i n g a nd g r a d i n g f i v e p r o b l e m s i n a r o w . S t u d e n t s c a n c o m p l e t e m a n y p r o b l e m s i n r a p i d s u cc e ss i o n , a ll o w i n g f o r s i g n i f i c a n t p r a c t i c e i n b u il d i n g t h e i r r e p r e s e n t a t i o n a l c o m p e t e n c y . A gg r e g a ti o n A gg r e g a t i o n 2 c l a ss p e r i o d s , 15 m i n ea c h R ea s o n i n g C l a ss 1 : U nd e rs t a nd i n g c h a r a c t e r i s t i c s o f v e l o c i t y g r a ph s C l a ss 2 : U nd e rs t a nd i n g c h a r a c t e r i s t i c s o f n o n - c o n s t a n t li n ea r v e l o c i t y g r a ph s . S u m m a r y : E a c h s t u d e n t i s r e s p o n s i b l e f o r c r ea t i n g o n e p a r t o f a f u n c t i o n f a m il y , a nd t h e s t u d e n t g r ou p s i n v e s t i g a t e t h e r e s u l t i n g p a tt e r n . ( I n K a p u t & H e g e d u s , 20 03 , a gg r e g a t i o n r e s u l t s i n a w h o l e - c l a ss a c t i v i t y . ) F i g u r e 7 . N e t C a l c c o ll a b o r a t i v e l ea r n i n g a c t i v i t i e s . ( T h i s t a b l e i s a d a p t e d f r o m L e v e r a g i n g ha n dh e l d s t o i n cr e a s e s t ud e n t l e a r n i n g : e n g a g i n g m i dd l e s c h oo l s t u - d e n t s w it h t h e m a t h e m a t i c s o f c ha n g e b y V a h ey , P . , T a t a r , D . & R o s c h e ll e , J . , 2004 , I n P r o c ee d i n g s o f t h e 6 t h i n t e r n a ti o n a l c o n f e r e n c e o n L e a r n i n g s c i e n c e s I C L S ‘ 04 , p . 5 55 . C o p y r i g h t 2004 b y I n t e r n a t i o n a l So c i e t y o f t h e L e a r n i n g S c i e n c e s . R e p r i n t e d b y p e r m i ss i o n . ) 4 . 3 . Design Tensions and Relevant Analytic Frameworks Project design tensions as they present themselves to the project designers may be analyzed within other frameworks and may drive the creation of new tensions at the vision level . I started this article by mentioning a number of de - sign methods that inform my research and that are consistent with a design tensions analysis . Participatory design , value sensitive design , and design re - search were all part of the Netcalc project . All emphasize sensitivity to users and to complex situations . Value - sensitive design also adds the call to include values as an object for discussion and reflection and a framework from which to reason . However , these leave implicit how to resolve conflicts or reason about incommensurate aspects of system design . Even value - sensitive design encourages the creation of design space , with the limitations discussed earlier . In addition , activity theory provides a framework that casts light on impor - tant circumstances surrounding system design via its emphasis on subjects , objects , and instruments ( Vygotsky et al . , 1978 ) or subject , community , and object ( Leontiev , 1978 , 1981 ) and their relationship to one another . Tension is present in the creation of the triangles of influence , but design tension analysis can help call out the cascading possibilities of influence from particular solu - tions . In recent years , the notion of design patterns has gained currency amongst computer scientists . Design patterns may be conceived of as constellations of design choices that are thought to go together , “profound invariants , ” in Alex - ander’s ( 1979 ) terminology . Design patterns are interesting because they do not attempt to define the entire design space but rather mark only a path through it , identifying the ( putatively ) important landmarks . The important difference between these and design tensions is that design tensions empha - size not answers but ways of reasoning about relationships and factors called out in these other frameworks . Design rationale ( MacLean , Young , & Moran , 1989 ; Sutcliffe , Carroll , & MacLean , 1994 ) and scenario - based design ( Rosson & Carroll , 2002 ) are two common practices that overlap the most with the consideration of tensions . Indeed , the concept of design tensions owes a lot to these . However , there are important differences . These differences are discussed again nextbut are sum - marized by a line in Dix , Finlay , Abowd , and Beale’s ( 1997 ) conclusions about design rationale and scenario - based design : “The software engineering life cycle aims to structure design in order to increase the reliability of the de - sign process . For interactive system design , this would equate to a reliable and reproducible means of designing predictably usable systems” ( p . 222 ) . Design rationale and scenario - based design are themselves optimized to work within a corporate structure that emphasizes reliability and repro - ducibility of process and outcome . Furthermore , design rationale has a tre - DESIGN TENSIONS FRAMEWORK 443 mendous focus on categorizing , documenting , and accumulating a repository of issues for reuse . This is highly valuable under some circumstances ; how - ever , the goals external to the current project make it heavy weight and bu - reaucratic . Furthermore , reuse is not the only purpose of HCI design or HCI frame - works . Tensions are evolving structures intended to help during the design process , whereas rationales are primarily post hoc reconceptualizations . In contrast , design tensions are aimed at novel situations , in which deep under - standing ( in contrast to design repeatability ) is at issue . 4 . 4 . Reflection and Design Tensions Reflection is a key method in the design tensions paradigm as with other design paradigms . Design tensions also demand reflection . Tensions cannot be described in the absence of reflection . In fact , it has been claimed that re - flection is a central component in design ( Schon , 1983 ) . Reflection is also cen - tral in the conduct of science ; reflection is what ties together actions into se - quences of arguments that progress . However , it is important to note that the claim that reflection is important is not the same as the claim that it must be either iterative or dialectical . Itera - tion would be returning to the same problem at a deeper level . However , the “as created” dilemma described previously is not an elaboration of the origi - nal is / ought question that drove the project , but rather another set of consid - erations raised by the pragmatic accomplishment of the project . Dialectics would be the claim that tensions involve a thesis and antithesis , and further that they resolve themselves into a synthesis ( Hegel , as cited in Houlgate , 2003 ) . No such claim is being made . The tensions must be resolved or avoided pragmatically through design , but they still exist implicitly . They are inherent in the multiple levels of the project as well as in tensions within levels . 4 . 5 . Reflection , Design Tensions , and New Analytic Frameworks At the same time , design tensions may suggest new analytic frameworks , important relationships , and visions . Figure 8 shows some candidate vari - ables that arose in conjunction with our project describing the design space of handheld distributed computing . If our project is considered to have shown that SimCalc can be combined with inexpensive handheld , networked com - puters , then a reformulated vision might include the state of affairs ( is ) that such a demonstration has been made and the hope ( ought ) that such a demon - stration could be made for a demonstrably general group of students and teachers . 444 TATAR 4 . 6 . The Nature of Design Tensions The design tensions paradigm does not make strong ontological claims for the similarity of its constituent parts or possible design solutions . The tension could be constituted by a dichotomy between two goals , or by a continuum , or by the relevance of two or more incommensurate forces . What unites the elements in a tension is the competition , within the framework of the project , DESIGN TENSIONS FRAMEWORK 445 Figure 8 . Some dimensions that may be of interest in describing handheld systems . for one or more limited resources . If only one constituent exists , there is no competition , no tension and no need to balance . Design tensions avoid the rhetoric of problem and solution . Instead there can be many formulations of problems across one or more tension . Because the formulation of a problem in a certain way implies a limited set of solutions ( Rittel , 1972 ) , a problem – solution formulation puts undue emphasis on the problem statement as compared to the elements of a tension that need to be reconciled . In this way , design tensions keep open the possibility for inven - tion . Trade - offs are one way to resolve a design tension in a particular case . In - sight is another , and reformulation is yet a third . Reformulation may be at any level : the vision , the approach , or some component of the project tension . The design tension process is better modeled as recursive than as iterative , be - cause of its capacity to require rethinking what may seem to be the same ground before ultimately leading to a coherent resolution . The advantages of these loose aspects of design tensions — allowing dissim - ilar forces , avoidance of problem / solution formulations , and the absence of a required resolution process — come at an obvious cost , that is , increased re - flection and documentation , which implies an extended development pro - cess . A design tension analysis is therefore primarily intended for non - routine situations that require complex thought . 5 . CONCLUSION Designing the socio - technical system for networked handheld machines is a complex weaving of technological and human possibilities , constrained by current practice and directed goals . It calls upon us to use what we know from past work , to draw upon what we value , and to make judgments about how to balance potentials . By framing this in terms of design tensions and their lay - ers , we put design potential at the forefront of our exploration . From an information theoretic point of view , we can downplay tensions and talk primarily about results . However , in promoting design tensions , we are doing more than this . We are providing tools that respond to the third par - adigm , that is , to the acknowledgement in 20th - century philosophy of com - plex interdependencies . The cognitive revolution has been pressed by ele - ments of a new paradigm for many years . Suchman’s ( 1987 ) Plans and Situated Action was such an important book because of its claims that “every course of action depends in essential ways on its material and social circumstances” and that “the significance of action is not reducible to uninterpreted body move - ments” ( p . 50 ) . But the growth of cognitive science toward an “embodied mind” view of the world ( Lakoff & Johnson , 1999 ) and even the call to ac - knowledge this from within computer science ( Dourish , 2001 ; McCullough , 446 TATAR 2004 ) does not tie us to practicable action . Value - sensitive design takes a stab at this by calling upon us to acknowledge values , indirect as well as direct stakeholder , and potential conflicts in values . However , value - sensitive de - sign is still bound by its ties to design spaces and its rhetorical focus on values as the privileged element of contemplation . The work presented here builds on this by giving the designer more freedom to consider the web of consider - ations , including value - laden ones , that are presented in the course of a pro - ject . However , the ultimate goal is not to choose one design technique over all others , but rather to encourage the persistent charge held by technologists and designers alike to create a future that we wish to see on a variety of dimen - sions and from a variety of perspectives . NOTES Acknowledgments . I thank my colleagues on NetCalc , Phil Vahey and Jeremy Roschelle ; Steve Harrison ; and three anonymous reviewers who taught me what I hadn’t said . In particular , Reviewer 3’s comments represent the kind of thoughtfulness that one hopes for in intellectual life but rarely finds . Support . This work is support by NSF Grant # 0087771 , Understanding Math Classroom Affordances of Networked Handheld Devices . Author’s Address . Deborah Tatar , Department of Computer Science , Virginia Tech , 2202 Kraft Drive , Blacksburg VA 24060 . E - mail : tatar @ cs . vt . edu . HCI Editorial Record . First manuscript received July 25 , 2005 . Revisions received June 12 , 2006 and October 29 , 2006 . Accepted by Gregory Abowd . Final manuscript received June 20 , 2007 . — Editor REFERENCES Abelson , H . , & DiSessa , A . ( 1981 ) . Turtle geometry . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Alexander , C . ( 1979 ) . The timeless way of building . Berkeley , CA : Center for Structured Environment . Anderson , A . H . , Clark , A . , & Mullin , J . ( 1992 ) . Communication skills in children : Learning how to make langauage work in dialogue . Edinburg , Scotland : University of Edinburg . Beaudouin - Lafon , M . ( 2004 ) . Designing interaction , not interfaces . Proceedings of the Working Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces ( AVI ‘04 ) . New York : ACM Press . Becker , H . A . , R . ( 1998 ) . Teaching , learning and computing : A national survey of schools and teachers . Retrieved January 28 , 2003 , from http : / / www . crito . uci . edu / tlc / html / tlc _ home . html Bly , S . A . , & Minneman , S . L . ( 1991 ) . Commune : A shared drawing surface . Proceedings of the Conference on Office Information Systems . New York : ACM Press . Bodker , S . ( 1996 ) . Creating conditions for participation : Conflicts and resources in system development . Human Computer Interaction , 11 , 215 – 235 . DESIGN TENSIONS FRAMEWORK 447 Bowers , J . , & Nickerson , J . ( 2000 ) . Students’ changing views of rates and graphs when working with a simulation microworld . Focus on Learning Problems in Mathematics , 22 ( 3 / 4 ) , 10 – 27 . Brown , A . ( 1992 ) . Design experiments : Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complex interventions in classroom settings . Journal of the Learning Sciences , 2 , 141 – 178 . Brown , A . , & Campione , J . ( 1996 ) . Psychological theory and the design of innovative learning environments . On procedures , principles and systems . In L . Schauble & R . Glaser ( Eds . ) , Innovations in learning . New environments for education ( pp . 289 – 325 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Brown , J . S . , & VanLehn , K . ( 1980 ) . Repair theory : A generative theory of bugs in pro - cedural skills . Cognitive Science , 4 , 379 – 426 . Burrill , G . , Allison , J . , Breaux , G . , Kastberg , S . , Leatham , K . , & Sanchez , W . ( 2002 ) . Handheld graphing technology at the secondary level : Research findings and implications for classroom practice . Dallas , TX : Texas Instrument . Card , S . , MacKinlay , J . , & Robertson , G . ( 1991 ) . A morphological analysis of the de - sign space of input devices . ACM Transactions on Information Systems , 9 , 99 – 122 . Clark , H . H . ( 1996 ) . Using language . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Clark , H . H . , & Brennan , S . E . ( 1991 ) . Grounding in communication . In L . B . Resnick , J . Levine , & S . D . Behrens ( Eds . ) , Perspectives on socially shared cognition ( pp . 127 – 149 ) . Washington , DC : APA . Clark , H . , & Krych , M . ( 2004 ) . Speaking while monitoring addressees for understand - ing . Journal of Memory and Language , 50 ( 1 ) , 62 – 81 . Clark , H . H . , & Wilkes - Gibbs , D . ( 1986 ) . Referring as a collaborative process . Cogni - tion , 22 , 1 – 39 . Cole , K . ( 1995 ) . Equity issues in computer - based collaboration : Looking beyond surface indica - tors . Palo Alto , CA : Institute for Research in Learning . Collins , A . ( 1992 ) . Toward a science of design in education . In E . Scanlon & T . O’Shea ( Eds . ) , New directions in educational technology ( pp . 15 – 22 ) . Berlin : Springer - Verlag . DiSessa , A . ( 2000 ) . Changing minds . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Dix , A . , Finlay , J . , Abowd , G . , & Beale , R . ( 1997 ) . Human - computer interaction ( 2nd ed . ) . Oxford , UK : Prentice - Hall . Dourish , P . ( 2001 ) . Where the action is . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Ehn , P . ( 1992 ) . Scandinavian design : On participation and skill . In P . Adler & T . Winograd ( Eds . ) , Usability : Turning technologies into tools ( pp . 96 – 132 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Friedman , B . ( 2004 ) . Value Sensitive Design . Encyclopedia of human - computer interaction ( pp . 769 – 774 ) . Great Barrington , MA : Berkshire Publishing Group . Friedman , B . , & Kahn , P . H . , Jr . ( 2000 ) . New directions : A value - sensitive design ap - proach to augmented reality . Proceedings of Designing Augmented Reality Environments , DARE 2000 . New York : ACM Press . Friedman , B . , Kahn , P . H . , Jr . , & Borning , A . ( 2006 ) . Value sensitive design and infor - mation systems . In Z . Ping & D . Galletta ( Eds . ) , Human - computer interaction and management information systems — Foundations : Vol . 4 , Advances in management informa - tion systems ( pp . 348 – 372 ) . Armonk , NY : Sharpe . 448 TATAR Hall , R . ( 2001 ) . Collaboration and learning as contingent responses to designed envi - ronments . In T . Koschmann , R . Hall , & N . Miyake ( Eds . ) , CSCL 2 : Carrying forward the conversation ( pp . 185 – 196 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Harrison , S . , & Minneman , S . ( 1996 ) . Space , timestreams , and architecture . Design in the age of digital video . Proceedings of the Design Team of the Future Conference , Decem - ber 4 ( pp . 170 – 178 ) , Cambridge , MA : MIT . Hegedus , S . , & Kaput , J . ( 2003 ) . The effect of a simcalc connect classroom on students’ algebraicthinking . Proceedingsofthe2003JointMeetingofPMEandPME - NA , 3 , 47 – 54 . Hesteness , D . , Wells , M . , & Swackhamer , G . ( 1992 ) . Force concept inventory . The Phys - ics Teacher , 30 , 141 – 157 . Houlgate , S . ( Ed . ) . ( 2003 ) . The Hegel reader . Malden , MA : Blackwell . Jones , J . C . ( 1992 ) . Design methods . New York : Van Nostrand Reinhold . Kaput , J . , & Hegedus , S . ( 2003 ) . Exploiting classroom connectivity by aggregating stu - dent constructions to create new learning opportunities . Proceedings of the Joint Meet - ing of PME and PME - NA , 1 , 293 . Kaput , J . , & Sims - Knight , J . E . ( 1983a ) . Errors in translations to algebraic equations : Roots and implications . Focus on Learning Problems in Mathematics , 5 ( 3 ) , 63 – 78 . Kaput , J . , & Sims - Knight , J . E . ( 1983b ) . Misconceptions of algebraic symbols : Repre - sentations and component processes . Proceedings of the International Seminar : Miscon - ceptions in Science and Mathematics . Columbus , OH : ERIC Clearinghouse . Kim , K . , & Tatar , D . ( 2005 ) . Weak guidance with “look” functionality in handheld - based classroom activities . Proceedings of the Conference on Computer - Supported Collab - orative Learning . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Lakoff , G . , & Johnson , M . ( 1999 ) . Philosophy in the flesh : The embodied mind and the chal - lenge to western thought . New York : Basic Books . Leontiev , A . N . ( 1978 ) . Activity , consciousness and personality . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Leontiev , A . N . ( 1981 ) . The problem of activity in psychology . In J . V . Wertsch ( Ed . ) , The concept of activity in soviet psychology ( pp . 37 – 71 ) . Armonk , NY : Sharpe . Lewin , K . ( Ed . ) . ( 1951 ) . Field theory in social science ; selected theoretical papers . New York : Harper & Row . MacLean , A . , Young , R . M . , & Moran , T . P . ( 1989 ) . Design rationale : The argument behind the artifact . ACM SIGCHI Bulletin , 20 ( SI ) , 247 – 252 . Matchett , E . , & Briggs , A . H . ( 1966 ) . Practical design based on method ( funda - mental design method ) . In S . Gregory ( Ed . ) , The design method ( pp . 183 – 200 ) . London : Butterworths . McCullough , M . ( 2004 ) . Digital ground : Architecture , pervasive computing , and environmen - tal knowing . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . McDermott , R . ( 1974 ) . Achieving school failure : An anthropological approach to illit - eracy and social stratification . In G . Spindler ( Ed . ) , Education and cultural process ( pp . 82 – 118 ) . Holt , Rinehart , & Winston . Means , B . ( 2000 ) . Technology in America’s schools : Before and after y2k yesterday : Changing goals . In R . Brandt ( Ed . ) , Education in a new era ( pp . 185 – 210 ) . Alexan - dria , VA : Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development . Moschkovich , J . ( 2001 ) . “i went by twos , he went by ones” : Connecting multiple ways of talking about graphs . Paper presented . AERA . Seattle , WA . DESIGN TENSIONS FRAMEWORK 449 National Research Council . ( 1999 ) . How people learn : Brain , mind , experience , and school . Washington , DC : National Academy Press . Nemirovsky , R . , Kaput , J . , & Roschelle , J . ( 1998 ) . Enlarging mathematical activity from modeling phenomena to generating phenomena . Proceedings of the 1998 Psy - chology of Mathematics Education Conference ( 22 nd , Stellenbosch , South Africa ) , 3 . Nickerson , S . D . , Nydam , C . , & Bowers , J . S . ( 2000 , October ) . Linking algebraic con - cepts and contexts : Every picture tells a story . Mathematics Teaching in the Middle School , 6 , 93 – 98 . Papert , S . ( 1980 ) . Mindstorms : Children , computers and powerful ideas . New York : Basic Books . Penuel , W . R . , Abrahamson , A . L . , & Roschelle , J . ( 2006 ) . Theorizing the transformed classroom : A sociocultural interpretation of the effects of audience response sys - tems in higher education . In D . Banks ( Ed . ) , Audience response systems in higher educa - tion : Applications and cases ( pp . 187 – 208 ) . Hershey , PA : Information Sciences . Rittel , H . ( 1972 ) . On the planning crisis : Systems analysis of the “first and second gen - erations . ” Bedrifts Okonomen , 8 , 390 – 396 . Roschelle , J . ( 1992 ) . Learning by collaborating : Convergent conceptual change . Jour - nal of the Learning Sciences , 2 , 235 – 276 . Rosson , M . B . , & Carroll , J . ( 2002 ) . Usability engineering : Scenario - based development of human - computer interaction . San Francisco : Morgan - Kaufmann . Sandoval , W . A . , & Bell , P . ( 2004 ) . Design - based research methods for studying learn - ing in context : Introduction . Educational Psychologist , 39 , 199 – 201 . Schon , D . ( 1983 ) . The reflective practitioner : How professionals think in action . New York : Basic Books . Schorr , R . , & Kaput , J . ( 2007 ) . Changing representational infrastructure changes most everything : The case of simcalc , algebra and calculus . In M . K . Heid & G . Blume ( Eds . ) , Research on technology in the learning and teaching of mathematics : Syntheses and perspectives . Charlotte , NC : Information Age Publishing . Sellen , A . J . , & Harper , R . H . R . ( 2002 ) . The myth of the paperless office . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Shneiderman , B . , & Plaisant , C . ( 2005 ) . Designing the user interface : Strategies for effective human - computer interaction ( 4th ed . ) . Wilbraham , UK : Addison - Wesley . Simon , H . ( 1982 ) . Theories of bounded rationality . In Models of bounded rationality . Behav - ioral economics and business organization ( Vol . 2 , pp . 408 – 423 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Stefik , M . , Foster , G . , Bobrow , D . , Tatar , D . , . & Lanning , S . ( 1987 ) . WYSIWIS Re - vised : Experiences with Multi - user Interfaces . ACM Transactions on Office Informa - tion Systems , 5 ( 2 ) , 147 – 167 . Stevens , R . ( 2001 ) . Divisions of labor in school and in the workplace : Comparing com - puter - and paper - suppored activities across settings . In T . Koschmann , R . Hall , & N . Miyake ( Eds . ) , CSCL 2 : Carrying forward the conversation ( pp . 223 – 252 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Strauss , A . ( 1985 ) . Work and the division of labor . The Sociological Quarterly , 29 , 1 – 19 . Suchman , L . A . ( 1987 ) . Plans and situated actions . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge Univer - sity Press . 450 TATAR Sutcliffe , A . , Carroll , J . , & MacLean , A . ( 1994 ) . Design rationale : Mutual opportunities for research and practice . Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ‘94 ) . New York : ACM . Tang , J . C . , & Minneman , S . L . ( 1990 ) . Videodraw : A video interface for collaborative draw - ing . Palo Alto , CA : Xerox Palo Alto Research Center . Tatar , D . , Foster , G . , & Bobrow , D . ( 1991 ) . Design for conversation : Lessons from cognoter . International Journal of Man - Machine Studies , 34 , 185 – 209 . Vahey , P . , Tatar , D . , & Roschelle , J . ( 2004 ) . Leveraging handhelds to increase student learning : Engaging middle school students with the mathematics of change . Pro - ceedings of the 6th International Conference of the Learning Sciences ( ICLS 2004 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Vahey , P . , Tatar , D . , & Roschelle , J . ( 2006 ) . Using handheld technology to move be - tween the private and public in the classroom . In M . van’t Hooft & K . Swan ( Eds . ) , Ubiquitous computing in education : Invisible technology , visible impact ( pp . 187 – 210 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Vygotsky , L . , Cole , M . , John - Steiner , V . , & Scribner , S . ( 1978 ) . Mind in society . Cam - bridge MA : Harvard University Press . Wilensky , U . , & Stroup , W . ( 2000 ) . Networked gridlock : Students enacting complex dynamic phenomena with the hubnet architecture . Proceedings of the Fourth Annual International Conference of the Learning Sciences . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum As - sociates . DESIGN TENSIONS FRAMEWORK 451