From genomics to chemical genomics : new developments in KEGG Minoru Kanehisa 1 , 2 , * , Susumu Goto 1 , Masahiro Hattori 1 , Kiyoko F . Aoki - Kinoshita 1 , Masumi Itoh 1 , Shuichi Kawashima 2 , Toshiaki Katayama 2 , Michihiro Araki 2 and 5 Mika Hirakawa 1 , 3 1 Bioinformatics Center , Institute for Chemical Research , Kyoto University , Uji , Kyoto 611 - 0011 , Japan , 2 Human Genome Center , Institute of Medical Science , University of Tokyo , Minato - ku , Tokyo 108 - 8639 , Japan and 3 Institute for Bioinformatics Research and Development , Japan Science and Technology Agency , Chiyoda - ku , Tokyo 102 - 8666 , Japan 10 Received September 14 , 2005 ; Revised and Accepted October 17 , 2005 ABSTRACT The increasing amount of genomic and molecular information is the basis for understanding higher - order biological systems , such as the cell and the 15 organism , and their interactions with the environ - ment , as well as for medical , industrial and other practical applications . The KEGG resource ( http : / / www . genome . jp / kegg / ) provides a reference know - ledge base for linking genomes to biological systems , 20 categorized as building blocks in the genomic space ( KEGG GENES ) and the chemical space ( KEGG LIGAND ) , and wiring diagrams of interaction networks and reaction networks ( KEGG PATHWAY ) . A fourth component , KEGG BRITE , has been formally 25 added to the KEGG suite of databases . This reflects our attempt to computerize functional interpretations as part of the pathway reconstruction process based on the hierarchically structured knowledge about the genomic , chemical and network spaces . In accord - 30 ance with the new chemical genomics initiatives , the scope of KEGG LIGAND has been significantly expanded to cover both endogenous and exogenous molecules . Specifically , RPAIR contains curated chemical structure transformation patterns extracted 35 from known enzymatic reactions , which would enable analysis of genome - environment interactions , such as the prediction of new reactions and new enzyme genes that would degrade new environmental compounds . Additionally , drug information is now 40 stored separately and linked to new KEGG DRUG structure maps . INTRODUCTION While traditional genomics and other types of omics approaches have contributed to our knowledge on the genomic 45 space of possible genes and proteins that make up the bio - logical system , the new chemical genomics initiatives will give us a glimpse of the chemical space of possible chemical substances that exist as an interface between the biological world and the natural world . The KEGG database project 50 was initiated in 1995 , the last year of the ﬁrst 5 - year phase of the Japanese Human Genome Programme ( 1 ) . After 10 years of development in parallel with the growing number of completely sequenced genomes and increased activities in post - genomic research , the KEGG project has 55 entered a new phase in accordance with the chemical genom - ics initiatives . KEGG is a database resource for understanding higher - order functions and utilities of the biological system , such as the cell or the organism , from genomic and molecular 60 information . In fact , we consider KEGG as a computer rep - resentation of the biological system , consisting of building blocks and wiring diagrams , which can be used for modeling and simulation as well as for browsing and retrieval ( 2 ) . Ori - ginally , the wiring diagrams involved endogenous molecules , 65 both those that are directly encoded in the genome ( proteins and RNAs ) and those that are indirectly encoded through biosynthetic / biodegradation pathways ( metabolites , glycans and so on ) . Now we are extending these wiring diagrams to include exogenous molecules . This will help understand inter - 70 actions between the biological system and the natural envir - onment , and would eventually lead to representation and reconstruction of another higher - level biological system , the biological world . Here we report new developments in KEGG towards this direction . * To whom correspondence should be addressed . Tel : + 81 774 38 3270 ; Fax : + 81 774 38 3269 ; Email : kanehisa @ kuicr . kyoto - u . ac . jp (cid:2) The Author 2006 . Published by Oxford University Press . All rights reserved . The online version of this article has been published under an open access model . Users are entitled to use , reproduce , disseminate , or display the open access version of this article for non - commercial purposes provided that : the original authorship is properly and fully attributed ; the Journal and Oxford University Press are attributed as theoriginalplace of publication withthe correct citationdetailsgiven ; if an article issubsequentlyreproducedor disseminatednot inits entiretybut only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated . For commercial re - use , please contact journals . permissions @ oxfordjournals . org D354 – D357 Nucleic Acids Research , 2006 , Vol . 34 , Database issue doi : 10 . 1093 / nar / gkj102 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / na r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 34 / s upp l _ 1 / D 354 / 1133379 b y gue s t on 14 J anua r y 2019 THE KEGG RESOURCE Overview KEGG consists of four main databases . As illustrated in Figure 1 they are categorized as building blocks in the 5 genomic space ( GENES databases ) and the chemical space ( LIGAND database ) , wiring diagrams in the network space ( PATHWAY database ) and ontologies for pathway recon - struction ( BRITE database ) . BRITE had been a separate data - base for many years , but it was formally included in KEGG 10 in release 34 . 0 ( April 2005 ) to establish a logical foundation for the KEGG Project . The URLs for accessing KEGG are summarized in Table 1 . Biological systems are represented in KEGG by two types of graphs , called nested graphs and line graphs in theoretical 15 computer science . The nested graph is a graph whose nodes can themselves be graphs . It is used for representing KEGG network hierarchy and for pathway reconstruction and func - tional inference . The line graph is a graph derived by inter - changing nodes and edges of another graph . It represents the 20 inherent complementarity of the metabolic pathway , which can be viewed either as a network of genes ( enzymes ) or as a network of compounds , meaning that one can be generated from the other by the line graph transformation . Thus , the line graph is the basis for integrated analysis of genomic and 25 chemical information . BRITE database KEGG BRITE is a collection of hierarchies and binary relations with two inter - related objectives corresponding to the two types of graphs : to automate functional interpretations 30 associated with the KEGG pathway reconstruction and to assist discovery of empirical rules involving genome - environment interactions . Currently , we focus on hierarchical structuring of our knowledge on functional aspects of the genomic and chemical spaces ( Table 2 ) , including the KEGG orthology 35 ( KO ) system for ortholog / paralog gene groups , the reaction classiﬁcation ( RC ) system for biochemical reactions , and other classiﬁcations for compounds and drugs tentatively called chemical ontology as shown in Figure 1 . We plan to extend the KO system to include the deﬁnition of functional modules 40 in the KEGG pathways and to develop ontologies for compu - tational inference of higher - order functions . PATHWAY database The KEGG PATHWAY database is a collection of manually drawn pathway maps for metabolism , genetic information Figure 1 . The overall architecture of KEGG now consisting of four main components . KEGG BRITE has been formally added to establish a logical foundation for inference of higher - order functions . Table 1 . URLs for the KEGG resource Database / content URL KEGG home page www . genome . jp / kegg / KEGG table of contents www . genome . jp / kegg / kegg2 . html KEGG PATHWAY www . genome . jp / kegg / pathway . html KEGG GENES www . genome . jp / kegg / genes . html KEGG LIGAND www . genome . jp / kegg / ligand . html KEGG BRITE www . genome . jp / kegg / brite . html KGML www . genome . jp / kegg / xml / KEGG API www . genome . jp / kegg / soap / KEGG DRUG www . genome . jp / kegg / drug / KEGG GLYCAN www . genome . jp / kegg / glycan / KEGG REACTION www . genome . jp / kegg / reaction / KEGG EXPRESSION www . genome . jp / kegg / expression / KEGG ANNOTATION www . genome . jp / kegg / kaas / KegArray / KegDraw www . genome . jp / download / DBGET www . genome . jp / dbget / BLAST / FASTA blast . genome . jp / GenomeNet FTP www . genome . jp / anonftp / GenomeNet home page www . genome . jp / The current GenomeNet address ‘www . genome . jp’ is recommended , but the previous address ‘www . genome . ad . jp’ will still be made available . Table 2 . Functional hierarchies in KEGG BRITE Network hierarchy KO Protein families EnzymesTranscription factors RibosomeTranslation factors ABC transporters G - protein - coupled receptors Ion channels CytokinesCytokinereceptorsCelladhesionmolecules ( CAMs ) CAM ligands CD molecules Bacterial motility proteins CompoundsCompounds with biological roles LipidsPhytochemical compounds Compound interactions Ion channel agonists / antagonists Cytochrome P450 substrates DrugsTherapeutic category of drugs Drug classification DiseasesDisease genes , genomes and pathways OrganismsKEGGorganisms As on September 12 , 2005 . Nucleic Acids Research , 2006 , Vol . 34 , Database issue D355 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / na r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 34 / s upp l _ 1 / D 354 / 1133379 b y gue s t on 14 J anua r y 2019 processing , environmental information processing such as signal transduction , various other cellular processes and human diseases . During the past 2 years we have signiﬁcantly increased the number of pathway maps for regulatory path - 5 ways including signal transduction , ligand – receptor interac - tion and cell communication , all based on extensive survey of published literature . For metabolic pathways we created two new sections , ‘Glycan Biosynthesis and Metabolism’ and ‘Biosynthesis of Polyketides and Nonribosomal Peptides’ . 10 The XML version of the pathway maps is available for both metabolic and regulatory pathways . These KEGG Markup Language ( KGML ) ﬁles provide graph information that can be used to computationally reproduce and manipulate KEGG pathway maps . 15 GENES database The KEGG GENES database is a collection of gene catalogs for all complete genomes and some partial genomes ( 31 euka - ryotes , 235 bacteriaand 23 archaea as of September 12 , 2005 ) , generated from publicly available resources , mostly NCBI 20 RefSeq ( 3 ) . All genomes in KEGG GENES are subject to SSDB computation and given manual KO assignments as described below . There are auxiliary collections of gene catalogs : DGENES for draft genomes ( 21 eukaryotes ) and EGENES for expressed sequence tag consensus contigs 25 ( 25 plants ) . These are meant to supplement the repertoire of KEGG organisms , and all are given automatic KO assign - ments using GENES as a reference dataset . Each GENES entry contains cross - reference information to outside databases , including NCBI gi numbers , Entrez Gene IDs 30 and UniProt accession numbers . Starting with KEGG release 37 . 0 ( January 2006 ) automatic ID conversion is implemented enabling use of such outside identiﬁers to access KEGG GENES and then the other KEGG databases . KEGG orthology 35 There is a total of over one million genes in KEGG GENES , representing a tiny , but well - characterized part of the genomic space that makes up the biological world . From this part we organize knowledge about orthologous genes and paralogous genes , which , we hope , can be generalized for understanding 40 the entire genomic space . This knowledge is stored in the KO system , a pathway - based classiﬁcation of orthologous genes , including orthologous relationships of paralogous gene groups . The KO identiﬁer , or the K number , is a common identiﬁer for linking genomic information in the GENES data - 45 base with network information in the PATHWAY database . The pathway nodes represented by rectangles in the KEGG reference pathway maps are given KO identiﬁers , so that organism - speciﬁc pathways can be computationally generated once each genome is annotated with KO’s . This annotation or 50 the KO assignment is done manually for KEGG GENES with the help of the GFIT tool using best - hit relations in pairwise genome comparisons stored in the SSDB database ( 4 ) . Because the number of ortholog groups that can be linked to pathways is limited , we have introduced two additional ways 55 to deﬁne KO’s . One is to use COG ( 5 ) to cover a broad - range of possible ortholog groups . The other is to rely on experts’ classiﬁcations of protein families , which tend to be more functionally oriented resulting in narrowly deﬁned KO’s . A growing number of protein families are being added to 60 the KO system , and they are shown in separate hierarchies different from the KEGG network hierarchy . The KO system can be best viewed from the KEGG BRITE database ( Table 2 ) . LIGAND database Originally , the LIGAND database consisted of just two 65 components : ENZYME for enzyme nomenclature and COM - POUND for chemical compound structures ( 6 ) . It later suc - cessively included additional components : REACTION for chemical reaction formulas , GLYCAN for glycan structures , RPAIR for reactant pair transformation patterns and DRUG 70 for drug information . This expansion of the LIGAND collec - tion represents our expanded efforts for understanding the chemical space that is part of the biological world . The KEGG DRUG database is a new addition from KEGG release 36 . 1 ( December 2005 ) . It contains chemical structures 75 and additional information such as therapeutic categories and target molecules . A most unique feature of KEGG DRUG is a collection of drug structure maps , which graphically illustrate , in a manner similar to KEGG pathway maps , our knowledge on groups of chemical structural patterns , therapeutic categor - 80 ies , their relationships and the chronology of drug develop - ment if known . Reaction classification The RC system in the chemical space is a counterpart of the KO system in the genomic space ( Figure 1 ) . It represents our 85 attempt to organize knowledge on chemical reactions by categorizing chemical structure transformation patterns . The REACTION database contains individual reaction formulas taken from the ENZYME database . Each reaction formula is split into a set of substrate - product pairs , and the chemical 90 structure comparison program SIMCOMP is applied to obtain an optimal alignment . This comparison is based on atom typ - ing , which is the conversion of regular atomic ( C , N , O , S , P and so on ) representation to what we call KCF representation that consists of 68 atom types distinguishing functional groups 95 and atomic environments ( 7 ) . The chemical structure align - ment generated by SIMCOMP is used to deﬁne the R atom for the reaction center , the D atom ( s ) for adjacent atom ( s ) in the mismatched region and the M atom ( s ) for adjacent atom ( s ) in the matched region ( 8 ) . This is ﬁrst done computationally and 100 is followed by extensive manual curation . The RPAIR database is still under development , but it is the basis for the RC system categorizing curated RDM patterns . Since an enzymatic reaction usually involves multiple sub - strates and products , one EC number corresponds to a com - 105 bination of RDM patterns . The RC system has enabled automatic assignment of EC numbers from a set of substrate and product structures ( 8 ) and will further enable exploration of unknown reactions by generating plausible combinations of RDM patterns , which may then be related to possible paralogs 110 of enzyme genes . Glycosyltransferase reactions Functional glycomics has been a most successful area for integrated analysis of genomic and chemical information ( 9 ) . The carbohydrate sequence of glycans is determined by 115 a speciﬁc set of biosynthetic reactions catalyzed by different D356 Nucleic Acids Research , 2006 , Vol . 34 , Database issue D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / na r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 34 / s upp l _ 1 / D 354 / 1133379 b y gue s t on 14 J anua r y 2019 types of glycosyltransferases . Thus , once we know the reper - toire of glycosyltransferases in the genome or in the transcrip - tome , it should in principle be possible to predict the repertoire of glycan structures . Conversely , the knowledge about glycan 5 structures can be used to search and annotate new glycosyl - transferases . Composite Structure Map in KEGG GLYCAN is a tool for converting genomic or transcriptomic data to glycan structure variations based on a curated set of known glycosyl - transferase reactions . 10 ACCESSING KEGG Web and FTP KEGG is the major component of the Japanese GenomeNet , which is served by the Kyoto University Bioinformatics Center . The other GenomeNet services including DBGET 15 and BLAST / FASTA searches are now primarily developed and used to support KEGG . The ofﬁcial URL for GenomeNet has been modiﬁed to http : / / www . genome . jp / , but the former URL http : / / www . genome . ad . jp / will still be made available ( Table 1 ) . To download the KEGG data , academic users 20 may use the GenomeNet FTP site . KEGG API The KEGG API service has become an increasingly popular mode of access . It is the SOAP / WSDL interface to KEGG , enabling users to write their own programs to access , custom - 25 ize and utilize KEGG . KegArray and KegDraw KegArray and KegDraw are standalone Java applications that make use of the KEGG resources . KegArray is for microarray data analysis in conjunction with KEGG pathways and gen - 30 omes . KegDraw is for drawing glycan structures and chemical compound structures , which can then be used to query against KEGG and PubChem databases . Both are freely available to academic and non - academic users . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 35 The KEGG project is supported by the Institute for Bioinformatics Research and Development of the Japan Science and Technology Agency , the 21st Century COE program ‘Genome Science’ , and a grant - in - aid for scientific research on the priority area from the Ministry of Education , 40 Culture , Sports , Science and Technology of Japan . The com - putational resources were provided by the Bioinformatics Center , Institute for Chemical Research , Kyoto University . Funding to pay the Open Access publication charges for this article was provided by the grant - in - aid for scientific research . 45 Conflict of interest statement . None declared . REFERENCES 1 . Kanehisa , M . ( 1997 ) A database for post - genome analysis . Trends Genet . , 13 , 375 – 376 . 2 . Kanehisa , M . , Goto , S . , Kawashima , S . , Okuno , Y . and Hattori , M . ( 2004 ) 50 The KEGG resource for deciphering the genome . Nucleic Acids Res . , 32 , D277 – D280 . 3 . Pruitt , K . D . , Tatusova , T . and Maglott , D . R . ( 2005 ) NCBI Reference Sequence ( RefSeq ) : a curated non - redundant sequence database of genomes , transcripts and proteins . Nucleic Acids Res . , 33 , 55 D501 – D504 . 4 . Kanehisa , M . , Goto , S . , Kawashima , S . and Nakaya , A . ( 2002 ) The KEGG databases at GenomeNet . Nucleic Acids Res . , 30 , 42 – 46 . 5 . Tatusov , R . L . , Natale , D . A . , Garkavtsev , I . V . , Tatusova , T . A . , Shankavaram , U . T . , Rao , B . S . , Kiryutin , B . , Galperin , M . Y . , Fedorova , N . D . 60 and Koonin , E . V . ( 2001 ) The COG database : new developments in phylogenetic classification of proteins from complete genomes . Nucleic Acids Res . , 29 , 22 – 28 . 6 . Goto , S . , Nishioka , T . andKanehisa , M . ( 1998 ) LIGAND : chemicaldatabase for enzyme reactions . Bioinformatics , 14 , 591 – 599 . 65 7 . Hattori , M . , Okuno , Y . , Goto , S . and Kanehisa , M . ( 2003 ) Development of a chemical structure comparison method for integrated analysis of chemical and genomic information in the metabolic pathways . J . Am . Chem . Soc . , 125 , 11853 – 11865 . 8 . Kotera , M . , Okuno , Y . , Hattori , M . , Goto , S . and Kanehisa , M . ( 2004 ) 70 Computational assignment of the EC numbers for genomic - scale analysis of enzymatic reactions . J . Am . Chem . Soc . , 126 , 16487 – 16498 . 9 . Hashimoto , K . , Goto , S . , Kawano , S . , Aoki - Kinoshita , K . F . , Ueda , N . , Hamajima , M . , Kawasaki , T . and Kanehisa , M . ( 2005 ) KEGG as a glycome 75 informatics resource . Glycobiology , in press . Nucleic Acids Research , 2006 , Vol . 34 , Database issue D357 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / na r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 34 / s upp l _ 1 / D 354 / 1133379 b y gue s t on 14 J anua r y 2019