Mastery - approach goals and knowledge transfer : An investigation into the effects of task structure and framing instructions Daniel M . Belenky a , ⁎ , Timothy J . Nokes - Malach b a Human - Computer Interaction Institute , School of Computer Science , Carnegie Mellon University , United States b Department of Psychology , Learning Research and Development Center , University of Pittsburgh , United States a b s t r a c t a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 19 March 2012 Received in revised form 29 November 2012 Accepted 16 February 2013 Keywords : Achievement goals Framing Invention Motivation Preparation for future learning Transfer Although prior work has shown that mastery - approach achievement goals are related to positive learning behaviors ( e . g . , moreinterest , perseverance , andself - regulation ) , lessisknownabouthowthesegoalsinteract with instruction to in ﬂ uence knowledge transfer . To address these issues we conducted a laboratory experi - ment investigating how two aspects of the instructional environment , the task structure ( tell - and - practice direct instruction vs . minimally - guided open - ended invention activities ) and the task framing ( mastery vs . performance ) , affected students ' task - based mastery goal adoption and transfer when learning statistics . The results showed that structure was more effective than framing in manipulating students ' mastery - approach goal adoption . In addition , students ' existing mastery - approach orientations for mathematics strongly predicted knowledge transfer for all of the instructional conditions except for students given inven - tion activities with a performance framing . For these students , the relationship between mastery - approach orientation and transfer was not observed , indicating that this condition makes transfer more likely for those lower in mastery - approach orientation . The results are discussed in terms of the implications for theories of achievement goal motivation , knowledge transfer , and instruction . © 2013 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction A common goal of the cognitive and educational sciences is to understand how people learn new concepts and transfer them from one task or situation to another ( Bransford & Schwartz , 1999 ; Lobato , 2006 ; National Research Council , 2000 ) . Much research in cognitive psychology has focused on identifying the underlying cognitive pro - cesses and knowledge representations that either facilitate or inhibit knowledge transfer ( for overviews see Detterman , 1993 ; Gick & Holyoak , 1987 ; Nokes , 2009 ) . Althoughsomeofthisworkhasexamined the role of individual variation in these processes ( e . g . , effects of exper - tise ) , the majority has ignored the effects of individual differences on transfer , especially with respect to motivation . In contrast , much work in the educational sciences has focused on the relationship between individual differences in motivation and academic performance , but little of this research has examined knowledge transfer . One aim of the current work is to begin to bridge these two literatures by examining the effect of individual differences in student motivation , operation - alized as achievement goals , on knowledge transfer . Achievement goals are the reasons people have for engaging in competence - based achievement settings , such as academics or sports ( Covington , 2000 ) . The prevailing way of classifying achievement goals is a 2 ( mastery / performance ) ×2 ( approach / avoidance ) framework that has been well - validated ( Elliot & McGregor , 2001 ; Elliot & Murayama , 2008 ) . This model separates the evaluative criterion ( mastery or per - formance ) from the focus ( approach or avoidance ) , which results in four distinct goals ( mastery - approach , mastery - avoidance , performance - approach , and performance - avoidance ) . Mastery goals refer to a person ' s aims to develop his or her competence in comparison to an internally - referenced expectation or intra - personally de ﬁ ned prior levels of competence , while performance goals refer to a focus on demonstrat - ing ability , often in comparison to a normative standard — that is , in com - parison to others . Approach goals refer to seeking positive outcomes , while avoidance goals refer to averting negative ones . The literature on achievement goal theory shows that these goals lead to different patterns of affect , interest , and achievement ( Harackiewicz , Barron , Pintrich , Elliot , & Thrash , 2002 ) , and that mastery - approach goals may be particularly predictive of learning in more complex environments and on more con - ceptual tasks ( Senko , Hulleman , & Harackiewicz , 2011 ; Utman , 1997 ) . However , very little is known about the relationship between a student ' s achievement goals and what is learned from a given learning activity , as well as whether or not that knowledge will transfer to a newtaskorsituation ( Pugh & Bergin , 2006 ) . Are some goals better pre - dictors of knowledge transfer and future learning than others ? What Learning and Individual Differences 25 ( 2013 ) 21 – 34 ⁎ Corresponding author at : 2602H Newell Simon Hall , Human - Computer Interaction Institute , School of Computer Science , Carnegie Mellon University , 5000 Forbes Avenue , Pittsburgh , PA 15213 , United States . Tel . : + 1 412 268 8230 . E - mail address : dbelenky @ andrew . cmu . edu ( D . M . Belenky ) . 1041 - 6080 / $ – see front matter © 2013 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . lindif . 2013 . 02 . 004 Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect Learning and Individual Differences journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / lindif instructional factors affect students ' achievement goals and whether or not a student adopts a particular goal for a speci ﬁ c learning or test task ? To begin to address these questions we have conducted a series of laboratory studies in which we have measured students ' achievement goals and examined their relationship to learning and knowledge transfer . In past work we found that the degree to which students reported being mastery - approach oriented toward mathematics predicted how likely they were to transfer a statistics concept from learning to test ( Belenky & Nokes - Malach , 2012 ) . In addition to using a well - established self - report measure of achievement goal orientation ( Elliot & McGregor , 2001 ) , we also developed and tested a “ task - based ” goal activity questionnaire to measure students ' achieve - ment goal adoption for the speci ﬁ c learning task . We found that a form of structured inquiry instruction ( Colburn , 2000 ; Roll , Holmes , Day , & Bonn , 2012 ) – which is referred to throughout as an “ invention ” activity – in which students ﬁ rst attempted to invent the necessary statistical procedures for the task resulted in increased task - based mastery goals compared to a more standard form of direct instruction called “ tell - and - practice , ” in which students were ﬁ rst shown a method for solving those types of problems and then given an opportunity to practice it on a new problem . Furthermore , we found an interaction between students ' achievement goal orientation and the type of instruction , such that students who were low in mastery - approach goal orientation in the invention condition were equally likely to trans - fer as those high in mastery - approach orientation , whereas those given direct instruction were only likely to transfer if they were already high in mastery - approach goal orientation . This interaction suggested that the type of learning activity affected students ' achievement goal adop - tion during the learning task , which impacted the likelihood of later transfer . In the current study we build directly on this past work in two ways . First , we aim to provide a further test of the hypothesis that higher mastery - approach goal orientations lead to better transfer from instruction whereas the other goals do not . Very few studies have documented this relationship and it is critical to provide further evidence that these different goals are related to different cognitive outcomes . Furthermore , cognitive psychology research on knowledge transfer has a long history of predictions of high levels of transfer that are not supported by empirical observations ( e . g . Bassok & Holyoak , 1989 ; Gick & Holyoak , 1980 ; Reed , Ernst , & Banerji , 1974 ) . Establishing stable individualdifferences thatpredicttransfercouldhelpresearchers better understand transfer processes and outcomes ( Nokes & Belenky , 2011 ; Perkins & Salomon , 2012 ) . Second , we aim to test the role of instructional activities in the adoption of task - based goals to see how these effects interact with existing motivation to in ﬂ uence transfer . We extend our past work by examining the effect of framing instruc - tions for the learning activity ( mastery versus performance ) in addition to the effect of the structure of the learning activities ( invention versus tell - and - practice ) on goal adoption and transfer . We will brie ﬂ y eluci - date how each of these aims ﬁ t into the broader existing literature on achievement goals and transfer , as well as to more fully describe the Belenky and Nokes - Malach ( 2012 ) study , which this work builds upon . 1 . 1 . Transfer and mastery - approach goals Research investigating the validity and reliability of achievement goal self - report surveys has provided much evidence that each goal represents a separate psychological construct and that students can have varying degrees of each goal for any given achievement domain ( Bong , 2001 ; Elliot & Murayama , 2008 ) . Based on these analyses many researchers have investigated the independent contribution of each goal ( or their interaction ; Harackiewicz et al . , 2002 ) for predicting someoutcomemeasure . Thisresearchtraditionhasledtotheidenti ﬁ ca - tion of a consistent pattern of research ﬁ ndings for each of the goals , in terms of what affective experiences , behaviors , and academic outcomes they are related to , which we describe next . Performance - avoidance goals have been correlated with a host of negative behaviors , feelings , strategies , and outcomes . For example , theyarerelatedtodisorganizedstudybehaviorsandshallowprocessing strategies ( Elliot , McGregor , & Gable , 1999 ) , test anxiety ( Elliot & McGregor , 1999 ) , lower interest ( Elliot & Harackiewicz , 1996 ) , and lower grades ( Elliot & Church , 1997 ) . Performance - approach goals have been associated with a mix of both positive and negative out - comes . On the positive side , they are often correlated with academic outcomes , such as grades ( see Harackiewicz et al . , 2002 ) . However , on the negative side they have been correlated with more shallow study strategies ( Elliot et al . , 1999 ) , test anxiety ( Elliot & McGregor , 1999 ) , and a dependence on high evaluations of ability , without which the learner may shift toward performance - avoidance goals ( Middleton , Kaplan , & Midgley , 2004 ) . Mastery - avoidance goals have only recently begun to receive empirical investigation so a consistent pattern of results has yet to emerge ( Madjar , Kaplan , & Weinstock , 2011 ; Richey & Nokes - Malach , 2013 ; Van Yperen , Elliot , & Anseel , 2009 ) . Because we are interested in studying how different paths of successful learning affect what knowledge is gained , our work focuses on mastery - approach goals , as these have been correlated with positive outcomes expected to in ﬂ uence transfer . Speci ﬁ cally , mastery - approach goals have been correlated with outcomes such as intrinsic motivation , interest , better self - regulation , and deeper strategy use ( Ford , Smith , Weissbein , Gully , & Salas , 1998 ; Harackiewicz , Durik , Barron , Linnenbrink - Garcia , & Tauer , 2008 ; Somuncuoglu & Yildirim , 1999 ) . In addition , they are associated with more positive affective experiences , such as feelings of challenge in response to dif ﬁ culties ( Elliott & Dweck , 1988 ) . Theselearningprocesses , affectiveexperiences , and outcomes are hypothesized to be important to learning in a way that produces knowledge transfer ( Nokes & Belenky , 2011 ; Nokes - Malach & Mestre , in press ) , but little empirical evidence exists that documents the direct in ﬂ uence of mastery - approach goals on transfer ( Pugh & Bergin , 2006 ) . In fact , mixed effects have been observed for mastery - approach goals on achievement measures such as exam scores or ﬁ nal semester grades ( see Harackiewicz et al . , 2002 ; Linnenbrink - Garcia , Tyson , & Patall , 2008 ) . A recent review found that about 40 % of studies that investigated the relationship between mastery - approach goals and achievement found a signi ﬁ cant positive correlation between the two variables ( Linnenbrink - Garcia et al . , 2008 ) , indicating that a majority of studies do not ﬁ nd evidence for a bene ﬁ t of mastery - approach on achievement . There are several potential explanations for this pattern of results . It is possible that mastery goals lead to studying that is focused on what the person ﬁ nds interesting , rather than what they expect to be on the test ( Senko & Miles , 2008 ) , or that mastery - approach goals which are adopted for social desirability reasons ( e . g . , wanting to please the teacher ) may not be as effective in promoting learning as an exclusive focus on improving one ' s competence ( Darnon , Dompnier , Delmas , Pulfrey , & Butera , 2009 ) . Another possibility is that the mastery - approach oriented students acquire a deep under - standing of the materials , but the tests ( e . g . , multiple - choice exams ) do not assess this type of learning . This idea has been called the “ depth - of - learning ” hypothesis ( see Senko et al . , 2011 ) , and it proposes that students with mastery - approach goals do indeed learn the material in a “ deeper ” way – that is , they gain more conceptual , abstract knowledge which is likely to transfer – but this does not lead to increased achievement because the achievement measures them - selves do not assess these types of learning outcomes . The study reported in Belenky and Nokes - Malach ( 2012 ) found some initial evidence for this hypothesis . Speci ﬁ cally , we tested the in ﬂ uence of existing mastery - approach goal orientation for math on transfer and examined how this motivation interacted with two different types of instruction , invention and tell - and - practice . We mea - sured transfer using the “ Preparation for Future Learning ” paradigm 22 D . M . Belenky , T . J . Nokes - Malach / Learning and Individual Differences 25 ( 2013 ) 21 – 34 developed by Bransford and Schwartz ( 1999 ) and Schwartz and Martin ( 2004 ) ( see Fig . 1 ) . In this paradigm , transfer is measured through a student ' s abilitytotransferknowledgefrominstructiontoanewoppor - tunity to learn ( i . e . , the learning resource ) and then to use that knowl - edge to solve a new problem or perform a novel task ( captured by the two inside lines in Fig . 1 ) . This is in contrast to a more “ traditional ” method of measuring transfer , which focuses on testing how knowl - edge gainedfrominstructionis directlyappliedtoanoveltransferprob - lem ( captured by the outside lines in Fig . 1 ) . We provided instruction on basic procedures and concepts in statistics , like how to calculate mean deviation . Students were then given an assessment that included a critical transfer problem that required the calculation of a standardized score ( although the problem did not explicitly say so ) . Half of the students in each instructional condition also received an embedded learning resource in the assess - ment ( inside lines of Fig . 1 ) . Speci ﬁ cally , they received a problem which included a worked example and explanation of how to calculate a standardized score . The critical measure of transfer is whether the instruction prepared students to learn from the worked example in suchawaythattheywouldtransfertheirknowledgetothetargettrans - fer item . Those given the learning resource were much more likely to solve the problem than those not given the resource . Furthermore , there was a clear pattern that higher levels of existing mastery - approach goal orientation for math predicted better transfer ( see Fig . 2 ) . This is evidence that students ' mastery - approach goals in ﬂ uenced what they learned from the different learning activities and subsequently affected the likelihood of knowledge transfer . Critically , no other achievement goal orientations were predictive of transfer . No priorresearchhaddemonstratedsuchadirectlinkbetweenmotivational orientation and transfer , particularly in an academic learning domain . In addition , we manipulated the type of instruction ( which we refer to henceforth as the “ structure ” of the learning activity ) that studentsreceivedbygivingthemeitherinventionortell - and - practiceac - tivities as they learned , as described above . Although there was no main effect of either type of structure on transfer , there was an interesting interaction between existing mastery - approach and the type of learning activity a student engaged in . Speci ﬁ cally , for the tell - and - practice condi - tion , the likelihood of transfer was strongly related to the amount of mastery - approach goal orientation for math one endorsed , but for the invention condition , the relationship was mitigated . Only those students high in mastery - approach goal orientation were likely to transfer from tell - and - practice instruction , while all students in the invention condi - tion were about equally likely to transfer , regardless of their mastery - approach goal orientation . To help understand this result , we next turn to how the different structures in ﬂ uenced goal adoption for the task . 1 . 2 . Task - based mastery goal adoption In our previous study we administered a task - based questionnaire during the course of the learning activities that asked students about the goals they focused on . Although achievement goal orientations are considered stable constructs ( Elliot , 1999 ) , they can be in ﬂ uenced by features of the environment ( Ames , 1992 ) , or by framing manipu - lations ( Elliot & Harackiewicz , 1996 ) . The activity questionnaire was an attempt to measure this spontaneous and task - speci ﬁ c goal adop - tion . The invention students reported adopting more mastery goals for the task than those who completed tell - and - practice activities . The open - ended nature of the activities seemed to prompt students to become more focused on developing their understanding in the course of solving the problems . These results , paired with the interaction of task structure and goal orientation discussed above , provided initial evidence that having mastery - approach goals was bene ﬁ cial for transfer , and that these goals could come from either an existing disposition ( students high in mastery - approach orientation in the tell - and - practice condition ) or from engaging with certain types of instruction ( students adopting task - based mastery goals in the invention condition ) . If mastery - approach goals promote positive learning outcomes , what is the best way to facilitate their adoption if students do not have them already ? The current studyexplores theissueof what factors affect goal adoption ina taskand thesubsequent effects ontransfer . We investigatewhether framingmanipulations can affectthe goals students adoptfor the learn - ingtask . Ifmanipulatingframing produces effects similartothose struc - ture produced in Belenky and Nokes - Malach ( 2012 ) , it would offer an easywaytopromoteadoptionofthedesiredgoalsandincreasethelike - lihood of positive transfer outcomes . Prior research has shown that framing can be used to manipulate achievement goals in laboratory experiments . Speci ﬁ cally , researchers have manipulated goal adoption by giving different types of instruc - tions about the scope , purpose , and utility of the task or activity ( e . g . , Elliot & Harackiewicz , 1996 ; Elliott & Dweck , 1988 ; Graham & Golan , 1991 ) . For example , mastery goals have been induced by instructing participants that the learning materials would help them improve their skills or knowledge ( Bereby - Meyer & Kaplan , 2005 ) , even if they face dif ﬁ culties or make errors ( Elliott & Dweck , 1988 ) . In contrast , performance goals have been induced by instructing partici - pants thatthe taskis re ﬂ ective of their underlyingabilityfor thedomain ( Graham & Golan , 1991 ) or that their performance would be compared to others ' performance ( Elliot & Harackiewicz , 1996 ) , and so the partic - ipant should strive to do well ( for performance - approach ) or avoid doing poorly ( for performance - avoidance ) . It may be possible and preferable to manipulate the framing of the instruction rather than to change the structure of the task , as framing has been manipulated with relatively simple interventions ( e . g . , Elliot , Cury , Fryer , & Huguet , 2006 ; Graham & Golan , 1991 ) . However , the existing research on these framing manipulations has focused on Fig . 1 . The preparation for futurelearning paradigm , withthe instantiated forms of this paradigm from Schwartz and Martin ( 2004 ) in parentheses . Adapted from Schwartz and Martin ( 2004 , p . 184 ) . Fig . 2 . Thepredictedprobabilityoftransferasafunctionofmastery - approachorientation score . From Nokes and Belenky ( 2011 , p . 128 ) . 23 D . M . Belenky , T . J . Nokes - Malach / Learning and Individual Differences 25 ( 2013 ) 21 – 34 outcomes relating to performance on simple , novel laboratory tasks ( e . g . , Elliott & Dweck , 1988 ) , or outcomes relating only to affective experiences with no measurements of performance ( e . g . , Elliot & Harackiewicz , 1996 ) . These studies do not examine learning and do not consider how different goals might predict performance on tasks that re - quiredifferentamountsofpriorknowledgeordifferentlevelsofcognitive processing ( cf . Graham & Golan , 1991 ) . Itisunknownwhetherthistypeof manipulation can be successfully used for academic domains such as mathematics , in which college students have much prior experience . Further empirical research on the issue of framing is important , both for theoretical and practical reasons . A fully realized theory of achievement goals should be able to make predictions about how a given achievement goal will in ﬂ uence speci ﬁ c learning outcomes , such as transfer . Additionally , the theory needs to be precise about whether the effects of achievement goal orientations for a given domain are the same as framings for a given task . Furthermore , the importance of achievement goals on academic outcomes would be validated if effects of framing similar to those already observed on non - academic tasks can be observed on more academically relevant tasks , such as mathematics instruction , with measures of transfer . However , if these framing manipulations do not generalize beyond non - academic laboratory tasks then achievement goal theories need to take this into account . Practically , if the framing approach is successful with academic tasks , an instructor could simply change the framing and rationale of a classroom activity to encourage mastery goal adoption . For example , telling students that a certain activity is helpful for developing understanding ( mastery framing ) would lead to different processing and knowledge than telling students that the activity evaluates their ability ( performance framing ) . 1 . 3 . Questions and hypotheses We investigated how achievement goals in ﬂ uence and are in ﬂ uenced by different activity structures ( invention vs . tell - and - practice ) and framings ( mastery vs . performance ) to support or inhibit knowledge transfer . By using the same learning activities as previous work and by manipulating the framing we could examine the relative contribution of each factor on transfer . Prior evidence suggests that goals activated during the task , whether due to individual dispositional differences or adopted in response to task structure or framing , couldin ﬂ uencethetypeoftheknowledgegainedfrominstruc - tion . We examined three questions related to this issue . First , what is the relationship between achievement goal orienta - tions and transfer ? We expected that existing mastery - approach goal orientations would positively predict transfer , whereas the other goals would not . Only a few studies have directly examined this relationship ( e . g . , Bereby - Meyer & Kaplan , 2005 ) , but we expected to see a similar effect as observed in our prior work ( Belenky & Nokes - Malach , 2012 ) . Speci ﬁ cally , we expected students who entered the experiment high in mastery - approach goal orientation would successfully transfer regardless of the structure or framing of the activity . Second , how do the factors of structure ( invention vs . tell - and - practice ) and framing ( mastery vs . performance ) affect mastery - related goal adoption during the task ? We predicted that invention activities would promote more mastery - approach goal adoption than tell - and - practice activities . In terms of framing , we predicted that a mastery framing would lead to more task - based mastery goals than a performance framing . However , we also predicted that this effect would be smaller than the effect of structure because the framing instructions might be ignored , downplayed , dismissed , or simply short - lived after the student begins to work on the learning activity . In contrast , the structure is inherent to the activity , so it is present throughout and is , therefore , likely to exert more in ﬂ uence on goal - setting . Put simply , ask - ing students to perform an activity in order to improve their understand - ing is probably not as effective as creating an activity that promotes a desire for understanding by engaging in the activity . Third , how does the structure and framing interact with a student ' s initial mastery - approach goal orientation to affect transfer ? Though higher levels of existing mastery - approach goals were predicted to improve transfer regardlessof learningactivitiesor framing , somecom - binations of these factors may produce better transfer than others for those who enter low in mastery - approach goals . Among those lower in mastery - approach goals who may otherwise not engage in a way that leads to transfer , what combination of instructional activities and framing is bene ﬁ cial ? Because this is an exploratory question strong a priori predictions are not offered . However , we will highlight some of the more interesting possibilities . One possibility is that crossing mastery framing with tell - and - practice instruction would produce the best transfer , as all of the necessary component skills are given in the tell - and - practice materials . The addition of the mastery framing may lead students to think deeply about these given skills during acquisition , leading to more abstract knowledgethattransfers . Anotherpossibilityisthatmatchinginvention activities with mastery framing would lead to the best transfer , as the open - ended instruction paired with directions to focus on developing skill may lead students to engage in a constructive way with the learn - ing materials , with no fear of negative evaluation of their abilities . Conversely , pairing open - ended invention activities , which require deep engagement with the underlying concepts of the problem , with a performance framing may lead students lower in mastery - approach goals to try very hard on the problem , based on the desire to do well and have validation of their ability . Even though they will inevitably struggle to solve the problem on their own , this sort of engagement may help those students to transfer . 2 . Methods This study closely followed the methods and materials of prior studies ( Belenky & Nokes - Malach , 2012 ; Schwartz & Martin , 2004 ) . Participants completed a pre - test , a series of learning activities on basic statistical concepts , and a post - test in a two - hour laboratory ses - sion . They were given questionnaires at the beginning , middle , and end of the experiment . 2 . 1 . Participants Ninety - eight undergraduates from the University of Pittsburgh participated in this study ( M = 19 . 4 years old , SD = 2 . 5 years ) in exchange for course credit in their Introduction to Psychology course . Participants volunteered to participate and scheduled an experimental session online , based on a small posting describing the purposes and methods of the study . Forty percent of the participants were male , 33 % were female , and the rest did not indicate their gender on a demo - graphic sheet . Eighty - one percent had previously taken at least one statistics or calculus course . Eighty - eight percent of the participants spoke English as their ﬁ rst language . This study was approved by the University of Pittsburgh ' s Institutional Review Board . 2 . 2 . Design and materials This study had a 2 ( structure : invention or tell - and - practice ) ×2 ( framing : mastery or performance instructions ) between - subjects design . Participants were randomly assigned to one of the four condi - tions ; Tell - and - Practice / Performance ( n = 25 ) , Tell - and - Practice / Mastery ( n = 24 ) , Invention / Performance ( n = 24 ) , and Invention / Mastery ( n = 25 ) . Materials were presented as packets in binders , which contained questionnaires , a pre - test , learning activities , a post - test , and a demo - graphic sheet . 2 . 2 . 1 . Learning materials The learning materials consisted of an activity on variability , followed by instruction on the calculation of mean deviation ( a 24 D . M . Belenky , T . J . Nokes - Malach / Learning and Individual Differences 25 ( 2013 ) 21 – 34 narrated PowerPoint video ) , and then an activity on standardization . Fifteen minutes were allotted for each of these three components . Students were not provided with the solutions to the variability and standardization activities . 2 . 2 . 1 . 1 . Variability activity . The ﬁ rst learning activity presented four different data sets representing the spread of a number of pitches thrown by different pitching machines . The students ' task was to decide which of the machines is the most reliable ( see Fig . 3 ) . The invention and tell - and - practice students both attempted to solve this problem , but the written instructions each received as part of the problem were different . Immediately prior to attempting the problem , the tell - and - practice group was given a worked example demonstrating how to calculate mean deviation ( see Fig . 4 ) and was told to use that procedure in attempting to solve the problem . The invention group was not given this worked example , and was given the following instructions : “ Your task is to invent a procedure for computing a quantity that expresses the variability for each of the pitching machines and decide which is most reliable . There is no single way to do this , but you have to use the same procedure for each machine , so it is a fair comparison . ” Bothgroupsweregivenaccesstoscrappaperandacalculatorduring this activity . 2 . 2 . 1 . 2 . Video . The video demonstrated a brief introduction on vari - ability before walking through the calculation of mean deviation in a worked example . This was followed by two simple problems to work on , with solutions given to make sure students understood the basics of the formula . These problems asked students to use the formula to decide which of the two small data sets ( six data points or less ) was more consistent . 2 . 2 . 1 . 3 . Standardization activity . The structure of the standardization activity was similar to the variability activity . The invention group was asked to evaluate which of two world records was “ more shattered , ” given two small data sets and the corresponding world record for each . The tell - and - practice group was given the exact same problem to solve , but was ﬁ rst shown how to graphically arrive at a solution through a worked example , which demonstrated how to create a visual representation ( i . e . , a histogram ) of the distributions to arrive at a solution . 2 . 2 . 2 . Framing Framing was manipulated across the instructional conditions . Immediately below the tell - and - practice or invention instructions for each of the variability and standardization activities , participants saw text about the purpose of the task . These were constructed to promote either mastery or performance goal adoption while working on the learning activities . The framing instructions were modeled on previous work that had experimentally manipulated goals ( i . e . , Elliot & Harackiewicz , 1996 ; Elliott & Dweck , 1988 ) . The mastery goal framing was : “ Many people see problems like this one as a challenge , and feel like they are developing their skill to solve these types of problems . While working on this problem , you may make mistakes and feel a little confused at times , but in the end you will have learned some things and developed your skill to solve problems like this one . ” The performance goal framing was : “ Thisproblem assesses your mathematicalability . People who can solve this problem generally have the capability to solve similar problems . While working on this activity , you can gauge how good you are at these types of math problems . ” These instructions were underlined to make them more salient . Given the success of prior studies in students comprehending the manipulation ( e . g . , 95 % choosing the correct goal in a manipulation check in Elliot & Harackiewicz , 1996 ) , these manipulations were administered without a manipulation check . 2 . 2 . 3 . Test materials 2 . 2 . 3 . 1 . Test problems . Thepre - testconsistedofthreeitems : aprocedural skill measure , a data representation problem , and a transfer problem . The post - test contained isomorphic versions of these problems , as well as an adaptive use and a qualitative reasoning problem . Analyses will Ronco Pitching Machine Big Bruiser Pitchomatic Fireball Pitchers Smyth’s Finest 2 . 23 4 . 24 1 3 . 16 3 4 3 4 . 24 3 . 16 1 12 1 . 41 1 . 41 3 . 61 3 . 61 2 . 24 2 . 24 2 . 83 Fig . 3 . The graphical representation of data given as part of the pitching machines problem , which students solved during the variability learning activity . Adapted from Schwartz and Martin ( 2004 , p . 135 ) . 25 D . M . Belenky , T . J . Nokes - Malach / Learning and Individual Differences 25 ( 2013 ) 21 – 34 focus exclusively on the transfer measure , as we predict that differences relating to mastery - approach goals will speci ﬁ cally in ﬂ uence that form of knowledge . The two isomorphic transfer problems were both word problems that presented descriptive statistics for two data distributions and one exceptional score from each , and asked which individual score was more impressive . Though similar to the standardization activity , this problem assesses transfer , as it requires reasoning from descriptive statistics , not raw data , and because the problems were constructed so that simpler heuristic processing would lead to an incorrect answer ( i . e . , choosing the smaller range , or choosing the higher value ) . This problem was scored dichotomously , with an incorrect response labeled a “ 0 , ” and a “ 1 ” being assigned if the participant calculated a standard - ized score correctly and used it to decide which value was more impressive . 2 . 2 . 3 . 2 . Worked example . Also included in the post - test was a worked example on how to calculate a standardized score ( see Fig . 5 ) . This was presented just like the other test problems and described a situ - ation in which one would want to calculate a standardized score to compare values from different samples . The text then introduced the formula to do so and computed the values for the data presented . This was followed by a second , very simple data set and asked the students to use the formula on these data . All participants were able to solve this simple problem correctly . The worked example always came at least two problems before the transfer problem , so if a student used the formula on the transfer problem , it was because they noticed that it applied and could recall it , not due to mere temporal contiguity . In contrast to prior work that experimentally manipulated the presence or absence of this resource in the test , all participants received the worked example . This was done because we are most interested in seeing how successful transfer occurs , and prior research has shown that learners generally do not do well on the transfer prob - lem without the resource ( Belenky & Nokes - Malach , 2012 ; Schwartz & Martin , 2004 ) . Fig . 4 . The worked example given to the tell - and - practice group before attempting the learning activity on mean deviation . 26 D . M . Belenky , T . J . Nokes - Malach / Learning and Individual Differences 25 ( 2013 ) 21 – 34 2 . 2 . 4 . Motivation measures Existing achievement goals were assessed using the Achievement Goal Questionnaire ( AGQ ; Elliot & McGregor , 2001 ) . This 12 - item scale has three items for each of the four achievement goal constructs . The questions were phrased to be speci ﬁ cally about math classes and were assessed on a 7 - point Likert scale , with a higher value indicating stronger endorsement of that particular goal . A construct score was created for each motivational orientation by averaging the three items for each goal ( see Table 1 ) . The reliability was high for the mastery - approach , mastery - avoidance , and performance - approach constructs ( α s > . 7 ) . The performance - avoidance construct was some - what lower ( α = . 60 ) , but given that it was still at an acceptable level for a construct comprised of three items ( Schmitt , 1996 ) , and how well - established the construct and this measure are in the literature ( e . g . , Elliot , 1999 ; Elliot & Murayama , 2008 ) , we feel con ﬁ dent in using this construct score in our analyses . Task - based mastery goals were assessed with an eight - item activity questionnaireadministeredduringthelearningphase ( thesameasthat used by Belenky & Nokes - Malach , 2012 ) . Four of these items had to do with the participant ' s mastery goal adoption during the learning activ - ities and four of these had to with the participant ' s affective experience . The four items pertaining to mastery goals had adequate reliability ( α = . 74 ) , so an average score was constructed for each participant . This follows the analysis procedure established in Belenky and Nokes - Malach ( 2012 ) . The four affect items assessed the participant ' s affective state and had low reliability ( α = . 34 ) . As such , they could not be combined into a scale , and are omitted from the results . Addi - tionally , at the end of the study , the participants completed additional questionnaires — the AGQ again , and a questionnaire we were piloting Fig . 5 . The ﬁ rst portion of the worked example on standardization . Adapted from Schwartz and Martin ( 2004 , p . 177 – 178 ) . Table 1 Descriptive statistics and reliability of achievement goal orientation scores . Mean SD α Mastery - approach 5 . 51 1 . 20 . 84 Mastery - avoidance 3 . 96 1 . 38 . 70 Performance - approach 5 . 03 1 . 67 . 93 Performance - avoidance 5 . 25 2 . 70 . 60 27 D . M . Belenky , T . J . Nokes - Malach / Learning and Individual Differences 25 ( 2013 ) 21 – 34 to assess how students re ﬂ ected on their experience . This new ques - tionnaire proved to have low reliability ( α = . 55 ) , and will be excluded from the results . 2 . 3 . Procedure The study was run in groups of up to six participants in a two - hour laboratory session , with all participants working individually on provided packets . Inside the packet was an initial motivation ques - tionnaire , a pre - test , a learning activity on variability , the activity motivation questionnaire , space to work on problems presented in the video , a learning activity on standardization , a post - test , a ﬁ nal set of questionnaires , and a demographics sheet ( see Fig . 6 ) . Participants took as long as they needed to complete the questionnaires , with no one taking longer than 3 min for any one questionnaire . Both learning activities and the video took 15 min each , with the video being com - prised of about 7 min ofinstruction , followed by two practiceproblems , eachofwhichprovided participants with3 min towork on them before the solution was demonstrated . Participants were given 5 min for each of the three pre - testitems and each of the six post - test items ( including the worked example ) . If a participant ﬁ nished any portion of the exper - imentearly , theywereaskedtositquietly , lookingovertheirwork , until time had elapsed and the experimenter instructed them to move on . 3 . Results The results will be presented in the same order as our hypotheses . Our ﬁ rst hypothesis was that existing mastery - approach orientations would predict transfer . As the transfer measure was scored dichoto - mously ( correct or incorrect ) , we use logistic regressions to evaluate the likelihood of successful transfer based on existing mastery - approach goal orientation . To ensure that this effect is independent of the other goal orientations , their impact on the likelihood of transfer is also modeled . The second set of hypotheses concerns the effect of the manipula - tionsonmasterygoaladoptionduringthelearningactivities . Speci ﬁ cally , we predicted that the invention structure would promote more task - basedmasterygoaladoptionthantell - and - practice , andthatthemastery framing would promote more task - based mastery goal adoption than the performance framing . Additionally , we predicted that the effect of invention activities would be larger than the effect of mastery framing . To examine these questions , we analyze students ' self - reported re - sponses to questionnaires administered during the learning activities . Finally , we were interested in exploring the interactions between structure , framing , and existing mastery - approach goal orientation for transfer . This was an exploratory analysis for which we made no strong a priori predictions . Throughout the analyses , an alpha level of p b . 05 is used to evaluate statistical signi ﬁ cance . We report effect Fig . 6 . Each line moving down represents the procedure for one of the experimental groups . From left to right , these are ; invention activities with mastery framing , invention activities with performance framing , tell - and - practice activities with mastery framing , and tell - and - practice activities with performance framing . 28 D . M . Belenky , T . J . Nokes - Malach / Learning and Individual Differences 25 ( 2013 ) 21 – 34 sizes of Cohen ' s d where appropriate , with an effect considered small when d is less than . 2 , moderate when d is between . 2 and . 8 , and large when d is greater than . 8 ( Cohen , 1988 ) . When logistic regres - sions are used , odds ratios are reported to indicate the effect size . 3 . 1 . Transfer performance As mentioned earlier , the transfer item asked students to decide which score was better , given two individual exceptional scores from two different distributions . This item was coded dichotomously as either correct or not , and , for a problem to be considered correct , the participant had to show that they calculated standardized scores in their work , and not simply chosen the correct response . Seventy - ﬁ ve percent of the participants solved the transfer problem correctly on the post - test . Toevaluateourhypothesisthatinitialmastery - approachorientation would predict transfer , we entered the mastery - approach goal orienta - tion score , as well as mastery - avoidance , performance - avoidance , and performance - approachgoalorientationscores , aspredictorsinalogistic regression model with transfer as the outcome . Speci ﬁ cally , the model was : ln P Transfer = 1 − P Transfer ð Þ ¼ f h a þ b Mastery − Approach (cid:2) Mastery − Approach þ b Mastery − Avoidance (cid:2) Mastery − Avoidance þ b Performance − Approach (cid:2) Performance − Approach þ b Performance − Avoidance (cid:2) Performance − Avoidance i : All independent variables were centered to aid in interpretation of the coef ﬁ cients ( Jaccard , 2001 ) . Two participants did not complete the initial motivation questionnaire ( one in the Tell - and - Practice / Mastery condition , onein theTell - and - Practice / Performance condition ) and are excluded from this analysis . This model was a signi ﬁ cantly better predictor than a constant - only model , χ 2 ( 4 , N = 96 ) = 14 . 95 , p b . 05 . The only coef ﬁ cient that was signi ﬁ cantly different from zero was the mastery - approach coef - ﬁ cient , B = . 22 , Exp ( B ) = 1 . 25 , Wald ' s χ 2 ( 1 , N = 96 ) = 6 . 87 , p b . 05 . The odds ratio of this coef ﬁ cient indicates that for every unit increase in mastery - approach goal orientation on the initial questionnaire , the odds that the participant successfully transferred on post - test increases by a factor of 1 . 25 ( see Fig . 7 ) . Additionally , the mastery - avoidance coef ﬁ cient was a marginally signi ﬁ cant negative predictor of transfer , B = − . 13 , Exp ( B ) = . 88 , Wald ' s χ 2 ( 1 , N = 96 ) = 3 . 28 , p = . 07 . 3 . 2 . Task - based mastery goal adoption The second set of hypotheses had to do with the effects of the manipulations on the adoption of task - based mastery goals . To assess this , a task - based mastery score was created by averaging the four items on the activity questionnaire and used as the dependent variable in a 2 ( Structure ) ×2 ( Framing ) ANOVA . Analysis revealed a medium effect of structure on task - based mastery goal adoption , F ( 1 , 94 ) = 14 . 40 , p b . 05 , d = . 75 . Students who engaged in invention activities ( M = 3 . 69 , SD = . 84 ) reported being more focused on mastery goals than those that engaged in tell - and - practice activities ( M = 2 . 99 , SD = 1 . 01 ) . There was no effect of framing , F ( 1 , 94 ) = . 74 , ns . However , there was a medium interaction of structure by framing , F ( 1 , 94 ) = 4 . 16 , p b . 05 , d = . 42 . A seriesof follow - uptests showed that this interac - tion was driven by the signi ﬁ cantly lower task - based mastery goal adoption for those completing tell - and - practice activities with a perfor - mance framing , compared to each of the other groups , all t s ( 47 ) > 2 . 02 , p b . 05 ( see Table 2 ) . 3 . 3 . Interactions between mastery - approach , framing , and structure on transfer Before investigating the three - way interaction between variables , it is important to establish whether our two manipulations of structure and framing predict transfer on their own . A binary logistic regression wasconductedtoanalyzetheeffectof structureand framingontransfer performance , as well as the interaction between these variables . The model being evaluated was : ln P Transfer = 1 − P Transfer ð Þ ¼ f h a þ b Structure (cid:2) Structure þ b Framing (cid:2) Framing þ b Structure (cid:2) Framing (cid:2) Structure (cid:2) Framing ð Þ i : This model was not signi ﬁ cantly better than a constant - only model , χ 2 ( 3 , N = 98 ) = 1 . 18 , ns . On their own , the manipulations did not seem to in ﬂ uence the ability of students to transfer from instruction , with participants transferring at similar rates across all four conditions . Speci ﬁ cally , there were no differences between the percentages of students who successfully transferred across the Tell - and - Practice / Performance ( 80 % ) , Tell - and - Practice / Mastery ( 75 % ) , Invention / Performance ( 67 % ) , and Invention / Mastery ( 72 % ) conditions , χ 2 ( 3 , N = 98 ) = 1 . 17 . Next , to investigate the possibilities of an interaction between existing mastery - approach goal orientation , structure , and framing , all three variables were entered into a logistic regression equation 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 P re d i c t e d P r o b a b ili t y o f T r a n s f er Mastery - Approach Orientation Score Fig . 7 . Predicted probability of transfer for a given mastery - approach orientation score , based on the logistic regression model with all four achievement goal constructs entered as predictors , with a linear trendline . Table 2 Mean activity questionnaire responses ( and standard deviations ) , and the averaged response , for the four experimental conditions . Tell - and - practice Invention Mastery Performance Mastery Performance “ I was concerned with the quality of the procedure I was using . ” 3 . 29 ( 1 . 40 ) 3 . 16 ( 1 . 25 ) 3 . 24 ( 1 . 09 ) 3 . 88 ( 1 . 15 ) “ I was concerned with how well I understood the procedure I was using . ” 3 . 38 ( 1 . 44 ) 2 . 72 ( 1 . 28 ) 3 . 60 ( 1 . 19 ) 3 . 83 ( 1 . 13 ) “ I tried to understand why the procedure I was using worked . ” 3 . 58 ( 1 . 21 ) 2 . 76 ( 1 . 20 ) 3 . 52 ( 1 . 23 ) 3 . 50 ( 1 . 18 ) “ I was concerned that the procedure I was using was not correct . ” 2 . 88 ( 1 . 45 ) 2 . 20 ( 1 . 35 ) 3 . 92 ( 1 . 12 ) 4 . 08 ( 1 . 14 ) Activity goals average 3 . 28 ( 1 . 10 ) a 2 . 71 ( . 85 ) b 3 . 57 ( . 83 ) a 3 . 83 ( . 85 ) a Note . The Tell - and - Practice / Performance condition was signi ﬁ cantly different than the other three conditions in a series of post - hoc t - tests , denoted by different superscript letters . 29 D . M . Belenky , T . J . Nokes - Malach / Learning and Individual Differences 25 ( 2013 ) 21 – 34 predicting transfer , with all possible interactions ( three two - way interactions and the three - way interaction ) entered . The mastery - approach goal orientation variable was centered to aid in interpreta - tion ( Jaccard , 2001 ) . The other goal constructs were excluded , as our earlier analyses indicated that they do not signi ﬁ cantly predict trans - fer , and to simplify the model . Speci ﬁ cally , the model being evaluated was : ln P Transfer = 1 − P Transfer ð Þ ¼ f h a þ b Mastery − Approach (cid:2) Mastery − Approach þ b Structure (cid:2) Structure þ b Framing (cid:2) Framing þ b Framing (cid:2) Structure (cid:2) Framing (cid:2) Structure ð Þ þ b Framing (cid:2) Mastery − Approach (cid:2) Framing (cid:2) Mastery − Approach ð Þ þ b Structure (cid:2) Mastery − Approach (cid:2) Structure (cid:2) Mastery − Approach ð Þ þ b Framing (cid:2) Structure (cid:2) Mastery − Approach (cid:2) Framing (cid:2) Structure (cid:2) Mastery − Approach ð Þ i : This model was a signi ﬁ cantly better predictor than a constant - only model , χ 2 ( 7 , N = 96 ) = 20 . 84 , p b . 05 . Aside from the constant term , B = 2 . 46 , Wald ' s χ 2 ( 1 , N = 96 ) = 6 . 55 , p b . 05 , only coef ﬁ cients which included the mastery - approach goal orientation variable were signi ﬁ cant . Speci ﬁ cally , the mastery - approach goal orientation coef ﬁ - cient B = . 51 , Exp ( B ) = 1 . 66 , Wald ' s χ 2 ( 1 , N = 96 ) = 4 . 63 , p b . 05 , the interaction coef ﬁ cient for mastery - approach and structure , B = − . 53 , Exp ( B ) = . 59 , Wald ' s χ 2 ( 1 , N = 96 ) = 4 . 16 , p b . 05 , and the three - way interaction coef ﬁ cient for mastery - approach goal orientation , structure , andframing , B = . 76 , Exp ( B ) = 2 . 13 , Wald ' s χ 2 ( 1 , N = 96 ) = 4 . 02 , p b . 05 were signi ﬁ cant . To better understand this pattern of results we analyzed the inter - action of framing with existing mastery - approach goal orientation separately for each structure . By comparing the results across these two structures the differences can be highlighted and aid the inter - pretation of the three - way interaction . First , a logistic regression model was conducted with the data from only those participants who completed tell - and - practice activities . Existing mastery - approach goal orientation ( centered ) and framing were entered as predictors , as well as their interaction , into a model predicting the likelihood of transfer . The model being evaluated was : ln P Transfer = 1 − P Transfer ð Þ ¼ f h a þ b Mastery − Approach (cid:2) Mastery − Approach þ b Framing (cid:2) Framing þ b Framing (cid:2) Mastery − Approach (cid:2) Framing (cid:2) Mastery − Approach ð Þ i : This model was signi ﬁ cantly different from zero , χ 2 ( 3 , N = 47 ) = 9 . 90 , p b . 05 . The constant term was signi ﬁ cantly different from zero , B = 2 . 46 , Wald ' s χ 2 ( 1 , N = 47 ) = 6 . 55 , p b . 05 , as was the mastery - approach goal orientation coef ﬁ cient , B = . 51 , Exp ( B ) = 1 . 66 , Wald ' s χ 2 ( 1 , N = 47 ) = 4 . 63 , p b . 05 . Neither the coef ﬁ cient for the framing variable , nor the coef ﬁ cient for the interaction of framing and mastery - approach goal orientation was signi ﬁ cant . The signi ﬁ cant coef ﬁ cient for mastery - approach goal orientation indicates that , for the tell - and - practice group , every unit increase in mastery - approach goal orientation corresponds to the odds of successfully transferring increasing by a factor of 1 . 66 , regardless of the type of framing ( see Fig . 8 ) . The same logistic regression model was conducted with the data only from those participants who completed the invention activities . This model was signi ﬁ cantly different from zero , χ 2 ( 3 , N = 49 ) = 9 . 85 , p b . 05 . In this model , the only coef ﬁ cient that was signi ﬁ cantly different from zero was the coef ﬁ cient of the interaction term , B = . 51 , Exp ( B ) = 1 . 62 , Wald ' s χ 2 ( 1 , N = 47 ) = 4 . 63 , p b . 05 . This interaction coef ﬁ cient represents the effect of mastery - approach goal orientation scores in the mastery framing condition , as the performance framing condition was the baseline . This means that for those who received the performance framing with invention activities , there was almost noeffectofmastery - approachgoalorientationscoresontheirlikelihood of transfer ; therelationship was ﬂ at ( see Fig . 8 ) . However , for thosewho received the mastery framing with invention activities , there was a pos - itive relationship between existing mastery - approach goal orientation and the likelihood of transfer , such that every unit increase in mastery - approach goal orientation increases the odds of successfully transferring by a factor of 1 . 62 . 3 . 4 . Activity goals and transfer The prior analysis focused on the effect of existing mastery - approach orientations on transfer . However , it is possible that the degree to which a student adopts a task - based mastery goal during the learning activity is itself predictive of transfer . To investigate this possibility , task - basedmasterygoaladoptionwasenteredasapredictor of transfer in a logistic regression . This model was not signi ﬁ cantly better than a constant - only model , χ 2 ( 1 , N = 98 ) = . 01 , ns . The degree to which students reported adopting a mastery - related goal for the task was , by itself , not predictive of transfer . 4 . Discussion 4 . 1 . Mastery - approach goals and transfer This study found an effect of existing mastery - approach orientation on transfer , replicating a main ﬁ nding of Belenky and Nokes - Malach ( 2012 ) . Overall , students high in mastery - approach goal orientation at the beginning of the experiment were more likely to transfer from instruction to a target problem at test . In contrast , the other three achievement goals had no signi ﬁ cant effects on the students ' likelihood of transfer . This result providesevidence thatexisting achievementgoal orientations change what a student learns during the course of instruc - tion . This ﬁ nding provides support for the importance and utility of the mastery - approach achievement goal construct , and , in particular , its role in the development of knowledge that is conceptual and abstract enough to transfer to novel problem - solving situations . However , the results of this study also suggest that certain combinations of task framings and structures may in ﬂ uence the relationship between mastery - approach goal orientation and transfer . In particular , the results indicate that a performance framing with invention activities may be particularly bene ﬁ cial for those who are lower in mastery - approach goal orientation . Before discussing this complex interaction , Fig . 8 . Predicted probability of transfer given initial mastery - approach orientation score for the four experimental conditions . 30 D . M . Belenky , T . J . Nokes - Malach / Learning and Individual Differences 25 ( 2013 ) 21 – 34 however , we will ﬁ rst discuss the effects of our manipulations on trans - fer and goal adoption . 4 . 2 . Experimental manipulations and transfer In contrast to prior work ( Schwartz , Chase , Opezzo , & Chin , 2011 ; Schwartz & Martin , 2004 ) , we did not observe an effect of invention promoting transfer relative to tell - and - practice . There are a number of potential explanations for this difference . One distinction between our study and the prior work is that the samples were drawn from different populations ; Schwartz ' s studies have been conducted with middle and highschoolstudents , whileourstudyused college students . College students may be better prepared to learn from tell - and - practice instruction because they have had more practice and experience in academic settings than a typical middle or high school student . In addi - tion , there may be selection effects operating on the college population that are not operating in the younger grades ( i . e . , college admissions requirements ) . This could have led to the college students having higher general abilities ( e . g . , selected vis - à - vis SAT scores ) or higher levels of motivation for academics than students in middle or high school . Any one of these factors or a combination of them may have given the college students a general learning advantage for either type of instruction , potentially minimizing the effect of invention compared to tell and practice . This possibility is supported by the levels of success seen in this study for the tell - and - practice conditions — approximately 75 % of students transferring with the worked example – as opposed to theirs – approximately 25 % ( Schwartz & Martin , 2004 ) . Additionally , participants in our study worked individually , while students in the SchwartzandMartinstudyworkedinpairsorsmallgroups . Itispossible that the bene ﬁ ts of invention on transfer are particularly strong when students work in groups ( Roll et al . , 2012 ; Wiedmann , Leach , Rummel , & Wiley , 2012 ) . There is also a difference in contexts between the stud - ies . Speci ﬁ cally , thecurrent study was conducted in a laboratory setting , while Schwartz and colleagues ( Schwartz & Martin , 2004 ; Schwartz et al . , 2011 ) have conducted studies in classroom settings , and have found effects of invention on transfer . Finally , the time scale of instruc - tion was different . In our study , participants worked for a short amount of time on the learning activities ( 45 min ) , but in Schwartz and colleagues ' work , students work on and discuss invention activities over multiple class periods ( e . g . , 6 h over two weeks ; Schwartz & Martin , 2004 ) . The present study ' s compressed time scale may have led participants to feel mentally tired ( i . e . , to experience “ ego deple - tion ; ” Baumeister , Bratslavsky , Muraven , & Tice , 1998 ) , asthey complet - ed a number of learning and test activities in a relatively short period of time . This may have hindered transfer for the invention condition , in particular , relative to prior studies . The invention activities require more constructive processing and active engagement , and , for typical students in these studies , involve the evaluation of many different ( unsuccessful ) solution paths . Given the short amount of time between the learning and test phases of the present work , the mentally taxing experience of the invention activities may have possibly lowered the amount of attention and energy available to the participant when they arrived at the transfer problem , near the end of the study . Any or all of these differences could potentially explain the different pattern of results observed in this study , compared to prior research . In addition to this result , no main effect of task framing was observed on transfer ; this will be discussed in light of the complex interaction between factors in a subsequent section . 4 . 3 . Experimental manipulations and task - based mastery goals Although the invention task structure did not have a direct effect on transfer , it did in ﬂ uence the adoption of task - based mastery goals during the learning activity . Overall , invention activities led to more task - based mastery goal adoption than tell - and - practice activi - ties . It appears that the open - ended nature of the invention activities leads students to focus on their own understanding in a way that a more standard , tell - and - practice mode of instruction does not . In con - trast , task framing only interacted with structure to affect task - based goal adoption . The way in which a task is framed seems to matter more for some types of activities than others . Speci ﬁ cally , students who received tell - and - practice activities with a performance framing had the lowest levels of task - based mastery goals . This result suggests that receivingdirect instructiononaformulaicprocedure andpracticing it while focusing on performing the procedure well does not promote the adoption of task - based mastery goals in students . Observing this result in a short laboratory study suggests that task - based mastery goal adoption may be quite low in typical class - rooms , which may not involve structured inquiry or mastery framings , leaving it up to students ' internal dispositions to determine whether or not to process the material deeply . A more optimistic interpretation of this effect would be that changing some aspects of the instruction can in ﬂ uence students ' task - based mastery goal adoption . The other three conditions in this study all had some element that in ﬂ uenced mastery , either through framing instructions or the structure , and all reported higher levels of mastery - related goal adoption . Note that these effects were not additive ; the Invention / Mastery group was not higher in task - based mastery goal adoption than the Invention / Performance group , or the Tell - And - Practice / Mastery group . Additional - ly , whiletheactivityquestionnairewehaveusedappearstoworkwellin this environment , it may be overly speci ﬁ ed to detect differences be - tween these task structures . Speci ﬁ cally , it focuses on students ' desire to understand the problem - solving procedure they are using , something that is very salient during invention activities , but likely less so in other forms of instruction . Future research should develop and validate mea - sures of task - based goal adoption , to help clarify exactly what effect existing motivational orientations , task structures , and framings have on the goals a student adopts in a given setting . 4 . 4 . Interaction between mastery - approach orientation , structure , framing and transfer A complex interaction between students ' existing mastery - approach achievement goal orientations , structure , framing , and transfer was observed in the current study . All of the conditions except invention with a performance framing followed the same general pattern , with mastery - approach goal orientation predicting the likelihood of transfer . The ﬁ nding that highly mastery - oriented students transferred well from tell - and - practice activities with performance - oriented framing seems particularly important for educational purposes . That is , these students may be very practiced at satisfying their desire for understanding in the context of evaluative demands , such as those seen in the course of normal schooling . Perhaps mastery - oriented students have become experts at balancing the demands of multiple goals while still achieving robust learning . For example , they may have developed methods to learn the material in ways that satisfy both the evaluative demands of the classroom and their own desire for understanding and improved competence . This research highlights the importance of taking into account individual differences in motivation for learning and transfer . That is , this study presents an instance where some students can perform well and some cannot , depending on an existing difference in their achievement goals . A productive research agenda for future investigation would be to examine the joint effect of existing motivation for a domain and other individual differences on learning , and , in particular , on learning from various types of instruction . This study also contributes the novel result that the relationship between mastery - approach orientation and the likelihood of transfer was ﬂ at for the condition that received invention with performance framing . This can be viewed in two ways . In one view , this ﬁ nding indicates that the evaluative context facilitated by the performance framing seems to have disrupted learning for high mastery - oriented 31 D . M . Belenky , T . J . Nokes - Malach / Learning and Individual Differences 25 ( 2013 ) 21 – 34 learners . We may not see evidence of this on the goal adoption measures because of the particular way that measure is constructed . Speci ﬁ cally , the questions on the activity questionnaire are focused on task - based mastery goals , but it is possible the evaluative context promoted an increase in performance goals , as well , which are orthogonal to the mastery goals we were assessing . The performance framing manipulation drew heavily on the idea of assessing ability , something that was not captured in the activity questionnaire . It is possible that keeping an ability - focused evaluation in mind increased performance goals ( either approach or avoidance ) , which may have been detrimental to highly mastery - oriented students . That is , the evaluative context may have made those students perform in ways that were more performance - oriented than they normally would , and , when paired with minimal guidance on a dif ﬁ cult problem , this hampered constructive learning processes . This is a speculative account , and more research is necessary to see which goals are more salient in given settings and how they coalesce or interfere with each other . A person - centered approach ( e . g . , Heikkila , Niemivirta , Nieminen , & Lonka , 2011 ) may also shed light on this issue by focusing on the effect of particular clusters of motivational variables , rather than treating each individually . The other view of this result highlights that students who were lower in mastery - approach orientation were more likely to transfer in that condition . Viewed this way , this result can be considered a positive outcome . By framing a challenging , open - ended task as an ability measurement ( i . e . , performance framing ) , some students may feel motivated to put effort in , and as the task is open - ended , that effort gets focused in a way that aids in deeper processing . One interesting potential implication of this may be that performance fram - ing , when paired with invention activities , may ( counter - intuitively ) lead to higher levels of mastery goals for the task . This conjecture is supported by the trend , observed on the activity questionnaire , that the group who completed the invention activity with performance framing had the highest level of mastery goal adoption in the task . That is , for low mastery - oriented students , the focus on evaluating ability in a challenging , open - ended task , may actually produce more mastery - approach motivation than would otherwise be expected , aiding their learning in a way that helps to transfer . This account needs to be further examined in future studies and would be aided by research that identi ﬁ es where the bene ﬁ ts for mastery - approach goal orientation on learning are to be found . It is possible that the relationship between these goals and learning observed in this and other studies is due to a correlated third individual differencevariable , suchasgeneralabilityormetacognitiveskill . Under - standing more about the exact nature of the relationship between mastery - approach goals and learning will help to make sense of differ - ences between research approaches that examine mastery - approach goals as stable orientations versus dynamic and task - based , and how eachmayin ﬂ uencelearning . Additionally , extendingthetypeofmethod used here to classroom settings will be important . As a laboratory study , it is unclear how generalizable these results are to the types of learning behaviors and outcomes that achievement goals may lead to in class - room settings , or as students study for classroom - based assessments . 4 . 5 . Mastery - approach goals : task - based vs . orientation Although self - reported task - based mastery goals did not predict transfer , existing mastery - approach goal orientations did . This raises important questions about the relationship between these two mea - sures . The activity questionnaire may bemeasuring a differentconstruct than the AGQ ( Elliot & McGregor , 2001 ) . That is , the AGQ could be mea - suring more than achievement goals for a given domain . In particular , the questionnaire seems likely to be capturing dispositional characteris - tics related to achievement goals ( e . g . , need for cognition , Cacioppo & Petty , 1982 ; need for cognitive closure , Webster & Kruglanski , 1997 ; naïve theories of intelligence , Dweck , 1999 ) , whereas the activity questionnaire is more locally bounded and likely to be capturing a student ' s proximal goal , based on the current setting ( e . g . , classroom effects , structure , framing , etc . ) . 4 . 5 . 1 . Comparison of the framing manipulation to prior research We did not observe a main effect of our task framing on goal adop - tion , even though one framing was designed to promote task - based mastery goal adoption . This manipulation did not appear to produce effects similar to existing predispositions . This stands in contrast to a small body of studies which have had success using such manipulations ( e . g . , Elliot & Harackiewicz , 1996 ; Elliot , Shell , Henry , & Maier , 2005 ; Elliott & Dweck , 1988 ; Senko & Harackiewicz , 2005 ) , so it is valuable to note important differences between prior studies and the current one . For example , Elliott and Dweck ( 1988 ) sampled from a much younger population than the present study . However , other studies have used similar populations as the present study ( e . g . , Darnon , Butera , & Harackiewicz , 2007 ) , so it is unlikely that this difference alone changed the pattern of results . A more likely reason for the differ - ences is that the goal manipulation in prior studies frequently included aspects beyond just the task framings used in the current study . In the earlier research , the performance goal manipulation included being videotaped in order to be evaluated by experts , which differs from the purely normative focus thought to be a part of performance goals . Sim - ilarly , students in that study ' s learning ( mastery ) goal condition were told that the types of tasks they were engaging in would “ sharpen the mind ” and may aid in future studies , which may have induced a growth mindset ( Dweck , 2006 ) , rather than only affecting mastery goals . While the current study attempted to stay more closely linked to the achieve - ment goal constructs , without a manipulation check , it is unclear to do what degree students did in fact adopta “ pure ” mastery or performance goal . This is a limitation , which future research should examine . It is possible that achievement goal manipulations that incorporate other motivational constructs are more successful , but at a cost of theoretical precision . Perhaps more critically , another difference between the current study and previous work is that most of the literature has focused heavily on performance measures , rather than measures of learning . A signi ﬁ cant amount of the existing research has looked at the effect of manipulated achievement goals on the performance of some intel - lectual task , such as hidden ﬁ gures puzzles ( Elliot & Harackiewicz , 1996 ) , ﬁ nding words in a jumble of letters ( Senko & Harackiewicz , 2005 ) , or completing number patterns ( Elliot et al . , 2005 ) . However , very few studies have looked at the effect on learning ( cf . Bereby - Meyer & Kaplan , 2005 ) . Perhaps the complexity of our instructional materials relative to previous experimental work led to a task envi - ronment that was less susceptible to small framing manipulations . This difference is important for achievement goal theory , and , in particular , for ensuring that the theory is ecologically valid . While a signi ﬁ cant amount of research has chronicled the effect of existing goal orientations on what students report doing in classrooms , it is important to see the effects these goals have on learning processes and knowledge outcomes . Goal manipulations should continue to be re ﬁ ned andextendedtoavarietyoflearningandperformancedomains . In particular , more work needs to be done on whether framing manip - ulations can in ﬂ uence learning in classroom contexts . Evidence already exists that long - term interventions can have very profound effects on student learning , especially when they succeed in changing underlying beliefs , such as beliefs about the malleability of students ' own intelli - gence ( e . g . , Blackwell , Trzesniewski , & Dweck , 2007 ; Good , Aronson , & Inzlicht , 2003 ) . 4 . 5 . 2 . Stability of achievement goals and goal adoption The research presented here also highlights a fundamental tension that is present in the achievement goal literature concerning the stabil - ity of achievement goal orientation . Research has provided evidence that it is both stable over time and a dynamic variable that changes 32 D . M . Belenky , T . J . Nokes - Malach / Learning and Individual Differences 25 ( 2013 ) 21 – 34 over time ( e . g . , Fryer & Elliot , 2007 ) , both easy to manipulate in the short term ( e . g . , Elliot & Harackiewicz , 1996 ) , and needing intensive intervention to affect in the long term ( e . g . , O ' Keefe , Ben - Eliyahu , & Linnenbrink - Garcia , 2012 ) . Linking particular learning activities ( i . e . , invention ) with variations in achievement goals for the task illus - trates that there is much more to be understood about the moment - to - moment in ﬂ uences on achievement goals , including predispositions , prior experience , and environmental variables . It is clear that there are many potential sources of mastery goals , such as classroom grading structure , the types of learning activities used , and the amount of authority given to students ( see Ames , 1992 ) . Individual differences , suchasnaïvetheoriesof intelligence ( Dweck , 1999 ) and needfor cogni - tion ( Cacioppo & Petty , 1982 ) , are also likely to in ﬂ uence mastery goal adoption . A formalized model of these factors that could be empirically tested would help clarify the relative contributions of each component towards achievement goals for a given task . Such a contribution could also help to make sense of the ﬁ nding in this study that , even though mastery - related goals varied in the different conditions , the degree to which students reported adopting these goals was not directly predic - tive of subsequent transfer . Instead , only existing mastery - approach goal orientations were predictive of transfer . Future research is needed to systematically analyze the relationship betweenthese differenttypesofmeasures , because itiscriticaltodeter - mine how achievement goals in ﬂ uence learning and performance . How is an achievement goal selected for a given task ? How do achievement goals change , both moment - to - moment and over longer periods ? When one achievement goal is activated , how does this change a student ' s pattern of learning behaviors ? These questions will need to beaddressedfor achievementgoaltheoryto continue beinga dominant way of understanding student motivation in academic settings . These questionsare important for boththeoretical and practicalreasons . Prac - tically , educators need precisely this type of information to understand how to structure their classrooms and individual learning activities to maximize student motivation and learning . For theory to advance , researchers will need to increase the speci ﬁ city of the predictions achievement goal theory makes , and to clarify exactly how different achievement goals are selected and used in any given setting . 5 . Conclusion The study of student motivation has much to offer researchers focused on how students learn . The goal a student has in a learning en - vironment is likely to in ﬂ uence the form and utility of the knowledge acquired in that environment ( Nokes & Belenky , 2011 ; Nokes - Malach & Mestre , in press ) . Speci ﬁ cally , the way information is represented and processed will have an effect on how that information is used to solve new problems and learn new concepts ( e . g . , Nokes & Ohlsson , 2005 ) . A student ' s goals for a learning environment can be a catalyst for facilitating different types of processing and result in different types of knowledge , as demonstrated by mastery - approach goals predicting performance on transfer tests . The fact that we can reliably show these differences in a laboratory setting with classroom - like materials provides initial evidence that the effect of goals and their interactions with the instruction has important implications for class - room learning , especially since student goals should be even more salient ( dominant ) in actual classrooms . However , it will be important to replicate these results in in - vivo classroom studies , especially given the lack of consistent ﬁ ndings of a bene ﬁ t for mastery - approach goals in academic settings . If this effect is robust and observed in a variety of settings using multiple measures of transfer , this would provide evidence for the “ depth - of - learning ” hypothesis ( Senko et al . , 2011 ) . That is , one possible reason that mastery - approach goals are not always correlated with achievement may be that the achievement measures are not measuring the sort of deep , conceptual knowledge that mastery - orientedlearnersaredeveloping . Usingmeasureswhichassess the ability to transfer knowledge in academic settings like college classrooms may help make sense of this apparent discrepancy in the theoretical account . Future research should also explore the cognitive mechanisms by which achievement goals affect the type of learning . Evidence exists that mastery goals predict improved self - regulation , preference for challenge , and persistence ( e . g . , Grant & Dweck , 2003 ; Linnenbrink , 2005 ; Wolters , 2004 ) , but work has not examined the underlying cognitive mechanisms . Potential accounts for improved learning with mastery - approach goals could be based on depth of pro - cessing ( e . g . , Graham & Golan , 1991 ; Watkins , 1983 ) , self - explanation ( e . g . , Chi , Bassok , Lewis , Reimann , & Glaser , 1989 ) , and schema forma - tion ( e . g . , Anderson & Pearson , 1984 ; Judd , 1908 ; NRC , 2000 ) , among others , and successful theories will need to incorporate these mecha - nisms for a complete account . Achievement goals remain an important individualdifferencetoconsider , andonethat couldgreatlyimpacthow wecanusevarioussubdomainsofpsychology – cognitive , social , educa - tional , and personality – to improve education . Acknowledgments This research was supported by Grant SBE00354420 from the National Science Foundation to the Pittsburgh Science of Learning Center ( http : / / www . learnlab . org ) . We thank research assistants Alex Harshberger and Stephen Grivnow for their help in collecting and coding the data . We would also like to thank Daniel Schwartz for his help with the development of the materials . References Ames , C . ( 1992 ) . Classrooms : Goals , structures , and student motivation . Journal of Educational Psychology , 84 ( 3 ) , 261 – 271 . Anderson , R . C . , & Pearson , P . D . ( 1984 ) . A schema - theoretic view of basic processes in readingcomprehension . InP . D . Pearson , R . Barr , M . L . Kamil , & P . Mosenthal ( Eds . ) , The handbook of reading research ( pp . 255 – 292 ) . New York : Longman . Bassok , M . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1989 ) . Interdomain transfer between isomorphic topics in algebra and physics . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 15 , 153 – 166 . Baumeister , R . F . , Bratslavsky , E . , Muraven , M . , & Tice , D . M . ( 1998 ) . Ego depletion : Is the active self a limited resource ? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 74 ( 5 ) , 1252 – 1265 . Belenky , D . M . , & Nokes - Malach , T . J . ( 2012 ) . Motivation and transfer : The role of mastery - approach goalsinpreparationforfuturelearning . TheJournaloftheLearning Sciences , 21 ( 3 ) , 399 – 432 . Bereby - Meyer , Y . , & Kaplan , A . ( 2005 ) . Motivational in ﬂ uences on transfer of problem - solving strategies . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 30 , 1 – 22 . Blackwell , L . S . , Trzesniewski , K . H . , & Dweck , C . S . ( 2007 ) . Implicit theories of intelligence predict achievement across and adolescent transition : A longitudinal study and an intervention . Child Development , 78 ( 1 ) , 246 – 263 . Bong , M . ( 2001 ) . Between - and within - domain relations of academic motivation among middle and high schoolstudents : Self - ef ﬁ cacy , task value , andachievement goals . Journal of Educational Psychology , 93 ( 1 ) , 23 – 34 . Bransford , J . D . , & Schwartz , D . L . ( 1999 ) . Rethinking transfer : A simple proposal with multiple implications . Review of Research in Education , 24 , 61 – 100 . Cacioppo , J . T . , & Petty , R . E . ( 1982 ) . The need for cognition . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 42 , 116 – 131 . Chi , M . T . H . , Bassok , M . , Lewis , M . , Reimann , P . , & Glaser , R . ( 1989 ) . Self - explanations : How students study and use examples in learning to solve problems . Cognitive Science , 13 , 145 – 182 . Cohen , J . ( 1988 ) . Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences . Hillsdale , New Jersey : Lawrence Erlbaum . Colburn , A . ( 2000 ) . Inquiring scientists want to know . Educational Leadership , 62 ( 1 ) , 63 – 66 . National Research Council ( 2000 ) . How people learn : Brain , mind , experience , and school . Washington D . C . : National Academy Press . Covington , M . V . ( 2000 ) . Goaltheory , motivation , andschoolachievement : Anintegrative review . Annual Review of Psychology , 51 , 171 – 200 . Darnon , C . , Butera , F . , & Harackiewicz , J . M . ( 2007 ) . Achievement goals in social inter - actions : Learning with mastery vs . performance goals . Motivation and Emotion , 31 , 61 – 70 . Darnon , C . , Dompnier , B . , Delmas , F . , Pulfrey , C . , & Butera , F . ( 2009 ) . Achievement goal promotion at university : Social desirability and social utility of mastery and performance goals . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 96 ( 1 ) , 119 – 134 . Detterman , D . K . ( 1993 ) . The case for the prosecution : Transfer as an epiphenomenon . In D . K . Detterman , & R . J . Sternberg ( Eds . ) , Transfer on trial : Intelligence , cognition and instruction ( pp . 1 – 24 ) . Westport , CT : Ablex Publishing . Dweck , C . S . ( 1999 ) . Self - theories : Their role in motivation , personality , and development . Philadelphia : Psychology Press . Dweck , C . S . ( 2006 ) . Mindset : The new psychology of success . New York , NY : Random House . 33 D . M . Belenky , T . J . Nokes - Malach / Learning and Individual Differences 25 ( 2013 ) 21 – 34 Elliot , A . J . ( 1999 ) . Approach and avoidance motivation and achievement goals . Educational Psychologist , 34 ( 3 ) , 169 – 189 . Elliot , A . J . , & Church , M . A . ( 1997 ) . A hierarchical model of approach and avoidance achievement motivation . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 72 , 218 – 232 . Elliot , A . J . , Cury , F . , Fryer , J . W . , & Huguet , P . ( 2006 ) . Achievement goals , self - handicapping , and performance attainment : A meditational analysis . Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology , 28 , 344 – 361 . Elliot , A . J . , & Harackiewicz , J . M . ( 1996 ) . Approach and avoidance achievement goals and intrinsic motivation : A meditational analysis . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 70 ( 3 ) , 461 – 475 . Elliot , A . J . , & McGregor , H . A . ( 1999 ) . Test anxiety and the hierarchical model of approach and avoidance achievement motivation . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 76 , 628 – 644 . Elliot , A . J . , & McGregor , H . A . ( 2001 ) . A 2×2 achievement goal framework . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 80 ( 3 ) , 501 – 519 . Elliot , A . J . , McGregor , H . A . , & Gable , S . ( 1999 ) . Achievementgoals , studystrategies , and exam performance : A mediational analysis . Journal of Educational Psychology , 91 ( 3 ) , 549 – 563 . Elliot , A . J . , & Murayama , K . ( 2008 ) . On the measurement of achievement goals : Critique , illustration , and application . Journal of Educational Psychology , 100 , 613 – 628 . Elliot , A . J . , Shell , M . M . , Henry , K . B . , & Maier , M . A . ( 2005 ) . Achievementgoals , performance contingencies , and performance attainment : An experimental test . Journal of Educational Psychology , 97 ( 4 ) , 630 – 640 . Elliott , E . S . , & Dweck , C . S . ( 1988 ) . Goals : An approach to motivation and achievement . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 54 ( 1 ) , 5 – 12 . Ford , K . J . , Smith , E . M . , Weissbein , D . A . , Gully , S . M . , & Salas , S . ( 1998 ) . Relationships of goal orientation , metacognitive activity , and practice strategies with learning outcomes and transfer . Journal of Applied Psychology , 83 ( 2 ) , 218 – 233 . Fryer , J . W . , & Elliot , A . J . ( 2007 ) . Stability and change in achievement goals . Journal of Educational Psychology , 99 , 700 – 714 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1980 ) . Analogicalproblem solving . CognitivePsychology , 12 , 306 – 355 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1987 ) . Cognitive basis of knowledge transfer . In S . M . Cormier , & S . D . Hagman ( Eds . ) , Transfer of learning : Contemporary research and application ( pp . 81 – 120 ) . New York : Academic Press . Good , C . , Aronson , J . , & Inzlicht , M . ( 2003 ) . Improving adolescents ' standardized test performance : An intervention to reduce the effects of stereotype threat . Applied Developmental Psychology , 24 , 645 – 662 . Graham , S . , & Golan , S . ( 1991 ) . Motivationalin ﬂ uencesoncognition : Taskinvolvement , ego involvement , and depth of information processing . Journal of Educational Psychology , 83 , 187 – 194 . Grant , H . , & Dweck , C . S . ( 2003 ) . Clarifying achievement goals and their impact . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 85 , 541 – 553 . Harackiewicz , J . M . , Barron , K . E . , Pintrich , P . R . , Elliot , A . J . , & Thrash , T . M . ( 2002 ) . Revision of achievement goal theory : Necessary and illuminating . Journal of Educational Psychology , 94 ( 3 ) , 638 – 645 . Harackiewicz , J . M . , Durik , A . M . , Barron , K . E . , Linnenbrink - Garcia , L . , & Tauer , J . M . ( 2008 ) . The role of achievement goals in the development of interest : Reciprocal relations between achievement goals , interest , and performance . Journal of Educational Psychology , 100 ( 1 ) , 105 – 122 . Heikkila , A . , Niemivirta , M . , Nieminen , J . , & Lonka , K . ( 2011 ) . Interrelations among university students ' approaches to learning , regulation of learning , and cognitive and attributional strategies : A person oriented approach . Higher Education , 61 , 513 – 529 . Jaccard , J . ( 2001 ) . Interaction effects in logistic regression . Sage university papers series on quantitative applications in the social sciences ( pp . 07 – 135 ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Judd , C . H . ( 1908 ) . The relation of special training and general intelligence . Educational Review , 36 , 28 – 42 . Linnenbrink , L . A . ( 2005 ) . The dilemma of performance - approach goals : The use of multiple goal contexts to promote students ' motivation and learning . Journal of Educational Psychology , 97 , 197 – 213 . Linnenbrink - Garcia , L . , Tyson , D . F . , & Patall , E . A . ( 2008 ) . When are achievement goal orientations bene ﬁ cial for academic achievement ? A closer look at main effects and moderating factors . International Review of Social Psychology , 21 , 19 – 70 . Lobato , J . ( 2006 ) . Alternative perspectives on the transfer of learning : History , issues , challenges for future research . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 15 , 431 – 449 . Madjar , N . , Kaplan , A . , & Weinstock , M . ( 2011 ) . Clarifying mastery - avoidance goals in high school : Distinguishing between intrapersonal and task - mastery standards of competence . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 36 ( 4 ) , 268 – 279 . Middleton , M . J . , Kaplan , A . , & Midgley , C . ( 2004 ) . The change in middle school students ' achievement goals in mathematics over time . Social Psychology of Education , 7 , 289 – 311 . Nokes , T . J . ( 2009 ) . Mechanisms of knowledge transfer . Thinking and Reasoning , 15 , 1 – 36 . Nokes , T . J . , & Belenky , D . M . ( 2011 ) . Incorporating motivation into a theoretical frame - workforknowledgetransfer . InJ . P . Mestre , & B . H . Ross ( Eds . ) , Psychologyoflearning and motivation . Cognition ineducation , 55 . ( pp . 109 – 135 ) . San Diego : AcademicPress . Nokes , T . J . , & Ohlsson , S . ( 2005 ) . Comparing multiple paths to mastery : What is learned ? Cognitive Science , 29 , 769 – 796 . Nokes - Malach , T . J . , & Mestre , J . ( inpress ) . Towardamodelof transferassense - making . Educational Psychologist . O ' Keefe , P . A . , Ben - Eliyahu , A . , & Linnenbrink - Garcia , L . ( 2012 ) . Shaping achievement goal orientations in a mastery - structured environment and concomitant changes in related contingencies of self - worth . Motivation and Emotion , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11031 - 012 - 9293 - 6 . Perkins , D . N . , & Salomon , G . ( 2012 ) . Knowledgetogo : Amotivationalanddispositional view of transfer . Educational Psychologist , 47 , 248 – 258 . Pugh , K . J . , & Bergin , D . A . ( 2006 ) . Motivational in ﬂ uences on transfer . Educational Psychologist , 41 , 147 – 160 . Reed , S . K . , Ernst , G . W . , & Banerji , R . ( 1974 ) . The role of analogy in transfer between similar problem states . Cognitive Psychology , 6 , 436 – 450 . Richey , J . E . , & Nokes - Malach , T . J . ( 2013 ) . How much is too much ? Learning and moti - vation effects of adding instructional explanations to worked examples . Learning and Instruction , 25 , 104 – 124 . Roll , I . , Holmes , N . G . , Day , J . , & Bonn , D . ( 2012 ) . Evaluating metacognitive scaffolding in guided invention activities . Instructional Science , 40 ( 4 ) , 691 – 710 . Schmitt , N . ( 1996 ) . Uses and abuses of coef ﬁ cient alpha . Psychological Assessment , 8 ( 4 ) , 350 – 353 . Schwartz , D . L . , Chase , C . C . , Opezzo , M . A . , & Chin , D . B . ( 2011 ) . Practicing versus inventing with contrasting cases : The effects of telling ﬁ rst on learning and transfer . Journal of Educational Psychology , 103 ( 4 ) , 759 – 775 . Schwartz , D . L . , & Martin , T . ( 2004 ) . Inventing to prepare for future learning : The hidden ef ﬁ ciency of encouraging originalstudent production instatisticsinstruction . Cognition and Instruction , 22 ( 2 ) , 129 – 184 . Senko , C . , & Harackiewicz , J . M . ( 2005 ) . Achievement goals , performance , and task interest : Why perceived dif ﬁ culty matters . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 31 , 1739 – 1753 . Senko , C . , Hulleman , C . S . , & Harackiewicz , J . M . ( 2011 ) . Achievement goal theory at the crossroads : Old controversies , current challenges , and new directions . Educational Psychologist , 46 , 26 – 47 . Senko , C . , & Miles , K . M . ( 2008 ) . Pursuing their own learning agenda : How mastery - oriented students jeopardize their exam performance . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 33 , 561 – 583 . Somuncuoglu , Y . , & Yildirim , A . ( 1999 ) . Relationship between achievement goal orientations and use of learning strategies . The Journal of Educational Research , 92 ( 5 ) , 267 – 277 . Utman , C . H . ( 1997 ) . Performance effects of motivational state : A meta - analysis . Personality and Social Psychology Review , 1 , 170 – 182 . Van Yperen , N . W . , Elliot , A . J . , & Anseel , F . ( 2009 ) . The in ﬂ uence of mastery - avoidance goals on performance improvement . European Journal of Social Psychology , 39 , 932 – 943 . Watkins , D . ( 1983 ) . Depthofprocessingandthequalityoflearningoutcomes . Instructional Science , 12 , 49 – 58 . Webster , D . M . , & Kruglanski , A . W . ( 1997 ) . Cognitive and social consequences of the need for cognitive closure . European Review of Social Psychology , 8 , 133 – 173 . Wiedmann , M . , Leach , R . C . , Rummel , N . , & Wiley , J . ( 2012 ) . Does group composition affect learning by invention ? Instructional Science , 40 ( 4 ) , 711 – 730 . Wolters , C . A . ( 2004 ) . Advancing achievement goal theory : Using goal structures and goal orientations to predict students ' motivation , cognition , and achievement . Journal of Educational Psychology , 96 , 236 – 250 . 34 D . M . Belenky , T . J . Nokes - Malach / Learning and Individual Differences 25 ( 2013 ) 21 – 34