Journal of Organizational and End User Computing , 18 ( 4 ) , 1 - 21 , October - December 2006 1 Copyright © 2006 , Idea Group Inc . Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of Idea Group Inc . is prohibited . ABSTRACT The article presents a case study following the activities of super users and local developers during the adoption of a new business application by an accounting ﬁrm in Scandinavia ( re - ferred to as the Company ) . The Company launched a program to train super users to help with this process because of the complexity of the new system , a generic multipurpose application system replacing several older nonintegrated systems . The system , Visma Business ( VB ) , is a comprehensive ﬁnancial and accounting application delivered as a set of components that need to be conﬁgured for domain - speciﬁc tasks , depending on the clients the accountants will interact with . The super users and the local end user developer ( also called the application coordinator ) were asked to take part in this study . We documented their activities empirically and analyti - cally , using interviews to gather data and draw on aspects of Activity Theory for the conceptual framework for analysis . Our ﬁndings provide insight into end - user development ( EUD ) activities with VB : what roles were created by the Company , what roles emerged spontaneously during the process , what the various user groups ( regular users , super users , and the application coordina - tor ) did , and how EUD was coordinated between super users and the application coordinator . Our ﬁndings show that super users ﬁll an important niche as mediators between regular users and local developers and can make a signiﬁcant contribution to the success of EUD efforts in a nontechnical application domain . Keywords : Please provide Super Users and Local Developers : The Organization of End - User Development in an Accounting Company Hege - René Hansen Åsand , University of Oslo , Norway Anders I . Mørch , University of Oslo , Norway INTRODUCTION The concept of coworker competence has become a matter of interest in many companies in Scandinavia as well as elsewhere in the world . Work has become signiﬁcantly more complex as workers con - front the integration of traditional work with computer use . Employees in the modern workplace need to master new tools while continuing to employ older skills . In addi - tion , the available task - relevant information has mushroomed . In knowledge intensive IDEA GROUP PUBLISHING This paper appears in the publication , Journal of Organizational and End User Computing , Volume 18 , Issue 4 edited by M . Adam Mahmood © 2006 , Idea Group Inc . 701 E . Chocolate Avenue , Suite 200 , Hershey PA 17033 - 1240 , USA Tel : 717 / 533 - 8845 ; Fax 717 / 533 - 8661 ; URL - http : / / www . idea - group . com ITJ3272 2 Journal of Organizational and End User Computing , 18 ( 4 ) , 1 - 21 , October - December 2006 Copyright © 2006 , Idea Group Inc . Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of Idea Group Inc . is prohibited . domains , such as accounting , this involves immediate access to large amounts of in - formation ( e . g . , all the rules for income tax returns for various enterprises ) . The development of coworker com - petence must keep pace with the introduc - tion of new technology ( Edwards , 1997 ; Ellström , Gustavsson , & Larsson , 1996 ) . It raises the importance of how organizations employ Information and Communication Technology ( ICT ) to adapt the workplace to the learning needs of diverse employees , or increase the ﬂexibility of technical sup - port ( for example , using local expertise vs . buying software for adaptation ) . For the company in our study , we focused our observations and interviews on the technical infrastructure surrounding a new business application . This perspective enabled us to analyze activities associated with EUD and learning at work , two important as - pects in the adoption and use of generic multipurpose applications . We have chosen a framework for analysis based on Activ - ity Theory ( Engeström , 1987 ; Kaptelinin , 1996 ; Kuutti , 1996 ; Nardi , 1996 ) . This framework provides explanatory categories that allowed us to focus both on the integra - tion of work and learning and the integration of design and use . We ﬁnd that these four related issues need to be addressed when introducing complex application systems into an organization with a large and diverse user group . In our case study , the support needs of the users ( accountants ) varied depending on the clients with whom they interacted ( from small - and medium - sized businesses ( SMBs ) to large enterprises ) . Previously the problem of introducing new technology has been addressed by bringing users and professional developers closer together , for example , conducting user testing in developer laboratories ; developing in - house software systems , in - stituting companywide teaching programs , and so forth ( Grudin , 1991 ) . The case we analyzed had a different goal , namely , to bridge the gap between developers and us - ers by creating new user / developer roles . Furthermore , these roles were acknowl - edged and supported by management in the organization and they persisted after the technology had been put into use . We present a case study of “super us - ers , ” who we deﬁne as regular employees with in - depth knowledge of one or more of the organization’s computer applica - tions without being programmers . Super users have both domain expertise and computer know - how , and they are trained to teach other users . They are not trained as programmers ; instead they interact with regular users and with local developers in their daily work . We analyzed how an orga - nization successfully initiates a program to train super users in conjunction with intro - ducing a new software application , Visma Business . Based on empirical material , we discuss our experiences and summarize our ﬁndings . Our research was formulated to address the following questions : • How do super users engage in EUD activities in order to achieve an ef - ﬁcient use of a complex computer application ? • How are EUD activities organized ( roles , division of labor , etc . ) ? The questions are discussed through - out the article and speciﬁcally addressed in the empirical section . The rest of this article is organized as follows . We start by presenting the perspective and rationale of the study , followed by a brief survey of EUD and user design activities . Next , we present our conceptual framework , based on elements of Activity Theory . Then we 19 more pages are available in the full version of this document , which may be purchased using the " Add to Cart " button on the product ' s webpage : www . igi - global . com / article / super - users - local - developers / 3816 ? camid = 4v1 This title is available in InfoSci - Journals , InfoSci - Journal Disciplines Communications and Social Science , InfoSci - Select , InfoSci - Technology Adoption , Ethics , and Human Computer Interaction eJournal Collection , InfoSci - Management Science and Organizational Research eJournal Collection , InfoSci - Journal Disciplines Computer Science , Security , and Information Technology , InfoSci - Journal Disciplines Business , Administration , and Management . Recommend this product to your librarian : www . igi - global . com / e - resources / library - recommendation / ? id = 2 Related Content An Architecture for Organizational Decision Support Systems that Utilizes a Model Coordination Subsystem Gyeung - Min J . Kim , James R . Burns and Rohae Myung ( 2000 ) . Journal of Organizational and End User Computing ( pp . 23 - 34 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / architecture - organizational - decision - support - systems / 3726 ? camid = 4v1a Effectiveness of Systems Analysis and Design Education : An Exploratory Study Rajiv Kohli and Jatinder N . D . Gupta ( 2003 ) . Advanced Topics in End User Computing , Volume 2 ( pp . 191 - 211 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / effectiveness - systems - analysis - design - education / 4450 ? camid = 4v1a An Examination of the Impacts of Brand Equity , Security , and Personalization on Trust Processes in an E Commerce Environment Catharina Stoecklin - Serino and David Paradice ( 2009 ) . Journal of Organizational and End User Computing ( pp . 1 - 36 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / examination - impacts - brand - equity - security / 3850 ? camid = 4v1a Comparative Analysis of Flight Search Representations Aimal Tariq Rextin , Fatima Iftekhar , Muhammad Muddasir Malik and Faheem Abbas ( 2019 ) . Journal of Organizational and End User Computing ( pp . 74 - 88 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / comparative - analysis - of - flight - search - representations / 233830 ? camid = 4v1a