J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e Dynamics of clathrin - mediated endocytosis and its requirement for organelle biogenesis in Dictyostelium Laura Macro , Jyoti K . Jaiswal * and Sanford M . Simon ` Laboratory of Cellular Biophysics , The Rockefeller University , New York , NY 10065 , USA * Present address : Center for Genetic Medicine Research , Children’s National Medical Center , Washington DC , DC 20010 , USA ` Author for correspondence ( simon @ rockefeller . edu ) Accepted 21 August 2012 Journal of Cell Science 125 , 5721 – 5732 (cid:2) 2012 . Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 108837 Summary The protein clathrin mediates one of the major pathways of endocytosis from the extracellular milieu and plasma membrane . In single - cell eukaryotes , such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae , the gene encoding clathrin is not an essential gene , raising the question of whether clathrin conveys specific advantages for multicellularity . Furthermore , in contrast to mammalian cells , endocytosis in S . cerevisiae is not dependent on either clathrin or adaptor protein 2 ( AP2 ) , an endocytic adaptor molecule . In this study , we investigated the requirement for components of clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) in another unicellular organism , the amoeba Dictyostelium . We identified a heterotetrameric AP2 complex in Dictyostelium that is similar to that which is found in higher eukaryotes . By simultaneously imaging fluorescently tagged clathrin and AP2 , we found that , similar to higher eukaryotes , these proteins colocalized to membrane puncta that move into the cell together . In addition , the contractile vacuole marker protein , dajumin - green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) , is trafficked via the cell membrane and internalized by CME in a clathrin - dependent , AP2 - independent mechanism . This pathway is distinct from other endocytic mechanisms in Dictyostelium . Our finding that CME is required for the internalization of contractile vacuole proteins from the cell membrane explains the contractile vacuole biogenesis defect in Dictyostelium cells lacking clathrin . Our results also suggest that the machinery for CME and its role in organelle maintenance appeared early during eukaryotic evolution . We hypothesize that dependence of endocytosis on specific components of the CME pathway evolved later , as demonstrated by internalization independent of AP2 function . Key words : Clathrin , AP2 , Dictyostelium Introduction Clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) is one of the major mechanisms for internalization of nutrients , signaling molecules and transmembrane receptors from the extracellular milieu and plasma membrane ( McMahon and Boucrot , 2011 ) . Although clathrin is required in metazoans , the gene encoding clathrin is not an essential gene in single - cell eukaryotes , such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Dictyostelium ( Payne and Schekman , 1985 ; Lemmon and Jones , 1987 ; O’Halloran and Anderson , 1992 ; Ruscetti et al . , 1994 ) raising the question of whether clathrin conveys specific advantages for multicellularity . In this study , we investigated the process of CME in Dictyostelium , a unicellular organism that can transition between a single - celled and differentiated multicellular form . Clathrin functions by forming a polyhedral lattice that acts as a scaffold for vesicle formation . Given that clathrin itself is unable to bind to either the membrane or the cargo molecules that are to be transported , it requires adaptor proteins that can perform this function ( Owen et al . , 2004 ) . One of the central adaptors for CME is the adaptor protein 2 ( AP2 ) complex , which is a member of a family of protein complexes ( AP1 – AP4 ) , each of which acts at different intracellular locations ( Owen et al . , 2004 ) . The AP2 complex functions at the plasma membrane , where it selects cargo proteins based on sorting signals in their cytosolic tails ( Ohno et al . , 1995 ) . The AP2 complex is a heterotetramer comprising two large subunits ( a and b 2 ) , a medium subunit ( m 2 ) and a small subunit ( s 2 ) , which bind to each other with high affinity ( Collins et al . , 2002 ) . The ability of AP2 to bind simultaneously to cargo proteins , plasma membrane PI - ( 4 , 5 ) - P 2 and clathrin makes it an important ‘hub’ molecule for CME ( Praefcke et al . , 2004 ) . Genetic deletions of clathrin in Dictyostelium have revealed its importance for macropinocytosis , cytokinesis , development and osmoregulation ( O’Halloran and Anderson , 1992 ; Ruscetti et al . , 1994 ; Niswonger and O’Halloran , 1997a ; Niswonger and O’Halloran , 1997b ; Wang et al . , 2003 ) . Given that clathrin functions at numerous membrane transport steps , it has been difficult to resolve whether CME from the plasma membrane is important for any of these processes . Evidence for CME in Dictyostelium is based on the observation that clathrin forms plasma membrane puncta that colocalize with AP2 , epsin , Hip1r and AP180 ( Stavrou and O’Halloran , 2006 ; Repass et al . , 2007 ; Brady et al . , 2008 ; Wen et al . , 2009 ; Sosa et al . , 2012 ) . In the case of AP2 , immunofluorescence studies using an antibody to the a or b 1 / 2 subunits showed that they localize to clathrin puncta ( Wen et al . , 2009 ; Sosa et al . , 2012 ) . In addition , the b 1 / 2 subunit has been shown to interact with the m 2 subunit ( Sosa et al . , 2012 ) ; however , the existence of a full heterotetrameric AP2 complex similar to that found in mammalian cells has not been established . In Dictyostelium , clathrin puncta have been observed to disappear at the plasma membrane coincident with a burst of actin ( Brady et al . , 2010 ) . Although disappearance of clathrin from the membrane is a consequence of endocytosis , Research Article 5721 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e disappearance as the sole criteria for endocytosis is insufficient because it is also observed when the clathrin coat disassembles during uncoating and as a result of photobleaching ( Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ; Merrifield et al . , 2005 ; Mattheyses et al . , 2011 ) . Thus , a robust measure for CME requires demonstration of cargo internalization together with the disappearance of clathrin from the cell membrane , as seen in mammalian systems ( Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ; Merrifield et al . , 2005 ; Rappoport et al . , 2005 ; Mattheyses et al . , 2011 ) . Similar evidence of internalization of specific plasma membrane cargo via CME has been lacking in Dictyostelium . Furthermore , owing to the use of low temporal resolution and fixed - cell imaging for monitoring CME in Dictyostelium , there is limited dynamic information about the endocytosis of clathrin - coated vesicles . In Dictyostelium , loss of expression of many different endocytic proteins results in a defect in osmoregulation , which is controlled by a specialized organelle called the contractile vacuole ( Gerisch et al . , 2002 ) . Osmoregulation phenotypes of varying severity are observed in both clathrin light chain ( clc – ) ( Wang et al . , 2003 ) and heavy chain ( chcA – ) knockouts ( O’Halloran and Anderson , 1992 ) , as well as in knockouts of AP180 ( Stavrou and O’Halloran , 2006 ) , the a , b 1 / 2 or m 2 subunits of AP2 ( Wen et al . , 2009 ; Sosa et al . , 2012 ) , and the m 1 subunit of AP1 ( Lefkir et al . , 2003 ) . Although the function of clathrin and its adaptors at the contractile vacuole is unclear , mislocalization of contractile vacuole components in AP1 and AP2 knockouts has suggested roles for these complexes in contractile vacuole biogenesis ( Lefkir et al . , 2003 ; Sosa et al . , 2012 ) . To study CME vesicles in live cells , we identified a cargo protein and determined the members of the AP2 complex in Dictyostelium . Using biochemical and optical tools , we found that cargo , clathrin and AP2 in Dictyostelium have dynamics characteristic of endocytosis . The AP2 complex colocalizes with clathrin in plasma membrane puncta that internalize from the cell surface into the cytosol . Our results provide direct evidence for the existence of a clathrin - mediated pathway for endocytosis in Dictyostelium , detailed characterization of the kinetics of clathrin and AP2 - containing vesicles , and establish a role for this pathway in the biogenesis of the contractile vacuole . Results Cloning and characterization of the Dictyostelium AP2 complex Genes corresponding to the subunits of AP1 , AP2 , AP3 and AP4 in Dictyostelium were inferred from homology to their mammalian counterparts ( supplementary material Table S1 ) . Experimental evidence has confirmed these annotations for the c , b 1 / 2 and m 1 subunits of AP1 ( Lefkir et al . , 2003 ) , for the d , b 3 and m 3 subunits of AP3 ( Bennett et al . , 2008 ) and for the b 1 / 2 and m 2 subunits of AP2 ( Sosa et al . , 2012 ) . To investigate the AP2 complex in Dictyostelium , we cloned the Ap2A1 gene and labeled it with green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) at the N terminus ( GFP - Ap2A1 ) . Expression of GFP - Ap2A1 in wild - type cells ( AX2 ) resulted in the expression of a single 140 - kDa protein , in agreement with the predicted size for GFP - Ap2A1 ( Fig . 1A ) . Expression of this protein showed no detectable effect on doubling time or time taken by cells to undergo development ( growth curves ; development on agar ; data not shown ) . To identify proteins that interact with GFP - Ap2A1 and form the AP2 complex , cells expressing GFP - Ap2A1 were lysed and incubated with an anti - GFP antibody . The co - immunoprecipitated proteins were separated by SDS - PAGE and the proteins identified by mass spectrometry . The proteins included the predicted a , b , m and s subunits of the AP2 complex ( Fig . 1B ; supplementary material Table S2 ) . We identified the protein product of the gene Ap1B1 as the b subunit , independently confirming the recent report that AP1 and AP2 use the same b subunit in Dictyostelium ( Sosa et al . , 2012 ) . We also identified the protein products of the apm2 gene as the m 2 subunit and of the Ap2S1 gene as the s 2 subunit ; other AP complex subunits were not identified . We also identified the Dictyostelium homolog of Eps15 , a clathrin adaptor known to bind to the AP2 a subunit in mammalian cells ( van Delft et al . , 1997 ) . These results demonstrate the existence of a functional AP2 complex in Dictyostelium that is homologous to the AP2 complex found in mammals . Additionally , GFP - Ap2A1 was incorporated into this AP2 complex and , at the level of expression used here , did not localize to any other protein complexes in the cell . Intracellular localization and dynamics of clathrin and AP2 in Dictyostelium Using GFP - Ap2A1 as a reporter for the AP2 complex , we investigated its localization within the cell . Confocal microscopy showed that GFP - Ap2A1 localized to distinct puncta that were distributed around the cell periphery ( Fig . 2A ) , in agreement with a previous study that used antibodies raised against Ap2A1 ( Wen et al . , 2009 ) . Imaging of cells by total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy ( TIR - FM ) , which excites molecules within , 100 nm of the coverslip , enabled us to establish that AP2 puncta are at , or close to , the plasma membrane ( Fig . 2B ) . TIR - FM time - lapse imaging of GFP - Ap2A1 revealed the dynamic nature of AP2 puncta : puncta appeared at the Fig . 1 . Molecular characterization of the AP2 complex . ( A ) Western blot for GFP in lysates from wild - type cells ( AX2 ) and GFP - expressing wild - type and apm2 – cells . ( B , C ) Coomassie - stained SDS - PAGE gel of proteins immunoprecipitated with anti - GFP antibodies from ( B ) AX2 , as well as AX2 expressing GFP - Ap2A1 and ( C ) apm2 – and apm2 – cells expressing GFP - Ap2A1 . A list of all proteins uniquely identified by LC - MS / MS is in supplementary material Table S2 . Journal of Cell Science 125 ( 23 ) 5722 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e membrane , remained there for various lengths of time and then disappeared from the TIR - FM field ( Fig . 2D ) . Occasionally , AP2 puncta could be seen to localize in rings or circles ( supplementary material Fig . S1A ) , closely resembling AP2 puncta localization on bladders of the contractile vacuole ( Wen et al . , 2009 ) and , thus , were excluded from further analysis . Fig . 2 . Intracellular localization and dynamics of clathrin and AP2 . ( A ) Confocal sections showing the intracellular localization of GFP - Ap2A1 in wild - type ( AX2 ) , Ap2A1 – , apm2 – , clc – and chcA – cells . ( B ) TIR - FM images of GFP - Ap2A1 puncta in AX2 , Ap2A1 – , apm2 – , clc – and chcA – cells . ( C ) TIR - FM images of mRFP - clc puncta in AX2 , Ap2A1 – , apm2 – , chcA – and GFP - clc puncta in clc – cells . ( D ) Examples of the dynamics of individual GFP - Ap2A1 puncta imaged by TIR - FM in AX2 , chcA – and apm2 – cells . Normalized fluorescence intensity is plotted as a function of time for each punctum . ( E ) Examples of the dynamics of individual mRFP - clc puncta imaged by TIR - FM in AX2 , Ap2A1 – and apm2 – cells . Normalized fluorescence intensity is plotted as a function of time for each punctum . ( F – H ) Cell surface durationof ( F ) GFP - clcpunctain clc – cells ; ( G ) GFP - Ap2A1punctainAX2cells ; and ( H ) GFP - Ap2A1in chcA – cells . ( I ) PercentageofGFP - Ap2A1punctapresentatthe end of the time - lapse with durations . 350 seconds . Scale bars : 1 m m ( A – C ) ; 0 . 5 m m ( D , E ) . See also supplementary material Fig . S1 and Table S3 . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis in Dictyostelium 5723 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e When AP2 puncta were imaged continuously for 7 . 5 seconds , three different puncta behaviors were observed : 78 6 8 % remained static , 16 6 8 % disappeared and 7 6 5 % moved laterally ( mean 6 s . d . ; n 5 363 ) . When AP2 puncta were followed over a longer time period ( time - lapse for 10 minutes ) , all the puncta observed to appear on the surface disappeared within 6 minutes , with an average duration on the surface of 56 . 3 6 4 . 2 seconds ( mean 6 s . e . m . ; n 5 111 ) ( Fig . 2G ) . Some puncta were lost owing to the movement of cells during the course of imaging and could not be included in the kinetic analysis . In an attempt to remove any potential bias in our manual tracking , we tested the use of automated tracking to follow every punctum in the cell . This method gave large errors and a significantly shorter duration because it did not exclude puncta that disappeared owing to cell movement . Thus , because of their highly motile nature , automated tracking is not a suitable approach to analyze the kinetics of endocytic puncta in Dictyostelium . To compare the behavior of AP2 with clathrin , we imaged clathrin light chain - knockout cells ( clc – ) expressing GFP - tagged clathrin light chain ( GFP - clc ) ( Wen et al . , 2009 ) and performed the same analysis . In TIR - FM , GFP - clc localized to distinct membrane puncta as well as to contractile vacuoles , as previously observed ( Fig . 2C ; supplementary material Fig . S1A ) ( Brady et al . , 2010 ; Wen et al . , 2009 ) . Continuous imaging of clathrin puncta for a 7 . 5 - second period revealed their dynamic behavior , with 55 6 18 % remaining static , 26 6 14 % disappearing and 19 6 5 % moving laterally ( mean 6 s . d . ; n 5 300 ) . When clathrin puncta were imaged over for a longer time period ( time - lapse for 10 minutes ) , all puncta observed appearing on the surface disappeared within 5 minutes , with an average duration on the surface of 55 . 6 6 6 . 0 seconds ( mean 6 s . e . m . ; n 5 103 ) ( Fig . 2F ) . This is similar to the value of 39 seconds previously reported ( Brady et al . , 2010 ) . Comparison of clathrin and AP2 puncta showed that they had similar distributions of duration times at the cell surface ( Fig . 2F , G ) ; however , more clathrin puncta had shorter durations at the cell surface ( 21 % of clathrin puncta have a lifetime , 10 seconds versus 0 % of AP2 puncta ) . We believe that this population corresponds to clathrin - coated intracellular vesicles that move close to the plasma membrane during imaging , thus being detected using TIR - FM ( Keyel et al . , 2004 ) . Using a two - sample Kolmogorov – Smirnov ( KS ) test , we saw that , if the puncta with durations , 10 seconds were removed from the clathrin population , the distribution of duration times was no longer significantly different between AP2 and clathrin ( KS test , P 5 0 . 066 ) ( supplementary material Table S3 ) . The localization of clathrin in dynamic membrane puncta at the cell membrane was consistent with results from mammalian cells and showed that , in Dictyostelium , clathrin - coated pits form on the plasma membrane . Our results also showed that , in Dictyostelium , the localization and dynamics of AP2 are similar to those in mammalian cells and , therefore , AP2 puncta correspond to clathrin - coated pits . Clathrin heavy chain is required for the dynamic behavior of AP2 puncta The formation and maturation of a clathrin - coated pit involves the recruitment of a complex array of proteins . It has been difficult to study the requirements for individual components of the clathrin - coated vesicle cycle in mammalian cells because of redundancy and incomplete knockdowns . We took advantage of the availability of clathrin and AP2 knockouts in Dictyostelium to investigate whether they are required for the observed cell surface dynamics of puncta . We expressed GFP - Ap2A1 in cells with either disrupted clathrin light chain ( clc – ) ( Wang et al . , 2003 ) or disrupted clathrin heavy chain ( chcA – ) ( Ruscetti et al . , 1994 ) . TIR - FM imaging of GFP - Ap2A1 in clc – cells showed that AP2 was able to localize to membrane puncta that behaved with similar dynamics to wild - type cells ( Fig . 2A , B ; supplementary material Fig . S1C , E ) . In chcA – cells , although GFP - Ap2A1 was able to form membrane puncta with a normal appearance , there was an increased number of diffuse puncta compared with wild - type cells ( Fig . 2B ) . In addition , there was cell - to - cell variability , with some cells showing no puncta . We analyzed AP2 puncta by fitting a single - peak two - dimensional ( 2D ) Gaussian curve to individual puncta , the width of the Gaussian where it falls to 1 / e of the maximum was then measured for each punctum . The average width of AP2 puncta in chcA – cells was 3 . 7 6 1 . 8 pixels ( mean 6 s . d . ; n 5 391 ) compared with 2 . 9 6 0 . 8 pixels in wild - type cells ( n 5 461 ) ; this difference was statistically significant ( t - test , P # 0 . 001 ) . Confocal imaging of GFP - Ap2A1 in chcA – cells showed that , although GFP - Ap2A1 could bind to the membrane , the puncta often stuck together and localized to one side of the cell ( Fig . 2A ) . Furthermore , time - lapse TIR - FM imaging showed high variability in the behavior of individual AP2 puncta ; several puncta were very short lived ( durations , 10 seconds ) , some had dynamics indistinguishable from the wild type , whereas others were long lived ( present at the beginning of imaging and did not disappear for over a 12 - minute period ) ( Fig . 2D ) . Analysis of the time for which the dynamic GFP - Ap2A1 puncta were detectable on the surface showed an increased proportion of puncta with durations of , 10 seconds , causing a significantly shorter average surface duration of 15 . 2 6 2 . 0 seconds ( mean 6 s . e . m . ; n 5 127 ) compared with wild - type cells ( 52 . 3 6 4 . 2 seconds ) ( Fig . 2H ) ; correspondingly , the distribution of durations was significantly different between wild - type and chcA – cells ( KS test , P 5 3 . 80 6 10 2 32 ) . To analyze the long - lived puncta , we quantified the time of arrival of puncta present at the end of the time - lapse to determine how many had a duration greater than 350 seconds . For wild - type cells , we did not observe any puncta with a duration . 350 seconds ; however , in chcA – cells , we found that 43 . 3 % of the GFP - Ap2A1 puncta had a duration . 350 seconds . This number was also elevated in clc – cells ( 26 . 3 % ) ( Fig . 2I ) . This shows that , although clathrin is not required for the plasma membrane localization of AP2 , its loss results in the appearance of two abnormal AP2 puncta populations , one that is very short lived and one that is long lived . This suggests that clathrin has roles in both stabilizing AP2 binding at the membrane and the progression of AP2 puncta to internalization . AP2 m 2 is not required for AP2 a puncta formation We next investigated the effects of disrupting the a ( Ap2A1 – ) ( Wen et al . , 2009 ) or m 2 ( apm2 – ) ( Mercanti et al . , 2006b ) subunits on the localization and dynamics of AP2 or clathrin in cells ( Fig . 2B , C ) . In both the a and m 2 knockouts , clathrin puncta at the plasma membrane were similar to wild - type cells ( Fig . 2C , E ; supplementary material Fig . S1B , G ; Table S3 ) . TIR - FM imaging of GFP - Ap2A1 in Ap2A1 – cells showed some Journal of Cell Science 125 ( 23 ) 5724 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e puncta with dynamics in the range of wild - type cells ; however , the distribution of durations was significantly different ( KS test , P 5 0 . 0094 ) because of the appearance of a population with shorter durations ( , 20 seconds ) ( supplementary material Fig . S1C , E ; Table S3 ) . This could be because of an incomplete rescue of the Ap2A1 – phenotype by the GFP - Ap2A1 protein . Interestingly , in m 2 knockouts , GFP - Ap2A1 also localized to distinct membrane puncta , some of which behaved with dynamics in the range of wild - type cells . A population with shorter durations also appeared , making the distributions significantly different ( KS test , P 5 2 . 23 6 10 2 5 ) ( Fig . 2B , D ; supplementary material Fig . S1C , E ; Table S3 ) . Confocal imaging showed that , although GFP - Ap2A1 puncta could be seen on the plasma membrane in apm2 – cells , there was a higher cytoplasmic level of GFP - Ap2A1 ( Fig . 2A ) . Western blot of cell lysates showed that loss of m 2 does not destabilize the a subunit ( Fig . 1A ) , consistent with the finding that the b 1 / 2 subunit is also stable in apm2 – cells ( Sosa et al . , 2012 ) . To investigate the composition of the GFP - Ap2A1 puncta , we incubated lysates from apm2 – cells expressing GFP - Ap2A1 with an anti - GFP antibody and separated and identified the co - immunoprecipitated proteins using SDS - PAGE and mass spectrometry ( Fig . 1C ) . We found that , in the absence of the m 2 subunit , GFP - Ap2A1 was still able to interact with the b 1 / 2 ( Ap1B1 ) and s 2 ( Ap2S1 ) subunits of the AP2 complex . Although we did not find any of the other AP m subunits , we did identify the c subunit of AP1 ( Ap1G1 ) . These results indicate that , in the absence of the m 2 subunit in Dictyostelium , a partial AP2 complex can form that contains the c subunit . Clathrin and AP2 puncta colocalize and disappear together To test the hypothesis that clathrin and AP2 puncta corresponded to clathrin - coated pits , we investigated their behavior in the same cell . Both mRFP - clc and GFP - Ap2A1 colocalized in puncta at the plasma membrane in live cells , in agreement with observations in fixed cells ( Fig . 3A ) ( Wen et al . , 2009 ) . Colocalization analysis demonstrated that 76 6 18 % of AP2 puncta were positive for clathrin and 57 6 19 % of clathrin puncta were positive for AP2 ( mean 6 s . d . ; n 5 33 cells ) ( Fig . 3C ) . Colocalization of less than 100 % is consistent with observations of clathrin and AP2 in mammalian cells ( Rappoport et al . , 2003 ) . Two color TIR - FM time - lapse imaging of puncta showed that GFP - Ap2A1 and mRFP - clc displayed similar dynamics at the plasma membrane ( Fig . 3B , D ) . Individual puncta were analyzed by calculating the time of disappearance from the TIR field for both GFP - Ap2A1 and mRFP - clc ( n 5 132 ) ( Fig . 3E ) . This analysis showed that , for 58 % of puncta , AP2 disappeared within 4 seconds of clathrin disappearance ; thus , we conclude that AP2 and clathrin leave the TIR field at similar times and behave with similar dynamics at the plasma membrane . Clathrin and AP2 disappearance corresponds to endocytosis To further investigate the nature of AP2 and clathrin disappearance , we monitored these puncta by alternating between widefield ( EPI ) and TIR . Given that the TIR field decays with a space constant of , 100 nm but the EPI field has a focal depth of , 500 nm , puncta that are internalized should continue to be detected with EPI illumination after disappearing from the TIR field ( Merrifield et al . , 2002 ; Mattheyses et al . , 2011 ) . Cells expressing GFP - Ap2A1 and clc - mRFP were imaged by alternating EPI and TIR illumination and the fluorescence intensity of individual puncta was quantified for each channel and used to group puncta based on their behavior ( Fig . 4 ) . Puncta Fig . 3 . Simultaneous imaging of the dynamics of clathrin and AP2 . ( A ) Two - color TIR - FM images of GFP - Ap2A1 and mRFP - clc puncta . Scale bar : 2 m m . ( B ) Example of dynamics of an individual punctum imaged by TIR - FM . Scale bar : 0 . 5 m m . ( C ) Quantification of colocalization between GFP - Ap2A1 and mRFP - clc puncta imaged by TIR - FM . The percentage overlap is plotted for GFP – Ap2A1 versus mRFP - clc ( gray bar ) and for mRFP - clc versus GFP - Ap2A1 ( white bar ) . Data are represented as mean 6 s . d . ( n 5 33 cells ) . ( D ) Normalized fluorescence intensity for the punctum shown in B is plotted as a function of time for GFP - Ap2A1 ( green , open circles ) and mRFP - clc ( red , filled circles ) . ( E ) Time between mRFP - clc and GFP - Ap2A1 disappearance from the TIR - FM field ( n 5 132 puncta ) . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis in Dictyostelium 5725 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e were only analyzed if , by TIR , they could be seen in both the GFP ( AP2 ) and RFP ( clathrin ) channels , and the fluorescence signal accumulated in a punctum followed by a rapid disappearance from TIR . For some puncta , the clathrin EPI signal could not be detected above the noise ; in these cases , only the AP2 EPI signal was used for analysis . A vesicle that formed in TIR , pinched off the membrane and moved into the cell , consistent with endocytosis , was observed for 32 6 17 % of puncta ( mean 6 s . d . ; n 5 93 ) ( Fig . 4A ) . For these puncta , the fluorescence appeared in EPI simultaneously with , or soon after , the TIR signal , consistent with the de novo formation of a clathrin - coated pit at the plasma membrane , and inconsistent with an internal vesicle moving towards the cell surface . When these puncta subsequently disappeared from the TIR field , they continued to be observed in EPI illumination , indicating movement away from the plasma membrane into the cell . For 17 6 13 % of puncta , the EPI signal appeared and disappeared simultaneously with the signal in TIR ( Fig . 4B ) . These events could correspond to endocytic vesicles that either lose their clathrin and AP2 coincident with the vesicle leaving the plasma membrane , or to vesicles internalizing faster than the imaging speed . Alternatively , the loss of signal could be because of an unproductive clathrin - coated pit where clathrin and AP2 disassemble at the cell membrane . Both of these behaviors have been reported in mammalian cells ( Mattheyses et al . , 2011 ) . A small percentage ( 12 6 6 % ) of puncta had an EPI signal that appeared before the TIR signal and , thus , appeared to be internal vesicles that entered the TIR field ( Fig . 4C ) and not clathrin - coated vesicles formed de novo . In 39 6 18 % of puncta , the EPI signal was not bright enough to distinguish from the background fluorescence in the cytoplasm , hence their fate could not be classified . We expect that the behavior of these puncta will be equally distributed between the behaviors observed above and so conclude that most ( . 50 % ) AP2 and clathrin puncta that disappeared from the TIR field showed behavior that corresponded to productive endocytic events . Dajumin - GFP is a plasma membrane cargo for clathrin - mediated endocytosis Given that clathrin and AP2 have a role in osmoregulation in Dictyostelium ( Wen et al . , 2009 ; O’Halloran and Anderson , 1992 ) , we examined whether CME is involved in retrieval of the contractile vacuole proteins that might have entered the cell membrane . Although contractile vacuoles are thought to fuse with the plasma membrane by a kiss - and - run mechanism that does not involve any membrane mixing ( Heuser , 2006 ; Gabriel et al . , 1999 ) , it is possible that there is a low level of leakage into the plasma membrane upon pore formation ( Wen et al . , 2009 ; Gabriel et al . , 1999 ; Sosa et al . , 2012 ) . We coexpressed the contractile vacuole specific marker protein dajumin - GFP ( Gabriel et al . , 1999 ) with mRFP - clc and imaged cells with TIR - FM ( Fig . 5A ) . Dajumin - GFP labeling of the contractile vacuole could be seen as bright bladders and tubules close to the basal membrane , as described previously ( Gabriel et al . , 1999 ) . Closer inspection of our images revealed that dajumin - GFP also localized to dim puncta that colocalized with mRFP - clc puncta ( Fig . 5A ) . Colocalization analysis showed that 40 6 14 % of mRFP - clc overlapped with dajumin - GFP and 22 6 12 % of dajumin - GFP overlapped with mRFP - clc ( mean 6 s . d . ; n 5 25 cells ) ( Fig . 5B ) . Colocalization was validated by performing a pixel shift analysis showing that the peak Fig . 4 . Identification of internalizing puncta . Examples of the dynamics of individual GFP - Ap2A1 and clc - mRFP puncta imaged by two - color alternating EPI and TIR illumination . Kymographs are a maximum intensity projection of the four pixels surrounding the center of the punctum . Normalized fluorescence intensity is plotted as a function of time for GFP - Ap2A1 TIR signal ( top graph , black line ) , GFP - Ap2A1 EPI signal ( top graph , gray line ) , clc - mRFP TIR signal ( bottom graph , black line ) and clc - mRFP EPI signal ( bottom graph , gray line ) . Lines indicate the time of either appearance or disappearance for each channel . ( A ) An individual punctum where the EPI and TIR signals appear together and the TIR signal disappears before the EPI signal . ( B ) An individual punctum where the EPI and TIR signals appear and disappear together . ( C ) An individual punctum where the EPI signal appears before the TIR signal . Journal of Cell Science 125 ( 23 ) 5726 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e colocalization overlap was in the nonshifted image ( dx 5 0 ) ( Fig . 5C ) . Colocalization quantification was confounded by the relatively dim fluorescence of dajumin - GFP puncta ; they appeared and disappeared and were not present at each time point . As a result , there was considerable cell - to - cell variability in the percentage overlap . In cells expressing Ap2A1 tagged with mRFPmars ( mRFP - Ap2A1 ) and dajumin - GFP ( Fig . 5D ) , we found , by TIR - FM , dajumin - GFP puncta that colocalized with mRFP - Ap2A1 . Colocalization analysis showed 16 6 14 % of mRFP - Ap2A1 overlapped with dajumin - GFP and 10 6 8 % of dajumin - GFP overlapped with mRFP - Ap2A1 ( mean 6 s . d . ; n 5 45 cells ) Fig . 5 . Simultaneous imaging of the dynamics of clathrin and dajumin - GFP . ( A , D ) Two - color TIR - FM images of dajumin - GFP and mRFP - clc ( A ) or dajumin - GFP and mRFP - Ap2A1 ( D ) . The enlarged images enable visualization of dajumin - GFP puncta ; intensities are rescaled . Scale bar : 1 m m . ( B , E ) Quantification of colocalization between dajumin - GFP and mRFP - clc ( B ) or between dajumin - GFP and mRFP - Ap2A1 ( E ) . Data are represented as mean 6 s . d . [ ( B ) n 5 25 cells , ( E ) n 5 45 cells ] . ( C , F ) Pixel shift analysis of colocalization was performed on each cell . The graph shows the percentage overlap as a function of shifting the images one pixel to the left ( negative numbers ) or right ( positive numbers ) . Data are represented as mean normalized percentage overlap 6 s . d . ( G ) Dynamics of an individual dajumin - GFP and mRFP - clc punctum imaged by TIR - FM . Scale bar : 0 . 5 m m . ( H ) Normalized fluorescence intensity for the punctum shown in G is plotted as a function of time for dajumin - GFP ( green , open circles ) and mRFP - clc ( red , filled circles ) . ( I ) Time between mRFP - clc and dajumin - GFP disappearance from the TIR - FM field ( n 5 47 puncta ) . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis in Dictyostelium 5727 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e ( Fig . 5E ) . Again , there was cell - to - cell variability and colocalization was validated using pixel shift analysis ( Fig . 5F ) . The colocalization of this transmembrane protein with AP2 and clathrin suggested that it was internalized in clathrin - coated vesicles . To investigate the dynamics of dajumin - GFP puncta , we used time - lapse imaging of cells expressing dajumin - GFP and mRFP - clc ( Fig . 5G ) . Puncta were tracked over time and the fluorescence intensity was quantified ( Fig . 5H ) . Dajumin - GFP accumulated with clathrin followed by a rapid disappearance from TIR . The time of initiation of disappearance from the TIR field was calculated for both dajumin - GFP and mRFP - clc for each punctum ( n 5 47 ) ( Fig . 5I ) . This analysis showed that 47 % of dajumin - GFP puncta disappeared together with clathrin ( , 4 seconds apart ) . Given that we showed that clathrin puncta that disappeared from TIR moved into the cell ( Fig . 4 ) , we conclude that dajumin - GFP is internalized from the plasma membrane of Dictyostelium via CME . Clathrin heavy chain is essential for internalization of plasma membrane dajumin - GFP Internalization of dajumin - GFP from the plasma membrane was confirmed using a biotin internalization assay ( Barth et al . , 1994 ) ( Fig . 6A ) . Plasma membrane proteins of wild - type cells Fig . 6 . Internalization of dajumin - GFP . ( A ) Biotin internalization assay for AX2 , Ap2A1 – , apm2 – , clc – and chcA – cells . Dajumin - GFP was immunoprecipitated from cell lysates . Membranes were probed for biotin with streptavidin - HRP ( short and long exposures shown ) or for GFP with an anti - GFP antibody . Dajumin - GFP full - length protein ( # ) , the 45 - kDa fragment ( $ ) and the 40 - kDa fragment ( N ) are indicated . ( B ) The - fold increase in biotin signal following 15 minutes of internalization calculated from western blots . Solid square , mean ; box , s . e . m . and 50th percentile ; gray diamond , individual values . Values were compared using a one - way ANOVA . ( C ) Widefield microscopy images of dajumin - GFP in AX2 , Ap2A1 – , apm2 – , clc – and chcA – cells . A single focal plane ( top row ) and a maximum intensity projection of the entire cell ( bottom row ) are shown . Scale bar : 1 m m . See also supplementary material Fig . S2 . Journal of Cell Science 125 ( 23 ) 5728 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e expressing dajumin - GFP were reversibly biotinylated with a membrane - impermeable biotin . Immunoprecipitation of dajumin - GFP from cell lysates , followed by SDS - PAGE and western blot analysis with streptavidin - HRP , showed that dajumin - GFP is biotinylated and , thus , present on the plasma membrane . Western blot analysis of dajumin - GFP showed that the full - length protein and two cleavage products ( 45 kDa and 40 kDa ) were present in cells ( Gabriel et al . , 1999 ) . Tagging of dajumin on its extracellular domain confirmed that these are products of cleavage and indicated the protein is cleaved at , or close to , the transmembrane domain ( data not shown ) . Only the full - length protein and the 45 - kDa fragment were biotinylated ; the 40 - kDa fragment was either not on the plasma membrane or did not have extracellular amino groups accessible to the biotinylation reagent . We next followed the fate of cell surface dajumin - GFP by allowing the cells to internalize proteins for 15 minutes by incubation at 22 ˚ C . Residual cell surface biotin was removed by incubation with a membrane - impermeable reducing agent . As a control , some cells were kept on ice and , thus , did not undergo any cell surface internalization . The results show that following the internalization step at 22 ˚ C , the amount of biotinylated dajumin - GFP increased , demonstrating endocytosis from the cell surface . We assessed the requirement of clathrin and AP2 for internalization by expressing dajumin - GFP in Ap2A1 – , apm2 – , clc – and chcA – cells . In Ap2A1 – , apm2 – and clc – cells , the amount of biotinylated dajumin - GFP increased following the internalization step , showing that plasma membrane dajumin - GFP was internalized similar to wild - type cells . By contrast , in chcA – cells , dajumin - GFP was biotinylated and , therefore , was on the plasma membrane , but no internalization was ever observed ( Fig . 6A , B ) . We confirmed these results by imaging the localization of dajumin - GFP in the various cell lines ( Fig . 6C ) . In wild - type , Ap2A1 – , apm2 – and clc – cells , deconvolution of z - stacks showed the predominant localization of dajumin - GFP to be in contractile vacuoles , in agreement with recently published results ( Sosa et al . , 2012 ) . The additional plasma membrane localization of dajumin - GFP that can be seen in individual focal planes has , however , not previously been described . In chcA – cells , no contractile vacuoles were observed ( O’Halloran and Anderson , 1992 ) and dajumin - GFP was predominantly localized to the plasma membrane ( Fig . 6B ) , again in agreement with ( Sosa et al . , 2012 ) . The absence of contractile vacuoles in chcA – cells was confirmed by staining with the lipophilic dye FM4 – 64 ( Heuser et al . , 1993 ) and with an antibody to the vacuolar proton pump ( VatM ) ( Fok et al . , 1993 ) ( supplementary material Fig . S2 ) . Some internal dajumin - GFP positive structures could be seen ; these did not colocalize with a fluid - phase endocytic marker or a lysosomal marker ( 10 kDa TxR - dextran ; Lysotracker DND Blue ; data not shown ) and might represent either a rudimentary contractile vacuole that has not fused with the plasma membrane or the dajumin - GFP transiting through the Golgi compartment . Together , our results show the existence of a clathrin - mediated endocytic pathway via which plasma membrane dajumin - GFP is internalized in a clathrin - dependent , AP2 - independent mechanism . This suggests that internalization from the plasma membrane by clathrin - coated vesicles is important for the biogenesis and maintenance of the contractile vacuole in Dictyostelium . Discussion The formation of clathrin - coated vesicles is characterized by the successive binding of various proteins . The adaptor complex AP2 acts as a central player in this process by binding to clathrin , many other accessory proteins and cargo ( McMahon and Boucrot , 2011 ) . We showed that a heterotetrameric AP2 complex exists in Dictyostelium that localizes to internalizing clathrin - coated pits on the plasma membrane . Given that AP1 and AP2 use the same b subunit in Dictyostelium ( Sosa et al . , 2012 ) , and the AP1 complex has been shown to localize to the Golgi ( Lefkir et al . , 2003 ) , membrane specificity of the AP complexes is not conferred by the b subunit . This is consistent with studies of mammalian AP complexes , which showed that b subunits primarily have a role in clathrin binding rather than membrane specificity ( Page and Robinson , 1995 ; Shih et al . , 1995 ) . In Dictyostelium , clathrin and AP2 showed similar dynamics at the membrane and , when imaged simultaneously , they colocalized in puncta and disappeared from the TIR - FM field together . This signature is consistent with the behavior of AP2 and clathrin puncta in mammalian cells ( Rappoport et al . , 2006 ) . For both AP2 and clathrin puncta , there was a variety of durations on the plasma membrane , again a property consistent with mammalian clathrin - coated pits ( Mattheyses et al . , 2011 ) . We took advantage of the spatial selectivity of TIR - FM compared with wide - field illumination to image the internalization of clathrin - coated pits as they moved from the plasma membrane into the cell . Taken together , our results demonstrated that AP2 and clathrin accumulate at clathrin - coated pits that disappear from the TIR - FM field , corresponding to productive endocytic events in Dictyostelium . Deletions in clathrin and AP2 genes in Dictyostelium were used to study the requirements for these proteins in clathrin - coated vesicle formation . Our results showed that AP2 can form membrane puncta in the absence of clathrin heavy chain but that some of these puncta cannot progress to internalization , similar to observations in mammalian cells ( Henne et al . , 2010 ) . These results suggest that the progressive nature and precise timing of forming a clathrin - coated vesicle have been conserved throughout evolution . Furthermore , we also observed a population of AP2 puncta that has a much shorter surface duration , indicating that clathrin also has a role in stabilizing AP2 at the membrane . In the absence of the AP2 m 2 subunit , GFP - Ap2A1 was stable and able to localize to plasma membrane puncta of partial AP2 complexes . This suggests that the AP2 complex can assemble and target to the plasma membrane without the m 2 subunit , consistent with findings for AP1 in Dictyostelium ( Lefkir et al . , 2003 ) . It is possible that the AP complexes are more dynamic than previously thought , with subunits functioning independently or exchanging freely . Interestingly , we also detected the c subunit of AP1 in our co - immunoprecipitation . Given that AP1 and AP2 use the same b subunit , it is possible that we detected the c subunit via this interaction . The appearance of a short - lived population of AP2 puncta in the m 2 and a knockouts suggested that the individual subunits have a role in stabilizing the binding of the AP2 complex to the membrane . Given that clathrin mutants are not lethal in unicellular organisms , such as Dictyostelium and yeast ( O’Halloran and Anderson , 1992 ; Payne and Schekman , 1985 ; Lemmon and Jones , 1987 ) , it has been suggested that CME acts as a nonspecialized endocytic portal in these lower eukaryotes ( McMahon and Boucrot , 2011 ) . For the first time in Dictyostelium , we have shown that a specific transmembrane cargo , dajumin - GFP , is internalized via CME . Just as clathrin is Clathrin - mediated endocytosis in Dictyostelium 5729 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e required for internalization of many cargos in mammalian cells , internalization of dajumin - GFP is fully dependent on clathrin . Interestingly , its uptake is not dependent on AP2 suggesting that , in Dictyostelium , AP2 is not essential to form clathrin - coated vesicles , a property normally associated with CME in mammalian cells ( Motley et al . , 2003 ; Henne et al . , 2010 ; Boucrot et al . , 2010 ) . Endocytosis independent of AP2 function is also seen in yeast ( Huang et al . , 1999 ; Yeung et al . , 1999 ) ; thus , dependence on AP2 might have arisen in metazoans . However , AP2 function might not have been fully removed in apm2 – knockouts owing to the presence of a partial AP2 complex that is still able to localize properly . Selection of dajumin - GFP as cargo might depend on the adaptor AP180 , which has already been shown to have a role in retrieving Vamp7B from contractile vacuoles , limiting their homotypic fusion ( Wen et al . , 2009 ) . A role for clathrin and AP1 in contractile vacuole biogenesis is well documented ( O’Halloran and Anderson , 1992 ; Wang et al . , 2003 ; Lefkir et al . , 2003 ; Sosa et al . , 2012 ) . In AP1 m 1 - knockouts , the contractile vacuole is completely absent , and the contractile vacuole proteins Rh50 and dajumin - GFP are mislocalized to punctate structures inside the cell ( Lefkir et al . , 2003 ; Sosa et al . , 2012 ) , indicating that at least some contractile vacuole components are trafficked in a clathrin - coated vesicle dependent mechanism . Dajumin - GFP localization to the plasma membrane in chcA – and b 1 / 2 - knockout cells was previously reported ( Sosa et al . , 2012 ) ; this study suggests that AP2 only functions in sorting of dajumin - GFP in the context of an AP1 knockout . In agreement , we found that there was no observed defect in dajumin - GFP trafficking in AP2 knockouts alone ; however , we showed that dajumin - GFP traffics through the plasma membrane even in wild - type cells , suggesting that this pathway operates normally , and not only in the context of mis - sorting by a AP1 knockout . Our data showed a role for CME in the biogenesis and / or maintenance of the contractile vacuole by functioning in retrieval of proteins from the cell membrane . This is in agreement with results for Rh50 showing that a fusion protein with the cytoplasmic tail of Rh50 traffics via the plasma membrane en route to the contractile vacuole ( Mercanti et al . , 2006a ) . It also suggests the plasma membrane is a potential source of membrane for the contractile vacuole . It is possible that CME arose as a mechanism of protein sorting and has evolved to serve other functions in higher eukaryotes . Further identification of cargoes internalized by CME in Dictyostelium will help in addressing whether it performs only a sorting function in this organism . In addition to its biosynthetic route , dajumin - GFP might enter the plasma membrane upon emptying of the contractile vacuole . Membrane mixing and entry of dajumin - GFP to the plasma membrane is not observed upon kiss - and - run fusion pore formation ( Heuser , 2006 ; Gabriel et al . , 1999 ) . However , CME might function as a back - up mechanism in case of membrane mixing . It is unclear whether CME has any role in the regulation of contractile vacuole emptying and pore formation itself . Our results offer the first direct demonstration that clathrin is utilized for endocytosis of membrane cargo in Dictyostelium in a process distinct from macropinocytosis and phagocytosis . This pathway is distinguished by the generation of endocytic vesicles that contain AP2 , clathrin and dajumin . Furthermore , our analysis of this pathway at a high spatial and temporal resolution shows the high degree of similarity in the kinetics of internalization of individual clathrin - coated vesicles between Dictyostelium and mammalian cells . These similarities support the conclusion that the formation of clathrin - coated vesicles is homologous between Dictyostelium and mammals and that Dictyostelium is a useful model to study CME in vivo . Materials and Methods Plasmid construction To generate mRFPmars - Ap2A1 ( mRFP - Ap2A1 ) , the coding region of Ap2A1 was amplified from a cDNA library and inserted into the vector 339 - 3 ( Fischer et al . , 2004 ) ( provided by Dr A . Mu¨ller - Taubenberger ) to generate GFP - Ap2A1 , mRFPmars was replaced with GFP . Either GFP - Ap2A1 or mRFP - Ap2A1 was inserted into plasmids pDM304 , pDM326 and / or pDM358 ( Veltman et al . , 2009 ) to allow selection with other resistance markers . To generate mRFPmars - clc ( mRFP - clc ) , the clc sequence from pTX - GFP - clc ( Wang et al . , 2006 ) ( provided by Dr T . O’Halloran ) was inserted into 339 - 3 , mRFP - clc was then inserted into pDM304 for expression . To generate clc - mRFPmars ( clc - mRFP ) , first mRFPmars was inserted into pDM304 or pDM326 to generate pDM304 - mRFP ( C ) and pDM326 - mRFP ( C ) . The clc sequence was then inserted into pDM304 - mRFP ( C ) and pDM326 - mRFP ( C ) . The plasmid encoding dajumin - GFP was provided by Dr A . Mu¨ller - Taubenberger ( Gabriel et al . , 1999 ) . Dajumin was inserted into pDM326 - mGFP ( C ) to generate dajumin - mGFP . Cell growth AX2 cells were cultured axenically in HL5 medium at 22 ˚ C . The knockout cell lines used were Ap2A1 – , apm2 – , clc – and chcA – and were provided by the Dicty Stock Center ( www . dictybase . org ) . Expression constructs were introduced into cells by electroporation and selected and maintained in HL5 medium containing 20 m g / ml Geneticin , 10 m g / ml BlasticidinS or 35 m g / ml Hygromycin . A table of expression constructs and strains can be found in the supplementary material Table S4 . Western blots Cells were lysed on ice with RIPA buffer containing protease inhibitors . SDS sample buffer was added to 16 m g of protein and run on a 4 – 20 % Tris - glycine gel followed by transfer to nitrocellulose membranes . Membranes were blocked with 5 % nonfat milk in TBS - T and probed with anti - GFP antibody ( Novus NB600 - 303 ; 1 : 2000 or Clontech JL - 8 ; 1 : 5000 ) followed by anti - rabbit - HRP ( Sigma A0545 ; 1 : 50 , 000 ) or anti - mouse - HRP ( Sigma A9917 ; 1 : 5000 ) . HRP was visualized using Supersignal West Pico Chemiluminescent Substrate ( Pierce ) or ECL Plus ( GE ) . Co - immunoprecipitation assay Growth phase cells ( 9 6 10 7 ) were collected at 600 g for 2 minutes and lysed on ice in 10 ml of lysis buffer ( 10 mM Tris - Cl pH 7 . 5 , 150 mM NaCl , 0 . 5 mM EDTA , 0 . 5 % NP - 40 ) for 30 minutes with pipetting every 10 minutes . The lysate was cleared by centrifugation at 20 , 000 g for 10 minutes at 4 ˚ C and the supernatant was collected . 60 m l of GFP - Trap - A beads ( ChromoTek ) was washed in dilution buffer ( 10 mM Tris - Cl pH 7 . 5 , 150 mM NaCl , 0 . 5 mM EDTA ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and then added to the cell lysate and nutated for 5 hours at 4 ˚ C . Beads were collected by centrifugation at 2 , 000 g and washed with 1 ml of dilution buffer followed by a wash with 1 ml of dilution buffer containing 0 . 5 M NaCl . Proteins were eluted from the beads by adding 50 m l of 2X SDS sample buffer followed by boiling for 10 minutes . Beads were collected at 2 , 700 g and supernatants were loaded onto 4 – 20 % Tris - glycine gels . Gels were stained with Coomassie Blue and bands were excised from the gel and analyzed by LC - MS / MS followed by a database search using MASCOT ( Proteomics Resource Center , Rockefeller University ) . Microscopy Growth phase cells were allowed to adhere to MatTek dishes ; growth media was then replaced by imaging media ( Low Fluorescence Axenic Media , www . dictybase . org ) for several hours before imaging . Widefield microscopy was performed at the Rockefeller University Bio - Imaging Resource Center ( BIRC ) . A Deltavision Image Restoration Microscope with a 100 6 1 . 4 NA objective was used to take Z - slices ( 200 nm steps ) , which were deconvolved with the softWoRx software using measured PSFs . Samples were excited with a xenon lamp and either a 490 / 20 excitation filter , a GFP / mCherry polychroic and a 528 / 38 emission filter , or a 555 / 28 excitation filter , a DAPI / FITC / Rhod / Cy5 polychroic and a 685 / 40 emission filter . Confocal microscopy was performed at the Rockefeller University BIRC . A Zeiss Axiovert 200 microscope with a Perkin - Elmer Ultraview spinning disk confocal head and a 100 6 1 . 45 NA objective was used . The laser excitation used was 491 nm with a 491LP dichroic and an ET500LP emission filter ; the microscope has an Andor iXon 512 6 512 EMCCD camera . TIR - FM : two similar microscopes previously described were used ( Mattheyses et al . , 2011 ) . A 60 6 1 . 45 NA objective combined with an additional 1 . 5 6 Journal of Cell Science 125 ( 23 ) 5730 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e magnifier was used . The microscope has a Hamamatsu Orca - ER CCD camera or a Hamamatsu EM - CCD Digital camera C9100 . For dual - color imaging , fluorescence emission was collected simultaneously and split into two images using a Cairn OptosplitIII emission splitter . For all TIR - FM imaging , an exposure time of 500 milliseconds was used and images were taken every 1 second for time - lapse imaging or continuously for streaming . For alternating EPI - TIR , images were acquired by changing the angle of incidence of the laser with a pair of galvanometers . A 500 - millisecond exposure was used for both EPI and TIR with a delay of , 200 milliseconds between EPI and TIR acquisitions . One set of images was acquired every 1 . 5 seconds . Image analysis Behavior of GFP - clc or GFP - Ap2A1 puncta : cells were imaged by streaming acquisition and individual puncta were tracked manually for 7 . 5 seconds and their behavior over this period described . Puncta that disappeared because of cell movement were not included in the analysis . Duration of GFP - clc or GFP - Ap2A1 on the surface : cells were imaged by time - lapse acquisition and individual puncta were tracked manually or automatically . For manual tracking , the frame of appearance in TIR and disappearance from TIR of individual puncta was used to determine the duration . For automatic tracking , individual puncta were tracked using the ‘spots’ function in the software Imaris . Criteria for determining spots was manually adjusted for each cell . For tracking , the Brownian motion algorithm was used with a maximum distance of 5 and a gap of 0 . The time of appearance in TIR and disappearance from TIR of individual puncta was used to determine the duration . Statistical analysis : a two - sample Kolmogorov – Smirnov ( KS ) test was used . The null hypothesis is that the durations are drawn from the same distribution . A nonparametric test was used because the distributions of durations did not correspond to a normal distribution . The test was implemented in Origin 8 . 5 software . Number of long - lived puncta : puncta present in the last frame of the time - lapse were tracked and their frame of appearance was determined . Their duration was determined as ‘time of last frame’ – ‘time of appearance in TIR’ . The number of puncta with durations over 350 seconds was calculated as a percentage of all the puncta tracked . Colocalization analysis : for dual - color imaging , red and green fluorescence emission channels were split and aligned using the Cairn Image Splitter Analyzer plugin for ImageJ . A background value of 200 was subtracted from all images followed by using the rolling ball background subtract function ( radius 50 – 100 , no smoothing ) . Single frames from the beginning of time - lapse images were used for colocalization analysis . Manual thresholding was used to outline the puncta for either channel . The maximum intensity pixel within each outline was overlaid onto the outlines of the other channel . A maximum was counted as colocalized if it fell within an outline on the other channel . Percentage overlap was calculated as ( number of colocalized maxima / total maxima ) 6 100 . For pixel shift analysis , the outline image was shifted 20 pixels to the left or right in one - pixel increments . The overlap analysis was then performed at each position . Percentage overlap values were calculated for each position and then normalized to the unshifted value . These procedures were implemented via custom macros in ImageJ . Gaussian fitting : individual puncta were analyzed using a 7 6 7 pixel region excised from the raw data . A custom program was used to fit a 2D , single peak Gaussian to each punctum , the program was implemented in LabView and provided by Dr Daniel Johnson . The width of the Gaussian from the center where it falls to 1 / e of the maxima was recorded in X and Y dimensions , the narrowest dimension was used in the measurement ( X dimension ) . Data were compared using a two - sample t - test with non - equal variance . Analysis of individual puncta : puncta were selected for analysis if a fluorescence signal was present in both channels and the puncta disappeared from the TIR field during the time - lapse . For GFP - Ap2A1 and mRFP - clc , puncta were circled in the GFP - Ap2A1 channel and transferred to the clathrin channel . For dajumin - GFP and mRFP - clc , puncta were circled in the mRFP - clc channel and transferred to the dajumin channel . Puncta were tracked using a combination of MATLAB and the ImageJ plugin SpotTracker 2D , as described in Mattheyses et al . ( Mattheyses et al . , 2011 ) . The average fluorescence intensity of the puncta was measured for both channels and the values normalized to the maximum intensity in each channel for each puncta . The time of initiation of departure was determined for each channel as the point at which the fluorescence intensity of a puncta started to decline irreversibly . Time between AP2 and clathrin disappearance or between dajumin and clathrin disappearance was calculated as ‘initiation of departure for mRFP - clc’ – ‘initiation of departure for GFP - Ap2A1 or dajumin - GFP’ . For EPI versus TIR data , the same analysis was performed as above , puncta centroids were calculated from the GFP - Ap2A1 TIR channel and applied to all other channels . The average fluorescence intensity of the puncta was measured for all channels and the values normalized to the maximum intensity in each channel for each puncta , we then applied a rolling average to the data using a seven - frame window . The time of initiation of appearance was determined for each channel as the point at which fluorescence intensity of a puncta started to increase irreversibly . The time of disappearance was determined as the point at which there was a plateau in the decline of the fluorescence intensity . Kymographs were created using a maximum intensity projection of the four pixels either side of the center of the spot for every time point . Classification of puncta into various categories was done manually by assessing both the fluorescence intensity measurements and kymographs for each punctum . Biotinylation assay The assay was performed as described in Barth et al . ( Barth et al . , 1994 ) , 5 6 10 6 cells were used per time point . After the cell surface reduction step , cells were lysed in 50 – 100 m l of lysis buffer and total protein concentration measured . Equal amounts of total protein were used for co - immunoprecipitation as described above , except 10 – 20 m l of GFP - Trap - A beads were used and nutation was performed for 2 hours at 4 ˚ C . Samples were eluted from the bead in 30 – 60 m l of non - reducing sample buffer . For detecting GFP , western blots were performed as described above ; 5 – 25 m l of the sample was run on a 4 – 20 % Tris - glycine gel followed by transfer to nitrocellulose membranes . For detectionofbiotin , 20 m lofthesamplewasrunona4 – 20 % Tris - glycinegelfollowedby transfer to nitrocellulose membranes . Membranes were blocked for 1 hour with 2 % BSA Fraction V in wash buffer ( 150 mM NaCl , 50 mM Na 2 B 4 O 7 , pH 10 . 0 ) and then probed for 1 hour with Pierce High Sensitivity Streptavidin - HRP ( 1 : 8 , 000 ) in 4 % BSA Fraction V in wash buffer containing 0 . 02 % Triton - X100 . Membranes were washed three times with wash buffer containing 0 . 01 % Triton - X100 , followed by three washes with wash buffer containing 0 . 1 % Triton - X100 . HRP was visualized using ECL Plus . Immunofluorescence Cells were incubated in imaging media on 25 mm NO . 1 . 5 glass coverslips and fixed as described in ( Fok et al . , 1993 ) but without the agar overlay . Cells were then immunostained ( Clarke et al . , 1987 ) with the N4 antibody ( Fok et al . , 1993 ) ( 1 : 50 ) followed by a goat anti - mouse AF488 secondary antibody ( 1 : 400 ) . Z - slices were taken with a widefield microscope with a 100 6 1 . 35 NA objective and deconvolved with the software Huygens using calculated PSFs . Samples were excited with a xenon lamp and a 470 / 40 excitation filter , a GFP dichroic mirror was used with a 520 / 40 emission filter . FM4 - 64 staining Cells were incubated in imaging media on MatTek dishes and FM4 – 64 dye was added at 1 m g / ml for 20 min . Cells were imaged with the Deltavision microscope described above . Acknowledgements We thank Dr T O’Halloran and Dr A . Mu¨ller - Taubenberger for reagents . We thank The Rockefeller University BIRC and Proteomics Resource Center , Dr Marina Fix for manuscript editing and Dr Daniel Johnson for the Gaussian fitting program . Funding This work was funded the National Institutes of Health ( National Institute of General Medical Sciences ) [ grant number 5R01GM087977 - 03 to S . M . S . ] . L . M . is supported by the Boehringer Ingelheim Fonds . Deposited in PMC for release after 12 months . Supplementary material available online at http : / / jcs . biologists . org / lookup / suppl / doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 108837 / - / DC1 References Barth , A . , Mu¨ller - Taubenberger , A . , Taranto , P . and Gerisch , G . ( 1994 ) . Replacement of the phospholipid - anchor in the contact site A glycoprotein of D . discoideum by a transmembrane region does not impede cell adhesion but reduces residence time on the cell surface . J . Cell Biol . 124 , 205 - 215 . Bennett , N . , Letourneur , F . , Ragno , M . and Louwagie , M . ( 2008 ) . Sorting of the v - SNARE VAMP7 in Dictyostelium discoideum : a role for more than one Adaptor Protein ( AP ) complex . Exp . Cell Res . 314 , 2822 - 2833 . Boucrot , E . , Saffarian , S . , Zhang , R . and Kirchhausen , T . ( 2010 ) . Roles of AP - 2 in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . PLoS ONE 5 , e10597 . Brady , R . J . , Wen , Y . and O’Halloran , T . J . ( 2008 ) . The ENTH and C - terminal domains of Dictyostelium epsin cooperate to regulate the dynamic interaction with clathrin - coated pits . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 3433 - 3444 . Brady , R . J . , Damer , C . K . , Heuser , J . E . and O’Halloran , T . J . ( 2010 ) . Regulation of Hip1r by epsin controls the temporal and spatial coupling of actin filaments to clathrin - coated pits . J . Cell Sci . 123 , 3652 - 3661 . Clarke , M . , Kayman , S . C . and Riley , K . ( 1987 ) . Density - dependent induction of discoidin - I synthesis in exponentially growing cells of Dictyostelium discoideum . Differentiation 34 , 79 - 87 . Collins , B . M . , McCoy , A . J . , Kent , H . M . , Evans , P . R . and Owen , D . J . ( 2002 ) . Molecular architecture and functional model of the endocytic AP2 complex . Cell 109 , 523 - 535 . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis in Dictyostelium 5731 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e Ehrlich , M . , Boll , W . , Van Oijen , A . , Hariharan , R . , Chandran , K . , Nibert , M . L . and Kirchhausen , T . ( 2004 ) . Endocytosis by random initiation and stabilization of clathrin - coated pits . Cell 118 , 591 - 605 . Fischer , M . , Haase , I . , Simmeth , E . , Gerisch , G . and Mu¨ller - Taubenberger , A . ( 2004 ) . A brilliant monomeric red fluorescent protein to visualize cytoskeleton dynamics in Dictyostelium . FEBS Lett . 577 , 227 - 232 . Fok , A . K . , Clarke , M . , Ma , L . and Allen , R . D . ( 1993 ) . Vacuolar H ( + ) - ATPase of Dictyostelium discoideum . A monoclonal antibody study . J . Cell Sci . 106 , 1103 - 1113 . Gabriel , D . , Hacker , U . , Ko¨hler , J . , Mu¨ller - Taubenberger , A . , Schwartz , J . M . , Westphal , M . and Gerisch , G . ( 1999 ) . The contractile vacuole network of Dictyostelium as a distinct organelle : its dynamics visualized by a GFP marker protein . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 3995 - 4005 . Gerisch , G . , Heuser , J . and Clarke , M . ( 2002 ) . Tubular - vesicular transformation in the contractile vacuole system of Dictyostelium . Cell Biol . Int . 26 , 845 - 852 . Henne , W . M . , Boucrot , E . , Meinecke , M . , Evergren , E . , Vallis , Y . , Mittal , R . and McMahon , H . T . ( 2010 ) . FCHo proteins are nucleators of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Science 328 , 1281 - 1284 . Heuser , J . ( 2006 ) . Evidence for recycling of contractile vacuole membrane during osmoregulation in Dictyostelium amoebae—a tribute to Gu¨nther Gerisch . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 85 , 859 - 871 . Heuser , J . , Zhu , Q . and Clarke , M . ( 1993 ) . Proton pumps populate the contractile vacuoles of Dictyostelium amoebae . J . Cell Biol . 121 , 1311 - 1327 . Huang , K . M . , D’Hondt , K . , Riezman , H . and Lemmon , S . K . ( 1999 ) . Clathrin functions in the absence of heterotetrameric adaptors and AP180 - related proteins in yeast . EMBO J . 18 , 3897 - 3908 . Keyel , P . A . , Watkins , S . C . and Traub , L . M . ( 2004 ) . Endocytic adaptor molecules reveal an endosomal population of clathrin by total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 13190 - 13204 . Lefkir , Y . , de Chassey , B . , Dubois , A . , Bogdanovic , A . , Brady , R . J . , Destaing , O . , Bruckert , F . , O’Halloran , T . J . , Cosson , P . and Letourneur , F . ( 2003 ) . The AP - 1 clathrin - adaptor is required for lysosomal enzymes sorting and biogenesis of the contractile vacuole complex in Dictyostelium cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 1835 - 1851 . Lemmon , S . K . and Jones , E . W . ( 1987 ) . Clathrin requirement for normal growth of yeast . Science 238 , 504 - 509 . Mattheyses , A . L . , Atkinson , C . E . and Simon , S . M . ( 2011 ) . Imaging single endocytic events reveals diversity in clathrin , dynamin and vesicle dynamics . Traffic 12 , 1394 - 1406 . McMahon , H . T . and Boucrot , E . ( 2011 ) . Molecular mechanism and physiological functions of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 12 , 517 - 533 . Mercanti , V . , Blanc , C . , Lefkir , Y . , Cosson , P . and Letourneur , F . ( 2006a ) . Acidic clusters target transmembrane proteins to the contractile vacuole in Dictyostelium cells . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 837 - 845 . Mercanti , V . , Charette , S . J . , Bennett , N . , Ryckewaert , J . - J . , Letourneur , F . and Cosson , P . ( 2006b ) . Selective membrane exclusion in phagocytic and macropinocytic cups . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 4079 - 4087 . Merrifield , C . J . , Feldman , M . E . , Wan , L . and Almers , W . ( 2002 ) . Imaging actin and dynamin recruitment during invagination of single clathrin - coated pits . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 691 - 698 . Merrifield , C . J . , Perrais , D . and Zenisek , D . ( 2005 ) . Coupling between clathrin - coated - pit invagination , cortactin recruitment , and membrane scission observed in live cells . Cell 121 , 593 - 606 . Motley , A . , Bright , N . A . , Seaman , M . N . J . and Robinson , M . S . ( 2003 ) . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis in AP - 2 - depleted cells . J . Cell Biol . 162 , 909 - 918 . Niswonger , M . L . and O’Halloran , T . J . ( 1997a ) . Clathrin heavy chain is required for spore cell but not stalk cell differentiation in Dictyostelium discoideum . Development 124 , 443 - 451 . Niswonger , M . L . and O’Halloran , T . J . ( 1997b ) . A novel role for clathrin in cytokinesis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 8575 - 8578 . O’Halloran , T . J . and Anderson , R . G . ( 1992 ) . Clathrin heavy chain is required for pinocytosis , the presence of large vacuoles , and development in Dictyostelium . J . Cell Biol . 118 , 1371 - 1377 . Ohno , H . , Stewart , J . , Fournier , M . C . , Bosshart , H . , Rhee , I . , Miyatake , S . , Saito , T . , Gallusser , A . , Kirchhausen , T . and Bonifacino , J . S . ( 1995 ) . Interaction of tyrosine - based sorting signals with clathrin - associated proteins . Science 269 , 1872 - 1875 . Owen , D . J . , Collins , B . M . and Evans , P . R . ( 2004 ) . Adaptors for clathrin coats : structure and function . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 20 , 153 - 191 . Page , L . J . and Robinson , M . S . ( 1995 ) . Targeting signals and subunit interactions in coated vesicle adaptor complexes . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 619 - 630 . Payne , G . S . and Schekman , R . ( 1985 ) . A test of clathrin function in protein secretion and cell growth . Science 230 , 1009 - 1014 . Praefcke , G . J . K . , Ford , M . G . J . , Schmid , E . M . , Olesen , L . E . , Gallop , J . L . , Peak - Chew , S . - Y . , Vallis , Y . , Babu , M . M . , Mills , I . G . and McMahon , H . T . ( 2004 ) . Evolving nature of the AP2 alpha - appendage hub during clathrin - coated vesicle endocytosis . EMBO J . 23 , 4371 - 4383 . Rappoport , J . Z . , Taha , B . W . , Lemeer , S . , Benmerah , A . and Simon , S . M . ( 2003 ) . The AP - 2 complex is excluded from the dynamic population of plasma membrane - associated clathrin . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 47357 - 47360 . Rappoport , J . Z . , Benmerah , A . and Simon , S . M . ( 2005 ) . Analysis of the AP - 2 adaptor complex and cargo during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Traffic 6 , 539 - 547 . Rappoport , J . Z . , Kemal , S . , Benmerah , A . and Simon , S . M . ( 2006 ) . Dynamics of clathrin and adaptor proteins during endocytosis . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 291 , C1072 - C1081 . Repass , S . L . , Brady , R . J . and O’Halloran , T . J . ( 2007 ) . Dictyostelium Hip1r contributes to spore shape and requires epsin for phosphorylation and localization . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 3977 - 3988 . Ruscetti , T . , Cardelli , J . A . , Niswonger , M . L . and O’Halloran , T . J . ( 1994 ) . Clathrin heavy chain functions in sorting and secretion of lysosomal enzymes in Dictyostelium discoideum . J . Cell Biol . 126 , 343 - 352 . Shih , W . , Gallusser , A . and Kirchhausen , T . ( 1995 ) . A clathrin - binding site in the hinge of the beta 2 chain of mammalian AP - 2 complexes . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 31083 - 31090 . Sosa , R . T . , Weber , M . M . , Wen , Y . and O’Halloran , T . J . ( 2012 ) . A single b adaptin contributes to AP1 and AP2 complexes and clathrin function in Dictyostelium . Traffic 13 , 305 - 316 . Stavrou , I . and O’Halloran , T . J . ( 2006 ) . The monomeric clathrin assembly protein , AP180 , regulates contractile vacuole size in Dictyostelium discoideum . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 5381 - 5389 . van Delft , S . , Schumacher , C . , Hage , W . , Verkleij , A . J . and van Bergen en Henegouwen , P . M . ( 1997 ) . Association and colocalization of Eps15 with adaptor protein - 2 and clathrin . J . Cell Biol . 136 , 811 - 821 . Veltman , D . M . , Akar , G . , Bosgraaf , L . and Van Haastert , P . J . M . ( 2009 ) . A new set of small , extrachromosomal expression vectors for Dictyostelium discoideum . Plasmid 61 , 110 - 118 . Wang , J . , Virta , V . C . , Riddelle - Spencer , K . and O’Halloran , T . J . ( 2003 ) . Compromise of clathrin function and membrane association by clathrin light chain deletion . Traffic 4 , 891 - 901 . Wang , J . , Wang , Y . and O’Halloran , T . J . ( 2006 ) . Clathrin light chain : importance of the conserved carboxy terminal domain to function in living cells . Traffic 7 , 824 - 832 . Wen , Y . , Stavrou , I . , Bersuker , K . , Brady , R . J . , De Lozanne , A . and O’Halloran , T . J . ( 2009 ) . AP180 - mediated trafficking of Vamp7B limits homotypic fusion of Dictyostelium contractile vacuoles . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 4278 - 4288 . Yeung , B . G . , Phan , H . L . and Payne , G . S . ( 1999 ) . Adaptor complex - independent clathrin function in yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 3643 - 3659 . Journal of Cell Science 125 ( 23 ) 5732 mRFP - clc ( AX2 ) GFP - Ap2A1 ( AX2 ) % o f pun c t a Duration on surface ( s ) 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 GFP - clc ( clc - ) 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 0 10 20 30 40 50 mRFP - clc ( clc - ) Duration on surface ( s ) 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 mRFP - clc ( Ap2A1 - ) Duration on surface ( s ) 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 mRFP - clc ( apm2 - ) Duration on surface ( s ) 55 . 6 ± 6 . 0s n = 103 37 . 3 ± 7 . 7s n = 43 36 . 3 ± 10 . 7s n = 56 32 . 8 ± 5 . 9s n = 52 0 100 200 300 400 D u r a t i on on s u r f a c e ( s ) c l c - G F P - c l c c l c - m R F P - c l c A p2 A 1 - m R F P - c l c ap m 2 - m R F P - c l c 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 D u r a t i on on s u r f a c e ( s ) A X 2 A p2 A 1 - ap m 2 - c l c - c h c A - 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 GFP - Ap2A1 ( AX2 ) Duration on surface ( s ) GFP - Ap2A1 ( Ap2A1 - ) 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 Duration on surface ( s ) GFP - Ap2A1 ( clc - ) 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 Duration on surface ( s ) 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 GFP - Ap2A1 ( chcA - ) Duration on surface ( s ) GFP - Ap2A1 ( apm2 - ) 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 Duration on surface ( s ) % o f pun c t a 56 . 3 ± 4 . 2s n = 111 15 . 2 ± 2 . 0s n = 127 105 . 4 ± 20 . 7s n = 38 51 . 1 ± 3 . 8s n = 84 83 . 5 ± 10 . 8s n = 63 A B C D E Figure S1 Fig . S1 . Dynamics of clathrin and AP2 ( related to Fig . 2 ) . ( A ) TIR - FM images of mRFP - clc and GFP - Ap2A1 showing examples of puncta localized in rings most likely around contractile vacuole bladders . Scale bar = 1 m m . ( B - C ) Box charts showing the durations of XFP - clc puncta ( B ) or GFP - Ap2A1 puncta ( C ) in the different cell lines . Crosses = maximum and minimum values ; solid square = mean ; error bars = s . d . ; box = 25 , 50 and 75 percentile . ( D - E ) Histograms of the duration on the surface for XFP - clc puncta ( D ) or GFP - Ap2A1 puncta ( E ) in the different cell lines . The mean duration ± s . e . m and the number of puncta measured are given . AX2 apm2 - clc - chcA - F M 4 - 64 D I C Ap2A1 - V a t M A B Figure S2 Fig . S2 . Localization of contractile vacuole markers in AP2 and clathrin knockouts ( related to Fig . 6 ) . ( A ) Widefield microscopy images of FM4 - 64 labeling in AX2 , Ap2A1 - , apm2 - , clc - and chcA - cells and corresponding DIC images . ( B ) Maximum intensity projection of VatM immunostaining in AX2 , Ap2A1 - , apm2 - , clc - and chcA - cells . Scale bars = 1 m m . Table S1 . AP genes in Dictyostelium Name Gene Dictybase Gene ID Percent identity with human ( name and accession number ) Divergence Experimental evidence AP - 1 γ subunit ap1g1 DDB _ G0281957 44 . 4 ( AP - 1 gamma - 1 isoform b , NP _ 001119 ) 84 . 2 ( Lefkir et al . , 2003 ) AP - 1 β subunit ap1b1 DDB _ G0279141 52 . 2 ( AP - 1 beta - 1 isoform b , NP _ 663782 ) 68 . 4 ( Sosa et al . , 2012 ) AP - 1 µ subunit apm1 DDB _ G0289247 67 . 4 ( AP - 1 mu - 1 isoform 2 , NP _ 115882 ) 38 . 4 ( Lefkir et al . , 2003 ) AP - 1 σ 1 subunit ap1s1 DDB _ G0279359 44 . 9 ( AP - 1 sigma - 2 , NP _ 003907 ) 89 . 1 AP - 1 σ 2 subunit ap1s2 DDB _ G0295711 57 . 8 ( AP - 1 sigma - 2 , NP _ 003907 ) 53 . 1 AP - 2 α subunit ap2a1 - 1 ap2a1 - 2 DDB _ G0273439 DDB _ G0273501 38 . 3 ( AP - 2 alpha - 2 isoform 2 , NP _ 036437 ) 100 . 3 This study AP - 2 β subunit ap1b1 DDB _ G0279141 51 . 9 ( AP - 2 beta isoform b , NP _ 001273 ) 70 . 0 This study , ( Sosa et al . , 2012 ) AP - 2 µ subunit apm2 DDB _ G0277139 50 . 8 ( AP - 2 mu isoform a , NP _ 004059 ) 64 . 0 This study , ( Sosa et al . , 2012 ) AP - 2 σ subunit ap2s1 DDB _ G0289721 62 . 0 ( AP - 2 sigma isoform AP17 , NP _ 004060 ) 52 . 6 This study AP - 3 δ subunit ap3d1 DDB _ G0279537 35 . 9 ( AP - 3 delta - 1 isoform 2 , NP _ 003929 ) 102 . 5 ( Bennett et al . , 2008 ) AP - 3 β subunit ap3b - 1 ap3b - 2 DDB _ G0272578 DDB _ G0274003 31 . 6 ( AP - 3 beta - 2 , NP _ 004635 ) 113 . 5 ( Bennett et al . , 2008 ) AP - 3 µ subunit apm3 DDB _ G0277901 47 . 4 ( AP - 3 mu - 1 , NP _ 036227 ) 74 . 6 ( Bennett et al . , 2008 ) AP - 3 σ subunit ap3s1 DDB _ G0275405 64 . 9 ( AP - 3 sigma - 1 , NP _ 001275 ) 39 . 5 AP - 4 ε subunit ap4e1 DDB _ G0280427 21 . 6 ( AP - 4 epsilon - 1 , NP _ 031373 ) 170 . 5 AP - 4 β subunit ap4b1 DDB _ G0283319 24 . 0 ( AP - 4 beta - 1 , NP _ 006585 ) 157 . 9 AP - 4 µ subunit apm4 DDB _ G0276945 21 . 6 ( AP - 4 mu - 1 , NP _ 004713 ) 148 . 2 AP - 4 ap4s1 DDB _ G0284905 55 . 4 59 . 3 The genes annotated as belonging to AP complexes in Dictyostelium ( www . dictybase . org ) are shown . Homologous human proteins were identified by searching GenBank using BLASTP ( http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / blast / Blast . cgi ) and the Dictyostelium AP complex protein sequences . The top hit was used to calculate percent identity and phylogenetic divergence using the Clustal V method and MegAlign 9 software . σ subunit ( AP - 4 sigma - 1 isoform 2 , NP _ 001121598 ) Table S2 . Summary of LC - MS / MS Results ( related to Fig . 1 ) . Summary of LC - MS / MS data for proteins identified from the gels shown in Fig . 1B , C . AX2 + GFP - Ap2A1 apm2 - + GFP - Ap2A1 Protein DDB ID Number of unique peptides ( total # peptides ) Percent coverage Protein score Number of unique peptides ( total # peptides ) Percent coverage Protein score ap1b1 ( β subunit ) G0279141 35 ( 103 ) 41 % 3548 8 ( 11 ) 10 % 116 apm2 ( µ subunit ) G0277139 13 ( 71 ) 31 % 2453 N / A N / A N / A ap2s1 ( σ subunit ) G0289721 7 ( 36 ) 44 % 750 6 ( 15 ) 30 % 136 ap1g1 ( γ subunit ) G0281957 N / A N / A N / A 3 ( 5 ) 3 % 76 eps15 G0287325 34 ( 118 ) 41 % 4728 22 ( 62 ) 37 % 1867 Table S3 . Kolmogorov - Smirnov ( KS ) test P values ( related to Fig . 2 and Fig . S1 ) . KS test was performed to ask whether the distribution of the durations of cell surface puncta measured in different cell lines are drawn from the same distribution . Data Set 1 Data Set 2 KS P value GFP - clc ( clc - ) GFP - Ap2A1 ( AX2 ) 0 . 04594 GFP - clc minus 10s ( clc - ) GFP - Ap2A1 ( AX2 ) 0 . 06564 mRFP - clc ( clc - ) GFP - Ap2A1 ( AX2 ) 2 . 15915 x 10 - 8 mRFP - clc minus 10s ( clc - ) GFP - Ap2A1 ( AX2 ) 0 . 0747 mRFP - clc ( clc - ) mRFP - clc ( Ap2A1 - ) 0 . 04744 mRFP - clc ( clc - ) mRFP - clc ( apm2 - ) 0 . 04795 GFP - Ap2A1 ( AX2 ) GFP - Ap2A1 ( Ap2A1 - ) 0 . 00937 GFP - Ap2A1 ( AX2 ) GFP - Ap2A1 ( apm2 - ) 2 . 22786 x 10 - 5 GFP - Ap2A1 ( AX2 ) GFP - Ap2A1 ( clc - ) 0 . 01449 GFP - Ap2A1 ( AX2 ) GFP - Ap2A1 ( chcA - ) 3 . 80114 x 10 - 32 Table S4 . List of strains and expression plasmids used . Strain shows the genetic background and the promoter used to drive expression . Plasmids used for expression are listed along with the antibiotic resistance used for selection . Bsn = blasticidin , G418 = geneticin , Hgr = hygromycin . Strain Name Expression Plasmid AX2 / [ A15 ] : GFP : Ap2A1 339 - 3 ( Bsn ) Ap2A1 - / [ A15 ] : GFP : Ap2A1 339 - 3 ( Bsn ) apm2 - / [ A15 ] : GFP : Ap2A1 pDM304 ( G418 ) clc - / [ A15 ] : GFP : Ap2A1 pDM304 ( G418 ) chcA - / [ A15 ] : GFP : Ap2A1 pDM304 ( G418 ) AX2 / [ A15 ] : mRFP : clc pDM304 ( G418 ) Ap2A1 - / [ A15 ] : mRFP : clc pDM304 ( G418 ) apm2 - / [ A15 ] : mRFP : clc pDM304 ( G418 ) clc - / [ A15 ] : mRFP : clc pDM304 ( G418 ) chcA - / [ A15 ] : mRFP : clc pDM304 ( G418 ) AX2 / [ A15 ] : GFP : Ap2A1 [ A15 ] : mRFP : clc 339 - 3 ( Bsn ) pDM304 ( G418 ) AX2 / [ A15 ] : GFP : Ap2A1 [ A15 ] : clc : mRFP 339 - 3 ( Bsn ) pDM304 ( G418 ) AX2 / [ A15 ] : dajumin : GFP [ A15 ] : mRFP : clc pDEXRH ( G418 ) pDM326 ( Bsn ) AX2 / [ A15 ] : dajumin : GFP [ A15 ] : mRFP : Ap2A1 pDEXRH ( G418 ) pDM358 ( Hgr ) Ap2A1 - / [ A15 ] : dajumin : GFP pDM326 ( Bsn ) apm2 - / [ A15 ] : dajumin : GFP pDEXRH ( G418 ) clc - / [ A15 ] : dajumin : GFP pDEXRH ( G418 ) chcA - / [ A15 ] : dajumin : GFP pDEXRH ( G418 )