REVIEW ARTICLE The intestinal barrier and its regulation by neuroimmune factors A˚ . V . KEITA & J . D . SO¨DERHOLM Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine , Division of Surgery and Clinical Oncology , Faculty of Health Science , Uni - versity Hospital , Linko¨ping , Sweden Abstract Background The ability to control uptake across the mucosa and protect from damage of harmful sub - stances from the lumen is deﬁned as intestinal barrier function . A disturbed barrier dysfunction has been described in many human diseases and animal mod - els , for example , inﬂammatory bowel disease , irritable bowel syndrome , and intestinal hypersensitivity . In most diseases and models , alterations are seen both of the paracellular pathway , via the tight junctions , and of the transcellular routes , via different types of endocytosis . Recent studies of pathogenic mecha - nisms have demonstrated the important role of neu - roimmune interaction with the epithelial cells in the regulation of barrier function . Neural impulses from extrinsic vagal and / or sympathetic efferent ﬁbers or intrinsic enteric nerves inﬂuence mucosal barrier function via direct effects on epithelial cells or via interaction with immune cells . For example , by nerve - mediated activation by corticotropin - releasing hor - mone or cholinergic pathways , mucosal mast cells release a range of mediators with effects on transcel - lular , and / or paracellular permeability ( for example , tryptase , TNF - a , nerve growth factor , and interleu - kins ) . Purpose In this review , we discuss current physiological and pathophysiological aspects of the intestinal barrier and , in particular , its regulation by neuroimmune factors . Keywords corticotropin - releasing hormone , enteric nerves , mast cell , permeability , stress . Abbreviations : ACh , acetylcholine ; CD , Crohn‘s disease ; COX , cyclooxygenase ; CRH , corticotropin - releasing hor - mone ; CRH - R , CRH receptor ; GSNO , glial - derived s - nitrosoglutathione ; HRP , horseradish peroxidase ; IBD , inﬂammatory bowel disease ; IBS , irritable bowel syndrome ; JAM , junctional adhesion molecule ; M cell , membranous cell ; MLCK , myosin light chain kinase ; NGF , nerve growth factor ; PAR , protease - activated receptor ; PG , prostaglan - din ; PI3K , phosphoinositide 3 - kinase ; RMCPII , rat mast cell protease II ; SP , substance P ; TJ , tight junction ; TER , transepithelial resistance ; UC , ulcerative colitis ; VIP , vaso - active intestinal peptide ; ZO , zonula occludens . INTRODUCTION The intestinal mucosa is continuously exposed to a heavy load of antigenic molecules from ingested food and microorganisms , such as resident and invading bacteria and viruses . The ability to control uptake across the mucosa and protect from damage of harmful substances from the lumen is deﬁned as intestinal barrier function . The normal intestinal barrier allows small amounts of antigens to pass the mucosa to interact with the innate and adaptive immune systems . If the control of the barrier function is disturbed , it can lead to enhanced antigen and bacterial passage which in turn may damage the mucosa leading to pathological con - ditions . A normal host can down - regulate this damage when the triggering event has resolved , whereas in a susceptible host , ongoing enhanced permeability may result in chronic inﬂammation . Loss of mucosal integrity is believed to play a role in the development of several clinical disorders . The diseases that have Address for correspondence Prof . Johan D So¨derholm , MD , PhD , Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine , Division of Surgery and Clinical Oncology , University Hospital , 581 85 Linko¨ping , Sweden . Tel : + 46 13 223546 ; fax : + 46 13 223570 ; e - mail : johan . d . soderholm @ liu . se Received : 18 January 2010 Accepted for publication : 12 March 2010 Neurogastroenterol Motil ( 2010 ) 22 , 718 – 733 doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2982 . 2010 . 01498 . x (cid:2) 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 718 been most commonly associated with intestinal barrier dysfunction include inﬂammatory bowel disease ( IBD ) , celiac disease , intestinal ischemia , food intolerance , allergy and malnutrition , rheumatoid arthritis , and more recently , diabetes type 1 . 1 – 4 Recent studies of pathogenic mechanisms have demonstrated the impor - tant role of neuroimmune interaction with the epithe - lial cells in the regulation of barrier function . Here , we review current physiological and pathophysiological aspects of neuroimmune regulation of intestinal barrier function . INTESTINAL BARRIER FUNCTION The intestinal barrier , i . e . the interface between the outside world and the human internal milieu is maintained by the physical defence mechanism asso - ciated with the mucosal surface and the junctional complexes linking adjacent epithelial cells ( Fig . 1 ) . The relative importance of the barrier components varies with the chemical , physical , and immunological nature of the luminal contents . The ﬁrst line of defence is the lumen itself , where bacteria and antigens are degraded by gastric acid , pancreatic , and biliary juices . Commensal bacteria inhibit the colonization of pathogens by production of antimicrobial substances ( bacteriocins ) , pH modiﬁcation of the luminal content , and competition for nutrients required for growth of pathogens . The microclimate including the unstirred water layer , the glycocalyx , and the mucus layer with secreted IgA , prevents adhesion of pathogenic bacteria to the epithelium by mucin - binding sites that compete with the epithelial binding sites , thus impeding bacterial – epithelial interaction . The epithelium , with epithelial cells connected to each other via junctional complexes , reacts to noxious stimuli with chloride secretion . The epithelial cells also secrete antimicro - bial peptides , whose function is to kill microorganisms , attract monocytes , and potentiate macrophage opsoni - zation . An important family of antimicrobial peptides is the defensins , which can be found in the Paneth cells of the crypts of the small bowel ( a - defensins ) and throughout the colonic epithelium ( b - defensins ) . Finally , the lamina propria consists of cells of innate and acquired immunity secreting immunoglobulins and cytokines , the enteric nervous system and endo - crine system , the myoﬁbroblasts , the matrix compo - nents , and so on . In addition , the rapid repair process and cell turnover of the epithelial cells , and intestinal propulsive motility also have to be recognized as being important factors in gut barrier function . Electron photomicrographs with examples of normal and altered intestinal epithelial barrier are shown in Fig . 2 . PASSAGE ROUTES ACROSS THE EPITHELIUM There are several ways for solutes to cross the intes - tinal epithelium ( Fig . 3 ) . Lipid soluble and small hydrophilic compounds may pass through the epithe - lial cells via passive diffusion into the lipid bilayers or via small hydrophilic aqueous pores , while medium - sized ( up to approximately 600 Da in vivo ; up to 10 kDa in vitro in cell lines ) hydrophilic molecules pass via the tight junctions ( TJs ) and intercellular spaces in the paracellular route . 5 , 6 Under normal conditions , the paracellular route is believed to be impermeable to protein - sized molecules and thus Figure 1 Components of the intestinal barrier . Lumen : Degradation of bacteria and antigens by bile , gastric acid , and pancreatic juice . Com - mensal bacteria inhibit the colonization of pathogens by production of antimicrobial sub - stances . Microclimate : Unstirred water layer , glycocalyx , and mucus layer preventing bacte - rial adhesion by IgA secretion . Epithelium : Epithelial cells , connected by junctional com - plexes , having the ability to transport luminal content but also react to noxious stimuli by secretion of chloride and antimicrobial peptides . Lamina propria : Cells of innate and acquired immunity secreting immunoglobulins and cytokines . The endocrine - and enteric nervous system , intestinal propulsive motility ( see text for more details ) . Volume 22 , Number 7 , July 2010 Intestinal barrier and neuroimmune regulation (cid:2) 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 719 constitutes an effective barrier to antigenic macromol - ecules . In addition to these ‘passive , ’ non - mediated perme - ation routes , active , energy - dependent uptake across the epithelium also takes place . Firstly , there are numerous carrier - mediated mechanisms , utilized for sugars , amino acids , vitamins , and other nutrients , and secondly , larger peptides , proteins , and particles may be endocytosed into endosomal vesicles and trans - ported through the cells via transcytosis . A controlled protein uptake via the transcytotic route is physiologic and essential for antigen surveillance in the gastroin - testinal tract . 7 – 9 Alterations of the paracellular path - way and the transcytotic uptake of peptides are believed to be the most important in the pathophysi - ology of intestinal disorders . ENDO - AND TRANSCYTOTIC PATHWAYS Large particles and molecules , like proteins and bacte - rial products that cannot pass through the cell mem - brane or the paracellular space , can be taken up by the cell through invagination of the plasma membrane followed by vesicle formation , i . e . endocytosis . This is an essential process that mediates uptake of foreign antigens against which the body can initiate an appropriate immune response . Following endocytosis the engulfed substances are actively transported by vectorial transcytosis through the cytoplasm to their particular destination . Food proteins that are absorbed are generally transported and degraded via the lyso - somal pathway of the enterocytes ; those that escape lysosomal degradation appear to be a small fraction of the food antigens , but these enter the body proper and potentially induce immune responses . 10 Both endocy - tosis and transcytosis are constantly manipulated by foreign microbes to establish an entry into the host . An intact barrier function to a large extent relies on that these processes function correctly and that the cell can eliminate the foreign substances taken up . Endocytosis in epithelial cells can occur in different ways , depending on the nature of the substance that is taken up ( Fig . 4 ) . The ﬁrst route is via clathrin - mediated endocytosis , 11 – 13 a highly speciﬁc receptor - mediated process , utilized mainly by immunoglobu - lins , viruses , and growth factors from breast milk . In this special type of endocytosis , the epithelial cells synthesize apical membrane receptors and internalize molecules that have bound speciﬁcally to them . 14 Clathrin - mediated endocytosis involves the formation of clathrin - coated vesicles that seldom become larger than 150 nm in diameter . 15 It begins with the recruit - ment and assembly of clathrin as well as adaptor and endocytotic accessory proteins at the plasma mem - brane . 16 The membrane curves into coated pits , which are sequentially severed from the plasma membrane as vesicles . Adaptor proteins are crucial for the assembly A Normal barrier Altered barrier B Figure 2 Examples of altered intestinal epithe - lial barrier ( A ) A normal intestinal epithelium from a control rat . ( B ) Altered intestinal barrier in rats exposed to chronic stress . Note the abnormal morphology with multiple vacuoles suggesting increased endocytotic activity ( left panel ) . Numerous bacteria attaching to the epi - thelial surface , and also internalizing ( arrow heads ) , with actin accumulation at the contact sites ( right panel ) . A B C D E Figure 3 Passage routes across the epithelium . ( A ) Transcellular route ( lipophilic and small hydrophilic compounds ) . ( B ) Paracellular route ( larger hydrophilic compounds ) . ( C ) Transcellular route via aqueous pores ( small hydrophilic compounds ) . ( D ) Active carrier - mediated absorption ( nutrients ) . ( E ) Endocytosis , followed by transcytosis and exocytosis ( larger peptides , proteins , and particles ) . A˚ . V . Keita & J . D . So¨derholm Neurogastroenterology and Motility (cid:2) 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 720 of clathrin - coated pits at the plasma membrane as well as for recognition of speciﬁc cytosolic motifs of the protein being internalized . Internalization of different plasma membrane proteins such as receptors and their ligands has been shown to occur through clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Non - signalling receptors that mediate the uptake of nutrients , like low - density lipoprotein receptors and transferrin receptors , are internalized either bound or not bound to their ligand via so called constitutive endocytosis . 17 , 18 This suggests that clathrin - mediated endocytosis also func - tions in a more regulatory way to adjust the actual number of receptors present on the surface of the cell in response to environmental signals . Larger ( up to several micrometer in size ) bacteria , viruses , and particles may be taken up via adsorptive endocytosis , or phagocytosis , 19 involving binding of molecules to the cell membrane via receptors . Phago - cytosis is relevant for the non - speciﬁc uptake of luminal dietary and bacterial antigens , and the process is triggered by secreted solubles from the invading bacterium . 20 Phagocytosis is a more common process in the membranous ( M ) cell - containing follicle - associ - ated epithelium than in the regular villus epithe - lium . 21 , 22 Macropinocytosis is a non - speciﬁc process by which considerable volumes of extracellular ﬂuid can be internalized , along with dissolved molecules as well as larger particles such as viruses , bacteria , and apop - totic cell fragments . However , macropinosomes do not usually exceed the diameter of 1 l m . The process is initiated through invagination of the cell membrane where bending of single surface lamellipodia gives rise to circular rufﬂes that ultimately are released in the cytoplasm as a vesicle ( macropinosome ) . 23 Several putative regulators of macropinocytosis in epithelial cells have been identiﬁed . For example , regulation via epidermal growth factor , 24 dynein light chain 1 phos - phorylation , Rab5 , 25 and phosphoinositide 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) 26 were described . Moreover , increased macr - opinocytosis has been observed in response to antigen stimulation in M cells and entrocytes . 19 , 27 In recent years , attention has been paid to a fourth mechanism , referred to as lipid rafts / caveolae . This endocytotic event involves a ﬂask - shaped invagination of cholesterol - enriched microdomains within the plas - ma membrane that may contain a coat protein , cave - olin . 28 Endocytosis via lipid rafts / caveolae is most common in endothelial cells but occurs also in enterocytes . 29 Studies have shown that , for example , certain enterotoxins and viruses may be endocytosed via rafts / caveolae . PARACELLULAR PATHWAYS The junctional complex The enterocytes of the epithelium are joined to each other by junctional complexes consisting of TJs , adhe - rens junctions , desmosomes , and gap junctions . 30 Tight junctions , also called zonula occludens ( ZO ) are located at the apical part of the lateral membrane forming a network of linking strands . Tight junctions are important in epithelial transport towards and away from the lumen ( gate function ) , as well as in main - taining the polarity of the epithelial cells by preventing diffusion of proteins and lipids from the apical to the basolateral region in the outer cell membrane ( fence function ) . These functions seem to be regulated in different ways . 31 Figure 4 Different types of endocytosis . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis : Formation of vesicles coated with clathrin , mediating uptake of receptor ( R ) - bound molecules . Phagocytosis : Binding of larger bacteria , viruses , and particles via Rs . Macropinocytosis : Invagination of the cell membrane mediating uptake of dissolved molecules . Caveolae - mediated endocytosis : Invagination of plasma membrane at lipid rafts coated with caveolin mediating uptake of certain enterotoxins and viruses . Volume 22 , Number 7 , July 2010 Intestinal barrier and neuroimmune regulation (cid:2) 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 721 Adherens junctions , located below the TJs , are actin - and myosin - associated membrane structures formed by adhesion molecules of the cadherin family and their cytoplasmatic binding proteins a - , b - , and c - catenin . It has been suggested that adherens junctions together with TJs form one single functional unit . 32 Desmosomes form spot - like dense adhesions be - tween the epithelial cells and are connected to the intermediate ﬁlaments of the cytoskeleton . Desmo - somes are dispersed all over the lateral cell surfaces , however , they are frequently found to be concentrated below the adherens junctions . Gap junctions are arrangements of cylindrical tubuli consisting of proteins called connexins . Gap junctions function as intercellular channels allowing ions and small molecules to pass between cells , thus linking the interior of adjacent cells . TJ permeability Tight junctions appear as focal contacts ( ‘kisses’ ) on the plasma membrane . These contacts correspond to con - tinuous ﬁbrils , where ﬁbrils on one cell interact with ﬁbrilsontheadjacentcell . Theﬁbrils consistofmultiple transmembrane proteins including occludin , 33 clau - dins , 34 and members of the junctional adhesion mole - cule ( JAM ) protein family . 35 The human claudin family includes at least 24 members 36 and the distribution of these varies in different tissues , which explains the variable permeability seen in diverse tissues . 31 A recent addition to the TJ proteins is tricellulin that is mainly located at contact points of three cells , but is expressed to a lower extent also at contacts between two cells . 37 In cultured epithelial cells , tricellulin forms a central tube in tricellular junctions that allows passage of large solutes ( up to 10 kDa ) , and the amount of expression of tricellulin regulates macromolecular permeability . 6 There is a size and charge - selectivity within the TJ permeability barrier , where positively charged mole - cules and ions pass more easily . From recent data it seems that the permeability characteristics of small pores is deﬁned by claudins , whereas the large pores are determined by tricellulin . 38 Of the JAM members , JAM - A seems to be the one involved in regulating barrier function and inﬂammatory response . 39 JAM - A is ex - pressed in several cell types but is mainly abundant in epithelial and endothelial cells , where it accumulates at TJstoinﬂuenceseveralcellularprocesseslikeregulating permeability , inﬂammation , and proliferation . Finally , the TJ proteins are connected to protein complexes called cytoplasmic plaques . These constitute of not only ZO - 1 , ZO - 2 , ZO - 3 , and ZAK , but also several peripheral proteins like cingulin , symplekin , 7H6 , and p130 . 40 The interaction of TJs with the actin cytoskeleton has been recognized as essential and appears to be critical for TJ barrier function and regulation of paracellular per - meability . 41 The regulation involves different func - tional pathways . Rapid permeability alterations occur by cytoskeletal contraction induced by phosphorylation of myosin light chain kinase ( MLCK ) 42 and endocytosis of TJ proteins , 43 , 44 whereas more long - term changes include reduced transcription of TJ proteins , 45 epithelial cellapoptosis , 46 , 47 andstructuralepithelialulceration . 48 Regulation of paracellular permeability via endocytosis of TJ proteins may occur by at least two different mechanisms . Actin - depolymerizing drugs caused dis - ruption of the TJs by removing occludin via caveolae - mediated endocytosis . 49 Intrestingly , Ivanov et al . re - ported conﬂicting data suggesting that occludin is endocytosed by clathrin - mediated endocytosis , 50 thus emphasizing the difﬁculty in elucidating the different endocytotic pathways . Moreover , a series of studies by Fasano et al . 51 have suggested a physiologic paracrine regulation of TJ permeability via zonulin . Recently , zonulin was iden - tiﬁed by proteomics as prehaptoglobulin - 2 , the precur - sor of the multifunctional protein haptoglobin - 2 . 52 Zonulin seems to exert its effects via activation of the epidermal growth factor receptor and protease - activated receptor ( PAR ) - 2 . Moreover , zonulin is over - expressed in the intestinal mucosa of patients with celiac disease , which may suggest that zonulin is involved not only in intestinal permeability , but also in intestinal mucosal immunology . BARRIER DYSFUNCTION IN HUMAN DISEASE AND ANIMAL MODELS A disturbed barrier dysfunction has been described in many human diseases and animal models , and in most cases both the paracellular and the transcellular path - ways are altered . A few examples of interest from a neuroimmune perspective are given here . Intestinal hypersensitivity Whether abnormalities in intestinal permeability are a consequence or cause of food intolerance is yet not fully clariﬁed . 53 However , it is well known that increased intestinal permeability is a characteristic of children suffering from food hypersensitivity . 54 , 55 The barrier dysfunction involves both trans - and paracellu - lar pathways by mechanisms involving TNF - a . 56 A series of experiments in animal models of food hypersensitivity from the McMaster group demon - strated a combined barrier dysfunction with an initial A˚ . V . Keita & J . D . So¨derholm Neurogastroenterology and Motility (cid:2) 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 722 antigen - speciﬁc transcellular transport followed by a mast cell - dependent increase in paracellular perme - ability . In the initial studies by Berin et al . 57 , 58 rats sensitized to horseradish peroxidase ( HRP ) showed enhanced HRP - uptake within the endosomal compart - ment of jejunal enterocytes already 2 min after antigen challenge , i . e . before mast cell activation . Later HRP was also visualized within the TJs and paracellular spaces between enterocytes . Studies with mast cell - deﬁcient Ws / Ws rats conﬁrmed the important role for mast cells in the second , paracellular , phase of trans - epithelial transport , whereas the initial transcytotic phase was unaffected by the absence of mast cells . Another study showed that IgE antibodies mediated the speciﬁc and rapid antigen uptake via interaction with the IgE receptor CD23 on epithelial cells . 59 Yu et al . 60 further demonstrated that IL - 4 is required for the IgE / CD23 - mediated enhanced HRP uptake in en - terocytes of sensitized mice . An additional example of Ig - mediated transcytosis early in the pathogenesis of intestinal inﬂammation is the IgA - mediated transcy - tosis of increased amounts of gliadin through upregu - lation of CD71 on epithelial cell apical surfaces occurring in celiac disease . 61 IBD A disturbed intestinal barrier function is as long regarded as an important factor in the pathogenesis of Crohn’s disease ( CD ) . 62 , 63 This has recently been further conﬁrmed by the development of genetic studies , 64 where several of the polymorphisms that predispose to CD are related to barrier function . The barrier disturbance has proved to be a combined dysfunction of the paracellular and transcellular path - way . Early studies demonstrated increased small bowel permeability to medium - sized probes . 62 , 65 , 66 Further , structural changes 67 and leakage of the TJs in response to luminal stimuli 68 were demonstrated in CD muco - sa . Therefore , CD was suggested as a TJ disorder . 69 In line with this hypothesis , Zeissig et al . 70 , 71 showed a reduction in TJ strand number and manifestations of strand discontinuities in CD . Furthermore , western blot analysis showed decreased expression of occludin , claudin - 5 , and - 8 in CD compared with controls , while claudin - 2 was upregulated . 71 Transcytosis is the most important route for protein uptake in the intestinal epithelium , and potentially contributes to inﬂammation and gastrointestinal dis - ease . 7 , 72 – 74 Increased transcellular uptake of protein antigens were found in microscopically normal ileum of CD , 75 , 76 and this seemed to be mediated by mechanisms involving TNF - a . 77 Mucosal mast cells are an important source of TNF - a in CD , 78 , 79 which suggests a role of mast cell mediators in IBD ( see further next section ) . It has been shown that dendritic cells may affect barrier function by extending their processes between epithelial cells into the lumen , thereby facilitating antigen uptake . 80 , 81 In addition , dendritic cells may play a role in IBD . Indomethacin - induced ileitis in rats showed an association between increased intestinal permeability and ileal dendritic cell redistribution during inﬂammation . 82 Moreover , a disturbed barrier to commensal bacteria in the follicle - associated epi - thelium of CD was demonstrated , 83 leading to more pro - inﬂammatory subepithelial dendritic cells 84 that may play a role in sustaining inﬂammation in CD mucosa . There is evidence of a concomitant dysfunc - tion of trans - and paracellular pathways also in ulcer - ative colitis ( UC ) . 76 , 85 For example , upregulated claudin - 2 protein expression and changes in TJ struc - ture and function have been demonstrated , 86 however , strand discontinuities were not as frequent as in CD . 87 In addition , a preliminary study suggests that the increase in transcellular uptake of protein antigens in UC may involve cholinergic pathways . 88 Irritable bowel syndrome ( IBS ) Clinical studies have shown an increased intestinal permeability in patients with postinfectious IBS , 89 , 90 and Marshall et al . 91 demonstrated a high incidience of postinfectious IBS with increased permeability follow - ing acute bacterial gastroenteritis after a waterbourne outbreak . Further it has been shown that barrier dysfunction in the colonic mucosa of IBS is due to changes in paracellular permeability and expression of ZO - 1 . 92 Moreover , fecal serine proteases from IBS patients caused increased colonic paracellular perme - ability via PAR - 2 activation and phosphorylation of MLCK . 93 Whether IBS also causes increased transcel - lular permeability is yet to be studied . However , in animal models of IBS , such as maternal separation 94 and chronic stress , 95 there is clear evidence that both pathways are involved ( see further below ) . NEUROIMMUNE REGULATION OF THE INTESTINAL BARRIER As obvious from the studies reviewed above , the intestinal barrier is highly regulated by immune factors . The obvious importance of mast cells and the growing evidence of nerve – mast cell interactions in human stress 96 , 97 and IBS 92 , 98 , 99 also imply the poten - tial pathophysioloigcal importance of neural signaling related to the epithelial barrier . Volume 22 , Number 7 , July 2010 Intestinal barrier and neuroimmune regulation (cid:2) 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 723 Enteric and extrinsic nerves Under both physiological and pathological conditions the enteric nervous system regulates intestinal muco - sal function . 100 While the myenteric plexus mainly regulates intestinal motility , the submucosal plexus together with nerve ﬁbers in the lamina propria are involved in regulating epithelial transport functions . These nerves form networks within the lamina propria of both crypts and villi 101 with the terminal axons in close contact with the basal lamina , i . e . an ideal position not only to affect epithelial cell func - tions but also to detect absorbed nutrients and anti - gens . These substances or released mediators from epithelial cells may act on the nerve terminals to change the properties of the sensory neurons and cause peripheral sensitization . There is also functional evi - dence of efferent communication between the central nervous system and the gut mucosa , for example , during stress , which could occur through one or more pathways . Extrinsic efferents include the vagal nerve and pelvic parasympathetic efferents , and postgangli - onic sympathetic neurons . These could also act via second order connections to intrinsic enteric neurons . In other words , the requirements for a continuous cross - talk between nerves and epithelial cells are at hand . In the nerve - mediated maintenance of intestinal barrier function , an important role for direct effects of vasoactive intestinal peptide ( VIP ) on epithelial cells , acting on ZO - 1 , has been demonstrated . 102 Enteroglia In a study by Aube´ et al . , 103 transgenic mice expressing haemagglutinin in glia , were used as a model of glia alterations . Immunohistochemistry showed decreased levels of substance P ( SP ) - and VIP - positive neurons in jejunal submucosal plexus of transgenic mice com - pared with the non - transgenic littermates . Moreover , intestinal permeability increased in transgenic mice compared with controls . This points to that glia disruption can change the neurochemical coding of enteric neurones , which in turn might cause dysfunc - tion in intestinal motility and permeability . Savidge et al . 104 recently showed that glial - derived s - nitrosoglutathione ( GSNO ) was important for mainte - nance of mucosal barrier function in vitro and in vivo . In mice , GSNO increased the expressions of perijunc - tional F - actin , ZO - 1 , and occludin . Furthermore , GSNO signiﬁcantly restored mucosal barrier function in colonic biopsies from patients with CD , a well - described inﬂammatory permeability disorder associ - ated with enteric glial - cell disruption . Neuroimmune interaction It is well established that close connections between nerve ﬁbers and immune cells appear in the intestinal mucosa . 105 , 106 Direct interaction between nerves and mast cells , eosinophils , or plasma cells often occur , 107 and it has been suggested that within the intestinal mucosa more or less all inﬂammatory cells are structurally innervated . 108 Upon neural stimulation , mast cells release compounds by a tightly regulated , selective secretion of speciﬁc mediators , which can be depicted by electron microscopy as piece - meal degranulation . 109 , 110 It is known that SP and calcitonin gene - related peptide - immunoreactive varicosities are found adjacent to mucosal mast cells , 111 suggesting the possibility of a relationship between extrinsic afferents ( vagal and / or spinal ) and epithelial - and immune cells of the mucosa . The close bi - directional connection between mast cells and enteric nerves , the expression of receptors for neuropeptides , 110 , 112 to - gether with the release of neurally active mediators ( histamine , proteases , prostaglandins [ PGs ] ) , demon - strate the signiﬁcance of mast cells as end effector cells of the brain – gut axis in the intestinal mucosa . The most well investigated examples of neuroimmune interaction in this respect are models of food hyper - sensitivity , roundworm ( nematode ) infections and in stress . Stress and barrier dysfunction There is an increasing body of evidence that acute and chronic stress affects mucosal barrier dysfunc - tion 113 and several studies have conﬁrmed the impor - tance of stress in gastrointestinal disease in humans . Barclay and Turnberg showed in the late 1980’s that psychological stress , induced by dichotomous listen - ing 114 or cold - induced hand pain , 115 reduced mean net water absorption and transformed net absorption of sodium and chloride to secretion . These effects were inhibited by atropine , suggesting the involvement of cholinergic neurons , acetylcholine ( ACh ) . In later studies , Santos et al . 96 extended this model and found that jejunal water secretion induced by cold pain stress was associated with luminal release of typical mast cell mediators , histamine , and tryptase . These ﬁndings pointed to an interaction between the intes - tinal mucosa , mast cells , and the central nervous system via cholinergic pathways during stress in humans . The neuro - endocrine factors involved in changes in mucosal function during stress have not been fully clariﬁed . The main mediators include ACh 116 and corticotropin - releasing hormone A˚ . V . Keita & J . D . So¨derholm Neurogastroenterology and Motility (cid:2) 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 724 ( CRH ) , 117 but neurotensin 117 and SP 118 have also been implicated . ACh Studies in rodents of mechanisms involved in the mucosal stress response conﬁrmed the ﬁndings in humans . 114 , 115 Jejunal paracellular permeability to 51 Cr - EDTA was inhibited by pretreating the rats with atropine or atropine methyl nitrate ( does not pass blood – brain barrier ) , but not with hexamethonium . 116 The increase in transcellular endosomal uptake and ﬂux of HRP was also inhibited by atropine 119 , 120 as well as by an antagonist of the muscarinic M3 recep - tor . 121 Similar ﬁndings were recently found in the co - lon in models of acute and chronic stress . 122 , 123 Taken together these results suggest that ACh can mediate stress - induced increase in paracellular permeability and transcellular uptake of proteins via muscarinic receptors located in the small and large intestine . CRH Corticotropin - releasing hormone - mediated ef - fects in the intestinal mucosa of rats are associated with secretion of rat mast cell protease ( RMCP ) II and mast cell activation , and these effects are inhibited by mast cell stabilizers . 124 By stressing adult rats that earlier had been subjected to neonatal maternal deprivation colonic paracellularpermeabilityincreasedasaresultfrommast cellreleaseofnervegrowthfactor ( NGF ) viaactivationof the CRH receptor ( R ) - 1 . 125 This was in line with Santos et al . who showed that CRH modulates barrier function in rat colon by acting on mucosal / submucosal CRH - R - bearing cells , through mast cell - dependent path - ways . 120 , 124 Moreover , inarecentstudy , 126 earlyweaned pigs were given selective CRH - R antagonists . Results showed that CRH - R1 activation is mediating barrier dysfunction and hypersecretion , whereas CRH - R2 acti - vationmayberesponsiblefornovelprotectiveproperties in the porcine intestine in response to early life stress . Thus , animal studies together suggest that acute stress - inducedintestinalbarrierdysfunction toalargeextent is mediated by CRH operating via activation of mucosal mast cells . Recently , Wallon et al . demonstrated that CRH regulates transcytosis of HRP in human colon via CRH - R1 and on subepithelial mast cells . 110 This sug - gests that the stress - CRH - mast cell pathway may be present also in human intestinal mucosa . The role of CRH in intestinal diseases is unclear , however , in - creasedexpressionofCRHwasfoundbyimmunstaining in the colon of UC , 127 and the clinical course of UC has been found to be affected by chronic stress . 128 , 129 Mast cells Several studies have conﬁrmed the role of mast cells in stress - related changes of intestinal mucosal function . For example , studies have shown increased levels of RMCPII during stress , 96 , 130 inhibi - tion of stress - induced changes by adding mast cell stabilizers , 120 , 131 , 132 and ultrastructural mast cell acti - vation in combination with stress - induced barrier dysfunction . 119 , 133 Moeser et al . 134 showed that the intestinal mucosa of early weaned piglets showed ele - vated mucosal mast cell tryptase levels and enhanced mast cell degranulation . Pretreatment with the mast cell stabilizer cromolyn abolished these early weaning - induced intestinal barrier disturbances . Furthermore , mast cell - deﬁcient ( Wv / Wv ) mice and ( Ws / Ws ) rats do not respond with stress - induced changes of barrier function . 109 , 135 , 136 In humans , acute psychological stress affects jejunal ion secretion , 114 and neu - roimmune regulation of intestinal ion transport via mast cells does occur in humans . 96 , 137 In addition , Alonso et al . 97 recently showed that acute stress in women was accompanied by increased secretion of tryptase and albumin into the jejunal lumen . As indicated above , mast cells play a major role in stress - induced changes of intestinal permeability . Although , it has been shown that the neural effects on intestinal permeability are not always mediated by mast cells . 138 In rat jejunum , deoxycholic acid in - creased ﬂuid transport via involvement of enteric nerves , while RMCPII was unchanged . This indicates that enteric neural effects on intestinal paracellular permeability function may also occur independently of mast cells . This was also recently conﬁrmed by Demaude et al . in a model of acute stress in mice . 122 Mast cell mediators with effects on intestinal barrier function Activated mast cells have the ability to release a wide variety of bioactive mediators . These include pre - formed mediators stored in the granules ( e . g . hista - mine and tryptase ) , and newly synthesized mediators ( e . g . PGs , leukotrienes , and cytokines ) . Several of these mediators have effects on mucosal barrier function , for example , IFN - c , TNF - a , and tryptase . IFN - c It is well - known that IFN - c has direct effects on TJ permeability . For example , it reduced the transepithe - lial resistance ( TER ) , ZO - 1 levels and disrupted apical actin in T84 cells . 139 , 140 Several further studies of human epithelial cells have conﬁrmed the effects of IFN - c not only on monolayer paracellular permeabil - ity , 50 , 141 , 142 but also on transcellular permeabil - ity . 143 , 144 In addition , in vivo studies have revealed an important role for IFN - c in gut permeability evoked by Volume 22 , Number 7 , July 2010 Intestinal barrier and neuroimmune regulation (cid:2) 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 725 stress and inﬂammation . 143 , 145 , 146 For example , re - peated stress in mice induced an overexpression of colonic IFN - c 147 and increased permeability in murine colon involved an overproduction of IFN - c . 132 TNF - a It is well known that TNF - a affects the barrier in several ways . Experiments in cell lines have shown that TNF - a decrease monolayer integrity and diminish the promoter activity of occludin . 45 , 87 TNF - a treatment also resulted in increased paracellular permeability by decrease of junctional strands and a reduction in the depth of the TJs . 87 , 148 Moreover , TNF - a can upregulate claudin - 2 , 71 and induce epithelial cell apoptosis , 148 resulting in increased paracellular permeability . It has also been shown that the elevated levels of TNF - a following T - cell activation in mice causes MLCK phosphorylation and thereby increased permeabil - ity . 149 Tumor necrosis factor - a expression and secretion is increased in mucosal immune cells of CD , including mast cells , 78 , 79 and has for a long time been considered a key mediator driving the disease . Isolated lamina propria mononuclear cells from CD patients secrete TNF - a that reduces TER in T84 monolayers , 150 and the increased transcytosis of protein antigens across the ileal mucosa of CD is mediated by TNF - a . 77 Moreover , there is a TNF - a - induced epithelial cell apoptosis in areas with barrier defects in IBD , 70 , 86 which can be restored by anti - TNF - a ( inﬂiximab ) treatment in patients with CD . 70 , 151 Tryptase and PAR - 2 Upon activation mast cells release tryptase , 152 which is preformed and stored in granules . Tryptase and other proteases can affect epithelial permeability directly via PAR - 2 expressed on the basolateral and apical side of epithelial cells , but also indirectly via PAR - 2 on enteric nerves and on mast cells them - selves . 152 – 155 This gives the opportunity for intricate regulation of epithelial function via PAR - 2 in a para - and autocrine fashion ( see Bueno & Fioramonti , 155 NGM 2008 for review ) . In brief , it has been shown that peptides that are speciﬁc agonists of PAR - 2 ( for example , SLIGRL ) increase paracellular permeability and bacterial translocation in the colon of rats . 146 , 156 These effects were mimicked by mast cell superna - tant and abolished by tryptase inhibitor . 157 The PAR - 2 - mediated effects on permeability in rats were inhibited by treatment with antibiotics that reduced expression of PAR - 2 on epithelial cells . 158 On the other hand , PAR - 2 expression and effects on perme - ability were unaffected by dexamethasone . 159 These data suggest that bacterial factors are important in regulating PAR - 2 - mediated effects on epithelial function . IL - 1 b , IL - 4 , and IL - 13 Several interleukins have effects on gut permeability . For example , IL - 1 b is a pro - inﬂammatory cytokine known to play an important role in the pathogenesis of intestinal inﬂammation in IBD . 160 A recent study in Caco - 2 cells revealed that IL - 1 b causes a drop in TER which correlated with increased epithelial TJ perme - ability . 161 Studies on the effects of IL - 4 , a cytokine increased in food allergy and in early CD , demon - strated increased permeability across human intestinal epithelial cells . 162 , 163 In T84 monolayers IL - 4 affected TER , ﬂux of 3H - formyl - methionyl - leucyl - phenylala - nine and HRP , 163 as well as transepithelial permeabil - ity to Dextran 4000 . 164 The IL - 4 - induced increase in T84 paracellular permeability was associated with an increase in the expression of claudin - 2 , and was prevented by PI3 - kinase inhibitors , 165 suggesting a mechanistic role for this signal transduction pathway . IL - 13 may be a key effector cytokine in barrier defect and epithelial apoptosis in UC . 86 Studies of IL - 13 in epithelial cell lines have shown increased paracellular permeability in combination with upregulated claudin - 2 expression , while only limited effects on claudin - 1 , 3 , and 4 were seen . 86 , 166 Mechanistic studies have further shown that IL - 13 increases paracellular permeability in T84 cells via PI3K transduction pathways . 165 , 166 Prostaglandins Stress induced by weaning in piglets was shown to cause increased short - circuit current , reduced TER and increased intestinal permeability to mannitol 134 that was sensitive to treatment with tetrodotoxin and the cyclooxygenase ( COX ) inhibitor , indomethacin , sug - gesting activation of enteric nerves and PG synthesis . A connection between nerves and COX was also described by Nylander et al . 167 showing that COX inhibition excites enteric nerves to induce motility , increase alkaline secretion , and decrease paracellular permeability in rat duodenum . Intestinal mucosal mast cells produce and release PGs , in particular PGD2 and PGE2 , in response to various activating stimuli . 120 , 168 , 169 Both PGD2 and E2 are considered mainly to have protective and immunomodulatory , functions in the mucosa . The PGD2 metabolite 15d - PGJ2 is an important endogenous agonist of the anti - A˚ . V . Keita & J . D . So¨derholm Neurogastroenterology and Motility (cid:2) 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 726 inﬂammatory transcription factor , PPAR - c , which is involved in barrier regulation in stress and inﬂamma - tion . 170 PGE2 - induced closure of the paracellular pathways has been shown to be an important ﬁrst step in epithelial repair , 171 and mast cell - derived PGs reduce epithelial hypersecretion induced by infection and neural stimulation . 172 On the other hand , it was also shown that prolonged release of PGD2 after resolved TNBS colitis leads to altered mucosal barrier function with increased bacterial translocation 173 and may predispose to chemically induced cancer in rats . 174 Further studies are therefore needed to fully understand the role of mast cell - derived PGs in intes - tinal barrier function . NGF A CRH - mediated release of NGF from colonic mast cells was recently described . 125 This study showed that adult rats that had been exposed to neonatal maternal deprivation early in life released NGF in response to activation of CRH - R1 , which induced increase in paracellular permeability . Neonatal maternal depriva - tion also induced a closer association of colonic mast cells with enteric nerves , and this effect was abolished by anti - NGF therapy . 175 Thus , mast cell - derived NGF may play an important role in mucosal dysfunction induced by chronic stress . CONCLUSIONS To summarize , mucosal barrier function plays an essential role in innate defence by keeping the body proper separated from the external environment . A small , but controlled uptake of antigens takes place for immunosurveillance , to maintain the defence sys - tems on alert . However , derangement of barrier integ - rity , with increased antigen load to the lamina propria , is believed to be important in the pathophysiology of several intestinal disorders . In most of the disease states where barrier function is disturbed , a concom - itant alteration of the paracellular pathway ( via TJs ) and the transcytotic uptake route for antigens is seen . Neuroimmune modulation of the mucosal barrier is Figure 5 A simpliﬁed schema of potential mechanisms involved in neuroimmune modulation of intestinal mucosal barrier function . Neural im - pulses from extrinsic vagal and / or sympathetic efferent ﬁbers or intrinsic enteric nerves inﬂuence mucosal barrier function via direct effects on epithelial cells ( e . g . acetylcholine [ ACh ] - or vasoactive intestinal peptide - mediated effects ) or via interaction with immune cells ( e . g . mast cells or plasma cells ) . For example , corticotropin - releasing hormone ( CRH ) induces piece - meal degranulation of mast cells to release various mediators that affect epithelial cells . Mast cell mediators such as TNF - a , tryptase ( via PAR - 2 ) , nerve growth factor ( NGF ) , and interleukins may affect paracellular permeability ( e . g . by altering expression of various claudins in the tight junctions or the transcellular uptake route ( e . g . by increasing macropino - cytosis ) to disrupt the barrier to antigens and bacteria . In most intestinal disorders , there is a concomitant disturbance of the paracellular and the transcellular pathway . Volume 22 , Number 7 , July 2010 Intestinal barrier and neuroimmune regulation (cid:2) 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 727 important in controlling innate defence , but can also lead to barrier dysfunction that potentially causes disease . One of the most well studied neuroimmune signalling pathways in gastrointestinal pathophysiol - ogy is nerve - mediated activation of mast cells , sum - marized in Fig . 5 . Upon activation by CRH - containing neurons or via cholinergic pathways , the mucosal mast cells release a range of mediators ( for example , tryptase , TNF - a , NGF , and interleukins - 1 b , - 4 , - 13 ) , which can have effects both on trans - and paracellular permeabil - ity . This may lead to an inappropriate immune activa - tion that in the predisposed host goes on to mucosal inﬂammation . The therapeutic effect of anti - TNF in IBD has during the last decade become well estab - lished . Interfering with other mediators of nerve – mast cell – epithelial interaction has shown promising effects in animal studies , but important species differences in these pathways are present . We therefore need to learn more about the activating signals and mediators in the human intestinal mucosa in health and disease before we will be able to balance the neuroimmune response in a way that beneﬁts our patients . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS JD So¨derholm’s stress research is supported by the Swedish Research Council ( VR - M ) , The Ihre Foundation of the Swedish Society of Medicine , and Medical Research Council of Southeast Sweden ( FORSS ) . DISCLOSURES The authors declare no ﬁnancial disclosures . REFERENCES 1 Bjarnason I , MacPherson A , Hol - lander D . Intestinal permeability : an overview . Gastroenterology 1995 ; 108 : 1566 – 81 . 2 Travis S , Menzies I . Intestinal per - meability : functional assessment and signiﬁcance . Clin Sci ( Lond ) 1992 ; 82 : 471 – 88 . 3 Arrieta MC , Bistritz L , Meddings JB . Alterations in intestinal permeabil - ity . Gut 2006 ; 55 : 1512 – 20 . 4 Turner JR . Intestinal mucosal barrier function in health and disease . Nat Rev Immunol 2009 ; 9 : 799 – 809 . 5 Watson CJ , Rowland M , Warhurst G . Functional modeling of tight junctions in intestinal cell mono - layers using polyethylene glycol oligomers . Am J Physiol Cell Phys - iol 2001 ; 281 : C388 – 97 . 6 Krug SM , Amasheh S , Richter JF et al . Tricellulin forms a barrier to macromolecules in tricellular tight junctions without affecting ion per - meability . Mol Biol Cell 2009 ; 20 : 3713 – 24 . 7 Sanderson IR , Walker WA . Uptake and transport of macromolecules by the intestine : possible role in clini - cal disorders ( an update ) . Gastroen - terology 1993 ; 104 : 622 – 39 . 8 Didierlaurent A , Sirard JC , Kra - ehenbuhl JP , Neutra MR . How the gut senses its content . Cell Micro - biol 2002 ; 4 : 61 – 72 . 9 Ponda PP , Mayer L . Mucosal epi - thelium in health and disease . Curr Mol Med 2005 ; 5 : 549 – 56 . 10 Heyman M , Crain - Denoyelle AM , Desjeux JF . Endocytosis and pro - cessing of protein by isolated villus and crypt cells of the mouse small intestine . J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 1989 ; 9 : 238 – 45 . 11 Swaan PW . Recent advances in intestinal macromolecular drug delivery via receptor - mediated transport pathways . Pharm Res 1998 ; 15 : 826 – 34 . 12 Neutra MR , Phillips TL , Mayer EL , Fishkind DJ . Transport of mem - brane - bound macromolecules by M cells in follicle - associated epithe - lium of rabbit Peyer’s patch . Cell Tissue Res 1987 ; 247 : 537 – 46 . 13 Frey A , Giannasca KT , Weltzin R et al . Role of the glycocalyx in reg - ulating access of microparticles to apical plasma membranes of intes - tinal epithelial cells : implications for microbial attachment and oral vaccine targeting . J Exp Med 1996 ; 184 : 1045 – 59 . 14 Marsh M . Endocytosis . New York : Oxford University Press , 2001 . 15 Liu SH , Mallet WG , Brodskt FM . Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis . Endocytosis . New York : Oxford University Press . 2001 : 1 – 25 . 16 Heuser J . Three - dimensional visual - ization of coated vesicle formation in ﬁbroblasts . J Cell Biol 1980 ; 84 : 560 – 83 . 17 Goldstein JL , Anderson RG , Brown MS . Receptor - mediated endocytosis and the cellular uptake of low den - sity lipoprotein . Ciba Found Symp 1982 ; 92 : 77 – 95 . 18 Hewlett LJ , Prescott AR , Watts C . The coated pit and macropinocytic pathways serve distinct endosome populations . J Cell Biol 1994 ; 124 : 689 – 703 . 19 Conner SD , Schmid SL . Regulated portals of entry into the cell . Nature 2003 ; 422 : 37 – 44 . 20 Viswanathan VK , Sharma R , Hecht G . Microbes and their products – physiological effects upon mamma - lian mucosa . Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2004 ; 56 : 727 – 62 . 21 Lu L , Walker WA . Pathologic and physiologic interactions of bacteria with the gastrointestinal epithelium . Am J Clin Nutr 2001 ; 73 : 1124S – 30S . 22 Owen RL , Pierce NF , Apple RT , Cray WC Jr . M cell transport of Vibrio cholerae from the intestinal lumen into Peyer’s patches : a mechanism for antigen sampling and for microbial transepithelial migration . J Infect Dis 1986 ; 153 : 1108 – 18 . 23 Swanson JA , Watts C . Macropinocy - tosis . TrendsCellBiol 1995 ; 5 : 424 – 8 . 24 Hamasaki M , Araki N , Hatae T . Association of early endosomal autoantigen 1 with macropinocyto - sis in EGF - stimulated A431 cells . Anat Rec A Discov Mol Cell Evol Biol 2004 ; 277 : 298 – 306 . 25 Lanzetti L , Palamidessi A , Areces L , Scita G , Di Fiore PP . Rab5 is a sig - nalling GTPase involved in actin remodelling by receptor tyrosine kinases . Nature 2004 ; 429 : 309 – 14 . 26 Amyere M , Payrastre B , Krause U , Van Der SP , Veithen A , Courtoy PJ . Constitutive macropinocytosis in A˚ . V . Keita & J . D . So¨derholm Neurogastroenterology and Motility (cid:2) 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 728 oncogene - transformed ﬁbroblasts depends on sequential permanent activation of phosphoinositide 3 - ki - nase and phospholipase C . Mol Biol Cell 2000 ; 11 : 3453 – 67 . 27 Ragnarsson EG , Schoultz I , Gullberg E et al . Yersinia pseudotuberculosis induces transcytosis of nanoparti - cles across human intestinal villus epithelium via invasin - dependent macropinocytosis . Lab Invest 2008 ; 88 : 1215 – 26 . 28 Hommelgaard AM , Roepstorff K , Vilhardt F , Torgersen ML , Sandvig K , van Deurs B . Caveolae : stable membrane domains with a potential for internalization . Trafﬁc 2005 ; 6 : 720 – 4 . 29 Tuma PL , Hubbard AL . Transcyto - sis : crossing cellular barriers . Phys - iol Rev 2003 ; 83 : 871 – 932 . 30 Farquhar MG , Palade GE . Junctional complexes in various epithelia . J Cell Biol 1963 ; 17 : 375 – 412 . 31 Mitic LL , Van Itallie CM , Anderson JM . Molecular physiology and path - ophysiology of tight junctions I . Tight junction structure and func - tion : lessons from mutant animals and proteins . Am J Physiol Gastro - intest Liver Physiol 2000 ; 279 : G250 – 4 . 32 Nusrat A , Turner JR , Madara JL . Molecular physiology and patho - physiology of tight junctions . IV . Regulation of tight junctions by extracellular stimuli : nutrients , cytokines , and immune cells . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2000 ; 279 : G851 – 7 . 33 Furuse M , Hirase T , Itoh M et al . Occludin : a novelintegralmembrane protein localizing at tight junctions . J Cell Biol 1993 ; 2 : 1777 – 88 . 34 Morita K , Furuse M , Fujimoto K , Tsukita S . Claudin multigene family encoding four - transmembrane do - main protein components of tight junction strands . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999 ; 96 : 511 – 6 . 35 Liu Y , Nusrat A , Schnell FJ et al . Human junction adhesion molecule regulates tight junction resealing in epithelia . J Cell Sci 2000 ; 113 : 2363 – 74 . 36 Tepass U . Claudin complexities at the apical junctional complex . Nat Cell Biol 2003 ; 5 : 595 – 7 . 37 Ikenouchi J , Furuse M , Furuse K , Sasaki H , Tsukita S , Tsukita S . Tri - cellulin constitutes a novel barrier at tricellular contacts of epithelial cells . J Cell Biol 2005 ; 171 : 939 – 45 . 38 Tsukita S , Furuse M , Itoh M . Mul - tifunctional strands in tight junc - tions . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2001 ; 2 : 285 – 93 . 39 Laukoetter MG , Nava P , Lee WY et al . JAM - A regulates permeability and inﬂammation in the intestine in vivo . J Exp Med 2007 ; 204 : 3067 – 76 . 40 Mitic LL , Anderson JM . Molecular architecture of tight junctions . Annu Rev Physiol 1998 ; 60 : 121 – 42 . 41 Madara JL , Barenberg D , Carlson S . Effects of cytochalasin D on occluding junctions of intestinal absorptive cells : further evidence that the cytoskeleton may inﬂuence paracellular permeability and junc - tional charge selectivity . J Cell Biol 1986 ; 102 : 2125 – 36 . 42 Turner JR , Rill BK , Carlson SL et al . Physiological regulation of epithelial tight junctions is associated with myosin light - chain phosphorylation . Am J Physiol 1997 ; 273 : C1378 – 85 . 43 Matsuda M , Kubo A , Furuse M , Tsukita S . A peculiar internalization of claudins , tight junction - speciﬁc adhesion molecules , during the intercellular movement of epithelial cells . J Cell Sci 2004 ; 117 : 1247 – 57 . 44 Utech M , Ivanov AI , Samarin SN et al . Mechanism of IFN - gamma - in - duced endocytosis of tight junction proteins : myosin II - dependent vacu - olarization of the apical plasma membrane . Mol Biol Cell 2005 ; 16 : 5040 – 52 . 45 Mankertz J , Tavalali S , Schmitz H et al . Expression from the human occludin promoter is affected by tu - mor necrosis factor alpha and inter - feron gamma . J Cell Sci 2000 ; 113 : 2085 – 90 . 46 Bojarski C , Gitter AH , Bendfeldt K et al . Permeability of human HT - 29 / B6 colonic epithelium as a function of apoptosis . J Physiol 2001 ; 535 : 541 – 52 . 47 Bruewer M , Luegering A , Kucharzik T et al . Proinﬂammatory cytokines disrupt epithelial barrier function by apoptosis - independent mechanisms . J Immunol 2003 ; 171 : 6164 – 72 . 48 Schulzke JD , Bojarski C , Zeissig S , Heller F , Gitter AH , Fromm M . Disrupted barrier function through epithelial cell apoptosis . Ann N Y Acad Sci 2006 ; 1072 : 288 – 99 . 49 Shen L , Turner JR . Actin depoly - merization disrupts tight junctions via caveolae - mediated endocytosis . Mol Biol Cell 2005 ; 16 : 3919 – 36 . 50 Ivanov AI , Nusrat A , Parkos CA . Endocytosis of epithelial apical junctional proteins by a clathrin - mediated pathway into a unique storage compartment . Mol Biol Cell 2004 ; 15 : 176 – 88 . 51 Fasano A . Physiological , pathologi - cal , and therapeutic implications of zonulin - mediated intestinal barrier modulation : living life on the edge of the wall . Am J Pathol 2008 ; 173 : 1243 – 52 . 52 Tripathi A , Lammers KM , Goldb - lum S et al . Identiﬁcation of human zonulin , a physiological modulator of tight junctions , as prehaptoglobin - 2 . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009 ; 106 : 16799 – 804 . 53 Heyman M . Gut barrier dysfunction in food allergy . Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2005 ; 17 : 1279 – 85 . 54 Heyman M , Grasset E , Ducroc R , Desjeux JF . Antigen absorption by the jejunal epithelium of children with cow’s milk allergy . Pediatr Res 1988 ; 24 : 197 – 202 . 55 Laitinen K , Isolauri E . Management of food allergy : vitamins , fatty acids or probiotics ? Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2005 ; 17 : 1305 – 11 . 56 Heyman M , Darmon N , Dupont C et al . Mononuclear cells from in - fants allergic to cow’s milk secrete tumor necrosis factor alpha , altering intestinal function . Gastroenterol - ogy 1994 ; 106 : 1514 – 23 . 57 Berin MC , Kiliaan AJ , Yang PC , Groot JA , Kitamura Y , Perdue MH . The inﬂuence of mast cells on pathways of transepithelial antigen transport in rat intestine . J Immunol 1998 ; 161 : 2561 – 6 . 58 Berin MC , Kiliaan AJ , Yang PC , Groot JA , Taminiau JA , Perdue MH . Rapid transepithelial antigen trans - port in rat jejunum : impact of sen - sitization and the hypersensitivity reaction . Gastroenterology 1997 ; 113 : 856 – 64 . 59 Yang PC , Berin MC , Yu LC , Conrad DH , Perdue MH . Enhanced intesti - nal transepithelial antigen transport in allergic rats is mediated by IgE and CD23 ( FcepsilonRII ) . J Clin In - vest 2000 ; 106 : 879 – 86 . 60 Yu LC , Yang PC , Berin MC et al . Enhanced transepithelial antigen transport in intestine of allergic mice is mediated by IgE / CD23 and regulated by interleukin - 4 . Gastro - enterology 2001 ; 121 : 370 – 81 . 61 Matysiak - Budnik T , Moura IC , Ar - cos - Fajardo M et al . Secretory IgA Volume 22 , Number 7 , July 2010 Intestinal barrier and neuroimmune regulation (cid:2) 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 729 mediates retrotranscytosis of intact gliadin peptides via the transferrin receptor in celiac disease . J Exp Med 2008 ; 205 : 143 – 54 . 62 Meddings JB . Review article : intes - tinal permeability in Crohn’s dis - ease . Aliment Pharmacol Ther 1997 ; 11 ( Suppl . 3 ) : 47 – 53 . 63 Hollander D . The intestinal perme - ability barrier . A hypothesis as to its regulation and involvement in Cro - hn’s disease . Scand J Gastroenterol 1992 ; 27 : 721 – 6 . 64 Xavier RJ , Podolsky DK . Unravelling the pathogenesis of inﬂammatory bowel disease . Nature 2007 ; 448 : 427 – 34 . 65 Hollander D , Vadheim CM , Bret - tholz E , Petersen GM , Delahunty T , Rotter JI . Increased intestinal per - meability in patients with Crohn’s disease and their relatives . A possi - ble etiologic factor . Ann Intern Med 1986 ; 105 : 883 – 5 . 66 Soderholm JD , Olaison G , Lindberg E et al . Different intestinal permeabil - ity patterns in relatives and spouses of patients with Crohn’s disease : an inherited defect in mucosal defence ? Gut 1999 ; 44 : 96 – 100 . 67 Marin ML , Greenstein AJ , Geller SA , Gordon RE , Aufses AH Jr . A freeze fracture study of Crohn’s disease of the terminal ileum : changes in epi - thelial tight junction organization . Am J Gastroenterol 1983 ; 78 : 537 – 47 . 68 Soderholm JD , Olaison G , Peterson KH et al . Augmented increase in tight junction permeability by luminal stimuli in the non - inﬂamed ileum of Crohn’s disease . Gut 2002 ; 50 : 307 – 13 . 69 Hollander D . Crohn’s disease – a permeability disorder of the tight junction ? Gut 1988 ; 29 : 1621 – 4 . 70 Zeissig S , Bojarski C , Buergel N et al . Downregulation of epithelial apoptosis and barrier repair in active Crohn’s disease by tumour necrosis factor alpha antibody treatment . Gut 2004 ; 53 : 1295 – 302 . 71 Zeissig S , Burgel N , Gunzel D et al . Changes in expression and distribu - tion of claudin 2 , 5 and 8 lead to discontinuous tight junctions and barrier dysfunction in active Crohn’s disease . Gut 2007 ; 56 : 61 – 72 . 72 Sartor RB . Pathogenesis and immune mechanisms of chronic inﬂamma - tory bowel diseases . Am J Gastro - enterol 1997 ; 92 ( 12 Suppl . ) : 5S – 11S . 73 Hugot JP , Alberti C , Berrebi D , Bin - gen E , Cezard JP Crohn’s disease : the cold chain hypothesis . Lancet 2003 ; 362 : 2012 – 5 . 74 Fiocchi C . Inﬂammatory bowel dis - ease : etiology and pathogenesis . Gas - troenterology 1998 ; 115 : 182 – 205 . 75 Soderholm JD , Peterson KH , Olaison G et al . Epithelial permeability to proteins in the noninﬂamed ileum of Crohn’s disease ? Gastroenterol - ogy 1999 ; 117 : 65 – 72 . 76 Schurmann G , Bruwer M , Klotz A , Schmid KW , Senninger N , Zimmer KP . Transepithelial transport pro - cesses at the intestinal mucosa in inﬂammatory bowel disease . Int J Colorectal Dis 1999 ; 14 : 41 – 6 . 77 Soderholm JD , Streutker C , Yang PC et al . Increased epithelial uptake of protein antigens in the ileum of Crohn’s disease mediated by tumour necrosis factor alpha . Gut 2004 ; 53 : 1817 – 24 . 78 Bischoff SC , Lorentz A , Schweng - berg S , Weier G , Raab R , Manns MP . Mast cells are an important cellular source of tumour necrosis factor al - pha in human intestinal tissue . Gut 1999 ; 44 : 643 – 52 . 79 Lilja I , Gustafson - Svard C , Franzen L , Sjodahl R . Tumor necrosis factor - alpha in ileal mast cells in patients with Crohn’s disease . Digestion 2000 ; 61 : 68 – 76 . 80 Kelsall BL , Strober W . Distinct pop - ulations of dendritic cells are pres - ent in the subepithelial dome and T cell regions of the murine Peyer’s patch . J Exp Med 1996 ; 183 : 237 – 47 . 81 Rescigno M , Urbano M , Valzasina B et al . Dendritic cells express tight junction proteins and penetrate gut epithelial monolayers to sample bac - teria . Nat Immunol 2001 ; 2 : 361 – 7 . 82 Silva MA , Jury J , Porras M , Vergara P , Perdue MH . Intestinal epithelial barrier dysfunction and dendritic cell redistribution during early stages of inﬂammation in the rat : role for TLR - 2 and - 4 blockage . In - ﬂamm Bowel Dis 2008 ; 14 : 632 – 44 . 83 Keita AV , Salim SY , Jiang T et al . Increased uptake of non - pathogenic E . coli via the follicle - associated epithelium in longstanding ileal Crohn’s disease . J Pathol 2008 ; 215 : 135 – 44 . 84 Salim SY , Silva MA , Keita AV et al . CD83 + CCR7 ) dendritic cells accu - mulate in the subepithelial dome and internalize translocated Escher - ichia coli HB101 in the Peyer’s pat - ches of ileal Crohn’s disease . Am J Pathol 2009 ; 174 : 82 – 90 . 85 Gitter AH , Wullstein F , Fromm M , Schulzke JD . Epithelial barrier de - fects in ulcerative colitis : character - ization and quantiﬁcation by electrophysiological imaging . Gas - troenterology 2001 ; 121 : 1320 – 8 . 86 Heller F , Florian P , Bojarski C et al . Interleukin - 13 is the key effector Th2 cytokine in ulcerative colitis that affects epithelial tight junc - tions , apoptosis , and cell restitution . Gastroenterology 2005 ; 129 : 550 – 64 . 87 Schmitz H , Fromm M , Bentzel CJ et al . Tumor necrosis factor - alpha ( TNFalpha ) regulates the epithelial barrier in the human intestinal cell line HT - 29 / B6 . J Cell Sci 1999 ; 112 : 137 – 46 . 88 Wallon C , Ericson AC , Yang PC et al . Increased macromolecular permeability in non - inﬂamed colon of ulcerative colitis involves mus - carinic receptor signalling via subepithelial eosinophils . Gastroen - terology 2008 ; 134 ( Suppl . 1 ) : A397 . 89 Dunlop SP , Hebden J , Campbell E et al . Abnormal intestinal perme - ability in subgroups of diarrhea - pre - dominant irritable bowel syndromes . Am J Gastroenterol 2006 ; 101 : 1288 – 94 . 90 Spiller RC , Jenkins D , Thornley JP et al . Increased rectal mucosal enteroendocrine cells , T lympho - cytes , and increased gut permeabil - ity following acute Campylobacter enteritis and in post - dysenteric irri - table bowel syndrome . Gut 2000 ; 47 : 804 – 11 . 91 Marshall JK , Thabane M , Garg AX , Clark W , Meddings J , Collins SM . Intestinal permeability in patients with irritable bowel syndrome after a waterborne outbreak of acute gas - troenteritis in Walkerton , Ontario . Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2004 ; 12 : 1317 – 22 . 92 Piche T , Barbara G , Aubert P et al . Impaired intestinal barrier integrity in the colon of patients with irrita - ble bowel syndrome : involvement of soluble mediators . Gut 2009 ; 58 : 196 – 201 . 93 Gecse K , Roka R , Ferrier L et al . In - creased faecal serine protease activ - ity in diarrhoeic IBS patients : a colonic lumenal factor impairing colonic permeability and sensitivity . Gut 2008 ; 57 : 591 – 9 . 94 Coutinho SV , Plotsky PM , Sablad M et al . Neonatal maternal separation alters stress - induced responses to viscerosomatic nociceptive stimuli A˚ . V . Keita & J . D . So¨derholm Neurogastroenterology and Motility (cid:2) 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 730 in rat . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2002 ; 282 : G307 – 16 . 95 Barreau F , Ferrier L , Fioramonti J , Bueno L . New insights in the etiol - ogy and pathophysiology of irritable bowel syndrome : contribution of neonatal stress models . Pediatr Res 2007 ; 62 : 240 – 5 . 96 Santos J , Saperas E , Nogueiras C et al . Release of mast cell mediators into the jejunum by cold pain stress in humans . Gastroenterology 1998 ; 114 : 640 – 8 . 97 Alonso C , Guilarte M , Vicario M et al . Maladaptive intestinal epithe - lial responses to life stress may pre - dispose healthy women to gut mucosal inﬂammation . Gastroen - terology 2008 ; 135 : 163 – 72 . 98 Barbara G , Stanghellini V , De Gior - gio R et al . Activated mast cells in proximity to colonic nerves corre - late with abdominal pain in irritable bowel syndrome . Gastroenterology 2004 ; 126 : 693 – 702 . 99 Guilarte M , Santos J , de T I et al . Diarrhoea - predominant IBS patients show mast cell activation and hyperplasia in the jejunum . Gut 2007 ; 56 : 203 – 9 . 100 Farthing MJ . Enterotoxins and the enteric nervous system – a fatal attraction . Int J Med Microbiol 2000 ; 5 : 491 – 6 . 101 Berthoud HR , Blackshaw LA , Broo - kes SJ , Grundy D . Neuroanatomy of extrinsic afferents supplying the gas - trointestinal tract . Neurogastroen - terol Motil 2004 ; 16 ( Suppl . 1 ) : 28 – 33 . 102 Neunlist M , Toumi F , Oreschkova T et al . Human ENS regulates the intestinal epithelial barrier perme - ability and a tight junction - associ - ated protein ZO - 1 via VIPergic pathways . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2003 ; 285 : G1028 – 36 . 103 Aube AC , Cabarrocas J , Bauer J et al . Changes in enteric neurone pheno - type and intestinal functions in a transgenic mouse model of enteric glia disruption . Gut 2006 ; 55 : 630 – 7 . 104 Savidge TC , Newman P , Pothoulakis C et al . Enteric glia regulate intesti - nal barrier function and inﬂamma - tion via release of S - nitrosog lutathione . Gastroenterology 2007 ; 132 : 1344 – 58 . 105 Ottaway CA , Lewis DL , Asa SL . Vasoactive intestinal peptide - con - taining nerves in Peyer’s patches . Brain Behav Immun 1987 ; 1 : 148 – 58 . 106 Stead RH , Bienenstock J , Stanisz AM . Neuropeptide regulation of mucosal immunity . Immunol Rev 1987 ; 100 : 333 – 59 . 107 Bienenstock J , Tomioka M , Matsuda H et al . The role of mast cells in inﬂammatory processes : evidence for nerve / mast cell interactions . Int Arch Allergy Appl Immunol 1987 ; 82 : 238 – 43 . 108 Stead RH . Innervation of mucosal immune cells in the gastrointestinal tract . Reg Immunol 1992 ; 4 : 91 – 9 . 109 Santos J , Yang PC , Soderholm JD , Benjamin M , Perdue MH . Role of mast cells in chronic stress induced colonic epithelial barrier dysfunc - tion in the rat . Gut 2001 ; 48 : 630 – 6 . 110 Wallon C , Yang PC , Keita AV et al . Corticotropin - releasing hormone ( CRH ) regulates macromolecular permeability via mast cells in nor - mal human colonic biopsies in vitro . Gut 2008 ; 57 : 50 – 8 . 111 Stead RH , Tomioka M , Riddell RH , Bienenstock J Substance P and / or calcitonin gene - related peptide are present in sub - epithelial enteric nerves apposed to intestinal mucosal mast cells . In : MacDermott RP eds . Inﬂammatory Bowel Disease : Cur - rent Status and Future Approach . Elsevier , Amsterdam . 1988 : 43 – 8 . 112 Van der Kleij HP , Ma D , Redegeld FA , Kraneveld AD , Nijkamp FP , Bienenstock J . Functional expression of neurokinin 1 receptors on mast cells induced by IL - 4 and stem cell factor . J Immunol 2003 ; 171 : 2074 – 9 . 113 Soderholm JD , Perdue MH . Stress and gastrointestinal tract . II . Stress and intestinal barrier function . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2001 ; 280 : G7 – 13 . 114 Barclay GR , Turnberg LA . Effect of psychological stress on salt and wa - ter transport in the human jejunum . Gastroenterology 1987 ; 93 : 91 – 7 . 115 Barclay GR , Turnberg LA . Effect of cold - induced pain on salt and water transport in the human jejunum . Gastroenterology 1988 ; 94 : 994 – 8 . 116 Saunders PR , Hanssen NP , Perdue MH . Cholinergic nerves mediate stress - induced intestinal transport abnormalities in Wistar - Kyoto rats . Am J Physiol 1997 ; 273 : G486 – 90 . 117 Pothoulakis C , Castagliuolo I , Le - eman SE . Neuroimmune mecha - nisms of intestinal responses to stress . Role of corticotropin - releas - ing factor and neurotensin . Ann N Y Acad Sci 1998 ; 840 : 635 – 48 . 118 Keita AV , So¨derholm JD , Ericson AC . Stress - induced barrier disrup - tion of rat follicle - associated epithelium involves corticotropin - releasing hormone , acetylcholine , substance P , and mast cells . Neuro - gastroenterol Motil 2010 ; Epub ahead of print , doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2982 . 2010 . 01471 . x . 119 Kiliaan AJ , Saunders PR , Bijlsma PB et al . Stress stimulates transepithe - lial macromolecular uptake in rat jejunum . Am J Physiol 1998 ; 1 : G1037 – 44 . 120 Santos J , Saunders PR , Hanssen NP et al . Corticotropin - releasing hor - mone mimics stress - induced colonic epithelial pathophysiology in the rat . Am J Physiol 1999 ; 277 : G391 – 9 . 121 Cameron HL , Perdue MH . Musca - rinic acetylcholine receptor activa - tion increases transcellular transport of macromolecules across mouse and human intestinal epithelium in vitro . Neurogastroenterol Motil 2007 ; 19 : 47 – 56 . 122 Demaude J , Leveque M , Chaumaz G et al . Acute stress increases colonic paracellular permeability in mice through a mast cell - independent mechanism : involvement of pancre - atictrypsin . LifeSci 2009 ; 84 : 847 – 52 . 123 Gareau MG , Jury J , Perdue MH . Neonatal maternal separation of rat pups results in abnormal cholinergic regulation of epithelial permeability . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2007 ; 293 : G198 – 203 . 124 Santos J , Yates D , Guilarte M , Vica - rio M , Alonso C , Perdue MH . Stress neuropeptides evoke epithelial re - sponses via mast cell activation in the rat colon . Psychoneuroendocri - nology 2008 ; 33 : 1248 – 56 . 125 Barreau F , Cartier C , Leveque M et al . Pathways involved in gut mucosal barrier dysfunction induced in adult rats by maternal depriva - tion : corticotrophin - releasing factor and nerve growth factor interplay . J Physiol 2007 ; 580 : 347 – 56 . 126 Smith F , Clark JE , Overman BL et al . Early weaning stress impairs devel - opment of mucosal barrier function in the porcine intestine . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2010 ; 298 : G352 – 63 . 127 Kawahito Y , Sano H , Mukai S et al . Corticotropin releasing hormone in colonic mucosa in patients with ulcerative colitis . Gut 1995 ; 37 : 544 – 51 . 128 Levenstein S , Prantera C , Varvo V et al . Stress and exacerbation in ulcerativecolitis : a prospective study Volume 22 , Number 7 , July 2010 Intestinal barrier and neuroimmune regulation (cid:2) 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 731 of patientsenrolledin remission . Am J Gastroenterol 2000 ; 95 : 1213 – 20 . 129 Bitton A , Sewitch MJ , Peppercorn MA et al . Psychosocial determi - nants of relapse in ulcerative colitis : a longitudinal study . Am J Gastro - enterol 2003 ; 98 : 2203 – 8 . 130 Castagliuolo I , Leeman SE , Bartolak - Suki E et al . A neurotensin antago - nist , SR 48692 , inhibits colonic re - sponses to immobilization stress in rats . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996 ; 93 : 12611 – 5 . 131 Castagliuolo I , Lamont JT , Qiu B et al . Acute stress causes mucin re - lease from rat colon : role of cortico - tropinreleasingfactorandmastcells . Am J Physiol 1996 ; 271 : G884 – 92 . 132 Demaude J , Salvador - Cartier C , Fi - oramonti J , Ferrier L , Bueno L . Phe - notypic changes in colonocytes following acute stress or activation of mast cells in mice : implications for delayed epithelial barrier dys - function . Gut 2006 ; 55 : 655 – 61 . 133 Theoharides TC , Letourneau R , Pa - tra P et al . Stress - induced rat intes - tinal mast cell intragranular activation and inhibitory effect of sulfated proteoglycans . Dig Dis Sci 1999 ; 8 ( Suppl . ) : 87S – 93S . 134 Moeser AJ , Klok CV , Ryan KA et al . Stress signaling pathways activated by weaning mediate intestinal dys - function in the pig . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2007 ; 292 : G173 – 81 . 135 Castagliuolo I , Wershil BK , Karalis K , Pasha A , Nikulasson ST , Potho - ulakis C . Colonic mucin release in response to immobilization stress is mast cell dependent . Am J Physiol 1998 ; 274 : G1094 – 100 . 136 Soderholm JD , Yang PC , Ceponis P et al . Chronic stress induces mast cell - dependent bacterial adherence and initiates mucosal inﬂammation in rat intestine . Gastroenterology 2002 ; 123 : 1099 – 108 . 137 Crowe SE , Perdue MH . Anti - immu - noglobulin E - stimulated ion trans - port in human large and small intestine . Gastroenterology 1993 ; 105 : 764 – 72 . 138 Fihn BM , Sjoqvist A , Jodal M . Involvement of enteric nerves in permeability changes due to deoxy - cholic acid in rat jejunum in vivo . Acta Physiol Scand 2003 ; 178 : 241 – 50 . 139 Youakim A , Ahdieh M . Interferon - gamma decreases barrier function in T84 cells by reducing ZO - 1 levels and disrupting apical actin . Am J Physiol 1999 ; 276 : G1279 – 88 . 140 Madara JL , Stafford J . Interferon - gamma directly affects barrier func - tion of cultured intestinal epithelial monolayers . J Clin Invest 1989 ; 83 : 724 – 7 . 141 Wang F , Graham WV , Wang Y , Witkowski ED , Schwarz BT , Turner JR . Interferon - gamma and tumor necrosis factor - alpha synergize to induce intestinal epithelial barrier dysfunction by up - regulating myo - sin light chain kinase expression . Am J Pathol 2005 ; 166 : 409 – 19 . 142 Watson JL , Ansari S , Cameron H , Wang A , Akhtar M , McKay DM . Green tea polyphenol ( ) ) - epigallo - catechin gallate blocks epithelial barrier dysfunction provoked by IFN - gamma but not by IL - 4 . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2004 ; 287 : G954 – 61 . 143 McKay DM , Watson JL , Wang A et al . Phosphatidylinositol 3 ¢ - kinase is a critical mediator of interferon - gamma - induced increases in enteric epithelial permeability . J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2007 ; 320 : 1013 – 22 . 144 Clark E , Hoare C , Tanianis - Hughes J , Carlson GL , Warhurst G . Inter - feron gamma induces translocation of commensal Escherichia coli across gut epithelial cells via a lipid raft - mediated process . Gastroenter - ology 2005 ; 128 : 1258 – 67 . 145 Yang H , Kiristioglu I , Fan Y et al . Interferon - gamma expression by in - traepithelial lymphocytes results in a loss of epithelial barrier function in a mouse model of total parenteral nutrition . Ann Surg 2002 ; 236 : 226 – 34 . 146 Cenac N , Chin AC , Garcia - Villar R et al . PAR2 activation alters colonic paracellular permeability in mice via IFN - gamma - dependent and - inde - pendent pathways . J Physiol 2004 ; 558 : 913 – 25 . 147 Ferrier L , Mazelin L , Cenac N et al . Stress - induced disruption of colonic epithelial barrier : role of interferon - gamma and myosin light chain ki - nase in mice . Gastroenterology 2003 ; 125 : 795 – 804 . 148 Gitter AH , Bendfeldt K , Schulzke JD , Fromm M . Leaks in the epithe - lial barrier caused by spontaneous and TNF - alpha - induced single - cell apoptosis . FASEB J 2000 ; 14 : 1749 – 53 . 149 Clayburgh DR , Barrett TA , Tang Y et al . Epithelial myosin light chain kinase - dependent barrier dysfunc - tion mediates T cell activation - in - duced diarrhea in vivo . J Clin Invest 2005 ; 115 : 2702 – 15 . 150 Zareie M , Singh PK , Irvine EJ , Sher - man PM , McKay DM , Perdue MH . Monocyte / macrophage activation by normal bacteria and bacterial prod - ucts : implications for altered epi - thelial function in Crohn’s disease . Am J Pathol 2001 ; 158 : 1101 – 9 . 151 Suenaert P , Bulteel V , Lemmens L et al . Anti - tumor necrosis factor treatment restores the gut barrier in Crohn’s disease . Am J Gastroenterol 2002 ; 97 : 2000 – 4 . 152 Payne V , Kam PC . Mast cell tryp - tase : a review of its physiology and clinical signiﬁcance . Anaesthesia 2004 ; 59 : 695 – 703 . 153 Cenac N , Coelho AM , Nguyen C et al . Induction of intestinal inﬂam - mation in mouse by activation of proteinase - activatedreceptor - 2 . AmJ Pathol 2002 ; 161 : 1903 – 15 . 154 He SH . Key role of mast cells and their major secretory products in inﬂammatory bowel disease . World J Gastroenterol 2004 ; 10 : 309 – 18 . 155 Bueno L , Fioramonti J . Protease - activated receptor 2 and gut perme - ability : a review . Neurogastroenterol Motil 2008 ; 20 : 580 – 7 . 156 Coelho AM , Vergnolle N , Guiard B , Fioramonti J , Bueno L . Proteinases and proteinase - activated receptor 2 : a possible role to promote visceral hyperalgesia in rats . Gastroenterol - ogy 2002 ; 122 : 1035 – 47 . 157 Jacob C , Cottrell GS , Gehringer D , Schmidlin F , Grady EF , Bunnett NW . c - Cbl mediates ubiquitination , degradation , and down - regulation of human protease - activated recep - tor 2 . J Biol Chem 2005 ; 280 : 16076 – 87 . 158 Roka R , Demaude J , Cenac N et al . Colonic luminal proteases activate colonocyte proteinase - activated receptor - 2 and regulate paracellular permeability in mice . Neurogastro - enterol Motil 2007 ; 19 : 57 – 65 . 159 Roka R , Ait - Belgnaoui A , Salvador - Cartier C et al . Dexamethasone prevents visceral hyperalgesia but not colonic permeability increase induced by luminal protease - acti - vated receptor - 2 agonist in rats . Gut 2007 ; 56 : 1072 – 8 . 160 Al Sadi RM , Ma TY . IL - 1beta causes an increase in intestinal epithelial tight junction permeability . J Immu - nol 2007 ; 178 : 4641 – 9 . A˚ . V . Keita & J . D . So¨derholm Neurogastroenterology and Motility (cid:2) 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 732 161 Al Sadi R , Ye D , Dokladny K , Ma TY . Mechanism of IL - 1beta - induced increase in intestinal epithelial tight junction permeability . J Immunol 2008 ; 180 : 5653 – 61 . 162 Berin MC , Yang PC , Ciok L , Waser - man S , Perdue MH . Role for IL - 4 in macromolecular transport across human intestinal epithelium . Am J Physiol 1999 ; 276 : C1046 – 52 . 163 Di L V , Yang PC , Berin MC , Perdue MH . Factors regulating the effect of IL - 4 on intestinal epithelial barrier function . Int Arch Allergy Immunol 2002 ; 129 : 219 – 27 . 164 Wisner DM , Harris LR III , Green CL , Poritz LS . Opposing regulation of the tight junction protein claudin - 2 by interferon - gamma and interleu - kin - 4 . J Surg Res 2008 ; 144 : 1 – 7 . 165 Ceponis PJ , Botelho F , Richards CD , McKay DM . Interleukins 4 and 13 increase intestinal epithelial perme - ability by a phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase pathway . Lack of evidence for STAT 6 involvement . J Biol Chem 2000 ; 275 : 29132 – 7 . 166 Prasad S , Mingrino R , Kaukinen K et al . Inﬂammatory processes have differential effects on claudins 2 , 3 and 4 in colonic epithelial cells . Lab Invest 2005 ; 85 : 1139 – 62 . 167 Nylander O , Hallgren A , Sababi M . COX inhibition excites enteric nerves that affect motility , alkaline secretion , and permeability in rat duodenum . Am J Physiol Gastroin - test Liver Physiol 2001 ; 281 : G1169 – 78 . 168 Bischoff SC . Role of mast cells in allergic and non - allergic immune responses : comparison of human and murine data . Nat Rev Immunol 2007 ; 7 : 93 – 104 . 169 Bischoff SC . Physiological and pathophysiological functions of intestinal mast cells . Semin Immu - nopathol 2009 ; 31 : 185 – 205 . 170 Ponferrada A , Caso JR , Alou L et al . The role of PPARgamma on resto - ration of colonic homeostasis after experimental stress - induced inﬂam - mation and dysfunction . Gastroen - terology 2007 ; 132 : 1791 – 803 . 171 Gookin JL , Galanko JA , Blikslager AT , Argenzio RA . PG - mediated clo - sure of paracellular pathway and not restitution is the primary determi - nant of barrier recovery in acutely injured porcine ileum . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2003 ; 285 : G967 – 79 . 172 Eutamene H , Theodorou V , Verg - nolle N , Comera C , Fioramonti J , Bueno L . Involvement of interleu - kin - 1 , prostaglandins and mast cells in rectal distension - induced colonic water secretion in rats . J Physiol 1998 ; 506 : 245 – 52 . 173 Zamuner SR , Warrier N , Buret AG , MacNaughton WK , Wallace JL . Cyclooxygenase 2 mediates post - inﬂammatory colonic secretory and barrier dysfunction . Gut 2003 ; 52 : 1714 – 20 . 174 Zamuner SR , Bak AW , Devchand PR , Wallace JL . Predisposition to colorectal cancer in rats with re - solved colitis : role of cyclooxygen - ase - 2 - derived prostaglandin d2 . Am J Pathol 2005 ; 167 : 1293 – 300 . 175 Barreau F , Salvador - Cartier C , Hou - deau E , Bueno L , Fioramonti J . Long - term alterations of colonic nerve - mast cell interactions induced by neonatal maternal deprivation in rats . Gut 2008 ; 57 : 582 – 90 . Volume 22 , Number 7 , July 2010 Intestinal barrier and neuroimmune regulation (cid:2) 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 733