Spontaneous surface reserve formation in wicked membranes bestow extreme stretchability Paul Grandgeorge 1 , Natacha Krins 2 , Aur´elie Hourlier - Fargette 1 , 3 , Christel Laberty 2 , S´ebastien Neukirch 1 , and Arnaud Antkowiak 1 , 4 1 Sorbonne Universit´es , UPMC Univ Paris 06 , CNRS , UMR 7190 Institut Jean Le Rond d’Alembert 2 Sorbonne Universit´es , UPMC Univ Paris 06 , CNRS , UMR 7574 Laboratoire de chimie de la mati ` ere condens´ee de Paris 3 D´epartement de Physique , ´Ecole Normale Sup´erieure , CNRS , PSL Research University , F - 75005 Paris , France 4 Surface du Verre et Interfaces , UMR 125 CNRS / Saint - Gobain , F - 93303 Auberviliers , France August 11 , 2018 Soft stretchable materials are key for arising technologies such as stretchable electronics [ 1 ] or batteries [ 2 ] , smart textiles [ 3 ] , biomedical devices [ 4 ] , tissue engineering and soft robotics [ 5 , 6 ] . Recent attempts to design such materials , via e . g . micro - patterning of wavy ﬁbres [ 7 ] on soft substrates , polymer engineering at the molecular level [ 8 ] or even kirigami techniques [ 9 ] , provide appealing prospects but suﬀer drawbacks impacting the material viability : complexity of manufacturing , fatigue or failure upon cycling , restricted range of materials or biological incompatibility . Here , we report a universal strategy to design highly stretchable , self - assembling and fatigue - resistant synthetic fabrics . Our approach ﬁnds its inspiration in the mechanics of living animal cells that routinely encounter and cope with extreme deformations , e . g . with the engulfment of large intruders by macrophages [ 10 ] , squeezing and stretching of immune cells in tiny capillaries [ 11 ] or shrinking / swelling of neurons upon osmotic stimuli [ 12 ] . All these large instant deformations are actually mediated and buﬀered by membrane reserves available in the form of microvilli , membrane folds or endomembrane that can be recruited on demand [ 11 , 13 ] . We synthetically mimicked this behavior by creating nanoﬁbrous liquid - infused tissues spontaneously forming surface reserves whose unfolding fuels any imposed shape change . Our process , relying only on geometry , elasticity and capillarity , allows to endow virtually any material with high stretchability and reversibility , making it straightforward to implement additional mechanical , electrical or chemical functions . We illustrate this with proof - of - concept activable capillary muscles , adaptable slippery liquid infused porous surfaces and stretchable basic printed electronic circuits . Geometry and elasticity of thin objects are intimately linked , so that metallic wires with identical diameter but with diﬀerent shapes ( e . g . straight or curly as a spring ) will contrast markedly in their mechanical response . Nature abounds in such examples where mechanical behavior is entangled with geometry . Leaf geometrical curvature , for example , is critical for some carnivorous plants’ prey - trapping ability . For example , the particular shape adopted by the Venus ﬂytrap’s leaf brings it on the verge of an elastic instability , requiring from an insect only a minute stroke to snap and rush the vegetal jaws – thereby providing the plant with one of the fastest non - muscular movements [ 14 ] . Geometry is also behind the curious mechanical behavior of the capture silk spun by ecribellate spiders : whether stretched or compressed , this ﬁbre remains straight while seemingly adjusting its length , as if telescopic . Actually the pulling force of surface tension allows to coil , spool and pack excess ﬁbre within the glue droplets decorating the thread . These so formed ﬁbre reserves can then be recruited on demand – and confer the thread an apparent extreme strechability of + 10 , 000 % [ 15 ] . Another example can be found inside our own body with cells which display a particular ability to cope with stretch . Macrophages extending their surface area by a factor 5 to engulf large microbes or cellular debris [ 10 ] ( see Fig . 1 ) , patrolling T - lymphocytes stretching by 40 % to squeeze into the microvasculature [ 11 ] , hundreds of µ m sized neuronal projections extruded from 10 µ m wide neurons [ 13 , 16 ] or osmotic swelling of ﬁbroblast leading to 70 % increase in area [ 17 ] are a few out of many examples of the extreme mechanical sollicitations encountered by living animal cells on a routine basis . This resilience is all the more spectacular that the lytic stretching level at which the plasma membrane ruptures is about 4 % [ 13 , 18 ] . Why do these cells then just not burst under stress ? 1 a r X i v : 1 7 09 . 05228v1 [ c ond - m a t . s o f t ] 1 5 S e p 2017 A . C . D . E . B . NANO - FIBROUS FABRIC Infusing the membrane with liquid droplets Irreversible rupture of the membrane NO STRETCHABILITY HIGH STRETCHABILITY DRY MEMBRANE REVERSIBLE HIGH STRETCHABILITY BIO - INSPIRED MEMBRANE BI0 - OBSERVATION DRY MEMBRANE LIQUID DROPLETS INFUSION Stretchability in macrophages Engulfment of huge ‘intruders’ Stretchability of the dry membrane ? Wet pre - formed membrane SURFACE RESERVES BIO - INSPIREDSURFACE RESERVES SELF - ASSEMBLED SURFACE RESERVES Figure 1 : Designing ultra - stretchable membranes . A . A thin ﬁbrous membrane ( here : electrospun PVDF - HFP membrane dyed blue with a coloring agent for visualization purposes ) and a scanning electron microscope micrograph of this membrane are presented ( scale bar : 50 µ m ) . The typical diameter of the ﬁbers composing this few microns thick membrane is 500 nm . B . At its native ( dry ) state , the membrane is attached to 8 translational supports slowly separated from each other . As the membrane is not intrinsically stretchable , it rapidly irreversibly tears oﬀ at around 30 % area extension . Scale bar : 3 cm . C . SEM micrographs of a J774 macrophage ( Courtesy of Prof . Heinrich , UC Davis [ 10 ] ) . The ﬁrst snapshot presents the macrophage at rest ( cell size is not representative due to shrinkage during ﬁxation ) . The two following pictures show the macrophage engulﬁng an antibody coated ( FC γ - opsonized ) 30 µ m diameter bead . Throughout this ambitious engulfment , the initially corrugated cell membrane smooths out , thus recruiting membrane surface , necessary for its up to 5 - fold surface area expansion . Scale bar : 10 µ m . D . Based on this biological observation , our membrane is now attached to the 8 translational supports ( set in a wide position ) and wicked by a wetting liquid ( here : v100 silicone oil ) . When the supports are brought closer , the membrane does not sag as one would expect ; it spontaneously folds inside the liquid veins due to the surface tension they develop . Scale bar : 3 cm . E . Once the whole membrane is wicked by the liquid , its compressed state spontaneously adopts a wrinkled and folded surface , similar to that of the resting J774 membrane . Just like for the J774 macrophage , our self - corrugated wicked membrane smooths out when stretched ; wrinkles and folds act as membrane reserves that can fuel up to a 50 - fold surface area expansion . Moreover , as the process relies only on elasticity and capillarity , it is reversible and repeatable ( wrinkles and folds continue self - assembling upon subsequent compressions ) . Scale bar : 3 cm . Actually cells have evolved a strategy consisting in storing excess membrane in the form of folds and microvilli [ 19 , 20 ] which can be recruited and deployed on demand . Interestingly , these geometrical corrugations enabling stretching do not ﬂuﬀ the membrane . Cellular tension is indeed preserved thanks to the pulling action of the 2 underlying cortical actin layer [ 21 ] . Learning from these examples , we here transpose Nature’s blueprints by making use of self - assembled membrane reserves to endow synthetic fabrics with high stretchability . Figure 1 illustrates the key steps to design such an extensible tissue . We ﬁrst manufacture , with a conventional spinning technique , a light and free - standing non - woven fabric . Without further treatment , the so - formed ﬁbrous membrane would show early signs of damage above a few percents of extension , and would deﬁnitely rupture at a 30 % area extension . In order to mimick the pulling action of the cortical actin layer , we infuse the polymeric mat with a wetting liquid so as to bestow the resulting wick with surface tension . Instantaneously , the membrane self - tenses while seemingly adjusting its surface , storing any excess membrane into folds : the membrane reserves . Once formed , these geometrical ruﬄes and furrows can be unfolded at will , fueling any imposed shape change to the membrane , see Fig . 1 . Remarkably , the process is entirely reversible as the membrane reserves self - assemble instantaneously upon contraction . Surface reserves Surface reserves Wrinkles Wrinkles Straight Wicked membrane 100 % Wrinkled Packed + wrinkled Compression L L - ∆X 100 % packed Liquid thickness h [ μm ] h / Lec λ / Lec ε = 0 . 01 ε = 0 . 02 ε = 0 . 0 5 Elasto - capillary wrinkles No capillary walls Soft capillary walls Compression W a v e l e n g t h λ [ μ m ] 0 5 10 15 20 0 20 40 60 A . B . a b c d C . D . 10 λ 10 λ Hard capillary walls Bending rigidity B Surface tension γ Liquid thickness h PAN t 0 ≈2μm / water PAN t 0 ≈2μm / water + surfactant PAN t 0 ≈4μm / water PAN t 0 ≈8μm / water 0 50 100 150 200 250 0 100 200 300 400 500 Figure 2 : Mechanics of the wicked membrane : capillary - driven wrinkling and packing . A . Electro - spun PAN membrane wicked with water and attached to two rigid mobile edges . The left and right photo respectively show the membrane at its extended and slightly compressed state . Upon this small compression , the wicked membrane immediately exhibits a clear wrinkling pattern ( L = 4 cm ) . B . Closer view of the membrane ( red and green rectangles in A . ) throughout a complete uni - axial compression . At the extended state , the wicked membrane is smooth ( a ) . A small compression engender a wrinkled surface ( of wavelength λ ) which rapidly displays a two phase texture as compression is pursued ( b and c respectively ) . One phase corresponds to a wrinkled texture ( same wavelength λ ) and the other one a closely packed accordion - like state which gradually expands throughout compression . The whole membrane is closely packed inside the liquid ﬁlm at the end of the compression ( d ) . This accordion - like phase houses the surface reserves which will be recruited upon a subsequent extension of the membrane . ( scale : 10 λ = 3 . 1 mm ) C . Physical interpretation of the early wrinkling of the membrane inside the liquid ﬁlm . Here , the membrane is described as an elastic beam of bending stiﬀness per unit depth B inside a liquid ﬁlm of initial thickness h and liquid - air interface energy γ . Considering the beam buckles in a sinusoidal shape and the liquid interface adopts a circular shape , at a given compression (cid:15) , three regimes emerge , depending on the liquid ﬁlm thickness . D . Experimental wavelength λ of the wrinkles observed at early an compression stage of the membrane as a function of the liquid ﬁlm thickness h for diﬀerent membrane thicknesses t 0 and infusing liquids . The inset provides the data normalized by the elasto - capillary length L ec . The solid gray lines correspond to an energy minimization analysis for compressions of (cid:15) = 1 , 2 and 5 % ( see Supplementary Material ) . To shed light over the mechanics of membrane reserve self - assembly , we now investigate the behavior of the wicked membrane at the microstructural level , i . e . at lengthscales of the order of the liquid ﬁlm thickness . Figure 2 reports typical global and close - up views of a membrane undergoing compression . It is readily seen that whenever compression starts , the initially ﬂat membrane ( Fig . 2A left and Fig . 2Ba ) is rapidly textured with a wrinkling pattern exhibiting a clear wavelength λ ( Fig . 2A right and Fig . 2Bb ) . Wrinkling is a trademark of thin elastic sheets , and develops spontaneously in a variety of contexts : pinched skin , shriveling fruits [ 22 ] , 3 brain sulci [ 23 ] , hanging curtains [ 24 ] or more generally thin sheets under tension [ 25 ] . This elastic instability occurs whenever a compressed slender structure is bound to a substrate resisting deformation . The emerging wavelength λ of this particular form of buckling therefore results from a trade - oﬀ between the deformation of the membrane and that of the substrate in order to minimize global energy . Here , the substrate role is played by the liquid ﬁlm interfaces , which can be seen as soft capillary walls restraining the deformation of the membrane . Interestingly , experiments reveal that the wrinkles wavelength λ is neither particularly sensitive to the value of interfacial tension γ nor the ﬁbrous membrane thickness t 0 , but scales linearly with the liquid ﬁlm thickness h , here measured by means of colorimetry ( see Fig . 2D and Materials & Methods ) . In order to further grasp the physics of wrinkle formation , we develop a simple model where a periodic sinusoidal membrane of bending stiﬀness per unit depth B exhibiting a wavelength λ interacts with a liquid ﬁlm exposing two free surfaces of surface tension γ , see Fig . 2B . Under the constraint of constant liquid ﬁlm volume and imposed compression (cid:15) , U n s t a b l e c a t e n o i d U n s t a b l e c a t e n o i d 0 . 5 1 . 0 2 . 0 1 . 5 0 . 0 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 Height h = 1 . 51 H / R H Neck radius r = 1 . 51 R / R H 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 . 0 1 . 0 2 . 0 3 . 0 2R tube 2R P 2R H 2H 2R 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 Distance x = X / L Force f = F / ( 2γW ) Radius r = R / R max Pressure p = P / ( 4γ / R tube ) X W F F A1 . B1 . B2 . C1 . C2 . C3 . B3 . A2 . A3 . Figure 3 : Forms and forces for capillary - folded wicked membranes . A1 . Soapy liquid ﬁlm on a frame . A2 . Wicked membrane attached to two mobile supports . The membrane has a width W and its ends are separated by a distance X . A3 . Force versus displacement diagram . The green curve corresponds to the force measurements during the ﬁrst compression / extension cycle of the wicked membrane whereas the gray curve was obtained after imposing 100 , 000 compression / extension cycles on the membrane . The blue dotted line shows the force prediction on a soapy liquid ﬁlm on a rigid frame of width W and the black dotted line is obtained by considering a surface minimization with iso - perimetric constraint on its free edges ( see Supplementary Material ) . B1 . Soapy liquid catenoid between two parallel circular rings . B2 . Two states of the catenoid shape adopted by a wicked membrane attached to two parallel circular rings . B3 . Neck radius of the catenoid versus distance between the two rings . The green points represent the experimental observation for a wicked membrane . The blue dotted line represents the soapy liquid solution for the catenoid and the black dotted line shows the solution for a catenoid with iso - perimetric constraint ( see Supplementary Material ) . C1 . Soapy bubble . C2 . Bubble generated by inﬂating a wicked membrane at two diﬀerent inﬂating stages . C3 . Pressure versus radius diagram . Here , the radius of a bubble is deﬁned as R = ( 34 π V ) 1 / 3 . The blue dotted line represents the theoretical pressure for a soapy bubble being inﬂated through a tube of radius R tube ( Laplace’s law ) . The green points correspond to the pressure measurements of the wicked membrane . At R = R max , the pressure diverges due to the inextensibility of the membrane ( the black dotted line illustrates this prediction ) , making this conﬁguration evocative of the hypotonic swelling of neurons [ 12 ] . Note the signiﬁcant deviation from Laplace’s law resulting from the mixed solid - liquid behavior of the membrane . Scale bars on all the photographs : 1 cm . we minimize the total energy of the system , consisting of the membrane elastic energy E el = 1 2 B (cid:82) κ 2 d s and the surface energy E γ = 2 γS , with κ and S denoting respectively the local membrane curvature and the exposed surface of the liquid ﬁlm per unit depth ( see details in Supplementary Material ) . The model reveals h / L ec as the relevant parameter governing the behavior of the system , with L ec = (cid:0) B / γ (cid:1) 1 / 2 being the elastocapillary length [ 26 ] . The limit h / L ec (cid:28) 1 typically corresponds to the behavior of everyday life soaked ﬁbrous membranes ( e . g . wet paper or cloth ) , that just sag or buckle globally when compressed , irrespective of any surface tension eﬀects ( see Fig . 2C ) . Conversely , our experiment is characterized by values of h / L ec (cid:29) 1 for which the microstructure 4 diﬀers markedly from the previous one : interface energies cannot longer be neglected and the membrane now buckles under the capillary conﬁnement of the interfaces ( see Fig . 2C ) . Indeed , in this regime the ratio of the surface energy to the elastic energy scales as E γ / E el ∼ (cid:0) h / L ec (cid:1) 2 (cid:29) 1 , i . e . any deformation of the liquid surface introduces a strong energetical penalty , making it clear that in - ﬁlm wrinkling is a low energy state conﬁguration . This phenomenon is therefore reminiscent of buckling under rigid conﬁnement , for which wavelengths λ also scale linearly with the conﬁnement gap h for a given compression (cid:15) [ 27 ] , and this behavior is indeed nicely recovered by our model ( see inset of Fig . 2D ) . Somewhat surprisingly , the experimentally measured wavelengths λ prove to be insensitive to the compression . This behavior , not captured by the model , coincides with the emergence of a second , tightly packed , accordion - like phase ( see Fig . 2B ) . This second phase , in mechanical equilibrium with the wrinkled phase , has a high membrane storage capacity and actually corresponds to the membrane reserve . The coexistence between these phases allows to continuously transfer material from one phase to another , and warrants the eﬀectiveness of the wicked membrane as a stretchable material . The local mechanics just described reﬂects into global geometries and force response that we explore next in Figure 3 . There we subject wicked membranes to three diﬀerent elementary solicitations , corresponding to stretching of planar - , cylindrically - , and spherically - shaped membranes . Strikingly enough , the equilibrium shape adopted by the wicked membrane in each conﬁguration strongly resembles that of a liquid ﬁlm under the same conditions : planar ﬁlm , catenoid and bubble . Once again , this behavior is made transparent by realizing that in the limit h / L ec (cid:29) 1 the energy of the wicked membrane is dominated by its capillary contribution ; the equilibrium shapes therefore essentially correspond to minimal surfaces . Although they diﬀer strongly in longevity , ways of fabrication and internal structure , the wicked membranes and liquid ﬁlms therefore present interesting similarities . Upon closer inspection though , the shapes of the membranes appear to diﬀer from their liquid counterparts in some respects . For example , a planar membrane attached on only two straight edges adopts a stable shape ( Fig . 3A ) , whilst a liquid ﬁlm in the same conﬁguration would merely burst . To understand this stabilization mechanism for membranes , we have to perceive that some regions of the membrane may undergo stretching up to a point where the membrane reserves are fully exhausted . Pure stretching deformations represent a far higher energetical cost as compared to bending ones [ 28 ] and as a ﬁrst approximation , this sharp energetical penalty can be seen as an inextensibility constraint . And indeed , the shapes adopted by the planar conﬁguration can fully be captured with a surface area minimization under isoperimetric constraint ( see Supplementary Material ) . This mixed liquid - solid behavior allows to stabilize the catenoid shape beyond its classic point of bursting to unveil new equilibria ( Fig . 3B and Supplementary Material ) , and is also responsible for signiﬁcant deviations from Laplace’s law in the bubble conﬁguration ( Fig . 3C ) . Such a hybrid mechanical behavior is again reminiscent of the response of cellular membranes , and indeed , whether for lymphocytes , ﬁbroblasts [ 11 , 17 ] or wicked membranes ( Fig . 3 ) , the mechanical response switches from liquid - like to solid - like once all the membrane reserves have been ﬂattened out . The peculiar behavior of our wicked membrane stems from its compound nature : while surface tension allows it to undergo ample shape changes , its solid underlying matrix provides mechanical robustness . Geometrical reorganizations at the microstructural level ( reserve self - assembly or unfolding ) are key in the mechanics of the wicked membrane , and allow in particular to prevent any signiﬁcant stretching at the molecular level . This results in a marked resilience of this material to fatigue , as illustrated by the unvarying mechanical response of the membrane after more than 100 , 000 cycles of 10 - fold stretching and compression events ( Fig . 3A3 and Supplementary Materials ) . Moreover , it is worth emphasizing that the mechanical functionalization of a membrane into a highly stretch - able membrane only relies on a combination of elasticity , capillarity and geometry . As such , the process is widely universal ( see the list of tested polymers in the Supplementary Material ) , and opens appealing prospects from an engineering point of view . To illustrate but a few applications taking advantage of this mechanical function , we present some proofs of concepts in Figure 4 . First we demonstrate that aﬃxing submicronic thick golden paths to the membrane allows to eﬀortlessly obtain a ∼ 10 - fold stretchable conductive material , presenting an unusual reversibility . Interestingly , due to the formation of folds and membrane reserves , the eﬀective electrical resistance of the material displays a dependence to its stretching state ( Fig . 4A ) . Second , by controlling the for - mation of the liquid ﬁlm ( via the surrounding humidity level , or with the instant release of a liquid ) , on - demand contractility of the wicked membrane is instantaneously obtained , making it straightforward to apply forces , possibly while distorting the membrane ( Fig . 4B ) . Finally we show that a wicked membrane infused with a lubricant becomes a transparent slippery surface [ 29 ] that can provide an instant non - wetting functionalization to curved , rough , warped and deformable surfaces thanks to its exceptional shape adaptability ( Fig . 4C ) . The use of membrane reserves to fuel large shape changes is encountered in an extremely wide variety of animal cells , but this strategy has so far not been used to create stretchable synthetic materials . The ease of manufacturing , self - assembly of membrane reserves , universality of the process along with its robustness opens tremendous novel pathways for the design of synthetic stretchable devices ( possibly biocompatible ) , electronics , batteries or actuators . 5 Adaptable slippery surface treatment Slippery membrane C . B . A . Water dr plet Treated surface Water jet Untreatedsurface On demand contractibility Self - assembly for stretchable electronics 8 - fold extension S p r a y i n g PVDF - HFP fibrous membrane Glass substrate Silicone oil infusion Smooth water - repellent surface X Ultra - thin gold path Liquid infused fibrous membrane Ω Electric resistance [ Ω ] Distance X [ mm ] 0 10 20 30 0 10 5 15 R Figure 4 : Stretchable electronics , on - demand contractibilty and adaptable slippery surfaces . A . A thin gold strip ( 100 nm thick ) is apposed on the wicked membrane ( here : PVDF - HFP membrane wicked by v100 silicone oil ) . Capillary adhesion guarantees the gold strip to remain secured to the membrane . Electricity runs through the gold strip even when membrane reserves are spontaneously generated upon compression of the membrane . Electric resistance versus membrane extension X is presented in the graph and due to local short circuits , this resistance drops as the membrane is contracted . Indeed , as shown on the right photograph ( scale bar : 7 mm ) , a gold strip wrinkles and folds when the membrane is compressed . The sequence shows the illumination of a 1 . 5V LED through a basic electric circuit throughout an 8 - fold extension of the supporting wicked membrane . Scale bar : 3cm . B . Capillary contraction upon wetting . The dry membrane is here attached to two mobile supports ( rafts freely gliding on a water bath , ﬁrst photograph ) . When ethanol ( dyed blue for visualization ) is sprayed on the membrane , membrane reserves are immediately generated through the capillary action ; the two mobile rafts are pulled towards one and other . Scale bar : 3cm . C . A PVDF - HFP ﬁbrous membrane is apposed to a non - ﬂat surface and is wicked by silicone oil . Capillary adhesion secures the wicked membrane onto the surface and the spontaneous generation of surface reserves allow for a macroscopically smooth surface even on a warped surface ( folds are conﬁned in the liquid ﬁlm ) . The wicked membrane then acts as a slippery surface treatment with water repellent properties . The chrono - photography ( 10 ms intervals , scale bar : 7mm ) shows a water droplet bouncing oﬀ such a treated spherical glass surface . The wicked membrane can adapt to any object such as glasses ( scale bar : 1 . 5 cm , water droplets stick to the untreated surface but roll oﬀ the treated glass ) or cocktail umbrellas ( scale bar : 2cm , the water repelling property is conserved after consecutive opening / closing of this toy umbrella ) . References [ 1 ] Rogers , J . A . , Someya , T . & Huang , Y . Materials and mechanics for stretchable electronics . Science 327 , 1603 – 1607 ( 2010 ) . [ 2 ] Liu , W . , Song , M . - S . , Kong , B . & Cui , Y . Flexible and stretchable energy storage : Recent advances and future perspectives . Advanced Materials 29 , 1603436 ( 2016 ) . 6 [ 3 ] Hu , J . , Meng , H . , Li , G . & Ibekwe , S . I . A review of stimuli - responsive polymers for smart textile applica - tions . Smart Materials and Structures 21 , 053001 ( 2012 ) . [ 4 ] Minev , I . R . et al . Electronic dura mater for long - term multimodal neural interfaces . Science 347 , 159 – 163 ( 2015 ) . [ 5 ] Shepherd , R . F . et al . Multigait soft robot . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 108 , 20400 – 20403 ( 2011 ) . [ 6 ] Lazarus , A . & Reis , P . M . Soft actuation of structured cylinders through auxetic behavior . Advanced Engineering Materials 17 , 815 – 820 ( 2015 ) . [ 7 ] Ahn , B . Y . et al . Omnidirectional printing of ﬂexible , stretchable , and spanning silver microelectrodes . Science 323 , 1590 – 1593 ( 2009 ) . [ 8 ] Sun , J . - Y . et al . Highly stretchable and tough hydrogels . Nature 489 , 133 – 136 ( 2012 ) . [ 9 ] Rafsanjani , A . & Bertoldi , K . Buckling - induced kirigami . Physical Review Letters 118 , 084301 ( 2017 ) . [ 10 ] Lam , J . , Herant , M . , Dembo , M . & Heinrich , V . Baseline mechanical characterization of J774 macrophages . Biophysical Journal 96 , 248 – 254 ( 2009 ) . [ 11 ] Guillou , L . et al . T - lymphocyte passive deformation is controlled by unfolding of membrane surface reser - voirs . Molecular Biology of the Cell 27 , 3574 – 3582 ( 2016 ) . [ 12 ] Morris , C . & Homann , U . Cell surface area regulation and membrane tension . The Journal of Membrane Biology 179 , 79 – 102 ( 2001 ) . [ 13 ] Raucher , D . & Sheetz , M . P . Characteristics of a membrane reservoir buﬀering membrane tension . Bio - physical Journal 77 , 1992 – 2002 ( 1999 ) . [ 14 ] Forterre , Y . , Skotheim , J . M . , Dumais , J . & Mahadevan , L . How the venus ﬂytrap snaps . Nature 433 , 421 – 425 ( 2005 ) . [ 15 ] Elettro , H . , Neukirch , S . , Vollrath , F . & Antkowiak , A . In - drop capillary spooling of spider capture thread inspires hybrid ﬁbers with mixed solid – liquid mechanical properties . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 201602451 ( 2016 ) . [ 16 ] Dai , J . & Sheetz , M . Mechanical properties of neuronal growth cone membranes studied by tether formation with laser optical tweezers . Biophysical Journal 68 , 988 – 996 ( 1995 ) . [ 17 ] Groulx , N . , Boudreault , F . , Orlov , S . N . & Grygorczyk , R . Membrane reserves and hypotonic cell swelling . Journal of Membrane Biology 214 , 43 – 56 ( 2006 ) . [ 18 ] Nichol , J . A . & Hutter , O . F . Tensile strength and dilatational elasticity of giant sarcolemmal vesicles shed from rabbit muscle . The Journal of Physiology 493 , 187 – 198 ( 1996 ) . [ 19 ] Erickson , C . & Trinkaus , J . Microvilli and blebs as sources of reserve surface membrane during cell spreading . Experimental Cell Research 99 , 375 – 384 ( 1976 ) . [ 20 ] Majstoravich , S . et al . Lymphocyte microvilli are dynamic , actin - dependent structures that do not require wiskott - aldrich syndrome protein ( wasp ) for their morphology . Blood 104 , 1396 – 1403 ( 2004 ) . [ 21 ] Salbreux , G . , Charras , G . & Paluch , E . Actin cortex mechanics and cellular morphogenesis . Trends in Cell Biology 22 , 536 – 545 ( 2012 ) . [ 22 ] Cerda , E . & Mahadevan , L . Geometry and physics of wrinkling . Physical Review Letters 90 ( 2003 ) . [ 23 ] Tallinen , T . et al . On the growth and form of cortical convolutions . Nat Phys 12 , 588 – 593 ( 2016 ) . [ 24 ] Vandeparre , H . et al . Wrinkling hierarchy in constrained thin sheets from suspended graphene to curtains . Physical Review Letters 106 ( 2011 ) . [ 25 ] Davidovitch , B . , Schroll , R . D . , Vella , D . , Adda - Bedia , M . & Cerda , E . A . Prototypical model for tensional wrinkling in thin sheets . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108 , 18227 – 18232 ( 2011 ) . [ 26 ] Roman , B . & Bico , J . Elasto - capillarity : deforming an elastic structure with a liquid droplet . J . Phys . Condens . Matter 22 , 493101 ( 2010 ) . [ 27 ] Roman , B . & Pocheau , A . Buckling cascade of thin plates : Forms , constraints and similarity . Europhysics Letters ( EPL ) 46 , 602 – 608 ( 1999 ) . 7 [ 28 ] Audoly , B . & Pomeau , Y . Elasticity and geometry : from hair curls to the nonlinear response of shells ( Oxford University Press , 2010 ) . [ 29 ] Okada , I . & Shiratori , S . High - transparency , self - standable gel - slips fabricated by a facile nanoscale phase separation . ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 6 , 1502 – 1508 ( 2014 ) . 8 Materials The polymers used to fabricate the ﬁbrous membranes are Poly ( vinylidene ﬂuoride - co - hexaﬂuoropropylene ) ( PVDF - HFP , Solvay ) , Polyacrylonitrile ( PAN , M . W . 150 , 000 , Sigma Aldrich ) , Polycaprolactone ( PCL , M . W . 80 , 000 , Sigma Aldrich ) and Polyvinylpyrrolidone ( PVP , M . W . 1 , 300 , 000 , Acros Organic ) . The solvents are n , n - dimethylformamide ( DMF , Carlo Erba Reagents ) and ethanol ( absolute , Sigma Aldrich ) . The liquids used to infuse the ﬁbrous membranes are deionized water , glycerol ( Sigma Aldrich ) , ethanol ( absolute , Sigma Aldrich ) and PDMS v100 oil ( Sigma Aldrich ) . The concentration of polymer of each polymer / solvent solution is 10 % wt . A summary of the constituents is provided in Table 1 . Surface tensions of the liquids are characterized using a Kr¨uss K6 manual tensiometer ( hanging ring ) . Erioglaucine disodium salt ( Sigma Aldrich ) is used to dye the ﬁbrous membrane ( dissolution of the coloring agent in the polymer / solvent solution prior to electrospinning ) and the infusing liquids . 1mm wide gold strips are obtained by manually cutting 100 nm thick edible gold leaves ( purchased from Alice Delice ) using a surgical blade . Polymer Solvent Wicking liquid PAN DMF water - glycerol - ethanol - silicone oil PVDF - HFP DMF ethanol - silicone oil PCL DMF ethanol - silicone oil PVP ethanol silicone oil Table 1 : Polymers used to fabricate ﬁbrous membranes with their respective solvents and infusing liquids that are used to generate self - assembled surface reserves . Sample preparation The ﬁbrous membranes are obtained using an electrospinning technique [ 2 ] using the electrospinning apparatus ES - 1A ( Electrospinz Ltd . ) following these key steps : 1 . A polymer is dissolved in a solvent ( the polymers and corresponding solvents that are used in this work are presented in Table 1 ) . 2 . The solution is injected through an electrically charged blunt needle ( diameter of the needle 1mm at a rate of 0 . 02 ml / min , between 10 and 15kV ) . The outgoing droplet is instantaneously destabilized through the formation of a Taylor cone which is ejected as a liquid rod towards an electrically neutral ﬁxed plane target ( distance between the tip of the needle and the target : 17cm ) . As it travels towards the target , the solvent evaporates from the liquid rod which therefore quickly undergoes a swirling instability randomly deviating it . 3 . The resulting ﬁbrous mat ( made of the addition of solid ﬁbers continuously generated ) is recovered from the target , which was previously covered with anti - adhesive cooking paper ( purchased from Monoprix S . A . ) to avoid sticking . Once the membrane is attached to the mobile supports ( Thorlabs translational elements or laser cut PMMA assembly of 8 translational supports ) , it is wicked by a wetting liquid ( see Table 1 ) using a Terumo 10ml syringe or a spray . Upon compression , the surface reserves are instantaneously formed through the wrinkling and folding of the membrane under the capillary forces . Thickness characterization of the infusing liquid ﬁlm For the study the wrinkling wavelength λ as a function of the liquid thickness h , a colorimetry tool is used to characterize the liquid ﬁlm thickness . The membrane is wicked by a dyed liquid ( water dyed blue ) and a photograph of the infused membrane is taken next to a calibration wedge containing the same dyed liquid with a D810 Nikon camera . Comparing the photograph’s local gray value on the membrane and the thickness versus the gray value curve ( see ﬁgure 5 ) , we can locally estimate the thickness of the liquid ﬁlm . Image analysis is performed using the image processing package Fiji . Wavelength measurement The wrinkling wavelength λ is measured when the wicked membrane is slightly compressed . The membrane is illuminated from the side in order to enhance the wrinkles’ contrast and a photograph is taken with a D810 Nikon 9 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 0 . 40 0 . 45 0 . 50 0 . 55 0 . 60 Liquid thickness [ μm ] Gray level W i c k e d m e m b r a n e Side view known thickness 2 glass slides dyedliquid Front view Reference wedge 0 . 50 Figure 5 : Measurement the liquid ﬁlm thickness of the infused membrane with a colorimetry method . A scale wedge ( two slightly non parallel glass slides ) is used to calibrate the gray level as a function of colored liquid thickness on a photograph . In this case , we show an area on the membrane where the gray level is 0 . 50 , corresponding to a liquid ﬁlm thickness of around 100 µ m . Camera . For each liquid ﬁlm thickness ( diﬀerent amount of wicked liquid ) , a set of 4 wavelength measurements is performed . The coloring agent ( erioglaucine disodium salt ) did not show to change the liquid surface tension signiﬁcantly . A typical wavelength measurement image is presented in ﬁgure 6 . 10 λ 1 cm 3 mm Figure 6 : Visualization of the wrinkles on a slightly compressed membrane . Force measurement and fatigue characterization The force versus displacement curve of the plane wicked membrane is performed using a cantilever beam method on a silicone oil infused PVDF - HFP ﬁbrous membrane . The cantilever beam’s mechanical response was cali - brated using calibrated weights ( weighed with a Mettler - Toledo MS 0 . 01 mg precision scale ) . The membrane is supported by two ﬂoating rafts on a water bath to ensure frictionless translational supports . The presented extension / compression force measurement cycles are performed at around 1mm / s but show little sensitivity to displacement speed ( the same force vs . displacement curve was obtained for a twice as fast displacement speed ) . The fatigue test was performed on a silicone oil infused PVDF - HFP ﬁbrous membrane mounted on a crank rod system and the wicked membrane underwent 3 extension / compression cycles per second . The compres - sion / extension cycle corresponds to an end to end distance X varying from X min = 2 mm to X max = 3 . 7 cm . The membrane was re - infused by silicone - oil every 20 , 000 cycles to avoid drying . Small circular holes ( hundreds of microns in diameter ) appeared at around 60 , 000 cycles , slowly growing up to 150 , 000 cycles . At this last point , the holes had a signiﬁcant impact on the mechanical behavior of the wicked membrane ( see ﬁg 7 ) and 10 the membrane tore oﬀ shortly after . 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 x = X = L 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 3 . 0 f = F = 2 ° W - 0 cycle - 30 ' 000 cycles - 70 ' 000 cycles - 100 ' 000 cycles - 150 ' 000 cycles - - theory Figure 7 : Force vs . displacement of the membrane during compression / extension cycle after imposing numerous cycles to it . Catenoid neck radius measurement To study the equilibrium forms adopted by a wicked membrane in a cylindrical conﬁguration , a PAN membrane is attached on the edge of two laser cut PMMA discs ( diameter 2 R = 2 . 5 cm ) with 3M double face tape . The membrane is wicked with deionized water and the distance between the two discs is controlled using a Thorlabs 25 mm manual translation stage . Throughout the compression / extension cycle , the shape adopted by the wicked membrane is ﬁlmed with a Nikon D810 camera and image post - processing ( Python ) allows to gather the neck radii of the resulting catenoid for the visited disc distances . Figure 8 shows a sequence of such compression / extension cycle and makes it clear that the shape adjustments of the wicked membrane are mediated by the self - assembled folds that act as surface reserves . Figure 8 : Side view of the catenoid - like shape adopted by a wicked membrane attached to the edge of two discs ( diameter of the disc : 2 R = 2 . 5 cm ) throughout a compression / extension cycle . Note that the this catenoid jumps from a thin to wide state between image 5 and 7 . This sudden change in shape is due to the iso - perimetric constraint , responsible for a strong path dependence of the equilibrium state ( see Supplementary Material ) . Wicked membrane bubble pressure measurement To measure the pressure inside an inﬂated spherical wicked membrane ( PAN ﬁbrous membrane wicked with deionized water ) , visualization of an adjacent ethanol ﬁlled tube is used . The bubble is inﬂated with air using a PHD Ultra Syringe Pumps ( Harvard apparatus ) at a rate of 6 ml / min . The air - entrance tube is connected to a U - shaped tube partially ﬁlled with dyed ethanol with a T - junction . One end of the U - shaped tube is therefore pneumatically linked to the bubble , while the other end is open ( at atmospheric pressure ) . The iﬀerence in height ∆ h of the two ethanol interfaces inside the U - shaped tube indicates the pressure P inside the bubble , knowing its density ρ = 789 kg / m 3 and earth acceleration g = 9 . 81 m / s 2 ( P = ρg ∆ h ) . The pressure P is normalized by P max = 4 γ / R tube , which is the theoritical maximum pressure for a spherical bubble of surface 11 Figure 9 : Side view of the bubble - like wicked membrane inﬂated with air . The tubes ﬁlled with blue dyed ethanol allow to characterize pressure inside the wicked membrane bubble throughout its inﬂating . The external diameter of the bubble supporting tube is 9 mm . tension γ , inﬂated out of cylindrical tube of radius R tube ( R tube = 4 . 5 mm in our experiment ) . It is to be mentioned that in contact with the PAN membrane , the surface tension of deionized water drops from 72 to 53 mN / m . 12 Wavelength λ Here , we study the buckling of an elastic beam conﬁned inside a liquid ﬁlm . Elastic energy minimization would favor high wavelength but for ﬂexible enough beams , capillary interface energy of the liquid ﬁlm can become non - negligible ; the system will ﬁnd a trade - oﬀ wavelength , minimizing the sum of the elastic and capillary energies . The solid beam is described by y ( x ) whereas the liquid / air + solid / air interface is given by y γ ( x ) . Indeed , since L l L - Δ L Lγ lγ λ x y B γ Figure 10 : Wrinkling of a beam of length L under compression ( ∆ L ) in a liquid ﬁlm of volume V = hL . The liquid / air and solid / air interfaces have the same speciﬁc interface energy γ and the liquid / solid interface is considered to have a speciﬁc energy of 0 . The beam has a bending resistance B and the texture wavelength is λ . the liquid / air and solid / air interface speciﬁc energies are considered to be the same , y γ ( x ) corresponds to the liquid / air interface where the beam is covered by liquid , but is given by the beam surface y ( x ) where no liquid covers the beam . Energies Because the wavelength λ is much smaller than the total beam length L , boundary conditions at the ends of the beam are not considered . The elastic and interface energies respectively are given by E e and E γ : E e = 1 2 B (cid:90) L − ∆ L 0 κ 2 ( x ) dx ( 1 ) E γ = 2 γ (cid:90) L − ∆ L 0 (cid:113) 1 + y γ (cid:48) 2 ( x ) dx ( 2 ) where κ ( x ) represents the beam curvature and y γ ( x ) represents the bottom liquid / air + solid / air interface . The factor 2 in eq . ( 2 ) comes from top / down pseudo - symmetry ( the bottom interface has the same length as the top interface ) . Volume conservation Incompressibility of the liquid requires for the volume V = hL to be conserved : 2 (cid:90) L − ∆ L 0 (cid:2) y γ ( x ) − y ( x ) (cid:3) dx = V ( 3 ) Inextensibility constraint Inextensibility of the beam provides a constraint on its length : (cid:90) L − ∆ L 0 (cid:113) 1 + y (cid:48) 2 ( x ) dx = L ( 4 ) Refocusing the problem on one wavelength λ l corresponds to the beam length in one wavelength , therefore , it satisﬁes l L = λ L ( 1 − (cid:15) ) ( 5 ) 13 with (cid:15) = ∆ LL , and equations 1 to 4 can be rewritten considering only the energies and shapes on one wavelength : E e = 1 2 L 1 − (cid:15) λ B (cid:90) λ 0 κ 2 ( x ) dx ( 6 ) E γ = 2 L 1 − (cid:15) λ γ (cid:90) λ 0 (cid:113) 1 + y (cid:48) 2 γ ( x ) dx ( 7 ) h = 21 − (cid:15) λ (cid:90) λ 0 (cid:2) y γ ( x ) − y ( x ) (cid:3) dx ( 8 ) λ 1 − (cid:15) = (cid:90) λ 0 (cid:112) 1 + y (cid:48) 2 ( x ) dx ( 9 ) Normalizing Using L ec = (cid:112) B / γ as unit length and B / L ec as unit energy , we introduce the following dimensionless quantities : ˜ x = x L ec ; ˜ y = y L ec ; ˜ y γ = y γ L ec ; ( 10a ) ˜ L = L L ec ; ˜ λ = λ L ec ; ˜ h = h L ec ; ˜ κ = κL ec ; ( 10b ) ˜ E e = E e L ec B ; ˜ E γ = E γ L ec B ; ( 10c ) Equations ( 6 ) to ( 14 ) can be rewritten as follows : ˜ E e = 1 2 ˜ L 1 − (cid:15) ˜ λ (cid:90) ˜ λ / 2 − ˜ λ / 2 ˜ κ 2 ( ˜ x ) d ˜ x ( 11 ) ˜ E γ = 2 ˜ L 1 − (cid:15) ˜ λ (cid:90) ˜ λ / 2 − ˜ λ / 2 (cid:113) 1 + ˜ y γ (cid:48) 2 ( ˜ x ) d ˜ x ( 12 ) ˜ h = 21 − (cid:15) ˜ λ (cid:90) ˜ λ / 2 − ˜ λ / 2 (cid:2) ˜ y γ ( ˜ x ) − ˜ y ( ˜ x ) (cid:3) d ˜ x ( 13 ) ˜ λ 1 − (cid:15) = (cid:90) ˜ λ / 2 − ˜ λ / 2 (cid:112) 1 + ˜ y (cid:48) 2 ( ˜ x ) d ˜ x ( 14 ) Interface y γ ( x ) The liquid interface and the elastic beam merge at the x - coordinate x γ ( see ﬁgure 11 ) . Because y γ ( x ) = y ( x ) where no liquid covers the beam , x γ has to satisfy the adapted formulation of equation ( 13 ) ( volume conservation ) : 21 − (cid:15) λ (cid:90) x γ − x γ (cid:2) y ( x ) − y γ ( x ) (cid:3) dx = h ( 15 ) We abandoned the ” ∼ ” notation for clarity . Since pressure has to be constant inside the liquid ﬁlm , y γ ( x ) is deﬁned as a circular arc between − x γ and x γ ( of radius R ) . We assume continuity between the liquid interface and the beam at the triple point ( no penetration of the beam across the liquid interface ) : y γ ( x γ ) = y ( x γ ) ( 16 ) and a tangent connection between the liquid surface and the beam ( the liquid wets the beam perfectly ) : y (cid:48) γ ( x γ ) = y (cid:48) ( x γ ) ( 17 ) These two conditions provide an explicit formulation for y γ ( x ) : y γ ( x ) = (cid:112) R 2 − x 2 − y c ( 18 ) 14 yγ ( x ) - xγ R C xγ y x λ / 2 - λ / 2 Figure 11 : Local problem on one wavelength λ with new unknowns x γ and y γ ( x ) where y c , the y - coordinate of the center of the circle describing the liquid interface , is given by : y c = y ( x γ ) + x γ y (cid:48) ( x γ ) ( 19 ) and the radius of said circle is expressed as followed : R = x γ (cid:115) 1 + 1 y (cid:48) 2 ( x γ ) ( 20 ) A schematic representation of the liquid surface y γ ( x ) is presented in ﬁgure 11 . Summary The goal is to ﬁnd the wavelength λ which minimizes the total energy ( elastic + capillary ) given by : E = (cid:90) λ / 2 λ / 2 1 2 κ 2 ( x ) + 2 (cid:113) 1 + y (cid:48) 2 γ ( x ) dx ( 21 ) where the constant factor L ( 1 − (cid:15) ) of eqs . ( 11 ) and ( 12 ) is discarded because it does not aﬀect the minimization . The inextensibility constraint on the beam reads : (cid:90) λ / 2 − λ / 2 (cid:112) 1 + y (cid:48) 2 ( x ) dx = λ 1 − (cid:15) ( 22 ) and the volume conservation is given by : 21 − (cid:15) λ (cid:90) x γ − x γ (cid:2) y ( x ) − y γ ( x ) (cid:3) dx = h ( 23 ) The liquid surface y γ is derived in section Interface y γ . The unknowns of the problem are y ( x ) , λ and x γ . Energy minimization for a sinusoidal buckling pattern In order to simplify the problem , we restrict ourselves to sinusoidal buckling patterns of wavelength λ for the elastic beam , i . e . y ( x ) = A cos (cid:0) 2 πλ x (cid:1) . These are the energy minimization steps that were followed : 1 . Choose a guess wavelength λ ( we deﬁne k = 2 πλ ) . The guess beam buckling pattern is given by y ( x ) = A cos ( kx ) . 15 2 . The amplitude A of the sinusoid is constrained by the inextensibility constraint . It can be found by numerically solving eq . ( 22 ) ( (cid:15) is known ) : (cid:90) λ / 2 − λ / 2 (cid:113) 1 + A 2 k 2 sin 2 ( kx ) dx = λ 1 − (cid:15) ( 24 ) 3 . Next , we ﬁnd x γ that satisﬁes the volume conversation constraint given by eq . ( 23 ) ( h is known ) . The integration is performed using a guess value for x γ and using eq . ( 18 ) : y γ ( x ) = (cid:112) R 2 − x 2 − y c ( 25 ) where y c and R are given by eqs . ( 19 ) and ( 20 ) respectively : y c = A cos (cid:0) kx γ (cid:1) − x γ Ak sin ( kx γ ) ( 26 ) and the radius of said circle is expressed as followed : R = x γ (cid:115) 1 + 1 A 2 k 2 sin 2 ( kx γ ) ( 27 ) It is to be mentioned that y γ ( x ) is described by the expression in eq . ( 25 ) for | x | ≤ x γ but as the beam surface y ( x ) where x γ < | x | < λ / 2 . 4 . We now have to compute the total energy E of the system using equation ( 21 ) where y γ ( x ) is described as explained in the previous step . The curvature κ is deﬁned as y (cid:48)(cid:48) ( x ) ( 1 + y (cid:48) 2 ( x ) ) 3 / 2 . Note that this energy E only depends on the ﬁrst guess value λ . 5 . Iterative steps are performed to ﬁnd the wavelength λ that minimizes the total energy of the system . Considering a non - zero thickness of a porous beam Experimentally , the wrinkling wicked membrane has a non - zero thickness . The thickness of the beam can be taken into account in our model by considering a vertical shift of half a thickness of the liquid interface . Since the membrane is very porous and entirely wicked by the liquid , we consider the that the entire thickness of the beam t adds up to the total liquid volume V . Step 3 of the previous section therefore has to be revisited . y c is shifted as follows : y c = A cos (cid:0) kx γ (cid:1) − x γ Ak sin ( kx γ ) − t 2 ( 28 ) where t is the thickness of the porous beam . The volume constraint equation given in eq . ( 29 ) rewrites as : 21 − (cid:15) λ (cid:90) x γ − x γ (cid:20) y ( x ) − t 2 − y γ ( x ) (cid:21) dx + t = h ( 29 ) It is to be noted that this formulation is only valid for small deformations ( i . e . small compressions (cid:15) ) . In this study , we consider the membrane to grow as the liquid ﬁlm gets thicker , i . e . the membrane thickness t is proportional to the liquid ﬁlm thickness h wicking it ( we use t = 0 . 8 h ) . However , we do not consider the bending stiﬀness per unit depth B to change during this growth . Graphical results and discussion Figure 12 presents the dimensionless wavelength λ versus the dimensionless liquid thickness h for PAN ﬁbrous membranes of diﬀerent thicknesses wicked by diﬀerent liquids . Both λ and h are normlized by the elastocapillary length L ec = (cid:112) B / γ . The surface tension γ was measured with the Kr¨uss K6 manual tensiometer ( deionized water showed a drop in surface tension when previously put in contact with a PAN membrane , from 72 mN / m to 53 mN / m ) . To test the dependence of surface tension on the wavelength , the experience was performed with deionized water and a water / soap solution ( of measured surface tension γ = 30 mN / m ) . The membrane bending rigidity per unit depth B being low , it could not be measured experimentally . Therefore , it was roughly estimated as B = α t 0 a Ea 3 where t 0 is the membrane dry thickness , a the typical radius of the ﬁber composing the membrane ( a = 500 µ m ) and E is the PAN Young’s modulus ( E (cid:39) 30 GPa ) . Finally , α is a dimensionless parameter to account for the membrane porosity ( here adjusted to the experiments using α = 2 · 10 − 4 ) . 16 0 5 10 15 20 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 Liquid thickness h / Lec t = 0 . 8h t = 0 ε = 0 . 0 1 ε = 0 . 01 ε = 0 . 0 2 ε = 0 . 02 ε = 0 . 0 5 ε = 0 . 05 W a v e l e n g t h λ / L e c PAN t 0 ≈2μm / water PAN t 0 ≈2μm / water + surfactant PAN t 0 ≈4μm / water PAN t 0 ≈8μm / water Figure 12 : Dimensionless wavelength λ versus liquid thickness h . The points refer to experimental data for diﬀerent PAN membrane dry ticknesses and diﬀerent wicking liquids . The gray solid lines are results of the here presented model for (cid:15) = 1 % , 2 % and 5 % . It is considered that the membrane grows as it is infused with liquid . To capture this growth , we choose the membrane thickness t to be proportional to the liquid thickness h ( t = 0 . 8 h ) . The gray dotted lines represent the same results for a zero - thickness beam . Plane wicked membrane Here we consider a wicked ﬁbrous membrane of width W attached to two parallel rigid straight supports at an initial rest distance L from one and other . Upon compression ( varying the distance X between the two supports ) the membrane remains under tension due to the liquid surface tension and stores the excess membrane inside wrinkles and folds which can afterwards be recruited when extended . The force necessary to keep the two poles at a distance X is here analyzed depending on W , L and the surface tension γ . Unlike a soapy liquid ﬁlm on a rigid frame , our membrane is only attached on two edges and has two free edges . It is to be mentioned that a soapy liquid ﬁlm would break oﬀ immediately if it was only “attached” on two of its edges . In order to minimize its interface energy with air , the wicked membrane adapts its shape and this minimization with isoperimetric constraint spontaneously leads to circular arcs of arc length L on its free edges [ 1 ] . Indeed , the the membrane can wrinkle and fold but cannot be stretched . Early compression : 2 π L < X < L At early compression , assuming the free edge describes a circular arc of length L and that the two supports are at a distance X , we include two new variables R and β , respectively the radius and angle span of the circular arc which are presented in ﬁgure 13 . R and β are related to L and X through two equations : L = 2 Rβ ( 30 ) X = 2 R sin β ( 31 ) The surface area of the liquid infused membrane then writes : S = WX − 2 R 2 β + 2 RX cos β ( 32 ) And the normalized force ( f = F / 2 γW ) that an operator has to apply on the rigid edges to ensure a distance X is given by the derivative of the energy with respect to X : f = 1 2 γW ∂ ( 2 γS ) ∂X ( 33 ) 17 R 2β X W L L A Figure 13 : Plane wicked membrane during early compression . The surface minimization with iso - perimetic constraint on the free edges of the wicked membrane is responsible for the circular shape adopted by these free edges . which can be solved numerically . Advanced compression : 0 < X < 2 π L At a more advanced compression , when β reaches π / 2 ( i . e . when X becomes smaller than 2 L / π ) , the geometry adopted by the liquid infused membrane changes and a sketch of it is presented in ﬁgure 14 . The radius R of the circular arc remains of interest and a new variable ∆ is considered , it represents the length on which the membrane is sticked to the support . R and ∆ are given by the 2 relations : X W Δ R L A L Figure 14 : Plane liquid infused membrane at a strong compression . L = 2∆ + πR ( 34 ) X = 2 R ( 35 ) and again , the surface is calculated : S = WX − 2 X ∆ − πR 2 ( 36 ) Finally , injecting the three previous relations in the force equation , eq . ( 33 ) , leads to an explicit expression for the force : f = 1 − L W (cid:18) 1 − πx 2 (cid:19) ( 37 ) where x = X / L . The theoretical dimensionless force vs . displacement curves are given in ﬁgure 15 for 4 diﬀerent rest distance to width ratios L / W . 18 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 3 . 0 F o r c e f = F / 2 γ W Displacement x = X / L Figure 15 : Theoretical dimensionless force versus displacement curve of the wicked membrane for L / W = 1 , 0 . 5 , 0 . 25 , 0 . 01 for the blue , green , orange and red curve respectively . Catenoid formed by the wicked membrane Y R ( Y ) R H L H Figure 16 : Sketch of the catenoid - like shape generated by a wicked membrane with self - assembled surface reserves attached to two parallel rings . Here , we consider a cylindrical geometry , reminiscent of the archetypical liquid soap catenoid : the wicked membrane is attached to two rigid parallel rings of radius R H at an initial distance L . Since the membrane is infused with a liquid , the output shape will minimize the total interfacial energy of the system , i . e . 2 γS where γ is the liquid - vapor speciﬁc energy of the liquid , and S the surface area of the catenoid . As surface tension does not vary , the system seeks to minimize its surface area S given by : S = (cid:90) H − H 2 πR (cid:112) 1 + R (cid:48) 2 d Y ( 38 ) Moreover , since the ﬁbers of the membrane are inextensible ( they can wrinkle inside the liquid ﬁlm , but cannot be stretched ) an inextensibility constraint is to be applied for the outer length of a given ﬁber from Y = − H to Y = H , this length is given by [ 1 ] : (cid:90) H − H (cid:112) 1 + R (cid:48) 2 d Y ≤ L ( 39 ) 19 where L is the rest length between the two rings ( corresponding to the distance between the two rings when the membrane is perfectly cylindrical ) . The energy of the system can then be re - written as : V = (cid:90) H − H 2 π ( R − µ ) (cid:112) 1 + R (cid:48) 2 d Y = 2 π (cid:90) H − H L ( R , R (cid:48) ) d Y ( 40 ) Where 2 πµ ≥ 0 is the Lagrange multiplier corresponding to the constraint given in eq . ( 39 ) . The inextensibibilty constraint is not active when µ < 0 . Since L ( R , R (cid:48) ) does not depend explicitly on Y , minimizing V can be done by solving : H = ∂ L ∂R (cid:48) R (cid:48) − L = c ( 41 ) Where c is a constant to be determined . Deriving the equation leads to : ( R − µ ) (cid:112) 1 + R (cid:48) 2 − R (cid:48) ( R − µ ) R (cid:48) 2 √ 1 + R (cid:48) 2 = c ( 42 ) Which , after solving , leads to : R ( Y ) = c cosh (cid:18) Y c (cid:19) − µ ( 43 ) With two implicit equations for c and µ : c sinh (cid:18) H c (cid:19) = L ( 44 ) c cosh (cid:18) H c (cid:19) − µ = R H ( 45 ) which have no explicit solutions but can be solved numerically . When µ < 0 the inextensibility constraint becomes inactive and as for the usual liquid catenoid , only the surface area given in eq . ( 38 ) has to be minimized . The catenoids can be compared by analyzing their neck radii R ( Y = 0 ) as a function of the distance between the two rings for given rest lengths L between the rings ( distance between the rings for which the membrane is perfectly cylindrical ) . It is to be mentioned that a wicked membrane can display two stable catenoid shapes for given parameters . For example , the curve corresponding to l = 1 . 4 shows that for a given height h slightly below 1 . 0 , the neck radius can be that of a pure soapy liquid catenoid ( blue curve ) , or that of a catenoid with isoperimetric constraint ( l = 1 . 4 ) corresponding to the green curve . This bistability results in a strong path - dependence for the adopted shape of the catenoid . Indeed , when this catenoid comes from h > 1 , it follows the green curve when bringing the two rings closer ( i . e . µ > 0 , the isoperimetric constraint is active ) . When it crosses the unstable liquid catenoid solution ( dotted blue line ) , µ changes sign and becomes negative , thus making the isoperimetric constraint inactive . The catenoid then jumps to the stable liquid catenoid solution ( solid blue curve ) . On its way back ( increasing h ) it continues traveling only on the blue curve until it crosses the h = 1 axis , in which case it will jump back to the isoperimetric constrained solution ( green curve ) . 20 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 N e c k r a d i u s r = 1 . 51 R / R H Height h = 1 . 51H / R H l = 1 . 51L / R H Figure 17 : Dimensionless neck radius r versus dimensionless distance between the two rings h for diﬀerent length constraints l . The length R h / 1 . 5090 is commonly used to normalize lengths in catenoid - related problems . It is to be noted that the inextensibibilty constraint allows for catenoid geometries to exist in a region where purely liquid catenoids do not exist ( i . e . where h > 1 ) . Solid green lines represent solutions of eq . ( 43 ) ( the neck radius refers to R ( Y = 0 ) ) for diﬀerent isoperimetric constraint ( distance between the two rings when the membrane is straight L ) where µ ≥ 0 , whereas the dotted green lines represent the solution of the same equations but with µ < 0 i . e . where the constraint is inactive . The solid and dotted blue line respectively represent the stable and unstable purely liquid catenoid . References [ 1 ] P . Berest . Calcul des variations : application a la mecanique et a la physique . ellipses , 1998 . [ 2 ] Andreas Greiner and Joachim H . Wendorﬀ . Electrospinning : A fascinating method for the preparation of ultrathin ﬁbers . Angewandte Chemie International Edition , 46 ( 30 ) : 5670 – 5703 , Jul 2007 . 21