Northumbria Research Link Citation : Haigh , Paul , Bausi , Francesco , Le Minh , Hoa , Papakonstantinou , Ioannis , Popoola , Wasiu Oyewole , Burton , Andrew and Cacialli , Franco ( 2015 ) Wavelength - Multiplexed Polymer LEDs : Towards 55 Mb / s Organic Visible Light Communications . IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications , 33 ( 9 ) . pp . 1819 - 1828 . ISSN 0733 - 8716 Published by : IEEE URL : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1109 / JSAC . 2015 . 2432491 < http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1109 / JSAC . 2015 . 2432491 > This version was downloaded from Northumbria Research Link : http : / / nrl . northumbria . ac . uk / id / eprint / 23708 / Northumbria University has developed Northumbria Research Link ( NRL ) to enable users to access the University’s research output . Copyright © and moral rights for items on NRL are retained by the individual author ( s ) and / or other copyright owners . Single copies of full items can be reproduced , displayed or performed , and given to third parties in any format or medium for personal research or study , educational , or not - for - profit purposes without prior permission or charge , provided the authors , title and full bibliographic details are given , as well as a hyperlink and / or URL to the original metadata page . The content must not be changed in any way . Full items must not be sold commercially in any format or medium without formal permission of the copyright holder . The full policy is available online : http : / / nrl . northumbria . ac . uk / policies . html This document may differ from the final , published version of the research and has been made available online in accordance with publisher policies . To read and / or cite from the published version of the research , please visit the publisher’s website ( a subscription may be required . ) IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS , VOL . 33 , NO . 9 , SEPTEMBER 2015 1819 Wavelength - Multiplexed Polymer LEDs : Towards 55 Mb / s Organic Visible Light Communications Paul Anthony Haigh , Francesco Bausi , Hoa Le Minh , Ioannis Papakonstantinou , Wasiu O . Popoola , Andrew Burton , and Franco Cacialli Abstract —We present recent progress on visible light commu - nication systems using polymer light - emitting diodes as the trans - mitters and a commercial silicon photodetector as the receiver . In this paper , we use transmitters at red , green , and blue wavelengths to investigate the maximum on - off keying link performance of each device type as the ﬁrst steps toward a wavelength - division multiplexed link . We show that a total transmission speed of 13 Mb / s is achievable when considering the raw bandwidth of each of the RGB PLEDs . Such a rate represents a 30 % gain over previously demonstrated systems . Further capacity improvement can be achieved using high performance artiﬁcial neural network equalizer offering a realistic prospect for transmission speeds up to 54 . 9 Mb / s . Index Terms —Equalizers , organic light - emitting diodes , polymer light - emitting diodes , visible light communications . I . I NTRODUCTION P OLYMER light - emitting diodes ( PLEDs ) offer remarkable potential for low - cost , large active area lighting panels and displays . Such is the promise of PLEDs and polymer electronics that the sector has a projected value of $ 330 billion as early as 2027 ; more than the silicon electronics sector is worth today [ 1 ] . One of the major reasons for this is the ability to dissolve polymers into solutions and process arbitrarily - shaped panels with methods such as spray - coating or inkjet printing at room temperature . Concurrently , visible light communication ( VLC ) has been proposed as a promising candidate as the solution for the Manuscript received May 28 , 2014 ; revised November 3 , 2014 ; accepted March 10 , 2015 . Date of publication May 12 , 2015 ; date of current version August 17 , 2015 . This work was supported by the EU COST Action IC1101 , EU FP7 MC ITN GENIUS Grant number PITNCT2010 - 264694 and by the EPSRC ( GR / S58416 / 01 ) . P . A . Haigh is with the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering , University College London , London WC1E 6BT , U . K . , and also with the Faculty of Engineering , University of Bristol , Bristol BS8 1TR , U . K . ( e - mail : paul . anthony . haigh @ ieee . org ) . F . Bausi and F . Cacialli are with the Department of Physics and As - tronomy , University College London , London WC1E 6BT , U . K . ( e - mail : f . bausi @ ucl . ac . uk ; f . cacialli @ ucl . ac . uk ) . H . Le Minh and A . Burton are with the Faculty of Engineering and Environ - ment , Northumbria University , Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 8ST , U . K . ( e - mail : hoa . le - minh @ northumbria . ac . uk ; andrew . burton @ northumbria . ac . uk ) . I . Papakonstantinou is with the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering , University College London , London WC1E 6BT , U . K . ( e - mail : i . papakonstantinou @ ucl . ac . uk ) . W . O . Popoola is with the Institute for Digital Communications , School of Engineering , University of Edinburgh , Edinburgh EH9 3JL , U . K . ( e - mail : w . popoola @ ed . ac . uk ) . Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available online at http : / / ieeexplore . ieee . org . Digital Object Identiﬁer 10 . 1109 / JSAC . 2015 . 2432491 so - called last - meter bottleneck caused by an exponentially increasing user demand for data [ 2 ] . This is because of a variety of key advantages , and especially because of a huge , unregulated ∼ 400 THz bandwidth free of licensing costs which is currently under - utilized . Furthermore , since light is conﬁned by opaque objects such as walls , VLC offers a higher level of security in comparison to radio frequency technologies . It is envisaged that VLC applications can be grouped into several broad categories ; ( i ) future smart homes / ofﬁces provid - ing ubiquitous broadcasting networks and room illumination ; ( ii ) hospitals and aircraft applications , where currently radio fre - quency technologies cannot operate due to critical interference with important frequencies ; ( iii ) transport networks providing intelligent automated braking and accurate positioning systems , and , ﬁnally ( iv ) mobile device - to - device communications with VLC transceivers embedded into the screens and chassis . For cases ( i ) , ( ii ) , and ( iii ) semiconductor light - emitting diodes ( LEDs ) and photodetectors have been commonly adopted as the optoelectronic devices due to high optical power and wide bandwidths . However , there is an increasingly con - vincing argument to seek alternative devices for case ( iv ) . Mo - bile device and display manufacturers are increasingly moving toward matrices of small - molecule organic LEDs ( SMOLEDs ) to replace liquid crystal displays ( LCDs ) . While LCDs are cheap , their temporal response is in the region of milliseconds ; hence their bandwidths are not suitable for communications purposes . They are not natural displays either , and have a requirement for inorganic LED backlights and color ﬁlters . SMOLEDs on the other hand are natural sources of light that can easily be patterned into displays , without using color ﬁlters and typically have bandwidths in the hundreds of kHz region , meaning that high throughputs are possible with the help of digital equalizers [ 3 ] – [ 5 ] . Despite these advantages , SMOLEDs are most effectively processed via evaporation in high - vacuum chambers , that is less technologically appealing than solution - processing . A more suitable and attractive option is represented by PLEDs , which can instead be processed readily via a number of solution - based methods ; thus potentially enabling ultra - low - cost thin ﬁlm screens of individually addressable pixel matrices . Further - more , PLEDs with active areas of a few μ m 2 and bandwidths in excess of 60 MHz have been demonstrated [ 6 ] , making them a serious competitor for a variety of intelligent display applica - tions . Display technologies must be able to render a large range of visible wavelengths and as such require individual red , green and blue ( RGB ) pixels . Fortunately , there are an abundance This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3 . 0 License . For more information , see http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 3 . 0 / 1820 IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS , VOL . 33 , NO . 9 , SEPTEMBER 2015 of polymers that emit ( and absorb ) in the visible range , with band gap energies between 1 – 4 eV [ 7 ] , meaning this is also a straightforward task . In this paper , we investigate the ﬁrst key steps toward this goal and examine the individual communications performance of individual RGB pixels . The RGB pixels are produced us - ing a constant device structure ( to be detailed in Section II ) and varying the emissive layer polymer between MDMO - PPV ( red ) , F8BT ( green ) and F8 : TFB : PFB ( blue ) ( see below for full chemical deﬁnitions ) . The simultaneous transmission of different wavelengths is known as wavelength - division mul - tiplexing ( WDM ) and is becoming increasingly popular in inorganic VLC systems as a means for increasing capacity through optically isolated parallel links . For instance , a trans - mission speed of 3 . 4 Gb / s was achieved in [ 8 ] using RGB wavelengths and the orthogonal frequency division multiplex - ing ( OFDM ) modulation format . In this paper , we adopt on - off keying ( OOK ) as the modulation format due to its simplicity of implementation in comparison to OFDM . It is commonly pre - sumed that OFDM will offer an increase in spectral efﬁciency over OOK . While this is true for un - equalized OOK , literature has shown that using a digital equalizers ( such as decision - feedback ) with OOK and further orders of pulse amplitude modulation requires less signal - to - noise ratio ( SNR ) to achieve the same transmission speed [ 9 ] , [ 10 ] . As a result a similar approach is adopted in this work . Artiﬁcial neural networks ( ANNs ) , in particular the multi - layer perceptron ( MLP ) offers a further SNR gain over the decision - feedback equalizer [ 11 ] and hence are adopted instead . In this paper , we explore the potential toward WDM - PLED - VLC and experimentally found that the red and blue components can support up to 27 . 9 Mb / s and 18 . 6 Mb / s , respectively , and the green component can offer 8 . 4 Mb / s when using the MLP - ANN equalizer , representing a total potential data rate of 54 . 9 Mb / s . This is a substantial improvement over the current state - of - the - art literature , which reports 11 . 2 Mb / s using an F8 : TFB : PFB device [ 3 ] . While this is the absolute maximum potential throughput for this type of system , it would be expected that a drop in throughput would be observed when simultaneous transmission of the wavelengths occurs . Without the equalizer we demonstrate that transmission speeds of 7 Mb / s , 4 Mb / s , and 2 Mb / s can be sustained for blue , red and green devices , respectively , and an overall transmission speed of 13 Mb / s , which represents a 10 Mb / s gain over the state of the art [ 3 ] – [ 5 ] . This paper is organized as follows . In Section II the pro - duction techniques used to process the PLEDs are outlined . In Section III the electrical characterization of the PLEDs is per - formed . Next , in Section IV the communications test setup and theoretical description of the equalizer is discussed . Finally , in Sections V and VI the results are discussed and the conclusions are drawn with a discussion of future outlook , respectively . II . P OLYMER L IGHT - E MITTING D IODE P ROCESSING One of the main limitations of organic photonic devices is the polymer degradation mechanisms associated with contact with oxygen / water from air , which drastically limits performance and lifetime [ 12 ] . As a result , the PLEDs produced for this work are prepared in a nitrogen atmosphere and are encapsulated between two glass slides with an epoxy resin for utilization in air without any apparent degradation with time . For preparation of all of the devices , a glass substrate is used with a pre - patterned ∼ 110 nm thick indium tin oxide ( ITO ) ﬁlm as a transparent anode ( Ossila Ltd ) which allows six independent PLEDs . The ITO was cleaned with sonication in acetone and isopropanol and treated with oxygen plasma [ 13 ] in order to increase the work function and reduce the surface roughness [ 13 ] , [ 14 ] . Afterwards , we deposited a hole - injection layer ( 40 nm ) of PEDOT : PSS ( Heraeus Clevios P VP AI 4083 ) via spin - coating ( 5000 rpm for 30 s in air ) . It con - sists of a water solution of poly ( 3 , 4 - ethylenedioxythiophene ) ( PEDOT ) doped with poly ( styrenesulfonic acid ) ( PSS ) . The PEDOT : PSS blend has a relatively high conductivity ( in the range of 0 . 2 − 2 × 10 − 2 S / cm ) and a work function of about 5 . 2 eV . It improves the hole - injection at the interface with the active layer . The samples are then annealed at 150 ◦ C for 10 minutes in nitrogen atmosphere to remove water residues and improve the hole - injection performance . The general schematic of the PLEDs is shown in Fig . 1 ; while the emissive layer is different for device type as described individually as follows . The molecular structure of each polymer used is detailed inset in Fig . 1 . A . The red emissive layer consists of poly [ 2 - methoxy - 5 - ( 3 (cid:4) , 7 (cid:4) - dimethyloctyloxy ) - 1 , 4 - phenylenevinylene ] ( MDMO - PPV ) with an M n of ∼ 23 , 000 g / mol ( Sigma - Aldrich ) deposited via spin coating from a 1 % w / w ( 8 . 76 g / mL ) solution in toluene . B . The green photoactive polymer is poly [ ( 9 , 9 - di - n - octylﬂuorenyl - 2 , 7 - diyl ) - alt - ( benzo [ 2 , 1 , 3 ] thiadiazol - 4 , 8 - diyl ) ] ( F8BT ) with an M n of 73 , 000 g / mol ( American Dye Source ) . The layer was deposited via spin - coating from a 2 % w / w ( 17 . 3 g / mL ) solution in toluene . C . The blue photoactive layer is a blend of three blue - emitting polymers : poly ( 9 , 9 - dioctyluorene ) ( F8 ) , ( poly ( 9 , 9 - dioctyluorene - alt - N - ( 4 - butylphenyl ) diphenylamine ) ( TFB ) and poly ( 9 , 90 - dioctyluorene - alt - bis - N , N 0 - ( 4 - butylphenyl ) - bis - N , N 0 - phenyl - 1 , 4 - phenylenediamine ) ( PFB ) ( American Dye Source ) in a 1 : 2 : 2 ratio in a 2 % w / w solution in mixed xylenes ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . For all device types , the photoactive layer was deposited via spin - coating at 2000 rpm for 60 s . The red emissive polymer layers were also subject to thermal annealing that resulted in a higher bandwidth of the devices [ 4 ] , [ 15 ] . We annealed the samples for 10 minutes at 150 ◦ C ( glass transition temperature is ∼ 75 ◦ C for PPV derivative [ 16 ] ) . This effect could be explained with a thermally - induced reorganization of the MDMO polymer chains favoring the inter - chain interaction and hence determining a better charge trans - port [ 17 ] . The treatment also causes a partial , but acceptable , decrease in the luminance due to molecular aggregation . The blue and green devices were not annealed . As a ﬁnal step to complete all of the devices , a metallic cathode was deposited by evaporating a thin ( 30 nm ) layer of calcium covered by a protective layer ( 150 nm ) of aluminium . HAIGH et al . : WAVELENGTH - MULTIPLEXED POLYMER LEDs : TOWARDS 55 Mb / s ORGANIC VLC 1821 Fig . 1 . An exploded schematic of the PLED used in this work ; inset are the molecular structures of the polymer emissive layers . Then we completed the encapsulation of the devices by ap - plying a protective glass slide using a UV - hardened epoxy - glue ( Ossila Ltd ) ; curing is done with a low - power UV lamp ( 4 mW / cm 2 ) for 15 minutes in nitrogen . III . PLED E LECTRICAL C HARACTERISATION The normalized emission intensities are shown in Fig . 2 . In clean WDM systems , it would be expected that the emission in - tensities would not overlap as heavily as with the polymers used here . For this reason to demonstrate a best - case performance , the RGB pixels are illuminated individually , thus avoiding interference introduced by crosstalk . The peak wavelengths for the RGB components are 480 nm , 538 nm and 598 nm , respectively and the blue component has a large spectral peak at 624 nm . The measured DC current - luminance and current - voltage relationships ( L - I - V ) are shown in Fig . 3 . The current was sourced by a Keithley 2400 current source which also measured the voltage across the diode . The luminance was measured Fig . 2 . Normalized emission intensity for the PLED pixels under test , with peak wavelengths of ∼ 480 nm ( blue ) , ∼ 535 nm ( green ) and ∼ 595 nm ( red ) . The blue device also exhibits a peak at ∼ 620 nm . Each device has a character - istic sharp cut - on wavelength and relaxed cutoff wavelength . Fig . 3 . The LIV relationships of each of the PLEDs ; the solid lines correspond to the voltages and the dashed lines correspond to the luminances . Each device exhibits excellent linearity to avoid nonlinear impairmenets to the signals . indirectly by converting the voltage output from a calibrated silicon photodetector using a Keithley 2000 digital multimeter . The L - I curves are sufﬁciently linear within the operating range ( ﬁtting curves are not shown for clarity ; R 2 values are 0 . 998 , 0 . 997 , and 0 . 988 for RGB , respectively ) , thus signal clipping can be avoided . Furthermore , the system bandwidth is also controlled according to the current bias point due to presence of semiconductor charge traps , which are introduced at the processing time due to defects and impurities [ 18 ] . The charge traps have an associated time constant , which is itself proportional to the ratio of occupied / vacant traps . By increasing the injection current , the number of occupied traps increases ; thus the associated time constant decreases . When all of the traps are occupied , the bandwidth becomes limited by the capacitive time constant as in inorganic devices . This mechanism has been described in the literature for both organic photodetectors ( OPDs ) [ 19 ] , and more generally for organic layers , as in [ 20 ] to name just a few . We have therefore selected the bias currents with the following constraints ; ( i ) so as to follow in the most linear region of the L - I response and ( ii ) for the bandwidth - limited by capacitance . More speciﬁcally , the operating points were therefore selected as ; 8 mA AC , 6 mA DC for all the devices . The measured bandwidths for the RGB pixels are shown in Fig . 4 and were measured using a Tektronix AFG2022B arbi - trary function generator ( AFG ) and an Agilent MXA N9010A 1822 IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS , VOL . 33 , NO . 9 , SEPTEMBER 2015 Fig . 4 . Bandwidths of the PLEDs under test ; measured by an Agilent MXA N9010A spectrum analyzer as 600 kHz ( blue ) , 350 kHz ( red ) and 110 kHz ( green ) . electrical spectral analyser . The 3 dB bandwidths were mea - sured as ∼ 350 , 110 and 600 kHz for red , green and blue , respectively and the noise ﬂoor is also shown in black . IV . T EST S ETUP AND E QUALIZER U NDER T EST The test setup is illustrated by the schematic block diagram in Fig . 5 ( a ) . A 2 10 − 1 pseudorandom binary sequence ( PRBS - 10 ) is generated using MATLAB and loaded into the memory of the AFG using a LabVIEW script . The PRBS - 10 data is passed through a unity height rectangular pulse shaping ﬁlter p ( t ) and output to a single pixel via a current mirror driving circuit . Each pixel has an individual driving circuit that is tailored to the respective L - I - V relationships to enable the best possible performance . The transmission distance is set to 0 . 05 m , consistent with the literature [ 3 ] – [ 5 ] , because singular pixels of ∼ 3 . 5 mm 2 were used which have relatively low luminance . In order to improve this distance , matrices of pixels could be used , which will be implemented in our future work . When scaling up from a single pixel to multiple pixels , the performance of the diodes is not expected to vary . Reports in the literature show that the SNRs in VLC systems are dominated by the line - of - sight path between the transmitter and receiver [ 21 ] – [ 24 ] and the strongest diffuse component is at least 7 dB ( electrical ) lower than the line - of - sight component , thus meaning the multipath interference will have little effect [ 22 ] . Furthermore , the literature has shown that the bandwidth of a typical room is > 100 MHz , which is larger than the gross transmission speed reported in this work . The optical power is absorbed and the photocurrent is am - pliﬁed by a ThorLabs PDA36A packaged silicon photodetector with inbuilt transimpedance ampliﬁer ( 10 dB , 5 . 5 MHz band - width ) . The continuous time photovoltage is sampled by a real time Agilent DSO9254A oscilloscope at a rate of t = t s . The sampling rate f s = 1 / t s is set to a maximum of 10 S / sym and at least 10 7 samples were recorded leading to an uncoded bit error rate ( BER ) target of 10 − 6 in line with ITU speciﬁcations [ 25 ] . The discrete time signal is passed through a fourth order low - pass ﬁlter and the Q - factor is measured ( not shown in Fig . 5 ( a ) ) to give a fast estimate of system performance . The signal is passed through a post emphasis circuit that consists of several high - pass ﬁlters of increasing order in parallel , added to the received signal path as shown in Fig . 5 ( b ) . The overall fre - quency response of the post - emphasis circuit can be represented with respect to the normalized cut - on frequency as follows : y ( f ) = q ( f ) + m (cid:2) ρ = 1 1 (cid:3)(cid:4) 1 + (cid:5) ff c (cid:6) 2 (cid:7) ρ ( 1 ) Where m is the maximum order ﬁlter under test and f c is the ﬁlter cut - on frequency and q ( f ) is the frequency response of the received signal . Extensive studies not shown in this work have demonstrated theoretically and experimentally that a substantial improvement in Q - factor can be yielded by setting m = 4 . While for m > 4 the improvement obtained is marginal . The ﬁlter weights are found by sweeping through a predetermined range of cut - on frequencies and measuring the Q - factor until a maximum value is found . The Q - factor is given by : Q = ν H − ν L σ H + σ L ( 2 ) where ν H and ν L are the high and low mean received voltages , respectively , and σ H and σ L are the high and low level standard deviations , respectively . Once the maximum value is found for each of the ﬁlters in the post - emphasis module , the ﬁlter coefﬁcients are locked and the transmission occurs . The post - emphasis circuit attempts to restore the attenuated high frequency components of the signal . The principle of operation of the proposed post - emphasis circuit is based on iteratively adjusting the weights of the ﬁlter based on the measured Q - factor at the output . Once the optimal ﬁlter is found , the signal is down - sampled using the integrate / dump method to maximize SNR . The system is then equalized , as will be discussed later and sliced by an average level threshold before comparison with the transmitted bits , symbol - by - symbol in a BER tester ( BERT ) . Inset in Fig . 5 ( a ) are a photograph of the RGB devices , and the responsivity of the photodetector in the context of thenormalized emission intensities of the three devices . The responsivities ( peak wavelengths ) are 0 . 14 A / W ( 480 nm ) , 0 . 21 A / W ( 538 nm ) and 0 . 27 A / W ( 598 nm ) , respectively . Obvi - ously there is a signiﬁcant difference between the responsivities of the blue / red components ( around two times ) and this will affect the link SNR . This is slightly compensated by the fact that the blue component has a large spectral peak , centerd at 624 nm ( 0 . 48 A / W ) . A . Equalizer The equalizer used in this work is an ANN based MLP , the structure of which is shown in Fig . 5 ( c ) . The key difference between the MLP and other types of conventional equalizers such as decision feedback or linear feedforward is the overall operation . Conventional equalizers work on the principle of calculating the contribution of inter - symbol interference ( ISI ) from previous symbols on the current symbol . On the other hand , ANNs operate on the principle of classiﬁcation ; grouping received samples into classes based on a training sequence . This means that explicit calculation of the HAIGH et al . : WAVELENGTH - MULTIPLEXED POLYMER LEDs : TOWARDS 55 Mb / s ORGANIC VLC 1823 Fig . 5 . Schematic block diagrams of ( a ) the system under test as described in the test ; inset are top - view photographs of the three RGB PLEDs and the responsivity of the PD in the context of the emission spectra ; ( b ) the post - empahsis module and ( c ) the equalizer under test . ISI is not required and classiﬁcation boundaries must instead be formed . The least complex digital implementation of the MLP is as a linear transversal ﬁlter ( in opposition to a lattice ) , as with conventional equalizers . The MLP outperforms conventional equalizers such as linear and decision feedback equalizers [ 11 ] , [ 26 ] . For further information on MLP , readers are encouraged to refer to [ 27 ] . The ﬁlter consists of N tapped delay inputs known as the observation vector X = [ x 0 , x 1 , . . . , x N ] . Each input has an associated weight w n as in conventional equalizers . The functional unit of the ANN is the neuron , which is where the processing happens , consisting of the sum of the weighted inputs and a ( typically ) nonlinear activation function ( selected as log - sigmoid here ) that allows computation of the ﬁlter out - put . Thus , the output of the ﬁlter is given as follows [ 28 ] : y n = ϕ (cid:8)(cid:2) n w n x n (cid:9) ( 3 ) where ϕ is the log - sigmoid activation function given by [ 27 ] : ϕ = 1 1 + e − βξ ( 4 ) where ξ is the weighted input and β is the slope parameter , set to unity in this work . The MLP must be trained in order to be able to classify the input symbols . The most popular training method , also adopted here , is the Levenberg - Marquardt back propagation algorithm . In this algorithm , the ANN adjusts its weights in order to minimize the error cost function E ( n ) as follows [ 28 ] : E n = (cid:5) d n − y n (cid:5) 2 ( 5 ) where d n is the desired symbol value at sample n and y n is the actual value . The Levenberg - Marquardt algorithm is an iterative procedure performing a gradient descent on E n . The weights are updated as follows [ 28 ] : w nj ( k + 1 ) = w nj ( k ) − η ∂ E n ∂ w nj ( k ) ( 6 ) where w nj is the weight between the interconnection of input x n and neuron n j . The number of neurons is set equal to the number of tapped inputs in order to provide a unity efﬁciency ANN [ 27 ] . To the best of our knowledge , there is no algorithm that describes the optimal number of neurons and tapped inputs and hence the best strategy is to start with a small network and add tapped inputs and neurons until the system performance is sufﬁcient or the system limits are met . On the other hand , it can be advantageous to begin with a large network and prune it until the desired performance is found . Therefore , here we test a series of values as the number of neurons ( and tapped inputs ) in order to show the difference in performance . The values selected are N = { 5 ; 10 ; 20 ; 30 ; 40 } . 1824 IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS , VOL . 33 , NO . 9 , SEPTEMBER 2015 Fig . 6 . Unequalized BER and Q - factor performance of the blue PLED ; up to 7 Mb / s can be achieved when using the post - emphasis module in comparison to 3 Mb / s without it . V . R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION The results will be presented in terms of individual wave - lengths . The ﬁrst type of devices to be discussed are the F8 : TFB : PFB ( blue ) PLEDs because they offer best perfor - mance as will be shown . Subsequently MDMO - PPV ( red ) devices will be discussed followed by F8BT ( green ) devices . A . BER Performance of F8 : TFB : PFB Devices The unequalized raw BER and Q - factor performance before and after the post - emphasis module for the blue devices are shown in Fig . 6 . It is clear that the post - emphasis module has a clear impact on the BER performance of the link as expected , improving the er - ror free ( at BER = 10 − 6 ) transmission speed from 3 Mb / s up to 7 Mb / s using four ﬁlters in parallel . This is also represented by a substantial ∼ 9 dB gain in Q - factor from 3 . 8 dB in the raw case to 12 . 2 dB in the post - emphasised case , as is reﬂected in the eye diagrams inset , which illustrate this improvement with a clear eye opening . The improvement can also be seen at 20 Mb / s , a transmission speed well outside of the modulation bandwidth , reducing the BER from ∼ 0 . 4 in the raw case to ∼ 4 × 10 − 2 ; or one order of magnitude . On the other hand , this BER is not sufﬁciently low to apply forward error correction ( FEC ) codes , which require a maximum BER of 3 . 6 × 10 − 3 or 2 × 10 − 2 considering a 7 % or 20 % overhead , respectively [ 3 ] . Due to space constraints inside Fig . 6 the legend is shown below . It should be noted that this is a remarkable transmission speed to achieve , representing a net gain of 133 % in comparison with the state - of - the - art unequalized error free data rate reported in the literature ( 3 Mb / s ) , which was achieved using both MDMO - PPV and F8 : TFB : PFB PLEDs [ 3 ] – [ 5 ] . The ANN equalized BER performance before ( solid lines ) and after the post - emphasis ( dashed lines ) module are both shown in Fig . 7 . Recall that the number of taps is set equal to the number of neurons in the equalizer for full efﬁciency and ranges within the set N = { 5 ; 10 ; 20 ; 30 ; 40 } . The two most important results in Fig . 7 are as follows ; ( i ) error free transmission ( BER = 10 − 6 ) can be supported using N = { 30 ; 40 } taps if the pre - emphasis module is included . If it is not , transmission Fig . 7 . Equalized BER performance of the blue PLEDs ; up to 22 Mb / s can be achieved error free while up to 27 . 9 Mb / s can be sustained considering a 7 % FEC limit . speeds are limited to 21 Mb / s for N = 40 and 20 Mb / s for N = { 5 ; 10 ; 20 ; 30 } ; ( ii ) considering the 7 % FEC limit , gross transmission speeds up to 30 Mb / s are readily available in this link either using the post - emphasis module and N = { 30 ; 40 } or without the post - emphasis module and N = 40 , leading to a net transmission speed of 27 . 9 Mb / s after deduction of the 7 % overhead . It should be noted that both the 22 Mb / s uncoded error free and 27 . 9 Mb / s FEC coded transmission speeds using the ANN equalizer reported here represent a signiﬁcant improvement over the existing literature at the time of writing . The previous reported work [ 3 ] has maximum uncoded and FEC coded transmission speeds of 10 Mb / s and 11 . 2 Mb / s , respectively for F8 : TFB : PFB PLEDs [ 3 ] , therefore an improvement of 120 % and 149 % , respectively , can be observed . For N = { 5 ; 10 ; 20 } , the system only sustains an error free transmission speed up to 20 Mb / s as mentioned . For N = 20 taps and considering the 7 % FEC with and without the post - emphasis module , gross ( net ) transmission speeds of 25 ( 23 . 25 ) and 22 ( 20 . 36 ) Mb / s can be achieved , respectively which demonstrate a considerable reduction over N = { 30 ; 40 } and are thus suboptimal . Considering the 20 % FEC , gross ( net ) transmission speeds of 30 ( 24 ) and 26 ( 20 . 8 ) Mb / s can be sustained with and without the post - emphasis module , respec - tively . For N = 10 and considering the 7 % FEC limit , gross ( net ) transmissionspeedsof23 ( 21 . 39 ) Mb / sand22 ( 20 . 46 ) Mb / s can be supported , offering slight gains of up to ∼ 1 . 4 Mb / s over the uncoded error rate . The available gross ( net ) trans - mission speeds considering the 20 % FEC are 23 ( 18 . 4 ) Mb / s and 24 ( 19 . 2 ) Mb / s , actually causing a reduction in available capacity over the uncoded rate . Similarly for N = 5 the avail - able transmission speeds drop below those of the uncoded data rates in all conﬁgurations . To provide an illustrative example of the improvement between the worst and best cases , the ﬁrst 1 × 10 5 samples at the output of the ANN equalizer are shown for a transmission speed of 30 Mb / s in Fig . 8 for the system with an ANN equalizer using 5 taps ( blue ) and 40 taps with the post - emphasis module ( black ) . The vertical red line indicates the length of the training sequence ( 1 × 10 4 ) and hence the pattern slightly degrades after this point due to the high noise level at 30 Mb / s . It is clearly possible to determine two deﬁnite signal levels for thresholding in the best case of N = 40 taps HAIGH et al . : WAVELENGTH - MULTIPLEXED POLYMER LEDs : TOWARDS 55 Mb / s ORGANIC VLC 1825 Fig . 8 . The equalizer output for the ﬁrst 10 5 samples ( including 10 4 training samples ) indicating the substantial classiﬁcation improvement between N = 40 ( black ) and 5 ( blue ) taps / neurons . Fig . 9 . Unequalized BER and Q - factor performance of the red devices ; up to 4 Mb / s can be achieved with the post - emphasis module in comparison to 2 Mb / s without it . and the post - emphasis , and in the worst case , with N = 5 taps , impossible to deﬁne any level . B . BER Performance of MDMO - PPV Devices Similarly to the F8 : TFB : PFB devices the raw , unequalized BER and Q - factor performance of the MDMO - PPV devices are ﬁrst shown in Fig . 9 with and without the post - emphasis module . Once more it is clear that the post - emphasis module has a large impact on the available transmission speed ; improving it from 2 Mb / s without the module to 4 Mb / s with a 4 th order mod - ule , a 100 % increase . However , in comparison to the previous devices , which showed an improvement of ∼ 4 dB at 20 Mb / s , using the module with MDMO - PPV devices at high transmis - sion speeds provides a substantially lower improvement . Only an additional ∼ 1 dB in Q - factor is available at 10 Mb / s , which reduces further at higher transmission speeds . Thus it can be inferred that the module will have little impact at transmission speeds > 10 Mb / s while adding additional complexity to the system , which proved to be the case after extensive tests , hence the post - emphasis module is not used for these devices . In terms of the ANN equalized BER performance , which is shown in Fig . 10 , error free ( at BER = 10 − 6 ) is available up to transmission speeds of 18 Mb / s using N = 40 taps and Fig . 10 . As the post - emphasis module has little effect in the red system for transmission speeds > 10 Mb / s , it is not considered here ; transmission speeds up to 18 Mb / s can be supported with N = 40 taps in comparison to 8 Mb / s with N = 5 taps . neurons . When considering the previously mentioned FEC limits , a transmission speed of 20 Mb / s is available with 40 taps , leading to an overall useful data rate of 18 . 6 Mb / s and a slight improvement over the error free rate . For N = 30 the error free transmission speed is severely reduced to 12 Mb / s indicating that the ISI spans over 30 – 40 symbols in this link . Interestingly , for N = 30 the 7 % FEC limit is never reached , meaning a transmission speed of 18 . 6 Mb / s can also be realized with 10 taps fewer , leading to a complexity advantage . If the number of taps is reduced to N = 20 the transmission speed is reduced below 10 Mb / s for the ﬁrst time in this link to 9 Mb / s . On the other hand , at the 7 % FEC limit a data rate of 14 Mb / s ( gross ) and 13 . 02 Mb / s ( net ) can be attained while for the 20 % limit a data rate of 17 Mb / s ( gross ) and 13 . 6 Mb / s ( net ) is readily available . Finally , for N = { 10 ; 5 } the error free data rate is further reduced to 8 Mb / s . Considering N = 10 and the 7 % and 20 % FEC limits , net data rates of 10 . 23 and 10 . 4 Mb / s are available . Finally , for N = 5 , the rates are both reduced below 10 Mb / s for the 7 % and 20 % FEC to 9 . 3 Mb / s and 8 Mb / s , respectively . C . BER Performance of F8BT Devices Finally , the green devices will be discussed . The raw BER and Q - factor performance is shown in Fig . 11 . For the F8BT devices the post - emphasis module does not cause any improve - ment in Q - factor or BER . The reason for this is due to the slow rise time of the PLEDs which is the major restriction of the link . The driving circuit was tested without the PLED and it was found to be free of a bandwidth limitation for the frequencies under test and hence it is inferred that the slow rise time is caused by the device itself rather than an external inﬂuence . The link is available error free ( BER = 10 − 6 ) up to 2 Mb / s , a signiﬁcant reduction in comparison to the F8 : TFB : PFB and MDMO - PPV devices due to the lower band - width / slow rise time . Therefore , the total error free link performance can be given by the sum of the three links , giving the maximum performance for each device and hence the maximum total performance of the link . The total error free transmission speed readily avail - able is 13 Mb / s , comprised of 7 Mb / s from the F8 : TFB : PFB 1826 IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS , VOL . 33 , NO . 9 , SEPTEMBER 2015 Fig . 11 . Unequalized ( black ) BER and Q - factor performance of the green link ; only 2 Mb / s can be recovered with no improvement evident from the post - emphasis module due to the slow rise time of the device . Also , shown is the ANN equalized performance ( labeled EQ ) for all values of N ; the available data rate is independent of the number of neurons due to the low bandwidth of the link and low SNR . devices , 4 Mb / s from the MDMO - PPV devices and 2 Mb / s from the F8BT devices . This is sufﬁcient capacity to support an Ethernet link in real time without any equalization methods for the ﬁrst time , which we will implement in our future work . Furthermore , as mentioned , the state - of - the - art unequalized transmission speed is reported at 3 Mb / s [ 3 ] – [ 5 ] , so the parallel link reported here could supply an additional 10 Mb / s , or an increase of 333 % which is remarkable . The ANN equalized performance for the F8BT devices is also shown in Fig . 11 which shows the error free link capac - ity can be improved to 4 Mb / s for all values of N . This is substantially lower than has been demonstrated in the previous devices . The reason for this is twofold ; ( i ) the bandwidth is at least half of the other two devices ( 110 kHz in comparison to 350 kHz ( red ) and 600 kHz ( blue ) ) ; ( ii ) therefore the system SNR descends into the noise ﬂoor at a lower frequency . It is well known that equalizers cannot equalize uncorrelated , unbounded noise such as Gaussian noise and therefore the equalizer fails . Thus the total potential error free transmission speed available on aggregate from the link is 44 Mb / s , which is more than four times higher than the state - of - the - art reported in the literature ( 10 Mb / s [ 3 ] ) . On the other hand , there is an improvement in transmission speed when considering the 7 % FEC BER limit . A gross trans - mission speed of 9 Mb / s can be sustained by the link , leading to a net data rate of ∼ 8 . 4 Mb / s . Thus , the aggregate capacity of the link considering a 7 % FEC is given as 54 . 9 Mb / s , representing approximately a ﬁvefold gain over the state - of - the - art in the literature of 11 . 2 Mb / s [ 3 ] , which is remarkable . It should be noted that the 44 and 54 . 9 Mb / s data rates are only available when each device is used independently . Cross - talk or inter - channel interference will cause degradation to these rates when simultaneous operation is performed , which will be investigated in our future work . VI . C ONCLUSION In this paper , we have demonstrated a system of RGB PLEDs with potential toward implementing a ∼ 55 Mb / s PLED - VLC link . In order to achieve this we used three separate pixels of individual wavelengths and a high performance artiﬁcial neural network equalizer . This is an important result for the research community ; however there are still key research challenges that remain . The most important of which is that when each component of the link is active simultaneously there will be a problem with inter - channel interference , or crosstalk . It would be expected that the green component of the link would most severely affected by the crosstalk due to high interference from both the red and blue components . In order to overcome this , either color ﬁlters or wavelength selective photodetectors can be used at the cost of SNR . Therefore , we propose in our future work to thoroughly investigate this challenge and analyse the performance in comparison to this link , which provides the best possible performance of such a link without considering crosstalk . A CKNOWLEDGMENT Franco Cacialli is a Royal Society Wolfson Research Merit Award holder . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] R . Das and P . Harrop , “Organic & printed electronics—Forecasts , players & opportunities 2007 – 2027 , ” IDTechEx , Cambridge , U . K . , Rep . , 2010 . [ 2 ] L . Hanzo et al . , “Wireless myths , realities , and futures : From 3G / 4G to optical and quantum wireless , ” in Proc . IEEE , vol . 100 , no . Special Centennial Issue , pp . 1853 – 1888 , May 2012 . [ 3 ] P . A . Haigh et al . , “A 10 mb / s visible light communication system using a low bandwidth polymer light - emitting diode , ” in Proc . IEEE CSNDSP , Jul . 2014 , pp . 999 – 1004 . [ 4 ] P . A . Haigh et al . , “Visible light communications : Real time 10 Mb / s link with a low bandwidth polymer light - emitting diode , ” Opt . Exp . , vol . 22 , no . 3 , pp . 2830 – 2838 , 2014 . [ 5 ] P . A . Haigh et al . , “Next generation visible light communications : 10 Mb / s with polymer light - emitting diodes , ” in Proc . Opt . Fiber Commun . Conf . , 2014 , pp . 1 – 3 . [ 6 ] I . A . Barlow , T . Kreouzis , and D . G . Lidzey , “High - speed electrolumines - cence modulation of a conjugated - polymer light emitting diode , ” Appl . Phys . Lett . , vol . 94 , no . 24 , pp . 243301 – 243303 , Jun . 2009 . [ 7 ] J . Clayden , N . Greeves , and S . Warren , Organic Chemistry . Oxford , U . K . : Oxford Univ . Press , 2012 . [ 8 ] G . Cossu , A . M . Khalid , P . Choudhury , R . Corsini , and E . Ciaramella , “3 . 4 Gbit / s visible optical wireless transmission based on RGB LED , ” Opt . Exp . , vol . 20 , no . 26 , pp . B501 – B506 , Dec . 2012 . [ 9 ] D . J . F . Barros and J . M . Kahn , “Comparison of orthogonal frequency - division multiplexing and on - off keying in ampliﬁed direct - detection single - mode ﬁber systems , ” J . Lightw . Technol . , vol . 28 , no . 12 , pp . 1811 – 1820 , Jun . 2010 . [ 10 ] D . J . F . Barros , S . K . Wilson , and J . M . Kahn , “Comparison of orthogo - nal frequency - division multiplexing and pulse - amplitude modulation in indoor optical wireless links , ” IEEE Trans . Commun . , vol . 60 , no . 1 , pp . 153 – 163 , Jan . 2012 . [ 11 ] K . Burse , R . N . Yadav , and S . C . Shrivastava , “Channel equalization using neural networks : A review , ” IEEE Trans . Syst . , Man , Cybern . C , Appl . Rev . , vol . 40 , no . 3 , pp . 352 – 357 , May 2010 . [ 12 ] R . H . Friend et al . , “Electroluminescence in conjugated polymers , ” Nature , vol . 397 , no . 6715 , pp . 121 – 128 , 1999 . [ 13 ] T . M . Brown and F . Cacialli , “Contact optimization in polymer light - emitting diodes , ” J . Polymer Sci . B , Polymer Physics , vol . 41 , no . 21 , pp . 2649 – 2664 , Nov . 2003 . [ 14 ] N . Johansson et al . , “A study of the ITO - on - PPV interface using pho - toelectron spectroscopy , ” Synthetic Metals , vol . 92 , no . 3 , pp . 207 – 211 , 1998 . [ 15 ] S . T . Le et al . , “10 - Mb / s visible light transmission system using a polymer light - emitting diode with orthogonal frequency division multiplexing , ” Opt . Lett . , vol . 39 , no . 13 , pp . 3876 – 3879 , 2014 . [ 16 ] M . Kemerink et al . , “Substitution and preparation effects on the molecular - scale morphology of PPV ﬁlms , ” Macromolecules , vol . 38 , no . 18 , pp . 7784 – 7792 , 2005 . HAIGH et al . : WAVELENGTH - MULTIPLEXED POLYMER LEDs : TOWARDS 55 Mb / s ORGANIC VLC 1827 [ 17 ] Z . E . Lampert , S . E . Lappi , J . M . Papanikolas , C . Lewis Reynolds , Jr , and M . O . Aboelfotoh , “Morphology and chain aggregation dependence of optical gain in thermally annealed ﬁlms of the conjugated polymer poly [ 2 - methoxy - 5 - ( 2 - ethylhexyloxy ) - p - phenylene vinylene ] , ” J . Appl . Phys . , vol . 113 , no . 23 , 2013 , Art . ID . 233509 . [ 18 ] H . T . Nicolai et al . , “Uniﬁcation of trap - limited electron transport in semiconducting polymers , ” Nat . Mater . , vol . 11 , no . 10 , pp . 882 – 887 , Oct . 2012 . [ 19 ] F . Arca et al . , “Interface trap states in organic photodiodes , ” Sci . Rep . , vol . 3 , p . 1324 , 2013 . [ 20 ] J . M . Montero , J . Bisquert , G . Garcia - Belmonte , E . M . Barea , and H . J . Bolink , “Trap - limited mobility in space - charge limited current in organic layers , ” Organic Electron . , vol . 10 , no . 2 , pp . 305 – 312 , Apr . 2009 . [ 21 ] M . Hoa Le et al . , “High - speed visible light communications using multiple - resonant equalization , ” IEEE Photon . Technol . Lett . , vol . 20 , no . 14 , pp . 1243 – 1245 , Jul . 2008 . [ 22 ] L . Zeng et al . , “High data rate multiple input multiple output ( mimo ) optical wireless communications using white LED lighting , ” IEEE J . Sel . Areas Commun . , vol . 27 , no . 9 , pp . 1654 – 1662 , Dec . 2009 . [ 23 ] A . M . Khalid , G . Cossu , R . Corsini , P . Choudhury , and E . Ciaramella , “1 - Gb / s transmission over a phosphorescent white LED by using rate - adaptive discrete multitone modulation , ” IEEE Photon . J . , vol . 4 , no . 5 , pp . 1465 – 1473 , Oct . 2012 . [ 24 ] M . Hoa Le et al . , “100 - Mb / s NRZ visible light communications using a postequalized white LED , ” IEEE Photon . Technol . Lett . , vol . 21 , no . 15 , pp . 1063 – 1065 , Aug . 2009 . [ 25 ] I . T . Sector , “Error performance parameters and objectives for interna - tional constant bit rate digital paths at or above the primary rate , ” Inter - national Telecommunication Union ( ITU ) , Geneva , Switzerland , ITU - T Study Group 131WP - 6 , ITU - T recommendation G . 826 , 1993 . [ 26 ] A . Zerguine , A . Shaﬁ , and M . Bettayeb , “Multilayer perceptron - based DFE with lattice structure , ” IEEE Trans . Neural Netw . , vol . 12 , no . 3 , pp . 532 – 545 , 2001 . [ 27 ] S . Haykin , Neural Networks : A Comprehensive Foundation , 2nd ed . New Jersey , NJ , USA : Prentice - Hall , 1998 . [ 28 ] P . A . Haigh et al . , “Exploiting equalization techniques for improving data rates in organic optoelectronic devices for visible light communications , ” J . Lightw . Technol . , vol . 30 , no . 19 , pp . 3081 – 3088 , Oct . 2012 . Paul Anthony Haigh received the B . Eng . ( Hons . ) degree in communications engineering and the Ph . D . degree in the area of organic visible light commu - nications from Northumbria University , Newcastle upon Tyne , U . K . , in 2010 and 2014 , respectively . Be - tween 2010 and 2011 , he held the prestigious Marie Curie Fellowship at the European Organization for Nuclear Research ( CERN ) , where he worked on the optoelectronic links in Large Hadron Collider exper - iments . He is currently a Research Associate with the High Performance Networks Group , University of Bristol , Bristol , U . K . , working on the EPSRC TOUCAN project . He has authored or coauthored over 30 scholarly articles , including over 16 articles in high - ranking journals such as the IEEE J OURNAL ON S ELECTED A REAS IN C OMMUNICATIONS , the IEEE Wireless Communications Magazine , Optics Express , the IEEE Communications Magazine , and the IEEE / OSA Journal of Lightwave Technology . His research is focused on real - time , seamless , transpar - ent , and programmable interfaces between wired and wireless multitechnology networks . Francesco Bausi is currently working toward the Ph . D . degree at the Centre for Nanotechnology , Uni - versity College London , London , U . K . He works on plastic electronics , particularly on innovative appli - cations of polymer light - emitting diodes and new materials for optoelectronics such as graphene - based transparent conductive thin ﬁlms . Hoa Le Minh has been a Senior Lecturer since 2010 and a Program Leader of electrical and electronics engineering since 2013 with Northumbria Univer - sity , Newcastle upon Tyne , U . K . Prior to joining Northumbria University , he was a Researcher at Siemens AG , Munich , Germany , in 2002 and at the University of Oxford , Oxford , U . K . , in 2007 . His research areas are optical communications , visible light communications , and smartphone technology , in which he has authored or coauthored over 100 papers in the refereed journals and conferences . Mr . Le Minh serves as the Vice - Chairman of the IEEE Communications Chapter of the U . K . and Ireland . He is also a Guest Editor of IET and ETT journals . Ioannis Papakonstantinou received the Ph . D . de - gree in polymer optical interconnects from Univer - sity College London ( UCL ) , London , U . K . , in 2008 . In 2008 , he joined Sharp Laboratories of Europe as a Research Associate . While at Sharp , he received training on nanoimprint lithography , the subject of his proposed work in this proposal , and specialized in subwavelength structures to improve the energy efﬁciency , uniformity , and brightness of liquid crys - tal displays . Together with his colleagues at Sharp , he ﬁled and was awarded ﬁve patents on the design and fabrication of antireﬂection coatings , nonabsorbing polarizers , color - separating gratings , and light in - coupling and out - coupling structures for backlights , all made by NIL . He is currently a Lecturer with the Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering , UCL , where he leads a team of six Ph . D . students as Principal and Second Supervisor . Prior to joining UCL , in 2009 – 2011 , he was with the Physics Department at the European Organization for Nuclear Research ( CERN ) , where he developed optical network topologies for the distribution of time , trigger , and control signals in the Large Hadron Collider . He has almost ten years of experience in optical components made of polymers . His research interests lie in the areas of nanophotonics for renewable energy , medical equipment , and ICT applications . Wasiu O . Popoola received the bachelor’s degree ( with ﬁrst - class honors ) in electronic and electri - cal engineering from Obafemi Awolowo University , Ife , Nigeria , and the M . Sc . and Ph . D . degrees from Northumbria University , Newcastle upon Tyne , U . K . He is currently a Chancellor’s Fellow with the In - stitute for Digital Communications , The University of Edinburgh , Edinburgh , U . K , where he was a Re - search Fellow in visible light communications from March 2010 to June 2012 . Previously , he was a Lecturer of electronic engineering at Glasgow Cale - donian University , between August 2012 and December 2014 . He has authored or coauthored over 60 journal articles / conference papers / patent , and over six of those are invited papers ( see : http : / / goo . gl / JdCo3R ) . He has coauthored Optical Wireless Communications : System and Channel Modelling with MATLAB ( CRC , 2012 ) . He was a recipient of the ’Xcel Best Engineering and Technology Student of the Year in 2009 during his Ph . D . studies . 1828 IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS , VOL . 33 , NO . 9 , SEPTEMBER 2015 Andrew Burton received the B . Eng . ( Hons . ) de - gree , the M . Sc . degree ( with distinction ) , and the Ph . D . degree in visible light communications from Northumbria University Northumbria , U . K . His re - search interests focus on electronics , optical com - munications , and visible light communications , in which he has 19 journal / conference publications . He is currently an Associate Lecturer with Northumbria University , where , in July 2015 , he will be involved in a collaboration between Northumbria University and the European Space Agency to develop a sim - ulation package for ground - to - space and space - to - ground free - space optical communications . Franco Cacialli received the bachelor’s degree and the Ph . D . degree in electronic engineering from the University of Pisa , Pisa , Italy . Since 2005 , he has been a Professor of physics in the London Centre for Nanotechnology and the Department of Physics and Astronomy at University College London , London , U . K , where he was a Lecturer in 2001 – 2003 and then a Reader in 2003 – 2004 . After postdoctoral work at Cambridge , he became a Royal Society University Research Fellow ( 1996 – 2004 ) , ﬁrst at Cambridge ( until 2001 ) . He coordinated an 11 - partner Marie Curie Research Training Network dedicated to investigation of threaded molec - ular wires ( THREADed Molecular wIres as supramoLecularly engineered muLtifunctional materials , www . threadmill . eu ) and currently coordinates a new European Training Network dedicated to exploitation of supramolecular materials for photonics ( SupramolecularlY eNgineered arCHitectures for op - toelectRonics and photONICS , http : / / synchronics - etn . eu ) . He has ( co ) authored over 250 publications and six patents . He has also coedited ( with P . Samori , Strasbourg ) Functional Supramolecular Architectures ( Wiley , 2010 ) . His re - search interests focus on the physics and application of organic semiconductors ( OS ) to photovoltaic / light - emitting diodes and to ﬁeld - effect transistors , with particular attention to the electronic properties of the electrode - semiconductors interface , an issue of fundamental importance in virtually all device applica - tions . His research interests also include supramolecular architectures for the control and tailoring of intermolecular interactions , and thus of OS photo - physics , and high - resolution nanolithography by means of the scanning near - ﬁeld optical microscope or the scanning thermal microscope . He is a Fellow of the Institute of Physics ( FinstP ) . He has been elected to a Fellowship of the American Physical Society in 2009 . He is a recipient of a Royal Society Wolfson Research Merit Award ( 2015 – 2019 ) .