Linking language and categorization in infancy * BROCK FERGUSON AND SANDRA WAXMAN Northwestern University ( Received  June  – Revised  August  – Accepted  September  ) ABSTRACT Language exerts a powerful in ﬂ uence on our concepts . We review evidence documenting the developmental origins of a precocious link between language and object categories in very young infants . This collection of studies documents a cascading process in which early links between language and cognition provide the foundation for later , more precise ones . We propose that , early in life , language promotes categorization at least in part through its status as a social , communicative signal . But over the ﬁ rst year , infants home in on the referential power of language and , by their second year , begin teasing apart distinct kinds of names ( e . g . nouns , adjectives ) and their relation to distinct kinds of concepts ( e . g . object categories , properties ) . To complement this proposal , we also relate this evidence to several alternative accounts of language ’ s e ﬀ ect on categorization , appealing to similarity ( ‘ labels - as - features ’ ) , familiarity ( ‘ auditory overshadowing ’ ) , and communicative biases ( ‘ natural pedagogy ’ ) . INTRODUCTION The power of human language comes from its links to our conceptual systems . In acquiring language , we acquire a means of encoding perceptual input as objects of thought ( Fausey & Boroditsky ,  ; Frank , Everett , Fedorenko & Gibson ,  ; Gleitman & Papafragou ,  ; Winawer , Witthoft , Frank , Wu , Wade & Boroditsky ,  ) , and a means of combining elemental concepts to form more complex ones ( Chomsky ,  ; Condry & Spelke ,  ; Murphy ,  ) . Language is also the [ * ] This research was supported by a Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada Doctoral Fellowship awarded to B . F . and a grant from the National Institutes of Health ( R  HD  ) to S . W . The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the o ﬃ cial views of the National Institutes of Health . We are grateful to the Project on Child Development at Northwestern University and especially to all of the parents and children who have participated in our projects . Address for correspondence : Sandra Waxman , Psychology Department , Northwestern University ,  Sheridan Rd . , Evanston , IL , USA  . e - mail : s - waxman @ northwestern . edu J . Child Lang . , Page  of  . © Cambridge University Press  doi :  .  / S   terms of use , available at http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0305000916000568 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Northwestern University Libraries , on 21 Nov 2016 at 19 : 58 : 41 , subject to the Cambridge Core bedrock of cultural transmission , providing an exceptionally powerful and e ﬃ cient channel for sharing our thoughts and beliefs with others ( Anggoro , Waxman & Medin ,  ; Pinker & Jackendo ﬀ ,  ; Tomasello ,  ; Vygotsky ,  ; Waxman ,  b ) . Although research in philosophy and psychology makes it quite clear that there are distinctions between language and thought , they are often so deeply intertwined in our experience of the world that they seem inseparable ( Gleitman & Papafragou ,  ; Pinker ,  ) . It is unsurprising , then , that some of the most compelling and enduring questions in the developmental and cognitive sciences have focused on identifying the links between language and thought , and how these are shaped over development ( Gentner & Goldin - Meadow ,  ; Waxman ,  b ,  ) . Over a half century of research has unearthed at least one striking link between language and one fundamental conceptual process , object categorization . Studies of this link reveal that ways in which objects are named guides learners ’ organization of these objects into mental categories . When the same noun is applied consistently to a set of distinct objects , both infants and adults alike are more likely to represent them as members of the same object category ( Gelman & Heyman ,  ; Keates & Graham ,  ; Lupyan ,  ; Lupyan , Rakison & McClelland ,  ; Waxman ,  b ; Waxman & Booth ,  ,  ; Waxman & Hall ,  ; Waxman & Markow ,  ) . Conversely , hearing di ﬀ erent nouns applied to a set of distinct objects draws learners ’ attention to distinctions among objects , facilitating their representations as distinct individuals or distinct categories ( Dewar & Xu ,  ,  ; Feigenson & Halberda ,  ; Ferguson , Havy & Waxman  ; Keates & Graham ,  ; Landau & Shipley ,  ; Scott & Monesson ,  ; Waxman & Braun ,  ; Xu ,  ; Xu , Cote & Baker ,  ; Zosh & Feigenson ,  ) . Categorization is a fundamental building block of cognition ( Mandler & McDonough ,  ; Mareschal & Quinn ,  ; Mervis & Rosch ,  ; Murphy ,  ; Sloman , Malt & Fridman ,  ; Smith & Medin ,  ) , and thus this evidence documenting the power of naming on categorization has garnered considerable attention ( e . g . Diesendruck ,  ; Gershko ﬀ - Stowe , Thal , Smith & Namy ,  ; Lupyan et al . ,  ; Plunkett ,  ; Sloutsky & Fisher ,  ; Waxman & Gelman ,  ) . When we identify two objects as members of the same category , we establish their equivalence , permitting us to identify new members of the category and to make inferences about non - obvious properties from one member of the category to another ( Bhatt , Wasserman & Reynolds ,  ; Murphy ,  ; Smith & Heise ,  ) . This seemingly simple feat has tremendous consequences on subsequent learning ; for example , by establishing the category DOG , we can learn from just one negative encounter to avoid all angry dogs ( even ones we have not yet seen ) , instead FERGUSON AND WAXMAN  terms of use , available at http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0305000916000568 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Northwestern University Libraries , on 21 Nov 2016 at 19 : 58 : 41 , subject to the Cambridge Core of painfully and repeatedly learning from encounters in which each individual dog bares its teeth . Categorization is also fundamental to word learning . To successfully learn the meaning of a novel word , infants and young children must map a phonological representation to the identi ﬁ able category , or referent , to which it refers . In other words , they must understand that the referent of a novel noun like fridge applies not only to the appliance in their own kitchen but also in others ’ . Recent research suggests that infants have established such mappings ; that is , they extend even their earliest words beyond named exemplars to other members of the same object category ( Bergelson & Swingley ,  ; Tinco ﬀ & Jusczyk ,  ) . Most of infants ’ early words are nouns , and most of these extend beyond distinct individuals ( e . g . “ Magic ” ) to categories ( doggie ) . Moreover , infants ’ ability to map nouns to object categories serves as a stepping - stone for the acquisition of other kinds of words , including verbs and adjectives , because the meanings of these predicates are informed by the nouns that they take as arguments ( Fisher , Gertner , Scott & Yuan ,  ; Gleitman ,  ; Klibano ﬀ & Waxman ,  ; Waxman & Lidz ,  ) . From this perspective , then , infants ’ and young children ’ s early links between language and object categories serve as an engine that catalyzes subsequent language and conceptual development . Our goal in this paper is to summarize the evidence documenting the emergence of a link between naming and object categorization and how it is shaped in the ﬁ rst few years of life . We begin by describing a foundational study , one that demonstrates the power of naming on object categorization at  months of age . We then look ahead in development , pointing to evidence documenting that toddlers increasingly re ﬁ ne this link over the second year of life , as they cull distinct ‘ kinds ’ of words in the input ( e . g . nouns , adjectives , verbs ) and link each to a distinct ‘ kind ’ of referent ( e . g . categories of objects , properties of objects , categories of events or relations ) . Next , we set our sights in a di ﬀ erent direction , looking back in development to identify the origin of infants ’ links between language and categorization in the ﬁ rst year of life . This review – looking forward and backward in developmental time – reveals a cascading process in which infants ’ earliest language – cognition links provide the foundation for later ones . To foreshadow , we propose that the power of language on cognition is initially grounded in its status as a social , communicative signal . Within the ﬁ rst year , infants home in on its referential status and , in the second year , they begin to tease apart the distinct kinds of words ( e . g . nouns , verbs , adjectives ) and link them to distinct kinds of reference . We also discuss several alternative theoretical proposals . Some have attributed the link between language and cognition entirely to lower - level LINKING LANGUAGE AND CATEGORIZATION  terms of use , available at http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0305000916000568 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Northwestern University Libraries , on 21 Nov 2016 at 19 : 58 : 41 , subject to the Cambridge Core perceptual processes . On one view , ‘ labels - as - features ’ , words promote object categorization simply because infants associate the words that co - occur with objects as perceptual ‘ features ’ of the objects themselves ( Deng & Sloutsky ,  ; Sloutsky ,  ; Sloutsky & Fisher ,  ) . On this view , because objects from the same category tend to co - occur with the same labels , naming ( like any shared perceptual feature ) increases the similarity among named objects and in this way promotes object categorization . However , as will become clear as our review unfolds , this view cannot account for the evidence . First , there is strong evidence that when names are paired systematically with objects , they consistently promote categorization , but that when other engaging sounds ( e . g . tone sequences , backward speech ) are paired systematically with objects , they engender no such boost to infants ’ categorization . Second , this view cannot accommodate the fact that , within the second year of life , di ﬀ erent kinds of words highlight di ﬀ erent kinds of commonalities among objects . The labels - as - features view has no account for why , at this juncture , nouns highlight category - based commonalities but adjectives highlight property - based commonalities , including color and texture . Another low - level account focused on processing , ‘ auditory overshadowing ’ , argues that the gap between language and other non - linguistic sounds can be reduced to an e ﬀ ect of auditory familiarity . Here the claim is that because infants are more familiar with the sounds of speech than with other non - linguistic sounds ( Robinson & Sloutsky ,  , ;  b ; Robinson , Best , Deng & Sloutsky ,  ; Sloutsky & Robinson ,  ) , and because it is less costly to process familiar than novel stimuli , non - linguistic sounds can ‘ overshadow ’ infants ’ ability to process materials simultaneously presented in the visual modality ( see also Lewkowicz ,  a ,  b ) . Therefore , although language appears to promote object categorization , it may in fact be merely less disruptive than the other less familiar sounds . While this account can capture some di ﬀ erences between linguistic and non - linguistic sounds , like the labels - as - features above , it is stretched to explain why di ﬀ erent kinds of language ( e . g . nouns , adjectives ) which di ﬀ er in meaning – but , critically , not in acoustic familiarity – have di ﬀ erent conceptual consequences , or why , as we will discuss , a select group of unfamiliar signals also promotes categorization early in infancy . Another relevant theory , ‘ natural pedagogy ’ , is closer in spirit to our own position , but still di ﬀ ers considerably , especially with regard to the developmental processes underlying the link between language and categorization in the ﬁ rst two years of life . Natural pedagogy asserts that the power of language comes , at least in part , from its social , communicative status , and we agree . But natural pedagogy also claims that other communicative signals ( e . g . eye - gaze , pointing ) are on par with FERGUSON AND WAXMAN  terms of use , available at http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0305000916000568 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Northwestern University Libraries , on 21 Nov 2016 at 19 : 58 : 41 , subject to the Cambridge Core language vis - à - vis their e ﬀ ects on cognition ( Csibra & Gergely ,  ,  ; Csibra & Shamsudheen ,  ; Futó , Téglás , Csibra & Gergely ,  ; Hernik & Csibra ,  ; Marno , Davelaar & Csibra ,  ;  ; Yoon , Johnson & Csibra ,  ) , that human infants are born with an expectation that information conveyed by a pedagogical partner ( e . g . a parent ) via ostensive , communicative signals is ‘ kind - relevant ’ , and that as a result communicative signals ( including , but not limited to , language ) bias infants toward establishing categories of object kinds . We agree that infant cognition is guided by the social , communicative status of language in the ﬁ rst year . Where we di ﬀ er is in our view of the function of language as primarily kind - relevant , and in our view of developmental processes underlying language over the course of this ﬁ rst year . In our view , language ‘ parts company ’ from the other communicative signals in the ﬁ rst year , as infants pinpoint with increasing precision the range of meaning that can be conveyed with language . We discuss these alternative accounts at various junctures in this review , as evidence relevant to each account is introduced . LINKING LANGUAGE AND CATEGORIZATION – A FOUNDATIONAL STUDY Waxman and Markow (  ) o ﬀ ered the ﬁ rst evidence of a link between language and object categorization in infants who were on the verge of producing their ﬁ rst words . They recruited  - month - old infants to participate in a classic categorization task , one that included a familiarization phase and a test phase ( see Figure  ) . During familiarization , infants were shown several members of a category ( e . g . ANIMAL ) , each accompanied by a phrase . What varied was the particular phrase infants heard . Infants in a Word condition heard a novel noun applied to each object ( e . g . “ Look ! This is a blick ! . . . Do you see the blick ? ” ) ; those in a No Word control condition heard phrases that drew their attention to the objects but included no novel words ( e . g . “ Look what ’ s here . . . Do you like it ? ” ) . At test , infants viewed two novel objects simultaneously . One was a novel member of the now - familiar category ( e . g . a new animal ) , and the other a member of a new object category to which infants had not yet been exposed ( e . g . a piece of fruit ) . This design took advantage of decades of research in infant cognition ( Colombo & Bundy ,  ; Eimas & Quinn ,  ; Fantz ,  ; Spelke & Kestenbaum ,  ) documenting that if infants notice the commonality among the objects presented during familiarization , then they show a preference for the novel over the familiar test object , and that conversely , infants who fail to detect this category during familiarization show no preference at test . LINKING LANGUAGE AND CATEGORIZATION  terms of use , available at http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0305000916000568 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Northwestern University Libraries , on 21 Nov 2016 at 19 : 58 : 41 , subject to the Cambridge Core Building on this logic , Waxman and Markow (  ) manipulated the design to consider the contribution of naming . They reasoned that , if novel nouns support object categorization in infants as young as  months , then infants in the Word condition should more successfully form categories than those not hearing novel words ( No Word condition ) . Their results supported this prediction , documenting that by  months of age , infants have begun to establish a link between object naming and object categorization ( for further evidence at  months , see Ferguson , Havy & Waxman ,  ; Fulkerson & Haaf ,  ; Waxman & Braun ,  ) . Balaban and Waxman (  ) provided additional evidence for the power of language in slightly younger infants . They compared the e ﬀ ect of novel words versus tone sequences on  - month - olds ’ categorization . Once again , infants in a Word condition heard a naming phrase accompanying each familiarization object . But infants in a Tones condition heard a sequence of sine - wave tones accompanying each object . These tone sequences were carefully matched to match the Word condition in mean frequency , duration , and pause length . They reasoned that , if any consistently applied sound promotes  - month - olds ’ object categorization , then infants in both of these conditions should succeed in forming the category ; however , if language exerts a unique e ﬀ ect on categorization as early as  months , then infants in the Word condition but not the Tones condition should succeed . The results were clear : infants in the Word condition successfully formed categories , but those in the Tones condition performed at chance level . This documented an advantage for novel words over carefully matched non - linguistic control stimuli in infants as young as  months of age . Together , these studies provided evidence that the link between language and categories is established early , and that it is not built up from Fig .  . A representation of stimuli and results from Waxman and Markow (  ) and Balaban and Waxman (  ) . FERGUSON AND WAXMAN  terms of use , available at http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0305000916000568 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Northwestern University Libraries , on 21 Nov 2016 at 19 : 58 : 41 , subject to the Cambridge Core associations between words in infants ’ existing vocabulary ( Smith ,  ) . After all , infants at  and  months of age produce only a few , if any , words on their own . Instead , the data reveal that a link between language and object categories is not the result of lexical development , but instead is in place early enough to support infants ’ vocabulary development from the start . Notice that neither the labels - as - features nor the auditory overshadowing accounts can account for both of these results on their own . The labels - as - features account best explains Waxman and Markow ’ s (  ) ﬁ nding that infants who heard a count noun consistently applied to a set of objects more reliably categorize them than do infants in a No Word condition . On the labels - as - features account , for infants in the Word ( but not the No Word ) condition , the shared novel noun increases the similarity among the familiarization objects , and thereby supports categorization . Infants in the No Word condition did not bene ﬁ t from this increased similarity and therefore failed to form the categories . But this account cannot accommodate Balaban and Waxman ’ s (  ) ﬁ nding that novel tone sequences – which were also applied consistently to all familiarization objects – failed to exert this advantageous e ﬀ ect . If any consistently paired auditory ‘ feature ’ account can increase the similarity of the objects with which it is paired , then both words and tones should exert the same in ﬂ uence . On the other hand , auditory overshadowing can explain Balaban and Waxman ’ s (  ) ﬁ nding , but not Waxman and Markow ’ s (  ) . In the case of Balaban and Waxman (  ) , auditory overshadowing would suggest that infants hearing language ( but not tones ) formed object categories because the tone sequences were less familiar than language . But the auditory overshadowing account cannot explain why certain kinds of language ( e . g . “ Look at the toma ” ) facilitate categorization , while other kinds of language ( e . g . “ Look at this ” ) fail to do so . In short , each of these alternative proposals can accommodate one set of ﬁ ndings , but neither can explain both . These results also bear on the proposal concerning ‘ natural pedagogy ’ ( Csibra & Gergely ,  ) . In Waxman and Markow (  ) , all infants were introduced to the familiarization objects in conjunction with human speech – a pedagogical cue . Although infants in the Word condition ( “ Look at the toma ” ) successfully formed object categories , those in the No Word condition ( “ Look at this ! ” ) did not . This reveals that by  months , infants have precise expectations about the functions of language : novel nouns , but not any referring phrase , refer to object categories . Thus , infants do not interpret all communicative signals as kind - relevant ( cf . Csibra & Gergely ,  ) ; rather , by their ﬁ rst birthdays , when infants begin to build their own productive lexicons , they have distinguished LINKING LANGUAGE AND CATEGORIZATION  terms of use , available at http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0305000916000568 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Northwestern University Libraries , on 21 Nov 2016 at 19 : 58 : 41 , subject to the Cambridge Core naming from other functions of language and link object naming alone to object categorization . This evidence from  - to  - month - old infants , although impressive , also raised new developmental questions . When do infants establish more precise links , mapping certain kinds of words ( e . g . nouns ) to object categories , but other kinds of words ( e . g . adjectives , verbs ) to di ﬀ erent kinds of meaning ( e . g . object properties , event categories ) ? SPECIFYING THE LINK : A LOOK FORWARD IN DEVELOPMENT The links between language and categorization expressed in  - month - olds do not remain constant across development . On the contrary , infants ’ expectations about naming become increasingly precise during their second year . During this time , infants tease apart the nouns from the other grammatical forms ( e . g . adjectives , verbs ) and map them speci ﬁ cally to object categories rather than surface properties ( like color ) or actions in which they are involved ( like running ) . Consider , for example , a scene in which a group of horses jumps over a fence . Infants in the second year of life focus on di ﬀ erent aspects of this scene , depending upon how it is described . So do older children and adults . For example , nouns ( e . g . “ Look ! They ’ re horses ! ” ) focus our attention on the object category . But verbs ( e . g . “ Look ! They ’ re running ! ” ) direct our attention to the action , and adjectives ( e . g . “ Look ! They ’ re white ! ” ) refer neither to the objects or event , but to a property of the objects . We know that even infants can use the position of a word within a sentence to distinguish among grammatical categories ( Hall , Veltkamp & Turkel ,  ; Höhle , Weissenborn , Kiefer & Schulz ,  ; Mintz ,  ; Shi ,  ; Waxman & Lidz ,  ; Weisleder & Waxman ,  ) and , by  to  months , they forge increasingly precise links between distinct grammatical forms and their distinct kinds of meaning . They link nouns to object categories , verbs to actions and relations among objects , and adjectives to object properties . These more speci ﬁ c links between distinct kinds of words and distinct kinds of meaning unfold in a cascading fashion ( see Waxman & Lidz ,  , for a comprehensive review ) . First , by  months , infants tease apart the nouns from other grammatical categories and link them speci ﬁ cally to object categories . Next , with this noun – object category link in place , they go on to forge the more precise links for predicates , including adjectives and verbs , whose meaning depends in part upon the nouns they take as arguments . Until roughly  months of age , infants appear to be ‘ generalists ’ when it comes to linking words and concept . Novel words , be they presented as nouns or adjectives , highlight any kind of commonality among objects ( e . g . category - based or property - based commonalities ) ( Waxman ,  b ; Waxman & Booth ,  ; Waxman & Markow ,  ) . A clear FERGUSON AND WAXMAN  terms of use , available at http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0305000916000568 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Northwestern University Libraries , on 21 Nov 2016 at 19 : 58 : 41 , subject to the Cambridge Core demonstration of this can be found in a study by Waxman and Booth (  ) , in which they presented  - month - old infants with a set of four objects ( e . g .  di ﬀ erent purple horses ) that shared both a category - based ( horse ) and property - based ( purple ) commonality ( see Figure  ) . At issue was whether infants focused on categories or properties , and whether their focus was shaped by the language they heard as they viewed these objects ( Waxman & Booth ,  ) . To assess this , infants participated in either a ‘ property ’ extension test ( e . g . pitting a new purple horse against a new green horse ) or a ‘ category ’ extension test ( e . g . pitting a new purple horse against a new purple chair ) . They reasoned as follows : if infants expect that di ﬀ erent kinds of words refer to di ﬀ erent kinds of meaning , then their performance in the Noun and Adjective conditions should di ﬀ er . More speci ﬁ cally , if they map nouns to object categories and adjectives to object properties , then (  ) infants for whom the familiarization objects were introduced with a novel noun should successfully extend the noun to another horse but not to other objects sharing only color , but not category membership , and (  ) infants who were introduced to novel adjectives should successfully extend them to the object property , but not the category . Demonstrating the infants ’ status as generalists at this age , Waxman and Booth (  ) found that  - month - olds who heard either kind of novel word ( either nouns or adjectives ) focused on either kind of commonality ( category - or property - based ) ; they extended the novel word either by property or by category , depending on their test condition . In contrast ,  - month - olds in a No Word condition ( “ Can you give me that one ? ” ) performed at chance . But infants do not remain generalists for long . By  months , they have teased apart the nouns in the input and have begun to link them speci ﬁ cally to object categories , but not object properties . In other words , in the categorization task described above ,  - month - olds extend novel nouns on the basis of category - based , but not property - based , commonalities ( Waxman ,  a ) . Nevertheless ,  - month - olds have not yet acquired a comparably precise expectation for adjectives . Instead , for most of their second year , infants continue to link novel adjectives to either category - based ( e . g . horse ) or property - based ( e . g . color , texture ) commonalities ( Booth & Waxman ,  ; Imai & Gentner ,  ; Waxman ,  a ; Waxman & Booth ,  ) ; only later do they begin mapping novel adjectives speci ﬁ cally to property - based , and not category - based , commonalities ( Waxman & Markow ,  ) . Moreover , infants ’ expectations for novel verbs appear to follow an even more protracted developmental course : only by  months do infants reliably map novel verbs to event categories rather than object categories ( Arunachalam & Waxman ,  ; Arunachalam , Escovar , Hansen & Waxman ,  ; Syrett , Arunachalam & Waxman ,  ; Tomasello & Kruger ,  ; Waxman , Lidz , Braun & Lavin ,  ; Yuan & Fisher ,  ) . LINKING LANGUAGE AND CATEGORIZATION  terms of use , available at http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0305000916000568 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Northwestern University Libraries , on 21 Nov 2016 at 19 : 58 : 41 , subject to the Cambridge Core By tracing infants ’ expectations for novel words through the second year of life , a developmental cascade becomes evident , one in which infants discover that there are distinct kinds of words and that each refers to a distinct kind of meaning . This cascade , in which precise expectations for nouns paves the way for expectations for predicate forms , poses challenges for accounts that appeal to perception alone . The labels - as - features perspective asserts that words are nothing more than perceptual features of the objects to which they are applied . If this were correct , then it is puzzling that novel nouns highlight category - based ( but not property - based ) commonalities among objects at  months ( Waxman ,  a ; Waxman & Booth ,  ) . This outcome reveals that labels do more than simply increase the perceived similarity among objects , otherwise novel nouns should highlight both category - and property - based commonalities equally . Arguments for auditory overshadowing fare no better in accounting for this developmental cascade . After all , infants in the Noun , Adjective , and Verb conditions in these various experiments were all listening to speech . In fact , they heard the very same novel wordforms paired with the very same sets of objects ; thus infants ’ familiarity with the wordforms and the objects are held constant across conditions and experiments . The only thing that varied was the grammatical context in which a novel word – the same novel word – appeared . Infants ’ distinct responses to di ﬀ erent kinds of words in these experiments reveal the insu ﬃ ciency of an auditory overshadowing account . Infants ’ performance is mediated by more than the ‘ familiarity ’ of speech ; they are also sensitive to distinctions among distinct kinds of words and the concepts to which they refer . Finally , these ﬁ ndings also reveal shortcomings in the predictions of natural pedagogy , highlighting that this proposal requires greater Fig .  . A representation of stimuli and results from Booth and Waxman (  ) , Waxman (  ) , and Waxman and Booth (  ) . FERGUSON AND WAXMAN  terms of use , available at http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0305000916000568 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Northwestern University Libraries , on 21 Nov 2016 at 19 : 58 : 41 , subject to the Cambridge Core precision . Communicative signals of all kinds – including language , eye - gaze , and pointing – can highlight either objects and events ( Liszkowski & Carpenter ,  ; Namy & Waxman ,  ; Peirce ,  ) . But only language can single out which of the myriad possible commonalities , present within a particular set of entities , a speaker is referring to . For infants as young as  months of age , language does more than highlight object categories or kinds . By this point , infants use the grammatical form of a novel word to shift their perspective on the scene at hand . THE ORIGINS OF THE LINK : LOOKING BACK INTO INFANTS ’ FIRST YEAR OF LIFE In more recent work in our lab , we have shifted our focus to looking back in developmental time . Our goal is to uncover the origin of infants ’ earliest links between language and cognition , and to trace how this link unfolds in the infants ’ ﬁ rst year . As a ﬁ rst step in this direction , Fulkerson and Waxman (  ) adapted Balaban and Waxman ’ s (  ) categorization task to examine the e ﬀ ect of language on categorization in  - month - old infants ( see Figure  ) . In the familiarization phase , infants viewed eight images from a single category ( e . g . dinosaurs ) one at a time , in random order on a screen . What varied was the auditory input accompanying each image . Infants either heard a novel word ( e . g . “ Look at the modi ! Do you see the modi ! ” ) or the sequence of sine - wave tones . At test , infants viewed two new images , presented in silence – a new member of the familiar category ( e . g . another dinosaur ) and an object from a novel category ( e . g . a ﬁ sh ) . Infants who listened to language during familiarization formed object categories , as witnessed by their reliable preference for the novel object at test . In contrast , infants who listened to tone sequences performed at chance levels . Thus , at  months , when infants are just beginning to comprehend their ﬁ rst words ( Bergelson & Swingley ,  ,  ,  ; Tinco ﬀ & Jusczyk ,  ,  ) , they have already begun to link language and object categories . Armed with this evidence , Ferry , Hespos , and Waxman (  ) considered still younger infants , extending this task to  - and  - month - olds . The results were surprising , and revealed an advantage for language over tones vis - à - vis categorization even in these very young infants : although  - and  - month - olds listening to language successfully formed object categories , those listening to sine - wave tone sequences performed at chance levels , just like at  and  months ( Fulkerson & Waxman ,  ) . These results reveal strong developmental continuity in infants ’ response to language versus tones in the ﬁ rst year of life . They also illuminate a surprisingly precocious link between language and categorization , one that LINKING LANGUAGE AND CATEGORIZATION  terms of use , available at http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0305000916000568 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Northwestern University Libraries , on 21 Nov 2016 at 19 : 58 : 41 , subject to the Cambridge Core is in place early enough to support infants ’ very ﬁ rst forays in language and cognitive development . But why does listening to human language ‘ boost ’ infant cognition so early in development ? It is unlikely that  - month - old infants understand the meanings of any words ( Fenson et al . ,  ; Frank , Braginsky & Yurovsky ,  ) . Indeed , there is little evidence that they can even parse individuals words from the ongoing stream of language ( Aslin ,  ; Bortfeld , Morgan , Golinko ﬀ & Rathbun ,  ; Jusczyk & Aslin ,  ; Seidl , Tinco ﬀ , Baker & Cristia ,  ) . What is it , then , that underlies the cognitive advantage conferred by language at  and  months ? It must be di ﬀ erent than at  months , because Waxman and Markow ’ s (  ) study clearly demonstrated that , by  months , identifying a novel word in the speech stream is critical ( recall that infants formed object categories when they heard a novel noun consistently applied to the familiarization objects , but not when they heard the same kinds of phrases with no novel word ( e . g . “ Look at this ! ” ) . If  - and  - month - olds do not yet parse distinct words from the continuous stream of speech , then what is the mechanism by which language confers its advantage ? Ferry et al . (  ) proposed that , for  - and  - month - olds , simply listening to language might promote object categorization . Previous studies have shown that infants prefer listening to human speech over other , non - speech sounds ( Shultz & Vouloumanos ,  ; Vouloumanos , Hauser , Werker & Martin ,  ) . Of course , a preference for speech cannot explain why infants link speech to their construal of the world ( that is , the objects they view in our tasks ) . Perhaps listening to speech not only engages infants ’ attention but also promotes their learning . One intriguing aspect Fig .  . A representation of stimuli and results from Balaban and Waxman (  ) , Ferry et al . (  ,  ) , and Fulkerson and Waxman (  ) . FERGUSON AND WAXMAN  terms of use , available at http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0305000916000568 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Northwestern University Libraries , on 21 Nov 2016 at 19 : 58 : 41 , subject to the Cambridge Core of the studies on infants ’ preferences for language is that , early on , infants prefer both human speech and non - human primate vocalizations over other sounds , suggesting that they tune their preferences to human speech over the ﬁ rst months of life ( Shultz , Vouloumanos , Bennett & Pelphrey ,  ; Vouloumanos & Werker ,  ,  ) . Might non - human primate vocalizations also promote  - and  - month - olds object categorization ? To address this possibility , Ferry , Hespos , and Waxman (  ) examined the e ﬀ ect of listening to two new sounds – non - human primate vocalizations and backward speech – on infants ’ object categorization at  - ,  - , and  - months . The design was identical to the studies by Fulkerson and Waxman (  ) and Ferry et al . (  ) ; what varied were the sounds infants listened to during the familiarization period . For half of the infants , the familiarization images were accompanied by a vocalization from a blue - eyed Madagascar lemur ( Eulemur macaco ﬂ avifrons ) ; for the others , the images were accompanied by a segment of backward speech ( the language stimuli from prior experiments , played in reverse ) . If the initial link between language and cognition , like infants ’ initial preferences , encompasses human speech and non - human primate vocalizations , then  - and  - month - olds listening to lemur vocalizations should successfully form object categories . Alternatively , if any complex sound promotes object categorization at this young age , then infants listening to either lemur vocalizations or backward speech should successfully form categories . These results of this study , testing the breadth of sounds that promote  - and  - month - olds ’ categorization , were clear . Infants listening to backward speech failed to form categories at any age , echoing the results with sine - wave tone sequences at the same ages as in Ferry et al . (  ) and Fulkerson and Waxman (  ) with a more complex auditory signal . In contrast , the lemur vocalizations conferred the same cognitive advantage as listening to human language :  - and  - month - olds in the lemur condition successfully formed object categories , performing identically at test as infants in Fulkerson and Waxman ’ s (  ) study with human speech . Yet this e ﬀ ect was short - lived ; by  months , infants had tuned the link speci ﬁ cally to language . At  months , lemur vocalizations no longer conferred infants any bene ﬁ t in categorization ( Ferry et al . ,  ) . This work o ﬀ ers two insights into the origins of infants ’ earliest links between language and cognition . First , at  and  months , the link is su ﬃ ciently broad to encompass vocalizations of both humans and non - human primates . Second , by  months , infants tune this initially broad link to the signal that will ultimately carry meaning : human speech . These results also posed new challenges to alternative accounts for the link between language and cognition in infancy . First , the auditory overshadowing account cannot accommodate the facilitative e ﬀ ect of lemur vocalizations on  - and  - month - olds ’ object categorization . Lemur calls are certainly LINKING LANGUAGE AND CATEGORIZATION  terms of use , available at http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0305000916000568 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Northwestern University Libraries , on 21 Nov 2016 at 19 : 58 : 41 , subject to the Cambridge Core unfamiliar to  - and  - month - olds , yet they facilitated ( rather than hindered ) infants ’ object categorization . Auditory overshadowing also fails to account for the ﬁ nding that infants tune out the e ﬀ ect of lemur vocalizations by  months . After all , the assumption underlying the overshadowing account rests on the processing load imposed by an unfamiliar versus familiar signal . Yet infants ’ exposure to lemur vocalizations likely remains sparse – and therefore constant – between  and  months . These results also expose limitations in the theory of natural pedagogy , a theory that has not engaged key developmental questions , including which signals very young infants identify as communicative and how the pedagogical force of these signals changes over the ﬁ rst years . Ferry et al . ’ s (  ,  ) results provide clear evidence that what counts as a communicative signal changes with development . In subsequent work , we have gone further to consider the processes that mediate infants ’ interpretation signals like lemur calls and tone sequences over the ﬁ rst year , pinpointing the role of passive and communicative experience . A CLOSER LOOK : HOW DO INFANTS ‘ TUNE ’ THE LINK BETWEEN LANGUAGE AND OBJECT CATEGORIZATION ? Ferry et al . ’ s (  ) results documented the ﬁ rst evidence that the link between language and categorization may be ‘ tuned ’ early in development . Tuning processes are ubiquitous in infant perceptual development ( e . g . face perception , speech perception ; Krentz & Corina ,  ; Lewkowicz & Ghazanfar ,  ; Maurer & Werker ,  ; Palmer , Fais , Golinko ﬀ & Werker ,  ; Pascalis , Loevenbruck , Quinn , Kandel , Tanaka & Lee ,  ; Quinn , Lee , Pascalis & Tanaka ,  ; Scott & Monesson ,  ,  ; Werker & Tees ,  ) . But the results reported by Ferry et al . (  ) document more than just perceptual tuning . Instead , their results were the ﬁ rst to document that infants tune the ‘ link ’ between language and categorization in the ﬁ rst  months of life . With this e ﬀ ect as a foundation , we have gone on to examine the relative contributions of maturation and experience as infants tune this link ( Perszyk , Ferguson & Waxman , in press ) ( see Figure  ) . How far can experience take us ? Documenting the e ﬀ ect of ‘ mere exposure ’ to non - language sounds In one recent line of research , we asked whether and how infants ’ experience contributed to tuning this link between language and categorization . Perhaps infants ’ frequent exposure to human speech in their everyday environments permits them to maintain the link between speech and object categorization FERGUSON AND WAXMAN  terms of use , available at http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0305000916000568 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Northwestern University Libraries , on 21 Nov 2016 at 19 : 58 : 41 , subject to the Cambridge Core while ‘ tuning out ’ the in ﬂ uence of non - human primate vocalizations , which are likely absent in their environments . One way to assess the role of experience is to manipulate it experimentally . A signature of experience - based tuning processes is the powerful role of later exposure : once infants have tuned out an earlier sensitivity , this sensitivity may be reinstated if infants are re - exposed to the signal anew , during what is known as a ‘ sensitive period ’ ( Johnson & Newport ,  ; Kuhl , Tsao & Liu ,  ; Werker & Hensch ,  ) . Might this signature of experience - based tuning be evident in the link between a signal and categorization ? If infants ’ experience is essential , then exposing infants to lemur vocalizations might permit them to ‘ re - open ’ the link to categorization . Perszyk and Waxman (  ) addressed this question by systematically manipulating  - month - old infants ’ exposure to lemur vocalizations . When infants entered the lab ’ s waiting room , they listened to a  - minute audio track comprised of instrumental music ( e . g . a Bach quartet ) , interspersed at irregular intervals with several distinct lemur vocalizations . This provided infants with a total of  minutes of passive exposure to lemur vocalizations . Importantly , these vocalizations were not connected to any communicative function . Next , infants entered the testing room to participate in the same categorization task while listening to lemur vocalizations ( as in Ferry et al . ,  ) . If experience is instrumental in tuning the link , then even this brief exposure with lemur vocalizations should be enough for  - month - olds to reinstate the earlier link between lemur vocalizations and object categorization . Fig .  . A representation of stimuli and results from Ferguson and Waxman (  ) and Perszyk and Waxman (  ) . LINKING LANGUAGE AND CATEGORIZATION  terms of use , available at http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0305000916000568 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Northwestern University Libraries , on 21 Nov 2016 at 19 : 58 : 41 , subject to the Cambridge Core This prediction was borne out . In contrast to their peers provided with no such exposure ( Ferry et al . ,  ) ,  - month - olds who had been exposed to lemur vocalizations in the lab successfully formed object categories while listening to lemur vocalizations ( Perszyk & Waxman ,  ) . This identi ﬁ es infants ’ ﬂ exibility and a critical role for experience in tuning the link to cognition : even  minutes of exposure permitted  - month - olds to link lemur vocalizations to categorization . Without this exposure , the link had been severed . But perhaps exposure to any sound – not only those that initially promote categorization – would have been su ﬃ cient to promote infants ’ categorization . This is the prediction of the auditory overshadowing account . Perszyk and Waxman (  ) provided clear evidence against this possibility by exposing another group of infants to the same classical music audio track but , this time , replacing the lemur vocalizations with segments of backward speech , a signal that fails to promote object categorization at any age ( Ferry et al . ,  ) . Although infants ’ exposure to backward speech or lemur vocalizations was identical in the two conditions , the results were quite di ﬀ erent : infants exposed to backward speech failed to form object categories in our task . This striking contrast suggests that exposure may be instrumental in maintaining a link between an auditory signal and categorization only if that signal is part of the initially privileged set of sounds that infants previously linked to categorization . A goal of our ongoing work is to specify the range of signals that are initially privileged in this way . Can infants interpret otherwise arbitrary sounds as communicative ? The power of embedding signals in a social - communicative exchange In a complementary line of work , we have asked about the developmental fate of signals that fall outside the initially privileged set – like sine - wave tone sequences and backward speech – signals that infants consistently fail to link to object categorization throughout their ﬁ rst year ( Ferry et al . ,  ; Fulkerson & Waxman ,  ) . As adults , we can ﬂ exibly link many signals to meaning , even unnatural signals like the beeps of Morse code . But what about infants ? Might there be some path by which even infants will privilege these otherwise inert sounds to communicative status and link them to categorization ? Or does this capacity come only later , after they have established a foundational communicative system , such as language ? We reasoned that if we embedded these sounds in communicative episodes , then infants might interpret them as communicative . At issue , though , was whether by raising them to communicative status , these signals might then ( like language ) promote infants ’ categorization . Our FERGUSON AND WAXMAN  terms of use , available at http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0305000916000568 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Northwestern University Libraries , on 21 Nov 2016 at 19 : 58 : 41 , subject to the Cambridge Core hypothesis was motivated by three other lines of research . First , myriad studies have demonstrated that , even from birth , infants are drawn not only to speech , but also to other communicative stimuli . For example , infants prefer to look at face - like stimuli over non - faces ( Farroni , Johnson , Menon , Zulian , Faraguna & Csibra ,  ; Valenza , Simion & Cassia ,  ) and to look at communicative gestures over non - communicative pantomime ( Krentz & Corina ,  ) . Second , beginning around  months , infants appear to represent the communicative function of some signals in social interactions ( Grossmann , Parise & Friederici ,  ; Krehm , Onishi & Vouloumanos ,  ; Lloyd - Fox , Széplaki - Köll ő d , Yin & Csibra ,  ; Parise & Csibra ,  ; Vouloumanos , Martin & Onishi ,  ; Vouloumanos , Onishi & Pogue ,  ) . Finally , as discussed with respect to natural pedagogy , a range of communicative signals beyond speech ( e . g . pointing and eye - gaze ) appear to shape infants ’ learning , at least in some contexts . Of particular interest to us , given that we have been investigating object categorization , is the claim that infants encode category - relevant properties of novel objects more e ﬀ ectively in communicative contexts than in non - communicative contexts ( Csibra & Gergely ,  ; Futó et al . ,  ; Hernik & Csibra ,  ; Wu , Gopnik , Richardson & Kirkham ,  ; Yoon et al . ,  ) . Together , these lines of research raise an intriguing possibility : if infants are ﬁ rst introduced to the otherwise inert sound as if it , like language , is a communicative signal , this sound may be elevated to communicative status and might subsequently promote infants ’ object categorization . To address this possibility , we turned our focus to sine - wave tone sequences , asking whether they might , in fact , promote  - month - olds ’ object categorization if , just prior to the categorization task , we introduced infants to the tones as if they were a communicative signal . We created a brief (  - minute ) vignette depicting a dialogue between two actors . One of the actors spoke in English and the other responded using sine - wave tone sequences . This vignette clearly demonstrated that the tones served a communicative function . After viewing this vignette , infants participated in the categorization task while listening to tone sequences ( Fulkerson & Waxman ,  ) . The vignette had a remarkable impact : after observing the tone sequences embedded in a social , communicative exchange ,  - month - olds successfully categorized while listening to tones , something we had not yet seen in any prior study at any age ( Ferguson & Waxman ,  ) . This suggests that when an otherwise inert signal is introduced in the context of a social , communicative exchange ,  - month - old infants elevate this signal to communicative status and forge an entirely new link between this signal and categorization . Moreover , this e ﬀ ect is related speci ﬁ cally to communicative information ; simply familiarizing infants to the tones – absent any communicative LINKING LANGUAGE AND CATEGORIZATION  terms of use , available at http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0305000916000568 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Northwestern University Libraries , on 21 Nov 2016 at 19 : 58 : 41 , subject to the Cambridge Core exchange – does not promote their use in categorization . To demonstrate this , we familiarized another group of infants to precisely the same tone sequences , but uncoupled them from the communicative episode , o ﬀ ering no evidence that tones served a communicative function . In this condition , we modi ﬁ ed the vignette so that the ‘ conversation ’ ( i . e . the speech and tone sounds ) played in the background – as if the sounds were playing on the radio – while the two actors engaged in a separate , cooperative task . Although infants in this condition heard precisely the same tones for precisely the same amount of time , they failed to form the categories in the subsequent categorization , performing instead at chance levels . This contrast between infants ’ success in the communicative condition and failure in the non - communicative control condition reveals the power of ‘ communicative ’ exposure alone in linking the tones to object categorization at  months of age . This outcome provides the strongest evidence to date against auditory overshadowing ( Robinson et al . ,  ; Robinson & Sloutsky ,  b ) . Ferguson and Waxman (  ) held the familiarity of the tones constant across both conditions : infants in the two conditions had the exact same amount of exposure to the tones before the categorization task . Familiarity alone , therefore , cannot explain why only those  - month - olds exposed to tones as a communicative signal later succeeded in categorizing objects while listening to tones . Our interpretation of the power of communicative experience in linking an otherwise inert sound ( e . g . tones ) to object categorization is consistent with the proposal for natural pedagogy ( Csibra & Gergely ,  ) . After learning that the tones were communicative , listening to tones seems to have engendered a communicative context that biased infants toward kind - relevant , generalizable information . Nevertheless , this ﬁ nding also reveals that the theory of natural pedagogy ( and any theory relying on infants ’ interpretation of communicative signals ) must specify how infants ‘ identify ’ which signals in their environment are communicative in the ﬁ rst place and how their interpretation of these signals is shaped over development . In future research , it will be important to manipulate systematically infants ’ experience with an inert sound such as tones , and to subsequently assess its impact on cognition . This will o ﬀ er a more nuanced developmental view of how a signal becomes communicative and , from this view , ‘ pedagogical ’ . A DEVELOPMENTAL CASCADE : INFANTS ’ EXPECTATIONS ABOUT ‘ LANGUAGE ’ CHANGES OVER THE FIRST  MONTHS These investigations into the origins of the link – its initial , broad state and the processes by which it is tuned thereafter – sharpen our understanding of FERGUSON AND WAXMAN  terms of use , available at http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0305000916000568 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Northwestern University Libraries , on 21 Nov 2016 at 19 : 58 : 41 , subject to the Cambridge Core how an early link between language and object categorization evolves early in development . We propose that , at  and  months , an initially privileged set of sounds – encompassing human speech and non - human primate vocalizations ( Ferry et al . ,  ,  ) – promotes categorization by broadly engaging infants ’ attention . By  months , this link is tuned to communicative signals through complementary processes of passive exposure ( maintaining the links of those signals to which infants are frequently exposed ; Perszyk & Waxman ,  ) and social - communicative exposure ( capable of privileging otherwise inert signals to communicative status ; Ferguson & Waxman ,  ) . Later , as infants approach their ﬁ rst birthday , this broad e ﬀ ect of communicative signals begins to be re ﬁ ned as infants discover which ‘ kinds ’ of language are particularly relevant to categorization ( Fennell & Waxman ,  ; Hollich , Hirsh - Pasek & Golinko ﬀ ,  ; Marcus , Fernandes & Johnson ,  ; May & Werker ,  ; Namy & Waxman ,  ; Woodward & Hoyne ,  ) . This discovery prompts a shift in attention from those signals that are ‘ communicative ’ to the ways in which labels alone are ‘ referential ’ . As infants learn about the referential capacities of di ﬀ erent kinds of labels , language becomes capable of more than broadly engaging infants ’ attention , but also of highlighting di ﬀ erent conceptual interpretations of the very same objects ( Booth & Waxman ,  ,  ; Waxman & Booth ,  ) . Only with additional evidence can we identify the mechanisms underlying these shifts . In these ways , although language promotes categorization throughout the ﬁ rst two years of life , the nature of this in ﬂ uence evolves during this period along with the developing capacities of the infant . Proposals that appeal only to infants ’ perceptual experience and processing of language ( Robinson et al . ,  ; Sloutsky & Fisher ,  ) cannot capture this dynamic , cascading developmental process . Likewise , although we propose that these links between language and concepts are grounded in infants ’ representation of language as a communicative signal , proposals that posit an enduring , static bias in communicative contexts ( Csibra & Gergely ,  ) also fail to capture this developmental trajectory . While the mechanisms posited by both of these views surely have some role to play in relating language to infants ’ cognition , neither appears su ﬃ cient in explaining the evidence at hand . FUTURE DIRECTIONS An important goal for future investigations is to identify which other cognitive capacities – in addition to object categorization – are shaped by language in the ﬁ rst year of life . There are reasons to suspect that language may cast a relatively wide facilitative net ( Vouloumanos & Waxman , LINKING LANGUAGE AND CATEGORIZATION  terms of use , available at http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0305000916000568 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Northwestern University Libraries , on 21 Nov 2016 at 19 : 58 : 41 , subject to the Cambridge Core  ) ; evidence has already begun to accumulate , suggesting that language promotes other fundamental learning processes , including abstract rule learning ( Ferguson & Lew - Williams ,  ; Dawson & Gerken ,  ; Marcus , Fernandes & Johnson ,  ) and associative learning ( Reeb - Sutherland , Fifer , Byrd , Hammock , Levitt & Fox ,  ) . Identifying the breadth of language ’ s in ﬂ uences – and the cognitive mechanisms that undergird them – will provide insights into the status of infants ’ earliest links between language and cognition , and how they are forged early in development , and will ultimately bring into sharper focus how language and thought become entwined . REFERENCES Anggoro , F . K . , Waxman , S . R . & Medin , D . L . (  ) . Naming practices and the acquisition of key biological concepts . Psychological Science  (  ) ,  –  . Arunachalam , S . , Escovar , E . , Hansen , M . A . & Waxman , S . R . (  ) . Out of sight , but not out of mind :  - month - olds use syntactic information to learn verbs even in the absence of a corresponding event . Language and Cognitive Processes  (  ) ,  –  . Arunachalam , S . & Waxman , S . R . (  ) . Meaning from syntax : evidence from  - year - olds . Cognition  ,  –  . Aslin , R . N . (  ) . Segmentation of ﬂ uent speech into words : learning models and the role of maternal input . In B . de Boysson - Bardies , S . de Schonen , P . Jusczky , P . McNeilage & J . Morton ( eds ) , Developmental Neurocognition : Speech and Face Processing in the First Year of Life ,  st ed . ,  –  . Norwell , MA : Kluwer . Balaban , M . T . & Waxman , S . R . (  ) . Do words facilitate object categorization in  - month - old infants ? Journal of Experimental Child Psychology  ,  –  . Bergelson , E . & Swingley , D . (  ) . At  –  months , human infants know the meanings of many common nouns . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  (  ) ,  –  . Bergelson , E . & Swingley , D . (  ) . The acquisition of abstract words by young infants . Cognition  (  ) ,  –  . Bergelson , E . & Swingley , D . (  ) . Early word comprehension in infants : replication and extension . Language Learning and Development  (  ) ,  –  . Bhatt , R . S . , Wasserman , E . A . , Reynolds , W . F . & Knauss , K . S . (  ) . Conceptual behavior in pigeons : categorization of both familiar and novel examples from four classes of natural and arti ﬁ cial stimuli . Journal of Experimental Psychology Animal Behavior Processes  (  ) ,  –  . Booth , A . & Waxman , S . R . (  ) . Mapping words to the world in infancy : infants ’ expectations for count nouns and adjectives . Journal of Cognition and Development  (  ) ,  –  . Booth , A . & Waxman , S . R . (  ) . A horse of a di ﬀ erent color : specifying with precision infants ’ mappings of novel nouns and adjectives . Child Development  (  ) ,  –  . Bortfeld , H . , Morgan , J . L . , Golinko ﬀ , R . M . & Rathbun , K . (  ) . ‘ Mommy ’ and me : familiar names help launch babies into speech - stream segmentation . Psychological Science  (  ) ,  –  . Chomsky , N . (  ) . Language and other cognitive systems . What is special about language ? Language Learning and Development  (  ) ,  –  . Colombo , J . & Bundy , R . S . (  ) . Infant response to auditory familiarity and novelty . Infant Behavior and Development  (  ) ,  –  . Condry , K . F . & Spelke , E . S . (  ) . The development of language and abstract concepts : the case of natural number . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General  (  ) ,  –  . FERGUSON AND WAXMAN  terms of use , available at http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0305000916000568 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Northwestern University Libraries , on 21 Nov 2016 at 19 : 58 : 41 , subject to the Cambridge Core Csibra , G . & Gergely , G . (  ) . Social learning and social cognition : the case for pedagogy . In Y . Munakata & M . H . Johnson ( eds ) , Processes of change in brain and cognitive development : attention and performance XXI ,  –  . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Csibra , G . & Gergely , G . (  ) . Natural pedagogy . Trends in Cognitive Sciences  (  ) ,  –  . Csibra , G . & Shamsudheen , R . (  ) . Nonverbal generics : human infants interpret objects as symbols of object kinds . Annual Review of Psychology  (  ) ,  –  . Dawson , C . & Gerken , L . (  ) . From domain - generality to domain - sensitivity :  - month - olds learn an abstract repetition rule in music that  - month - olds do not . Cognition  (  ) ,  –  . Deng , W . & Sloutsky , V . M . (  ) . Carrot eaters or moving heads : inductive inference is better supported by salient features than by category labels . Psychological Science  (  ) ,  –  . Dewar , K . & Xu , F . (  ) . Do  - month - old infants expect distinct words to refer to kinds ? Developmental Psychology  (  ) ,  –  . Dewar , K . & Xu , F . (  ) . Do early nouns refer to kinds or distinct shapes ? Evidence from  - month - old infants . Psychological Science  (  ) ,  –  . Diesendruck , G . (  ) . Categories for names or names for categories ? The interplay between domain - speci ﬁ c conceptual structure and language . Language and Cognitive Processes  (  /  ) ,  –  . Eimas , P . D . & Quinn , P . C . (  ) . Studies on the formation of perceptually based basic - level categories in young infants . Child Development  (  ) ,  –  . Fantz , R . L . (  ) . Pattern vision in newborn infants . Science  (  ) ,  –  . Farroni , T . , Johnson , M . H . , Menon , E . , Zulian , L . , Faraguna , D . & Csibra , G . (  ) . Newborns ’ preference for face - relevant stimuli : e ﬀ ects of contrast polarity . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  (  ) ,  –  . Fausey , C . M . & Boroditsky , L . (  ) . English and Spanish speakers remember causal agents di ﬀ erently . In B . C . Love , K . McRae & V . M . Sloutsky ( eds ) , Proceedings of the  th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp .  –  ) . Austin , TX : Cognitive Science Society . Feigenson , L . & Halberda , J . (  ) . Conceptual knowledge increases infants ’ memory capacity . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  (  ) ,  –  . Fennell , C . T . & Waxman , S . R . (  ) . What paradox ? Referential cues allow for infant use of phonetic detail in word learning . Child Development  (  ) ,  –  . Fenson , L . , Dale , P . S . , Reznick , J . S . , Thal , D . , Bates , E . , Hartung , J . & Reilly , J . (  ) . The MacArthur Communicative Development Inventories : user ’ s guide and technical manual . San Diego , CA : Singular Publishing Group . Ferguson , B . , Havy , M . & Waxman , S . R . (  ) . The precision of  - month - old infants ’ link between language and categorization predicts vocabulary size at  and  months . Frontiers in Psychology ,  , online : < http : / / doi . org /  .  / fpsyg .  .  > . Ferguson , B . & Lew - Williams , C . (  ) . Communicative signals support abstract rule learning by  - month - old infants . Scienti ﬁ c Reports ,  , online : < http : / / doi . org /  .  / srep  > . Ferguson , B . & Waxman , S . R . (  ) . What the [ beep ] ? Six - month - olds link novel communicative signals to meaning . Cognition  ( C ) ,  –  . Ferry , A . L . , Hespos , S . J . & Waxman , S . R . (  ) . Categorization in  ‐ and  ‐ month ‐ old infants : an advantage of words over tones . Child Development  (  ) ,  –  . Ferry , A . L . , Hespos , S . J . & Waxman , S . R . (  ) . Nonhuman primate vocalizations support categorization in very young human infants . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  (  ) ,  –  . Fisher , C . , Gertner , Y . , Scott , R . M . & Yuan , S . (  ) . Syntactic bootstrapping . Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews : Cognitive Science  ,  –  . Frank , M . C . , Braginsky , M . & Yurovsky , D . (  ) . Wordbank : an open repository for developmental vocabulary data . Journal of Child Language , online : < http : / / doi . org /  .  / s  > . LINKING LANGUAGE AND CATEGORIZATION  terms of use , available at http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0305000916000568 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Northwestern University Libraries , on 21 Nov 2016 at 19 : 58 : 41 , subject to the Cambridge Core Frank , M . C . , Everett , D . L . , Fedorenko , E . & Gibson , E . (  ) . Number as a cognitive technology : evidence from Pirahã language and cognition . Cognition  (  ) ,  –  . Fulkerson , A . L . & Haaf , R . A . (  ) . Does object naming aid  - month - olds ’ formation of novel object categories ? First Language  (  ) ,  –  . Fulkerson , A . L . & Waxman , S . R . (  ) . Words ( but not tones ) facilitate object categorization : evidence from  - and  - month - olds . Cognition  (  ) ,  –  . Futó , J . , Téglás , E . , Csibra , G . & Gergely , G . (  ) . Communicative function demonstration induces kind - based artifact representation in preverbal infants . Cognition  (  ) ,  –  . Gelman , S . A . & Heyman , G . D . (  ) . Carrot - eaters and creature - believers : the e ﬀ ects of lexicalization on children ’ s inferences about social categories . Psychological Science  (  ) ,  –  . Gentner , D . & Goldin - Meadow , S . (  ) . Whither Whorf . In Language in mind : advances in the study of language and thought ,  –  . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Gershko ﬀ - Stowe , L . , Thal , D . J . , Smith , L . B . & Namy , L . L . (  ) . Categorization and its developmental relation to early language . Child Development  (  ) ,  –  . Gleitman , L . R . (  ) . The structural sources of verb meanings . Language Acquisition  (  ) ,  –  . Gleitman , L . R . & Papafragou , A . (  ) . Language and thought . In K . J . Holyoak & R . G . Morrison ( eds ) , The Cambridge handbook of thinking and reasoning ,  –  . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Grossmann , T . , Parise , E . & Friederici , A . D . (  ) . The detection of communicative signals directed at the self in infant prefrontal cortex . Frontiers in Human Neuroscience ,  , online : < http : / / doi . org /  .  / fnhum .  .  > . Hall , D . G . , Veltkamp , B . & Turkel , W . (  ) . Children ’ s and adults ’ understanding of proper namable things . First Language  (  ) ,  –  . Hernik , M . & Csibra , G . (  ) . Infants learn enduring functions of novel tools from action demonstrations . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology  ( C ) ,  –  . Hollich , G . , Hirsh - Pasek , K . & Golinko ﬀ , R . M . (  ) . Breaking the language barrier : an emergentist coalition model for the origins of word learning . Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development  (  ) ,  –  . Höhle , B . , Weissenborn , J . , Kiefer , D . & Schulz , A . (  ) . Functional elements in infants ’ speech processing : the role of determiners in the syntactic categorization of lexical elements . Infancy  (  ) ,  –  . Imai , M . & Gentner , D . (  ) . A cross - linguistic study of early word meaning : universal ontology and linguistic in ﬂ uence . Cognition  (  ) ,  –  . Johnson , J . S . & Newport , E . L . (  ) . Critical period e ﬀ ects in second language learning : the in ﬂ uence of maturational state on the acquisition of English as a second language . Cognitive Psychology  (  ) ,  –  . Jusczyk , P . W . & Aslin , R . N . (  ) . Infants ’ detection of the sound patterns of words in ﬂ uent speech . Infant Pathways to Language : , Methods , Models and Research Directions  (  ) ,  –  . Keates , J . & Graham , S . A . (  ) . Category markers or attributes : Why do labels guide infants ’ inductive inferences ? Psychological Science  (  ) ,  –  . Klibano ﬀ , R . S . & Waxman , S . R . (  ) . Basic level object categories support the acquisition of novel adjectives : evidence from preschool - aged children . Child Development  (  ) ,  –  . Krehm , M . , Onishi , K . H . & Vouloumanos , A . (  ) . I see your point : infants under  months understand that pointing is communicative . Journal of Cognition and Development  (  ) ,  –  . Krentz , U . C . & Corina , D . P . (  ) . Preference for language in early infancy : the human language bias is not speech speci ﬁ c . Developmental Science  (  ) ,  –  . Kuhl , P . K . , Tsao , F . M . & Liu , H . M . (  ) . Foreign - language experience in infancy : e ﬀ ects of short - term exposure and social interaction on phonetic learning . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  (  ) ,  –  . FERGUSON AND WAXMAN  terms of use , available at http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0305000916000568 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Northwestern University Libraries , on 21 Nov 2016 at 19 : 58 : 41 , subject to the Cambridge Core Landau , B . & Shipley , E . (  ) . Labelling patterns and object naming . Developmental Science  (  ) ,  –  . Lewkowicz , D . J . (  a ) . Sensory dominance in infants : I . Six - month - old infants ’ response to auditory - visual compounds . Developmental Psychology  (  ) ,  –  . Lewkowicz , D . J . (  b ) . Sensory dominance in infants : II . Ten - month - old infants ’ response to auditory - visual compounds . Developmental Psychology  (  ) ,  –  . Liszkowski , U . & Carpenter , M . (  ) . Pointing out new news , old news , and absent referents at  months of age . Developmental Science  (  ) , F  –  . Lewkowicz , D . J . & Ghazanfar , A . A . (  ) . The emergence of multisensory systems through perceptual narrowing . Trends in Cognitive Sciences  (  ) ,  –  . Lloyd - Fox , S . , Széplaki - Köll ő d , B . , Yin , J . & Csibra , G . (  ) . Are you talking to me ? Neural activations in  - month - old infants in response to being addressed during natural interactions . Cortex  ,  –  . Lupyan , G . (  ) . The conceptual grouping e ﬀ ect : categories matter ( and named categories matter more ) . Cognition  (  ) ,  –  . Lupyan , G . , Rakison , D . H . & McClelland , J . L . (  ) . Language is not just for talking : redundant labels facilitate learning of novel categories . Psychological Science  (  ) ,  –  . Mandler , J . M . & McDonough , L . (  ) . Concept formation in infancy . Cognitive Development  (  ) ,  –  . Marcus , G . F . , Fernandes , K . J . & Johnson , S . P . (  ) . Infant rule learning facilitated by speech . Psychological Science  (  ) ,  –  . Marcus , G . F . , Fernandes , K . J . & Johnson , S . P . (  ) . The role of association in early word - learning . Frontiers in Psychology ,  ,  , online : < http : / / doi . org /  .  / fpsyg .  .  > . Mareschal , D . & Quinn , P . C . (  ) . Categorization in infancy . Trends in Cognitive Sciences  (  ) ,  –  . Marno , H . , Davelaar , E . J . & Csibra , G . (  ) . Nonverbal communicative signals modulate attention to object properties . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Perception and Performance  (  ) ,  –  . Marno , H . , Davelaar , E . J . & Csibra , G . (  ) . An object memory bias induced by communicative reference . Acta Psychologica ,  ( C )  –  . Maurer , D . & Werker , J . F . (  ) . Perceptual narrowing during infancy : a comparison of language and faces . Developmental Psychobiology  (  ) ,  –  . May , L . & Werker , J . F . (  ) . Can a click be a word ? Infants ’ learning of non - native words . Infancy  (  ) ,  –  . Mervis , C . B . & Rosch , E . (  ) . Categorization of natural objects . Annual Review of Psychology  ,  –  . Mintz , T . H . (  ) . Frequent frames as a cue for grammatical categories in child directed speech . Cognition  (  ) ,  –  . Murphy , G . L . (  ) . Noun phrase interpretation and conceptual combination . Journal of Memory and Language  (  ) ,  –  . Murphy , G . L . (  ) . The big book of concepts . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Namy , L . L . & Waxman , S . R . (  ) . Naming and exclaiming : infants ’ sensitivity to naming contexts . Journal of Cognition and Development  (  ) ,  –  . Namy , L . L . & Waxman , S . R . (  ) . Symbols rede ﬁ ned . In L . L . Namy ( ed . ) , Symbol use and symbolic representation ,  –  . Malwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Palmer , S . B . , Fais , L . , Golinko ﬀ , R . M . & Werker , J . F . (  ) . Perceptual narrowing of linguistic sign occurs in the  st year of life . Child Development  (  ) ,  –  . Parise , E . & Csibra , G . (  ) . Neural responses to multimodal ostensive signals in  - month - old infants . PLoS ONE  (  ) ,  . Pascalis , O . , Loevenbruck , H . , Quinn , P . C . , Kandel , S . , Tanaka , J . W . & Lee , K . (  ) . On the links among face processing , language processing , and narrowing during development . Child Development Perspectives  (  ) ,  –  . LINKING LANGUAGE AND CATEGORIZATION  terms of use , available at http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0305000916000568 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Northwestern University Libraries , on 21 Nov 2016 at 19 : 58 : 41 , subject to the Cambridge Core Peirce , C . S . (  ) . Collected papers , ( eds . ) , C . Hartshorne & P . Weiss . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Perszyk , D . , Ferguson , B . & Waxman , S . ( in press ) . Maturation constrains the e ﬀ ect of experience in linking language and cognition : evidence from healthy preterm infants . Developmental Science . Pinker , S . (  ) . The stu ﬀ of thought : language as a window into human nature . New York , NY : Viking Press . Pinker , S . & Jackendo ﬀ , R . (  ) . The faculty of language : What ’ s special about it ? Cognition  (  ) ,  –  . Plunkett , K . (  ) . Labels can override perceptual categories in early infancy . Cognition  (  ) ,  –  . Quinn , P . C . , Lee , K . , Pascalis , O . & Tanaka , J . W . (  ) . Narrowing in categorical responding to other - race face classes by infants . Developmental Science  (  ) ,  –  . Reeb - Sutherland , B . C . , Fifer , W . P . , Byrd , D . L . , Hammock , E . A . D . , Levitt , P . & Fox , N . A . (  ) . One - month - old human infants learn about the social world while they sleep . Developmental Science  (  ) ,  –  . Robinson , C . W . , Best , C . A . , Deng , W . & Sloutsky , V . M . (  ) . The role of words in cognitive tasks : What , when , and how ? Frontiers in Psychology  (  ) ,  –  , online : < http : / / doi . org /  .  / fpsyg .  .  > . Robinson , C . W . & Sloutsky , V . M . (  a ) . Linguistic labels and categorization in infancy : Do labels facilitate or hinder ? Infancy  (  ) ,  –  . Robinson , C . W . & Sloutsky , V . M . (  b ) . Visual processing speed : e ﬀ ects of auditory input on visual processing . Developmental Science  (  ) ,  –  . Scott , L . S . & Monesson , A . (  ) . The origin of biases in face perception . Psychological Science  (  ) ,  –  . Scott , L . S . & Monesson , A . (  ) . Experience - dependent neural specialization during infancy . Neuropsychologia  (  ) ,  –  . Seidl , A . , Tinco ﬀ , R . , Baker , C . & Cristia , A . (  ) . Why the body comes ﬁ rst : e ﬀ ects of experimenter touch on infants ’ word ﬁ nding . Developmental Science  (  ) ,  –  . Shi , R . (  ) . Functional morphemes and early language acquisition . Child Development Perspectives  (  ) ,  –  . Shultz , S . & Vouloumanos , A . (  ) . Three - month - olds prefer speech to other naturally occurring signals . Language Learning and Development  (  ) ,  –  . Shultz , S . , Vouloumanos , A . , Bennett , R . H . & Pelphrey , K . (  ) . Neural specialization for speech in the ﬁ rst months of life . Developmental Science  (  ) ,  –  . Sloman , S . A . , Malt , B . C . & Fridman , A . (  ) . Categorization versus similarity : the case of container names . In U . Hahn & M . Ramscar ( eds ) , Similarity and categorization ,  –  . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Sloutsky , V . M . (  ) . From perceptual categories to concepts : What develops ? Cognitive Science  (  ) ,  –  . Sloutsky , V . M . & Fisher , A . V . (  ) . Induction and categorization in young children : a similarity - based model . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General  (  ) ,  –  . Sloutsky , V . M . & Fisher , A . V . (  ) . Linguistic labels : Conceptual markers or object features ? Journal of Experimental Child Psychology  (  ) ,  –  . Sloutsky , V . M . & Robinson , C . W . (  ) . The role of words and sounds in infants ’ visual processing : from overshadowing to attentional tuning . Cognitive Science  (  ) ,  –  . Smith , E . E . & Medin , D . L . (  ) . Categories and concepts . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Smith , L . B . (  ) . Avoiding associations when it ’ s behaviorism you really hate . In R . M . Golinko ﬀ & K . Hirsh - Pasek ( eds ) , Becoming a word learner : a debate on lexical acquisition ,  –  . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Smith . , L . B . & Heise , D . (  ) . Perceptual similarity and conceptual structure . In B . Bums ( ed . ) , Advances in psychology – percepts , concepts , and categories : the representation and processing of information ,  –  . Amsterdam : Elsevier . FERGUSON AND WAXMAN  terms of use , available at http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0305000916000568 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Northwestern University Libraries , on 21 Nov 2016 at 19 : 58 : 41 , subject to the Cambridge Core Spelke , E . S . & Kestenbaum , R . (  ) . Les origines du concept d ’ objet . Psychologie Française  ,  –  . Syrett , K . , Arunachalam , S . & Waxman , S . R . (  ) . Slowly but surely : adverbs support verb learning in  - year - olds . Language Learning and Development  (  ) ,  –  . Tinco ﬀ , R . & Jusczyk , P . W . (  ) . Some beginnings of word comprehension in  - month - olds . Psychological Science  (  ) ,  –  . Tinco ﬀ , R . & Jusczyk , P . W . (  ) . Six - month - olds comprehend words that refer to parts of the body . Infancy  (  ) ,  –  . Tomasello , M . (  ) . The cultural origins of human cognition . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Tomasello , M . & Kruger , A . C . (  ) . Joint attention on actions : acquiring verbs in ostensive and non - ostensive contexts . Journal of Child Language  (  ) ,  –  . Valenza , E . , Simion , F . & Cassia , V . M . (  ) . Face preference at birth . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Perception and Performance  (  ) ,  –  . Vouloumanos , A . & Waxman , S . R . (  ) . Listen up ! Speech is for thinking during infancy . Trends in Cognitive Sciences  (  ) ,  –  . Vouloumanos , A . , Hauser , M . D . , Werker , J . F . & Martin , A . (  ) . The tuning of human neonates ’ preference for speech . Child Development  (  ) ,  –  . Vouloumanos , A . , Martin , A . & Onishi , K . H . (  ) . Do  - month - olds understand that speech can communicate ? Developmental Science  (  ) ,  –  . Vouloumanos , A . , Onishi , K . H . & Pogue , A . (  ) . Twelve - month - old infants recognize that speech can communicate unobservable intentions . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  (  ) ,  –  . Vouloumanos , A . & Werker , J . F . (  ) . Tuned to the signal : the privileged status of speech for young infants . Developmental Science  (  ) ,  –  . Vouloumanos , A . & Werker , J . F . (  ) . Listening to language at birth : evidence for a bias for speech in neonates . Developmental Science  (  ) ,  –  . Vygotsky , L . S . (  ) . Thought and language . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Waxman , S . R . (  a ) . Specifying the scope of  - month - olds ’ expectations for novel words . Cognition  (  ) , B  –  . Waxman , S . R . (  b ) . The dubbing ceremony revisited : object naming and categorization in infancy and early childhood . In D . L . Medin & S . Atran ( eds ) , Folkbiology ,  –  . Cambridge , MA : Bradford . Waxman , S . R . (  ) . Early word learning and conceptual development : everything had a name , and each name gave birth to a new thought . In U . Goswami ( ed . ) , Blackwell handbook of childhood cognitive development ,  –  . Oxford : Blackwell . Waxman , S . R . & Booth , A . (  ) . Seeing pink elephants : fourteen - month - olds ’ interpretations of novel nouns and adjectives . Infant Pathways to Language : Methods , Models and Research Directions  (  ) ,  –  . Waxman , S . R . & Booth , A . (  ) . The origins and evolution of links between word learning and conceptual organization : new evidence from  - month - olds . Developmental Science  (  ) ,  –  . Waxman , S . R . & Braun , I . (  ) . Consistent ( but not variable ) names as invitations to form object categories : new evidence from  - month - old infants . Cognition  , B  –  . Waxman , S . R . & Gelman , S . A . (  ) . Early word - learning entails reference , not merely associations . Trends in Cognitive Sciences  (  ) ,  –  . Waxman , S . R . & Hall , D . G . (  ) . The development of a linkage between count nouns and object categories : evidence from ﬁ fteen ‐ to twenty ‐ one ‐ month ‐ old infants . Child Development  (  ) ,  –  . Waxman , S . R . & Lidz , J . (  ) . Early word learning . In D . Kuhn & R . Siegler ( eds ) , Handbook of Child Psychology ,  th ed . , Vol .  ,  –  . Hoboken , NJ : Wiley . Waxman , S . R . , Lidz , J . , Braun , I . E . & Lavin , T . (  ) . Twenty - four - month - old infants ’ interpretations of novel verbs and nouns in dynamic scenes . Infant Pathways to Language : Methods , Models and Research Directions  (  ) ,  –  . LINKING LANGUAGE AND CATEGORIZATION  terms of use , available at http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0305000916000568 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Northwestern University Libraries , on 21 Nov 2016 at 19 : 58 : 41 , subject to the Cambridge Core Waxman , S . R . & Markow , D . B . (  ) . Words as invitations to form categories : evidence from  - to  - month - old infants . Infant Pathways to Language : Methods , Models and Research Directions  (  ) ,  –  . Waxman , S . R . & Markow , D . B . (  ) . Object properties and object kind : twenty - one - month - old infants ’ extension of novel adjectives . Child Development  (  ) ,  –  . Weisleder , A . & Waxman , S . R . (  ) . What ’ s in the input ? Frequent frames in child - directed speech o ﬀ er distributional cues to grammatical categories in Spanish and English . Journal of Child Language  (  ) ,  –  . Werker , J . F . & Hensch , T . K . (  ) . Critical periods in speech perception : new directions . Annual Review of Psychology  (  ) ,  –  . Werker , J . F . & Tees , R . (  ) . Cross - language speech perception : evidence for perceptual reorganization during the ﬁ rst year of life . Infant Behavior and Development  (  ) ,  –  . Winawer , J . , Witthoft , N . , Frank , M . C . , Wu , L . , Wade , A . R . & Boroditsky , L . (  ) . Russian blues reveal e ﬀ ects of language on color discrimination . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  (  ) ,  –  . Woodward , A . L . & Hoyne , K . L . (  ) . Infants ’ learning about words and sounds in relation to objects . Child Development  (  ) ,  –  . Wu , R . , Gopnik , A . , Richardson , D . C . & Kirkham , N . Z . (  ) . Infants learn about objects from statistics and people . Developmental Psychology  (  ) ,  –  . Xu , F . (  ) . The role of language in acquiring object kind concepts in infancy . Cognition  (  ) ,  –  . Xu , F . , Cote , M . & Baker , A . (  ) . Labeling guides object individuation in  - month - old infants . Psychological Science  (  ) ,  –  . Yoon , J . M . D . , Johnson , M . H . & Csibra , G . (  ) . Communication - induced memory biases in preverbal infants , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  (  ) ,  –  . Yuan , S . & Fisher , C . (  ) . ‘ Really ? He blicked the cat ? ’ : Two - year - olds learn distributional facts about verbs in the absence of a referential context . Psychological Science  (  ) ,  –  . Zosh , J . M . , and Feigenson , L . (  ) . Beyond ‘ what ’ and ‘ how many ’ : capacity , complexity and resolution of infants ’ object representations . In L . Santos & B . Hood ( eds . ) , The origins of object knowledge ,  –  . Oxford : Oxford University Press . FERGUSON AND WAXMAN  terms of use , available at http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0305000916000568 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Northwestern University Libraries , on 21 Nov 2016 at 19 : 58 : 41 , subject to the Cambridge Core