Understanding Strategies and Challenges of Conducting Daily Data Analysis ( DDA ) Among Blind and Low - vision People Chutian Jiang Wentao Lei Emily Kuang Computational Media and Arts Thrust Computational Media and Arts Thrust Golisano College of Computing and The Hong Kong University of Science The Hong Kong University of Science Information Sciences and Technology ( Guangzhou ) and Technology ( Guangzhou ) Rochester Institute of Technology Guangzhou , China Guangzhou , China Rochester , USA cjiang893 @ connect . hkust - gz . edu . cn shepa _ do @ 126 . com ek8093 @ rit . edu Teng Han ∗ Mingming Fan Institute of Software Computational Media and Arts Thrust Chinese Academy of Sciences The Hong Kong University of Science Beijing , China and Technology ( Guangzhou ) hanteng @ iscas . ac . cn Guangzhou , China The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology Hong Kong SAR , China mingmingfan @ ust . hk ABSTRACT Being able to analyze and derive insights from data , which we call Daily Data Analysis ( DDA ) , is an increasingly important skill in everyday life . While the accessibility community has explored ways to make data more accessible to blind and low - vision ( BLV ) people , little is known about how BLV people perform DDA . Knowing BLV people’s strategies and challenges in DDA would allow the community to make DDA more accessible to them . Toward this goal , we conducted a mixed - methods study of interviews and think - aloud sessions with BLV people ( N = 16 ) . Our study revealed fve key approaches for DDA ( i . e . , overview obtaining , column comparison , key statistics identifcation , note - taking , and data validation ) and the associated challenges . We discussed the implications of our fndings and highlighted potential directions to make DDA more accessible for BLV people . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Empirical studies in acces - sibility . KEYWORDS blind and low vision , BLV , qualitative study , data exploration , daily data analysis , DDA , interview , think - aloud , data accessibility ∗ Corresponding author Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the frst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specifc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . ASSETS ’23 , October 22 – 25 , 2023 , New York , NY , USA © 2023 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 979 - 8 - 4007 - 0220 - 4 / 23 / 10 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3597638 . 3608423 ACM Reference Format : Chutian Jiang , Wentao Lei , Emily Kuang , Teng Han , and Mingming Fan . 2023 . Understanding Strategies and Challenges of Conducting Daily Data Analysis ( DDA ) Among Blind and Low - vision People . In The 25th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility ( ASSETS ’23 ) , October 22 – 25 , 2023 , New York , NY , USA . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 15 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3597638 . 3608423 1 INTRODUCTION On a typical workday , Tom opens a spreadsheet of a list of commodities with product information and prices . Instead of glancing at it to get an overview ( e . g . , number of rows and columns ) , as a blind person , Tom moves the cursor in the spreadsheet cell by cell while carefully listening to each value being read by the screen reader . Tom has to spend quite some time gaining a general understanding of the data in the spreadsheet before making calculations and comparisons among the commodities . This is a typical scenario of how blind and low - vision people ( BLV ) perform daily data analysis ( DDA ) . DDA is a series of common tasks people perform in certain situations ( e . g . , splitting expenses amongst friends , computing stock portfolio changes , and calculating average scores ) . In particular , the word “daily” emphasizes its common occurrence in our everyday lives . Access to data is a prerequisite for DDA . Recent studies un - covered BLV people’s practices and accessibility challenges with various data sources and platforms , presented recommendations on how to overcome these challenges , and provided guidelines and design considerations on how to make these data access pro - cesses more accessible . The areas they explored include web and social media [ 14 , 20 , 51 , 73 ] , smartphone data [ 2 , 22 , 47 ] , and online - shopping [ 38 , 41 ] . To improve access to data for BLV people , re - searchers have investigated various assistive technologies , such as printed Braille and refreshable Braille displays [ 29 , 31 ] , screen readers [ 42 , 71 , 79 ] , sonifcation approaches [ 30 , 56 , 66 , 67 ] , and haptic devices [ 15 , 19 , 29 ] . ASSETS ’23 , October 22 – 25 , 2023 , New York , NY , USA Jiang et al . Figure 1 : Our research revealed fve key approaches to performing DDA among blind and low - vision ( BLV ) people : a ) Overview Obtaining ; b ) Column Comparison ; c ) Key Statistics Identifcation ; d ) Note - Taking ; e ) Data Validation ; In addition to uncovering and addressing access to data chal - lenges , researchers have investigated how BLV people use spread - sheets [ 13 , 34 , 75 , 76 ] . For example , Doush et al . [ 13 ] found that the large amount of information stored in the spreadsheet , the multi - dimensional nature of the contents , and the several features were factors that prevented BLV people from getting the overview of var - ious elements ( e . g . , charts and tables ) in the spreadsheet . Similarly , Stockman found that navigating spreadsheets with most screen readers is time - consuming , and places a large load on users’ short - term memory [ 75 ] . While informative , prior work primarily focused on how BLV people conduct non - visual navigation of spreadsheets . In contrast , performing DDA is a comprehensive activity that in - volves not only non - visual navigation but also how to make sense of the data . It remains largely unknown how BLV people perform DDA to make sense of the data and the challenges they encounter in the process . By gaining insight into their strategies and challenges , we can identify opportunities for developing assistive technologies that cater to their needs more efectively . Inspired by this need , we investigate the following research question ( RQ ) : How do BLV people perform DDA , and what are the associated challenges ? To answer this RQ , we recruited 16 BLV people to participate in a mixed - methods study , which consisted of semi - structured inter - views and think - aloud sessions in which they completed a series of DDA tasks using screen readers while verbalizing their thoughts . By analyzing their interviews and think - aloud data , we identifed fve key approaches that participants used to conduct DDA : overview obtaining , column comparison , key statistics identifcation , note - taking , and data validation . We also identifed particularly challeng - ing operations such as obtaining the quantity , layout , and relation - ships between the elements in the spreadsheet , as well as possible ways of improving assistive tools for more efcient DDA . In sum , we make the following two contributions : 1 ) We iden - tifed the process by which BLV people perform DDA and the challenges they encountered ; 2 ) Based on the fndings , we present design considerations for improving the accessibility of the DDA process for BLV people . 2 RELATED WORK Our work draws on prior literature in three areas : data sensemaking , BLV people’s practices and challenges in accessing data , and non - visual navigation of spreadsheets . Daily Data Analysis ( DDA ) Among Blind and Low - vision People ASSETS ’23 , October 22 – 25 , 2023 , New York , NY , USA 2 . 1 Data Sensemaking Data sensemaking is the process of constructing meaning from information [ 4 ] and is an iterative process that involves linking diferent pieces of information into a single conceptual representa - tion [ 27 , 60 ] . Weick et al . also defned it as an ongoing retrospective development of plausible images that rationalize what people are doing [ 84 ] . Prior work has investigated various perspectives of data sensemaking , such as Weick [ 82 , 83 ] , Stefk , Pirolli , and Card [ 61 ] , and Dervin [ 12 ] . Researchers have also developed a model for the cost structure of sensemaking and found that sensemaking is a cyclic process that involves searching for representations and then organizing information in these representations while reducing the cost of task operations [ 61 ] . They presented four case studies to show that making sense of complex information always appears to follow a common pattern despite diferences in domain [ 61 ] . Thus , we were motivated to explore how this process may map to how people make sense of a data set during DDA . They also found that the main cost ( i . e . , time and efort ) associated with sensemaking is data extraction , in which people try to fnd relevant information and then transform that information into a canonical form [ 61 ] . Hence , we will investigate if a similar step in the DDA process causes chal - lenges for BLV people and seek to identify improvements to reduce that cost . Researchers have also explored the types of common tasks that are involved in DDA with sighted people [ 1 , 5 , 37 ] . Boy et al . found six fundamental data literacy questions , which include determining the maximum ( T1 ) , minimum ( T2 ) , variation ( T3 ) , intersection ( T4 ) , average ( T5 ) , and comparison ( T6 ) [ 5 ] . Amar et al . presented 10 low - levels tasks that help people make sense of data visualizations , which include retrieve value , flter , compute derived value , fnd extremum , sort , determine range , characterize distribution , fnd anomalies , cluster , and correlate [ 1 ] . Although the tasks that BLV people engage in during DDA are the same as sighted people , the way they approach them may difer . While sighted people may glance at a chart to fnd extremum , BLV people rely on assistive tools . Thus , we will investigate the various strategies that BLV peo - ple employ and the challenges they encounter during this process . 2 . 2 BLV people’s Practices and Challenges in Accessing Data In order for BLV people to perform DDA , they frst need access to such data . The process of accessing data was investigated by previous studies that focused on BLV people’s practices and chal - lenges in various data sources and platforms , which resulted in recommendations , guidelines , and design considerations . For in - stance , previous work has explored web accessibility [ 14 , 35 , 64 , 73 ] , smartphone data accessibility [ 2 , 33 , 48 , 59 , 73 , 77 ] , social media data accessibility [ 20 , 36 , 51 , 63 , 78 ] , and online - shopping data accessibil - ity [ 38 , 41 , 80 ] . In particular , Siu et al . found that many BLV people experienced barriers when trying to access accurate information about COVID - 19 , which highlighted data access inequalities in the BLV people community during a time of crisis [ 73 ] . Lee et al . exam - ined how screen readers narrate diferent out - of - vocabulary ( OOV ) words ( e . g . , abbreviations , wordplays , slang ) on Twitter and how the presence of these words infuences the interaction behavior and comprehension of blind screen reader users . They found that screen readers rarely narrated the standard form of OOV words ( e . g . , bros as “brothers” ) , even for popular words such as acronyms . Thus , blind users relied on tedious workarounds to discover the actual meaning , which included repeatedly listening to the tweet , search - ing on Google , asking friends , and creating custom pronunciation dictionaries for select OOV words [ 36 ] . 2 . 2 . 1 Assistive Tools for Data Access . To improve BLV people’s access to data , researchers have developed various assistive tools , such as printed Braille and Braille displays [ 6 , 17 , 29 , 31 , 39 , 49 ] , screen readers [ 25 , 42 , 50 , 52 , 65 , 71 , 74 , 79 , 88 ] , sonifcation [ 16 , 30 , 56 , 57 , 66 , 67 ] , and haptic devices [ 15 , 19 , 23 , 29 ] . BLV people have used Braille for decades , but due to its high cost and infexibility , printed Braille is not frequently used when ac - cessing data in spreadsheets [ 6 , 49 ] . Recently , multi - rows refre - shable Braille displays and pin array haptic displays have been developed , which enabled BLV people to understand compli - cated fgures and graphs [ 17 , 29 , 31 , 39 ] . Screen readers , as a frequently used tool , have been widely researched , with applica - tions including but not limited to reading text , tables , fgures , and charts [ 14 , 25 , 42 , 50 , 65 , 68 , 71 , 79 , 88 , 89 ] . Some researchers fo - cused on screen readers’ user experience and design principles [ 14 , 25 , 42 , 71 , 89 ] , while others developed new functions or plug - ins for screen readers [ 50 , 65 , 68 , 79 , 79 , 88 ] . Sonifcation is used for BLV people’s access to both tabular data and visualized data . The increase or decrease in the value of the data is communicated to users via the change of sonifcation’s pitch , amplitude , and tempo [ 16 , 30 , 56 , 67 ] . Among these works , some developed sonifcation for charts or fgures [ 16 , 30 , 67 ] , while the others focused on data sets [ 56 ] . The use of haptic devices allowed users to feel the data through their fngers or hands [ 15 , 18 , 19 , 23 , 29 , 72 ] , harnessing diferent interactions such as active surfaces [ 29 , 72 ] , vibrations [ 19 , 23 ] , and force [ 18 ] . Our review demonstrates that prior work has primarily focused on data access ( e . g . , how BLV people access data and what chal - lenges they encounter ) , while our study aims to explore the full DDA process from the point where BLV people open a data set until the end of their analysis . Specifcally , we will investigate the strate - gies that BLV people utilize and the challenges they experience when making sense of data sets . 2 . 3 Non - visual Navigation of Spreadsheets Apart from revealing and addressing issues found in accessing data , researchers explored how BLV people interacted with spreadsheets via non - visual navigation with screen readers . Compared to fgures , participants preferred to access data with tabular and textual data to acquire detailed information [ 64 ] . Previous work has explored BLV people’s challenges when conducting non - visual navigation of tabular data presented in spreadsheets [ 13 , 34 , 75 , 76 ] , which includes slow navigation speed , large load on users’ short - term memory , difculty in understanding the spatial structure of the spreadsheet , and lack of hierarchical presentation of the data [ 13 ] . Since BLV people must remember the data that was just read , they felt that their memory deteriorates over time due to fatigue [ 76 ] . Additionally , Kildal et al . found that it can be challenging for BLV individuals to obtain an overview of complex tabular numerical data sets , which is the frst step in their navigation process [ 34 ] . ASSETS ’23 , October 22 – 25 , 2023 , New York , NY , USA Jiang et al . Table 1 : Participants’ demographic information . ID Age Gender Visual acuity level Ability to read characters Color per - ception Contrast sensitivity Congenital condition 1 19 M Low Vision yes yes yes yes 2 23 M Totally Blind no no no yes 3 19 M Totally Blind no no no yes 4 40 M Totally Blind no no no no 5 23 F Totally Blind no no no yes 6 20 M Totally Blind no no no yes 7 19 M Totally Blind no no no yes 8 19 M Low Vision yes yes yes yes 9 21 F Totally Blind no no no yes 10 19 M Low Vision yes yes yes no 11 17 F Low Vision no yes yes yes 12 24 M R : Totally Blind ; L : Low Vision no yes yes yes 13 34 M Low Vision yes yes yes yes 14 41 F Totally Blind no no no no 15 21 F Totally Blind no no yes no 16 19 F Totally Blind no no yes no The current body of work on non - visual navigation is insufcient to extrapolate insights about DDA since performing DDA includes not only non - visual navigation but also requires users to make sense of their data . It remains largely unknown how they perform DDA and what challenges they must overcome . Understanding the strategies and challenges is useful when designing and developing assistive tools for BLV people’s DDA process . Thus , our work aims to explore the DDA process and provide suggestions to improve assistive tools for more efcient DDA . 3 USER STUDY We conducted a mixed - methods user study with BLV participants to understand their strategies and challenges in performing DDA . The entire user study process started with a short demographic survey . Then we proceeded with the semi - structured interview to understand their general strategies and challenges . The interview results helped to inform our design of think - aloud tasks in the next phase . After 1 - 2 weeks , participants were invited back to perform DDA think - aloud tasks to understand their DDA strategies and challenges in practice . Due to COVID - 19 travel restrictions , all sessions were conducted online , and the total time required for both sessions was between 90 and 120 minutes . The study sessions were audio recorded , and the recordings were then transcribed for thematic coding . The study was approved by the ethical review board at the authors’ institution . 3 . 1 Participants We recruited 16 BLV participants who had prior experience in conducting DDA either for work or personal reasons . As shown in Table 1 , participants had various levels of visual acuity and were familiar with Microsoft Excel   since they had used it before with a screen reader . 3 . 2 Procedure The study consisted of two separate components : ( 1 ) A semi - structured interview session to understand their DDA strategies and challenges ; ( 2 ) A follow - up think - aloud DDA task session to observe their DDA process in practice . 3 . 2 . 1 The Semi - structured Interview Session . The semi - structured interview session was designed to understand their strategies and challenges during the DDA process . Participants were asked about when and how they performed DDA , the types of data they ana - lyzed , the tools they used , common mistakes they made , and chal - lenges they encountered . The fndings from this session guided the design of the following think - aloud session . 3 . 2 . 2 The Think - Aloud DDA Task Session . While interviews relied on participants to accurately recall their experiences [ 11 ] , the think - aloud study allowed us to observe frsthand how BLV participants perform DDA tasks on diferent data sets in practice . Through the think - aloud protocol , we gained more detailed insights into their thought processes to further complement the fndings on DDA approaches and challenges from the interviews . Data sets . Based on fndings from the semi - structured inter - view , we curated two data sets to cover the types of data that BLV participants often encountered in their DDA process . The frst data set was a spreadsheet about automobiles , which consisted of cross - sectional data collected at a specifc point in time ( shown in Table 3 in the Appendix ) . This spreadsheet was adapted from the widely used Data for Motor Trend sample of 32 automobiles [ 28 ] . The second spreadsheet contained time series data about stock prices that described the changes over time , such as the stock price and commodity quantity ( shown in Table 4 in the Appendix ) . This spreadsheet was adapted from real stock prices in Yahoo Finance from 3 / 7 / 2017 to 1 / 7 / 2022 [ 86 ] . Tasks . We chose three types of tasks to represent the common tasks for DDA : cross - sectional tasks ( Task 1 - Task 6 ) , time - series Daily Data Analysis ( DDA ) Among Blind and Low - vision People ASSETS ’23 , October 22 – 25 , 2023 , New York , NY , USA Table 2 : Think - aloud Data Analysis Tasks Task ID Task Description T1 Are there any outliers in the whole spreadsheet ? T2 How many types of cylinders are there in the spreadsheet ? T3 Please calculate the average miles per gallon of all cars . T4 What is the percentage of Mercedes - Benz cars among all the provided brands ? T5 Please identify all the car models whose displacement is between ( but not including ) 120 and 175 , and determine the maximum and minimum displacement in this group of car models . T6 Based on the provided prices , which car model is the most appropriate if you have a budget of 60 . 0 and would like to buy the model with maximum horsepower ? T7 Please describe the trend of stock prices from 3 / 7 / 2017 to 1 / 7 / 2022 of Company A in as much detail as possible . T8 Which company’s stock price had the highest volatility from 3 / 7 / 2017 to 1 / 7 / 2022 ? T9 Which two companies’ stock prices have the strongest correlation ? T10 Please explore both datasets freely . tasks ( Task 7 - Task 9 ) , and the free exploration task ( Task 10 ) . The details of tasks are shown in Table 2 . Cross - sectional Tasks . We compared the real - world tasks men - tioned by participants in the semi - structured interviews to the ten low - level analysis tasks proposed by Amar et al . [ 1 ] , noting that some tasks overlapped ( e . g . , participants had to “retrieve a value” to “fnd anomalies” , and participants had to “fnd an extremum” to “determine the range” ) . To avoid repetition , we condensed these tasks into six cross - sectional tasks . Time - series Tasks . We chose these three time - series tasks because of their frequent occurrence in the analysis of time - series data , as re - vealed in the semi - structured interviews , which included exploring the trend , understanding the fuctuation , and making comparisons of diferent trends . Free Exploration Task . The free exploration task simulated a re - alistic DDA scenario where participants had unlimited time and freedom to determine their own goals . The following prompt was given to the participants : “Please explore the data set according to your own preferences and utilize any techniques you fnd suit - able . There are no restrictions on the time frame for this task , and you are free to choose your objectives . ” The free exploration task for both data sets was designed to explore possible DDA approaches that were not covered by the prior tasks . 3 . 3 Data Analysis All interviews and think - aloud DDA sessions were recorded and transcribed . Two coders performed a thematic analysis of the in - terviews and think - aloud sessions to identify BLV participants’ strategies and challenges when performing DDA . We followed an open coding approach [ 10 ] , in which we frst independently coded the data and then discussed the codes through weekly research meetings . For cases that had diferent interpretations , we explained our perspectives and discussed them until we reached a consensus . Afterward , we performed afnity diagramming to group the codes into tentative themes and iteratively refned them , which resulted in fve themes . We report our fndings based on these themes and corresponding key codes in the following section . 4 FINDINGS We present our fndings about BLV participants’ strategies and chal - lenges of how they perform DDA . We identifed fve key approaches that participants took when performing DDA : overview obtaining , column comparison , key statistics identifcation , note - taking , and data validation . Figure 2 shows the corresponding themes and codes . 4 . 1 Overview Obtaining Participants’ frst step was to get an overview of the spreadsheet . The spreadsheets they received usually included two elements : tables which consisted of several columns of data , and charts based on the tables’ data ( e . g . , bar chart , pie chart , and line chart ) . They typically traversed the spreadsheet with their screen readers to get an idea of the types of elements ( e . g . , tables and charts ) in it and their quantities . They then traversed the title row of each table before focusing on a specifc column . In addition , participants used OCR functions to read charts ( e . g . , bar charts and pie charts ) . Participants mentioned that they would form an initial rough estimation of the structure and size of the spreadsheet , and they continued to revise their estimation as they traversed . During this process , participants reported three challenges in difculty in getting the layout of the elements and their quantities , difculty in fguring out the relationship between the elements , and difculty in reading line charts . 4 . 1 . 1 Dificulty in geting the layout of the elements and their quan - tities in a spreadsheet . Participants mentioned that it was hard for them to get a full understanding of the layout and quantities of the elements in a spreadsheet as they might miss some elements . Participants did not know how much they had to traverse when receiving a new spreadsheet and continued until they believed it was the end . Elements varied in layout and quantities as they re - ceived spreadsheets from diferent people . Some put each element close together while others spread these elements out with space in between . In this process , participants might miss elements that were isolated from the rest of them . A lack of standardization of spreadsheet layouts made it hard for participants to discover the full content . One participant mentioned : “If the spreadsheet is too complicated , such as having several tables and charts in it , then it is relatively hard for me to comprehend it . In fact , it is even hard to ASSETS ’23 , October 22 – 25 , 2023 , New York , NY , USA Jiang et al . Figure 2 : Summary of the fve key approaches and associated challenges for performing DDA . know the existence of all elements if I don’t traverse all possible areas in the spreadsheet , which takes a signifcant amount of efort . In many cases , if my sighted colleagues are available , I will have to bother them to tell me the layout of these elements . ” - P13 4 . 1 . 2 Dificulty in figuring out the relationship between the elements in a spreadsheet . Participants found it hard to discover the relation - ship between elements in a spreadsheet as they had to identify and memorize the theme and content of each element . In addition , the same data may be used as key components by diferent tables . For example , the table of students’ demographic information and the table of their fnal scores were connected by the “Name” and “Student ID” data columns . Therefore , to fgure out the relationship between tables , participants have to read each element and memo - rize their main content , which was tedious and time - consuming . 4 . 1 . 3 Dificulty with reading charts . While in the think - aloud ses - sions of our study , no participants chose to generate charts from data while performing DDA . They provided two main reasons . First , it was challenging for them to use the functions in spreadsheets to generate charts . This process required them to be able to locate the chart generation functions , select the data to be plotted , and choose the right type of charts to be used . Afterward , they had to be able to locate the generated chart in the spreadsheet . Second , even if they could generate the right chart and locate it in the spreadsheet , their screen readers often did not read out the chart’s content in a comprehensible manner . However , participants mentioned that they might receive data with charts , from their friends or colleagues , in their daily lives . As a result , as part of their DDA , they might also need to read charts . Most ( N = 15 ) of the participants found it hard to get meaningful information from line charts , even with the use of OCR . Participants used the OCR function integrated within screen readers to extract text from the chart and pasted them into Notepad . The contents were pasted without formatting , making the data scrambled and hard to read . The lack of alternative text exacerbated the issue of reading charts . On websites , fgures are typically accompanied by alterna - tive text , but charts created in Excel during the DDA process lacked alternative text . While participants felt that it did not signifcantly afect bar charts and pie charts as these contained fewer data points , they found that reading line charts was virtually impossible . More - over , participants also mentioned the unavailability of assistive tools to help them read line charts . They were either unaware of the existing assistive tools , such as sonifcation , or could not aford a refreshable Braille display ( e . g . , “ It costs as much as my parents’ two months salary ” - P10 ) . We found that while assistive tools have been developed in research or commercial settings , the limited availability for everyday usage remains a barrier that negatively impacts participants’ ability to obtain information from line charts . After obtaining an overview , participants utilized two ap - proaches to gain insight into the data . They either conducted column comparison to make a coarse but rapid comparison or key statistics identifcation to determine the trends and extremes , which yielded Daily Data Analysis ( DDA ) Among Blind and Low - vision People ASSETS ’23 , October 22 – 25 , 2023 , New York , NY , USA more precise results but took more time . To assist their insight generation , participants often took notes during the intermediate steps , which we describe in the following sections . 4 . 2 Column Comparison Participants conducted comparisons between two columns by ( 1 ) traversing horizontally in alternating directions and ( 2 ) traversing vertically down the whole column and switching to another column , as shown in Figure 3 . For columns that were close to each other , they used the frst method , which ensured quick comparisons between data in the same row . The second method was used when the columns under comparison were not adjacent to each other as mentioned by P4 . In this case , participants had to quickly traverse down the frst column , and then switch to the next . “When making a quick comparison between two columns , such as reading the car data form , I com - pared every two columns one by one such as the cylin - der numbers and displacement . While comparing the columns that are not adjacent , I must go through the whole column before moving to the other . Otherwise , I would have lost the location of each column during the process while switching columns . ” - P4 4 . 2 . 1 Dificulty with manipulating columns . We observed that when comparing columns that were far from each other , partici - pants did not utilize strategies to rearrange the data into adjacent columns , which required multiple operations such as hiding the middle column or copying or pasting to empty columns . This sug - gests that participants had difculty manipulating the columns or were unaware these operations could make comparisons easier . Figure 3 : Visualization of the two strategies for conducting column comparisons : a ) traversing horizontally in alternat - ing directions , b ) traversing vertically down the whole col - umn and switching to another column . ( The arrows indicate the order of traversal , the lighter shade indicates cells that are already been traversed , and the darker shade indicates cells that participants are currently traversing . ) 4 . 3 Key Statistics Identifcation After gaining an initial overview of the spreadsheet , participants tended to identify the key statistics of each element , such as the maximum , minimum , and trend of the data set . P13 mentioned : “In our daily work , the maximum and the minimum are the two key features that I look for , because these are checked by my boss every morning . The trend over time is also important , which is calculated at diferent frequencies such as one month , half year , or one year . ” - P13 To get these statistics , participants took a three - step approach : ( 1 ) data splitting , ( 2 ) within - group statistics identifcation , and ( 3 ) overall statistics identifcation . Data Splitting . Participants frst split a data column into sev - eral groups . For instance , when the data column contained 1000 rows of data , some participants divided them into groups with 100 rows each . The quantity of each group varied between participants , they either chose hundreds or certain time intervals ( e . g . , 365 days , quarterly ) that were commonly used in time - series data . Within - group Statistics Identifcation . When participants looked for within - group statistics ( extremes or average ) in small data sets , participants either traversed through each group , sorted the data to get the extremes , or calculated the average . For large data sets , participants used a similar method , but more participants sorted the data before traversing so that they could easily get the extremes at the beginning and end of the column ( N = 8 ) . Some participants also took notes to reduce the strain on their short - term memory , which is discussed in Section 4 . 4 . Overall Statistics Identifcation . Lastly , they made comparisons of the within - group statistics to identify the overall statistics of the full data set . For example , participants either directly traversed or sorted frst then traversed within - group statistics . This allowed them to build a mental map of the overall trend of the data set , which was helpful in answering key questions about the data . Based on the prior observations , we identifed a challenge with the loss of within - group trends . 4 . 3 . 1 Loss of Within - group Trends . The current data - splitting method resulted in the loss of within - group trends since all the values in the group were aggregated into summary statistics ( e . g . , a group with 100 rows of data would be represented by its average ) . Therefore , the fuctuations in the values within the group were smoothed out in this process , which led to the loss of meaningful information . For example , the average is heavily infuenced by out - liers and may not represent the full picture of the data , making the results less precise . P3 said : “The data splitting relieves me from memorizing a huge amount of data in a very short time . However , the drawback is that I have to miss small trends within each group , such as small rises and falls because the data in each group is reduced to just one point . ” - P3 4 . 4 Note - Taking We found that participants took notes using diferent methods during the process of generating insights on the data . Some took notes by creating a new Word fle and recording comments to assist ASSETS ’23 , October 22 – 25 , 2023 , New York , NY , USA Jiang et al . with navigation , while others took notes in the same spreadsheet such as in the empty cells on the right or below the data columns . Participants’ choices for where to take notes also depended on the amount of data that they were analyzing . For small data sets , participants tended to create another document ( e . g . , a Microsoft Word fle ) to store key information , such as the maximum of each data group . After taking the notes , they went through them and made comparisons to get the maximum or minimum or other fea - tures of the whole data set . If many notes were taken , participants created comments in the document to make navigation through the Word document easier . For instance , P11 created a comment on every section title of her notes . When reviewing her notes , she selected one comment and used the direction keys to switch to the next comment , then used “ESC” to return to the main content . In this way , she could rapidly jump through the contents and get infor - mation efciently . However , this strategy was not prevalent since only three participants chose to take notes with small amounts of data . One possible reason was mentioned : “If there is too little data , there is no need to take notes as it would be easier to just remember . While for larger data sets , creating notes and always changing between software is troublesome , so I prefer to take notes in the same spreadsheet . ” - P8 For large amounts of data , participants utilized two methods for taking notes directly in the spreadsheet : ( 1 ) they inserted another column on the right side of the data set and took notes on the average of each row , and ( 2 ) they added notes about key statistics of each column below the last cell of the data set . They then used these statistics to make further comparisons if needed . Participants reported two challenges when taking notes , which include the inconvenience of frequently switching between Excel and Word , and the difculty in retrieving original data . 4 . 4 . 1 Inconvenience of Frequently Switching Between Excel and Word . We found that some participants used Excel to read the data but took notes in Word . They had to press Win + Tab and direction buttons to switch frequently between the two windows , which led to extra operations and time delays . This even discouraged some participants from taking notes completely and relied on their memory when analyzing small amounts of data . 4 . 4 . 2 Dificulty in Retrieving Original Data . It was hard for par - ticipants to retrieve the original data from their notes , especially for large data quantities . For example , participants mentioned that after taking notes of the averages of each group , it was difcult to go back to the specifc start point and end point of each group without re - traversing the entire row or column . Therefore , if the participants wanted to check the correctness of their notes , they have to conduct another round of traversal . After gaining insights into how participants extracted informa - tion and took notes on the data , we observed that some participants performed data validation to check whether their fndings con - tained any errors . 4 . 5 Data Validation Participants conducted data validation after the DDA process . Some participants ( N = 8 ) checked for potential errors regularly because they wanted to ensure the accuracy of their analysis . For example , they checked whether all the necessary data were included during their calculations and whether correct formulas were used ( e . g . , using STDEV . P instead of STDEV . S ) . In contrast , some ( N = 8 ) only checked errors occasionally because they found the process to be time - consuming and tedious . Unless Excel reported errors ( e . g . , # REF , # NUM , # NAME , # N / A , # VALUE , # NULL , # DIV / 0 ) or obviously wrong answers ( e . g . , a negative value for price ) , they would skip data validation . Some challenges that led to this reluctance include ( 1 ) difculty in identifying outliers quickly ; ( 2 ) difculty in diferentiating between similar cells . 4 . 5 . 1 Dificulty in Identifying Outliers Qickly . While sighted par - ticipants may easily notice outliers on a chart due to their relative location to the other data points , it is more difcult for BLV partic - ipants who must rely on each value being read by screenreaders . Thus , they must memorize the existing values to identify values that seemed abnormal , which is both time - consuming and often fruitless . P8 said : “Unless I know that there is an outlier , and deter - mined to fnd it , I will never know its existence in the whole process as it is like searching for a needle in the haystack . ” - P8 4 . 5 . 2 Dificulty in Diferentiating Between Similar Cells . Partici - pants often skipped to the next cell without waiting for the full content to be read , which led to them missing subtle diferences at the end of similar cells ( e . g . , STDEV . P instead of STDEV . S ) and making incorrect calculations . We found that some participants had to sacrifce validity ( conducting DDA thoroughly and correctly ) for efciency ( conducting DDA quickly ) . 5 DISCUSSION DDA is a common strategy to derive insights from data . Given the era of big data and the benefts of mastering data science , DDA is an essential skill for deriving insights and performing daily activ - ities . Thus , we argue that it is critical to ensure BLV people have equal access to performing DDA so that they could also , as their sighted peers , tap into the benefts provided by data analysis . As a result , in response to recent calls to make data more accessible for BLV people , we conducted a mixed - methods study to under - stand how BLV people currently perform DDA , including their strategies and challenges . By using a mixed - methods approach , we observed frsthand the struggles that participants experienced and gained insights into nuanced operations that participants made which would not have been identifed with only interviews . Specif - ically , we identifed fve key approaches and the corresponding challenges . While there is a body of trending research investigating ways to make data visualizations more accessible to BLV people [ 7 , 15 , 16 , 30 , 65 – 67 , 69 ] and making diferent forms of data more accessible [ 21 , 56 , 80 , 85 ] , little is known about how BLV people cur - rently explore raw data in spreadsheets to derive insights through the process of DDA and the associated challenges . Our research contributes to the understanding of this gap . Daily Data Analysis ( DDA ) Among Blind and Low - vision People ASSETS ’23 , October 22 – 25 , 2023 , New York , NY , USA 5 . 1 Connection between DDA and Data Sense - Making and Information - Seeking Models We identifed some connections between our fndings and vari - ous models on data sense - making and information - seeking . As discussed in Sec 2 . 1 , data sensemaking involves searching for repre - sentations and organizing information in these representations [ 61 ] . Our fndings show that participants frst tried to obtain an high - level overview of the data set , then refned their understanding by conducting comparisons between specifc columns and identifying key statistics . They continuously updated their mental model of the data set as new information was discovered . Russell et al . also found that data extraction led to the highest cost , while we observed that participants spent the most time on key statistics identifcation . Both processes involve fnding relevant information amongst the larger body of data and making use of that information . Furthermore , Marchionini et al . presented a 7 - step information - seeking model , which includes recognizes an information need , ac - cepts the challenge , problem formulation , express the information need , examination of results , reformulations , and use the information [ 46 ] . Although this model is more applicable to the web searching process while our paper focuses on the data analysis approaches , we can still draw parallels between certain steps ( e . g . , “overview obtaining” aligns with the formulate step , “column comparison , ” “key statistics identifcation , ” and “note - taking” align with the expressing step , and “data validation” corresponds to the examine and reformulate steps ) . In particular , we observed that the reformulate step was often neglected , as half the participants found error checking to be tedious . Future work should explore methods to facilitate easier reformulation for BLV people . The information scent model posits that the user’s behavior is guided by information scent , which is determined by their percep - tion of the value and cost of the information concerning their fnal goal [ 8 ] . Our fndings indicate that participants typically opted for strategies that saved time and were more likely to reveal the desired information . For example , they preferred splitting data into fewer groups to obtain a rough trend rather than a detailed one . Additionally , they rarely focused on error detection as the scent for errors was weaker compared to traversing . Next , we will discuss the implications of our results and highlight possible ways to make performing DDA more accessible to BLV people . 5 . 2 Challenges in Performing DDA and Potential Solutions Prior research has mostly focused on making the DDA process visually more accessible . The visual information design mantra , proposed by Shneiderman et al . [ 70 ] , is “overview frst , zoom and flter , then details - on - demand . ” Zhao et al . later proposed an audi - tory information - seeking principle , which is “gist , navigate , flter , and details - on - demand” , to guide data sonifcation design [ 87 ] . Our empirical research provides insights into how such principles are refected in BLV people’s fve key approaches in the DDA process . The principles of “overview frst” and “gist” ( i . e . , quick grasp of overall trends ) are partly refected in our fndings about “overview obtaining” and “key statistics identifcation . ” The principles of “fl - ter” , “zoom” and “detail - on - demand” are grouped in steps of “key statistics identifcation” and “column comparison” that BLV peo - ple took when exploring data in detail and on demand . Our study revealed that as opposed to zooming in on data visualizations like sighted people , BLV people instead traversed raw data , split data into groups , performed interim calculations , and took notes . More - over , our study also provided novel insights into how BLV people traverse data , such as traversing horizontally in alternating direc - tions and traversing vertically down the whole column . 5 . 2 . 1 Overview Obtaining . BLV people conducted a thorough tra - versal with screen readers to obtain an overview of the spreadsheets , which is diferent from “overview frst” and “gist” . “Overview frst” refers to the control of a movable feld - of - view ( FOV ) box to get the contents of a data set [ 70 ] , while “gist” refers to the understanding of an overall trend or pattern [ 87 ] . Since BLV people were unable to glance over the overall spreadsheet and quickly get an overview , they had to fgure out the layout and relationships between cells using screen readers , which was time - consuming . An earlier study by Stockman et al . found that the spatial nature of spreadsheet contents challenges BLV people’s non - visual navigation tasks , es - pecially during spreadsheet overview [ 75 ] . Later , Doush et al . also suggested that BLV people can lose structural information in a spreadsheet when conducting non - visual navigation [ 13 ] . More than a decade later , our fndings revealed similar challenges in DDA for BLV people even when technologies have advanced signifcantly from these earlier works . Although the HCI and accessibility com - munities have investigated ways to make data and visualization more accessible by designing various assistive tools such as sonif - cation and haptic devices , our work highlights the challenges that BLV people still encounter when performing DDA . Future work should investigate easier ways for BLV people gain an overview of data so that they could better perform the rest of the DDA steps . One possible approach for BLV people to gain an overview of data is by creating dynamic hierarchical overviews , which were initially designed to support sighted people’s data analysis process . To enhance their exploration of spreadsheets , previous research investigated interactive and detailed interfaces , such as an over - all structure of the data alongside the spreadsheet [ 24 ] and an overview with detailed interface [ 9 ] . However , one limitation of such approaches is that they only provide static summaries in a separate area and do not provide correspondence between the raw data and the summary . This limitation motivated the design of more interconnected overview structures , such as dynamic hierarchical overviews . A dynamic hierarchical overview interface consists of seven main parts : the overview , the aggregate column , the spread - sheet , the history , the breadcrumb , the user’s current focus , and the cells corresponding to navigation and aggregation attribute [ 58 ] . This design provides a customizable summary of the spreadsheet , allowing users to connect the summary to the raw data . It is highly suitable for BLV people to obtain an overview that allows them to quickly fgure out the quantity , layout , and relationships between the elements in one spreadsheet . However , such interfaces were developed for sighted people , and future work should investigate ways to design dynamic hierarchical overviews for BLV people , for example , by supporting screen readers , easy - to - remember shortcut keys , and possible combinations with haptic assistive tools and sonifcation approaches . ASSETS ’23 , October 22 – 25 , 2023 , New York , NY , USA Jiang et al . 5 . 2 . 2 Key Statistics Identification . Key statistics identifcation is a crucial step for BLV people to obtain important characteristics of a data set . Similar to obtaining an overview , traversing a data set was commonly used to identify key statistics but this process was tedious and time - consuming . When extracting trends from the data set , BLV people adopted an approach , which we called “data splitting” , to split data into smaller groups and compute interim statistics for each group before making a comparison . This process of splitting data into smaller groups reduced their short - term mem - ory load . However , the accuracy of the overview depended on the size of each group . While splitting larger amounts of data into one group may lead to the loss of within - group trends , splitting smaller amounts may lead to a plethora of groups and interim statistics to manage . Previous work proposed the use of sonifcations to extract trends from both data sets and graphs . However , as Stockman et al . pointed out , sonifcation is less efective in creating fne - grained presentations [ 76 ] . Thus , how to help BLV people efciently identify key statistics and trends remains to be a key challenge . There are two possible directions to address this problem : by designing assistive tools to help BLV people read charts generated from data or by assisting BLV people in exploring data directly without visualization . Previous research primarily focused on the former approach , such as designing haptic devices and sonifca - tion techniques [ 29 , 30 , 67 , 72 ] . However , our fndings suggested that BLV people rarely created charts or fgures during their DDA processes to gain insights . Toward this end , we suggest that the community focus on exploring data splitting and extremum extrac - tion techniques that are tailored to BLV people’s DDA processes , for example , designing tools that allow BLV people to explore data at diferent granularity on demand [ 62 , 64 ] . While pivot tables in Excel are available to split data and cal - culate averages , these tools can be inconvenient for BLV people when dealing with large amounts of data as they have to make adjustments and remember the averages of each group . Previous work has developed data extraction tools and plug - ins to address data accessibility issues , and many are web - based and can be easily used by BLV people [ 44 , 67 , 69 ] . The combination of such tools with sonifcation and haptic devices might allow BLV people to gain a deeper understanding of data set’s key characteristics . 5 . 2 . 3 Data Validation . Currently , participants felt that data vali - dation was time - consuming and tedious , or skipped it altogether , which resulted in errors being missed . The development of an au - tomatic error detection system will improve the validity of their results . Previous work has presented various automated approaches for spreadsheet quality assurance ( QA ) , which include visualization - based approaches , static code analysis and reports , testing ap - proaches , automated fault localization and repair , model - driven development approaches , and design and maintenance support [ 32 ] . Among these tools , Nixon et al . developed Spreadsheet Detec - tive , a static analysis techniques - based spreadsheet auditing tool that checks errors in spreadsheets and presents them as graphical annotations [ 53 ] . For example , the system can automatically ana - lyze the entire spreadsheet to identify whether the same formula is repeated throughout a particular row or column . It also provides a complete list of all distinct formulas and named ranges , which no longer requires BLV people to spend time traversing the whole spreadsheet to discover the formulas used . In addition , Barowy et al . presented a static analysis tool specifcally designed to fnd spreadsheet formula errors by exploiting the intrinsically rectan - gular layout of spreadsheets [ 3 ] . Cells and formulas considered potentially incorrect by the system will be automatically shown in a diferent color . However , these currently available error detec - tion tools are heavily reliant on visual indicators ( e . g . , displaying notifcations as lines and color diferences ) . Thus , accessibility im - provements , such as integration with screen readers , sonifcation , and haptic devices , are required to make such tools more accessible to BLV people . 5 . 2 . 4 Considerations for High - Level Strategies . Although our study uncovered low - level strategies that BLV participants employ and the challenges they encountered , high - level approaches should also be considered when developing future assistive tools . Our fnd - ings about low - level strategies provide empirical evidence and a foundation to guide the design of high - level assistive technologies . For example , AI technology could automate low - level tasks by re - sponding to natural language queries for calculating averages and identifying trends . These approaches may avoid the necessity of using low - level strategies when BLV people conduct DDA and have potential to reduce the required time and efort . Prior work has discussed how large language models ( LLMs ) , such as ChatGPT , can be used for data science . The applications include data visualization [ 40 , 43 , 45 , 54 ] and information extraction [ 26 , 55 , 81 ] . Noever et al . found that ChatGPT can simulate human behavior to conduct data analysis on structured and organized datasets , then present the results by generating graphs using Python code [ 54 ] . Maddigan et al . developed a system to provide a reliable approach to rendering visualizations from natural language queries , even when queries are underspecifed [ 45 ] . Wei et al . proposed a ChatGPT - based multi - round question - and - answer framework for information extraction , which can decompose complex information extraction tasks and generate a fnal structured result [ 81 ] . Although these tools were de - signed for sighted people , they could become more accessible when integrated with screen readers . However , it is unknown whether BLV people would prefer such approaches as they may lower their control and understanding of the raw data set by directly providing analysis results . Therefore , future research is needed to explore how BLV people will interact with such high - level approaches . 5 . 3 Limitations and Future Work We took the frst step to understanding how BLV people perform DDA through a mixed - method approach of a think - aloud task ses - sion and an interview . Our work provides initial insights into BLV people’s strategies and challenges in DDA . More eforts are needed to make DDA more accessible for BLV people so that they could tap into the power of data analysis along with their sighted peers . We highlight a few limitations of our current work and future research directions . First , all participants in our study performed DDA using screen readers . However , people who commonly use magnifers or refreshable Braille displays may have diferent DDA strategies and challenges , which prompts future work on understanding the DDA process with other assistive devices . Second , the think - aloud DDA sessions in our study consisted of specifc tasks . We believe that additional insights may be obtained Daily Data Analysis ( DDA ) Among Blind and Low - vision People ASSETS ’23 , October 22 – 25 , 2023 , New York , NY , USA if participants performed DDA on their own in an in - the - feld study , such as shadowing BLV people at their workplace . Furthermore , if we did not include certain tasks , we may have missed key challenges that BLV participants experienced ( e . g . , the task of identifying out - liers led to the challenge described in Section 4 . 5 . 1 ) . Although our list was curated from tasks reported by participants , we recognize that it is not exhaustive and may have missed other operations that BLV people may encounter in daily life . Thus , future work is warranted to develop a comprehensive taxonomy of tasks for investigating DDA . Third , diferent tasks ( e . g . , cross - sectional tasks , time - series tasks , and free exploration tasks ) may infuence the selection of DDA ap - proaches . For instance , when BLV people conduct free exploration tasks during leisure time and for personal purposes , they have the freedom to decide on their own approaches and tools . They may be willing to learn and try new approaches , such as learning to pro - gram ( e . g . , Python , R ) . When BLV people conduct cross - sectional tasks and time - series tasks issued for school or work , they may feel more restricted to the same software ( e . g . , Excel ) and use more tedious but conservative approaches to avoid mistakes such as the three steps we identifed in key statistics identifcation . Thus , future work can further investigate how diferent tasks and settings can impact the choice of DDA approaches . Lastly , participants were asked to use their computers for the study as they reported using these for DDA . As smartphones be - come an increasingly important tool in people’s daily lives , future work is warranted to investigate why BLV people might not prefer to use smartphones and how future designers and researchers can better support DDA on smartphones . 6 CONCLUSION We presented the fndings of a mixed - method study with interviews and think - aloud sessions to understand how BLV people perform DDA . Specifcally , we identifed fve main strategies ( e . g . , overview obtaining , key statistics identifcation ) that they adopted in per - forming DDA and the challenges they encountered ( e . g . , loss of within - group trends ) when performing DDA in practice . We further highlighted how our fndings are novel from previous work , and possible ways to improve current DDA processes . Moreover , as an initial work that aims to make the data analysis process more accessible to BLV people , we also highlighted the limitations of our current study and potential future research directions . Overall , our study provides guidance for the future development of assistive tools to facilitate BLV people’s entire DDA process . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work is partially supported by the Guangzhou Science and Technology Program City - University Joint Funding Project ( Project No . 2023A03J0001 ) and Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of Integrated Communication , Sensing and Computation for Ubiquitous Internet of Things . The third author is supported by the National Science Foundation under Award No . DGE - 2125362 . Any opinions , fndings , and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author ( s ) and do not necessarily refect the views of the National Science Foundation . We thank Xiaofu Jin , Nash Lyke , and Juliann Thang for their help in proofreading earlier versions of the paper . We thank Xiaoying Wei and Yihan Hou for their help in creating some fgures . Lastly , we thank the participants for their time and efort . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Robert Amar , James Eagan , and John Stasko . 2005 . Low - Level Components of Analytic Activity in Information Visualization . In Proceedings of the Proceedings of the 2005 IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization ( INFOVIS ’05 ) . IEEE Computer Society , USA , 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / INFOVIS . 2005 . 24 [ 2 ] Giulia Barbareschi , Catherine Holloway , Katherine Arnold , Grace Magomere , Wyclife Ambeyi Wetende , Gabriel Ngare , and Joyce Olenja . 2020 . The Social Network : How People with Visual Impairment Use Mobile Phones in Kibera , Kenya . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Honolulu , HI , USA ) ( CHI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376658 [ 3 ] Daniel W . Barowy , Emery D . Berger , and Benjamin Zorn . 2018 . ExceLint : Au - tomatically Finding Spreadsheet Formula Errors . Proc . ACM Program . Lang . 2 , OOPSLA , Article 148 ( oct 2018 ) , 26 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3276518 [ 4 ] Ann Blandford and Simon Attfeld . 2022 . Interacting with information . Springer Nature . [ 5 ] Jeremy Boy , Ronald A . Rensink , Enrico Bertini , and Jean - Daniel Fekete . 2014 . A Principled Way of Assessing Visualization Literacy . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 20 , 12 ( 2014 ) , 1963 – 1972 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2014 . 2346984 [ 6 ] Ian Bruce , Aubrey McKennell , and Errol C Walker . 1991 . Blind and partially sighted adults in Britain : the RNIB survey . Vol . 1 . Bernan Press ( PA ) . [ 7 ] Richard Burns , Sandra Carberry , and Stephanie Elzer Schwartz . 2019 . An auto - mated approach for the recognition of intended messages in grouped bar charts . Computational Intelligence 35 , 4 ( 2019 ) , 955 – 1002 . [ 8 ] Ed H . Chi , Peter Pirolli , Kim Chen , and James Pitkow . 2001 . Using Information Scent to Model User Information Needs and Actions and the Web . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Seattle , Wash - ington , USA ) ( CHI ’01 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 490 – 497 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 365024 . 365325 [ 9 ] Andy Cockburn , Amy Karlson , and Benjamin B . Bederson . 2009 . A Review of Overview + detail , Zooming , and Focus + context Interfaces . ACM Comput . Surv . 41 , 1 , Article 2 ( jan 2009 ) , 31 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1456650 . 1456652 [ 10 ] Juliet M . Corbin and Anselm Strauss . 1990 . Grounded theory research : Procedures , canons , and evaluative criteria . Qualitative Sociology 13 , 1 ( 1990 ) , 3 – 21 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / BF00988593 [ 11 ] Melissa DeJonckheere and Lisa M Vaughn . 2019 . Semistructured interviewing in primary care research : a balance of relationship and rigour . Family Medicine and Community Health 7 , 2 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1136 / fmch - 2018 - 000057 arXiv : https : / / fmch . bmj . com / content / 7 / 2 / e000057 . full . pdf [ 12 ] Brenda Dervin . 1992 . From the mind’s eye of the user : The sense - making qualitative - quantitative methodology . Sense - making methodology reader ( 1992 ) . [ 13 ] Iyad Abu Doush and Enrico Pontelli . 2013 . Non - visual navigation of spreadsheets . Universal Access in the Information Society 12 , 2 ( 2013 ) , 143 – 159 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10209 - 012 - 0272 - 1 [ 14 ] Danyang Fan , Alexa Fay Siu , Hrishikesh Rao , Gene Sung - Ho Kim , Xavier Vazquez , Lucy Greco , Sile O’Modhrain , and Sean Follmer . 2023 . The Accessibility of Data Visualizations on the Web for Screen Reader Users : Practices and Experiences During COVID - 19 . ACM Trans . Access . Comput . 16 , 1 , Article 4 ( mar 2023 ) , 29 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3557899 [ 15 ] Danyang Fan , Alexa Fay Siu , Wing - Sum Adrienne Law , Raymond Ruihong Zhen , Sile O’Modhrain , and Sean Follmer . 2022 . Slide - Tone and Tilt - Tone : 1 - DOF Haptic Techniques for Conveying Shape Characteristics of Graphs to Blind Users . In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( New Orleans , LA , USA ) ( CHI ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 477 , 19 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517790 [ 16 ] John H . Flowers , Dion C . Buhman , and Kimberly D . Turnage . 1997 . Cross - Modal Equivalence of Visual and Auditory Scatterplots for Exploring Bivariate Data Samples . Human Factors 39 , 3 ( 1997 ) , 341 – 351 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1518 / 001872097778827151 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1518 / 001872097778827151 PMID : 9394628 . [ 17 ] Sean Follmer , Daniel Leithinger , Alex Olwal , Akimitsu Hogge , and Hiroshi Ishii . 2013 . InFORM : Dynamic Physical Afordances and Constraints through Shape and Object Actuation . In Proceedings of the 26th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( St . Andrews , Scotland , United Kingdom ) ( UIST ’13 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 417 – 426 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2501988 . 2502032 [ 18 ] Simon Gay , Marc - Aurèle Rivière , and Edwige Pissaloux . 2018 . Towards Haptic Surface Devices with Force Feedback for Visually Impaired People . In Computers Helping People with Special Needs , Klaus Miesenberger and Georgios Kouroupet - roglou ( Eds . ) . Springer International Publishing , Cham , 258 – 266 . ASSETS ’23 , October 22 – 25 , 2023 , New York , NY , USA Jiang et al . [ 19 ] Nicholas A . Giudice , Hari Prasath Palani , Eric Brenner , and Kevin M . Kramer . 2012 . Learning Non - Visual Graphical Information Using a Touch - Based Vibro - Audio Interface . In Proceedings of the 14th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility ( Boulder , Colorado , USA ) ( ASSETS ’12 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 103 – 110 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2384916 . 2384935 [ 20 ] Cole Gleason , Amy Pavel , Xingyu Liu , Patrick Carrington , Lydia B Chilton , and Jefrey P Bigham . 2019 . Making memes accessible . In The 21st International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility . 367 – 376 . [ 21 ] Cole Gleason , Amy Pavel , Xingyu Liu , Patrick Carrington , Lydia B . Chilton , and Jefrey P . Bigham . 2019 . Making Memes Accessible . In Proceedings of the 21st International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility ( Pittsburgh , PA , USA ) ( ASSETS ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 367 – 376 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3308561 . 3353792 [ 22 ] Ricardo E . Gonzalez Penuela , Paul Vermette , Zihan Yan , Cheng Zhang , Keith Vertanen , and Shiri Azenkot . 2022 . Understanding How People with Visual Impairments Take Selfes : Experiences and Challenges . In Proceedings of the 24th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility ( Athens , Greece ) ( ASSETS ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 63 , 4 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3517428 . 3550372 [ 23 ] Jenna L Gorlewicz , Jessica Burgner , Thomas J Withrow , and Robert J Webster III . 2014 . Initial Experiences Using Vibratory Touchscreens to Display Graphical Math Concepts to Students with Visual Impairments . Journal of Special Education Technology 29 , 2 ( 2014 ) , 17 – 25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 016264341402900202 [ 24 ] Jonathan Grudin . 2001 . Partitioning Digital Worlds : Focal and Peripheral Aware - ness in Multiple Monitor Use . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Hu - man Factors in Computing Systems ( Seattle , Washington , USA ) ( CHI ’01 ) . As - sociation for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 458 – 465 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 365024 . 365312 [ 25 ] João Guerreiro and Daniel Gonçalves . 2016 . Scanning for Digital Content : How Blind and Sighted People Perceive Concurrent Speech . ACM Trans . Access . Comput . 8 , 1 , Article 2 ( jan 2016 ) , 28 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2822910 [ 26 ] Jiabang He , Lei Wang , Yi Hu , Ning Liu , Hui Liu , Xing Xu , and Heng Tao Shen . 2023 . ICL - D3IE : In - Context Learning with Diverse Demonstrations Updating for Document Information Extraction . arXiv : 2303 . 05063 [ cs . CL ] [ 27 ] Marti Hearst . 2009 . Search user interfaces . Cambridge university press . [ 28 ] Harold V Henderson and Paul F Velleman . 1981 . Building multiple regression models interactively . Biometrics ( 1981 ) , 391 – 411 . [ 29 ] Leona Holloway , Swamy Ananthanarayan , Matthew Butler , Madhuka Thisuri De Silva , Kirsten Ellis , Cagatay Goncu , Kate Stephens , and Kim Marriott . 2022 . Animations at Your Fingertips : Using a Refreshable Tactile Display to Convey Motion Graphics for People Who Are Blind or Have Low Vision . In Proceedings of the 24th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility ( Athens , Greece ) ( ASSETS ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 32 , 16 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3517428 . 3544797 [ 30 ] Leona M Holloway , Cagatay Goncu , Alon Ilsar , Matthew Butler , and Kim Mar - riott . 2022 . Infosonics : Accessible Infographics for People Who Are Blind Us - ing Sonifcation and Voice . In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Hu - man Factors in Computing Systems ( New Orleans , LA , USA ) ( CHI ’22 ) . Asso - ciation for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 480 , 13 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517465 [ 31 ] Tao Hu , Shouhu Xuan , Yinduan Gao , Quan Shu , Zhenbang Xu , Shuaishuai Sun , Jun Li , and Xinglong Gong . 2022 . Smart Refreshable Braille Display Device Based on Magneto - Resistive Composite with Triple Shape Memory . Advanced Mate - rials Technologies 7 , 1 ( 2022 ) , 2100777 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / admt . 202100777 arXiv : https : / / onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / pdf / 10 . 1002 / admt . 202100777 [ 32 ] Dietmar Jannach , Thomas Schmitz , Birgit Hofer , and Franz Wotawa . 2014 . Avoiding , fnding and fxing spreadsheet errors – A survey of automated ap - proaches for spreadsheet QA . Journal of Systems and Software 94 ( 2014 ) , 129 – 150 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jss . 2014 . 03 . 058 [ 33 ] Shaun K . Kane , Chandrika Jayant , Jacob O . Wobbrock , and Richard E . Ladner . 2009 . Freedom to Roam : A Study of Mobile Device Adoption and Accessibility for People with Visual and Motor Disabilities . In Proceedings of the 11th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility ( Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , USA ) ( Assets ’09 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 115 – 122 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1639642 . 1639663 [ 34 ] Johan Kildal . 2009 . Developing an interactive overview for non - visual exploration of tabular numerical information . Ph . D . Dissertation . University of Glasgow . [ 35 ] Jonathan Lazar , Aaron Allen , Jason Kleinman , and Chris Malarkey . 2007 . What Frustrates Screen Reader Users on the Web : A Study of 100 Blind Users . International Journal of Human – Computer Interac - tion 22 , 3 ( 2007 ) , 247 – 269 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10447310709336964 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10447310709336964 [ 36 ] Hae - Na Lee and Vikas Ashok . 2022 . Impact of Out - of - Vocabulary Words on the Twitter Experience of Blind Users . In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( New Orleans , LA , USA ) ( CHI ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 608 , 20 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3501958 [ 37 ] Sukwon Lee , Sung - Hee Kim , and Bum Chul Kwon . 2017 . VLAT : Development of a Visualization Literacy Assessment Test . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 23 , 1 ( 2017 ) , 551 – 560 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2016 . 2598920 [ 38 ] Wentao Lei , Mingming Fan , and Juliann Thang . 2022 . “I Shake The Package To Check If It’s Mine” : A Study of Package Fetching Practices and Challenges of Blind and Low Vision People in China . In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( New Orleans , LA , USA ) ( CHI ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 268 , 15 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3502063 [ 39 ] Daniel Leithinger , Sean Follmer , Alex Olwal , and Hiroshi Ishii . 2015 . Shape Dis - plays : Spatial Interaction with Dynamic Physical Form . IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 35 , 5 ( 2015 ) , 5 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / MCG . 2015 . 111 [ 40 ] Can Liu , Yun Han , Ruike Jiang , and Xiaoru Yuan . 2021 . ADVISor : Automatic Visualization Answer for Natural - Language Question on Tabular Data . In 2021 IEEE 14th Pacifc Visualization Symposium ( PacifcVis ) . 11 – 20 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / PacifcVis52677 . 2021 . 00010 [ 41 ] Guanhong Liu , Xianghua Ding , Chun Yu , Lan Gao , Xingyu Chi , and Yuanchun Shi . 2019 . " I Bought This for Me to Look More Ordinary " : A Study of Blind People Doing Online Shopping . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Glasgow , Scotland Uk ) ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300602 [ 42 ] Alan Lundgard and Arvind Satyanarayan . 2022 . Accessible Visualization via Natural Language Descriptions : A Four - Level Model of Semantic Content . IEEE Transactions on Visualization & Computer Graphics ( Proc . IEEE VIS ) ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2021 . 3114770 [ 43 ] Yuyu Luo , Jiawei Tang , and Guoliang Li . 2021 . nvBench : A Large - Scale Syn - thesized Dataset for Cross - Domain Natural Language to Visualization Task . arXiv : 2112 . 12926 [ cs . HC ] [ 44 ] Stephen MacNeil , Parth Patel , and Benjamin E . Smolin . 2022 . Expert Goggles : Detecting and Annotating Visualizations Using a Machine Learning Classifer . In Adjunct Proceedings of the 35th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( Bend , OR , USA ) ( UIST ’22 Adjunct ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 58 , 3 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3526114 . 3558627 [ 45 ] Paula Maddigan and Teo Susnjak . 2023 . Chat2VIS : Generating Data Visualiza - tions via Natural Language Using ChatGPT , Codex and GPT - 3 Large Language Models . IEEE Access 11 ( 2023 ) , 45181 – 45193 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ACCESS . 2023 . 3274199 [ 46 ] Gary Marchionini and Ryen White . 2007 . Find what you need , understand what you fnd . International Journal of Human [ # x02013 ] Computer Interaction 23 , 3 ( 2007 ) , 205 – 237 . [ 47 ] Natalina Martiniello , Werner Eisenbarth , Christine Lehane , Aaron Johnson , and Walter Wittich . 2022 . Exploring the use of smartphones and tablets among people with visual impairments : Are mainstream devices replacing the use of traditional visual aids ? Assistive Technology 34 , 1 ( 2022 ) , 34 – 45 . [ 48 ] N . Martiniello , W . Eisenbarth , C . Lehane , A . Johnson , and W . Wittich . 2022 . Exploring the use of smartphones and tablets among people with visual im - pairments : Are mainstream devices replacing the use of traditional visual aids ? Assist Technol 34 , 1 ( 2022 ) , 34 – 45 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10400435 . 2019 . 1682084 1949 - 3614 Martiniello , Natalina Orcid : 0000 - 0002 - 2739 - 8608 Eisenbarth , Werner Lehane , Christine Orcid : 0000 - 0001 - 7872 - 0890 Johnson , Aaron Wittich , Wal - ter Orcid : 0000 - 0003 - 2184 - 6139 Journal Article Research Support , Non - U . S . Gov’t United States 2019 / 11 / 08 Assist Technol . 2022 Jan 2 ; 34 ( 1 ) : 34 - 45 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 10400435 . 2019 . 1682084 . Epub 2019 Nov 7 . . [ 49 ] C . P . McCabe . 1986 . Data on Blindness and Visual Impairment in the U . S . : A Resource Manual on Characteristics , Education , Employment , and Service Delivery . Archives of Ophthalmology 104 , 8 ( 08 1986 ) , 1142 – 1142 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1001 / archopht . 1986 . 01050200048043 [ 50 ] Silvia Mirri , Silvio Peroni , Paola Salomoni , Fabio Vitali , and Vincenzo Rubano . 2017 . Towards accessible graphs in HTML - based scientifc articles . In 2017 14th IEEE Annual Consumer Communications & Networking Conference ( CCNC ) . 1067 – 1072 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / CCNC . 2017 . 7983287 [ 51 ] Meredith Ringel Morris , Annuska Zolyomi , Catherine Yao , Sina Bahram , Jefrey P Bigham , and Shaun K Kane . 2016 . " With most of it being pictures now , I rarely use it " Understanding Twitter’s Evolving Accessibility to Blind Users . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 5506 – 5516 . [ 52 ] Rosiana Natalie , Jolene Loh , Huei Suen Tan , Joshua Tseng , Ian Luke Yi - Ren Chan , Ebrima H Jarjue , Hernisa Kacorri , and Kotaro Hara . 2021 . The Efcacy of Collaborative Authoring of Video Scene Descriptions . In Proceedings of the 23rd International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility ( Virtual Event , USA ) ( ASSETS ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 17 , 15 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3441852 . 3471201 [ 53 ] David Nixon and Mike O’Hara . 2010 . Spreadsheet auditing software . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1001 . 4293 ( 2010 ) . [ 54 ] David Noever and Forrest McKee . 2023 . Numeracy from Literacy : Data Science as an Emergent Skill from Large Language Models . arXiv : 2301 . 13382 [ cs . CL ] Daily Data Analysis ( DDA ) Among Blind and Low - vision People ASSETS ’23 , October 22 – 25 , 2023 , New York , NY , USA [ 55 ] Maciej P . Polak and Dane Morgan . 2023 . Extracting Accurate Materials Data from Research Papers with Conversational Language Models and Prompt Engineering . arXiv : 2303 . 05352 [ cs . CL ] [ 56 ] Venkatesh Potluri , John Thompson , James Devine , Bongshin Lee , Nora Morsi , Peli De Halleux , Steve Hodges , and Jennifer Mankof . 2022 . PSST : Enabling Blind or Visually Impaired Developers to Author Sonifcations of Streaming Sensor Data . In Proceedings of the 35th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( Bend , OR , USA ) ( UIST ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 46 , 13 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3526113 . 3545700 [ 57 ] Giorgio Presti , Dragan Ahmetovic , Mattia Ducci , Cristian Bernareggi , Luca Lu - dovico , Adriano Baratè , Federico Avanzini , and Sergio Mascetti . 2019 . WatchOut : Obstacle Sonifcation for People with Visual Impairment or Blindness . In Pro - ceedings of the 21st International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility ( Pittsburgh , PA , USA ) ( ASSETS ’19 ) . Association for Computing Ma - chinery , New York , NY , USA , 402 – 413 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3308561 . 3353779 [ 58 ] Sajjadur Rahman , Mangesh Bendre , Yuyang Liu , Shichu Zhu , Zhaoyuan Su , Karrie Karahalios , and Aditya G . Parameswaran . 2021 . NOAH : Interactive Spreadsheet Exploration with Dynamic Hierarchical Overviews . Proc . VLDB Endow . 14 , 6 ( feb 2021 ) , 970 – 983 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 14778 / 3447689 . 3447701 [ 59 ] André Rodrigues , Kyle Montague , Hugo Nicolau , and Tiago Guerreiro . 2015 . Getting Smartphones to Talkback : Understanding the Smartphone Adoption Process of Blind Users . In Proceedings of the 17th International ACM SIGAC - CESS Conference on Computers & Accessibility ( Lisbon , Portugal ) ( ASSETS ’15 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 23 – 32 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2700648 . 2809842 [ 60 ] Daniel M . Russell . 2003 . Learning to see , seeing to learn : visual aspects of sensemaking . In Human Vision and Electronic Imaging VIII , Bernice E . Rogowitz and Thrasyvoulos N . Pappas ( Eds . ) , Vol . 5007 . International Society for Optics and Photonics , SPIE , 8 – 21 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1117 / 12 . 501132 [ 61 ] Daniel M . Russell , Mark J . Stefk , Peter Pirolli , and Stuart K . Card . 1993 . The Cost Structure of Sensemaking . In Proceedings of the INTERACT ’93 and CHI ’93 Con - ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Amsterdam , The Netherlands ) ( CHI ’93 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 269 – 276 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 169059 . 169209 [ 62 ] JooYoung Seo . 2019 . Is the Maker Movement Inclusive of ANYONE ? : Three Acces - sibility Considerations to Invite Blind Makers to the Making World . TechTrends 63 , 5 ( 2019 ) , 514 – 520 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11528 - 019 - 00377 - 3 [ 63 ] Woosuk Seo and Hyunggu Jung . 2022 . Challenges and Opportunities to Improve the Accessibility of YouTube for People with Visual Impairments as Content Creators . Univers . Access Inf . Soc . 21 , 3 ( aug 2022 ) , 767 – 770 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10209 - 020 - 00787 - 8 [ 64 ] Ather Sharif , Sanjana Shivani Chintalapati , Jacob O . Wobbrock , and Katharina Reinecke . 2021 . Understanding Screen - Reader Users’ Experiences with Online Data Visualizations . In Proceedings of the 23rd International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility ( Virtual Event , USA ) ( ASSETS ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 14 , 16 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3441852 . 3471202 [ 65 ] Ather Sharif and Babak Forouraghi . 2018 . evoGraphs — A jQuery plugin to create web accessible graphs . In 2018 15th IEEE Annual Consumer Communications & Networking Conference ( CCNC ) . 1 – 4 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / CCNC . 2018 . 8319239 [ 66 ] Ather Sharif , Olivia H . Wang , and Alida T . Muongchan . 2022 . “What Makes Sonifcation User - Friendly ? ” Exploring Usability and User - Friendliness of Soni - fed Responses . In Proceedings of the 24th International ACM SIGACCESS Con - ference on Computers and Accessibility ( Athens , Greece ) ( ASSETS ’22 ) . Asso - ciation for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 45 , 5 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3517428 . 3550360 [ 67 ] Ather Sharif , Olivia H . Wang , Alida T . Muongchan , Katharina Reinecke , and Jacob O . Wobbrock . 2022 . VoxLens : Making Online Data Visualizations Accessible with an Interactive JavaScript Plug - In . In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( New Orleans , LA , USA ) ( CHI ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 478 , 19 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517431 [ 68 ] Ather Sharif , Andrew Mingwei Zhang , Anna Shih , Jacob O Wobbrock , and Katha - rina Reinecke . 2022 . Understanding and Improving Information Extraction From Online Geospatial Data Visualizations for Screen - Reader Users . In Proceedings of the 24th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility . 1 – 5 . [ 69 ] Ather Sharif , Andrew Mingwei Zhang , Anna Shih , Jacob O . Wobbrock , and Katha - rina Reinecke . 2022 . Understanding and Improving Information Extraction From Online Geospatial Data Visualizations for Screen - Reader Users . In Proceedings of the 24th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility ( Athens , Greece ) ( ASSETS ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 61 , 5 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3517428 . 3550363 [ 70 ] B . Shneiderman . 1996 . The eyes have it : a task by data type taxonomy for infor - mation visualizations . In Proceedings 1996 IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages . 336 – 343 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / VL . 1996 . 545307 [ 71 ] Alexa Siu , Gene S - H Kim , Sile O’Modhrain , and Sean Follmer . 2022 . Supporting Accessible Data Visualization Through Audio Data Narratives . In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( New Orleans , LA , USA ) ( CHI ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 476 , 19 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517678 [ 72 ] Alexa F . Siu . 2019 . Advancing Accessible 3D Design for the Blind and Visually - Impaired via Tactile Shape Displays . In Adjunct Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( New Orleans , LA , USA ) ( UIST ’19 Adjunct ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 146 – 149 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3332167 . 3356875 [ 73 ] Alexa F . Siu , Danyang Fan , Gene S - H Kim , Hrishikesh V . Rao , Xavier Vazquez , Sile O’Modhrain , and Sean Follmer . 2021 . COVID - 19 Highlights the Issues Facing Blind and Visually Impaired People in Accessing Data on the Web . In Proceedings of the 18th International Web for All Conference ( Ljubljana , Slovenia ) ( W4A ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 11 , 15 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3430263 . 3452432 [ 74 ] Abigale Stangl , Nitin Verma , Kenneth R . Fleischmann , Meredith Ringel Morris , and Danna Gurari . 2021 . Going Beyond One - Size - Fits - All Image Descriptions to Satisfy the Information Wants of People Who Are Blind or Have Low Vision . In Proceedings of the 23rd International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility ( Virtual Event , USA ) ( ASSETS ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 16 , 15 pages . [ 75 ] Tony Stockman . 2004 . The Design and Evaluation of Auditory Access to Spread - sheets . In ICAD 2004 : The 10th Meeting of the International Conference on Au - ditory Display , Sydney , Australia , July 6 - 9 2004 , Proceedings , Stephen Barrass and Paul Vickers ( Eds . ) . International Community for Auditory Display . http : / / www . icad . org / websiteV2 . 0 / Conferences / ICAD2004 / posters / stockman . pdf [ 76 ] Tony Stockman , Christopher Frauenberger , and Greg Hind . 2005 . Interactive sonifcation of spreadsheets . Georgia Institute of Technology . [ 77 ] Lida Theodorou , Daniela Massiceti , Luisa Zintgraf , Simone Stumpf , Cecily Morri - son , Edward Cutrell , Matthew Tobias Harris , and Katja Hofmann . 2021 . Disability - First Dataset Creation : Lessons from Constructing a Dataset for Teachable Object Recognition with Blind and Low Vision Data Collectors . In Proceedings of the 23rd International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility ( Virtual Event , USA ) ( ASSETS ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 27 , 12 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3441852 . 3471225 [ 78 ] Violeta Voykinska , Shiri Azenkot , Shaomei Wu , and Gilly Leshed . 2016 . How blind people interact with visual content on social networking services . In Pro - ceedings of the 19th acm conference on computer - supported cooperative work & social computing . 1584 – 1595 . [ 79 ] Alexandra Vtyurina , Adam Fourney , Meredith Ringel Morris , Leah Findlater , and Ryen W . White . 2019 . Bridging Screen Readers and Voice Assistants for Enhanced Eyes - Free Web Search . In The World Wide Web Conference ( San Francisco , CA , USA ) ( WWW ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 3590 – 3594 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3308558 . 3314136 [ 80 ] Ruolin Wang , Zixuan Chen , Mingrui Ray Zhang , Zhaoheng Li , Zhixiu Liu , Zihan Dang , Chun Yu , and Xiang ’Anthony’ Chen . 2021 . Revamp : Enhancing Accessible Information Seeking Experience of Online Shopping for Blind or Low Vision Users . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Yokohama , Japan ) ( CHI ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 494 , 14 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445547 [ 81 ] Xiang Wei , Xingyu Cui , Ning Cheng , Xiaobin Wang , Xin Zhang , Shen Huang , Pengjun Xie , Jinan Xu , Yufeng Chen , Meishan Zhang , Yong Jiang , and Wen - juan Han . 2023 . Zero - Shot Information Extraction via Chatting with ChatGPT . arXiv : 2302 . 10205 [ cs . CL ] [ 82 ] Karl E Weick . 1995 . Sensemaking in organizations . Vol . 3 . Sage . [ 83 ] Karl E . Weick . 2000 . Making Sense of the Organization . [ 84 ] Karl E . Weick , Kathleen M . Sutclife , and David Obstfeld . 2005 . Organizing and the Process of Sensemaking . Organization Science 16 , 4 ( 2005 ) , 409 – 421 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / orsc . 1050 . 0133 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / orsc . 1050 . 0133 [ 85 ] Jian Xu , Syed Masum Billah , Roy Shilkrot , and Aruna Balasubramanian . 2019 . DarkReader : Bridging the Gap Between Perception and Reality of Power Con - sumption in Smartphones for Blind Users . In Proceedings of the 21st International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility ( Pittsburgh , PA , USA ) ( ASSETS ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 96 – 104 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3308561 . 3353806 [ 86 ] Yahoo . 2022 . Yahoo Finance . https : / / fnance . yahoo . com / . [ 87 ] Haixia Zhao , Catherine Plaisant , Ben Shneiderman , and Ramani Duraiswami . 2004 . Sonifcation of Geo - Referenced Data for Auditory Information Seeking : Design Principle and Pilot Study . . In ICAD . Citeseer . [ 88 ] Shaojian Zhu , Daisuke Sato , Hironobu Takagi , and Chieko Asakawa . 2010 . Sasayaki : An Augmented Voice - Based Web Browsing Experience . In Proceedings of the 12th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibil - ity ( Orlando , Florida , USA ) ( ASSETS ’10 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 279 – 280 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1878803 . 1878870 [ 89 ] Jonathan Zong , Crystal Lee , Alan Lundgard , JiWoong Jang , Daniel Hajas , and Arvind Satyanarayan . 2022 . Rich Screen Reader Experiences for Accessible Data Visualization . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2205 . 04917 ( 2022 ) . ASSETS ’23 , October 22 – 25 , 2023 , New York , NY , USA Jiang et al . A APPENDIX Table 3 : Spreadsheet of Automobile ID Brands Models Miles per gal - lon Number of cylinders Displacement Horse Power Weight Price 1 Mazda RX - 4 21 . 0 6 160 . 0 110 . 0 2 . 62 18 . 0 2 Mazda RX - 4W 21 . 0 6 160 . 0 110 . 0 2 . 88 39 . 0 3 Mercedes 240D 24 . 4 4 146 . 7 62 . 0 3 . 19 41 . 0 4 Mercedes 230 22 . 8 4 140 . 8 95 . 0 3 . 15 35 . 0 5 Mercedes 280 19 . 2 6 167 . 6 123 . 0 3 . 44 50 . 0 6 Mercedes 280C 17 . 8 6 167 . 6 123 . 0 3 . 44 53 . 0 7 Mercedes 450SE 16 . 4 8 275 . 8 180 . 0 4 . 07 88 . 0 8 Mercedes 450SL 17 . 3 8 275 . 8 180 . 0 3 . 73 118 . 0 9 Mercedes 450SLC 15 . 2 8 275 . 8 180 . 0 3 . 78 125 . 0 10 Lincoln Continental 10 . 4 8 472 . 0 205 . 0 0 . 00 61 . 0 11 Chrysler Imperial 14 . 7 0 440 . 0 230 . 0 5 . 35 98 . 0 12 Fiat 128 32 . 4 4 78 . 7 66 . 0 2 . 20 10 . 0 13 Toyota Corolla 33 . 9 4 71 . 7 65 . 0 1 . 84 17 . 0 14 Toyota Corona 21 . 5 4 120 . 1 97 . 0 2 . 47 23 . 0 15 Honda Civic 30 . 4 4 75 . 7 52 . 0 1 . 62 13 . 0 16 Dodge Challenger 15 . 5 8 318 . 0 150 . 0 3 . 52 45 . 0 17 Ferrari Dino 19 . 7 6 145 . 0 175 . 0 27 . 70 210 . 0 18 Maserati Bora 15 . 0 8 301 . 0 335 . 0 3 . 57 100 . 0 19 Volvo 142E 21 . 4 4 121 . 0 109 . 0 2 . 78 57 . 0 20 Camaro Z - 28 13 . 3 99 350 . 0 245 . 0 3 . 84 48 . 0 21 Pontiac Firebird 19 . 2 8 400 . 0 175 . 0 3 . 85 66 . 0 22 Porsche 914 26 . 0 4 120 . 3 91 . 0 2 . 14 125 . 0 23 Lotus Europa 30 . 4 4 95 . 1 113 . 0 1 . 51 40 . 0 24 Ford Pantera 15 . 8 8 351 . 0 264 . 0 3 . 17 15 . 0 25 Buick EW 16 . 9 8 350 . 0 155 . 0 4 . 36 78 . 0 26 Ford Country 15 . 5 8 351 . 0 142 . 0 4 . 05 49 . 0 27 Chevy Malibu 19 . 2 8 267 . 0 125 . 0 3 . 61 21 . 0 28 Chevette Original 30 . 0 4 98 . 0 68 . 0 2 . 16 12 . 0 29 Audi 5000 20 . 3 5 131 . 0 103 . 0 2 . 83 37 . 0 30 VW Rabbit 31 . 9 4 89 . 0 71 . 0 1 . 93 8 . 0 Daily Data Analysis ( DDA ) Among Blind and Low - vision People ASSETS ’23 , October 22 – 25 , 2023 , New York , NY , USA Table 4 : Spreadsheet of Stock Price Date Company A Company B Company C Company D Company E Company F 2017 / 7 / 3 898 . 7 34 . 0 180 . 0 187 . 1 67 . 7 106 . 0 2017 / 7 / 5 911 . 7 34 . 1 183 . 8 190 . 2 67 . 7 108 . 5 2017 / 7 / 6 906 . 7 33 . 8 181 . 8 189 . 9 68 . 4 107 . 4 2017 / 7 / 7 918 . 6 34 . 1 181 . 4 190 . 7 68 . 6 108 . 5 2017 / 7 / 10 928 . 8 34 . 3 182 . 9 192 . 2 68 . 6 108 . 2 2017 / 7 / 11 930 . 1 34 . 4 184 . 4 194 . 4 68 . 9 108 . 2 2017 / 7 / 12 943 . 8 34 . 5 186 . 8 194 . 5 68 . 9 109 . 9 2017 / 7 / 13 947 . 2 35 . 0 186 . 9 194 . 3 69 . 1 109 . 8 2017 / 7 / 14 956 . 0 35 . 3 188 . 6 196 . 5 69 . 4 110 . 2 2017 / 7 / 17 953 . 4 35 . 4 188 . 2 196 . 9 69 . 0 110 . 3 2017 / 7 / 18 965 . 4 35 . 5 189 . 5 196 . 2 68 . 2 110 . 0 2017 / 7 / 19 970 . 9 35 . 7 190 . 9 198 . 7 67 . 1 109 . 7 2017 / 7 / 20 968 . 2 35 . 6 191 . 3 198 . 1 68 . 2 109 . 8 2017 / 7 / 21 972 . 9 35 . 6 193 . 2 199 . 9 67 . 0 109 . 3 2017 / 7 / 24 980 . 3 36 . 0 198 . 6 199 . 9 66 . 1 109 . 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2022 / 6 / 16 2132 . 7 130 . 1 137 . 4 133 . 4 108 . 3 154 . 5 2022 / 6 / 17 2157 . 3 131 . 6 139 . 8 136 . 8 107 . 9 153 . 9 2022 / 6 / 21 2240 . 3 135 . 9 145 . 6 136 . 8 106 . 4 159 . 1 2022 / 6 / 22 2240 . 7 135 . 4 142 . 7 137 . 2 106 . 9 159 . 1 2022 / 6 / 23 2253 . 7 138 . 3 146 . 1 134 . 0 107 . 2 157 . 5 2022 / 6 / 24 2370 . 8 141 . 7 151 . 3 141 . 5 102 . 7 159 . 1 2022 / 6 / 27 2332 . 4 141 . 7 155 . 2 138 . 7 104 . 8 156 . 5 2022 / 6 / 28 2251 . 4 137 . 4 153 . 8 138 . 7 109 . 1 157 . 1 2022 / 6 / 29 2245 . 1 139 . 2 151 . 3 138 . 4 111 . 9 155 . 7 2022 / 6 / 30 2187 . 4 136 . 7 148 . 7 136 . 7 112 . 5 154 . 2 2022 / 7 / 1 2181 . 6 138 . 9 151 . 5 139 . 8 108 . 8 155 . 2