Rho GTPases in cell biology Sandrine Etienne - Manneville * & Alan Hall * † * MRC Laboratory for MolecularCell Biology and Cell Biology Unit , CancerResearch UKOncogene and Signal Transduction Group ; and † Departmentof Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , University College London , Gower Street , London WC1E 6BT , UK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Rho GTPases are molecular switches that control a wide variety of signal transduction pathways in all eukaryotic cells . They are known principally for their pivotal role in regulating the actin cytoskeleton , but their ability to inﬂuence cell polarity , microtubule dynamics , membrane transport pathways and transcription factor activity is probably just as signiﬁcant . Underlying this biological complexity is a simple biochemical idea , namely that by switching on a single GTPase , several distinct signalling pathways can be coordinately activated . With spatial and temporal activation of multiple switches factored in , it is not surprising to ﬁnd Rho GTPases having such a prominent role in eukaryotic cell biology . G TPases are molecular switches that use a simple bio - chemical strategy to control complex cellular processes . They cycle between two conformational states : one bound to GTP ( ‘active’ state ) , the other bound to GDP ( ‘inactive’ state ) , and they hydrolyse GTP to GDP ( Fig . 1 ) . In the ‘on’ ( GTP ) state , GTPases recognize target proteins and generate a response until GTP hydrolysis returns the switch to the ‘off’ state . This idea has been elaborated throughout evolution , and mammalian cells contain several hundred GTPase switches . The Ras superfamily of GTPases is particularly interesting to cell biologists , as its members have turned out to be master regulators of many aspects of cell behaviour . These small , mono - meric GTPases , which number over 60 in mammals , fall into ﬁve major groups : Ras , Rho , Rab , Arf and Ran . This review focuses speciﬁcally on Rho GTPases , emphasizing the insights they are providing into the molecular mechanisms underlying cell biology . Although the Rho switch itself is straightforward , it is very carefully regulated , and the human genome contains over 60 activators ( guanine nucleotide exchange factors , GEFs ) and over 70 inactivators ( GTPase - activating proteins , GAPs ) for this family ( Fig . 1 ) . Unfortunately , target proteins do not contain a single recognizable sequence motif useful in database searches , but for Rho , Rac and Cdc42 , the three best - characterized members of the family , over 60 targets have so far been identiﬁed experimentally . This is unparalleled complexity for a GTPase switch and points to their importance in the eukaryotic cell . The Rho gene was identiﬁed in 1985 , but it was observations reported in 1992 that provided the ﬁrst insights into the cellular function of Rho GTPases . Constitutively activated ( GTPase deﬁcient ) mutants of Rho and Rac were found to induce the assembly of contractile actin and myosin ﬁlaments ( stress ﬁbres ) and actin - rich surface protrusions ( lamellipodia ) , respectively , when introduced into ﬁbroblasts 1 , 2 . Later , Cdc42 was shown to promote the formation of actin - rich , ﬁnger - like membrane exten - sions ( ﬁlopodia ) 3 , 4 . The conclusion that Rho , Rac and Cdc42 regulate three separate signal transduction pathways linking plasma membrane receptors to the assembly of distinct ﬁlamentous actin structures has since been conﬁrmed in a wide variety of mammalian cell types as well as in yeast , ﬂies and worms . Few functional data are currently available on the other 13 members of the mammalian Rho GTPase family . Further interest in Rho GTPases has been fuelled by the realiz - ation that they regulate many other signal transduction pathways in addition to those linked to the actin cytoskeleton . They participate in the regulation of cell polarity , gene transcription , G1 cell cycle progression , microtubule dynamics , vesicular transport pathways and a variety of enzymatic activities ranging from an NADPH oxidase in phagocytes to a glucan synthase in yeast . The seemingly endless list of activities is confusing , but is consistent with the large number of target proteins identiﬁed . Our aim is to integrate this information into a cell biological context , and we have organized the review into three broad , often overlapping topics relevant to all eukaryotic cells : morphology , movement and behaviour . Morphology Animal cells adopt a huge diversity of shapes , ranging from the relatively simple - looking columnar epithelial cell through to the highly complex branched structure of a neuron . Shape is highly dependent on the external environment , which also provides direc - tional cues that drive the establishment of intracellular polarity . Establishing intracellular asymmetry Even unicellular organisms respond to directional cues , and genetic analysis of budding yeast provided the ﬁrst evidence linking Cdc42 to cell polarity 5 . In the absence of this GTPase , Saccharomyces cerevisiae cannot establish a deﬁned site for daughter cell growth and , as a consequence , cells expand isotropically ( Fig . 2 ) . Similarly , during mating , yeast cells extend surface protrusions ( shmoos ) directed along a gradient of secreted pheromone ; without Cdc42p ( yeast Cdc42 ) the protrusions are no longer oriented correctly . The conclusion is clear : Cdc42p is not needed for cell growth or protrusion formation per se , but it is needed for these processes to GAP GEF Rho - GDP Rho - GDP GDI GDP GTP Effectors Rho - GTP Plasma membrane Pi Figure 1 The Rho GTPase cycle . Twenty mammalian Rho GTPases have been described : Rho ( three isoforms : A , B , C ) ; Rac ( 1 , 2 , 3 ) ; Cdc42 ; TC10 ; TCL ; Chp ( 1 , 2 ) ; RhoG ; Rnd ( 1 , 2 , 3 ) ; RhoBTB ( 1 , 2 ) ; RhoD ; Rif ; and TTF . They cycle between an active ( GTP - bound ) and an inactive ( GDP - bound ) conformation . In the active state , they interact with one of over 60 target proteins ( effectors ) . The cycle is highly regulated by three classes of protein : in mammalian cells , around 60 guanine nucleotide exchange factors ( GEFs ) catalyse nucleotide exchange and mediate activation ; more than 70 GTPase - activating proteins ( GAPs ) stimulate GTP hydrolysis , leading to inactivation ; and four guanine nucleotide exchange inhibitors ( GDIs ) extract the inactive GTPase from membranes . All Rho GTPases are prenylated at their C terminus , and this is required for function . Rnd proteins are exceptional in that they do not hydrolyse GTP in vitro , which is an unusual property for a regulatory GTPase . It has been argued that they are controlled by expression , but it is equally possible that a yet to be identiﬁed GAP is required for hydrolysis . review article NATURE | VOL 420 | 12 DECEMBER 2002 | www . nature . com / nature 629 © 2002 Nature PublishingGroup occur at the right place on the cell surface . Once the bud site has been established , the organization of the actin and microtubule cytoskeletons and the direction of vesicular transport pathways are ﬁxed ( Fig . 2 ) . In a subsequent step , Rho1p ( another member of the yeast Rho GTPase family ) is recruited and activates three signal transduction pathways required for growth of the bud 6 . These observations provide a number of potential models for morphogenesis in more complicated systems . First , Cdc42 is the principal determinant in establishing correct cell polarity with respect to the external environment . Second , establishing intra - cellular asymmetry is a prerequisite for morphogenesis . Third , small GTPases provide distinct , but cooperative contributions to the morphogenetic process . The biochemistry of polarity establishment has proved more difﬁcult to elucidate , and one important distinc - tion to bear in mind is that generating cellular asymmetry is not necessarily the same as generating asymmetry in the correct orien - tation . Thus , in yeast lacking Cdc42p , pheromone induces an asymmetrical , stochastic accumulation of shmoo components on the membrane surface , but these are transient . The role of Cdc42 is to stabilize this activity in the correct location with respect to the external cue . Positive feedback loops probably have a prominent role , and in agreement with this , a target of Cdc42p ( Bem1p ) that localizes to the shmoo stabilizes the GEF ( Cdc24p ) that is respon - sible for activating Cdc42p in the ﬁrst place 7 . The genetic analysis of the ﬁrst cell ( zygote ) division during Caenorhabditis elegans development has provided some of the best insights into how cellular asymmetry can be generated . The protein products of six par genes ( PAR - 1 – 6 , partitioning defective ) and an atypical protein kinase C ( PKC - 3 ) are essential for establishing the anterior / posterior axis within this single cell . PAR - 1 and PAR - 2 localize at the posterior end of the cell ( where fertilization takes place ) , whereas PAR - 3 , PAR - 6 and PKC - 3 localize at the anterior end ( Fig . 2 ) 8 . PAR proteins are conserved throughout the animal king - dom ( although not in yeast ) and the PAR - 6 – atypical PKC complex has been shown to direct cell asymmetry during oocyte maturation and neuroblast division in Drosophila ( Fig . 2 ) 9 . Further work in C . elegans has revealed that inhibition of Cdc42 completely disrupts polarity and delocalizes all PAR proteins 10 , 11 . A clue to its role comes from mammalian cells , where Cdc42GTP interacts directly with Par6 ( mammalian homologue of PAR - 6 ) to stimulate the kinase activity of the associated atypical PKC 12 – 14 . It is likely that a spatially localized , active Cdc42GTP – PAR - 6 – PKC - 3 complex is required for maintaining the asymmetry of the zygote in C . elegans ( Fig . 2 ) . These examples relate to the establishment of cell polarity before cell division and are required for cell fate determination , but are Cdc42 and Par proteins used to establish polarity during morphogenesis ? Establishing shape Typical epithelial cells , such as those lining the colon or those forming the Drosophila wing , form monolayers of packed cuboidal cells with specialized cell – cell contacts and a distinctive asymme - trical distribution of proteins at the basolateral and apical mem - branes ( Fig . 2 ) . The establishment of epithelial cell morphology is driven primarily by two types of intercellular adhesive junction : adherens junctions , which form a strong mechanical link between adjacent cells , and tight junctions , which form a physical barrier preventing the diffusion of both lipids and proteins between the basolateral and apical membranes . Accompanying the assembly of these junctions , the actin and microtubule cytoskeletons are re - organized and vesicular transport is polarized , and in this way , the Polarity Anterior Posterior Budding yeast C . elegans Drosophila Neuroblasts Apical Basal N . . . . . . . . Bud neck Daughter Mother Morphology Epithelial cell Neurons Growth cone Dendrites Axon Spines N Apical Basal Basolateralsecretion Tight junctions Adherensjunctions a b Figure 2 Morphogenesis . a , Polarity . All eukaryotic cells are able to polarize in response to cues at the plasma membrane . Cdc42 is required for bud site assembly in yeast and , if deleted , cells expand isotropically . The polarized distribution of proteins in the C . elegans zygoteorin Drosophila neuroblastsleadstoasymmetricalcelldivision , a prerequisite for cell fate determination . In C . elegans , polarity establishment is controlled by Cdc42 , the products of six par genes ( PAR - 1 – 6 ) , and an atypical protein kinase C ( PKC - 3 ) . PAR - 6 – PAR - 3 – PKC - 3 localize at the anterior pole ( orange line ) ; PAR - 1 and PAR - 2 localize at the posterior pole ( blue line ) . The microtubule organizing centre ( MTOC ) isshowninredandmicrotubulesareingreen . b , Morphology . Polarityis also a major factor in determining cell morphology . In an epithelial cell , Cdc42 , Par6 , Par3 and atypical PKC regulate tight junction assembly to determine apical basolateral polarity . Cdc42 , Rac and Rho are also involved in the assembly of adherens junctions and , along with basolaterally directed vesicle transport , this leads to the typical columnar shape . Junctions are further stabilized by associated actin ﬁlaments and , here too , Rho GTPases have an involvement . Rho GTPases are involved in determining the morphology of neurons ; they affect axon , dendrite and spine growth , as well as axon guidance . It has not yet been shown whether Cdc42 has a role in establishing the polarity of the neuron . review article NATURE | VOL 420 | 12 DECEMBER 2002 | www . nature . com / nature 630 © 2002 Nature PublishingGroup shape of the epithelial cell is established and maintained . During the formation of epithelia , cadherin - mediated cell – cell contact ﬁrst leads to the development of adherens junctions . How this occurs is beginning to be unravelled 15 . First , Cdc42 and Rac are activated by and recruited to cadherin – cadherin contact sites formed between neighbouring cells . Observations made with epi - dermal cells during C . elegans development , ectodermal cells during Drosophila dorsal closure , and cultured mouse keratinocytes have revealed that ﬁlopodia and / or lamellipodia emerge from cells and penetrate into neighbouring cells 16 – 18 . This seems to provide a driving force to generate intimate cell – cell contact , and Cdc42 and Rac probably have a prominent role in this context . Inhibition of Rho also prevents adherens junction assembly ; its contribution may be to stabilize junctions through actin ﬁlament assembly ; however , non - actin - dependent pathways have also been proposed . The formation of the tight junction is required to establish the apical / basolateral asymmetry ( Fig . 2 ) . Notably , a Par6 – atypical PKC complex is required for the formation of this junctional structure and Par3 is recruited to initial cell – cell contacts and remains associated with tight junctions in polarized cells 19 . The activity of this complex is probably regulated by Cdc42 , although experimental evidence to support this is contradictory 20 , 21 . These observations point to a conserved mechanism for establishing intracellular asymmetry in both the C . elegans zygote and the mammalian epithelial cell . Although the precise role of Cdc42 in tight junction assembly is not clear , one possibility is that activation of atypical PKC induces phosphorylation of Par3 , allowing this scaffold - like protein to interact with junctional components , such as Jam 22 . Unlike Cdc42 , Par6 and atypical PKC are not required for adherens junction assembly . Finally , epithelial cell polarity also depends on the cell’s interaction with extracellular matrix through integrins at the basal surface ( Fig . 2 ) . The formation of hollow cysts ( apical - in , basolateral - out ) when MDCK cells are placed in a three - dimen - sional matrix , for example , requires recognition of laminin . Inter - estingly , Rac is required for the correct assembly of extracellular laminin and therefore inﬂuences the orientation of the apico - basal axis 23 . This points to an intimate cooperation between Rac and Cdc42 in establishing epithelial cell polarity . Rho GTPases contribute to epithelial cell morphogenesis through other activities . Disruption of Cdc42 in MDCK monolayers results in the inhibition of vesicular transport speciﬁcally to basolateral surfaces , leading to a selective depolarization of basolateral mem - brane proteins 24 . Interestingly , the delivery of vesicles containing basolateral membrane proteins is mediated by the exocyst complex , and in yeast , Cdc42p interacts directly with one of its components , Sec3p 25 . In mammalian cells , Ral , a small GTPase in the Ras family , interacts with another exocyst component , Sec5 , and Ral has been reported to be activated by Cdc42 ( refs 26 , 27 ) . This could be a mechanism for delivering membrane to the lateral edges , leading to cell elongation and the formation of the typical columnar shape . The generation of intracellular asymmetry in response to environmental cues is required in most animal cell types to direct Figure 3 Movement . a , Independent movement . Cells move through the polarized and dynamic re - organization of the actin cytoskeleton , involving a protruding force at the front ( blue arrows ) , combined with a contractile force in the cell body ( double - headed red arrows ) . This contractile activity leads to retraction of the rear of the cell as the adhesions are lost ( single - headed red arrows ) . Rho GTPases act spatially and temporallytocontrolalltheseaspects . Racregulatesactinpolymerizationatthefrontto promote protrusion . Cdc42 acts at the front to control direction in response to extracellular cues . Rho stimulates actin – myosin contraction in the cell body . Invading cancer cells are probably not directed byoutsidesignals , but deregulated Rac is thought to have an important role . Invasion probably involves changes in gene expression , secretion of proteases , alterations in surface adhesion proteins , and loss of adhesion - dependent signals controlling cell death . Growth cone movement of an axon is governed by attractive or repulsive cues , leading to actin - dependent protrusion or retraction , respectively . Microtubule dynamics and vesicular transport pathways also have a role in facilitating directed cell migration . b , Coordinated movement . In in vitro scratch assays , cells sense the free space left by the scratch and migrate together as a sheet . Rac is essentialforforwardmovementinﬁbroblastsandastrocytes . Migratingcellsareoriented perpendicularly to the scratch , most noticeably with astrocytes , showing pronounced elongation , with their MTOC ( red circle ) and Golgi apparatus ( brown stack ) in front of the nucleus . These aspects of cell polarity are controlled by Cdc42 . In astrocytes , Par6 and PKC z are localized at the leading edge of migrating cells ( orange line ) and are essential for polarity ( although not elongation ) . The movement of astrocytes is dependent on microtubule as well as actin dynamics . How cells behind the front row migrate coordinately with front row cells is unclear , but may involve secretion of soluble factors and / or mechanical tension . In Drosophila dorsal closure , ectodermal cells move coordinatelyas asheet over the embryo . The Rho - dependent contraction of an actin ring ( red line ) , joining all the cells of the front row , is involved . The Rac / Cdc42 - dependent secretion of a soluble TGF b - like factor ( Dpp , in blue ) is required to promote migration of the entire monolayer . When cells approach each other , Cdc42 - and Rac - dependent ﬁlopodia and lamellipodia protrude to execute closure . review article NATURE | VOL 420 | 12 DECEMBER 2002 | www . nature . com / nature 631 © 2002 Nature PublishingGroup a morphogenetic programme , but perhaps none is as complex as that in neurons . Neurons extend neurites , one of which differen - tiates into an axon , whereas the others become dendrites ( Fig . 2 ) . Dendrites form spines : small actin - rich projections along their length that form synapses with axons of other neurons . The mechanism that underlies the decision to form one axon from many neurites is not understood , but this is the step that establishes the polarity and morphology of the neuron . In vitro this seems to be a stochastic decision , but in vivo the developing neuron probably takes cues from its environment . Cdc42 and Par gene products may be involved in establishing the polarity of the differentiating neuron , but this has not yet been addressed . Cdc42 and Rac are positive regulators of neurite outgrowth , whereas Rho inhibits neurite extension 28 . On the basis of work in ﬁbroblasts , where Cdc42 and Rac promote membrane protrusion ( through actin ﬁlament assembly at the periphery ) whereas Rho promotes membrane retraction ( through contractile actin and myosin ﬁlaments ) , the opposing activities of these GTPases on the actin cytoskeleton have been used extensively to explain their observed effects in neurons . Thus , Rho is required to limit dendritic outgrowth in Drosophila 29 , whereas Rac is required for nerve growth factor ( NGF ) - induced axon growth 30 . Similarly , Rac activation increases the number of dendritic spines , whereas Rho activation has the opposite effect 31 , 32 . The idea that opposing Rac and Rho activities control neuronal shape through the actin cytoskeleton may , however , turn out to be an oversimpliﬁcation . It is still unclear , for example , what the relative contributions are of the actin and microtubule cytsokeletons in dendrite and axon outgrowth , and there is now overwhelming evidence that Rho GTPases directly control microtubule dynamics ( see below ) . Movement The migration of cells , either as individuals or as groups , is a principal feature of metazoan embryonic development , and in the adult it is required to maintain tissue integrity ( for example , the movement of differentiating stem cells in the colon ) and during immune surveillance ( for example , neutrophil chemotaxis ) . Single - cell migration The ability of a cell to move requires the asymmetrical organization of cellular activities . The front of the migrating cell generates protrusive force , generally associated with the extension of a lamellipodium in the direction of migration coupled with the development of new cell adhesions to the extracellular substrate . This in itself is not sufﬁcient , however , and cell contractility is required to allow the body and rear of the cell to follow the extending front 33 . Through its ability to promote both protrusion and cell contraction , the actin cytoskeleton is believed to provide the driving force for cell migration ( Fig . 3a ) . Rac induces actin polymerization and integrin adhesion complex assembly at the cell periphery , leading to membrane protrusion , and it is essential for the migration of all cells examined so far 34 . The biochemical mechanisms by which Rac catalyses actin polymeriz - ation are a focus of great interest . Four Rac targets ( IRSp53 , phosphatidylinositol - 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase , p65Pak and LIM kinase ) have been implicated , as has the Arp2 / 3 complex , which Figure 4 Behaviour . a , Contraction . Rho and its target p160Rho kinase are principal mediators of cell shape changes through their effects on actin and myosin contraction . Rho stimulates smooth muscle cell contraction ( to regulate blood circulation ) and endothelial cell contraction ( to allow movement of blood cells into the surrounding tissues ; extravasation ) . b , Phagocytosis . The localized polymerization of actin at peripheral sites can promote internalization of attached particles and microorganisms ( blue rectangle ) . During type I phagocytosis , Cdc42 and Rac induce actin polymerization to form membrane extensions that engulf the particle . Rac also associates with p67phox , a component of the NADPH oxidase enzyme complex ( green square ) , to stimulate the production of superoxide ions as part of a bactericidal programme . c , Secretion . The re - orientation of the microtubule cytoskeleton ( tubulin , green ; MTOC , red ) in cytotoxic T cells allows the targeted delivery of perforin - containing granules ( blue dots ) to the target APC . Cdc42 is essential for establishing cell polarity in this context , but its downstream targets have not been identiﬁed . d , Cell division . Rho , Rac and Cdc42 contribute different activities to the G1 phase of the cell cycle . Rho is required to prevent expression of p21 , an inhibitor of G1 cyclin / Cdk , whereasRacandRhopromotetranscriptionandtranslationofcyclinD . RhoandCdc42 are also required late in the cell cycle for the correct assembly of the actin and myosin contractile ring ( red ) that separates daughter cells . review article NATURE | VOL 420 | 12 DECEMBER 2002 | www . nature . com / nature 632 © 2002 Nature PublishingGroup catalyses de novo nucleation of actin polymerization and the formation of new ﬁlament branches 35 . How Rac promotes the small integrin adhesion complexes found at the front of a migrating cell that are required to generate traction forces is unknown . The protrusive activity required for cell migration must be spatially controlled to promote net cell translocation . FRET ( ﬂuorescence resonance energy transfer ) microscopy has revealed that RacGTP levels are highest at the leading edge of a migrating cell . The mechanism of localized Rac activation is not clear , although integrin – matrix interactions probably play an important part 36 . Work in Drosophila 37 , 38 and C . elegans 39 has revealed the importance of a Dock 180 – CrkII scaffold complex in mediating Rac activation by chemotactic agents during border cell and distal tip cell migration , respectively . The mammalian orthologues of these associate with integrins 40 . The spatial distribution of Rho activity during cell migration has yet to be visualized , although in motile monocytes , it is responsible for contraction and retraction within the trailing cell body , suggesting that RhoGTP may be restricted to the cell body and excluded from the leading edge 41 . Cell migration is normally directed and controlled by extracellu - lar cues ( Fig . 3 ) . In tissue culture , many cells can adopt a polarized morphology with a front and rear , and are able to migrate , but this is only transiently sustained , leading essentially to a random walk ( chemokinesis ) . The stabilization of directional movement ( chemo - taxis ) requires input from external cues , and this is controlled by Cdc42 . The best study of this so far is in macrophage cells moving up a gradient of a chemotactic factor . When Cdc42 is inhibited , the macrophage reverts to a random walk , whereas inhibition of Rac blocks all cell movement 42 . It seems that Cdc42 directs and / or stabilizes Rac activity at the cell front . How it does this is not known , but it will be interesting to see whether the Par proteins participate as they do in migrating sheets of cells ( see below ) . Although localized Rac - induced actin polymerization is the driv - ing force , migration may be facilitated by other cellular activities . The microtubule cytoskeleton , for example , is highly polarized during migration . This is characterized by the accumulation of stabilized , detyrosinated microtubules in the vicinity of the leading edge ; increased microtubule growth at the leading edge ; and re - orientation of the microtubule organizing centre ( MTOC ) either in front of or behind the nucleus , with respect to the direction of migration 43 . Notably , Rho ( acting through p160Rho kinase and mDia ) promotes the accumulation of detyrosinated microtubules , Rac ( acting through p65Pak ) inactivates the microtubule destabilizing protein , stathmin and Cdc42 regulate the orientation of the MTOC . Axon guidance can be thought of as a specialized form of directed migration : the cell body does not move , but the growth cone at the axon tip responds to attractive and repulsive extracellular cues as it extends to its target site ( Fig . 3a ) 44 . Repulsion induced by the ephrin / Eph family of ligand / receptors requires Rho activation , whereas growth cone advance is associated with Rac activation . This ﬁts well into the mutually opposing retraction / extension model previously mentioned for Rho and Rac . However , all is not as it seems ; another class of chemorepellent , the semaphorins , acting through the plexin receptor family require Rac activity to induce growth cone collapse . The clearest in vivo work implicating Rho GTPases in the regulation of growth cone guidance has come from genetic screens in Drosophila 45 and C . elegans 46 showing that Rac is essential for axons to ﬁnd their correct target site . If directional cues within the growth cone are at all similar to those operating in chemotactic cells , then it is to be expected that Cdc42 will also have a crucial role . So far , however , there is little direct evidence for this . Coordinated cell migration During embryogenesis , many cells move as sheets or as loosely associated groups and not as individuals . One of the best - studied in vivo examples of this is during Drosophila dorsal closure ( Fig . 3b ) . Here , cell migration and cell stretching are not so easily distinguish - able , and the morphogenetic movements seem to have more similarity to embryonic wound healing where the formation of an actin and myosin cable , which joins all cells at the leading edge , promotes movement through a ‘purse - string’ contraction mecha - nism 18 . Here , Rho ( acting through PKN and p160Rho kinase ) controls the assembly and the contraction of the actin and myosin cable that drives wound or dorsal closure 47 , 48 . Rac and Cdc42 are also required during dorsal closure and they contribute at least two activities . First , as the two migrating cell sheets come close , they promote ﬁlopodia and lamellipodia , which interact with opposing cells and facilitate completion of dorsal closure 18 . Second , they regulate the Jun N - terminal kinase ( JNK ) mitogen - activated pro - tein ( MAP ) kinase cascade required for transcription of a trans - forming growth factor - b family member , Dpp , in cells at the leading edge 49 . Secreted Dpp acts in a paracrine fashion to stimulate coordinated movement of the epithelial sheet 50 . One of the simplest ways of generating mammalian cell migration in vitro , by scratching ( wounding ) a cell monolayer , induces the coordinated movement of sheets of cells , at least in non - trans - formed cells ( Fig . 3b ) . Using either primary ﬁbroblasts or primary astrocytes , Rac is essential for cell migration in these assays . As with single cells , migrating sheets of cells recognize the direction of migration ( the space formed by the scratch ) and polarize so that protrusive activity is restricted to the front , the MTOC re - orients in front of the nucleus to face the direction of migration , and secretion is directed towards the front . Cells in a monolayer or a group have an additional directional cue that is provided by interactions with their neighbours . Although the mechanisms operating within a cell to promote migration are becoming clearer , those promoting coordinated migration are poorly understood ( Fig . 3b ) . In both astrocyte and ﬁbroblast scratch assays , inhibition of Cdc42 leads to misdirected protrusive activity and a random orientation of the MTOC 51 – 53 . In astrocytes at least , both these aspects of polarity depend on a Par6 – atypical PKC complex loca - lized at the leading edge . The initiating external cue in this assay is integrin engagement ( with matrix ) at the front of leading edge cells , causing Cdc42 activation . Whether the positive , Cdc42 - dependent cues found at the front of the migrating astrocytes are reinforced by ‘negative’ cues emanating from points of cell – cell contact with neighbours is not known . Thus , the molecules that control the establishment of polarity in migrating monolayers of astrocytes are the same as those that control asymmetrical cell division in C . elegans and tight junction assembly in epithelial cells . Astrocytes undergo marked cell elongation ( perpendicular to the scratch ) during cell migration , which is also Rac - dependent ( Fig . 3b ) . Unlike migration , however , this shape change is independent of actin polymerization , but is instead dependent on microtubule dynamics . It is unknown whether microtubule extension itself generates the elongated shape , or whether it is something ( perhaps vesicular transport ) that depends on microtubule dynamics . Rho has also been reported to induce a microtubule - dependent shape change ( mediated by its target mDia ) in non - migrating HeLa cells 54 . Behaviour Mammalian Rho GTPases are well suited to control many of the specialized functions in cells of the adult . A brief overview will be presented here to demonstrate the diversity of effects uncovered so far , but more thorough reviews of this area can be found else - where 15 , 55 . Cell contraction Contractile actin and myosin ﬁlaments are used by many cell types to induce rapid , reversible changes in shape . For example , vascular smooth muscle cells control blood ﬂow by constricting and dilating in response to physiological stimuli ( Fig . 4 ) . Numerous agonists induce Rho activation in aortic smooth muscle cells , which through review article NATURE | VOL 420 | 12 DECEMBER 2002 | www . nature . com / nature 633 © 2002 Nature PublishingGroup p160Rho kinase stimulates myosin light chain phosphorylation to promote actin and myosin contraction 56 , 57 . Small molecule inhibi - tors of p160Rho kinase prevent agonist - induced contraction of both vascular and bronchial smooth muscle cells , and have been reported to reduce high blood pressure in a rat model of hypertension 58 . Similarly , Rho and p160Rho kinase control the barrier function of vascular endothelial cells to regulate extravasation of lymphocytes from circulating blood into surrounding tissues ( Fig . 4 ) . Addition of vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) or thrombin to endothelial cells in culture induces an increase in the permeability of cell monolayers and this is partially inhibited by p160Rho kinase inhibitors 59 . It is thought that contraction forces , generated through increased actin and myosin activity , are responsible for destabilizing the endothelial cell – cell junctions 60 . Phagocytosis The assembly and disassembly of peripheral actin ﬁlaments can be used to promote localized changes in the structure of the plasma membrane ; phagocytosis is driven in this way ( Fig . 4 ) . Two distinct phagocytic pathways have been uncovered in the mammalian macrophage : type I ( for example , through the immunoglobulin receptor ) requires both Rac and Cdc42 , whereas type II ( for example , through the complement receptor ) requires Rho 61 . In C . elegans , phagocytosis of apoptotic cellsduring developmentoccurs through two distinct pathways , one of which requires Rac 62 . It is not clear why phagocytosis needs alternative pathways , but the answer probably lies not in the uptake process itself , but in other associated activities . For example , immunoglobulin , but not complement - mediated phagocytosis , is accompanied by activation of the NADPH enzyme complex , which coincidentally is allosterically regulated by Rac ( Fig . 4 ) 63 . The actin - rich surface protrusions induced by Rac and Cdc42 also mediate a related endocytic process , pinocytosis . Not only is this important for the uptake of essential nutrients , but it is used by immature dendritic cells to sample the surrounding tissue environment . Proteins taken up by Cdc42 / Rac - dependent pinocytosis are processed and presented as peptides associated with major histocompatibility complex molecules , on the surface of mature dendritic cells 64 . The central role of Rho GTPases in phagocytosis provides at least a partial explanation of why they are such common substrates for bacterial toxins and effectors ( reviewed in refs 65 , 66 ) . Clostridial toxins covalently modify and inactivate Rho GTPases , whereas Yersinia YopE ( injected into cells through a bacterial type III secretion system ) acts as a Rho GAP . In both cases , this prevents phagocystosis of bacteria . Salmonella typhimurium , on the other hand , is an invasive bacterium and it injects cells with SopE , which acts as a GEF , to activate Cdc42 and Rac , and thereby promotes its own internalization . Furthermore , once inside the host cell , Salmonella releases SptP , a GAP that downregulates Cdc42 and Rac . Proliferation In addition to their effects on the cytoskeleton , Rho GTPases contribute to the regulation of cell cycle progression . One of the best - characterized examples of this is after antigen stimulation of T cells . Appropriate engagement of the T - cell receptor induces GTP loading on Rac ( catalysed by Vav ) and stimulation of the JNK MAP kinase cascade . This leads to activation of the transcription factor NF - ATand expression of the cytokine interleukin - 2 ( IL - 2 ) , which in turn stimulates G1 progression of the quiescent T cell and promotes clonal expansion of the appropriate antigen - speciﬁc lymphocytes 67 . Interestingly , Rac has a dual role and controls changes to the actin cytoskeleton that are essential for induction of proliferation in these cells . Rac and its exchange factor Vav are also essential for prolifer - ation of B cells ; in this case , Rac regulates expression of the cyclin D2 gene through an unknown pathway 68 . Work with ﬁbroblasts and epithelial cells in culture has shown that Rho , Rac and Cdc42 each contribute to G1 cell cycle pro - gression . All three can promote entry into G1 and progression to S phase when expressed in quiescent ﬁbroblasts , whereas inhibition of any of the three blocks serum - induced G1 progression ( Fig . 4 ) 69 . The signal transduction pathways involved are still unclear , but Rho seems to have at least two important roles : to inhibit expression of the cyclin / Cdk inhibitor p21 Waf1 / Cip1 , and to induce cyclin D1 expression in mid - G1 ( by promoting sustained activation of extra - cellular - signal - regulated kinase ( ERK ) MAP kinase ) 70 , 71 . In endo - thelial cells , Rac is essential for cyclin D1 expression during G1 , although in this case , it regulates messenger RNA translation rather than transcription of the gene 72 . The cell cycle is completed with cytokinesis ( Fig . 4 ) , and in animal cells this is driven by an actin and myosin contractile ring , which constricts to form the two daughter cells . Inhibition of either Rho or Cdc42 prevents the assembly of the contractile ring in a variety of mammalian cells as well as in Xenopus embryos 73 . Expression of constitutively activated Rho or Cdc42 also blocks cytokinesis , suggesting that cycling between the active and inactive forms is required for function . Regulated secretion There are now several examples where Rho GTPases participate in regulated secretory pathways and in some case this seems to be actin - independent . The interaction of the T - cell receptor ( TCR ) on cytotoxic T cells with a corresponding antigen - presenting cell ( APC ) , for example , induces the re - orientation of the Golgi and MTOC to face the APC interaction site , thereby facilitating the spatially restricted delivery of secretory granules ( Fig . 4 ) . MTOC polarization in T cells is Cdc42 - dependent—whether Par6 and atypical PKC are involved has not yet been examined 74 . Crosslinking of IgE receptors on circulating mast cells induces histamine and serotonin release from large cytoplasmic granules , and work with permeabilized cells has revealed that Rho , Rac and Cdc42 are required . Although their exact function is not known , it is thought to be independent of the actin cytoskeleton 75 . Finally , insulin stimulation of adipocytes induces translocation of intracellular vesicles containing glucose transporters , and TC10 , a relatively uncharacterized member of the Rho family , is required 76 . In this case , a GTPase - dependent re - organization of cortical actin seems to be involved 77 . Future perspectives The single most notable feature of Rho GTPases is their partici - pation in so many aspects of cell biology , ranging from the funda - mental ( for example , cell polarity ) to the highly specialized ( for example , contraction of vascular smooth muscle cells ) . The future will no doubt hold many more surprises and examples of cellular control by these proteins . The analysis of individual signal transduction pathways con - trolled by Rho GTPases still poses many problems , and with so many GEFs , GAPs and targets it has proved difﬁcult to link speciﬁc receptors all the way through to a biological response . Conceptually , it is still unclear how spatially localized activation of GTPases is achieved or , when activated , how GTPases are able to ‘choose’ the correct target ( s ) from the large number of possibilities present in the same cell . The answer will probably involve positive feedback loops , cooperative signalling pathways , scaffold proteins and intracellular compartmentalization . Complex changes in cell behaviour are the result of multiple biochemical pathways acting in unison . Combinations of Rho GTPases , each with their numerous targets , are ideally positioned to coordinate this kind of parallel circuitry . Yeast has provided several examples of this , but we are still awaiting clearcut examples in mammalian cells . Changes in the actin cytoskeleton do not occur independently of other cellular responses such as changes in gene transcription , the microtubule cytoskeleton or vesicular transport . review article NATURE | VOL 420 | 12 DECEMBER 2002 | www . nature . com / nature 634 © 2002 Nature PublishingGroup We have seen how a simple Rho GTPase switch can potentially orchestrate this biological complexity , what is needed now is evidence of how and when they actually do . Indeed , it may be that to achieve a better understanding of the molecular basis of cell biology , it will be necessary to shift focus a little , away from trying to identify every component of a favoured signalling pathway , to exploring how pathways cooperate with each other during a deﬁned biological response . A doi : 10 . 1038 / nature01148 . 1 . Ridley , A . J . & Hall , A . ThesmallGTP - bindingproteinRhoregulatestheassemblyoffocaladhesions and stress ﬁbers in response to growth factors . Cell 70 , 389 – 399 ( 1992 ) . 2 . Ridley , A . J . , Paterson , C . L . , Johnston , C . L . , Diekmann , D . & Hall , A . ThesmallGTP - bindingprotein Rac regulates growth factor - induced membrane rufﬂing . Cell 70 , 401 – 410 ( 1992 ) . 3 . Nobes , C . D . & Hall , A . Rho , RacandCdc42regulatetheassemblyofmultimolecularfocalcomplexes associated with actin stress ﬁbers , lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia . Cell 81 , 53 – 62 ( 1995 ) . 4 . Kozma , R . , Ahmed , S . , Best , A . & Lim , L . TheRas - relatedproteinCdc42Hsandbradykininpromote formation of peripheral actin microspikes and ﬁlopodia in Swiss 3T3 ﬁbroblasts . Mol . Cell . Biol . 15 , 1942 – 1952 ( 1995 ) . 5 . Pruyne , D . & Bretscher , A . Polarization of cell growth inyeast . I . Establishment and maintenance of polarity states . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 365 – 375 ( 2000 ) . 6 . Schmidt , A . & Hall , M . N . Signalingtotheactincytoskeleton . Annu . Rev . CellDev . Biol . 14 , 305 – 338 ( 1998 ) . 7 . Butty , A . - C . et al . A positive feedback loop stabilizes the guanine - exchange factor Cdc24 at sites of polarization . EMBO J . 21 , 1565 – 1576 ( 2002 ) . 8 . Kemphues , K . PARsing embryonic polarity . Cell 101 , 345 – 348 ( 2000 ) . 9 . Ohno , S . Intercellularjuntionsandcellularpolarity : thePAR - aPKCcomplex , aconservedcorecassette playing fundamental roles in cell polarity . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 13 , 641 – 648 ( 2001 ) . 10 . Gotta , M . , Abraham , M . C . & Ahringer , J . CDC - 42controlsearlycellpolarityandspindleorientation in C . elegans . Curr . Biol . 11 , 482 – 488 ( 2001 ) . 11 . Kay , A . J . & Hunter , C . P . CDC - 42regulatesPARproteinlocalizationandfunctiontocontrolcellular and embryonic polarity in C . elegans . Curr . Biol . 11 , 474 – 481 ( 2001 ) . 12 . Joberty , G . , Petersen , C . , Gao , L . & Macara , I . G . Thecell - polarityproteinPar6linksPar3andatypical protein kinase C to Cdc42 . Nature Cell Biol . 2 , 531 – 539 ( 2000 ) . 13 . Qiu , R . - G . , Abo , A . & Martin , G . S . A human homolog of the C . elegans polarity determinant Par - 6 links Rac and Cdc42 to PKC z signaling and cell transformation . Curr . Biol . 10 , 697 – 707 ( 2000 ) . 14 . Lin , D . etal . AmammalianPAR - 3 - PAR - 6compleximplicatedinCdc42 / Rac1andaPKCsignallingand cell polarity . Nature Cell Biol . 2 , 540 – 547 ( 2000 ) . 15 . VanAelst , L . & Symons , M . RoleofRhofamily GTPasesin epithelialmorphogenesis . GenesDev . 16 , 1032 – 1054 ( 2002 ) . 16 . Vasioukhin , V . , Bauer , C . , Yin , M . & Fuchs , E . Directed actin polymerization is the driving force for epithelial cell - cell adhesion . Cell 100 , 209 – 219 ( 2000 ) . 17 . Raich , W . B . , Agbunag , C . & Hardin , J . Rapid epithelial - sheet sealing in the Caenorhabditis elegans embryo requires cadherin - dependent ﬁlopodial priming . Curr . Biol . 9 , 1139 – 1146 ( 1999 ) . 18 . Jacinto , A . , Martinez - Arias , A . & Martin , P . Mechanisms of epithelial fusion and repair . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , E117 – E123 ( 2001 ) . 19 . Yamanaka , T . et al . PAR - 6 regulates aPKC activity in a novel way and mediates cell - cell contact - induced formation of the epithelial junctional complex . Genes Cells 6 , 721 – 731 ( 2001 ) . 20 . Rojas , R . , Ruiz , W . G . , Leung , S . M . , Jou , T . S . & Apodaca , G . Cdc42 - dependentmodulation of tight junctionsandmembraneproteintrafﬁcinpolarizedMadin - Darbycaninekidneycells . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 2257 – 2274 ( 2001 ) . 21 . Gao , L . , Joberty , G . & Macara , I . G . Assembly of epithelial tight junctions is negatively regulated by Par - 6 . Curr . Biol . 12 , 221 – 225 ( 2002 ) . 22 . Ebnet , K . et al . The cell polarity protein ASIP / PAR - 3 directly associates with junctional adhesion molecule ( JAM ) . EMBO J . 20 , 3738 – 3748 ( 2001 ) . 23 . O’Brien , L . E . et al . Rac1 orientates epithelial apical polarity through effects on basolateral laminin assembly . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 831 – 838 ( 2001 ) . 24 . Kroschewski , R . , Hall , A . & Mellman , I . Cdc42 controls secretory and endocytic transport to the basolateral plasma membrane of MDCK cells . Nature Cell Biol . 1 , 8 – 13 ( 1999 ) . 25 . Zhang , X . etal . Cdc42interactswiththeexocystandregulatespolarizedsecretion . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 46745 – 46750 ( 2001 ) . 26 . Sugihara , K . etal . TheexocystcomplexbindsthesmallGTPaseRalAtomediateﬁlopodiaformation . Nature Cell Biol . 4 , 73 – 78 ( 2001 ) . 27 . Moskalenko , S . et al . The exocyst is a Ral effector complex . Nature Cell Biol . 4 , 66 – 72 ( 2002 ) . 28 . Luo , L . Rho GTPases in neuronal morphogenesis . Nature Rev . Neurosci . 1 , 173 – 180 ( 2000 ) . 29 . Lee , T . , Winter , C . , Marticke , S . S . , Lee , A . & Luo , L . Essential role of Drosophila RhoA in the regulation of neuroblast proliferation and dendritic but not axonal morphogenesis . Neuron 25 , 307 – 316 ( 2000 ) . 30 . Ozdinler , P . H . & Erzurumlu , R . S . Regulation of neurotrophin - induced axonal responses via Rho GTPases . J . Comp . Neurol . 438 , 377 – 387 ( 2001 ) . 31 . Li , Z . , VanAelst , L . & Cline , H . T . RhoGTPasesregulatedistinctaspectsofdendriticarborgrowthin Xenopus central neurons in vivo . Nature Neurosci . 3 , 217 – 225 ( 2000 ) . 32 . Wong , W . T . , Faulkner - Jones , B . , Sanes , J . R . & Wong , R . O . Rapid dendritic remodeling in the developing retina : dependence on neurotransmission and reciprocal regulation by Rac and Rho . J . Neurosci . 20 , 5024 – 5036 ( 2000 ) . 33 . Ridley , A . Rho GTPases and cell migration . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 2713 – 2722 ( 2001 ) . 34 . Small , J . V . , Stradal , T . , Vignal , E . & Rottler , K . Thelamellipodium : wheremotilitybegins . TrendsCell Biol . 12 , 112 – 120 ( 2002 ) . 35 . Condeelis , J . How is actin polymerization nucleated in vivo ? Trends Cell Biol . 11 , 288 – 293 ( 2001 ) . 36 . Kraynov , V . S . etal . LocalizedRacactivationdynamicsvisualizedinlivingcells . Science 290 , 333 – 337 ( 2000 ) . 37 . Gupta , T . & Schupbach , T . Twosignalsarebetterthanone : bordercellmigrationin Drosophila . Dev . Cell 1 , 443 – 445 ( 2001 ) . 38 . Duchek , P . , Somogyi , K . , Jekely , G . , Beccari , S . & Rorth , P . Guidanceofcellmigrationbythe Drosophila PDGF / VEGF receptor . Cell 107 , 17 – 26 ( 2001 ) . 39 . Reddien , P . W . & Horvitz , H . R . CED - 2 / CrkII and CED - 10 / Rac control phagocytosis and cell migration in Caenorhabditis elegans . Nature Cell Biol . 2 , 131 – 136 ( 2000 ) . 40 . Albert , M . L . , Kim , J . I . & Birge , R . B . a v b 5 integrin recruites the CrkII - Dock180 - rac1 complex for phagocytosis of apoptotic cells . Nature Cell Biol . 2 , 899 – 905 ( 2000 ) . 41 . Worthylake , R . A . , Lemoine , S . , Watson , J . M . & Burridge , K . RhoA is required for monocyte tail retraction during transendothelial migration . J . Cell Biol . 154 , 147 – 160 ( 2001 ) . 42 . Allen , W . E . , Zicha , D . , Ridley , A . J . & Jones , G . E . AroleforCdc42inmacrophagechemotaxis . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 1147 – 1157 ( 1998 ) . 43 . Wittmann , T . & Waterman - Storer , C . M . Cellmotility : canRhoGTPasesandmicrotubulespointthe way ? J . Cell Sci . 114 , 3795 – 3803 ( 2001 ) . 44 . Liu , B . P . & Strittmatter , S . M . Semaphorin - mediated axonal guidance via Rho - related G proteins . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 13 , 619 – 626 ( 2001 ) . 45 . Ng , J . etal . RacGTPasescontrolaxongrowth , guidanceandbranching . Nature 416 , 442 – 447 ( 2002 ) . 46 . Lundquist , E . A . , Reddien , P . W . , Hartwieg , E . , Horvitz , H . R . & Bargmann , C . I . Three C . elegans Rac proteins and several alternative Rac regulators control axon guidance , cell migration and apoptotic cell phagocytosis . Development 128 , 4475 – 4488 ( 2001 ) . 47 . Brock , J . , Midwinter , K . , Lewis , J . & Martin , P . Healingof incisionalwoundsin the embryonicchick wing bud : characterization of the actin purse - string and demonstration of a requirement for Rho activation . J . Cell Biol . 135 , 1097 – 1107 ( 1996 ) . 48 . Lu , Y . & Settleman , J . The Drosophila Pkn protein kinase is a Rho / Raceffector target required for dorsal closure during embryogenesis . Genes Dev . 13 , 1168 – 1180 ( 1999 ) . 49 . Stronach , B . E . & Perrimon , N . Stress signaling in Drosophila . Oncogene 18 , 6172 – 6182 ( 1999 ) . 50 . Knust , E . Drosophila morphogenesis : movements behind the edge . Curr . Biol . 7 , R558 – R561 ( 1997 ) . 51 . Nobes , C . D . & Hall , A . RhoGTPasescontrolpolarity , protrusionandadhesionduringcellmovement . J . Cell Biol . 144 , 1235 – 1244 ( 1999 ) . 52 . Etienne - Manneville , S . & Hall , A . Integrin - mediated Cdc42 activation controls cell polarity in migrating astrocytes through PKC z . Cell 106 , 489 – 498 ( 2001 ) . 53 . Palazzo , A . F . et al . Cdc42 , dynein , and dynactinregulateMTOC reorientationindependent of Rho - regulated microtubule stabilization . Curr . Biol . 11 , 1536 – 1541 ( 2001 ) . 54 . Ishizaki , T . et al . Coordination of microtubules and actin cytoskeleton by the Rho effector mDial . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 8 – 14 ( 2001 ) . 55 . Ridely , A . J . Rho family proteins : coordinating cell responses . Trends Cell Biol . 11 , 471 – 477 ( 2001 ) . 56 . Fukata , Y . , Amano , M . & Kaibuchi , K . Rho - Rho - kinase pathway in smooth muscle contraction and cytoskeletal reorganization of non - muscle cells . Trends Pharmacol . Sci . 22 , 32 – 39 ( 2001 ) . 57 . Sakurada , S . , Okamoto , H . , Takuwa , N . , Sugimoto , N . & Takuwa , Y . Rho activation in excitatory agonist - stimulated vascular smooth muscle . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 281 , C571 – C578 ( 2001 ) . 58 . Uehata , M . etal . CalciumsensitizationofsmoothmusclemediatedbyRho - associatedproteinkinase in hypertension . Nature 389 , 990 – 994 ( 1997 ) . 59 . van Nieuw Amerongen , G . P . , van Delft , S . , Vermeer , M . A . , Collard , J . G . & van Hinsbergh , V . W . Activation of RhoA by thrombin in endothelial hypermeability : role of Rho kinase and protein tyrosine kinases . Circ . Res . 87 , 335 – 340 ( 2000 ) . 60 . Wojciak - Stothard , B . , Potempa , S . , Eichholtz , T . & Ridley , A . J . Rhoand Rac butnot Cdc42 regulate endothelial cell permeability . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 1343 – 1355 ( 2001 ) . 61 . Caron , E . & Hall , A . Identiﬁcationoftwodistinctmechanismsofphagocytosiscontrolledbydifferent Rho GTPases . Science 282 , 1717 – 1721 ( 1998 ) . 62 . Caron , E . Rac and roll over the corpses . Curr . Biol . 10 , R489 – R491 ( 2000 ) . 63 . Bokoch , G . M . RegulationofcellfunctionbyRhofamilyGTPases . Immunol . Res . 21 , 139 – 148 ( 2000 ) . 64 . Nobes , C . & Marsh , M . Dendriticcells : newrolesforCdc42andRacinantigenuptake ? Curr . Biol . 10 , R739 – R741 ( 2000 ) . 65 . Aktories , K . , Schmidt , G . & Just , I . RhoGTPasesastargetsofbacterialproteintoxins . Biol . Chem . 381 , 421 – 426 ( 2000 ) . 66 . Galan , J . E . Salmonella interactionswithhostcells : TypeIIIsecretionatwork . Annu . Rev . CellDev . Biol . 17 , 53 – 86 ( 2001 ) . 67 . Cantrell , D . Lymphocyte signalling : a coordinating role for Vav ? Curr . Biol . 8 , R535 – R538 ( 1998 ) . 68 . Glassford , J . etal . VavisrequiredforcyclinD2 inductionandproliferationofmouseB lymphocytes activated via the antigen receptor . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 41040 – 41048 ( 2001 ) . 69 . Olson , M . F . , Ashworth , A . & Hall , A . AnessentialroleforRho , RacandCDC42GTPasesincellcycle progression through G1 . Science 269 , 1270 – 1272 ( 1995 ) . 70 . Welsh , C . F . et al . Timing of cyclin D1 expressionwithin G1 phase is controlled by Rho . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 950 – 957 ( 2001 ) . 71 . Olson , M . F . , Paterson , H . F . & Marshall , C . J . SignalsfromRasandRhoGTPasesinteracttoregulate expression of p21 Waf1 / Cip1 . Nature 394 , 295 – 299 ( 1998 ) . 72 . Mettouchi , A . et al . Integrin - speciﬁc activation of Raccontrols progression through the G 1 phase of the cell cycle . Mol . Cell 8 , 115 – 127 ( 2001 ) . 73 . Glotzer , M . Animal cell cytokinesis . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 17 , 351 – 386 ( 2001 ) . 74 . Stowers , L . , Yelon , D . , Berg , L . J . & Chant , J . RegulationofthepolarizationofTcellstowardsantigen - presenting cells by Ras - related GTPase CDC42 . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 92 , 5027 – 5031 ( 1995 ) . 75 . Pinxteren , J . A . , O’Sullivan , A . J . , Larbi , K . Y . , Tatham , P . E . R . & Gomperts , B . D . Thirty years of stimulus - secretioncoupling : fromCa 2 (cid:135) toGTPintheregulationofexocytosis . Biochimie 82 , 385 – 393 ( 2000 ) . 76 . Chiang , S . H . etal . Insulin - stimulatedGLUT4translocationrequirestheCAP - dependentactivationof TC10 . Nature 410 , 944 – 948 ( 2001 ) . 77 . Kanzaki , M . & Pessin , J . E . Insulin - stimulatedGLUT4translocationinadipocytesisdependentupon cortical actin remodeling . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 42436 – 42444 ( 2001 ) . Acknowledgements We are grateful for support from Cancer Research UK and the Medical Research Council . S . E . - M . is supported by an EMBO long - term fellowship . Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A . H . ( e - mail : alan . hall @ ucl . ac . uk ) . review article NATURE | VOL 420 | 12 DECEMBER 2002 | www . nature . com / nature 635 © 2002 Nature PublishingGroup Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission .