Current Biology Article Architecture and Connectivity Govern Actin Network Contractility Hajer Ennomani , 1 , 5 Gae¨lle Letort , 1 , 5 Christophe Gue´rin , 1 Jean - Louis Martiel , 1 Wenxiang Cao , 2 Franc¸ois Ne´de´lec , 3 Enrique M . De La Cruz , 2 Manuel The´ry , 1 , 4 , 6 , * and Laurent Blanchoin 1 , 6 , * 1 Biosciences & Biotechnology Institute of Grenoble , Laboratoire de Physiologie Cellulaire et Vege´tale , CNRS / CEA / UGA / INRA , Grenoble 38054 , France 2 Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry , Yale University , 260 Whitney Avenue , New Haven , CT 06520 - 8114 , USA 3 Cell Biology and Biophysics Unit , EMBL , Meyerhofstrasse 1 , 69117 Heidelberg , Germany 4 Unite´ de the´rapie Cellulaire , Hopital Saint - Louis , Avenue Claude Vellefaux , Paris 75010 , France 5 Co - ﬁrst author 6 Co - senior author * Correspondence : manuel . thery @ cea . fr ( M . T . ) , laurent . blanchoin @ cea . fr ( L . B . ) http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2015 . 12 . 069 SUMMARY Actomyosin contractility plays a central role in a wide range of cellular processes , including the establishment of cell polarity , cell migration , tissue integrity , and morphogenesis during development . The contractile response is variable and depends on actomyosin network architecture and biochem - ical composition . To determine how this coupling regulates actomyosin - driven contraction , we used a micropatterning method that enables the spatial control of actin assembly . We generated a variety of actin templates and measured how deﬁned actin structures respond to myosin - induced forces . We found that the same actin ﬁlament crosslinkers either enhance or inhibit the contractility of a network , depending on the organization of actin within the network . Numerical simulations uniﬁed the roles of actin ﬁlament branching and crosslink - ing during actomyosin contraction . Speciﬁcally , we introduce the concept of ‘‘network connectivity’’ and show that the contractions of distinct actin ar - chitectures are described by the same master curve when considering their degree of connectivity . This makes it possible to predict the dynamic response of deﬁned actin structures to transient changes in connectivity . We propose that , depending on the connectivity and the architecture , network contrac - tion is dominated by either sarcomeric - like or buck - ling mechanisms . More generally , this study reveals how actin network contractility depends on its architecture under a deﬁned set of biochemical conditions . INTRODUCTION Actomyosin contractility plays a central role in a wide range of cellular processes including the establishment of cell polarity , cell migration , tissue integrity , or morphogenesis dur - ing development [ 1 , 2 ] . Contraction is generated by myosin molecular motors that exert forces on actin ﬁlaments [ 3 – 6 ] . This active process is complex , in part because actin ﬁla - ments in contractile networks are assembled in a variety of dynamic organized structures that undergo continuous as - sembly , disassembly , and overall reorganization [ 7 , 8 ] . Acto - myosin contractility can be reproduced using cell extracts [ 9 , 10 ] or reconstituted systems [ 4 , 5 , 11 – 14 ] . In parallel , the molecular mechanism of single myosin motors has been studied extensively over the last decades [ 15 ] . Three principal mechanisms of contractility have been proposed for actin ﬁlament networks : ( 1 ) a sarcomeric - like model , where ﬁlaments slide because of structural asymmetry that originates from motor processivity , crosslinker distribution [ 16 , 17 ] or from contractile versus expansile state stability [ 18 ] ; ( 2 ) an actin ﬁlament treadmilling model , where contrac - tility depends on actin ﬁlament turnover [ 19 ] ; and ( 3 ) a buck - ling model , where contractility depends on the mechanical deformation of actin ﬁlament under the force exerted by the myosin [ 20 ] . However , little is known about how the architecture of the actin structure inﬂuences contraction , the molecular mechanism of contraction in complex actin structures , or how network dynamic reorganization affects its deformation . In a cellular context , actin ﬁlaments can be roughly assem - bled into three categories of dynamical structures , each of them performing speciﬁc functions : ( 1 ) a nearly orthogonal network at the leading edge of motile cells ; ( 2 ) parallel bundles in ﬁlipodia type of membrane protrusions or at adhesion sites ; and ( 3 ) anti - parallel contractile actin ﬁbers in the cell cytoplasm [ 21 ] . Lamellipodia and ﬁlipodia types of actin organization have been extensively studied using a combination of biochemical and cell - biological approaches [ 21 – 23 ] . Although a general consensus emerges from these studies on the mechanism of force generation by actin polymerization and how this can deform or protrude the plasma membrane [ 21 , 24 , 25 ] , the role of actomyosin interaction in the remodeling of these struc - tures is far less characterized . Moreover , the mechanism of contraction , which depends on the organization of actin ﬁla - ments , is largely unknown . 616 Current Biology 26 , 616 – 626 , March 7 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved Here , we used our ability to generate well - deﬁned actin organi - zation using surface micropatterning of actin Nucleating Promot - ingFactor ( NPF ) [ 26 , 27 ] , tochallengetheactin - geometricalprinci - ples ruling contractility . We found that the rate of the macroscopic actin deformation due tomyosin - contractiondepends onnetwork architecture ( disordered branched networks , ordered or disor - dered bundles ) . Using numerical simulations , we established that in addition of ﬁlaments organization , network connectivity modulates the contractile response . We determined the mecha - nism of contraction leading to macroscopic deformation for the different actin architectures and how it depends on the degree of network connectivity . Finally , using our model , we predicted how dynamictransitionuponactinorganizationcanmodulatetheacto - myosincontractileresponseandvalidatedthesepredictionsusing a new experimental system allowing the dynamic and reversible modulation of actin organization during contraction . RESULTS Contractile Response of Different Actin Organizations Cellular actin ﬁlaments assemble into a variety of structures that are distinct with respect to the orientation of the ﬁlaments , as well as their connectivity ( ability of one ﬁlament to be linked to another ﬁlament ) [ 21 , 23 , 28 ] . The organization of actin ﬁlaments modulates the contractile response of a network . For example , branched networks are less contractile than bundles of anti - par - allel ﬁlaments [ 6 ] . Here , we investigate the factors that govern the coupling between ﬁlament spatial arrangement and the degree of crosslinking in the regulation of actomyosin contraction . We evaluated the contractile response of various in vitro reconsti - tuted actin structures , that are branched or not , and in which ﬁlaments are either of mixed polarity , or prominently antiparallel ( Figure 1 ) . To obtain such diversity in actin architecture , we used Figure 1 . Architecture - Dependent Contractility of Actin Rings ( A ) Schematic representation of the different types of actin architecture : disordered networks , ordered bundles , and disordered bundles , respectively . ( B ) Contraction dynamics of the different actin rings , induced by myosin motors . Time is indicated in each picture . Scale bar , 25 m m . ( C ) Measured ring perimeter , for each type of ring , as a function of time . The disordered networks ( green ) and ordered bundles ( red ) both contract within a few minutes following assembly , whereas disordered bundles ( blue ) are not contractile within the same time interval . Each curve was obtained by averaging over a dozen of different patterns . Error bars represent SEM . Conditions : 2 m M actin , 6 m M proﬁlin , 100 nM Arp2 / 3 complex , and 16 nM myosin VI . 300 nM ADF / coﬁlin was added to the reaction to obtain the ring made of disordered bundles . See also Figure S1 and Movies S1 , S2 , and S3 . Current Biology 26 , 616 – 626 , March 7 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved 617 surface micropatterning to initiate geometrically controlled actin assembly over 70 - m m - wide rings [ 26 ] . In this assay , well - deﬁned surfaces coated with Actin Promoting Factor ( NPF ) trigger actin assembly in a reaction chamber containing a mixture of proteins including the Arp2 / 3 complex , actin , and proﬁlin . Throughout this study , we varied the architecture and biochemical composition of the overall ring - like network . The perimeter was used as a sim - ple and global readout of contractility ( Figure 1 ) . We generated rings made of three different architectures ( Fig - ure 1A ) that span the diversity of cellular contractile structures : ( 1 ) disordered branched networks ( named : disordered networks ) mimicking lamella - like structures were assembled from a full ring coated with NPF ( Figure 1A , left panel ) ; ( 2 ) a series of intercon - nected , ordered , antiparallel actin bundles ( named : ordered bundles ) , mimicking sarcomeric - like bundles , were generated by a dotted ring where only the dots were coated with NPF ( Fig - ure 1A , middle panel ) ; and ( 3 ) disordered , mixed polarity actin bundles ( named : disordered bundles ) , mimicking cytokinesis ring - like bundles , were generated by debranching the disor - dered branched meshwork described above by addition of ADF / coﬁlin ( Figures 1A , right panel , and S1 ; Movie S1 [ for the illustration of ADF / coﬁlin debranching activity ] ) . The deformation of these actin networks was triggered by the presence of double - headed ( heavy - meromyosin ( HMM ) - like ) myosin VI in the reac - tion mixture . Myosin VI - HMM [ 6 ] is a pointed - end directed proc - essive molecular motor [ 29 ] . Unlike myosin II , it can trigger continuous contraction and / or ﬁlament sliding ( Movie S2 ) without the need to assemble into miniﬁlaments . To generate signiﬁcant force , myosin VI - HMM must tether two neighboring ﬁlaments and slide them with respect to one another ( Movie S2 ) . Of course , myosin VI - HMM could stay on a single 10 20 30 40 0 10 20 30 0 10 20 30 40 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 10 20 30 Time ( s ) P e r i m e t e r ( µ m ) D i s o r de r ed ne t w o r ks O r de r ed bund l e s D i s o r de r ed bund l e s Infinite rigidity Measure of buckling M ean c u r v a t u r e ( µ m - 1 ) C A B D P e r i m e t e r ( µ m ) Figure 2 . Simulation of Architecture - Dependent Contractility of Actin Rings ( A ) Simulated contractility of actin rings with different architectures . The essential features of the three types of actin rings were constructed within the cytosim platform ( green , disordered network ; red , ordered bundles ; blue , disordered bundles ) and simulated ( see text ) . The diameter of the rings is 9 m m . ( B ) Measured ring perimeter , for each type of ring , as a function of time . The simulated dynamics of ring contraction in the presence of motors were generated from ten simulations in each case . ( C ) Effect of polymer rigidity on ring deformation . Simulations were identical as in ( A ) but with an in - ﬁnite polymer rigidity . Dark curves correspond to Lp = 15 m m . Light curves were obtained with straight ﬁlaments , corresponding to inﬁnite Lp . ( D ) Estimation of actin ﬁlaments buckling during ring deformation . The curvature ( inverse of the radius of curvature ) was determined as the average ﬁlament curvatures for the entire ring ( see Experimental Procedures ) . See also Figures S2 and S3 and Movie S4 . actin ﬁlament for most of the time and act on separate ﬁlaments for a small frac - tion of total stepping events . Thus , using myosin VI - HMM has the advantage that it yields in unprecedented reproducibility of the contractile response , unlike myosin II - based miniﬁlaments , which often vary in length when reconstituted in vitro [ 6 ] . The contraction of actin rings by myosins follows three phases [ 6 ] : an initial phase corresponding to actin assembly and reorga - nization by myosins , a second phase characterized by a con - stant and often fast rate of contraction , and a ﬁnal phase where actin is slowly compacted at the center of the ring . We measured the contraction rate during the second phase , to quantify the contractile behavior of all systems . This readout was highly reproducible across experiments . Two types of rings contracted : the rings made of disordered branched networks and the rings made of ordered antiparallel bundles ( Figure 1B , top and middle rows ) . Consistent with previ - ous observations [ 6 ] , the rings made of ordered antiparallel bun - dles contract faster than the ones made of branched networks ( Figure 1C , cf . green and red curves ; Movie S3 , cf . top row , left and middle rings ) . In contrast , the third type of rings , correspond - ing to disordered bundles , deforms very little over time ( Figures 1B , bottomrow , and1C , bluecurve ; MovieS3 , toprow , rightring ) . To understand how different actin architectures respond to myosin - induced contraction , we performed detailed simulations of the different types of actin rings—disordered network , disor - dered and ordered bundles using Cytosim ( Figures 2A and S2A ; Movie S4 ; [ 30 , 31 ] ) . We implemented our simulation with entities mimicking molecular motors with properties similar to myosin VI ( Figures 2A and S2B ) . Thereby , we could reproduce in silico the diversity of contractile response for various actin ar - chitectures ( Figures 2A and S2A ; Movie S4 , left panel , top row ) and track individual actin ﬁlaments during ring evolution ( Movie S4 , left panel , bottom row ) . Disordered bundles do not 618 Current Biology 26 , 616 – 626 , March 7 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved contract but are nevertheless dynamic . Filaments in them slide with respect to one another ( Figure 2A ; Movie S4 , left panel , bot - tom row , right ring ) , leading to local polarity sorting ( see Movie S5 for an illustration of this mechanism ) , suggesting that myosin - produced forces are not transduced into contractile dipoles in this structure . In contrast , inter - connected ﬁlaments in disor - dered network and ordered bundles directly lead to whole - ring contraction ( Movie S4 , left panel , left and middle rings ) . The variation of the ring perimeter over time in our simulation was qualitatively similar than in the experiments , in that rings of ordered bundles contract faster than rings of disordered net - works and rings made of disordered bundles did not contract ( Figure 2B ) . Three major mechanisms have been proposed to explain the macroscopic network contraction from the microscopic details : ( 1 ) a ‘‘sarcomeric - like mechanisms’’ where the distribution of the crosslinkers and motors are polarized along the actin ﬁlaments ( see Movie S5 for an illustration of this mechanism and [ 16 ] ) ; ( 2 ) a ‘‘buckling mechanisms’’ where contraction arises after actin ﬁlament mechanical deformation generated by motor contraction see Movie S5 for an illustration of this mechanism and [ 20 ] ; and ( 3 ) a more recent ‘‘dynamic mechanism’’ where contraction emerge by the combined effect of actin turnover and crosslinking [ 19 ] . Since our simulations do not need to Figure 3 . Effects of a - Actinin on the Contractility of Actin Rings ( A ) Contraction of one representative example of each actin ring , in the presence of a - actinin : ( top row ) 15 nM a - actinin for the disordered network ; ( middle and bottom rows ) 20 nM a - actinin for both the ordered and disordered bundles . ( B ) Normalized ring perimeters as a function of time are represented . Note that addition of a - ac - tinin induces the disordered bundle ring to con - tract , whereas it decelerates contraction of the other rings . ( C ) Maximal perimeters decrease speed for each type of network , as afunction of the concentration of a - actinin . A dozen of ring perimeters were measured as a function of time for each architec - ture and each a - actinin concentration , and the extracted maximum speeds were averaged . Error bars represent SEM . Conditions : same as in Fig - ure 1 but with addition of a - actinin . See also Movie S3 . include actin turnover to obtain macro - scopic deformation , we focused on the ﬁrst two mechanisms . We do not expect major turnover in the experimental condi - tions , but , since high myosin concentra - tion can induce actin disassembly [ 6 , 32 ] , it will be interesting to investigate in the future if in these conditions the dy - namic model would contribute to global deformation . To discriminate between sarcomeric - like and buckling models during ring contraction , we tested the effect of the polymer rigidity ( Figure 2C ) . Indeed , increasing polymer rigidity should have a minimum impact if ring contraction is dominated by a sarcomeric - like model , where a high polymer rigidity should inhibit contraction driven by buck - ling . Our simulation revealed that polymer with inﬁnite rigidity ( Lp = N ) support similar ring contraction than polymer with a Lp = 15 m m ( cf . Figures 2B and 2C ) . This suggests that in these conditions ring contraction for the disordered networks and or - dered bundles is mainly driven by a sarcomeric - like mechanism . This was further conﬁrmed by the low degree of ﬁlament buckling during ring contraction in our simulations ( Figure 2D ) . Other pa - rameters such as motor binding range , actin ﬁlament lengths , ring perimeters , and number of myosins can also affect the con - tractile response but not the qualitative behavior of the different architectures ( Figure S3 ) . a - Actinin Modulates the Contractile Response of Different Actin Organizations Filament inter - connection in cells is achieved with the help of crosslinking proteins such as a - actinin , fascin , and ﬁlamin [ 33 ] . Strikingly , non - deforming rings comprising disordered ﬁbers become contractile when a - actinin is added ( Figures 3A , bottom row , and 3B , blue curve ; Movie S3 , bottom row , right ) . In marked contrast , a - actinin impairs the contraction of the other types of rings ( Figures 3A , top and middle rows , and 3B , green and red Current Biology 26 , 616 – 626 , March 7 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved 619 curves ; Movie S3 , bottom row , left and middle rings ) . Therefore , the effects of a - actinin on ring deformation depend on their ar - chitecture . Ring deformation also depends on the a - actinin con - centration ( Figure 3C ) . In our experimental condition with 2 m M actin monomers , the maximal rate of ring contraction of the disordered network ( Figure 3C , green curve ) was ﬁrst increased by low concentration ( 3 nM ) of a - actinin and then decreased pro - gressively for higher a - actinin concentrations ( ranging from 5 to 30 nM ) displaying undetectable deformation at high a - actinin concentration ( > 30 nM ) over the timescale of our measurements . Increasing the concentration of a - actinin ( Figure 3C , red curve ) progressively lowered the maximal deformation rate of ordered bundles . At high concentrations ( > 30 nM ) , a - actinin blocked the deformation of all types of actin architectures . The complex effect of a - actinin on the rate of myosin - induced contraction in different actin architectures suggests that both the ﬁlament or - ganization and their physical interaction are key parameters gov - erning the contractile response . Unfortunately , these parameters cannot be measured experimentally . We could , however , use numerical simulation to study how the amount of crosslinkers and branches affect actomyosin contraction . The Mechanism of Ring Contraction Depends on the Number of Crosslinkers To the simulations containing myosin entities , we added struc - tural elements connecting two actin ﬁlaments thereby represent - ing the contribution of a - actinin to the system ( Figures 4A and S2B , bottom panel ) . We then calculated the maximal contraction velocity as a function of the crosslinker number for the three types of ring architectures ( Figure 4B ) . The number of cross - linkers in our simulations ranged from 0 to 6 , 000 , corresponding at most to one crosslinker every 320 nm along ﬁlaments , on average . This range is similar to that in our experimental condi - tions . The contraction rate of the disordered networks , ordered bundles , and disordered bundles ( respectively , green , red , and blue ; Figure 4B ) were qualitatively similar to those obtained experimentally ( Figure 3C ) , indicating that our simulations had reliably modeled the role of ﬁlament crosslinkers on the various actin architectures . To establish the preferred ring contraction mechanism of a - actinin crosslinked networks , we evaluated how the maximal velocity depends on the ﬁlament rigidity and crosslinker density ( Figure 4C ) . In contrast to the behavior observed in the absence of crosslinker , the ﬁlament rigidity has a major impact of the maximal velocity ( cf . Figure 4C , curve Lp ! 15 m m and Lp ! N ) . Indeed , the maximal velocity of networks comprising ﬁlaments with inﬁnite rigidity drop rapidly with the concentration of cross - linkers , for both disordered networks and ordered bundles ( cf . to Lp ! 15 m m ) . This shows that buckling is required to allow contraction and suggests that the buckling mechanism is at play under crosslinked conditions . The difference between the curves ( Lp ! 15 m m and Lp ! N ) of maximal velocity versus num - ber of crosslinkers illustrated by the dotted curve readily illus - trates the rigidity and buckling contributions to contraction ( Figure 4C ) . Contraction of disordered networks and ordered bundles at low crosslinker density is dominated by the sarco - meric - like mechanism . The contribution of buckling to the contraction increased with the crosslinker density and became the main contraction mechanism at intermediate crosslinker concentrations . High concentrations of crosslinkers inhibit ﬁla - ment buckling and therefore reduce the maximal velocity of ring contraction ( Figure 4C ) . For the disordered bundles con - ﬁguration , the situation is different since its native architecture lacks connection . Therefore , the mechanism driven by myosin switches from polarity sorting at low crosslinker concentrations to buckling at a number of crosslinkers higher than 2 , 000 . High numbers of crosslinkers also inhibit buckling of disordered bun - dles , and , as a result , ring contraction . To further validate the contribution of the buckling during ring contraction , we measured the maximal ﬁlament curvature as a function of the number of crosslinkers for the three different actin organization ( Figure 4D ) . In agreement with our above statement , the maximum curvature of the ﬁlament increases for the three type of actin organization as a function of the number of crosslinkers to reach a maximum and then decreases at high number of crosslinkers . Connectivity Regulates Network Contraction in a Biphasic Manner Both crosslinkers and branches act as ﬁlaments connectors [ 11 , 34 ] . We then estimated the global degree of ‘‘connectivity , ’’ deﬁned as the average number of connectors per actin ﬁlament ( Figure 5A , generated by the Arp2 / 3 complex at branched point and by the bridge made by a - actinin between two ﬁlaments ) . By plotting the contraction velocity with respect to the connectivity for the different actin organizations ( Figure 5B ) , we found that they all reach a maximum centered on an optimal connectivity comprised between 2 and 4 . This value corresponds to the percolation threshold ( transition point from which all ﬁlaments are connected together in one single cluster ( Figure 5C ; [ 4 ] ) . Below 2 ( non - percolated network ) , many ﬁlaments may be un - connected inside the structure . Thus , the deformation is domi - nated by local events but do not lead to global network contrac - tion . Above 4 , ﬁlaments get partially or totally blocked and can no longer be moved by myosins . The ﬁrst important insight gained from this analysis was that Arp2 / 3 complex is a more efﬁcient connector than a - actinin . By essence , for any given pair of ﬁlaments , there can be only one Arp2 / 3 connection , whereas multiple a - actinin connections are possible . Thus , in terms of percolating the network , Arp2 / 3 complex entities are more potent than a - actinin crosslinks , because some of the later may be connecting ﬁlaments that are already linked otherwise ( Figure 5A , branched versus crosslinked connectivity ) . The sec - ond important insight is that , in parallel to curve shape regulation , the contraction rate also depends on the network organization ( Figure 5B ) and is maximal for ordered bundles ( red curve ) , inter - mediate for the disordered network ( green curve ) , and minimal for disordered bundles ( blue curve ) . Indeed , ordered bundles have an optimal actin architecture in which ﬁlaments are perfectly aligned , oriented , and properly anchored at their pointed ends , allowing efﬁcient transmission of local myosin work throughout the entire structure without adding frictional constraints along the ﬁlament . On the other hand , randomly ori - ented ﬁlaments in disordered branched networks resist defor - mation and are inefﬁcient at propagating myosin - induced trans - location . In disordered bundles , a signiﬁcant fraction of the myosins are not productive , or their work is dissipated in motor displacement rather than ﬁlament sliding . Accordingly , both 620 Current Biology 26 , 616 – 626 , March 7 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved A B C D Figure 4 . Mechanism of Ring Deformation in Presence of Crosslinkers ( A ) Snapshots of simulated actin rings with different architectures : branched network ( green ) , ordered bundles ( red ) , disordered bundles ( blue ) in presence of 2 , 500 crosslinkers representing a - actinin . ( B ) Maximal rate of ring perimeter decrease , as a function of the number of crosslinkers for each type of ring . ( C ) Effect of polymer rigidity on ring deformation . Simulations were performed for two different polymer rigidities ( Lp = 15 m m dark curve and N Lp light curve ) for thedifferenttypesofactinarchitectureasindicatedinthedifferentpanels . ThedashedcurvescorrespondatthedifferencebetweenthecurvesforLp = 15 m mand inﬁnite Lp , respectively . ( D ) Estimation of maximal actin ﬁlaments buckling during ring deformation . The maximal curvature over time was determined according to ﬁlaments curvature ( inverse of curvature radius ) for the entire ring . See also Figure S2 and Movies S4 and S5 . Current Biology 26 , 616 – 626 , March 7 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved 621 the degree of connectivity and the spatial organization of ﬁla - ments regulate overall actomyosin response . However , we were not able to directly compare the three different organiza - tions for connectivity values below 2 because the connection made by the Arp2 / 3 complex in disordered networks ( green ) and ordered bundles ( red ) already exceeds this value ( Figure 5B ) . We therefore decrease the number of branches by increasing the number of ‘‘primers’’ in our simulation to maintain the number of ﬁlamentsconstant ( Figure5D ) . Inthiscase , thecontractionveloc - itywith respect totheconnectivity fordisordered network andor - dered bundles forms a bell - shaped curve similarly to disordered bundles organization ( Figure 5D , green and red curves ) . This behavior further conﬁrms that both the architecture and connec - tivity have an important contribution during contraction . Dynamic Modulation of Actin Network Connectivity Interestingly , ﬁlament connectivity and conformation in adherent motile cells vary as the network evolves from ﬁlament nucleation at the cell periphery to ﬁlament alignment and crosslinking in transverse arcs , up to ﬁlament disassembly in the cell interior [ 35 ] . Our work suggests that contractility could change accord - ingly during these dynamic architectural transitions . Investi - gating the contractile response of dynamic actin organization required an experimental system where the degree of connectiv - ity or / and the actin ﬁlament organization could be modulated over time . One limitation in our initial experimental setup described above is that ring contraction is rapid and the struc - ture collapses when the connectivity is optimal ( 2 – 3 ) or disas - sembles with minimum deformation when the connectivity is higher than 4 . Our ability to modulate the network composition with this setup is therefore limited . To circumvent this limitation , we developed a new method to assemble controlled actin orga - nizations on soft polyacrylamide gels ( Figure S4A ; [ 27 ] ) . The behavior of actin structures on soft substrate differs drastically from what was previously described with hard substrate . On soft gels , actin rings contract and deform the underlying sub - strate without detaching from it ( Figures 6A and S4B ) . In these conditions , actin networks do not collapse and disassemble as on hard substrate . Rather , they are maintained in a tensed steady state . By sequentially changing the biochemical condi - tions , the networks in such steady states are then amenable to dynamic changes . Because the polyacrylamide gels were produced with a deﬁned rigidity , the forces exerted by the various actin structures on the substrate upon myosin - addition could be measured with traction force microscopy ( Figures 4A and S4B ) . Consistent with the variation of the contractile response on hard substrate ( Figure 3C ) , increasing concentra - tions of a - actinin ﬁrst enhances ( Figures 5 and 6B ; 5 nM a - acti - nin , disordered network ) then decreases ( Figure 6B ; 10 and 30 nM a - actinin ) the magnitude of tension forces , resulting in a bell - shape curve for the variation of the mechanical energy in function of the concentration of a - actinin . To modify the connec - tivity in real time , we designed an open reaction chamber ( Fig - ure S4C ) that is placed on top of the soft patterned surface . Because of its bell - shape response curve , our numerical model predicts that a given reduction of connectivity can have opposite effects on tensional forces depending of the initial level of network connectivity ( Figure 6C ) . Indeed , if the contractile struc - ture has a high degree of connectivity , a decrease in connectivity should enhance contraction ( Figure 6C , red arrow ) . In contrast , if the structure has an optimal degree of connectivity , reductions in connectivity should block the network deformation and reduce contractility ( Figure 6C , blue arrow ) . We tested these predictions experimentally using ADF / coﬁlin ability to debranch Arp2 / 3 network and slightly sever actin ﬁlaments , in order to modulate ring connectivity as it contracted ( Figures 6D and 6E ) . As pre - dicted , addition of ADF / coﬁlin to a highly connected structure increased the magnitude of the contractile forces ( Figure 6D ) . In contrast , addition of ADF / coﬁlin to an actin organization with optimal connectivity reduced the magnitude of tensional forces 0 . 0 1 . 0 2 . 0 Connectivity M a x i m a l v e l o c i t y ( µ m / s ) 0 . 0 0 . 4 0 . 8 Connectivity La r ge s t c l u s t e r s i z e 0 2 4 6 8 0 . 0 1 . 0 Connectivity 1755001000 0 2 4 6 8 0 . 0 1 . 0 2 . 0 Connectivity 486401200 0 2 4 M a x i m a l v e l o c i t y ( µ m / s ) M a x i m a l v e l o c i t y ( µ m / s ) B A C D 6 8 0 2 4 6 8 Connectivity Arp2 / 3 Crosslinker c = 1 c = 1 c = 2 c = 2 Figure 5 . Connectivity Modulates the Con - tractile Response of Actin Rings ( A ) Schematic illustration ( left ) of theconnectivity C of different actin ﬁlament generated by the Arp2 / 3 complex ( red symbols ) and a - actinin ( black sym - bols ) . Thenetworkconnectivityistheaverageofall ﬁlament connectivity values . It is expected to in - crease as a function of the number of connecting crosslinkers present in the system ( right ) . ( B ) Maximal velocity of perimeter deformation for thedifferentactinringsasafunctionofthenetwork connectivity . ( C ) Size of the largest percolating cluster ( normal - ized to the total number of actin ﬁlaments ) as a function of the network connectivity , for branched network ( green ) , ordered bundles ( red ) , and disordered bundles ( blue ) . Vertical lines indicate the threshold at which percolation is considered reached ( i . e . , 95 % of ﬁlaments are connected ) . ( D ) Variation of the maximal velocity for a deﬁne ring architecture ( disordered networks green , ordered bundles red ) with different initial conﬁgu - ration ( variable number of primers for disordered networks green or ordered bundles red , see Experimental Procedures ) as a function of the network connectivity . 622 Current Biology 26 , 616 – 626 , March 7 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved ( Figure 6E ) . These experiments showed how the dynamic reor - ganization of actin network architecture could modulate the con - tractile mechanical response over time . DISCUSSION In this study , we have investigated the role of network architec - ture in the contractile response to myosin activity . Variation in Actomyosin Contractile Response Contractile actomyosin structures in cells have different abilities to generate forces [ 8 ] . We found that these variations may result from a combination of two interrelated parameters : the spatial organization of actin ﬁlaments ( branched , ordered , or disordered bundles ) within the network , and their connectivity . The degree of connectivity within the network regulates the type of the con - tractile response ( local sliding , global deformation , or massive freezing ) . This results in a bell - shape contractile response curve Figure 6 . Dynamic Variations of Actin Network Connectivity ( A ) Contraction of a branched network ring on a patterned deformable substrate . Combined ﬂuo - rescence images ( top row ) show actin and myosin signals , while second and third rows show the corresponding force vectors and the force map reconstitution . ( B ) Maximal mechanical energy of the actin disordered branched network , for the indicated a - actinin concentrations . The maximal mechani - cal energy is deﬁned as the maximal deformation that ring contractions cause on their substrate . ( C ) Qualitative contractile behavior for the three different actin rings , as a function of the network connectivity , as predicted by the model ( Fig - ure 3D ) . The red arrow illustrates the effect of reducing connectivity in a highly connected actin network , while the blue arrow indicates a reduc - tion of connectivity in a network with optimal connectivity . The contractility is enhanced in the shift represented by the red arrow , whereas it is reduced in the blue arrow . ( DandE ) Cartoonrepresentations ( top ) oftheactin architectures before and after addition of ADF / coﬁlin and kinetic of the normalized total network mechanical energy as a function of time ( bottom ) . In ( D ) , ahighly crosslinked branched actin network ( 100nM a - actinin ) wasde - branchedbyadditionof 100 nM ADF / coﬁlin . This conﬁguration corre - sponds to the red arrow . In ( E ) , a network with nearly optimal connectivity ( 10 nM a - actinin ) is debranched by addition of 100 nM ADF / coﬁlin . This conﬁguration corresponds to the blue arrow . See also Figure S4 . as a function of the connectivity , for all actin architecture tested ( Figure 7 ) . This is in agreement with the observation made in disorganized actin network where contractility depends on the de - gree of crosslinked networks [ 4 , 11 ] . In addition , we reported here that the network architecture governs the magnitude of the contractile response ( Figure 7 ) . In particular , the spatial distribution of the connectors ( Arp2 / 3 complex , crosslinkers ) can explain the differ - ences of contractile behavior observed for different architectures at equal connectivity ( Figure 7 ) . As other proteins such as fascin or myosin ﬁlaments [ 5 , 8 ] can also act as connectors , it will be interesting to test in the future how these molecules inﬂuence the contractile response of the different actin architectures . Mechanism of Contractility Depends on Network Architecture Both actin organization and connectivity inﬂuence the mode of network deformation ( Figure 7 ) . Indeed , contractility ofdifferent type of actin organization cannot be describedby a unique mech - anism of contraction but by a combination of the sarcomeric - like and buckling mechanisms . First , all networks at low connectivity ( under percolation threshold ) are driven by a local polarity sorting mechanism resulting from the sliding of the actin ﬁlaments by the Current Biology 26 , 616 – 626 , March 7 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved 623 motor without global contraction ( Figure 7 ; Movie S5 ) . When con - nectivity is mainly generated by Arp2 / 3 complex - like connections ( disordered networks or ordered bundles at initial connectivity ) , network contraction follows a sarcomeric - like mechanism where the actin ﬁlament mechanical property has a minimal impact on theoverallcontractileresponse ( Figure7 ; MovieS5 ) . Thisismostly due to the architecture of these arrays that impact on the spatial distribution of the connectivity along the actin ﬁlament giving rise to some sarcomericity . As the connectivity increases ( due to crosslinkers addition ) , the contractility of the three different actin organizations is dominated by the buckling mechanism , where the mechanical properties of the ﬁlaments play a major role . This could be explained by the fact that the presence of cross - linkers adds frictional constraints anywhere along the ﬁlament , thus favoring ﬁlament buckling over ﬁlament motion ( pivoting , sliding , or rotation ) . For connectivity above 4 in our system , buck - ling is inhibited and contractility is hindered . This is where we pro - pose that the dynamic of actin network is essential to avoid a full inhibition of the contractile response from excessive connectivity . This could be triggered in the cell by actin ﬁlament dynamics , in particular , disassembly mediated by ADF / coﬁlin , or by myosins [ 21 ] . Indeed , we were able to restore contractility of highly cross - linked network using ADF / coﬁlin as a modulator of connectivity . This revealed how mechanical processes are coupled to biochemical feedbacks . With this system , we were able to highlight the importance of the network architecture . While the mechanism of contractility has been under study for years , our study reveals the importance of the nature of the connectors ( Arp2 / 3 complex , crosslinkers , others ) as a key factor in the contractile behavior of actin networks . Dynamic Transition in Contractile Networks The local densities of molecular motors and crosslinkers have been described as key modulators of the transition from contrac - tile to non - contractile organization [ 5 , 10 , 11 , 36 , 37 ] . Here , we have demonstrated that for a deﬁned set of biochemical param - eters the spatial organization of actin ﬁlaments can strongly impinge on the rate of contraction and the magnitude of force generation . Moreover , we showed how the contractile properties of an actin network could change drastically , as its conformation is modiﬁed . Such behaviors are likely to be important since modulations of the actin architecture are often present in vivo . Modulation occurs , for example , following the maturation of sar - comeres in cardomyocytes [ 38 , 39 ] , during which misoriented actin ﬁlaments are transported and sorted by myosins , up to the generation of alternate distribution between myosins and crosslinkers along aligned ﬁlaments , an organization that opti - mizes force production at large scales . Similarly , dynamic changes of connectivity and network architecture occur in the Contractility Connectivity Sarcomeric mechanism Buckling mechanism Sorting polarity Ordered bundles Disordered network Disordered bundles Actin architecture Crosslinker Arp2 / 3 complex Actin filaments Figure 7 . Model of Actin Architecture - Dependent Contractile Response The contractile response as a function of the connectivity follows a bell - shaped curve for the three different architectures tested ( disordered network , ordered bundles , and disordered bundles ) . However , the amplitude of the contractile response depends on the actin organization , such that it is maximal for ordered bundles , intermediate for disordered networks , and lowest for disordered bundles . Depending on the actin organization and connectivity , the contractile mechanism isdominated by asarcomericmechanismat lowtointermediateconnectivity , or byabuckling mechanism atintermediateto highconnectivity . Atno or very low connectivity , myosin primarily induces polarity sorting of actin ﬁlaments . 624 Current Biology 26 , 616 – 626 , March 7 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved lamella of motile cells , where the protrusive branched network of short ﬁlaments is converted to transverse arcs , which are long bundles of aligned and crosslinked ﬁbers , and probably much better suited to produce tension [ 35 ] . The possibility to modulate network architecture and composition to ﬁnely tune the contrac - tile response provides a large degree of mechanical adaptation and responsiveness to contractile networks . This modularity is crucial for cell - shape changes during migration or tissue devel - opment where the mechanical properties and the geometry of the local environment can vary considerably in space and time [ 40 , 41 ] . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Protein expression , puriﬁcation , and labeling are detailed in Supplemental Experimental Procedures . Micropatterning Hard Patterning Deep UV exposure through a photomask creates micropatterns on polyeth - ylene - glycol - coated coverslip . pWA is adsorbed on the micropatterned re - gions . In the presence of the actin polymerizing mix , ﬁlaments should grow on and out of the micropattern and get contracted . Soft Surface Patterning Polyacrylamid gel was prepared as described in detail previously [ 27 ] with somemodiﬁcations . A20 - mm 2 coverslipwassilanizedinordertobindthepol - yacrylamid gel to it . Solution of 40 % polyacrylamide and 2 % bisacrylamide was mixed to have a solution that contains 4 % acrylamide and 0 . 06 % bis - acrylamide to have a 1 . 16 kPa gel rigidity . Beads were added to this mixture andthendegasedfor15min . Thepolymerization solution was added between a coverslip with patterned pWA and the silanized coverslip for 20 min to trans - fer the protein from the hard to the soft substrate . Actin Polymerization Actin polymerization and contraction were induced in a solution containing 2 m M actin monomers ( 7 % labeled with Alexa 568 ) , 6 m M proﬁlin , 100 nM Arp2 / 3 complex , and 16 nM of HMM - myosin VI ( GFP labeled ) . These proteins mixture were diluted in freshly prepared buffer containing 15 mM imidazole - HCl ( pH 7 . 8 ) , 0 . 6 mM ATP , 55 mM DTT , 1 mM EGTA , 75 mM KCl , 3 . 5 mM MgCl 2 , 1 . 5 mg / ml glucose , 10 m g / ml catalase , 50 m g / ml glucose oxidase , and 0 . 25 % w / v methylcellulose . An ATP regenerating system was also added to this medium ( 2 mM MgATP , 2 mM phosphoenolpyruvate , 2 , 000 U / ml pyruvate kinase ) . TIRF Microscopy , Image Acquisition , and Data Analysis Time course of actin assembly was acquired on a total internal reﬂection ﬂuo - rescence ( TIRF ) microscope ( Roper Scientiﬁc ) equipped with an iLasPulsed system and an Evolve camera ( EMCCD 512 3 512 , pixel = 16 m m ) using a 60 3 1 . 49 numerical aperture ( NA ) objective lens . During ring contraction , im - ages were taken using a straight BX61 Olympus microscope equipped with a40 3 dryobjective ( UPLFLN , NA = 0 . 75 ) , anXYmotorizedstage ( Marzhauser ) , andaCoolSnapHQ2camera ( RoperScientiﬁc ) . Microscopeanddeviceswere driven by MetaMorph ( Molecular Devices ) . Data were analyzed with ImageJ v . 1 . 48 ( see Supplemental Information ) and plotted with GraphPad Prism6 . SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes four ﬁgures , Supplemental Experimental Procedures , and ﬁve movies and can be found with this article online at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2015 . 12 . 069 . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS H . E . , G . L . , F . N . , E . M . D . L . C . , M . T . , andL . B . conceivedanddesignedtheexper - iments . H . E . and G . L . performed the experiments . H . E . , G . L . , and J . L . M . analyzed the data . H . E . , G . L . , W . C . , C . G . , and F . N . contributed reagents , ma - terials , and / or analysis tools . H . E . , G . L . , F . N . , E . M . D . L . C . , M . T . , and L . B . wrote the manuscript . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Thiswork was supported by grants from theHuman FrontierScience Program ( RGP0004 / 2011 awarded to L . B . and E . M . D . L . C . ) , Agence Nationale de la Re - cherche ( ANR - 12 - BSV5 - 0014awarded toL . B . ) , and NIH ( GM097348awarded to E . M . D . L . C ) and an ERC starter grant ( 310472 ) to M . T . H . E . was awarded a PhD fellowship from the IRTELIS program of the CEA . E . M . D . L . C . acknowl - edges support from a Burroughs Wellcome Fund ( BWF ) 2014 Collaborative Research Travel Grant CRTG ) . E . M . D . L . C . and L . B . received a Projet Interna - tional de Coope´ration Scientiﬁque ( PICS ) award from CNRS . Received : July 15 , 2015 Revised : November 25 , 2015 Accepted : December 24 , 2015 Published : February 18 , 2016 REFERENCES 1 . Levayer , R . , and Lecuit , T . ( 2012 ) . Biomechanical regulation of contrac - tility : spatial control and dynamics . Trends Cell Biol . 22 , 61 – 81 . 2 . Heisenberg , C . P . , and Bellaı¨che , Y . ( 2013 ) . Forces in tissue morphogen - esis and patterning . Cell 153 , 948 – 962 . 3 . Thoresen , T . , Lenz , M . , andGardel , M . L . ( 2011 ) . Reconstitutionofcontrac - tile actomyosin bundles . Biophys . J . 100 , 2698 – 2705 . 4 . Alvarado , J . , Sheinman , M . , Sharma , A . , MacKintosh , F . C . , and Koenderink , G . H . ( 2013 ) . Molecular motors robustly drive active gels to a critically connected state . Nat . Phys . 9 , 591 – 597 . 5 . Ko¨hler , S . , and Bausch , A . R . ( 2012 ) . Contraction mechanisms in compos - ite active actin networks . PLoS ONE 7 , e39869 . 6 . Reymann , A . - C . , Boujemaa - Paterski , R . , Martiel , J . - L . , Gue´rin , C . , Cao , W . , Chin , H . F . , De La Cruz , E . M . , The´ry , M . , and Blanchoin , L . ( 2012 ) . Actin network architecture can determine myosin motor activity . Science 336 , 1310 – 1314 . 7 . Letort , G . , Ennomani , H . , Gressin , L . , The´ry , M . , and Blanchoin , L . ( 2015 ) . Dynamic reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton . F1000Research 4 , 940 . 8 . Murrell , M . , Oakes , P . W . , Lenz , M . , and Gardel , M . L . ( 2015 ) . Forcing cells into shape : the mechanics of actomyosin contractility . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 16 , 486 – 498 . 9 . Pollard , T . D . , and Ito , S . ( 1970 ) . Cytoplasmic ﬁlaments of Amoeba proteus . I . The role of ﬁlaments in consistency changes and movement . J . Cell Biol . 46 , 267 – 289 . 10 . Janson , L . W . , Kolega , J . , and Taylor , D . L . ( 1991 ) . Modulation of contrac - tion by gelation / solation in a reconstituted motile model . J . Cell Biol . 114 , 1005 – 1015 . 11 . Bendix , P . M . , Koenderink , G . H . , Cuvelier , D . , Dogic , Z . , Koeleman , B . N . , Brieher , W . M . , Field , C . M . , Mahadevan , L . , andWeitz , D . A . ( 2008 ) . Aquan - titative analysis of contractility in active cytoskeletal protein networks . Biophys . J . 94 , 3126 – 3136 . 12 . Murrell , M . P . , and Gardel , M . L . ( 2012 ) . F - actin buckling coordinates contractility and severing in a biomimetic actomyosin cortex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 20820 – 20825 . 13 . Carvalho , K . , Lemie ` re , J . , Faqir , F . , Manzi , J . , Blanchoin , L . , Plastino , J . , Betz , T . , and Sykes , C . ( 2013 ) . Actinpolymerization ormyosin contraction : twowaystobuildupcorticaltensionforsymmetrybreaking . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B Biol . Sci . 368 , 20130005 . 14 . Abu Shah , E . , and Keren , K . ( 2014 ) . Symmetry breaking in reconstituted actin cortices . eLife 3 , e01433 . 15 . Houdusse , A . , and Sweeney , H . L . ( 2001 ) . Myosin motors : missing struc - tures and hidden springs . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 11 , 182 – 194 . 16 . Kruse , K . , and Ju¨licher , F . ( 2000 ) . Actively contracting bundles of polar ﬁl - aments . Phys . Rev . Lett . 85 , 1778 – 1781 . Current Biology 26 , 616 – 626 , March 7 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved 625 17 . Zemel , A . , and Mogilner , A . ( 2009 ) . Motor - induced sliding of microtubule and actin bundles . Phys . Chem . Chem . Phys . 11 , 4821 – 4833 . 18 . Dasanayake , N . L . , Michalski , P . J . , and Carlsson , A . E . ( 2011 ) . General mechanism of actomyosin contractility . Phys . Rev . Lett . 107 , 118101 . 19 . Oelz , D . B . , Rubinstein , B . Y . , and Mogilner , A . ( 2015 ) . A Combination of Actin Treadmilling and Cross - Linking Drives Contraction of Random Actomyosin Arrays . Biophys . J . 109 , 1818 – 1829 . 20 . Lenz , M . , Thoresen , T . , Gardel , M . L . , and Dinner , A . R . ( 2012 ) . Contractile units in disordered actomyosin bundles arise from F - actin buckling . Phys . Rev . Lett . 108 , 238107 . 21 . Blanchoin , L . , Boujemaa - Paterski , R . , Sykes , C . , and Plastino , J . ( 2014 ) . Actin dynamics , architecture , and mechanics in cell motility . Physiol . Rev . 94 , 235 – 263 . 22 . Pollard , T . D . , Blanchoin , L . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2000 ) . Molecular mecha - nisms controlling actin ﬁlament dynamics in nonmuscle cells . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 29 , 545 – 576 . 23 . Fletcher , D . A . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2010 ) . Cell mechanics and the cytoskel - eton . Nature 463 , 485 – 492 . 24 . Pollard , T . D . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin ﬁlaments . Cell 112 , 453 – 465 . 25 . Mogilner , A . , and Oster , G . ( 1996 ) . Cell motility driven by actin polymeriza - tion . Biophys . J . 71 , 3030 – 3045 . 26 . Reymann , A . - C . , Martiel , J . - L . , Cambier , T . , Blanchoin , L . , Boujemaa - Paterski , R . , and The´ry , M . ( 2010 ) . Nucleation geometry governs ordered actin networks structures . Nat . Mater . 9 , 827 – 832 . 27 . Vignaud , T . , Ennomani , H . , and The´ry , M . ( 2014 ) . Polyacrylamide hydrogel micropatterning . Methods Cell Biol . 120 , 93 – 116 . 28 . Tojkander , S . , Gateva , G . , and Lappalainen , P . ( 2012 ) . Actin stress ﬁbers – assembly , dynamics and biological roles . J . Cell Sci . 125 , 1855 – 1864 . 29 . Wells , A . L . , Lin , A . W . , Chen , L . Q . , Safer , D . , Cain , S . M . , Hasson , T . , Carragher , B . O . , Milligan , R . A . , and Sweeney , H . L . ( 1999 ) . Myosin VI is an actin - based motor that moves backwards . Nature 401 , 505 – 508 . 30 . Nedelec , F . , and Foethke , D . ( 2007 ) . Collective Langevin dynamics of ﬂex - ible cytoskeletal ﬁbers . New J . Phys . 9 , 427 . 31 . Letort , G . , Politi , A . Z . , Ennomani , H . , The´ry , M . , Nedelec , F . , and Blanchoin , L . ( 2015 ) . Geometrical and mechanical properties control actin ﬁlament organization . PLoS Comput . Biol . 11 , e1004245 . 32 . Haviv , L . , Gillo , D . , Backouche , F . , and Bernheim - Groswasser , A . ( 2008 ) . A cytoskeletal demolition worker : myosin II acts as an actin depolymeriza - tion agent . J . Mol . Biol . 375 , 325 – 330 . 33 . Ahmed , W . W . , andBetz , T . ( 2015 ) . Dynamiccross - linkstunethesolid - ﬂuid behavior of living cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 112 , 6527 – 6528 . 34 . Wang , S . , andWolynes , P . G . ( 2012 ) . Tensegrityandmotor - driveneffective interactions in a model cytoskeleton . J . Chem . Phys . 136 , 145102 . 35 . Burnette , D . T . , Manley , S . , Sengupta , P . , Sougrat , R . , Davidson , M . W . , Kachar , B . , and Lippincott - Schwartz , J . ( 2011 ) . A role for actin arcs in the leading - edge advance of migrating cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 , 371 – 381 . 36 . Luo , T . , Mohan , K . , Iglesias , P . A . , and Robinson , D . N . ( 2013 ) . Molecular mechanisms of cellular mechanosensing . Nat . Mater . 12 , 1064 – 1071 . 37 . Abu Shah , E . , and Keren , K . ( 2013 ) . Mechanical forces and feedbacks in cell motility . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 25 , 550 – 557 . 38 . Craig , E . M . , Dey , S . , and Mogilner , A . ( 2011 ) . The emergence of sarco - meric , graded - polarity and spindle - like patterns in bundles of short cyto - skeletal polymers and two opposite molecular motors . J . Phys . Condens . Matter 23 , 374102 . 39 . Kresh , J . Y . , and Chopra , A . ( 2011 ) . Intercellular and extracellular mecha - notransduction in cardiac myocytes . Pﬂugers Arch . 462 , 75 – 87 . 40 . Elliott , H . , Fischer , R . S . , Myers , K . A . , Desai , R . A . , Gao , L . , Chen , C . S . , Adelstein , R . S . , Waterman , C . M . , and Danuser , G . ( 2015 ) . Myosin II con - trols cellular branching morphogenesis and migration in three dimensions by minimizing cell - surface curvature . Nat . Cell Biol . 17 , 137 – 147 . 41 . DuFort , C . C . , Paszek , M . J . , and Weaver , V . M . ( 2011 ) . Balancing forces : architectural control of mechanotransduction . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 12 , 308 – 319 . 626 Current Biology 26 , 616 – 626 , March 7 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved