How sketching can aﬀect the idea generation process in design group meetings Remko van der Lugt , Delft University of Technology , School of Industrial Design Engineering , Landbergstraat 15 , 2628 CE , Delft , The Netherlands This study consists of four experimental idea generation meetings , which explore whether functions of sketching in design activity are also valid for idea generation meetings . The relevant functions of sketching found in theory are : 1 ) supporting a re - interpretive cycle in the individual thinking process , 2 ) supporting re - interpretation of each other’s ideas in group activity , and 3 ) enhancing access to earlier ideas . To examine these three possible functions of sketching activity in a group , a model is introduced that considers sketching activities as interactions with the group’s external memory . In each meeting both a technique that includes sketching and a technique that includes writing as the primary mode of communication was applied . Diﬀerences in the participants’ linking behavior for these two techniques were compared . The results provide some support for the ﬁrst and the third functions of sketching . No support was found for the second function . (cid:1) 2005 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . Keywords : collaborative design , creativity , design cognition , drawings , problem solving I dea generation techniques , like brainstorming , are commonly applied by designers as a means to come up with original design ideas . In the existing body of idea generation techniques , the primary mode of expressing ideas is in written language . Usually , during idea generation meetings , brief descriptions of ideas are listed on a ﬂipchart . In contrast , when involved in unstructured design meetings , designers tend to make extensive use of sketching when generating design ideas . Design thinking researchers regard this activity of sketching as a means to spur creative thought . Many lines drawn in www . elsevier . com / locate / destud 0142 - 694X $ - see front matter Design Studies 26 ( 2005 ) 101 e 122 doi : 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2004 . 08 . 003 101 (cid:1) 2005 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved Printed in Great Britain a sketch are incomplete and can be interpreted in diﬀerent ways . This is referred to as ‘ambiguity’ or ‘indeterminacy’ ( Goel , 1995 ) , which enables designers to re - interpret what they have just drawn , and to proceed designing with the newly acquired insights . The interaction that designers have with their sketches is seen as essential to creativity in design activity ( Purcell and Gero , 1998 ) . In the creative problem solving literature , these creative qualities of using sketching are much less emphasized . In his categorization of active ingredients in idea generation techniques , Smith ( 1998 ) presents the use of making graphic representations of the ideas as a ‘display stimulation tactic’ . He mentions : ‘Presumably , when visually depicted , ideas are more able to inspire new ones’ ( p . 125 ) . Granted that this may also be a valid function of a designer’s sketching , it does not cover the creative functioning of sketching as found in the design thinking research literature . The objective of this paper is to explore whether the functions of sketching as proposed in design thinking research can also be relevant for idea generation meetings . If this is the case , utilizing these functions may enrich creative problem solving activity . First , we will describe the functions of sketching in design activity and how they may be applicable for idea generation meetings . To examine these three possible functions of sketching activity in a group , a model is introduced that considers sketching activities as interactions with the group’s external memory . Then we will describe the research method used , called ‘linkography’ , with which we take a process perspective : investigating the qualities of the connections between the ideas , rather than the qualities of the resulting ideas themselves . Next , we will discuss the results of an experimental study , which consists of four idea generation meetings in which both graphic and written language are used as a means for idea notation . In the ﬁnal remarks , we will address some limitations to this research , suggestions for further research and suggestions for de - veloping idea generation techniques that involve sketching . 1 Functions of sketching in design In his book ‘Engineering and the mind’s eye’ , Ferguson ( 1992 ) identiﬁes three kinds of sketches , which may be useful for identifying the role of sketches in creative design groups : the thinking sketch , the talking sketch , and the prescriptive sketch . Thinking sketches refer to the designers making use of the drawing surface in support of their individual thinking processes . According to Ferguson , engineers use the thinking sketch ‘to focus and guide nonverbal thinking’ ( p . 97 ) . Talking 102 Design Studies Vol 26 No . 2 March 2005 sketches refer to designers making use of the ( shared ) drawing surface in support of the group discussion . Ferguson states : ‘ . talking sketches , spontaneously drawn during discussions with colleagues , will continue to be important in the process of going from vision to artifact . Such sketches make it easier to explain a technical point , because all parties in the discussion share a common graphical setting for the idea being debated’ ( p . 97 ) . Prescriptive sketches refer to the designers communi - cating design decisions to persons that are outside of the design process . Ferguson describes the prescriptive sketch as the means for the engineer : ‘to direct the drafter in making a ﬁnished drawing’ ( p . 97 ) . The prescriptive sketch is , according to McGown and Green ( 1998 ) , ‘ . used almost exclusively within the latter detailing ( pre - manufacture ) phases of the design’ ( p . 436 ) . The prescriptive type is not very relevant for this study as we are interested in the functions of sketching in conceptual design activity . Ullman et al . ( 1990 ) propose an additional use of drawing in the design process . Ullman et al . state that the ﬁrst use of the act of drawing is to ‘archive the geometric form of the design’ ( p . 264 ) . Sketches provide a means to store design ideas , so that they can be revisited at a later point in time . We will refer to this category of sketches as ‘storing sketches’ : Storing sketches refer to the designers using the drawing surface to archive design ideas for their own future reference . Storing sketches have much in common with prescriptive sketches . They both freeze , rather than develop , design ideas . However , the purpose of these two types of sketches is quite diﬀerent . The storing sketch is intended for retaining information , whereas the prescriptive sketch is intended for communicating information . Relating to the diﬀerent kinds of interactions that designers have with their sketches , these three types of sketches e thinking , talking , and storing e serve as an initial categorization to help organize theories on the functions of sketches found in design thinking literature . 1 . 1 The thinking sketch In a review of the research on drawing and design , Purcell and Gero ( 1998 ) focus on the role of sketching in design cognition . This research is mainly concerned with investigating the ways in which the activity of sketching stimulates creativity in design cognition . They point out underlying themes regarding the role of sketching in design . The principal theme deals with the positive role that sketching plays in re - interpretation . A second theme is that re - interpretation provides new knowledge and that this new knowledge leads towards further re - interpretation . Various researchers propose such cyclical models of How sketching can aﬀect the idea generation process 103 re - interpretation , each with a slightly diﬀerent connotation , ranging from a dialectic type of argumentation between seeing - as and seeing - that ( Goldschmidt , 1991 ) , interactive conversations with the paper on which the designer draws ( Scho¨n and Wiggins , 1992 ) and movement from description to depiction ( Fish and Scrivener , 1990 ) . In order to provide a general understanding of this re - interpretative process , these various perspectives will be described brieﬂy . Goldschmidt ( 1991 ) observes that architectural designers produce unclear , ambiguous sketches . She suggests that this is a substantial component of creativity in the design process . Designers often use sketches as metaphors for the objects to be designed . She calls this interactive imagery , which she deﬁnes as : . the simultaneous or almost simultaneous production of a display and the generation of an image that it triggers . Sketching , then , is not merely an act of representation of a preformulated image ; in the context we deal with , it is , more often than not , a search for such an image . ( p . 131 ) She proposes a dialectic type of argumentation in design . Based on protocol studies Goldschmidt points out that , while making idea sketches , architects use two types of reasoning in rapid oscillation . One type is based on analogical or metaphorical thought , dealing with extracting new meaning from the sketch . She describes this kind of reasoning as seeing - as . The other type , seeing - that , deals with the design consequences of this newly acquired meaning of the sketch . Scho¨n and Wiggins ( 1992 ) observe that designers develop their products by engaging in an interactive conversation with the paper on which they draw . They describe design as a cyclical process of sketching , interpreting and taking the sketches further . According to them : Working in some visual medium e drawing , in our examples e the designer sees what is ‘there’ in some representation of a site , draws in relation to it , and sees what has been drawn , thereby informing further designing . In all this ‘seeing’ , the designer not only visually registers information , but also constructs its meaning e identiﬁes patterns and gives them meaning beyond themselves . ( p . 135 ) Another function of sketching , identiﬁed by Fish and Scrivener ( 1990 ) , is that sketching facilitates the transition from general descriptive knowledge into speciﬁc depiction . According to Fish and Scrivener the primary reason for designers to sketch is : ‘ . the need to foresee the results of the synthesis or manipulation of objects without actually executing such operations’ ( p . 117 ) . In order to explain the functioning of sketching within design , the authors present a spectrum of visual 104 Design Studies Vol 26 No . 2 March 2005 representations , ranging from purely descriptive symbol systems to purely depictive symbol systems . Descriptive symbol systems can represent whole classes of information : they are abstract and categorical . An example of a descriptive symbol system is natural language . For instance , the word chair may represent many diﬀerent types of seats ; sofas , oﬃce chairs , TV chairs , rocking chairs , and garden chairs are all covered under the label chair . The information in such a descriptive symbol system is extrinsic , meaning that the object described by the symbol system is associated with the descriptive system solely by means of external deﬁnitions . The word chair does not contain any of the qualities of the represented objects , neither in structure , color , nor in form . On the other side of the spectrum are depictive symbol systems , which carry all information about the represented objects within themselves , and do not depend on rules for extracting the information from the representation . These symbol systems are concrete and spatially speciﬁc , meaning that there is a direct relationship between the spatial position in the medium and the spatial position in the object represented . For instance , a picture of a rocking chair contains the topological information of that object . Depictive representations refer to speciﬁc objects , rather than classes of information . According to Fish and Scrivener , sketches have a special set of attributes that help the human mind in translating descriptive propositional information into depictive information . They theorize that in a creative design process this depictive information is then scanned , which leads to new descriptive propositional information , which in turn may be translated into depiction , and so on : We posit that sketches have the important function of assisting the mind to translate descriptive propositional information into depiction . This depictive information may then be scanned by attentional processes to extract new and perhaps original descriptive information , which in turn can lead to new depiction . ( p . 118 ) These theories provide two general roles of sketching within the designer’s individual process that need to be considered when investigating sketching in idea generation meetings in product design . First , sketching is said to allow for tentative and non - committal moves from general description towards speciﬁc depiction . Second , sketching is said to involve a cyclical process of re - interpretation . The ﬁrst role is likely to be more relevant for the later phases of an idea generation process , in which a higher level of resolution is desired . Especially the second role could be relevant for idea generation meetings , as the general goal of such meetings is to provide a variety of novel ideas . How sketching can aﬀect the idea generation process 105 1 . 2 The talking sketch In addition to the individual , cognitive functions of sketching , typical group functions can be identiﬁed . The literature on the typical group aspects of sketching is less elaborate than the literature on individual functions and consists mostly of reports of exploratory investigations . The main eﬀorts for understanding group design are related to design communication , predominantly connected to furthering the ﬁeld of computer supported collaborative work ( CSCW ) and human e com - puter interaction . The principal interest of this ﬁeld of research is to allow designers to work together from diﬀerent locations , by means of computer support . As computers constrict the communication lines available , most research approaches focus on understanding the workspace activity of design groups ( Tang and Leifer , 1988 ; Tang , 1991 ) and experiments which involve limiting the communication lines available ( Bly , 1988 ; Scrivener and Clark , 1994 ) . The recognized importance of interaction through sketching and gesturing activity lead to preliminary CSCW solutions , which show , for instance , the hand of the person drawing ( Bly , 1988 ) , in addition to the drawing . One ofthe topics of interest within theresearch ﬁeld of human e computer interaction is the role of the ‘shared visual context’ in communication ( Karsenty , 1999 ) . In a design discussion , the shared visual context can be used to make relative references , for instance : ‘let’s combine this with that ’ , rather than to describe the whole idea when referring to it . This way , relative references provide a more eﬃcient communication process . In design communication , the use of quickly drawn sketches in support of group discussions could lead to a more eﬃcient design process by providing a shared visual context . In addition to providing a shared visual context , Scrivener and Clark ( 1994 ) suggest a second role for sketching in collaborative design . In relation to the way in which sketching supports creative group discussion they observe : The fact that drawings are usually accompanied by verbalizations ( in the case of the individual designer this would just be unspoken thought ) supports the idea that sketches only partially represent ideas in mind . In general , a drawing act in sketching is not an attempt to represent a solution as such , rather it is a notational device that helps its creator to reason with complex and labile mental structures . ( p . 114 ) According to Scrivener and Clark , sketching provides representations of design solutions that allow for a range of interpretations of elements . By 106 Design Studies Vol 26 No . 2 March 2005 sketching , temporal decisions are made which allow for evaluation and interpretation of a design solution , without excluding alternatives . Finally , besides having the function of communicating and discussing ideas through sketches , the act of sketching itself is regarded important in team design activity . Tang ( 1991 ) points out the distinction between the information contained in the artifacts that result from design sketching activity and the information within the activity itself . Relating to his observations from protocol analysis of eight experimental design team meetings , he concludes : ‘The process of creating and using drawings conveys information not found in the resulting drawings’ ( p . 150 ) . According to Tang , the act of sketching is a means of communication and attracting attention , as well as providing a medium for storing information . As with the individual functions of sketching , the function of inviting re - interpretation is especially relevant for the idea generation process , as re - interpretation can lead to novel directions for generating ideas . 1 . 3 The storing sketch As we mentioned earlier , Smith ( 1998 ) refers to this function when he states : ‘Methods implementing the Display tactic make ideas visible in a graphic array . Presumably , when visually depicted , ideas are more able to inspire new ones’ ( p . 125 ) . According to McKim ( 1980 ) building and maintaining a e what he calls e ‘visible graphic memory’ ( p . 127 ) fosters the group’s creative process by providing an easily accessible database of generated information , which stimulates building on earlier ideas . So , in relation to the storing sketch , sketching may facilitate archiving and retrieval of information generated earlier in the problem solving process . In the design thinking research literature little relevant information can be found concerning this function of sketching . However , in the ﬁeld of visual cognition , diﬀerences in recognition of words and pictures have been the subject of investigation . This research is relevant for our search , if we consider a sketch to be a type of picture . There is evidence that pictures of objects can be categorized more rapidly than words that describe these objects ( Potter and Faulconer , 1975 ) . But , if the objects from the diﬀerent categories share many physical characteristics , this advantage of pictures over words may be lost . In that case , categorization for pictures may even be slower than for words ( Snodgrass and McCullough , 1986 ) . This relates to the depictive qualities of sketches : by sharing actual attributes of the ( imaginary or How sketching can aﬀect the idea generation process 107 real ) object they refer to , sketches provide stronger distinctive features than words . Humphreys and Bruce ( 1989 ) hypothesise : Words representing a particular class of objects will generally bear no greater resemblance to one another than words representing objects from diﬀerent classes . This is not true for most objects ( though there may be exceptions , such as faces ) . Objects from many natural classes resemble one another more closely than objects from other classes ( e . g . many animals resemble one another , as do birds , insects , etc . ) . It may be that visual processing capitalizes on these family resemblances to optimize cognition . ( p . 285 ) Other than a few exceptions , words do not share attributes with the actual object that they represent , which means that words lack distinctive features . As sketches are more easily recognized among other sketches , they facilitate the designers’ access to earlier ideas . Easier access to earlier design ideas is likely to stimulate increased use of these earlier design ideas . So , sketches may enhance the use of information in previously generated ideas by facilitating the access to these ideas . To summarize the literature ﬁndings we propose the following potential functions of sketching in idea generation meetings : e In relation to the thinking sketch : Sketching stimulates a re - interpretive cycle in the individual participant’s idea generation process . e In relation to the talking sketch : Sketching stimulates the participants to re - interpret each other’s ideas . e In relation to the storing sketch : Sketching stimulates the use of earlier ideas in the idea generation process by enhancing their accessibility . 2 Sketching as interaction with external memory In the previous section , the various functions of sketching found in theory were organized by means of an adaptation of Ferguson’s ( 1992 ) categorization of types of sketches . Even though the thus derived categorization worked for structuring the functions of sketches found in the design literature , there are two problems with it , which limit its use for developing a coding scheme for diﬀerentiating between the diﬀerent functions in an empirical study . First , if we want to compare the idea generation processes when sketching or written language is used as a working medium , the categorization used needs to refer to various aspects of the use of 108 Design Studies Vol 26 No . 2 March 2005 notations in the group , regardless of the working medium used . Ferguson’s categorization only refers to sketching as a working medium and does not allow for inclusion of writing as a working medium . Second , Ferguson’s classiﬁcation describes sketches in terms of types of artifacts , which suggests unchanging characteristics . Ferguson labels his types by means of the kinds of activity that they are used for , such as the thinking sketch . In practice , a single sketch may very well have diﬀerent functions at diﬀerent times . For instance , a designer may produce an idea sketch individually . At this point the sketch can be largely considered to be in support of the designer’s own cognitive process . In Ferguson’s terms , this is a thinking sketch . Then , when the designer explains his or her idea , the sketch is used to support the explanation of the idea . All of a sudden the thinking sketch turns into a talking sketch . Then , the sketch may be pasted on the wall and the designers shift their attention to producing new idea sketches . At this point the talking sketch turns into a storing sketch . So , in this common example of group idea generation activity , a single sketch needs to be categorized as three diﬀerent types at diﬀerent times . If a single sketch is likely to have diﬀerent functions in various activities , it may be more informative to develop a categorization that addresses the designer’s diﬀerent kinds of interaction with the working medium , rather than providing a catego - rization of types of sketches . As we are more interested in diﬀerences in the transfer of information that takes place through the working media , rather than the diﬀerences of the resulting artifacts , it may be useful to take an information processing perspective for describing the diﬀerent connections that the groups make with their earlier ideas . Then , the designers’ interactions with their working media can be regarded as interactions with the group’s ‘external memory’ . The group’s external memory consists of all the task - related notations made by the group members and that are available to them . In idea generation meetings , the external memory can be considered to consist mainly of the posted ﬂipcharts with ideas and the participants’ individual notebooks or post - it pads . We based this categorization largely on Newell and Simon’s ( 1972 ) division of external memory into short - term areas and remote areas . Newell and Simon make a distinction between external memories that are in the direct view of the subject , which the above refers to , and more distant external memories which require more eﬀort to access : There are , of course , more remote EM’s , such as the work sheet on the side of the table , the sheet under the sheet now being worked on , nearby How sketching can aﬀect the idea generation process 109 books , books in the library , and so on . Accessing times become increasingly large as more extensive motor behavior and physical distance are involved in retrieval . ( p . 802 ) For our categorization for interaction with the working medium in idea generation groups , this means that a distinction needs to be made between the short - term and the remote parts of the designer’s external memory . The short - term part is used in the immediate idea generation activity . This is , what Newell and Simon refer to as the extension of short - term memory , which consists of the information that is in the designer’s direct ﬁeld of vision . The remote part of external memory consists of information that is outside this ﬁeld of vision . The term short - term suggests a relation to time rather than to the location of the idea , which could be confusing if we apply this term to external memory , in which the immediate area is identiﬁed by the location of the idea . To avoid confusions , we will use the term ‘direct’ external memory , rather than ‘short - term’ external memory to refer to the ideas that are immediately available to the designer . This model of a designer’s interaction with notations in his or her external memory can be extended towards group problem solving . Interaction between group members takes place through verbal or gestural communication , and through the group’s external memory . The group’s external memory consists of the combined external memories of the individuals . Some parts of the group’s external memory belong to the individual group members , for instance , notes written by a group member in a personal notebook . Other parts of the group’s external memory are shared , for instance , when a group member makes marks on a whiteboard while the other group members are watching . Then , this information becomes available to all group members present . Analogous to the individual parts , the shared parts of the group’s external memory can be sub - divided into direct parts and remote parts . The shared - direct parts of the group’s external memory may consist of notations that are made in support of the discussion on a whiteboard , or the ﬂipchart used by a facilitator to record options while brainstorming . The shared - remote parts of the group’s external memory may consist of notations on ﬂip charts that are posted away from the direct view of the group members . Figure 1 shows the four parts of external memory available to a group member . Arrows refer to the ways in which information can move between the various areas . This model provides a categorization of four link types that reﬂect the diﬀerent interactions of a design group with their notations in external 110 Design Studies Vol 26 No . 2 March 2005 memory . Interactions with the individual - direct area refer to the thinking sketch . Interactions with the shared - direct area refer to the talking sketch , and interactions with the individual - remote and shared - remote areas refer to the storing sketch . Figure 2 positions the three functions of sketching found in the design thinking literature within the model of the group’s external memory . 3 Method 3 . 1 Procedure A technique called ‘brainsketching’ ( Van Gundy , 1988 ; Van der Lugt , 2002 ) was used as a representative of idea generation techniques that use sketching . Brainsketching is a graphic variation of the more widely Figure 1 Model of the various parts of external memory available to a group member Figure 2 Theoretical functions of sketching How sketching can aﬀect the idea generation process 111 known brainwriting technique ( Geschka et al . , 1973 ) . During brain - sketching , participants sketch ideas individually in short rounds . After each round they brieﬂy share their ideas and switch papers . In the next round they use the ideas already present on the worksheet as a source of inspiration . Usually this procedure is repeated about ﬁve times . Selecting brainsketching as a representative of graphic idea generation techniques suggests choosing brainwriting as a representative of sentential idea generation techniques , as brainsketching is a direct graphic variation of the brainwriting technique . However , brainwriting tends to result in very high numbers of ideas with little variation among the ideas ( Gryskiewicz , 1980 ) . Isaksen et al . ( 1998 ) suggest using brainwriting when a very high number of ideas within a few themes are required . Thus , brainwriting is not exemplary for the class of associative idea generation techniques that use writing . As our objective is to gain an understanding of the diﬀerences in process characteristics between idea generation techniques that use sketching or writing , it is more suitable to slightly compromise on comparability , because it is more useful to investigate techniques that are typical for their mode of representation . Therefore , the brainsketching technique was compared to brainstorming with post - its ( Isaksen et al . , 1998 ) , which was selected as a representative of idea generation techniques that use writing as the primary working medium . Brainstorming with post - its is a slight variation on the brainstorming technique ( Osborn , 1953 ) , developed to increase the speed of recording ideas . During brainstorming with post - its , group members generate ideas by writing them down on large post - its in a clear and legible manner . After having written down an idea , a group member explains the idea to the group and then hands the post - it with the idea to the facilitator . The facilitator then pastes the idea onto a ﬂipchart . According to Isaksen et al . ( 1998 ) , brainstorming with post - its is likely to result in the same types of options as would be generated by regular brainstorming . In each of four experimental meetings both brainsketching and brainstorming with post - its were applied which allowed us to perform a paired comparison analysis of each participant’s problem solving behavior ( n = 20 ) . Each meeting consisted of ﬁve advanced product design students who were involved in a course in facilitating creative problem solving meetings . Each meeting was moderated by an experienced professional creative problem solving facilitator . 112 Design Studies Vol 26 No . 2 March 2005 The participants were asked to generate ideas for products to make traveling by car fun for children . The assignment involved generating ideas for a particular multi - functional family car . 3 . 2 Method of analysis The main reason for organizing a creative group meeting is for the group members to interact in their problem solving eﬀorts . This makes the ‘building on each other’s ideas’ guideline for divergent thinking ( Osborn , 1953 ) especially relevant to this research project . Investigating the ways in which the participants build on each other’s ideas provides direct process clues regarding the functioning of the techniques applied . Linkography ( Goldschmidt , 1996 ; Goldschmidt and Weil , 1998 ) is a research approach which speciﬁcally addresses the ways in which designers build on each other’s input . We have adapted this method for application in our research of creative problem solving meetings . In this article we cannot go into detail regarding the linkography approach . For a more detailed description we refer to earlier work : Van der Lugt ( 2000 , 2001 ) . Here we will limit ourselves to a brief description of the general approach , followed by a more in - depth description of the categorization of links needed in the current study . In linkography for each idea direct connections or ‘links’ with all earlier ideas are determined by gathering and evaluating evidence of connections . Evidence can be found within the content of the ideas . Such evidence is based on ﬁnding similarities in subject matter . Evidence can also be found within the context in which the ideas are generated . Such context indicators can consist of among other things : gestures or remarks made by the designers when they explain their ideas ; physical action when conceiving the idea ; or connecting symbols on the ﬂipcharts ( Van der Lugt and Van der Graaf , 2002 ) . We believe that making explicit use of context indicators while constructing link systems enhances the reliability of linkography as a research method . For each of the four brainsketching segments and the four brainstorm - ing segments , this process of determining links was performed twice by the same person with a time interval of at least one week . For each segment , the discrepancies between the two link systems were then re - evaluated , which provided the ﬁnal link system . For veriﬁcation purposes , an independent judge was asked to ﬁll out a link system for two of the segments . Inter - rater agreement was determined using Cohen’s Kappa . Good levels of agreement were found ( K = 0 . 73 and K = 0 . 63 ) between the link systems produced by the two raters . How sketching can aﬀect the idea generation process 113 3 . 3 Categorization of links as interactions with external memory Once the link systems were ﬁnalized , the links were categorized to reﬂect structurally diﬀerent interactions that the designers can have with their earlier ideas . Within a link system , link densities ( l . d . ) can be determined for these various parts of the group’s external memory , which provide indicators for the extent to which brainstorming and brainsketching make use of these diﬀerent parts . The link density consists of the number of links made within one area of external memory , divided by the number of ideas generated . The distinction between the individual and the group aspects of the external memory can easily be identiﬁed in a link system . An ‘individual’ link is marked when an idea has a connection with an earlier idea by the same designer . A ‘shared’ link is marked when an idea has a connection with an earlier idea generated by another designer . An operationalization for the distinction between the direct and the remote aspects still needs to be made . Newell and Simon’s ( 1972 ) working deﬁnition of the external part of the short - term memory is ‘the part of the visual display that is in the subject’s foveal view’ ( p . 801 ) . But on the same page , they doubt their assumption : ‘ . it is not clear whether only the instantaneous foveal region can be merged with STM or whether a somewhat larger region , connected by adequately indexed saccades , might be available’ ( p . 801 ) . In any case , direct interactions with external memory can be assumed to take place with ideas that do not have to be searched for . These are the ideas that are present within the focus of attention . For the brainsketching segments , the immediate linking area can be considered to contain the ideas that were explained just before the current round of generating ideas started , plus the ideas that the designer is generating him - or herself during the present round of sketching ideas . See Figure 3 for the resulting representation of the link system , which we refer to as a ‘link matrix’ . In the ﬁgure , links in the shaded areas represent interaction with the direct part of external memory . Black squares refer to interpersonal links and crosses refer to self - links . During brainsketching , the designers individually generate ideas in parallel . Therefore , it is not likely that there are direct links between 114 Design Studies Vol 26 No . 2 March 2005 ideas generated by diﬀerent designers within the same round of generating ideas . The designers may sometimes take a quick look at the ﬂipcharts of their neighbors , but this was found to occur rarely . In the brainsketching link matrices the areas where linking is unlikely to occur are whitened . Of course , within each round of generating ideas , designers can build on their own recently generated ideas , as represented by the single links , or small triangular groups of potential link locations at the diagonal of the link matrix . For brainstorming with post - its the generation of ideas is a continuous group process , which makes it more complicated to provide an operationalization for the direct linking areas in the link matrix . As for brainsketching , the direct linking area ought to cover the link locations with ideas that are still present in the focus of attention . This number needs to be more than seven , because according to Miller ( 1956 ) that is the average amount of ideas or chunks that the internal short - term memory can contain . The external notations are supposed to provide an extension to the short - term memory and therefore should contain more than these seven ideas . It cannot be much more than seven ideas , however , because the human attentional focus can only cover a limited number of items ( Pashler , 1995 ) . We made the assumption that Figure 3 Link matrix for a brainsketching segment How sketching can aﬀect the idea generation process 115 the direct linking area for the brainstorming segments contains the link locations with the 10 previous ideas . The actual direct area may contain a few ideas more or a few ideas less , but the results do not change dramatically when the bandwidth is made a few link locations narrower or wider . See Figure 4 for an example of a link matrix for a brainstorming with post - its segment . For each of these four categories of links , the link - type indices ( LTI ) were determined . The link - type indices ( Supplementary , Modiﬁcation , and Tangential ) provide the distribution of diﬀerent types of connections that are made within the external memory area , based on a categorization of the nature of ideas provided by Gryskiewicz ( 1980 ) . Tangential links indicate wild leaps into a diﬀerent direction , modiﬁcation links indicate direct variations and supplementary links indicate small alterations and repetitions . 4 Results For our investigation of the functions of sketching in idea generation meetings especially the diﬀerences in link density and tangential link - type index for the brainstorming and brainsketching conditions are of interest . Table 1 shows the results for each area of external memory . With these results , we can now evaluate whether the three basic functions of sketching in design activity as proposed before e are also valid for idea generation meetings . 4 . 1 The thinking sketch Individual idea generation has a substantial role in the brainsketching process . Compared to brainstorming , ideas had signiﬁcantly ( p ! 0 . 005 ) more connections with ideas in the individual - direct area of the external memory ( link density for brainsketching , x = 0 . 26 , SD = 0 . 13 ; for brainstorming , x = 0 . 12 , SD = 0 . 10 ) . The purported function of sketching in idea generation groups is that the re - interpretation taking place in an idea sketching cycle is said to be conducive to creativity . Purcell and Gero ( 1998 ) describe such re - interpretation as : ‘the emergence of new ways of seeing the perceptual ( drawn ) representation of a potential design’ ( p . 396 ) . Suwa and Tversky ( 1997 ) relate re - interpretation to ‘ . acts of shifting the focus of attention’ ( p . 394 ) . For idea generation meetings , such ‘new ways of seeing’ or ‘focus shifts’ , can contribute to the creative process by opening up new directions for further exploration . The level of tangential linking can be seen as an indicator for such creative 116 Design Studies Vol 26 No . 2 March 2005 re - interpretation taking place . Tangential links indicate possible focus shifts , which may be further explored through direct association , identiﬁed by modiﬁcation - type linking , and steps of incremental development , identiﬁed by supplementary - type linking . So , a relatively high ratio of tangential links can be seen as a basic indicator that the working medium used supports creativity through re - interpretation . A comparison of the link - type indices in the individual - direct area of external memory between the brainsketching and brainstorming conditions does not show a substantial diﬀerence in tangential - type links . For the brainsketching segments , the tangential link - type index was only slightly higher ( x = 0 . 50 , SD = 0 . 04 ) than for brainstorming ( x = 0 . 46 , SD = 0 . 20 ) . However , by comparing the link - type indices for the area of external memory at hand e the individual - direct area e with the overall link - type indices , we can evaluate the relative contribution to the creative process of the proposed individual re - interpretive cycle . The link - type indices for the links with ideas in the individual - direct area provide a rough indication for the nature of this part of the process . Figure 4 Link matrix for a brainstorming segment How sketching can aﬀect the idea generation process 117 In the individual - direct area of the brainsketching segments , a relatively high ratio of tangential linking takes place ( x = 0 . 50 , SD = 0 . 04 ) , compared to the overall tangential link - type index ( x = 0 . 32 , SD = 0 . 15 ) . This indicates that in the individual - direct area of external memory a high ratio of wild leap - type connections is made with earlier ideas , which means that the linking in the individual - direct area stimulates creativity by opening novel directions . 4 . 2 The talking sketch Similar to the previous individual direct function of sketching , the link - type indices for the shared - direct area provide some insight into the nature of the connections made with the recently generated ideas of other designers . For both brainstorming and brainsketching the shared - direct area is an important source for making connections ( link density for brainsketching x = 0 . 53 , SD = 0 . 22 ; for brainstorming x = 0 . 43 , SD = 0 . 17 ) . As in the previously mentioned function of sketches for the individual design process , if sketches stimulate creativity through inviting re - interpretation of each other’s sketches , this should show by a relatively high ratio of tangential links for the brainsketching condition in this area . However , the tangential link - type index is substantially lower for brainsketching ( x = 0 . 29 , SD = 0 . 06 ) compared to brainstorming ( x = 0 . 41 , SD = 0 . 04 ) . This is not in line with what one would expect if the creative process were inﬂuenced by the proposed function of the designers re - interpreting each other’s idea sketches . 4 . 3 The storing sketch Because sketches may be easier to identify in the external memory , the designers are more likely to make use of the ideas in the remote area of Table 1 Results Brainstorming Brainsketching Individual direct l . d . ( SD ) 0 . 12 ( 0 . 10 ) * * 0 . 26 ( 0 . 13 ) * * LTI T ( SD ) 0 . 46 ( 0 . 20 ) 0 . 50 ( 0 . 04 ) Individual remote l . d . ( SD ) 0 . 09 ( 0 . 09 ) 0 . 13 ( 0 . 12 ) LTI T ( SD ) e e Shared direct l . d . ( SD ) 0 . 43 ( 0 . 17 ) 0 . 53 ( 0 . 22 ) LTI T ( SD ) 0 . 41 ( 0 . 04 ) 0 . 29 ( 0 . 06 ) Shared remote l . d . ( SD ) 0 . 20 ( 0 . 18 ) * 0 . 35 ( 0 . 22 ) * LTI T ( SD ) 0 . 12 ( 0 . 14 ) 0 . 25 ( 0 . 05 ) For the individual - remote area , too few data entries were found to determine reliable link - type indices . The signiﬁcance of the diﬀerence in means was determined by means of a paired sample t - test ( two tailed ) . * p ! 0 . 05 , * * p ! 0 . 005 . 118 Design Studies Vol 26 No . 2 March 2005 external memory , which consists of the individual - remote area and the shared - remote area . Comparing the link densities in these areas of external memory for the brainsketching and for the brainstorming condition provides a basic indication of whether this function of sketching is relevant for idea generation meetings . The designers made few connections with ideas in the individual - remote area of external memory in both conditions . And , there is no substantial diﬀerence between the link densities for the individual - remote area ( for the graphic condition : x = 0 . 13 , SD = 0 . 12 ; for the sentential condition : x = 0 . 09 , SD = 0 . 09 ) . Many more connections are made with the shared - remote area . Here , there is a substantial diﬀerence between the link densities . The mean link density in the shared - remote area for the graphic condition ( x = 0 . 35 ; SD = 0 . 22 ) is signiﬁcantly ( p ! 0 . 05 ) higher in comparison to the sentential condition ( x = 0 . 20 , SD = 0 . 18 ) . Thus , in the sketching condition , ideas have many more connections with ideas in the shared - remote part of external memory , which supports the notion that brainsketching enhances the creative group process by improving the accessibility of each other’s earlier ideas . 5 Conclusion So , does sketching support creative process in idea generation groups ? The results endorse this notion for two of the three proposed functions of sketching in idea generation groups , relating to the thinking sketch and the storing sketch . The results do not support the function that relates to the talking sketch , which suggests that sketching stimulates creativity by inviting re - interpretation of each other’s idea sketches . So , in idea generation groups , sketches can stimulate creativity , especially in the immediate individual idea generation process , by providing new directions for idea generation in an individual generate - interpret cycle . And , sketches can provide a more integrated group process , by providing better access to the earlier ideas , especially in the shared parts of external memory . 6 Final remarks The two techniques applied in the experimental meetings are rather diﬀerent in nature . Brainsketching involved an idea generation process in rounds , whereas brainstorming involved a continuous idea generation process . This means that no generalizations can be made about the functioning of sketching in idea generation meetings ; the implications How sketching can aﬀect the idea generation process 119 are limited to the diﬀerences found between the two techniques . Because of the results of an earlier study ( Ullman et al . , 1990 ) we could not use an experimental design in which only the working medium was altered . This earlier study showed a breakdown of the idea generation process , if sketching was included in brainstorming , without making structural changes to the technique . The individual function of sketching e relating to the thinking sketch e particularly accounts for the way in which the so - called ‘visual brainstorming’ technique failed in this earlier study . Visual brainstorm - ing was a direct variation to brainstorming with post - its . Designers were asked to sketch ideas on individual sheets of paper and , when done with a sketch , immediately share the idea with the group , whereupon the facilitator pasted the sheet with the idea sketch onto the ﬂipchart . This technique did not allow for the individual idea generation cycle , in which new search directions can be found . Indeed , the technique not only lacked quantity of ideas ( only 17 ideas were generated , compared to 46 for the control condition , in which regular brainstorming was applied ) , but the tangential link index was also especially low for visual brainstorming ( x = 0 . 21 , compared to x = 0 . 46 for regular brainstorm - ing ) , indicating few new connections that could open up novel directions for generating ideas . Apparently , even when involved in an idea generation meeting , participants need to be allowed e and perhaps to even be stimulated e to engage in individual cycles of re - interpretation . The brainsketching technique applied in the current study accomplishes this by means of formal rounds of individual idea generation . Perhaps other ways are possible in which the participants can make more informal shifts between the re - interpretive cycle of their individual sketching process , and making connections within the group process . References Bly , S A A ( 1988 ) Use of drawing surfaces in different collaborative settings in I Greif ( ed . ) Second Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , Association for Computing Machinery , New York pp 250 e 256 Ferguson , E S ( 1992 ) Engineering and the mind’s eye MIT Press , Cambridge , MA Fish , J and Scrivener , S ( 1990 ) Amplifying the mind’s eye : sketching and visual cognition Leonardo Vol 23 No 1 pp 117 e 126 Geschka , H , Schaude , G R and Schlicksupp , H ( 1973 ) Modern techniques for solving problems Chemical Engineering August pp 91 e 97 Goel , V ( 1995 ) Sketches of thought MIT Press , Cambridge , MA 120 Design Studies Vol 26 No . 2 March 2005 Goldschmidt , G ( 1991 ) The dialectics of sketching Creativity Research Journal Vol 4 No 2 pp 123 e 143 Goldschmidt , G ( 1996 ) The designer as a team of one in N Cross , H Christiaans and K Dorst ( eds ) Analysing design activity , Wiley , Chichester , UK pp 65 e 91 Goldschmidt , G and Weil , M ( 1998 ) Contents and structure in design reasoning Design Issues Vol 14 No 3 pp 85 e 100 Gryskiewicz , S S ( 1980 ) A study of creative problem solving techniques in group settings Unpublished doctoral dissertation , University of London Humphreys , G W and Bruce , V ( eds ) ( 1989 ) Visual cognition , computational , experimental and neuropsychological perspectives Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Ltd , Hove , UK Isaksen , S G , Dorval , K B and Treﬃnger , D J ( 1998 ) Toolbox for creative problem solving Creative Problem Solving Group e Buﬀalo , Buﬀalo , NY Karsenty , L ( 1999 ) Cooperative work and shared visual context : an empirical study of comprehension problems in side - by - side and remote help dialogues Human e Computer Interaction Vol 14 pp 283 e 315 McGown , A and Green , G ( 1998 ) Visible ideas , informational patterns of conceptual sketch activity Design Studies Vol 19 pp 431 e 453 McKim , R H ( 1980 ) Experiences in visual thinking ( second edition ) Wadsworth , Boston , MA Miller , G A ( 1956 ) The magical number seven , plus or minus two Psychological Review Vol 63 pp 81 e 97 Newell , A and Simon , H A ( 1972 ) Human problem solving Prentice - Hall , Englewood Cliﬀs , NJ Osborn , A F ( 1953 ) Applied imagination Scribner’s , New York Pashler , H ( 1995 ) Attention and visual perception : analyzing divided attention in S M Kosslyn and D N Oshershon ( eds ) Visual cognition Vol 2 MIT Press , Boston , MA pp 71 e 100 Potter , M C and Faulconer , B A ( 1975 ) Time to understand pictures and words Nature Vol 253 pp 437 e 438 Purcell , T and Gero , J S ( 1998 ) Drawings and the design process Design Studies Vol 19 No 4 pp 389 e 430 Scho¨n , D A and Wiggins , G ( 1992 ) Kinds of seeing and their functions in designing Design Studies Vol 13 No 2 pp 135 e 156 Scrivener , S A R and Clark , S M ( 1994 ) Sketching in collaborative design in L MacDonald and J Vince ( eds ) Interacting with virtual environments , Wiley , Chichester , UK Smith , G F ( 1998 ) Idea - generation techniques : a formulary of active ingredients Journal of Creative Behavior Vol 32 No 2 pp 107 e 133 Snodgrass , J G and McCullough , B ( 1986 ) The role of visual similarity in picture categorization Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory and Cognition Vol 7 pp 339 e 345 Suwa , M and Tversky , B ( 1997 ) What do architects and students perceive in their sketches ? A protocol analysis Design Studies Vol 18 pp 385 e 403 Tang , J C ( 1991 ) Findings from observational studies of collaborative work International Journal of Man - Machine Studies Vol 34 pp 143 e 160 Tang , J C and Leifer , L J ( 1988 ) A framework for understanding the workspace activity of design teams in I Greif ( ed . ) Second Conference on How sketching can aﬀect the idea generation process 121 Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , Association for Computing Machinery , New York pp 244 e 249 Ullman , D G , Wood , S and Craig , D ( 1990 ) The importance of drawing in the mechanical design process Computers & Graphics Vol 14 No 2 pp 263 e 274 Van der Lugt , R ( 2000 ) Developing a graphic tool for creative problem solving in design groups Design Studies Vol 21 No 5 pp 505 e 522 Van der Lugt , R ( 2001 ) Sketching in design idea generation meetings Doctoral dissertation , Delft University of Technology Van der Lugt , R ( 2002 ) Brainsketching and how it differs from brainstorming Creativity and Innovation Management Vol 11 No 1 pp 43 e 54 Van der Lugt , R and Van der Graaf , A ( 2002 ) Context indicators for determining links between design ideas in D Marjanovic ( ed . ) Proceedings of the Design 2002 7 th International Design Conference , Faculty of mechanical engineering and naval architecture , The Design Society , Zagreb , Croatia Van Gundy , A B ( 1988 ) Techniques of structured problem solving ( second edition ) Van Nostrand Reinhold , New York 122 Design Studies Vol 26 No . 2 March 2005