Designing for the Invisible — User - Centered Design of Infrastructure Awareness Systems Juan David Hincapi´e - Ramos , Aur´elien Tabard , Jakob Bardram IT University of Copenhagen { jdhr , auta , bardram } @ itu . dk ABSTRACT Infrastructure awareness systems reveal invisible aspects of infrastructures to their existing or potential users . Design - ing such systems is challenging as it requires making visible the hidden activity of infrastructures while providing infor - mation of interest to the users . To address this challenge we introduce the AMC technique ( for Awareness Model Cards ) . This technique relies conceptually on awareness model’s concepts of nimbus and focus . The main objective is to match the users’ interests to the information the infras - tructure awareness systems can provide , through the use of card matching . This technique provides three beneﬁts : 1 ) evaluate how relevant is the information displayed by infras - tructure awareness systems ; 2 ) identify which of users’ in - terests infrastructure awareness systems does not take into account ; 3 ) identify elements of re - design in the infrastruc - tures themselves so that they could be better adopted by their users . Author Keywords Infrastructure Awareness , User - Centred Design , AMCards ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords H . 5 . 2 Information Interfaces and Presentation : User Inter - faces— User - centered design INTRODUCTION Infrastructures are persistent socio - technical systems over which services are delivered to support an organization or society in general [ 3 ] . Infrastructures can be physical such as the power grid or gas pipes ; human such as homeschoolers and gate - community dwellers [ 8 , 11 ] ; or technological such as instant messaging or computational grids [ 3 ] . According to Star [ 14 ] , the most salient characteristics of infrastruc - tures are their embeddedness and transparency ( to which we will refer as ‘invisibility’ ) , which in turn make it inherently difﬁcult for users to understand and appropriate them [ 2 ] . Awareness systems offer a solution for improving the appro - priation of invisible technology [ 13 ] . By providing informa - tion that can move back and forth between users’ periphery Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior speciﬁc permission and / or a fee . DIS 2010 , August 16 - 20 , 2010 , Aarhus , Denmark . Copyright 2010 ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 0103 - 9 , 2010 / 08 . . . $ 10 . 00 . and center of attention , awareness systems foster reﬂection among users and improve their understanding of the tech - nology [ 15 ] . For instance , by showing the current state of energy consumption , sustainability projects seek to trigger reﬂection on resource usage and to stimulate environmental friendly behaviors [ 6 ] . The invisibility of infrastructures , however , possesses a fun - damental challenge to the user - centered design of such aware - ness systems ; it is inherently difﬁcult to engage users in a de - sign process about something invisible . The invisibility of an infrastructure inevitable leads to a lack of understanding of the nature and characteristics of an infrastructure . And this lack of understanding is a core hindrance to a user - centered design process , as users make wrong assumptions or ignore the potential of the infrastructure . To address this challenge , we propose the Awareness - Model Card ( AMC ) technique . From a methodological stance , this technique takes its outset in the Inspiration Cards techniques proposed by Halskov and Dalsg ˚ ard [ 5 ] . This technique helps bring different sources of inspiration into the design process . From a theoretical stance , we ground the technique in Ben - ford and Fahl´en’s model of awareness [ 1 ] . This model uses the terms ‘focus’ and ‘nimbus’ to deﬁne awareness as taking place when the observing object’s focus meets the observed object’s nimbus . The AMC technique seeks to instantiate focus and nimbus in the context of users and infrastructures , in order to better match them together . BACKGROUND Our work is part of a project which aims to create a peer - to - peer ( P2P ) computational grid of personal computers within a biology research laboratory . This grid is targeted to help biologist execute their bioinformatics algorithms in a dis - tributed manner . This type of grid is often called a ‘voluntary grid’ since it relies on volunteers to donate CPU cycles on their personal computers . Hence , such grids are dependent on the number of donors to be effective . In order to engage people at the lab , we started to investigate how an awareness system for the P2P grid could be designed and initial ﬁeld studies and interviews indicated that such an awareness system would indeed help the adoption of the grid . Moreover , further design workshops with the biologists formed the idea that a public display environment could help make the grid visible and would engage biologists to donate CPU cycles . However , many visualization strategies can be used on such displays . One option is to show grid usage ; another is to highlight which users are donating the most to the grid ( an approach often used in other grids ) . During these design workshops , the core challenge was , however , that the invisibility of the infrastructure restrained participants from understanding the design space , which in turn hindered their engagement and creativity . THE AMC CONCEPTS In order to address the challenge of engaging user in the de - sign of awareness systems for an invisible infrastructure , we propose the Awareness - Model Card ( AMC ) technique . This technique builds conceptually on the concept of awareness as proposed by Benford and Fahl´en [ 1 ] , and methodologi - cally on the Inspiration Card technique proposed by Halskov and Dalg˚ard [ 5 ] . This section outlines this conceptual back - ground and the next section presents the technique . Infrastructure Awareness The awareness model presents ‘focus’ as what an object is interested in , and ‘nimbus’ as the information that an object projects about itself [ 1 ] . Awareness of object A in relation to object B happens when A’s focus meets B’s nimbus ; i . e . when A is interested and has access to what B projects about itself . The problem of invisibility of infrastructures , mod - elled in terms of awareness model , is presented in ﬁgure 1A . Here there are two obstacles to awareness , ﬁrst the user ( U ) focuses on different things than the infrastructure ( I ) in itself , and second the infrastructure’s invisibility ( shown in dashed lines ) keeps the user from sporadically confronting it . Figure 1 . Infrastructure Awareness’ awareness model . ( The circle represents the object’s nimbus . The cone represents the object’s focus and its orientation . ) An Infrastructure Awareness ( IA ) system seeks to overcome these difﬁculties by providing awareness to the user about one or more properties of an infrastructure . To achieve this , the Infrastructure Awareness system extracts data from the infrastructure’s nimbus and translates it into information that the user is interested in and can pick up using technologies like ambient displays . This is shown in ﬁgure 1B . Design Approach A range of participatory and user - centered design methods provide tools and resources to foster stakeholders’ creativity in the design process [ 4 ] . For example , Pictive [ 12 ] is an early example of using paper based techniques to facilitate users’ implication in the design process . Mackay discusses in further details how paper and video prototypes help iden - tify possible solutions [ 10 ] . As open thinking can be hard to instigate for participants not familiar with such methods , de - signers proposed to use different sets of visual elements such as elements of the Interactive Thread [ 9 ] or IDEO cards [ 7 ] to engage participants in generating ideas . More recently , Halskov and Dalsg˚ard have proposed inspi - ration cards [ 5 ] to both frame the ideas of participants and bring various sources of inspiration into the design process . They introduce two types of cards ; so - called ‘domain cards’ describing ﬁndings from domain studies , and ‘technology cards’ illustrating applications of technology . By combin - ing such cards , their workshop activity aims to develop new design concepts . Central to all these previous techniques is that they all ad - dress a design process for something very speciﬁc and visi - ble . Our focus is , however , slightly different since we are not only interested in what technology to use for the awareness system , but rather which elements of the ( invisible ) infras - tructure are interesting to the users . For this purpose , the AMC technique retain card mapping between two differ - ent domains . But rather than using domain and technology cards , we propose to generate awareness systems ideas by using focus and nimbus cards . THE AMC TECHNIQUE The objective of the AMC technique is to construct an aware - ness model through a participatory card matching activity . Figure 2 illustrates the overall ﬂow of the technique . Figure 2 . The AMC technique in the design process . Card design The AMC technique uses two types of cards : focus cards and nimbus cards . Based on preparatory domain analysis and ﬁeld studies , designers initially create a deck of focus cards . Focus cards represent users’ interests in the context of a given activity . Using information from the infrastructure developers , designers also create a deck of nimbus cards . Nimbus cards highlight different features of both the un - derlying infrastructure and the awareness system . We used cardboard cards with a title , a description , optionally a re - lated image , and free space for comments . All cards also belong to a category for inspiring participants to generate new cards within a given category , or to identify missing categories . Presentation The introduction to the AMC activity starts with a short de - scription of the workshop activities , the infrastructure , and the current state of the awareness system being designed . Thereafter , the focus cards are presented for 1 or 2 minutes , and participants start exploring them . Co - creation and Matching In the ﬁrst phase of the workshop , participants are invited to challenge the focus cards . Participants start by exploring the cards in order to reﬁne or discard them , or even create new ones describing interests related to the application domain . Then , participants organize focus cards in a hierarchy and in categories . The hierarchical organization leads to deﬁne the relevance of focus cards from the participants’ standpoint . The categorical organization leads to identify missing cate - gories as well as topics which are more salient than others . During the second phase of the workshop , focus and nim - bus cards are matched . Participants group one or more focus cards with a nimbus card , if they considered the nimbus card provides for information related to the user cards . The cards are attached to a cardboard and participants are encouraged to describe how the matching occurs . In this stage partici - pants and designers can discuss new nimbus cards that would match focus cards . Closure The ﬁnal phase organized the matching cards in three cate - gories matched , missed , and discarded . The matched cate - gory consists of matching focus and nimbus cards , implying that users’ interests are matched by a representation of the infrastructure information . Designers can use matched cards to investigate awareness efﬁciency , and to identify improve - ments . The missed category consists of groups of focus and nimbus cards that match but where one of the two elements of the nimbus is missing . Either the awareness system dis - play information not available from the infrastructure or the infrastructure provides elements of interests that are not dis - played by the awareness system . Designers can leverage this information to inform the new features of the awareness sys - tem , or to critique the infrastructure . The discarded category consists of focus or nimbus cards that could not be matched , as well as focus cards that were out of scope ( e . g . , “provide a centralized purchasing system” ) . USING THE AMC TECHNIQUE The AMC technique was used in the design of the ambient displays system for the P2P biology grid . First , two design workshops were conducted to discuss and mock - up the dis - play system , and then one workshop using the AMC tech - nique was done in order to reﬁne the design . In the AMC workshop , four molecular biologists ( one post doc and three PhD students ) and two designers participated . Two of the biologists participate in the overall project of building the P2P computational grid , and have experience in developing bioinformatics software . All of the participants have taken part of some of the previous design workshops and had an overall understanding of both the infrastructure and the con - cepts of an awareness system . The designers brought an initial set of cards consisting of 19 nimbus cards and 11 user focus cards . The nimbus cards de - tailed features of the infrastructure ( 15 cards ) or the aware - ness system ( 4 cards ) like “ [ grid ] capacity” , “tasks executed” , “contribution levels” , and “job progress” . The user focus cards represent users’ interests like “resource availability” , “latest publications” , and “how quickly will I have my re - sults ? ” . During the co - creation and matching stage 15 new user focus cards were created showing interests like “projects explanations” and “calendar of upcoming events” . In the matching stage , participants created 11 match groups all of which had matching features of both the infrastructure and the awareness system . Moreover , 4 nimbus cards where discarded as irrelevant for the user interests . Participants discarded 9 user focus cards ( 5 new ) as not related to the infrastructure , and 4 ( 2 new ) of them were categorized as missed . Results and Discussion Overall , the AMC technique proved instrumental in refram - ing the understanding of participants’ interests through their use of focus cards . This helped them to draw implications for the ( re ) design of both the awareness system and the in - frastructure . More speciﬁcally , our ﬁrst observation was that by letting participants review , correct , create , and classify focus cards , the technique helped the designers to gauge the interests of the participants . We were able to reﬁne our understanding of the participants’ interest and identify elements we missed during the ﬁeld work . Moreover , the focus card helped to prioritize participants interests in the following order : 1 . Ongoing activity in the laboratory – What is going on ? What are the latest publications ? Who can share biologi - cal material ? 2 . Get and understand results – How do others do procedure X ? Am I missing something ? How quickly will I get my results ? 3 . Experimental procedure – Resource availability and loca - tion . Colleagues Expertise . 4 . Publicizing results – Exceptional results . Decoded RNA & DNA . While we initially identiﬁed experimental results as the most important thing that biologists wanted to share with each other , the AMC workshop revealed that their interest was stronger in day - to - day activities and discussions . As for the topical organization of focus cards ( ﬁgure 3 ) , it led to a new category we had missed ; namely communica - tion . This led to the generation of a whole set of focus cards Figure 3 . Topical organization of focus cards focusing on aspects like explanations about ongoing project , Tweets , MBI emails ( a mailing list dedicated to resources in the laboratory ) , updates about last week’s activities , and an overview of upcoming events . By grouping focus cards in categories , we could also identify how some interests were redundant or deeply related and thus select focal points from different categories . Our second core observation was , that the mapping of focus cards to nimbus cards deﬁned an awareness model we could rely on for the re - design of our grid awareness system . We were able to identify both what worked , as well as identify potential breakdowns in the awareness our system was cre - ating . This included , amongst other things , the following issues : • which of the infrastructure features being shown , but not relevant ( e . g . bidding activity ) ; • which of the infrastructure features not being shown , but relevant ( e . g . the data used to execute a task ) ; • which elements of interest the awareness system could display to engage people even though not supported by the infrastructure ( e . g . latest publications or location of resources ) . • which elements of the infrastructure were missing to an - swer users’ interests ( e . g . sharing of the results with all the grid members ) . Note that we mixed both infrastructure cards and awareness system cards in the set of nimbus cards . This combination proved to be useful to identify which interests were correctly made visible by the ambient display . It also made it easy to recognize infrastructure properties that matched partici - pants’ interest but were not visible on our ambient displays . However , by mixing these cards , we also made it more dif - ﬁcult for participants to know what was coming from the infrastructure and what was external to it . CONCLUSION In this paper , we have proposed the AMC technique , which is a card matching activity speciﬁcally crafted for design - ing awareness system for invisible infrastructures . We have demonstrated the use of it through the design of an ambient display system for providing awareness and motivating ap - propriation of a volunteer computational P2P grid infrastruc - ture . The use of this technique provided important insights into the further redesign of this display system . The AMC technique helps match the interests of users to the information the infrastructure can provide , respectively the focus and the nimbus according to the awareness model . This technique provides three beneﬁts : 1 ) evaluate how ex - isting infrastructure awareness systems match users’ inter - ests ; 2 ) identify which of the users’ interests the infrastruc - ture awareness system does not take into account ; 3 ) identify elements of redesign in the infrastructures themselves so that they could be better appropriated by their users . We discussed the AMC technique in the context of grid in - frastructures , but as its name hints , the technique could be appropriated for the design of awareness systems in other contexts , such as in environmental setting for e . g . saving en - ergy . Future improvements include deﬁning a more generic set of awareness cards that could be instantiated to speciﬁc application cases . This generic set could rely more heavily on the abstractions from the Awareness Model proposed by Benford and Fahl´en , including concepts like space , objects , media , aura , adapters and boundaries . This set of abstrac - tions could also be used as lenses to analyze the outcomes of the AMC sessions . Finally , we seek to explore the notion of interaction in infrastructure awareness systems , as a way to trigger reﬂection and better support adoption of infrastruc - tures . REFERENCES 1 . S . Benford and L . Fahl´en . A spatial model of interaction in large virtual environments . In ECSCW’93 : Proceedings of the third conference on European Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pages 109 – 124 , Norwell , MA , USA , 1993 . Kluwer Academic Publishers . 2 . M . Chalmers and A . Galani . Seamful interweaving : heterogeneity in the theory and design of interactive systems . In DIS ’04 : Proceedings of the 5th conference on Designing interactive systems , pages 243 – 252 , New York , NY , USA , 2004 . ACM . 3 . W . K . Edwards , M . W . Newman , and E . S . Poole . The infrastructure problem in hci . In CHI ’10 : Proceedings of the 28th international conference on Human factors in computing systems , pages 423 – 432 , New York , NY , USA , 2010 . ACM . 4 . J . Greenbaum and M . Kyng , editors . Design at work : cooperative design of computer systems . L . Erlbaum Associates Inc . , Hillsdale , NJ , USA , 1992 . 5 . K . Halskov and P . Dalsg˚ard . Inspiration card workshops . In DIS ’06 : Proceedings of the 6th conference on Designing Interactive systems , pages 2 – 11 , New York , NY , USA , 2006 . ACM . 6 . T . G . Holmes . Eco - visualization : combining art and technology to reduce energy consumption . In C & C’07 : Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGCHI conference on Creativity & cognition , pages 153 – 162 , New York , NY , USA , 2007 . ACM . 7 . T . Kelley and T . Peters . The Art of Innovation : Lessons in Creativity from IDEO , America’s Leading Design Firm . Currency , 2001 . 8 . C . P . Lee , P . Dourish , and G . Mark . The human infrastructure of cyberinfrastructure . In CSCW ’06 : Proceedings of the 2006 20th anniversary conference on Computer supported cooperative work , pages 483 – 492 , New York , NY , USA , 2006 . ACM Press . 9 . W . E . Mackay . The interactive thread : exploring methods for multi - disciplinary design . In DIS ’04 : Proceedings of the 5th conference on Designing interactive systems , pages 103 – 112 , New York , NY , USA , 2004 . ACM . 10 . W . E . Mackay , A . V . Ratzer , and P . Janecek . Video artifacts for design : bridging the gap between abstraction and detail . In DIS ’00 : Proceedings of the 3rd conference on Designing interactive systems , pages 72 – 82 , New York , NY , USA , 2000 . ACM . 11 . S . D . Mainwaring , M . F . Chang , and K . Anderson . Infrastructures and their discontents : Implications for ubicomp . In 6th International Conference in Ubiquitous Computing . Ubicomp 2004 , pages 418 – 432 . September 2004 . 12 . M . J . Muller . Pictive—an exploration in participatory design . In CHI’91 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , pages 225 – 231 , NY , USA , 1991 . ACM . 13 . D . Snowdon and A . Grasso . Diffusing information in organizational settings : learning from experience . In CHI ’02 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , pages 331 – 338 , New York , NY , USA , 2002 . ACM . 14 . S . L . Star . The ethnography of infrastructure . The American Behavioral Scientist , 43 ( 3 ) : 377 – 391 , 1999 . 15 . M . Weiser and J . S . Brown . Designing calm technology . PowerGrid Journal , 1 , 1996 .