Molecular Biology of the Cell Vol . 17 , 3197 – 3210 , July 2006 Distinct Mechanisms of Clathrin - independent Endocytosis Have Unique Sphingolipid Requirements □ D Zhi - Jie Cheng , * Raman Deep Singh , * Deepak K . Sharma , * † Eileen L . Holicky , * Kentaro Hanada , ‡ David L . Marks , * and Richard E . Pagano * * Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , Thoracic Diseases Research Unit , Mayo Clinic College of Medicine , Rochester , MN 55905 ; and ‡ Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology , National Institute of Infectious Diseases , Tokyo 162 - 8640 , Japan Submitted December 5 , 2005 ; Accepted April 24 , 2006 Sphingolipids ( SLs ) play important roles in membrane structure and cell function . Here , we examine the SL requirements of various endocytic mechanisms using a mutant cell line and pharmacological inhibitors to disrupt SL biosynthesis . First , we demonstrated that in Chinese hamster ovary cells we could distinguish three distinct mechanisms of clathrin - independent endocytosis ( caveolar , RhoA , and Cdc42 dependent ) which differed in cargo , sensitivity to pharmacological agents , and dominant negative proteins . General depletion of SLs inhibited endocytosis by each clathrin - independent mechanism , whereas clathrin - dependent uptake was unaffected . Depletion of glycosphingolipids ( GSLs ; a subgroup of SLs ) selectively blocked caveolar endocytosis and decreased caveolin - 1 and caveolae at the plasma membrane . Caveolar endocytosis and PM caveolae could be restored in GSL - depleted cells by acute addition of exogenous GSLs . Disruption of RhoA - and Cdc42 - regulated endocytosis by SL depletion was shown to be related to decreased targeting of these Rho proteins to the plasma membrane and could be partially restored by exogenous sphingomyelin but not GSLs . Both the in vivo membrane targeting and in vitro binding to artiﬁcial lipid vesicles of RhoA and Cdc42 were shown to be dependent upon sphingomyelin . These results provide the ﬁrst evidence that SLs are differentially required for distinct mechanisms of clathrin - independent endocytosis . INTRODUCTION In recent years , several clathrin - independent mechanisms of endocytosis have been identiﬁed in mammalian cells . The protein machinery supporting these various endocytic mechanisms and appropriate markers for distinguishing these pathways are just beginning to be deﬁned ( Smart et al . , 1999 ; Nichols and Lippincott - Schwartz , 2001 ; Johannes and Lamaze , 2002 ; Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ; Parton and Richards , 2003 ) . One well studied nonclathrin mechanism is uptake via caveolae—ﬂask - shaped invaginations at the plasma membrane ( PM ) that are enriched in sphingolipids ( SLs ) , cholesterol ( Chol ) , and caveolin - 1 ( Cav1 ) ( Mineo and Anderson , 2001 ; Parton , 2003 ) . Caveolae have been shown to be in - volved in the uptake of certain viruses ( e . g . , simian virus 40 [ SV40 ] ) , toxins ( e . g . , cholera toxin B subunit [ CtxB ] ) , bacte - ria , and albumin ( Orlandi and Fishman , 1998 ; Lencer et al . , 1999 ; Shin et al . , 2000 ; Norkin , 2001 ; Pelkmans et al . , 2001 ; Richterova et al . , 2001 ; Duncan et al . , 2002 ; Marjomaki et al . , 2002 ; Minshall et al . , 2002 ; Singh et al . , 2003 ) . Our laboratory has demonstrated that the ﬂuorescent SL analog BODIPY - lactosylceramide ( BODIPY - LacCer ) is inter - nalized via caveolae in a range of cell types ( Puri et al . , 2001 ; Singh et al . , 2003 ) . BODIPY - LacCer is internalized rapidly and can be observed within Cav1 - positive vesicles by 1 – 2 min after initiation of endocytosis at 37°C ( Puri et al . , 2001 ; Singh et al . , 2003 , 2004 ) . In human skin ﬁbroblasts , BODIPY - LacCer is delivered to early endosomes within 5 – 10 min of internalization , and eventually a portion reaches the Golgi apparatus ( Puri et al . , 2001 ; Choudhury et al . , 2002 ; Sharma et al . , 2003 ) . The uptake by caveolae and subsequent trafﬁcking of BODIPY - LacCer is considerably different from that re - ported for SV40 virus , which is internalized much more slowly , does not enter early endosomes , and is delivered to the ER without passage through the Golgi apparatus ( Pelkmans et al . , 2001 ) . It is unknown whether BODIPY - LacCer and SV40 virus are internalized by identical mechanisms , and the possibility that there are multiple forms of caveolar endocytosis has been discussed ( Le and Nabi , 2003 ) . Other clathrin - independent uptake mechanisms involve membrane microdomains that have a similar lipid compo - sition to caveolae but that are devoid of caveolins ( Damm et al . , 2005 ; Kirkham et al . , 2005b ) . These include 1 ) the uptake of the interleukin 2 receptor ( IL - 2R ) by a clathrin - indepen - dent , dynamin ( Dyn ) - and RhoA - dependent mechanism ( Lamaze et al . , 2001 ; Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ) ; and 2 ) uptake of some glycosylphosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) - anchored pro - teins as well as ﬂuorescent dextrans via a clathrin - and Dyn2 - independent , Cdc42 - regulated pinocytic pathway ( Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ) . Although several studies have dem - onstrated the existence of multiple nonclathrin endocytic path - ways with different cargo , protein machinery , and pharmaco - logical sensitivities within a single cell type ( Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ; Singh et al . , 2003 ; Sharma et al . , 2004 ) , the distinction between the various clathrin - independent pathways is not al - This article was published online ahead of print in MBC in Press ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E05 – 12 – 1101 ) on May 3 , 2006 . □ D The online version of this article contains supplemental material at MBC Online ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org ) . † Present address : Photometrics , 3440 East Britannia Dr . , Tucson , AZ 85706 . Address correspondence to : Richard E . Pagano ( pagano . richard @ mayo . edu ) . © 2006 by The American Society for Cell Biology 3197 ways clear . For example , the use of cholesterol sequestering ( e . g . , nystatin or ﬁlipin ) or extracting agents ( e . g . , cyclodex - trins ) may not differentiate between uptake via caveolae or other cholesterol - dependent mechanisms ( Orlandi and Fishman , 1998 ; Singh et al . , 2003 ) . In addition , endocytic mark - ers may behave differently in varying cell types . For example , CtxB may be internalized via caveolae , clathrin - mediated endocytosis , or other mechanisms depending on cell type ( Orlandi and Fishman , 1998 ; Torgersen et al . , 2001 ; Singh et al . , 2003 ) . Finally , the caveolar markers SV40 and CtxB are internalized via caveolae - independent mechanisms in both wild - type and Cav1 knockout mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts ( Damm et al . , 2005 ; Kirkham et al . , 2005b ) . Interestingly , markers for clathrin - independent endocytosis are often found in PM microdomains ( Brown and London , 1998 ; Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ; Nabi and Le , 2003 ; Parton and Richards , 2003 ; Simons and Vaz , 2004 ) , suggesting that SLs and cholesterol might play a role in the regulation of these endocytic mechanisms . Indeed , endocytosis of SLs , GPI - anchored proteins , albumin , SV40 , and CtxB are re - ported to be sensitive to cholesterol depletion or seques - tration ( Orlandi and Fishman , 1998 ; Pelkmans et al . , 2002 ; Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ; John et al . , 2003 ; Singh et al . , 2003 ) . We recently found that addition of exogenous glycosphin - golipids ( GSLs ) selectively stimulates caveolar - mediated endocytosis ( Sharma et al . , 2004 ) , suggesting a regulatory role for SLs in this process . However , only a few studies have dealt with the role of SLs in endocytosis in mammalian cells or in yeast ( Chen et al . , 1995 ; Zanolari et al . , 2000 ) , and it is unknown whether any of the clathrin - independent endocytic mechanisms speciﬁcally requires SLs for normal function . In the current study , we used a mutant Chinese hamster ovary ( CHO ) cell line ( SPB - 1 cells ) ( Hanada et al . , 1990 ) deﬁcient in SL biosynthesis at the nonpermissive tempera - ture as well as selective inhibitors of SL synthesis ( Supple - mental Figure 1 ) to dissect the requirement of various endocytic mechanisms for different SLs . We show that 1 ) general depletion of SLs inhibits multiple mechanisms of clathrin - independent endocytosis but not clathrin - depen - dent uptake ; 2 ) depletion of GSLs selectively inhibits caveolar endocytosis ; and 3 ) overall depletion SLs inhibits clathrin - independent endocytic mechanisms involving RhoA or Cdc42 , because of the loss of sphingomyelin ( SM ) , which is required for their translocation to the PM . These ﬁndings provide the ﬁrst evidence that SLs are differentially required by multiple mechanisms of clathrin - independent endocytosis . MATERIALS AND METHODS Lipids and Miscellaneous Reagents BODIPY - LacCer was synthesized as described previously ( Martin and Pa - gano , 1994 ) . C8 - ceramide and monosialoganglioside GM 3 were from Matreya ( State College , PA ) . N - hexanoyl sphingosylphosphorylcholine ( C6 - sphingo - myelin ; C6 - SM ) , phosphatidylcholine ( 1 , 2 - dimyristoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phospho - choline ; DMPC ) , d - lactosyl - (cid:1) 1 - 1 (cid:1) - N - octanol - d - erythro - sphingosine ( C8 - Lac - Cer ) , and bovine brain SM were from Avanti Polar Lipids ( Alabaster , AL ) . Fluorescent Alexa Fluor AF594 - or AF647 - labeled albumin , transferrin ( Tfn ) , and dextran were from Invitrogen ( Carlsbad , CA ) ; and DiI - LDL was from Intracel ( Frederick , MD ) . Tyrosine kinase inhibitor PP2 was from Calbiochem ( San Diego , CA ) . Cholesterol , Clostridium difﬁcile toxin B , and FB1 were from Sigma - Aldrich ( St . Louis , MO ) . N - butyldeoxygalactonojirmycin ( NB - DGJ ) was from Toronto Research Chemicals ( Toronto , Ontario , Canada ) . D , L - threo - 1 - Phenyl - 2 - hexadecanoylamino - 3 - pyrrolidino - 1 - propanol ( PPPP ) was gift from Dr . J . Shayman ( University of Michigan , Ann arbor , MI ) . The IL - 2R (cid:1) chain antibody mik - (cid:1) 3 , labeled with phycoerythrin ( PE ) , and anti - PM - Cav1 ( C43420 ) and anti - Golgi - Cav1 ( C37120 ) were from BD Biosciences PharMingen ( San Diego , CA ) . Plasmids encoding the IL - 2R (cid:1) chain ( IL - 2R (cid:1) ) ( A . Dautry - Varsat , Institut Pasteur , Paris , France ) , DN AP180 ( H . McMahon , MRC Labora - tory of Molecular Biology , University College London , London , United King - dom ) , and Dyn2 K44A ( M . McNiven , Mayo Foundation , Rochester , MN ) , and wild - type ( WT ) , constitutively active ( CA ) , and dominant negative ( DN ) RhoA and Cdc42 ( in pcDNA3 . 1 ) ( D . Billadeau , Mayo Foundation ) were generous gifts as noted . Green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) - RhoA Q63L and GFP - Cdc42 Q61L were generated by subcloning into the enhanced green ﬂuorescent protein ( EGFP ) - C3 vector ( Clontech , Mountain View , CA ) at the HindIII and ApaI sites . HA - Rho and HA - Cdc42 were from the University of Missouri cDNA Resource Center ( Rolla , MO ) . Cav1 - monomeric red ﬂuorescent protein ( mRed ) was generated as described previously ( Sharma et al . , 2004 ) . Lipid Analysis Lipid extraction and analysis were performed as described previously ( Puri et al . , 2003 ) . SLs were separated by TLC and identiﬁed by comparison to known standards using CHCl 3 / CH 3 OH / 15 mM CaCl 2 [ 65 : 35 : 8 ( vol / vol / vol ) ] as the developing solvent . Primulin was used as a detection reagent , and lipids were quantiﬁed by scanning densitometry . RhoA and Cdc42 Activity Assay RhoA and Cdc42 activities were determined using commercial kits ( RhoA activation kit ; catalog no . BK036 , Cytoskeleton , Denver , CO ; Cdc42 activation kit ; catalog no . 17 - 286 ) from Upstate Biotechnology , Charlottesville , VA ) . For both assays , serum - starved cells were incubated in Ham’s F - 12 with 10 % serum for 10 min , chilled on ice , and washed once with phosphate - buffered saline . For RhoA activity , cells were lysed in 500 (cid:2) l of lysis buffer ( 50 mM Tris , pH 7 . 2 , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 0 . 5 % sodium deoxycolate , 0 . 1 % SDS , 500 mM NaCl , 10 mM MgCl 2 , 10 (cid:2) g / ml each of aprotinin and leupeptin , and 1 mM phenyl - methylsulfonyl ﬂuoride ( PMSF ) . Lysates were centrifuged , equal volumes were incubated with the glutathione S - transferase ( GST ) - Rho binding domain of Rhotekin RBD beads ( 20 (cid:2) g protein / sample ) for 1 h at 4°C , washed three times , and eluted with SDS sample buffer . Bound RhoA was analyzed by SDS - PAGE separation on a 12 % polyacrylamide gel , followed by immuno - blotting with a monoclonal antibody against RhoA ( catalog no . BK036 , Cy - toskeleton ) . For Cdc42 activity , cells were lysed in lysis buffer ( 23 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 5 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 % Igepal CA - 630 , 10 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM EDTA , 2 % glycerol , and 10 (cid:2) g / ml each of aprotinin and leupeptin ) . Cleared lysates were incubated with 20 (cid:2) g of GST - p21 - binding domain of PAK1 for 45 min at 4°C , washed three times , and eluted with SDS sample buffer . Bound Cdc42 was analyzed by Western blotting as described above , using a monoclonal anti - Cdc42 antibody ( catalog no . 17 - 286 , Upstate Biotechnology ) . Cell Culture and Transfection The CHO mutant SPB - 1 , which is defective in serine palmitoyltransferase ( SPT ) activity , and parental CHO - K1 cells were maintained as described previously ( Hanada et al . , 1990 ) . SPB - 1 SLs were depleted by growth in Nutridoma - BO for 2 d at 39°C . SL levels were decreased in CHO - K1 cells by incubation with 20 (cid:2) g / ml FB1 , 100 (cid:2) M NB - DGJ , or 0 . 5 (cid:2) M PPPP for 2 d in culture . Cells were transfected with IL - 2R (cid:1) , Cav1 - mRed , GFP - RhoA Q63L , or GFP - Cdc42 Q61L or cotransfected with CFP - Nuc and RhoA T19N , Cdc42 T17N , DN AP180 , or Dyn2 K44A using FuGENE 6 . Incubation of Cells with Fluorescent Lipids and Various Markers BODIPY - LacCer and other nonﬂuorescent exogenous SLs were complexed to defatted bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) ( Martin and Pagano , 1994 ) . Cells were typically incubated for 30 min at 10°C with 1 (cid:2) M BODIPY - LacCer / BSA in HEPES - buffered minimal essential medium ( HMEM ) with glucose , washed twice , and further incubated for the indicated times ( usually 3 min ) at 37°C . BODIPY - LacCer remaining at the PM was then removed by back - exchange at 10°C as described previously ( Martin and Pagano , 1994 ) . For labeled proteins , cells were preincubated with 5 (cid:2) g / ml AF594 - Tfn or 50 (cid:2) g / ml AF594 or AF647 - albumin for 30 min at 10°C , further incubated at 37°C for 5 min or as indicated , and then acid - stripped to remove labeled protein remaining at the cell surface . For ﬂuid phase uptake , cells were incubated with 1 mg / ml AF594 - dextran for 5 min at 37°C without preincubation or acid stripping . For IL - 2R (cid:1) internalization , cells transiently transfected with IL - 2R (cid:1) were incu - bated with 1 nM IL - 2 and 5 (cid:2) g / ml PE - mik - (cid:1) 3 for 5 min at 37°C . Inhibitor Treatments Cells were preincubated in HMEM containing 10 nM PP2 or 100 (cid:2) M C . difﬁcile toxin B for 1 h at 37°C , or with 50 (cid:2) M genistein , 8 (cid:2) g / ml CPZ , or 5 mM methyl - (cid:1) - cyclodextrin ( m (cid:1) - CD ) for 30 min at 37°C as described previously ( Puri et al . , 2001 ; Sharma et al . , 2004 ) . Inhibitors were present in all subsequent steps of the experiments . Addition of Exogenous Lipids and SMase Treatment Cells were preincubated in HMEM containing 20 (cid:2) M defatted BSA complex with nonﬂuorescent lipids ( C8 - ceramide , C6 - SM , GM 3 , and C8 - LacCer ) for 30 min at 10°C before incubation with various markers as described above . To deplete SM , cells were treated with 200 mU / ml SMase from Bacillus aureus ( Sigma - Aldrich ) at 37° for 2 h . Z . - J . Cheng et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3198 Subcellular Fractionation , RhoA and Cdc42 Translocation Cells were fractionated as described previously ( del Pozo et al . , 2004 ) . Brieﬂy , cells were lysed in ice - cold hypotonic lysis buffer ( 10 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 5 , 1 . 5 mM MgCl 2 , 5 mM KCl , 1 mM dithiothreitol , 0 . 2 mM sodium vanadate , 1 mM PMSF , and 1 (cid:2) g / ml each of aprotinin and leupeptin ) for 5 min . Lysates were homogenized and then centrifuged at 700 (cid:2) g for 3 min . The resulting supernatants were spun at 40 , 000 (cid:2) g for 30 min at 4°C to separate the crude membrane pellet ( P ) from the supernatant ( S ) containing the cytosol . Ten percent of the membrane fractions and 2 % of the cytosol fractions were analyzed by Western blotting using antibodies against RhoA or Cdc42 , and quantiﬁed by densitometry . Binding of RhoA and Cdc42 to Multilamellar Lipid Vesicles ( MLVs ) Stock solutions of DMPC , cholesterol , and SM in CHCl 3 were mixed in various proportions and dried under a stream of nitrogen . Samples were vortex mixed in PPE buffer ( 5 mM PIPES , 50 mM KCl , and 1 mM EDTA ) and further incubated for 30 min at 37°C followed by centrifugation for 15 min at 40 , 000 (cid:2) g ( 4°C ) . The resulting MLVs were resuspended in PPE buffer at a ﬁnal concentration of 10 mM lipid . HA - tagged Rho - GTPases were prepared from CHO - K1 cells transiently transfected with HA - RhoA or HA - Cdc42 . After 48 h , the HA - tagged proteins were immunoprecipitated from cells lysates using immobilized anti - HA antibody matrix ( catalog no . 11815016001 ; Roche Diagnostics , Indianapolis , IN ) . Puriﬁed HA - RhoA or HA - Cdc42 was loaded with GDP or guanosine 5 (cid:1) - O - ( 3 - thio ) triphosphate ( GTP (cid:3) S ) ( del Pozo et al . , 2004 ) , and 1 (cid:2) g of immunoprecipitated protein was incubated with 200 (cid:2) M MLVs in 1 ml of PPE buffer for 30 min at 30°C . The samples were then centrifuged and washed twice as described above and resuspended in SDS sample buffer . Bound proteins were detected by immunoblotting using anti - HA or anti - Rho - GDI antibodies . Fluorescence and Electron Microscopy ( EM ) Studies Epiﬂuorescence and total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence ( TIRF ) microscopy were carried out using an Olympus IX70 microscope with an Olympus TIRF module . Quantitation of images was performed using the MetaMorph image - processing program ( Molecular Devices , Sunnyvale , CA ) as described previ - ously ( Sharma et al . , 2005 ) . For these studies , whole cell ﬂuorescence was determined by drawing borders around individual cells , and noncellular background was subtracted . All photomicrographs in a given experiment were exposed and processed identically for a given ﬂuorophore . For colocal - ization studies , no “cross - over” between microscope channels was observed at the concentration and exposure setting used . For EM studies , cells were grown on Aklar sheets placed in 35 - mm culture dishes and were either untreated ( control ) or incubated with NB - DGJ for 48 h ( see above ) . Samples were ﬁxed in the presence of 1 mM ruthenium red and embedded as described previously ( Henley et al . , 1998 ) . Transverse ultrathin sections were cut and viewed under a FEI Tecnai T12 transmission electron microscope operating at (cid:3) 80 kV . Overlapping images of the entire cell pe - rimeter in a given ﬁeld were taken at 21 , 000 (cid:2) magniﬁcation . For quantitation , the number of ruthenium red positive , 50 - to 80 - nm - diameter vesicles within 0 . 5 (cid:2) m of the cell surface were counted for the entire cell perimeter . Values are expressed per 100 (cid:2) m of perimeter length . RESULTS Clathrin - independent Endocytosis in CHO Cells To investigate the role of SLs in endocytosis , we ﬁrst studied the uptake of the transferrin ( Tfn ) receptor , a ﬂuorescent GSL analog ( BODIPY - LacCer ) , albumin , IL - 2R , and dextran , markers previously shown to internalize by a variety of endocytic mechanisms in CHO cells and other cell types ( Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ; Singh et al . , 2003 ; Sharma et al . , 2004 ) . To monitor caveolar endocytosis , we used BODIPY - Lac - Cer , which is rapidly internalized via caveolae in several cell types , as shown by sensitivity to a range of pharmacological agents and DN proteins ( Puri et al . , 2003 ; Singh et al . , 2003 ; Sharma et al . , 2004 , 2005 ) . Here , we found that BODIPY - LacCer uptake by CHO cells was inhibited by m (cid:1) - CD , genistein , and DN Dyn2 protein expression , but it was un - affected by inhibitors of the clathrin pathway ( chlorproma - zine and DN AP - 180 expression ) and the Rho protein - de - pendent pathways ( C . difﬁcile toxin B , DN RhoA , and Cdc42 expression ) ( Figure 1 , A and B , Supplemental Figure 2 , and Figure 1 . Characterization of the endocytosis of various markers in CHO - K1 cells . ( A ) Cells were pretreated with m (cid:1) - CD , genistein , PP2 , or CPZ or cotransfected with CFP - Nuc and DN AP180 or Dyn2 K44A constructs . Internalization ( 5 min at 37°C ) of ﬂuorescently labeled LacCer , albumin , dextran , or Tfn , relative to untreated cells ( control ) was quantiﬁed by image analysis . Internalization of IL - 2R was followed after transfection of cells with IL - 2R (cid:1) ( see Materials and Methods ) . ( B ) Cells were pretreated with toxin B or cotransfected with CFP - Nuc and RhoA T19N or Cdc42 T17N constructs , and internalization ( 5 min at 37°C ) of the indicated marker , relative to that in nontransfected cells , was quantiﬁed by image analysis . Val - ues in A and B represent means (cid:4) SD ( n (cid:4) 30 from 3 independent experiments ) . ( C ) Colocalization of albumin with BODIPY - LacCer versus IL - 2R in CHO cells . Cells , untransfected ( left ) or transfected with IL - 2R (cid:1) ( right ; see Materials and Methods ) , were coincubated with AF647 - albumin and either BODIPY - LacCer or PE - mik - (cid:1) 3 . Af - ter internalization for 1 min at 37°C , samples were acid stripped and back exchanged before microscopy . Separate images were acquired for each ﬂuorophore , rendered in pseudocolor , and are presented as overlays . Insets show the boxed regions at higher magniﬁcation . Note that LacCer and albumin were not colocalized ( presence of discrete green and red puncta ) whereas LacCer and IL - 2R over - lapped extensively as shown by the yellow puncta . Bar , 10 (cid:2) m . Sphingolipid Regulation of Endocytosis Vol . 17 , July 2006 3199 Supplemental Table 1 ) . In addition , BODIPY - LacCer colocal - ized with mRed - tagged Cav1 in vesicular structures 1 min after its internalization ( Supplemental Figure 3 ) , consistent with our previous studies in other cell types . These data demonstrate that BODIPY - LacCer is internalized via caveo - lae in CHO cells . A clear distinction between uptake via caveolae and other nonclathrin pathways was observed using the src family - speciﬁc tyrosine kinase inhibitor PP2 ( Hanke et al . , 1996 ; Bain et al . , 2003 ) . BODIPY - LacCer uptake by CHO cells was strongly inhibited by PP2 , whereas IL - 2R and dextran ( markers for the RhoA - and Cdc42 - dependent pathways , respectively ) uptake was unaffected by PP2 ( Figure 1A and Supplemental Figure 2B ) . Another feature that differentiated the nonclathrin endocytic pathways was their sensitivity to cholesterol depletion by acute m (cid:1) - CD treatment . The uptake of BODIPY - LacCer , IL - 2R and albumin was signiﬁcantly inhibited by treatment with 5 mM m (cid:1) - CD ( Figure 1A ) , whereas inhibition of dextran uptake was only observed at higher concentrations ( e . g . , 15 mM m (cid:1) - CD ; Supplemental Figure 2A ) . The limited sensitivity of dextran uptake to cholesterol depletion seems surprising because low doses ( 4 – 5 mM ) of m (cid:1) - CD have been reported to inhibit the up - take and subsequent targeting of cholera toxin in Cav1 knockout cells ( Kirkham et al . , 2005a ) and Helicobacter pylori vacuolating toxin in various cell types ( Patel et al . , 2002 ; Gauthier et al . , 2005 ) . In these studies , both toxins were proposed to be internalized via the Cdc42 - dependent mechanism . However , in contrast to dextran , which is a marker for ﬂuid phase uptake , the endocytosis of both toxins requires a membrane binding step and probable association with lipid microdomains before internalization . Thus , one pos - sible explanation for the differences in these studies is that the binding of the toxins to membranes and their organization into microdomains may be more sensitive to cholesterol depletion than the endocytic process itself . Modiﬁed albumins such as ﬂuorescent albumins are in - ternalized via caveolae in some cell types via their binding to cell surface proteins ( e . g . , gp18 and gp30 ) ( Schnitzer and Oh , 1994 ; Schnitzer et al . , 1994 ; Singh et al . , 2003 ; Sharma et al . , 2004 ; Bito et al . , 2005 ) ; however , the mechanism of albumin uptake in CHO cells has not been characterized . We found that albumin endocytosis in CHO cells exhibited properties identical to that of IL - 2R , i . e . , it was Rho A dependent , tyrosine kinase and Dyn2 dependent , but independent of clathrin and src kinase ( Figure 1A and Supplemental Fig - ures 3 and 4 ; data summarized in Supplemental Table 2 ) . Unlike the uptake of ﬂuorescent dextran , which when used at concentrations of 1 mg / ml is taken up primarily via the ﬂuid phase pathway and is speciﬁcally inhibited by DN Cdc42 ( Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ) , albumin uptake was selectively inhibited by DN Rho A ( Figure 1B and Supplemental Figure 4 ) . Furthermore , albumin colocal - ized with the IL - 2R but not with Cav1 - mRed or with the caveolar marker BODIPY - LacCer ( Figure 1C and Supple - mental Figure 3 ) . Thus , albumin serves as an additional marker for the RhoA - dependent endocytic pathway in CHO cells . Together , the results in Figure 1 , Supplemental Figures 2 – 4 , and Supplemental Table 1 demonstrate that we are able to separately monitor endocytosis via clathrin ( Tfn ) and three distinct clathrin - independent endocytic mechanisms ( caveolar [ BODIPY - LacCer ] , RhoA - dependent [ IL - 2R and al - bumin ] , and Cdc42 - dependent [ dextran ] ) . SL Depletion Selectively Attenuates Clathrin - independent Endocytosis We examined the role of SLs in regulating endocytosis using the temperature - sensitive CHO mutant cell line SPB - 1 . At the nonpermissive temperature ( 39°C ) , these cells fail to synthesize all SLs because of a defect in SPT ( Hanada et al . , 1990 ) , which catalyzes the ﬁrst step of SL biosynthesis ( refer to Supplemental Figure 1 ) . When SPB - 1 and its parental CHO - K1 cells were maintained in 5 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) at the permissive temperature ( 33°C ) , SPB - 1 cells had a similar SL composition to CHO - K1 cells as determined by quantitative lipid analysis of SM and GM 3 ganglioside , the two major SLs in CHO cells ( Supplemental Table 3 ) . When cultured under nonpermissive conditions , SPB - 1 cells exhib - ited a time - dependent decrease in their SL content , with the maximum reduction ( (cid:3) 70 – 75 % ) , relative to cells cultured under permissive conditions , occurring after 48 h ( Supple - mental Figure 5A and Supplemental Table 3 ) . In contrast , no signiﬁcant difference was observed in GM 3 ganglioside or SM levels between CHO - K1 cells cultured at 33 or 39°C ( Supplemental Table 3 ) . We then studied the effect of SL depletion on the caveolar endocytosis of BODIPY - LacCer by comparing its initial in - ternalization in SPB - 1 versus CHO - K1 cell lines . Cells were incubated with BODIPY - LacCer for 30 min at 10°C to incor - porate the lipid into the PM and were then warmed to 37°C to initiate endocytosis . CHO - K1 and SPB - 1 cells internalized BODIPY - LacCer to a similar degree when cultured under permissive conditions ( Figure 2A ) . After culture under non - permissive conditions , SPB - 1 cells showed a dramatic reduc - tion in BODIPY - LacCer uptake compared with CHO - K1 cells grown under the same conditions ( Figure 2 , A and C , and Supplemental Figure 5B ) , whereas uptake by CHO - K1 cells was unaffected by the culture conditions ( Figure 2A ) . In control experiments , both SPB - 1 and CHO - K1 cells cultured under nonpermissive conditions showed similar levels of PM ﬂuorescence after initial incubation with BODIPY - LacCer at 10°C , demonstrating “equal loading” of the PM with BODIPY - LacCer before endocytosis in both normal and SL - depleted cells ( Figure 2A , right ) . We next examined the initial internalization of other en - docytic markers in SPB - 1 and CHO - K1 cells under nonper - missive conditions . The uptake of albumin , dextran , and IL - 2R , all markers for other clathrin - independent endocyto - sis , were signiﬁcantly inhibited in SPB - 1 cells , whereas en - docytosis of Tfn and DiI - LDL ( markers for clathrin - depen - dent endocytosis ) were not affected under the same conditions ( Figure 2 , B and C ) . Thus , clathrin - dependent and - independent endocytosis were differentially regulated in this mutant cell line . The extent of reduction in uptake for all the markers of clathrin - independent endocytosis depended on the time in culture at the nonpermissive temperature ( Supplemental Figure 5C ) and correlated well with the time - dependent change in SL content of SPB - 1 cells ( Supplemen - tal Figure 5A ) , suggesting a requirement of SLs for various clathrin - independent endocytic processes . GSL Depletion Selectively Blocks Caveolar Uptake Because multiple clathrin - independent mechanisms of en - docytosis were inhibited by SL depletion in SPB - 1 cells ( Figure 2 ) , we next sought to determine whether these mech - anisms might be differentially affected by different SL sub - groups . For these studies , cells were treated with the cer - amide synthase inhibitor fumonisin B1 ( FB1 ) ( Merrill et al . , 1996 ) , to inhibit both SM and GSLs synthesis , or with glu - cosylceramide synthase ( GCS ) inhibitors ( NB - DGJ ) ( Platt Z . - J . Cheng et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3200 et al . , 1994 ) or PPPP ( Lee et al . , 1999 ) , which decreased GSLs and slightly increased SM levels concomitantly ( Supplemen - tal Figure 1 and Supplemental Table 4 ) . Using these treat - ments , we then compared the initial internalization of mark - ers for the various mechanisms of clathrin - independent endocytosis . Treatment with FB1 led to an inhibition of uptake of all the markers for clathrin - independent endocy - tosis ( Figure 3 ) , consistent with our ﬁndings using SPB - 1 cells ( Figure 2 ) , and suggesting a general role for SLs in clathrin - independent endocytosis . In contrast , when cells Figure 2 . SL depletion selectively attenuates clathrin - independent endocytosis . ( A ) CHO - K1 or SPB - 1 cells were cultured under permissive ( F - 12 medium containing 5 % FBS at 33°C ; left ) or nonpermissive ( Nutridoma - BO medium at 39°C ; middle and right ) conditions for 48 h . Cells were then incubated for 30 min at 10°C with 1 (cid:2) M BODIPY - LacCer and immediately observed ( right ) or warmed for 3 min at 37°C and back exchanged ( left , middle ) before observation under the ﬂuorescence microscope at green wavelengths . Similar effects were also observed after 5 and 10 min of internalization ( Supplemental Figure 5B ) . ( B ) CHO - K1 or SPB - 1 cells were cultured under nonpermissive conditions for 48 h . Internalization ( 5 min at 37°C ) of the indicated markers was measured as in Figure 1 . Bars , 10 (cid:2) m . ( C ) Quantitative analysis of the uptake ( 5 min at 37°C ) of the indicated markers in CHO - K1 and SPB - 1 cells cultured under nonpermissive conditions . Results for SPB - 1 cells are expressed as percentage of uptake measured in CHO - K1 cells . Values are the mean (cid:4) SD ( n (cid:4) 50 cells from 3 independent experiments ) . Sphingolipid Regulation of Endocytosis Vol . 17 , July 2006 3201 were treated with either NB - DGJ or PPPP and then double labeled with ﬂuorescent LacCer and albumin , LacCer inter - nalization was inhibited , whereas albumin uptake was un - affected in the same cells . Similarly , no effect was seen on the endocytosis of markers for other clathrin - independent en - docytic mechanisms ( Figure 3 ) . Based on the biosynthetic steps affected by these inhibitors ( Supplemental Figure 1 ) , these results suggest that GSLs are essential for caveolar - mediated endocytosis , whereas other clathrin - independent endocytic mechanisms require SLs other than GSLs ( e . g . , ceramide or SM ) . Exogenous SLs Restore Different Mechanisms of Clathrin - independent Endocytosis after SL Depletion To specify which SL subgroup ( ceramide , SM , or GSLs ) was required for particular mechanisms of clathrin - independent endocytosis , we brieﬂy incubated SL - depleted cells with nonﬂuorescent SLs ( C8 - ceramide , C6 - SM , GM 3 , or C8 - LacCer ) and then assessed the effect of these treatments on internalization of BODIPY - LacCer , albumin , IL - 2R , and dex - tran ( Figure 4 ) . In these experiments , the incubations with exogenous SLs were carried out at 10°C for short times ( 30 min ) to minimize the subsequent metabolism of these lipids . Uptake of ﬂuorescent LacCer was almost completely res - cued by addition of GM 3 or nonﬂuorescent C8 - LacCer in cells chronically treated with FB1 ( Figure 4 , A and C ) , in agreement with the results in Figure 3 , which suggested that GSLs were essential for caveolar - mediated endocytosis . In contrast , C6 - SM partially restored albumin , IL - 2R , and dex - tran ( but not BODIPY - LacCer ) uptake in FB1 - treated cells ( Figure 4 ) , suggesting that SM was speciﬁcally required for Rho - dependent internalization . Addition of C8 - ceramide Figure 3 . GSLs are required for caveolar - mediated endocytosis of BODIPY - LacCer . CHO - K1 cells were pretreated with FB1 , NB - DGJ , or PPPP for 48 h ( see Materials and Meth - ods ) . The internalization ( 5 min at 37°C ) of BODIPY - LacCer , albumin , dextran , and IL - 2R were then observed and quantiﬁed as in Fig - ure 1 . ( A ) Representative ﬂuorescence micro - graphs for control , FB1 or NB - DGJ treated cells . Bar , 10 (cid:2) m . ( B ) Quantitation of marker uptake . Results are expressed as percentage of marker uptake in untreated ( control ) cells . Values are the mean (cid:4) SD ( n (cid:4) 50 cells for each marker ) . Z . - J . Cheng et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3202 had no effect on the endocytosis of any of these markers in SL - depleted cells ( Figure 4C ) . Cav1 and Caveolae in SL - depleted Cells To investigate possible mechanisms by which GSL depletion could affect caveolar endocytosis , we examined the intracel - lular distribution of Cav1 in CHO - K1 cells ( (cid:4) NB - DGJ or (cid:4) FB1 treatments ) by immunoﬂuorescence using speciﬁc Cav1 antibodies and different permeabilization methods previously shown to selectively detect Cav1 pools at the PM or at the Golgi complex ( Pol et al . , 2005 ) . The amount of Cav1 at the PM of CHO - K1 cells treated with NB - DGJ or FB1 was considerably reduced compared with untreated control cells , whereas the Cav1 ﬂuorescence in the Golgi region was dramatically increased ( Figure 5 , A and B ) . A loss of Cav1 from the PM upon FB1 or NB - DGJ treatment was also seen using TIRF microscopy in cells overexpressing Cav1 - GFP ( our unpublished data ) . In contrast to these results , the total amount of Cav1 present in the cells , detected by Western blotting , was unaffected by these inhibitors ( Figure 5B ) . When FB1 - treated cells were incubated with exogenous lip - ids , the PM localization of Cav1 was restored to the levels seen in control cells untreated with FB1 by addition of C8 - lacCer or GM 3 but not by C6 - SM ( Figure 5 , E and F ) . We also analyzed CHO - K1 cells by electron microscopy and found approximately threefold reduction in the number of 50 - to 80 - nm surface - connected vesicles ( presumably caveo - lae ) in cells treated with NB - DGJ relative to untreated con - trol cells ( Figure 5 , C and D ) . Incubation of NB - DGJ – treated cells with GM 3 restored surface - connected vesicles to the levels seen in untreated cells ( Figure 5 , C and D ) . SLs Modulate the Membrane Targeting of Rho GTPases RhoA and Cdc42 are members of the Rho GTPase family that are essential for clathrin - and caveolar - independent endocytosis ( Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ) . In the present study , overexpression of the inactivated , GDP - bound form of RhoA inhibited albumin and IL - 2R uptake , whereas the inacti - Figure 4 . Exogenous SLs restore marker uptake in FB1 - treated cells . CHO - K1 cells were untreated ( control ) or pretreated with 20 (cid:2) g / ml FB1 for 48 h . FB1 - treated cells were then incubated with a 20 (cid:2) M BSA complex of C6 - SM , GM 3 , or C8 - LacCer for 30 min at 10°C in HMEM . ( A ) Cells were then double labeled with BODIPY - LacCer and AF647 - albumin for 30 min at 10°C , and the internalization ( 5 min at 37°C ) was then measured as described in Figure 1 . Dashed lines delineate cell periphery in each ﬁeld . Bar , 10 (cid:2) m . Note that the same ﬁelds of cells are shown for LacCer and albumin uptake . ( B ) Cells were incubated with IL - 2R antibody under the same conditions as described in A . Fluorescent regions at the PM indicate noninternalized IL - 2R antibody . Bar , 10 (cid:2) m . ( C ) Uptake of BODIPY - LacCer , albumin , IL - 2R , or dextran in FB1 - treated cells after addition of the indicated exogenous SL . Results were quantiﬁed by image analysis and are expressed as a percentage of marker uptake in control cells . Values are the mean (cid:4) SD ( n (cid:4) 50 cells for each condition ) . Sphingolipid Regulation of Endocytosis Vol . 17 , July 2006 3203 Figure 5 . Effect of SL depletion on Cav1 distribution and the number of surface - connected , 50 - to 80 - nm vesicles at the PM of CHO - K1 cells . Cells were untreated ( control ) or pretreated with FB1 or NB - DGJ for 2 d . ( A ) Samples were permeabilized with methanol and stained with anti - PM - Cav1 or permeabilized with 0 . 1 % saponin and stained with anti - Golgi - Cav1 antibodies ( Pol et al . , 2005 ) . Cells were then incubated with ﬂuorescent secondary antibodies , and staining was observed by ﬂuorescence microscopy . Bar , 10 (cid:2) m . ( B ) Samples treated and stained for Cav1 as described in A were analyzed for PM ( anti - PM - Cav1 - antibody ) and Golgi ( anti - Golgi - Cav1 antibody ) Cav1 signal intensity by microscopy and image analysis . Note that the values shown for “Golgi” represent quantitation of entire cell ﬂuorescence detected with the anti - Golgi - Cav1 antibody ( see A ) . No differences in the total amount of Cav1 were detected by Western blotting of cell lysates from control , FB1 - , or NB - DGJ – pretreated cells ( B ) . ( C andD ) Cells were untreated ( control ) , pretreated with NB - DGJ for 48 h , or pretreated with NB - DGJ for 48 h and then with GM 3 ganglioside for 30 min at 10°C . Cells were then stained with ruthenium red to identify surface - connected invaginations , ﬁxed , and processed for transmission EM . Samples were sectioned vertically to the substratum . ( D ) For quantitation , the entire circumference of a given cell in a single section was analyzed . Values represent the number of 50 - to 80 - nm surface - connected vesicles within 0 . 5 (cid:2) m of the cell surface and are expressed as number per 100 (cid:2) m of length . In total , 30 different cells were analyzed for each condition in three independent experiments . Note that the NB - DGJ – treated cells showed approximately threefold reduction in the number of these vesicles per unit length . Bar , 500 nm . ( E ) Cells treated with FB1 were incubated with exogenous lipids for 30 min at 10°C and then ﬁxed and stained for PM - Cav1 Z . - J . Cheng et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3204 vated form of Cdc42 inhibited dextran internalization ( Fig - ure 1B and Supplemental Figure 4 ) . Because exogenously supplied SM ( but not other SLs ) restored uptake of albumin and dextran in FB1 treated cells ( Figure 4 ) , we next exam - ined the mechanism by which this might occur . We ﬁrst studied the activation of RhoA and Cdc42 in control , FB1 - , or NB - DGJ – treated cells and found that serum stimulated GTP loading of either GTPase to similar levels in control , FB1 - , or NB - DGJ – treated cells ( Supplemental Figure 6 ) , suggesting that SL depletion did not affect their GTP loading . Additional Figure 5 ( cont ) . immunoﬂuorescence as described in A . Bar , 10 (cid:2) m . ( F ) Quantitation of PM labeling in cells treated with FB1 plus exogenous lipids as described in E . Results are means (cid:4) SE for (cid:4) 30 cells from three independent experiments for each condition shown . Figure 6 . SLs modulate the serum - stimulated membrane targeting of Rho GTPases . ( A – C ) In vitro studies using CHO - K1 cells treated with FB1 or NB - DGJ . ( D and E ) In situ studies using CHO - K1 and SPB - 1 cells . ( A ) CHO - K1 cells were untreated or pretreated with FB1 or NB - DGJ for 2 d and serum starved overnight . Cells were then stimulated with 10 % FBS for 10 min and then lysed in hypotonic buffer . The particulate ( P ) and soluble ( S ) fractions were isolated , and 2 % of the cytoplasmic fraction and 10 % of the membrane fraction were analyzed by Western blotting . ( B and C ) Densitometric analysis of Rho GTPase translocation to membranes . The percentage of RhoA ( B ) or Cdc42 ( C ) in the membrane fraction was calculatedaccordingly . ( D ) CHO - K1andSPB - 1cellstransfectedwithGFP - RhoAQ63LorGFP - Cdc42Q61Lconstructswereculturedundernonpermissive conditionsfor48handthenserumstarvedovernight . ThepresenceofGFP - RhoAQ63LorGFP - Cdc42Q61LatthePMwasobservedbyTIRFmicroscopy at 10°C ( left ) . The corresponding cells were also observed by epiﬂuorescence microscopy ( right ) , demonstrating that substantial amounts of GFP ﬂuorescence were present in all the cell samples visualized by TIRF microscopy . Bar , 10 (cid:2) m . ( E ) Quantitative analysis of the PM - associated GFP - RhoA or - Cdc42 in CHO - K1 and SPB - 1 cells . SPB - 1 cells were evaluated after growth under permissive ( 33°C ) or nonpermissive ( 39°C ; SL - depleted ) conditions . Values of PM and total cell ﬂuorescence of individual cells were obtained by image analysis of TIRF and epiﬂuorescence micrographs , respectively , acquired under standardized exposure conditions . PM / total cell ﬂuorescence ratios calculated for SBP - 1 cells are expressed relative to ratios for CHO - K1 cells , which were arbitrarily set to 100 . Results are the mean (cid:4) SD from at least 50 measurements for each condition . Sphingolipid Regulation of Endocytosis Vol . 17 , July 2006 3205 Figure 7 . Translocation of Rho - GTPases to membranes requires SM . ( A andB ) CHO - K1 and SPB - 1 cells transfected with GFP - RhoA Q63L were cultured under nonpermissive conditions for 48 h and then serum starved . The SPB - 1 cells were incubated for 30 min at 10°C (cid:4) 20 (cid:2) M C6 - SM / BSA or GM 3 / BSA in HMEM and then observed by TIRF or epiﬂuorescence microscopy at 10°C . Bar , 10 (cid:2) m . ( B ) PM - associated GFP - RhoA Q63L ﬂuorescence was quantiﬁed relative to total cell ﬂuorescence by image analysis as described in Figure 6E . PM / total cell ﬂuorescence ratios calculated for SBP - 1 cells (cid:4) lipids are expressed relative to the PM / total ratio in CHO - K1 cells ( with no added lipid ) , which was set to 100 . Values are the mean (cid:4) SD from (cid:4) 50 cells for each condition . ( C ) CHO - K1 cells were transiently transfected with HA - RhoA or HA - Cdc42 . After 48 h , the HA - tagged proteins in the cell lysate were immunoprecipitated using immobilized anti - HA antibody matrix . The immunoprecipitates were analyzed by Western blotting using anti - HA or anti - Rho - GDI antibodies . ( D ) MLVs were prepared from DMPC / Chol ( 85 / 15 , mol / mol ) ; DMPC / SM ( 85 / 15 , mol / mol ) , DMPC / SM / Chol ( 42 . 5 / 42 . 5 / 15 , mol / mol / mol ) , or DMPC / GM3 / Chol ( 42 . 5 / 42 . 5 / 15 , mol / mol / mol ) and subsequently incubated with HA - tagged RhoA or Cdc42 in the presence of GDP or GTP (cid:3) S . After washing the MLVs , binding was determined by SDS - PAGE and Western blotting ( see Materials and Methods ) . Z . - J . Cheng et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3206 experiments using the constitutively active , GTP - bound form of RhoA showed that overexpression of this construct in SPB - 1 or FB1 - treated CHO - K1 cells was unable to restore albumin uptake ( our unpublished data ) . Thus , although active RhoA and Cdc42 are required , they are not sufﬁcient for the endocy - tosis of albumin , IL - 2R , and dextran in SL - depleted cells . To test the effect of SL depletion on the membrane target - ing of endogenous RhoA or Cdc42 , particulate and cytosolic fractions were prepared from control , FB1 - , or NB - DGJ – treated cells by subcellular fractionation ( del Pozo et al . , 2004 ) . Western blotting showed that both RhoA and Cdc42 translocated to the membrane fraction in control and NB - DGJ – treated cells after serum stimulation , but little translo - cation to the membrane fraction was seen in FB1 - treated cells ( Figure 6 , A – C ) . This indicates that a subgroup of SLs , but not GSLs , are critical for membrane targeting of RhoA and Cdc42 . We also evaluated the effect of SL depletion on RhoA and Cdc42 targeting to the PM in living cells . SPB - 1 and CHO - K1 cells were transfected with the GFP fusion protein of consti - tutively active forms of either RhoA or Cdc42 ( GFP - RhoA Q63L or GFP - Cdc42 Q61L ) . GFP ﬂuorescence at the PM was visualized using TIRF microscopy , whereas the total cell - associated ﬂuorescence was assessed by epiﬂuorescence . TIRF microscopy demonstrated that GFP - RhoA Q63L and GFP - Cdc42 Q61L ﬂuorescence at the PM was greatly re - duced in SPB - 1 cells grown at the nonpermissive tempera - ture relative to CHO - K1 cells ( Figure 6D , left ) , whereas epiﬂuorescence images of the same cells ( Figure 6D , right ) demonstrated that the total ﬂuorescence present in these cells was approximately the same . Thus , despite their con - stitutively activated status , the proportion of RhoA Q63L and Cdc42 Q61L at the PM was greatly reduced in SPB - 1 cells at the nonpermissive temperature relative to CHO - K1 cells ( Figure 6 , D and E ) . SPB - 1 cells grown at the permissive temperature exhibited PM / total ratios for RhoA Q63L , and Cdc42 Q61L similar to those seen in CHO - K1 cells ( Figure 6E ) . These ﬁndings are in agreement with our studies of membrane targeting of endogenous RhoA and Cdc42 as assessed by cell fractionation ( Figure 6 , A – C ) , and suggest that certain SLs are required for translocation of these Rho GTPases to the PM . Because C6 - SM partially restored the uptake of albumin and dextran in SL - depleted cells ( Figure 4 ) , we reasoned that it might do so by restoring membrane targeting of RhoA or Cdc42 . To test this , SPB - 1 cells transfected with GFP - RhoA Q63L were preincubated with exogenous SLs for 30 min at 10°C before examining the distribution of GFP - RhoA in the cells . All steps , including observation under the ﬂuorescence microscope , were carried out at 10°C to minimize formation of SL metabolites . Incubation of SPB - 1 cells with C6 - SM signiﬁcantly increased the proportion of GFP - RhoA Q63L at the PM , whereas other lipids such as ceramide , GM 3 , and C8 - LacCer had little effect ( Figure 7 , A and B ) . Similar results were obtained using SPB - 1 cells expressing GFP - Cdc42 Q61L ( our unpublished data ) . Thus , in combination with the data in Figure 4 , these results suggest that SM is the key SL required by RhoA and Cdc42 for regulation of IL - 2 and ﬂuid phase endocytosis . We also studied the in vitro binding of puriﬁed RhoA or Cdc42 proteins to artiﬁcial MLVs of various compositions . HA - tagged Rho proteins were puriﬁed by immunoprecipi - tation using cell lysates from CHO cells overexpressing HA - RhoA or HA - Cdc42 ( see Materials and Methods ) . Endogenous Rho - GDI was also present in the immunoprecipitates ( Fig - ure 7C ) , in agreement with a previous report that RhoA and Cdc42 form a complex with Rho - GDI in cytosolic fractions ( Fukumoto et al . , 1990 ) . The RhoA / RhoGDI or Cdc42 / Rho - GDI complexes were loaded with GDP or GTP (cid:3) S and then incubated ( 30 min at 30°C ) with MLVs containing various combinations of phosphatidylcholine ( PC ) , cholesterol , SM , and GM 3 . The MLVs were then centrifuged , washed , and the bound proteins were examined by SDS - PAGE and Western blotting . MLVs containing PC , cholesterol , and SM showed a strong binding to RhoA or Cdc42 which was enhanced by GTP (cid:3) S , and which was not observed in MLVs lacking cho - lesterol or containing GM 3 in place of SM ( Figure 7D ) ; Rho - GDI was not dectectable in any of the MLVs after incubation with the immunoprecipitated proteins ( our unpublished data ) . These results suggest that SM and cholesterol are both crucial for RhoA or Cdc42 binding to membranes . DISCUSSION In the current study , we examined the role of SLs in regu - lating three separate clathrin - independent endocytic mech - anisms in CHO cells . These endocytic mechanisms were shown to be distinct in terms of their cargo and sensitivity to biochemical inhibitors and DN proteins , and they were found to require SLs for proper function . First , we showed that each form of clathrin - independent endocytosis was in - hibited by general depletion of SLs whereas clathrin - depen - dent endocytosis was unaffected under the same conditions . Second , we found that depletion of GSLs , a subgroup of SLs , selectively blocked caveolar - uptake of BODIPY - LacCer , but that it had no effect on the internalization of albumin and IL - 2R , and dextran , which are internalized via nonclathrin mechanisms regulated by RhoA and Cdc42 , respectively . Inhibition of caveolar endocytosis was accompanied by a decrease in Cav1 at the PM and a reduction in the number of 50 - to 80 - nm - diameter vesicles at the cell surface . Both cell surface caveolae and caveolar endocytosis could restored by incubation with exogenous GSLs ( but not other SLs ) . Finally , we found that the inhibitory effects of general SL depletion on RhoA - and Cdc42 - dependent endocytosis were a result of a requirement of SM for RhoA and Cdc42 translocation to the membrane . Inhibition of these endocytic pathways could be partially reversed by incubating cells with exogenous SM ; however , no restoration was seen using exogenous GSLs or ceramide . Together , these results provide the ﬁrst evidence that SLs differentially regulate multiple clathrin - indepen - dent endocytic mechanisms . Below we discuss several points related to these ﬁndings . One potential explanation for our ﬁndings is that inhibi - tion of SL or GSL synthesis might result in the accumulation of a lipid second messenger ( e . g . , ceramide , sphingosine , or sphingosine - phosphate ) , which in turn modulates selected mechanisms of endocytosis . Indeed , sphingoid base synthe - sis is required for endocytosis in yeast ( Zanolari et al . , 2000 ) and ceramide has been shown to modulate endocytosis in mammalian cells ( Chen et al . , 1995 ; Zha et al . , 1998 ) . How - ever , several results from the current study suggest that SL second messengers are probably not responsible for the effects on endocytosis reported here . First , a similar inhibi - tion of all three nonclathrin pathways was seen whether SL depletion was accomplished using SPB - 1 cells or by FB1 treatment of CHO - K1 cells . FB1 treatment prevents the for - mation of ceramides , SM , and GSLs ( Supplemental Figure 1 ) , but it may cause the accumulation of sphingoid bases ( e . g . , sphingosine and sphingosine - 1 - P ) , whereas SPB - 1 cells are not able to synthesize either sphingoid bases or other SLs derived from them . The similar inhibition of nonclathrin endocytic pathways seen in SPB - 1 cells or in FB1 treated CHO - K1 cells suggests that these effects are more likely Sphingolipid Regulation of Endocytosis Vol . 17 , July 2006 3207 because of the loss of required higher order SLs than to the accumulation of sphingoid bases . In addition , we showed that addition of exogenous GSLs or SM ( but not ceramide ) could partially restore caveolar and Rho - dependent endocy - tosis , respectively , suggesting speciﬁc roles for higher order SLs in these endocytic processes ( Figure 4C ) . GSL Requirement for Caveolar Endocytosis Previous studies from our laboratory have shown that a ﬂuorescent analog of LacCer is internalized almost exclu - sively via caveolae in multiple cell types , including CHO - K1 cells ( Sharma et al . , 2003 ; Singh et al . , 2003 ) . Evidence for this internalization mechanism comes from the initial colocaliza - tion of LacCer with other caveolar markers and with Cav1 - ﬂuorescent proteins and from the use of pharmacological inhibitors known to preferentially block this pathway . In the current study , we showed a speciﬁc requirement of GSLs for caveolar endocytosis because only this pathway was dis - rupted by PPPP or NB - DGJ , two inhibitors of GSL synthesis ( refer to Supplemental Figure 1 ) . Unfortunately , other mark - ers for caveolar endocytosis in CHO cells , apart from BODIPY - LacCer , are not available . For example , although albumin is endocytosed via caveolae in other cell types ( Schnitzer et al . , 1994 ; Minshall et al . , 2002 ; Singh et al . , 2003 ; Sharma et al . , 2004 ) , in CHO cells ﬂuorescent albumin inter - nalized via the RhoA - dependent pathway , similar to the IL - 2R , and it did not colocalize with Cav1 - mRed or BODIPY - LacCer upon internalization ( Supplemental Table 2 ) . The reason that albumin is endocytosed by a noncaveolar mech - anism in CHO cells is unknown but may reﬂect a different distribution of albumin binding protein ( s ) at the surface of CHO cells versus other cell types . A second potential marker for caveolar uptake is CtxB ( Henley et al . , 1997 ; Orlandi and Fishman , 1998 ; Singh et al . , 2003 ) ; however , this toxin binds to GM 1 ganglioside , which is not detectable in CHO - K1 cells . Interestingly , inhibition of GSL synthesis also reduced Cav1 at the PM and decreased the number of 50 - to 80 - nm - diameter vesicles connected with the cell surface ( Figure 5 ) . Such vesicles are consistent with the reported size and shape of caveolae . These data suggest that the reduction in caveo - lar endocytosis observed upon GSL depletion occurs be - cause GSLs are required for the PM organization of caveo - lae . The present ﬁndings are in apparent contrast to a previous report in which caveolae structure and sorting of caveolin were found to be normal in NIH - 3T3 cells after treatment with PPPP ( Shu et al . , 2000 ) . This discrepancy could be because of differences in the cell types used . For example , differing endogenous lipid compositions in differ - ent cell types could have differential effects on the organiza - tion of caveolae . Another important difference between the studies is that for immunoﬂuorescence we used permeabi - lization and ﬁxation conditions and selective antibodies to differentially stain PM versus intracellular ( e . g . , Golgi ) Cav1 , unlike the technique used by Shu et al . ( 2000 ) , which broadly stained Cav1 . In addition , for EM studies cells were coated with ruthenium red so that we could selectively identify surface - connected smooth vesicles ( e . g . , caveolae ) , whereas Shu et al . ( 2000 ) apparently used only size and proximity to the PM as a means to identify caveolae . Thus , our morpho - logical methods may have been more sensitive for detecting a loss of caveolae from the PM . Most importantly , we showed that treatment with PPPP or NB - DGJ caused a loss of caveolar endocytosis , a feature that was not monitored in the Shu study . In addition , we could restore cell surface caveolae and caveolar endocytosis by incubating GSL de - pleted cells with exogenous GSLs ( e . g . , GM 3 ganglioside or nonﬂuorescent LacCer ) , whereas no restoration was seen when exogenous SM or ceramide were used ( Figures 4C and 5 , C and D ) . Sphingomyelin Is Required for Rho GTPase - dependent Mechanisms of Endocytosis The two Rho dependent - pathways used for endocytosis of IL - 2R ( RhoA ) and dextran ( Cdc42 ) were also inhibited by general SL depletion but not by inhibitors of GSL synthesis ( Figure 3 ) . Importantly , endocytosis by the Rho - dependent pathways in SL - depleted cells could be restored by addition of exogenous SM ( but not exogenous GSLs or ceramide ) ( Figure 4 ) . Furthermore , hydrolysis of SM at the cell surface with SMase inhibited both RhoA - and Cdc42 - dependent uptake ( Supplemental Table 1 ) . Together , these results sug - gest a speciﬁc requirement for SM in endocytosis via the RhoA - and Cdc42 - dependent pathways . To study the mechanism by which RhoA - and Cdc42 - mediated processes might be affected by SLs , we ﬁrst exam - ined their GTP loading in control , FB1 - , or NB - DGJ – treated cells and found that SL depletion using either inhibitor did not affect the activation of these Rho GTPases ( Supplemental Figure 6 ) . Also , overexpression of the GTP bound form of RhoA was not able to restore the endocytosis of albumin in SPB - 1 cells ( our unpublished data ) , further indicating that GTP loading was not involved . We next studied the targeting of RhoA and Cdc42 to membranes because several studies have shown that upon activation , Rho GTPases are targeted to speciﬁc membrane microdomains where they are coupled to their effectors and trigger downstream signaling events ( del Pozo et al . , 2004 ; Palazzo et al . , 2004 ) . Using subcellular fractionation we found that targeting of RhoA and Cdc42 to membranes was reduced (cid:5) 70 % in FB1 - treated cells compared with control cells ( Figure 6 , A – C ) . In addition , TIRF microscopy demon - strated that in SPB - 1 cells transfected with GFP fusion pro - teins of RhoA Q63L or Cdc42 Q61L , there was a dramatic decrease in GFP ﬂuorescence at the PM compared with CHO - K1 cells ( Figure 6 , D and E ) . Importantly , PM targeting of GFP - RhoA ( Figure 7 , A and B ) and - Cdc42 ( our unpub - lished data ) could be partially restored by incubating cells with SM but not with exogenous ceramide , GM 3 , or LacCer ( Figure 7B ) . Finally , we showed that membrane targeting of RhoA and Cdc42 could be recapitulated in vitro using arti - ﬁcial lipid vesicles ( liposomes ) of deﬁned composition ( Fig - ure 7D ) . Interestingly , this association occurred only when both SM and cholesterol were present in the liposomes . Although our results provide strong evidence that SM is essential for the membrane targeting of RhoA and Cdc42 , they also pose an intriguing topological problem . Namely , how does SM , which is highly enriched in the external leaﬂet of PM bilayer ( Pagano , 1988 ; Futerman et al . , 1990 ; van Echten and Sandhoff , 1993 ; Sprong et al . , 2001 ) , interact with Rho GTPases on the inner leaﬂet of the PM ? One possibility is that the two leaﬂets of the bilayer are “coupled” such that changes in composition on one side of the membrane induce changes in the structure , composition , or organization on the opposite leaﬂet . “Bilayer coupling” at the PM has been ob - served for H - and K - ras and for GFP modiﬁed with various lipid anchors ( Prior et al . , 2001 ; Zacharias et al . , 2002 ) . Our results showing that both SM and cholesterol were required for the binding of RhoA and Cdc40 to lipid vesicles suggest the possibility that SM might contribute to the organization of cholesterol on the inner leaﬂet of the PM into microdo - mains for which the Rho proteins have an afﬁnity . Alterna - tively , it is possible that there is a small pool of SM on the cytosolic leaﬂet of the PM as has been reported previously ( Linardic and Hannun , 1994 ; Andrieu et al . , 1996 ) , which is Z . - J . Cheng et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3208 not readily detected but plays a key role in binding RhoA and Cdc42 . Future studies and new methodologies will be required to distinguish between these alternatives . In summary , the current study demonstrates that SLs can selectively regulate clathrin - independent mechanisms of en - docytosis and helps to further deﬁne the critical components necessary for these different uptake mechanisms . Our data also provides further evidence that caveolar endocytosis and other nonclathrin uptake mechanisms are distinct processes . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by Public Health Service Grant GM - 22942 ( to R . E . P . ) . D . K . S . was supported by a Mayo - Kendall Fellowship . REFERENCES Andrieu , N . , Salvayre , R . , and Levade , T . ( 1996 ) . Comparative study of the metabolic pools of sphingomyelin and phosphatidylcholine sensitive to tu - mor necrosis factor . Eur . J . Biochem . 236 , 738 – 745 . Bain , J . , McLauchlan , H . , Elliott , M . , and Cohen , P . ( 2003 ) . The speciﬁcities of protein kinase inhibitors : an update . Biochem . J . 371 , 199 – 204 . Bito , R . , Hino , S . , Baba , A . , Tanaka , M . , Watabe , H . , and Kawabata , H . ( 2005 ) . Degradation of oxidative stress - induced denatured albumin in rat liver en - dothelial cells . Am . J . Physiol . 289 , C531 – C542 . Brown , D . A . , and London , E . ( 1998 ) . Functions of lipid rafts in biological membranes . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 14 , 111 – 136 . Chen , C . - S . , Rosenwald , A . G . , and Pagano , R . E . ( 1995 ) . Ceramide as a modulator of endocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 13291 – 13297 . Choudhury , A . , Dominguez , M . , Puri , V . , Sharma , D . K . , Narita , K . , Wheatley , C . W . , Marks , D . L . , and Pagano , R . E . ( 2002 ) . Rab proteins mediate Golgi transport of caveola - internalized glycosphingolipids and correct lipid traf - ﬁcking in Niemann - Pick C cells . J . Clin . Investig . 109 , 1541 – 1550 . Damm , E . M . , Pelkmans , L . , Kartenbeck , J . , Mezzacasa , A . , Kurzchalia , T . , and Helenius , A . ( 2005 ) . Clathrin - and caveolin - 1 - independent endocytosis : entry of simian virus 40 into cells devoid of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 477 – 488 . del Pozo , M . A . , Alderson , N . B . , Kiosses , W . B . , Chiang , H . H . , Anderson , R . G . , and Schwartz , M . A . ( 2004 ) . Integrins regulate Rac targeting by inter - nalization of membrane domains . Science 303 , 839 – 842 . Duncan , M . J . , Shin , J . S . , and Abraham , S . N . ( 2002 ) . Microbial entry through caveolae : variations on a theme . Cell Microbiol . 4 , 783 – 791 . Fukumoto , Y . , Kaibuchi , K . , Hori , Y . , Fujioka , H . , Araki , S . , Ueda , T . , Kikuchi , A . , and Takai , Y . ( 1990 ) . Molecular cloning and characterization of a novel type of regulatory protein ( GDI ) for the rho proteins , ras p21 - like small GTP - binding proteins . Oncogene 5 , 1321 – 1328 . Futerman , A . H . , Stieger , B . , Hubbard , A . L . , and Pagano , R . E . ( 1990 ) . Sphingomyelin synthesis in rat liver occurs predominantly at the cis and medial cisternae of the Golgi apparatus . J . Biol . Chem . 265 , 8650 – 8657 . Gauthier , N . C . , Monzo , P . , Kaddai , V . , Doye , A . , Ricci , V . , and Boquet , P . ( 2005 ) . Helicobacter pylori VacA cytotoxin : a probe for a clathrin - independent and Cdc42 - dependent pinocytic pathway routed to late endosomes . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 4852 – 4866 . Hanada , K . , Nishijima , M . , and Akamatsu , Y . ( 1990 ) . A temperature - sensitive mammalian cell mutant with thermolabile serine palmitoyltransferase for the sphingolipid biosynthesis . J . Biol . Chem . 265 , 22137 – 22142 . Hanke , J . H . , Gardner , J . P . , Dow , R . L . , Changelian , P . S . , Brissette , W . H . , Weringer , E . J . , Pollok , B . A . , and Connelly , P . A . ( 1996 ) . Discovery of a novel , potent , and Src family - selective tyrosine kinase inhibitor . Study of Lck - and FynT - dependent T cell activation . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 695 – 701 . Henley , J . , Krueger , E . , Oswald , B . , and McNiven , M . ( 1997 ) . Dynamin - mediated internalization of caveolae in mammalian cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 8 ( suppl ) , 425a . Henley , J . R . , Krueger , E . W . , Oswald , B . J . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 1998 ) . Dynamin - mediated internalization of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 85 – 99 . Johannes , L . , and Lamaze , C . ( 2002 ) . Clathrin - dependent or not : is it still the question ? Trafﬁc 3 , 443 – 451 . John , T . A . , Vogel , S . M . , Tiruppathi , C . , Malik , A . B . , and Minshall , R . D . ( 2003 ) . Quantitative analysis of albumin uptake and transport in the rat microvessel endothelial monolayer . Am . J . Lung Cell Mol . Physiol . 284 , L187 – L196 . Kirkham , M . , Fujita , A . , Chadda , R . , Nixon , S . J . , Kurzchalia , T . V . , Sharma , D . K . , Pagano , R . E . , Hancock , J . F . , Mayor , S . , and Parton , R . G . ( 2005b ) . Ultrastructural identiﬁcation of uncoated caveolin - independent early endo - cytic vehicles . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 465 – 476 . Lamaze , C . , Dujeancourt , A . , Baba , T . , Lo , C . G . , Benmerah , A . , and Dautry - Varsat , A . ( 2001 ) . Interleukin 2 receptors and detergent - resistant membrane domains deﬁne a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway . Mol . Cell 7 , 661 – 671 . Le , P . U . , and Nabi , I . R . ( 2003 ) . Distinct caveolae - mediated endocytic path - ways target the Golgi apparatus and the endoplasmic reticulum . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 1059 – 1071 . Lee , L . , Abe , A . , and Shayman , J . A . ( 1999 ) . Improved inhibitors of glucosyl - ceramide synthase . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 14662 – 14669 . Lencer , W . I . , Hirst , T . R . , and Holmes , R . K . ( 1999 ) . Membrane trafﬁc and the cellular uptake of cholera toxin . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1450 , 177 – 190 . Linardic , C . M . , and Hannun , Y . A . ( 1994 ) . Identiﬁcation of a distinct pool of sphingomyelin involved in the sphingomyelin cycle . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 23530 – 23537 . Marjomaki , V . , Pietianinen , V . , Matilainen , H . , Upla , P . , Ivaska , J . , Nissinen , L . , Reunanen , H . , Huttunen , P . , Hyypia , T . , and Heino , J . ( 2002 ) . Internaliza - tion of echovirus 1 in caveolae . J . Virol . 76 , 1856 – 1865 . Martin , O . C . , and Pagano , R . E . ( 1994 ) . Internalization and sorting of a ﬂuorescent analog of glucosylceramide to the Golgi apparatus of human skin ﬁbroblasts : utilization of endocytic and nonendocytic transport mechanisms . J . Cell Biol . 125 , 769 – 781 . Merrill , J . , A . H . , Liotta , D . C . , and Riley , R . T . ( 1996 ) . Fumonisins : fungal toxins that shed light on sphingolipid function . Trends Cell Biol . 6 , 218 – 223 . Mineo , C . , and Anderson , G . W . ( 2001 ) . Potocytosis . Histochem . Cell Biol . 116 , 109 – 118 . Minshall , R . D . , Tiruppathi , C . , Vogel , S . M . , and Malik , A . B . ( 2002 ) . Vesicle formationi and trafﬁcking in endothelial cells and regulation of endothelial barrier function . Histochem . Cell Biol . 117 , 105 – 112 . Nabi , I . R . , and Le , P . U . ( 2003 ) . Caveolae / raft - dependent endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 161 , 673 – 677 . Nichols , B . J . , and Lippincott - Schwartz , J . ( 2001 ) . Endocytosis without clathrin coats . Trends Cell Biol . 11 , 406 – 412 . Norkin , L . C . ( 2001 ) . Caveolae in the uptake and targeting of infectious agents and secreted toxins . Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . 49 , 301 – 315 . Orlandi , P . A . , and Fishman , P . H . ( 1998 ) . Filipin - dependent inhibition of cholera toxin : evidence for toxin internalization and activation through caveo - lae - like domains . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 905 – 915 . Pagano , R . E . ( 1988 ) . What is the fate of diacylglycerol produced at the Golgi apparatus ? Biochem . Sci . 13 , 202 – 205 . Palazzo , A . F . , Eng , C . H . , Schlaepfer , D . D . , Marcantonio , E . E . , and Gun - dersen , G . G . ( 2004 ) . Localized stabilization of microtubules by integrin - and FAK - facilitated Rho signaling . Science 303 , 836 – 839 . Parton , R . G . ( 2003 ) . Caveolae – from ultrastructure to molecular mechanisms . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell . Biol . 4 , 162 – 167 . Parton , R . G . , and Richards , A . A . ( 2003 ) . Lipid rafts and caveolae as portals for endocytosis : new insights and common mechanisms . Trafﬁc 4 , 724 – 738 . Patel , H . K . , Willhite , D . C . , Patel , R . M . , Ye , D . , Williams , C . L . , Torres , E . M . , Marty , K . B . , MacDonald , R . A . , and Blanke , S . R . ( 2002 ) . Plasma membrane cholesterol modulates cellular vacuolation induced by the Helicobacter pylori vacuolating cytotoxin . Infect . Immun . 70 , 4112 – 4123 . Pelkmans , L . , Kartenbeck , J . , and Helenius , A . ( 2001 ) . Caveolar endocytosis of simian virus 40 reveals a new two - step vesicular - transport pathway to the ER . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 473 – 483 . Pelkmans , L . , Pu¨ntener , D . , and Helenius , A . ( 2002 ) . Local actin polymeriza - tion and dynamin recruitment in SV40 - induced internalization of caveolae . Science 296 , 535 – 539 . Platt , F . M . , Neises , G . R . , Karlsson , G . B . , Dwek , R . A . , and Butters , T . D . ( 1994 ) . N - Butyldeoxygalactonojirimycin inhibits glycolipid biosynthesis but does not affect N - linked oligosaccharide processing . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 27108 – 27114 . Pol , A . , Martin , S . , Fernandez , M . A . , Ingelmo - Torres , M . , Ferguson , C . , Enrich , C . , and Parton , R . G . ( 2005 ) . Cholesterol and fatty acids regulate dynamic caveolin trafﬁcking through the Golgi complex and between the cell surface and lipid bodies . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 2091 – 2105 . Prior , I . A . , Harding , A . , Yan , J . , Sluimer , J . , Parton , R . G . , and Hancock , J . F . ( 2001 ) . GTP - dependent segregation of H - ras from lipid rafts is required for biological activity . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 368 – 375 . Sphingolipid Regulation of Endocytosis Vol . 17 , July 2006 3209 Puri , V . , Jefferson , J . R . , Singh , R . D . , Wheatley , C . L . , Marks , D . L . , and Pagano , R . E . ( 2003 ) . Sphingolipid storage induces accumulation of intracel - lular cholesterol by stimulating SREBP - 1 cleavage . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 20961 – 20970 . Puri , V . , Watanabe , R . , Singh , R . D . , Dominguez , M . , Brown , J . C . , Wheatley , C . L . , Marks , D . L . , and Pagano , R . E . ( 2001 ) . Clathrin - dependent and - inde - pendent internalization of plasma membrane sphingolipids initiates two Golgi targeting pathways . J . Cell Biol . 154 , 535 – 547 . Richterova , Z . , Liebl , D . , Horak , M . , Palkova , Z . , Stokrova , J . , Hozak , P . , Korb , J . , and Forstova , J . ( 2001 ) . Caveolae are involved in the trafﬁcking of mouse polyomavirus virions and artiﬁcial VP1 pseudocapsids toward cell nuclei . J . Virol . 75 , 10880 – 10891 . Sabharanjak , S . , Sharma , P . , Parton , R . G . , and Mayor , S . ( 2002 ) . GPI - anchored proteins are delivered to recycling endosomes via a distinct cdc42 - regulated , clathrin - independent pinocytic pathway . Dev . Cell 2 , 411 – 423 . Schnitzer , J . E . , and Oh , P . ( 1994 ) . Albondin - mediated capillary permeability to albumin . Differential role of receptors in endothelial transcytosis and endocytosis of native and modiﬁed albumins . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 6072 – 6082 . Schnitzer , J . E . , Oh , P . , Pinney , E . , and Allard , J . ( 1994 ) . Filipin - sensitive caveolae - mediated transport in endothelium : reduced transcytosis , scavenger endocytosis , and capillary permeability of select macromolecules . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 1217 – 1232 . Sharma , D . K . , Brown , J . C . , Cheng , Z . , Holicky , E . L . , Marks , D . L . , and Pagano , R . E . ( 2005 ) . The glycosphingolipid , lactosylceramide , regulates beta1 - integrin clustering and endocytosis . Cancer Res . 65 , 8233 – 8241 . Sharma , D . K . , Brown , J . C . , Choudhury , A . , Peterson , T . E . , Holicky , E . , Marks , D . L . , Simari , R . , Parton , R . G . , and Pagano , R . E . ( 2004 ) . Selective stimulation of caveolar endocytosis by glycosphingolipids and cholesterol . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 3114 – 3122 . Sharma , D . K . , Choudhury , A . , Singh , R . D . , Wheatley , C . L . , Marks , D . L . , and Pagano , R . E . ( 2003 ) . Glycosphingolipids internalized via caveolar - related endocytosis rapidly merge with the clathrin pathway in early endosomes and form microdomains for recycling . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 7564 – 7572 . Shin , J . - S . , Gao , Z . , and Abraham , N . ( 2000 ) . Involvement of cellular caveolae in bacterial entry into mast cells . Science 289 , 785 – 788 . Shu , L . , Lee , L . , Chang , Y . , Holzman , L . B . , Edwards , C . A . , Shelden , E . , and Shayman , J . A . ( 2000 ) . Caveolar sructure and protein sorting are maintained in NIH 3T3 cells independent of glycosphingolipid depletion . Arch . Biochem . Biophys . 373 , 83 – 90 . Simons , K . , and Vaz , W . L . ( 2004 ) . Model systems , lipid rafts , and cell membranes . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 33 , 269 – 295 . Singh , R . D . , Puri , V . , Valiyaveettil , J . T . , Marks , D . L . , Bittman , R . , and Pagano , R . E . ( 2003 ) . Selective caveolin - 1 - dependent endocytosis of glyco - sphingolipids . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 3254 – 3265 . Smart , E . , Graf , G . , McNiven , M . , Sessa , W . , Elgelman , J . , Scherer , P . , Okamoto , T . , and Lisanti , M . ( 1999 ) . Caveolins , liquid - ordered domains , and signal transduc - tion . Mol . Cell Biol . 19 , 7289 – 7304 . Sprong , H . , van der Sluijs , P . , and van Meer , G . ( 2001 ) . How proteins move lipids and lipids move proteins . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 , 504 – 513 . Torgersen , M . L . , Skretting , G . , van Deurs , B . , and Sandvig , K . ( 2001 ) . Inter - nalization of cholera toxin by different endocytic mechanisms . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 3737 – 3742 . van Echten , G . , and Sandhoff , K . ( 1993 ) . Ganglioside metabolism . Enzymol - ogy , Topology , and regulation . J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 5341 – 5344 . Zacharias , D . A . , Violin , J . D . , Newton , A . C . , and Tsien , R . Y . ( 2002 ) . Parti - tioning of lipid - modiﬁed monomeric GFPs into membrane microdomains of live cells . Science 296 , 913 – 916 . Zanolari , B . , Friant , S . , Funato , K . , Sutterlin , C . , Stevenson , B . J . , and Riezman , H . ( 2000 ) . Sphingoid base synthesis requirement for endocytosis in Saccharo - myces cerevisiae . EMBO J . 19 , 2824 – 2833 . Zha , X . , Pierini , L . M . , Leopold , P . L . , Skiba , P . J . , Tabas , I . , and Maxﬁeld , F . R . ( 1998 ) . Sphingomyelinase treatment induces ATP - independent endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 39 – 47 . Z . - J . Cheng et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3210