Arp2 / 3 complex is bound and activated by two WASP proteins Shae B . Padrick a , Lynda K . Doolittle a , Chad A . Brautigam a , David S . King b , and Michael K . Rosen a , 1 a Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Biochemistry , University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center , Dallas , TX 75390 ; and b Howard Hughes Medical Institute Mass Spectrometry Laboratory and Department of Molecular and Cell Biology , University of California , Berkeley , CA 94720 - 3202 AUTHOR SUMMARY The protein actin is a component of the cytoskeleton in eukaryotic cells . Cells accomplish many tasks by dynamically rearranging the actin cytoskeleton ( e . g . , establishing polarity , moving in a directed fashion , interacting with adjacent cells and the extracellular matrix , and importing materials from the environment and transporting them internally ) . All of these processes require polymerization of actin from a soluble pool into polarized filaments at specific places and times in response to collections of incoming signals ( 1 ) . In many cases , actin polymerization is spatially and temporally controlled by specific factors that nucleate new actin filaments . One such factor is the ubiquitous Arp2 / 3 complex , which nucleates new actin filaments from the sides of existing filaments . Inactive in isolation , the Arp2 / 3 complex can be activated by association with members of the Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) family ( 2 ) . After a decade of study , the mechanism by which members of the WASP family stimulate the Arp2 / 3 complex to nucleate new filaments is still only partially understood . In this study , we use an integrated biochemical and biophysical approach to arrive at a model for interactions between WASP and the Arp2 / 3 complex during nucleation ( Fig . 1 ) . The Arp2 / 3 complex is composed of seven protein subunits . Two subunits are actin - related proteins for which the complex is named , Arp2 and Arp3 . These are thought to participate directly in the nucleation of new actin filaments . Actin nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 complex is greatly stimulated by a conserved C - terminal element that defines the WASP family , the VCA . The VCA is so named for its V region , a central region and an acidic region , the latter of which together constitute the CA region . The CA region binds the Arp2 / 3 complex and triggers a conformational change thought to be necessary for nucleation . In addition to this conformational change and actin delivery , which is facilitated by the V region , the Arp2 / 3 complex must also bind to an existing actin filament for nucleation to occur . Despite its importance , the structural basis of the VCA – Arp2 / 3 complex interaction has been difficult to elucidate . To date , a high - resolution X - ray crystal structure that would reveal these contacts in detail has not been identified . Studies using a variety of methods , such as chemically introducing covalent bonds between the VCA and nearby Arp2 / 3 complex subunits , have identified more than half of the subunits of the Arp2 / 3 complex as potential VCA binding sites . However , these reports have been difficult to merge into a coherent structural model of how a VCA peptide binds to the Arp2 / 3 complex . For example , the acidic portion of the CA region has been independently reported to bind two subunits of the Arp2 / 3 complex , but these subunits are far apart in both the inhibited Arp2 / 3 complex crystal structure ( 3 ) and the three dimensional reconstruction of the Arp2 / 3 complex in the actin filament branch junction determined through the use of electron microscopy ( 4 ) . Similarly , while it is clear that the delivery of an actin monomer is important , whether the actin monomer is first delivered to Arp2 or Arp3 is still debated . Resolving where the CA region binds the Arp2 / 3 complex and where the first actin monomer is delivered are essential components of a mechanistic description of nucleation . Models stemming from these studies have implicitly assumed that one VCA delivers one actin to the Arp2 / 3 complex to trigger nucleation . However , we recently showed that dimerization substantially increases the activity of WASP - family VCA domains , which suggests that multiple VCA binding sites exist on the Arp2 / 3 complex ( 5 ) . This observation raised several questions : How many VCA peptides independently bind to the Arp2 / 3 complex , and if more than one , what are their distinct functions ? How many actin monomers do VCA peptides deliver to Arp2 / 3 complex ? Fig . P1 . The nucleation of new actin filaments is a tightly regulated process . The actin nucleation factor , Arp2 / 3 complex is a seven - membered protein machine ( shown as a multicolored assembly , with subunit names indicated in black lettering ) . Arp2 / 3 complex is activated by VCA peptides ( indicated in black ) of the WASP family of proteins . Described in this study is a structural model of the nucleation process , in which two of these peptides deliver two actin monomers ( in gray ) to Arp2 / 3 complex . Authorcontributions : S . B . P . , C . A . B . , andM . K . R . designedresearch ; S . B . P . , L . K . D . , andC . A . B . performed research ; S . B . P . , C . A . B . , and D . S . K . contributed new reagents / analytic tools ; S . B . P . , L . K . D . , C . A . B . , and M . K . R . analyzed data ; S . B . P . , C . A . B . , and M . K . R . wrote the paper . The authors declare no conflict of interest . This Direct Submission article had a prearranged editor . 1 To whom correspondence should be addressed . E - mail : Michael . Rosen @ UTSouthwestern . edu . See full research article on page E472 of www . pnas . org . Cite this Author Summary as : PNAS 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1100236108 . www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1100236108 PNAS ∣ August 16 , 2011 ∣ vol . 108 ∣ no . 33 ∣ 13367 – 13368 B I O C H E M I S T RY P N A S P L U S Here , we employed an integrated biochemical - biophysical approach to resolve these questions . Using analytical ultracentrifugation methods , we found that two VCA peptides bind the Arp2 / 3 complex simultaneously , and by adding a distinct competing Arp2 / 3 complex ligand — the acidic domain from the N terminus of the protein Cortactin ( NtA ) — we determined that these two binding sites are not equivalent . In the presence of excess Cortactin NtA , only one VCA binds to the Arp2 / 3 complex , providing a useful tool to distinguish between the two binding sites . Site - specific incorporation of cross - linking and label transfer reagents into CA peptides , and competition with the site - discriminating Cortactin NtA domain , allowed us to resolve the CA peptide contacts with the Arp2 / 3 complex into two separate binding sites : one site contacting Arp2 and the other site contacting Arp3 . Additional experiments revealed that both VCA peptides can accommodate actin while bound to Arp2 / 3 complex , and that covalent VCA heterodimers lacking one of the two actin delivering V regions have very low activity . The activity of covalent VCA dimers sharply decreases when the separation of their N termini drops below 70 Å , suggesting that there is a critical separation distance for N - terminal V regions . Tandem VCA dimers , connected head - to - tail as a single polypeptide , bind the Arp2 / 3 complex asymmetrically in the presence of actin . Using these engineered VCA materials , we showed that actin delivery to Arp3 likely serves a more important role in nucleation , while delivery to Arp2 enhances affinity . Together these data suggest that two actin monomers must be delivered to the Arp2 / 3 complex for high - potency activation . We propose that nucleation proceeds through an assembly of two VCAs , two actin monomers , and one Arp2 / 3 complex . Finally , we propose a structural model for this assembly based on the combined literature , our new observation regarding stoichiometry of the assembly , and our site - specific cross - linking data . Our structural model describes both VCA - binding sites on the Arp2 / 3 complex . One VCA binding site has the CA element engaged with conserved surfaces on Arp2 and an adjacent subunit , ArpC1 , with its V region positioned for delivery of actin to Arp2 . The other VCA - binding site has the CA peptide engaged with conserved surfaces on Arp3 and its V region positioned for delivery of actin to Arp3 . This model makes testable predictions regarding the activity of engineered VCA dimers . The spatial organization of the N termini of the V regions predicts sensitivity to the length of the linker that connects them , which was observed by varying the number of disordered residues linking the two V regions . The difference between the spacing of N termini at one site and the C termini of the VCA bound to the other site suggests that tandem VCA dimers bound to actin can only activate the Arp2 / 3 complex when bound in one orientation , as we observed in label transfer experiments . Thus , our model explains both of these additional observations . In cells , WASP proteins integrate a wide variety of signals to control Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin dynamics . These signals include lipids and protein ligands , which cooperate to cluster WASP proteins at membranes . Our model of VCA binding to Arp2 / 3 complex has interesting implications in this regard . First , VCA dimers are likely the functional form of WASP proteins in cells , reinforcing a biochemical mechanism in which two VCAs act together to promote nucleation . Until recently , the regulation of VCA activity has been almost exclusively cast in terms of the action of individual WASP proteins and allosteric mechanisms that control access to VCAs . The model we present here proposes that the Arp2 / 3 complex is usually bound by two WASP proteins during activation , and thus activation of WASP proteins by oligomerization is part of their normal functioning . Second , the cellular mechanisms of WASP signal integration appear to have coevolved with the molecular mechanism of Arp2 / 3 complex activation , illustrating the ability of different organizational scales to influence one another . We hope that this mechanistic insight into the Arp2 / 3 complex function will drive both biochemical and biological studies of actin dynamics . 1 . PollardTD ( 2007 ) RegulationofactinfilamentassemblybyArp2 / 3complexandformins . Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 36 : 451 – 477 . 2 . PadrickSB , RosenMK ( 2010 ) Physical mechanismsof signalintegrationby WASPfamily proteins . Annu Rev Biochem 79 : 707 – 735 . 3 . Robinson RC , et al . ( 2001 ) Crystal structure of Arp2 / 3 complex . Science 294 : 1679 – 1684 . 4 . Rouiller I , et al . ( 2008 ) The structural basis of actin filament branching by the Arp2 / 3 complex . J Cell Biol 180 : 887 – 895 . 5 . Padrick SB , et al . ( 2008 ) Hierarchical regulation of WASP / WAVE proteins . Mol Cell 32 : 426 – 438 . 13368 ∣ www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1100236108 Padrick et al .