Invoking Social Comparison to Improve Electronic Brainstorming : Beyond Anonymity MORGAN M . SHEPHERD , ROBERT 0 . BRIGGS , BRUCE A . REINIG . JEROME YEN , AND JAY F . NUNAMAKER , JR . MORGAN M . SHEPHERD is an Assistant Professor in the IS department at the University of Colorado at Colorado Springs . His research interests include technology support for distributed groups , applications for technology in the leaming environment , and evaluating factors that affect the diffusion of technology in organizations . He received his Ph . D . in management information systems from the University of Arizona and B . S . in mechanical engineering from the University of Virginia . ROBERT 0 . BRIGGS is a Research Fellow in the Center for the Management of Information at the University of Arizona . His research interests include the use of groupware to change and improve the dynamics of leaming and the use of groupware to support geographically distributed teams . He received his Ph . D . in management information systems from the University of Arizona and B . S . and M . B . A . from San Diego State University . BRUCE A . REINIG is a Researcher in management information systems at the Univer - sity of Arizona . His research interests include the use of groupware to improve the leaming process , diffusion of information technology , human - computer interaction , and management and social policies regarding infonnation technology . He received his B . S . in business administration from Northeast Missouri State University . JEROME YEN is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Infonnation and Systems Management at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology . His research interests include infomiation economics , information retrieval , digital libraries , group and negotiation supports systems , artificial intelligence , and neural networks . He received his Ph . D . in systems engineering from the University of Arizona . JAY F . NUNAMAKER , JR . See Guest Editors ' Introduction . ABSTRACT : This paper presents a study of electronic brainstorming ( EBS ) that begins with theory building , tool development , and experimentation , and ends with practical guidance for facilitators and developers . The paper argues that social loafing impairs the productivity of EBS groups , and that social comparison is a way to decrease the effect { s ) of social loafing . The literature on brainstorming productivity suggests tbat there is a conelation between the quantity of ideas produced and the number of high - quality ideas produced . By inducing social comparison with a graphical feedback tool and increasing the salience of that social comparison with facilitation techniques , we increased the productivity of EBS groups by 63 percent . Joumat of Management litformation Systeta I Winter 1995 - 96 , Vol . 12 , NQ . 3 . pp . 155 - 170 Copyright© 1996 M . E . Shaipe . Inc . 156 SHEPHERD ET AL . KEY WORDS AND PHRASES : electronic brainstorming , group creativity , group support systems , social loafing . THERE ARE soLrD THEORETICAL REASONS TO BELIEVE that the productivity of elec - tronic brainstorming ( EBS ) can be improved . Brainstorming is a process whereby participants generate as many new ideas as they can . Participants are encouraged to submit all ideas as they occur , regardless of quality , in the hope that even unconven - tional or impractical ideas will stimulate the thinking of other group members , leading to more good ideas than may have otherwise occurred . In EBS , participants contribute their ideas simultaneously and anonymously by typing into personal computers connected by a network . The system makes all contributions available to other members on their screens . Nearly four decades ago , Osbom [ 22 ] introduced brainstorming as a structured technique to improve group problem solving . He reasoned that his rules—no criticism , quantity over quality , build on the ideas of others—would increase the productivity of idea generation by reducing evaluation apprehension ( fear of negative assessment from other group members ) and by increasing synergy ( Figure 1 ) . More than eighty studies were subsequently published comparing Osbom ' s brain - storming groups with nominal groups ( the same number of individuals working alone , then combining their results ) ( e . g . , [ 9 , 16 , 28 ] ) . None of these studies found the results Osbom expected . Despite Osbom ' s rules , nominal groups tended to outperform brainstorming groups . On the other hand , electronic brainstorming groups , working anonymously and in parallel , tend to outperform both manual brainstorming groups and nominal groups [ 4 , 7 , 12 ] . This paper briefly examines the research leading up to and following the development of electronic brainstorming . Social loafing , we argue , may occur during electronic brainstorming , and we present the results of two experiments that study this phenomenon . The first experiment examines the use of technology to induce social comparison as a means of reducing social loafing . The second experiment examines facilitation techniques to increase the salience of social comparison in an effort to fiirther reduce social loafing . The paper concludes with a discussion of the implications of the findings for facilitators and developers , and with suggestions for future research into social loafing and social comparison in EBS productivity . Theory i r . DiEHL AND STROEBE [ 9 ] DEMONSTRATED THAT PRODUCTION BLOCKING waS a signif - icant inhibitor to idea generation for traditional brainstorming groups ( Figure 2 ) . Production blocking occurs when something prevents veibalization of ideas as they occur . One may forget an idea while waiting for a tum to speak , or may devote attention to remembering an idea , becoming too distracted to generate new ideas [ 9 , 21 ] . The losses from production blocking , free riding ( slacking off and letting others SOCIAL COMPARISON & ELECTRONIC BRAINSTORMING 157 Synergy EvaluationApprehension Productivity ( Idea Ganeratlon ) Figure I . Model of Group Idea Generation Productivity ( implied by [ 22 ] ) Synergy EvaluationApprehension ProductionBlocking Free - Riding \ + Productivity ( Idea Generation ) Figure 2 . Idea Generation Productivity ( implied by [ 9 ] ) generate ideas ) , and evaluation apprehension appeared to outweigh any possible benefits from synergy in face - to - face brainstorming groups . Diehl and Stroebe [ 9 ] found small but statistically significant losses in brainstorming productivity from evaluation apprehension and free riding , and Collaros and Anderson [ 3 ] found that productivity varied inversely with evaluation apprehension ( Figure 2 ) . While Osbom ' s rule proscribing open criticism of ideas may have slightly reduced evaluation apprehension , it could not completely eliminate it . People still felt reluctant to disagree with those in authority or to risk the ridicule of their peers . The advent of group support systems ( GSS ) offered new ways to overcome produc - tion blocking and evaluation apprehension . With GSS , all participants contribute simultaneously by typing their ideas into computers . The system immediately makes all contributions available to other participants on their tertninals . Because nobody has to wait for a tum to speak , production blocking is eliminated . The anonymity of electronic brainstorming eliminates evaluation apprehension . Anonymous members feel free to offer novel but poorly developed ideas , unpopular ideas , or politically risky ideas that might otherwise elicit negative responses or reprisals from peers or superiors [ 4 , 5 , 6 , 21 , 28 ] . Studies show that groups using GSS for electronic brainstorming tend to generate more unique ideas , and higher - quality ideas than groups doing manual brainstorming , and both electronically supported and manual nominal groups [ 7 , II , 20 , 27 ] . Appar - ently , eliminating production blocking and evaluation apprehension permitted the benefits of synergy that Osbom posited ( Figure 3 ) . Connolly , Jessup , and Valacich [ 4 ] 158 SHEPHERD ETAL . SimultaneousContribution Anonymity _ Synergy ProductionBlocking EvaluationApprehension Free - Rldlng Productivity ( Idas G«n»ratlon ) Figure 3 . GSS EfTects on Group Idea Generation demonstrated that the anonymity eifect is independent of the parallel contribution effect . They also demonstrated that anonymous contribution eliminated the need for Osbom ' s restriction on making critical comments about the ideas of others . Unlike identified brainstorming groups , anonymous EBS groups were even more productive when permitted to make both critical and supportive statements than when only permitted to make supportive statements [ 4 ] . Although anonymous brainstorming is demonstrably superior to identified brain - storming , anonymity may be a mixed blessing . A large body of social loafing research shows that individuals tend to expend less effort in group tasks than they do in individual tasks , unless their contribution can be specifically identified , or unless they believe that their contribution is critical to the success of the task [ 9 , 14 , 15 , 18 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 ] . The social loafing phenomenon has been demonstrated in a variety of physical [ 18 ] and cognitive [ 23 ] tasks , ranging from tug - of - war to shouting to idea generation . Given that anonymity tends to promote social loafing in many tasks , one might expect individuals to exert less cognitive effort during anonymous EBS than during identified EBS . It may be that the demonstrated benefits of anonymous EBS are actually the net of two opposing effects of anonymity . The benefits of reduced evaluation apprehension may outweigh the losses from social loafmg , but social loafing may nonetheless occur ( Figure 4 ) . If social loafing occurs during EBS , and if a way could be found to reduce it without sacrificing anonymity , it might be possible for EBS groups to become even more productive . There is little empirical research to show whether social loafing occurs during EBS , and if it does occur , whether anything can be done to overcome it . However , social comparison has been shown to offset social loafing in studies of manual brainstorming sessions [ 23 , 24 ] . Social comparison is a phenomenon wherein people match their rate of performance to the rate of the people working around them . Participants working in an environment where others are performing at a high level also tend to perform highly . Participants working in an environment where others are performing at a low level match the inferior performance rate [ 13 ] . Paulus et al . [ 24 ] demonstrated that they could improve the productivity of manual brainstorming fissions by inducing the group members to compare their own performance to an absent and mythical " average " group . SOCIAL COMPARISON & ELECTRONIC BRAINSTORMING 159 SimultaneousContribution Anonymi ^ - Synergy ProductionBlocking EvaluationApprehension Social Loafing ( Free - Riding ) Productivity ( litoa GanaratJon ) Figure 4 . Effects of Anonymity on Group Idea Generation We reasoned that if participants engaged in anonymous EBS received real - time feedback about their performance compared with an imaginary " average " group , the social comparison effect might reduce social loafmg . This line of reasoning led us to our first hypothesis : HI : Anonymous participants with a basis for social comparison with an absent " average " group will produce more unique ideas during electronic brainstorm - ing than participants with no basis for social comparison . Experiment 1 . Social Comparison versus No Social Comparison To ESTABLISH A BASIS FOR SOCIAL COMPARISON , we developed an electronic graph to be projected on a wall during EBS ( Figure 5 ) . The graph had three main features : real - time feedback , a reference baseline , and background - color changes . The real - time feedback feature displayed the cumulative number of lines of text the group had produced over time . The reference baseline was a horizontal line in the middle ofthe graph . Participants were told that the reference baseline represented the performance level of an " average " group working on the same task . The tool allowed the experimenters to set the baseline to any value . The rest of the graph would automatically scale to the value of the baseline so that all participants were presented with nearly the same visual stimulus . The graph displayed as a red area below the baseline , and as a green area above the baseline . The background color ofthe graph provided the participants with additional feed - back about their performance . If they produced fewer than four lines of text in the previous minute , the background turned black . When they produced between four and eight lines of text in the previous minute , the background turned gray . If the group submitted more than eight lines of text , the background turned blue . The graph updated every fifteen seconds . Several other feauires were designed to encourage participants to notice the graph while they were brainstonning . First , rather than simply adding another data point to 160 SHEPHERD ET AL . Productivity of Electronic Brainstorming H , Vertical Axis : Lines of text Horizontal Axis : Time in minutes Figure 5 . Electronic Real - Time Feedback Graph the graph every fifteen seconds , the entire screen cleared and the graph was redrawn , a process that took ahout one second . Thus , every fifteen seconds there was visible motion on the front screen . Second , if the update included a color change , the graph was redrawn twice to draw more attention . Third , when the graph reached the baseline , the tool produced a five - second display to attract attention to the event . Participants One hundred and eighty male and female students in four sections of an " Introduction to Computer Technology " course participated in the study for course credit . Partici - pants were randomly assigned to groups of five , and each group was randomly assigned to a treatment . / . " > • Task In a moderate - ambiguity variation on the School of Business task [ 29 ] , participants in our study used the EBS tool from GroupSystems® to propose solutions for wicked problems in an imaginary school of business . Each participant was assigned to one of five roles : Associate Dean , President of the Student Council , President of the Alumni Association , Chairperson of the Faculty Council , and Vice President of Undergraduate Instruction . Each participant was given a packet of information about his or her assigned role . Each role had different information and each role had a vested interest in a different outcome . The group faced a total of nineteen interrelated problems , such as declining budgets . SOCIAL COMPARISON & ELECTRONIC BRAINSTORMING 16 ! overcrowded classrooms , declining reputation , and faculty resignations . Solutions to any given problem tended to exacerbate other problems , and solutions favorable to one role tended to be unfavorable to another . The School of Business task has several advantages in brainstorming research . First , this task is not controversial , nor does it require special knowledge not generally available to the participants , two factors identified as potential inhibitors to brain - storming activity [ 9 ] . Second , the task is complex enough to simulate real - world problem solving . Wood [ 30 ] defmes task complexity in terms of three components ; ( 1 ) products ( deliverablcs ) , ( 2 ) acts ( behavior required to create products ) , and ( 3 ) information cues ( knowledge that allows actors to make judgments ) , and three types of complexity : ( I ) component complexity ( number of acts and infonnation cues needed to create products ) , ( 2 ) coordination complexity ( the frequency , timing , and intensity of sequencing interactions required to produce products ) , and ( 3 ) dynamic complexity ( the degree to which required acts and information cues change during the task ) . More complex tasks require more infonnation , more coordination between activities , and involve more changes in requirements , and so place higher demands on attention resources than do simple tasks . Task complexity should not be confused with cognitive difficulty . For example , Harkins and Petty [ 15 ] found that the social loafing effect only occuned during a cognitively easier idea - generation task , and disappeared when participants were engaged in a cognitively more difficult task . In their study , the difficult task required students to generate uses for a detached doorknob , and the easy task required students to generate uses for a knife . Although one of these tasks is more difficult than the other , both are low in complexity . Results of studies with the School of Business task may be more generalizable to the workplace because of the higher degree of complexity . Treatments . • The experiment compared the performance of participants with no basis for social comparison to that of participants viewing a graph - and - baseline to Induce social comparison . The experiment had two control groups : ( 1 ) no performance - feedback - graph ; and ( 2 ) performance - feedback - graph without a baseline and without back - ground color changes . The second control group was necessary to assure that results were not simply attributable to the presence of a graph . Because the goal - setting literature suggests that people with higher goals tend to outperform people with lower goals [ 10 , 19 ] . we used three different levels of baseline to establish a basis of social comparison : low , average , and high . In pilot studies , we found that control groups produced an average of 206 lines of text during a forty - min - ute brainstonning session . The most productive group produced 304 lines , and the least productive group produced 145 lines . Therefore one - third of the treatment groups received an average baseline treatment ; they were told that an average group would produce " about 210 . " Another third of the treatment groups received a low baseline treatment ; they were told that an average group would produce " about 140 . " The fmal 162 SHEPHERD ETAL . third ofthe treatment groups were given a high baseline treatment ; they were told that an average group produced " about 310 . " Procedure Participants signed an attendance sheet when they arrived , and then seated themselves at one of five computers . The computers were situated side - by - side facing the projection screen at the front ofthe room . One of three treatment - blind facilitators greeted the participants and read them instructions from a script . Participants then received a packet of information , and were given ten minutes to read about their roles . Each facilitator ran an equal number of sessions for each treatment level . It was important for all the groups in the study to start with a similar understanding ofthe nineteen problems and the five conflicting viewpoints they faced before they started to generate solutions ( the task was not to be an exercise in problem identifica - tion , but in solution generation ) . Therefore , the facilitator , still treatment - blind , conducted a structured interview with each participant in the presence ofthe others . Each participant was asked to explain to the other group members all the problems she or he had identified in the School of Business . During the interview , an accomplice , seated at a word processor , pretended to record the problems the participants identified . At the end ofthe interviews Ihe accomplice printed and distributed a standard list of problems , to ensure that all groups started generating solutions to an identical problem set At this point the facilitator learned what treatment would be administered , and instructed participants about how to use the EBS tool and the feedback graph , if the graph was to be used . If the participants were assigned to the social comparison treatment , the facilitator was to read the following instructions from the script ; Do you see the line at the middle ofthe graph ? Most groups generate about that many solutions during a problem - solving session like this one . In effeet , we ' ve put you in competition with the rest ofthe world . So , try to push the graph above this line by gen - erating as many different solutions as you can . . . . . . . the background color of the graph will give you an additional bit of infonnation . If the background is black it means that no solutions arc coming in . When few solutions are coming in , the background turns gray . When you are producing more solutions than the average group , the background turns blue . Try to keep the background blue , by generating as many unique solutions as quickly as you can Participants were allowed forty minutes to brainstorm solutions . During the forty minutes the facilitator called the participants ' attention to the graph at seven pre - planned , randomly spaced intervals by stating the time and the cumulative number of lines generated , as in , " It ' s been 11 minutes and you ' ve got 57 . " At the end ofthe brainstorming session the participants were given a printout of everything they had typed and were sent to a conference room to write a reconimendation to the imaginary Provost . Then they were debriefed , thanked , and released . The experimental sessions lasted approximately ninety minutes . The design of this experiment precludes a Hawthorne effect because all participants used EBS . * • SOCIAL COMPARISON & ELECTRONIC BRAINSTORMING 163 Dependent Variable The dependent variable was the number of unique , or nonredundant , solutions the group generated for problems in the school of business . Three different treatment - blind coders analyzed the output from the brainstorming sessions for the number of unique ideas ( interrater reliability = 0 . 84 ) . Results of Experiment 1 • There was no statistically significant overall effect on the number of unique ideas by facilitator ( Table 1 ) . There was not a difference in the number of unique ideas generated between the two control treatments ( Table 2 ) so the results from both control groups were combined . As we hypothesized , the participants who had a basis for social con ^ iarison produced significantly more unique ideas than did the participants who had no basis for social comparison ( Tables 2 and 3 ) . There was no statistically significant difference in number of unique ideas by baseline level ( Table 1 ) . There were no statistically significant differences by gender , age , years of work experience , typing ability , or time of day . Discussion of Experiment 1 The results supported our hypothesis : participants given the graph and baseline as a basis for social comparison were more productive than participants who had no basis for social comparison . This suggests that social loafing may actually occur in anony - mous EBS sessions , and that invoking social comparison with a mythical " average group " reduces the social loafing phenomena . The goal - setting literature suggests that people will be more productive if they are given a high goal than if they are given a low goal . However , we found no effect by goal level . The baseline was necessary to establish a basis for social comparison , but the baseline setting did not seem to matter . All social - comparison participants were approximately equally productive at all goal levels . It may be that the social compar - ison effect overwhelmed any goal - setting effect . It may also be that goal - setting effects do not occur as readily in a very complex task as they do in tasks of lower complexity . Further research into this question is warranted . Because there was no difference in the performance of the two control groups , one can rule out the possibility that the results were due to the presence of a graph rather than a social comparison effect . Participants viewing a graph without a baseline , and hence no basis for social comparison , did not perform differently than participants with no graph at all . Experiment 2 . Facilitation and the Salience of Social Comparison ALTHOUGH THERE WERE NO OVERALL DIFFERENCES BY FACILITATOR in the first study , a detailed examination of the data revealed that participants working with a particular 164 SHEPHERD ETAL facilitator in the social - comparison treatments consistently produced about SO percent more ideas than the participants working with the other two facilitators ( Table 3 ) . This rather startling effect did not occur in either control group , only in the social comparison groups . This suggested that something in the facilitation style of the one facilitator might be dramatically increasing the effect of the social comparison manipulation . There is little written about facilitation style and its impact on productivity [ 2 ] . There is little empirical literature to explain the effect we uncovered , although there are several prescriptive and descriptive papers about the role of the facilitator [ 2 , 8 , 17 , 2 ! ] . Bostrom , Anson , and Clawson [ 1 ] argue that a facilitator can improve group performance by encouraging effective task and relational behaviors . Dickson , Par - tridge , and Robinson [ 8 ] posit that one key role of the facilitator is to " reduce the mystique associated with the GSS technology . " However , in our study , all facilitator interactions with participants were scripted , and were virtually identical for all participants . We could not simply attribute the observed differences to the " star quality " of the one facilitator because the effect only occurred in the social - comparison treatments ; the performance of that facilitator ' s participants in the control treatments was unre - markable . Nor could we attribute the effect to mere random fluctuations in the data because participants under this facilitator had produced the top ten scores among the thirty - five groups in the study , and the difference was substantial . An experimenter who had anended all of the sessions reported that the high - per - forming facilitator had routinely adopted a mildly jocular tone during participant instructions , while the other facilitators maintained a neutral tone . The high - perform - ing facilitator also deviated from the script in a seemingly minor way when instructing the participants about the feedback graph . Instead of reading the routine instructions given above , he said : The background color of the graph will give you an additional bit of infonnation . When the background is black like this , it means you ' re brain - dead ! If the background lums gray , it means you are doing a little bit , but you are still below average . If the background turns blue , it means you are really smoking ! Try to keep the background blue , by generating as many unique solutions as quickly as you can . Further , rather than delivering the straight time - and - line - count verbal cues , this facilitator made mildly jocular comments about the background color of the graph , as in , " It ' s been 11 minutes and the background is black . I guess your fmgers fell asleep , " or " It ' s been 16 minutes and the background is blue . You are doing great ! " We reasoned that these differences in facilitation style might be increasing the salience of the social comparison for the participants and further reducing the effects of social loafmg . This line of reasoning led to the hypothesis for experiment 2 : H2 . As the salience of social comparison increases , the number of unique ideas produced during anonymous electronic brainstorming will also increase . We extended the original study to examine this hypothesis . ; SOCIAL COMPARISON & ELECTRONIC BRAINSTORMING 165 Table 1 . ANOVA Results of Differences in Number of Unique Ideas Generated df Facilitator 2 Baseline level 3 Table 2 . t tests of Differences i Control treatment 1 vs . control treatment 2 Social comparison vs . no social comparison F 3 . 71 in Number of Unique Ideas Generated df 12 33 t Table 3 . Number of Unique Ideas for Each Group Means and Standard Deviations Social comparison No social comparison Low baseline Average baseline High baseline Facilitator 1 Other facilitators Mean 54 . 43 39 . 85 49 . 14 60 . 14 54 . 00 57 . 67 41 . 80 STD 23 . 07 15 . 77 17 . 12 29 . 11 23 . 72 24 . 92 15 . 91 P ns ns P ns 0 . 033 n 21 14 7 7 7 15 20 Participants Two hundred and eighty - five male and female students from several sections of an " Introduction to Computer Technology " course participated for course credit . Par - ticipants were randomly assigned to groups of five , and each group was randomly assigned to a treatment . Task Participants used the same moderate - ambiguity version ofthe School of Business task used during the first study . . f Treatments There were three levels of social comparison : no - comparison , low - salience compari - son , and high - salience comparison . As before , there were two no - comparison control 166 SHEPHERD ETAL . groups , one without a graph , the other with a graph that did not have either a baseline or background - color changes for social comparison . All facilitators adopted a neutral tone , and adhered strictly to the original script when instructing the low - salience social - comparison treatment participants on how to use the graph . For the high - sa - lience social comparison all facilitators adopted a jocular tone , used the colorful metaphors described above to explain the meaning of the color changes in the background ofthe graph , and used colorful , jocular verbal cues to call the participants ' attention to the graph at predetermined , randomly spaced intervals during the EBS session . As in the fu ^ t study , to control for goat - setting effects , participants in the two social - comparison treatments were exposed to one of three baseline levels ; 140 , 210 , or 310 . Dependent Variable We measured the number of unique solutions generated by each group for the problems ofthe imaginary school of business . Procedures Other than the changes required to manipulate the salience for social comparison , tiie procedures were identical to those in experiment 1 . Results There was no difference in the number of unique ideas generated between the control treatments ( Table 4 ) , and no difference in unique ideas generated by facilitator ( Table 5 ) . There were not any statistically significant differences by gender , age , years of work experience , typing ability , or time of day . As in the first experiment , a r - test revealed those groups with a basis for social comparison outperformed groups with no basis for social comparison ( Table 4 ) . ANOVA tests revealed statistically significant differences by level of salience of comparison ( Table 5 ) . A Scheffe test revealed that participants in the high - salience treatment produced significantly more unique ideas than participants in the low salience and no - comparison treatments . Thus , the results support our second hypoth - esis stating that as the salience of social comparison rises , the productivity of electronic groups rises ( Table 6 ) . There was no statistically significant difference in number of unique ideas by level of baseline ( Table 5 ) . Discussion of Experitnents 1 and 2 As hypothesized , EBS productivity increased as the salience of social comparison increased . We observed that the participants in the low - baseline treatment appeared to enjoy reaching their goal at about mid - meeting . We inferred their enjoyment from SOCIAL COMPARISON & ELECTRONIC BRAINSTORMING 167 Table 4 . / tests of Differences in Number of Unique Ideas Generated Control treatment 1 vs . control treatment 2 Social comparison vs . no social comparison df ^ ? 1 • • $ : 1 . 45 2 . 28 P ns 0 . 027 Table 5 . ANOVA Results of Differences in Number of Unique Ideas Generated df Salience of social comparison 2 Facilitator t Baseline level 3 F iM 2 . 24 P 0 . 006 ns ns Table 6 . Number of Unique Ideas Means and Standard Deviations No social comparison Low salience social comparison High salience social comparison Low baseline Average baseline High baseline Mean 39 . 85 48 . 68 64 . 71 50 . 28 59 . 20 59 . 85 STD 15 . 77 22 . 63 26 . 05 24 . 11 23 . 33 29 . 23 n 14 22 21 14 15 14 vocal , kinesic , haptic , and verbal cues . However , having passed the goal , they did not slow their effort . This suggests that two different social comparison effects may have been at work . First , participants may have begun their work quickly in response to being compared with an " average " group . Having begun their work quickly , individ - uals may then have compared their own efforts to the efforts of those around them , and so continued high production even after reaching the baseline . This is consistent with the effort - matching hypothesis of social comparison theory discussed earlier . It may be that any opening ploy that encourages them to work quickly at the beginning of a session will lead to high productivity throughout the session . Clearly , there is an effect for facilitation style in addition to the effect for the technology . The groups with low - salience instructions produced 23 percent more unique ideas than the control participants . The groups who received high - salience instructions produced 33 percent more than the low - salience groups , or 63 percent more ideas than the control groups produced . Thus , it appears that real - time feedback 168 SHEPHERD ET AL . for social comparison and facilitation techniques to enhance the salience of compari - son are both useful for improving the use of EBS technology . Neither experiment found an effect for level of goal . Contrary to the literature , those with a higher goal did not outperform those with a lower goal . It was important to have some goal in order to establish a basis for social comparison . , but the level ofthe goal did not seem to matter . It may be that the goal - setting efTect occurs with some kinds of tasks but not others . It may also be that the social - comparison etTect overwhelmed the goal - setting effect . Implications for Facilitators and Developers The results of this study suggest facilitators must be aware that social loafmg occurs during anonymous group work , and take steps to deal with it . Social comparison appears to be a useful and inoffensive method for reducing the effects of social loafmg . Facilitators can develop a repertoire of techniques for invoking social comparison , thereby increasing group productivity . There may well be other methods for reducing social loafmg . These should be explored . We discovered that seemingly minor improvements in facilitation techniques caused major increases in group productivity during EBS . It may also be that seemingly minor deficiencies could cause equally large decreases in productivity . This highlights the need for more extensive investi - gation into the effects of facilitation techniques on GSS use . It also emphasizes the value of using multiple facilitators for GSS research to assure that the fmdings are not the result of idiosyncratic facilitation techniques , and to leam more about the role of the facilitator as we leam about technology . Developers of group supptMt systems must also attend to social loafing issues when designing new technologies . As demonstrated in tiiis study , minor variations in the techno - logical interventions can make large differences in group productivity . A single horizontal line across the projection screen led to a productivity increase of 63 percent . This highlights the need for more research into the effects of interface design on GSS productivity . Limitations The generalizability of these studies is limited in several ways . First , participants were all students . More work with participants from other populations will help establish how widely this effect occurs . Second , these experiments were all conducted with a single task . Further work with tasks of differing complexity and difficulty will be illuminating . Finally , these experiments took place in a laboratory setting with a realistic , but nonetheless imaginary task . Subsequent research in the field will help determine whether social loafing and social comparison occur in the same way when people have more ofa vested interest in the outcome . Conclusions and Future Directions THE RESULTS OF THESE STUDIES PROVIDE SUPPORT FOR THE ARGUMENT that the productivity of anonymous EBS can be diminished by social loafmg , and that social SOCIAL COMPARISON & ELECTRONIC BRAINSTORMING 169 comparison is a useful means of reducing social loafing . The results also offer empirical support that facilitation techniques and user interface are important variables in the successful use of GSS technology . Our results were different from those of Harkins and Petty [ 14 ] who found that social loafing only occurred with cognitively easy tasks , not with cognitively difficult tasks . The task we used required participants to grapple with five competing constituencies and nineteen interrelated problems , clearly a cognitively difficult task , and yet we found a large social loafing effect . It may be that the effects they observed only hold for tasks of low complexity . It may also be that besides being more complex , our task was more difficult than Harkins and Petty ' s difficult task , and that social loafing occurs with very easy and very difficuh tasks , but does not with tasks of moderate difficulty . Participants may fmd moderately difficult tasks interesting enough to be engaging , but not so taxing as to cause them to give up . There are many other ways to invoke social comparison for participants besides the tools and techniques we used . For example one could create a tug - of - war graph pitting one group of participants against another in real time . Or one might eliminate the graph entirely and simply change the background color ofthe EBS tool . One might present the graph and baseline , but offer no verbal cues during the session to call attention to it . Further study is needed to understand the efficacy of differing approaches . Problem solving is more than idea generation , and GSS is more than EBS . Much empirical work is needed to explore and explain social loafing , social comparison , and facilitation effects in all aspects ofthe electronic meeting process . REFERENCES 1 . Bostrom , R . P . ; Anson , R . ; and Clawson , V . K . Group facilitation and group support systems . In L . Jessup and J . Valacich ( eds . ) Group Suppori Systems : New Perspectives . New York : Macmillan . 1993 . 2 . Clawson , V . K . ; Bostrom . R . P . ; and Anson , R . The rote ofthe facilitator in eomputer - sup - ported meetings . Smail Group Research . 24 , 4 ( November 1993 ) , 547 - 565 . 3 . Collaros , P . A . , and Anderson , L . R . Effect of perceived expertness upon creativity of members of hminstonn ' mg groups . Journal of Applied Psychology , 5i ( April 1969 ) , 159 - 163 . 4 . Connolly , T . ; Jessup , L . M . ; and Valacich , J . S . Effects of anonymi ^ and evaluative tone on idea generation in computer - mediated groups . Management Science , 36 , 6 ( June 1990 ) , 689 - 703 . 5 . Connolly , T . ; Routhiaux , R . L . ; and Schneider , S . K . On the effectiveness of group brainstonning : test of one underlying cognitive mechanism . Small Group Research , 24 , 4 ( November 1993 ) , 490 - 503 . 6 . Dennis , A . R . ; Nunamaker , J . F . ; and Vogel , D . R . A comparison of laboratory and field research in the study of electronic meeting systems . Journal of Management Information Systems , 7 . 3 ( Winter 1991 ) , 107 - 135 . 7 . Dennis , A . R . ; Valacich , J . S . ; and Nunamaker , J . F . An experimental investigation of small , medium , and large groups in an electronic meeting system environment . IEEE Transac - tions on Systems , Man , and Cybernetics , 20 , 5 ( September - October 1990 ) , 1049 - 1057 . 8 . Dickson , G . W . ; Partridge , J . L . ; and Robinson , L . H . Exploring modes of facilitative support for GDSS technology . A / / 5 ( ? uar / er / v , / 7 , 2 ( June 1993 ) , 173 - 194 . 9 . Diehl . M . , and Stroebe , W . Productivity loss in brainstorming groups : toward the solution ofa riddle . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 53 , 3 ( September 1987 ) , 497 - 509 . 10 . Earley . P . C . ; Northcraft , G . B . ; Lee , C ; and Lituchy , T . R . Impact of process and outcome feedback on the relation of goal setting to task performance . Academy of Management Journal , iJ , l ( March 1990 ) , 87 - 105 . 170 SHEPHERD ETAL . 11 . Gallupe , R . B . ; Bastianutti . L . ; and Cooper , W . H , Unblocking brainstonns . Journal of Applied Psychology , 76 , I ( February 1991 ) , 137 - 142 . 12 . Gallupe , R . B . ; Dennis , A . R . ; Cooper , W . H . ; Valacich , J . S . ; Bastianutti , LM . ; and Nunamaker . Jr . , J . F . Electronic brainstonning and group size . / fcflifemyo / ' Monagemen / Journa / , JJ , 2 ( June 1992 ) , 350 - 369 . 13 . Goethals , G . R . , and Darley , J . M . Social comparison theory : self - evaluation and group life . In B . Mullen and G . R . Goethal ( eds . ) . Theories of Group Behavior . New York : Springer - Verlag , 1987 , pp . 21 ^ 8 . 14 . Harkins . S . G . , and Jackson , J . M . The role of evaluation in eliminating social loafmg . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin . I / , 4 ( December 1985 ) . 457 - 465 . 15 . Harkins , S . G . . and Petty , R . E . Effects of task difficulty and task uniqueness on social loafing . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 43 , 6 ( December 1982 ) , 1214 - 1229 . 16 . Jessup , L . M . . and Valacich , J . S . On the study of group support systems : an introduction to group support system research and development . In L . M . Jessup and J . S . Valacich ( eds . ) . Group Support System . s : New Perspectives . New York : Macmillan , 1993 . 17 . Kraemer . K . L . , and King , J . L . Computer - based systems for cooperative work and group decision making . ACM Computing Surveys , 20 , 2 ( June 1988 ) , 115 - 146 . 18 . Latane , B . ; Williams , K . ; and Harkins , S . Many hands make light the work : the causes and consequences of social \ oz . Tm % . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 37 , 6 ( June 1979 ) , 822 - 832 . 19 . Locke , E . A . , and Latham , G . P . A Theory of Goal Setting and Task Performance . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall , 1990 . 20 . Nunamaker , J . F . ; Applegatc , L , M . ; and Konsynski , B . R . Facilitating group creativity with GDSS . Journal of Management Information Systems , i , 4 ( Spring 1987 ) , 5 - 19 . 21 . Nunamaker , J . F . ; Dennis , A . R . ; Valacich , J . S . ; Vogei . D . R . ; and George . J . F . Electronic meeting systems to support group work . Communicaiion . s of the ACM , 34 , 7 ( July 1991 ) , 40 - 61 . 22 . Osbom , A . F . Applied Imagination : Principles and Procedures of Creative Thinking , rev . ed . New York : Scribner ' s , 1957 . 23 . Paulus , P . B . , and Dzindolet , M . T . Social influence processes in group brainstorming . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , ( 54 . 4 ( April 1993 ) . 575—586 . 24 . Paulus , P . B . ; Dzindolet , M . T . ; Poletes , G . ; and Camaeho , L . M . Perceptions of perfor - mance in group brainstonning : the illusion of productivity . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin . 19 , 1 ( February 1993 ) , 78 - 89 . 25 . Sanna , L . J . Self - efficacy theory : implications for social facilitation and social loafing . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 62 , 5 ( May 1992 ) , 774 - 786 . 26 . Triplett , N . The dynamogenic factors in pacemaking and competition . American Joumal of Psychology . 9 ( 1898 ) , 507 - 563 . 27 . Valacich , J . S . ; Dennis , A . R . ; and Connolly , T . idea generation in computer ba« ; d groups : a new ending to an old story . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 57 , ' i ( March 1994 ) , 448 - ^ 67 . 28 . Valacich , J . S . ; Jessup , L . M . ; Dennis , A . R . ; and Nunamaker , J . F . , Jr . A conceptual framework of anonymity in group support systems . Proceedings ofthe Twenty - Sixth interna - tional Conference on Systems Sciences , ^ { \ 992 ) , pp . 101—112 . 29 . Wheeler . B . C . , and Mennecke , B . E . Modeling group task processes using a hidden profile task : the School of Business Policy task . Indiana University working paper no . 513 , 1992 . 30 . Wood , R . E . Task complexity : definition ofthe construct . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 37 , 1 ( February 1986 ) , 60 - 82 .