Harmful or Empowering ? Stakeholders’ Expectations and Experiences of Patient Accessible Electronic Health Records CHRISTIANE GRÜNLOH KTH Royal Institute of Technology School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Media Technology and Interaction Design SE - 100 44 Stockholm , Sweden TRITA - EECS - AVL - 2018 : 72 ISBN 978 - 91 - 7729 - 971 - 4 Academic dissertation which , with due permission of the KTH Royal Institute of Technology , is submitted for public defence for the degree of Doctor of Technology on Friday , the 2nd November 2018 , at 13 : 00 in F3 , KTH , Lindstedtsvägen 26 , Stockholm . © Christiane Grünloh , 2018 Printed by Universitetsservice US AB iii Abstract Healthcare systems worldwide face organisational and ﬁnancial challenges due to increasing number of people with chronic conditions , increasing costs , and an ageing population . eHealth services have the potential to address some of these challenges , for example , by supporting patients who are engaged in self - care , improving quality of care , and reducing medical costs . In 2012 , Region Uppsala in Sweden launched an eHealth service that enabled patients to access their electronic health records through the Internet . The launch of the service was accompanied by strong criticism from healthcare professionals ( HCPs ) and was heavily debated in the media . Patients on the other hand were very positive towards the service . Albeit promising , the potential of Patient Accessible Electronic Health Records ( PAEHRs ) cannot be realised if HCPs still have reservations towards the service and their concerns are not fully understood . The purpose of this research is therefore to enhance our understanding of how physicians view PAEHR in relation to both their work environment and the level of patient participation . Furthermore , the aim is to shed light on whether their concerns related to patients’ well - being have materialised in practice and how patients view and make use of the service . Finally , this thesis identiﬁes implicated human values and value tensions related to PAEHR . To enhance our understanding of the physicians’ perspective , semi - structured interviews with 12 physicians in Uppsala were thematically analysed . A national patient survey was conducted to investigate patients’ use of and their experiences with PAEHR . Furthermore , empirical and conceptual investigations were carried out to identify human values and value tensions . The results of this research show that the physicians’ assumptions and views of PAEHR and its consequences for patients were different from the views and actual experiences of patients using the PAEHR system . The physicians were mainly concerned about potential increase in their workload and that it could be harmful for patients to access their Electronic Health Record ( EHR ) , for example , as it might evoke anxiety or worry . The vast majority of patients appreciated timely access to their results , felt more involved in their care , and read their records to become more involved . The investigation of human values associated with PAEHR identiﬁed values such as Ownership & Property , Professional Autonomy , Responsibility , Human Well - Being , Accountability & Transparency , and Trust . Furthermore , value tensions were identiﬁed that may occur between direct and indirect stakeholders ( here : patients and physicians ) , or are related to an interpretation of PAEHR . This thesis contributes to current research on eHealth in Human - Computer Interaction ( HCI ) by instigating a critical discussion of values associated with eHealth technologies that might be perceived as conﬂicting given a stakeholder’s framing of the technology . For example , tensions that emerge between values that prioritise placing the responsibility on a physician for their patients versus a value system that prioritises patient autonomy . The ﬁndings of this thesis suggest that while policymakers and government agencies adhere to a system of values that place a premium on patient empowerment , paternalistic tendencies are still present among physicians . However , an eHealth service like PAEHR is an important ﬁrst step towards patient participation . The results of this thesis suggest that the support of patient participation in their own care through PAEHR outweighs the potential harm . iv Sammanfattning Hälso - och sjukvårdssystemen världen över står inför organisatoriska och ekonomiska utmaningar på grund av ökat antal personer med kroniska sjukdomar , ökade kostnader och en åldrande befolkning . eHälso tjänster har potential att adressera dessa utmaningar , till exempel genom att stödja patienter som är engagerade i egenvård , förbättra vårdkvaliteten och minska sjukvårdskostnaderna . År 2012 lanserade Region Uppsala i Sverige en e - hälsotjänst som gjorde det möjligt för patienterna att läsa sina elektroniska journaler via internet . Lanseringen av tjänsten var starkt kritiserad av hälso - och sjukvårdspersonal och diskuterades mycket i media . Patienterna å andra sidan var mycket positiva mot tjänsten . Potentialen i e - hälsotjänster för patienter att läsa sin journal via nätet kan inte realiseras om vårdpersonalen har reservationer mot tjänsten , och innan deras oro har fullt ut förståtts och adresserats . Syftet med denna forskning är därför att öka vår förståelse för vårdpersonalens syn på journal via nätet i förhållande till deras arbetsmiljö och graden av patientinvolvering . Vidare är målet att belysa hur deras oro över patientens välbeﬁnnande har upplevts i praktiken och hur patienter ser och nyttjar tjänsten . Slutligen identiﬁerar denna avhandling implicita mänskliga värderingar och värdekonﬂikter relaterade till journal via nätet . För att öka vår förståelse för läkares perspektiv analyserades semi - strukturerade intervjuer med 12 läkare i Uppsala tematiskt . En nationell patientundersökning utfördes dessutom för att undersöka patienternas användning av , och deras erfarenheter med , journal via nätet . Vidare genomfördes empiriska och konceptuella undersökningar för att identiﬁera mänskliga värden och värdekonﬂikter . Resultaten av denna forskning visar att läkares antaganden och syn på journal via nätet och dess konsekvenser för patienter skilde sig från åsikterna och de faktiska erfarenheterna hos patienter som använder e - hälsotjänsten att läsa sin journal via nätet . Läkarna var huvudsakligen oroade över en potentiell ökningen i arbetsbelastning , och att det skulle kunna vara skadligt för patienter att ha tillgång till sin journal , till exempel genom att framkalla ångest eller oro . De allra ﬂesta patienter uppskattade tidigt tillgång till sina resultat , kände sig mer delaktiga i vården och läste journal via nätet för att bli mer involverade . Undersökningen av mänskliga värderingar identiﬁerade värden som kan vara involverade i journal via nätet , såsom Ägarskap och egendom , professionell autonomi , ansvar , mänskligt välbeﬁnnande , ansvarsskyldighet och öppenhet och förtroende . Vidare identiﬁerades värdekonﬂikter som kan uppstå mellan direkta och indirekta intressenter ( här : patienter och läkare ) eller är relaterade till en tolkning av journal via nätet . Denna avhandling bidrar till aktuell forskning om e - hälsa i människa - datorinteraktion genom att initiera en kritisk diskussion om värderingar som hör samman med e - hälsotjänster som kan uppfattas som motstridiga med tanke på en intressents tolkning av tekniken . Till exempel spänningar som uppstår mellan , å ena sidan , värderingar som prioriterar en läkares ansvar för sina patienter , och å andra sidan , ett värdesystem som prioriterar patientens autonomi . Resultatet av denna avhandling tyder på att även om policyutvecklare och statliga myndigheter följer ett system av värderingar som premierar patientdeltagande , är paternalistiska tendenser fortfarande förekommande hos läkare . En e - hälsotjänst som journal via nätet är dock ett viktigt första steg mot patientdeltagande . Resultaten av denna avhandling tyder på att stödet från patientdeltagandet i egenvård genom journal via nätet överväger den potentiella skadan . v Acknowledgements Doing a PhD is an exciting adventure and I want to give my gratitude to all the people who supported and encouraged me during these years . First of all , I want to thank all four of my supervisors wholeheartedly for their continuous support , guidance , and kindness . Thank you for believing in me , building up my conﬁdence , and creating a safe environment where I always knew you were there for me when I needed you . Every one of you saw to it that I got encouragement and support as well as the freedom to develop as an independent researcher while providing feedback and guidance when needed . My main supervisor , Jan Gulliksen , thank you for taking me on as an external PhD student in the ﬁrst place , for always trusting me going through with this , for helping me with all the formalities , and for always reminding me to think about what comes next . Thank you , Åke Walldius , for supporting me especially early on in my research , for all the inspiring discussions on value sensitive design , for helping me connecting the dots , and for your detailed and constructive feedback . I am forever grateful to have met Gerhard Hartmann during my Bachelor studies who introduced me to Human - Computer Interaction ( HCI ) . Thank you for encouraging me to go for a PhD , always supporting me through discussions as well as also organisationally . I am deeply grateful that you encouraged and supported me to travel to conferences , workshops , or summer schools which made it possible for me to meet all these amazing researchers and to build a network . My sincerest thanks go to Åsa Cajander for inviting me to join not only the DOME consortium but also her research group at Uppsala University . Collaborating with you was not only inspiring and fun , I also learned so much from you about doing research , academic writing , mentoring , supervision , leadership , setting priorities , and embracing opportunities . Thank you for your trust , for believing in me , and for reminding me of my skills when I lost conﬁdence . I would also like to thank all discussants , opponents , and reviewers who spent lots of time reading my work , providing feedback and reviews to help me become a better researcher and academic writer . I would especially like to thank Sabine Koch , Geraldine Fitzpatrick , and Henrik Artman who performed reviews at various stages of my PhD research . To all the wonderful members of the DOME consortium and the HTO research group from whom I learned so much : Thank you for all the amazing discussions , the great collaboration , and all the interesting talks during ‘ﬁka’ . Special thanks go to Gunilla Myreteg for making qualitative research that can be difﬁcult and messy at times so much fun . A very special thank you goes to Hanife Rexhepi for being not only an inspirational researcher but also a wonderful friend who always encouraged and cheered for me . I am also especially grateful to all of my colleagues within HTO who read my thesis draft in advance and provided me with their thoughtful comments . I want to thank my colleagues and friends at the Media Technology and Interaction Design ( MID ) department at KTH , many of whom graduated by now and moved on . Thank you for helping me attend courses and meetings online , ﬁguring out new guidelines and rules , and for all the lovely dinners we had together . I want to thank Susanna Heyman , Henrik Åhman , Elina Eriksson , Fredrik Enoksson , Filip Kis , Hanna Hasselqvist , and Cecilia Teljas for making my visits to Stockholm so much fun ! A very special thanks goes to Rebekah Cupitt for organising most of the social activities when I visited Stockholm and for helping me sorting out some language issues . Thank you for always giving me food for thought , inspiring me with your creative G & T recipes , and just for being an amazing friend . I consider myself lucky that I got to know other fellow PhD students and researchers , for example , at summer schools , conferences , or workshops . I am constantly amazed how these encounters can lead to friendships that endure even long distances and different time zones . A special thank you goes to Leanna Woods , Tina Øvad Pedersen , Nino Amvrosiadi , and Ian S . King for being part of my journey , your support , and encouragement . vi Doing a PhD part - time can be very challenging at times . I am very grateful for having such supportive colleagues at TH Köln . Special thanks to the students who took part in my ﬁrst study and my colleagues who stepped in for me when deadlines were approaching . Thank you for your encouragement , support , and understanding . I joined social media relatively late compared to others , but I am happy that I did , because I have learned a great deal from people sharing their stories . Thank you to all patients , relatives , caregivers , patient advocates , healthcare professionals , qualitative researchers , PhD students , and all members of the eHealth community who never cease to share their experiences and knowledge through blogging or on Twitter . You broadened my mind , made me reﬂect , and I really learned a lot by reading your stories and communicating with you . A special thank you goes to my # AcWri friends and # LittleHelpers Macarena de la Vega de León ( @ MacarenaDLVDL ) and Tracey E . Grifﬁths ( @ t _ e _ grifﬁths ) . Although we have not met in person ( yet ) , we were together in this writing adventure and you really made the last months a lot easier for me . You celebrated my writing accomplishments , rooted for me when it was difﬁcult , reminded me to take breaks , and made me laugh with funny , inspiring , and creative GIFs and hashtags . Thank you for all of it . This thesis would not have been possible without the support from my family and friends , especially Martina , Norbert , Max , Felix , Heike , Matze , Uschi , Rudi , Markus , Stefan , Conny , Sabine , Sarah , Andrea , Daniela , Julia , Björn , Nadine , Michael , Laureen , Nina , Henning . Thank you for your care , for always being there for me and believing in me , for making life fun , and letting me know that I am loved ! A special thanks goes to my sister Martina for her endless support and for always making me feel at home . Without you I would not even have made it through my masters programme . Finally , I want to thank my love , partner , soul mate , and husband Marcel . Thank you for your unconditional love , your patience and encouragement , and for resuscitating me every morning with a large cup of coffee . You were with me all the way through my PhD and inspired me to set my own deadlines and stick to them , so that I could spend guilt - free quality time with you . I am absolutely amazed how you manage to make me feel missed when I get stuck at my desk or travel to conferences while at the same time never make me feel bad or complain but always encourage and support me . Thank you for taking care of all the things we usually do together in less stressful times ; for bringing me food when I was in my ﬂow and did not dare to stop writing ; for researching and planning all vacations in advance to keep me sane , which always motivated me to ﬁnish a milestone beforehand and which gave me a fantastic reward to look forward to . You are my joy and not a day goes by where you don’t make me laugh . I am so looking forward to our future together . G I have faith in what I see Now I know I have met an angel in person And he looks perfect No , I don’t deserve this You are perfect for me . adaptedfromEdSheeran vii Glossary application programming interface ( API ) An application programming interface speciﬁes function - alities , constraints , and procedures that enable interactions between computer applications and allow them to exchange information ( Jacobson et al . 2012 ) . critical incident A critical incident is an event that happened to a person that they regard as important or signiﬁcant in some way ( Fook & Gardner 2007 , p . 77 ) . Critical incidents are used by groups of people to reﬂect on their speciﬁc practice experience to “unsettle the fundamental ( and dominant ) thinking implicit in professional practices , in order to see other ways of practising” ( Fook & Gardner 2007 , p . 51 ) . eHealth Emerging ﬁeld of medical informatics , referring to the organisation and delivery of health services and information using the Internet and related technologies . In a broader sense , the term characterises not only a technical development , but also a new way of working , an attitude , and a commitment for networked , global thinking , to improve healthcare locally , regionally , and world - wide by using information and communication technology ( Pagliari et al . ( 2005 ) , based on deﬁnition originally by Eysenbach ( 2001 ) ) . stakeholder According to ISO 9241 - 210 ( 2010 , p . 3 ) , a stakeholder is an “individual or organization having a right , share , claim or interest in a system or in its possession of characteristics that meet their needs and expectations” . Friedman et al . ( 2006 , p . 361 ) distinguish between two classes of stakeholders : direct stakeholders are individuals or organisations who interact directly with the system or its output , and indirect stakeholders are all other parties who are affected by the use of the system . technological frames ( TF ) Systematic approach that builds on and extends research into cognitions and values to understand how people make sense of technology in their organisation ( Orlikowski & Gash 1994 , p . 174 ) . TF are deﬁned as the core set of assumptions , expectations , and knowledge that people use to understand technology . values The concept of values in this thesis relates to human values as conceptualised within the Value Sensitive Design ( VSD ) approach and refers to “what a person or group of people consider important in life” ( Friedman et al . 2006 , p . 349 ) . VSD considers especially values with moral and ethical import , accounts for conventions , and personal values ( Friedman et al . 2006 , p . 360 ) . value tensions Within VSD , value tensions are potential conﬂicts between values or design impli - cations of values that can occur within individuals or across groups ( Davis & Nathan 2015 ) . Unresolved value tensions can contribute to the failure of information system appropriation ( Miller et al . 2007 ) . However , not all value tensions can or should be resolved , but maybe marked for attention later in the design process ( Davis & Nathan 2015 ) . work environment Work environment is a broader concept than work alone and encompasses various factors and relationships at work , such as physical , technical , organisational , social , and the work content ( Swedish Work Environment Authority 2018 ) . viii Acronyms API Application Programming Interface . 19 CI Critical Incident . xvi , 71 CSCW Computer - Supported Cooperative Work . xviii DISA Digitalisation and the Effect on the Work Environment of Nurses . xvii , xix , 5 , 80 DOME Development of Online Medical Records and E - Health Services . xvii , xix , 24 , 25 , 28 , 44 , 71 , 72 EHR Electronic Health Record . iii , xiv , xv , xix , 2 – 6 , 10 , 16 – 21 , 25 , 34 , 36 , 37 , 41 , 43 , 44 , 46 , 47 , 49 , 51 – 54 , 56 – 60 , 63 – 69 , 72 , 75 – 77 HCD Human - Centred Design . 2 , 70 HCI Human - Computer Interaction . iii , v , xi , xii , xviii , 3 , 7 , 8 , 11 , 25 , 26 , 73 HCP healthcare professional . iii , 1 – 6 , 9 , 10 , 14 – 17 , 19 , 20 , 30 , 34 , 35 , 43 , 44 , 50 – 58 , 60 , 61 , 64 – 68 , 70 , 75 , 77 , 79 , 80 HIE Health Information Exchange . 18 , 19 HIPAA Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act . 17 HTO Health , Technology & Organisation . xvii , xix ICT Information and Communication Technology . xix , 15 , 18 , 36 , 61 , 76 , 77 ISO International Organization for Standardization . 16 IT Information Technology . xvii , xviii OpenAPS Open Artiﬁcial Pancreas System project . 56 PAEHR Patient Accessible Electronic Health Record . iii , xiii , xiv , xvi , 2 – 7 , 9 , 10 , 12 , 17 – 20 , 23 – 25 , 28 , 29 , 31 , 33 – 36 , 40 , 41 , 43 – 48 , 50 – 56 , 58 – 61 , 63 – 70 , 72 , 75 – 77 , 79 , 80 , 103 PHR Personal Health Record . 16 SALAR Swedish Association of Local Authorities and Regions . 18 SPPARO System Providing Patients Access to Records Online . 18 SUSTAINS Support USers To Access INformation and Services . 19 , 20 TA Thematic Analysis . 26 – 28 TF Technological Frames . xiii , xiv , 7 , 10 – 12 , 23 , 27 , 29 , 30 , 33 , 44 , 45 , 59 , 67 – 70 , 72 , 79 ix UX User Experience . xi VSD Value Sensitive Design . vii , xiii , xiv , 5 , 7 – 11 , 23 , 29 , 30 , 44 , 67 WHO World Health Organization . 14 x xi Preface “ We have spared no effort to make better tools but we have paid little attention to learning how to communicate better with one another . ” Jay Katz , The Silent World of Doctor and Patient , 2002 , p . xli This thesis takes a social constructionist approach , which not only takes into account multiple realities , but also emphasises the important role of the researcher , who shapes not only the study through their research design but also the analysis and hence the results . Furthermore , this thesis mainly builds on qualitative research in which the subjectivity of the researcher , including their views , perspectives , background , etc . are considered as a strength , not as a weakness . Qualitative research values reﬂexivity , which includes “bringing the researcher into the research , making us visible as part of the research process” ( Braun & Clarke 2013 , p . 37 ) . The aim of this preface is to make myself visible to the reader ; disclose my background and motivations ; and share some parts of my journey that have inﬂuenced me as a researcher and subsequently shaped my research . Before I studied media informatics , I worked for about 8 years as a certiﬁed physician’s assistant in general practice and urology . During my media informatics studies , I became highly interested in Human - Computer Interaction ( HCI ) and User Experience ( UX ) , which led me to pursue a PhD in this area . When I was looking for a topic for my PhD research , it was actually not my initial thought to combine my interest in HCI with my medical background . However , as I was passionate about both domains , my research pathway arose somewhat naturally . In the beginning of my PhD , technology within the quantiﬁed - self movement became more popular . I came across direct - to - consumer genetic testing services like 23AndMe , and I was very concerned , in a similar manner to the healthcare professionals represented in this thesis . I was worried that people who receive genetic testing results would become anxious and upset , especially if they were not able to discuss these results with a healthcare professional . Furthermore , the genetic testing results might indicate a pre - disposition which does not guarantee that the person actually will get this speciﬁc condition . In a double role of a former physician’s assistant ( who is interested in and responsible for patients’ well - being ) and a computer scientist ( who is aware of her responsibility to develop technology that supports and rather than harms people ) , these types of services awakened my protective instinct for the prospective users of healthcare technologies . I assumed these healthcare technologies to be technology - driven innovations that overlooked people’s actual experiences . Hence , I identiﬁed a need to investigate these experiences so that they can be taken into account in the design of healthcare - related technologies . During the course of my research , certain events made me reﬂect on and re - think how I view the people who are intended to use , or are affected by , the technology . These shifts in my point of view occurred in stages . Firstly , I conducted a study with two groups of students who were supposed to design an online platform for publishing the test results of direct - to - consumer genetic testing services . One student group basically refused to give people access to their results without a medical professional present in an attempt to “protect users from themselves” . Although I could understand their motivation as it was based on their protective instinct , their concern for the individual well - being of the customer , and an awareness of their responsibility as a designer , I nevertheless felt uneasy . Leaving aside the fact that these students’ decision undermines the company’s business model , it more importantly undermines the autonomy of customers who have decided to use the service . Although , the resulting paper from xii this study ( Grünloh et al . 2015 ) is not part of this thesis , it contributed to my research as it helped me articulate my reﬂections on my own views and inﬂuenced how I approached future studies . A second , and maybe more important shift occurred through my contact with patients and patient advocates from all over the world . Whether they shared their experiences as participants in research studies , wrote about it on social media platforms like Twitter , on their own blogs , or when speaking on stage ; these patients and patient advocates showed me that many of them are anything but vulnerable and in need of protection . On the contrary , I learned that many patients spend most of their time engaged in self - care activities . Rather than fearing the results of their medical tests , or being over - burdened by information , these patients were mostly tired of having to ﬁght to be taken seriously and for the right of access to their own medical data that is basically their’s to begin with . During the course of my research , many people continuously encouraged me to reﬂect and re - think . Many times when I had considered something along the lines of ‘Well , perhaps patients with this particular condition should not have direct access to their records’ , patients and / or research taught me , that it is actually much more complicated than that . For example , when I read about physicians’ concerns regarding oncology patients reading their records , I thought this was probably reasonable . Maybe oncology patients should not read their health records on their own . Due to my background and my knowledge of the German healthcare system I did not consider though , that patients might have to wait for a very long time to get their results in person . According to a study by Rexhepi et al . ( 2016 ) having to wait for the results can create even more anxiety in patients than reading about the results by themselves . Studies like Rexhepi et al . ( 2016 ) and other research played a large role in helping me realise the complexity of , not only this , but other aspects of the patient experience . Just as I was able to understand concerns regarding patients diagnosed with a mental health condition reading their own medical notes online , I was also able to begin to appreciate that this too was even more complicated . Further research has shown that reading or co - producing therapy notes had the potential to contribute to an increased understanding of the patient , better relationship between patient and healthcare professional , and also lead to increased patient engagement and collaboration ( e . g . , Perlich & Meinel 2016 ; Peck et al . 2017 ) . Although I was still able to relate to the concerns of the Swedish healthcare professionals , I was nevertheless puzzled by how strongly they reacted to patients having immediate access to their records , despite the fact that their patients seemed to ﬁnd this extremely valuable . How could two actors whom I had never considered to be in opposition to each other have such different perspectives ? And how can we as HCI researchers help to design a technology that supports both stakeholders ? Obviously , there is more to it than meets the eye . Even from these initial questions , healthcare and more speciﬁcally eHealth seemed like a complex research problem and it combined two of my passions : healthcare and HCI . This was the perfect venue for me to conduct research that might aim to enhance our understanding of the underlying problems , seek to bring healthcare professionals and patients into dialogue with each other , and to pay attention to the many ways in which to communicate better with one another - with or without technology . xiii List of Papers This thesis is based on six papers , which are referred to in the text using Roman numerals . An overview of the included papers , how they are connected to each other and to the thesis chapters , is depicted in Figure A . Paper VI Using Critical Incidents in Workshops to Inform eHealth Design Reﬂection & writing based on critical incidents workshop D i s c u ss i o n Critical Incidents Workshop Interviews with Physicians & Patient Survey Thesis Human Values and Value Tensions Related to PAEHR R e s u l t s : R Q 3 Application of the analytical approach proposed in Paper I : Identiﬁcation of human values based on Technological Frames Paper IV Patients’ Experiences of Accessing Their Electronic Health Records : Results of a National Patient Survey in Sweden R e s u l t s : R Q 2 Patient Survey Paper V Electronic Health Records Are More Than a Work Tool : Conﬂicting Needs of Direct and Indirect Stakeholders Selection of data : Descriptive analysis of data informed by themes , non - parametric statistics Entire data set : Descriptive analysis , non - parametric statistics Paper II “The Record is Our Work Tool ! ” – Physicians’ Framing of a Patient Portal in Sweden R e s u l t s : R Q 1 Interviews with Physicians Entire data set : Thematic analysis informed by Technological Frames Selection of data : Thematic analysis on data coded ‘patient empowerment’ Paper III “Why Do They Need to Check me ? ” Patient Participation Through eHealth and the Doctor - Patient Relationship Paper I Using Technological Frames as an Analytic Tool in Value Sensitive Design M e t h od s Reﬂection & Writing : Based on theories and results in Paper II informedsurveydesign informedPaper I proposed method applied in thesis informedanalysis informedanalysis informedreﬂection and writing Figure A : Overview of included papers , their connections , and related chapters Paper I proposes an analytical method which was informed by the theories and results of Paper II . The interview study presented in Paper II and III informed the survey design ( Paper IV and Paper V ) . Furthermore , the themes identiﬁed in Paper II informed the analysis conducted in Paper V , as well as the analysis of human values in section 4 . 3 of this thesis . The reﬂections in Paper VI were grounded in the empirical research conducted for Paper II – V . Paper I Using Technological Frames as an Analytic Tool in Value Sensitive Design Christiane Grünloh . 2018 . Ethics and Information Technology . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10676 - 018 - 9459 - 3 Short Summary : This article proposes the use of Technological Frames ( TF ) as an analytic tool in VSD to support the identiﬁcation of human values . Technological Frames ( TF ) are used to investigate people’s interpretation of a particular technology , which can be inﬂuenced and informed by human values . The article exempliﬁes the use of TF in VSD with the case of PAEHRs in Sweden . Previously identiﬁed frames serve as a basis to further identify corresponding values , including congruence , tensions , and / or inconsistencies between them . Hereby the article illustrates how the TF approach can be used as a method in relation to the empirical , technical , and conceptual investigations within VSD . xiv My Contribution : I am the sole author of this article which was developed for the workshop on Value Sensitive Design : Charting the Next Decade , which took place November 14 – 18 , 2016 in Leiden ( Netherlands ) . Each workshop participant wrote a reﬂective paper on VSD . The idea for this article was developed through discussions with my co - supervisor Åke Walldius and feedback was provided by the workshop participants . The article was then further developed and published in a peer - reviewed special issue on VSD in the journal Ethics and Information Technology . Paper II “The Record is Our Work Tool ! ” – Physicians’ Framing of a Patient Portal in Sweden Christiane Grünloh , Åsa Cajander , and Gunilla Myreteg . 2016 . Journal of Medical Internet Research 18 , 6 , e167 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2196 / jmir . 5705 Short Summary : This journal paper presents the results of a qualitative study investigating the per - spective of physicians concerning a patient portal that gives patients access to their Electronic Health Record ( EHR ) , in particular in relation to their work environment . Semi - structured interviews with twelve physicians from different specialities ( Oncology , Orthopaedics , Emergency Medicine , Internal Medicine ) were analysed and discussed based on the theory of Technological Frames ( TF ) . A thematic analysis of the data set was conducted and four main themes were identiﬁed : work tool , process , workload , and control . In relation to the ﬁrst three themes , physicians’ concerns about patients was another theme identiﬁed , which were based to some extent on a generalised view of patients that does not consider patients who already actively participate in their care . We conclude that transferring paper - based processes into digital processes has consequences for the work environment ( e . g . , change of work practices ) . My Contribution : I am the main author of this paper . Analysis and coding was mainly done by the ﬁrst and second author , and I carried out phase 3 and 4 of the thematic analysis ( ‘Searching for themes’ and ‘Reviewing themes’ ) . I also created the visual representations of the candidate themes , which were jointly reviewed and discussed by all authors . As ﬁrst author , I co - ordinated the analysis and writing process , which was a collaborative process based on discussions and contributions from all authors . Paper III “Why Do They Need to Check me ? ” Patient Participation Through eHealth and the Doctor - Patient Relationship : Qualitative Study Christiane Grünloh , Gunilla Myreteg , Åsa Cajander , and Hanife Rexhepi . 2018 . Journal of Medical Internet Research 20 , 1 , e11 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2196 / jmir . 8444 Short Summary : This journal paper presents a qualitative data analysis of the same interviews as in Paper II . In this paper , a selection of data was used for an in - depth thematic analysis , which con - sisted of data that had been previously coded ‘patient empowerment’ . The aim of this analysis was to understand how physicians view the idea of patient participation in their healthcare in general and in particular in relation to Patient Accessible Electronic Health Records ( PAEHRs ) . Although the physicians stated that they , in principle , were in favour of patient participation , the analysis found xv little support for this position in their descriptions of their daily practice where that participation would have been actualised . On the contrary , we identiﬁed several signs that paternalistic practices are still present , even if professionals might not be aware of this . This can create a conﬂict between patients who strive to become more informed and whose questions and requests for more detailed information are thus being interpreted as signs of critique and mistrust towards the physician . We argue that the concept of patient empowerment is problematic as it triggers an interpretation of “power” in healthcare as a zero - sum , which is not helpful for the maintenance of the relationship between the actors . My Contribution : I am the main author of this paper . The selection of data used in this study comprised nearly 50 pages of interview excerpts , which were thoroughly and repeatedly read through , jointly discussed , and commented on by all four authors of the paper . I carried out phase 3 and 4 of the thematic analysis ( ‘searching for themes’ and ‘reviewing themes’ ) and developed the visual representations of the candidate themes . These were then jointly reviewed and discussed . I co - ordinated the analysis and writing process , while all authors contributed to the discussions and writing stages . Paper IV Patients’ Experiences of Accessing Their Electronic Health Records : Results of a National Patient Survey in Sweden Jonas Moll , Hanife Rexhepi , Åsa Cajander , Christiane Grünloh , Isto Huvila , Maria Hägglund , Gunilla Myreteg , Isabella Scandurra , Rose - Mharie Åhlfeldt . in press . Journal of Medical Internet Research . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2196 / jmir . 9492 Short Summary : This journal paper presents a descriptive analysis of a national patient survey in Sweden . The aim was to investigate patients’ experiences when accessing their EHR through the Swedish national patient portal . This article gives an overview of the study design and presents the results of the descriptive analysis that focused on user characteristics , usage , and general attitudes towards the system . The results show that the majority of respondents were female and many have worked or still work in healthcare . Most respondents used the system infrequently , and often to get an overview of their health status . Furthermore , laboratory test results were shown to be the most important type of information to have access to . The majority of the patients wants to have access to new information within a day of having carried out the test , and were strongly positive towards the system . My Contribution : The design of the study and the questionnaire was co - ordinated by the second author . The questionnaire was informed by previous survey and interview studies , some of which were part of my previous research papers and their results ( see Paper II and III ) . The ﬁrst author led the analysis and the writing process . I worked with the study design , took part in discussions about analysis and data interpretation , and contributed to all sections of the paper during the writing stage . xvi Paper V Electronic Health Records Are More Than a Work Tool : Conﬂicting Needs of Direct and Indirect Stakeholders Åsa Cajander and Christiane Grünloh . Manuscript submitted to the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) Short Summary : This article is based on a data set collected in the national patient survey presented in Paper IV . In this paper , we present the analysis of survey data from 520 patients who received care in Region Uppsala , with a special focus on the four main themes identiﬁed in Paper II . The aim was to investigate the concerns raised by physicians from the patients’ perspective to shed some light on whether these issues have been justiﬁed in practice . The results show that the needs and wishes of patients conﬂict with the preconceptions of patient needs in the eyes of physicians as well as their own work - related requirements . We conclude that PAEHR has become a tool for patients in handling their medical conditions and allowing them to engage in their own healthcare . Thus the electronic health record has become more than just a tool exclusively for healthcare professionals . This paper highlights the need to consider the accuracy of stakeholders’ opinions about other stakeholder groups and discusses the implications of the results in relation to design , methods and tools in HCI , and reorientation of work . My Contribution : This article is based on the data collected in the national patient survey also presented in Paper IV . The authors appear in alphabetic order as all stages of this paper involved an equal and joint effort in the analysis and writing of this paper . Paper VI Using Critical Incidents in Workshops to Inform eHealth Design Christiane Grünloh , Jean D . Hallewell Haslwanter , Bridget Kane , Eunji Lee , Thomas Lind , Jonas Moll , Hanife Rexhepi , Isabella Scandurra . 2017 . INTERACT 2017 , Part I , LNCS 10513 , pp . 364 – 373 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 67744 - 6 _ 24 Short Summary : This article describes a workshop method based on the concept of Critical Incidents ( CIs ) . This concept is used to reﬂect on , and critically analyse different experiences and practices in relation to eHealth services for patients and their relatives . The workshop format was carried out at the 9th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction ( NordiCHI 2016 ) and was considered helpful to identify possible implications for eHealth design . This article describes and discusses the workshop format and gives recommendations how it can be adapted to use with actual stakeholders during eHealth development projects . My Contribution : I was the main organiser of the workshop that is described and reﬂected upon in this paper . I am the main author and co - ordinated and led the writing process . The paper was mainly written by the ﬁrst three authors , the remaining authors contributed through comments based on readings of the drafts . xvii About Supervisors Jan Gulliksen : Professor at the Department of Media Technology and Interaction Design , as well as Vice president for Digitalisation , KTH Royal Institute of Technology , Sweden . Jan Gulliksen has a background in Engineering Physics and systems analysis and his research focuses on improving the digital work environments for everybody . He serves both the Swedish Committee for Digitalisation as chairman as well as the European Commission as appointed ‘Digital Champion’ of Sweden , and is the main supervisor of this thesis . Åsa Cajander : Professor of Computer Science with a specialisation towards Human - Computer Inter - action at the Department of Information Technology , Uppsala University , Sweden . Åsa Cajander is the research leader of the HTO group ( Health , Technology & Organisation ) , principle investigator of DISA ( Digitalisation and the Effect on the Work Environment of Nurses ) , and part of the managing team of the DOME consortium ( Development of Online Medical Records and E - Health Services , see further description below ) . Åsa Cajander does research in the ﬁeld of Information Technology ( IT ) and work , on learning and didactics in Computer Science , and she is co - supervisor of this thesis . Gerhard Hartmann : Professor at the Institute of Informatics , TH Köln University of Applied Sci - ences , Germany . Gerhard Hartmann has a background in theoretical physics , musicology , and has worked in industry as a software engineer . He is head of the master programme Web Science and his teaching involves Human - Centred Design of Interactive Systems , Digital Media , and various kinds of measurements ( e . g . , Web Analytics , Measuring User Experience , Usability Evaluation ) . His main research focus is in interaction design and he is co - supervisor of this thesis . Åke Walldius : Associate Professor at the Department of Media Technology and Interaction Design , KTH Royal Institute of Technology , Sweden . Åke Walldius has a PhD in cinema studies and has worked in video production and information visualisation . His main interests are information visualisa - tion , genre analysis , user - driven software design , and quality assurance . He is an appointed expert in standardisation ( human - centred design and usability ) and he is co - supervisor of this thesis . About Co - authors Rose - Mharie Åhlfeldt : Associate professor in Informatics with a specialisation in the ﬁeld of infor - mation security and healthcare informatics at the School of Informatics , University of Skövde , Sweden . Her particular interests are in the areas of information security management , privacy , and secure information management in healthcare . She has led and participated in several research projects in collaboration with companies and the public sector . Together with Åsa Cajander and Isabella Scandurra , Rose - Mharie is part of the managing team of the DOME consortium . Maria Hägglund : Senior lecturer in implementation science at Uppsala University , Sweden . Her research focuses on user centred development of patient centred information and communication systems to support collaboration within health - and social care as well as patient empowerment . A special research interest is focusing on transparency and collaboration when providing patients with online access to their electronic health records , for example through patient portals . xviii Jean D . Hallewell Haslwanter : Professor of Informatics at the Upper Austria University of Applied Sciences and former PhD student in the HCI Group at TU Wien , Austria . Her previous research was in participatory design and didactics for programming . Jean has a background in mathematics and computing sciences , and has about 13 years working experience in industry ( mostly user interfaces for technical products , e . g . , control systems ) . Her research interests are in HCI , software development processes , and Active and ( Ambient ) Assisted Living ( AAL ) . Isto Huvila : Professor in Information Studies at the Department of ALM ( Archival Studies , Library and Information Science and Museum and Cultural Heritage Studies ) at Uppsala University , Sweden . His primary areas of research include information and knowledge management , information work , knowledge organisation , documentation , and social and participatory information practices . Bridget Kane : Associate Professor in Information Systems at Karlstad University Business School , Sweden , with special interest in Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) and Human - Computer Interaction ( HCI ) in healthcare . Bridget has a background in medical science , management and organi - sation behaviour . She has a special interest in research questions that concern the use of health IT , the use of information in medical decision making , and patient safety . Eunji Lee : PhD student at SINTEF Digital , Oslo , Norway and researcher at Oslo University Hospital , Norway . Eunji Lee has a background in informatics , health science , and service design . She does research in the ﬁeld of health informatics and has academic interests in patient - centred service design and people - centred integrated care . Thomas Lind : Former PhD student in Computer Science with a specialisation towards Human - Computer Interaction , now Post - Doc at the Department of Information Technology , Uppsala University , Sweden . Thomas has a background in socio - technical systems engineering and does research on the impact of organisational change processes on the usability of new or altered IT , and on the work environment of its users . Jonas Moll : Post - Doc in Human - Computer Interaction with a background in computer science at the Department of Information Technology , Uppsala University , Sweden . Jonas’ main research areas are computer mediated communication and collaboration in multimodal environments . Within the DOME consortium , his research focuses on how patients’ online access to their health records affect the communication between patients and physicians . Gunilla Myreteg : Senior lecturer in accounting and ﬁnance at the Department of Business Studies and also senior lecturer at the Department of Information Technology , Uppsala University , Sweden . Gunilla holds a PhD from the Swedish research school Management and IT and does research regarding IT in organisations , and the possible problems , beneﬁts , and values thereof for different stakeholders . Gunilla has worked as a university teacher for over 20 years and was previously senior lecturer at Örebro University School of Business , Sweden . Hanife Rexhepi : Former PhD student , now lecturer at the School of Informatics , University of Skövde , Sweden . Hanife has a background in information systems . She holds a Bachelor of science degree in nursing and a Master of science degree in information systems . She does research within healthcare informatics , and teaches in the ﬁeld of information systems with a focus on healthcare . xix Isabella Scandurra : Assistant professor in Health Informatics at the School of Business Örebro University , Sweden . Her major scientiﬁc interests comprise human - computer interaction in healthcare as well as usability issues of Information and Communication Technology ( ICT ) solutions and welfare technology in integrated care and other transitional settings . As a senior researcher she is currently working with development and assessment of eHealth services where patients access their health data online as well as of future EHR systems and health innovations , with the objective to achieve a continuity of care from the perspectives of patients , professionals and care processes . Together with Åsa Cajander and Rose - Mharie Åhlfeldt , Isabella is part of the managing team of the DOME consortium . Research Collaborations During the course of my PhD research , I became member of the following research collaborations and projects : Development of Online Medical Records and E - Health Services ( DOME ) Development of Online Medical Records and E - Health Services ( DOME ) is a collaborative consortium between Karlstad University , Karolinska Institutet , KTH Royal Institute of Technology , University of Lund , University of Skövde , Uppsala University , and Örebro University . DOME started as a collaborative action research project between Uppsala University , the University of Lund and the University of Skövde and was funded by the Swedish Governmental Agency for Innovation Systems , VINNOVA . Initially , the acronym stood for Deployment of Online Medical Records and E - Health Services and aimed to build knowledge related to the implementation and use of eHealth services . After the funding ended , the research collaboration remained and expanded to include various researchers from other universities . The managing team of the consortium consists of Åsa Cajander , Isabella Scandurra , and Rose - Mharie Åhlfeldt . A speciﬁc goal of the research conducted within the DOME consortium is to create a better basis for future introductions of eHealth services . The consortium therefore aims at developing recommendations for the introduction of new or improved eHealth services in the healthcare system . Health , Technology & Organisation ( HTO ) Health , Technology & Organisation ( HTO ) is a research group led by Åsa Cajander with members from Uppsala University , Reykjavik University , KTH Royal Institute of Technology , and TH Köln . The aim of the group is to study the relationships and dynamics of health , technology , and organisation with the goal of creating knowledge that support sustainable development and utilisation of ICT . Digitalisation and the Effect on the Work Environment of Nurses ( DISA ) Digitalisation and the Effect on the Work Environment of Nurses ( DISA ) is a research project that investigates the question , how digitalisation has affected the work environment of nurses , including health and well - being , control over the work situation , effects on operational quality , and communication with patients and others stakeholders . The project started in October 2016 and investigates the aforementioned areas from a socio - technical and gender perspective . My research was partly supported by DISA . The project team is multidisciplinary and includes members from the DOME consortium . The project is funded by Forte and performed in collaboration with the county council in Uppsala , and especially the EPJ division ( E lektronisk p atient j ournal ; electronic patient record ) . xx Other Publications The following publications are not included in this thesis , but have been part of my research and , as mentioned in the preface , inﬂuenced me as researcher : • Christiane Grünloh & Åsa Cajander ( 2017 ) . Using Themes from Qualitative Interviews as Lens to Analyse Survey Data . OzCHI ’17 , November 28 – December 1 , 2017 , Brisbane , Australia . Workshop on “Mixing Quantitative with Qualitative Methods . Current Practices in designing experiments , gathering data and analysis with mixed methods reporting” . • Åsa Cajander , Christiane Grünloh , Thomas Lind , Isabella Scandurra ( 2016 ) . Designing eHealth Services for Patients and Relatives : Critical Incidents and Lessons to Learn . In : Proceedings of the 9th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction - NordiCHI ’16 , Gothenburg , Sweden . October 23 - 27 , 2016 . ACM , New York , NY , USA . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2971485 . 2987670 • Hanife Rexhepi , Christiane Grünloh , Åsa Cajander , Isabella Scandurra ( 2016 ) . “Please Do Not Confuse Your Google Search With My Medical Degree” ? How Accessing Electronic Health Records ( EHRs ) and Online Searches can Support Information Needs and Increase Understanding for Patients and Relatives . NordiCHI ‘16 , October 23 - 27 , 2016 , Gothenburg , Sweden . Workshop on “Designing eHealth Services for Patients and Relatives : Critical Incidents and Lessons to Learn” . • Åsa Cajander , Christiane Grünloh , Hanife Rexhepi ( 2015 ) . Worlds Apart - Doctors’ Techno - logical Frames and Online Medical Records . In : Adjunct Proceedings of 15th IFIP TC . 13 International Conference on Human - Computer Interaction - INTERACT 2015 , Bamberg , Ger - many . September , 14 - 18 , 2015 . Workshop on “Interactivity in Healthcare Systems” . University of Bamberg Press . • Christiane Grünloh , Åke Walldius , Gerhard Hartmann , Jan Gulliksen ( 2015 ) . Using Online Reviews as Narratives to Evoke Designer’s Empathy . In : Proceedings of 15th IFIP TC . 13 Inter - national Conference on Human - Computer Interaction - INTERACT 2015 , Bamberg , Germany . September , 14 - 18 , 2015 . Springer International Publishing . Contents Abstract iii Sammanfattning iv Acknowledgements v Glossary vii Acronyms viii Preface xi List of Papers xiii Contents xxi 1 Introduction 1 1 . 1 Research Problem & Aim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 1 . 2 Research Approach & Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 1 . 3 Delimitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 1 . 4 Summary of Main Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 2 Background 7 2 . 1 Human - Computer Interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 2 . 1 . 1 Value Sensitive Design ( VSD ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 2 . 1 . 2 Technological Frames ( TF ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 2 . 1 . 3 Relationship Between Technological Frames and Human Values . . . . . . . . 11 2 . 2 Patient Participation and the Doctor - Patient Relationship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 2 . 2 . 1 Models of the Doctor - Patient Relationship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 2 . 2 . 2 Patient Empowerment and Participation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 2 . 3 eHealth Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 2 . 3 . 1 Patient Portals and Patient Accessible Electronic Health Records . . . . . . . 16 2 . 3 . 2 Patient Accessible Electronic Health Records in Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . 18 3 Research Methods 23 3 . 1 Data Collection Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 3 . 1 . 1 Interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 3 . 1 . 2 Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 3 . 2 Analysis Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 xxi xxii CONTENTS 3 . 2 . 1 Thematic Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 3 . 2 . 2 Survey Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28 3 . 2 . 3 Analysis of Human Values Based on Technological Frames . . . . . . . . . 29 3 . 2 . 4 Reﬂexivity and Writing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 3 . 3 Ethical Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 4 Results 33 4 . 1 Physicians’ Perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33 4 . 1 . 1 Work Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33 4 . 1 . 2 Patient Participation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35 4 . 2 Patients’ Perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36 4 . 2 . 1 Overview of Patients Using Journalen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36 4 . 2 . 2 Patients’ Perspective in Relation to Physicians’ Concerns . . . . . . . . . . . 40 4 . 3 Human Values and Value Tensions Related to PAEHR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44 4 . 3 . 1 Human Values related to Physicians’ Technological Frames of PAEHR . . . 45 4 . 3 . 2 Value Tensions related to PAEHR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56 5 Discussion 63 5 . 1 Physicians’ Views on PAEHR and Patient Participation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63 5 . 2 Patients’ Views on and Use of PAEHR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65 5 . 3 Technological Frames , Human Values , and Tensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67 5 . 4 Implications for Healthcare and eHealth Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69 5 . 5 Reﬂections on Research Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71 6 Conclusions 75 7 Future Work 79 List of Figures 81 List of Tables 82 Bibliography 83 A Interview Template 101 B Questionnaire 103 INTRODUCTION 1 Chapter 1 Introduction Healthcare systems worldwide are facing challenges due to increasing costs , an increasing number of people with chronic conditions , and the ageing population . At the same time , the healthcare domain is undergoing a transition from the more authoritarian and paternalistic ( also known as “the doctor knows best” ) towards a patient - centred care that embraces shared decision making with patients . Especially in the cases where no clear evidence - based solutions exist , decisions have to be made based on the values and preferences of the patient ( Williamson 2014 ) . To determine what is ‘best’ for patients means that their beliefs , values , preferences , cultural commitments , and idiosyncratic inclinations have to be taken into account ( Veatch 2000 ) and value trade - offs between these considerations may be necessary . It is therefore impossible for the physician to know how to balance beneﬁts and harms ( Veatch 2000 ) . Patients today are more informed and tend to be more actively engaged in their care . Patient movements and organisations evolved that aim to foster collaboration between patients and profes - sionals , recognise patient autonomy , create patient communities , and highlight the changing roles in the doctor - patient relationship ( cf . deBronkart 2015 ) . Technology plays a vital role in supporting and increasing patient engagement in their own healthcare regimes , be it through self - monitoring devices , reading up on their medical condition by searching the Internet , or even ‘hacking’ their own medical device to tailor them to their needs ( e . g . , Omer 2016 ) . eHealth services offered through patient patient portals have the prospect to support patient partici - pation while taking some of the burden of care from healthcare professionals ( HCPs ) . For instance , patients can request referrals , drug prescriptions , or schedule an appointment online through these eHealth services . As many patients with chronic conditions are engaged in self - care , their efforts can be supported by those portals which often also enable them to access their own medical information . eHealth technologies have the potential to improve processes in healthcare , increase efﬁciency and quality of care , and support HCPs and patients in their everyday tasks . The Digital Agenda of the European Commission views eHealth as one way to address several of the pressing health challenges as it provides an opportunity to improve quality of care , reduce medical costs , and foster independent living ( European Commission 2010 , 2012 ) . Included in the digital agenda are actions related to the interoperability of patient records , and providing patients secure online access to their health data ( European Commission 2010 ) . The development of eHealth technologies is however challenging , because healthcare is a quite complex application domain . Issues such as interoperability , organisational , legal , and ethical barriers have to be dealt with . Furthermore , socio - technical challenges have to be addressed given that eHealth development has to include heterogenous end - users , but also a multitude of stakeholders with different interest and values . These complex differences generally require a lot of effort to resolve ( Myers 1995 ) . Some European countries , such as Sweden , Denmark , and Estonia have progressed further 2 INTRODUCTION when it comes to implementing eHealth technologies , while other countries are still struggling . For example , the German government is working on the implementation of an eHealth smartcard system since 2004 . Initially aimed to launch by 2010 , the development was put on hold with costs piling up to 1 . 7 billion euros , while physicians and other healthcare providers opposed to buy special equipment for the card ( Tuffs 2010 ) . Although the eHealth smartcard is supposed to store and retrieve patient data digitally ( Stafford 2015 ) , patients will only have access to the information on the cards via computer terminals in the medical ofﬁce ( Woratschka 2017 ) . According to the German health minister , the introduction of the eHealth card has still not gone beyond pilot projects and the technology may be already outdated before it has been fully implemented ( Borchers 2018 ) . Meanwhile , the two large health insurers AOK and Techniker Krankenkasse started their own projects to enable patients access to their records ( Höhl 2017 ) . In the following section , I will outline the research problem and aim of this thesis . Subsequently , the research approach and research questions will be presented along with the delimitations and a summary of the main contributions of this thesis . 1 . 1 Research Problem & Aim In Region Uppsala ( Sweden ) , an eHealth service has been developed as part of a European project that enables patients to access their Electronic Health Record ( EHR ) online through a patient portal . This project faced many barriers that had to be overcome . For instance , the law had to be changed , because at the time it was illegal for patients to access their EHR digitally ( SFS 1985 : 562 ; SFS 2008 : 355 ) . Furthermore , HCPs were very sceptical towards Patient Accessible Electronic Health Records ( PAEHRs ) , considered this service as potentially harmful for patients who do not understand the information , which in turn was seen as a harm to the professionals’ work environment as they could be “inundated by questions from alarmed and / or inquisitive patients” ( Erlingsdottir & Lindholm 2015 , p . 43 ) . The local medical association made several appeals to ofﬁcial authorities , for example to the Data Inspection Board for using and recommending Google Translate , as well as to the Swedish Work Environment Authority for showing patients the list of people who have accessed their records ( for more information on the appeals to ofﬁcial authorities see Lyttkens 2015 ) . The project was highly debated in the media with more than 180 articles in the national press ( Lyttkens 2015 ) and it was unclear what kind of consequences PAEHR would have for HCPs , their work environment , and for patients . On the surface , the PAEHR service called Journalen seems to be a digitalisation of a process that had already been in place before , namely giving patients access to their health records . In Sweden , like in many other countries , patients have the legal right to read their health records on paper , which was not controversial among HCPs . However , the process of accessing the paper - based records was quite cumbersome and it may seem like a logical conclusion to not only digitalise appointment bookings and prescription renewals , but also to enable digital access to the EHR . As the case in Sweden showed , the progression from paper medical records and healthcare - related communications to digital - based solutions was viewed as anything but a natural progression by Swedish HCPs . As was reported in the ﬁnal pilot evaluation , the Swedish Medical Association that represents physicians has been a major opponent of introducing PAEHR , which supports conclusions that “de - ployment of the services requires a strong determination of politicians to deal with the initial resistance among medical doctors” ( Lyttkens 2015 , p . 2 ) . Physicians , nurses , and other HCPs are often included in Human - Centred Design ( HCD ) activities , given that they are domain experts in healthcare . How - ever , depending on the eHealth service in question , they might not be the main users and thus rather indirect stakeholders of the technology . In case of PAEHR , patients interact directly with this eHealth INTRODUCTION 3 technology and can be considered direct stakeholders , while HCPs who have their own professional tools to engage with the records can be considered as indirect stakeholders of PAEHR ( cf . Friedman et al . 2006 ) . It should be emphasised here that the distinction relates not to the interaction of the HCP or patient with the EHR as an artefact . Both actors can be considered direct stakeholders of the health record as such . This thesis focuses on the eHealth service Journalen that gives patients access to their records and HCPs do not use this eHealth service in their role as professionals . Thus , following the distinction between direct and indirect stakeholders by Friedman et al . ( 2006 ) , in this thesis direct stakeholders are deﬁned as the patients seeking healthcare and health - related advice , while physicians , nurses , and associated healthcare organisations are considered indirect stakeholders of the PAEHR system Journalen . Depending on the HCPs’ status and role in dispensing healthcare as well as their social relations to the design team , their views could have a big impact on how important features are implemented in the ﬁnal design . For example , the Swedish Medical Association argued that PAEHR should include a respite period of 14 days before patients can read the information about their recent medical consultation and laboratory test results . The patient association , however , was very determined that patients should make this decision themselves , which was in line with the political view ( Lyttkens 2015 , p . 11 ) . There is an interesting tension between giving too much voice to indirect stakeholders ( which may lead to reinforcing the status quo ) , and neglecting important stakeholders ( which might reinforce a negative attitude and resistance ) . From an Human - Computer Interaction ( HCI ) perspective , it is important to consider ways to involve indirect stakeholders in a design project , which might be difﬁcult especially if they have a very negative attitude towards the system to begin with . Different views of indirect and direct stakeholders have to be identiﬁed , negotiated , and appropriately addressed in the design process . This poses a challenge especially considering unknown and unforeseeable socio - technical consequences of an innovative service , given that technology and the people in a work system are interdependent . Each affects the other . Technology affects the behaviour of people , and the behaviour of people affects the working of the technology . It is inevitable , it is a real part of the situation , and one therefore needs to take account of how they affect each other . ( Klein 2014 , p . 138 ) People potentially affected by PAEHR include , but are not limited to , HCPs , such as physicians , nurses , therapists etc . as well as patients , family members , caregivers . The research presented in this thesis focuses on physicians and patients . The aim of this thesis is to enhance our understanding of physicians’ views , their criticism , and their concerns . Furthermore , the aim is to shed light on whether these concerns have been materialised in practice and how patients view and experience the technology . Finally , through working towards this aim , the desired outcome is to identify human values and tensions between these values that may be associated with PAEHR . 1 . 2 Research Approach & Research Questions Academic research is underpinned by assumptions about the nature of reality or existence ( ontology ) and the nature of knowledge claims ( epistemology ) . The research presented in this thesis is mainly based on a constructionist epistemology that is embedded in an interpretive research paradigm . According to constructionism 1 , meaning is constructed by humans as they engage with the world they are interpreting 1 Crotty ( 1998 , p . 58 ) proposed the following distinction between constructivism and constructionism : ‘constructivism’ refers to meaning - making of the individual ; ‘constructionism’ refers to collective generation of meaning . In this thesis , however , the two terms are used interchangeably to reﬂect the terms used in the individually cited references . 4 INTRODUCTION ( Crotty 1998 , p . 43 ) . Thus , what we know about the world is not out there “waiting to be discovered” ( Braun & Clarke 2013 , p . 30 ) , but produced by humans in interaction with objects , technologies , and their environments . Not only the epistemology , but also the theoretical perspective is embedded in the research approach ( Crotty 1998 , p . 2ff ) . The theoretical perspective or philosophical stance informing this research is interpretivism . Interpretive research aims to produce an understanding of the context of an information system ( Walsham 1993 , p . 4f ) and ﬁts well with constructionist epistemology , as it assumes “that our knowledge of reality is gained only through social constructions such a [ sic ] language , consciousness , shared meanings , documents , tools , and other artifacts” ( Klein & Myers 1999 , p . 69 ) . This thesis focuses on PAEHR that have been implemented on a national level in Sweden . As described above , the launch of the system was not welcomed by everyone . Especially physicians and the medical association representing them opposed the project . To understand the socio - technical opportunities and challenges and to suggest ways to support future projects , the research questions for this thesis have been formulated as follows : RQ1 How do physicians view PAEHR in relation to their work environment and patient participation ? In line with interpretivism , the aim is to develop an understanding of how physicians are making sense of the PAEHR system and how they view this development in relation to their work environment and patient participation . Work environment is a broader concept than work alone . For example , in their research on work - related stress and illness Karasek & Theorell ( 1990 , p . 9 ) showed “it is not the demands of work itself but the organizational structure of work that plays the most consistent role in the development of stress - related illness” . Aspects such as skill discretion ( i . e . , breadth of skills usable on the job ) and decision authority ( or autonomy , i . e . , having the social authority over making decisions ) are part of the psycho - social work environment as presented by Karasek & Theorell ( 1990 , p . 58 ) . In Sweden , the Work Environment Act includes regulations regarding obligations and responsibilities of employers as well as activities regarding cooperation between employers and employees to create a good environment ( SFS 1977 : 1160 ) . Here , the work environment encompasses various factors and relationships at work , such as physical , technical , organisational , social , and the work content ( Swedish Work Environment Authority 2018 ) . Patient participation relates in this thesis to individual patient involvement in their care , for example in treatment decisions or other aspects of care ( cf . Longtin et al . 2010 ; Castro et al . 2016 ) . An in - depth understanding of areas of concern from the physicians’ point of view informs the study aiming to address the following research question : RQ2 How do patients view PAEHR and make use of it ? What are their experiences of accessing their EHR ? Besides investigating patients’ experiences of reading their records through Journalen , the areas of concern expressed by physicians are studied from the patients’ point of view . This enables to distinguish concerns that have materialised from those that were unfounded . The ﬁndings can be useful to inform the development , implementation , and maintenance of PAEHR in this or similar settings . Furthermore , HCPs in Sweden can learn more about their patients’ experiences , which has the potential to inﬂuence their own practices in the future . INTRODUCTION 5 RQ3 Which human values are implicated through engagement or interaction with PAEHR ? Values can affect a person’s interpretation of a situation and at the same time , technology is not value neutral . According to the theoretical stance of Value Sensitive Design ( VSD ) , human values are not embedded within or inscribed into a technology ( Friedman et al . 2006 ) , but rather implicated in the technology through engagement or interaction with it . In this thesis , the main focus is on physicians as indirect stakeholders and patients as direct stakeholders . Given that physicians do not use the PAEHR system in their professional role , they are considered indirect stakeholders . From their point of view , values are thus not implicated through the use of PAEHR but through engagement with the technology . Patients on the other hand do use PAEHR directly and thus human values are associated with it through the interaction with the technology . The empirical studies conducted to answer RQ1 and RQ2 informed the conceptual investigations to answer RQ3 . Survey and interview data as well as the wider literature have been used to conceptually investigate associated human values , including potential tensions between the various values present . 1 . 3 Delimitations The thesis investigated the perspectives of patients and physicians related to the PAEHR system called Journalen that was deployed in Region Uppsala in 2012 . Although other regions and counties also implemented Journalen in the meantime , they have done so in a variety of ways and do not all show the same information to their patients ( see section 2 . 3 . 2 ) . This thesis mainly focuses on Region Uppsala only and so the participants in the empirical studies either worked as physicians or were patients who received care in this region . Investigations that include HCPs and patients from other counties and regions are beyond the scope of this thesis . As this research on the Swedish PAEHR system was carried out mainly in Uppsala , its results may not be applicable , or only partly transferrable , to other settings . For example , Åhlfeldt & Huvila ( 2014 ) conducted a survey investigating the attitudes of Swedish patients regarding safety and privacy aspects of PAEHR and found that security is taken more or less for granted . This general attitude towards security of eHealth services might be different in other countries . Nevertheless , as Uppsala is one of few regions with a long - term implementation of PAEHRs , much can be learned from both patients’ and HCPs’ experiences thus far . In relation to RQ1 , interviews were conducted shortly after the launch of the system and with physicians from various specialities . The results of the interviews are potentially inﬂuenced by the specialities of the physicians . For example general practitioners may be more likely or able to establish a certain type of relationship to their patients compared to physicians practising in a hospital . Furthermore , it is possible that attitudes to patient accessible EHR systems might have changed to a certain extent since 2012 . Follow - up research in Region Uppsala is underway but its ﬁndings are outside the scope of this thesis . The aim of this research is to understand both direct and indirect stakeholders’ experiences and expectations of PAEHR . The empirical investigations are limited to physicians and patients , although more stakeholders are affected by the launch of the service , such as nurses , therapists , family members etc . The main focus was on physicians in this thesis as they were most critical towards the technology . However , research on the effects of PAEHR on the nurses’ work environment is already in progress within the DISA project . The conceptual investigation related to RQ3 is informed by the empirical investigations conducted for this thesis as well as by the wider literature on human values and VSD . Human values may vary 6 INTRODUCTION depending on context and culture , and the framing of the technology may change over time . The results of RQ3 point towards possible future studies in which the values and tensions between them are empirically assessed with all stakeholder groups . This is , however , outside the scope of this thesis . 1 . 4 Summary of Main Contributions The research conducted in this thesis provides important insights into the underlying assumptions and expectations of physicians regarding PAEHR , how patients make use of it , and what aspects of the eHealth service patients ﬁnd most important . The research shows that the views and expectations of physicians were quite different from the views and actual experiences of patients using the PAEHR system . The physicians were mostly concerned not only about potential increase of their workload and a negative effect on their work processes ( i . e . , their work environment ) , but also that patients would be affected negatively if they were able to access their EHR independently . The vast majority of patients appreciated timely access to their results , stated that they understand the content , that accessing their record would make them feel more involved in their care , and that they read their records out of a desire to become more involved . The assumptions and expectations from physicians reported in this thesis are based on interviews shortly after the launch . Thus , the thesis contributes to the dissemination knowledge in terms of reassuring HCPs about the actual experiences of patients reading their records , which does not seem to conﬁrm initial concerns . Furthermore , given that many of the physicians considered access to their records of little value for patients , this research shows that many patients considered access to their EHR as valuable and what types of information were particular important for them . Another contribution of this thesis is its ability to instigate critical discussion of those values associated with eHealth technologies that may stand in tension or might be perceived as conﬂicting given the framing of the technology . In general , people’s interpretations of a technology and their perceptions of how their values are supported or hindered by these technologies and during their use of them , affect their actions as well as their assessment of its usefulness . In a best case scenario , all stakeholders need to be supported both at the design stage and when the technology is in use . This important level of support can be achieved through reﬂecting on their values and to engaging them in dialogue with each other in a bid to raise awareness of the multiple perspectives that affect how a technology is used and received . Part of this process of reﬂection and increased awareness involves pointing out the tensions between different values that are associated with a particular design . These can be made explicit through a discussion over when and why certain values are prioritised over others . This thesis plays a central role in instigating a discussion on how tensions between potentially conﬂicting values in healthcare can be resolved , for example , the tensions between a stance that prioritises technology design that is founded on the belief that experts have a responsibility to make decisions on the patient’s behalf and with their well - being in mind versus technology that supports increased patient autonomy and decision making . These types of discussion are key to future design of healthcare technologies given that one of the motivations behind the introduction of PAEHR in Sweden was patient empowerment , which is closely related to autonomy . Although today a doctor - patient relationship that is based on the medical practitioner’s responsibility to make decisions and act on behalf of the patient from a purely medical standpoint is considered paternalistic and out of date , the ﬁndings of this thesis suggest that paternalistic tendencies still inﬂuence HCPs’ perceptions of PAEHR . However , an eHealth service like PAEHR is a promising ﬁrst step towards patient participation as it makes it easier for patients to actively engage in their care , for example , by accessing their medical information on their own without being dependent on their HCPs for permission or assistance . BACKGROUND 7 Chapter 2 Background This chapter starts with an overview of HCI as the research discipline in which this thesis is situated , including approaches such as Value Sensitive Design ( VSD ) and Technological Frames ( TF ) . Relevant models of the doctor - patient relationship are then discussed as well as the changing role of the patient . Initiatives to ‘empower’ patients include the introduction of eHealth services , which are brieﬂy outlined . The chapter closes with a description of the contextual setting of this research ( i . e . , PAEHR in Sweden ) . 2 . 1 Human - Computer Interaction The ﬁeld of Human - Computer Interaction ( HCI ) was founded in the early 80s and has been broadly de - ﬁned as “discipline concerned with the design , evaluation and implementation of interactive computing systems for human use and with the study of major phenomena surrounding them” ( Hewett et al . 1992 , chapter 2 ) . The ﬁeld has been described as an ‘amalgam of other ﬁelds’ , such as computer science , psychology , human factors engineering , and others . Thus HCI researchers make use of approaches and methods that originate from a variety of disciplines and ﬁelds , for example , social sciences , engineering , or medical research ( Lazar et al . 2010 , p . 2ff ) . The technological advancements of the last decades did also reﬂect on HCI as a ﬁeld , shifted the focus of research and thus affected the research approaches applied . The development of HCI over time has been discussed by several authors ( e . g . , Bødker 2006 , 2015 ; Harrison et al . 2007 , 2011 ; Grudin 2005 , 2017 ) , and can be summarised as a movement from “evaluation of interfaces through design of systems and into general sense - making of our world” ( Bannon 2011 , p . 50 ) . As HCI as a ﬁeld moved into the ‘third paradigm’ , in which interaction is “a form of embodied meaning - making in which the artifact , its context , and its study are mutually deﬁning and subject to multiple interpretations” ( Harrison et al . 2011 , p . 385 ) , new approaches were needed . Essential to the third paradigm is the acknowledgement that “science does not have a single , objective viewpoint but may encompass a wide variety of viewpoints , even ones that may conﬂict” ( Harrison et al . 2011 , p . 389 ) . Due to the variety of viewpoints , a system evaluation cannot be related to universal measures , but have to be related to what is valued in a particular context , which is reﬂected in value - based approaches ( Harrison et al . 2011 , p . 389 ) . Two approaches that are particularly relevant for this thesis are Value Sensitive Design ( VSD ) and Technological Frames ( TF ) , which are discussed in the following sections . 2 . 1 . 1 Value Sensitive Design ( VSD ) The development of VSD began in the 1990s , was initially used as an umbrella term for an orientation towards human values in technology design , and has been claimed to provide theory , methodology , 8 BACKGROUND methods , and an approach “for scaffolding consideration of human values during the design , imple - mentation , use , and evaluation of interactive systems” ( Davis & Nathan 2015 , p . 12ff ) . VSD is an interactional theory in which values are neither ‘inscribed’ into a technology , nor transmitted by social forces ( Friedman et al . 2006 , p . 361 ) . In other words , values are not embedded within a technology , but implicated through engagement and by technology use ( Davis & Nathan 2015 , p . 15 ) . How a technology inﬂuences our lives is not fully determined by its design but is shaped by features of the design , society , and individuals as well as the context in which it is used ( Davis & Nathan 2015 , p . 15 ) . Human Values and Value Tensions Depending on the discipline , context , and the perspective taken , the term ‘value’ has different meanings . Kujala & Väänänen - Vainio - Mattila ( 2009 ) give an overview of different concepts of ‘value’ from psychology , marketing and management science , and HCI . They summarise different value concepts in HCI as : participatory design focuses on the worker’s point of view ; value - sensitive design of universal moral values and value - centred design focus on the intended worth of the product ( Kujala & Väänänen - Vainio - Mattila 2009 , p . 30 ) The concept of values in this thesis relates to human values as conceptualised within the VSD approach , that is referring to “what a person or group of people consider important in life” ( Friedman et al . 2006 , p . 349 ) . VSD considers especially values with moral and ethical import , accounts for conventions , and personal values ( Friedman et al . 2006 , p . 360 ) . Friedman et al . ( 2006 ) provide a list of human values with ethical import that are often implicated in design , namely human welfare , ownership and property , privacy , freedom of bias , universal usability , trust , autonomy , informed consent , accountability , courtesy , identity , calmness , and environmental sustainability . Providing a heuristic list of values has been criticised given that it might bias researchers towards these particular values ( Borning & Muller 2012 ) . However , Friedman et al . ( 2006 , p . 363ff ) note that this list is not comprehensive , but may be useful in “suggesting values that should considered in the investigation” . Borning & Muller ( 2012 ) consider such a list as problematic and criticise the lack of context . However , according to them a carefully conducted empirical investigation might mitigate the risk of bias and having a heuristic list can help designers considering values that may be important for a particular system ( Borning & Muller 2012 , p . 1128 ) . Related to a given technology , several values might be implicated and value tensions can emerge . Those value tensions can occur between values of an individual and those shared by a group , within individuals , or across groups ( Davis & Nathan 2015 , p . 18 ) . Miller et al . ( 2007 ) developed the Value Dams and Flows method for addressing value tensions in design . Here , value dams are technical features that are strongly opposed even by a small set of stakeholders , while value ﬂows are those features that a large number of stakeholders favour . The method aim to avoid features that are seen as problematic , focus on values that stakeholders wish to see embodied by the system , and systematically address values - oriented trade - offs ( Miller et al . 2007 , p . 284 ) . Although not all value tensions can or have to be resolved , it is important to identify potential opposition of how a given technology functions or is deployed , because a strong opposition can block appropriation and inhibit effective use of the technology ( Davis & Nathan 2015 , p . 18 ) . Strong opposition may be accompanied by similar strong emotions , given that “emotions reveal those values that matter to our well - being given a particular design or technology” ( Desmet & Roeser 2015 , p . 203 ) . As technology is value - laden rather than value - neutral , technology evokes “positive and negative emotions of the people who encounter or use it , by touching upon their personal and moral values” BACKGROUND 9 ( Desmet & Roeser 2015 , p . 203 ) . The strong opposition by the HCPs in Sweden towards PAEHR , including several appeals to ofﬁcial authorities ( cf . Lyttkens 2015 ) are indicators of potential values and value tensions associated with PAEHR . Value Sensitive Design Approach VSD is a theoretically grounded approach to account for human values throughout the design process and employs an iterative methodology that integrates conceptual , empirical , and technical investigations ( Friedman et al . 2006 ) . The three investigations are iterative and integrative , which means that they are supposed to inform each other , may overlap , happen in a different order , or intertwine with each other ( Davis & Nathan 2015 , p . 16 ) . Conceptual investigations involve the identiﬁcation of stakeholders who will be affected by the design as well as the implicated values ( Friedman et al . 2006 ; Davis & Nathan 2015 ) . According to ISO 9241 - 210 ( 2010 , p . 3 ) , a stakeholder is an “individual or organization having a right , share , claim or interest in a system or in its possession of characteristics that meet their needs and expectations” . VSD distinguishes two classes of stakeholders : direct stakeholders are individuals or organisations who interact directly with the computer system or its output , whereas indirect stakeholders refer to all other parties who are affected by the use of the system ( Friedman et al . 2006 , p . 361 ) . Besides the identiﬁcation of the stakeholder groups , the conceptual investigations addresses the question , how they are affected by the design , what values are implicated , how they are conceptualised , and how to deal with competing values ( Friedman et al . 2006 , p . 350 ) . For example , in relation to PAEHR one might identify autonomy as a value that is implicated in the technology and deﬁne what autonomy means in that context . Within VSD , the term stakeholders refers speciﬁcally to roles and not to individual people ( Davis & Nathan 2015 , p . 17 ) . Thus , in VSD the stakeholder analysis aims to identify the roles of individuals who will be affected by the technology and the type of roles depends on the context ( s ) under investigation ( Davis & Nathan 2015 , p . 17 ) . As stakeholders are identiﬁed by their roles in relation to the system or organisation ( Miller et al . 2007 , p . 283 ) , a person takes on multiple different stakeholder roles throughout the day depending on the situation ( Davis & Nathan 2015 , p . 17 ) . For example , an individual might engage with medical laboratory test results in her role as a physician or in her role as a patient living with diabetes . Empirical investigations focus on the human context of the technology , for example , how stake - holders prioritise competing values , how they apprehend values in context , whether there are differences between what people say and what they actually do ( Friedman et al . 2006 , p . 351 ) . These investigations focus on the individuals , groups , or larger social systems and can be conducted by applying quantitative or qualitative methods used in social science research ( Friedman et al . 2006 , p . 351f ) . Technical investigations focus on the technology itself , its properties , and underlying mechanisms given that these are able to support or hinder human values ( Friedman et al . 2006 , p . 352 ) . Speciﬁc features of the technology are examined , for example , by designing new technology that aims to support certain values or by analysing how existing technologies support or hinder particular values in a context of use ( Davis & Nathan 2015 , p . 16 ) . The aim of this thesis was not to engage in design activities , but to analyse the value implications in retrospect . Although VSD consists of the tripartite methodology , it is often applied ﬂexibly and “particular studies may rest more heavily on just one or two” ( Davis & Nathan 2015 , p . 30 ) . In this thesis empirical and conceptual investigations were conducted . To answer RQ1 and RQ2 , empirical investigations involved the analysis of interviews with physicians as well as a survey with patients . The 10 BACKGROUND analyses , reﬂection , and writing informed conceptual investigations and lead to an additional analysis of the human values that can be associated with the different viewpoints of the stakeholders . As PAEHR refers to a service that gives patients and relatives access to their EHR , they can be considered as direct stakeholders . HCPs in their professional role do not interact directly with the PAEHR system , as they have their own EHR system and can thus be considered as indirect stakeholders of PAEHR . It can be argued , that HCPs provide the data for the EHR and may be more than just indirect stakeholders . However , in this thesis the stakeholders are identiﬁed by their role in relation to the technology that gives patients access to their records . Given that HCPs use their own technology to interact with the health records , this thesis considers them as indirect and patients and relatives as direct stakeholders . This is in line with the interpretation by Erlingsdottir & Lindholm ( 2015 , p . 40 ) that “the medical profession was not really perceived as a legitimate actor in the development process” of the PAEHR system in question . The distinction between direct and indirect stakeholders should not imply that values and concerns of the latter are not relevant . To the contrary , VSD emphasises the importance to account also for the values of indirect stakeholders . As an example , Friedman et al . ( 2006 , p . 361 ) discuss that medical record systems have often been designed with too little regard for values of indirect stakeholders , namely , the patients . In this thesis , both classes of stakeholders and their values are considered as important and the distinction between direct and indirect refers to the stakeholders’ role in relation to the PAEHR system . 2 . 1 . 2 Technological Frames ( TF ) Technological Frames ( TF ) is a systematic approach that builds on and extends research into cognitions and values to understand how people make sense of technology in their organisation ( Orlikowski & Gash 1994 , p . 174 ) . TF are deﬁned as the core set of assumptions , expectations , and knowledge that people use to understand technology , including “speciﬁc conditions , applications , and consequences of that technology in particular contexts” ( Orlikowski & Gash 1994 , p . 178 ) . Orlikowski & Gash ( 1994 ) identiﬁed an initial set of frame domains to characterise participants’ interpretations about the technology , which can serve as guideline to examine and articulate those interpretations : Nature of Technology People’s view of the technology and their understanding regarding its capabili - ties and functionality Technology Strategy People’s understanding regarding their organisation’s motivation / vision for the implementation of the technology and the adoption decision , as well as the likely value to the organisation Technology in Use People’s understanding how the technology will be used and the conditions and consequences of its use Orlikowski & Gash ( 1994 ) identiﬁed these three frame domains in the context of a particular technology , but as they are quite general and are recommended as a guideline , they were suitable to examine the physicians’ interpretations of PAEHR . Another concept that is useful for analysis is the notion of congruence to describe “the nature and extent of differences among frames” ( Orlikowski & Gash 1994 , p . 175 ) . TF that are congruent are related in structure and content ( i . e . , they have common categories of frames and similar values on the common categories ) ( Orlikowski & Gash 1994 , p . 180 ) . Incongruent frames indicate differences in expectations , assumptions , or knowledge about key aspects of the technology ( Orlikowski & Gash 1994 , p . 180 ) and can explain difﬁculties and conﬂicts related to technology . Those frame differences often BACKGROUND 11 occur across groups , however , it is also possible that frames are internally inconsistent ( Orlikowski & Gash 1994 , p . 181 ) . The authors exemplify this with a framing related to a collaborative tool and people’s belief that this will increase productivity within the group while at the same time do not expect to make a contribution themselves to actually make this work , but expect everyone else to do so ( Orlikowski & Gash 1994 , p . 181 ) . The differences in expectations and assumptions implied in incongruent frames can be problematic and may inhibit the adoption and acceptance of technology . Strategies may be developed to establish frame alignment and overcome those difﬁculties . However , interventions to reach frame alignment can be interpreted as a political approach to impose a dominant frame and might backﬁre ( Davidson 2006 , p . 36 ) . Whatever the strategy , the identiﬁcation of incongruent frames is an important step to understand barriers related to technology acceptance and adoption . Used as an analytic tool , TF enhances our understanding of people’s actions towards technology and identifying inconsistent or incongruent TF has the potential to “reduce the likelihood of unintended misunderstandings and delusions around the implementation and use of new information technology” ( Orlikowski & Gash 1994 , p . 202 ) . 2 . 1 . 3 Relationship Between Technological Frames and Human Values Miller et al . ( 2007 ) identiﬁed four strands of research within HCI that focus on values : • Research that focuses on understanding the meaning and components of speciﬁc values • Research that investigates stakeholders’ views about and experiences of values with respect to technology • Research that proposes technological designs to support speciﬁc human values • Research that investigates methods to design for values The approach used in this thesis to combine the approaches of TF and VSD is situated in the second research strand : to investigate values implicated in a technology from a stakeholder’s perspective . As presented in the previous section , the concept of TF is an approach to investigate how people interpret and make sense of technology . Although TF builds on research into cognition and values , human values are not explicitly investigated . However , values can effect a person’s interpretation of a situation : As sources of motivation , important values inﬂuence people to interpret situations in terms of the opportunities the situations offer for attaining particular cherished goals and the threats they harbor to these goals . The same situation may therefore elicit very different construals from people with different value priorities , construals that give rise to different worries or to no worry at all . ( Schwartz et al . 2000 , p . 313 ) According to socio - technical theories , technology and people are interdependent , that is , technology affects how people behave , and how they behave affects the working of the technology ( Klein 2014 , p . 138 ) . Similar to these interdependencies between social and technical aspects in socio - technical theories , we can identify an interdependency between values and interpretations of technology ( i . e . , their TF ) . Values inﬂuence how a person perceives , interprets , and experiences a technology , and in turn , how they interpret a technology inﬂuences their perception of whether the technology supports or hinders their values . This is in line with the theoretical position of VSD that rejects the idea that values are embedded or inscribed into technology . As “technology can be appropriated in innumerable ways , shaped by individuals and societies and by the context of use , as well as by its form and content” , values are 12 BACKGROUND implicated in the technology through engagement and through technology use ( Davis & Nathan 2015 , p . 15 ) . The identiﬁcation of TF enhances our understanding of how people interpret a technology ( e . g . , the features , why it was introduced , and its use in context ) and based on that we can investigate the values that might be associated with that interpretation . The examination of both TF and values can lead to a more in - depth understanding of certain assumptions , expectations , and conﬂicts . Furthermore , it can help us understand the interpretations of people who do not interact directly with the technology ( i . e . , the indirect stakeholders ) . To answer RQ3 , TF were used as an analytic tool to identify values and value tensions that may be implicated in PAEHR ( see a more detailed description of the analysis method in section 3 . 2 . 3 ) . 2 . 2 Patient Participation and the Doctor - Patient Relationship In this section , several models of the doctor - patient relationship are outlined describing different roles patients and physicians can take in this relationship . Furthermore , the concepts of patient empowerment and patient participation are presented . 2 . 2 . 1 Models of the Doctor - Patient Relationship There are different approaches to model the relationship between patients and their physicians . In their well - known conceptualisation of the doctor - patient relationship , Szasz & Hollender ( 1956 ) outline three basic models and relate each to a prototype as an analogy borrowed from parent - child relationship . • Activity – passivity : The physician does something to the patient , who is a passive recipient ( e . g . , because they are unable to respond ) . The prototype here is the relationship between parent and infant . • Guidance – cooperation : In this model , the physician tells the patient what to do , while the patient as cooperator is supposed to obey . The relationship prototype is here between a parent and a child or adolescent . • Mutual participation : Here , the physician helps the patient to help herself , while the patient is an equal partner , who uses expert help . The relationship here is analogue to one between two adults . The name of the particular model indicates the activity or role for each actor , whereas the prototype of the model points towards a changing role for the patient . The analogy of infant , child , and adult seems to indicate a level of matureness , whereas the physician’s role seems to remain one as adult . However , the level of control varies for the physician . In the activity - passivity model , the physician is in “absolute control of the situation” ( Szasz & Hollender 1956 , p . 587 ) , which today is merely appropriate when the patient for example is not well enough to participate . When the patient improves , the relationship must change and so must the physician’s attitude similar to the aforementioned analogy : “the need for the parent to behave every differently toward his growing child” ( Szasz & Hollender 1956 , p . 588 ) . Another well - known delineation of relationship - models with an emphasis on patient values , physi - cian’s obligations , and a conception of patient’s autonomy was made by Emanuel & Emanuel ( 1992 ) . This was motivated by an unclear role of the patient in decision making , which had been characterised as a conﬂict between autonomy and health , and between the values of physician and those of the patient ( Emanuel & Emanuel 1992 ) . The authors discern four models of the physician - patient relationship and outline with each a conception of the physician’s role as follows ( Emanuel & Emanuel 1992 ) : BACKGROUND 13 • Paternalistic : The physician as a guardian , promotes the patient’s well - being independent of the patient’s current preferences . • Deliberative : The physician’s role is conceptualised as a friend / teacher , who articulates and persuades the patient of the most admirable values , informs the patient and implements the intervention selected by the patient . • Interpretive : As counsellor / advisor , the physician elucidates and interprets relevant patient values , informs the patient , and implements the intervention selected by the patient . • Informative : The physician as the competent technical expert provides relevant factual informa - tion and implements the interventions selected by the patient . Except for the paternalistic model , in all other models the medical intervention that best realise their values are selected by the patients themselves ( Emanuel & Emanuel 1992 ) . This change towards redeﬁning patients as active and having the right to self - determination was highly inﬂuenced by the law and the interpretation of informed consent ( Roter 1977 , p . 282 ) . Since the 1970s , informed consent was supposed to be patient - oriented , where the “physician has a ‘duty’ to provide appropriate medical facts to empower the patient to use his or her values to determine what interventions should be implemented” ( Emanuel & Emanuel 1992 , p . 2223 ) . Furthermore , it has been recognised that physicians cannot be expected to know what is in the best interest for a patient , for example , when balancing decisions that contribute to medical well - being versus total well - being , or how to relate medical beneﬁts to overall beneﬁts ( Veatch 2000 ) . As Veatch ( 2000 ) concludes The only way physicians in the future will be able to approximate knowledge of what serves their patients’ interests is to ask them . It is not that patients will always be correct in their assessment of what is in their interests . But , if they are educated with the assistance of physicians and others , and gradually become comfortable telling physicians what their interests are , eventually the patients themselves are likely to be the most reliable source physicians have of knowing their patients’ interests . ( Veatch 2000 , p . 708 ) An alternative approach to paternalistic or informed models is shared decision making , and has been discussed as a fact - value division of labor in which both actors make essential contributions , as they both possess knowledge that is essential to select the best treatment option ( Emanuel & Emanuel 1992 , p . 2224 ) . Physicians provide factual information and contribute with their medical training , knowledge , and expertise , while patients make value decisions and hence bring knowledge of their own aims and values ( Brock & Wartman 1990 , as cited in Emanuel & Emanuel 1992 ) . This shared decision making is seen as a collaborative process , however , Charles et al . ( 1997 , p . 683 ) warn that “information sharing does not necessarily lead to a sharing of the decision - making process” if the role of the physicians is limited to the information exchange . In order to establish a shared decision making process , both patient and physician have to share their treatment preferences ( Charles et al . 1997 , p . 683 ) . 2 . 2 . 2 Patient Empowerment and Participation Besides legislation related to informed consent , the self - help movement during the 1970s and 1980s also supported the view of patients and consumers as being active in their own care ( Roter 1977 , p . 282 ) . During this time , the concept of patient empowerment evolved and continues to grow in importance ( Castro et al . 2016 ) . Patient empowerment was proposed already in the 1990s as an approach to diabetes care and education ( Funnell et al . 1991 ) . The motivation behind their proposal was a recognition 14 BACKGROUND that “diabetes is an illness that affects all aspects of a person’s life” , which necessitates that “each person makes many diabetes - related choices each day” ( Funnell et al . 1991 , p . 38 ) . Their deﬁnition of empowerment has two important components ( Funnell et al . 1991 , p . 38 ) : • Empowerment as Process : The discovery and development of one’s inherent capacity to be responsible for one’s own life . • Empowerment as Outcome : Patients are empowered when they have knowledge , skills , atti - tudes , and self - awareness necessary to inﬂuence their own behaviour and that of others in order to improve the quality of their lives . Later Anderson & Funnell ( 2010 , p . 278 ) clariﬁed that in line with Paulo Freire’s view on education , their aim was to increase a person’s freedom and autonomy , not to increase conformity or compliance . For them , “Empowerment is the antithesis of compliance . The purpose of empowerment - based interventions is to help patients learn to think critically and make informed decisions” ( Anderson & Funnell 2010 , p . 279 ) . Deﬁnitions of the concept ‘patient empowerment’ vary , and it is sometimes used interchangeably with ‘patient participation’ ( Castro et al . 2016 , p . 1926 ) . Other close concepts are engagement , enablement , involvement , and activation ( Fumagalli et al . 2015 ) . In an attempt to clarify those neighbouring concepts , Fumagalli et al . ( 2015 ) developed a concept map and combined the key deﬁnitions into : Patient empowerment is the acquisition of motivation ( self - awareness and attitude through engagement ) and ability ( skills and knowledge through enablement ) that patients might use to be involved or participate in decision - making , thus creating an opportunity for higher levels of power in their relationship with professionals . ( Fumagalli et al . 2015 , p . 390 , emphasis added ) A recent analysis by Castro et al . ( 2016 ) examined the three overlapping concepts patient empow - erment , patient participation , and patient - centredness . They conclude that patient empowerment is a broader concept than patient participation and patient - centredness , more a “philosophy or a framework for thinking” ( Castro et al . 2016 , p . 1930f ) . They consider patient participation as a strategy to achieve patient - centred care , which then can promote patient empowerment ( Castro et al . 2016 , p . 1931 ) . However , patient participation presupposes that the patient has acquired some form of motivation and skills , which is part of the deﬁnition of patient empowerment by Fumagalli et al . ( 2015 ) as well as Anderson & Funnell ( 2010 ) . Thus , activities related to empowerment can be considered to precede participatory activities . Power as a concept can be viewed as zero - sum ( gaining power on one side , necessitates a loss in power in the other ) or non - zero - sum ( if one person gains , everyone also gains ) ( Laverack 2005 , p . 31ff ) . The World Health Organization ( WHO ) has acknowledged that ‘patient empowerment’ is an “emotionally charged and challenging term” , and stated that although it might be preferred from a patient advocacy point of view , ‘patient participation’ might be a term more acceptable to many HCPs , patients , and cultures ( WHO 2009 , p . 190 ) . The term ‘empowerment’ implies an exchange or transference of power from one actor to the other . For Anderson & Funnell ( 2010 , p . 279 ) , however , “empowerment has nothing to do with giving or taking power” . Furthermore , Laverack ( 2005 , p . 3 ) states that “power cannot be given to people but must be gained or seized by themselves” and that the practitioner’s role is to encourage patients to “take greater responsibility and control over their lives” . This can be quite challenging , however , as HCPs are socialised to a set of responsibilities and expectations that deﬁne their professional identity BACKGROUND 15 ( Anderson & Funnell 2010 , p . 278 ) , which may lead them to act more according to a traditional model despite talking of empowerment in interactions with people ( Paterson 2001 , p . 580 ) . As stated by Paterson ( 2001 , p . 580 ) : “Practitioners can extend invitations to people with chronic illness to engage in participatory decision making , but their behaviours and practices may actually inhibit or negate their intended goal . ” It should be noted that patients can also empower themselves , for instance through education programmes , support groups , or searches for information on the Internet ( Holmström & Röing 2010 , p . 171 ) . By investigating patients’ experience of feeling powerless , Aujoulat et al . ( 2007b , p . 782f ) found that “a ‘successful’ process of empowerment might occur when patients come to terms with their threatened senses of security and identity , not only with the management of their treatment” . It can be assumed that it requires some form of empowerment for patients to be able to share their treatment preferences and engage in shared decision making . For example , a patient who is only used to the paternalistic approach and who has not yet developed the skills and motivation needed , might be overwhelmed if she is suddenly invited to engage in shared decision making . Although information sharing does not automatically lead to a change in the decision making process , it is however a start to invite the patient to become involved . Technological innovations have made it much easier for patients to access their own health and medical information , to get involved , and to be able to participate and engage in self - care . Some of the technologies available today are discussed in the following section . 2 . 3 eHealth Services ICT has been used in healthcare since the development of electronic communication ( Riva 2000 ) , known under various terms such as telemedicine , telehealth , eHealth etc . ( Mitchell 2000 ) . Telemedicine and telehealth describe the provision of medical services and healthcare to distant locations ( Mitchell 2000 ) , while eHealth is the integration of telehealth technologies with the Internet ( Riva 2000 ) . After almost two decades of research related to eHealth , a consensus of what eHealth describes is still lacking . Systematic reviews identiﬁed 51 ( Oh et al . 2005 ) or 36 ( Pagliari et al . 2005 ) deﬁnitions of eHealth . One of the most cited deﬁnitions of eHealth was made by Eysenbach ( 2001 ) , which was minimally adapted by Pagliari et al . ( 2005 ) following their systematic review to : e - health is an emerging ﬁeld of medical informatics , referring to the organization and delivery of health services and information using the Internet and related technologies . In a broader sense , the term characterizes not only a technical development , but also a new way of working , an attitude , and a commitment for networked , global thinking , to improve health care locally , regionally , and worldwide by using information and communication technology ( Pagliari et al . 2005 ) Although the preceding ‘e’ derives from ‘electronic’ , it encompasses other concepts , such as efﬁciency , enhancing quality of care , evidence based , empowerment , encouragement , education , enabling , extending , ethics , and equity ( Eysenbach 2001 ; Meier et al . 2013 ) . A recent qualitative analysis by Shaw et al . ( 2017 ) identiﬁed three overlapping eHealth domains that informed their model for conceptualising eHealth : Health in our hands The use of eHealth technologies to monitor , track , and inform health Interacting for health The use of technologies to communicate among practitioners as well as between HCPs and patients or clients Data enabling health The collection , management , and use of health data sources 16 BACKGROUND Rather than to substitute human activities , eHealth technology is seen as a means to expand , assist , or enhance them ( Oh et al . 2005 ) . eHealth technologies have been used in healthcare and education , for example remote video consultation , medical imaging , surgical simulations ( Riva 2000 ) . Other services focus on the patient as a main user , such as electronic medication renewal , electronic appointment booking , asynchronous communication between patient and HCP ( Hyppönen et al . 2015 ) , and are often made accessible through patient portals . As mentioned previously , one motivator for patient empowerment was the acknowledgement that patients with chronic conditions such as diabetes are already responsible for most of their care . Unruh & Pratt ( 2008 ) conducted a longitudinal ﬁeld study and give detailed examples of the invisible work patients conduct to cope with lack of information , bridge inter - institutional care , manage dependencies , and resolve inconsistent recommendations . eHealth can support patients in their daily activities and support patient empowerment . In order to do that , the services need to support the three steps of ‘accessing information’ , ‘building knowledge’ and ‘transforming knowledge into action’ ( Koch 2012 , p . 27 ) . 2 . 3 . 1 Patient Portals and Patient Accessible Electronic Health Records Patient portals are provider - tethered applications that allow patients to access different eHealth services , such as secure messaging with their healthcare provider via secure messaging , appointment booking , requesting prescription reﬁlls , or reviewing their health information ( Bourgeois et al . 2009 ) . Nowa - days health information of patients is predominantly documented electronically . The International Organization for Standardization deﬁnes an Electronic Health Record ( EHR ) for integrated care as repository of information regarding the health status of a subject of care , in computer pro - cessable form , stored and transmitted securely and accessible by multiple authorized users , having a standardized or commonly agreed logical information model that is independent of EHR systems and whose primary purpose is the support of continuing , efﬁcient and quality integrated health care . It contains information which is retrospective , concurrent and prospective . ( ISO / TR 20514 2005 ) Data in patient portals are usually controlled by the portal provider , however , some portals also integrate a Personal Health Record ( PHR ) which supports patients to share information with HCPs , family , or caregivers . PHRs are controlled by the patient and also contain information entered by the patient ( Häyrinen et al . 2008 ) . Examples of portals integrating PHR are the US services MyChildren’s ( Bourgeois et al . 2009 ) and Blue Button ( Turvey et al . 2014 ) , or MyChart in Canada ( Curtis et al . 2011 ) . Initiatives to research and develop infrastructure to involve patients in the use of their own health records are ongoing in various countries worldwide ( Häyrinen et al . 2008 ) . Part of the Digital Agenda for Europe was to undertake pilot actions so that citizens have secure online access to their medical health data by 2015 , and widespread deployment of telemedicine services by 2020 ( European Commission 2010 , p . 29f ) . The extent of access to the EHR can vary , as some providers provide after - visit summaries ( Ralston et al . 2007 ) , while others allow patients to read visit notes ( e . g . , Open Notes in the US , Delbanco et al . 2010 ) . As full access to the EHR and the medical notes raises concerns among HCPs ( e . g . , Walker et al . 2011 ) , after - visit summaries might seem as a safe option . However , content recall and patient satisfaction with the provided information is rather limited , as patients preferred more information to be included ( Pavlik et al . 2014 ) . Today , only few countries offer their citizens access to their own health data on a national level ( Nøhr et al . 2017 ) . In Europe , Denmark and Estonia implemented national patient portals that give patients access to their full record ( Nøhr et al . 2017 ; BEUC 2013 ) . A comparison of ten countries BACKGROUND 17 showed that many PAEHR systems only provided access to a limited selection of data , although the citizens in all of these countries had a legal right to access their data ( Essén et al . 2017 ) . Since 1996 , the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act ( HIPAA ) in the US demands that patients are able to see their records , get copies , and request amendments ( Delbanco et al . 2010 ) . The exercise of this right is supported by the implementation of PAEHRs , for example Open Notes ( Delbanco et al . 2010 ) , and the Veterans Health Administration’s Blue Button ( Turvey et al . 2014 ) . Open Notes started in 2010 as a pilot project with more than 100 primary care physicians in Massachusetts , Pennsylvania , and Washington ( Delbanco et al . 2010 ) . The project was set up from the beginning as demonstration and evaluation project , and included a study with a pre - post design and comparison groups of nonparticipating physicians and patients ( Delbanco et al . 2010 ) . The survey conducted before the project started showed strong differences between physicians’ and patients’ attitudes towards sharing visit notes ( Walker et al . 2011 ) . Many physicians and most of those who declined to participate in the project worried about negative effects on their time , for instance , through an increase of calls , letters , and emails from patients , or more time spent on writing and editing notes ( Delbanco et al . 2010 ; Walker et al . 2011 ) . It was furthermore of concern that reading might lead to strong emotions such as guilt , fear , anger , panic , depression ( Delbanco et al . 2010 ) . However , some physicians anticipated potential beneﬁts , such as improvement in patient safety and satisfaction , patients might feel more in control , take better care of themselves , and being better prepared for the next visit ( Walker et al . 2011 ) . The patients who participated in the survey were overwhelmingly positive , which was independent of age , education , or health characteristics ( Walker et al . 2011 ) . More generally , the physicians , especially those who did not want to participate in the project , were far more worried about negative consequences than the patients themselves ( Walker et al . 2011 ) . The pilot project ran for one year and a survey was conducted afterwards to investigate the experiences of patients and physicians ( Delbanco et al . 2012 ) . The survey revealed that many concerns had not materialised , such as an additional time burden , or patients becoming worried or offended ( Delbanco et al . 2012 ) . Furthermore workload concerns had diminished markedly in the post - intervention survey , and many physicians commented about a strengthened relationship with some of their patients ( Delbanco et al . 2012 ) . The patients reported several positive consequences , such as an increased sense of control , increased understanding of their medical issues , becoming more likely to take their medications as prescribed , and being better prepared for the next visits ( Delbanco et al . 2012 ) . Only few had become worried , confused , or offended by reading their notes ( Delbanco et al . 2012 ) . Blue Button is a special feature in the portal of the Department of Veterans Affairs , which combines a online personal health record and a patient portal ( Turvey et al . 2014 ) . Among other things , the Blue Button feature allows veterans to access certain components of their EHR , such as test results , clinical notes , appointments , medication , allergies , electronic communication between patient and their HCPs ( Turvey et al . 2014 ; Nazi et al . 2015 ) . Patients who accessed their notes reported positive effects similar to the aforementioned Open Notes study ( Nazi et al . 2015 ) . Having all information in one place , enhanced their understanding of their health history and their medications , as well as made it easier for them to monitor their laboratory test results ( Turvey et al . 2014 ) . Only few patients reported about becoming confused or worried , but many expressed the overall beneﬁts , such as an increased understanding of their condition and better recall of their care plan , improved medication adherence , better preparation for the next visit , and that they feel more in control ( Nazi et al . 2015 ) . Based on the concerns the physicians in the Open Notes study had expressed , Nazi et al . ( 2015 ) were also interested in actions taken by the patients who read their EHR . The majority did , however , not contact their healthcare provider after reading . One should note , that the veteran patients in the Blue Button study by Nazi et al . ( 2015 ) had online access to all of their clinical notes , while the patients in the Open Notes projects had access to notes written by physicians who volunteered . 18 BACKGROUND Another American project that conducted a randomised controlled trial is System Providing Patients Access to Records Online ( SPPARO ) , which besides access to the medical records also entails a guide to heart failure and a messaging system ( Earnest et al . 2004 ) . Prior to the trial , patients were more likely than physicians to expect that accessing the records would be empowering for them . Interestingly , after the trial period physicians’ attitude changed from less than half to all of them anticipating that it would empower patients ( Earnest et al . 2004 ) . Furthermore , although they initially had raised concerns about possible negative effects , none of these were mentioned in the interviews after the trial as they considered the SPPARO project as ‘invisible’ and that it did not affect their workﬂow ( Earnest et al . 2004 ) . These above examples are from the US and thus the context is not directly comparable to European healthcare . However , concerns and experiences might be nevertheless transferable in parts and it is valuable to look at differences and similarities related to consequences of PAEHR . A recent systematic interpretative review found only few studies that originate from Europe ( de Lusignan et al . 2014 ) , however , professionals expressing concerns and patients expressing enthusiasm seem to occur across countries . 2 . 3 . 2 Patient Accessible Electronic Health Records in Sweden Sweden is divided into 290 municipalities and 21 county councils / regions , which are self - governing authorities . Most health and medical costs are paid for by taxes of the municipalities and county councils / regions and patients need referrals but have free choice of hospitals ( Sellberg & Eltes 2017 , p . 226f ) . The county councils , regions , and municipalities are autonomous and make their own ICT investments ( Sellberg & Eltes 2017 , p . 227 ) . Since 2015 , Inera AB is responsible for the development and maintenance of all public eHealth services and the national patient portal ‘1177 . se’ ( Hägglund & Scandurra 2017 ) . Inera AB is owned by Swedish county councils , regions , and municipalities as well as the Swedish Association of Local Authorities and Regions ( SALAR ) ( Inera AB 2018a ) , The research in this thesis focuses on the national eHealth service Journalen that gives patients in Sweden access to their EHR . As brieﬂy outlined in section 1 . 1 , Journalen was initially developed as part of a European project and faced several challenges that even led to a temporary termination ( Erlingsdottir & Lindholm 2015 , p . 35 ) . However , despite the barriers , Journalen was launched as a pilot in Region Uppsala in 2012 and eventually became the national PAEHR system in Sweden . In the following , the Swedish eHealth architecture that is the basis for Journalen , and the history and development as well as the current status of the PAEHR system are brieﬂy outlined . Swedish eHealth architecture Sweden developed an eHealth architecture that was based on three rationales ( Sellberg & Eltes 2017 ) : • National IT Strategy ( 2005 ) • National eHealth Strategy for Accessible and Secure Information in healthcare ( 2010 ) • National Action Plan for eHealth ( 2009 – 2012 and 2013 – 2018 ) The Swedish eHealth architecture consists of several components which have been described in detail by Sellberg & Eltes ( 2017 ) . The core components are the national Reference Architecture Framework , the national Health Information Exchange ( HIE ) platform , and the national service contracts ( Sellberg & Eltes 2017 , p . 228ff ) . These core components deﬁne architecture principles , service - oriented integration patterns , and platform capabilities as well as requirements of service - oriented communication end - points ( Sellberg & Eltes 2017 ) . Because the Swedish reference architecture is BACKGROUND 19 service - oriented , it does not rely upon central storage of EHRs ( Sellberg & Eltes 2017 , p . 231 ) . The connected eServices , including the PAEHR system Journalen offered by Inera AB , are based on the HIE platform , Application Programming Interfaces ( APIs ) , and the connected EHRs , as illustrated in Figure 2 . 1 . 400 EHRs are connected to the national HIE platform and yearly about 1 billion exchanges take place through more than 100 shared APIs . Health information exchange platform Diagnoses Lab results Medication requests Warnings EHR EHR EHR EHR EHR EHR EHR Vaccinations State agency ( e . g . , Swedish eHealth agency ) State agency ( e . g . , Insurance agency ) Virtual national EHR connected e S e rv i c e s Figure 2 . 1 : National health information exchange infrastructure ( courtesy of Johan Eltes , Inera AB ) One of the principles of the reference architecture is to enable local and regional developments of EHR solutions and the HIE platform is the single connection point for clients to access information and perform transactions on all EHR systems in Sweden ( Sellberg & Eltes 2017 , p . 231 ) . The architecture supports multiplicity and heterogeneity , because HCPs can work with their preferred EHR systems and still exchange information with others who use different systems ( Sellberg & Eltes 2017 , p . 233 ) . The national reference architecture and the HIE platform do not only support information exchange between HCPs , but also allow patients to access their health information through eHealth services that apply the national reference architecture and are connected to the HIE platform . Development of patient applications The National IT strategy from 2005 aimed not only to give professionals information access across organisational boundaries , but also to give patients , citizens , and families access to information on their own health ( Sellberg & Eltes 2017 , p . 227f ) . Furthermore , one goal of the action plans for eHealth was that patients are enabled to access all clinical information about themselves and hereby increase patient empowerment ( Sellberg & Eltes 2017 , p . 228 ) . Attempts to give patients access to their health information started in the middle of the nineties . Between 1997 to 2012 , Region Uppsala 1 developed eHealth services as part of the European project Support USers To Access INformation and Services ( SUSTAINS ) ( Erlingsdottir & Lindholm 2015 ) . The service that enabled patients to access their EHR over the Internet was later named Journalen ( Lyttkens 2015 , p . 25 ) and has become the national PAEHR in Sweden . Despite the successful implementation on the national level today , the SUSTAINS project faced several difﬁculties during the development process . Successful pilot tests had been conducted in 1997 and 2002 , including one longterm pilot at a general practitioner surgery in Uppsala , which lasted nine years ( Lyttkens 2015 ) . As a next step , the project team had planned to offer the service to all hospital 1 Uppsala was a county council until the end of 2016 and became a region in 2017 . 20 BACKGROUND patients in Uppsala in 2004 , that is to approximately 300 , 000 people ( Erlingsdottir & Lindholm 2015 ) . Patients had the right since 1985 to request a copy of their health records ( SFS 1985 : 562 ) , however , the Swedish Data Inspection board decided in 2003 that digital patient access was against the law ( Erlingsdottir & Lindholm 2015 ; Lyttkens 2015 ) . According to the law at that time , it was only legal to allow digital access in relation to carrying out work , and as patients are not employees , giving them access was basically illegal until legislation changed in 2008 ( Erlingsdottir & Lindholm 2015 ) . In July 2008 , the Patient Data Act ( SFS 2008 : 355 ) came into force and allowed not only patients to access their health records digitally ( Erlingsdottir & Lindholm 2015 ) , but also allowed HCPs to share EHRs with each other if the patient gives his or her permission ( Lyttkens 2015 ) . In November 2012 , Region Uppsala then launched several eHealth services including PAEHR , appointment booking , prescription renewals , tracking referrals , and others . Patients can also see the log list which presents a list of everyone who has accessed the patient’s EHR ( i . e . , HCPs and persons who the patient has chosen to share their record with ) . The list enables patients to check whether someone accessed their record without authorisation or professional legitimisation , for example , people in their family or circle of acquaintances who might work in healthcare and thus can access their record technically although this is of course not allowed . Parallel to the PAEHR development in Region Uppsala , Stockholm County Council also developed a PAEHR system ( Hägglund & Scandurra 2017 ; Sellberg & Eltes 2017 ) . For a while both PAEHR systems were accessible for patients through the patient portal ‘1177 . se’ , however , as this caused a fragmented view , the county councils made a decision to have one national PAEHR system ( Hägglund & Scandurra 2017 ) . As Journalen had reached a larger user base , the county council in Stockholm decided at the end of 2015 to decommission their eHealth service in favour of the PAEHR system in Uppsala ( Sellberg & Eltes 2017 ) . According to Sellberg & Eltes ( 2017 , p . 239 ) , switching from one so called ‘patient EHR viewer’ to another only required administration of access rights as it was based on the same backend . Current status of Journalen Since March 2018 , all county councils and regions have implemented Journalen , in other words , it has become the national PAEHR system ( Inera AB 2018c ) . Depending on the county council / region , the information that is displayed via Journalen varies ( see Figure 2 . 2 ) . Also , some counties / regions such as Uppsala , show all information directly . Other counties / regions have implemented a delay of 14 days for unsigned notes or for all medical notes , and some do not show unsigned notes at all . As stated before , the Swedish Medical Association in Uppsala argued for a delay of 14 days , which was not followed , as the patient association was determined to leave this decision ( i . e . , whether they want to see information immediately or not ) to the patient ( Lyttkens 2015 , p . 11 ) . In relation to the SUSTAINS project , there was also a debate whether unsigned notes should be shown . Based on a decision of the Supreme Administrative Court , unsigned notes can and will be shown , unless the patient opts for a delay ( Lyttkens 2015 , p . 12 ) . BACKGROUND 21 County / Region Notes Diagnoses Health Declaration Forms Log List Medication Maternity Care Lab Results Referrals Blocking Growth Curves Warnings Vaccinations Contact History Blekinge x x x x x x Dalarna x x x Gotland x x x x Gävleborg x x x x Halland x x x x x Jämtland / Härjedalen x x x x x Jönköping x x x x x Kalmar x x x x Kronoberg x x x x Norrbotten x x x x x Skåne x x x Stockholm x x x x Södermanland x x x x Uppsala x x x x x x x x x x Värmland x x x x x x x Västerbotten x x x x Västmanland x x x x Västra Götaland x x x x Örebro x x x x x x x Östergotland x x x x x x x Figure 2 . 2 : Overview of information displayed in each county council / region as of January 2018 ( Inera AB 2018b ) The user interface of Journalen and in particular the timeline of the patient’s EHR is shown in Figure 2 . 3 . New and unsigned notes have a marker ‘Nytt / Osignerat’ ( New / Unsigned ) attached . Patients can also access their lab results in a separate view , export them as a spreadsheet , and visualise them as a graph . Figure 2 . 3 : PAEHR user interface - Timeline of the EHR 22 BACKGROUND As of March 2018 , Journalen has up to 1 . 8 million registered users and about 48 , 000 people log into their health record each day ( Inera AB 2018c ) . The user statistics of Journalen are made available by Inera AB through their website ( Inera AB 2018d ) . Figure 2 . 4 shows the number of unique residents from all regions and counties who used Journalen in 2018 ( as of August 5 , 2018 ) . The ﬁgure shows the age and gender distribution in 10 - year intervals as well as aggregated . DISTRIBUTION GENDER Male 37 % Female 63 % Female Male DISTRIBUTION AGE & GENDER N u m b e r o f u s e r s 0 40 . 000 80 . 000 120 . 000 160 . 000 Age intervals 10 - 19 20 - 29 30 - 39 40 - 49 50 - 59 60 - 69 70 - 79 80 - 89 90 - 99 100 + Female Male JOURNALEN SWEDEN 2018 ( as of August 5 , 2018 ) Age Female Male 10 - 19 21 . 662 8 . 298 20 - 29 158 . 183 66 . 057 30 - 39 135 . 443 66 . 086 40 - 49 113 . 417 62 . 331 50 - 59 112 . 410 66 . 670 60 - 69 87 . 867 71 . 699 70 - 79 48 . 474 54 . 915 80 - 89 7 . 520 10 . 042 90 - 99 731 604 100 + 11 3 Sum 685 . 718 406 . 705 Figure 2 . 4 : Swedish residents who used Journalen in 2018 ( as of August 5 , 2018 ) RESEARCH METHODS 23 Chapter 3 Research Methods The research presented in this thesis is based on various methods for data collection and analysis , such as interviews , survey , thematic analysis , descriptive analysis , non - parametric statistics , and the use of TF as analytical tool in VSD . Furthermore , reﬂective practice and writing as analytic activities are essential parts of my research . An overview of the applied methods in relation to the research questions , included papers and the thesis are outlined in Figure 3 . 1 . For RQ1 , semi - structured interviews with physicians were thematically analysed . To answer RQ2 , a patient survey was developed and analysed to give a general overview of patients using the eHealth service . Furthermore , a selection of data was analysed in relation to the themes identiﬁed in the interviews . To answer RQ3 , the proposal outlined in Paper I was applied by using the TF identiﬁed in the interviews to further analyse and identify human values that are implicated in PAEHR . Paper II & III Paper IV Thematic analysis Interviews Survey Descriptive analysis and non - parametric statistics Paper V Paper I & Thesis Descriptive analysis informed by themes , non - parametric statistics Identiﬁcation of human values based on Technological Frames Survey RQ1 Interviews / Survey RQ2 RQ3 Interviews Figure 3 . 1 : Methods for data collection and analysis in relation to RQ and included papers In this chapter the particular methods used for data collection and analysis in this research are presented . For each method , ﬁrst a more general description is provided , which is followed by an account of how this method was used . The chapter closes with a discussion of ethical aspects in this research . 24 RESEARCH METHODS 3 . 1 Data Collection Methods The methods for data collection used in this thesis are interviews and a survey . The interviews were conducted and transcribed prior to my involvement by other researchers in DOME . I was involved throughout the design and the realisation of the survey . 3 . 1 . 1 Interviews Interviews as a data collection method are suitable to investigate people’s experiences , understandings , and perception ( Braun & Clarke 2013 , p . 45 , 81 ) . Depending on the level of detail related to the interview structure and questions , interviews can be unstructured , semi - structured , or structured ( Blandford et al . 2016 , 40 ) . Interviews belong to interactive data collection methods ( Braun & Clarke 2013 , p . 48 ) , which is probably best reﬂected in unstructured and semi - structured interviews , as here the interviewer can follow - up on interesting aspects that emerge during the conversation ( Blandford et al . 2016 , p . 40 ) . Interviews that are fully structured follow a script with pre - determined questions in a particular order , from which the interviewer is not supposed to deviate . Thus , a fully structured interview is similar to a survey , but can potentially elicit a more detailed answer compared to a written survey response ( Lazar et al . 2010 , p . 189 ) . RQ1 is related to the physicians’ views and their experiences of PAEHR ( see Section 1 . 2 ) . It was already well known that healthcare professionals were critical towards the system ( cf . Erlingsdottir & Lindholm 2015 ) . Attitudes and experiences can also be elicited for instance by surveys ( see Section 3 . 1 . 2 ) , for instance to get an overview of the attitudes of a particular population . Within DOME several surveys had already been conducted ( cf . Scandurra et al . 2015 ; Ålander & Scandurra 2015 ) which showed that a negative attitude predominated among the professionals while those with personal experience using the system were more positive . The aim was therefore to develop an in - depth understanding of physicians’ perspective on PAEHR and the reasons why many were very sceptical and concerned about it . To achieve this aim , conducting semi - structured interviews is an appropriate approach . The interviews took place in 2013 , about 6 months after the launch of the patient portal . The recruitment strategy involved a number of activities , for example , contacting heads of departments at the University Hospital in Uppsala using mailing lists . The aim was to interview several physicians from various specialities , but it proved difﬁcult to get access to physicians who had the time and were willing to participate in this study . In the end , 12 physicians from 4 different specialities volunteered and were interviewed face to face , with one exception , which was done by email . The interviews were conducted by three DOME researchers and all used the same interview template . The template had been developed collaboratively in several meetings and consisted of 27 questions , which can be divided in four areas ( see Appendix A ) : • Introductory questions ( e . g . , medical speciality ; work experience ; use of IT in daily work ; views on patient participation ) • eHealth services in general and Journalen ( e . g . , conception of eHealth services ; experiences with them ; thoughts on Journalen ; frequency of seeing patients who read their EHR via Journalen or on paper ) • Patient Accessible Electronic Health Record ( e . g . , opportunities and concerns regarding patients accessing their EHR online ; effects on meetings and writing practices ; views on log list ) RESEARCH METHODS 25 • eHealth services on a regional and national level ( e . g . , knowledge about national and regional strategies ; experiences with eHealth services ; stakeholders of eHealth services and their view on who beneﬁts ) 3 . 1 . 2 Survey Surveys are used to collect data from individuals with a set of well - deﬁned questions and are commonly used as a research method , not only in HCI ( Lazar et al . 2010 , p . 100 ) . Compared to interviews , surveys lack depth , however , by collecting data from a large number of people , it is possible to draw more generalised conclusions ( Oates 2005 , p . 104f ) as well as to get an overview of a user population ( Lazar et al . 2010 , p . 101 ) . RQ2 relates to patients’ experiences of accessing their EHR . Previous research in DOME included interviews with 30 oncology patients , half of which had read their EHR through Journalen ( Rexhepi et al . 2016 ) . The results of this in - depth interview study indicated that PAEHR was valuable for these 15 patients who already used it . However , as the system was running for several years and had several hundred thousand registered users at the time , the aim was to investigate patients’ experiences on a bigger scale . The planning for the national survey took place during spring 2016 , in which the questionnaire was designed in a collaborative effort within DOME . All of the involved researchers had conducted research in relation to the PAEHR system . Previous interview and survey studies with healthcare professionals and patients informed the design of the survey instrument , including the identiﬁed concerns of physicians from the above mentioned interview study ( Paper II ) . The overall aim was to learn about how people use the system , about their experiences reading their health record , and how they deal with difﬁculties ( such as potentially worrying or incomprehensible information ) . To achieve content validity for our questionnaire , the design was informed by literature , previous research within the DOME consortium , and joint discussion among various DOME researchers . The questionnaire consisted of 24 questions , some of which included sub - questions or a set of items to respond to ( for the full questionnaire see Appendix B ) . The questions can be divided in six areas : • General questions related to the eHealth service Journalen • Experiences from accessing and using the content of Journalen • Information security • Information needs , behaviour , information - seeking styles • Personal health - related questions • Demographics The response options for the questions varied between multiple choice , Likert scale ( 5 - point : strongly agree , agree , neutral , disagree , strongly disagree ) , and free text form . The survey was made available through the PAEHR system from 16th June to 15th October 2016 . Approved by the Regional Ethical Review Board , the data collected through the national survey was managed by the PAEHR provider Inera AB . The company anonymised and exported the data to the DOME researchers after the collection period ended . 26 RESEARCH METHODS 3 . 2 Analysis Methods The data collected by the methods described in section 3 . 1 were analysed using Thematic Analysis ( TA ) , descriptive analysis , non - parametric statistics , and through reﬂection and writing . In this section , the methods are ﬁrst presented on a more general level , followed by a description of how they were applied in this thesis . 3 . 2 . 1 Thematic Analysis Thematic Analysis ( TA ) has been widely used in HCI ( Blandford et al . 2016 , p . 3 ) and across a multitude of disciplines , including research with a focus on health and well - being ( Braun & Clarke 2014 ) . The TA method used in this thesis was developed by Braun & Clarke ( 2006 ) , thus in the following , TA explicitly refers to their approach . TA is a method to systematically identify , analyse , and report patterns ( themes ) across a dataset , which is not tied to a particular theory ( Braun & Clarke 2013 , p . 178 ) . The main strength lies in its ﬂexibility as it does not prescribe methods of data collection , theoretical , epistemological , or ontological frameworks ( Braun & Clarke 2013 , p . 178 ) . Braun & Clarke ( 2006 ) outline a recursive six - phase process for thematic analysis , which we used for analysing the conducted interviews : 1 . Familiarising with the data This step involves the immersion of the researcher in the data through repeated reading in an active way ( i . e . , active searching for meanings , patterns , taking notes ) . As the interviews were conducted in Swedish , the immersion took place by translating them into English , repeated reading , and joint discussions and coding . This was done by using collaborative software or just by reading them together , by which we could jointly reﬂect on the meaning . 2 . Generating initial codes After initial ideas have been created , initial codes are produced in this phase by working system - atically through the entire data set . We followed the advice given by Braun & Clarke ( 2006 ) and coded quite broadly ( i . e . , for as many potential themes as possible ) and inclusively ( i . e . , keep surrounding data to include the context ) . 3 . Searching for themes After the data has been coded , the analysis moves from focussing on codes to a more broader level towards themes . Hence , it involves sorting the codes into themes , which was mainly done by me . I found the recommendation by Braun & Clarke ( 2006 ) very helpful to use visual representations ( tables and mind - maps ) . In this phase , various alternatives of representations were used to analyse how codes are related to each other and how they may be combined to form an overarching theme . Digital spreadsheets , using coloured borders for each code , were printed , cut and shufﬂed in order to visualise possible relations . 4 . Reviewing themes In this phase our candidate themes were revised on two levels , as described by Braun & Clarke ( 2006 ) . The extracts were read for each theme and reviewed in terms of a coherent pattern within that theme and the revised candidate themes were reviewed in relation to the entire data set . Joint discussions with my co - authors helped in two ways : Presenting the candidate themes made their strength and weaknesses visible quite early in the process ( i . e . , before writing the report ) . The questions raised and joint discussions helped to reﬂect how the codes relate to each other . RESEARCH METHODS 27 5 . Deﬁning and naming themes In this phase , the themes are further deﬁned , reﬁned , and the data within them analysed by organising the collated data extracts for each theme ( Braun & Clarke 2006 ) . Our previously created mind maps were further developed to support the reﬂection on whether a theme contains a sub - theme and how they relate to each other . The coded data extracts had been printed on paper to support the search for themes , which in this phase helped to organise the data extracts for each theme . 6 . Producing the report This phase involves the ﬁnal analysis and writing of a “concise , coherent , logical , non - repetitive and interesting account of the story the data tell” ( Braun & Clarke 2006 , p . 93 ) . As recommended by the authors , we reviewed each ‘pile’ of printed data extracts and selected from them vivid examples that captured the essence and that are easily identiﬁable as an example of the issue . In other research areas , it is quite common to explicitly report all numbers available . For example , some reviewers have asked to report the number of respondents that contributed to a certain theme . The importance or value of a theme is , however , not determined by frequency ( Braun & Clarke 2013 , p . 230 ) . It may be even misleading to use frequency , as this might be interpreted as if the remaining participants opposed this particular aspect . But , because interviews are ﬂexible and different aspects might have been brought up by participants , researchers can only interpret what is reported in the data ( Braun & Clarke 2013 , p . 261 ) . Following Braun & Clarke ( 2014 , p . 262 ) , we indicated prevalence in the data through language , such as ‘few’ , ‘many’ , etc . . Two thematic analyses were performed on the interview data . The ﬁrst analysis considered all data collected from the interviews , was informed by the theory of Technological Frames ( Orlikowski & Gash 1994 ) , but still allowed for inductive coding . In a second analysis , a speciﬁc data set was selected which consisted of data that had been coded previously with “patient empowerment” . This data set comprised around 50 pages of excerpts , was coded again using an inductive approach , and then analysed in - depth based on literature relating to patient participation and the doctor - patient relationship . Thus , the second analysis can be seen as a combination of inductive and theoretical TA ( Braun & Clarke 2013 , p . 175 ) , because after the initial inductive approach further analysis was guided by theoretical concepts . The analysis was conducted within a constructionist framework , which views meaning and experi - ence as being socially produced and reproduced and which “seeks to theorize the sociocultural contexts , and structural conditions , that enable the individual accounts that are provided” ( Braun & Clarke 2006 , p . 85 ) . The aim was also to examine the underlying assumptions and conceptualisations and thus the latent approach to TA was applied . The latent approach goes beyond the semantic content of the data and involves interpretative work and a theorised analysis , that aims to identify “the underlying ideas , assumptions , and conceptualizations - and ideologies - that are theorized as shaping or informing the semantic concept of the data” ( Braun & Clarke 2006 , p . 84 ) . The qualitative analysis conducted in this thesis followed the criteria for good TA as outlined by Braun & Clarke ( 2006 , 2013 ) . In an attempt to establish reliability of qualitative analysis , some textbooks recommend the calculation of an inter - coder or inter - rater reliability measure ( Lazar et al . 2010 , p . 296ff ) . This is , however , seen problematic by others , as it assumes that coding can and should be objective ( Braun & Clarke 2013 , p . 279 ) . In addition , even if two researchers are trained to code the same way , this would not exclude subjectivity but simply result in an “interpretation agreed by two people” ( Yardley 2000 , p . 218 ) . Instead , in qualitative research , reliability can be interpreted in terms of the trustworthiness or dependability of the methods of data collection and analysis , which can be achieved by other means than calculating measures like Cohen’s Kappa ( Braun & Clarke 2013 , p . 279 ) . For example , by following guiding principles for qualitative research ( e . g . , Yardley 2000 , 2017 ) , or – 28 RESEARCH METHODS as was performed in the research reported in this thesis – by following the checklist of criteria for TA ( Braun & Clarke 2006 , 2013 ) and by applying reﬂexivity . As reported in Paper II , the software used for qualitative analysis provided a feature to compare the coding between researchers . This was used in the beginning to learn about coding styles of the individual researcher , however , it was not used to calculate an inter - rater reliability measure . Instead we made use of this feature to engage in early discussions on what the individual coder found interesting and why it was coded in that particular way . Following from that , the researchers engaged in collaborative coding sessions to jointly reﬂect and discuss the data while coding . It should be noted that while it is necessary to follow guidelines and principles to produce a good thematic analysis , this does not ‘guarantee’ a high quality outcome , because producing a good thematic analysis relies also on the researcher’s interpretative analytical skills ( Braun & Clarke 2006 ) . 3 . 2 . 2 Survey Analysis The survey made use of multiple - choice , Likert scale , and free text forms . The data collected with the 5 - point Likert scale are ordinal , which means that in contrast to interval data the differences between the responses ( e . g . , “disagree” , “neutral” , “agree” ) are not necessarily equal ( Sullivan & Artino 2013 , p . 541 ) . To analyse the survey , we made use of initial descriptive analysis , in particular frequency distributions , which is a useful way to summarise and understand the data ( Punch 2013 , p . 255 ) . At ﬁrst , we wanted to give an overview over the data in relation to demographics , general informa - tion how patients use the service , and general attitudes towards PAEHR . The SPSS 25 software was used for all analyses and we used descriptive statistics to report response frequencies on Likert - scale questions . As a high ratio of respondents answered positive to the question whether they had worked or still work in healthcare ( 39 . 8 % , 1 , 030 ) further analysis was conducted . To compare the group of respondents who worked or had worked in healthcare to all other respondent , the Mann - Whitney U test was used for Likert - scale items after a transformation ( Strongly agree = 5 ; Strongly disagree = 1 ) . For nominal scales the chi - square test was used . Given that county councils have implemented Journalen differently , which might affect how people respond depending on where they received care , we used the Kruskal - Wallis test to detect possible differences in ratings between county councils . The signiﬁcance level was set to 95 % for all tests . The results of the analysis on a national level is reported in Paper IV . Although the interview study reported on in Paper II and III informed the design of the ques - tionnaire , the two studies were not planned together from the outset . As discussed in section 3 . 1 . 2 , the questionnaire was designed in collaboration with several researchers within DOME and included many aspects that were of interest for the consortium but not relevant to answer RQ2 of my research . Following the results of the interview study , we were particularly interested in answering the question : What are the patients’ experiences on the issues raised by physicians related to PAEHR and their work environment ? The “issues raised by physicians” relate to the themes identiﬁed in the interview study ( see Paper II ) . As mentioned previously , the results of the interview study did inform the questionnaire design , but the questions relevant for our analysis were spread throughout the questionnaire . We therefore went through the questionnaire and identiﬁed questions that could help us shed light on the physicians’ main concerns from the patients’ point of view . Figure 3 . 2 outlines the questions that were selected as they were seen to have a strong connection to the themes ( for the full questionnaire see Appendix B ) . As the interviews with the physicians were conducted in Region Uppsala , we extracted the survey data from patients who had received care in that region . In our analysis , we structured the questions based on the themes identiﬁed in the qualitative analysis of the interviews , analysed the survey data using descriptive statistics , and complemented them with insights gained from the free text forms . Thus , RESEARCH METHODS 29 • Worktool / shared resource ( Q7 ) • Medical language understandable ( Q9 ) • Usefulness and importance for patients ( Q3 , Q4 , Q16 , Q17 ) • Anxiety creation ( Q12 ) • Upsetting ( Q13 ) Work Tool • When to access ( Q6 ) • Actions when not understanding ( Q10 ) • Actions when EHR creates anxiety ( Q12 ) • Actions when EHR upsets ( Q13 ) • Important features that effect process ( Q17 ) • How to receive bad news ( Q19 ) Process • Change writing ( Q9 ) • Actions when not understanding ( Q10 ) • Actions when EHR creates anxiety ( Q12 ) • Actions when EHR upsets ( Q13 ) • Actions when errors found ( Q14 ) Workload • Reasons for reading EHR ( Q4 ) • Log list ( Q9 , Q17 ) • Checking for errors , blocking access ( Q17 ) Control Figure 3 . 2 : Selected questions related to areas of concern for physicians we used the identiﬁed themes from the qualitative interviews as a lens to analyse survey data . This allowed us to investigate the issues raised by the physicians from the patients’ perspective . As the ratio of respondents who in indicated a professional background in healthcare was 39 . 4 % ( 205 ) also relatively high , the Mann - Whitney U and the chi - square test were used to look at possible differences between the groups . 3 . 2 . 3 Analysis of Human Values Based on Technological Frames Conducting an analysis of human values implicated in a technology based on TF was proposed in Paper I . As described in section 2 . 1 . 1 , VSD is a design approach that aims to account for human values by integrating conceptual , empirical , and technical investigations ( Friedman et al . 2006 ) . TF conceptualise people’s assumptions , expectations , and knowledge , which can be used to examine people’s interpretive relations with the technology ( Orlikowski & Gash ( 1994 ) , see section 2 . 1 . 2 ) . The identiﬁcation of TF and in particular frames that are congruent or incongruent , can help to understand difﬁculties and conﬂicts related to a particular technology . However , the analysis can go further than that given that assumptions , expectations , and knowledge ( i . e . , the components of TF ) may be associated with or based on particular human values . Following the proposal in Paper I , analysis of implicated human values based on the TF identiﬁed in the interviews with physicians was conducted . The analysis iterated between empirical and conceptual investigations . The TF were based on empirical studies , which were then initially examined based on human values presented in Friedman et al . ( 2006 ) and van den Hoven et al . ( 2015 ) . Heuristic lists of values have been criticised for its potential to bias the researcher , which can however be mitigated by empirical investigations ( cf . Borning & Muller 2012 ) . Despite the potential risk , a conceptualisation of potential values in healthcare was needed to be able to identify these values in the ﬁrst place . For example , if the researcher has no conceptualisation of ‘autonomy’ , it would be very difﬁcult to identify that this value is associated with the technology in question . Thus , an iterative analysis was conducted , which initially examined the TF with the awareness of human values as described in Friedman et al . ( 2006 ) and van den Hoven et al . ( 2015 ) . After potential human values and value tensions in relation to PAEHR were identiﬁed , the literature was consulted to investigate more in - depth how each of the values were conceptualised . This was then used to look again at the interview data in light of the value conceptualisations to assess whether this particular value is indeed potentially implicated in PAEHR . 30 RESEARCH METHODS Through this iterative approach , the aim was to mitigate the risk of being biased as well as the risk of missing out on important values . TF can be useful within empirical , conceptual , and technical investigations . Through iterations , empirical and technical investigations can for example inform the conceptual investigations , for instance by clarifying what a speciﬁc value means for a particular stakeholder in this context . The analysis in section 4 . 3 aims to provide this context by illustrating the identiﬁed values with verbatim quotes . In VSD , technical investigations usually involve an examination of the technology , its properties , and mechanisms to identify whether these support or hinder human values ( Friedman et al . 2006 , p . 351 ) . For example , some social media applications allow to add a image description so that the content is also accessible for people who are visually impaired . This feature would then support accessibility , which can be identiﬁed through technical investigations . Using TF changes the point of view , as they relate to the stakeholder’s framing and thus adds an important component to the analysis . A technology might have been purposively designed to support a certain values , as was shown by the social media example . However , people might experience or frame a technology quite differently and consequently have a different assessment whether their values are supported or not . 3 . 2 . 4 Reﬂexivity and Writing In interpretive research , the role of the researcher is particularly acknowledged as the collection and analysis of data involves the researcher’s subjectivity ( Walsham 1995 , p . 77 ) . Contrary to the quantitative paradigm of research , where objectivity is highly valued , in qualitative and interpretative research , researchers’ subjectivity is not only valued but is also seen as a research tool ( Braun & Clarke 2013 , p . 36f ) . The emphasis of the researcher’s role is also reﬂected in writing , for example , by refraining to write about “emerging” themes , as this denies the active role of the researcher ( Braun & Clarke 2006 , p . 80 ) . Furthermore , writing is seen as part of the analytic process : qualitative analysis is writing . It uses words to tell the story about textual ( and visual ) data . This means writing is the process through which the analysis develops in its ﬁnal form ( Braun & Clarke 2013 , p . 248f , emphasis in original ) Essential in this line of research is to critically reﬂect on the produced knowledge and the role the researchers play in the production of that knowledge ( Braun & Clarke 2013 , p . 37 ) . Wilkinson ( 1988 ) discusses reﬂexivity as disciplined self - reﬂection on the researcher’s own identity ( personal reﬂexivity ) , on the nature and function of the research ( functional reﬂexivity ) , and on the nature and form / function of the ﬁeld of enquiry ( disciplinary reﬂexivity ) . My research was collaborative and multidisciplinary in nature . Reﬂective practice was thus enacted throughout the research by joint discussions , especially during analysis and writing . Furthermore , as was outlined also in the Preface ( page xi ) , I engaged in the public discourse not only through analysis and writing , but also by attending conferences and following and engaging in discussions with patients and HCP ( e . g . , in social media and face - to - face ) . Not only collaborative writing , but writing as such supports analysis and reﬂection . This was used in all of my work , but more explicitly in relation to Paper I , because for this paper no new data was collected . It is a theoretical contribution based on the empirical work and theory used in Paper II . Based on discussions , reﬂections , and writing , I proposed to use TF as an analytic tool in VSD , which was welcomed by the VSD community . The discourse during the VSD workshop in Leiden , as well as the comments by reviewers helped me to reﬂect on the value of using TF and to make this more explicit . The analysis method proposed in Paper I was applied in this thesis to answer RQ3 ( see section 4 . 3 ) . RESEARCH METHODS 31 3 . 3 Ethical Considerations Prior to the interview study , the researchers contacted several ethical committees , including Uppsala and Gothenburg , to discuss whether an ofﬁcial ethical review was necessary . The study was also discussed with the Data Inspection Board . As the study was not directly related to human research and no sensitive information nor personal data was collected , no formal ethical approval by the research board was required . Following general ethical principles , participants in the interview study were informed about the purpose of the study and the interview was conducted following their consent . Given the sample size , the participants location and specialities , we paid attention not to convey information in the verbatim quotes that would make them identiﬁable by their peers . For the national patient survey , ethical approval of the research was granted by the Regional Ethical Review Board in Uppsala , Sweden ( EPN 2016 / 129 ) . The survey was made available through the PAEHR system and patients were shown information about the study and a request to participate voluntarily after they logged into the system . Patients were automatically presented with standard consent online prior to completing the survey . The participants accessed the survey , and the possibility to give consent , by following a link beneath the information about the study . Before patients could initiate the survey , they were asked to give their consent . The data was collected and managed by the PAEHR provider Inera AB in accordance with the security requirements presented in the ethical application and approved from the Regional Ethical Review Board . After the survey was closed , Inera AB exported the anonymised data to researchers for analysis . From my personal and professional point of view , ethical considerations are not limited to the procedures involved in data collection and analysis . This is also in line with professional code of ethics and conduct , for example , by the British Psychological Society which focuses on the four ethical principles respect , competence , responsibility , and integrity ( The British Psychological Society 2018 ) . As a researcher , I consider it as imperative to be reﬂective of my own assumptions and biases , and be open to other people’s perspective that may challenge my assumptions . That includes also considerations of ethical and societal impacts of technology , potential conﬂicts , and negative consequences that may result in harm . For example : a positive impact of PAEHR for patients ( e . g . , PAEHR as a democratic tool that empowers patients ) could have negative effects on the work environment of physicians . Part of my ethical conduct is therefore to reﬂect on both positive and negative implications of a technology and to try to make a contribution to society ( cf . Association for Computing Machinery 2018 ) . RESULTS 33 Chapter 4 Results This chapter presents the results in relation to the research questions addressed in this thesis . Thus , the most relevant results from the included papers are summarised in the sections below . For a more detailed presentation of the results , I refer the interested reader to the papers . 4 . 1 Physicians’ Perspective The ﬁrst research question focuses on the physicians’ perspective : RQ1 How do physicians view PAEHR in relation to their work environment and patient participation ? Paper II and Paper III both contribute to this research question . Paper II focuses on the physicians’ perspective in relation to the work environment , and Paper III presents their perspective on PAEHR in relation to patient participation . The main results are outlined in the following . 4 . 1 . 1 Work Environment In this thesis , the initial analysis of the whole interview data set was theoretically guided by TF as it is a “conceptual framework for examining the interpretations that people develop around technology” ( Orlikowski & Gash 1994 , p . 175 ) . The initial coding of the data followed an inductive approach , but used the three frame domains identiﬁed by Orlikowski & Gash ( 1994 , p . 183 ) : what is the technology ( i . e . , nature of technology ) , why was it introduced ( i . e . , technology strategy ) as well as how will the technology be used and what are the consequences ( i . e . , technology in use , see section 2 . 1 . 2 ) . Relating to the question how physicians view PAEHR in relation to their work environment , four main themes were identiﬁed : work tool , process , workload , and control . These four themes can be related to the aforementioned frame domains in that work tool refers to the nature of technology , control refers to both , technology strategy and technology in use , and process and workload refer to technology in use ( Figure 4 . 1 ) . The four themes can be considered as instantiations of the frame domains and are brieﬂy described in the following sections . 34 RESULTS Technological Frames Frame domains Nature of Technology Technology Strategy Technology in Use Control Control Process Workload Work Tool What is the technology and how does it work ? Why was it introduced ? How will it be used and what are the consequences ? Figure 4 . 1 : Four main themes related to technological frame domains Work Tool An integral component of the eHealth service is the EHR and giving patients access to their record is supposed to enhance patient participation . This idea seems to be incongruent with the physicians’ perception of EHRs as their work tool , written to enable efﬁcient communication between HCPs only . For this , the use of medical terminology was seen as crucial and it was expected that patients are not able to comprehend the content of the EHR . They anticipated that it might be expected of them to change their writing to make the content more comprehensible for patients . They also considered themselves to change their writing practices to prevent patients from reading , for example , suspected diagnosis as this might be upsetting or anxiety creating for patients . Changes of writing practices was seen as time consuming and as a threat to the effectiveness and efﬁciency of EHRs as work tool . Control Related to potential reasons why PAEHR was introduced ( technology strategy ) and poten - tially used ( technology in use ) was the perception that patients would monitor and control the work of the physicians and to check for errors . This was related to both , patients reading their EHR and also the log list of HCPs who had been in their record . Many physicians explained that they would only access records for professional reasons and expressed concerns that PAEHR and in particular the log list could create a feeling of mistrust from patients . Process Considering effects on their work environment , many physicians held a rather negative attitude and expected changes that would affect their work processes in a negative way . Especially the fact that patients might read their test results before the physician was considered as potentially harmful for patients and as an interference with their established work practices . This is related to the time needed to catch up with the latest test results , to consult with colleagues about speciﬁc cases , and how to break ‘bad news’ , for example , in case of initial diagnoses of serious conditions . Physicians expected to have less time for these activities when patients can immediately see new test results and thus assumed that now they might have to contact their patients sooner . In addition , many physicians RESULTS 35 expected patients to become anxious or upset , or that they misinterpret the records which would lead the patients to call them and demand immediate explanations . These potential actions taken by patients could not only interfere with their process , as they may not have had the time to read the recent results , but was also seen to increase their workload . Workload The assumption that patients would not understand the content and ask much more questions was very dominant in the interviews . Most physicians anticipated that patients would need more explanations , which then would increase the phone calls and prolong the visits , which in sum would increase their workload . The prospect of patients asking more questions was mainly discussed in relation to time spent during consultation and increased number of phone calls , thus , it tended to be viewed as a negative consequence of PAEHR . In case patients ﬁnd errors , potential requests to have them corrected were also seen as increasing their workload . However , some physicians considered PAEHR as an opportunity for patients to revisit what has been said during a consultation and that in total , the workload might even remain unchanged as it could support patients’ self - care activities . 4 . 1 . 2 Patient Participation PAEHR aims to enhance patient participation , which was another focus of the analysis . How do physicians view patient participation in general and in relation to PAEHR ? We identiﬁed two themes that are closely related to the doctor - patient relationship : roles and involvement . Roles The roles involved in the relationship are medical professionals and patients . Many physicians viewed their role as medical professionals as being the ones to take on the responsibility and to determine treatment options . Patient participation was considered as important , in that this helps the HCP to understand the problems their patients are experiencing . In addition , it was also considered relevant in case there are equivalent treatment options as the patient would then make a choice . It was also emphasised that medical professionals should be trusted , as they were considered to have the best interest for their patient in mind . Furthermore , if patients would trust them , there would be no need for them to read their records . We identiﬁed a tendency to view it as a sign of mistrust if patients read their EHR or ask questions . In relation to the role of patients , lack of skills considered as crucial to beneﬁt from PAEHR as well as patients’ characteristics were aspects identiﬁed in the interviews . Most physicians were concerned that patients would not understand or misunderstand the medical language , and that they would focus on details the professionals considered as not relevant or important . The physicians’ expectations regarding PAEHR ranged from rather negative to neutral to rather positive . When discussing negative or positive expectations , physicians exempliﬁed this by describing patients with certain characteristics . In relation to negative expectations , the patients in their examples were described as anxious , detail - focused , needing guidance , or as laypersons . In those examples , physicians expected that additional work would be demanded of them , such as calming the patient or explaining something the patient had read in the record . When physicians discussed potential positive consequences of PAEHR , patients were described as very interested in their healthcare , well - informed , or read up , or as someone who takes responsibility for possible consequences . Patients who have a chronic condition were associated with this group . In some cases , physicians commented on PAEHR in a neutral way , adding that certain aspects depend on the patient . For example , whether patients are involved directly would depend on their personality , their general interest , or their age . Thus , in these ‘neutral’ instances the physicians did not have ﬁxed expectations and did not describe a speciﬁc type of patient as such . However , that older people were perceived as less likely to be interested in active involvement or to have Internet access can be seen as 36 RESULTS an overgeneralisation as well . In relation to patients’ characteristics , we identiﬁed a tendency to refer to patients as static entities disregarding their potential to develop skills and knowledge over time . Involvement Involvement captures aspects that support or hinder patients to contribute and take an active role in the doctor - patient relationship . Aspects related to the theme involvement are gatekeeping , information sharing , and self - care . We identiﬁed a tendency of gatekeeping in relation to certain information as the physicians preferred to be the contact person for the patients instead of them reading the EHR themselves . Examples of this were that they would not sign test results , write more vaguely , or wait with writing certain details until they had discussed them with the patient . In relation to information sharing , physicians were not critical about giving patients information per se . For instance , they emphasised the importance for patients to understand the situation and the reasons for certain instructions . It was acknowledged that patients have a right to access the information , however , what is shared how and when was seen as critical . In that sense , they could see some opportunities for ICT to improve information sharing with patients , as it is sometimes difﬁcult for patients to memorise what has been discussed during a visit . The physicians expressed concerns that patients have the right to block information in the EHR as this might impede the provision of good care . As discussed above , physicians assumed that patients would focus on irrelevant details in the EHR . Hence , not the patient but the physician was considered to be able to determine whether a piece of information is relevant or important for the current situation . This view reoccurred in relation to patients blocking data , as many physicians were concerned patients might block information that the professionals regard as important . In the context of PAEHR , patients engaging in self - care were discussed only on few occasions , as the physicians focused more on their own responsibility in taking care of patients . In some instances , physicians mentioned that patients could be encouraged to change their behaviour ( e . g . , when they read in the EHR a comment regarding smoking ) , or it could aid them remember instructions and hereby help them to follow these . 4 . 2 Patients’ Perspective The second research question focuses on the patient’s perspective : RQ2 How do patients view PAEHR and make use of it ? What are their experiences of accessing their EHR ? Paper IV contributes to this question by giving an overview of the data set collected in the national survey . The contribution of Paper V to this question is an analysis of responses by patients who received care in Region Uppsala . The analysis focused on survey questions that were related to the themes reported in Paper II . 4 . 2 . 1 Overview of Patients Using Journalen Data from the national survey were analysed to learn about patients’ demographics , their general attitude towards PAEHR , their motivation for and frequency of using Journalen , and what types of information they most value . RESULTS 37 Demographical information During the time of data collection , 423 , 141 people logged in into Journalen of which 2587 initiated the patient survey . Out of these respondents , 1629 were female , 798 male , 10 selected ‘other’ , and 150 did not disclose their gender ( see Figure 4 . 2 ) . The majority of respondents received care in Region Skåne ( 26 . 7 % , 692 ) or Uppsala ( 20 . 1 % , 520 ) . Not disclosed 6 % Other 0 % Male 31 % Female 63 % Female Male Other Not disclosed NATIONAL SURVEY - GENDER N % Female 1 . 629 62 , 97 % Male 798 30 , 85 % Other 10 0 , 39 % Not disclosed 150 5 , 80 % Total 2 . 587 100 % Figure 4 . 2 : Gender distribution of respondents from all counties / regions Many respondents stated that they work or have worked in healthcare ( 39 . 81 % , 1030 , see Figure 4 . 3 ) . The nonparametric analysis showed however , that for most questions the responses from those with professional background in healthcare did not signiﬁcantly differ from others . The educational level was quite high with 38 . 5 % ( 945 ) of the respondents having at least three years of higher education background . NATIONAL SURVEY - BACKGROUND IN HEALTHCARE N % Works or has worked in HC 1 . 030 39 , 81 % Has not worked in HC 1 . 411 54 , 54 % Not disclosed 146 5 , 64 % Total 2 . 587 100 % Not disclosed 6 % Has not worked in HC 55 % Works or has worked in HC 40 % Works or has worked in HC Has not worked in HC Not disclosed Figure 4 . 3 : Distribution of respondents with or without professional background in healthcare from all counties / regions Attitude towards Journalen The respondents had a very positive attitude towards accessing Jour - nalen , 89 . 2 % ( 2256 ) strongly agreed that access to their records is good for them . In addition , 84 . 7 % ( 2152 ) strongly agreed that giving patients Web - based access to their EHR is a good reform . A Mann - Whitney test showed a difference between the group of respondents with and without a professional background in healthcare . In both these cases respondents who have no work experience in healthcare were signiﬁcantly more positive than current or former healthcare professionals ( see Table 4 . 1 ) . Motivation for and frequency of use The three most common reasons for using Journalen were to get an overview of the medical history and their treatment , to follow up what has been said during a visit , and to become more involved in their care . 38 RESULTS Table 4 . 1 : Comparison between groups regarding attitude towards Journalen Access to medical records online is a good reform ; ( p < 0 . 001 ) N M SD Respondents with background in HC 1018 4 . 70 0 . 699 Respondents with no background in HC 1395 4 . 85 0 . 515 Access to Journalen is good for me ; ( p = 0 . 005 ) N M SD Respondents with background in HC 1015 4 . 82 0 . 560 Respondents with no background in HC 1385 4 . 87 0 . 496 A comparison between groups showed a statistically relevant difference only regarding two aspects : insecurity whether they received the right care as well as reading the record as preparation for the next visit was stronger for respondents who do not or have not worked in healthcare ( see Table 4 . 2 ) . Related to the question how often they use the system , 72 % ( 1794 ) reported that they would use it about once a month . Table 4 . 2 : Comparison between groups regarding motivation for using Journalen Because I am not sure if I got the right care ; ( p = 0 . 001 ) N M SD Respondents with background in HC 985 2 . 54 1 . 356 Respondents with no background in HC 1323 2 . 74 1 . 384 To prepare for my healthcare visit ; ( p = 0 . 003 ) N M SD Respondents with background in HC 987 3 . 38 1 . 391 Respondents with no background in HC 1354 3 . 57 1 . 295 Information valued in Journalen Regarding the importance of accessing certain types of informa - tion , the majority of respondents strongly agreed on referrals ( 72 . 6 % , 1775 ) , list of pharmaceuticals ( 76 % , 1864 ) , test results ( 83 . 5 % , 2049 ) , overview of their visit history ( 73 . 9 % , 1802 ) , and the ability to read all types of record entries ( 78 . 3 % , 1920 ) . In all of these instances , ‘strongly disagree’ was selected by less than 2 % of the respondents . Comparing the group who has worked in healthcare with the rest of the respondents , the ones that do or have worked in healthcare considered it signiﬁcantly more important to access overview of vaccinations , to contribute with information to their health , and to access the log list ( see Table 4 . 3 ) . 71 . 5 % ( 1792 ) strongly agreed that it is important to access patient information , because it makes them feel informed . With 56 . 2 % ( 1418 ) , more than half of the respondents also strongly agreed that it improves the communication between medical staff and them , and 50 . 4 % ( 1261 ) strongly agreed that it makes them feel safe . Furthermore , more 73 . 7 % ( 1728 ) strongly disagreed that accessing patient information has no relevance . A comparison between respondents with or without a healthcare background showed a statistically signiﬁcant difference related to the statements whether access to Journalen ( 1 ) improves communication between medical staff and them ; ( 2 ) leads to improvements in health and social care ; ( 3 ) improves their understanding of the condition ; ( 4 ) makes them feel informed ; ( 5 ) leads to an improved ability to take care of their health ; ( 6 ) whether they use it for their own documentation ; and ( 7 ) whether it RESULTS 39 Table 4 . 3 : Comparison between groups regarding information valued in Journalen Overview of all vaccinations ; ( p < 0 . 001 ) N M SD Respondents with background in HC 1010 4 . 44 0 . 987 Respondents with no background in HC 1371 4 . 33 0 . 987 Contribute with information on health , e . g . by providing Health declaration for next visit ; ( p < 0 . 001 ) N M SD Respondents with background in HC 1014 4 . 22 1 . 051 Respondents with no background in HC 1354 4 . 05 1 . 075 See which care units and staff groups have been inside Journalen ( see log data ) ; ( p = 0 . 004 ) N M SD Respondents with background in HC 1008 4 . 16 1 . 226 Respondents with no background in HC 1355 4 . 05 1 . 231 has relevance at all . In all these cases , respondents who do not and have not worked in healthcare responded signiﬁcantly more positive ( see Table 4 . 4 ) . Only few respondents strongly agreed or agreed with the statement that accessing their patient information ‘has no relevance’ . However , comparing both groups showed that signiﬁcantly more respondents with a professional background chose that option ( see Table 4 . 4 ) . 40 RESULTS Table 4 . 4 : Comparison between groups regarding importances of access to Journalen It improves communication between medical staff and me ; ( p < 0 . 001 ) N M SD Respondents with background in HC 1015 4 . 24 1 . 003 Respondents with no background in HC 1391 4 . 41 0 . 849 It leads to improvements in health and social care ; ( p = 0 . 013 ) N M SD Respondents with background in HC 1005 4 . 01 1 . 071 Respondents with no background in HC 1366 4 . 14 0 . 952 It improves the understanding of the condition ; ( p < 0 . 001 ) N M SD Respondents with background in HC 1001 4 . 14 1 . 057 Respondents with no background in HC 1374 4 . 33 0 . 899 It makes me feel informed ; ( p = 0 . 021 ) N M SD Respondents with background in HC 1010 4 . 57 0 . 799 Respondents with no background in HC 1376 4 . 67 0 . 621 It leads to that I can take care of my health better ; ( p < 0 . 001 ) N M SD Respondents with background in HC 1001 3 . 42 1 . 179 Respondents with no background in HC 1356 3 . 60 1 . 095 For my own documentation ; ( p < 0 . 001 ) N M SD Respondents with background in HC 994 3 . 77 1 . 321 Respondents with no background in HC 1346 4 . 09 1 . 158 It has no relevance ; ( p = 0 . 021 ) N M SD Respondents with background in HC 951 1 . 54 0 . 958 Respondents with no background in HC 1287 1 . 46 0 . 915 4 . 2 . 2 Patients’ Perspective in Relation to Physicians’ Concerns The interviewed physicians raised several issues and concerns about PAEHR in relation to their work environment . The aim of this analysis was to investigate the patients’ perspective in relation to these issues ( i . e . , the themes identiﬁed in the interview study , see Paper II ) and their experiences with Journalen . Given that the interviews were conducted with physicians in Uppsala , we performed this analysis on data from respondents who had received care in that region . In total , 520 respondents had received care in Region Uppsala , of which 327 were female , 167 male , 1 person chose ‘other’ , and 25 did not disclose their gender ( see Figure 4 . 4 ) . Similar to the results on the national level , a high number of respondents work or have worked in healthcare ( 39 . 4 % , 205 , see Figure 4 . 5 ) . RESULTS 41 Not disclosed 5 % Other 0 % Male 32 % Female 63 % Female Male Other Not disclosed UPPSALA SURVEY - GENDER N % Female 327 62 , 88 % Male 167 32 , 12 % Other 1 0 , 19 % Not disclosed 25 4 , 81 % Total 520 100 % Figure 4 . 4 : Gender distribution of respondents who have received care in Region Uppsala UPPSALA SURVEY - BACKGROUND IN HEALTHCARE N % Works or has worked in HC 205 39 , 42 % Has not worked in HC 290 55 , 77 % Not disclosed 25 4 , 81 % Total 520 100 % Not disclosed 5 % Has not worked in HC 56 % Works or has worked in HC 39 % Works or has worked in HC Has not worked in HC Not disclosed Figure 4 . 5 : Distribution of respondents in Region Uppsala with or without professional background in healthcare Following the areas of concern identiﬁed in the analysis of the interviews with physicians , the data analysis of the patient survey focused on the same areas : work tool , process , workload , and control . Work Tool EHR as a work tool was considered by physicians to contain a jargon that patients would not understand . In the patient survey , however , the majority of respondents strongly agreed ( 60 % , 293 ) or agreed ( 36 % , 176 ) that they understand most of the information in the EHR , and only 5 % ( 25 ) strongly agreed that it would contain too much technical language . A Mann - Whitney test showed that understanding of the records , the test results , and the log list was signiﬁcantly greater for respondents with a professional background in healthcare . At the same time , respondents who do not work in healthcare agreed signiﬁcantly more on the statement that it contains too much technical language ( see Table 4 . 5 ) . Connected to this is a potential emotional reaction of patients who read something related to their health and well - being that they do not fully understand . Contrary to what the physicians expected , only few patients responded in our survey that they had read something that made them feel anxious ( 27 % , 135 ) or upset ( 11 % , 44 ) . A comparison between groups with and without professional background in healthcare found no signiﬁcant difference . As most physicians doubted that PAEHR was useful for patients , we were interested in how important it was for them to have access to which type of information . Most respondents strongly agreed on referrals ( 72 . 4 % , 352 ) , list of pharmaceuticals ( 72 . 5 % , 354 ) , test results ( 83 . 5 % , 410 ) , and an overview of their contacts with healthcare ( 72 . 1 % , 349 ) as important . 85 % ( 417 ) of the respondents strongly agreed that online access to their medical records is a good reform and 90 % ( 447 ) of the respondents strongly agreed that access to Journalen is good for them . 42 RESULTS Table 4 . 5 : Comparison between groups regarding their understanding of the content in Journalen I understand most of what is in the medical records ; ( p < 0 . 001 ) N M SD Respondents with background in HC 203 4 . 71 0 . 562 Respondents with no background in HC 285 4 . 41 0 . 669 I think that the medical records contain too much technical language ; ( p < 0 . 001 ) N M SD Respondents with background in HC 203 2 . 38 1 . 254 Respondents with no background in HC 282 2 . 84 1 . 189 I understand most of the test results ; ( p < 0 . 001 ) N M SD Respondents with background in HC 187 4 . 35 0 . 952 Respondents with no background in HC 259 3 . 90 1 . 063 I understand most of the log list ; ( p < 0 . 001 ) N M SD Respondents with background in HC 175 4 . 41 0 . 898 Respondents with no background in HC 233 4 . 10 0 . 937 Similar to the national results , a Mann - Whitney test showed that respondents who have no work experience in healthcare were signiﬁcantly more positive than current or former healthcare professionals ( see Table 4 . 6 ) . Table 4 . 6 : Comparison between groups regarding attitude towards Journalen Access to medical records online is a good reform ; ( p = 0 . 003 ) N M SD Respondents with background in HC 202 4 . 71 0 . 690 Respondents with no background in HC 286 4 . 85 0 . 525 Access to Journalen is good for me ; ( p = 0 . 012 ) N M SD Respondents with background in HC 203 4 . 82 0 . 528 Respondents with no background in HC 289 4 . 90 0 . 430 The main reasons for using Journalen were to get an overview of the medical history and their treatment ( 75 % , 369 strongly agreed ) and to follow up on what has been said during a visit ( 89 % , 436 strongly agreed or agreed ) . It was also used to prepare themselves for the next visit ( 60 % , 291 strongly agreed or agreed ) . A Mann - Whitney test showed that using Journalen to prepare for the next visit was greater for respondents who do not or have not worked in healthcare ( see Table 4 . 7 ) . Table 4 . 7 : Comparison between groups regarding using Journalen for preparation To prepare for my healthcare visit ; ( p = 0 . 049 ) N M SD Respondents with background in HC 200 3 . 42 1 . 383 Respondents with no background in HC 277 3 . 67 1 . 309 RESULTS 43 Accessing their EHR helped respondents also to communicate with medical staff ( 66 % , 320 of respondents agreed or strongly agreed ) , use it to become more involved in their care ( 84 % , 404 strongly agreed or agreed ) , and it had a positive impact on their ability to follow the prescription of treatment ( 71 % , 343 strongly agreed or agreed ) , and to take own steps to improve their health ( 58 % , 281 strongly agreed or agreed ) . A Mann - Whitney test showed that the positive effect of information in Journalen on their communication with medical staff was greater for respondents who do not or have not worked in healthcare ( see Table 4 . 8 ) . Table 4 . 8 : Comparison between groups regarding the effect of information in Journalen on communica - tion with medical staff Information in Journalen has helped me in communication with medical staff ; ( p = 0 . 001 ) N M SD Respondents with background in HC 199 3 . 64 1 . 101 Respondents with no background in HC 283 3 . 97 0 . 974 Many respondents would also like to contribute with information to the EHR , for example , providing a health declaration ( 73 % , 352 strongly agreed or agreed ) , write their own comments in the record ( 47 % , 230 strongly agreed or agreed ) , or contribute with information from self - testing or monitoring ( 53 % , 254 strongly agreed or agreed ) . Contrary to the results from the national survey ( see Table 4 . 3 ) , the Mann - Whitney test showed no difference between respondents with or without healthcare background in Uppsala . The results suggest , that patients make use of Journalen , ﬁnd it valuable , and want to be engaged in their care . Process Physicians were particularly concerned that patients might read something before they had signed and approved it , as records might contain errors . The majority of patients considered a waiting time of same day ( 19 % , 95 ) or a day after a visit ( 54 % , 267 ) as reasonable , even if that results in reading notes that have not been signed by a HCP yet . A chi - square test showed no signiﬁcant differences between respondents with or without a healthcare background . As mentioned , physicians were concerned about actions that patients would take based on their need for more explanations . These would add not only to the workload , but also might interrupt their processes . According to the survey , respondents felt that they understood the information , and if they felt the need to ask , most of them did so during the next visit ( 82 % , 403 strongly agreed or agreed ) . However , many responded that they would call the healthcare unit ( 51 % , 244 strongly agree or agreed ) . Even though this might not affect the physicians’ work processes , it might add to the nurses’ workload . As mentioned above , patients would like to contribute to the record , for instance with information related to their expectations for the healthcare visit . If HCPs are supposed to act according to this information , the current workﬂow might have to be adapted accordingly . The current processes might be affected through PAEHR in case patients receive ‘bad news’ by reading their records before they have spoken to their physician . According to our study , the majority of patients who had received bad news , got informed about them during a healthcare visit ( 46 % , 318 ) , by phone ( 25 % , 169 ) , and / or by mail ( 15 % , 106 ) . Workload The physicians expected that additional contacts and requests for explanations would increase their workload . This was particularly related to the assumption that patients would not understand or misunderstand the content of their records , become anxious , or upset . In addition , some physicians were worried that they might have to change their way of writing so that patients would 44 RESULTS understand the content . According to our study , the large majority of respondents negated that they have read anything that made them feel upset ( 89 % , 366 ) or anxious ( 73 % , 361 ) . As mentioned before , most respondents felt that they understand most of the content ( 96 % , 469 agreed or strongly agreed ) and only 5 % ( 25 ) strongly agreed that it would contain too much technical language . Another potential cause for an increased workload was that patients might ﬁnd errors and ask the HCPs to make corrections . Although several respondents reported that they had found something that was wrong in their records ( 38 % , 186 ) , the most selected response options for what they had done in those cases were to wait until the next visit ( 30 % , 77 ) or to do nothing ( 30 % , 75 ) . The free text responses indicate that the errors found were rather minor and that respondents did not want to bother healthcare staff about them . For the majority of the respondents it was important to have the ability to contact healthcare electronically to ask questions about the record ( 46 % , 224 strongly agreed , 28 % , 134 agreed ) . Control Several physicians discussed the PAEHR system in terms of a surveillance tool through which patients would monitor the professionals . It was , however , only a minority of patients who use Journalen because they suspect inaccuracies ( 7 % , 32 strongly agreed ) or because they are not sure whether they receive the right care ( 11 % , 50 strongly agreed ) . Most respondents considered it as important to be able to point out errors they ﬁnd in the record ( 60 % , 292 strongly agreed , 18 % , 88 agreed ) , however , as was mentioned previously , most waited until the next visit or did nothing when they actually found an error . The majority of patients considered it as important to access information about who has been in their EHR ( 56 % , 274 strongly agreed ) . As indicated by the free text comments , this log list of who accessed their record is also used to make inferences about what might happen next . 4 . 3 Human Values and Value Tensions Related to PAEHR The third research question focuses on human values and value tensions related to PAEHR : RQ3 Which human values are implicated through engagement or interaction with PAEHR ? As described in section 2 . 1 . 1 , the interactional aspect of VSD relates to the idea that values are not embedded within a technology , but are implicated in a design through engagement with and by use of the technology ( Davis & Nathan 2015 , p . 15 ) . Within the VSD process it is possible to start with any of the three core aspects : a value , technology , or the context of use ( Friedman et al . 2006 , p . 362 ) . Using a heuristic list of values has been criticised as potentially harmful as the values on such a list “tend to bias the researcher or designer toward existing analyses and ways of thinking” ( Borning & Muller 2012 , p . 1128 ) . Thus , instead of beginning with a particular value , it can be an advantage to begin with a technology or context of use , because “discovering stakeholders’ values through an initial empirical investigation can help to avert researcher bias” ( Davis & Nathan 2015 , p . 33 ) . Paper I proposed the use of TF as analytical tool in VSD and exempliﬁed this brieﬂy with the case of PAEHR and human values that are associated with the technology . To answer RQ3 , Paper I can be considered as a starting point to investigate in - depth which human values are implicated in PAEHR and to identify potential value tensions . TF identiﬁed in the qualitative analysis reported in Paper II were used and interview data from Paper II and III were revisited to identify human values implicated through engagement with PAEHR from the physicians’ point of view . Data from the patient survey , other empirical investigations within DOME , and the wider literature are then used to identify and discuss potential value tensions as well as congruent and incongruent TF . RESULTS 45 The aim of this analysis is not to claim certainty about the values held by the particular group , but to investigate which values are potentially implicated and may stand in tension with each other . Thus , the conceptual investigation outlined here is informed by the empirical investigations conducted for this thesis as well as by relevant literature . As values may vary depending on cultures and contexts , the results of this analysis point towards possible future studies in which these values and value tensions can be empirically assessed with all stakeholder groups . 4 . 3 . 1 Human Values related to Physicians’ Technological Frames of PAEHR This section presents the results of the analysis of human values based on TF as described in section 3 . 2 . 3 and in Paper I . As outlined in section 2 . 1 . 2 , TF conceptualise the assumptions , expectations , and knowledge that people use to understand a particular technology ( Orlikowski & Gash 1994 ) . The TF and themes identiﬁed through a thematic analysis of interviews with physicians form the basis to identify human values that are are implicated in the technology through the physicians’ engagement with PAEHR . The identiﬁcation of human values followed an iterative process . The frames and themes were reviewed to identify an initial set of human values associated with PAEHR from the physician’s perspective . This was followed by an investigation how these values are conceptualised in the literature ( e . g . , van den Hoven et al . 2015 ; Friedman et al . 2006 ) and by another review of the interview data in light of that particular conceptualisation . Figure 4 . 6 shows an overview of the themes within the TF ( work tool , process , workload , control , and concerns about patients ) . Based on physicians TF and the interview data , the following values were identiﬁed : Ownership & Property , Professional Autonomy , Responsibility , Human Well - Being , Transparency & Accountability , and Trust ( Figure 4 . 6 ) . Technological Frames Transparency & Accountability Trust Control Themes within Frames and identiﬁed Human Values Professional Autonomy Human Well - Being ( Patients & HCPs ) Process Workload Professional Autonomy Human Well - Being ( HCPs ) Work Tool Ownership & Property Professional Autonomy Responsibility Concerns about Patients Human Well - Being ( Patients ) Figure 4 . 6 : Themes within Technological Frames and the identiﬁed Human Values In the following , each of the identiﬁed human values is brieﬂy described based on the literature and then illustrated with data extracts from the empirical investigations conducted as part of this thesis . The structure in this section follows the order in which the values are presented in Figure 4 . 6 ; text appearing in bold refer to the associated theme from the interviews . Some quotes used here have been slightly edited to make them more readable . The data ID code added to quotes from physicians are the same as 46 RESULTS in Paper II and III and refer to the speciality of the individual physician ( Ortho : Orthopaedics , Onco : Oncology , EM : Emergency Medicine , IM : Internal Medicine ) . Ownership & Property Friedman et al . ( 2006 , p . 364 ) deﬁne ownership and property as “a right to possess an object ( or information ) , use it , manage it , derive income from it , and bequeath it” . Lipinski & Britz ( 2000 ) discuss the dual nature of information ownership in the intellectual property system , which supports an ownership ( or right to control ) as well as the right of access to information . Although ownership involves the right to control access to information , others may possess at the same time the right of access to that information . The case of PAEHR and the complex relationship between indirect and direct stakeholders necessi - tates to focus not only on the eHealth service that gives patients access to the EHR , but to consider the record as such . As shown in Figure 4 . 6 , the value of ownership & property is associated with the theme work tool . The consideration of ownership and property should not be interpreted in the legal sense , especially given that the physicians do not ‘possess’ the EHR , ‘derive income from it’ , or ‘bequeath it’ as deﬁned by Friedman et al . ( 2006 , p . 364 ) . Swedish law does not specify a particular ‘owner’ of the record , but regulates rights and obligations . For example , the Patient Data Act speciﬁes who is required to keep a patient record and that the record is an information source also for the patient ( SFS 2008 : 355 ) . The Swedish Supreme Administrative Court decided that record entries are public documents ( Scandurra et al . 2017 , p . 801 ) and thus the patient has the right to read even unsigned record entries . Despite the lack of a legal deﬁnition of ownership , it is interesting to look at the framing of whose record it is and who has the right to use and manage it . Most physicians in the interviews felt quite strongly about the record being their work tool , not the patients’ , as illustrated by the following quotes : Because the record is our work tool , it has never been the patients’ . [ Ortho - 1 ] There will be misconceptions that the records are for the patient just because it happens to be about the patient . [ Ortho - 5 ] Records are not the patient’s property ! It is the physician’s tool . [ EM - 1 ] This framing of the EHR as being their work tool corresponds to the value of ownership and the EHR as their property . Ownership implies also the right to control and the possibility to grant or deny access . The following statements exemplify the aforementioned ‘dual nature of information ownership’ which supports ownership control as well as access rights . Here the physician did not understand why patients should have access to their EHR , but later in the interview acknowledged that patients have a right to read their EHR : Patients can ask the doctors and doctors are honest and are telling the truth , why should they get access to the record , they can surely come to visit and discuss possibilities and explanations . [ . . . ] So , I do not understand why everyone should have access to such a system . [ Onco - 1 ] The patient has the right to know what is about him or her , they have the right to read the record and get to know how we have written about it , and it’s not something secret , I mean we are talking to the patient about what is happening and we explain everything . [ Onco - 1 ] RESULTS 47 These statements from the same physician illustrate the dual nature of information ownership supporting both control and access rights ( Lipinski & Britz 2000 ) . Perceiving ownership of the EHR implies the right to control access ( hence , the suggestion to ask the physician instead of accessing it ) , while at the same time acknowledging the patients’ right to read the record . In the beginning of PAEHR in Uppsala , physicians could control access to the records through their signing practices . Notes that had not been signed were not accessible for patients at that time : Someone has phoned the reception and said that I have not signed an entry and they could not read it online , so I would immediately go in and sign it so they could read it . [ Ortho - 4 ] Some physicians considered to change their signing practices to prevent patient access : I will no longer sign test results in the same way as I did . If there is any progress then I will not sign since the patient can go in and read the answer before I have had time to call and tell them . [ Onco - 1 ] Not all physicians used the signing practices as a way to prevent access by patients . As one physician pointed out [ Onco - 3 ] , test results that are not signed are still visible to them in a list , while signed test results would ‘disappear’ . Not signing was in this case used to retain some form of to - do list . In addition , some colleagues were described as just ‘being bad at signing’ : Well , then there’s the doctor who does not sign , never sign . That is a problem we have here . We do have doctors who are very late at signing . Most of them sign within a couple of days anyway , but not the very same day . But there are more people here that do not sign until it has been about a month , which of course is totally wrong but that is how it is in reality . [ Onco - 2 ] The possibility that physicians could deny or grant patients access to certain record entries through signing practices might have strengthened a view of ownership , which is consistent with the framing of the EHR as their work tool . Professional Autonomy Autonomy has been deﬁned as “people’s ability to decide , plan , and act in ways that they believe will help them to achieve their goals” ( Friedman et al . 2006 , p . 364 ) . Similarly , but more speciﬁcally related to work environment , professional autonomy refers to a worker having the social authority over making decisions ( Karasek & Theorell 1990 , p . 58 ) . In an attempt to deﬁne job autonomy , de Jonge ( 1995 ) concludes : [ Autonomy ] as a job characteristic is mostly described in terms of self - determination , dis - cretion and freedom . These descriptions come close to the psychological and metaphysical meaning of everyday autonomy . Following the same train of thought , job autonomy can be theoretically deﬁned as the worker’s self - determination , discretion or freedom , inherent in the job , to determine several task elements . ( de Jonge 1995 , p . 13 ) As shown in Figure 4 . 6 , the value of professional autonomy is associated with the identiﬁed themes work tool , process , and workload . Physicians’ view of the EHR as their work tool involves that they write in a way that serves their work - related purposes ( e . g . , to communicate with colleagues ) . The idea that they would have to write in a different way was seen as detrimental to achieving their goals and as unfair , as exempliﬁed in the following quote : 48 RESULTS The record is not a means of communication with the patient , the record is a tool and therefore it must contain medical terms that the layman does not understand for it to be an effective communication tool among doctors and other health professionals . It is not fair to me as a doctor to change my way of dictating , change my way to express myself for patients to understand . Then the information will be inaccurate , useless , does not fulﬁl its purpose , and rather be a risk I would say . And it is also a value , I think , the fact that the record is still used among the doctors to may bring an argument about differential diagnoses and stuff that is not perhaps destined for the patient in the ﬁrst place , but that are thoughts , speculations , which can also lead to unnecessary anxiety . [ Ortho - 2 ] The aspect of PAEHR that challenged their professional autonomy in relation to their process is that patients can now read information directly . That way it is beyond the physicians’ control when a patient receives that information which thus interferes with their traditional processes , as illustrated by the following quotes : The hardest part is with severe diseases where sometimes doctors have to make decisions about things , perhaps in advance , which also must be documented . And if you then know that the patient can go directly into the record and read everything then you have no chance to guide the patient in a good way . And that’s not good . So my solution or suggestion is that they can read their record , but not just now when everything is on it’s way or when all of this is happening , but in three weeks . [ IM - 2 ] I think , well generally , that test results and the like should be signed by the doctor before they can be read by a patient . Because by then you have typically made some sort of decision . [ Ortho - 2 ] I have a long education , and I do tests and other things and then I put all these things together and in the meantime , while I do the investigation , I do not want anyone to put their nose in this . [ Ortho - 1 ] Physicians expected an increase in workload due to the introduction of PAEHR , for example , by an increased demand for explanations by the patient . These additional explanations were expected to occur only because PAEHR existed and thus challenges their professional autonomy to make the decision which information is relevant for the patient to know and to be described in detail . The following quotes present some of the examples given by physicians where more detailed information might be needed due to patients reading their records : They also read about what options they have before they come here ; they are well - read in that case . And then there will be greater demands when they come . And it is not certain that they have understood what they have read , but they just saw something and are stuck on what they think is best for them [ . . . ] so it takes time to explain why we do not choose such a treatment . [ Ortho - 1 ] There are also a lot [ of cases ] where a lab value or something is outside the reference range but when it does not mean anything , which I think the average citizen does not understand : “But it is outside the reference range , so surely something must be wrong . ” [ Ortho - 2 ] Besides the association to the above themes , professional autonomy also relates to medical decision making and the physicians’ authority to have the ﬁnal say , as illustrated in the following quote : RESULTS 49 There is some sort of limit to how much should the patient [ be involved ] . Where is the line between being involved and to decide ? We do have some treatments that we claim to be better than others , but some patients come with a belief that , well , they have read or heard that a friend got this other treatment and think it is better , and [ . . . ] I think that the doctor should have the ﬁnal say in the case if you are basing your opinion on science . [ Ortho - 3 ] Responsibility Technological design can affect individual responsibility , for example in terms of a person assuming responsibility or being responsible for something ( Fahlquist et al . 2015 ) . Different meanings of responsibility have been distinguished , for example , responsibility as a character trait or virtue ( i . e . , being a ‘responsible person’ ) ; being morally responsible for consequences of something ( e . g . , receiving blame or praise for it ) ; being in charge of something or responsible for a task ( van de Poel 2011 ; Fahlquist et al . 2015 ) . Related to the physicians’ framing of the EHR as their work tool , the responsibility that they take on in their profession was also discussed . Most physicians considered themselves as the person being responsible for their patients , especially if something goes wrong : We are trying to do the best for all patients . We are the ones who take responsibility for complications and everything so they’re going to try to enjoy life and not sit in front of a computer and check test results and devote time to it . [ Onco - 1 ] Responsibility can also be assigned to individuals , not only in terms of being morally responsible but also in terms of being the person in charge of something . The following quotes illustrate the idea that patients assign this type of responsibility to their physicians : I believe that most patients feel that they know what they need to know , and have the inﬂuence according to their level of knowledge , or how to put it . It’s a bit like if I leave the car to the mechanic , I do not expect that I’ll know exactly what they will do , but I’m happy if they ﬁx it—sort of . [ Ortho - 2 ] My feeling is that most of them are not , well , are not that interested . They might have opinions on the treatment options , but generally leave the decision to the doctor . They may want information about what is available but are quite happy with that and feel that , just as long as they are part of the discussion , they feel that they can leave the decision to the doctor . [ . . . ] Many would probably want to know their options but I think most people’s interest in participation ends there . They may want to have a sense of being included but I do not believe that they , most of them are probably not willing to take the responsibility , they neither want to nor can . [ Ortho - 5 ] One of the physicians who encourages patients to access their records refers to patients’ responsi - bility for their actions , for example , if they block certain entries in the record or read test results outside ofﬁce hours , as the following quote illustrates : It increases the participation in healthcare , and many patients can access their test results especially when they know that they will have a planned patient visit . And I tell them that they should access it , but that they also need to take the consequences that they must wait until their next planned patient visit to discuss the results . And I believe that this suits some patients , but many patients also say : “I do not dare” . And then to just read the notes 50 RESULTS about the disease contributes to improved engagements . So I am positive to this if it does not result in many problems or harm for the patients . For example , that they get notiﬁed at strange times when they cannot contact anyone . But when the patient is aware about this , then I do not see any problems with it . I mean you must take responsibility for your actions and if you want to log in and look for the test results at a certain time , then you have to take responsibility for it even if it is in the middle of the night . [ Onco - 2 ] This quote illustrates how a particular design feature can affect responsibility . Notiﬁcations are ‘designed’ , so if a patient is notiﬁed at ‘strange times’ , it can be seen as the technologies’ fault . As described by Fahlquist et al . ( 2015 , p . 476 ) , in order to be morally responsible , the action resulting in the outcome has to be voluntary , that is , the individual person determined the course of action and is therefore morally responsible . If there are no notiﬁcations ‘at strange times’ but patients voluntarily decide to log into their record ‘in the middle of the night’ , then they can be regarded as responsible for that action . This exempliﬁes that responsibility and personal autonomy are not only closely linked , but that personal autonomy is a precondition for the assignment of responsibility , as discussed also by Franssen ( 2015 , p . 141 ) . Human Well - Being As outlined by Brey ( 2015 , p . 367 ) , well - being is a “state of persons which designates that they are happy or ﬂourishing and that their life is going well for them . ” Three main types of philosophical theories of well - being have been distinguished ( Brey 2015 ) : • Hedonist Theories : Well - being consists of the absence of pain and the presence of pleasure , i . e . , a design would then focus on causing pleasant sensations , avoiding unpleasant activities , and prevent or reduce mental and physical pain and discomfort ( Brey 2015 , p . 368ff ) . • Desire - Fulﬁlment Theories : Within these theories , well - being is related to the fulﬁlment of a person’s desires ( Brey 2015 , p . 368 ) . A design would focus on satisfying desires of stakeholders and users which presupposes an investigation what people actually desire ( Brey 2015 , p . 370 ) . • Objective List Theories : conceptualise well - being in terms of a list of objective goods that contribute to a person’s well - being even if a ) this is not desired by that person , and b ) they do not experience pleasure from them ( Brey 2015 , p . 368 ) . Designing for well - being following this theory would mean that the design would address the ‘objective goods’ on that list , for example , supporting the development of friendships , exercising autonomy , etc . ( Brey 2015 , p . 370 ) . In other areas such as economics and psychology , studies of well - being focus on how people evaluate their own happiness ( subjective well - being ) , on developing tools for making people’s lives more fulﬁlling ( positives psychology ) , or assume that certain basic capabilities are needed to attain well - being ( capability approach ) ( Brey 2015 , p . 369 ) . Considering the physicians’ framing of the technology , the value of Human Well - Being is implicated in at least two ways . First , PAEHR is assumed to pose a threat to patients’ well - being as it could evoke negative experiences such as anxiety , worry , or upset . Second , PAEHR is assumed to pose a threat to the HCPs’s well - being due to increased stress and workload . Physicians’ concerns about patients was one of the identiﬁed themes in the interviews and thus is directly related to the patients’ well - being . As noted previously in relation to professional autonomy , PAEHR was considered to challenge the traditional process when patients can read everything directly and physicians are unable to guide them ‘in a good way’ . Many physicians assumed that patients would RESULTS 51 become anxious or worried when reading their EHR online and this would negatively affect the patients’ well - being : I think that you solve the wrong problem . Patients are not informed ; they feel non - informed . And I agree with that . They are worried , because they don’t understand , they are not doctors themselves . This is solved by them reading their medical record ? It is the wrong solution to the problem ! Then they become more worried , and more upset , and don’t understand . All this worry should be met in a better way with better information and better general information . [ Ortho - 1 ] According to one oncologist , patients should try to enjoy their lives instead of reading their records and get worried by this : Cancer is in some cases an incurable disease , a fatal disease . And it is just worrying to get in and read the smallest thing that happens . They should enjoy life , the life that is left , and some do not have much left . [ Onco - 1 ] As mentioned previously , not only patients’ but also HCPs’ well - being might be affected by PAEHR . The ability alone that patients can immediately read test results and notes , as well as potential actions taken by patients who read their EHR was perceived to increase the pressure : But now everyone will call , because they have seen the test results and want to know why , so they want a decision at once . So , yes , if all patients would go in and look at the test results , then this is great pressure for us to catch up , have time to write letters , call patients and not to take two - weeks until the next visit , but the day after . [ Onco - 1 ] An increase of pressure and stress can be seen as detrimental to the physicians’ well - being . Furthermore , the perception that it might potentially increase their workload when patients read their EHR can also be related to affect the physicians’ well - being negatively : I can also imagine that patients , if you write in the journal the things you perceived and then you can see things in a different way than what the patient thinks it is . One concern is that the patient reads the record and thinks : “No , but this is not true” and they will call you and want to have it changed . And that could mean changes which are not important to the conditions in general . For example , it says that the patient ran into a blue car , but it was a yellow car . It has no importance whatsoever really . But it may still cause a lot of extra work . [ Ortho - 4 ] It’s also about , if we look at the work environment situation , it’s also about that we work in a constant lack of resources situation where we are too few , we have for some time , we have too much to manage simultaneously , and that means it sometimes takes a little longer for us to come to that particular patient’s problem than what he or she would want to . [ Onco - 3 ] Increasing the workload in a work environment that already lacks sufﬁcient resources can be seen as a threat to the well - being of HCPs . In relation to patients’ ability to block certain data from the record , one physician was concerned about potential dangers to HCPs’ physical well - being : 52 RESULTS In psychiatry one can probably think of several examples of dangerous behaviour that may be important for staff to know . Those data may not be possible to block but there would be a clear health hazard , it is dangerous to be a health professional in many situations , but then you have to protect us , the right of patients is important but our right is not unimportant . [ Ortho - 5 ] The arguments made by physicians are in line with the hedonist conception of well - being , which assumes that well - being consists of the absence of pain , prevention of discomfort , and the presence of pleasure . Based on the assumption that PAEHR would lead to unpleasant experiences , even mental pain or discomfort , reading their records online would be detrimental to the patients’ well - being . Furthermore , based on the expectation of negative consequences on their work environment , in their framing the value of physicians’ well - being is also implicated by PAEHR . Transparency & Accountability According to Friedman et al . ( 2006 , p . 364 ) accountability refers to “the properties that ensures that the actions of a person , people , or institution may be traced uniquely to the person , people , or institution” . Hulstijn & Burgemeestre ( 2015 , p . 304 ) describe accountability as “providing evidence to justify past actions to others” and transparency as the “tendency to be open in communication” . Accountability is similar to the notion of responsibility , which was discussed previously . However , accountability involves the obligation to justify one’s actions , but does not necessarily imply blame or liability which are related to responsibility ( Hulstijn & Burgemeestre 2015 , p . 310 ) . This section refers to transparency and accountability of people and their actions , which may be facilitated through PAEHR . Thus , it is not related to accountability of the technology , for example , that the software should be held accountable or that the source code is made available in terms of transparency . The focus here is , for example , on the accountability of physicians in their practice , which may be facilitated through technology . PAEHR gives patients access to the HCPs’ documentation who can then be held accountable for what they have written . Although the PAEHR system was not necessarily designed to account for transparency and accountability , it may nevertheless facilitate these values . As mentioned before , most physicians acknowledged that patients have a right to read their record and that the record is not to be considered secret as they would discuss most of the content with the patient anyway . Furthermore , some considered it to be helpful to remember instructions : It would surely be that the patient gets easier opportunity to review what was said at such a clinic visit , to remember all instructions better maybe , or together with the information you had , because you know that it is difﬁcult to absorb all the information during a visit so , so that it is clear that there can be an advantage to have it as repetition . [ Ortho - 2 ] In that sense , reading the EHR can be seen as re - reading information that was transparent already before . However , some physicians framed PAEHR in terms of a monitoring device used by patients to control the professionals . Within this frame , PAEHR might make their work too transparent , as the following quotes exemplify : Yes , it is not that we want to hide something or , but there is a world of its own and we have gone through a long training to handle it in the best way and then you have to also let us do the work without checking everything and interfering as someone who does not know much about it . [ Med - 2 ] RESULTS 53 The whole thing feels uncomfortable . It feels like we will have an audit society where we don’t trust each other any more . [ Ortho - 1 ] Accountability has been deﬁned as a “relationship in which an actor feels an obligation to explain and to justify his or her conduct to some signiﬁcant other” ( Day & Klein 1987 , as cited in Hulstijn & Burgemeestre 2015 ) . Furthermore , as described by Hulstijn & Burgemeestre ( 2015 , p . 305 ) , being responsible for one’s actions means that if being held accountable for this later , one has to justify those decisions . On a more general level , several physicians discussed that explanations and justiﬁcations are part of their practice , especially in relation to patient participation : Before the doctor told the patient what to do and the patient did it without really under - standing , and nowadays that does not happen . Today people require to understand why and I think that is reasonable . [ Ortho - 1 ] [ I think ] that they’re going to get to ask questions and to understand why you do certain things . That one has to justify and explain , because it is not always self - evident truths . It can on one hand be that we can do this or it can on other hand be that we can do that . They can then be involved and perhaps not decide but sometimes be active in making a judgement . [ Ortho - 3 ] However , with patients reading their EHR online it was assumed that patients’ needs for explanations and justiﬁcations would increase , as the following quotes illustrate : [ Patients ] become a little more criticising : why they took this test this time and not the last time , why test the marker every other treatment and not every treatment ? So they have comments on what we order and what we think it is necessary , Yes , and you can not explain all the details , we have advanced treatments , we do not know each , with each course of treatment the marker is , it varies very much between different groups too . So there are samples that we might take at each treatment when one is in gyn group and samples that are taken every second processing when working with gastro - intestinal tumours . So it varies a bit depending on what you are working with , but the patient can not understand it . They have only heard and seen on other that samples are taken more often than they left . [ Onco - 1 ] So it may be a good thing with it that they are prepared . They have seen the test results . They know roughly what it could mean and focus on the opportunities available as treatments . They also read about what options they have before they come here ; they are well - read in that case . And then there will be greater demands when they come . And it is not certain that they have understood what they have read , but they just saw something and are stuck on what they think is best for them [ . . . ] so it takes time to explain why we do not choose such a treatment . [ Ortho - 1 ] Related to human values , this can be interpreted as PAEHR elevating transparency of activities in healthcare and thus potentially increasing accountability in terms of explanations and justiﬁcations . Another feature of the patient portal is the log list that displays who accessed the patient’s records , which was considered by some physicians as a way to control and monitor the HCPs . However , the log list can also be interpreted in terms of transparency , as the following quote illustrates : 54 RESULTS Yes , the advantage is that as a patient , or in other words , it’s not possible to read someone else’s medical records without leaving a trace which of course hopefully removes any pure curiosity medical record readers , like a neighbour or a relative . I think that is a much less of a problem than you might think . In general , you are frankly quite uninterested in such things when you work with . But there are cases like that , so it has happened and there is a potential for reducing that with a log ﬁle , so this is an advantage for the patient , I think . [ Ortho - 3 ] Some physicians reacted quite strongly when asked about the log list , as exempliﬁed by the following quote : Why would it be good ? Does not inﬂuence patient involvement ! No need for this if the rules about who is allowed access to the journal are followed . I see no point in this ! Is the patient supposed to act as the police ? [ EM - 1 ] Similar to the physician who was concerned about the ‘audit society’ , PAEHR and the log list can evoke a feeling of being monitored while supporting transparency and accountability . Trust Trust has been deﬁned as a “psychological state that represents the trusted person or object as being trustworthy ” ( Nickel 2015 , p . 552 , emphasis in original ) . Furthermore , trust involves to accept one’s own vulnerability to others by “willingly placing oneself in their hands to some extent” ( Nickel 2015 , p . 552 ) . When designing for values , conceptions of trust refer to the technology itself ( i . e . , a person has trust in a technology ) or to trust between people where the technology’s role is to mediate this interpersonal trust ( Nickel 2015 ) . Exploring the nature of trust and trust in online interactions , Friedman et al . ( 2000 , p . 34f ) focus on interpersonal trust : “we trust when we are vulnerable to harm from others yet believe these others would not harm us even though they could” . This section focuses on interpersonal trust and the role of PAEHR in mediating trust between patient and HCP as identiﬁed in the physicians’ framing . In line with the framing of PAEHR as a tool to monitor and control physicians , the interpretation that it is a sign of distrust when patients read their EHR might not come as a surprise . In the following quote , this aspect is discussed by a physician : Everything comes back to this . If you don’t trust the doctor , you need to have control of everything he or she says . If you trust the doctors you say : OK , I will do this . I talk to them again and then I believe in what she says , and I believe that she has this experience so I believe in her . This need to read on your own , and read up on your own makes it problematic and things can really go wrong . [ Ortho - 1 ] The same physician was equally critical about the aforementioned log list where patients can see who accessed their EHR . Here as well the same physician criticised the lack of trust : This is really problematic . That part is the worst part of all of this . This does not build at all on trust . The motivation behind online medical records is that the patient should understand and know what happens . That part is really , I think , it is the wrong way to go . But , the motivation is really not true . To see who has done this , and who has done that is only a control of the doctors ! It is the assumption that they are stupid and do not do their jobs . [ Ortho - 1 ] RESULTS 55 Visualising who exactly did what can be interpreted as a way to make processes more transparent . It can , however , also be perceived as surveillance and as a sign of distrust , as was exempliﬁed with the previous quote . Similarly , one physician discussed how the log list can create distrust in patients , especially when being encouraged to check the log list for unauthorised access . According to this physician , when professionals learn that patients check the log list , they may feel distrusted : I think it will be too much and somehow a misunderstanding that we would have some inter - est in reading the records [ . . . ] . And when the County Council goes out and urges patients to check their logs then it’s just completely absurd . Yes , it is clearly creating uncertainty among patients that this is what they are doing [ HCPs reading records unauthorised ] . Yes , there have been a few instances where it has been misused , but what system should you have for that ? There is no answer for that , but I think this is not a good system . And the idea was to create somehow a better patient - doctor relationship but if you would be told that [ . . . ] the patient reads the log list , if you were told that the patient had requested the logs before a visits , then you might think that this is a little suspect and it would interfere with meeting the patient to have that information . It would lead to a worse patient - doctor relationship and create a distrustfulness like : Well this patient is kind of wary and distrusts me , distrusts healthcare . I think it would have the complete opposite effect . Or in any case a risk that there is nothing that would bring patient and doctor closer together , but rather the risk of creating a distance . [ Ortho - 5 ] This quote exempliﬁes that a particular design or feature can mediate interpersonal relationships in a new way , as described by Nickel ( 2015 , p . 558 ) . Knowing that a patient has requested a log list before a visit , creates a feeling that this patients does not trust the physician or distrusts healthcare . Depending on the framing , it is also possible that patients develop trust over time and do not feel the need to read . One oncologists , who was positive towards PAEHR and encourages patients to read , discussed the aspect of vulnerability in that patients might read their records in the beginning when they do not feel safe in their care ( yet ) : Interviewer : Do patients talk about this [ reading their record ] ? Onco - 2 : Yes , and I tell them to do it as well . But most are quite satisﬁed , I think , so that they stop after a while when they become , when they feel safe in their care . Interviewer : Why do you think is that ? Onco - 2 : Well , they think it may not be necessary . And then it usually becomes more complicated , the easiest decision is often the ﬁrst decisions , then we can go on treatment programmes and then it becomes so complicated that you can not look it up yourself by using information on the Internet . [ Onco - 2 ] The physician describes that patients stop reading their records after a while and explains this in terms of patients feeling safe and that reading might not be necessary . It is also possible that PAEHR provides the patient with some evidence for trust which is “highly relevant when ﬁguring out whether to rely on another person or entity” ( Nickel 2015 , p . 554 ) . What patients read in their record can potentially enhance or undermine trust . A recent study of patients accessing their mental health notes showed that trust can be strained when patients perceive low transparency or notice an incongruence between sessions and medical notes ( Cromer et al . 2017 ) . However , patients who read their mental health notes felt respected and reported greater trust when the notes provided evidence that the clinician had actually listened to them ( Cromer et al . 2017 ) . 56 RESULTS 4 . 3 . 2 Value Tensions related to PAEHR Value tensions can occur between different values of different groups ( e . g . , physicians’ privacy versus transparency for patients ) ; the same values of different groups ( e . g . , physicians’ autonomy versus patients’ autonomy ) ; different interpretations of the same human value ( e . g , what is considered harmful for a patient’s well - being ; who ‘owns’ the EHR ) ; or different values within the same group ( e . g . , accountability and transparency versus privacy of physicians ) . In the following , potential value tensions related to PAEHR are discussed with reference to aforementioned values and the wider literature . “My Work Tool” versus “My Body , My Data” As noted previously , ownership or property of the EHR is not speciﬁed in legal terms . With reference to US regulations , Barrows & Clayton ( 1996 , p . 143 ) argued that ownership of a medical record is “at best a limited right that is primarily custodial in nature , and information contained in the record is often characterized as the patient’s property” . They further state that clear legal assignment of electronic health data ownership “does not appear likely” and that everyone who is entrusted with health data “should reasonably considered as stewards of data” , including liability for irresponsible acts ( Barrows & Clayton 1996 , p . 143 ) . As presented in the previous section , physicians’ framing of the EHR as being their work tool corresponds to the value of ownership which implies a right to control access . In our patient survey , we asked how important it is for them to access patient information , where one patient commented in the free text form : It’s my record . [ P - 1522 ] This quote illustrates that some patients frame the record as belonging to them , given that the information in the record is in fact about them . The patient movement known as # WeAreNotWaiting is worth mentioning here where patients not only demand access to their data but hack their medical devices to help manage their conditions ( Omer 2016 ) . Out of frustration that their data was not accessible and actionable , and because they were no longer willing to wait for their needs to be addressed ( Omer 2016 , p . 2 ) , the social media campaign # WeAreNotWaiting encouraged “patients and providers to take their device and software development into their own hands” ( Hilliard et al . 2015 , p . 5 ) . These patient - driven projects have led to the development of creative solutions ( Omer 2016 , p . 2 ) . One example is the so called Do - It - Yourself Pancreas System by Dana Lewis and Scott Leibrand , that initially aimed to merely increase the volume of the continuous glucose monitor alert ( Lewis 2014 ) . It was developed further into the Open Artiﬁcial Pancreas System project ( OpenAPS ) , which is an “open and transparent effort to make safe and effective basic Artiﬁcial Pancreas System ( APS ) technology widely available” ( Lewis 2014 ) . Patient - driven innovations like these show that patients are indeed not waiting any longer , claim their right to access the data they need , and take action . Similar to a potential tension between the right to control and the right to access information ( Lipinski & Britz 2000 ) , there might be an inconsistent framing of who ‘owns’ and therefore has the right to control the information in the record . Most of the interviewed physicians felt quite strongly that the record is their work tool and immediate access and possible interference by patients would have negative consequences . Some of them considered changing the way of writing or stop signing the record to prevent patient access , ( i . e . , exercising a control right ) . A recent survey of psychiatric HCPs in Region Skåne found that psychologists and physicians stated to be less candid in their documentation after PAEHR was implemented , which could have a negative effect on the HCPs’ work and on patient participation if important information is missing in the record ( Petersson & Erlingsdóttir 2018 ) . Not only HCPs are able to withhold information RESULTS 57 in the health record . Swedish law also grants patients a control right as they are allowed to block certain information in their record . It seems that albeit no clear owner has been speciﬁed , to a certain extent both HCPs and patients have the right to control and to access at least parts of the information in the EHR . A variety of stakeholders have been identiﬁed that are interested in EHRs for their own purposes and thus place more requirements on the clinical documentation , such as provider institutions , technology vendors , government regulators , and payers ( Kuhn et al . 2015 ) . In that sense , EHRs can be considered as boundary objects , which are “shared informational objects that can be used by different groups for their own purposes” ( Lutters & Ackerman 2006 ) . Boundary objects have been conceptualised by Star & Griesemer ( 1989 ) to explain how museum workers managed the diversity and heterogeneity between their groups and were able to cooperate despite lacking consensus . Later Star ( 2010 , p . 602 ) clariﬁed that boundary objects are a sort of arrangement arisen due to information and work requirements by different groups that allow them to work together without consensus . Thus it can be argued that patients are then just another group of people who want to make use of the ‘boundary object’ ( i . e . , the EHR ) to ﬁll their information needs . Professional versus Personal Autonomy In the previous analysis , professional autonomy was discussed as a right to individual self - determination related to the work environment . Patient also have the right to self - determination and one of the values underlying healthcare is the respect for the patient’s will ( van der Wilt et al . 2015 , p . 721 ) . According to Katz ( 2002 , p . 104 ) , it has ben a longstanding view that patients do not have the capacity to participate in decision making , unfolding a debate over patient self - determination . Related to this debate , Katz ( 2002 , p . 104ff ) explicitly distinguishes between rights to and capacities for decision making : Right to self - determination The right of individuals to make their own decisions without interference from others . Psychological autonomy Denotes solely the capacities of persons to reﬂect about contemplated choices and to make choices , in other words , the capacity to exercise the right to self - determination . Self - determination and autonomy are often used interchangeably , but Katz ( 2002 , p . 105 ) explicitly distinguishes between these two concepts , as autonomy refers to the capacity to exercise the right to self - determination . Katz ( 2002 , p . 107 ) emphasises the importance not to encompass rights and capacities under the same term as this can lead to confusion . Given the long - held view that patients potentially lack the capacity to make choices , Katz ( 2002 ) identiﬁed autonomy as one of the tensions in relation to the idea of patient participation in decision making : Meaningful decision making implies that both parties have the capacity to make choices . This notion is opposed by ancient medical beliefs that patients , by virtue of being ill , are more like children than adults and therefore their capacity for choice is fatally impaired . ( Katz 2002 , p . 85ff ) One could argue that the capacity to make choices demands that essential information needed to reﬂect about these choices are made available . But what type of information is needed for what types of choices ? Looking back at the physicians’ perspective on patient participation in our interviews , patients’ decision making tended to be limited to selecting a particular treatment option among equivalent alternatives . Thus , to be able to make this decision it might be seen as sufﬁcient to just provide 58 RESULTS information about these options . In this light , patients’ immediate access to their EHR including test results might not be considered as a necessary aspect of patient autonomy from the physicians’ point of view . Patients , however , might view this differently , as is reﬂected for example in the patient movement “Nothing About Me Without Me” . The phrase has its origin in the Salzburg Seminar Through the Patient’s Eyes in 1998 ( Delbanco et al . 2001 ) and ended up to be much more than a guiding principle during the seminar . It is one of the phrases used when advocating for patient - centred care and shared decision making ( Barry & Edgman - Levitan 2012 ) , and in particular in the activist patient community ( Quinlan 2018 ) . A different doctor - patient relationship has been called for , where patients are seen as partners , recognised for being an expert as well , and where the emphasis is on “shared information , shared evaluation , shared decision making , and shared responsibilities” ( Coulter 1999 , p . 719 ) . Coming back to the tension identiﬁed by Katz ( 2002 ) , giving patients access to their health information might even increase their capacity to make decisions , especially those that go beyond selecting from alternative options , for example , health - related choices that have to be made on a daily basis ( cf . Funnell et al . 1991 ) . As presented previously in relation to professional autonomy , patients reading their records was perceived as interfering their processes and physicians preferred to ﬁnish their investigations and to determine themselves when to disclose information . Some expressed a preference to have the ﬁnal say in decision making . The following free - text comment from the patient survey illustrates that patients might encounter the tension when meeting a physician : Some get really angry when you are talking about reading the record yourself [ P - 2411 ] In light of a doctor - patient partnership , this conﬂicts with the view of shared information and shared decision making . Shared information implicated in this partnership relates therefore to information transparency . How can patients be considered as true partners and as having the capacity to exercise their right to self - determination , if they do not have access to their own data ? Furthermore , the results of the patient survey suggest that it can support patients to improve their health , given that 58 % ( 281 ) agreed or strongly agreed that it had a positive impact on their ability to take own steps towards health improvement . Especially in relation to chronic conditions , patients can develop an understanding of their condition over time , engage in self - care activities , and start taking on further responsibilities ( Nunes et al . 2015 ) . The extent of autonomy and control over ones condition depends however on the disease and the patient’s current health status ( Nunes et al . 2015 ) . A tension between professional autonomy and patient empowerment implicated in the Swedish PAEHR system Journalen has been identiﬁed before . According to Erlingsdottir & Lindholm ( 2015 , p . 43f ) , PAEHR changes the balance between patient empowerment and the autonomy of the medical profession , who traditionally had the power over the records . Sweden introduced a new law ( Patient Data Act , SFS 2008 : 355 ) that made it legal for patients to access their health records digitally . Through this new law , “Patient empowerment was prioritized over the autonomy and doubts of the medical professionals” ( Erlingsdottir & Lindholm 2015 , p . 44 ) Concern for Patients’ Well - Being versus Patient Autonomy We can assume that well - being of the patient is equally valued by both HCPs and patients . Thus , the tension does not appear on the value level , but in the framing of the technology and people’s interpretation of how PAEHR contributes to or endangers the well - being of the patient . Most physicians in the interviews were concerned that it would inﬂict harm to the patient in terms of increasing anxiety and worry . Avoidance of inﬂicting harm to the patient is a value deeply ingrained in the healthcare RESULTS 59 domain and “inﬂicting avoidable or unnecessary harm to patients is considered a very grave offense , occasionally giving rise to the suspension or even prohibition of a professional’s continued practice” ( van der Wilt et al . 2015 , p . 721 ) . Patients in our survey , however , considered having access to their EHR as a good reform . On the national level , 84 . 7 % ( 2 , 152 ) strongly agreed that this is a good reform . Furthermore , as presented by Rexhepi et al . ( 2016 ) , accessing the EHR and being able to read the test results timely instead of waiting can contribute to the patients’ well - being . For patients in that interview study , waiting for the results caused more anxiety than reading it for themselves through the PAEHR system ( Rexhepi et al . 2016 ) . This shows , that the TF of patients and physicians in relation to patients’ well - being are incongruent . Although both stakeholders share the value of well - being , when it comes to PAEHR the deeply ingrained value to avoid unnecessary harm may be in tension with the value of patient autonomy or “respect for the patient’s will” ( van der Wilt et al . 2015 , p . 721 ) . When PAEHR is framed as a technology that potentially harms patients , physicians’ attempts to circumvent the technology ( e . g . , by writing more vaguely or not signing notes to prevent patient access ) supports their value to avoid unnecessary harm . However , this conﬂicts with the autonomy of patients who want timely access to their EHR . It is also interesting to note , that the physicians’ argument implies that PAEHR induces worry or increases worry of those who are already unwell . It was pointed out in the interviews that patients are supposed to enjoy their lives instead of reading their records . Patients in the study by Rexhepi et al . ( 2016 ) expressed that accessing their record helped them to feel more in control of their care and that this was crucial for their well - being . Contrary to what one might expect and to what the physicians were very concerned about , some patients may even choose deliberately to receive bad news by reading their record instead of a face - to - face meeting . According to Rexhepi et al . ( 2016 , p . 5f ) , one patient chose to read about their cancer diagnosis through PAEHR because it was easier than having to wait , and another patient preferred to have the emotional reaction at home and being “back on track” when meeting the doctor . According to the study , “many of the patients want to decide themselves how they should receive that information , by talking to the physicians or by reading about it in the medical record” ( Rexhepi et al . 2016 , p . 5 ) . Of course , patient preferences may vary and some patients might prefer not to know or to read . Whether patients want to read their records or not might also vary depending on their condition and how they feel in a given situation . As the study by Klein et al . ( 2018 ) showed , patients with common chronic diseases ( congestive heart failure , asthma , diabetes ) and those with a greater number of ofﬁce visits were more likely to access their medical notes . Veatch ( 2000 , p . 704 ) distinguishes between total and medical well - being and following from that he concludes that physicians cannot know what is in the patients’ best interest : “If the physician’s task is to focus on maximizing the medical well - being of the patient , then wise patients will recognize that they want merely very good health , not maximum medical well - being . ” Furthermore , Veatch ( 2000 ) adds : [ Whether physicians ] view their responsibility as limited to the narrowly medical or expand their sphere to total well - being – they can be expected to fail at guessing what the proper mix between the medical and other spheres ought to be for a particular patient ( Veatch 2000 , p . 705 ) Following this line of argumentation , patients should determine what is important for them and whether or not PAEHR is beneﬁcial for their well - being . This can include the desire to access their EHR immediately as well as the request for a delay to protect from accidentally reading bad news , as was reported by Esch et al . ( 2016 , p . 7 ) . Related to value - sensitive design , PAEHR can be seen to contribute to their well - being in the conception of desire - fulﬁlment or preference - satisfaction theories 60 RESULTS of well - being ( Brey 2015 , p . 368 ) , according to which well - being lies in the fulﬁlment of one’s desires . Hence , if patients prefer to read their records online , then PAEHR helps them fulﬁl this desire . Concern for Patients’ Well - Being versus Patients’ Privacy As mentioned previously , patients in Sweden have the legal right to block certain information in the EHR . This was seen critically , as some physicians were concerned that patients might block information that is important for them to determine the right course of treatment . Hence , there is a risk that this feature might enable patients to perform an action that is detrimental to their well - being . On the other hand , the ability to block information supports patients’ privacy which is also a human value . Friedman et al . ( 2006 , p . 364 ) deﬁned privacy as “a claim , an entitlement , or a right of an individual to determine what information about himself or herself can be communicated to others” . In this regard , privacy is also closely related to patient autonomy , given that the patient determines whether a particular information is shared with HCPs or not . Accountability and Transparency versus Privacy and Trust The EHR can be seen as a document that supports accountability and transparency of actions taken by physicians and other HCPs . The log list supports the value of accountability and transparency given that it makes it possible to trace actions ( i . e . , accessing a record ) uniquely to the person . As mentioned before , the deﬁnition of privacy by Friedman et al . ( 2006 , p . 364 ) includes the right of an individual to determine what information is shared with others . In that sense , the log list supports patients’ privacy , as they can review that there was no unauthorised access , for example , by people in their circle of acquaintances who might work in healthcare . However , from the physicians’ point of view , the log list was seen critically and associated with surveillance . Surveillance touches upon another human value : physicians’ privacy . Warnier et al . ( 2015 , p . 432 ) identiﬁed three main aspects of privacy : freedom from intrusion ( the right to be left alone ) , control of information about oneself , and freedom from surveillance ( the right not to be tracked , followed , or watched in one’s own private space ) . Following the physicians’ framing of PAEHR and in particular the log list , freedom from surveillance was affected in that every time they access an EHR , their name is logged and visible for patients . They cannot determine whether this information about themselves is communicated to their patients . One can argue that in this case privacy and integrity of the patient is prioritised given that it enables patients to identify unauthorised access and ﬁle a complaint . Many physicians pointed out , however , that it might lead to misunderstandings if they access an EHR for a consult without meeting the patient in person . Another aspect is worth noting : The deﬁnition by Warnier et al . ( 2015 ) refers the right to not to be tracked in one’s private space . One might argue , that physicians do not conduct their professional activities in their own ‘private space’ , however , employees also have a right to privacy . On the other hand , although right to privacy is considered a fundamental human right , it is not absolute ( Warnier et al . 2015 , p . 435f ) . As this case shows , values of transparency , accountability , and privacy are all implicated in the technology and have to be negotiated . A strong argument for “employing surveillance is the control of crime in the workplace” ( Miller & Weckert 2000 , p . 260 ) and given that it is technically possible but illegal for HCPs to access medical records of people other than their patients , patient integrity might have been prioritised over employees’ privacy . In relation to the log list , the interpersonal trust between physician and patient was considered to be endangered . Patients being encouraged by the municipality to review the list was seen as creating distrust . However , patients might suspect unauthorised access of the EHR even without encouragement . Thus , the log list enables not only to conﬁrm unauthorised access , it may also remove such a suspicion RESULTS 61 if unfounded ( Lyttkens 2015 , p . 16 ) . Given that a patient might have family members or other acquaintances who work in healthcare , the idea that all HCPs can potentially read their records can be very disconcerting for patients . The possibility to view the list , can increase trust in the technology and the healthcare system . Thus , there is a strong relation between transparency facilitated by ICT and trust . As pointed out by Bannister & Connolly ( 2011 , p . 145 ) : “Ironically , transparency increases trust because it leaves less to trust . ” Research in the US related to Open Notes also reported an enhanced trust through PAEHR ( Esch et al . 2016 ) . In the study by Asan et al . ( 2018 ) , patients were provided with a second screen which allowed them to see what their physician was doing in real - time , including documentation and data reviewing . Patients in that study reported that they already had a high level of trust , however , the improved transparency through the second screen was more inviting of their participation and fostered additional trust ( Asan et al . 2018 , p . 5 ) . DISCUSSION 63 Chapter 5 Discussion In this chapter , the results are discussed in relation to the research questions and in relation to the wider literature . Subsequently , implications for healthcare and the development of eHealth applications will be presented . The chapter concludes with a reﬂection on the research methods applied in this thesis . 5 . 1 Physicians’ Views on PAEHR and Patient Participation Most of the interviewed physicians considered the EHR as their work tool as they use it mainly for communicating with other healthcare professionals who use the same medical language . Given the characteristics of the record , it is not surprising that the introduction of another recipient of this artefact sparks a critical or negative reaction . In communication practices , consideration of the recipient of a given message is crucial to establish an effective and efﬁcient information exchange . Other studies also reported about physicians’ concerns of a one - size - ﬁts - all note ( Delbanco et al . 2012 , p . 466 ) , and of problems when additional requirements ( e . g . , a particular data format or standardised data elements ) are put on the EHR for other purposes than direct care of the patient ( Kuhn et al . 2015 ) . The majority of the physicians in our study considered patients as unable to decode the content , as they contain medical jargon that the patients would not understand . Most of the negative consequences that were expected were based on this assumption . A potential demand to change their writing by using language appropriate for layperson would increase their workload . A patient who does not understand the content , who focuses on irrelevant details , and who misinterprets information is more likely to get upset , anxious , and worried and subsequently is inclined to contact them to remedy this situation . This extra contact would add to their workload , but is also considered as an interference ; a disruption of their current work practices in which , up to now , they were the ones in charge to determine the chain of events . The prospect of patients asking more questions tended to be viewed as a negative consequence of PAEHR , as it was associated with more time spent during consultation and an increased workload . Similar concerns were reported for example by Walker et al . ( 2011 ) . Interestingly , in an early report on handing out their records to patients while sitting in the waiting room , Baldry et al . ( 1986 ) , who are themselves physicians , frame the activity of patients asking more questions or having more discussions in a positive light . They include experiences of other practices in the UK at the time , stating that these patients “seem to show more trust and ask more questions” , and “notes have become more relevant and there is more discussion” ( Baldry et al . 1986 , p 597 ) . The way in which the authors directly connect the two aspects suggest a positive framing , which was not done by the Swedish physicians in our study . Breaking ‘bad news’ to patients is difﬁcult in any case , however , physicians were understandably concerned that patients would learn about , for instance , an initial diagnosis of cancer by reading the 64 DISCUSSION EHR . Similar concerns were expressed by the aforementioned physicians sharing paper - based records with their patients , which was resolved in that they withheld grave results from the records to discuss them with the patient before they read them ( Baldry et al . 1986 , p . 597 ) . Although Swedish physicians can use keywords to withhold information from patients , for example , suspected diagnoses or notes about sensitive life - situations , this feature is rarely used and often unknown to physicians ( Wass & Vimarlund 2018 ) . Most physicians considered older people as not skilled or interested in reading their EHR . Although this might be true for some people , the view of older patients as being generally not interested or sufﬁciently skilled might be a misconception based on inaccurate stereotypes . A recent study by Klein et al . ( 2018 ) related to Open Notes in the US showed that 94 % ( N = 653 ) of patients older than 70 years accessed their notes during the intervention period . In the Swedish context , Huvila et al . ( 2018 ) conducted a survey with patients who had ordered a paper copy of their medical record . In their study , patients older than 66 were much more positive that reading their medical records would improve both their communication with HCPs and their understanding of their health or condition ( Huvila et al . 2018 ) . Participants in this age group ( older than 66 ) were more conﬁdent than the group of older adults ( age 51 – 66 ) to understand their health information , but had some reservations to read the records online ( Huvila et al . 2018 ) . These reservations could be explained by other factors than age and also might change over time . A recent study by van Velsen et al . ( 2018 ) investigated collection of health data among older adults ( age range 62 – 87 years ) using a tablet application compared to paper surveys . Interestingly , the majority of their participants preferred the tablet application , mainly because they perceived it as easier to use ( van Velsen et al . 2018 ) . The results presented in this thesis are in line with other studies conducted on PAEHR , such as the Open Notes initiative in the US . Walker et al . ( 2011 ) found striking differences between doctor and patient attitudes towards sharing visit notes . Similar to the Swedish physicians , American physicians were concerned about longer visits ; more time spent addressing patient questions , writing , or editing notes ; and patients becoming frightened or confused ( Walker et al . 2011 , p . 815f ) . Overall , the physicians who declined to participate in the initiative predicted negative consequences for their practice and little positive effect on their patients ( Walker et al . 2011 , p . 816 ) . Furthermore , they were also concerned that changing the writing to contain less medical language would undermine efﬁcient communication ( Walker et al . 2015 , p . 3 ) . In a study by Ross et al . ( 2005 ) , physicians were more likely to anticipate concerns and less likely to anticipate that shared records would be empowering for patients . Patients reading their records had , however , far less impact on the work environment of the physicians than expected ( Delbanco et al . 2012 ) . Only few physicians reported an increase in visit duration , questions , or time spent on writing their notes , while a majority commented about a strengthened relationship with some of their patients ( Delbanco et al . 2012 , p . 466f ) . Enhanced trust and an improved relationship with HCPs was also reported by patients in Esch et al . ( 2016 , p . 7f ) . Hence , patients reading their notes can actually contribute to a trusting relationship . Most physicians in our study , however , anticipated the exact opposite as they assumed that the portal would increase or create a feeling of mistrust from patients . The concerns about patients being offended or worried when reading the records did not materialise according to physicians in the US ( Delbanco et al . 2012 , p . 466 ) . Many studies on PAEHR have been conducted in the US , however , a systematic review by Mold et al . ( 2015 ) included also studies from Norway . They found that the fear of additional burden and workload from patients accessing their EHR were only partly realised as many administrative and non - urgent tasks appear to be readily conducted online ( Mold et al . 2015 , p . 148 ) . The doctor - patient relationship has developed over time , where today the patient is supposed to be seen as an equal partner engaging for example in shared decision making . As the results DISCUSSION 65 showed , physicians were in principle in favour of patient participation . However , the analysis found little support for this position in their descriptions of their daily practice where that participation would have been actualised , for example , in terms of gatekeeping and limits to involvement as the physician was seen to get the ﬁnal say . This is in line with Anderson & Funnell ( 2010 , p . 278 ) , who stated that HCPs are socialised into a set of responsibilities and expectations that deﬁne their professional identity . This socialisation process is so powerful that “one can believe in the empowerment approach intellectually and yet behave in ways that completely contradict it , without being aware of the contradiction” ( Anderson & Funnell 2010 , p . 278 ) . A tool like PAEHR may help patients become more involved as it enables access to their medical data without having to ask for permission . However , PAEHR has not realised its full potential as it could also support communication between HCPs and patients as well as strengthen the relationship between them . 5 . 2 Patients’ Views on and Use of PAEHR The respondents in our study were very positive toward PAEHR and use it mostly to get an overview , follow up on the last visits , prepare for the next visit , and to become more involved . The comparison showed that using PAEHR for preparation was even greater for respondents who do not or have not worked in healthcare . Reading the notes after a visit to follow up on what has been said could explain why the majority responded to understand most of the content and only few agreed that it contains too much technical language . Similar results are reported for instance by Pyper et al . ( 2004 ) , who investigated experiences of patients in Oxford reading their EHR for the ﬁrst time . They found that most patients found it easy to understand , however , many requested explanations of medical terms ( Pyper et al . 2004 , p . 40 ) . Although a Mann - Whitney test showed that the understanding of the content was greater for respondents who work or have worked in healthcare , in sum 94 . 4 % ( 269 ) of respondents without healthcare background still strongly agreed or agreed that they understand most of the records . It is possible , that patients overestimate their level of understanding , as shown for example by Chapman et al . ( 2003 ) . One should note , however , that the participants in the study by Chapman et al . ( 2003 ) were randomly selected and did not read their own record but were asked about terms commonly used in cancer - related consultations . As many patients seem to read their EHR after their consultation , in which they were able to ask questions , this provides a context for the medical terms in their record . For instance , Baldry et al . ( 1986 ) report about patients reading their notes in the waiting room of a general practitioner . According to their study , most patients were already familiar with the content and many also stated that they understood all or most of the letters ( Baldry et al . 1986 ) . As this was in 1986 , these records were on paper and unlike today , patients could not easily search the Internet for explanations , as many of the patients in our study did . Patients’ ability to understand the content , also called health literacy , should however not be underestimated . As many of our participants had a medical background , it is also possible that patients with a high level of literacy are more inclined to use PAEHR . Health literacy is considered as one important factor that inﬂuences patient’ interest and ability to use patient portals ( Irizarry et al . 2015 ) . The results of our survey showed , that patients make use of the Internet or family and friends who have a medical background to learn more about the content . It is also possible that reading ones records after the visit enhances health literacy , as it is possible to connect the medical terms to what has been explained to them in the consultation . The majority of respondents in our survey stated that PAEHR helped them in communication with medical staff . An interesting result of a Mann - Whitney test was that the effect of information in Journalen to help in communication with medical staff was greater for those who do not work or have not worked in healthcare . One explanation could be that patients without 66 DISCUSSION a medical background learn certain terms through reading and hereby experience an improvement in their communication with the medical staff . Learning can be related not only to the content of the EHR , but also to processes and activities within healthcare . Physicians were concerned that patients would demand immediate explanations and consultation . PAEHR enables them , however , to see whether the results are already back or not ; or whether their physician has logged in after the results came back . This can increase the patient’s understanding of temporal aspects in healthcare . The results suggest that patients are aware of the physicians’ high workload and respectful of their time . Not knowing what is going on , however , may increase the need to make contact to learn what is actually happening . The majority of respondents also considered PAEHR to have a positive impact on their ability to follow the prescription of treatment . Interestingly this was one potential positive aspect considered by some physicians , namely that PAEHR might help patients to remember instructions and follow these . In the US , patients using Open Notes also reported an improved recall of their care plans and that it helped them taking their medications ( Delbanco et al . 2012 ) . Most respondents did not read anything that made them feel upset or anxious , however , of those who did , it remains unclear what exactly caused the anxiety . As reported by Rexhepi et al . ( 2016 , p . 5 ) , waiting for results was seen as causing more anxiety than accessing the results through the eHealth system . In the study by Baldry et al . ( 1986 , p . 598 ) , 10 % of the patients had been upset about particular issues , but they still felt that “record sharing was reassuring , informative , and helpful . ” This suggests that for these patients the overall experience and value of reading the records outweighs situations where patients might have negative experiences . Patients in our study would like to contact healthcare in a simpler way ( e . g . , by email ) . Similarly , their interest in contributing to the record through Journalen ( e . g . , by writing comments or adding information of self - testing or monitoring at home , or about expectations for the next visit ) can be interpreted as a more simple way to share information . This is in line with the study by Esch et al . ( 2016 , p . 9 ) reporting that patients would like to become more involved in the generation of their records . This idea might not be far fetched , considering the idea of ‘OurNotes’ in the US , where patients and families are invited to contribute to their notes ( Maﬁ et al . 2017 ) . Some patients contacted the healthcare unit in case they became upset , anxious , or found errors . However , most patients seem to ﬁnd strategies that does not add to the workload , such as waiting until the next visit , talking to friends , or searching the Internet for more information . This is in accordance with the ﬁndings by Rexhepi et al . ( 2016 , p . 6 ) and Esch et al . ( 2016 , p . 8 ) , where patients report they would usually wait until the next visit instead of making an additional contact . Similarly , Delbanco et al . ( 2012 , p . 467 ) suspect that the lack of impact on the professionals’ work is caused by patients being respectful of the physicians’ time and resourceful in addressing questions . In our survey we also identiﬁed a tendency of patients not reporting errors the found in their record and therefore not adding to the HCP’s workload . This is , however , not necessarily positive given that errors in the EHR might negatively affect the quality of care . In the US , patients’ attitude toward the prospect of reading the records were overwhelmingly positive ( Walker et al . 2011 , p . 816 ) . In a post - intervention survey , patients reported similarly to our ﬁndings that accessing their EHR increased their sense of control , improved their understanding of their medical issues and their ability to recall their plans for care , as well as lead to a better preparation for their visits ( Delbanco et al . 2012 ) . In addition , only few patients became confused , worried , or offended by reading their EHR ( Delbanco et al . 2012 , p . 467 ) . A mixed methods evaluation by Esch et al . ( 2016 ) found that patients experience an improved understanding by refreshing their memory and conﬁrming or improving what they understand about their own health information . Furthermore , they DISCUSSION 67 experienced a better relationship with their physicians ( increased trust ) , a stronger sense of control , and an improved management of medications ( Esch et al . 2016 , p . 8 ) . 5 . 3 Technological Frames , Human Values , and Tensions In this thesis , TF identiﬁed based on interviews were used as a starting point to identify human values associated with PAEHR . Based on the theoretical stance of VSD , values are not embedded within a technology , but implicated through engagement with or the use of the technology ( Davis & Nathan 2015 , p . 15 ) . Physicians were considered as indirect stakeholders as they do not interact directly with the PAEHR system in their role as HCP . However , although they do not use it themselves , they are concerned with the technology as part of their work environment and are potentially affected by its implementation and their patients using it . Thus , how physicians interpret or frame the technology inﬂuences how they engage with it , for example , whether they encourage patients to read their records . TF can be inﬂuenced by human values , given that “values are standards that individuals use to judge objects in their worlds” ( Allen & Ng 1999 , p . 6 ) and can inﬂuence a person’s assumptions , expectations and knowledge ( i . e . , their interpretation of a technology ) . Negative reactions of stakeholders toward a technology can be related to their TF , but they may also be based on value tensions implicated in the technology . The analysis in section 4 . 3 showed that various human values might be implicated in eHealth technologies related to the EHR and physicians’ work environment . Some of these values are directly related to the technology ( e . g . , transparency and the framing of PAEHR as a monitoring device ) , while others are more indirectly related to PAEHR ( e . g . , physicians well - being in terms of stress and the assumptions what patients might do after they use the technology ) . Further , the analysis identiﬁed tensions that can occur between values of the same stakeholder group ( e . g , transparency vs . privacy of physicians ) , between values of different stakeholder groups ( e . g , physicians’ professional autonomy vs . patients’ personal autonomy ) , and between framings of the technology related to particular values ( e . g , PAEHR in light of patients’ well - being vs . patient autonomy ) . It is important to understand , how people interpret and make sense of a technology and in what way their values might be supported or hindered by it . This is crucial as only then conﬂicts can be dealt with , for example , by trying to achieve a consensus between the stakeholders on how to move forward . Those investigations might result in the need for adjustments to the technology to support certain values or prevent negative consequences . Depending on the context , it is also possible that a strategic design decision has to be made that can then be based on certain values ( e . g . , prioritisation of values of a particular stakeholder ) . It should be communicated to stakeholders which trade - offs were made and why , for example , if patient values like privacy and integrity are prioritised over physicians’ privacy . Hulstijn & Burge - meestre ( 2015 ) proposed value - based argumentation to make trade - offs between values , objectives , and system components explicit . This can prevent misunderstandings that may lead to incongruent frames , for example , people’s understanding of the organisations’ motivation to implement a technology ( technology strategy ) . The motivation to implement PAEHR may have been transparency and patient participation , however , some physicians perceived it as a lack of trust in their practices . Different values can be implicated at the same time by a particular technology . For example , a technology can support transparency and accountability and at the same time support surveillance which stands in tension with professionals’ autonomy and privacy . Technology does not necessarily hinder the professionals’ values per se ; but based on a person’s TF it may be perceived as such . Thus , how people frame a technology can give insights into which values they perceive as supported or hindered . 68 DISCUSSION If a tension is not between competing values but arises due to different interpretations between indirect and direct stakeholders , it should be investigated how the technology actually supports or hinders that particular value . For example : Well - being of patients is a human value most likely shared by both stakeholders ; that is , the patient should not be harmed . The interpretation what harms them differs , however ( i . e . , patients reading their EHR ) . This is not a value tension but can be rather considered to be incongruent frames . Interventions to align frames could be a way to solve this conﬂict , however , there is a risk that this involves “imposing a dominant frame or manipulating other groups’ understanding to align with this frame to meet managerial goals” ( Davidson 2006 , p . 36 ) . Moreover , stakeholders’ competing and divergent perspectives should be appreciated given that they are all “legitimate from their own points of view” ( Heracleous & Barrett 2001 , p . 774 ) . However , if TF are based on a lack of information or misunderstandings , this should be corrected to enable reframing . As outlined by Orlikowski & Gash ( 1994 ) , TF can be helpful when they allow an interpretation of an ambiguous situation , reduce uncertainty , and provide a basis for taking action . At the same time TF can be constraining when they reinforce unreﬂective reliance on assumptions ( Orlikowski & Gash 1994 ) . The research presented in this thesis might help physicians to align those TF that were mainly based on assumptions or lack of information . For example , many physicians considered it to be harmful that patients read their records out of concern that they read suspected diagnoses , but they were not aware that they could use keywords to withhold such information . In addition , as TF include also assumptions and expectations about the technology , these are also subject to change as new information becomes available . This includes , for example , research on how patients actually use the technology and their experiences of reading their EHR as presented in this thesis . The case of PAEHR illustrates the complexity of stakeholder relationships given that the individual can shift roles and might move from indirect stakeholder to direct stakeholder ( cf . Davis & Nathan 2015 , p . 29f ) . For example , in their role as a physician a person is an indirect stakeholder of PAEHR , but as a patient or caregiver for their parents they might become a direct stakeholder . Furthermore , patient and HCPs are both direct stakeholders of the health record as such . The analysis focused only on physicians and patients , however , in a complex application domain like healthcare more stakeholders are involved , such as the public sector , industry , insurance companies , society as a whole . The analysis conducted in section 4 . 3 should be considered as initial empirical and conceptual investigations . The recognised values are based on TF identiﬁed in qualitative interviews which did not include direct questions related to values . It is crucial to understand the perspectives of the stakeholders involved , how they frame the technology , which of their values are implicated in the technology , and how they themselves might negotiate potential value tensions . User involvement is essential in “identifying user values , interpreting practical meaning of the values and implementing the values in products” ( Kujala & Väänänen - Vainio - Mattila 2009 , p . 36 ) . However , it can be quite difﬁcult to discuss values with stakeholders who may not even recognise their own values and some values are “unconscious or socially not desirable to mention” ( Kujala & Väänänen - Vainio - Mattila 2009 , p . 36 ) . The analysis in this thesis provides a foundation for supporting stakeholder reﬂection on these values , what they mean for different roles , and how people make trade - offs depending on the situation . One approach to help stakeholders reﬂect on technical and value aspects of design ideas is the Value Sensitive Action - Reﬂection Model ( Yoo et al . 2013 ) . The method makes use of stakeholder and designer prompts as “a means for bringing empirical data on values and theoretical perspective into the co - design process” ( Yoo et al . 2013 , p . 419 ) . The values and value tensions identiﬁed in this thesis could , for example , be used as stakeholder prompts in a co - design process . As different stakeholders represent different interests , Hulstijn & Burgemeestre ( 2015 , p . 320 ) argue that trade - offs concerning core values have to be solved in a dialogue between stakeholders . The different perspectives of physicians and patients as identiﬁed in this thesis supports that it is DISCUSSION 69 important for stakeholders to engage with each other . The need for inter - stakeholder dialogue was also identiﬁed by Greenhalgh et al . ( 2012 , p . 1 ) based on their ﬁndings that the introduction of “telehealth and telecare is hampered because different stakeholders hold different assumptions , values and world views , ‘talk past’ each other and compete for recognition and resources” . Thus , stakeholders with conﬂicting or contrasting concepts and perspectives have to engage more effectively with one another ( Greenhalgh et al . 2012 , p . 10 ) . Approaches and tools to support identiﬁcation and communication between stakeholders are under development ( e . g . , mobile tool for in - situ value reﬂection and elicitation by Pommeranz et al . ( 2011 ) , value - based argumentation approach by Hulstijn & Burgemeestre ( 2015 ) ) . However , considering the workload and time constraints in healthcare , this might be difﬁcult to realise in practice . An important aspect to consider is the time frame of the empirical work conducted in this thesis . The analysis of physicians’ interpretations and actions to PAEHR is a “point - in - time snapshot of frames” as is quite typical in TF studies ( Davidson 2006 , p . 30 ) . However , frames are ﬂexible in structure and content , have variable dimensions that shift in salience and content by context over time ( Orlikowski & Gash 1994 , p . 176 ) . Given that interpretations can change , which can be triggered by a variety of circumstances ( Davidson 2006 , p . 30 ) , the next iteration of empirical investigations could focus on frames as a dynamic process and how TF of PAEHR may have changed over time . The values and value tensions presented in section 4 . 3 are based on the identiﬁed TF , which as stated may change over time . Values , however , have been considered to be less subject to change and thus emphasis has been placed on investigating stakeholder values , for instance by Heracleous & Barrett ( 2001 ) : Our research indicates that leaders should go beyond what multiple stakeholders say about intended implementation of electronic data interchange systems and attempt to understand the deeper values and beliefs of these stakeholders that are enshrined in the groups’ discursive structures because these are what persist over time and guide actors’ interpretations and actions . ( Heracleous & Barrett 2001 , p . 774 ) Values have been characterised also by others as relatively stable preferences that reﬂect socialisation and are culturally shared ( Kujala & Väänänen - Vainio - Mattila 2009 , p . 25 ) . Despite the assumed stability , how values are prioritised might differ given that individuals make trade - offs in their daily decisions ( Kujala & Väänänen - Vainio - Mattila 2009 , p . 25 ) . On the other hand , for some technologies values may indeed be subject to change , for example , because new values might emerge in society , relevance of values may change , or how they are deﬁned and understood ( van de Poel 2018 ) . Stakeholder participation is essential to investigate their reﬂections on the identiﬁed TF , values , and value tensions as well as value considerations that may not have been identiﬁed in the investigations presented in this thesis . 5 . 4 Implications for Healthcare and eHealth Design Healthcare is a very complex application domain with many stakeholders involved who may have competing interests . In this thesis only two of these stakeholders have been addressed : patients as direct and physicians as indirect stakeholders of PAEHR . The results suggest that physicians and patients view PAEHR very differently and consequently their assessment whether it is beneﬁcial for patients to read their EHR differs . The empirical and conceptual investigations identiﬁed a variety of values and potential value tensions related to PAEHR . As TF are considered to be shared among groups of individuals and values are intimately connected to the identity of people ( Hulstijn & Burgemeestre 2015 , p . 330 ) , technology that aims to introduce 70 DISCUSSION change in the organisation have to be designed and discussed with the stakeholders . According to the project report , PAEHR was considered an issue of patient empowerment and was supported on the political level in Sweden ( Lyttkens 2015 , p . 8 ) . PAEHR can increase patient involvement through information - sharing ( cf . Thompson 2007 ) . However , practice change like this cannot be solved by implementing technology alone . In relation to implementing shared decision making , Grande et al . ( 2013 ) suggest that a collaborative approach is needed , in which all stakeholders must openly confront the many real barriers to implementation , at the organization , practice , and patient – physician level , so that those who have the most insight and potential impact are engaged to ﬁnd solutions . ( Grande et al . 2013 , p . 221 ) The importance of involving stakeholders holds also true when designing innovative eHealth technologies . Within HCD , approaches have been developed to help designers to engage with their target users . For instance , personas aim to make assumptions about users explicit , engender interest and empathy towards users and are hereby supposed to help a design team to become more user - focused ( Adlin & Pruitt 2010 , p . 1 ) . There is a risk , however , that personas are more stereotypes than descriptions of believable characters , as pointed out by Nielsen ( 2002 ) . This makes an engagement with the character much more difﬁcult , and essentially reinforces an overgeneralised view of heterogenous groups of people such as ‘the elderly’ or ‘patients’ . An engagement with the characters and an understanding of their background , personality , intentions , and motives is vital to explore how they might respond to new technology ( Wright & McCarthy 2008 , p . 641 ) . However , even in projects which start with rich descriptions , there is still a risk that the team falls back onto generalisations and stereotypes as demonstrated by Hallewell Haslwanter & Fitzpatrick ( 2013 ) . The identiﬁcation of the stakeholder’s TF and values , and of congruences and tensions between them , is crucial to develop a technology that supports their values and needs as well as a collaborative relationship between patient and HCP . TF concern assumptions , expectations , and knowledge of people . An existing conﬂict between different framings of a technology ( e . g . , PAEHR as a surveillance tool versus a tool to increase patient participation ) may not be based on conﬂicting values . As presented in section 4 . 3 , stakeholders may share the same values , however , different TF may be causing the conﬂict . Making these aspects explicit and encouraging a dialogue can help resolve the tensions . As pointed out by Greenhalgh et al . ( 2012 ) : While consensus is not a realistic or even desirable goal , surfacing such things as as - sumptions and values , and inviting debate on their signiﬁcance through intersectoral and interdisciplinary dialogue will help achieve what systems thinkers have called ‘accommo - dation’ ( acknowledgement of , and adaptation towards , other perspectives and practices ) . ( Greenhalgh et al . 2012 , p . 11 ) The idea that TF and values can be identiﬁed in collaboration with and through a dialogue between the stakeholders is promising to achieve this accommodation . Activities related to eHealth design should , however , go beyond the design and implementation of technologies and include also in - depth investigations of socio - technical and long - term consequences as well as evaluations of eHealth implementations . Consequences of innovative technologies are by deﬁnition unknown and advantages or disadvantages may become known long after the launch of the technology . Furthermore , eHealth developments fail or its uptake does not live up to expectations ( Greenhalgh et al . 2010 , 2017 ) . However , reﬂections on successes and failures of eHealth implemen - tations that included multiple stakeholders are scarce ( Swinkels et al . 2018 ) . Greenhalgh & Russell ( 2010 ) propose a social practice approach to eHealth evaluations , which includes active engagement with a social situation and consideration of how that situation is framed and enacted by participants . DISCUSSION 71 Reﬂexivity is a key quality criterion which includes “consciously thinking about issues such as values , perspectives , relationships , and trust” ( Greenhalgh & Russell 2010 , p . 1 ) . Critical Incidents ( CIs ) workshops as reported in Paper VI can support reﬂexivity and help gain valuable insights into a variety of different eHealth projects . We conducted a workshop using CIs at NordiCHI , which is the biennial Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction . The overarching aim of the workshop was to provide a venue for researchers and practitioners to share experiences relating to the design and deployment of eHealth services for patients and relatives . The theoretical basis of the workshop format was the critical incident technique , which was originally developed by Flanagan ( 1954 ) , and the critical reﬂection model by Fook & Gardner ( 2007 ) , which is based on reﬂective practice as discussed by Donald Schön and others . A critical incident is deﬁned as “something ( an event ) that happened to a person that they regard as important or signiﬁcant in some way” ( Fook & Gardner 2007 , p . 77 ) . In their critical reﬂection model , CIs are used by small groups of people to reﬂect on their speciﬁc practice experience to “unsettle the fundamental ( and dominant ) thinking implicit in professional practices , in order to see other ways of practising” ( Fook & Gardner 2007 , p . 51 ) . The process involves two stages in which group members make use of questions and engage in dialogue to elicit and examine fundamental and implicit assumptions in the accounts of practices ( stage 1 ) , and further articulate new theories of practice resulting from the reﬂections ( stage 2 ) ( Fook & Gardner 2007 , p . 73f ) . The detailed description of the workshop format can be found in Paper VI . In line with the social practice approach to eHealth evaluations mentioned previously , the CI workshop supported active reﬂection about assumptions that were made about stakeholders , the problem , and the situation . It provided an accessible way to learn about successes and failures of real - world eHealth projects and helped workshop participants to gain valuable insights into the lessons learned . 5 . 5 Reﬂections on Research Methods As stated in chapter 3 , the interviews with the physicians were conducted and transcribed prior to my involvement in the DOME consortium . The researcher plays an important role in the data collection that goes way beyond asking the questions carefully prepared in the interview guide . Depending on the topic of the interview , aspects such as similarity between interviewer and participant ; power position of interviewer and participant ; or the necessity to disclose personal information to participants might be important to consider ( Braun & Clarke 2013 , p . 85ff ) . These aspects can inﬂuence the level of rapport the researcher builds with the participant and thus can inﬂuence how much they disclose in the interview . Furthermore , important information might be missing on the audio recordings and thus have not been transcribed , for example , contextual information or non - verbal communication such as shrug of a shoulder or facial expressions . Contextual information like this did , however , not get lost during the data analysis given that this was a collaborative effort with researchers who conducted the interviews . This was very valuable and important , because that way we could make sure that the data analysis and interpretation was not dependent on the transcriptions alone . Given that the interviews were conducted in Swedish , it was necessary to translate them into English for me being able to engage in the analysis . This was done by the Swedish co - authors involved in the project , which also helped them to re - familiarise with the data given that some time had passed between conducting the interviews and the beginning of the data analysis . Although I do not have sufﬁcient skills in the Swedish language myself to perform the translation , I nevertheless made use of both the Swedish and the English transcripts throughout the analysis . Although it is preferable to speak the local language , not being able to is no impediment for conducting interpretive research ( Walsham 2006 , p . 323f ) . However , certain aspects in the language 72 DISCUSSION may be missed or misinterpreted , which is why it was even more important to analyse and discuss the material together with researchers who speak the local language . One of the challenges we noticed during the analysis of the interviews was to distinguish between genuine personal experiences and assumptions . As mentioned , the launch of the system sparked strong criticism among healthcare professionals . Questions that were quite open and asked speciﬁcally for opinions and views invited the participants to provide examples that had been discussed in the media or among colleagues , but which were not experienced by themselves . It is also possible that participants answered in a certain way to inﬂuence the outcome of the study . One of the difﬁculties of interviews is that language might not be a good indicator of thought and action ( Punch 2013 , p . 152 ) , because what participants say they do , or think , might differ from what they actually do or think ( Oates 2005 , p . 198 ) . It is therefore possible , that their accounts were coloured by the broad coverage of the launch of the system in the media . We also could see that some accounts were rather hypothetical assumptions than accounts from personal experience . This is not surprising given that the interviews took place only a few months after the launch . However , the aim of the study was to understand the physicians perspective on the patient portal and in particular their framing of PAEHR . The analysis therefore took into account that some statements were based not on personal experiences but on assumptions , which are an important aspect of how people frame a technology ( cf . the deﬁnition of TF as the core set of assumptions , expectations , and knowledge ) . Asking open - ended questions has been described as “the most important guidance for designing effective qualitative interview questions” ( Braun & Clarke 2013 , p . 86 ) . In this particular case ( i . e . , an interview study quite early after the launch of the system ) , the open - ended questions invited the physicians to share opinions and assumptions and to hypothesise . The lesson learned for a follow - up study is to start with a closed - ended question to make explicit whether the following conversation is based on personal experience or based on assumptions . For example , a follow - up study focusing on physicians’ actual experiences with patients reading their EHR would then start with a closed - ended question on a speciﬁc topic and then follow up on that with further probes . Probes are part of the interview template and aim to encourage the participants to open up and provide more detail to their answers ( Braun & Clarke 2013 , p . 86 ) . There were also some methodological lessons learned when analysing the survey data , some of which could have been spotted in a pilot test . Unfortunately , the questionnaire was not pilot tested before data collection . During the data analysis , we noticed that some respondents used the free text form of a particular question to comment on a previous question , which did not provide a free text form . Thus , it might prove valuable to offer a free text form for all questions . Several participants made use of this to also explain their responses . For example , one statement in questions 17 was “Ability to access information and manages services for my children” . Several added as a comment that they do not have children , indicating also that a response option “not applicable” should have been included . The free text forms proved extremely valuable as respondents were able to point out potential misconceptions or mistakes in the questionnaire design that helped to interpret the data . The questionnaire was developed in collaboration with several researchers in the DOME consortium presenting various perspectives , disciplines , and research questions . This collaborative effort was very valuable during the iterative process of developing the questionnaire and revising the wording of questions and response options . However , the questionnaire ended up being quite long , which increases the risk of participants dropping out and not responding to all questions . During the course of my PhD , I learned a lot about research approaches and different methods which helped me to develop as a researcher over time . In the early stages of my PhD , the way I communicated my research results was inﬂuenced by lacking an in - depth understanding of different research paradigms and their implications as well as English being my second language . Thus , I turned to publications DISCUSSION 73 within HCI and other ﬁelds , read articles that had been presented at the particular conference venue I wanted to submit my work , and adapted structure and style of my writing accordingly . By focusing on different venues and audiences for my publication I missed out on the implications an underlying research paradigm has on how the particular research is communicated . For example , with a background in media informatics I was familiar with and did not question the convention to write in passive voice . Within an interpretive research paradigm , however , the use of the ﬁrst person active is used to indicate the active involvement of the researcher ( cf . Oates 2005 , p . 310ff ) . Similar to this , I was not aware of the connotations and implications of expressions like ‘themes emerge’ or ‘the analysis reveals’ . These expressions also conceal the active role of the researcher in the analysis and imply a more positivist paradigm to research ( Clarke 2018 ) , which is conﬂicting with the constructionist interpretive research conducted in this thesis . CONCLUSIONS 75 Chapter 6 Conclusions The aim of this research was to enhance the understanding of patients’ and physicians’ views on PAEHR , and patients’ experience using the technology . Furthermore , I aimed to investigate human values and value tensions that may be implicated through engagement with or the use of PAEHR . The results of this research show that the assumptions and views of physicians are quite different from the views and the actual experiences of patients using the PAEHR system . The vast majority of patients appreciate timely access to their results , state that they understand the content , feel more involved in their care , and read their records to become more involved . The physicians were mostly concerned not only about potential increase of their workload , but also that patients would be harmed when accessing their EHR . An analysis of physicians’ technological frames identiﬁed several human values implicated through engagement with PAEHR . Furthermore , value tensions were identiﬁed on which some of the concerns raised by the physicians may be based . The analysis presented in this thesis provides a foundation for engaging in a dialogue with the stakeholders and to support reﬂection on these values . The concerns of the physicians are seen as legitimate from their points of view and it is of course possible that some patients become upset or may add to the burden of physicians because they have read something in their EHR . This should , however , not lead to an exclusion of all patients , many of whom value the access to their EHR and ﬁnd it very useful , in particular when engaging in self - care . We need a more nuanced understanding of the situations that actually cause worry , but which might occur with or without PAEHR . As was discussed by Rexhepi et al . ( 2016 ) , waiting for the test results for a long period of time was causing anxiety for patients ; not that they then could read them online . The research illustrates that investigations before , during , and after the development as well as communication between all involved parties ( direct and indirect stakeholders , development team ) is vital . PAEHR has potential beneﬁts not only for patients , but also for HCPs in various ways , for example , it may increase ofﬁce efﬁciency by decreasing the number of phone calls , handling messages more quickly , eliminating need to inform patients of normal results ( Miller Jr et al . 2016 ) . It is important to share those potential beneﬁts and features with HCPs so that they can make use of it , for example , the existence of the ‘keyword’ feature to withhold suspected diagnoses . In addition , it should be communicated to HCPs in which ways patients to date make use of PAEHR in their daily self - care activities . The need for communication does also include the patient , for instance , about the existence of the PAEHR service and the extend of which they have access to their information . The last county council implemented Journalen in March 2018 . With a population of about 9 . 98 million and 1 . 8 million registered users in March 2018 ( Inera AB 2018c ) , not even 20 % of the population have registered yet . This may be due to lack of knowledge about the system , lack of interest , or lack of usefulness of the 76 CONCLUSIONS provided data in that particular county council . Although the respondents in our survey reported that they found it useful , as county councils could determine what information is shown , depending on where and when a patient received treatment the view of health related data is fragmented ( Hägglund & Scandurra 2017 ) . As Irizarry et al . ( 2015 ) pointed out , provider endorsement is one of the most inﬂuential factors that impact patients’ initial adoption and continued use . This thesis sheds light on the concerns that may have inhibited physicians to encourage their patients to read by investigating patients’ experiences with PAEHR . Most patients in our study felt comfortable that they understand the content . However , patients who lack this knowledge might not beneﬁt from PAEHR although they might want to . Low health literacy and lack of knowledge of the subject is considered as one of the main obstacles to patient participation ( Longtin et al . 2010 , p . 54 ) . Hence , patients with lower health literacy who want to make use of PAEHR should be supported in doing so . It goes without saying , that it is the patient who should determine how much they want to be involved and thus if they want to use the system . In terms of equal opportunities , however , all patients should be given the chance to participate . This could also be supported by ICT , for example , by linking medical terms in the EHR to lay deﬁnitions as suggested by Chen et al . ( 2018 ) . One contribution of this thesis is its ability to instigate critical discussion of those values associated with eHealth technologies that may stand in tension or might be perceived as conﬂicting given the framing of the technology . People’s interpretations of a technology and their perception of how their values are supported or hindered , affect their actions and their assessment of the usefulness of a technology . Stakeholders should be supported to reﬂect on their values and to engage in dialogue with each other to raise awareness of the multiple perspectives involved . Value tensions in a particular design should be made explicit to the stakeholders including potential prioritisation of one value over the other . This thesis plays a central role in instigating a discussion on how tensions between potentially conﬂicting values in healthcare can be resolved . For example , the tensions between a stance that prioritises technology design that is founded on the belief that experts have a responsibility to make decisions on the patient’s behalf and with their well - being in mind versus technology that supports increased patient autonomy and decision making . These types of discussion are key to future design of healthcare technologies given that one of the motivations behind the introduction of PAEHR in Sweden was patient empowerment , which is closely related to autonomy . Psychological autonomy refers to the extent and limits of a persons’ capacity to reﬂect and to make choices , and although the capacity of a person might be limited , this can be enhanced through conversation ( Katz 2002 , p . 111 ) . Many physicians considered patients to lack skills necessary to understand their EHR as well as to participate in decision making which represents a limit to involvement . However , following the argument by Katz ( 2002 ) this view might create a vicious cycle : If physicians were to pay greater attention to conversation - to patients’ capacities to reﬂect about choices - it could change their traditional attitudes towards patients capacities to make their own decision and , in turn , could radically transform the current state of physician - patient decision making . ( Katz 2002 , p . 112 ) The perception of patients lacking capacities to make their own decision , combined with practical issues such as time constraints and other barriers ( cf . Grande et al . 2013 ) , may prevent conversations that could actually enhance a persons’ capacity to make those decisions . The ﬁndings of this thesis suggest that while policymakers and government agencies adhere to a system of values that place a premium on patient empowerment , paternalistic tendencies are still present among physicians . The development of eHealth services like PAEHR is an important ﬁrst step , as it makes it much more difﬁcult to exclude patients . Initiatives that are supposed to increase patient participation , however , also have effects on other areas in the domain . Given the already stressful work CONCLUSIONS 77 environment and ICT systems that are not of high usability , it is not surprising that professionals are concerned with this new development . Some organisational changes outside of the scope of this thesis might be necessary , such as allocation of time to respond to patients’ emails and reading patients’ notes , reimbursement issues , implementation of processes to easily correct errors in the EHR , etc . In addition , as was already discussed by Katz ( 2002 ) , medical education has to account for general changes , for instance in terms of communication practices and the roles and responsibilities in the doctor - patients relationship . According to Mold & de Lusignan ( 2015 ) , this may include also training on effective communication and learning new styles and modes of communication as well as on - going support and training related to new technologies . Coming back to the title of my thesis : Is it harmful or empowering for patients to read their electronic health record ? In an attempt to answer this question , I’d like to refer back to Friedman et al . ( 2006 ) : [ The ] interactional position holds that although the features or properties that people design into technologies more readily support certain values and hinder others , the technology’s actual use depends on the goals of the people interacting with it . ( Friedman et al . 2006 , p . 361 ) Patient autonomy and related to this participation and empowerment can be supported through PAEHR , however , it also depends on the patient , their goals , and how they use it . PAEHR gives patients the opportunity to prepare for the next visit , serves as memory aid , and may also help them to get to know medical terminology related to their own health . PAEHR can support patients to participate in their own care , however , not all patients use PAEHR in ways that empower them , and some may not even use it at all , despite having access to it . Regardless of the diverse ways in which patients choose to interact with or use PAEHR , it provides an opportunity to become more involved in matters of their own health , but it also makes it more difﬁcult for physicians , who prefer the paternalistic healthcare paradigm , to exclude them . Can it be harmful ? The complexity of the research conducted in this thesis prevents a simple answer to the question raised in the title . As with most technologies , PAEHR can also have negative consequences , for example , by adding to the stress of a difﬁcult medical situation by presenting patients with excessive information . Not only HCPs , also patients have reservations whether PAEHR might be more confusing than helpful ( cf . , Klein et al . 2018 ) and it also carries broader risks associated with data misuse and privacy breaches . These consequences are in addition to PAEHR potentially having a negative effect on the physicians’ work environment . Despite its potential to improve the quality of care and reduce workload , PAEHR could create more activities in the long term that add to their workload . However , the results of this thesis suggest that the support of patient participation in their own care through PAEHR outweighs the potential harm . FUTURE WORK 79 Chapter 7 Future Work Based on this thesis , future research could investigate more in - depth how patients make use of the PAEHR in their daily life . As the patients in our study felt quite conﬁdent that they understood most of the content in their record , follow - up studies could speciﬁcally look into whether this perception is correct and how to support those patients who have difﬁculties understanding the content . It would be interesting to study furthermore how patients may have learned to use the technology over time , for example , whether they learn the ‘medical language’ , and how they make sense of what is written in their record . Furthermore , as some patients had become worried through reading , further studies could investigate what actually causes worry or distress . For example , whether this is caused by the technology or by the current situation ( e . g . , not knowing what is going on ) , and how patient manage these situations . The physicians in our study expected negative affects on the doctor - patient relationship , but other studies showed an enhanced trust and improved relationship . Thus , further studies should investigate how the Swedish PAEHR contributes to or inﬂuences the relationship . The survey conducted in this thesis aimed to learn about experiences of current users and thus was distributed through Journalen . Future work should investigate the perspectives and reasons of those who do not use PAEHR , for instance , the reasons they might have chosen not to read the records or might have stopped reading . Literature suggests that the changing roles in healthcare is quite challenging for HCPs . Although on a rational level , professionals might seem in favour of ‘empowerment’ , they might still “act according to a traditional biomedical model” ( Paterson 2001 , p . 580 ) , and might “have to unlearn being in control” ( Aujoulat et al . 2007a , p . 17 ) . As HCPs have been socialised to a set of responsibilities and expectations that deﬁne their professional identity ( Anderson & Funnell 2010 , p . 278 ) , further research could look into the role of physicians and their self identity in relation to the new established relationship . On the one hand , some patients are very engaged in self - care , are very knowledgable and take up lots of responsibilities . On the other hand , some patients or patients in certain situations might still prefer to leave the responsibilities to the HCP and want to be taken care of . Thus , although a set of responsibilities as such might still be part of their professional identity , the degree of responsibility for what kind of actions and the preferences might have to be established together with the individual patient . As was pointed out by Hulstijn & Burgemeestre ( 2015 , p . 330 ) , values are intimately connected to the identity of people . The values and value tensions identiﬁed in this thesis should be empirically investigated and reﬂected with stakeholders . Furthermore , the interviews took place in 2013 shortly after the launch of PAEHR . Although recent studies in Region of Jönköping County suggest that concerns related to potential harm and increased workload still exist ( Wass & Vimarlund 2018 ) , follow - up studies should investigate whether the concerns are still prevalent in Region Uppsala , whether the TF have 80 FUTURE WORK changed over time , and whether the potential of PAEHR as communication tool between patient and HCP is utilised . A new interview study with oncologists in Region Uppsala is currently in progress . As mentioned in the delimitations ( section 1 . 3 ) , physicians and patients are not the only stakeholder groups affected by the implementation of PAEHR . Within the DISA project , research on the effect on the nurses’ work environment is already in progress . Future research could investigate also the effects of PAEHR on other groups of HCPs ( e . g . , therapists ) as well as caregivers ( e . g . , family members of patients ) . List of Figures A Overview of included papers , their connections , and related chapters . . . . . . . . . xiii 2 . 1 National health information exchange infrastructure ( courtesy of Johan Eltes , Inera AB ) 19 2 . 2 Overview of information displayed in each county council / region as of January 2018 ( Inera AB 2018b ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 2 . 3 PAEHR user interface - Timeline of the EHR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 2 . 4 Swedish residents who used Journalen in 2018 ( as of August 5 , 2018 ) . . . . . . . . 22 3 . 1 Methods for data collection and analysis in relation to RQ and included papers . . . . 23 3 . 2 Selected questions related to areas of concern for physicians . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29 4 . 1 Four main themes related to technological frame domains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34 4 . 2 Gender distribution of respondents from all counties / regions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37 4 . 3 Distribution of respondents with or without professional background in healthcare from all counties / regions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37 4 . 4 Gender distribution of respondents who have received care in Region Uppsala . . . . . 41 4 . 5 Distribution of respondents in Region Uppsala with or without professional background in healthcare . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41 4 . 6 Themes within Technological Frames and the identiﬁed Human Values . . . . . . . . 45 81 List of Tables 4 . 1 Comparison between groups regarding attitude towards Journalen . . . . . . . . . . 38 4 . 2 Comparison between groups regarding motivation for using Journalen . . . . . . . . 38 4 . 3 Comparison between groups regarding information valued in Journalen . . . . . . . 39 4 . 4 Comparison between groups regarding importances of access to Journalen . . . . . . 40 4 . 5 Comparison between groups regarding their understanding of the content in Journalen 42 4 . 6 Comparison between groups regarding attitude towards Journalen . . . . . . . . . . 42 4 . 7 Comparison between groups regarding using Journalen for preparation . . . . . . . . 42 4 . 8 Comparison between groups regarding the effect of information in Journalen on communication with medical staff . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43 82 Bibliography Adlin & Pruitt 2010 A DLIN , Tamara ; P RUITT , John : The Essential Persona Lifecycle : Your Guide to Building and Using Personas . Morgan Kaufmann , 2010 Åhlfeldt & Huvila 2014 Å HLFELDT , Rose - Mharie ; H UVILA , Isto : Patient Safety and Patient Privacy When Patient Reading Their Medical Records . In : S ARANTO , Kaija ( Eds . ) ; C ASTRÉN , Maaret ( Eds . ) ; K UUSELA , Tiina ( Eds . ) ; H YRYNSALMI , Sami ( Eds . ) ; O JALA , Stina ( Eds . ) : Safe and Secure Cities . Springer International Publishing , Cham , 2014 . – ISBN 978 – 3 – 319 – 10211 – 5 , pp . 230 – 239 Ålander & Scandurra 2015 Å LANDER , Ture ; S CANDURRA , Isabella : Experiences of Healthcare Professionals to the Introduc - tion in Sweden of a Public eHealth Service : Patients’ Online Access to their Electronic Health Records . In : Stud Health Technol Inform 216 ( 2015 ) , pp . 153 – 157 Allen & Ng 1999 A LLEN , Michael W . ; N G , Sik H . : The direct and indirect inﬂuences of human values on product ownership . In : Journal of Economic Psychology 20 ( 1999 ) , February , No . 1 , pp . 5 – 39 Anderson & Funnell 2010 A NDERSON , Robert M . ; F UNNELL , Martha M . : Patient empowerment : Myths and misconceptions . In : Patient Education and Counseling 79 ( 2010 ) , June , No . 3 , pp . 277 – 282 Asan et al . 2018 A SAN , Onur ; T YSZKA , Jeanne ; C ROTTY , Bradley : The electronic health record as a patient engagement tool : mirroring clinicians’ screen to create a shared mental model . In : JAMIA Open 377 ( 2018 ) , April , No . 10 , pp . 904 Association for Computing Machinery 2018 A SSOCIATION FOR C OMPUTING M ACHINERY : ACM Code of Ethics and Professional Con - duct . https : / / www . acm . org / binaries / content / assets / about / acm - code - of - ethics - and - professional - conduct . pdf . Version : 2018 , accessed : Aug 7 , 2018 . – Archived by WebCite at http : / / www . webcitation . org / 71UfnvfZ3 Aujoulat et al . 2007a A UJOULAT , Isabelle ; D ’H OORE , William ; D ECCACHE , Alain : Patient empowerment in theory and practice : Polysemy or cacophony ? In : Patient Education and Counseling 66 ( 2007 ) , April , No . 1 , pp . 13 – 20 83 84 BIBLIOGRAPHY Aujoulat et al . 2007b A UJOULAT , Isabelle ; L UMINET , Olivier ; D ECCACHE , Alain : The Perspective of Patients on Their Experience of Powerlessness . In : Qualitative Health Research 17 ( 2007 ) , No . 6 , pp . 772 – 785 Baldry et al . 1986 B ALDRY , Molly ; C HEAL , Carol ; F ISHER , Brian ; G ILLETT , Myra ; H UET , Val : Giving patients their own records in general practice : experience of patients and staff . In : British medical journal ( Clinical research ed . ) 292 ( 1986 ) , March , No . 6520 , pp . 596 – 598 Bannister & Connolly 2011 B ANNISTER , Frank ; C ONNOLLY , Regina : Trust and transformational government : A proposed framework for research . In : Government Information Quarterly 28 ( 2011 ) , April , No . 2 , pp . 137 – 147 Bannon 2011 B ANNON , Liam : Reimagining HCI . In : interactions 18 ( 2011 ) , July , No . 4 , pp . 50 Barrows & Clayton 1996 B ARROWS , Randolph C . ; C LAYTON , Paul D . : Privacy , Conﬁdentiality , and Electronic Medical Records . In : Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 3 ( 1996 ) , March , No . 2 , pp . 139 – 148 Barry & Edgman - Levitan 2012 B ARRY , Michael J . ; E DGMAN - L EVITAN , Susan : Shared Decision Making – The Pinnacle of Patient - Centered Care . In : New England Journal of Medicine 366 ( 2012 ) , No . 9 , pp . 780 – 781 BEUC 2013 BEUC , The European Consumer Organisation : Patient access to Electronic Health Records . ( 2013 ) , June , pp . 1 – 18 Blandford et al . 2016 B LANDFORD , Ann ; F URNISS , Dominic ; M AKRI , Stephann : Qualitative HCI Research : Going Behind the Scenes . Morgan & Claypool Publishers , 2016 ( Synthesis Lectures on Human - Centered Informatics ) Bødker 2006 B ØDKER , Susanne : When Second Wave HCI Meets Third Wave Challenges . In : Proceedings of the 4th Nordic Conference on Human - computer Interaction : Changing Roles . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2006 ( NordiCHI ’06 ) , pp . 1 – 8 Bødker 2015 B ØDKER , Susanne : Third - wave HCI , 10 Years Later – Participation and Sharing . In : interactions 22 ( 2015 ) , August , No . 5 , pp . 24 – 31 Borchers 2018 B ORCHERS , Detlef : Verzögerungen “inakzeptabel” : Gesundheitsminister Spahn will eGK durch ID - System ersetzen ( Delays “unacceptable” : Health Minister Spahn wants to replace eGK with ID system ) . https : / / www . heise . de / newsticker / meldung / Verzoegerungen - inakzeptabel - Gesundheitsminister - Spahn - will - eGK - durch - ID - System - ersetzen - 4043711 . html . Version : 2018 , accessed : Aug 6 , 2018 . – Archived by WebCite at http : / / www . webcitation . org / 71TJ4RI4n BIBLIOGRAPHY 85 Borning & Muller 2012 B ORNING , Alan ; M ULLER , Michael : Next Steps for Value Sensitive Design . In : Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2012 ( CHI ’12 ) . – ISBN 978 – 1 – 4503 – 1015 – 4 , 1125 – 1134 Bourgeois et al . 2009 B OURGEOIS , Fabienne C . ; M ANDL , Kenneth D . ; S HAW , Danny ; F LEMMING , Daisy ; N IGRIN , Daniel J . : Mychildren’s : Integration of a Personally Controlled Health Record with a Tethered Patient Portal for a Pediatric and Adolescent Population . In : AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings ( 2009 ) , pp . 65 – 69 Braun & Clarke 2006 B RAUN , Virginia ; C LARKE , Victoria : Using thematic analysis in psychology . In : Qualitative Research in Psychology 3 ( 2006 ) , No . 2 , pp . 77 – 101 Braun & Clarke 2013 B RAUN , Virginia ; C LARKE , Victoria : Successful Qualitative research : A Practical Guide for Beginners . 1 . SAGE Publications Ltd , 2013 . – ISBN 978 – 1 – 84787 – 582 – 2 Braun & Clarke 2014 B RAUN , Virginia ; C LARKE , Victoria : What can “thematic analysis” offer health and wellbeing researchers ? In : International Journal of Qualitative Studies on Health and Well - being 9 ( 2014 ) , pp . 26152 Brey 2015 B REY , Philip : Design for the Value of Human Well - Being . In : ( van den Hoven et al . 2015 ) , pp . 365 – 382 Brock & Wartman 1990 B ROCK , Dan W . ; W ARTMAN , Steven A . : When Competent Patients Make Irrational Choices . In : New England Journal of Medicine 322 ( 1990 ) , No . 22 , pp . 1595 – 1599 Castro et al . 2016 C ASTRO , Eva M . ; V AN R EGENMORTEL , Tine ; V ANHAECHT , Kris ; S ERMEUS , Walter ; V AN H ECKE , Ann : Patient empowerment , patient participation and patient - centeredness in hospital care : A concept analysis based on a literature review . In : Patient Education and Counseling 99 ( 2016 ) , December , No . 12 , pp . 1923 – 1939 Chapman et al . 2003 C HAPMAN , Kristina ; A BRAHAM , Charles ; J ENKINS , Valerie ; F ALLOWFIELD , Lesley : Lay understanding of terms used in cancer consultations . In : Psycho - Oncology 12 ( 2003 ) , September , No . 6 , pp . 557 – 566 Charles et al . 1997 C HARLES , Cathy ; G AFNI , Amiram ; W HELAN , Tim : Shared decision - making in the medical encounter : what does it mean ? ( or it takes at least two to tango ) . In : Social Science & Medicine 44 ( 1997 ) , No . 5 , pp . 681 – 692 Chen et al . 2018 C HEN , Jinying ; D RUHL , Emily ; P OLEPALLI R AMESH , Balaji ; H OUSTON , K . T . ; B RANDT , A . C . ; Z ULMAN , M . D . ; V IMALANANDA , G . V . ; M ALKANI , Samir ; Y U , Hong : A Natural Language 86 BIBLIOGRAPHY Processing System That Links Medical Terms in Electronic Health Record Notes to Lay Deﬁnitions : System Development Using Physician Reviews . In : Journal of Medical Internet Research 20 ( 2018 ) , Jan , No . 1 , pp . e26 Clarke 2018 C LARKE , Victoria : Ten tweets on why @ ginnybraun and I ﬁnd the language of ‘themes emerged’ so problematic in # thematicanalysis and how else can you write about your themes and how they were developed [ Twitter thread ] . https : / / threadreaderapp . com / thread / 1014814432139141121 . html . Version : July , 5 2018 , accessed : Aug 10 , 2018 . – Archived by WebCite at http : / / www . webcitation . org / 71ZS1VoQF Coulter 1999 C OULTER , Angela : Paternalism or partnership ? Patients have grown up—and there’s no going back . In : BMJ 319 ( 1999 ) , September , No . 7212 , pp . 719 – 720 . – ISSN 0959 – 8138 Cromer et al . 2017 C ROMER , Risa ; D ENNESON , Lauren M . ; P ISCIOTTA , Maura ; W ILLIAMS , Holly ; W OODS , Susan ; D OBSCHA , Steven K . : Trust in Mental Health Clinicians Among Patients Who Access Clinical Notes Online . In : Psychiatric Services 68 ( 2017 ) , February , No . 5 , pp . 520 – 523 Crotty 1998 C ROTTY , Michael : The Foundations of Social Research : Meaning and perspective in the research process . Sage , 1998 Curtis et al . 2011 C URTIS , Jeff ; C HENG , Sarina ; R OSE , Kurt ; T SAI , Oliver : Promoting Adoption , Usability , and Research for Personal Health Records in Canada : The MyChart Experience . In : Healthcare Management Forum 24 ( 2011 ) , September , No . 3 , pp . 149 – 154 Davidson 2006 D AVIDSON , Elizabeth : A Technological Frames Perspective on Information Technology and Organizational Change . In : The Journal of Applied Behavioral Science 42 ( 2006 ) , March , No . 1 , pp . 23 – 39 Davis & Nathan 2015 D AVIS , Janet ; N ATHAN , Lisa P . : Value Sensitive Design : Applications , Adaptations , and Critiques . In : ( van den Hoven et al . 2015 ) , pp . 11 – 40 Day & Klein 1987 D AY , Patricia ; K LEIN , Rudolf : Accountabilities : ﬁve public services . Tavistock , London , 1987 deBronkart 2015 DE B RONKART , Dave : From patient centred to people powered : autonomy on the rise . In : BMJ 350 ( 2015 ) , February , No . feb10 14 , pp . h148 – h148 Delbanco et al . 2001 D ELBANCO , Tom ; B ERWICK , Donald M . ; B OUFFORD , Jo I . ; E DGMAN - L EVITAN , S ; O LLEN - SCHLÄGER , Günter ; P LAMPING , Diane ; R OCKEFELLER , Richard G . : Healthcare in a land called PeoplePower : nothing about me without me . In : Health Expectations 4 ( 2001 ) , September , No . 3 , pp . 144 – 150 BIBLIOGRAPHY 87 Delbanco et al . 2012 D ELBANCO , Tom ; W ALKER , Jan ; B ELL , Sigall K . ; D ARER , Jonathan D . ; E LMORE , Joann G . ; F ARAG , Nadine ; F ELDMAN , Henry J . ; M EJILLA , Roanne ; N GO , Long ; R ALSTON , James D . ; R OSS , Stephen E . ; T RIVEDI , Neha ; V ODICKA , Elisabeth ; L EVEILLE , Suzanne G . : Inviting Patients to Read Their Doctors’ Notes : A Quasi - experimental Study and a Look Ahead . In : Annals of Internal Medicine 157 ( 2012 ) , October , No . 7 , pp . 461 – 470 Delbanco et al . 2010 D ELBANCO , Tom ; W ALKER , Jan ; D ARER , Jonathan D . ; E LMORE , Joann G . ; F ELDMAN , Henry J . ; L EVEILLE , Suzanne G . ; R ALSTON , James D . ; R OSS , Stephen E . ; V ODICKA , Elisabeth ; W EBER , Valerie D . : Open Notes : Doctors and Patients Signing On . In : Annals of Internal Medicine 153 ( 2010 ) , July , No . 2 , pp . 121 – 125 Desmet & Roeser 2015 D ESMET , Pieter M . A . ; R OESER , Sabine : Emotions in Design for Values . In : ( van den Hoven et al . 2015 ) , pp . 203 – 219 Earnest et al . 2004 E ARNEST , Mark A . ; R OSS , Stephen E . ; W ITTEVRONGEL , Loretta ; M OORE , Laurie A . ; L IN , Chen - Tan : Use of a Patient - Accessible Electronic Medical Record in a Practice for Congestive Heart Failure : Patient and Physician Experiences . In : Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 11 ( 2004 ) , September , No . 5 , pp . 410 – 417 Emanuel & Emanuel 1992 E MANUEL , Ezekiel J . ; E MANUEL , Linda L . : Four Models of the Physician - Patient Relationship . In : Jama 267 ( 1992 ) , April , No . 16 , pp . 2221 – 2226 Erlingsdottir & Lindholm 2015 E RLINGSDOTTIR , Gudbjörg ; L INDHOLM , Cecilia : When patient empowerment encounters professional autonomy : The conﬂict and negotiation process of inscribing an eHealth service . In : Scandinavian Journal of Public Administration 19 ( 2015 ) , No . 29 , pp . 27 – 48 Esch et al . 2016 E SCH , Tobias ; M EJILLA , Roanne ; A NSELMO , Melissa ; P ODTSCHASKE , Beatrice ; D ELBANCO , Tom ; W ALKER , Jan : Engaging patients through open notes : an evaluation using mixed methods . In : BMJ Open 6 ( 2016 ) , January , pp . e010034 – 12 Essén et al . 2017 E SSÉN , Anna ; S CANDURRA , Isabella ; G ERRITS , Reinie ; H UMPHREY , Gayl ; J OHANSEN , Monika A . ; K IERGEGAARD , Patrick ; K OSKINEN , Jani ; L IAW , Siaw - Teng ; O DEH , Souad ; R OSS , Peeter ; A NCKER , Jessica S . : Patient access to electronic health records : Differences across ten countries . In : Health Policy and Technology ( 2017 ) , November European Commission 2010 E UROPEAN C OMMISSION : A Digital Agenda for Europe . http : / / www . ipex . eu / IPEXL - WEB / dossier / document . do ? code = COM & year = 2010 & number = 0245 & extension = FIN . Version : August 2010 , accessed : Mar 6 , 2016 . – Archived by WebCite at http : / / www . webcitation . org / 6gq8FMunO European Commission 2012 E UROPEAN C OMMISSION : eHealth Action Plan 2012 - 2020 – Innovative healthcare for the 88 BIBLIOGRAPHY 21st century . http : / / eur - lex . europa . eu / legal - content / EN / TXT / PDF / ? uri = CELEX : 52012DC0736 & from = EN . Version : December 2012 , accessed : Mar 6 , 2016 . – Archived by WebCite at http : / / www . webcitation . org / 6gq7uGsb1 Eysenbach 2001 E YSENBACH , Gunther : What is e - health ? In : Journal of Medical Internet Research 3 ( 2001 ) , No . 2 , pp . e20 – 2 Fahlquist et al . 2015 F AHLQUIST , Jessica N . ; D OORN , Neelke ; P OEL , Ibo van d . : Design for the Value of Responsibility . In : ( van den Hoven et al . 2015 ) , pp . 473 – 490 Flanagan 1954 F LANAGAN , John C . : The critical incident technique . In : Psychological Bulletin 51 ( 1954 ) , July , No . 4 , pp . 327 – 358 Fook & Gardner 2007 F OOK , Jan ; G ARDNER , Fiona : Practising Critical Reﬂection : A Resource Handbook . McGraw - Hill Education ( UK ) , 2007 Franssen 2015 F RANSSEN , Maarten : Design for Values and Operator Roles in Sociotechnical Systems . In : ( van den Hoven et al . 2015 ) , pp . 117 – 149 Friedman et al . 2006 F RIEDMAN , Batya ; K AHN J R , Peter H . ; B ORNING , Alan : Value Sensitive Design and Information Systems . In : Z HANG , Ping ( Eds . ) ; G ALLETTA , Dennis ( Eds . ) : Human – Computer Interaction and Management Information Systems : Foundations . M . E . Sharpe , Armonk , New York , 2006 , pp . 348 – 372 Friedman et al . 2000 F RIEDMAN , Batya ; K HAN J R , Peter H . ; H OWE , Daniel C . : Trust online . In : Communications of the ACM 43 ( 2000 ) , December , No . 12 , pp . 34 – 40 Fumagalli et al . 2015 F UMAGALLI , Lia P . ; R ADAELLI , Giovanni ; L ETTIERI , Emanuele ; B ERTELE , Paolo ; M ASELLA , Cristina : Patient Empowerment and its neighbours : Clarifying the boundaries and their mutual relationships . In : Health Policy 119 ( 2015 ) , March , No . 3 , pp . 384 – 394 Funnell et al . 1991 F UNNELL , Martha M . ; A NDERSON , Robert M . ; A RNOLD , Marilynn S . ; B ARR , Patricia A . ; D ONNELLY , Michael ; J OHNSON , Patricia D . ; T AYLOR - M OON , Denise ; W HITE , Neil H . : Empow - erment : An Idea Whose Time Has Come in Diabetes Education . In : The Diabetes Educator 17 ( 1991 ) , No . 1 , pp . 37 – 41 Grande et al . 2013 G RANDE , Stuart W . ; D URAND , Marie - Anne ; F ISHER , Elliott S . ; E LWYN , Glyn : Physicians as Part of the Solution ? Community - Based Participatory Research as a Way to Get Shared Decision Making into Practice . In : Journal of General Internal Medicine 29 ( 2013 ) , September , No . 1 , pp . 219 – 222 BIBLIOGRAPHY 89 Greenhalgh et al . 2010 G REENHALGH , Trisha ; H INDER , Susan ; S TRAMER , Katja ; B RATAN , Tanja ; R USSELL , Jill : Adoption , non - adoption , and abandonment of a personal electronic health record : case study of HealthSpace . In : BMJ 341 ( 2010 ) Greenhalgh et al . 2012 G REENHALGH , Trisha ; P ROCTER , Rob ; W HERTON , Joe ; S UGARHOOD , Paul ; S HAW , Sara : The organising vision for telehealth and telecare : discourse analysis . In : BMJ Open 2 ( 2012 ) , No . 4 Greenhalgh & Russell 2010 G REENHALGH , Trisha ; R USSELL , Jill : Why Do Evaluations of eHealth Programs Fail ? An Alternative Set of Guiding Principles . In : PLoS Medicine 7 ( 2010 ) , November , No . 11 , pp . e1000360 Greenhalgh et al . 2017 G REENHALGH , Trisha ; W HERTON , Joseph ; P APOUTSI , Chrysanthi ; L YNCH , Jennifer ; H UGHES , Gemma ; A’C OURT , Christine ; H INDER , Susan ; F AHY , Nick ; P ROCTER , Rob ; S HAW , Sara : Beyond Adoption : A New Framework for Theorizing and Evaluating Nonadoption , Abandonment , and Challenges to the Scale - Up , Spread , and Sustainability of Health and Care Technologies . In : Journal of Medical Internet Research 19 ( 2017 ) , No . 11 , pp . e367 Grudin 2005 G RUDIN , Jonathan : Three faces of human – computer interaction . In : Annals of the History of Computing ( 2005 ) Grudin 2017 G RUDIN , Jonathan : From Tool to Partner : The Evolution of Human - Computer Interaction . In : Synthesis Lectures on Human - Centered Informatics 10 ( 2017 ) , January , No . 1 , pp . i – 183 Grünloh et al . 2015 G RÜNLOH , Christiane ; W ALLDIUS , Åke ; H ARTMANN , Gerhard ; G ULLIKSEN , Jan : Using Online Reviews as Narratives to Evoke Designer’s Empathy . In : A BASCAL , Julio ( Eds . ) ; B AR - BOSA , Simone ( Eds . ) ; F ETTER , Mirko ( Eds . ) ; G ROSS , Tom ( Eds . ) ; P ALANQUE , Philippe ( Eds . ) ; W INCKLER , Marco ( Eds . ) : Human - Computer Interaction – INTERACT 2015 Bd . 9296 , Springer International Publishing , 2015 ( Lecture Notes in Computer Science ) . – ISBN 978 – 3 – 319 – 22700 – 9 , 298 - 315 Hägglund & Scandurra 2017 H ÄGGLUND , Maria ; S CANDURRA , Isabella : Patients’ Online Access to Electronic Health Records : Current Status and Experiences from the Implementation in Sweden . In : Stud Health Technol Inform 245 ( 2017 ) , pp . 723 – 727 Hallewell Haslwanter & Fitzpatrick 2013 H ALLEWELL H ASLWANTER , Jean D . ; F ITZPATRICK , Geraldine : The Development of a Sensor - based System for Older People : A Case Study . In : Proceedings of the 27th International BCS Human Computer Interaction Conference . British Computer Society , Swinton , UK , UK , 2013 ( BCS - HCI ’13 ) , 11 : 1 – 11 : 10 Harrison et al . 2011 H ARRISON , Steve ; S ENGERS , Phoebe ; T ATAR , Deborah : Making epistemological trouble : 90 BIBLIOGRAPHY Third – paradigm HCI as successor science . In : Interacting with Computers 23 ( 2011 ) , September , No . 5 , pp . 385 – 392 Harrison et al . 2007 H ARRISON , Steve ; T ATAR , Deborah ; S ENGERS , Phoebe : The Three Paradigms of HCI . In : Alt . Chi . Session at the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems San Jose , California , USA , 2007 , pp . 1 – 18 Häyrinen et al . 2008 H ÄYRINEN , Kristiina ; S ARANTO , Kaija ; N YKÄNEN , Pirkko : Deﬁnition , structure , content , use and impacts of electronic health records : a review of the research literature . In : International Journal of Medical Informatics 77 ( 2008 ) , April , No . 5 , pp . 291 – 304 Heracleous & Barrett 2001 H ERACLEOUS , Loizos ; B ARRETT , Michael : Organizational Change as Discourse : Communicative Actions and Deep Structures in the Context of Information Technology Implementation . In : Academy of Management Journal 44 ( 2001 ) , November , No . 4 , pp . 755 – 778 Hewett et al . 1992 H EWETT , Thomas T . ; B AECKER , Ronald ; C ARD , Stuart ; C AREY , Tom ; G ASEN , Jean ; M ANTEI , Marilyn ; P ERLMAN , Gary ; S TRONG , Gary ; V ERPLANK , William : ACM SIGCHI Curricula for Hu - man – Computer Interaction . http : / / old . sigchi . org / cdg / index . html . Version : 1992 , accessed : Jan 24 , 2018 . – Archived by WebCite at http : / / www . webcitation . org / 6wiTOX2CH Hilliard et al . 2015 H ILLIARD , Marisa E . ; O SER , Sean M . ; C LOSE , Kelly L . ; L IU , Nancy F . ; H OOD , Korey K . ; A NDERSON , Barbara J . : From Individuals to International Policy : Achievements and Ongoing Needs in Diabetes Advocacy . In : Current Diabetes Reports 15 ( 2015 ) , July , No . 9 , pp . 59 Holmström & Röing 2010 H OLMSTRÖM , Inger ; R ÖING , Marta : The relation between patient - centeredness and patient empowerment : A discussion on concepts . In : Patient Education and Counseling 79 ( 2010 ) , No . 2 , pp . 167 – 172 van den Hoven et al . 2015 H OVEN , Jeroen van d . ( Eds . ) ; V ERMAAS , Pieter E . ( Eds . ) ; P OEL , Ibo van d . ( Eds . ) : Handbook of Ethics , Values , and Technological Design : Sources , Theory , Values and Application Domains . Springer Netherlands , Dordrecht , 2015 Hulstijn & Burgemeestre 2015 H ULSTIJN , Joris ; B URGEMEESTRE , Brigitte : Design for the Values of Accountability and Transparency . In : ( van den Hoven et al . 2015 ) , pp . 303 – 333 Huvila et al . 2018 H UVILA , Isto ; E NWALD , Heidi ; E RIKSSON - B ACKA , Kristina ; H IRVONEN , Noora ; N GUYEN , Hai ; S CANDURRA , Isabella : Anticipating ageing : Older adults reading their medical records . 54 ( 2018 ) , May , No . 3 , pp . 394 – 407 Hyppönen et al . 2015 H YPPÖNEN , Hannele ; K ANGAS , Maarit ; R EPONEN , Jarmo ; N ØHR , Christian ; V ILLUMSEN , Sid - sel ; K OCH , Sabine ; H ARDARDOTTIR , Gudrun A . ; G ILSTAD , Heidi ; J ERLVALL , Lars ; P EHRSSON , BIBLIOGRAPHY 91 Thomas ; F AXVAAG , Arild ; A NDREASSEN , Hege ; B RATTHEIM , Berit ; V IMARLUND , Vivian ; K AIPIO , Johanna : Nordic eHealth Benchmarking . Nordic Council of Ministers , 2015 Höhl 2017 H ÖHL , Rebekka : Elektronische Patientakte : Raus aus der Warteschleife ? ( Electronic patient record : Get out of the waiting loop ? ) . https : / / www . aerztezeitung . de / praxis _ wirtschaft / e - health / article / 944688 / elektronische - patientenakte - raus - warteschleife . html . Version : 2017 , accessed : Feb 13 , 2018 . – Archived by WebCite at http : / / www . webcitation . org / 6xCRedZ1a Inera AB 2018a I NERA AB : About Inera . https : / / www . inera . se / om - inera / about - inera / . Version : 2018 , accessed : Feb 11 , 2018 . – Archived by WebCite at http : / / www . webcitation . org / 6x9NT4MfV Inera AB 2018b I NERA AB : Fördjupad information om våra tjänster ( More detailed information about our services ) . https : / / www . inera . se / Fordjupning / fordjupad - information - om - vara - tjanster / Journalen / . Version : 2018 , accessed : Feb 11 , 2018 . – Archived by WebCite at http : / / www . webcitation . org / 6x9SywF87 Inera AB 2018c I NERA AB : Nu har hela Sverige tillgång till e - tjänsten Journalen ( Now all of Sweden has access to eService Journalen ) . https : / / www . inera . se / aktuellt / nyheter / 2018 / journalen / nu - har - hela - sverige - tillgang - till - e - tjansten - journalen / . Version : 2018 , accessed : May 04 , 2018 . – Archived by WebCite at http : / / www . webcitation . org / 6zAHch9zD Inera AB 2018d I NERA AB : Statistik för Journalen ( Statistics on Journalen ) . https : / / www . inera . se / aktuellt / statistik / journalen _ statistik / . Version : 2018 , accessed : July 03 , 2018 . – Archived by WebCite at http : / / www . webcitation . org / 70dapQwNg Irizarry et al . 2015 I RIZARRY , Taya ; D E V ITO D ABBS , Annette ; C URRAN , Christine R . : Patient Portals and Patient Engagement : A State of the Science Review . In : Journal of Medical Internet Research 17 ( 2015 ) , No . 6 , pp . e148 – 15 ISO 9241 - 210 2010 ISO 9241 - 210 : Ergonomics of human - system interaction – Part 210 : Human – centred design for interactive systems . International Organization for Standardization , Geneva , Switzerland , 2010 ( ISO 9241 - 210 : 2010 ( E ) ) . – Norm ISO / TR 20514 2005 ISO / TR 20514 : Health informatics – Electronic health record – Deﬁnition , scope and context . In - ternational Organization for Standardization , Geneva , Switzerland , 2005 ( ISO / TR 20514 : 2005 ( E ) ) . – Norm Jacobson et al . 2012 J ACOBSON , Daniel ; B RAIL , Greg ; W OODS , Dan : APIs : A Strategy Guide . O’Reilly Media , 2012 . – ISBN 97814493089296 92 BIBLIOGRAPHY de Jonge 1995 J ONGE , Jan de : Job autonomy , well - being , and health : a study among Dutch health care workers , Rijksuniversiteit Limburg , Diss . , 1995 Karasek & Theorell 1990 K ARASEK , Robert ; T HEORELL , Töres : Healthy Work : Stress , Productivity , and the Reconstruction Of Working Life . 1990 . – ISBN 0465028977 Katz 2002 K ATZ , Jay : The Silent World of Doctor and Patient . Revised . Johns Hopkins University Press , 2002 . – ISBN 9780801857805 Klein & Myers 1999 K LEIN , Heinz K . ; M YERS , Michael D . : A Set of Principles for Conducting and Evaluating Interpretive Field Studies in Information Systems . In : MIS Quarterly ( 1999 ) , pp . 67 – 93 Klein et al . 2018 K LEIN , Jared W . ; J ACKSON , Sara L . ; O STEER , Natalia V . ; P EACOCK , Sue ; D ELBANCO , Tom ; W ALKER , Jan ; E LMORE , Joann G . : Who Reads Their Doctor’s Notes ? Examining the Association between Preconceptions and Accessing Online Clinical Notes . In : Journal of AHIMA 89 ( 2018 ) , January , No . 1 , pp . 28 – 33 Klein 2014 K LEIN , Lisl : What do we actually mean by ‘sociotechnical’ ? On values , boundaries and the problems of language . In : Applied Ergonomics 45 ( 2014 ) , March , No . 2 , pp . 137 – 142 Koch 2012 K OCH , Sabine : Improving quality of life through eHealth – the patient perspective . 180 ( 2012 ) , pp . 25 – 29 Kuhn et al . 2015 K UHN , Thomson ; B ASCH , Peter ; B ARR , Michael ; Y ACKEL , Thomas : Clinical Documentation in the 21st Century : Executive Summary of a Policy Position Paper From the American College of Physicians . In : Annals of Internal Medicine ( 2015 ) , January Kujala & Väänänen - Vainio - Mattila 2009 K UJALA , Sari ; V ÄÄNÄNEN - V AINIO - M ATTILA , Kaisa : Value of Information Systems and Products : Understanding the Users’ Perspective and Values . In : Journal of Information Technology Theory and Application 9 ( 2009 ) , No . 4 , pp . 23 – 39 Laverack 2005 L AVERACK , Glenn : Public Health : Power , Empowerment and Professional Practice . Palgrave Macmillan , 2005 Lazar et al . 2010 L AZAR , Jonathan ; F ENG , Jinjuan H . ; H OCHHEISER , Harry : Research Methods in Hu - man – Computer Interaction . 1 . Wiley , 2010 Lewis 2014 L EWIS , Dana : What is # DIYPS ( Do - It - Yourself Pancreas System ) ? https : / / diyps . org / 2014 / 06 / 20 / what - is - diyps - do - it - yourself - pancreas - BIBLIOGRAPHY 93 system / . Version : 2014 , accessed : May 31 , 2018 . – Archived by WebCite at http : / / www . webcitation . org / 6zpOjjE6V Lipinski & Britz 2000 L IPINSKI , Tomas A . ; B RITZ , Johannes : Rethinking the ownership of information in the 21st century : Ethical implications . In : Ethics and Information Technology 2 ( 2000 ) , pp . 49 – 71 Longtin et al . 2010 L ONGTIN , Yves ; S AX , Hugo ; L EAPE , Lucian L . ; S HERIDAN , Susan E . ; D ONALDSON , Liam ; P ITTET , Didier : Patient Participation : Current Knowledge and Applicability to Patient Safety . In : Mayo Clinic Proceedings 85 ( 2010 ) , January , No . 1 , pp . 53 – 62 de Lusignan et al . 2014 L USIGNAN , Simon de ; M OLD , Freda ; S HEIKH , Aziz ; M AJEED , Azeem ; W YATT , Jeremy C . ; Q UINN , Tom ; C AVILL , Mary ; G RONLUND , Toto A . ; F RANCO , Christina ; C HAUHAN , Umesh ; B LAKEY , Hannah ; K ATARIA , Neha ; B ARKER , Fiona ; E LLIS , Beverley ; K OCZAN , Phil ; A RVANI - TIS , Theodoros N . ; M C C ARTHY , Mary ; J ONES , Simon ; R AFI , Imran : Patients’ online access to their electronic health records and linked online services : a systematic interpretative review . In : BMJ Open 4 ( 2014 ) , No . 9 , pp . e006021 – e006021 Lutters & Ackerman 2006 L UTTERS , Wayne G . ; A CKERMAN , Mark S . : Beyond Boundary Objects : Collaborative Reuse in Aircraft Technical Support . In : Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) 16 ( 2006 ) , December , No . 3 , pp . 341 – 372 Lyttkens 2015 L YTTKENS , Leif : Document D6 . 3 Final Pilot Evaluation Uppsala County Council . http : / / www . sustainsproject . eu / sustainsproject / attachment / d63v12 . pdf . Version : January 2015 , accessed : Feb 22 , 2016 . – Archived by WebCite at http : / / www . webcitation . org / 6fUJue03s Maﬁ et al . 2017 M AFI , John N . ; G ERARD , Macda ; C HIMOWITZ , Hannah ; A NSELMO , Melissa ; D ELBANCO , Tom ; W ALKER , Jan : Patients Contributing to Their Doctors’ Notes : Insights From Expert Interviews . In : Annals of Internal Medicine ( 2017 ) , November Meier et al . 2013 M EIER , Carlos A . ; F ITZGERALD , Maria C . ; S MITH , Joseph M . : eHealth : Extending , Enhancing , and Evolving Health Care . In : Annual Review of Biomedical Engineering 15 ( 2013 ) , July , No . 1 , pp . 359 – 382 Miller et al . 2007 M ILLER , Jessica K . ; F RIEDMAN , Batya ; J ANCKE , Gavin ; G ILL , Brian : Value Tensions in Design : The Value Sensitive Design , Development , and Appropriation of a Corporation’s Groupware System . In : Proceedings of the 2007 International ACM Conference on Supporting Group Work . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2007 ( GROUP ’07 ) . – ISBN 978 – 1 – 59593 – 845 – 9 , pp . 281 – 290 Miller & Weckert 2000 M ILLER , Seumas ; W ECKERT , John : Privacy , the Workplace and the Internet . In : Journal of Business Ethics 28 ( 2000 ) , Dec , No . 3 , pp . 255 – 265 . – ISSN 1573 – 0697 94 BIBLIOGRAPHY Miller Jr et al . 2016 M ILLER J R , David P . ; L ATULIPE , Celine ; M ELIUS , Kathryn A . ; Q UANDT , Sara A . ; A RCURY , Thomas A . : Primary Care Providers’ Views of Patient Portals : Interview Study of Perceived Beneﬁts and Consequences . In : Journal of Medical Internet Research 18 ( 2016 ) , No . 1 , pp . e8 – 11 Mitchell 2000 M ITCHELL , John : Increasing the cost - effectiveness of telemedicine by embracing e - health . In : Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare 6 ( 2000 ) , No . 1 _ suppl , pp . 16 – 19 Mold & de Lusignan 2015 M OLD , Freda ; L USIGNAN , Simon de : Patients’ Online Access to Their Primary Care Electronic Health Records and Linked Online Services : Implications for Research and Practice . In : Journal of Personalized Medicine 5 ( 2015 ) , December , No . 4 , pp . 452 – 469 Mold et al . 2015 M OLD , Freda ; L USIGNAN , Simon de ; S HEIKH , Aziz ; M AJEED , Azeem ; W YATT , Jeremy C . ; Q UINN , Tom ; C AVILL , Mary ; F RANCO , Christina ; C HAUHAN , Umesh ; B LAKEY , Hannah ; K ATARIA , Neha ; A RVANITIS , Theodoros N . ; E LLIS , Beverley : Patients’ online access to their electronic health records and linked online services : a systematic review in primary care . In : The British journal of general practice : the journal of the Royal College of General Practitioners 65 ( 2015 ) , March , No . 632 , pp . e141 – 51 Myers 1995 M YERS , Michael D . : Dialectical hermeneutics : a theoretical framework for the implementation of information systems . In : Information Systems Journal 5 ( 1995 ) , January , No . 1 , pp . 51 – 70 Nazi et al . 2015 N AZI , Kim M . ; T URVEY , Carolyn L . ; K LEIN , Dawn M . ; H OGAN , Timothy P . ; W OODS , Susan S . : VA OpenNotes : exploring the experiences of early patient adopters with access to clinical notes . In : Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 22 ( 2015 ) , March , No . 2 , pp . 380 – 389 Nickel 2015 N ICKEL , Philip J . : Design for the Value of Trust . In : ( van den Hoven et al . 2015 ) , pp . 551 – 567 Nielsen 2002 N IELSEN , Lene : From user to character : an investigation into user - descriptions in scenarios . In : DIS ’02 : Proceedings of the 4th conference on Designing interactive systems : processes , practices , methods , and techniques . ACM , New York , New York , USA , June 2002 , pp . 99 Nøhr et al . 2017 N ØHR , Christian ; P ARV , Liisa ; K INK , Pille ; C UMMINGS , Elizabeth ; A LMOND , Helen ; N ØR - GAARD , Jens R . ; T URNER , Paul : Nationwide citizen access to their health data : analysing and comparing experiences in Denmark , Estonia and Australia . In : BMC Health Services Research 17 ( 2017 ) , August , No . 1 , pp . e141 Nunes et al . 2015 N UNES , Francisco ; V ERDEZOTO , Nervo ; F ITZPATRICK , Geraldine ; K YNG , Morten ; G RÖNVALL , Erik ; S TORNI , Cristiano : Self - Care Technologies in HCI : Trends , Tensions , and Opportunities . In : ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 22 ( 2015 ) , December , No . 6 , pp . 33 : 1 – 33 : 45 . – ISSN 1073 – 0516 BIBLIOGRAPHY 95 Oates 2005 O ATES , Briony J . : Researching Information Systems and Computing . 1 . SAGE Publications Ltd , 2005 . – ISBN 9781412902243 Oh et al . 2005 O H , Hans ; R IZO , Carlos ; E NKIN , Murray ; J ADAD , Alejandro ; P OWELL , John ; P AGLIARI , Claudia : What Is eHealth ( 3 ) : A Systematic Review of Published Deﬁnitions . In : Journal of Medical Internet Research 7 ( 2005 ) , No . 1 , pp . 1 – 12 Omer 2016 O MER , Timothy : Empowered citizen ‘health hackers’ who are not waiting . In : BMC Medicine 14 ( 2016 ) , August , No . 1 , pp . 118 Orlikowski & Gash 1994 O RLIKOWSKI , Wanda J . ; G ASH , Debra C . : Technological Frames : Making Sense of Information Technology in Organizations . In : ACM Trans . Inf . Syst . 12 ( 1994 ) , No . 2 , pp . 174 – 207 Pagliari et al . 2005 P AGLIARI , Claudia ; S LOAN , David ; G REGOR , Peter ; S ULLIVAN , Frank ; D ETMER , Don ; K AHAN , James P . ; O ORTWIJN , Wija ; M AC G ILLIVRAY , Steve : What Is eHealth ( 4 ) : A Scoping Exercise to Map the Field . In : Journal of Medical Internet Research 7 ( 2005 ) , No . 1 , pp . e9 – 20 Paterson 2001 P ATERSON , Barbara : Myth of empowerment in chronic illness . In : Journal of Advanced Nursing 34 ( 2001 ) , June , No . 5 , pp . 574 – 581 Pavlik et al . 2014 P AVLIK , Valory ; B ROWN , Anthony E . ; N ASH , Susan ; G OSSEY , J T . : Association of Patient Recall , Satisfaction , and Adherence to Content of an Electronic Health Record ( EHR ) – Generated After Visit Summary : A Randomized Clinical Trial . In : The Journal of the American Board of Family Medicine 27 ( 2014 ) , March , No . 2 , pp . 209 – 218 Peck et al . 2017 P ECK , Pamela ; T OROUS , John ; S HANAHAN , Meghan ; F OSSA , Alan ; G REENBERG , William : Patient access to electronic psychiatric records : A pilot study . In : Health Policy and Technology 6 ( 2017 ) , September , No . 3 , pp . 309 – 315 Perlich & Meinel 2016 P ERLICH , Anja ; M EINEL , Christoph : Patient - Provider Teamwork via Cooperative Note Taking on Tele - Board MED . In : Stud Health Technol Inform 228 ( 2016 ) , pp . 117 – 121 Petersson & Erlingsdóttir 2018 P ETERSSON , Lena ; E RLINGSDÓTTIR , Gudbjörg : Open Notes in Swedish Psychiatric Care ( Part 2 ) : Survey Among Psychiatric Care Professionals . In : JMIR Mental Health 5 ( 2018 ) , June , No . 2 , pp . e10521 van de Poel 2011 P OEL , Ibo van d . : The Relation Between Forward - Looking and Backward - Looking Responsibility . In : V INCENT , Nicole A . ( Eds . ) ; P OEL , Ibo van d . ( Eds . ) ; H OVEN , Jeroen van d . ( Eds . ) : Moral Responsibility : Beyond Free Will and Determinism . Springer Netherlands , Dordrecht , 2011 , pp . 37 – 52 96 BIBLIOGRAPHY van de Poel 2018 P OEL , Ibo van d . : Design for value change . In : Ethics and Information Technology ( 2018 ) , Jun . – ISSN 1572 – 8439 Pommeranz et al . 2011 P OMMERANZ , Alina ; D ETWEILER , Christian ; W IGGERS , Pascal ; J ONKER , Catholijn : Elicitation of situated values : need for tools to help stakeholders and designers to reﬂect and communicate . In : Ethics and Information Technology 14 ( 2011 ) , November , No . 4 , pp . 285 – 303 Punch 2013 P UNCH , Keith F . : Introduction to Social Research : Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches . Third Edition . SAGE Publications Ltd , 2013 . – ISBN 9781446240939 Pyper et al . 2004 P YPER , Cecilia ; A MERY , Justin ; W ATSON , Marion ; C ROOK , Claire : Patients’ experiences when accessing their on - line electronic patient records in primary care . In : The British journal of general practice : the journal of the Royal College of General Practitioners 54 ( 2004 ) , January , No . 498 , pp . 38 – 43 Quinlan 2018 Q UINLAN , Casey : “Nothing About Me Without Me” – 20 Years Later . https : / / www . science37 . com / blog / nothing - about - me - without - me - progress - in - participatory - healthcare / . Version : 2018 , accessed : May 31 , 2018 . – Archived by WebCite at http : / / www . webcitation . org / 6zpDzwjam Ralston et al . 2007 R ALSTON , James D . ; C ARRELL , David ; R EID , Robert ; A NDERSON , Melissa ; M ORAN , Maureena ; H EREFORD , James : Patient Web Services Integrated with a Shared Medical Record : Patient Use and Satisfaction . In : Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 14 ( 2007 ) , November , No . 6 , pp . 798 – 806 Rexhepi et al . 2016 R EXHEPI , Hanife ; Å HLFELDT , Rose - Mharie ; C AJANDER , Åsa ; H UVILA , Isto : Cancer patients’ attitudes and experiences of online access to their electronic medical records : A qualitative study . In : Health Informatics Journal ( 2016 ) , 1 – 10 . http : / / jhi . sagepub . com / content / early / 2016 / 07 / 14 / 1460458216658778 . abstract Riva 2000 R IVA , Giuseppe : From Telehealth to E - health : Internet and distributed virtual reality in health care . In : CyberPsychology & Behavior 3 ( 2000 ) , No . 6 , pp . 989 – 998 Ross et al . 2005 R OSS , Stephen E . ; T ODD , Jamie ; M OORE , Laurie A . ; B EATY , Brenda L . ; W ITTEVRONGEL , Loretta ; L IN , Chen - Tan : Expectations of Patients and Physicians Regarding Patient - Accessible Medical Records . In : Journal of Medical Internet Research 7 ( 2005 ) , No . 2 , pp . e13 – 8 Roter 1977 R OTER , Debra L . : Patient Participation in the Patient - Provider Interaction : The Effects of Patient Question Asking on the Quality of Interaction , Satisfaction and Compliance . In : Health Education Monographs 5 ( 1977 ) , No . 4 , pp . 281 – 315 BIBLIOGRAPHY 97 Scandurra et al . 2015 S CANDURRA , Isabella ; J ANSSON , Anette ; F ORSBERG - F RANSSON , Marie - Louise ; Å LANDER , Ture : Is ‘Patient’s Online Access to Health Records’ a Good Reform ? – Opinions from Swedish Healthcare Professionals Differ . In : Procedia - Procedia Computer Science 64 ( 2015 ) , pp . 964 – 968 Scandurra et al . 2017 S CANDURRA , Isabella ; P ETTERSSON , Maria ; E KLUND , Benny ; L YTTKENS , Leif : Analysis of the Updated Swedish Regulatory Framework of the Patient Accessible Electronic Health Record in Relation to Usage Experience . In : Stud Health Technol Inform 245 ( 2017 ) , pp . 798 – 802 Schwartz et al . 2000 S CHWARTZ , Shalom H . ; S AGIV , Lilach ; B OEHNKE , Klaus : Worries and Values . In : Journal of Personality 68 ( 2000 ) , April , No . 2 , pp . 309 – 346 Sellberg & Eltes 2017 S ELLBERG , Nina ; E LTES , Johan : The Swedish Patient Portal and Its Relation to the National Reference Architecture and the Overall eHealth Infrastructure . In : A ANESTAD , Margunn ( Eds . ) ; G RISOT , Miria ( Eds . ) ; H ANSETH , Ole ( Eds . ) ; V ASSILAKOPOULOU , Polyxeni ( Eds . ) : Informa - tion Infrastructures within European Health Care : Working with the Installed Base . Springer International Publishing , Cham , 2017 , pp . 225 – 244 SFS 1977 : 1160 SFS 1977 : 1160 : Arbetsmiljölag ( Work Environment Act ) . https : / / www . riksdagen . se / sv / dokument - lagar / dokument / svensk - forfattningssamling / arbetsmiljolag - 19771160 _ sfs - 1977 - 1160 , accessed : Aug 12 , 2018 . – Archived by WebCite at http : / / www . webcitation . org / 71cP9MkJh SFS 1985 : 562 SFS 1985 : 562 : Patientjournallag ( Patient Records Act ) . https : / / www . riksdagen . se / sv / dokument - lagar / dokument / svensk - forfattningssamling / patientjournallag - 1985562 _ sfs - 1985 - 562 , accessed : May 30 , 2018 . – Archived by WebCite at http : / / www . webcitation . org / 6znRaE9Wx SFS 2008 : 355 SFS 2008 : 355 : Patientdatalag ( Patient Data Act ) . https : / / www . riksdagen . se / sv / dokument - lagar / dokument / svensk - forfattningssamling / patientdatalag - 2008355 _ sfs - 2008 - 355 , accessed : Feb 11 , 2018 . – Archived by WebCite at http : / / www . webcitation . org / 6x9gtLySQ Shaw et al . 2017 S HAW , Tim ; M C G REGOR , Deborah ; B RUNNER , Melissa ; K EEP , Melanie ; J ANSSEN , Anna ; B ARNET , Stewart : What is eHealth ( 6 ) ? Development of a Conceptual Model for eHealth : Qualitative Study with Key Informants . In : Journal of Medical Internet Research 19 ( 2017 ) , No . 10 , pp . e324 – 12 Stafford 2015 S TAFFORD , Ned : Germany is set to introduce e - health cards by 2018 . In : BMJ 350 ( 2015 ) , June , pp . h2991 – h2991 Star 2010 S TAR , Susan L . : This is Not a Boundary Object : Reﬂections on the Origin of a Concept . In : Science , Technology & Human Values 35 ( 2010 ) , August , No . 5 , pp . 601 – 617 98 BIBLIOGRAPHY Star & Griesemer 1989 S TAR , Susan L . ; G RIESEMER , James R . : Institutional Ecology , ‘Translations’ and Boundary Objects : Amateurs and Professionals in Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology , 1907 - 39 . In : Social Studies of Science 19 ( 1989 ) , August , No . 3 , pp . 387 – 420 Sullivan & Artino 2013 S ULLIVAN , Gail M . ; A RTINO , Anthony R . : Analyzing and interpreting data from likert - type scales . In : Journal of graduate medical education 5 ( 2013 ) , December , No . 4 , pp . 541 – 542 Swedish Work Environment Authority 2018 S WEDISH W ORK E NVIRONMENT A UTHORITY : About the Work Environment Act . https : / / www . av . se / en / work - environment - work - and - inspections / acts - and - regulations - about - work - environment / the - work - environment - act / about - the - work - environment - act / . Version : 2018 , accessed : Aug 12 , 2018 . – Archived by WebCite at http : / / www . webcitation . org / 71cOLokXk Swinkels et al . 2018 S WINKELS , Sophia Ilse C . ; H UYGENS , Johanna Martine W . ; S CHOENMAKERS , M . T . ; O UDE N IJEWEME - D’H OLLOSY , Wendy ; V ELSEN , Lex van ; V ERMEULEN , Joan ; S CHOONE - H ARMSEN , Marian ; J ANSEN , JFM Y . ; S CHAYCK , CP O . ; F RIELE , Roland ; W ITTE , Luc de : Lessons Learned From a Living Lab on the Broad Adoption of eHealth in Primary Health Care . In : Journal of Medical Internet Research 20 ( 2018 ) , Mar , No . 3 , pp . e83 Szasz & Hollender 1956 S ZASZ , Thomas S . ; H OLLENDER , Marc H . : A Contribution to the Philosophy of Medicine : The Basic Models of the Doctor - Patient Relationship . In : A . M . A . archives of internal medicine 97 ( 1956 ) , May , No . 5 , pp . 585 – 592 The British Psychological Society 2018 T HE B RITISH P SYCHOLOGICAL S OCIETY : Code of Ethics and Conduct . https : / / www . bps . org . uk / sites / bps . org . uk / files / Policy % 20 - % 20Files / BPS % 20Code % 20of % 20Ethics % 20and % 20Conduct % 20 % 282018 % 29 . pdf . Version : 2018 , accessed : July 4 , 2018 . – Archived by WebCite at http : / / www . webcitation . org / 70exUkCPC Thompson 2007 T HOMPSON , Andrew G H . : The meaning of patient involvement and participation in health care consultations : A taxonomy . In : Social Science & Medicine 64 ( 2007 ) , March , No . 6 , pp . 1297 – 1310 Tuffs 2010 T UFFS , Annette : Germany puts universal health e - card on hold . In : BMJ 340 ( 2010 ) , pp . c171 – c171 Turvey et al . 2014 T URVEY , Carolyn ; K LEIN , Dawn ; F IX , Gemmae ; H OGAN , Timothy P . ; W OODS , Susan ; S IMON , Steven R . ; C HARLTON , Mary ; V AUGHAN - S ARRAZIN , Mary ; Z ULMAN , Donna M . ; D INDO , Lilian ; W AKEFIELD , Bonnie ; G RAHAM , Gail ; N AZI , Kim : Blue Button use by patients to access and share health record information using the Department of Veterans Affairs’ online patient portal . In : Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 21 ( 2014 ) , July , No . 4 , pp . 657 – 663 BIBLIOGRAPHY 99 Unruh & Pratt 2008 U NRUH , Kenton T . ; P RATT , Wanda : The Invisible Work of Being a Patient and Implications for Health Care : " [ the doctor is ] my business partner in the most important business in my life , staying alive " . In : Conference proceedings . Ethnographic Praxis in Industry Conference 2008 ( 2008 ) , November , No . 1 , pp . 40 – 50 Veatch 2000 V EATCH , Robert M . : Doctor Does not Know Best : Why in the New Century Physicians Must Stop Trying to Beneﬁt Patients . In : The Journal of medicine and philosophy 25 ( 2000 ) , December , No . 6 , pp . 701 – 721 van Velsen et al . 2018 V ELSEN , Lex van ; F RAZER , Sanne ; N’ DJA , Aurèle ; A MMOUR , Nadir ; D EL S IGNORE , Susanna ; Z IA , Gianluca ; H ERMENS , Hermie : The Reliability of Using Tablet Technology for Screening the Health of Older Adults . In : Stud Health Technol Inform 247 ( 2018 ) , pp . 651 – 655 Walker et al . 2011 W ALKER , Jan ; L EVEILLE , Suzanne G . ; N GO , Long ; V ODICKA , Elisabeth ; D ARER , Jonathan D . ; D HANIREDDY , Shireesha ; E LMORE , Joann G . ; F ELDMAN , Henry J . ; L ICHTENFELD , Marc J . ; O STER , Natalia ; R ALSTON , James D . ; R OSS , Stephen E . ; D ELBANCO , Tom : Inviting Patients to Read Their Doctors’ Notes : Patients and Doctors Look Ahead : Patient and Physician Surveys . In : Annals of Internal Medicine 155 ( 2011 ) , December , No . 12 , pp . 811 – 819 Walker et al . 2015 W ALKER , Jan ; M ELTSNER , Michael ; D ELBANCO , Tom : US experience with doctors and patients sharing clinical notes . In : BMJ 350 ( 2015 ) , February , pp . g7785 Walsham 1993 W ALSHAM , Geoff : Interpreting Information Systems in Organizations . Wiley , 1993 Walsham 1995 W ALSHAM , Geoff : Interpretive case studies in IS research : nature and method . In : European Journal of Information Systems 4 ( 1995 ) , May , No . 2 , pp . 74 – 81 Walsham 2006 W ALSHAM , Geoff : Doing interpretive research . In : European Journal of Information Systems 15 ( 2006 ) , No . 3 , pp . 320 – 330 Warnier et al . 2015 W ARNIER , Martijn ; D ECHESNE , Francien ; B RAZIER , Frances : Design for the Value of Privacy . In : ( van den Hoven et al . 2015 ) , pp . 431 – 445 Wass & Vimarlund 2018 W ASS , Soﬁe ; V IMARLUND , Vivian : Same , same but different : Perceptions of patients’ online access to electronic health records among healthcare professionals . In : Health Informatics Journal 12 ( 2018 ) , June . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1460458218779101 . – DOI 10 . 1177 / 1460458218779101 WHO 2009 WHO : Patient involvement in hand hygiene promotion . Version : 2009 . https : / / 100 BIBLIOGRAPHY www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / books / NBK144022 / , accessed : Feb 4 , 2018 . In : WHO Guide - lines on Hand Hygiene in Health Care : First Global Patient Safety Challenge Clean Care Is Safer Care . World Health Organization , Geneva , 2009 , 189 – 198 Wilkinson 1988 W ILKINSON , Sue : The role of reﬂexivity in feminist psychology . In : Women’s Studies Interna - tional Forum 11 ( 1988 ) , January , No . 5 , pp . 493 – 502 Williamson 2014 W ILLIAMSON , Laura : Patient and Citizen Participation in Health : The Need for Improved Ethical Support . In : The American Journal of Bioethics 14 ( 2014 ) , May , No . 6 , pp . 4 – 16 van der Wilt et al . 2015 W ILT , Gert J . d . ; R EUZEL , Rob ; G RIN , John : Design for Values in Healthcare Technology . In : ( van den Hoven et al . 2015 ) , pp . 717 – 738 Woratschka 2017 W ORATSCHKA , Rainer : Kritik am Gesundheitsministerium : Grüne wollen Daten - hoheit für Patienten ( Criticism of the Ministry of Health : Greens Party want data sovereignty for patients ) . http : / / www . tagesspiegel . de / politik / kritik - am - gesundheitsministerium - gruene - wollen - datenhoheit - fuer - patienten / 20528140 . html . Version : 2017 , accessed : Feb 13 , 2018 . – Archived by WebCite at http : / / www . webcitation . org / 6xCOnPHaL Wright & McCarthy 2008 W RIGHT , Peter ; M C C ARTHY , John : Empathy and Experience in HCI . In : CHI ’08 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM Request Permissions , New York , New York , USA , April 2008 , pp . 637 – 646 Yardley 2000 Y ARDLEY , Lucy : Dilemmas in qualitative health research . In : Psychology & Health 15 ( 2000 ) , March , No . 2 , pp . 215 – 228 Yardley 2017 Y ARDLEY , Lucy : Demonstrating the validity of qualitative research . In : The Journal of Positive Psychology 12 ( 2017 ) , January , No . 3 , pp . 295 – 296 Yoo et al . 2013 Y OO , Daisy ; H ULDTGREN , Alina ; W OELFER , Jill P . ; H ENDRY , David G . ; F RIEDMAN , Batya : A Value Sensitive Action - reﬂection Model : Evolving a Co - design Space with Stakeholder and Designer Prompts . In : Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2013 ( CHI ’13 ) . – ISBN 978 – 1 – 4503 – 1899 – 0 , 419 – 428 INTERVIEW TEMPLATE 101 Appendix A Interview Template This interview template was used for the semi - structured interviews and was originally phrased in Swedish . It has been translated for publication ( e . g . , Paper II and Paper III ) . Certain terms might differ from those used in this thesis , such as “medical records online” as a translation from the Swedish “journal via nätet” , while in this thesis I use “electronic health records” . I NTRODUCTORY Q UESTIONS 1 . What medical speciality do you work in ? 2 . Number of years in practice . 3 . Gender . 4 . How much do you estimate that you use IT in your daily activities ? ( suggested answers in % of your work time ) 5 . What do you think about patient involvement in healthcare ? What does it mean for you to increase the patient’s participation ? G ENERAL QUESTIONS REGARDING E H EALTH SERVICES AND Journalen 7 . What does eHealth services mean for you ? Give some examples ! 8 . What is your experience of eHealth services for citizens ? 9 . Have you heard of the eService Journalen ? 10 . What do you think is important when eHealth services are introduced in your county ? 11 . How often do you meet patients who have read their records ? 12 . How often do you meet patients who have read their paper records ? Or the records online ? Do you ﬁnd any difference between them ? O NLINE A CCESS - S PECIFIC I SSUES 13 . What opportunities do you see when the patient has access to their medical records online ? What are your concerns ? 14 . Have records online affected the meeting with patients ? 102 INTERVIEW TEMPLATE 15 . Have records online inﬂuenced your approach on a general level ? 16 . Is the way you document in the medical record affected by the currently available online for the patients and if so how ? 17 . What is your opinion regarding that the log data is accessible to the patient ? Are there pros / cons with this ? Will / does it affect your work environment ? 18 . What do you think about the possibility of having “respite” ( time to correct and verify ) before the patient has access to his / her latest record entry ? How do you regard this , compared to a service that gives the patient direct access ? 19 . What do you think about the possibility for a patient to block certain information in his / her medical record ? E H EALTH S ERVICES - N ATIONAL AND R EGIONAL 20 . What do you know about the national eHealth strategy and its Action Plan on eHealth services ? 21 . What do you know about the county and regional strategies on eHealth services ? 22 . According to the action plan of CeHis ( Center för eHälsaisamverkan ; Swedish Center for eHealth ) , 100 % of the inhabitants in Sweden should in 2014 have the possibility to access parts of their medical records and in 2017 to access his / her record information from all care and diligence , through the patient portal “My eHealth” . What is your opinion about that vision ? 23 . Which eHealth services do you currently use in your own work situation ? Positive / negative experiences ? 24 . What needs of eHealth services will you / your profession have in the future ? Why ? 25 . Which actors in the health sector do you believe are interested in eHealth services and in what respect ? 26 . Which groups of healthcare do you believe are interested in eHealth services and in what respect ? 27 . Who do you think will beneﬁt the most from eHealth services ? 28 . Is there anything further that you consider in the context of eHealth services that you think that we have not addressed ? QUESTIONNAIRE 103 Appendix B Questionnaire This questionnaire was made accessible via the PAEHR system Journalen and was originally provided in Swedish . It has been translated for publication ( e . g . , Paper IV and Paper V ) . Certain terms might differ from those used in this thesis , such as “medical records online” as a translation from the Swedish “journal via nätet” , while in this thesis I use “electronic health records” . G ENERAL Q UESTIONS ON Journalen 1 . I received information about the possibility to use Journalen via : Medical professionals (cid:50) Media (cid:50) Information on the care unit (cid:50) Friends / Relatives (cid:50) Other ( specify ) : 2 . How often do you use Journalen ? Several times a day (cid:50) Once a week (cid:50) Several times a week (cid:50) Once a month (cid:50) 3 . What is your attitude towards Journalen ? Strongly Strongly Disagree Disagree Neutral Agree Agree I believe that access to medical records online is (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) generally a good reform I believe that access to Journalen is good for me (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) I would consider to change healthcare providers to (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) get one that gives me access to Journalen 104 QUESTIONNAIRE 4 . Why do you use Journalen ? Strongly Strongly Disagree Disagree Neutral Agree Agree Mostly general interest (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) To get an overview of my medical history (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) and treatment To get an overview of my relatives’ medical (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) history and treatment Because I am not sure if I got the right care (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) To follow up what has been said during a (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) healthcare visit Because I suspect inaccuracies (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) To prepare for my healthcare visit (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) To become more involved in my care (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) Other ( specify ) : 5 . How important is it for you to be able to access patient information ? Strongly Strongly Disagree Disagree Neutral Agree Agree It improves communication between medical (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) staff and me It leads to improvements in health and (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) social care It improves the understanding of the condition (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) It makes me feel safe (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) It makes me feel informed (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) It leads to that I can take care of my (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) health better It leads to that I can take care of my relatives’ (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) health better It is essential that I am able to actively (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) participate in decisions about my or my relatives’ health For my own documentation (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) It has no relevance (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) Other ( specify ) : QUESTIONNAIRE 105 6 . How long do you thing is reasonable to have to wait after a healthcare visit before you have access to your medical records via Journalen ? Same day ( unsigned / uncertiﬁed information ) (cid:50) After a day ( unsigned / uncertiﬁed information ) (cid:50) Two weeks ( can be both signed / certiﬁed and unsigned / uncertiﬁed data ) (cid:50) One month ( can be both signed / certiﬁed and unsigned / uncertiﬁed data ) (cid:50) Other ( specify ) : 7 . To what extend do you agree with the following statements regarding your relationship with healthcare ? Strongly Strongly Disagree Disagree Neutral Agree Agree To take part of the patient information via (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) Journalen has affected the relationship with healthcare system positively Medical staff has informed me about the (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) possibility to read Journalen Medical staff has encouraged me to use Journalen (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) I discuss the content of Journalen with medical (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) staff 8 . What do you think about the usability of Journalen ? Strongly Strongly Disagree Disagree Neutral Agree Agree I think I want to use Journalen regularly (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) I think that Journalen is more complicated than it (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) needs to be I think that Journalen is easy to use (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) I think I would need personal technical support (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) to use Journalen I think that the various functions in Journalen (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) work well together I think there are many elements in Journalen that (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) are not consistent I think that most people could learn to use (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) Journalen fairly quickly I think that Journalen is difﬁcult to use (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) I feel very safe and secure ( about what I do ) when (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) I use Journalen I need to learn quite a lot before I can start (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) using Journalen I as a user of 1177 . se ﬁnd it difﬁcult to ﬁnd the (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) link to Journalen Other ( specify ) : 106 QUESTIONNAIRE I NFORMATION C ONTENT 9 . How accurate are the following statements regarding your understanding of the content in Journalen ? Strongly Strongly Disagree Disagree Neutral Agree Agree I understand most of what is in the medical (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) records I think that the medical records contain too much (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) technical language I think that the medical records should be written (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) more comprehensible I understand most of the test results (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) I understand most of the log list (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) I understand most of the referral function (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) 10 . What would you do if you see something in Journalen you do not understand ? Strongly Strongly Disagree Disagree Neutral Agree Agree Contact the current healthcare unit via phone (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) Ask medical staff at the next visit (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) Ask a medically trained person , e . g . via (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) phone on 1177 Ask an anonymous question via www . 1177 . se (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) Ask someone who I know personally , in family (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) or among acquaintances Look for information myself , e . g . via Internet (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) Use social media , e . g . discussion forums (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) Do nothing (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) Other ( specify ) : 11 . How do you share information in Journalen with others ? Strongly Strongly Disagree Disagree Neutral Agree Agree I use the Share - function in Journalen to appoint (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) representatives and share information Discuss it with relative (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) Discuss it with medical staff (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) Other ( specify ) : QUESTIONNAIRE 107 If you use the Share - funktion in Journalen , how do you share information ? I share all information in Journalen (cid:50) I share only selected parts in Journalen (cid:50) 12 . Have you read anything in Journalen that made you feel anxious ? Yes (cid:50) No (cid:50) If yes , what did you do ? Contacted healthcare via phone (cid:50) Waited until the next visit (cid:50) Contacted a friend with medical background (cid:50) Contacted patient association / patient committee (cid:50) Tried to ﬁnd information about it on the Internet (cid:50) Done nothing (cid:50) Other ( specify ) : 13 . Have you read anything in Journalen that has made you feel upset ? Yes (cid:50) No (cid:50) If you like , specify why you felt upset : If yes , what did you do ? Contacted healthcare via phone (cid:50) Waited until the next visit (cid:50) Contacted a friend who works in healthcare (cid:50) Contacted patient association / patient committee (cid:50) Wrote about it on social media (cid:50) Done nothing (cid:50) Other ( specify ) : 14 . Have you read anything in Journalen that was wrong , such as wrong information and / or data ? Yes (cid:50) No (cid:50) Do not know (cid:50) 108 QUESTIONNAIRE If yes , what did you do ? Contacted healthcare via phone (cid:50) Waited until the next visit (cid:50) Contacted a friend with medical background (cid:50) Contacted patient association / patient committee (cid:50) Tried to ﬁnd information about it on the Internet (cid:50) Done nothing (cid:50) Other ( specify ) : 15 . How accurate is the content of Journalen ? Strongly Strongly Disagree Disagree Neutral Agree Agree The content in the record reﬂects the information (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) I think that healthcare has about me There is information about me that is missing in (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) the record which I think should be there and that the staff should know If you consider that there is information missing that should be there , specify what type of information is missing : 16 . How important is Journalen to make you feel that you are involved in your own care ? Strongly Strongly Disagree Disagree Neutral Agree Agree Information in Journalen has helped me in (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) communication with medical staff Information in Journalen had a positive impact on (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) the ability to work together with medical staff making decisions about care and treatment Information in Journalen had a positive impact on (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) the ability to follow the prescription of treatment Information in Journalen had a positive impact on (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) the ability to take own steps to improve health Other ( specify ) : QUESTIONNAIRE 109 17 . How important is it for you to have access to the following information which is wholly or partly based on information contained in Journalen ? Strongly Strongly Disagree Disagree Neutral Agree Agree Referral ( content and how it is handled in care ) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) List of all pharmaceuticals (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) Overview of all vaccinations (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) Results of tests (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) Overview of all healthcare contacts (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) Being able to read record entries from psychiatry (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) Being able to read all types of record entries (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) Ability to order and manage medical certiﬁcate (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) and other certiﬁcates Ability to point out errors I ﬁnd in the record (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) Ability to write own comments to text (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) in Journalen Contribute with information on health , e . g . by (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) providing Health declaration for next visit Contribute with information of self - testing or (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) monitoring at home Contribute information about expectations for (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) the healthcare visit Ability to contact healthcare electronically and (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) ask questions about medical record Ability to communicate electronically with other (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) patients Ability to block certain medical records from (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) access by other medical staff See which care units and staff groups have been (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) inside Journalen ( see log data ) Ability to access information and manage services (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) for my children Other ( specify ) : 110 QUESTIONNAIRE S ECURITY 18 . How do you perceive the level of security in Journalen ? Strongly Strongly Agree Agree Neutral Disagree Disagree As far as I can judge , I think that Journalen (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) generally maintains a high level of security . I trust that only authorized medical staff is (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) accessing my medical records in Journalen . It is good that I as a patient am able to take part in (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) the log list and see who has accessed my patient data . Other ( specify ) : G ENERAL QUESTIONS ON INFORMATION 19 . How do you receive bad news about your health from your healthcare provider ? By Phone (cid:50) In connection with a healthcare visit (cid:50) Via mail (cid:50) Via other “web / eServices” (cid:50) Other ( specify ) : 20 . How would you want to receive bad news about your health ? By Phone (cid:50) In connection with a healthcare visit (cid:50) Via mail (cid:50) In connection with that I read alone about it in Journalen (cid:50) Other ( specify ) : QUESTIONNAIRE 111 21 . How accurate are the following statements regarding access to health information ? Strongly Strongly Disagree Disagree Neutral Agree Agree It is important ( for me ) to get information about (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) health I want to get health information from many (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) different sources I compare the health information I have received (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) from various sources It is easy to determine in what situations I need (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) health information I know where I can get health information (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) I can use the health information I have received (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) or acquired in order to take care of my own or other people’s health I easily get hold of the health information I need a ) in printed sources ( magazines , books ) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) b ) on the internet (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) c ) on TV or radio (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) d ) from medical staff ( e . g . doctors , nurses ) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) e ) from other people (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) f ) from healthcare information system etc . (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) It is difﬁcult to know whom to trust regarding (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) health issues / questions It is easy to determine whether the health information I received from the following sources are reliable or not a ) in printed sources ( magazines , books ) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) b ) on the internet (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) c ) on TV or radio (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) d ) from medical staff ( e . g . doctors , nurses ) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) e ) from other people (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) It is difﬁcult to understand words or sentences (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) used in health information It is easy to understand the drugs package (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) inserts , labels or prescription I get way too much information about health (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) I do not want to think about matters related to health (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) 112 QUESTIONNAIRE Strongly Strongly Disagree Disagree Neutral Agree Agree I have avoided to read , listen to or watch health information a ) in printed sources ( magazines , books ) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) b ) on the internet (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) c ) on TV or radio (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) d ) from medical staff ( e . g . doctors , nurses ) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) e ) from other people (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) The health information I receive a ) helps me often to understand or (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) learn something new b ) often conﬁrms my previous understanding (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) c ) often conﬂict with my previous views (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) I can affect my own health (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) 22 . What other sources do you use to ﬁnd health information ? www . 1177 . se (cid:50) Internetmedicin . se (cid:50) Netdoktor . se (cid:50) Health magazines (cid:50) Books (cid:50) Peer - to - peer sources (cid:50) ( e . g . , discussion forums , Facebook ) Other ( specify ) : Q UESTIONS ABOUT YOUR HEALTH 23 . I am part of one of the following disease groupings : Cancer (cid:50) Mental health (cid:50) Diabetic (cid:50) High blood pressure (cid:50) Other ( specify ) : QUESTIONNAIRE 113 24 . I consider myself Strongly Strongly Disagree Disagree Neutral Agree Agree My health is very good (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) I am very worried about my health (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) I often think about my health (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) (cid:50) D EMOGRAPHIC Q UESTIONS Age Year of Birth : Gender Female (cid:50) Male (cid:50) Other (cid:50) Do you work ( or have you worked ) in healthcare ? Yes (cid:50) No (cid:50) Education ? ( Select the highest education / degree you have received / completed ) No formal education (cid:50) Compulsory education (cid:50) ( e . g . , elementary school , junior secondary school ) High school , less than 3 years (cid:50) High school , 3 years or more (cid:50) Higher education , less than 3 years (cid:50) Higher education , 3 years or more (cid:50) Doctorate (cid:50) Other ( specify ) : 114 QUESTIONNAIRE I belong to the following county council : Blekinge county council (cid:50) Dalarna county council (cid:50) Region Gotland (cid:50) Region Gävleborg (cid:50) Region Halland (cid:50) Region Jämtland / Härjedalen (cid:50) Region Jönköpings Iän (cid:50) Kalmar county council (cid:50) Kronoberg county council (cid:50) Norrbotten county council (cid:50) Region Skåne (cid:50) Stockholm county council (cid:50) Sörmland county council (cid:50) Region Uppsala (cid:50) Värmland county council (cid:50) Västerbottens county council (cid:50) Västernorrland county council (cid:50) Västmanland county council (cid:50) Region Västra Götaland (cid:50) Region Örebro (cid:50) Region Östergötland (cid:50) I have also received healthcare in another county council : Blekinge county council (cid:50) Dalarna county council (cid:50) Region Gotland (cid:50) Region Gävleborg (cid:50) Region Halland (cid:50) Region Jämtland / Härjedalen (cid:50) Region Jönköpings Iän (cid:50) Kalmar county council (cid:50) Kronoberg county council (cid:50) Norrbotten county council (cid:50) Region Skåne (cid:50) Stockholm county council (cid:50) Sörmland county council (cid:50) Region Uppsala (cid:50) Värmland county council (cid:50) Västerbottens county council (cid:50) Västernorrland county council (cid:50) Västmanland county council (cid:50) Region Västra Götaland (cid:50) Region Örebro (cid:50) Region Östergötland (cid:50)