Immunological Markers of Buruli Ulcer Disease • JID 2009 : 200 ( 1 December ) • 1675 M A J O R A R T I C L E Immunosuppressive Signature of Cutaneous Mycobacterium ulcerans Infection in the Peripheral Blood of Patients with Buruli Ulcer Disease Richard Phillips , 1 , 2 Fred S . Sarfo , 1 Laure Guenin - Mace´ , 3 Je´re´mie Decalf , 4 Mark Wansbrough - Jones , 5 Matthew L . Albert , 4 and Caroline Demangel 3 1 Komfo Anokye Teaching Hospital and 2 School of Medical Sciences , Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology , Kumasi , Ghana ; 3 Unite´ Postulante de Pathoge´nomique Mycobacte´rienne Inte´gre´e and 4 Laboratory of Dendritic Cell Biology , INSERM U818 , Institut Pasteur , Paris , France ; 5 St George’s University of London , London , United Kingdom Buruli ulcer disease ( BUD ) is an emerging human disease caused by infection with Mycobacterium ulcerans , which leads to the development of necrotic skin lesions . The pathogenesis of the ulcer is closely associated with the production of mycolactone , a diffusible cytotoxin with immunomodulatory properties . To identify immunological correlates of BUD , we performed a broad screen of inﬂammatory mediators in serum samples and stimulated whole - blood supernatants of patients . We found that patients with active ulcers displayed a distinctive proﬁle of immune suppression , marked by the down - modulation of selected chemokines and an impaired capacity to produce Th1 , Th2 , and Th17 cytokines on stimulation with mitogenic agents . These immunological defects were induced early in the disease and resolved after anti - BUD therapy , establishing their association with the presence of M . ulcerans . Interestingly , some of the defects in cytokine and chemokine response could be mimicked in vitro by incubation of CD4 + peripheral blood lymphocytes with mycolactone . Our ﬁndings support the hypothesis that mycolactone contributes to bacterial persistence in human hosts by limiting the generation of adaptive cellular responses . Moreover , we identiﬁed immunological markers of BUD , which may be helpful for conﬁrmatory diagnosis of the disease and , especially , for monitoring the response to antibiotic treatment . Buruli ulcer disease ( BUD ) is a disease of subcutaneous tissue caused by infection with Mycobacterium ulcerans , from the family of bacteria causing tuberculosis and leprosy [ 1 ] . BUD starts as a painless nodule , papule , or plaque , which eventually breaks down centrally to form a characteristic ulcer with undermined edges . The ex - tensive tissue destruction associated with BUD lesions often leads to gross deformities and permanent disability . Received 22 April 2009 ; accepted 1 July 2009 ; electronically published 28 Octo - ber 2009 . Potential conﬂicts of interest : none reported . Presented in part : World Health Organization annual meeting on Buruli ulcer disease , Cotonou , Benin ( Basic Science session ) , 30 March – 3 April 2009 . Financial support : Agence Nationale de la Recherche ( grant ANR - 07 - MIME - 016 - 01 ) . Reprints or correspondence : Dr Caroline Demangel , Institut Pasteur , 25 Rue du Dr Roux , 75724 Paris Cedex 15 , France ( caroline . demangel @ pasteur . fr ) . The Journal of Infectious Diseases 2009 ; 200 : 1675 – 84 (cid:2) 2009 by the Infectious Diseases Society of America . All rights reserved . 0022 - 1899 / 2009 / 20011 - 0010 $ 15 . 00 DOI : 10 . 1086 / 646615 Since the late 1980s , the prevalence of the disease has been increasing dramatically in West and Central Africa , prompting the World Health Organization ( WHO ) to initiate an awareness and control campaign in 1998 [ 2 ] . BUD is usually diagnosed on the basis of clinical symp - toms , because identiﬁcation of M . ulcerans by means of cultures or polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) requires dedicated facilities and specialized equipment . Recently , major advances have been made in the treatment of the disease with antibiotics [ 3 , 4 ] . However , although antimycobacterial drugs are relatively effective during the preulcerative stage of the disease , antibiotic treat - ment requires optimization , and surgical excision with skin grafting remains the only alternative for advanced lesions . To control the emergence of BUD , alternative diagnostic approaches that allow the early identiﬁcation of patients and better biomarkers of the infection are clearly needed . A distinctive feature of M . ulcerans is the production 1676 • JID 2009 : 200 ( 1 December ) • Phillips et al Table 1 . Characteristics of Patients with Buruli Ulcer Disease ( BUD ) , Control Participants , and Patients with Tuberculosis ( TB ) Characteristic Patients with BUD Healthycontrol ( ) c n p 21 PatientswithTB ( ) c n p 8 Preulcerative ( ) a n p 13 Ulcerative ( ) n p 15 Kinetic study ( ) b n p 9 Age , median ( range ) , years 14 ( 5 – 45 ) 16 ( 8 – 40 ) 10 ( 7 – 25 ) 27 ( 12 – 56 ) 38 ( 24 – 61 ) Sex , no . male / no . female 7 / 5 5 / 10 3 / 6 8 / 13 4 / 4 a Patients in the preulcerative group had disease characterized by nodule , edema , or plaque . b The kinetic study included patients with BUD who were receiving antibiotic treatment . c Control participants and patients with tuberculosis were from the same zone of endemicity as were patients with BUD . of a macrocyclic polyketide called mycolactone [ 5 ] . Mycolac - tone plays a critical role in bacterial pathogenicity , as shown by the necrotic lesions induced by intradermal injection of the puriﬁed molecule [ 6 ] . M . ulcerans bacilli remain essentially lo - calized in peripheral subcutaneous tissues , but there is evidence from animal studies that mycolactone diffuses from infectious foci into the blood , where it accumulates in mononuclear cell subsets [ 7 ] . Although mycolactone is cytotoxic and proapo - ptotic [ 8 , 9 ] , recent data suggest that it plays a major role in allowing M . ulcerans to evade host innate immunity by sup - pressing inﬂammatory processes . In support of this hypothesis , noncytotoxic doses of mycolactone were found to block the capacity of dendritic cells to prime cellular immune responses and produce chemotactic signals of inﬂammation in vitro [ 10 ] . Furthermore , macrophages and monocytes treated by myco - lactone before stimulation failed to produce several inﬂam - matory cytokines , without loss of cell viability [ 11 – 14 ] . Inter - estingly , M . ulcerans lipid extracts suppress the activation - induced production of interleukin ( IL ) 2 by human T cell lines . Moreover , systemic interferon ( IFN ) g responses are modulated in patients during BUD progression [ 15 – 21 ] , suggesting that mycolactone may also interfere with the func - tional biology of T cells in vivo . In the present study , we searched for immunological markers of M . ulcerans infection in patient serum and evaluated whether these could help improve current approaches to BUD diagnosis and treatment . We found that , in contrast to healthy partici - pants and patients with pulmonary tuberculosis , patients with BUD displayed a characteristic suppression of circulating che - mokines . In addition , the capacity of their lymphocytes to pro - duce inﬂammatory cytokines in ex vivo stimulation assays was largely impaired . Some of the immunological defects of patients with BUD could be reproduced in vitro by treating CD4 + T cells with mycolactone , which would identify a novel cell subset targeted by this immunosuppressive agent and support the hy - pothesis that mycolactone limits the generation of host adaptive cellular responses by suppressing CD4 + T cell effector functions . Therefore , in addition to providing novel information on the pathogenesis of BUD , our study identiﬁed biomarkers of M . ulcerans infection that correlate with disease progression . MATERIALS AND METHODS Mycolactone preparation . M . ulcerans 1615 ( American Type Culture Collection 35840 ) , which produces a mixture of my - colactones A / B and C , was obtained from the Trudeau Institute collection . Bacteria were cultivated in Dubos medium comple - mented with 10 % oleic acid – albumin - dextrose - catalase ( Becton Dickinson ) in spinner ﬂasks at 32 (cid:3) C . Mycolactone A / B was puriﬁed from bacterial pellets , as described elsewhere [ 6 ] . Patient cohort . A total of 37 patients with BUD were re - cruited by local health workers from villages near Tepa Gov - ernment Hospital in the Ahafo Ano North District of Ghana , where there is a high prevalence of BUD ( Table 1 ) . Patients were recruited if they met the WHO clinical case deﬁnition of M . ulcerans disease ; were not pregnant ; were not receiving an - tibiotic treatment ; had no history of tuberculosis , leprosy , or liver , kidney , or hearing impairment ; and gave written informed consent ( thumbprint of parent or guardian in the case of chil - dren , depending on literacy ) . Twenty - one healthy control par - ticipants were included from the same area of endemicity . In addition , 8 patients with pulmonary tuberculosis who had been receiving antimycobacterial treatment for 2 – 12 weeks were re - cruited from the Chest Clinic at Komfo Anokye Teaching Hos - pital , Kumasi , Ghana . The study protocol was approved by the ethics review committees at the School of Medical Sciences , Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology , Ku - masi , and St George’s Hospital in London . Diagnosis and treatment . Punch biopsy specimens 4 mm in diameter were obtained to conﬁrm the clinical diagnosis , and treatment was started with 10 mg / kg oral rifampicin and 15 mg / kg intramuscular streptomycin daily , administered at village health posts under direct observation . If the diagnosis was conﬁrmed by PCR for the IS2404 repeat sequence char - acteristic of M . ulcerans , antibiotic treatment was continued for 8 weeks . Biopsy specimens were also stained for acid - fast bacilli and cultured on Lowenstein - Jensen slopes , as described else - Immunological Markers of Buruli Ulcer Disease • JID 2009 : 200 ( 1 December ) • 1677 where [ 22 ] . All lesions had healed by 6 months after the end of treatment , and there were no recurrences during the 10 months of posttreatment follow - up . Whole - blood assay . Blood samples were obtained at 0 , 4 , 8 , 12 , and 48 weeks after the start of treatment for stimulation assays . Venous blood ( 12 mL ) was obtained in sodium heparin Vacutainer tubes ( Becton Dickinson ) . One - milliliter aliquots of undiluted blood were distributed in duplicate in 24 - well tissue culture plates ( Becton Dickinson ) and incubated at 37 (cid:3) C in 5 % CO 2 for 24 h in the presence of 10 m g / mL phytohemagglutinin ( PHA ) or no stimulant . After stimulation , supernatants were harvested and stored at (cid:1) 20 (cid:3) C until further analysis . CD4 + peripheral blood lymphocyte stimulation assay . Hu - man peripheral blood lymphocytes were isolated from whole blood by sedimentation on a Ficoll - Hypaque gradient ( GE Healthcare ) . CD4 + T cells were then puriﬁed by negative se - lection ( MACS ; Miltenyi Biotec ) and cultured in Roswell Park Memorial Institute 1640 medium ( Invitrogen ) supplemented with 10 % heat - inactivated fetal calf serum ( Invitrogen ) , 2 mmol / L l - glutamine ( Sigma ) , 100 IU / mL penicillin , and 100 m g / mL streptomycin . Cells were plated in 96 - well plates ( 105 cells / well ) in the presence of increasing doses of mycolactone for 24 h and then stimulated for 24 h with 10 ng / mL phorbol - 12 - myristate 13 - acetate ( PMA ) and 250 ng / mL calcium ion - ophore A23187 . After stimulation , supernatants were harvested and stored at (cid:1) 20 (cid:3) C until further analysis . Culture supernatant and serum analysis . Chemokines and cytokines were measured with a Luminex 100IS system ( Mil - liplex MAP kits ; Millipore ) , according to the manufacturer’s instructions . In brief , 50 m L of biological ﬂuid or standard was incubated with antibody - linked beads for 2 h , washed twice with wash solution , and incubated for 1 h with biotinylated secondary antibodies . A ﬁnal incubation of 30 min with strep - tavidin - phycoerythrin preceded the acquisition on the Luminex system . At least 100 events were acquired for each analyte . Values above or below the standard curves were replaced by the lowest or the highest concentrations measured . Where ap - plicable , 2 - tailed nonparametric comparisons ( Mann - Whitney U test ) were performed to calculate P values . Statistical analyses were performed with the OmniViz program ( version 5 . 2 ) . RESULTS Selective suppression of circulating chemokines in patients with BUD . Taking advantage of a multianalyte proﬁling tech - nology , we compared the circulating levels of a panel of in - ﬂammatory cytokines and chemokines in patients with BUD and healthy control participants from the same endemic zone . The serum levels of epidermal and vascular endothelial growth factor , intercellular and vascular adhesion molecules , and the metalloproteinases MMP2 and MMP9 were also examined , be - cause they are potential indicators of tissue inﬂammation . De - spite the presence of proliferating bacteria and massive tissue destruction in cutaneous lesions , the circulating levels of most of the studied analytes were not augmented in patients with BUD , compared with control participants ( Figure 1 ) . In fact , the 4 inﬂammatory chemokines macrophage inﬂammatory protein ( MIP ) 1 b , IL - 8 , monocyte chemoattractant protein ( MCP ) 1 , and ( to a lesser extent ) fractalkine were signiﬁcantly suppressed . Importantly , down - modulation of MIP - 1 b , IL - 8 , and MCP - 1 was induced at the nodular stage and persisted during the ulcerative stage of the disease ( Figure 2 A ) . To evaluate the extent to which down - regulation of MIP - 1 b , IL - 8 , and MCP - 1 is spe - ciﬁc to BUD , these chemokines were assessed in patients from the same area who had pulmonary tuberculosis . Although the level of MIP - 1 b was lower in patients with tuberculosis than in control participants , those patients , unlike patients with BUD , did not have signiﬁcantly reduced levels of IL - 8 and MCP - 1 , which suggests that the selective suppression of these 2 chemokines is not a common feature of mycobacterial in - fections ( Figure 2 B ) . Resolution of BUD - associated immunosuppression afteran - tibiotic therapy . We next examined the dynamics of circu - lating chemokines during the course of antibiotic treatment . To gain insight into the host cellular responses , we also inves - tigated a panel of T cell – derived cytokines . Serum samples were obtained at monthly intervals from patients receiving the an - tibiotic combination rifampicin - streptomycin for 8 weeks and after 10 months of posttreatment follow - up , and they were submitted to multianalyte proﬁling . As shown in Figure 3 , this analysis demonstrated that inﬂammatory cytokines and che - mokines were either not modulated or positively regulated dur - ing the course of antibiotic therapy . Among the above - mentioned chemokines found to be sup - pressed in patients with BUD , we observed a marked augmen - tation of IL - 8 and MCP - 1 circulating levels 10 months after completion of antibiotic therapy , with concentrations reaching those of control participants ( Figure 3 A ) . A similar evolution was observed for MIP - 1 a , MIP - b , MCP - 3 , eotaxin , and frac - talkine , although these data were more variable . In contrast , chemokines that were not suppressed in patients with BUD , such as IFN - inducible protein 10 or macrophage - derived che - mokine , were not modulated during treatment . With regard to T cell cytokines , only IL - 6 , IL - 10 , tumor necrosis factor ( TNF ) a , IL - 4 , and granulocyte - macrophage colony - stimulating factor ( GM - CSF ) were detectable in patient serum ( Figure 3 B ) . Whereas the circulating levels of IL - 6 , IL - 10 , and TNF - a were not modulated by antibiotic therapy , those of IL - 4 and GM - CSF were signiﬁcantly up - regulated 10 months after the end of antibiotic treatment ( Figure 3 B ) . Notably , in the case of IL - 4 , the serum levels are signiﬁcantly higher than those of endemic control participants 10 months after com - 1678 • JID 2009 : 200 ( 1 December ) • Phillips et al Figure 1 . Selective suppression of circulating chemokines in patients with Buruli ulcer disease ( BUD ) . Serum concentrations of a panel of inﬂammatory cytokines , chemokines , and inﬂammation markers were measured in patients with BUD ( ) and healthy control participants ( HC ) ( ) , by n p 24 n p 11 use of Luminex technology . All values were normalized , and a heat map was used to mark quartile ranks for the entire data set . To identify induced or suppressed analytes , a Mann - Whitney U test was used , with a false discovery rate correction for multiple analyte testing ( ; NS , not P (cid:2) . 05 signiﬁcant ) . Findings were compared between patients with BUD and age - and sex - matched healthy donors from the region where disease was endemic . Data are mean values for duplicate wells . EGF , endothelial growth factor ; ICAM , intercellular adhesion molecule ; IL , interleukin ; IP , interferon g – inducible protein ; MCP , monocyte chemoattractant protein ; MIP , macrophage inﬂammatory protein ; MMP , metalloproteinase ; sCD40L , soluble CD40 ligand ; TGF , transforming growth factor ; TNF , tumor necrosis factor ; VCAM , vascular cell adhesion molecule ; VEGF , vascular EGF . pletion of the antibiotic therapy . The augmentation of IL - 4 and GM - CSF coincided with that of the lymphoid survival factor IL - 7 ( Figure 3 B ) . Selective suppression of T cell functional properties in pa - tients with BUD . Defective systemic production of IFN - g has been reported in patients with BUD who have progressive ul - cers , as evidenced by ex vivo stimulation of peripheral blood lymphocytes with mitogenic agents . Having shown that patients with BUD display a distinctive proﬁle of immune suppression , we analyzed in depth the functionality of T cell populations in these patients . Supernatants of PHA - stimulated whole - blood cultures were submitted to a broad screen of cytokines and chemokines by means of the above - described multiplex tech - nology . In accordance with other reports , stimulation - induced production of IFN - g by Th1 cells was reduced in patients with BUD compared with healthy control participants ( Figure 4 ) . Even more dramatic was the suppression of IL - 2 , a critical T cell growth factor . Th2 and Th17 responses were also down - modulated in pa - tients with BUD , as indicated by the reduced levels of IL - 4 , IL - 13 , and IL - 17 in cell supernatants . The capacity of T cells to produce GM - CSF on PHA stimulation was also suppressed in patients with BUD compared with control participants . A trend toward suppression was also observed for IL - 10 , although it was not statistically signiﬁcant . Interestingly , this inhibitory ef - fect was not observed with all T cell – derived cytokines ; the production of IL - 6 and TNF - a was comparable in the 2 groups . Overall , the results of this analysis suggested that the functional biology of all Th1 , Th2 , and Th17 cell subsets was impaired in patients with BUD , with a selective effect on the cytokines IL - 2 , IFN - g , IL - 4 , IL - 13 , IL - 17 , and GM - CSF . Immunological defects in BUD mimicked by action of my - colactone on CD4 + T lymphocytes . The data in Figures 1 – 4 identify a series of host inﬂammatory molecules that are sys - temically suppressed in patients with BUD . Among them are chemokines , which are expressed by all mononuclear cell sub - sets , and cytokines , which are primarily produced by CD4 + T lymphocytes . We postulated that the defective cytokine and chemokine responses in patients with BUD may be caused by , at least partially , the immunosuppressive activity of mycolac - tone on this cell population . This possibility was investigated by incubating peripheral blood – derived CD4 + T lymphocytes of healthy donors with increasing doses of the toxin and mon - itoring their cytokine and chemokine responses to stimulation . For all of the inﬂammatory molecules tested , a marked and highly reproducible inhibitory action of mycolactone was ob - served , with nearly complete suppression of cytokine or che - mokine production in the presence of 50 ng / mL mycolactone , when either PMA – calcium ionophore or antibodies to CD3 and CD28 were employed to stimulate activation ( Figure 5 A and data not shown ) . Importantly , a major proportion of the cells remained viable in the presence of biologically active con - centrations of mycolactone ( Figure 5 B ) . With regard to IL - 2 and IFN - g , these results were conﬁrmed independently by Immunological Markers of Buruli Ulcer Disease • JID 2009 : 200 ( 1 December ) • 1679 Figure 2 . Down - modulation of macrophage inﬂammatory protein ( MIP ) 1 b , interleukin ( IL ) 8 , and monocyte chemoattractant protein ( MCP ) 1 induced at the nodular stage and speciﬁc for Buruli ulcer disease ( BUD ) . A , Serum concentrations of MIP - 1 b , IL - 8 , and MCP - 1 , as measured by a Luminex system , were compared in 13 patients with BUD at the nodular stage ( Nod ) , 15 patients with BUD at the ulcerative stage ( Ulc ) , and 11 healthy control participants ( HC ) . B , Serum concentrations of MIP - 1 b , IL - 8 , and MCP - 1 in 8 patients with tuberculosis ( TB ) and 8 healthy control participants . Data are mean values of duplicate wells , which were analyzed with the OmniViz program . Mann - Whitney U tests were performed to obtain P values ( * ; * * ; NS , not signiﬁcant ) . Each point corresponds to an individual donor , and lines indicate median values in each group . Data are P (cid:2) . 05 P (cid:2) . 01 representative of 2 independent experiments . means of enzyme - linked immunosorbent assay ( ELISA ) , with exposure to 20 ng / mL mycolactone inducing 1 75 % suppression of cytokine production by CD4 + T lymphocytes , irrespective of the stimulating agent ( data not shown ) . DISCUSSION In some regions of sub - Saharan Africa , the incidence of BUD exceeds those of tuberculosis and leprosy , 2 major human in - fectious diseases that are caused by M . tuberculosis and My - cobacterium leprae , respectively . BUD contributes to a combined mycobacterial disease burden in impoverished rural commu - nities , causing considerable morbidity and stigmatization [ 23 ] . A hallmark of these 3 pathogenic mycobacteria is their capacity to establish residence in the host and provoke long - term in - fections , for which they have evolved different strategies for evading and exploiting the host immune system . In particular , there is growing evidence that the unique lipids of their en - velopes , at the interface between pathogen and host , play a central role in mycobacterial virulence . For example , the li - poarabinomannans and phosphatidylinositol mannosides of M . tuberculosis have been shown to modulate phagosomal matu - ration , thereby contributing to bacterial persistence in infected macrophages [ 24 ] . M . tuberculosis lipoarabinomannans and phenolic glycolipids also impair the production of proinﬂam - matory mediators by professional antigen - presenting cells in vitro [ 25 , 26 ] . As a potent suppressor of b - chemokine pro - duction by dendritic cells and inﬂammatory cytokine and che - mokine production by monocytes , mycolactone therefore con - stitutes another type of mycobacterial lipid capable of inhibiting innate inﬂammatory responses . The generation of speciﬁc cellular responses , particularly in the Th1 compartment , is crucial for protective immunity against most mycobacterial infections . In BUD , although the spontaneous healing of skin lesions usually coincides with a 1680 • JID 2009 : 200 ( 1 December ) • Phillips et al Figure 3 . Resolution of Buruli ulcer disease ( BUD ) – associated immunosuppression after antibiotic therapy . The kinetics of serum concentrations are shown for a panel of inﬂammatory chemokines ( A ) and cytokines ( B ) in patients with BUD who were undergoing antibiotic treatment ( ) . Data n p 9 are means and standard deviations of duplicate Luminex measurements , which were performed at the beginning of therapy ( 0 weeks ) , after 4 weeks of treatment ( 4 weeks ) , at the end of the 8 - week treatment ( 8 weeks ) , and 1 and 10 months after the end of treatment ( 12 and 48 weeks , respectively ) . Values were compared by means of repeated - measures analysis of variance with the Bonferroni post hoc test ( * ; * * ; * * * ; P (cid:2) . 05 P (cid:2) . 01 P (cid:2) . 001 NS , not signiﬁcant ) . Data are representative of 2 independent experiments . GM - CSF , granulocyte - macrophage colony - stimulating factor ; HC , healthy control participants ; IL , interleukin ; MCP , monocyte chemoattractant protein ; MIP , macrophage inﬂammatory protein ; TNF , tumor necrosis factor . conversion to positive delayed - type hypersensitivity reaction against M . ulcerans antigens , the mechanisms involved in im - mune protection remain largely unknown [ 27 ] . A distinctive feature of BUD lesions is the lack of inﬂammation despite massive infection and tissue necrosis [ 28 ] . Patients who have BUD with active ulcers also show reduced systemic lympho - proliferative and IFN - g responses [ 1 ] . Notably , these defects are not speciﬁc to mycobacterial antigens . Furthermore , they resolve after surgical excision of the lesions and curative an - tibiotic therapy [ 29 ] , strongly suggesting that a bacterial factor inhibits cellular responses locally and systemically . Here we show that , in fact , the systemic suppression of cellular responses in BUD affects not only the Th1 cell compartment but also the Th2 and Th17 cell subsets . This defect is not due to dif - ferences in T cell concentrations , because blood cell counts were comparable in patients with BUD and in control participants Immunological Markers of Buruli Ulcer Disease • JID 2009 : 200 ( 1 December ) • 1681 Figure 4 . Selective suppression of T cell functional properties in patients with Buruli ulcer disease ( BUD ) . For 4 patients with BUD and 4 healthy control participants ( HC ) , T cell – derived cytokines were assessed with a Luminex system in supernatants of whole - blood stimulation assays . Data correspond to mean values of phytohemagglutinin - stimulated duplicate wells , from which the mean value of unstimulated control wells was subtracted . Data were analyzed with the OmniViz program , and Mann - Whitney U tests were performed to obtain P values ( * ; NS , not signiﬁcant ) . Each P (cid:2) . 05 point corresponds to an individual donor , and lines indicate median values in each group . Data are representative of 2 independent experiments . GM - CSF , granulocyte - macrophage colony - stimulating factor ; IFN , interferon ; IL , interleukin ; TNF , tumor necrosis factor . ( R . Phillips , unpublished data ) . In accordance with other re - ports , these ﬁndings demonstrate that defective T cell respon - siveness to stimulation is not antigen speciﬁc but is rather associated with a functional blockade of T cell capacity to ex - press , or secrete , inﬂammatory products . Because suppression of T cell functions occurs without loss of cell viability ( Figure 5 ) , it may be the result not of a cytotoxic action of mycolactone but rather of the induction of an anergic state , the mechanism of which remains to be investigated . In the face of such a broad and antigen - independent sup - pression of T cell responses , it is unclear why patients with BUD are not more susceptible to secondary infections . Al - though recently an increased prevalence of human immuno - deﬁciency virus ( HIV ) infection was reported in patients with BUD in Benin , the frequency of superinfections remains sur - prisingly low , and patients with BUD typically show a good general health status other than the progression of skin lesions [ 30 ] . This may be partially explained by the fact that systemic suppression of cellular responses in patients with BUD is in - complete and reversible . Although Th1 responses are signiﬁ - 1682 • JID 2009 : 200 ( 1 December ) • Phillips et al Figure 5 . Defective cytokine and chemokine responses in patients with Buruli ulcer disease mimicked by action of mycolactone on CD4 + T lymphocytes . A , Suppression of interleukin ( IL ) 2 , interferon ( IFN ) g , tumor necrosis factor ( TNF ) a , IL - 4 , IL - 10 , IL - 17 , macrophage inﬂammatory protein ( MIP ) 1 b , and IL - 8 production by human CD4 + peripheral blood lymphocytes . Cells incubated with mycolactone for 24 h before stimulation with phorbol - 12 - myristate 13 - acetate and calcium ionophore for 24 h are compared with cells stimulated in the absence of mycolactone . Data are means and standard deviations of duplicate measurements obtained with a Luminex system in 3 independent donors . B , Effect of 90 - h incubation with mycolactone on cell viability , as measured by a ﬂow cytometric approach using propidium iodide ( PI ) and ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate – labeled annexin V staining . Annexin V + / PI (cid:1) cells were identiﬁed as early apoptotic cells , annexin V + / PI + cells as late apoptotic cells , and annexin V (cid:1) / PI (cid:1) cells as live cells . Data are representative of 2 independent experiments . cantly impaired in patients with BUD , particularly during the early stages of the disease , host T cells remain viable and func - tional as the disease progresses , as evidenced by the vigorous inﬂammation occurring in the skin after antibiotic adminis - tration [ 31 – 33 ] . The success of M . ulcerans in the establishment of a persistent infection may thus be viewed as a balance be - tween pathogen and host , in which mycolactone suppresses but does not neutralize the development of host immune responses . The relevance of lymphocyte immunosuppression in the con - text of a natural infection with M . ulcerans relies on the phar - macodistribution of the toxin and its ability to interact with target cells in the host . Although hematogenous dissemination of M . ulcerans has been reported , the fact that bacteria remain essentially localized in subcutaneous tissue raises the question of how mycolactone gains access to lymphocytes in vivo [ 14 ] . Once mycobacteria are phagocytosed by host cells , their lipid constituents are thought to trafﬁc within subcellular compart - ments and be released by infected cells via the formation of vesicles [ 34 ] . Cells harboring intracellular M . ulcerans , or lesions containing extracellular bacteria , may similarly release the toxin to the medium . This is in accordance with the unusual his - topathological feature of Buruli ulcers , which suggests a radial diffusion of mycolactone from the infectious foci . In addition , we have evidence from mouse studies that mycolactone pro - duced in peripheral tissues can reach internal organs , because structurally intact mycolactone was identiﬁed in blood and spleen lymphocytes of mice subcutaneously injected with my - colactone or infected with M . ulcerans [ 7 ] . These data , therefore , are consistent with the notion that mycolactone permits M . ulcerans to establish long - term infections by remotely neutral - izing the development of cellular responses . BUD is usually diagnosed on the basis of clinical ﬁndings , because laboratory tests based on smear examination , M . ul - cerans cultures , or PCR detection require signiﬁcant logistics and equipment . Alternative diagnostic approaches are urgently needed to allow the early identiﬁcation of patients and enable more effective treatment . In this study , we identiﬁed a series of immunological mediators , the production of which is sys - temically suppressed in patients with BUD . Using an algorithm based on the serum levels of MIP - 1 b , IL - 8 , MCP - 1 , and frac - talkine , we were able to identify correctly 100 % of the patients with BUD and 64 % of the control participants ( data not shown ) . In basal conditions , MIP - 1 b , IL - 8 , and MCP - 1 are present in patient serum in signiﬁcant amounts . They are di - rectly and easily assessable with simple , inexpensive , and ﬁeld - friendly assays , such as ELISAs . Furthermore , our preliminary investigations show that suppression of IL - 8 and MCP - 1 is induced early in BUD . To our knowledge , this is the ﬁrst report of a down - modulation of these chemokines in association with an infectious disease . Although a follow - up cohort would be required to validate these ﬁndings for clinical use , the ﬁndings of this study strongly suggest that measuring the levels of MIP - 1 b , IL - 8 , and MCP - 1 in serum may help conﬁrm a clinical diagnosis of BUD . Until recently , the only available treatment for BUD was surgical excision of the lesion . Today , WHO recommends a daily administration of rifampicin ( oral ) and streptomycin ( in - tramuscular ) for 8 weeks , treatment that represents consider - Immunological Markers of Buruli Ulcer Disease • JID 2009 : 200 ( 1 December ) • 1683 able progress in the management of the disease . To optimize the frequency , duration , and route of administration of anti - biotics , sensitive biomarkers of the therapeutic response of pa - tients are now required . Our analysis of patient serum during the course of antibiotic therapy showed that most of the BUD immunological correlates were positively modulated by anti - biotic therapy . However , their up - regulation was a slow process , beginning after completion of the treatment . In the absence of reagents to detect mycolactone , we cannot determine whether this reﬂects the progressive elimination of mycolactone , or other mycobacterial products , from the host organism . Notably , IL - 4 was the only inﬂammatory marker to be modulated during the course of antibiotic therapy , with serum levels increasing signiﬁcantly during the period between 4 and 8 weeks of treat - ment . The stimulation of IL - 4 production was intense , with circulating levels reaching higher concentrations than those of control participants 10 months after the end of antibiotic treat - ment . IL - 4 is a key T cell cytokine that stimulates both activat - ed B and T cell proliferation and the differentiation of CD4 + T cells into Th2 cells . The administration of antibiotics often leads to an active inﬂammatory process at the site of infection , with massive inﬁltration of activated T and B cells [ 34 ] . The up - regulation of IL - 4 in patient serum may thus reﬂect the reversal of mycolactone - induced local immunosuppression and restoration of active humoral and cellular immune responses , thereby constituting a valuable tool for monitoring patient re - sponses to antibiotic treatment . Acknowledgments We gratefully acknowledge the Center for Human Immunology at In - stitut Pasteur for support in conducting this study . References 1 . Demangel C , Stinear TP , Cole ST . Buruli ulcer : reductive evolution enhances pathogenicity of Mycobacterium ulcerans . Nat Rev Microbiol 2009 ; 7 : 50 – 60 . 2 . World Health Organization . Buruli ulcer . World Health Organization Web site . http : / / www . who . int / gtb - buruli . Updated 2009 . 3 . Wansbrough - Jones M , Phillips R . Buruli ulcer : emerging from obscu - rity . Lancet 2006 ; 367 : 1849 – 58 . 4 . Etuaful S , Carbonnelle B , Grosset J , et al . Efﬁcacy of the combination rifampin - streptomycin in preventing growth of Mycobacteriumulcerans in early lesions of Buruli ulcer in humans . Antimicrob Agents Che - mother 2005 ; 49 : 3182 – 6 . 5 . Hong H , Demangel C , Pidot SJ , Leadlay PF , Stinear T . Mycolactones : immunosuppressive and cytotoxic polyketides produced by aquatic mycobacteria . Nat Prod Rep 2008 ; 25 : 447 – 54 . 6 . George KM , Chatterjee D , Gunawardana G , et al . Mycolactone : a poly - ketide toxin from Mycobacterium ulcerans required for virulence . Sci - ence 1999 ; 283 : 854 – 7 . 7 . Hong H , Coutanceau E , Leclerc M , Caleechurn L , Leadlay PF , De - mangel C . Mycolactone diffuses from Mycobacterium ulcerans - infected tissues and targets mononuclear cells in peripheral blood andlymphoid organs . PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2008 ; 2 : e325 . 8 . Snyder DS , Small PL . Uptake and cellular actions of mycolactone , a virulence determinant for Mycobacterium ulcerans . Microb Pathog 2003 ; 34 : 91 – 101 . 9 . George KM , Pascopella L , Welty DM , Small PL . A Mycobacterium ulcerans toxin , mycolactone , causes apoptosis in guinea pig ulcers and tissue culture cells . Infect Immun 2000 ; 68 : 877 – 83 . 10 . Coutanceau E , Decalf J , Martino A , et al . Selective suppression of dendritic cell functions by Mycobacterium ulcerans toxin mycolactone . J Exp Med 2007 ; 204 : 1395 – 403 . 11 . Simmonds RE , Lali FV , Smallie T , Small PL , Foxwell BM . Mycolactone inhibits monocyte cytokine production by a posttranscriptional mech - anism . J Immunol 2009 ; 182 : 2194 – 202 . 12 . Torrado E , Adusumilli S , Fraga AG , Small PL , Castro AG , Pedrosa J . Mycolactone - mediated inhibition of tumor necrosis factor production by macrophages infected with Mycobacterium ulcerans has implications for the control of infection . Infect Immun 2007 ; 75 : 3979 – 88 . 13 . Pahlevan AA , Wright DJ , Andrews C , George KM , Small PL , Foxwell BM . The inhibitory action of Mycobacterium ulcerans soluble factor on monocyte / T cell cytokine production and NF - kappa B function . J Im - munol 1999 ; 163 : 3928 – 35 . 14 . Coutanceau E , Marsollier L , Brosch R , et al . Modulation of the host immune response by a transient intracellular stage of Mycobacterium ulcerans : the contribution of endogenous mycolactone toxin . Cell Mi - crobiol 2005 ; 7 : 1187 – 96 . 15 . Yeboah - Manu D , Peduzzi E , Mensah - Quainoo E , et al . Systemic sup - pression of interferon - gamma responses in Buruli ulcer patients re - solves after surgical excision of the lesions caused by the extracellular pathogen Mycobacterium ulcerans . J Leukoc Biol 2006 ; 79 : 1150 – 6 . 16 . Westenbrink BD , Stienstra Y , Huitema MG , et al . Cytokine responses to stimulation of whole blood from patients with Buruli ulcer disease in Ghana . Clin Diagn Lab Immunol 2005 ; 12 : 125 – 9 . 17 . PrevotG , BourreauE , PascalisH , etal . Differentialproductionofsystemic and intralesional gamma interferon and interleukin - 10 in nodular and ulcerative forms of Buruli disease . Infect Immun 2004 ; 72 : 958 – 65 . 18 . Phillips R , Horsﬁeld C , Kuijper S , et al . Cytokine response to antigen stimulation of whole blood from patients with Mycobacterium ulcerans disease compared to that from patients with tuberculosis . Clin Vaccine Immunol 2006 ; 13 : 253 – 7 . 19 . Gooding TM , Kemp AS , Robins - Browne RM , Smith M , Johnson PD . Acquired T - helper 1 lymphocyte anergy following infection with My - cobacterium ulcerans . Clin Infect Dis 2003 ; 36 : 1076 – 7 . 20 . Gooding TM , Johnson PD , Smith M , Kemp AS , Robins - Browne RM . Cytokine proﬁles of patients infected with Mycobacterium ulcerans and unaffected household contacts . Infect Immun 2002 ; 70 : 5562 – 7 . 21 . Gooding TM , Johnson PD , Campbell DE , et al . Immune response to infection with Mycobacterium ulcerans . Infect Immun 2001 ; 69 : 1704 – 7 . 22 . Phillips R , Horsﬁeld C , Kuijper S , et al . Sensitivity of PCR targeting the IS2404 insertion sequence of Mycobacterium ulcerans in an assay using punch biopsy specimens for diagnosis of Buruli ulcer . J Clin Microbiol 2005 ; 43 : 3650 – 6 . 23 . Huygen K , Adjei O , Affolabi D , et al . Buruli ulcer disease : prospects for a vaccine . Med Microbiol Immunol 2009 ; 198 : 69 – 77 . 24 . Vergne I , Fratti RA , Hill PJ , Chua J , Belisle J , Deretic V . Mycobacterium tuberculosis phagosome maturation arrest : mycobacterial phosphati - dylinositol analog phosphatidylinositol mannoside stimulates early en - dosomal fusion . Mol Biol Cell 2004 ; 15 : 751 – 60 . 25 . Nigou J , Gilleron M , Rojas M , Garcia LF , Thurnher M , Puzo G . My - cobacterial lipoarabinomannans : modulators of dendritic cell function and the apoptotic response . Microbes Infect 2002 ; 4 : 945 – 53 . 26 . Reed MB , Domenech P , Manca C , et al . A glycolipid of hypervirulent tuberculosis strains that inhibits the innate immune response . Nature 2004 ; 431 : 84 – 7 . 27 . Dobos KM , Spotts EA , Marston BJ , Horsburgh CR Jr , King CH . Se - rologic response to culture ﬁltrate antigens of Mycobacterium ulcerans during Buruli ulcer disease . Emerg Infect Dis 2000 ; 6 : 158 – 64 . 28 . Guarner J , Bartlett J , Whitney EAS , et al . Histopathologic features of Mycobacterium ulcerans infection . Emerg Infect Dis 2003 ; 9 : 651 – 6 . 29 . Sarfo FS , Phillips RO , Ampadu E , Sarpong F , Adentwe E , Wansbrough - 1684 • JID 2009 : 200 ( 1 December ) • Phillips et al Jones M . Dynamics of the cytokine response to Mycobacterium ulcerans during antibiotic treatment for M . ulcerans disease ( Buruli ulcer ) in humans . Clin Vaccine Immunol 2009 ; 16 : 61 – 5 . 30 . Johnson RC , Nackers F , Glynn JR , et al . Association of HIV infection and Mycobacterium ulcerans disease in Benin . AIDS 2008 ; 22 : 901 – 3 . 31 . Schutte D , Pluschke G . Immunosuppression and treatment - associated inﬂammatory response in patients with Mycobacterium ulcerans infec - tion ( Buruli ulcer ) . Expert Opin Biol Ther 2009 ; 9 : 187 – 200 . 32 . Schutte D , Um - Boock A , Mensah - Quainoo E , Itin P , Schmid P , Plusch - ke G . Development of highly organized lymphoid structures in Buruli ulcer lesions after treatment with rifampicin and streptomycin . PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2007 ; 1 : e2 . 33 . Schutte D , Umboock A , Pluschke G . Phagocytosis of Mycobacterium ulcerans in the course of rifampicin and streptomycin chemotherapy in Buruli ulcer lesions . Br J Dermatol 2009 ; 160 : 273 – 83 . 34 . Beatty WL , Rhoades ER , Ullrich HJ , Chatterjee D , Heuser JE , Russell DG . Trafﬁcking and release of mycobacterial lipids from infected mac - rophages . Trafﬁc 2000 ; 1 : 235 – 47 .