Src family kinases , key regulators of signal transduction Sarah J Parsons * , 1 and J Thomas Parsons * , 1 1 Department of Microbiology and Cancer Center , University of Virginia Health System , Charlottesville , VA 22908 - 0734 , USA The Src family of protein tyrosine kinases ( SFKs ) plays key roles in regulating signal transduction by a diverse set of cell surface receptors in the context of a variety of cellular environments . SFKs have evolved many ingenious molecular strategies to couple receptors with the cyto - plasmic signaling machinery . The contributions to this issue of ONCOGENE describe how this machinery regulates fundamental cellular processes , including cell growth , differentiation , cell shape , migration and survival , and specialized cell signals . The pleotropic functions of Src and Src family members underscore the importance of these kinases and explain why many of the members of this family have been identiﬁed as cellular oncogenes . In this volume , we have attempted to provide the reader with an overview of the current understanding of the function of Src family kinases in the regulation of selected cellular signaling pathways . Oncogene ( 2004 ) 23 , 7906 – 7909 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . onc . 1208160 Keywords : tyrosine kinase ; transformation ; cancer ; cell proliferation Introduction This issue of ONCOGENE is devoted to the Src family of protein tyrosine kinases ( SFKs ) , a family of kinases that plays key roles in regulating signal transduction by a diverse set of cell surface receptors in the context of multiple cellular environments . The origins of the family ( Martin , 2001 ) can be traced back almost a century to the pioneering studies of Peyton Rous , who recognized that injection of cell - free extracts from chicken tumors could cause tumors in naive animals , giving rise to the scandalous hypothesis that cancer could be caused by a transmissible agent ( e . g . , a virus ) . Indeed , it took almost 50 years to establish this concept in the scientiﬁc literature , but with the acceptance of these ideas came renewed studies on the virus that Rous had originally described , Rous sarcoma virus ( RSV ; Martin , this issue ) . Over the next 20 years , studies on RSV yielded an incredibly rich medley of new and startling informa - tion ; cellular transformation was caused by a single gene ( Src ) ( Figure 1 ) ; Src was a protein kinase ; Src catalysed the phosphorylation of tyrosine ; Src was derived from a cellular gene ( the proto - oncogene , c - Src ) ; Src activity was regulated by intramolecular interactions controlled by tyrosine phosphorylation ; and domains of Src ( SH2 and SH3 ) mediated protein – protein interactions with sequences containing phosphotyrosine and proline - rich motifs . Concurrent with the studies on Src came the recognition that Src was a member of a large family of structurally related kinases ( Table 1 ) ( Thomas and Brugge , 1997 ) , many of which were expressed predomi - nantly in highly differentiated cell types . As described in the chapters of this issue , Src and family members play an important role in regulating signals from cell surface receptors . SFKs have evolved many ingenious molecular strategies to couple receptors with the cytoplasmic signaling machinery . As described herein , this machin - ery regulates many fundamental cellular processes , including cell growth , differentiation , cell shape , migra - tion and survival , and specialized cell signals . The pleotropic functions of Src and Src family members underscore the importance of these kinases and explain why many of the members of this family have been identiﬁed as cellular oncogenes ( Blume - Jensen and Hunter , 2001 ) . In this volume , we have attempted to provide the reader with an overview of the current understanding of the function of Src family kinases in the regulation of selected cellular signaling pathways . While not comprehensive , we have attempted to assemble well - studied examples of how Src family kinases contribute to the regulation of cellular events . Unfortunately , we have not been able to include discussions of all of the interesting and undoubtedly important roles of Src in cellular regulation ( e . g . , platelets ( Clark et al . , 1994 ; Obergfell et al . , 2002 ) , osteoclasts ( Rodan and Rodan , 1997 ; Duong et al . , 2000 ) ) , or discussions of important Src substrates ( e . g . , p190Rho - GAP , Cortactin ( Parsons and Parsons , 1997 ) ) . Historical overview While the origins of the Src family of kinases are nearly a century old , the contemporary understanding of the activity of various family members , both as mediators of biological signals and as kinases , is recent . Steven Martin provides a historical overview of the studies on avian retroviruses and RSV , in particular . He describes the discoveries that led to the concept of cell transfor - mation and the identiﬁcation of the RSV transforming * Correspondence : SJ Parsons ; E - mail : sap @ virginia . edu JT Parsons ; E - mail : jtp @ virginia . edu Oncogene ( 2004 ) 23 , 7906 – 7909 & 2004 Nature Publishing Group All rights reserved 0950 - 9232 / 04 $ 30 . 00 www . nature . com / onc gene ( v - Src ) , as well as its protein product , and how this information in turn led to the discovery of cellular Src . Structure and regulation of SFKs : structural dissection of a prototypical modular signaling protein Members of the family exhibit a conserved domain organization , which includes a myristoylated N - terminal segment , followed by SH3 , SH2 , linker and tyrosine kinase domains , and a short C - terminal tail ( Figure 1 ) . As discussed by Boggon and Eck , the structural dissection of Src kinases has elucidated canonical mechanisms of phosphotyrosine recognition by the SH2 domain and proline - motif recognition by the SH3 domain . Crystallographic analysis of nearly intact Src kinases in the autoinhibited state has revealed that these protein interaction motifs turn inward and lock the kinase in an inactive conformation via intramolecular interactions . The autoinhibited Src kinase structures reveal a mode of domain assembly used by other tyrosine kinases outside the Src family , including Abl and Tec family kinases . In addition , the underlying regulatory principles uncovered by the analysis of Src family kinases have proven to be surprisingly general among diverse modular signaling proteins . Although considerable structural information is available for the autoinhibited conformation of Src kinases , how these kinases assemble into active signaling complexes with substrates and regulators is an unresolved question . SFKs and receptor tyrosine kinases ( RTKs ) The ability of oncogenic forms of SFKs to induce cell transformation pointed early onto a role for Src and its family members in regulating cell growth . Bromann et al . provide an overview of how SFKs interact with , and participate in signaling from RTKs . These authors provide a summary of how SFKs are activated by RTKs , and how SFKs in turn activate RTKs . In addition , SFKs promote signaling from growth factor receptors in multiple ways , including the direct partici - pation in pathways required for DNA synthesis as well as controlling the turnover of cell surface receptors , modulating actin cytoskeleton rearrangements and promoting cell motility and survival . G - protein - coupled receptors ( GPCRs ) and SFKs GPCRs serve as ligand - activated guanine nucleotide exchange factors ( GEFs ) for a class of heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide - binding ( G ) proteins . Hormone binding catalyses the conformation - dependent exchange of GTP for GDP on the G a subunit of the hetero - trimeric G protein . This , in turn , leads to the dissocia - tion of the GTP - bound G a subunit from the G bg subunit heterodimer , rendering it free to regulate the activity of enzymatic effectors . Ligand activation of many growth factor RTKs leads directly to activation of SFKs , an event essential for propagation of downstream signals . Luttrell and Luttrell discuss the unexpected role for SFKs in GPCR signaling . The strictly dichotomous model of transmembrane signaling by GPCRs has been challenged by the discovery that GPCRs also exert control over cellular growth , proliferation and differ - entiation , and do so by stimulating tyrosine phosphor - ylation cascades . Several mechanisms , from the direct association of SFKs with GPCRs or receptor - associated proteins to the transactivation of RTKs and focal adhesion complexes by G - protein - mediated signals , permit GPCRs to activate SFKs . Conversely , Src Figure 1 Domain structure of Src family kinases Table 1 Characteristics of Src family kinases Src family member a Pattern of expression Isoforms Oncogenic forms b Blk B cells Fgr Myeloid cells , B cells Oncogenic fusion with gag sequences in feline sarcoma virus ; overexpressed in some leukemias and lymphomas Fyn Ubiquitous T - cell - speciﬁc isoform ( Fyn T ) Hck Myeloid cells Two different translational starts Lck T cells , NK cells , brain Overexpressed in T - cell acute lymphocytic leukemias Lyn Brain , B cells , myeloid cells Two alternatively spliced forms Src Ubiquitous Neuron - speciﬁc isoforms Mutated and truncated in retroviruses ; truncated in colon cancer ; overexpressed in mammary , pancreatic and other cancers Yes Ubiquitous Oncogenic fusion with gag sequences in avian sarcoma viruses ; highly expressed in colon , malignant melanoma and other cancers Yrk Ubiquitous a Thomas and Brugge ( 1997 ) . b Blume - Jensen and Hunter ( 2001 ) Src family kinases SJ Parsons and JT Parsons 7907 Oncogene activity plays a central role in controlling GPCR trafﬁcking and effects on cell proliferation and cytoske - letal rearrangement . As Luttrell and Luttrell point out , GPCRs and Src family kinases do not belong to separate , exclusive clubs ; rather , these strange bed - fellows are intimately involved in multilayered forms of cross - talk that inﬂuence a host of cellular processes . SFKs and the regulation of cell adhesion and migration The oncogenic potential of several of the SFKs under - scores the role of these kinases in regulating cellular events distinct from those controlling cell proliferation . Indeed the pronounced effects of oncogenic v - Src on cell morphology , cell adhesion and motility clearly indicated a role for Src in the regulation of cytoskeletal - linked events . Indeed , a growing number of studies directly points to the role of SFKs in human cancers . Playford and Schaller discuss the connections between SFKs and the integrin family of cell adhesion molecules . These authors review the role of Src and integrin signaling in normal cells and how integrin signaling is altered in human cancer . SFKs target a number of molecules that contribute to the regulation of integrin - mediated signal - ing pathways , including focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) , paxillin and p130 CAS . How Src signaling affects the formation of focal adhesions and interplay with the extracellular matrix and how changes in the signals transduced by this pathway contribute to cancer cell progression are also described . Cross - talk between steroid receptors and the c - Src - RTK receptor pathways In recent years , evidence has emerged showing that both steroid hormones and growth factors stimulate prolif - eration of steroid - dependent tumor cells . Regulation of steroid receptors is well understood . These receptors are ligand - activated transcription factors , which , upon ligand binding , dimerize , recruit co - regulatory molecules and activate target gene transcription . As described by Shupnick , response to steroid ligands can be function - ally linked to activation of Src or RTKs . Ligand - independent stimulation of steroid receptor - mediated transcription by growth factors is now believed to occur through activated protein kinases that phosphorylate the receptors and co - regulatory proteins . Recently , steroid hormones themselves have been shown to rapidly activate intracellular signaling cascades by virtue of their binding to cognate cytoplasmic or membrane - associated receptors . In some contexts , steroid receptors interact directly with Src and other cytoplasmic signal - ing molecules , such as Shc , PI3K and p130 Cas . As Shupnick discusses , cross - talk between growth factors and steroids in both the cytoplasm and nucleus may have a profound impact on complex biological pro - cesses , such as cell growth , and play a signiﬁcant role in the treatment of steroid - dependent cancers . Emerging roles for p120 - catenin in cell adhesion and cancer A large body of evidence points to a role for Src in the regulation of cell – cell adhesion . Among the molecules that have been implicated in this regulatory pathway is p120 - catenin , a protein originally identiﬁed as an Src substrate in v - Src transformed cells . As described by Reynolds and Roczniak - Ferguson , p120 - catenin ( p120 ) is now known to regulate cell – cell adhesion through its interaction with the cytoplasmic tail of classical and type II cadherins . New evidence indicates that p120 regulates cadherin turnover at the cell surface , thereby controlling the amount of cadherin available for cell – cell adhesion . This function is necessary but not sufﬁcient to promote strong adhesion , which is further controlled by signals acting on the amino - terminal p120 regulatory domain . The activities of RhoA , Rac and Cdc42 are also modulated by p120 , suggesting that , along with other Src substrates , p120 contributes to the regulation of cytoskeletal dynamics . Reynolds and Roczniak - Fergu - son suggest that p120 is a master regulator of cadherin abundance and activity and likely participates in regulating the balance between adhesive and motile cellular phenotypes . Role of STATs as downstream signal transducers in SFK - mediated tumorigenesis The signal transducers and activators of transcription ( STATs ) were originally identiﬁed as components of signaling pathways activated by non - tyrosine kinase - containing cytokine receptors . As a result , the role of STATs in regulation of cellular processes is best understood in the context of hematopoietic cell signal - ing . For cytokine receptors , activation of STAT tyrosine phosphorylation occurs via ligand - induced recruitment and activation of the intracellular JAK kinases . How - ever , as discussed by Silva , STATs can also be activated by growth factor receptors , particularly the epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) , as well as by SFKs , particularly Src . In many cases , a differential activation of the STATs is mediated by these tyrosine kinases , compared to activation of the cytokine receptor / JAK pathway . This difference provides potential for unique actions of STATs in response to growth factor receptor and SFK activation . Many cancers , including breast and colon , exhibit elevated expression of SFKs and Src in particular . In addition , many of these cancers also overexpress EGFR and related growth factor receptors . As Silva points out , in these cancers , STATs may play an important role in the tumorigenesis process . Src in synaptic transmission and plasticity The role of Src in regulating specialized cellular functions has been intensely studied in the context of the central nervous system ( CNS ) . In the CNS , Src and other SFKs are widely expressed and are abundant in Src family kinases SJ Parsons and JT Parsons 7908 Oncogene neurons . Src has been implicated in proliferation and differentiation during the development of the CNS . However , Src is also highly expressed in fully differ - entiated neurons in the developed CNS , implying additional functions . As discussed by Kalia et al . , a large body of evidence has accumulated showing that a primary function of Src is to upregulate the activity of N - methyl - D - aspartate ( NMDA ) receptors and other ion channels . NMDA receptors ( NMDARs ) are a principal subtype of glutamate receptors that mediate fast excitatory transmission at most central synapses . Kalia et al . describe how Src serves as a regulator of NMDARs and the role of Src in NMDAR - dependent synaptic plasticity . Recent studies provide insights into the regulation of Src itself at glutamatergic synapses . By upregulating the function of NMDARs , Src gates the production of NMDAR - dependent synaptic potentia - tion and plasticity . Thus , Src is critical for processes underlying physiological plasticity , including learning and memory , and pathological plasticity , such as pain and epilepsy . Function of the SFKs , Lck and Fyn , in T - cell development and activation Studies in cell lines and animal models point to a critical role for Lck and Fyn in proximal T - cell antigen receptor ( TCR ) signal transduction . As discussed by Palacios and Weiss , these kinases are recruited to the TCR , where they phosphorylate TCR at sequence motifs referred to as ITAMs ( immunoreceptor tyrosine - based activation motifs ) on the CD3 and z chains . Phosphorylation of these sites , in turn , serves to create docking sites for Syk family kinases . The recruited Syk family kinases are then activated by SFK - dependent phosphorylation . Within the cell membrane , Lck and Fyn are spatially segregated by localization to different lipid rafts and are thought to undergo sequential activation . SFKs are linked to the TCR via association with the CD4 and CD8 co - receptors ; however , additional adaptor proteins , for example , Unc119 , may also serve to link SFKs with the TCR . CD45 and Csk serve as positive and negative regulators of SFK functions . Several stages of T - cell development require TCR - based signaling , including pre - TCR signaling , positive selection , peripheral main - tenance of naive T cells and lymphopenia - induced proliferation . SFKs , particularly Lck , appear necessary for each of these TCR - based signals . SFKs in B - cell development and signaling The SFKs play key roles in initiating signal transduc - tion by the B - cell antigen receptor ( BCR ) . In addition , as discussed by Gauld and Cambier , numerous studies have shown that this family of kinases also contributes to signaling by BCR surrogates during B - lymphocyte lineage development and maturation . Paradoxically , loss of function of SFKs not only results in the expected defects in B - cell development but also impacts the onset of autoimmunity . Thus , SFKs , most notably Lyn , play both activating and inhibitory roles in B - cell function . As described by Gauld and Cambier , an important , but confounding , issue relating to SFK function in B cells is the varied co - expression of family members that mediate redundant as well as unique functions . Molecular interdiction of SFK signaling in hematopoietic cells The ability of SFKs to mediate signaling from cell surface receptors in hematopoietic cells is a function of their catalytic activity , location and binding partners . SFK activity is regulated in the cell by regulatory kinases and phosphatases that alter the state of phosphorylation of key tyrosine residues , and by protein - binding partners that stabilize the kinase in active or inactive conformations or localize the enzyme to speciﬁc subcellular or submembrane domains . As Geahlen et al . discuss , kinase activity and function can be modulated experimentally through the use of small - molecule inhibitors designed to directly target catalytic or binding domains or regulate the location of the protein by altering its state of acylation . The authors discuss the signiﬁcant potential for using such small molecules as therapeutic agents . Epilogue As readers will glean from the following chapters , studies on SFKs have provided a rich experimental milieu for understanding cell regulation . We wish to thank our colleagues who have devoted their valuable time in helping compile this volume on the SFKs . References Blume - Jensen P and Hunter T . ( 2001 ) . Nature , 411 , 355 – 365 . Clark EA , Shattil SJ and Brugge JS . ( 1994 ) . Trends Biochem . Sci . , 19 , 464 – 469 . Duong LT , Lakkakorpi P , Nakamura I and Rodan GA . ( 2000 ) . Matrix Biol . , 19 , 97 – 105 . Martin GS . ( 2001 ) . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 2 , 467 – 475 . Obergfell A , Eto K , Mocsai A , Buensuceso C , Moores SL , Brugge JS , Lowell CA and Shattil SJ . ( 2002 ) . J . Cell Biol . , 157 , 265 – 275 . Parsons JT and Parsons SJ . ( 1997 ) . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . , 9 , 187 – 192 . Rodan SB and Rodan GA . ( 1997 ) . J . Endocrinol . , 154 ( Suppl ) , S47 – S56 . Thomas SM and Brugge JS . ( 1997 ) . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . , 13 , 513 – 609 . Src family kinases SJ Parsons and JT Parsons 7909 Oncogene