Practical Study of Positive - feedback Button for Brainstorming with Interjection Sound Effects Abstract There are three key factors that can reduce the productivity of brainstorming . In this study , we focus on evaluation apprehension , whereby the fear of negative evaluations from other members prevents subjects from generating and presenting their ideas . To mitigate evaluation apprehension problem , we propose a novel approach that reduces the effort required to give positive feedback . We introduce a physical analogue to Facebook’s “Like” button , enabling people to give positive feedback expressly and casually with a physical button in face - to - face brainstorming . We examined how this system can be used “in the wild . ” Author Keywords Interaction Design ; Creativity Support Tool ; Computer Supported Cooperative Work ; Brainstorming ; ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . 3 [ Information interfaces and presentation ] : Group and Organization Interfaces – Computer - supported cooperative work . Introduction Brainstorming ( BS ) is widely used to generate new ideas and to formulate creative solutions in groups [ 1 ] . Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the Owner / Author . Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . CHI ' 16 Extended Abstracts , May 07 - 12 , 2016 , San Jose , CA , USA ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4082 - 3 / 16 / 05 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2851581 . 2892418 Natsuko Yoshida The University of Tokyo 7 - 3 - 1 , Hongo , Bunkyo - ku , Tokyo , Japan nyoshi @ nae - lab . org Shogo Fukushima The University of Tokyo 7 - 3 - 1 , Hongo , Bunkyo - ku , Tokyo , Japan shogo @ nae - lab . org Daiya Aida The University of Tokyo 7 - 3 - 1 , Hongo , Bunkyo - ku , Tokyo , Japan da @ nae - lab . org Takeshi Naemura The University of Tokyo 7 - 3 - 1 , Hongo , Bunkyo - ku , Tokyo , Japan naemura @ nae - lab . org Late - Breaking Work : Collaborative Technologies # chi4good , CHI 2016 , San Jose , CA , USA 1322 Conventional BS consists of two phases : an idea generation ( storming ) phase and an idea categorization ( norming ) phase . In the storming phase , it is important to generate many distinct ideas [ 12 ] . However , this process is inhibited by the fear of negative evaluations from other members . This is known as evaluation apprehension ( EA ) [ 2 , 17 ] . To mitigate EA and promote storming , the following four principles have been suggested [ 1 ] : ( 1 ) no criticism is allowed ( positive feedback is often recommended ) , ( 2 ) unusual ideas are welcomed , ( 3 ) quantity is encouraged , ( 4 ) combination and improvement are sought . However , following these principles is not always easy [ 5 ] , particularly as positive feedback requires some social cost even when we really agree with a speaker , as we have to deliberate on the words and speak up so that it go through to others . In general , facilitators join and lead the group , or people are trained according to these four principles [ 13 , 14 ] . However , it is often impractical to force everyone to undergo training , and not always possible to invite facilitators . To overcome EA using technical devices , we propose a novel approach that lowers the barriers required to give positive feedback and heightens the awareness of how much positive feedback has been given . We introduce a physical analogue to Facebook’s “Like” button . 1 for face - to - face BS ( Figure 1 ) . The traditional online Like button enables people to give positive feedback casually and facilitates posting activity [ 15 ] . Similarly , our system enables people to give positive feedback 1 Facebook : https : / / www . facebook . com / casually with a physical button and facilitates storming [ 10 ] , evoking a positive affect with exaggerated interjection sounds [ 7 ] . The presence of physical buttons and sounds reminds people of the principles of BS . Our system can also record the timings at which members agree with the speaker . We have conducted an “in - the - wild” user study to examine how people use our system and are influenced by our system . The contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows : 1 . We describe the design of a novel system for face - to - face BS that lowers the barriers to giving positive feedback and heightens the awareness of how much positive feedback has been given . 2 . We examined how this system can be used “in the wild . ” Related Work To mitigate EA , the technique of Electronic Brainstorming ( EBS ) using networked computers to express ideas is often used [ 16 ] . The key factor in reducing EA under EBS is anonymity [ 3 ] . Anonymity allows people to be more open about sharing their ideas and less concerned about the evaluation of others . However , in face - to - face situations , EBS can reduce the interaction between participants , which is a particular issue for problem - solving and perceived performance [ 11 ] . Additionaly , EBS works well for large groups of more than six members [ 9 ] . In non - BS scenarios , there are several studies have employed simple anonymous devices in face - to - face situations [ 18 ] . Conversation votes [ 4 ] allows Figure 1 : Conceptual image of the “Naruhodo Button” . Figure 2 : Hardware structure . Figure 3 : User study in a university class . Late - Breaking Work : Collaborative Technologies # chi4good , CHI 2016 , San Jose , CA , USA 1323 participants to share their real intentions with the speaker by furtively pushing anonymous agree / disagree buttons . Though reducing the effort required to judge other members and heightening the awareness , this does not overcome EA , as it adopts negative feedback buttons to criticize the speaker . One of the limitations of anonymity is that it heightens both positive and negative awareness , and that some people may game the system . Thus , our method provides a non - anonymized means of sharing positive feedback . There are many methods for recording and annotating audio and visual data [ 6 , 19 ] . Nishida et al . [ 6 ] proposed a recording system that tags a scene of the video data as being important when a button is pressed . However , not many systems can record as well as promote people’s communication in order to facilitate the cooperative work . System Design and Implementation To introduce a physical Like button into the BS process , we assume the following four requirements : ( 1 ) Easy to set up and practical to use ; ( 2 ) Heightens the positive awareness and reminds people of the principles of BS ; ( 3 ) Evokes a positive affect and facilitates storming ; ( 4 ) Does not hinder the groupwork or original communication . To meet the above requirements , we adopted a simple smartphone application with a physical button ( as seen in Figure 2 ) . The button ( switch ) is configured to be coupled with the MIC and GND terminals of the four - pole plug of a smartphone via a four - pole cable . The smartphone determines that someone has pushed the button by the voltage drop at the terminal , then sounds the interjection feedback , and the timing is recorded . Setting up the system takes about 10 s . Users can choose their favorite button and sound ( Figure 4 and Table 1 ) , but we do not allow users to change the sound during the BS session , as multiple functions can reduce usability . Exaggerated interjection sounds are employed because sound feedback is known to evoke a positive affect [ 7 ] , and positive emotion leads to higher levels of creativity [ 8 ] . The presence of physical buttons and sounds reminds users of the principles of BS . In addition to the audio and visual data , our system records when , by whom , and how many times the buttons are pressed . The video data are digested according to the timing of when the buttons are pressed . This system consists of one server and multiple clients ( Figure 5 ) . Each user has a client . When the smartphone detects the push of the button , it sends its ID to the server , which records the information about the button press ; namely , it records the time at which a user agrees with the speaker . In this system , we do not aim to limit the beauty and wealth of providing feedback verbally by narrowing it all down to button presses . Instead , our approach provides a positive means to help participants give positive feedback to each other and enrich the original communication , or even track down important moments within a BS video . User Study in a University Class Purpose The purpose of the user study was to examine how this system can be used “in the wild” environment ( Figure 3 ) . Specifically , we focus on when , how , and for what purpose participants used this system . Figure 4 : The three choices of button size . Japanese sound English description naruhodo I see tashikani Right sugoi Amazing iine I like it kami Absolutely yabai Cool h ē Uh - huh deta That’s it oh Oh Table 1 : Nine interjection for giving positive feedback . Figure 5 : System configuration . Late - Breaking Work : Collaborative Technologies # chi4good , CHI 2016 , San Jose , CA , USA 1324 Experimental Context There is an annual class in the University of Tokyo , the aim of which is to provide practical education in cooperative work methodologies . The students in the class aim to produce a practical solution for a social problem with cooperative work . To construct our “in the wild” environment , we integrated the user study into the class schedule . We describe the schedule below . Participants and Schedule Twenty undergraduates were divided into five groups . Each group consisted of one woman and three men . The participants were not acquainted with one another and were not used to BS . The user study continued over four weeks . In the first week , participants were lectured on the principles of BS beforehand . They were taught how to use our system and allowed to practice . To eliminate the individual variations , we asked participants to choose their favorite parameters after practicing with the system . Specifically , we prepared : small , medium , and large button sizes , and nine choices of sound . Participants then continued to use the chosen option . In the second and third weeks , they performed the storming and norming phases respectively , using our system with pens and post - it notes . Each phase lasted about 70 min . We instructed participants about our system that “ When you feel an idea is good and press a button , a positive sound feedback is given to the speaker and the scene is tagged as important . We will use the tagged data to produce a digest of the storming phase . We will show this before the norming phase . ” They were not told to use the system or informed of the actual purpose of the study . In the fourth week , each group presented their achievements to a professional from the Technology Licensing Organization at the University of Tokyo . The theme of the BS was “ Considering the current student life , incubate an innovative service for students . ” . All the group discussed this topic . Data collection and analysis All the details were recorded by an omnidirectional video camera , and a trained facilitator observed the students’ behavior and took field notes . To examine how this system can be used , we examined ( 1 ) when and how , ( 2 ) for what purpose they pushed their button ( Q1 , 2 , 3 in our questionnaire ) , ( 3 ) the number of ideas generated by writing down one idea on one post - it note , ( 4 ) the degree to which participants felt they could generate unexpected ideas ( Q4 ) during the storming phase in the second week . The user responses are categorized in Table 2 . To examine the demographics of the participants , we questioned their role in their group from five choices after the brainstorming in the fourth week . Experimental Results Exp . ( 1 ) : We analyzed when and how the buttons were pressed . Figure 6 shows the cumulative number of button presses by each group . Groups 1 and 2 pressed their buttons most frequently ( 193 times each ) , though they had not been told to use them . There seems to be some mechanism that encourages participants to push a button , possibly they feel positive atmosphere that the speaker and other members of the group are pleased when they push a button . At some points , the number of button presses increases rapidly . At such points , we observed two distinctive features in the way participants used our system . First , Figure 7 : The scene where members pressed a button as others’ enthusiasm was infectious . ↓ ↓ Late - Breaking Work : Collaborative Technologies # chi4good , CHI 2016 , San Jose , CA , USA 1325 members pressed their button because the enthusiasm of others was infectious ( as seen in Figure 7 ) . Participants were reminded of the BS rules when other members pressed a button . Second , some people expressed how much they agreed with the speaker by pressing their button repeatedly or forcefully . These features cannot be conveyed when giving positive feedback by speaking directly . In this way , our system heightens the awareness of how much positive feedback has been given . The number of times individuals pressed their button varied significantly . One participant pressed 96 times , whereas another participant in the same group did not press his button once . Those who considered their role to be “ to make a positive atmosphere ” pressed their buttons more often than those who considered they were in the group “ to think discreetly . ” Figure 6 : Cumulative number of button presses by each group . Exp . ( 2 ) : We examined for what purpose our system was used by asking the following three questions using a five - point Likert scale : “ Do you think you pushed the button to enhance the positive atmosphere for the group ( Q1 ) / to give positive feedback to the speaker ( Q2 ) / to tag the scene as important ( Q3 ) during BS ? ” Figure 8 shows the distribution of scores for each question , with more than half of the participants giving scores of 4 or 5 . Thus , as well as tagging certain scenes as important , they appreciated the effectiveness of our system in providing positive feedback and enhancing a positive atmosphere , though we had not informed the participants of the system’s intention . This can be seen in the user report . Figure 9 shows a Venn diagram of the distribution of people who answered for Q1 , 2 , and 3 . Participants pressed their button most often to give positive feedback to the speaker . Eight participants who have gave positive responses for all three questions pressed their buttons 380 times in total , whereas five participants who have gave negative responses for all three questions only pressed their buttons 36 times in total . These five participants did not appreciate the effectiveness of pressing the button . Exps . ( 3 ) , ( 4 ) : Figure 10 shows a scatter plot of the number of generated ideas and the number of button presses in each group . Also , we examined the perceived performance by asking “ Do you feel you could generate many ideas that you could not generate by yourself during BS ? ( Q4 ) ” . Figure 11 shows the scatter plot of the score for Q4 and the number of button presses in each group . There are strong positive correlations in each . Alongside the user report , this correlation indicates the possibility that our system improves productivity . However , we must elucidate the causation between these aspects through controlled Figure 8 : User’s purpose for pressing buttons ( Q1 , 2 , 3 ) . Figure 9 : User’s purpose for pressing buttons ( Q1 , 2 , 3 ) . 5 1 1 8 1 1 3 enhance the positive atmosphere for group tag the scene as important give positive feedback to the speaker 0 N = 20 Late - Breaking Work : Collaborative Technologies # chi4good , CHI 2016 , San Jose , CA , USA 1326 experiments with additional subjects . On the other hand , the strong correlation means that our system could be used as a novel tool for measuring BS performance . Number of Participants Category 7 I could give positive feedback casually or enjoyably using the system 2 I could enhance the positive atmosphere or make the group friendly using the system 5 The system encouraged members to generate more ideas 5 The system is useful as a recording system 4 I gave positive feedback by speaking directly 6 I want to change the sound for each scene or use more general sound Table 2 : Categorized user report Discussion Some participants reported that they would prefer to change the sound for each scene by using multiple buttons though we limited the interface to a single button . As there is a tradeoff between usability and the number of functions , we intend to examine the optimum design for the proposed system . We will also study how people use our system once they have used it for a long period . As we mentioned in Exps . ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) , there were some participants who did not press their button or appreciate the effectiveness of the system compared to other participants . From their reports , it would appear that they were able to give positive feedback by speaking directly without using the system . However , as the trained facilitator observed , they actually gave less feedback than others . While deliberating on the words and speaking up , they sometimes subconsciously decline to give positive feedback . Our approach aims to heighten the awareness of how much positive feedback has been given in terms of quantity and scale by reducing the effort required and exaggerating the reaction . Conclusion and Future Work To mitigate the problem of EA , we have proposed a practical approach that reduces the effort of giving positive feedback and facilitates storming , evoking a positive affect with exaggerated interjection sounds . An “in - the - wild” user study identified two distinctive features that cannot be conveyed when speaking directly . First , participants pressed a button because the enthusiasm of others was infectious . Second , some people expressed how much they agreed with the speaker by pressing a button repeatedly or forcefully . In this way , the proposed system heightens the awareness of how much positive feedback they has been given . Furthermore , more than half of the participants appreciated the effectiveness of our system in providing positive feedback and enhancing a positive atmosphere , as well as tagging certain scenes as important , though we did not inform the participants of the system’s intention . We expect that our system could be used as a communication tool in various situations besides BS such as parties and casual chat , because giving positive feedback and enhancing a positive atmosphere is important in many situations . Acknowledgements This work was supported by CREST , JST . We thank Rei Kawakami for her advice and reviewing . Figure 10 : Scatter plot of number of button presses by a group against number of ideas generated . Figure 11 : Scatter plot of number of button presses by a group against ability to generate unexpected ideas ( Q4 ) . 0 20 40 60 80 100 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 T H E N U M B E R S O F I D E A S THE NUMBER OF BUTTON PRESSES r = 0 . 736 * * : . 01 < p < . 05 0 1 2 3 4 5 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 T H E S C O R E F O R Q 4 THE NUMBER OF BUTTON PRESSES r = 0 . 928 * * : . 01 < p < . 05 positive negative Late - Breaking Work : Collaborative Technologies # chi4good , CHI 2016 , San Jose , CA , USA 1327 References 1 . Alex F . Osborn . 1953 . Applied imagination , principles and procedures of creative thinking . Charles Scribner’s Sons . 2 . Michael Diehl et al . 1987 . Productivity loss in brainstorming groups : Toward the solution of a riddle . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 53 , 3 : 497 - 509 . 3 . William H . Cooper et al . 1998 . Some liberating effects of anonymous electronic brainstorming . Small Group Research 29 , 2 : 147 - 178 . 4 . Tony Bergstrom et al . 2007 . Conversation votes : enabling anonymous cues . CHI ' 07 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM . 5 . Ben Matthews . 2009 . Intersections of brainstorming rules and social order . CoDesign 5 , 1 : 65 - 76 . 6 . Toyoaki Nishida et al . 2014 . Conversation Quantization . Conversational Informatics . Springer Japan . 103 - 130 . 7 . Shogo Fukushima et al . 2010 . Laugh enhancer using laugh track synchronized with the user’s laugh motion . CHI ' 10 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM . 8 . Beth A . Hennessey et al . 2010 . Creativity . Annual Review of Psychology 61 : 569 - 598 . 9 . R . Brent Gallupe et al . 1992 . Electronic brainstorming and group size . Academy of Management Journal 35 , 2 : 350 - 36 . 10 . B . F . Skinner et al . 1998 . The behavior of organisms : An experimental analysis . 11 . Paul Dourish et al . 1992 . Awareness and coordination in shared workspaces . Proceedings of the 1992 ACM Conference on Computer - supported Cooperative Work . ACM , 107 - 114 . 12 . Hao - Chuan Wang et al . 2010 . Idea Expander : Supporting group brainstorming with conversationally triggered visual thinking stimuli . Proceedings of the 2010 ACM Conference on Computer - supported Cooperative Work . ACM , 103 - 106 . 13 . Nicole L . Oxley et al . 1996 . The effects of facilitators on the performance of brainstorming groups . Journal of Social Behavior & Personality 11 , 4 : 633 - 646 . 14 . Thomas J . Bouchard . 1972 . Training , motivation , and personality as determinants of the effectiveness of brainstorming groups and individuals . Journal of Applied Psychology 56 , 4 : 324 - 331 . 15 . Moira Burke et al . 2011 . Plugged into the community : Social motivators in online goal - setting groups . CT 2011 : Fifth International Conference on Communities and Technologies , 1 - 10 . 16 . Leonard M . Jessup et al . 1992 . Group support systems : New perspectives . Prentice Hall Professional Technical Reference . 17 . Mabel L . Camacho et al . 1995 . The role of social anxiousness in group brainstorming . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 68 , 6 : 1071 - 1080 . 18 . Tony Bergstrom et al . 2011 . Encouraging initiative in the classroom with anonymous feedback . Human - Computer Interaction – INTERACT 2011 . Springer Berlin Heidelberg , 627 - 642 . 19 . Listening Table ( 2014 ) : http : / / nytlabs . com / projects / table . html Late - Breaking Work : Collaborative Technologies # chi4good , CHI 2016 , San Jose , CA , USA 1328