Storia : Summarizing Social Media Content based on Narrative Theory using Crowdsourcing Joy Kim Stanford University jojo0808 @ stanford . edu Andr´es Monroy - Hern´andez Microsoft Research amh @ microsoft . com ABSTRACT People from all over the world use social media to share thoughts and opinions about events , and understanding what people say through these channels has been of increasing in - terest to researchers , journalists , and marketers alike . How - ever , while automatically generated summaries enable people to consume large amounts of data efﬁciently , they do not pro - vide the context needed for a viewer to fully understand an event . Narrative structure can provide templates for the order and manner in which this data is presented to create stories that are oriented around narrative elements rather than sum - maries made up of facts . In this paper , we use narrative theory as a framework for identifying the links between social media content . To do this , we designed crowdsourcing tasks to gen - erate summaries of events based on commonly used narrative templates . In a controlled study , for certain types of events , people were more emotionally engaged with stories created with narrative structure and were also more likely to recom - mend them to others compared to summaries created without narrative structure . Author Keywords Social computing ; crowdsourcing ; creative collaboration ; storytelling . ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords H . 5 . 3 Group and Organization Interfaces : Collaborative com - puting INTRODUCTION Social media today allows millions of people from all over the world to share and discuss their thoughts about commonly ex - perienced events . There has been increasing interest among researchers , journalists , and marketers alike in using social media to understand what people say about these events ; a large body of research explores summarizing emotions and reactions as seen on Twitter [ 23 , 17 , 5 ] , and news articles and blog posts often integrate social media content and visualiza - tions into their text . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , topostonserversortoredistributetolists , requirespriorspeciﬁcpermission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . CSCW ’16 , February 27 – March 02 , 2016 , San Francisco , CA , USA . Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 3592 - 8 / 16 / 02 $ 15 . 00 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2818048 . 2820072 However , while existing automated approaches excel at iden - tifying moments of public attention , it is often up to the viewer to create their own interpretation of the data ( or seek out interpretations provided by journalists and bloggers ) . This can be difﬁcult because tweets , Facebook posts , and other social media messages are generally created in the mo - ment [ 20 ] , and so sometimes lack the context needed to make sense to future viewers . In addition , some viewers may not be familiar enough with the event to understand the jargon , idioms , or other specialized language used by social media authors . On the other hand , manually authored stories punctuated with a curated set of social media posts , such as those created through Storify [ 2 ] , can provide unifying commentary that bridge gaps in information : for example , a news article about Brazil’s dramatic loss to Germany in the FIFA 2014 World Cup semi - ﬁnals describes not just the ﬁnal score but also compares it against past matches to highlight the intensity of the loss ; it also points out that Brazil’s top scorer and top de - fender were unable to play during the match due to circum - stances external to the match itself . However , the process for creating these stories is limited to those who have the time , skills , and resources to learn about an event’s context by ob - serving the event , doing research , and conducting interviews . To achieve both the scalability of automated approaches and the coherency of manually authored stories , we propose sum - marizing social media content based on narrative structure : rather than depending on a trained storytelling expert , inter - preting social media in terms of narrative elements — such as beginnings , middles , ends , characters , goals , and climaxes — may reveal what information a summary needs in order to make sense to viewers . This approach makes use of crowd - sourcing to interpret data at scale and automatically generate summaries with these narrative elements in mind . We hypothesize that designing crowdsourcing tasks around narrative elements can help non - expert crowd workers col - laborate in addressing this challenge . In this paper , we ﬁrst identify and ﬁll narrative gaps in a social media record . For example , if a name appears in a social media feed , we may want to know more about who they are and their signiﬁcance with respect to the overall story ( i . e . a “character” introduc - tion ) . Then , we link content to narrative categories —for ex - ample , we may be able to recognize certain tweets as descrip - tions of conﬂict between the story’s characters . Speciﬁcally , we refer to narrative categories [ 6 ] as a simple template for structuring social media content with respect to storytelling roles . a r X i v : 1509 . 03026v1 [ c s . H C ] 10 S e p 2015 To explore this approach , we created a prototype crowdsourc - ing system called Storia ( Figure 1 ) . Storia takes , as input , data from an automated system that detects moments that oc - cur during a public event ( such as a sports game ) and uses crowdsourcing to output a written story about the event . Sto - ria consists of two crowdsourcing modules that ask crowd workers to 1 ) gather missing narrative context and 2 ) write paragraphs for each important moment in the event based on social media content , using narrative categories as a tem - plate . For four social media events , we compared stories gen - erated by Storia with stories that were crowdsourced with - out using narrative structure through a controlled study . We asked 30 participants to evaluate each story with respect to how well it conveys an event to someone who had missed it , and found that , for certain events , Storia stories were recom - mended three times as often by participants due to its emo - tional content . To summarize our contributions , in this paper we : • contribute a technique for recovering missing information from social media feeds by identifying and ﬁlling narrative gaps , • demonstrate the application of narrative theory in design - ing crowdsourcing workﬂows for generating stories , and • explore the limitations of narrative summarization by studying its output given different types of social media events . Our results set the stage for constructing concise emotional experiences out of multiple viewpoints and deriving lessons for applying narrative theories to approaches for crowdsourc - ing creative work . RELATED WORK Storia focuses on using an underutilized source of content ( that is , social media ) to craft narratives , rather than surfacing trends and themes for analysis or ( re ) constructing a logical description of events . It turns to past work in narrative theory , social media summarization and curation , and crowdsourcing creativity to inform its design . Narrative Theory Narrative theory [ 9 ] stems from the idea that people use narra - tive as a basic cognitive strategy for making sense of various aspects of the human experience ( such as time and change ) . In fact , the presence of narrative can signiﬁcantly alter how an experience is perceived [ 21 ] . We may be able to frame social media content as the product of people attempting to under - stand experiences with others ; when a user creates and posts content , they act as a narrator conveying some experience to an audience . Storia attempts to incorporate speciﬁc theories about how sto - ries are understood in the design of its crowdsourcing tasks . In his theory of narrative categories , Cohn approaches story - telling in comics with respect to cognition , examining visual elements in terms of narrative syntax [ 6 ] . Cohn argues that individual comic panels can be mapped to four basic narra - tive functions or roles that control narrative dramatization and pacing : • the peak depicts the culmination of an action set in motion during the narration ; it can stand alone as a ( blunt ) sum - mary of the narrative . • the establisher sets up the relationships of all characters involved in the story , • the initial starts the action that eventually culminates in the peak , • and the release depicts the aftermath or reaction to the peak , providing a sense of closure or creating room for an - ticipation for the next part of the story . Furthermore , these roles can act hierarchically : a group of panels can together fulﬁll a narrative role for the larger story . In other words , these roles form “sentences” that make up the narrative arcs of a comic . Storia uses this theory as the ba - sis for a structured form used by crowd workers to write text ( rather than visual ) summaries based on social media data . Social Media Summarization and Curation Projects such as Narrative Science [ 1 ] point to the value of transforming large amounts of quantitative data into natural language summaries to facilitate an accessible understanding of an event . A large body of work focuses speciﬁcally on text summarization of events in social media , particularly on Twitter [ 17 , 5 ] . This work focuses mostly on using text anal - ysis , sentiment analysis , and machine learning [ 15 , 7 , 10 ] to surface important moments out of social media chatter and on generating understandable summary text automatically . Other work aggregates Twitter content into visual summaries [ 18 , 22 ] . However , while visual summaries may suggest a narrative , they do not offer a narrative on their own . Both types of summaries often result in a simple list of highly - tweeted moments ( such as the goals in a soccer game ) that is detached from the emotional ups and downs of the over - all event . We complement this past work ; rather than try to detect important events , we start with a data set that has al - ready grouped social media content into important moments using existing techniques and attempt to form a narrative that provides the context behind various pieces of information and conveys a sense of dramatic structure . In social media curation , people manually organize social me - dia content in order to engage in sensemaking—for example , by collecting posts from a speciﬁc conversation or event . A major aspect of research studying social media curation in - volves developing systems that can assist human curators in sorting through large amounts of content , often by provid - ing automatic techniques for recommending new and relevant content [ 8 , 25 ] . We extend this approach ; in this paper , ma - chines assist by providing structure rather than direct sugges - tions , and crowd workers then interpret the provided structure to generate new content . Crowdsourcing Stories and Reports Crowdsourcing is often used as a tool to generate ideas and break down creative tasks into smaller pieces [ 12 ] . In News - pad [ 16 ] and Eventful [ 3 ] , a story author asks crowd workers to create or retrieve content for news stories—for example , by asking workers to go to a particular event and take a spe - ciﬁc set of photos . By delegating work to multiple people and Figure 1 . Overview of the Storia system . drawing from content that has been already created , an author can more quickly collect a diverse set of content than if they were to work alone . The application of crowdsourcing to more artistic work is also an emerging area of research . For example , in Ensem - ble [ 11 ] , authors maintained an outline of a short ﬁction story to guide crowd workers in generating ideas and contributing content . While machines have showed promise in their ability to logically reorder or generate content according to narrative templates and structures , Storia hypothesizes we can augment this past work by making use of people’s unique capacity to understand and create emotion . STORIA Storia is a system that generates summaries of social media events through crowdsourcing tasks designed based on narra - tive theory . Data Storia is based on content from Seen 1 , an online service that creates clusters of social media posts from Instagram , Twitter , and Vine based on time and keyword given a social media hashtag . Each cluster represents trending sub - issues or points in time related to the hashtag ( e . g . tweets about the ﬁrst goal of the # GERvsARG soccer game ) . In this paper , we call each cluster of posts a moment ; several moments make up an event . Design Challenge : Narrative Gaps To understand the role social media play in how people con - struct a story about an event , we conducted preliminary inter - views with 10 participants ( six male , four female ) recruited 1 http : / / seen . co / about from research volunteer mailing lists . We showed partici - pants a variety of views of the 2014 FIFA World Cup ﬁnal match between Germany and Argentina ( a raw social media feed , a timeline of clustered social media posts , and a news article ) and observed them as they used the views to learn about factual and emotional aspects of the event . Afterwards , we asked about the strategies they use for ﬁnding informa - tion about events , the role social media play in these strate - gies , perceptions of the social media view they were given , and motivations behind sharing information and social media posts with others . Each session lasted about 45 minutes . Through these interviews , we found three common themes in the type of information participants looked for while attempt - ing to construct a picture of the event : First , there was a lack of understanding of the relationship between moments during the event ; even when social media posts were divided into clusters , participants had difﬁculty identifying the discrete parts that made up an event and how those parts related to one another : I was trying to ﬁgure out the order of events like when that damn free kick happened . I have no idea . Participant 5 , timeline condition Some participants had an easier time making predictions about where information might be located based on the fact that the story views shown to participants presented informa - tion in rough chronological order : So I’m kind of like , from when everybody was like , “Oh , Germany won . ” And just going right back from there and looking for “free kick” and a name in the post . Participant 3 , timeline condition However , this strategy required domain knowledge to be use - ful ; the participant above knew that free kicks usually happen near the end of a soccer match . Second , participants were also confused about the relation - ship between actors . When asked whether Brazilians gener - ally rooted for Argentina or Germany during the ﬁnal match , eight participants stated they didn’t know . ( Brazilians cheered for Germany , as Argentina is traditionally their rival with re - spect to soccer . ) Thus , the potential conﬂict and outcomes at stake for each of the event’s “characters” were not clear to participants . Lastly , most participants saw no relationship between the event and their own lives . Participants expressed little mo - tivation to share or act on information found through social media with friends and family if they were not already inter - ested or invested in the event in some way . We note that this is not necessarily an intrinsic weakness of social media but was also affected by participants’ individual interests ; never - theless , participants indicated that emotional investment was necessary for them to take further action regarding the event . It is unsurprising that participants had difﬁculty ﬁnding this information ( even when the information they were looking for was available in the data ) . Social media posts are gener - ally made in the moment [ 20 ] , and so may make little sense Figure 2 . Crowd workers can ( a ) view the social media posts for the moment they are assigned to and ask a question that will be ( b ) answered by another crowd worker . to future readers ; these posts might refer to people using pronouns or nicknames , or simply comment on a moment without describing what they are referring to ( “Did you see that ! ? ! ? ” ) . Furthermore , ﬁnding information is a learned skill , and the difﬁculties people encountered may not be solely in - herent to social media ; supporting information retrieval and search is a large research area on its own [ 14 ] . Given these difﬁculties , automating the creation of narratives may allow people to understand large amounts of data more easily . Extracting Narrative from Social Media With these challenges in mind , we developed a prototype story creation system called Storia ( Figure 1 ) comprised of three crowdsourcing modules . Storia takes as input a set of raw social media content clustered by moment , and outputs a written story consisting of several four - sentence paragraphs ( one paragraph per moment ) . Storia uses Amazon Mechanical Turk , an online crowdsourc - ing platform where workers can perform short microtasks for pay . In all tasks , crowd workers were from the U . S . who had a Mechanical Turk approval rating of over 90 % . Identifying and Filling Narrative Gaps We ﬁrst eliminate the narrative gaps we observed in our pre - liminary interviews . To alleviate confusion workers might have about unfamiliar names or terms encountered while pro - cessing social media content , we wanted to add context to the characters and actions that might appear in the ﬁnal story . Figure 3 . Storia guides summary writing for crowd workers . Workers are provided with ( a ) the story written so far , ( b ) the social media posts for a moment of the event , and ( c ) a structured form with prompts based on narrative categories . Two Mechanical Turk tasks ( Figure 2 ) collected this informa - tion for each moment : Ask questions . For this task , we showed crowd workers a chronologically ordered stream of social media posts for a randomly chosen moment and asked workers what questions they thought a typical viewer might ask when viewing this content . Rather than suggest types of questions to ask based on narrative structure , we gave workers free rein to ask any question relevant to the goal of understanding the moment represented by the social media feed . We wanted to be open to the possibility that workers might ask unexpected types of questions , but workers did tend to ask questions related to narrative elements such as character and progression of plot , such as questions about names ( “Who is Oscar ? ” ) , jargon spe - ciﬁc to the event ( “What is a free kick ? ” ) , and why some action was occurring ( “Why was everyone booing Fred ? ” ) , reﬂecting the types of narrative gaps we observed in prelimi - nary interviews . Answer questions . Here , we showed workers a question cre - ated by a worker from the previous task and asked them to brieﬂy answer the question using a search engine or the in - formation present in the social media stream . These workers saw the same stream of social media shown to the worker who had asked the question . We collected two or three questions for each moment , and collected at least one answer for each question . Writing Summaries using Narrative Categories Second , we link content to narrative roles to generate a story structure for the event . In this module , we asked crowd work - ers to write one four - sentence paragraph for each moment of the event . Storia utilizes Cohn’s four basic narrative cate - gories ( establisher , initial , peak , release ) as a simple narrative template that crowd workers use as a base for the paragraph they write . Workers were provided with a view of paragraphs written by other workers for the overall story so far ( Figure 3a ) , the set of social media posts about the moment for which they were writing their paragraph ( Figure 3b ) , and the set of questions and answers generated by workers in the pre - vious step . A structured form ( Figure 3c ) prompted workers in mapping the information available in the social media feed to each of the Cohn’s basic narrative categories . The word - ing of the prompts used in the form differed slightly ( Table 1 ) depending on when the worker thought the moment occurred ( i . e . , near the beginning , middle , or end of the event ) . This process resulted in a story consisting of several paragraphs ( one paragraph per moment ) , where each paragraph was com - posed of four sentences that map to each of Cohn’s four basic narrative categories . We collected at least three paragraphs per moment then launched another task to ask other workers to vote for the paragraph they thought best represented the set of social me - dia posts belonging to the moment . The highest voted para - graph became the representative paragraph for that moment . Votes were weighted slightly more if the voting worker indi - cated that he or she had watched the event . De - duplication Once we had one paragraph per moment , we ran a redun - dancy elimination task on Mechanical Turk . This is because the structured data we received from Seen . co did not produce mutually exclusive clusters—sometimes content appeared in multiple clusters , making it possible for the same content to inform multiple summaries by workers . We showed workers a random paragraph from the story and asked them to select other paragraphs in the story they thought could replace their assigned paragraph without dras - tically affecting the story’s overall ﬂow or the information available to a reader . Workers were then asked to vote for the paragraph that best represented the entire group of para - graphs that they had selected . We then grouped paragraphs by similarity . If at least two workers indicated that they thought Paragraph A was similar to Paragraph B , we considered Paragraph A and Paragraph B as true duplicates . If one of the two duplicate paragraphs was already in a group , we simply added the other paragraph to the same group ; similarly , if both paragraphs were already in groups , their respective groups were combined . We then tallied the votes for all paragraphs and used the highest - voted paragraph from each group for the ﬁnal story . EVALUATION We hypothesized that recognizing and organizing social me - dia data according to narrative roles could help workers over - come narrative gaps present in social media in order to pro - duce evocative and automatic summaries of social media events . Method We tested our hypothesis through a controlled study compar - ing the output of two crowdsourcing workﬂows : the work - ﬂow used by Storia , described above ( see Appendix A ) , and a control version of the workﬂow where we asked crowd work - ers to write four - sentence paragraphs for each moment of the event , but without prompts to guide the summary writing phase or the questions and answers generated about the event ( see Appendix B ) . All other aspects of the control workﬂow remained the same as in the Storia workﬂow : paragraphs in the control condition went through a de - duplication process similar to that of the Storia condition in order to create a story with one paragraph for each moment . We ran both the Storia and control workﬂows over social me - dia posts about four different events ( Table 2 ) , and randomly sampled up to 12 , 000 posts from the entire corpus of content for each event . Stories ranged from sports events to televi - sion specials ; in all cases , we chose widely viewed events based on topics that most crowd workers would be familiar with . Furthermore , we chose events that were well - structured ( making it easy to compare crowd - created interpretations of the event with the actual sequence of events ) and had some element of emotional arousal ( and thus suitable for narration rather than just description ) . We may be able to apply our ﬁndings to events that are interpreted and processed over an indeterminate amount of time ( such as natural disasters and other breaking news ) , but leave this as future work . To measure how well a non - expert reader might understand the generated text stories for each condition , we asked 30 Me - chanical Turk workers to complete a short evaluation task . As we were interested in emotional reactions of a general popu - lation rather than an objective sense of the quality of stories written , we chose not to evaluate stories with experts . Partic - ipants were shown the Storia and control stories for a random event in random order , then asked to choose the story they would be more likely to recommend to someone who had wanted to see the event but missed it . We also asked workers to brieﬂy explain their choice . Participants were paid $ 0 . 30 for this two - minute task . Participants’ free - form responses to the task were analyzed to look for themes in how participants justiﬁed their choice . A second within - subjects evaluation task asked 30 additional Mechanical Turk workers to evaluate stories according to Establisher Initial Peak Release Beginning Make an introduction . Write ONE sentence about anyone or anything that hasn’t appeared in the story yet , with a brief de - scription about who / what they are . Provide context . Write ONE sentence brieﬂy summarizing the event as a whole . Describe goals . Write ONE sen - tence about what the people or things you wrote above want to do during this event . Describe the stakes . Write ONE sentence about what it would mean if they achieve their goal ( or if they don’t ) . Middle Set the scene . Write ONE sen - tence about who is involved in this paragraph and what they were doing before the action started . Start the action . Write ONE sen - tence about how something be - gan . Describe the main event . Write ONE sentence about what hap - pened at the moment people posted these photos and tweets . Resolve the action . Write ONE sentence describing the after - math or the reaction to the mo - ment you see in these photos and tweets . End Summarize the result . Write ONE sentence about the impor - tant ending result of the event as a whole . Summarize the reaction . Write ONE sentence about how people reacted to the result you wrote about in the sentence above . Describe the consequences . Write ONE sentence about what the end result of the event means for the future . Look to the future . Write ONE sentence about the next event or the next goal for the characters in this story . Table 1 . Prompts guided summary writing by workers . Storia prompts changed depending on whether the worker thought a moment occured at the beginning , middle , or end of the event . Event # posts # moments Event Date Sochi Winter Olympics Opening Ceremony 4691 27 7 Feb . 2014 2014 FIFA World Cup Semi - ﬁnals 1483 45 8 Jul . 2014 State of the Union ( SOTU ) 2015 11921 48 20 Jan . 2015 Glee Series Finale 5574 29 20 Mar . 2015 Table 2 . The events used to generate stories through Storia and the con - trol system . Content was randomly sampled from the entire corpus of posts for each event . Task # of HITs $ per HIT Ask questions 2 per moment $ 0 . 10 Answer questions 2 per question $ 0 . 20 Write summaries 3 per moment $ 0 . 50 Voting for summaries 5 per moment $ 0 . 15 De - duplication ≥ 2 per moment $ 0 . 30 Table 3 . Summary of the tasks and costs for both the Storia workﬂow and the control workﬂow . more ﬁne - grained dimensions ( such as informativeness ) us - ing 7 - point Likert scales . The stories from both conditions for a randomly chosen event were shown in random order . Participants were paid $ 0 . 40 for this task . For all evaluation tasks , participants were restricted to Mechanical Turk work - ers who had not participated in any of the story creation tasks . Results Event type seemed to have a strong effect on the differences we observed between the Storia and control stories for each event . For this reason , we divide this section into two parts — the ﬁrst section describes the results for the FIFA and Winter Olympics events , and the second section describes the results for the SOTU and Glee events . “Placing me back in the game” For the FIFA and Winter Olympics events , crowd workers fol - lowed the establisher - initial - peak - release pattern in the para - graphs written for Storia stories , as seen in this example para - graph from the FIFA semi - ﬁnals Storia story : The fans are sitting in front of their TVs and smartphones getting excited about the match as it starts . Germany scores their ﬁrst goal against Brazil , and the fans are going wild rooting for Germany . Germany then goes on to scored their second , then their third and ﬁnally their fourth goal against Brazil , who has zero goals . Fans cannot believe what they’re seeing and they’re wondering if this is a match or a bloodbath because Ger - many has completely demolished Brazil . In contrast , paragraphs written for control stories conveyed less of a dramatic arc , and instead tended to dwell on the same idea for most of its sentences . For example , each sentence in the following paragraph from the Winter Olympics control story mentions that viewers are ready for the event : People watching the ceremony announced they were ready for it to begin . The people watching were ready to support their indi - vidual nations . People tweeted out picture of themselves wearing gear showing their commitment to their country . Some people even tweeted out pictures of babies getting ready for their ﬁrst opening ceremony . For these two events , participants signiﬁcantly preferred Sto - ria stories over control stories ( FIFA : χ 2 ( 1 ) = 6 . 5333 , p < 0 . 05 ; Winter Olympics : χ 2 ( 1 ) = 10 . 8 , p < 0 . 01 ) ; participants preferred the Storia story over the control story 73 % of the time for the FIFA event and 80 % of the time for the Winter Olympics event . Participants who picked Storia stories appreciated the large amount of detail included and felt that they were a more com - plete view of the event . Notably , most of the participants also justiﬁed their choice with some variant of “I felt like I was getting a vivid recap” or “the story captured the emotion” : While it would be simple to just say that [ the Storia story ] is longer etc . . . It actually really expresses more emotion , more detail , and the ability to get a real feel for how the game went , the sentiments involved , every - thing to make it a better read ! Participant , FIFA event Participants who voted for the control story stated they chose it because it was more concise , conveying major points about the event without including extraneous information : [ The Storia story ] seems like a lot of non - quality infor - mation designed to entertain . . . while [ the control story ] is more informative . Participant , Winter Olympics event To these participants , the control story seemed more pro - fessional . However , the participants that chose Storia sto - ries stated they did not pick control stories for very simi - lar reasons : the control story felt like a bland generaliza - tion or a brief report . The second set of participants cor - roborated this sentiment ; Friedman tests indicated that par - ticipants thought Storia stories had more interesting intro - ductions ( FIFA : χ 2 ( 1 ) = 8 . 067 , p < 0 . 01 ; Winter Olympics : χ 2 ( 1 ) = 5 . 762 , p < 0 . 05 ) , giving Storia stories mean scores of 4 . 679 ( S D = 1 . 307 ) for the FIFA event and 5 . 111 ( S D = 1 . 22 ) for the Winter Olympics event , and control stories mean scores of 3 . 571 ( S D = 1 . 501 ) for the FIFA event and 4 . 37 ( S D = 1 . 363 ) for the Winter Olympics event . Participants also thought Storia stories for these events were more informative ( FIFA : χ 2 ( 1 ) = 16 . 2 , p < 0 . 01 ; Winter Olympics : χ 2 ( 1 ) = 7 . 1176 , p < 0 . 01 ) , giving Storia stories mean scores of 5 . 679 ( S D = 0 . 612 ) for the FIFA event and 5 . 519 ( S D = 1 . 087 ) for the Winter Olympics event , and con - trol stories mean scores of 4 . 393 ( S D = 1 . 343 ) for the FIFA event and 4 . 778 ( S D = 1 . 086 ) for the Winter Olympics event . Lastly , participants felt that the Storia stories for these events were more likely to make readers feel as if they were there ( FIFA : χ 2 ( 1 ) = 15 . 385 , p < 0 . 01 ; Winter Olympics : χ 2 ( 1 ) = 4 . 262 , p < 0 . 05 ) , giving Storia stories mean scores of 5 . 143 ( S D = 1 . 079 ) for the FIFA event and 5 ( S D = 1 . 144 ) for the Winter Olympics event , and control stories mean scores of 3 . 25 ( S D = 1 . 404 ) for the FIFA event and 4 . 111 ( S D = 1 . 528 ) for the Winter Olympics event . “I disliked both stories , but . . . ” The stories for the Glee and SOTU events were character - istically different from the stories for the FIFA and Winter Olympics events . For example , in both SOTU stories , work - ers added their own opinions regarding certain politicians us - ing words not present in the provided set of social media con - tent : President Obama walked into the SOTU with the normal pomp and circumstance . President Obama came out ﬁrm , expressing his over - whelming victories to the obstinate and denialist Congress . John Boehner had the same , half asleep , half drunk look on his face . With that , the gauntlet was thrown . The control condition went so far to parody political relation - ships to the point of absurdity , which extended through sev - eral paragraphs : Vladimir Putin was not happy , the endless enlargement of NATO could not stand ! John McCain on the other hand couldn’t help but peer over at his sore buddy Putin and laugh to himself . But the murmering in the crowd quieted as Barack Obama approached the podium . . . “Suck it Putin ! ” he exclaimed as he ripped off his shirt and exposed the “Superman S” on his undershirt ! “I’m Barack Obama , you got that” and he ﬂew away . For these stories , there was no signiﬁcant effect of study con - dition on participants’ preferences ( Glee : χ 2 ( 1 ) = 0 . 133 , n . s . ; SOTU : χ 2 ( 1 ) = 1 . 2 , n . s . ) . For the Glee story , most partici - pants stated they based their choice on writing quality rather than on emotional aspects . The second set of participants re - ﬂected this , as there was no signiﬁcant difference in which story they thought would be more likely to make readers feel like they were at the event . In hindsight , this makes sense , as these events were meant to be televised rather than attended . Opinions on which story participants preferred for the SOTU event was divided on the control story’s use of parody—some workers thought it was amusing , but others disapproved : [ The control story ] was juvenile and unintelligent in too many places . . . [ The Storia story ] provides a better sum - mary that is more sophisticated and intelligent ( even though it’s not great either ) . Participant , SOTU event This is reﬂected in the results from the second evaluation task ; neither Glee story was seen as more informative than the other ( χ 2 ( 1 ) = 7 . 118 , n . s . ) , but the Storia story for the SOTU event was seen as more informative ( χ 2 ( 1 ) = 10 . 889 , p < 0 . 01 ) , receiving a mean score of 4 . 96 ( S D = 1 . 695 ) while the control story received a mean score of 3 . 28 ( S D = 1 . 969 ) . Neither story , in both events , was seen as having a more interesting introduction ( Glee : χ 2 ( 1 ) = 3 . 556 , n . s . ; SOTU : χ 2 ( 1 ) = 2 , n . s . ) . Overall , the approach of framing social media summariza - tion around narrative seemed to be more effective for the FIFA and Winter Olympics events . For these events , partici - pants did perceive the Storia story as having higher emotional value , choosing to recommend Storia stories to someone who wanted to learn more about the event . DISCUSSION Through an evaluation of narratives generated by crowd - sourcing tasks based on narrative theory , we found that cer - tain types of stories written with narrative guidance were more emotionally engaging and better suited for conveying an event to someone who had missed it . Other events did not beneﬁt as clearly from narrative guidance . Here , we dis - cuss the strengths and limitations of this approach as seen in our results , as well as potential broader impact on future ap - proaches for crowdsourcing creativity . Interpreting Social Media Notably , study participants did not observe emotional dif - ferences between the Storia and control stories for the Glee and SOTU events . We speculate this is because the narrative gaps in these events were too large—in the Glee event’s case , workers had little information about the overall arc of the ﬁnale episode , making it difﬁcult to construct an emotional summary even with information retrieved by other crowd workers through questions and answers . Similarly , the SOTU event had no inherent narrative arc at all , with no clear winner , loser , or conﬂict . Because of this , the only meaningful thing workers could write about were their own opinions ( or ﬁcti - tious storylines ) . This is in contrast to sports events , which can be understandable and interesting even when one is not acquainted with the players or teams due to its familiar nar - rative and emotional pattern—a struggle to win , the joy of victory , and the pain of loss . A strategy often employed by journalists for writing stories about events that do not have their own narrative arcs is to take a speciﬁc viewpoint . Storia may be able to accommo - date this strategy , as it does not provide deterministic out - put ; depending on the workers who participate in the process , one could view a State of the Union address from the per - spective of a Democrat or from the perspective a Republican . One could also view events from the perspective of a person watching the event at home , or from the perspective of the event organizers , or from the perspective of players or per - formers , each with their own goals and hopes for the event . Extending this further , this might allow us to apply Storia’s approach to other types of social media , such as question - answering sites ( like Quora ) or discussion sites ( like reddit ) . Rather than generating a story about an event ( which implies a narrative structure due to having a beginning and end ) , the crowd could , for example , identify multiple stances for opin - ion pieces based on an online discussion . These perspectives could then be available to anyone wanting to learn about dif - ferent interpretations of the event . Stories are not reproduc - tions of reality but representations of it ( whether consciously designed or not ) . We have other means of learning what hap - pened in reality ( e . g . through recordings ) ; this paper tries to look at how we can expose and examine an audience’s inter - pretation of what happened . Converging Creative Goals Crowdsourcing creative work typically requires splitting the project into smaller tasks a priori and stitching together the results of each sub - task to create the ﬁnal product [ 12 ] . As a result , the success of a creative task depends heavily on the design of its sub - tasks . While Storia follows this approach in the sense that an event is described through a set of individual paragraphs , Storia also allows the crowd to write sub - tasks for itself : the crowd is able to ask questions that other workers can answer , for example . The idea of asking crowd workers to generate crowdsourcing tasks for themselves is not new [ 13 ] ; however , Storia points toward a strategy of allowing the crowd to identify gaps in understanding , which , in turn , becomes work for other crowd workers . That is , it dynamically structures creative work around testing and iteration rather on predetermined sub - tasks that eventually merge together . Enabling this ﬂexibility may be even more important for creative work ( such as story writ - ing ) , which may have no objective solution and require work - ers to converge on common creative goals . Limitations As explained previously , we chose to apply Storia’s approach to events that had a clear beginning and an end , in order to ensure we would be able to compare crowd - created interpre - tations of the event with what actually happened . For this reason , we were able to use an approach where social media is automatically clustered into parts and the crowd linearly transforms these clusters into a story . This approach might be less suitable for events concerning natural disasters , break - ing news , and other ongoing , developing stories—Storia cur - rently relies on a story structure that is static , and interpreting the importance or emotional valence of certain moments may be difﬁcult as new information and public opinion develops . Despite the fact that participants appreciated Storia’s level of detail , both Storia and control stories were prone to factual er - rors . However , in this paper , our goal was to enable scalable creation of evocative and experientially - oriented summaries of social media events rather than aim for factual accuracy ; we suspect additional strategies ( such as asking a human ed - itor to proofread stories generated by our system ) can effec - tively address these issues . Storia also limited itself to producing text output , despite the large number of visual content that appeared in social me - dia feeds shown to workers . Images can be effective tools for expressing difﬁcult - to - describe or intangible things such as emotion or atmosphere ; in the New York Times’ article about Brazil’s loss to Germany in the 2014 FIFA World Cup semi - ﬁnals [ 4 ] , photos and videos of stunned fans and griev - ing players accompany the text . Exploring how crowd work - ers can make use of multiple types of media while generating their stories is left as future work . CONCLUSION In this work , we explored the strategies for creating stories about events based on social media data that convey a pub - lic interpretation of an event . Our prototype , Storia , drew together narrative theories and crowdsourcing to create a sys - tem that generates collaborative creative work by ﬁnding and ﬁlling narrative gaps and linking content to narrative roles . Through a controlled study , we compared stories generated by Storia to stories crowdsourced with no narrative guidance , and found that , for certain events , participants found Storia stories more emotionally engaging and more appropriate for communicating what it felt like to view an event . Are emotional stories better than objective ones ? Journal - ists often struggle to maintain a balance between objectivity and emotion when writing their stories . In journalism stud - ies , the “emotionalization” of stories is often associated with sensationalism and the decline in quality of journalistic sto - ries [ 19 ] ; on the other hand , a case study of Pulitzer Prize - winning articles revealed that winning stories rely heavily on emotional storytelling , using strategies such as anecdotal in - troductions and expressions of affect in order to draw atten - tion to complex and important social and political topics [ 24 ] . We did not attempt to compare stories generated by Storia with professionally written news articles and stories . Sto - ria does not attempt to automatically generate Pulitzer - prize winning articles , nor does it try to solve the problem of dis - tinguishing emotionality from tabloidism ; it is obvious that our generated stories are nowhere near professional quality . However , motivated by evidence that emotional perspectives of events are valued , it takes a ﬁrst step towards consider - ing emotional and narrative arcs in the automatic generation of event summaries . People join social media networks to ask questions , read comments , and make connections—all to seek out what others think and how they feel . Social media is rich with declarations of emotions ; by distilling the chatter of the social web , we may be able to bring out its voice . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to thank our colleagues at Microsoft Research , study participants , and Mechanical Turk workers for their valuable feedback and participation , as well as Neil Cohn for his insights on narrative theories . We also thank Mor Naaman and Seen . co for their help with their dataset . This material is based upon work supported by the NSF GRFP under Grant No . DGE - 114747 . APPENDIX A . Example Storia Story The fans prepared to watch Germany vs Brazil . Some were excited to hear the announcers attempt to pronounce the name of the Ger - man player Schweinsteiger . To the surprise of some , the Korean announcers were able to pronounce the name reasonably well . The fans were impressed at the ability of the announcers to pronounce Schweinsteiger . All of the fans for both Brazil and Germany were very excited and ready for the game to start . The World Cup match was a big deal for both countries playing , Brazil and Germany . Both teams had a spot in the ﬁnals , and were very anxious to win the game to pro - ceed . Losing the game would mean they would have no chance at the World Cup . Brazil and Germany had both worked very hard to get to this point , and only one would be able to continue . The fans were going wild as the opening ceremonies began . Both teams played very well . Only one team actually won . David Luiz held the jersey of his injured teammate Neymar . The team began to sing the national anthem . Their enthusiasm shone brightly as they sang the anthem like a war cry . Fans speculated whether David Luiz could lead the team to victory as they geared up for the match . The fans are sitting in front of their TVs and smartphones getting excited about the match as it starts . Germany scores their ﬁrst goal against Brazil , and the fans are going wild rooting for Germany . Germany then goes on to scored their second , then their third and ﬁnally their fourth goal against Brazil , who has zero goals . Fans cannot believe what they’re seeing and they’re wondering if this is a match or a bloodbath because Germany has completely demolished Brazil . Germany was on ﬁre and scored goal after goal . The Brazilian fans started to become angered while the Germans were more and more elated . Anger turned to despair for Brazilan fans as Germany ex - tended their lead by an incredible margin . As loss seemed inevitible , the fans lamented the absence of Brazilian forward Neymar , who had been injured in a previous match . The game was already heavily in Germany’s favor . German player Lahm made a good tackle on Marcelo , winning the ball fairly . The fans were very impressed with Lahm’s performance . It was just one more show of dominance by Germany . Germany’s leading scorer Thomas Muller drove towards the goal . Muller scored the ﬁrst goal of the game , and the fans went wild . The fans remarked that this was Mueller’s tenth World Cup goal , an impressive feat . Unfortunately for Brazil , things were only going to get worse from here . Brazil and Germany were locked in a tense World Cup game Fans are in disbelief about what has happened so far . Fans are stunned that Germany is dominating Brazil . Fans were in utter disbelief at the way the game was playing out . The German players looked to still have a full tank of gas half way into the game . The Brazilians tried without luck to stop the German attack , but German technique was to hog the ball . Again , German took a shot at the goal with Schurrle moving into the goal box ! One tweeter posted ”They look like they’ve got concrete boots on Brazil and Germany played a ﬁerce game of soccer . Germany’s goal - keeper blocked every one of Brazil’s attempts to score a goal . The game ended in emberrassment for Brazil as they ended the game with 0 points , due to Germany’s defensive goalkeeper . Germany has now advanced to the ﬁnals , leaving Brazillian fans fuming across the world . With Brazil’s weakness in depth , they had to play Fred as a striker . He showed promise in qualifying leading up to the event but has really struggled in Brazil . As he looked invisible on the pitch and Germany ran up the score , people wondered why he was even on the ﬁeld . After the 7 - 0 scoreline ﬂashed , fans wondered how a nation such as Brazil can have such little depth . Germany managed to defeat Brazil 8 - 0 The Germany fans were ec - static , while the Brazilians were shocked Brazil , previously thought to be one of the best , will have this game rubbed in their faces until the end of time Germany , boosted by their win , will be helped in the next stage Germany destroyed Brazil in the World Cup semiﬁnal . Fans were astounded by the massacre . Brazil will suffer a setback on the inter - national soccer stage . Germany looks to win in the ﬁnal With Germany up 7 to 0 , it appeared Brazil would go scoreless in this World Cup semiﬁnal . With only minutes left , Brazilian player Oscar managed to score one goal . Now the score was 7 to 1 , so at least Brazil had put some points on the board . Many fans thanked Oscar for helping give a small shred of respect to the Brazilian rout . B . Example Control Story Neuer , Lahm , Boateng , Kroos , Schweinsteiger and M¨uller com - prised Germany’s starting lineup in the semi - ﬁnals . Dante made it to Brazil’s semi - ﬁnals , playing his ﬁrst game for the World Cup . It had been speculated that Willian would replace Neymar , but it turned out to be Bernard instead . Dante replaced Thiago Silva , making Brazil’s semi - ﬁnal lineup Fred , Oscar & Bernard . While casual fans though Brazil would win die hard soccer fans though Germany had the better team . It wasn’t surprising how Ger - many played , but it was how Brazil played . For some reason it just seemed that Brazil didn’t show up to start the game and things steamrolled . Germany was the best team at this World Cup and de - served the title . Thomas M¨uller scored the ﬁrst point in the semi - ﬁnals ! Left un - guarded , he snuck the ball in through the corner . The fans went wild , as Germany put heavy pressure on Brazil with the early point . With an impressive record of scores and assists in World Cup games , M¨uller has truly shown himself as a strong asset to Germany’s team . After thirty minutes of the Germany - Brasil game , the game was over . With a score of 0 - 5 Germany fans were already celebrating . While some felt bad for Brasil fans , most were happy with the re - sults . German fans were ecstatic that the chance to play in the World Cup ﬁnal was given so easily to them . Fans around the world had much to say about Brazil’s disappointing performance in the 2014 FIFA World Cup . Some took to social me - dia sites like Twitter to bash the Brazilian team . German fans were excited about their team and took every opportunity to make fun of Brazil . Brazilians were upset about their team . As Germany crushed , you had to feel sorry for Brazil . Goal keeper Manuel Neuer was in great from , shutting down Brazil . Neymar was sulking , mighty Brazil was in trouble . Finally , deep in stoppage time , Brazil got some relief as they had scored . REFERENCES 1 . Narrative Science . http : / / www . narrativescience . com / . 2 . Storify . http : / / storify . com / . 3 . Elena Agapie and Andr´es Monroy - Hernandez . 2014 . Eventful : Crowdsourcing Local News Reporting . Collective Intelligence Conference . http : / / research . microsoft . com / apps / pubs / default . aspx ? id = 211606 4 . Sam Borden . 2014 . World Cup 2014 : Host Brazil Stunned by Germany in Semiﬁnal . The New York Times ( July 2014 ) . 5 . Deepayan Chakrabarti and Kunal Punera . 2011 . Event Summarization Using Tweets . In Proc . ICWSM ( ICWSM ) . 6 . Neil Cohn . 2013 . Visual narrative structure . Cognitive science 37 , 3 ( 2013 ) , 413 – 452 . 7 . N . Diakopoulos , M . Naaman , and F . Kivran - Swaine . 2010 . Diamonds in the rough : Social media visual analytics for journalistic inquiry . In IEEE Symposium on VAST . 115 – 122 . 8 . Kevin Duh , Tsutomu Hirao , Akisato Kimura , Katsuhiko Ishiguro , Tomoharu Iwata , and Ching - Man Au Yeung . 2012 . Creating Stories : Social Curation of Twitter Messages . In Proc . ICWSM ( ICWSM ) . 9 . Andrew Gibson . 1996 . Towards a postmodern theory of narrative . Edinburgh University Press , Edinburgh . 10 . Renato Kempter , Valentina Sintsova , Claudiu Musat , and Pearl Pu . 2014 . EmotionWatch : Visualizing Fine - Grained Emotions in Event - Related Tweets . In Proc . ICWSM . 11 . Joy Kim , Justin Cheng , and Michael S . Bernstein . 2014 . Ensemble : Exploring Complementary Strengths of Leaders and Crowds in Creative Collaboration . In Proc . CSCW . 745 – 755 . 12 . Aniket Kittur , Jeffrey V . Nickerson , Michael Bernstein , Elizabeth Gerber , Aaron Shaw , John Zimmerman , Matt Lease , and John Horton . 2013 . The Future of Crowd Work . In Proc . CSCW . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1301 – 1318 . 13 . Anand Kulkarni , Matthew Can , and Bj¨orn Hartmann . 2012 . Collaboratively Crowdsourcing Workﬂows with Turkomatic . In Proc . CSCW . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1003 – 1012 . 14 . Gary Marchionini . 2006 . Exploratory Search : From Finding to Understanding . Commun . ACM 49 , 4 ( April 2006 ) , 41 – 46 . 15 . Adam Marcus , Michael S . Bernstein , Osama Badar , David R . Karger , Samuel Madden , and Robert C . Miller . 2011 . Twitinfo : Aggregating and Visualizing Microblogs for Event Exploration . In Proc . CHI . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 227 – 236 . 16 . J . Nathan Matias and Andr´es Monroy - Hernandez . 2014 . NewsPad : Designing for Collaborative Storytelling in Neighborhoods . In Proc . CHI . 1987 – 1992 . 17 . Jeffrey Nichols , Jalal Mahmud , and Clemens Drews . 2012 . Summarizing Sporting Events Using Twitter . In Proc . IUI . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 189 – 198 . 18 . Brendan O’Connor , Michel Krieger , and David Ahn . 2010 . TweetMotif : Exploratory Search and Topic Summarization for Twitter . In Proc . ICWSM . 19 . Mervi Pantti . 2010 . The value of emotion : An examination of television journalists notions on emotionality . European Journal of Communication 25 , 2 ( 2010 ) , 168 – 181 . 20 . Steven Schirra , Huan Sun , and Frank Bentley . 2014 . Together Alone : Motivations for Live - tweeting a Television Series . In Proc . CHI . 2441 – 2450 . 21 . Edward F Schneider . 2004 . Death with a Story . Human communication research 30 , 3 ( 2004 ) , 361 – 375 . 22 . David A . Shamma , Lyndon Kennedy , and Elizabeth F . Churchill . 2011 . Peaks and Persistence : Modeling the Shape of Microblog Conversations . In Proc . CSCW . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 355 – 358 . 23 . Beaux Shariﬁ , Mark - Anthony Hutton , and Jugal Kalita . 2010 . Summarizing Microblogs Automatically . In Proc . HLT . Association for Computational Linguistics , Stroudsburg , PA , USA , 685 – 688 . 24 . Karin Wahl - Jorgensen . 2013 . The strategic ritual of emotionality : A case study of Pulitzer Prize - winning articles . Journalism 14 , 1 ( 2013 ) , 129 – 145 . 25 . Changtao Zhong , Sunil Shah , Karthik Sundaravadivelan , and Nishanth Sastry . 2013 . Sharing the Loves : Understanding the How and Why of Online Content Curation . In Proc . ICWSM ( ICWSM ) .