Understanding the molecular basis of disease opens new avenues for the development and improvement of treat­ ments . Gaining such understanding is often the motiv­ ation behind fundamental biological research and forms the foundation of molecular medicine , which finds its origins in the seminal observations of Linus Pauling . In 1949 , Pauling discovered that patients with sickle cell anaemia carry an altered haemoglobin protein complex ; this finding demonstrated for the first time that disease has a molecular basis 1 . Almost a decade later , in 1957 , Vernon Ingram proved that sickle cell anaemia is caused by a single amino acid substitution in the haemo globin subunit that is encoded by the β­globin gene 2 . Thus , the concept emerged that proteins are encoded in DNA and that DNA is transmitted from generation to gener­ ation , providing an explanation for how variations in coding DNA sequences can change the properties of the encoded protein and be the underlying cause of hereditary disease 2 . However , two decades later several research groups reported a surprising finding when studying other herit­ able globinopathies , the thalassaemias . The research groups showed that gene dysregulation was not caused by gene­intrinsic mutations but by deletions of sequences elsewhere on the chromosome 3 , 4 . The existence of regulatory DNA elements that control the transcriptional output of genes was then proposed and was soon demonstrated with the discovery of enhancers . Enhancers were first discovered in viral DNA with the identification of the SV40 enhancer 5 , 6 , whereas the first enhancer discovered in mammalian DNA was the immunoglobulin enhancer 7 – 9 . The release of the first human genome sequence 10 , 11 and the development of genome­wide association stud­ ies ( GWAS ) uncovered that more than 90 % of disease­ associated variants lie in non­coding DNA 12 , 13 . GWAS aim to identify the molecular basis of disease , and they do this by systematically comparing genetic profiles between large cohorts of human samples with and without a given trait , rather than by serendipity , which Ingram candidly reported to be a contributing factor to his important discovery 14 . Regardless of the rationale and promise of GWAS to eventually be meaningful for patients , the general outcomes of GWAS are currently unsatisfactory ; in particular , when considering the costs involved in the genetic characterization of , nowadays , often tens of thousands of human subjects per study . So far , GWAS have identified an enormous collection of trait­associated genetic variants 15 , of which the majority lie in non­ coding genomic sequences . However , it is unclear whether and how this sequence variability affects gene expression and what their target genes may be . The general obser­ vation is that risk variants accumulate in presumptive enhancers 12 , 13 , 16 , of which more than one million have now been documented 16 – 19 . Therefore , a picture is emerging in which diseases and traits are often the con sequence of an erroneous wiring of the regulatory circuitry between enhancers and their target genes . Hubrecht Institute of The Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences ( KNAW ) and the University Medical Center Utrecht , Uppsalalaan 8 , 3584 CT Utrecht , The Netherlands . Correspondence to W . d . L . w . delaat @ hubrecht . eu doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm . 2016 . 138 Published online 9 Nov 2016 Thalassaemias Inherited blood disorders characterized by the abnormal formation of haemoglobin and caused by the reduced production of globin proteins . Enhancers Regulatory DNA elements that can upregulate the transcriptional output of a target gene . Regulation of disease - associated gene expression in the 3D genome Peter Hugo Lodewijk Krijger and Wouter de Laat Abstract | Genetic variation associated with disease often appears in non - coding parts of the genome . Understanding the mechanisms by which this phenomenon leads to disease is necessary to translate results from genetic association studies to the clinic . Assigning function to this type of variation is notoriously difficult because the human genome harbours a complex regulatory landscape with a dizzying array of transcriptional regulatory sequences , such as enhancers that have unpredictable , promiscuous and context - dependent behaviour . In this Review , we discuss how technological advances have provided increasingly detailed information on genome folding ; for example , genome folding forms loops that bring enhancers and target genes into close proximity . We also now know that enhancers function within topologically associated domains , which are structural and functional units of chromosomes . Studying disease - associated mutations and chromosomal rearrangements in the context of the 3D genome will enable the identification of dysregulated target genes and aid the progression from descriptive genetic association results to discovering molecular mechanisms underlying disease . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 17 | DECEMBER 2016 | 771 T h e 3 D g e n o m e © 2016 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Topologically associated domains ( TADs ) . Boundary - insulated chromosomal segments within which sequences preferentially contact each other . In this Review , we describe the complexity of the transcription regulatory landscape of the mammalian genome . The mammalian genome carries an astounding amount of potential transcriptional enhancers that can have different modes of action . In this complex regu­ latory environment , the effects of sequence variability are often difficult to predict . We discuss how know­ ledge of the 3D genome can help uncover the functional consequences of disease­associated mutations and chromosomal rearrangements . Technological advances that build on the original chromosome conformation capture ( 3C ) method developed by Job Dekker 20 ( BOX 1 ) are rapidly increasing our understanding of the structure and function of the 3D genome . Throughout the genome , chromatin loops link functionally relevant enhancers to target genes . Enhancers find their target genes within topologically associated domains ( TADs ) , which are the structural and functional units of chromosomes that function to spatially confine transcription regulatory circuits . TADs are formed by architectural chromatin loops that often involve the ‘looping’ factors CCCTC­ binding factor ( CTCF ) and cohesin . We highlight recent studies that have implemented 3D genome information to show that intact TAD boundaries contribute to health by preventing inadvertent gene activation . This finding indicates that genetic variation can alter genomic inter­ actions , resulting in transcriptional changes that lead to disease . Therefore , studying disease­linked variants in the context of the 3D organization of the genome can provide insights into the molecular mechanisms under­ lying disease , thus reaching beyond the descriptive results of genetic association studies . Acknowledging the importance of 3D genome organization , we pres­ ent a roadmap to help move GWAS towards a better understanding of the molecular basis of disease . A rich and complex regulatory landscape The identity and function of each cell in the human body is determined by its gene expression programme , which changes in response to developmental and environ­ mental stimuli . Gene transcription is initiated at pro­ moter sequences immediately upstream of a gene , but differential gene expression in development and disease is also controlled by additional , often distal , regulatory sequences . Of these regulatory sequences , enhancers are the most abundant and best characterized . The mammalian genome is full of enhancers . Enhancers were originally defined in plasmid­based assays as DNA sequences that increase transcription of a target gene in a position­ and orientation­independent manner 5 , 6 , 21 . Enhancers are sequence modules , generally not more than a few hundred base pairs in size , which harbour recog­ nition motifs that attract specific sets of transcription fac­ tors . Transcription factor binding and the co­recruitment of associated factors activate enhancers and provide them with a distinct chromatin signature . This signature often includes increased DNA accessibility , an accumulation of histone H3 lysine 4 monomethylation ( H3K4me1 ) and H3K27 acetylation ( H3K27ac ) marks , and the presence of the cofactor p300 . The binding of specific transcription factors and the production of small enhancer RNAs are also part of the chromatin signature ( for comprehensive reviews , see REFS 22 – 24 ) . Currently , genomic sequences are often classified as predicted enhancers if they contain one or more of these characteristics . The term super enhancer was recently coined 25 for large enhancers — often kilobases in size and fre­ quently consisting of multiple typical enhancers in close linear genomic proximity — that reach high ( arbitrary ) Box 1 | Chromosome conformation capture technologies Chromosome conformation capture ( 3C ) ‑based technologies all rely on formalde‑ hyde‑mediated crosslinking of DNA sequences that are spatially proximal in the cell nucleus , followed by DNA fragmentation , in situ ligation and removal of crosslinks . Subsequently , the ligation junctions are quantified and taken as a measure of pairwise contact frequencies in the cell population ( see the figure ) . By comparing the contact frequencies among multiple sequences , an average view of the genome conformation of a locus of chromosome can be generated . There are currently six technologies of this type ( see the table ) : 3C focuses on contacts between two selected DNA fragments 20 ; 3C‑on chip ( 4C ) 125 , 154 and Capture‑C‑like approaches 155 – 158 focus on all contacts made by one or more given DNA fragments of interest ; 3C carbon copy ( 5C ) analyses contacts among multiple selected DNA fragments 159 ; Hi‑C provides an analysis of contacts among all genomic fragments 59 , 160 ; and chromatin interaction analysis by paired‑end tag ( ChIA‑PET ) combines 3C with chromatin immunoprecipitation ( ChIP ) to analyse the contacts of sequences bound by a protein of interest 161 . In the context of studying genetic variation in disease , 4C , Hi‑C and capture strategies are the techniques of choice to generate high‑resolution contact maps that are required to study regulatory loops between enhancers and promoters and architectural chromatin loops that form topologically associated domains . Technique Purpose Principle of detection 3C One - to - one qPCR 4C One - to - all Inverse PCR from selected fragment plus sequencing Capture - C One / many - to - all Pull down of selected fragment plus sequencing 5C Many - to - many Multiplex ligation - mediated amplification plus sequencing * * * ChIA - PET Many - to - many ChIP plus sequencing Hi - C All - to - all Sequencing Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Crosslink spatially proximal chromatin Fragmentation Ligate and decrosslink Determine ligation frequency ? R E V I E W S 772 | DECEMBER 2016 | VOLUME 17 www . nature . com / nrm R E V I E W S © 2016 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Cofactor p300 An enhancer - associated protein with histone acetyltransferase activity that recruits transcriptional - activating proteins and can increase gene expression . STARR - seq Self - transcribing active regulatory region sequencing . A massively parallel analysis plasmid based method to interrogate the sequence - intrinsic enhancer capacity of genomic segments . Housekeeping gene promoter Promoter of a gene that is expressed in all tissues . thresholds for the binding density of key transcrip­ tion factors or the Mediator complex . Mediator is an enhancer­bound complex that facilitates the loading of RNA polymerase II onto gene promoters ( for a review on Mediator , see REF . 26 ) . Although this definition is novel , super enhancers have been observed in earlier studies . For example , the extensively studied regulatory sequences of the immunoglobulin heavy chain enhancer ( the first mammalian enhancer discovered ) 7 – 9 and the β­globin locus control region ( LCR ) 27 would now be classified as super enhancers 28 . Systematic mapping efforts based on chromatin sig­ natures have uncovered more than one million enhanc­ ers across different human and other mammalian cell types ( reviewed in REFS 23 , 29 ) . Enhancers primarily reside in non­coding parts of the genome at varying distances from their nearest genes and are mostly cell­ type specific 16 – 19 . It has therefore become clear that the human genome presents a rich and complex regulatory landscape that orchestrates the spatial and temporal expression of its roughly 20 , 000 genes . How is gene expression coordinated in such a regu­ latory landscape ? To examine the functional connection of enhancers to target genes , two aspects are important to consider : their genomic context and the intrinsically promiscuous nature of many regulatory DNA sequences . Below , we illustrate the diverse modes of action of enhancers , how regulatory interactions between enhanc­ ers and genes cooperate and compete , and how this process depends on the genomic context . Promiscuous interplay between enhancers and promoters . Developmental genes are often controlled by multiple enhancers . These enhancers can all be active in the same tissue where they cooperate to induce a given transcriptional output to their shared target gene in a redundant , additive or synergistic fashion 30 – 34 . Alternatively , the enhancers can be active in different tissues and / or times to control the complex developmen­ tal expression pattern of a gene ( FIG . 1a , b ) . Examples of genes that depend on multiple enhancers for expression in a single tissue include the α­ and β­globin genes 31 , 33 , Wap ( encoding whey acidic protein ) 30 and Aicda ( encod­ ing activation­induced cytidine deaminase ) 34 . Additional examples include the microRNAs miR­290 and miR­295 , Prdm14 ( encoding PR domain zinc finger protein 14 ) and Sik1 ( encoding salt­inducible kinase 1 ) 32 . Genes with an exquisite tissue­specific expression pattern are controlled by enhancers with non­redundant spatial and tem poral activities spread over tens to hundreds of kilobases of flanking DNA . Examples of such genes include Shh ( encoding Sonic hedgehog ) 35 – 37 , Myc ( encoding the Myc proto­oncogene ) 38 , Fgf8 ( encoding fibroblast growth factor 8 ) 39 and the HOX 40 , 41 gene family . The opposite also occurs , whereby multiple genes compete for a common enhancer ( FIG . 1c , d ) . In such cases , there are two possible outcomes . In the ‘winner takes all’ type of competition , the expression of genes is mutually exclusive . Neurons in the olfactory sensory system and brain exploit this principle to ensure that only one of the many olfactory receptor genes or one of the proto­ cadherin genes is expressed in each cell 42 , 43 . This pro­ cess confers individual neurons with a unique identity . In the ‘we are all winners’ type of competition , a shared enhancer elevates the expression level of multiple genes in each cell , but not necessarily to maximal levels . This type of regulation becomes detectable when one gene in such a network is deleted and the expression of others increases 44 , or when an extra gene copy is introduced that decreases the transcript levels of other genes 45 , 46 . A more dynamic interplay in which an enhancer fre­ quently switches gene interactions in a single cell is thought to underlie this type of gene competition 47 . Although promiscuous , regulatory sequences are also selective . Using STARR - seq , two different collec­ tions of sequences were found to activate a housekeeping gene promoter and a developmental gene promoter 48 . Interestingly , although these sequences appar ently intrinsically harboured the capacity to act as an enhancer , many of them were actively repressed at their endogen­ ous location in the genome , showing that chromatin can add an additional regulatory layer to control the activity of non­coding sequences 49 , 50 . Regulatory incom­ patibility as revealed by STARR­seq may be one reason why enhancers do not necessarily act on their nearest neighbour gene . There are many examples of enhanc­ ers that ‘ignore’ the gene closest to them to regulate a more distal gene . Perhaps the best­studied example is Gene Gene Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Gene E E E E Gene E E E E E Gene E a One gene , multiple enhancers , one tissue b One gene , multiple enhancers , more tissues c Gene competition for a shared enhancer : winner takes all d Gene competition for a shared enhancer : we are all winners Or Or Or Gene Gene Gene E And And And Figure 1 | Mechanism of gene expression regulation by enhancers . a | Multiple enhancers ( E ) can cooperate in a tissue to increase the transcription of a shared target gene . The gene is therefore expressed at a higher level than it would be if regulated by each enhancer individually . b | Multiple enhancers can be active in different tissues ( denoted by different colours ) to control the complex developmental expression pattern of a shared target gene . A single enhancer or combinations of two or more enhancers can function on one gene in a tissue - specific manner . c | Genes can compete for a common enhancer based on a ‘winner takes all’ principle , resulting in mutually exclusive gene expression : only one gene per chromosome is active in each cell . d | Genes compete for a common enhancer based on a ‘we are all winners’ principle : multiple genes per chromosome are activated by a shared enhancer and are expressed , but not necessarily at maximum levels , in all cells . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 17 | DECEMBER 2016 | 773 T h e 3 D g e n o m e © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2016 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Minimal promoter The minimal portion of the promoter ( the core promoter ) required to initiate transcription . When integrated in the genome , it depends on enhancers for detectable levels of transcription . Enhancer trap assay Assay in which transcriptional output of a genomic integrated reporter gene under the control of a minimal promoter is used to identify regulatory elements in a given genomic context . Structural variations Changes in the linear order of multiple base pairs as a consequence of a chromosomal rearrangement ( for example , translocation , inversion , deletion , insertion or duplication ) . Nuclear compartments Nuclear sub - volumes in which chromosomal regions with similar chromatin composition spatially aggregate . Haplotype A genomic region that is inherited from one parent that has a sequence composition with genetic variations such as single - nucleotide polymorphisms ( SNPs ) that can be different from those found in the corresponding genomic region inherited by the other parent . the ZRS enhancer , which resides in an intron of Lmbr1 ( encoding limb region 1 protein ) but is crucial for the limb bud activation of the Shh gene , which is nearly a megabase away 35 , 51 . Finally , an important observation is that there are many sequences in the genome that carry the epigenetic signature of an enhancer , but their dele­ tion does result in any apparent changes in gene expres­ sion 52 . This result may be due to redundancy , whereby other enhancers compensate for the loss of regulatory action . However , it is likely that there will also be many ‘useless but harmless’ enhancers : sequences that can recruit transcription factors and their associated protein complexes but that lack a target gene to act on . Enhancer action depends on the genomic context . The importance of genomic context for gene regulation has been known ever since the description of ‘position effects’ in Drosophila melanogaster . Position effects refer to cases in which the expression of a gene is altered when placed in a different chromosomal context 53 ; for example , following a translocation . More recent experi­ ments have highlighted the complexity and unpredict­ ability of position effects in the mammalian genome . For example , a reporter gene under the control of a minimal promoter was used to analyse the transcriptional output at hundreds of different genomic locations in mouse embryos at a defined stage of develop ment ( enhancer trap assay ) 54 . At approximately 40 % of the genomic integration sites , the gene remained inactive , indicating that the promoter was not able to autono­ mously drive expression . However , at nearly all other genomic positions , transcription occurred in a tissue­ specific manner that often partially or completely mim­ icked the expression pattern of a nearby endogenous gene . This result suggested that local tissue­specific enhancers activates the minimal promoter . Interestingly , in some genomic locations , the expression pattern of the reporter gene was markedly different when it was integrated at sites that were only tens of kilobases apart . By contrast , elsewhere in the genome , the cassette could be located at distant sites ( hundreds of kilobases apart ) but displayed the same tissue­restricted expression pattern 54 . In the same way , genomic context also affects the transcription of endogen ous genes . Endogenous genes can adopt each other’s complex expression patterns if placed at each other’s chromosomal location by rearrangements 39 . As discussed below , this theme is recurrent in disease­causing structural variations . Transcription control in the 3D genome The studies summarized above demonstrate that it is difficult to predict the relevance and effect of a given non­coding sequence module , even if it carries the hallmarks of a transcription regulatory element . However , we are increasingly appreciating that regula­ tory action is controlled in the spatial context of the genome . Thus , understanding genome topology will help us to assign function to non­coding DNA . Below , we discuss how our genome is hierarchically folded and organized by chromatin loops , contact domains and nuclear compartments . Enhancer action through chromatin looping . The develop ment of 3C technology 20 and its high­ throughput variants 55 , 56 have enabled studies of the 3D shape of the genome . 3C technologies quantify ligation efficien­ cies among crosslinked DNA fragments as a measure of their contact frequency in a cell population ( BOX 1 ) . Depending on the scale and resolution at which 3D genome organization is analysed , one can discern contacts between larger chromosomal regions or between specific regulatory sites . Chromosomal segments can contact each other but contact probabilities rapidly decay the further two segments are apart on the linear chromosome . If con­ tacts between chromosomal sites are stabilized — for example , by associated proteins with affinity for each other — it results in chromatin loops that can be classi­ fied into two types : architectural loops and regulatory loops . Architectural loops strongly depend on the pro­ tein CTCF ( see below ) and the cohesin protein complex . Moreover , architectural loops can span distances of up to 3 Mb of linear DNA and subdivide chromosomes into structural domains , or TADs 57 – 59 , discussed in fur­ ther detail below . Regulatory loops are formed between enhancers and promoters and take place within the context of a TAD ( FIG . 2 ) . Regulatory loops also seem to rely on the binding of tissue­specific transcription factors , often in concert with cohesin and sometimes with CTCF 60 . Looping of enhancers is thought to effectively increase the local concentration of transcription factor­ binding sites , which causes accumulation of the corres­ ponding activating factors at the promoter sequence and stimulates gene transcription 61 , 62 . A recent Hi­C ( BOX 1 ) study carried out at unprecedented resolution 59 uncov­ ered that each investigated cell type harbours hundreds of tissue­specific enhancer­promoter loops . These loops contained genes that were expressed at the highest levels in the corresponding cell type , supporting the idea that chromatin loops are functionally important . Additional evidence comes from haplotype ­resolved Hi­C studies demonstrating a correlation between allele­specific looping frequencies and transcriptional output 63 . Direct evidence for the functional importance of chromatin loops came from elegant studies that used zinc finger technology to recruit a protein dimerization domain to a β­globin gene and induce looping between the β­globin gene and the LCR ( the β­globin super enhancer ) . Looping to the LCR was sufficient to strongly upregulate β­globin gene expression 64 . Follow­up studies revealed that physically recruiting a developmentally silenced gene to the LCR through looping can also lead to strong transcriptional activation 65 . Chromatin looping between enhancers and promoters therefore seems to causally underlie gene activation . How tissue­specificity , or dynamics , of promoter­ enhancer loops is achieved remains unclear . Key cellular identity genes , in particular those that are transcribed at high levels , often seem to attract enhancers specifically in the cells that express these genes 66 , 67 . During cellular reprogramming , these regulatory loops are effectively erased while new , pluripotent­specific chromatin loops R E V I E W S 774 | DECEMBER 2016 | VOLUME 17 www . nature . com / nrm R E V I E W S © 2016 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . are established 68 , 69 . In addition to these tissue­restricted loops , tissue­invariant chromatin loops are also found in all cell types . The HoxD gene family members , for exam­ ple , seem to use both invariant and tissue­specific con­ tacts with distal regulators to control expression in the developing limb bud 40 , 41 . Also , Shh forms tissue­ invariant contacts with its tissue­specific ZRS enhancer located a megabase away , with the gene and enhancer benefit­ ing from being at the base of the architectural loop that forms their TAD 57 , 70 . The stability of this loop , however , seems increased in the Shh ­expressing cells 71 . Although the functional differences between pre­formed and developmentally de novo formed loops are currently unclear , it has been suggested that the de novo formation of loops might provide an additional instructive layer of regulation needed to ensure that key cellular genes are exclusively expressed in specific cell types . By contrast , pre­formed loops have been suggested to represent a permissive configuration that allows a rapid transcrip­ tional response upon the recruitment of transcription factors to enhancers 72 . Regulatory interactions form inside TADs . Architec­ tural loops subdivide chromosomes into structural domains ; that is , chromosomal segments within sequences that preferentially contact each other prob­ ably because their boundaries are physically connected via a loop 57 – 59 . Such domains were first identified by early Hi­C studies as TADs , being on average 1 Mb in length ( ranging from 100 kb to 5 Mb ) 57 , 58 . Higher reso­ lution contact maps also uncovered smaller structural domains , called sub­TADs , with a median size of 185 kb ( ranging from 40 kb to 3 Mb ) 59 , 66 . Sub­TADs are believed to be dynamic and often tissue­specific 66 . TADs are often described as largely tissue­invariant and conserved between species ; however , although their structural conservation is indeed remarkable , 30 – 50 % of the TADs may still differ between cell types 57 , 59 . TAD boundaries tend to separate domains with dis­ tinct chromatin signatures , distinct gene activity and distinct replication timing 57 – 59 , 73 , 74 , whereas co­regulated enhancers and promoters are mostly found within the same TAD 18 ( FIG . 2 ) . Enhancer trap assays have demon­ strated that the physical partitioning of the genome strongly correlates with its functional partitioning 75 . Reporter genes integrated hundreds of kilobases apart may show the same expression patterns when all located in the same TAD , whereas this correlation sharply declines beyond TAD boundaries 75 . Furthermore , by intersecting chromatin interaction maps and haplotype­ resolved epigenome and transcriptome data , it has been shown that correlated chromatin variation occurs mostly within TADs 76 – 78 . Structural domains therefore seem critical for coordinating function in the complex regu­ latory landscape of the genome and , as such , also serve as the functional units of chromosomes . CTCF and cohesin are important players in the establishment of the architectural loops that partition chromosomes into structural domains . CTCF is a highly conserved , developmentally essential DNA­binding pro­ tein 79 that binds to tens of thousands of genomic sites , of which more than 60 % are bound in a tissue­ invariant manner 80 ( reviewed in REF . 81 ) . CTCF can form chroma­ tin loops between dispersed binding sites 82 , 83 , possibly through self­dimerization 84 or via the recruitment of cohesin 85 – 88 , a ring­shaped protein complex that can embrace two double­stranded DNA helices ( reviewed in REF . 89 ) . Interestingly , most CTCF chromatin loops involve pairs of sites with CTCF­binding motifs in a convergent ( forward – reverse ) orientation 59 , 90 , and this CTCF binding polarity is crucial for loop forma­ tion 91 – 93 ( FIG . 2 ) . In agreement , the boundaries between structural domains often have divergently oriented CTCF sites 94 . On the basis of these findings , it has now been suggested that loop extrusion 95 underlies TAD formation 93 , 96 ( reviewed in REF . 97 ) . In this model , DNA is actively extruded , possibly through cohesin rings , until the process is stalled by CTCF at sites with convergent orientation . In support of the idea that structural domains mark the functional units of chromosomes , the dis­ ruption of boundaries through deletion or inversion of CTCF­binding motifs sometimes leads to gene Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology TAD TAD TAD TAD TAD TAD TAD TAD Regulatoryloop Architecturalloops Boundary STOP Chromosome TAD 1 MB Chromosome TAD Nucleus Figure 2 | TADs host de novo and pre - formed regulatory enhancer – promoter loops . Chromosomes are subdivided into topologically associated domains ( TADs ) , which limit the contact search space of enhancers and promoters . Potential target genes of a given enhancer should therefore be found in the same TAD . Likewise , the regulatory elements relevant for the expression of a given gene should be contained in the same TAD as the target gene . TADs are formed by architectural chromatin loops . Green arrows at the bases of TADs represent convergently oriented CCCTC - binding factor ( CTCF ) sites that serve as structural and functional boundaries together with cohesin rings ( red ) . Regulatory loops , which can also involve cohesin , are formed within TADs between enhancers and promoters . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 17 | DECEMBER 2016 | 775 T h e 3 D g e n o m e © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2016 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Chromocentres Sites in the nuclear interior where heterochromatic pericentromeric regions of different chromosomes cluster . Polycomb A family of proteins that remodel chromatin to repress transcription . SNPs Single - nucleotide polymorphisms causing genetic variation . Indels Short DNA sequence insertions or deletions . Copy number variations Changes in the number of copies of a given chromosomal segment in a cell caused by their duplication or deletion . Drivers Risk - associated variants that cause disease . Passengers Risk - associated variants that do not cause disease . Linkage disequilibrium Alleles of SNPs are in linkage disequilibrium when their frequency of association in the population is not random , which indicates that they are physically and / or functionally linked . dysregulation ( further discussed below ) 91 , 92 , 98 – 100 . In such instances , previously insulated genes and regula­ tory sequences are presumably released to form new regulatory connections . Higher order genome structures . Beyond the level of TADs , genome folding also follows certain rules . These rules can be succinctly summarized by the phrase ‘birds of a feather flock together’ ( REF . 101 ) . The way chromo­ somes fold ensures that active and inactive TADs spatially cluster in distinct nuclear compartments . Most often , the active regions preferentially accumulate in the nuclear interior , whereas inactive TADs accumulate at the periphery 102 or near chromocentres . Within these two compartments , there is further subdivision of preferen­ tial neighbourhoods ; for example , polycomb ­bound TADs or TADs heavily bound by tissue­specific transcrip­ tion factors each tend to form their own subcompart­ ments 59 , 103 – 105 . Artificial recruitment of the corresponding factors can be sufficient to relocate a given sub­TAD to such nuclear subcompartments 106 . However , it is increas­ ingly being recognized that genome folding at this level of organization is highly probabilistic 107 – 109 , implying that in different cells , a given TAD will most often be neighbours with different TADs . On the basis of this phenomenon and because pairwise contacts between TADs are less fre­ quent than those inside TADs , such higher order topo­ logical features are believed to play a contributory role rather than a deterministic role in gene regulation 106 , 110 . In summary , genome structure strongly influences genome function . The looping of enhancers activates their target genes , and regulatory interactions seem to be primarily confined to structural domains or TADs . Therefore , it is these two levels of structural organiza­ tion in particular that need to be considered to inter­ pret genetic variation and to decipher transcription regulatory circuits . Assigning function to disease variants With the advent of GWAS , the catalogue of known human disease­associated variants has expanded dramat ically and continuous to grow . A recent report from the 1000 Genomes Project revealed that a typical genome dif­ fers from the reference human genome at 4 . 1 million to 5 . 0 million individual sites 111 , with variants ranging from SNPs and short indels ( together > 99 . 9 % ) to large structural variants and copy number variations . GWAS classically do not sequence entire genomes ; thus , the identified risk­associated variants may be drivers of disease or passengers that are in linkage disequilibrium with nearby but undetected driver variants 29 , 112 . This ambiguity compromises the discovery of the cause of disease , which by itself is not a trivial endeavour in a genome in which regulatory circuits between genes and non­coding sequences are hard to predict . In­depth studies focusing on individual non­ coding genetic variants associated with cancer or with rare heritable disorders show that these non­coding regions can drive disease through a diverse range of molecu­ lar mechanisms 113 ( FIG . 3 ) . Enhancers can be deleted or relocated , or they can be inactivated by point mutations that disrupt transcription factor­binding sites , which can all lead to transcriptional suppression of the original target gene 35 , 114 , 115 . Inadvertent activation of new target genes can also occur . Rearrangements such as inversions or translocations , as well as deletions of neighbouring Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Gene E Wild type a Enhancer deletion b Disruption TF binding site d Enhancer duplication c Insertion TF binding site e Enhancer introduction f Promoter introduction g Promoter deletion h Enhancer hijacking β - Thalassaemia HPE PDD2 Lung adenocarcinoma T - ALL α - Thalassaemia α - Thalassaemia * Burkitt lymphoma β - globin genes SHH MYC TAL1 α - Globin genes α - Globin genes / NME4 MYC LCR ZRS 3 ′ ~ 450 kb SE NA α - Globin enhancers α - Globin enhancers IgH enhancer Disease Aﬀected gene Enhancer SHH SBE2 44 Refs 3 , 4 121 116 , 117 35 , 122 46 124 36 Gene Gene E E Gene E E Gene E Gene Gene E Gene E Gene E Gene E Figure 3 | Erroneous regulatory wiring between enhancers and target genes causing disease . Erroneous regulatory wiring between genes and enhancers ( E ) can result in dysregulation of gene expression , and consequently , disease . Enhancers can be deleted ( part a ) , mutated and weakened ( part b ) , mutated and strengthened ( part c ) , duplicated ( part d ) , or a new enhancer ( part e ) or promoter ( part f ) can be introduced , which can all lead to transcriptional dysregulation of the original target gene . The deletion of a promoter can rewire the enhancer to drive upregulation of a new gene ( part g ) . Chromosomal rearrangements ( inversions , translocations or larger deletions ) can place an enhancer in a new genomic context in which its promiscuous nature enables it to activate a new target gene ( known as enhancer hijacking ) ( part h ) . For each case , one example of known disease and the target gene and enhancer that are affected are shown . For promoter deletion , note that it is the deletion of the α - globin genes that causes α - thalassaemia rather than the subsequent upregulation of NME4 . HPE , holoprosencephaly ; IgH , immunoglobulin heavy chain ; NA , not applicable ; PDD2 , preaxial polydactyly type II ; T - ALL , T cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia ; SHH , sonic hedgehog ; TF , transcription factor . R E V I E W S 776 | DECEMBER 2016 | VOLUME 17 www . nature . com / nrm R E V I E W S © 2016 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . sequences , can place an enhancer in a new genomic context where , owing to its promiscuous nature , it can activate a new target gene . This effect frequently happens in cancers of the blood , with the classic example being the t ( 8 ; 14 ) translocation in Burkitt lymphoma that juxtaposes the immunoglobulin heavy chain enhancer to MYC 116 , 117 . ‘Enhancer hijacking’ , as it was recently dubbed 118 , also occurs in solid tumours , as exemplified by the discovery that medulloblastoma is frequently caused by rearrangements that place the GFI1 gene family under the control of ( super ) enhancers 118 . Gain in enhancer activity can also occur without a chromosomal rearrangement . A risk variant identified via GWAS to be associated with both plasma low­ density lipoprotein cholesterol and myocardial infarction was shown to create a transcription factor­binding site that enhances expression of nearby SORT1 , a gene relevant for lipoprotein metabolism 119 . Similarly , a GWAS­ identified risk variant associated with neuroblastoma was found to form an extra transcription factor­ binding site in an enhancer that , as a consequence , led to over­ expression of the LMO1 oncogene 120 . In leukaemia , an enhancer created via mutations that introduced tran­ scription factor­binding motifs caused overexpression of the nearby TAL1 oncogene 121 . Furthermore , point mutations in enhancers can result in ectopic target gene expression . Mutations in the distal ZRS enhancer that recruit new transcription factors drive Shh expression in ectopic sites of the limb bud 122 , 123 . Finally , amplifications of enhancers are a common mechanism for upregulating the expression of cancer driver genes 124 . With such diverse functional implications of genetic variants and the realization that GWAS variants may not be causal but only passengers , the question is how to systematically assign function to the ever­ expanding collection of variants associated with disease ? One strategy is to link identified risk variants to now widely available genome­wide epigenetic maps and to search for variants that colocalize with presumptive regula­ tory sequences 29 , 112 . Given that regulatory sequences are usually active in a tissue­specific manner and that only in these tissues are the corresponding epigenetic features carried , such analysis requires the availability of epi genetic maps of disease­relevant cell types . This approach has recently been successfully applied to unravel how GWAS­identified variants drive certain types of neuro blastoma 120 and leukaemia 121 . The emerg­ ing , complementary approach is to study sequence vari­ ation in the context of the 3D genome . In this approach , DNA contact profiles are used to distinguish passen­ gers from disease­relevant non­coding variants , link them to key target genes and thus enable the functional annotation of the genetic variation . Gene regulation and dysregulation in 3D Structural features of the genome provide explanations for observed regulatory actions in a given genomic context . For example , the tissue­invariant long­range ( boundary ) contacts between the ZRS and Shh prob­ ably explain why point mutations in the ZRS that create binding sites for unrelated transcription factors are suf­ ficient to ectopically activate Shh expression elsewhere in the developing limb 122 , 123 . The β­globin genes are con­ trolled by five regulatory sites of the LCR that together increase β­globin gene expression by 25 – 100­fold . The deletion of each of these sites individually only reduces β­globin expression by up to twofold 33 . In 3D , each of the sites contacts the active gene . Collectively , the five sites have been proposed to form a spatial enhancer hub in which they redundantly collaborate to ensure high transcriptional output of their targets 62 , 125 . However , the actual existence of cooperative 3D interactions between enhancers and genes is still debated . It would require the investigation of multi­way DNA contacts , but initial studies of different loci have resulted in different conclusions 126 , 127 . As the chance of forming chromatin contacts between pairs of sites decays rapidly with increased distance on the linear template , the assumption that genes compete in 3D for physical contacts with enhanc­ ers explains why a proximal gene has a competitive advantage over more distal genes . A striking example of this effect is seen in olfactory receptor gene regula­ tion , in which the genes that are linearly closest to the shared enhancer are expressed in the largest percentage of sensory neurons 128 . This finding also explains why this competitive advantage dissolves when competing 1 Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology 1 E 2 STOP 1 E 2 a Wild type b TAD border deletion c TAD border inversion d TAD border duplication 1 E 1 E 2 E 2 STOP S T O P STOP STOP Duplication Inversion Figure 4 | Regulatory detours between TADs . Larger chromosomal rearrangements often distort and merge topologically associated domains ( TADs ) . As a consequence , previously separated genes and enhancers enter each other’s contact search space and can form new regulatory circuits . a | Hypothetical wild - type locus with two neighbouring TADs ( blue and yellow shading ) , two genes ( 1 and 2 ) and one enhancer ( E ) . b | The disruption of a TAD boundary ( for example , as a result of cohesin and / or CCCTC - binding factor ( CTCF ) depletion , or mutation or methylation of a CTCF - binding site ) can result in the merging of TADs . Gene 1 is no longer insulated and can be activated by the enhancer in the previously neighbouring TAD , potentially leading to gene dysregulation . c , d | Chromosomal rearrangements , such as inversions or duplications , can partially merge TADs , placing enhancers in a new genomic context in which its promiscuous nature enables it to activate a new target gene . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 17 | DECEMBER 2016 | 777 T h e 3 D g e n o m e © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2016 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Chromosomal breakpoints The sites where chromosomes were incidentally broken and , as consequence of erroneous DNA repair , now flank a chromosomal rearrangement . Haploinsufficient A phenotypic state observed despite a diploid organism still carrying one functional gene . genes are both placed at a large linear distance from an enhancer , as seen in transgenic mouse experiments 45 . In α­thalassaemia , a causal genetic variant between the α­globin genes and its enhancer creates a novel bind­ ing site for the erythroid transcription factor GATA1 , which forms a cryptic promoter 46 . Retrospectively , it seems likely that this newly formed and competing promoter re­allocated the enhancer loops away from the α­globin genes 46 . In another patient , deletion of the α­globin genes caused α­thalassaemia but was observed to also release and physically re­direct the enhancer to another gene , NME4 ( encoding nucleoside diphos­ phate kinase ) , 300 kb away , causing its upregulation 44 . Enhancers can also move out of reach . For example , a large duplication of proximal enhancers in the mouse HoxD locus results in a modified spatial organiza­ tion and the inability of the most distal enhancers to contribute to gene regulation 129 . When enhancers know no boundaries . Larger chromo­ somal rearrangements often disrupt boundar ies and merge the TADs that carry the chromosomal break - points 58 , 92 , 93 ( FIG . 4 ) . As a consequence , new genes and enhancers enter each other’s search space and can form new regulatory circuits 130 . This phenomenon is what occurs in enhancer hijacking 118 . Experimental dele­ tion of domain boundaries has shown that the merg­ ing of TADs can induce regulatory rewiring and alter gene expression 58 , 91 , 92 , 98 – 100 . However , this effect does not always occur , as a new TAD border may be formed at a nearby CTCF site 98 or because the existing regulatory circuits persist in the absence of flanking borders . Further support that intact boundaries are impor­ tant for health comes from studies showing that CTCF and the cohesin subunits are frequently mutated in cancer 131 – 134 , that CTCF and cohesin haploinsufficient mice are predisposed to cancer 135 – 137 ( reviewed in REF . 138 ) , GATA2 E Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology TAD TAD TAD TAD TAD TAD EVI1 E TAD TAD TAD TAD TAD TAD EVI1 GATA2 Inversion AML with inv ( 3 ) / t ( 3 ; 3 ) Chromosome 3 a b WNT6 IHH E E E EPH4 PAX3 WNT6 E WNT6 IHH E E E IHH WNT6 IHH E E E EPH4 PAX3 WNT6 IHH E E E PAX3 E E E EPH4 PAX3 IHH EPH4 PAX3 Brachydactyly deletion WNT6 / IHH / EPHA4 / PAX3 locus Brachydactylydeletion Polydactyly deletion Polydactyly duplication Polydactyly ( deletion ) Polydactyly ( duplication ) F - syndrome Inversion F - syndrome ( inversion ) E E Figure 5 | Disease variants associated with disruptions in TADs and the 3D regulatory landscape . Examples of how disease variants disrupt topologically associated domains ( TADs ) and the 3D regulatory landscape . a | In acute myeloid leukaemia ( AML ) , inversions in chromosome 3 ( inv ( 3 ) / t ( 3 ; 3 ) ) are associated with aberrant expression of the stem cell regulator EVI1 . The inversions ( spanning many TADs ) re - direct an enhancer from the GATA2 tumour suppressor gene to the EVI1 oncogene , with loss and gain of the enhancer , for GATA2 and EVI1 respectively , being independent oncogenic events . b | Deletions , inversions and duplications at the WNT6 , IHH , EPHA4 and PAX3 locus in brachydactyly , polydactyly and F - syndrome disrupt the boundaries of a TAD with limb - specific enhancers ( illustrated in red ) causing different congenital limb malformations depending on the genes ( indicated in green ) that are being placed under the control of the limb enhancer landscape . The top panel shows the wild - type configuration and indicates the chromosomal regions that are deleted , duplicated or inverted in each disease . R E V I E W S 778 | DECEMBER 2016 | VOLUME 17 www . nature . com / nrm R E V I E W S © 2016 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . and that CTCF­ and cohesion­binding sites accumu­ late mutations in multiple different cancer types 100 , 139 , 140 . Interestingly , CTCF­binding site mutations often occur near oncogenes and other dysregulated genes in cancer 100 , 140 . DNA methylation blocks the binding of CTCF to its recognition sequences 141 – 143 . This realiza­ tion led to the investigation of whether CTCF may be involved in tumorigenesis in gliomas that show DNA hypermethylation . Indeed , reduced CTCF binding was observed at many genomic positions , TAD borders were weakened or disrupted , and a prominent glioma onco­ gene was brought under the control of an enhancer in a neighbouring TAD 144 . Collectively , these studies indi­ cate that architectural loops and structural domains are crucial for enhancers to act on the appropriate genes and show that their disruption can alter regulatory contacts and lead to disease . Assigning function to variants in 3D . Non­coding sequences control transcription by physically contacting their target genes . Thus , the analysis of DNA contact maps by 3C technologies can be instrumental to linking disease or other trait­associated variants to target genes and in discovering their functional relevance , as illustrated by an increasing number of studies . In one of the earliest studies applying this strategy , 3C technology enabled the separ­ ation of the driver variants from passenger variants associ­ ated with skin colour . Moreover , the study showed that the causal variant destabilized an enhancer – promoter loop with OCA2 , a gene implicated in pigmentation , and led to its downregulation 145 . 4C­seq 125 ( BOX 1 ) combined with genome­editing methods to delete enhancers enabled the deciphering of the molecular mechanisms driving leukaemia in patients carrying a common inversion on chromosome 3 . The inversions ( spanning many TADs ) Box 2 | Roadmap : from disease - associated genetic variants to molecular mechanisms causing disease A roadmap is provided here with the aim of facilitating the transition from anecdotal descriptions of risk variants to the discovery of molecular mechanisms underlying disease . To achieve this goal , the disease‑causing variant and its target gene ( or genes ) must be discovered . • Step 1 : as genome‑wide association genotyping arrays only contain index single‑nucleotide polymorphisms ( SNPs ) ( red vertical bars ) representative for their linkage disequilibrium ( LD ) block , targeted haplotyping of associated loci or haplotype‑based SNP imputation is required to identify all associated variants . Any of those SNPs may be the causal variant driving disease . • Step 2 : provided the disease‑relevant cell type is known , associated SNPs can be intersected with epigenomics maps ( for example , using GWAS3D 162 ) derived from this cell type to select variants present in potential regulatory sequences ( green horizontal bars ) : these are best candidate causal variants . • Step 3 : to identify potential target genes , genetic variation maps can be intersected with Hi‑C‑based chromosome contact maps , ideally from the relevant cell type , to uncover the genes that co‑occupy the same topologically associated domain ( TAD ) : these are best candidate target genes . As TADs are relatively conserved between tissues , contact maps from other or related cell types may also be informative . • Step 4 : provided the disease‑relevant cell type is known , chromosome conformation capture‑on chip ( 4C ) ‑based methodologies can be used to physically link candidate regulatory sequences ( step 2 ) to candidate target genes ( step 3 ) . • Step 5 : to uncover a functional , regulatory link between suspected non‑coding variants and genes , transcriptional output in the relevant cell type can be compared between carriers and non‑carriers of the risk variants . If genetic variation leads to subtle changes ( < twofold ) in transcriptional output , intra‑individual haplotype‑resolved transcriptional output ( indicated as purple and red variants in the gene ) may be compared between alleles with and without the risk variants . • Step 6 : optionally , the non‑coding sequence of interest can be confirmed to harbour enhancer capacity using in vitro reporter assays . By comparing reporter gene activity between the sequence with and without the variant , one may be able to assign function to the variant . • Step 7 : to unequivocally demonstrate that the non‑coding variant influences expression of the presumed target gene , site‑directed genome‑editing is required to show that introduction or reversal of the variant leads to expression changes in the relevant cell type . The use of model organisms is required to demonstrate that this effect is relevant for disease . Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Disease - associated variants 1 Impute / targeted haplotyping to uncover all variants in LD 2 Candidate causal variants colocalize with potential regulatory sequences All variants in LD Sequences with regulatory epigenetic signature 3 Intersect with 3D genome information : identify genes in the same TAD 4 Physically link candidate variants to genes : high - resolution contact maps 5 Functionally link variant to gene : haplotype - resolved expression analysis TAD1 TAD2 6 In vitro reporter assay to test enhancer capacity 7 Genome editing to conﬁrm molecular mechanism R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 17 | DECEMBER 2016 | 779 T h e 3 D g e n o m e © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2016 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . re­direct an enhancer from the GATA2 tumour suppres­ sor gene to the EVI1 oncogene , with both the enhancer loss and gain independently being oncogenic events 146 ( FIG . 5a ) . An essentially similar strategy ( that is , 4C­seq to uncover the contacted regulatory landscape of genes affected by rearrangements and subsequent validation of the hypothesized consequences by targeted genome editing ) was used to elegantly demonstrate the causes of different congenital limb malformations . Deletions , inversions and duplications disrupting the boundaries of a TAD with a series of limb­specific enhancers each cause different congenital limb malformations because they result in different , not limb­specific , genes being placed under the control of the limb enhancer landscape 147 ( FIG . 5b ) . The examination of genome organization also contributed to linking risk variants associated with obesity to unanticipated target genes . Variants in introns of FTO , a gene that can influence body mass in mice 148 , were found to be located within enhancers that regulate not FTO but the physically contacted IRX3 and IRX5 genes , ~ 0 . 5 – 1 Mb away from the identified variants 149 , 150 . Finally , recur­ rent microdeletions were recently found in T cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia ( T­ALL ) that eliminate CTCF­ mediated boundaries of domains containing prominent T­ALL proto­oncogenes . Using human embryonic kidney ( HEK­293T ) cells and genome editing to recapitulate some of these deletions , new regulatory contacts and ( mild ) upregulation of the TAL1 and LMO2 oncogenes were observed 140 . Collectively , these recent reports provide the first demonstration of how genomic contact maps can help assign function to disease­associated genetic variants . Conclusions and future perspectives The human genome harbours a dizzying array of regula­ tory sequences with a priori unpredictable , promiscuous and context­dependent behaviour . Assigning function to non­coding genetic variation is therefore challeng­ ing . Intersecting maps of genomic variation with tran­ scription factor binding and epigenetic data to search for overlaps at potential regulatory sites can help make a first distinction between driver and passenger genetic variants . Technological advances and the availability of increasingly detailed genomic contact maps now also enable our interpretation of variants in their 3D genomic context . As recent work has demonstrated , such approaches can greatly assist in discovering driver muta­ tions , in linking variants to target genes and in guiding genome­editing experiments to decisively uncover the molecular mechanisms underlying disease . Acknowledging the importance of 3D genome organ­ ization , we define a roadmap ‘from disease­ associated variants to molecular mechanisms causing disease’ that proposes the implementation of both epigenetic and 3D genome maps to interpret the functional consequences of disease­associated genetic aberrations ( BOX 2 ) . The boundaries of TADs limit the contact search space of the sequences they encompass and insulate DNA regu­ latory circuits . Assigning function to a non­coding sequence therefore requires knowledge of the TAD it lies within and understanding its physical wiring to other sequences in this TAD . TAD organization seems relatively conserved between tissues , but whether con­ servation is sufficient to be able to rely on contact maps generated from unrelated cells remains to be seen . We predict that in many cases useful information can only be extracted from DNA contacts measured in the rele­ vant cell type , which can be difficult to obtain , particu­ larly for developmental disorders and rare cell types . If disease or disease predisposition is a consequence of small differences in transcriptional output , hetero zygous risk variants can be phased 151 , 152 to heterozygous tran­ script SNPs to quantitatively compare transcription rates and looping frequencies 63 , 153 of risk and healthy alleles in the same subject . As the described reports also illus­ trate , genome editing is an obligatory validation step to decisively draw conclusions . Overall , the integration of 3D genome information with other genomic studies is anticipated to significantly accelerate our ability to move beyond GWAS and towards a better understanding of the molecular basis of disease . 1 . Pauling , L . et al . Sickle cell anemia a molecular disease . Science 110 , 543 – 548 ( 1949 ) . 2 . Ingram , V . M . Gene mutations in human haemoglobin : the chemical difference between normal and sickle cell haemoglobin . Nature 180 , 326 – 328 ( 1957 ) . 3 . Fritsch , E . F . , Lawn , R . M . & Maniatis , T . Characterisation of deletions which affect the expression of fetal globin genes in man . Nature 279 , 598 – 603 ( 1979 ) . 4 . Van der Ploeg , L . H . et al . γ - Β - Thalassaemia studies showing that deletion of the γ - and δ - genes influences β - globin gene expression in man . Nature 283 , 637 – 642 ( 1980 ) . 5 . Banerji , J . , Rusconi , S . & Schaffner , W . Expression of a β - globin gene is enhanced by remote SV40 DNA sequences . Cell 27 , 299 – 308 ( 1981 ) . 6 . Benoist , C . & Chambon , P . In vivo sequence requirements of the SV40 early promotor region . Nature 290 , 304 – 310 ( 1981 ) . 7 . Banerji , J . , Olson , L . & Schaffner , W . A lymphocyte - specific cellular enhancer is located downstream of the joining region in immunoglobulin heavy chain genes . Cell 33 , 729 – 740 ( 1983 ) . 8 . Gillies , S . D . , Morrison , S . L . , Oi , V . T . & Tonegawa , S . A tissue - specific transcription enhancer element is located in the major intron of a rearranged immunoglobulin heavy chain gene . Cell 33 , 717 – 728 ( 1983 ) . 9 . Mercola , M . , Wang , X . F . , Olsen , J . & Calame , K . Transcriptional enhancer elements in the mouse immunoglobulin heavy chain locus . Science 221 , 663 – 665 ( 1983 ) . 10 . Lander , E . S . et al . Initial sequencing and analysis of the human genome . Nature 409 , 860 – 921 ( 2001 ) . 11 . Venter , J . C . et al . The sequence of the human genome . Science 291 , 1304 – 1351 ( 2001 ) . 12 . Maurano , M . T . et al . Systematic localization of common disease - associated variation in regulatory DNA . Science 337 , 1190 – 1195 ( 2012 ) . 13 . Schaub , M . A . , Boyle , A . P . , Kundaje , A . , Batzoglou , S . & Snyder , M . Linking disease associations with regulatory information in the human genome . Genome Res . 22 , 1748 – 1759 ( 2012 ) . References 12 and 13 reveal that most of the disease - associated variations are located in regulatory sequences . 14 . Ingram , V . M . Sickle - cell anemia hemoglobin : the molecular biology of the first “molecular disease” — the crucial importance of serendipity . Genetics 167 , 1 – 7 ( 2004 ) . 15 . Welter , D . et al . The NHGRI GWAS Catalog , a curated resource of SNP - trait associations . Nucleic Acids Res . 42 , D1001 – D1006 ( 2014 ) . 16 . Roadmap Epigenomics Consortium et al . Integrative analysis of 111 reference human epigenomes . Nature 518 , 317 – 330 ( 2015 ) . 17 . Thurman , R . E . et al . The accessible chromatin landscape of the human genome . Nature 489 , 75 – 82 ( 2012 ) . 18 . Shen , Y . et al . A map of the cis - regulatory sequences in the mouse genome . Nature 488 , 116 – 120 ( 2012 ) . 19 . Abecasis , G . R . et al . An integrated map of genetic variation from 1 , 092 human genomes . Nature 491 , 56 – 65 ( 2012 ) . 20 . Dekker , J . , Rippe , K . , Dekker , M . & Kleckner , N . Capturing chromosome conformation . Science 295 , 1306 – 1311 ( 2002 ) . 21 . Fromm , M . & Berg , P . Simian virus 40 early - and late - region promoter functions are enhanced by the 72 - base - pair repeat inserted at distant locations and inverted orientations . Mol . Cell . Biol . 3 , 991 – 999 ( 1983 ) . 22 . Spitz , F . & Furlong , E . E . Transcription factors : from enhancer binding to developmental control . Nat . Rev . Genet . 13 , 613 – 626 ( 2012 ) . 23 . Shlyueva , D . , Stampfel , G . & Stark , A . Transcriptional enhancers : from properties to genome - wide predictions . Nat . Rev . Genet . 15 , 272 – 286 ( 2014 ) . 24 . Heinz , S . , Romanoski , C . E . , Benner , C . & Glass , C . K . The selection and function of cell type - specific enhancers . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 16 , 144 – 154 ( 2015 ) . 25 . Whyte , W . A . et al . Master transcription factors and mediator establish super - enhancers at key cell identity genes . Cell 153 , 307 – 319 ( 2013 ) . R E V I E W S 780 | DECEMBER 2016 | VOLUME 17 www . nature . com / nrm R E V I E W S © 2016 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . 26 . Allen , B . L . & Taatjes , D . J . The Mediator complex : a central integrator of transcription . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 16 , 155 – 166 ( 2015 ) . 27 . Grosveld , F . , van Assendelft , G . B . , Greaves , D . R . & Kollias , G . Position - independent , high - level expression of the human beta - globin gene in transgenic mice . Cell 51 , 975 – 985 ( 1987 ) . 28 . Hnisz , D . et al . Super - enhancers in the control of cell identity and disease . Cell 155 , 934 – 947 ( 2013 ) . 29 . Kellis , M . et al . Defining functional DNA elements in the human genome . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 111 , 6131 – 6138 ( 2014 ) . 30 . Shin , H . Y . et al . Hierarchy within the mammary STAT5 - driven Wap super - enhancer . Nat . Genet . 48 , 904 – 911 ( 2016 ) . 31 . Hay , D . et al . Genetic dissection of the α - globin super - enhancer in vivo . Nat . Genet . 48 , 895 – 903 ( 2016 ) . 32 . Hnisz , D . et al . Convergence of developmental and oncogenic signaling pathways at transcriptional super - enhancers . Mol . Cell 58 , 362 – 370 ( 2015 ) . 33 . Bender , M . A . et al . Targeted deletion of 5’HS1 and 5’HS4 of the β - globin locus control region reveals additive activity of the DNaseI hypersensitive sites . Blood 98 , 2022 – 2027 ( 2001 ) . 34 . Kieffer - Kwon , K . R . et al . Interactome maps of mouse gene regulatory domains reveal basic principles of transcriptional regulation . Cell 155 , 1507 – 1520 ( 2013 ) . 35 . Lettice , L . A . et al . A long - range Shh enhancer regulates expression in the developing limb and fin and is associated with preaxial polydactyly . Hum . Mol . Genet . 12 , 1725 – 1735 ( 2003 ) . 36 . Jeong , Y . , El - Jaick , K . , Roessler , E . , Muenke , M . & Epstein , D . J . A functional screen for sonic hedgehog regulatory elements across a 1 Mb interval identifies long - range ventral forebrain enhancers . Development 133 , 761 – 772 ( 2006 ) . 37 . Sagai , T . et al . A cluster of three long - range enhancers directs regional Shh expression in the epithelial linings . Development 136 , 1665 – 1674 ( 2009 ) . 38 . Uslu , V . V . et al . Long - range enhancers regulating Myc expression are required for normal facial morphogenesis . Nat . Genet . 46 , 753 – 758 ( 2014 ) . 39 . Marinic , M . , Aktas , T . , Ruf , S . & Spitz , F . An integrated holo - enhancer unit defines tissue and gene specificity of the Fgf8 regulatory landscape . Dev . Cell 24 , 530 – 542 ( 2013 ) . 40 . Montavon , T . et al . A regulatory archipelago controls Hox genes transcription in digits . Cell 147 , 1132 – 1145 ( 2011 ) . 41 . Andrey , G . et al . A switch between topological domains underlies HoxD genes collinearity in mouse limbs . Science 340 , 1234167 ( 2013 ) . 42 . Khan , M . , Vaes , E . & Mombaerts , P . Regulation of the probability of mouse odorant receptor gene choice . Cell 147 , 907 – 921 ( 2011 ) . 43 . Tasic , B . et al . Promoter choice determines splice site selection in protocadherin α and γ pre - mRNA splicing . Mol . Cell 10 , 21 – 33 ( 2002 ) . 44 . Lower , K . M . et al . Adventitious changes in long - range gene expression caused by polymorphic structural variation and promoter competition . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 21771 – 21776 ( 2009 ) . 45 . Dillon , N . , Trimborn , T . , Strouboulis , J . , Fraser , P . & Grosveld , F . The effect of distance on long - range chromatin interactions . Mol . Cell 1 , 131 – 139 ( 1997 ) . 46 . De Gobbi , M . et al . A regulatory SNP causes a human genetic disease by creating a new transcriptional promoter . Science 312 , 1215 – 1217 ( 2006 ) . 47 . Wijgerde , M . , Grosveld , F . & Fraser , P . Transcription complex stability and chromatin dynamics in vivo . Nature 377 , 209 – 213 ( 1995 ) . 48 . Zabidi , M . A . et al . Enhancer - core - promoter specificity separates developmental and housekeeping gene regulation . Nature 518 , 556 – 559 ( 2015 ) . 49 . Arnold , C . D . et al . Genome - wide quantitative enhancer activity maps identified by STARR - seq . Science 339 , 1074 – 1077 ( 2013 ) . 50 . Rada - Iglesias , A . et al . A unique chromatin signature uncovers early developmental enhancers in humans . Nature 470 , 279 – 283 ( 2011 ) . 51 . Sagai , T . , Hosoya , M . , Mizushina , Y . , Tamura , M . & Shiroishi , T . Elimination of a long - range cis - regulatory module causes complete loss of limb - specific Shh expression and truncation of the mouse limb . Development 132 , 797 – 803 ( 2005 ) . 52 . Nobrega , M . A . , Zhu , Y . , Plajzer - Frick , I . , Afzal , V . & Rubin , E . M . Megabase deletions of gene deserts result in viable mice . Nature 431 , 988 – 993 ( 2004 ) . 53 . Sturtevant , A . H . The effects of unequal crossing over at the bar locus in Drosophila . Genetics 10 , 117 – 147 ( 1925 ) . 54 . Ruf , S . et al . Large - scale analysis of the regulatory architecture of the mouse genome with a transposon - associated sensor . Nat . Genet . 43 , 379 – 386 ( 2011 ) . This study comprehensively illustrates the importance of genomic context for enhancer function . 55 . Dekker , J . , Marti - Renom , M . A . & Mirny , L . A . Exploring the three - dimensional organization of genomes : interpreting chromatin interaction data . Nat . Rev . Genet . 14 , 390 – 403 ( 2013 ) . 56 . Denker , A . & de Laat , W . The second decade of 3C technologies : detailed insights into nuclear organization . Genes Dev . 30 , 1357 – 1382 ( 2016 ) . 57 . Dixon , J . R . et al . Topological domains in mammalian genomes identified by analysis of chromatin interactions . Nature 485 , 376 – 380 ( 2012 ) . 58 . Nora , E . P . et al . Spatial partitioning of the regulatory landscape of the X - inactivation centre . Nature 485 , 381 – 385 ( 2012 ) . References 57 and 58 demonstrate the presence of TADs in the mammalian genome . 59 . Rao , S . S . et al . A 3D map of the human genome at kilobase resolution reveals principles of chromatin looping . Cell 159 , 1665 – 1680 ( 2014 ) . 60 . Bouwman , B . A . & de Laat , W . Getting the genome in shape : the formation of loops , domains and compartments . Genome Biol . 16 , 154 ( 2015 ) . 61 . Ptashne , M . Gene regulation by proteins acting nearby and at a distance . Nature 322 , 697 – 701 ( 1986 ) . 62 . Tolhuis , B . , Palstra , R . J . , Splinter , E . , Grosveld , F . & de Laat , W . Looping and interaction between hypersensitive sites in the active β - globin locus . Mol . Cell 10 , 1453 – 1465 ( 2002 ) . 63 . Dixon , J . R . et al . Chromatin architecture reorganization during stem cell differentiation . Nature 518 , 331 – 336 ( 2015 ) . 64 . Deng , W . et al . Controlling long - range genomic interactions at a native locus by targeted tethering of a looping factor . Cell 149 , 1233 – 1244 ( 2012 ) . This study provides direct evidence that chromatin loops between enhancers and promoters underlie transcription . 65 . Deng , W . et al . Reactivation of developmentally silenced globin genes by forced chromatin looping . Cell 158 , 849 – 860 ( 2014 ) . 66 . Phillips - Cremins , J . E . et al . Architectural protein subclasses shape 3D organization of genomes during lineage commitment . Cell 153 , 1281 – 1295 ( 2013 ) . 67 . Palstra , R . J . et al . The β - globin nuclear compartment in development and erythroid differentiation . Nat . Genet . 35 , 190 – 194 ( 2003 ) . 68 . Krijger , P . H . et al . Cell - of - origin - specific 3D genome structure acquired during somatic cell reprogramming . Cell Stem Cell 18 , 597 – 610 ( 2016 ) . 69 . Beagan , J . A . et al . Local genome topology can exhibit an incompletely rewired 3D - folding state during somatic cell reprogramming . Cell Stem Cell 18 , 611 – 624 ( 2016 ) . 70 . Li , G . et al . Extensive promoter - centered chromatin interactions provide a topological basis for transcription regulation . Cell 148 , 84 – 98 ( 2012 ) . 71 . Williamson , I . , Lettice , L . A . , Hill , R . E . & Bickmore , W . A . Shh and ZRS enhancer co - localisation is specific to the zone of polarizing activity . Development 143 , 2994 – 3001 ( 2016 ) . 72 . de Laat , W . & Duboule , D . Topology of mammalian developmental enhancers and their regulatory landscapes . Nature 502 , 499 – 506 ( 2013 ) . 73 . Bickmore , W . A . & van Steensel , B . Genome architecture : domain organization of interphase chromosomes . Cell 152 , 1270 – 1284 ( 2013 ) . 74 . Pope , B . D . et al . Topologically associating domains are stable units of replication - timing regulation . Nature 515 , 402 – 405 ( 2014 ) . 75 . Symmons , O . et al . Functional and topological characteristics of mammalian regulatory domains . Genome Res . 24 , 390 – 400 ( 2014 ) . 76 . Waszak , S . M . et al . Population variation and genetic control of modular chromatin architecture in humans . Cell 162 , 1039 – 1050 ( 2015 ) . 77 . Grubert , F . et al . Genetic control of chromatin states in humans involves local and distal chromosomal interactions . Cell 162 , 1051 – 1065 ( 2015 ) . 78 . Denker , A . & de Laat , W . A . Long - distance chromatin affair . Cell 162 , 942 – 943 ( 2015 ) . 79 . Heath , H . et al . CTCF regulates cell cycle progression of αβ T cells in the thymus . EMBO J . 27 , 2839 – 2850 ( 2008 ) . 80 . Chen , H . , Tian , Y . , Shu , W . , Bo , X . & Wang , S . Comprehensive identification and annotation of cell type - specific and ubiquitous CTCF - binding sites in the human genome . PLoS ONE 7 , e41374 ( 2012 ) . 81 . Ong , C . T . & Corces , V . G . CTCF : an architectural protein bridging genome topology and function . Nat . Rev . Genetics 15 , 234 – 246 ( 2014 ) . 82 . Splinter , E . et al . CTCF mediates long - range chromatin looping and local histone modification in the beta - globin locus . Genes Dev . 20 , 2349 – 2354 ( 2006 ) . 83 . Handoko , L . et al . CTCF - mediated functional chromatin interactome in pluripotent cells . Nat . Genet . 43 , 630 – 638 ( 2011 ) . 84 . Yusufzai , T . M . , Tagami , H . , Nakatani , Y . & Felsenfeld , G . CTCF tethers an insulator to subnuclear sites , suggesting shared insulator mechanisms across species . Mol . Cell 13 , 291 – 298 ( 2004 ) . 85 . Hadjur , S . et al . Cohesins form chromosomal cis - interactions at the developmentally regulated IFNG locus . Nature 460 , 410 – 413 ( 2009 ) . 86 . Kagey , M . H . et al . Mediator and cohesin connect gene expression and chromatin architecture . Nature 467 , 430 – 435 ( 2010 ) . 87 . Parelho , V . et al . Cohesins functionally associate with CTCF on mammalian chromosome arms . Cell 132 , 422 – 433 ( 2008 ) . 88 . Wendt , K . S . et al . Cohesin mediates transcriptional insulation by CCCTC - binding factor . Nature 451 , 796 – 801 ( 2008 ) . 89 . Watrin , E . , Kaiser , F . J . & Wendt , K . S . Gene regulation and chromatin organization : relevance of cohesin mutations to human disease . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 37 , 59 – 66 ( 2016 ) . 90 . Vietri Rudan , M . et al . Comparative Hi - C reveals that CTCF underlies evolution of chromosomal domain architecture . Cell Rep . 10 , 1297 – 1309 ( 2015 ) . 91 . de Wit , E . et al . CTCF binding polarity determines chromatin looping . Mol . Cell 60 , 676 – 684 ( 2015 ) . 92 . Guo , Y . et al . CRISPR inversion of CTCF sites alters genome topology and enhancer / promoter function . Cell 162 , 900 – 910 ( 2015 ) . 93 . Sanborn , A . L . et al . Chromatin extrusion explains key features of loop and domain formation in wild - type and engineered genomes . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 112 , E6456 – E6465 ( 2015 ) . References 59 , 91 – 93 show that TADs are formed between convergent CTCF sites . 94 . Gomez - Marin , C . et al . Evolutionary comparison reveals that diverging CTCF sites are signatures of ancestral topological associating domains borders . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 112 , 7542 – 7547 ( 2015 ) . 95 . Alipour , E . & Marko , J . F . Self - organization of domain structures by DNA - loop - extruding enzymes . Nucleic Acids Res . 40 , 11202 – 11212 ( 2012 ) . 96 . Fudenberg , G . et al . Formation of chromosomal domains by loop extrusion . Cell Rep . 15 , 2038 – 2049 ( 2016 ) . 97 . Merkenschlager , M . & Nora , E . P . CTCF and cohesin in genome folding and transcriptional gene regulation . Annu . Rev . Genomics Hum . Genet . 31 , 17 – 43 ( 2016 ) . 98 . Narendra , V . et al . CTCF establishes discrete functional chromatin domains at the Hox clusters during differentiation . Science 347 , 1017 – 1021 ( 2015 ) . 99 . Dowen , J . M . et al . Control of cell identity genes occurs in insulated neighborhoods in mammalian chromosomes . Cell 159 , 374 – 387 ( 2014 ) . 100 . Ji , X . et al . 3D chromosome regulatory landscape of human pluripotent cells . Cell Stem Cell 18 , 262 – 275 ( 2016 ) . 101 . Gibcus , J . H . & Dekker , J . The hierarchy of the 3D genome . Mol . Cell 49 , 773 – 782 ( 2013 ) . 102 . Kind , J . & van Steensel , B . Genome - nuclear lamina interactions and gene regulation . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 22 , 320 – 325 ( 2010 ) . 103 . de Wit , E . et al . The pluripotent genome in three dimensions is shaped around pluripotency factors . Nature 501 , 227 – 231 ( 2013 ) . 104 . Bantignies , F . et al . Polycomb - dependent regulatory contacts between distant Hox loci in Drosophila . Cell 144 , 214 – 226 ( 2011 ) . 105 . Denholtz , M . et al . Long - range chromatin contacts in embryonic stem cells reveal a role for pluripotency factors and polycomb proteins in genome organization . Cell Stem Cell 13 , 602 – 616 ( 2013 ) . 106 . Wijchers , P . J . et al . Cause and consequence of tethering a SubTAD to different nuclear compartments . Mol . Cell 61 , 461 – 473 ( 2016 ) . 107 . Krijger , P . H . & de Laat , W . Identical cells with different 3D genomes ; cause and consequences ? Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 23 , 191 – 196 ( 2013 ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 17 | DECEMBER 2016 | 781 T h e 3 D g e n o m e © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2016 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . 108 . Nagano , T . et al . Single - cell Hi - C reveals cell - to - cell variability in chromosome structure . Nature 502 , 59 – 64 ( 2013 ) . 109 . Dekker , J . & Mirny , L . The 3D genome as moderator of chromosomal communication . Cell 164 , 1110 – 1121 ( 2016 ) . 110 . Therizols , P . et al . Chromatin decondensation is sufficient to alter nuclear organization in embryonic stem cells . Science 346 , 1238 – 1242 ( 2014 ) . 111 . 1000 Genomes Project Consortium et al . A global reference for human genetic variation . Nature 526 , 68 – 74 ( 2015 ) . 112 . Tak , Y . G . & Farnham , P . J . Making sense of GWAS : using epigenomics and genome engineering to understand the functional relevance of SNPs in non - coding regions of the human genome . Epigenetics Chromatin 8 , 57 ( 2015 ) . 113 . Kleinjan , D . J . & Coutinho , P . Cis - ruption mechanisms : disruption of cis - regulatory control as a cause of human genetic disease . Brief . Funct . Genomics Proteomic 8 , 317 – 332 ( 2009 ) . 114 . Benko , S . et al . Highly conserved non - coding elements on either side of SOX9 associated with Pierre Robin sequence . Nat . Genet . 41 , 359 – 364 ( 2009 ) . 115 . Fukami , M . et al . Complex genomic rearrangement in the SOX9 5’ region in a patient with Pierre Robin sequence and hypoplastic left scapula . Am . J . Med . Genet . A 158A , 1529 – 1534 , ( 2012 ) . 116 . Taub , R . et al . Translocation of the c - myc gene into the immunoglobulin heavy chain locus in human Burkitt lymphoma and murine plasmacytoma cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 79 , 7837 – 7841 ( 1982 ) . 117 . Dalla - Favera , R . et al . Human c - myc onc gene is located on the region of chromosome 8 that is translocated in Burkitt lymphoma cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 79 , 7824 – 7827 ( 1982 ) . 118 . Northcott , P . A . et al . Enhancer hijacking activates GFI1 family oncogenes in medulloblastoma . Nature 511 , 428 – 434 ( 2014 ) . 119 . Musunuru , K . et al . From noncoding variant to phenotype via SORT1 at the 1p13 cholesterol locus . Nature 466 , 714 – 719 ( 2010 ) . 120 . Oldridge , D . A . et al . Genetic predisposition to neuroblastoma mediated by a LMO1 super - enhancer polymorphism . Nature 528 , 418 – 421 ( 2015 ) . 121 . Mansour , M . R . et al . Oncogene regulation . An oncogenic super - enhancer formed through somatic mutation of a noncoding intergenic element . Science 346 , 1373 – 1377 ( 2014 ) . 122 . Wieczorek , D . et al . A specific mutation in the distant sonic hedgehog ( SHH ) cis - regulator ( ZRS ) causes Werner mesomelic syndrome ( WMS ) while complete ZRS duplications underlie Haas type polysyndactyly and preaxial polydactyly ( PPD ) with or without triphalangeal thumb . Hum . Mutat . 31 , 81 – 89 ( 2010 ) . 123 . Lettice , L . A . et al . Opposing functions of the ETS factor family define Shh spatial expression in limb buds and underlie polydactyly . Dev . Cell 22 , 459 – 467 ( 2012 ) . 124 . Zhang , X . et al . Identification of focally amplified lineage - specific super - enhancers in human epithelial cancers . Nat . Genet . 48 , 176 – 182 ( 2016 ) . 125 . van de Werken , H . J . et al . Robust 4C - seq data analysis to screen for regulatory DNA interactions . Nat . Methods 9 , 969 – 972 ( 2012 ) . 126 . Gavrilov , A . A . , Chetverina , H . V . , Chermnykh , E . S . , Razin , S . V . & Chetverin , A . B . Quantitative analysis of genomic element interactions by molecular colony technique . Nucleic Acids Res . 42 , e36 ( 2014 ) . 127 . Jiang , T . et al . Identification of multi - loci hubs from 4C - seq demonstrates the functional importance of simultaneous interactions . Nucleic Acids Res . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / nar / gkw568 ( 2016 ) . 128 . Fuss , S . H . , Omura , M . & Mombaerts , P . Local and cis effects of the H element on expression of odorant receptor genes in mouse . Cell 130 , 373 – 384 ( 2007 ) . 129 . Montavon , T . , Thevenet , L . & Duboule , D . Impact of copy number variations ( CNVs ) on long - range gene regulation at the HoxD locus . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 20204 – 20211 ( 2012 ) . 130 . Lupianez , D . G . , Spielmann , M . & Mundlos , S . Breaking TADs : how alterations of chromatin domains result in disease . Trends Genet . 32 , 225 – 237 ( 2016 ) . 131 . Kandoth , C . et al . Mutational landscape and significance across 12 major cancer types . Nature 502 , 333 – 339 ( 2013 ) . 132 . Filippova , G . N . et al . A widely expressed transcription factor with multiple DNA sequence specificity , CTCF , is localized at chromosome segment 16q22 . 1 within one of the smallest regions of overlap for common deletions in breast and prostate cancers . Genes Chromosomes Cancer 22 , 26 – 36 ( 1998 ) . 133 . Kon , A . et al . Recurrent mutations in multiple components of the cohesin complex in myeloid neoplasms . Nat . Genet . 45 , 1232 – 1237 ( 2013 ) . 134 . Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network . Genomic and epigenomic landscapes of adult de novo acute myeloid leukemia . N . Engl . J . Med . 368 , 2059 – 2074 ( 2013 ) . 135 . Kemp , C . J . et al . CTCF haploinsufficiency destabilizes DNA methylation and predisposes to cancer . Cell Rep . 7 , 1020 – 1029 ( 2014 ) . 136 . Mullenders , J . et al . Cohesin loss alters adult hematopoietic stem cell homeostasis , leading to myeloproliferative neoplasms . J . Exp . Med . 212 , 1833 – 1850 ( 2015 ) . 137 . Viny , A . D . et al . Dose - dependent role of the cohesin complex in normal and malignant hematopoiesis . J . Exp . Med . 212 , 1819 – 1832 ( 2015 ) . 138 . Corces , M . R . & Corces , V . G . The three - dimensional cancer genome . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 36 , 1 – 7 ( 2016 ) . 139 . Katainen , R . et al . CTCF / cohesin - binding sites are frequently mutated in cancer . Nat . Genet . 47 , 818 – 821 ( 2015 ) . 140 . Hnisz , D . et al . Activation of proto - oncogenes by disruption of chromosome neighborhoods . Science 351 , 1454 – 1458 ( 2016 ) . 141 . Bell , A . C . & Felsenfeld , G . Methylation of a CTCF - dependent boundary controls imprinted expression of the Igf2 gene . Nature 405 , 482 – 485 ( 2000 ) . 142 . Wang , H . et al . Widespread plasticity in CTCF occupancy linked to DNA methylation . Genome Res . 22 , 1680 – 1688 ( 2012 ) . 143 . Maurano , M . T . et al . Large - scale identification of sequence variants influencing human transcription factor occupancy in vivo . Nat . Genet . 47 , 1393 – 1401 ( 2015 ) . 144 . Flavahan , W . A . et al . Insulator dysfunction and oncogene activation in IDH mutant gliomas . Nature 529 , 110 – 114 ( 2016 ) . 145 . Visser , M . , Kayser , M . & Palstra , R . J . HERC2 rs12913832 modulates human pigmentation by attenuating chromatin - loop formation between a long - range enhancer and the OCA2 promoter . Genome Res . 22 , 446 – 455 ( 2012 ) . 146 . Groschel , S . et al . A single oncogenic enhancer rearrangement causes concomitant EVI1 and GATA2 deregulation in leukemia . Cell 157 , 369 – 381 ( 2014 ) . 147 . Lupianez , D . G . et al . Disruptions of topological chromatin domains cause pathogenic rewiring of gene - enhancer interactions . Cell 161 , 1012 – 1025 ( 2015 ) . References 146 and 147 illustrate how chromatin contact profiles help uncover the functional consequences of chromosomal rearrangements and in the discovery of molecular mechanisms underlying disease . 148 . Fischer , J . et al . Inactivation of the Fto gene protects from obesity . Nature 458 , 894 – 898 ( 2009 ) . 149 . Smemo , S . et al . Obesity - associated variants within FTO form long - range functional connections with IRX3 . Nature 507 , 371 – 375 ( 2014 ) . 150 . Claussnitzer , M . et al . FTO obesity variant circuitry and adipocyte browning in humans . N . Engl . J . Med . 373 , 895 – 907 ( 2015 ) . References 149 and 150 illustrate how the implementation of both epigenetic and 3D genome maps can greatly assist in the identification of the target gene of disease - associated variants . 151 . de Vree , P . J . et al . Targeted sequencing by proximity ligation for comprehensive variant detection and local haplotyping . Nat . Biotechnol . 32 , 1019 – 1025 ( 2014 ) . 152 . Selvaraj , S . , Schmitt , A . D . , Dixon , J . R . & Ren , B . Complete haplotype phasing of the MHC and KIR loci with targeted HaploSeq . BMC Genomics 16 , 900 ( 2015 ) . 153 . Splinter , E . et al . The inactive X chromosome adopts a unique three - dimensional conformation that is dependent on Xist RNA . Genes Dev . 25 , 1371 – 1383 ( 2011 ) . 154 . Simonis , M . et al . Nuclear organization of active and inactive chromatin domains uncovered by chromosome conformation capture - on - chip ( 4C ) . Nat . Genet . 38 , 1348 – 1354 ( 2006 ) . 155 . Hughes , J . R . et al . Analysis of hundreds of cis - regulatory landscapes at high resolution in a single , high - throughput experiment . Nat . Genet . 46 , 205 – 212 ( 2014 ) . 156 . Davies , J . O . et al . Multiplexed analysis of chromosome conformation at vastly improved sensitivity . Nat . Methods 13 , 74 – 80 ( 2016 ) . 157 . Mifsud , B . et al . Mapping long - range promoter contacts in human cells with high - resolution capture Hi - C . Nat . Genet . 47 , 598 – 606 ( 2015 ) . 158 . Sahlen , P . et al . Genome - wide mapping of promoter - anchored interactions with close to single - enhancer resolution . Genome Biol . 16 , 156 ( 2015 ) . 159 . Dostie , J . et al . Chromosome Conformation Capture Carbon Copy ( 5C ) : a massively parallel solution for mapping interactions between genomic elements . Genome Res . 16 , 1299 – 1309 ( 2006 ) . 160 . Lieberman - Aiden , E . et al . Comprehensive mapping of long - range interactions reveals folding principles of the human genome . Science 326 , 289 – 293 ( 2009 ) . 161 . Fullwood , M . J . et al . An oestrogen - receptor - α - bound human chromatin interactome . Nature 462 , 58 – 64 ( 2009 ) . 162 . Li , M . J . , Wang , L . Y . , Xia , Z . , Sham , P . C . & Wang , J . GWAS3D : detecting human regulatory variants by integrative analysis of genome - wide associations , chromosome interactions and histone modifications . Nucleic Acids Res . 41 , W150 – W158 ( 2013 ) . Acknowledgements W . d . L’s research is supported by a Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research - Chemical Sciences ( NWO / CW ) TOP grant ( 714 . 012 . 002 ) , an NWO - Innovational Research Incentives Scheme ( VICI ) grant ( 724 . 012 . 003 ) , a European Union grant ( 2010 – 259743 ; Modelling Hepatocellular Carcinoma ( MODHEP ) ) and a grant from The Leducq Foundation ( FP058566 - 01 - PR ) . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing interests . R E V I E W S 782 | DECEMBER 2016 | VOLUME 17 www . nature . com / nrm R E V I E W S © 2016 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved .