IST - Africa 2020 Conference Proceedings Miriam Cunningham and Paul Cunningham ( Eds ) IST - Africa Institute and IIMC , 2020 ISBN : 978 - 1 - 905824 - 65 - 6 Copyright © 2020 The authors www . IST - Africa . org / Conference2020 Page 1 of 12 Smart City Citizens’ Service Provision using Participatory Design and Participatory Sensing : Lessons for Developing Cities Stephen KYAKULUMBYE , Shaun PATHER , Antoine BAGULA University of the Western Cape , Cape Town , 7535 , South Africa Tel : + 27 1674427 , Fax : + 021 959 3115 , Email : 3759606 @ myuwc . ac . za , spather @ uwc . ac . za , abagula @ uwc . ac . za Abstract : Involving citizens in public affairs through participatory design and participatory sensing is a new emerging theme in the Western World contributing to realization of successful e - government applications . Such participatory design and participatory sensing ( PD / PS ) through Internet of Things ( IoT ) devices uses data , information and information sharing which are key aspects of development in globalized economies . Adopting a mankind nervous system IoTs architectural design from human computer interaction design principles , PD / PS offers a promise for a fair balance between functional and non - functional IoT requirements which have been revealed to be orthogonal yet necessary . The methodology of this paper leverages literature search , policy analysis and aligns to empirical participatory design results from the previous PhD study in order to inform Smart City initiatives in a developing country context case study . Based on findings , this paper proposes a smart city digital model premised on participatory design for public safety requirements gathering to advance a participatory design - sensing ( PD / PS ) architecture IoTs for Kampala Smart City . This paper contributes to the benefit for realization of a smart city strategy that is part of the commitments for e - government benefits attainment for citizens . It can be used as a framework for operationalization of e - government for citizen applications in both urban and marginalized contexts with diffusion of smart mobile phones and similar affordable sensing devices . From a human computer interaction approach , further research aims to align the proposed architecture within the cloud - computing framework . Keywords : smart cities , digitization , e - government , human centred design , participatory design and participatory sensing . 1 . Introduction The UN World report notes that more than half of the population ( 51 . 4 % ) now live in urban areas and many more are migrating to cities and similar upcoming towns with estimated number being at 60 % by 2030 [ 1 ] . With such growing populations in the urban areas , the complex congregation of people , inevitably tend to become messy and disordered places with quite a number of problems that become wicked and tangled [ 2 ] . Some of the problems include difficulty in waste management , scarcity of resources , air pollution , human health concerns , traffic congestions , inadequate public safety and security threats , deteriorating and aging infrastructures are among the more basic technical , physical , and material problems [ 3 ] , [ 4 ] , [ 5 ] , [ 6 ] . With such problems among others therefore , there has been birth of the concept of Smart Cities , which has become a buzz word for both developed and developing countries . Copyright © 2020 The authors www . IST - Africa . org / Conference2020 Page 2 of 12 2 . Objectives This paper aims to achieve the following objectives :  Assess the policy environment of smart city digital initiatives for developed and developing contexts to benchmark any lessons learned from implementation of IoTs for emerging city’s service delivery ;  To evaluate the available IoT architectures that form an impetus for deployment of Smart city IoTs for citizen service delivery in developing contexts like Uganda ;  To present a participatory design and participatory sensing framework IoTs for developing context smart city implementation . 3 . Methodology This paper is both a review of online policy strategic smart city documentation and partial results from a longitudinal participatory action research design methodology that harnessed design science research . The results that informed this project are from the four design research iterations referred to as 4Co - Ds viz Co - problem D iscovery , Co - Problem D efinition , Co - D evelopment and Co - D elivery with the co - design team members in four full round iterations and with co - citizens in other four full round iterations [ 5 ] , [ 6 ] . Specifically , the solutions from the identified problems are co - designed with design team throughout the process and the prototypes simulated among the selected citizens . The problems were co - identified from a survey among 425 citizen groups who operate small and medium enterprises within Mukono District , Uganda . Whereas the survey was to examine the status quo of citizens as regards to use of computer based systems , this paper reports about interview results that aimed at generating the problems to be engineered as potential solutions during the requirements analysis . The SMEs from Mukono District , Uganda were stratified ( 9 stratum ) according to similarity of enterprises they run with the assumption that they face similar problems . Mukono District was selected as a case study because it was , according to the National e - government framework , a candidate pilot project for e - government infrastructure development . It is also in close geographical proximity to Kampala where most government ministries are located . Data was collected from SMEs using a close ended interview guide and to scope the design requirements further , more follow up data was collected from citizens from a health setting . The results from Mukono were used for corroboration to inform a Smart city strategy development for improving citizen service delivery . Moreover , Smart city policy data was collected using document checklists among Kampala - the capital city of Uganda and purposely selected developed Smart city strategy documents . 4 . The Conceptualization of the Notion of Smart City It is revealed that as the term “smart city” gains wider and wider currency , there is still confusion about what a smart city is , especially since several similar terms are often used interchangeably [ 7 ] . Albino , et al maintain that a range of conceptual variants is often obtained by replacing “smart” with alternative adjectives , for example , “intelligent city” or “digital city , ” “cyber city , ” “global city , ” “e - city , ” information city” “virtual city , ” “network city” [ 8 ] . The label “smart city” is a fuzzy concept and is used in ways that are not always consistent [ 9 ] . There is neither a single template of framing a smart city , nor a one - size - fits - all definition of it , and all literature being reviewed reports a word like inconsistent definition , replaced adjectives , fuzzy concept , etc [ 9 ] . These are all words to mean lack of consensus in the conceptualization of a Smart City . Whereas there is a unified lack of conceptualization of what a smart city entails , this paper supposes that it is real and the concept is driven by intelligent technologies that include wireless sensor networks , Copyright © 2020 The authors www . IST - Africa . org / Conference2020 Page 3 of 12 mobile phones , social media , mobile based applications among other similar devices all referred to as digital initiatives using Internet of Things [ 10 ] , [ 11 ] . The next section provides policy context based literature of Smart City digital initiatives to examine the type of technologies being harnessed . 4 . 1 Smart City Digital initiatives and enablers The following five key city digital initiative documents all accessed from Internet formed the impetus for further literature reviews : Germany digital strategy 2025 [ 12 ] ; City of Cape Town Digital Strategy [ 13 ] ; Kampala Capital City Authority Smart Strategy [ 14 ] ; Washington D . C Smart city strategy [ 15 ] and Barcelona [ 16 ] . The results are summarized in the section that follows . Whereas technology per say does not determine the highest rank of top cities , it is a prerequisite for Smart city development [ 11 ] . Barcelona is currently one of the most famous smart cities due its high number of technological services offered to citizens , businesses and general community , ranging from intelligent systems to more diverse wireless sensor networks [ 16 ] , [ 17 ] . This is due to its all - encompassing use of new technologies , including a smart traffic light system which sets the lights at green until fire engines have passed , emergency response devices installed in the individual’s home and connected through a ( land or mobile ) telephone line to a Call Centre , which can be contacted at the simple press of a button , and other innovations [ 18 ] . Washington D . C Smart city strategy includes : waste monitoring systems through use of sensors ; centralized information portal and repository with government partners ; Video sensors to monitor , classify and count city movements to measure traffic volume and flows in economic development corridors and event locations ; street light management systems ; and urban living labs through sensor based technologies [ 15 ] . Germany’s digital initiative in Berlin is characterized by ICTs , telecommunications , energy supply systems , traffic management systems , waste management systems , urban environment , and digital big data . Digital technologies in the private spheres include smart phones , computers , telecommunications devices , and household appliances and private cars equipped with sensors and computer capabilities [ 12 ] . The City of Cape Town ( CoCT ) Digital Initiative , South Africa boosts city residents by offering free public Wi - Fi , CCTV cameras , Open data portal , smart grid technologies at municipality levels , free Wi - Fi on MyCity buses , with electric buses underway [ 13 ] . All these cities when compared to Uganda’s capital smart city strategy commit to ICTs for efficient and effective administration of the city in provision of services to residents / citizens ; aerial geo - mapping , national backbone infrastructure , mobile technology solutions for both smart phone and low end mobile users , interactive web portal , tech for city surveillance with police , secure private cloud for hosting citizen applications , free Wi - Fi hotspots in plan . CCTV cameras are all over the city to monitor crime , enhance citizens’ security and compliance to public health issues [ 14 ] . The interconnected technological enablers of smart city digital strategies form the commonly used term Internet of Things . Therefore , the next section evaluates the available IoT architectures that that are enablers for service provision among residents . 5 . Technology description : The Internet of Things ( IoTs ) Architectures The Internet of Things ( IoTs ) aims to bridge a gap between real world processes and information systems . When attached to physical items or locations to communicate with mobile devices like mobile phones , the IoTs such as Radio Frequency Identifiers ( RFIds ) and other wireless sensor networks transform where they are attached into smart items . The ability of such items to capture context - based data allows information systems to monitor Copyright © 2020 The authors www . IST - Africa . org / Conference2020 Page 4 of 12 community and other business - based processes . The information generated by smart items allows the monitoring and control of products along the entire process thereby strengthening the integrity that could be compromised : for instance product integrity , component integrity and route integrity [ 19 ] . Most IoTs architectures are based on functional requirements , which at most times fail to match with the realization of non - functional requirements [ 20 ] , [ 21 ] . Yet , it has been observed that functional and non - functional IoT architectures are orthogonal , and the underlying challenge is how to balance them [ 22 ] , [ 23 ] . For instance , non - functional requirements are underpinned by cognitive processes which humans undergo during any information processing initiatives of any given participatory design framework [ 6 ] hence the birth of architectures like internet of people via internet services [ 24 ] ; hub - centric approach to IoTs [ 25 ] ; Need finding machines IoTs [ 26 , p . 64 ] among others . From such concepts , this paper advances an IoT design paradigm of participatory sensing architectures as feasible approaches to deployment of IoTs . 5 . 1 Service provision through participatory sensing architecture In terms of service provision using IoTs , participatory sensing ( PS ) is a wireless network sensing approach that aims to include smart phones in the sensing loop and utilize them as sensory stations taking a multi sensor snapshot of their immediate environment [ 27 ] . Like the name suggests , PS is based on public participation or participatory design . It has been observed that involving the public , especially the citizens in public affairs such as smart city design using participatory sensing applications is key to realization of e - government and mobile government [ 28 ] . In participatory sensing , citizens make decisions about what , where and when to sense . Smart Cities are about digitalization of city services and functions through wireless networks and remote sensors as could be likened to the human neural system . This then implies that such intelligent systems need to harness data informed processes for effective decision - making and action . Harrison , et al in Figure 1 provides a conceptual flow of data and information in an instrumented world system [ 29 ] . This is also premised on Garrison Jr , et al , who observes that beginning with real - world data and ending with insight drives effective decision - making [ 30 ] . Figure 1 . A conceptual flow of data and information in a digitized world system adapted from Harrison [ 29 ] From Figure 1 , it can be observed that at level 1 are the technologies for sensing , metering and application integration of the various infrastructure and software . At level 2 , data is captured , formatted and transformed into standard based information . At level 3 , the information is visualized after analytics . At level 4 , the policy makers and implementers ( custodians of Smart City Strategy ) gain insight from the information , and at level 5 , time Copyright © 2020 The authors www . IST - Africa . org / Conference2020 Page 5 of 12 dependent decisions are taken and information if fully utilized for various city actions especially as way of improving citizen service delivery requirements and needs . 5 . 2 An IoT architecture based participatory sensing devices harnessing mobile phones as main device As observed , the opportunity of intelligent systems for making cities smarter like use of mobile phones , RFIds , drones and similar WSNs is vested in data for urban planning for improving the information value chain discussed before . Some of the devices that can be used for interactive patterns and participatory sensing among citizens , government officials and community members are summarized in the Figure 2 below : Figure 2 : Interaction patterns among smart devices ; Source : modified from [ 31 ] From the above figure , some of the devices that can be used during the participatory design and participatory sensing initiatives include : Blue - tooth enabled phones tagged with RFId labels ( 1 ) , Portable Digital Assistants ( PDAs ) ( 2 ) , BT nodes ( 3 ) , RFId antenna and readers ( 4 ) , sensor smart boards ( 5 ) , Blue - tooth access points ( 6 ) , RFId tags ( 7 ) and Global System for Mobile Communication mast ( GSM ) ( 8 ) . For analytics purposes , all the data generated should be rooted into a centralized database ( 9 ) . 6 . Results In this section , the results are presented based on objectives three and four of this paper as : a participatory sensing framework IoTs for developing context smart city implementation ; and the impact of participatory sensing methodology onto citizen service provision within developing country smart city contexts . They include participatory design problem discovery , participatory sensing implementation framework , impact and opportunity for Uganda urban cities . Finally , the paper concludes with areas for further research . 6 . 1 Interview Results Revealing Citizens’ Real Needs in Respect of e - Government Services Most of the e - government service requirements suggested by the interviewees were framed around personal / citizen - level and community - level needs . The first four e - government service requirements ( reporting crime at businesses and homes ; kidnaps in community among citizens , women and children ; fire outbreaks in communities , schools and Copyright © 2020 The authors www . IST - Africa . org / Conference2020 Page 6 of 12 businesses ; challenges of booking scarce transport to townships ) formed the basis for participatory design continuity for implementation :  Crime at work and home : A neighbourhood home or business ( SMEs ) application that monitors crime , theft or similar incidences for public safety . It was named ReportIt .  Kidnappings of women and children : An application intended for use by a kidnapped victim to signal authorities or government security agencies like the police for emergency response . This was a common problem among SMEs as victims fall prey to criminals who think they carry money home from work . The application was named FindMe .  Fire outbreaks at work and school : A fire - reporting application in case of fire outbreak at schools to offer real - time response by government agencies . It was named QuickApp .  Booking transport to go to township : Some respondents reported that they were located far from city centres and yet buses traverse the city where they conduct business transactions . It was named UBus .  Improve health care giving to citizens and residents through online booking systems for private patients who can use online means . Health - booking system App . From the above resident problems , Figure 3 below presents a use interface and use case based on the participatory design for which the next level participatory sensing approach is premised : Figure 3 : Use case for incident reporting mobile application respectively Source : Kyakulumbye et al . [ 6 ] From the above use case , the user , the system ( data base administrator ) and system administrator are all kept in the loop about what is being reported , where and when . From the participatory design use case , there is the citizen layer ( device capture layer ) , device - to - server processing layer , server processing layer and application layer all requiring interconnection to the technological infrastructures . At device capture layer , there is user configuration that includes user authentication with profile , sign in credentials and if required account creation . This then enables automated capture of the event using time location trace like GPS / GSM / Wi - Fi + time ) . Another important feature is the International Mobile Equipment Identity ( IMEI ) that helps to keep track of the mobile device itself even when the SIM card is removed . Similar to the IMEI is Copyright © 2020 The authors www . IST - Africa . org / Conference2020 Page 7 of 12 the Media Access Control ( MAC ) Address used to identify the mobile device on the network . The next layer in the use case is the device - to - server processing layer , which is towards server processing . Prior to sending information to the database server , this architecture allows for navigation into the logged in page , navigation to main menu to select incidence option and a report detail summary can be provided instantly . So when the system confirms successful reporting of an incidence , information will be written into the server ( database ) . However , in between the device - to - server processing layer and the device capture layer , there can be a router or routers and similar intelligent devices that are interoperable with smart mobile phones . A router is an electronic device that connects multiple computer networks through wired or wireless connections . It is also used to receive , analyse and convert data from another network . It consists of a CPU memory and an I / O interface . The third layer in this use case is the server processing layer that can handle real time or historical data contextual data , GIS data etc and can be linked to data analytics applications like Tableau , SPSS modeler etc for making more sense out of the data . This then determines decision and action initiated at the application layer . At the last application analysis layer is where decision for citizen service response and improvement takes place . The desired response is to act in a real time manner to citizen’s reported problems , in this case incidences that could have been submitted like fire outbreak , kidnaps , crimes , advocacy or citizen engagement in a democratic process among other citizen engagements sought . All the action taken at this layer will be based on the information visualized on the administrator’s dashboard , which is a reflected of the citizen service requirement at the application layer . 6 . 2 Towards IoTs architecture of participatory design and participatory sensing for Developing contexts Smart Cities Having that participatory sensing architecture using wireless sensor networks and mobile devices offers developing contexts like Kampala a number of opportunities based on the available city challenges at hand . Figure 4 presents a hybrid of traditional participatory design and participatory sensing : Figure 4 : Layered PD - PS architecture of a developing context smart city From a participatory design approach , originally adopted and employed to design the e - government mobile prototypes being proposed for implementation , the paper examined buzz words close to participatory design goals and principles in a wireless network environment . Participatory sensing is a concept of communities and other group of people Copyright © 2020 The authors www . IST - Africa . org / Conference2020 Page 8 of 12 contributing sensory information from the sensing layer ( situation around them ) aimed at jointly addressing issues affecting them at the application layer . The onset of participatory sensing is participatory design which involves collective design and involvement by citizens and other stakeholders throughout the project life cycle ( co - problem discovery , co - problem definition , co - development to co - delivery ) [ 5 ] , [ 6 ] , [ 32 ] . It involves use of citizens’ mobile phones to make them become active in observations and data distribution . The citizens themselves become aware and initiate or receive and transmit alerts regarding the situation surrounding them to initiative the required responses and engagement through their own collective action using sensing components and physical devices at the sensing layer [ 33 ] . In this situation , citizens and other stakeholder groups form an eco - system of communication network using the wireless technologies like social media , blue tooth , RFIds readers and near network field communication tags etc all connected into a common platform where they report , share and be notified about the progress of events happening in the city . For instance , a user walking around who witnesses a public safety incidence in a given location can take a picture , write a text , and share the incidence with other users of the application . The city council and service providers will be notified of the occurrence and proceed accordingly to send a responsible employee ( s ) to the location to address the problem . Such incidences may be so emergent that they need response by use of unmanaged vehicles like drones since road access in urban centers in developing context can mean to be messy and traffic congested . However , the deployment of WSNs like drones connected with Wi - Fi to signal residents about collective action need participatory design since such technologies can be so fascinating and threatening to ordinary citizens . Moreover , as earlier discussion , WNS are faced by non - functional requirements issues like security , privacy , trust among others that require to be addressed through traditional participatory design . By various community stakeholders getting connected to the participatory sensing architecture , a local newspaper or radio or TV station , for example , will escalate the issue if no attention is given to a reported incidence . The media escalates the same problem to its online information channel , which also provides the citizens avenue for accessing participatory sensing events . Such data / information shared at sensing layer can be accessed at the data management layer through the transmission layer that triggers action to the incidences back at the application layer . 6 . 3 IoTs designed as human - centered systems than technology oriented ones In the first place , IoTs have been likened to human neural system . From a biological perspective , the analogy of IoTs in this paper is to liken connectivity and interaction of data to the nervous system . The Central Nervous systems that comprises of the brain as a management and centralized data center with distributed cord nodes , spinal cord with distributed control nodes and the network of nerves which is likened to IoT network and sensors [ 34 ] , [ 35 ] , [ 36 ] . These sensors through our senses voluntarily or involuntarily receive cues from the environment , processes the data through perception , comprehension and projection . The major processes that take place in the central processing server can be briefly outlined as below :  Perception is an attention - based selection of task requirements . It includes affordance ( which implies how an application should be used ) , consistency , familiarity , recognisability , visibility , and benefits expectations [ 6 ] , [ 35 ] .  Comprehension is an understanding of perceived information about a particular situation . It includes learnability , association , generalization , informative , ease of use [ 5 ] , [ 6 ] , [ 35 ] , [ 36 ] . Copyright © 2020 The authors www . IST - Africa . org / Conference2020 Page 9 of 12  Projection includes feedback , user centeredness , support , user confidence , meaningfulness , prediction , pop - up messages , signal displays and error detection functions among others [ 5 ] , [ 6 ] , [ 35 ] and [ 36 ] . During processing , active processes will be loaded in the short - term server ( memory ) which some processes not immediately required will be held in the long - term memory server . From the IoT perspective , the IoTs network transmits the messages from the sensors to the corresponding control nodes and the management and data center , which receives , translates and sends back message to sensors to control the situation or to fix the problem initially faced . The management and data center that can be likened to cloud computing is a centralized data center for processing and storing data ( short term and long term ) and managing the whole network . From a participatory design perspective , the design for public good calls for requirements understanding among citizens . Such requirements ( perceived and real ) include reliability , security , dependability , usability , relevance , maintainability , trustworthiness , cost , development time , and are crucial for system success [ 29 ] . They are underpinned by cognitive processes , which humans undergo during any information processing initiatives [ 6 ] . From such an understanding , participatory sensing using IoTs and its associated service benefits can be realized among citizens within the context of smart city realization . A number of studies have human related IoT architectures for effective participatory sensing . 6 . 4 Use of human - like IoT architecture for a cloud based citizen health care management Among the several citizen pressing issues , this section provides a use case for a resource constrained hospital that aims at providing health care to residents at an affordable yet quality service . This hospital comprises of two categories of citizens : the well to do and the economically impoverished who constitute the great majority yet they need health care which they cannot afford to pay . Healthcare is a key e - government concern for developing nations like Uganda , and if not well handled can make towns and cities even more congested , messy and cloudy . Within the e - government health sector , one component for making cities smarter is improving the turnaround time for health care giving . This is because long turnaround time makes health care giving centres clouded , noisy and unpleasant hence negatively affecting the quality of services provided . The leading question for this pilot requirement - gathering phase was : “How can a hospital in a resource - constrained environment maintain health service delivery at a low cost and enhance service accessibility and affordability to the poor population served ? ” From the group presentations , major finding among citizens presented was as observed : The private wing needs to be furnished with online booking services to improve accessibility , online patient data capture and timeliness of care giving so that more private patients are attracted all over the country to enhance revenue for offering sustainable services to the other non - paying patients . ( Group presenter emphasis ) A separate group member noted , As a private patient , I want to come to the hospital and find my medical record sorted rather than being asked over and over again . Let’s put services online rather than making us stand in line here . ( Presentation by a retired civil servant accessing services from the hospital ) The impetus for all mobile applications is for use of information sensed at the sensing layer through the transmission layer , to the data management layer and back to application layer for making decisions and taking real - time action to save life and improve service Copyright © 2020 The authors www . IST - Africa . org / Conference2020 Page 10 of 12 delivery . While IoTs can provide enormous amount of data , some of this can be processed locally or embedded in microcontroller enabled processor devices . The huge data generated from various sources can reside in the cloud , which requires greater processing power to retrieve information in a secure and reliable manner . However , from a participatory sensing perspective , the use of internet transcends its use for interconnecting end user devices , to internet used for interconnecting physical objects that communicate with each other and / or with humans is can be the case for smart city initiatives . As has been observed , within a smart city , several devices are intercommunicating with each other when managed or not managed by humans , however , manual involved kicks in at some point : data retrieval , device control , data location capture among other . This then calls for a cloud - computing framework that is machine - human centred . 7 . Conclusions Smart things are transforming humanity , but their effectiveness calls for human - centric design and human - centric sensing which are still amiss in the sensing literature [ 37 ] . This paper provides a pointer to participatory design paradigm and methodology in efforts to makes cities smarter . From the theoretical contribution perspective , this paper advances an IoT framework that is likened to the human nervous systems and a layered PD - PS architecture of a developing context smart city deployment . To practice , smart city policy makers and implementers could devise strategies taking a human - centric perspective as the main approach to understand and incorporate lived realities of city population into smart city designs . Whatever is outlined in this paper is an area of further implementation and validation based on the promised Wireless Sensor Networks participatory design and participatory sensing taking a socio - technical perspective . The implementation of the frameworks herein proposed for urban and peri - urban setting cities , constitutes further area of research . Moreover , as revealed by literature in this paper , there are a number of barriers ranging from security protocol design barriers , participatory sensing usability barriers , ethical , regulatory among others that impinge on the deployment of intelligent systems for Smart city deployment that can all be addressed by similar work that take a socio - technical view point . It has been observed by similar other authors that as IoT is emerging towards the smart city requirements , privacy concerns , device or data security seems to be a major concern [ 38 ] , [ 39 ] . These among other detailed configuration and security issues are out of scope of this paper and form an opportunity for future research for use in the public space . A major limitation of this study is that there are wireless sensor network technologies being adopted for purposes of participatory sensing within Kampala , Uganda yet our counterpart developing nations and their cities are way far ahead of such implementations as has been observed in their smart city strategies . In conclusion , this paper posits that there is need for collaborative research cooperation between Europe & Africa ( North , South , East Collaboration ) in this area in order to have lessons learnt for effective and efficient implementation of smart city strategies in developing contexts . The use of low cost technologies can be applicable in the developing contexts where technology cost ( such as the cost of drones , RFIds etc ) is deemed to be an impediment for smart city implementation . References [ 1 ] United Nations . ( 2016 ) The World’sCities in 2016 : Economic and Social Affairs . Booklet . [ 2 ] Chourabi , H . , Nam , T . , Walker , S . , Gil - Garcia , J . R . , Mellouli , S . , Nahon , K . , Pardo , T . A . and Scholl , H . J . , 2012 , January . Understanding smart cities : An integrative framework . In 2012 45th Hawaii international conference on system sciences ( pp . 2289 - 2297 ) . IEEE . Copyright © 2020 The authors www . IST - Africa . org / Conference2020 Page 11 of 12 [ 3 ] Vardoulakis , Sotiris , Keith Dear , and Paul Wilkinson . " Challenges and opportunities for urban environmental health and sustainability : the HEALTHY - POLIS initiative . " Environmental health 15 , no . 1 ( 2016 ) : S30 . [ 4 ] Taamallah , A . , Khemaja , M . and Faiz , S . , 2020 . Building a Framework for Smart Cities : Strategy Development . In Smart Governance for Cities : Perspectives and Experiences ( pp . 29 - 53 ) . Springer , Cham . Hiller , H . H . , 2000 . Mega(cid:31)events , urban boosterism and growth strategies : an analysis of the objectives and legitimations of the Cape Town 2004 Olympic Bid . International journal of urban and regional research , 24 ( 2 ) , pp . 449 - 458 . [ 5 ] De Filippi , F . , Coscia , C . , Cocina , G . G . , Lazzari , G . and Manzo , S . , 2020 . Digital Participatory Platforms for Civic Engagement : A New Way of Participating in Society ? : Analysis of Case Studies in Four EU Countries . International Journal of Urban Planning and Smart Cities ( IJUPSC ) , 1 ( 1 ) , pp . 1 - 21 . [ 6 ] Kyakulumbye , S . , Pather , S . and Jantjies , M . , 2019 . Knowledge Creation in a Participatory Design Context : The use of Empathetic Participatory Design . Electronic Journal of Knowledge Management , 17 ( 1 ) . [ 7 ] Guo , Y . M . , Huang , Z . L . , Guo , J . , Li , H . , Guo , X . R . and Nkeli , M . J . , 2019 . Bibliometric Analysis on Smart Cities Research . Sustainability , 11 ( 13 ) , p . 3606 . [ 8 ] Albino , V . , Berardi , U . and Dangelico , R . M . , 2015 . Smart cities : Definitions , dimensions , performance , and initiatives . Journal of urban technology , 22 ( 1 ) , pp . 3 - 21 . [ 9 ] Nam , T . and Pardo , T . A . , 2011 , June . Conceptualizing smart city with dimensions of technology , people , and institutions . In Proceedings of the 12th annual international digital government research conference : digital government innovation in challenging times ( pp . 282 - 291 ) . ACM . [ 10 ] Da Xu , L . , He , W . and Li , S . , 2014 . Internet of things in industries : A survey . IEEE Transactions on industrial informatics , 10 ( 4 ) , pp . 2233 - 2243 . [ 11 ] Jin , J . , Gubbi , J . , Marusic , S . and Palaniswami , M . , 2014 . An information framework for creating a smart city through internet of things . IEEE Internet of Things journal , 1 ( 2 ) , pp . 112 - 121 . [ 12 ] https : / / www . berlin - partner . de / fileadmin / user _ upload / 01 _ chefredaktion / 02 _ pdf / 02 _ navi / 21 / Strategie _ Smart _ City _ Berlin _ e n . pdf [ 13 ] https : / / www . capetownmagazine . com / cape - town - smartest - city - in - africa [ 14 ] https : / / unctad . org / meetings / en / Presentation / ecn162016p10 _ Ssekajja - KCCA _ en . pdf [ 15 ] https : / / smarter . dc . gov / [ 16 ] http : / / www . barcinno . com / barcelona - smart - city - technologies / [ 17 ] Moir , E . , Moonen , T . and Clark , G . , 2014 . What are future cities ? Origins , meanings and uses . Compiled by The Business of Cities for the Foresight Future of Cities Project and the Future Cities Catapult . Published by Government Office for Science , Foresight . https : / / www . gov . uk / government / uploads / system / uploads / attachment _ data / file / 337549 / 14 - 820 - what - are - future - cities . pdf . [ 18 ] Edwards , L . , 2016 . Privacy , security and data protection in smart cities : A critical EU law perspective . Eur . Data Prot . L . Rev . , 2 , p . 28 . [ 19 ] Ferreira , P . , Martinho , R . and Domingos , D . , 2010 , September . IoT - aware business processes for logistics : limitations of current approaches . In INForum ( pp . 611 - 622 ) . [ 20 ] Saadatmand , M . , Cicchetti , A . and Sjödin , M . , 2011 , October . Uml - based modeling of non - functional requirements in telecommunication systems . In The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances ( ICSEA 2011 ) ( pp . 213 - 220 ) . Barcelona , Spain : The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers , Inc . . [ 21 ] Jonkers , H . , Iacob , M . E . , Lankhorst , M . M . and Strating , P . , 2005 , September . Integration and analysis of functional and non - functional aspects in model - driven e - service development . In Ninth IEEE International EDOC Enterprise Computing Conference ( EDOC ' 05 ) ( pp . 229 - 238 ) . IEEE . [ 22 ] Harrison , N . and Avgeriou , P . , 2007 , July . Pattern - driven architectural partitioning : Balancing functional and non - functional requirements . In 2007 Second International Conference on Digital Telecommunications ( ICDT ' 07 ) ( pp . 21 - 21 ) . IEEE . [ 23 ] Gross , D . and Yu , E . , 2001 , August . Evolving system architecture to meet changing business goals : an agent and goal - oriented approach . In Proceedings Fifth IEEE International Symposium on Requirements Engineering ( pp . 316 - 317 ) . IEEE . [ 24 ] Yonezawa , T . , Matranga , I . , Galache , J . A . , Maeomichi , H . , Gurgen , L . and Shibuya , T . , 2015 , April . A citizen - centric approach towards global - scale smart city platform . In 2015 International Conference on Recent Advances in Internet of Things ( RIoT ) ( pp . 1 - 6 ) . IEEE . [ 25 ] Lea , R . and Blackstock , M . , 2014 , December . City hub : A cloud - based iot platform for smart cities . In 2014 IEEE 6th international conference on cloud computing technology and science ( pp . 799 - 804 ) . IEEE . Copyright © 2020 The authors www . IST - Africa . org / Conference2020 Page 12 of 12 [ 26 ] Soro , A . , Brereton , M . and Roe , P . eds . , 2018 . Social Internet of Things . Springer . Accessed at https : / / www . springer . com / gp / book / 9783319946573 [ 27 ] Haider , I . , Höberl , M . and Rinner , B . , 2016 , May . Trusted sensors for participatory sensing and iot applications based on physically unclonable functions . In Proceedings of the 2nd ACM International Workshop on IoT Privacy , Trust , and Security ( pp . 14 - 21 ) . ACM . [ 28 ] Winkler , T . J . , Ziekow , H . and Weinberg , M . , 2012 . Municipal benefits of participatory urban sensing : A simulation approach and case validation . Journal of theoretical and applied electronic commerce research , 7 ( 3 ) , pp . 101 - 120 . [ 29 ] Harrison , C . , Eckman , B . , Hamilton , R . , Hartswick , P . , Kalagnanam , J . , Paraszczak , J . and Williams , P . , 2010 . Foundations for smarter cities . IBM Journal of research and development , 54 ( 4 ) , pp . 1 - 16 . [ 30 ] Garrison Jr , L . P . , Neumann , P . J . , Erickson , P . , Marshall , D . and Mullins , C . D . , 2007 . Using real(cid:31)world data for coverage and payment decisions : The ISPOR real(cid:31)world data task force report . Value in health , 10 ( 5 ) , pp . 326 - 335 . [ 31 ] Siegemund , F . and Florkemeier , C . , 2003 , March . Interaction in pervasive computing settings using Bluetooth - enabled active tags and passive RFID technology together with mobile phones . In Proceedings of the First IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications , 2003 . ( PerCom 2003 ) . ( pp . 378 - 387 ) . IEEE . [ 32 ] Shilton , K . , Ramanathan , N . , Reddy , S . , Samanta , V . , Burke , J . , Estrin , D . , Hansen , M . and Srivastava , M . , 2008 , October . Participatory design of sensing networks : strengths and challenges . In Proceedings of the Tenth Anniversary Conference on Participatory Design 2008 ( pp . 282 - 285 ) . Indiana University . [ 33 ] DiSalvo , C . , Nourbakhsh , I . , Holstius , D . , Akin , A . and Louw , M . , 2008 , October . The Neighborhood Networks project : a case study of critical engagement and creative expression through participatory design . In Proceedings of the tenth anniversary conference on participatory design 2008 ( pp . 41 - 50 ) . Indiana University . [ 34 ] Ning , H . and Wang , Z . , 2011 . Future internet of things architecture : like mankind neural system or social organization framework ? IEEE Communications Letters , 15 ( 4 ) , pp . 461 - 463 . [ 35 ] Endsley , M . R . , 1995 . Measurement of situation awareness in dynamic systems . Human factors , 37 ( 1 ) , pp . 65 - 84 . [ 36 ] Endsley , M . R . , 2017 . Toward a theory of situation awareness in dynamic systems . In Situational Awareness ( pp . 9 - 42 ) . Routledge . [ 37 ] Beckwith , C . M . , 2016 . Encountering the more - than - human in urban fantasy literature . The University of Utah . [ 38 ] Al - Fuqaha , A . , Guizani , M . , Mohammadi , M . , Aledhari , M . and Ayyash , M . , 2015 . Internet of things : A survey on enabling technologies , protocols , and applications . IEEE communications surveys & tutorials , 17 ( 4 ) , pp . 2347 - 2376 . [ 39 ] Roy , S . , Ashaduzzaman , M . , Hassan , M . and Chowdhury , A . R . , 2018 , December . BlockChain for IoT Security and Management : Current Prospects , Challenges and Future Directions . In 2018 5th International Conference on Networking , Systems and Security ( NSysS ) ( pp . 1 - 9 ) . IEEE