In vitro high - resolution structural dynamics of single germinating bacterial spores Marco Plomp * , Terrance J . Leighton † , Katherine E . Wheeler † , Haley D . Hill ‡ , and Alexander J . Malkin * § * Department of Chemistry , Materials and Life Sciences , Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory , L - 234 , Livermore , CA 94551 ; † Children’s Hospital Oakland Research Institute , Oakland , CA 94609 ; and ‡ Department of Chemistry and International Institute for Nanotechnology , Northwestern University , 2145 Sheridan Road , Evanston , IL 60208 Edited by Bert Vogelstein , The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins , Baltimore , MD , and approved April 24 , 2007 ( received for review November 30 , 2006 ) Although signiﬁcant progress has been achieved in understanding the genetic and biochemical bases of the spore germination pro - cess , the structural basis for breaking the dormant spore state remains poorly understood . We have used atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) to probe the high - resolution structural dynamics of single Bacillus atrophaeus spores germinating under native conditions . Here , we show that AFM can reveal previously unrecognized germination - induced alterations in spore coat architecture and topology as well as the disassembly of outer spore coat rodlet structures . These results and previous studies in other microorgan - isms suggest that the spore coat rodlets are structurally similar to amyloid ﬁbrils . AFM analysis of the nascent surface of the emerg - ing germ cell revealed a porous network of peptidoglycan ﬁbers . The results are consistent with a honeycomb model structure for synthetic peptidoglycan oligomers determined by NMR . AFM is a promising experimental tool for investigating the morphogenesis of spore germination and cell wall peptidoglycan structure . atomic force microscopy (cid:1) cell wall (cid:1) germination (cid:1) amyloid (cid:1) peptidoglycan W hen starved for nutrients , Bacillus and Clostridium cells initiate a series of genetic , biochemical , and structural events that result in the formation of a metabolically dormant endospore ( 1 ) . Spores can remain dormant for extended time periods and possess a remarkable resistance to environmental insults ( i . e . , heat , radiation , toxic chemicals , and pH extremes ) ( 1 – 5 ) that are lethal to vegetative cells . The resistance and persistence of dormant spores is attributed to a multilayer spore architecture ( 6 ) . Upon exposure to favorable conditions , spores break dormancy through the process of germination ( 2 , 7 , 8 ) and eventually reenter the vegetative mode of replication . A comprehensive understanding of the mechanisms control - ling spore germination is of fundamental importance both for practical applications related to the prevention of a wide range of diseases by spore - forming bacteria ( including food poisoning and pulmonary anthrax ) , as well as for fundamental studies of cell development . Germination involves an ordered sequence of chemical , degradative , biosynthetic , and genetic events ( 2 , 8 ) . Significant progress has been made in understanding the biochemical and genetic bases for the germination process ( 2 ) . Germination is triggered by the interaction of germinants with specific receptors ( 2 , 7 , 9 ) in the inner spore core membrane , causing the release of the dipicolinic acid and its replacement by water . Subsequent hydrolysis of the spore cortex , further uptake of water , core expansion , and spore coat hydrolysis allow emer - gence of the incipient vegetative cell . The role of the spore coat in the germination process is unclear ( 2 , 6 ) and is the focus of this study . Spore coat structure regulates the permeation of germinant molecules ( 7 – 10 ) . It is believed that penetration of germinants proceeds through pores in the coat structure and may involve GerP proteins ( 9 ) . Atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) has been used to probe in vitro the architecture of large macromolecular ensembles and pathogens ( reviewed in ref . 11 ) . In particular , high - resolution AFM studies of fungal spores ( 12 , 13 ) have revealed native spore coat structure and surface adhesion properties accompanying spore germination ( 12 ) . We have used AFM to investigate spore coat structure and assembly mechanisms in several species of Bacillus ( 14 – 16 ) . We have also used AFM to study environmen - tal effects on the structural dynamics of single ungerminated spores ( 14 , 16 ) . Whereas AFM images of air - dried germinated Bacillus spores have been reported ( 17 , 18 ) , high - resolution spore coat structures were not resolved . Here , we report the development of in vitro AFM methods for molecular - scale examination of spore coat and germ cell wall dynamics during spore germination and outgrowth . Results Spore Germination : Spore Coat Architecture and Dynamics . In the present study , the germination of single Bacillus atrophaeus spores was investigated . At the micrometer scale , when spores are exposed to cognate germinant molecules , germination ini - tiates with an increase in spore volume resulting from the uptake of water and terminates with the release of emerging vegetative cells from spore coat remnants ( 19 ) . The timing of germination and outgrowth varies stochastically among individual spores ( 20 ) . The germination medium used for our germination exper - iments was designed to allow rapid and synchronous initiation of spore germination , but does not have sufficient nutritional resources to allow extensive vegetative cell outgrowth . Prelim - inary high - resolution AFM analysis of B . atrophaeus spores germinating in this medium indicated that swelling occurred within 0 . 5 h of germinant contact . Initiation of etching of the coat layers and outgrowth typically occurred within 1 – 2 h and 3 – 7 h , respectively ( data not shown ) , which allows successful real - time AFM visualization of the germination and outgrowth process . Individual germinating spores were followed in real time to probe molecular - scale structural transformations and to con - struct a complete cytological sequence of the germination process . A significant fraction ( (cid:1) 30 % ) of spores did not proceed to outgrowth in the timeframe of the observation and did not exhibit degradation of the rodlet layer . However , after drying , (cid:2) 90 % of these spores showed a structural collapse , indicating the prior replacement of dipicolinic acid in the spore core with Author contributions : M . P . , T . J . L . , and A . J . M . designed research ; M . P . , K . E . W . , H . D . H . , and A . J . M . performedresearch ; T . J . L . andK . E . W . contributednewreagents / analytictools ; M . P . , T . J . L . , H . D . H . , andA . J . M . analyzeddata ; andM . P . , T . J . L . , K . E . W . , andA . J . M . wrotethepaper . The authors declare no conﬂict of interest . This article is a PNAS Direct Submission . Freely available online through the PNAS open access option . Abbreviation : AFM , atomic force microscopy . § To whom correspondence should be addressed at : Department of Chemistry , Materials , and Life Sciences , L - 234 , Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory , 7000 East Avenue , Livermore , CA 94551 . E - mail : malkin1 @ llnl . gov . © 2007 by The National Academy of Sciences of the USA 9644 – 9649 (cid:1) PNAS (cid:1) June 5 , 2007 (cid:1) vol . 104 (cid:1) no . 23 www . pnas . org (cid:2) cgi (cid:2) doi (cid:2) 10 . 1073 (cid:2) pnas . 0610626104 water , i . e . , they did proceed through the germination stage , but not to the outgrowth stage . To obtain a comprehensive understanding of the role of the spore coat in germination , AFM imaging on a nanometer scale is required . At this scale , the outer layer of the B . atrophaeus spore coat is composed of a crystalline rodlet array ( 14 ) ( Fig . 1 a ) containing a small number of point and planar ( stacking fault ) defects ( 16 ) . Upon exposure to the germination solution , disas - sembly of the rodlet structures was observed on (cid:1) 70 % of spores . During the initial stages of germination , the formation of 2 - to 3 - nm - wide micro - etch pits in the rodlet layer was observed ( Fig . 1 b ) . Subsequently , the etch pits formed fissures ( Fig . 1 b – d ) that were , in all cases , oriented perpendicular to the rodlet direction . Simultaneously , etching commenced on the stacking faults ( Fig . 1 e and f ) revealing a previously unrecognized spore coat layer with a hexagonal structure ( Fig . 1 g ) . During later stages of germination , further disintegration of the rodlet layer ( Fig . 1 e and f ) proceeded by coalescence of existing fissures , their autonomous elongation ( at a rate of (cid:1) 10 – 15 nm / hr ) and wid - ening ( at (cid:1) 5 nm / hr ) , and by continued formation of new fissures . Higher - Order Rodlet Structure . Disassembly of the higher - order rodlet structure began before the outgrowth stage of germina - tion ( Fig . 2 ) . Disaggregation of the rodlet layer occurred per - pendicular to the orientation of individual rodlets resulting in the formation of banded remnants ( Fig . 2 ) . Further structural disruption led to the formation of extended , 2 - to 3 - nm - wide fibrils ( indicated with arrows in Fig . 2 e ) , which were also oriented perpendicular to the rodlet direction . The observed rodlet disassembly process seems not to be perturbed by the AFM scanning probe . Imaging using various scan angles did not influence either the appearance of the rodlet remnants and fibrils or their relative orientation . In addition , the rodlet disassembly processes producing fibrils were consistently observed both on spores that were imaged continuously from the onset of germination ( Fig . 1 ) , as well as on spores that were imaged only when rodlet degradation was already in progress . Finally , at all stages of the rodlet disassembly , prolonged scan - ning of a small area followed by a zoom - out to a large previously nonscanned area ( Fig . 2 b and c ) did not indicate any alterations in the morphology of the initially imaged area ( such as increased etching ) . Emergence of Vegetative Cells . Etch pits were the initiation sites for early germination - induced spore coat fissure formation . During intermediate stages of germination , small spore coat apertures developed that were up to 70 nm in depth ( Fig . 3 b ) . During late stages of germination these apertures dilated ( Fig . 3 c – e ) allowing vegetative cell emergence ( data not shown ) . In vitro AFM visualization of germling emergence allowed high resolution visualization of nascent vegetative cell surface structure ( Fig . 3 e – g ) . Vegetative cell wall structure could be recognized through the apertures (cid:1) 30 – 60 min before germ cell emergence . The emerging germ cell surface was initially partially covered with residual patches of spore integument ( Fig . 3 f ) . During the release of vegetative cells from the spore integument , the entire cell surface consisted of a porous fibrous network ( Fig . 3 g ) . To compare the cell wall structure of germling and mature vegetative cells , we carried out separate experiments in which cultured vegetative B . atrophaeus cells were adhered to a gelatin - coated surface ( 21 ) , and imaged with AFM in water . As seen in Fig . 3 h , the cell wall of mature vegetative cells contained a porous , fibrous structure similar to the structure observed on the surface of germling cells ( Fig . 3 g ) . Discussion The results presented here demonstrate that in vitro AFM is a powerful tool for revealing the structural dynamics and archi - tectural topography of the spore germination process . The ability to image single emergent vegetative cells at nanometer scale , under native conditions , also provides a powerful tool for investigating the biological structure of Gram - positive cell walls . Electron microscopy ( EM ) techniques such as thin sectioning , freeze - fracturing , negative staining , and cryo - electron micros - copy have been the primary tools used to study microbial surface structures ( 19 , 22 – 24 ) . AFM allows new approaches to high - resolution real - time dynamic studies of single microbial cells under native conditions ( in air or in aqueous solution ) . Envi - ronmental parameters ( e . g . , temperature , chemistry , or gas phase ) can be easily changed during the course of AFM exper - iments , allowing dynamic environmental and chemical probing of microbial surface reactions . The AFM studies presented here elucidate the time - dependent structural dynamics of individual germinating spores and reveal previously unrecognized nano - structural alterations of the outer spore coat . Disassembly of the higher - order rodlet structure initiates at micro - etch pits , and proceeds by the ex - pansion of the pits to form fissures perpendicular to the rodlet direction . What causes this breakdown of the rodlet layer ? It is known that several lytic enzymes , which cause cortex hydrolysis , are located at the cortex - coat junction , inner membrane and in outer spore coat layers ( 2 ) . We suggest by analogy that rodlet a e b f c g d Fig . 1 . Disintegration of the spore coat rodlet layer . ( a ) The intact rodlet layercoveringtheoutercoatofdormant B . atrophaeus sporesis (cid:1) 11nmthick , andhasaperiodicityof (cid:1) 8nm ( 14 ) . ( b – d ) SeriesofAFMheightimagestracking theinitialchangesoftherodletlayerafter13min ( b ) , 113min ( c ) , and295min ( d ) ofexposuretogerminationsolution . Smalletchpits ( indicatedwitharrows in b ) evolve into ﬁssures ( indicated with an arrow in c ) perpendicular to the rodletdirection . Theﬁssuresexpandbothinlengthandwidth . ( e and f ) Series of AFM images showing another germinating spore . The spore long axis , as well as major rodlet orientation , is left - right . Enhanced etching at stacking faults ( running from left to center and indicated with an arrow in e ) , as well asincreasedetchingattheperpendicularﬁssures , wasvisibleafter135min ( e ) and 240 min ( f ) of germination . Fissure width and length increased from 10 – 15nmand100 – 200nm ( 135min ) to15 – 30nmand125 – 250nm ( 240min ) , respectively . ( g ) Etching and / or fracture of the rodlet layer at a stacking fault revealed the underlying hexagonal layer of particles with a 10 - to 13 - nm lattice period . [ Scale bars : 20 nm ( a and g Inset ) and 100 nm ( b – g ) . ] Plomp et al . PNAS (cid:1) June 5 , 2007 (cid:1) vol . 104 (cid:1) no . 23 (cid:1) 9645 B I O P H Y S I C S structure degradation is caused by specific hydrolytic enzyme ( s ) , located within the spore integument and activated during the early stages of germination . The highly directional rodlet disas - sembly process suggests that coat degrading enzymes could be localized at the etch pits , and either recognize their structural features , or that the etch pits are predisposed to structural deformation during early stages of spore coat disassembly . The gradual elongation of the fissures suggests that once hydrolysis is initiated at an etch pit , processive hydrolysis propagates perpendicular to the rodlet direction and to neighboring rodlets . The locations of the small etch pits may coincide with point defects in the rodlet structure . These point defects could be caused by misoriented rodlet monomers or by the incorporation of impurities into the crystalline structure . In both cases , point defects could facilitate access of degradative enzymes to their substrate in an otherwise tightly packed structure . Recent proteomic and genetic studies suggest that the inner and outer spore coats of Bacillus subtilis , which is closely related to B . atrophaeu s , are composed of (cid:2) 50 polypeptide species ( 25 ) . However , it is unknown which of these proteins form the surface rodlet layer of the spore coat or how this outer spore coat layer is assembled . We have shown previously for Bacillus cereus spores ( 14 ) and here for B . atrophaeu s spores ( Fig . 1 g ) that the outer spore coat rodlet layer is underlain by a crystalline honeycomb structure . The closest structural and functional orthologs to the Bacillus species rodlet structure ( not its protein sequence ) are found outside the Bacillus genus . Several classes of proteins , with divergent primary sequences , were found to form similar rodlet structures on the surfaces of cells of Gram - negative Escherichia coli and Salmonella enterica as well as spores of Gram - positive streptomycetes and various fungi ( 26 ) . These rodlets were shown to be structurally highly similar to amyloid fibrils ( 26 ) . Amyloids possess a characteristic cross (cid:1) - structure and have been associ - ated with neural degenerative diseases ( i . e . , Alzheimer’s and prion diseases ) ( 27 ) . Amyloid fibrils or rodlets form microbial surface layers ( 26 ) , which play important roles in microbial attachment , dispersal and pathogenesis . Fungal hydrophobin rodlet layers cause hyphal fragments and spores to become water - repellent , which enables escape from the aqueous envi - ronment and stimulates aerial release , dispersal and attachment to hydrophobic host surfaces ( 26 ) . The structural similarity of B . atrophaeus spore coat rodlets and the amyloid rodlets found on other bacterial and fungal spores suggests that Bacillus rodlets have an amyloid structure . AFM characterization of the nanoscale properties of individual amyloid fibrils has revealed that these self - assembled structures can have a strength and stiffness comparable with structural steel ( 28 ) . The extreme physical , chemical and thermal resistance of Bacillus endospores suggests that evolutionary forces have captured the mechanical rigidity and resistance of these amyloid self - assembling bioma - terials to structure the protective outer spore surface . AFM has played a pivotal role in revealing the powerful and pervasive forces of convergent evolution that have shaped prokaryotic and eukaryotic spore surface architecture ( 12 – 16 , 28 ) . Structural studies of amyloids have identified an array of possible rodlet assemblies , each consisting of several ( 2 or 4 ) individual a d b e c Fig . 2 . Series of AFM height images showing the progress of rodlet disassembly . Time between images was 36 min ( a to b ) , 3 min ( b to c ) , and 6 min ( c to d ) , for a total time between a and d of 45 min . In the circled regions , banded remnants of rodlet structure ( a ) disassemble into thinner ﬁbrous structures ( d ) . In b , the area imaged in c is indicated with a light gray box . In b and c , the area imaged in a and d is indicated with a dark gray box . In e , which is an enlarged part of d , arrows indicate the end point of rodlet disruption , i . e . , ﬁbrils with a diameter of 2 – 3 nm , oriented roughly perpendicular to the rodlets . [ Scale bars : 50 nm ( a and c – e ) and 200 nm ( b ) . ] 9646 (cid:1) www . pnas . org (cid:2) cgi (cid:2) doi (cid:2) 10 . 1073 (cid:2) pnas . 0610626104 Plomp et al . cross - (cid:1) - sheet fibrils , which are often helically intertwined ( 26 ) . The number of fibrils determines the diameter of the rodlet . Most amyloids resulting from protein - folding diseases , and some natu - rally occurring amyloids , form individual fibrils or disorganized rodlets networks . The in vitro self - assembly of fungal hydrophobin rodlet layers at hydrophobic / hydrophilic interfaces ( 29 ) may indi - cate that the amphiphilic nature of the hydrophobins is sufficient to ( i ) bring monomers and growing rodlets together in a confined two - dimensional ( 2D ) layer , ( ii ) structurally orient their hydropho - bicandhydrophilicresiduesinsuchawaythat ( iii ) monomersattach to growing rodlets , and ( iv ) rodlets easily coalesce to form a closely packed layer . In spore coats of B . atrophaeus , the higher - order rodlet structure is organized as one major domain of parallel rodlets covering the entire spore surface ( 16 ) . Because of the close - packed , 2D crystalline nature of these rodlet domains , their self - assembly seems to be governed by principles similar to macromolecular crystallization , for which an extensive body of knowledge and theory exists . In particular , crystallization re - quires that there must be periodic bonds in every growth direction ( 30 ) . Rodlet domain formation requires there must be periodic bonds in the rodlet direction ( ‘‘parallel bonds’’ ) as well in the direction perpendicular to it ( ‘‘perpendicular bonds’’ ) . In the case of amyloid - like rodlets , the intra - rodlet , parallel bonds are known and consist primarily of hydrogen bonds associated with the cross - (cid:1) - sheets that form the backbone of the rodlet fibrils . However , the nature of the perpendicular bonds , i . e . , the inter - rodlet bonds that keep the rodlets tightly packed , is un - known . Based on the high degree of order in the domains , it is expected that in addition to the macroscopic hydrophilic / hydrophobic effect mentioned previously , there are specific , attractive rodlet - rodlet interactions that stabilize the structure in the perpendicular direction . Interestingly , for B . atrophaeus the ratio of length ( parallel to rodlet direction ) and width ( perpen - dicular to rodlet direction ) of the rodlet domains is on average (cid:1) 1 ( 16 ) , indicating that during formation of these domains , growth velocity was similar in both directions , and hence parallel and perpendicular bonds were similar in strength . Based on these rodlet features , one might expect that during germination individual rodlets would detach or erode , leaving a striated pattern parallel to the rodlet direction . Surprisingly , stria - tions perpendicular to the rodlet direction were observed ( Fig . 2 ) , and 2 – to 3 - nm - wide fibrils perpendicular to the rodlet direction ( Fig . 2 e ) were the culmination product of coat degradation . This resultindicatesthatduringgermination , perpendicularrodletbonds are stronger , or are more resistant to hydrolysis , than bonds parallel to the rodlet direction . Second , and most surprisingly , these per - pendicular structures facilitate the formation , of 200 – 300 nm long fibers perpendicular to the rodlet direction . It is unclear how microbial amyloid fibers form these perpen - dicular structures . One possibility is that during formation of the rodlet layer , both intra - rodlet parallel bonds and inter - rodlet per - pendicular bonds form , similar in strength and leading to tightly packed rodlets domains held together by a checkerboard - like bonding pattern . During germination , the intra - rodlet parallel bondsarehydrolyzed , whereastheinter - rodletperpendicularbonds remain intact over longer time periods . Spore coat hydrolytic enzymes could target a specific residue or structure ( in this case , that of the cross - (cid:1) - sheets ) and leave other ( here , perpendicular ) residues or structures intact . Identification of the gene ( s ) encoding the rodlet structure and the enzymes responsible for rodlet degra - dation are important areas for future research . The bacterial cell wall consists of long chains of peptidoglycan that are cross - linked via flexible peptide bridges ( 31 , 32 ) . Whereas the composition and chemical structure of the peptidoglycan layer vary among bacteria , its conserved function is to allow bacteria to withstand high internal osmotic pressure ( 31 ) . The length of peptidoglycan strands varies from 3 – 10 disaccharide units in Staph - ylococcus aureus to (cid:1) 100 disaccharide units in B . subtilis , with each unit having a length and diameter of (cid:1) 1 nm ( 33 ) . The fibrous network observed on the germ cell surface with 5 – to 100 - nm pores , ( Fig . 3 e and g ) , and the fibrous network observed on mature vegetative cells with 5 – to 50 - nm pores ( Fig . 3 h ) seem to represent the nascent peptidoglycan architecture of newly formed and mature cell wall , respectively , and is comprised of either individual or a b d c e f g h Fig . 3 . Emergence of vegetative cells . ( a – g ) Series of AFM height images showing 60 - to 70 - nm - deep apertures in the rodlet layer ( indicated with arrows in b ) that gradually enlarged ( c and d ) , and subsequently eroded the entire spore coat ( e ) . Germ cells emerged from these apertures . ( e ) Before germ emergence from the spore coat , the peptidoglycan cell wall structure was evident . ( f and g ) At an early stage of emergence , the cell wall was still partly covered by spore remnants ( f ) , whereas immediately before cell emer - gence , the cell wall was free of spore integument debris ( g ) . The germ cell surfacecontained1 – to6 - nmﬁbersformingaﬁbrousnetworkenclosingpores of 5 – 100 nm . Images in a – g were collected on the same spore as those shown in Fig . 1 e and f . Elapsed germination time ( in hr : min ) was as follows : ( a ) 3 : 40 , ( b ) 5 : 45 , ( c ) 7 : 05 , ( d ) 7 : 30 , ( e ) 7 : 45 , ( f ) 7 : 15 , ( g ) 7 : 50 . ( h ) Inseparateexperiments , cultured vegetative B . atrophaeus cells were adhered to gelatin surfaces and imaged in water . AFM height images show a slightly denser , similar ﬁbrous networkcomparedwiththegermcellnetworkstructure ( g ) , with5 – to50 - nm pores . ( Inset ) The imaged part ( h ) of the entire cell is indicated with a white rectangle . [ Scale bars : 500 nm ( a - e ) , 100 nm ( f – h ) , and 1 (cid:2) m ( h Inset ) . ] Plomp et al . PNAS (cid:1) June 5 , 2007 (cid:1) vol . 104 (cid:1) no . 23 (cid:1) 9647 B I O P H Y S I C S several intertwined peptidoglycan strands . The cell wall density of mature cells seems to be higher with , on average , smaller pores and more fibrous material , as compared with the germ cells . These results are consistent with murein growth models whereby new peptidoglycan is inserted as single strands and subsequently cross - linked with preexisting murein ( 34 ) . A similar fibrous network has been reported in AFM studies of Gram - positive S . aureus cell growth and division ( 35 ) . The AFM - resolved pore structure of the nascent B . atrophaeus germ and vegetative cell surfaces , as well as S . aureus vegetative cell pepti - doglycan is similar to the honeycomb structure of peptidoglycan oligomers ( elementaryporesizeof7nm ) determinedbyNMR ( 32 ) . The pore size range is expected to increase with decreasing degrees of cross - linking ( 32 ) . The B . atrophaeus cell wall pore structure ( Fig . 3 e , g , and h ) is consistent with the lower degree of cross - linking and broad glycan chain length distribution ( 25 – 100 disaccharide units ) that is typical for B . subtilis ( 24 , 33 ) . Spore germination provides an attractive experimental model system for investigating the genesis of the bacterial peptidogly - can structure . Dormant spore populations can be chemically cued to germinate with high synchrony ( 2 ) , allowing the gener - ation of homogenous populations of emergent vegetative cells suitable for structural analysis . Proposed models for the bacterial cell wall structure posit that peptidoglycan strands are arranged either parallel ( planar model ) or orthogonal ( scaffold model ) to the cell membrane ( 31 , 32 ) . Existing experimental techniques are unable to confirm either the planar or the orthogonal model . The experiments described here do not contain sufficient high - resolution data , in particular of individual peptidoglycan strands , to deduce with certainty the tertiary three - dimensional peptidoglycan structure . The pore structures ( Fig . 3 g and h ) of the emergent germ and mature vegetative cell wall ( an array of pores ) suggest a parallel orientation of glycan strands with peptide stems positioned in stacked orthogonal planes ( 32 ) . More detailed studies of germ cell surface architecture and morphogenesis will be required to confirm this peptidoglycan architecture and to investigate whether glycan biosynthesis precedes peptide cross - linking . Materials and Methods Spore and Vegetative Cell Preparation : Purification and Germination Conditions . B . atrophaeus ( ATCC 9372 ) was obtained from the American Type Culture Collection ( ATCC , Manassas , VA ) . Spores were produced by using Schaeffer’s sporulation me - dium and purified as described ( 36 ) . Spore germination was induced by the addition of 100 mM L - alanine , 1 . 65 mM L - asparagine , 2 . 8 mM D - glucose , 2 . 8 mM D - fructose , 5 mM potassium chloride , and 25 mM Tris (cid:1) HCl buffer , pH 8 . 0 . The germination time course was characterized by phase contrast microscopy before performing AFM imaging . More than 95 % of spores turned phase dark within 15 min , and cell outgrowth typically occurred within 3 – 7 h . The same spore preparation was used to generate vegetative cells in liquid Difco nutrient broth ( NB ) media . After overnight incubation , the resulting suspension was streaked over NB agar plates . The next morning , single colonies could be isolated and were grown in tubes with NB . All incubation was done at 37°C . AFM Imaging of Spores . The outer surface of bacterial spores is highly hydrophobic . Thus , spores do not adhere well to hydro - philic substrates , such as mica and glass , when used in liquid AFM imaging . We found that bacterial spores adhered to polycoated vinyl plastic substrates with sufficient avidity for successful AFM imaging in fluid . These substrates were used exclusively for imaging of germinating bacterial spores . For AFM observations , a 1 - to 2 . 5 - (cid:2) l droplet of a spore suspension ( 10 8 spores per ml ) was deposited on the substrate and incubated for 10 min to allow spore adherence . The substrate was gently rinsed with double distilled water and transferred to the AFM fluid cell , which was typically filled with water first , for imaging a group of spores before germination . Subsequently , water was replaced with germinant solution to initiate spore germination . Germi - nation experiments were conducted at 37°C . The time course of germination experiments varied between 2 and 15 h to allow for the completion of vegetative cell emergence . Images were collected by using a Digital Instruments Multi - mode Nanoscope IV atomic force microscope ( Veeco Instru - ments , Santa Barbara , CA ) equipped with a tapping mode fluid cell , and exclusively operated in tapping mode . In our experi - ments , light tapping - mode imaging was exclusively used to minimize possible tip - induced effects on the spore coat struc - ture . At these scanning conditions a minimal decrease in the applied force typically resulted in the detachment of the AFM tip from the scanning surface . Under stable conditions , the tapping amplitude was reoptimized at least once every hour to optimize resolution and contrast while keeping the tip - sample interaction forces low . The scan rate varied from (cid:1) 1 Hz for imaging of entire germinating spores to (cid:1) 2 Hz for high - resolution imaging of the structural dynamics of the rodlet spore coat layer . A commercial Digital Instrument Multimode heater package , for use with standard scanners and AFM fluid cells , was used for sustained temperature control during the germination experi - ments . The temperature inside the AFM fluid cell was recorded with a thermocouple , and kept within 0 . 5°C of 37°C at all times . AFM probes consisting of silicon tips on silicon nitride cantile - vers ( force constants of (cid:1) 0 . 1 N / m , Veeco Instruments ) were used at tapping frequencies of (cid:1) 9 kHz . AFM Imaging of Vegetative Cells . For AFM imaging of B . atropha - eus vegetative cells , the cell suspension was washed 2 (cid:3) by centrifuging 1 ml of culture for 2 min at 8 , 000 (cid:3) g , and replacing the liquid with sterile ice cold double distilled water . After an additional centrifugation step , cells were resuspended in 100 (cid:2) l of sterile water . Plastic cover slips cut into a 15 - mm circle were dipped briefly in liquid porcine gelatin suspension ( type A , 300 bloom , Electron Microscopy Sciences , Hatfield , PA ) and then left to dry vertically , resulting in a thin gelatin coverage . After drying , the gelatin - coated plastic was attached to a metal 15 - mm AFM specimen disk ( Ted Pella , Redding , CA ) . A droplet of B . atrophaeus cell suspension ( 3 – 5 (cid:2) l ) was deposited directly onto a gelatin - covered AFM disk and allowed to incubate for (cid:1) 10 – 20 min . The disk was transferred into the AFM fluid cell and imaged in water as described above for spore imaging . This work was performed under the auspices of the U . S . Department of Energy by the University of California , Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under Contract W - 7405 - Eng - 48 . This work is supported by the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory through Laboratory Directed Research and Development Grant 04 - ERD - 002 and was funded in part by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency and the Federal Bureau of Investigation . H . D . H . acknowledges that this research was performed while on appointment as a U . S . Department of Homeland Security ( DHS ) Fellow under the DHS Scholarship and Fellowship Program . 1 . Gould GW ( 1977 ) J Appl Bacteriol 42 : 297 – 309 . 2 . Moir A ( 2006 ) J Appl Microbiol 101 : 526 – 530 . 3 . Nicholson WL , Munakata N , Horneck G , Melosh HJ , Setlow P ( 2000 ) Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 64 : 548 – 572 . 4 . Setlow P ( 2006 ) J Appl Microbiol 101 : 514 – 525 . 5 . Pearce SM , Fitz - James PC ( 1971 ) J Bacteriol 107 : 337 – 344 . 6 . Driks A ( 1999 ) Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 63 : 1 – 20 . 7 . Moir A , Corfe BM , Behravan J ( 2002 ) Cell Mol Life Sci 59 : 403 – 409 . 8 . Setlow P ( 2003 ) Curr Opin Microbiol 6 : 550 – 556 . 9 . Behravan J , Chirakkal H , Masson A , Moir A ( 2000 ) J Bacteriol 182 : 1987 – 1994 . 9648 (cid:1) www . pnas . org (cid:2) cgi (cid:2) doi (cid:2) 10 . 1073 (cid:2) pnas . 0610626104 Plomp et al . 10 . Kutima PM , Foegeding PM ( 1987 ) Appl Environ Microbiol 53 : 47 – 52 . 11 . Dufreˆne YF ( 2004 ) Nat Rev Microbiol 2 : 451 – 460 . 12 . Dufreˆne YF , Boonaert CJP , Gerin PA , Asther M , Rouxhet PG ( 1999 ) J Bacteriol 181 : 5350 – 5354 . 13 . Zhao L , Schaefer D , Marten MR ( 2005 ) Appl Environ Microbiol 71 : 955 – 960 . 14 . PlompM , LeightonTJ , WheelerKE , MalkinAJ ( 2005 ) BiophysJ 88 : 603 – 608 . 15 . Plomp M , Leighton TJ , Wheeler KE , Malkin AJ ( 2005 ) Langmuir 21 : 7892 – 7898 . 16 . Plomp M , Leighton TJ , Wheeler KE , Pitesky ME , Malkin AJ ( 2005 ) Langmuir 21 : 10710 – 10716 . 17 . Chada VGR , Sanstad EA , Wang R , Driks A ( 2003 ) J Bacteriol 185 : 6255 – 6261 . 18 . Zaman MS , Goyal A , Dubey GP , Gupta PK , Chandra H , Das TK , Ganguli M , Singh Y ( 2005 ) Microsc Res Tech 66 : 307 – 311 . 19 . Santo LY , Doi RH ( 1974 ) J Bacteriol 120 : 475 – 481 . 20 . Chen D , Huang SS , Li YQ ( 2006 ) Anal Chem 78 : 6936 – 6941 . 21 . Doktycz MJ , Sullivan CJ , Hoyt PR , Pelletier DA , Wu S , Allison DP ( 2003 ) Ultramicroscopy 97 : 209 – 216 . 22 . Aronson AI , Fitz - James P ( 1976 ) Bacteriol Rev 40 : 360 – 402 . 23 . Beveridge TJ , Graham LL ( 1991 ) Microbiol Rev 55 : 684 – 705 . 24 . Matias VR , Beveridge TJ ( 2005 ) Mol Microbiol 56 : 240 – 251 . 25 . Kim H , Hahn M , Grabowski P , McPherson DC , Otte MM , Wang R , Ferguson CC , Eichenberger P , Driks A ( 2006 ) Mol Microbiol 59 : 487 – 502 . 26 . Gebbink MF , Claessen D , Bouma B , Dijkhuizen L , Wo¨sten HA ( 2005 ) Nat Rev Microbiol 3 : 333 – 341 . 27 . Dobson CM ( 2003 ) Nature 426 : 884 – 890 . 28 . Smith JF , Knowles TPJ , Dobson CM , MacPhee CE , Welland ME ( 2006 ) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 : 15806 – 15811 . 29 . Wo¨sten HA , de Vocht ML ( 2000 ) Biochim Biophys Acta 1469 : 79 – 86 . 30 . Grimbergen RF , Meekes H , Bennema P , Strom CS , Vogels LP ( 1998 ) Acta Crystallogr A 54 : 491 – 500 . 31 . Vollmer W , Ho¨ltje JV ( 2004 ) J Bacteriol 186 : 5978 – 5987 . 32 . Meroueh SO , Bencze KZ , Hesek D , Lee M , Fisher JF , Stemmler TL , Mobashery S ( 2006 ) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 : 4404 – 4409 . 33 . Ward JB ( 1973 ) Biochem J 133 : 395 – 398 . 34 . Ho¨ltje JV , Heidrich C ( 2001 ) Biochimie 83 : 103 – 108 . 35 . Touhami A , Jericho MH , Beveridge TJ ( 2004 ) J Bacteriol 186 : 3286 – 3295 . 36 . Longchamp P , Leighton T ( 2000 ) Lett Appl Microbiol 31 : 242 – 246 . Plomp et al . PNAS (cid:1) June 5 , 2007 (cid:1) vol . 104 (cid:1) no . 23 (cid:1) 9649 B I O P H Y S I C S