Memory & Cognition 1976 , 4 ( 5 ) , 541 - 547 Recall memory for visually presented chess positions PETER W . FREY and PETER ADESMAN Northwestern University , Evanston , Illi7W ' is 60201 A series of three experiments replicated and extended earlier research reported by Chase and Simon ( 1973 ) , de Groot ( 1965 ) , and Charness ( Note 1 ) . The first experiment demonstrated that the relationship between memory for chess positions and chess skill varies directly with the amount of chess - specific information in the stimulus display . The second experiment employed tachistoscopic displays to incrementally " build " tournament chess positions by meaningful or nonmeaningful chunks and demonstrated that meaningful piece groupings during presentation markedly enhance subsequent recall performance . The third experiment tested memory for one of two positions presented in immediate sequence and demonstrated that explanations based on a limited - capacity short - term memory ( Chase & Simon , 1973 ) are not adequate for explaining performance on this memory task . The game of chess provides a useful working environ ment for the analysis of specialized information processing skills . Skill in chess is acquired only with ex tensive exposure to the game . From an analysis of verbal protocols , de Groot ( 1965 ) established that chess masters and less able players use similar thought pro cesses in analyzing a complex chess position . They con sider a similar number of moves ( about 35 ) , calculate to similar depths ( about 7 plies ) , make the same number of fresh starts ( about 7 ) , and analyze a similar number of moves per minute ( about 3 ) . The only major difference de Groot noted was that the masters invariably analyzed stronger moves than the weaker players . This conclu sion ( i . e . , better players are better because they select better moves ) was not terribly illuminating . de Groot ' s ( 1965 ) research did indicate that masters differed from weaker players in their ability to recall a chess position from an unfamiliar game after it had been presented for only 5 sec . Masters recalled 93 % of 22 pieces , while strong club players recalled about 51 % . Chase and Simon ( 1973 ) have shown that this recall ability is chess specific by replicating de Groot ' s result and including a control condition in which the chess pieces were arranged randomly . With a 5 - sec exposure of quiet middle - game positions , their master recalled 81 % of the 22 pieces , while a novice recalled only 33 % . With the randomized positions , all subjects recalled only three to five pieces correctly . This result indicates that the master and novice have similar visual memory capacities for nonmeaningful piece configurations . Thus , the ability to play chess well seems to depend on a The design and interpretation of these experiments benefited greatly from discussions with Neil Charness , Eliot Hearst , Henry Helff , Michael Humphreys , and Benton J . Underwood . The authors thank Stanton Tripodis for data collection assistance in Experiment I . Reprint requests should be addressed to Peter Frey , Department of Psychology , Northwestern University , Evanston , Illinois 60201 . learned perceptual skill rather than on the acquisition of a sophisticated problem - solvingstrategy . EXPERIMENT I Our first study attempted to replicate and extend the fmdings of de Groot ( 1965 ) and of Chase and Simon ( 1973 ) using chess diagramswhich were projected on a ground - glass screen in an experimental chamber . The degree of chess - specific information in the displays was manipulated by presenting randomized positions and meaningful positions , as was done by Chase and Simon ( 1973 ) , and by including , in addition , entire game segments presented in a move - by - move sequence . It is unusual for an experienced chess player to encoun ter a middle - game position " without any knowledge of the move sequence which led to that position . " Games are generally played and analyzed as wholes rather than as isolated positions . The third condition in our experi ment was an attempt to present a meaningful chess posi tion in the context of the move sequence which led to its development . Our expectation was that recall in this condition would covary more strongly with chess skill than recall in the other two conditions . Method Subjects . The subjects were 13 male volunteers from the Northwestern University chess club . Each subject was assigned to one of three groups based on his rating from the United States Chess Federation . Apparatus . The subjects were seated in a sound - attenuated lAC booth ( Industrial Acoustics Corporation , Bronx , New York ) that had a ground - glassscreen on one wall . The stimulus displays ( 35 - mm photographic slides ) were projected on this screen from the exterior . The duration of each slide was controlled by a two - channel projection tachistoscope ( Ralph Gerbrands Com pany , Model 61170 ) . The displays were photographs of chess diagrams available from the United States Chess Federation . The subject sat in the booth facing the ground - glassscreen . Procedure . The experimental design was a 3 by 3 factorial , with chess skill as a between - subject factor and type of display 541 54 ~ FREY AND ADESMAN 20 0 18 Mo•• - 81 - Mo•• 16 Prelentat , on < - ~ U 14 t 0 0 o 12 " I · . . M . anilW , lful / u s Confi9uration / / Q . . 10 . , . . o / u . 91 / Q . . 8 . . . . . / 0 ~ 6 , , " . Q I . . . . . . E " Z 4 Random Confivuration 2 . - - - . - - - - - - - - - - . 0 1000 1250 1550 To To To 1200 1350 1750 USCF Rating Figure 1 . Number of pieces placed correctly asa function of chess skill andpresentation condition in Experiment I . as a within - subject factor . Ihe positions to be recalled were quiet middle - game positions which arose in tournament games after 22 moves or a randomized transformation of oneof these positions . In each case , the position involved 23 or 24 pieces . In two oftheconditions ( random and meaningful ) , thepositions were displayed only once for 8 sec . Inthemove - by - move condi tion , each sequence started with the standard beginning config uration for chess and then sequenced , move - by - move , through the first 44 positions ( 22 moves for each side ) at 2 sec / position ( 88 sec total presentation time ) . The final position , which was thesubject of therecall test , appeared foronly 2 sec , in thesame way as the other positions in the sequence . Each subject re ceived 4 trials in each condition and , thus , 12 trials total . The order of trials was the same for all subjects . Each condition occurred once during Trials 1 - 3 , once again during Trials 4 - 6 , once again during Trials 7 - 9 , etc . The subjects were told that chess positions would be pro jected on the ground - glass screen and that the display would sometimes involve a series of positions in sequence . Each was then instructed to attend carefully to the screen during each trial and to startreconstructing the last position only after the screen became " blank . " After each trial , the subject was given 90 sec to reconstruct the position using a chess set which had been placed on a table in the lAC booth . The experimenter entered the booth after 30 sec of therecall periods and recorded thesubject ' s piece placements . ResultsTherecall performance of the subjects was measured by the number of pieces placed correctly for each posi tion . The average recall scores across the four positions in each condition are presented in Figure 1 . There were statistically significant effects of both chess Skill [ F ( 2 , 1O ) = 14 . 45 , P < . 001 ] and Display conditions [ F ( 2 , 20 ) = 109 . 52 , p < . 001 ] . The interaction of these two factors was also significant [ F ( 4 , 20 ) = 7 . 52 , p < . 001 ] . The standard error of the means for the between - subject variable ( Skill level ) was 2 . 83 pieces . The standard error of the means for the within - subject variable ( Display condition ) was 2 . 16 pieces . The major hypothesis we wished to test was that the effect of chess Skill would differ as a function of the Display condi tions . Our prediction was that the slope of the function relating recall performance to chess Skill would become increasingly steep as the Display condition involved more chess - specific information . A test for trend ( Myers , 1972 , p . 368 ) indicated that the interaction was pri marily due to differences in the linear components [ F ( 2 , 30 ) = 11 . 78 , P < . 001 ] . Subsequent analyses corn paring slopes under the individual conditions indicated that the random condition had a different slope than the meaningful condition [ F ( l , 30 ) = 8 . 37 , P < . 01 ] and that the slopes in the meaningful condition and the move - by move condition just missed being statistically significant [ F ( l , 30 ) = 3 . 73 , p < . 07 ] . DiscussionThefirst experiment provides a clear replication of de Groot ' s ( 1965 ) finding that recall of briefly exposed meaningful chess configurations varies directly with the chess skill of the subject , and also replicates Chase and Simon ' s ( l973 ) finding that this outcome is not ob served with random piece configurations . The results demonstrate that these prior findings can still be ob tained when the chess skill factor is manipulated in a restricted range . Our best subjects were far less skillful than the masters employed by de Groot and by Chase and Simon . In addition , our results generalize the pre vious methodology to chess diagrams which are pre· sented usinga projection procedure . The steeper slope of the recall function in the move - by - move condition provides a further demonstration that the amount of chess - specific information is the key factor for pro ducing superior recall of chess positions by skilled players . EXPERIMENT II Chase and Simon ( l973 ) presented latency data from their memory task and from a reconstruction task which indicated that pieces placed with a short interpiece placement latency tend to be closely related in a chess ical sense . Their interpretation of this clustering pheno mena was that each piece grouping was a perceptual chunk which had a specific , possibly nonverbal , label . Charness ( Note 1 ) presented verbal descriptions of chess piece configurations by calling out the individual pieces and their location one square at a time . His data indicated that the order of presentation was important in that " meaningful " orderings led to better recall than presentation by columns . Charness concluded that presentation in meaningful perceptual clusters strongly aided the subjects in visualizing the positions . Our second experiment replicated Charness ' ( Note 1 ) irocedure , except that a visual manipulation of the legree of meaningful clustering was used . This manipula . ion was implemented by tachistoscopically presenting 1 position in six segments in which the position " de zeloped " in an incremental fashion by either meaningful ) r nonmeaningful chunks . The expectation , based on : harness ' fmdings , was that recall performance would be oetter when the information was presented in meaning ' til chunks . ~ ethod Subjects . The subjects were 27 volunteers from the Evanston chess club and the Northwestern University chess club . Each subject was assigned to one of three skill levels . The nine high skill subjects had USCF ratings between 1 , 800 and 2 , 000 , the nine medium - skill subjects had ratings between 1 , 400 and 1 , 600 , and the nine low - skill subjects were novices without a USCF rating or with a rating below 1 , 200 . The subjects ranged in age from 17 years to 48 years and were predominantly male ( i . e . , only one female ) . Apparatus . The equipment and data collection arrangement were the same as in the first experiment . Because some of our novice chess players in Experiment I seemed to be unfamiliar with the chess diagrams , our displays for the second experiment were made by photographing an actual chess set from the front and slightly above and to the side . Design . Chess skill was analyzed as a between - subject factor , with nine subjects at each skill level . Within each skill level , the memory task problems were arranged in a 9 by 9 Greco Latin square counterbalancing test positions and presentation mode . There were nine chess positions to be remembered . Each chess position involved 24 pieces and pawns and had been taken from a game between chess masters ( Chernev , 1960 ) . Procedure . The subjects were told that chess positions would be exposed briefly on the glass screen and that the display would change several times during each trial . Each was then instructed to attend carefully to the screen during each trial and to start reconstructing the position only after the stimulus display had terminated . Each chess position was presented in a series of six slides . Each slide appeared for 2 sec , with a time gap between successive slides of less than 2 msec . One trial ( i . e . , six slides ) took 12 sec . After each 12 - sec presentation , the subject was given a maximum of 2 min to reconstruct the position on a chess set which had been placed on a table in the lAC booth for that purpose . The experimenter entered the testing booth after 30 sec of the recall period and recorded the subject ' s piece placements . Each subject viewed and recalled nine chess positions . The primary independent variable in the memory task was the mode in which each six - slide display was constructed . In one mode , the chess position grew sequentially by meaningful chunks . That is , the first slide would show three to six pieces , such as a castled - king position . The second slide would show this same meaningful chunk plus an additional chunk , such as a pawn chain . The third slide would contain the first two chunks plus a third chunk . The entire board position appeared for only 2 sec on the final slide of the six - slide sequence . Our definition of a meaningful chunk was based on the five relationships discussed by Chase and Simon ( 1973 ) : attack at short distance , defense , proximity , piece color , and piece type . A second presentation mode also involved the sequential presentation of cumulative segments of the board except the board developed by columns . The board " grew " four pieces at a time starting with column I ( white ' s queen rook file ) and proceeding to columns 3 . 5 , 7 , 2 , 4 , 6 , 8 , in that order . To an experienced chess player , this order of board development is clearly non meaningful . The entire board appeared only on the final slide . The third presentation mode involved the presentation of the MEMORY FOR CHESS POSITIONS 543 Table 1 Number of Pieces Placed Correctly in Experiment 11 When a Meaningful Chess Position was Presented in Its Entirety or Sequentially by Columns or Meaningful Chunks Entire Meaningful Skill Level Board Chunks Columns High ( Class A ) 16 . 1 17 . 5 13 . 6 Medium ( Class C ) 15 . 3 16 . 0 12 . 4 Low ( novice ) 6 . 9 7 . 6 6 . 1 entire board position on each of the six slides . Each subject was shown three series of slides in each of the three presentation modes . ResultsPerformance on the memory task was scored by counting the number of pieces placed correctly . These data are summarized in Table 1 . Skill level had a major ' impact on recall , with the high ( ClassA ) , intermediate ( ClassC ) , and low ( novice ) skill levels remembering 15 . 73 , 14 . 57 , 6 . 88 pieces , respectively . These between subject differences were statistically significant [ F ( 2 , 16 ) = 39 . 80 , p < . 001 ] , The standard error of these means was . 76 pieces . The Mode of Presentation also had a major effect on recall performance , with the meaningful chunk procedure averaging 13 . 72 pieces , the entire procedure averaging 12 . 77 pieces , and the columns procedure averaging 10 . 69 pieces . These within - subject differences were also significant [ F ( 2 , 192 ) = 15 . 09 , p < . 001 ] . The standard error of these means was . 40 pieces . The data analysis also indicated that performance deteriorated across trials , Across the first , second , and third three - trial blocks , the subjects recalled 13 . 79 , 12 . 09 , and 11 . 30 peices [ F ( 2 , 192 ) = 10 . 25 , P < . 001 ] . No other main effects or interactions were statistically significant . DiscussionThesecond experiment demonstrated that chess skill is correlated with recall performance for meaning ful chess positions whether they are presented as a whole or presented sequentially by columns or by meaningful chunks . In each condition , the high - and medium - skill subjects showed much better recall than the novices . A second fmding was that the mode of presentation had an important effect on performance . Best recall occurred when the pieces were presented sequentially by meaningful chunks ( 13 . 7 pieces ) . Recall performance in the entire board condition was slightly lower ( 12 . 8 pieces ) , while performance with sequential presentation by columns was poorest ( 10 . 7 pieces ) . These results are consistent with Charness ' ( Note 1 ) results , in which chunks were manipulated by varying the sequence in which verbal labels were given for chess pieces . The results of both experiments strongly support the chunk ing hypothesis as proposed by Chase and Simon ( 1973 ) . The absence of an interaction between chess skill and presentation mode indicates that both strong and 544 FREY AND ADESMAN weak players " chunk " material when faced with this recall task . The strong chess players , however , seem to be more proficient in finding and effectively labeling these chunks . Finally , the results indicated that performance deteriorated throughout the nine recall trials . This effect suggests that there is considerable proactive interference on the later trials , because one might ex pect , with a novel task such as this , that there would be some improvement in performance as the subjects became more familiar with the task requirements . EXPERIMENT III Chase and Simon ( 1973 ) have suggested that skilled chess players perform better than unskilled players in the recall task because they perceive a meaningful position in teons of larger perceptual " chunks . " Al though their memory capacity is similar to that of novice players , the masters can remember more pieces because each of the retained chunks is larger . Their data from middle - game positions indicated that a chess master averaged 7 . 7 chunks per position of 2 . 4 pieces each , while a beginner averaged 5 . 3 chunks per position of 1 . 8 pieces each . Apparently , their master recognized more chunks and bigger chunks . In addition to their chunking hypothesis which seems well supported by their data and our own data ( Experiment II ) , Chase and Simon ( 1973 ) postulated a limited - capacity ( six - to eight - chunk ) short - term memory which was used to store the infoonation between presentation and recall . They proposed that the defining characteristic for each chess " chunk " is stored in long - teon memory and that humans perform the chess memory task by recognizing familiar chunks , storing a label , not necessarily verbal , for each chunk in short - term memory , and then recalling the individual pieces by decoding each label during the test period . Because skilled chess players have many more familiar chess patterns in long - term memory , they recognize more chunks and bigger chunks , and thereby have a more efficient labeling system for the limited capacity of short - teon memory . This model matches conventional notions of short term memory capacity ( seven ± two chunks ) and fits their chunking data quite well . Since the memory task has traditionally involved only a 5 - sec presentation of each chess position , Chase and Simon ( 1973 ) assumed that recall performance must depend on the short term memory store . Storing information in long - term memory is thought to require about 5 to 10 sec / chunk ( Simon , 1974 ) . This analysis has been questioned , however , by recent data . Charness ( Note 1 ) repeated the basic chess memory study using the Brown - Peterson paradigm ( Brown , 1958 ; Peterson & Peterson , 1959 ) . He inter polated 30 sec of additional processing ( computing a running sum of random digits , mentally rotating ar then copying abstract symbols , etc . ) between stimuli presentation and recall . Charness ' ( Note 1 ) data inc cated that these interpolated activities had little , if an : effect on recall for the chess positions . These resul strongly question Chase and Simon ' s ( 1973 ) idea tho the chess information is stored in short - term memor Numerous investigators ( e . g . , Keppel & Underwoo ; 1962 ; Murdock , 1961 ; Peterson & Peterson , 195 ~ have demonstrated that interpolated processing tasl tend to interfere with information stored in shor teon memory . The Chase and Simon ( 1973 ) model can be salvage if one assumes that the chess information is stored i a context - specific format and will not be " disturbed by unrelated information . Although this revision if volves a major change in the model , it retains the e : sential features of the original idea . This extension c their model seems logical given evidence ( e . g . , Ternes , Yuille , 1972 ) for separate short - term stores for verbs and visual information . Our third experiment provide , a further examination of the notion that the ches information is stored in a limited - capacity short - terr memory . Method Subjects . The SUbjects were 20 male volunteers from th Northwestern University chess club ranging in age from 17 to 3 : years . Each subject had a USCF rating between 1 , 500 and 2 , 100 Apparatus . The equipment and testing environment wer identical to that used in the first and second experiments . Th stimuli were 35 - mm photographic slides of chess positions whicl had appeared as diagrams in a book on tournament chess games Each stimulus was a quiet middle - game position with 13 or 2 ' pieces on the board . Procedure . The subjects arrived at the laboratory individ ually , according to a prearranged appointment schedule . Eacl subject was introduced to the lAC booth and instructed tc attend to the ground - glass screen . He was informed that one 0 : two chess positions would be displayed and that a three - digi number would then appear . When the number was presented he was to start counting backward by sevens in a loud voice He continued counting backward by sevens until he was in structed to recall , by reconstruction on a chess board , either the single position or one of the two chess positions which had beer : displayed . Each subject was given 12 memory trials . One - third of the trials ( four ) consisted of a single chess position , followed by counting , followed by a recall test . One - third of the trials ( four ) consisted of two chess positions shown in sequence , followed by counting , followed by recall of the first chess diagram . One third of the trials ( four ) consisted of two chess positions shown in sequence , followed by counting , followed by recall of the second chess diagram . One of each of these three trial types occurred during Trials 1 - 3 . 4 - 6 , 7 - 9 , and 10 - 12 . Half of the trials in each condition involved a recall test after 3 sec and the other half had a recall test after 30 sec . In each condition , one recall test at each interval was given during Trials I ~ and the second was given during Trials 7 - 12 . Each chess diagram was presented for 8 sec , and there was a l - sec delay between slides when two positions were presented in sequence . During each recall period . the subject was given 90 sec to reconstruct the designated posi tion from memory on a chess board . After 30 sec . the experi - MEMORY FOR CHESS POSITIONS 545 Table 3 Number of Intrusion Errors in Experiment III as a Function of Presentation Condition and Stage of Training DiscussionTheresults of our third experiment do not support the notion that memory for chess positions in the classic de Groot ( I965 ) paradigm is stored in a limited capacity short - term memory , as postulated by Chase and Simon ( 1973 ) . First of all , our data replicate Charness ' ( Note 1 ) finding that interpolated processing ( counting backward by sevens in our study ) has little detrimental effect on recall performance . There was essentially no difference between recall after 3 sec and recall after 30 sec during the first six trials . Second , Chase and Simon ' s ( 1973 ) model suggests that one middle - game position ( i . e . , 24 pieces ) es sentially saturates short - term memory . Reasoning on this basis , one would predict that two diagrams would over - saturate the capacity of short - term memory and that therefore , recall to each one would be about half as good as recall to a single diagram . The data presented in Table 2 are clearly inconsistent with this prediction . Recall performance in the two - diagram conditions was almost as good as in the single - diagram condition . Third , a detailed comparison of the results depicted in Table 2 with Chase and Simon ' s ( 1973 ) results cast doubt on the notion that the site of storage is limited to seven or eight chunks of information . Our subjects recalled 12 . 3 pieces on the average in the single - diagram condition and 9 . 8 pieces in the two - diagram condition . According to the Chase and Simon model , our subjects would have to have labels in short - term memory rep resenting 19 . 6 pieces in order to recall 9 . 8 pieces when they had no prior knowledge of which diagram would be tested . Chase and Simon ' s ( 1973 ) data indicated that their ClassA player ( equivalent to our best subjects ) employed chunks of Size 2 . 6 , 2 . 5 , 1 . 8 , and 1 . 6 as his first four chunks on the memory tasks . If our subjects could have stored four chunks in STM for the first diagram and four chunks in STMfor the ~ cond diagram ( i . e . , eight chunks total ) and their chunk size was as large as that for Chase and Simon ' s ClassA player , one could project an average recall score on the two - diagram task of 8 . 5 pieces . This is less than the 9 . 8 pieces we observed despite the fact that our subjects , on the average , were below the ClassA level and that Chase and Simon ' s ClassA player averaged about six chunks per trial rather than eight . These considerations also question the limited - capacity notion . Fourth , even if the chess information is stored in a context - specific memory site , this should not prevent displacement of prior information by a second input when both inputs are chess related . The relatively Table 2 Number of Pieces Placed Correctly in Experiment 1II as a Function of Presentation Condition and Time of Recall Duration of Interpolated Activity Between Presen tation and Recall Condition 3 Sec 30 Sec A only , Recall A 13 . 1 11 . 6 A , then B , Recall B 10 . 6 10 . 4 A , then B , Recall A 9 . 9 8 . 5 menter entered the booth and started recording the subjects ' placements . ResultsRecall performance was measured in terms of the number of pieces placed correctly in each condition . These data are presented in Table 2 . Table 2 indicates that recall was best when only one chess diagram had been presented ( 12 . 3 pieces ) . When two diagrams were presented , recall of the second diagram ( 10 . 5 pieces ) was better than recall of the first diagram ( 9 . 2 pieces ) . These differences were highly reliable [ F ( 2 , 209 ) = 13 . 15 , p < . 00l ] . A subsequent Neuman - Keuls test ( 0 : = . 05 ) indicated that each condition was reliably different from the others . Table 2 also indicates that recall at 3 sec ( 11 . 2 pieces ) was slightly better than recall at 30 sec ( 10 . 2 pieces ) . This difference was reliable [ F ( 1 , 209 ) = 4 . 38 , p < . 05 ] . The interaction between recall interval and the three conditions was not significant [ F ( 2 , 209 ) = . 82 ] . The standard error of the means in Table 2 is . 43 pieces . The effect of recall interval depended on the stage of testing , with little or no difference between 3 and 30 sec during the first six trials ( 11 . 0 and 11 . 1 pieces , re spectively ) and poorer performance at the longer interval during the last six trials ( 11 . 5 and 9 . 3 pieces , re spectively ) [ F ( I , 209 ) = 5 . 41 , P < . 025J . The standard error of these means was . 35 pieces . No other main effect or interactions with this dependent measure were significant . An analysis wasalso made of the number ofintrusion errors in the two conditions in which two different diagrams were presented in sequence . An intrusion error was defined as an error of commission in which the incorrect placement would have been correct for the nonrecalled diagram . The intrusion errors for the two conditions as a function of stage of testing are depicted in Table 3 . During the first six trials , intrusion errors were most prominent when the subject recalled the second diagram . During the last six trials , intrusion errors were equally likely in both recall conditions . This interaction was significant [ F ( 1 , 133 ) = 5 . 08 , P < . 05 ] . The standard error of the means in Table 3 is . 18 pieces . No other effects or interactions with this dependent measure were significant . The overall level of intrusion errors was 21 % of the number of pieces placed correctly in the two - diagramconditions . Condition A , then B , Recall B A , then B , Recall A Trials 1 - 6 2 . 7 1 . 6 Trials 7 - 12 1 . 9 2 . 2 546 FREY AND ADESMAN small difference observed between recall of the first diagram ( 9 . 2 pieces ) and recall of the second diagram ( l0 . 5 pieces ) suggests that the second input did not substantially displace the information from the first input . In fact , there is very little evidence of displace ment at all , as one might expect for a limited - capacity store . Losses of information seem to be related more to interference effects ( i . e . , retrieval problems ) than to displacement per se . There was a relatively high propor tion of instrusion errors ( 21 % ) . During the first six trials , these intrusions were primarily proactive ( Table 3 ) ; items from the first diagram were identified as being from the second diagram . A displacement effect should have produced the opposite pattern of intrusions . Moreover , the interaction between stage of testing and recall interval indicates that the small drop in per formance between 3 and 30 sec which was observed occurred only after the subjects had experienced 10 prior diagrams . This clearly suggests that the small decrease in recall scores is related to proactive inter ference rather than to displacement . In summary , the data from our third experiment strongly question the notion that memory for briefly presented chess diagrams is held in a limited - capacity short - term memory . These data even appear to exclude a modified form of the Chase and Simon ( 1973 ) model which postulates a context - specific short - term memory store . The data necessitate a revision of the model to assume a short - term memory which holds either larger chunks or more chunks or to assume that the chess information is transmitted directly to long - term memory during the initial brief presentation . GENERAL DISCUSSION The present studies extend previous fmdings ( Chase & Simon , 1973 ; de Groot , 1965 ) indicating that memory for briefly exposed chess positions is a function of chess skill and that this relationship is critically de pendent upon the amount of chess - specific information contained in the stimulus display . Additionally , the notion that skilled players cope with the relatively com plex visual inputs by " chunking " pieces into familiar groupings ( Chase & Simon , 1973 ; Chamess , Note 1 ) was supported by directly manipulating chunking . The development of a chess position in terms of a sequence of familiar piece groupings leads to much better recall than a similar sequential development in terms of un usual piece groupings . Thus , our first two experiments strongly confirm the prior observations that skilled chess players perform well in the chess memory task because of chess - specific knowledge rather than extraordinary memory capacity and that this superior performance derives from a learned perceptual facility for grouping chess pieces into meaningful chunks . The results of the third experiment , however , strongly question the notion that recall for briefly ex - posed chess positions is mediated by storing these meaningful chunks in a limited - capacity short - term memory . Charness ( Note 1 ) has previously demonstrated that interpolated processing between presentation and recall delays the rate of recall of chess information but does not reduce the accuracy of recall . His data from the Brown - Peterson paradigm suggest that the chess posi . tions are not being stored in short - term memory in the same way that verbal material seems to be stored ( Keppel & Underwood , 1962 ; Murdock , 1961 ; Peterson & Peterson , 1959 ) . Our data replicated this finding and , in addition , provided evidence that the amount of material being stored was more than could be expected for the traditional limited - capacity model of short term memory . Finally , the data from our third experi ment suggested that recall was limited by proactive interference rather than by the displacement of material from short - term memory by more recent items . These findings cast considerable doubt on the memory assump tions in the Chase and Simon ( 1973 ) model . Charness ' ( Note I ) data in conjunction with our results seem to imply that the information imparted by the chess diagrams is processed relatively deeply in a brief period of time and is then passed directly to a long - term store . Recent evidence indicating that pictorial information is processed very rapidly to an abstract level of meaning ( Nelson , Metzler , & Reed , 1974 ; Potter , 1975 ) is consistent with this interpretation . The research by Shaffer and Shiffrin ( 1972 ) on recog nition of pictures suggests a similar mechanism in that environment . These results seem most consistent with Craik and Lockhart ' s ( 1972 ) view that recall ability depends on the depth of processing . In our situation , the more skilled players not only identify more chunks and bigger chunks , but also discover more semantic relations among the pieces and among the chunks . This deeper level of processing may in fact be the key to better retention . REFERENCE NOTE 1 . Charness , N . H . Memory for chess positions : The effects of interference and input modality . Unpublished PhD dissertation . Carnegie - Mellon University . 1974 . REFERENCES BROWN , J . Some tests of the decay theory of immediate memory . Quarter ( v Journal of Experimental Psychology , 1958 . 10 . 12 - 21 . CHASE . W . G . . & SIMON . H . A . Perception in chess . Cognitive Psychology . 1973 . 4 . 55 - 81 . CHERNEV . I . Combinations : The heart of chess . New York : Crowell . 1960 . CRAIK . F . I . M . , & LOCKHART . R . S . Levels of processing : A framework for memory research . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior . 1972 . 11 . 671 - 684 . DEGROOT . A . Thought and choice in chess . The Hague : Mouton . 1965 . KEPPEL . G . • & UNDERWOOD . B . J . Proactive inhibition in short - term retention of single items . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 1962 , 1 , 153 - 16l . MURDOCK , B . B . The retention of individual items . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 1961 , 62 , 618 - 625 . MYERS , J . L . Fundamentals of Experimental Design . Boston : Allyn & Bacon , 1972 . NELSON . T . 0 . . METZLER , J . , & REED , D . A . Role of details in the long - term recognition of pictures and verbal descriptions . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 1974 , 102 . 184 - 186 . PETERSON , L . R . . & PETERSON , M . J . Short - term retention of individual verbal items . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 1959 , 58 , 193 - 198 . POTTER , M . C . Meaning in visual search . Science , 1975 , 187 , 965 - 966 . MEMORY FOR CHESS POSITIONS 547 SHAFFER , D . , & SHIFFRIN , R . M . Rehearsal and storage of visual information . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 1972 . 92 , 292 - 296 . SIMON , H . A . How big is a chunk ? Science , 1974 , 183 , 482 - 488 . TERNES , W . , & YUILLE , 1 . C . Words and pictures in an STM task . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 1972 , 96 , 78 - 86 . ( Received for publication October 21 , 1975 ; revision accepted January 21 . 1976 . )