1 Medical Sensemaking with Entity Workspace Dorrit Billman and Eric A . Bier Palo Alto Research Center , Inc . 3333 Coyote Hill Rd . , Palo Alto , CA 94304 { dbillman , bier } @ parc . com ABSTRACT Knowledge workers making sense of a topic divide their time among activities including searching for information , reading , and taking notes . We have built a software system that supports and integrates these activities . To test its effectiveness , we conducted a study where subjects used it to perform medical question - answering tasks . Initial results indicate that subjects could use the system , but that the nature of this use depended on the subject’s overall question - answering strategy . Two dominant strategies emerged that we call the Reader and Searcher strategies . Author Keywords sensemaking , search , note - taking , quick click , highlighting . ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . 2 [ Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) ] : User Interfaces - - - GUI . INTRODUCTION Making sense of a rich body of information preparatory to acting on it requires integrating many activities : search for relevant information ; selective reading ; and capturing , commenting on , and organizing information in notes . Sensemaking is a central activity for many knowledge workers , including lawyers , doctors , scientists , researchers , intelligence analysts , detectives , financial analysts , industry analysts , and ordinary people making complex decisions . Our software system , Entity Workspace [ 2 ] , is designed to facilitate sensemaking by providing an integrated work environment . It supports search by providing a document - collection visualization and methods for searching over the collection and within documents . It supports reading with automatic highlighting of important terms . It supports note - taking with an electronic notebook and quick methods for importing text from documents , adding comments , and organizing information . For some tasks , this system takes the place of multiple traditional tools , such as search engines , word processors , and document collection browsers . It has similarities to tools such as Oculus nSpace [ 4 ] , but differs in its approach to these tasks . We assessed the effectiveness of our prototype in a small - scale study . Users worked on a medical sensemaking task in which they answered questions that varied in the amount of inference and integration across documents required of the user . A TOOL TO ACCELERATE SENSEMAKING We designed Entity Workspace ( EW ) to help users make sense of large document collections . Figure 1 shows EW’s two , multi - pane windows as used in our study . While EW can be used on a single display , two were used to minimize window management and because multiple screens are becoming common in offices . The window on the left , known as CorpusView , provides an array visualization of a document collection , an area for reading documents ( two documents are open in the Figure ) , and a region for specifying search queries that apply either across the entire document collection or within a single document . The window on the right side of the figure provides a facility for taking structured notes . It has four panels . 1 ) In the largest , the Evidence Panel , users take notes about entities . 2 ) The Entity Inspector Panel displays information about a selected entity . 3 ) The System Suggestions Panel recommends additional entities of interest . 4 ) The Document Trails panel shows the history of searches and the documents found by each search . Searching . EW provides tools to search the corpus for relevant documents , to search individual documents , and to track the process of using the documents identified by search . The design goal is to provide both efficiency and power . There are two methods to initiate search of the corpus : through a query box and as a side effect of entity selection . There is one method , a second query - box , for initiating search within the current active document . Both boxes support Boolean queries . When a corpus level query is initiated , the system finds all matching documents and highlights them in a visualization that shows the collection as an array of icons . In addition , a modified version of this query seeds the document - level query box , so the user can immediately find instances of the search terms within each matching document . This method is designed for power . The second corpus - level search method , one - click , provides a low effort way to specify a search . When the user clicks on a notebook entity that represents a document page , EW opens the corresponding document to that page . If the user clicks on any other entity , EW computes a query to find that entity , enters that query in the corpus - level query box , runs the query , and highlights the found documents in the icon array . This method is designed for efficiency . EW provides three methods for browsing within documents returned from a corpus - level search . First , arrow - shaped buttons beside each query box allow the user to view the matching documents in decreasing or increasing order of search score . Second , the user can also visit the matches in arbitrary order by clicking on them in the collection array . Finally , in the Document Trails panel , the tool displays a history of recent queries , showing icons that represent the matching documents . Clicking on an icon in a trail opens the matching document . Trails also provide arrow keys for stepping through the documents in order . Reading . To accelerate reading , EW displays all documents as page images for rapid page flipping . It automatically highlights terms that the user has already placed in the notebook , using more salient highlighting for terms that the user has marked as being of high interest . Note - taking . EW provides several methods for integrated importing , commenting , and organization of notes . The design goal is to capture more relevant information faster . Importing . EW provides entity quick - click [ 1 ] to copy phrases or longer passages to the notebook with little effort . If the desired passage is already highlighted , it can be copied by depressing the Shift key and clicking . Otherwise , the user first selects the passage and then performs the Shift - click . In either case , the copied text is positioned in the notebook automatically ; little mouse travel is needed . The copied phrase is automatically grouped with information about its source document and page . Finally , to accelerate note organization , EW provides a drag - and - drop method for grouping phrases that we call snap - together knowledge . If one phrase is dragged to be near another horizontally , they snap together into a belief statement . When phrases or belief statements are positioned near each other vertically , they snap together into an entity group . If two entity groups are positioned near each other vertically , they snap together into a super group . Clicking on an entity in the notebook causes all belief statements and entity groups that contain that entity to highlight , making it easy to review notes about that entity . Figure 2 shows an example super group including entity groups , which in turn contain document links , a belief statement , an entity , a comment and copied passages . The notebook is designed to scale up to hundreds of notes . Groups and supergroups can be collapsed to a compact form and the notebook can be scrolled to fit more notes . These technologies work together . Notebook entries generate document highlighting . Note selection initiates a search or opens a document , and creates a document trail . Organizing notes influences the information that will be highlighted when a note is selected and hence which entities and documents will be easy to find later . MEDICAL SENSEMAKING USER STUDY EW was originally designed for intelligence analysis . However , for this study we chose medical sensemaking tasks to verify that our technologies could be used in multiple domains and because such tasks are of general importance and interest . Initial study results indicate that novice subjects were able to take advantage of our system . While the interface is complex , users were able to learn the basic task functions in a half - hour training . Further , the nature of their use depended on the subject’s overall strategy . We noticed two primary strategy groups that we called Readers and Searchers . The study also provided us with guidance on ways to simplify our user interface and increase its performance and utility . Method Task . The medical task concerned diabetes . Three questions Figure 2 . Excerpt from a subject’s notebook First of 3 groups entity Statement with document link and comment copied passage super group reading area notebook a b c d Figure 1 . Experimental setup on three displays . Labels ( a ) - ( d ) indicate panels . search tools collection view 3 involved general information and five questions asked subjects to advocate for a hypothetical uncle newly diagnosed with diabetes . To motivate note - taking , subjects were asked to prepare information another family member might use when accompanying the uncle on a medical visit . Questions varied : ( 1 ) in how directly the information could be searched from key words in the question versus how much interpretation and integration was needed ; ( 2 ) in whether information had to be collected across multiple documents or was available in one , and ( 3 ) in the relevant methods for assessing if an answer was complete . The questions were ordered so that information and documents found early might contribute to later question - answering . Corpus . The 66 documents addressed various aspects of diabetes . Documents included web pages and a variety of papers . Formality ranged from papers written for clinicians or scientists to patient discussion postings on diabetes websites . Documents were classified into a dozen categories such as “intro” , “drugs” , and “exercise” . These categories were shown in the visualization . Users . Nine employees , primarily student interns , volunteered for the study . None had used Entity Workspace before , although a few had heard it discussed . Procedure . The study ran for two and a half to three hours . Users were encouraged to ask questions and talk about what they were doing . Sessions were videotaped and results were saved at intermediate points . Users answered a pre - assessment questionnaire concerning relevant health knowledge . Training used a different corpus with short documents concerning an intelligence analysis problem . It included an inference task as well as use of the tools and took slightly under an hour . Users then read the “uncle” scenario and began working with the diabetes corpus . The last six users spent roughly 5 minutes orienting to and exploring the corpus before they began answering questions . Users began with the 3 general questions from the preassessment questionnaire and continued with the five “uncle” questions . At the end of the session users were asked what they liked and didn’t like about the system . Subjects were seated in front of a PC with three displays , all set at 1600 pixels wide by 1200 high . The application windows were set up as shown in Figure 1 . In left to right order , subjects were given a region for reading documents , the document collection array , a notebook window , and a Web browser displaying a tutorial for our tools ( which was used little , if at all ) . The procedure was informal ; the experimenter answered questions , made occasional suggestions ( e . g . , if the user was having trouble finding a function ) , and moved users through the tasks so we could observe subject responses to a range of tasks . Of nine users , three finished all questions . Results Overall , users were able understand the task and the tool , and to produce sensible , though often incomplete , answers to the questions . The approach to the task and choice of methods from the tool both varied . We report on the strategies employed and then on tool usability . User Strategies : Readers and Searchers We noticed two approaches to the task . Subjects characterized as Readers spent more time reading the content of the articles . By and large , these users expected that they would need to understand or think about the material more and to integrate information from multiple documents . They were motivated to take notes on what they had learned so far , to keep track of previously - read documents so they could return to them later , and to add commentary . One Reader mentioned building and using a custom document corpus in the past . Searchers , by contrast , expected to be able to find the answer to each task question by direct match to a search . With this strategy , users seemed to expect that they could quickly determine if the search had succeeded in finding ( part of ) the needed information . Hence , they did not expect to need to read or make inferences from the information . They did less reading and note - taking , focusing their energy on constructing the best possible search queries , in the hopes of finding hits with a clearly relevant and probably complete answer . Searchers may not have been familiar with the idea of having a pre - selected document corpus but were very familiar with using Web search engines . Searchers sometimes complained about not having access to the whole Web where , they believed , they could easily find the requested information . Two subjects adopted a strong Searcher strategy , three adopted a Reader strategy , with the remaining four in between . While other authors have reported on alternatives to search in finding information , such as orienteering strategies [ 3 ] , the effect we observed appears to be a difference in strategy for making sense of information , and some users appeared to have a strong preference for one strategy over the other . Usability Results Searching . Our tools provide several ways to initiate and navigate through a search . We hypothesized these user preferences : 1 . For initiating search at the corpus level : a preference for clicking in the notebook , as this requires no typing . 2 . For initiating within a document : automatic search seeded by the corpus - level query , as this requires no additional typing , once the corpus - level search is run . 3 . For navigation , a preference for the arrow keys to open query - matching documents in sequence , as this takes less effort than finding an icon per document and clicking on it . In fact , we did not find any of these hypothesized preferences . Some users did initiate a search by clicking on an entity in the notebook . However , other users initiated most queries by typing in the search boxes . In some cases , users would click on an entity in the notebook as a quick way to get its string into the search box but would then modify the query by typing . Furthermore , users who largely initiated queries by typing were inconvenienced by the current design which replaces the query with a new one as a side effect of selecting an entity in the notebook . Users had a similar reaction to the automatic within - document search . Some users would provide a broad query to find documents but then want to find a more restricted set of phrases within the document . Again , these users were inconvenienced when the system overwrote their manually - written query with a computed one . To track use of documents found by a search , users happily referred to the icon array , and found the next document by position in the array . Users made little or no use of arrow keys to read through documents in order of search score . Reading . Reactions to automatic highlighting in the documents were mixed . Some users found them helpful or at least easy to ignore when they were not wanted . Other users found them so distracting they wanted to turn them off . Because all entities ( below a predetermined length ) placed in the notebook become highlighted in the documents , any entities accidentally placed in the notebook caused highlights that were particularly counter - productive . Note - taking . To import text , we hypothesized that users would make heavy use of the entity quick click method of importing . Quick click was indeed the greatly - preferred method and users frequently commented on the value of this function . Heavy reliance on quick click occurred even though software errors caused incorrect copying with some selection gestures . Subjects occasionally complained , however , that the notebook was too far from the document reader , causing excessive mouse travel and eye movement . More broadly , users valued being able to take notes easily , within the same context as the documents being read . To comment on information , users typed their own information into the notebook . They usually preferred this mode to the use of snap - together statements , which were seen as more labor - intensive to construct . Comments were also added as group or section headers . To organize information , our subjects created between 8 and 22 entity groups each , with a mean of 14 . 9 . All users grouped these entity groups further , making between 1 and 5 supergroups , with a mean of 3 . 8 . Almost all entities were placed in a group of some kind with a mean of only 2 . 3 entities ungrouped at session end . We were encouraged that no user reported a problem with managing this number of notes . The study also revealed that subjects care about the order of objects within a group ; when a design flaw in snapping made it too difficult to place an entity at the top of a group , subjects created workarounds , including placing entities outside the group but nearby , to act like titles . CONCLUSIONS Our study confirms that Entity Workspace can be used by novices for medical sensemaking and also raises new research questions . We found that users have different question answering strategies , like the Reader and Searcher strategies . We would like to understand when different strategies are effective or attractive for different combina - tions of tasks and tools . Reactions to our tools show both enthusiasm for an integrated work environment and the need for more work on the technology supporting each sensemaking task . In particular , improved designs are needed for search tools that perform both inter - document and intra - document search , track reading progress through query results sets , and take advantage of information captured in a notebook ; these new designs will probably need to be simpler and more unified than our current design . Users will want additional control over automatic highlighting of content , both to ensure relevance and to accommodate users with greater or lesser tolerance for highlighting in general . The heavy use of entity quick click in the study suggests that further improvements will be valuable , including ways to reduce eye movement and mouse travel and to recover from unintended copying . Likewise , feedback on grouping suggests that group titles will be valuable , along with more precise ways to order elements within groups . This research was funded in part by the Advanced Research and Development Activity NIMD and ARIVA programs ( MDA904 - 03 - C - 0404 ) . REFERENCES 1 . Bier , E . , Ishak , E . , and Chi , E . Entity quick click : rapid text copying based on automatic entity extraction . Extended Abstracts of the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI 2006 ) . 2 . Bier , E . , Ishak , E . , and Chi , E . Entity Workspace : an evidence file that aids memory , inference , and reading . Proceedings of Intelligence and Security Informatics ( ISI 2006 ) , pp . 466 - 472 , Springer - Verlag . 3 . Teevan , J . , Alvarado , C . , Ackerman , M . , and Karger , D . The perfect search engine is not enough : a study of orienteering behavior in directed search . Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI 2004 ) , pp . 415 - 422 . 4 . Wright , W . , Schroh , D . , Proulx , P . , Skaburskis , A . , and Cort , B . The sandbox for analysis : concepts and evaluation . Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI 2006 ) , pp . 801 - 810 .