Do gender , nationality , or academic age affect review decisions ? An analysis of submissions to the journal Biological Conservation Richard B . Primack a , * , Elizabeth Ellwood a , Abraham J . Miller - Rushing b , c , Rob Marrs d , Adrian Mulligan e a Biology Department , Boston University , 5 Cummington Street , Boston , MA 02215 , USA b Wildlife Society , 5410 Grosvenor Lane , Bethesda , MD 20814 , USA c USA National Phenology Network , 1955 East 6th Street , Tucson , AZ 85721 , USA d School of Biological Sciences , University of Liverpool , Liverpool L69 7ZB , UK e Elsevier Ltd . , The Boulevard , Langford Lane , Oxford OX5 1GB , UK a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 12 June 2009 Accepted 19 June 2009 Available online 12 July 2009 Keywords : Academic age Double - blind Gender bias Nationality Review process a b s t r a c t Recent papers have considered whether the present system of single - blind reviewing results in bias against women or other groups of authors in biological journals . If so , double - blind reviewing might be an alternative approach that avoids such bias . We investigated the effects of gender , nationality ( English - speaking countries only ) , academic age , year of review , and handling editor on the decisions made on a sample of 1856 papers submitted to the journal Biological Conservation between 2004 and 2007 . There is no evidence of differences in acceptance rates among genders , nationalities , academic age , or year , nor is there evidence for interactions among these factors . Individual handling editors differed in the proportions of papers that they accepted , rejected following review , and rejected without review , but did not show biases based on any of the factors we examined . Overall , we did not ﬁnd evi - dence supporting a change in the present review system , although the low rate of acceptance of papers from certain non - English - speaking countries is an issue that needs to be addressed . We believe that these types of audits of the editorial system are necessary , so that all submitting authors feel that the editorial process is fair , unbiased and rigorous . (cid:2) 2009 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction Peer review of articles is the most commonly used method of evaluating the quality and originality of scientiﬁc research . In order to be effective , the scientiﬁc community must regard peer review as fair and without systematic bias . There has recently been a vig - orous and wide - ranging debate among biologists and others about whether the present system of peer review facilitates gender bias against female authors and whether this bias necessitates a change in the current system of peer review ( Budden et al . , 2008 ; Engqvist and Frommen , 2008 ; Hammerschmidt et al . , 2008 ; Webb et al . , 2008 ; Whittaker , 2008 ) . Before attempting to change the present system of reviewing , however , it is ﬁrst helpful to determine whether gender bias or any other readily identiﬁable type of bias is occurring in the current review system . In the most common method of peer review in ecological liter - ature , reviewers are invited by an editor of a journal to evaluate a paper submitted for publication in a single - blind fashion : the reviewers know the name of the author , but the author does not know the names of the reviewers , unless the reviewers choose to reveal their identity to the author . In this singe - blind review sys - tem , reviewer prejudices based on the author’s gender , nationality , and other factors could inﬂuence the ﬁnal decision on whether to accept a manuscript ( Wennerås and Wold , 1997 ; Link , 1998 ; Budden et al . , 2008 ) . A system of double - blind reviewing , such as adopted by the journal Behavioral Ecology , might help to eliminate existing biases , because reviewers would not automatically know the name and afﬁliation of the authors . However , the single - blind system , the system used today by most biological journals , has been used for many decades and is generally accepted . Addition - ally , a move to double - blind reviewing has some disadvantages . Most importantly , reviewers are expected to comment on issues such as double publishing , inappropriate use of data , inappropriate references , and other ethical issues , which may be difﬁcult or impossible to comment on in a double - blind system . Many review - ers also believe that they can correctly identify an author even when his or her identity is hidden ( Ware , 2008 ) . Furthermore , there is an economical consideration ; masking the identity of authors is a time consuming and expensive process . Thus , before this common method of reviewing is changed it is helpful to deter - mine whether there is a systematic bias that could potentially be prevented by the introduction of the double - blind reviewing system . 0006 - 3207 / $ - see front matter (cid:2) 2009 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . biocon . 2009 . 06 . 021 * Corresponding author . Tel . : + 617 353 2454 ; fax : + 617 353 6340 . E - mail addresses : primack @ bu . edu , bacon @ bu . edu , polgar @ bu . edu ( R . B . Pri - mack ) . Biological Conservation 142 ( 2009 ) 2415 – 2418 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Biological Conservation journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / biocon Recently , Budden et al . ( 2008 ) presented evidence that the per - cent of papers published by women increased by 8 % over time in the journal Behavioral Ecology after it began using a double - blind system . However , subsequent analysis of this data set by another research team ( Webb et al . , 2008 ) showed that this increase in pa - pers published by women in that journal was not signiﬁcantly dif - ferent from other journals in the same ﬁeld , such as Biological Conservation , which do not use a double - blind review system . A problem with the analyses of gender bias in ecological journals presented by Budden et al . ( 2008 ) and Webb et al . ( 2008 ) was that they used the percent of papers published by women to evaluate reviewer bias . An increasing percentage of articles published by women could simply be caused by an increasing percentage of arti - cles submitted by women , rather than a decline in gender bias . In order to determine whether there might be bias against women in the review process , we must evaluate the acceptance rate of arti - cles submitted by women in comparison with the acceptance rate of articles submitted by men . Budden et al . ( 2008 ) and Webb et al . ( 2008 ) did not have access to this type of data , and the analyses that have been done so far suggest that there is no difference in the acceptance rate of articles submitted to biological journals by men and women ( Tregenza , 2002 ; Whittaker , 2008 ) . However , a further problem is that previous studies generally consider articles by male and female authors as two large catego - ries , and simply compare these two groups to evaluate whether there might be bias against women in the review process . Such a gross comparison fails to considerother factorsthat mightinﬂuence the acceptance rate of papers and obscure gender differences . Such differences include differences among handling editors , countries from which the papers are submitted , academic age and experience , and changes over time . For example , lumping authors from China and India , whose papers have low acceptance rates , with authors from countries such as Australia and Canada , whose acceptance rates are greater , might tend to obscure more subtle factors such as gender differences . These past studies also did not include varia - tion among the handling editors of a journal , who often decide if a paper should be rejected without review or sent out for review . It is possible that a handling editor who favors men authors could cre - ate bias in the review process ; or such an editor might be balanced by another handlingeditor who favorswomenauthors . The purpose of this study is to evaluate what factors affect the acceptance rate of papers under a single - blind review system from one journal . These factors include differences among genders , countries , editors , years of submission , and the academic age of authors . The editors whose decisions were considered in the study agreed to this evaluation . 2 . Methods 2 . 1 . Journal and factors For the purpose of analysis , we used scientiﬁc papers submitted to the journal Biological Conservation from 2004 to 2007 . The jour - nal began to use web - based submission in 2004 , and from this per - iod forward a comprehensive record of all journal actions is available for audit . Biological Conservation receives approximately 1000 submissions per year . For this study , we evaluated only those papers submitted from English - speaking countries , which totaled 1856 papers , roughly half of the submissions to the journal over the period of analysis . Submissions from English - speaking coun - tries were used as they provided a sufﬁcient sample size , author genders could be more easily identiﬁed , and the language skills of the authors were less likely to be an additional factor in the acceptance rate ( Primack and Marrs , 2008 ) . Papers from English - speaking countries were assigned a gender based on the ﬁrst name of the corresponding author . Names were assigned to a category of unknown gender if the names were ambiguous as to gender ( e . g . , Robin ) or were not readily recog - nized Western names ( e . g . , Sharda , Khoon Meng , etc . ) . Using only papers from English - speaking countries resulted in our being able to assign gender to a greater percentage of authors than in previ - ous studies . In approximately 97 % of the cases , the corresponding author is the same person as the ﬁrst author of the article . We used corresponding authors , because these data were the most readily available from the journal’s online submission system . The corresponding author’s name is also the name used by han - dling editors in all of their correspondence . We did not consider separately those few papers in which the ﬁrst author is different from the corresponding author , and we considered only one author per paper . In addition to gender , we analyzed the effects of individual han - dling editors , country of the corresponding author based on ad - dress , and academic age of the corresponding author on whether papers were accepted , rejected following review , or rejected with - out review . Handling editors are a potentially important variable , as they have a greater inﬂuence over the review process than do individual reviewers , as each of the 7 – 8 editors handles 100 – 200 papers per year . Editors carry out a two step review process , whereby some papers are rejected without review , and the remainder are sent out for external review , typically to 2 – 3 review - ers . At Biological Conservation editors reject approximately 31 % of papers without review , as their past experience has taught them that certain papers are not appropriate for the journal and will be recommended for rejection by the reviewers . Also , editors make the ﬁnal decisions on borderline cases , such as when reviews are contradictory . For this study , we excluded temporary editors and guest editors of special issues for which there was an insufﬁcient sample size for analysis . Such special issues also tend to have high - er acceptance rates , which would bias the analysis . We obtained a measure of each author’s academic age by deter - mining when he or she published his or her ﬁrst scientiﬁc article , as indicated by Scopus ( http : / / www . scopus . com / scopus / home . url ) . We then calculated each author’s academic age by subtracting the year of the author’s ﬁrst publication ( for example 1995 ) from the year the Biological Conservation paper was submitted ( for example 2004 ) . In some cases , the author’s ﬁrst published paper occurred after the submission to Biological Conservation , resulting in a nega - tive academic age . For this analysis , we omitted certain individuals with common names , such as C . Smith , because we were not able to distinguish their publications from other people with similar names . Also , for analyses involving academic age , we used only authors from the United States , about half of the papers in the sam - ple , due to the laborious nature of obtaining the data . 2 . 2 . Analysis Because our data were primarily count data with categorical explanatory variables we used chi - squared tests and generalized linear models ( GLM ) for most of our analyses . For our most broad test , we tested the relationships among gender , nationality , han - dling editor , and the ﬁnal decision ( accepted , rejected following re - view , or rejected without review ) . We created a GLM with each of those four factors and their interactions as explanatory variables and count as the response variable . We tested for signiﬁcant inter - actions among variables by removing each interaction from the model in a stepwise fashion , and in each instance we used ANOVA to test whether there was a signiﬁcant difference in the explana - tory power of the simpler model relative to the more complex model . Because of the large number of contingencies included in this model , we were able to include only handling editors and nationalities that were associated with at least 100 papers ( 1411 papers ; 80 % of the total ) . 2416 R . B . Primack et al . / Biological Conservation 142 ( 2009 ) 2415 – 2418 We used chi - squared tests to examine the relationship between most factors ( gender , nationality , and handling editor ) and the ﬁnal decision on each paper using the full data set of 1856 papers . For academic age , a quantitative variable , we used linear regression to test the relationship between academic age and the rates at which papers were accepted and rejected without review . We also used GLM to test for changes in the relationship between each fac - tor and decisions over time . All tests were done using R ( R Devel - opment Core Team , 2007 ) . 3 . Results Of our total data set of 1856 papers , we could not assign about 104 authors ( 6 % ) to a gender , because their ﬁrst name was ambig - uous or was not a typical western name . This percentage of ambig - uous names is less than other comparable studies ( e . g . Budden et al . , 2008 ) and was lower because we used only papers submitted from English - speaking countries . Of the remaining 1752 papers , men submitted 1166 ( 67 % ) and women submitted 586 ( 33 % ) . For the set of papers for which we could determine the authors’ gender , papers submitted by men ( 38 % accepted ) and women ( 34 % accepted ) were accepted roughly in proportion to those that were submitted , as determined by a chi - squared test ( { 2 = 1 . 88 , df = 1 , P = 0 . 17 ) ( Table 1 ) . We found no evidence of differences in the acceptance rate of papers by men and women authors . Similarly , papers submitted by men ( 29 % immediately rejected ) and women ( 34 % immediately rejected ) were rejected without review roughly in proportion to those that were submitted ( { 2 = 2 . 23 , df = 1 , P = 0 . 13 ) ( Table 1 ) . Even though there were no signiﬁcant differ - ences based on gender , the differences between men and women are getting smaller each year , with women having a slightly higher acceptance rate than men in 2007 . It is also interesting to note that the immediate rejection rate for authors with ambiguous names ( 41 % ) was larger than that for men ( 29 % ) and women ( 34 % ) , possi - bly because English was not the ﬁrst language for many of them . Editors both accepted and rejected papers without review at different rates from one another ( accepted : { 2 = 59 . 4 , df = 11 , P < 0 . 001 ; rejected without review : { 2 = 59 . 8 , df = 11 , P < 0 . 001 ) . For example , one editor accepted 52 % of papers and rejected just 20 % without review , compared to another editor who accepted just 27 % of papers and rejected 47 % without review . Papers submitted by authors from different English - speaking countries tended to be accepted and rejected without review roughly in proportion to those that were submitted ( accepted : { 2 = 9 . 81 , df = 7 , P = 0 . 12 ; re - jected without review : { 2 = 4 . 57 , df = 7 , P = 0 . 71 ) . The academic age of the corresponding author did not have a signiﬁcant impact on the rate at which papers were accepted or re - jected without review , as indicated by linear regression ( accepted : P = 0 . 20 ; immediately rejected : P = 0 . 66 ) ; there was no evidence that older and presumably more experienced authors had a higher acceptance rate than younger and presumably less experienced authors or even authors submitting their ﬁrst paper . Among these authors , the academic age of men ( median = 7 years ; range (cid:2) 4 to 47 ) is signiﬁcantly greater than that of women ( median = 3 years ; range (cid:2) 4 to 41 ) , using a Wilcoxon signed rank test . The relationships between each of the factors—author gender , author nationality , and handling editor—and decisions were rela - tively constant over time ; that is , none had signiﬁcant interactions with year ( P > 0 . 05 in all cases ) . When we considered gender , nationality , handling editors , and ﬁnal decisions together , there were no signiﬁcant interactions among the explanatory variables , except between editors and decisions ( P < 0 . 001 ) , indicating that different editors accept , immediately reject , and reject papers fol - lowing review in different proportions . 4 . Discussion We found that there was no overall inﬂuence of gender , nation - ality , academic age , or year of submission on the proportion of arti - cles accepted by the journal Biological Conservation from English - speaking countries . The only factor that affected the proportion of papers accepted and rejected without review was the handling editor ; some editors accepted a greater proportion of articles than others and some rejected a greater proportion of papers without review than did other editors . The differences among editors are confounded by the fact that editors cover different geographical re - gions , review articles in different topic areas , have worked in dif - ferent years of the four year study period , and have differing levels of experience at assessing papers prior to review ( and slightly different strategies for rejecting papers without review ) . Also , certain editors tend to handle more papers for special issues , which generally have higher acceptance rates . However , there is no evidence that any of the individual editors showed any bias in the handling of papers based on gender , nationality , or academic age . We found it particularly surprising that academic age had no signiﬁcant effect on whether a paper was accepted , rejected fol - lowing review , or rejected without review . We expected that pa - pers with more senior authors would tend to be accepted more frequently than those with relatively junior authors . It seems quite reasonable to expect that older and therefore more experienced authors would have a higher likelihood of having their papers ac - cepted for publication than younger and presumably less experi - enced authors . However , this was not the case . The number , academic age , and identity of other coauthors on each paper may have played a role in masking any affect of the academic age of the corresponding author . Papers with more than four authors and papers with authors who have published many papers tend to be cited more frequently ( Leimu and Koricheva , 2005a , 2005b ; Leimu et al . , 2008 ) , and perhaps also fare better in the review pro - cess . We did see in our sample that men had a greater average age than women , reﬂecting the fact that in the past the majority of ecologists were men . It is important to recognize that we found no impact of nation - ality on acceptance rates among authors from English - speaking Table 1 Proportions of papers accepted , rejected following review , and rejected without review in each year of our study according to the gender of the corresponding author . Year Gender Accepted Rejected following review Rejected without review Total number of submissions 2004 Female 0 . 34 0 . 43 0 . 23 122 Male 0 . 43 0 . 31 0 . 25 263 2005 Female 0 . 40 0 . 27 0 . 33 131 Male 0 . 46 0 . 30 0 . 23 296 2006 Female 0 . 31 0 . 33 0 . 36 170 Male 0 . 36 0 . 32 0 . 32 306 2007 Female 0 . 32 0 . 28 0 . 40 163 Male 0 . 28 0 . 36 0 . 36 301 R . B . Primack et al . / Biological Conservation 142 ( 2009 ) 2415 – 2418 2417 countries . However , authors from non - English - speaking countries have much lower rates of acceptance than authors from English - speaking countries ( Primack and Marrs , 2008 ) . Approximately 30 % or more of manuscripts submitted by authors from English - speaking countries are accepted for publication , whereas about 20 % of submissions from authors from non - English - speaking developed countries are accepted ( Primack and Marrs , 2008 ) . This difference suggests that there is substantial disadvantage of not having English as a ﬁrst language ; this disadvantage could result in a decrease of around 30 % in the chance of acceptance . Rates of acceptance from many developing countries , such as China and In - dia , are less than 5 % . Problems with language , funding for research , training , lack of familiarity with current ideas of research topics and experimental design and analysis , and lack of access to current literature , are some of the factors that may reduce the chance of papers being accepted . We believe it is important to address these shockingly low acceptance rates , and consider what can be done to improve the situation . If the low acceptance rates are due to re - viewer or editor bias against authors from these countries , then double - blind reviewing might provide a way to address the prob - lem . However , if the problem is due to poor science , limited access to scientiﬁc literature , poor writing , or ineffective preparation of the manuscripts , then other mechanisms would need to be put into place to address the problem . Programs that encourage long - term partnerships between researchers from different countries might be one useful approach . In summary , we investigated the possibility of a link between the gender of the corresponding author and other factors and the chances of manuscript acceptance in a single journal . We found no evidence to suggest that single - blind reviewing is biased against women , at least in the journal Biological Conservation . We believe that the review process is complex , and involves multiple factors , including different editors , countries , and subdisciplines , and that these factors and journal policies change over time . A major value of the recent debate over bias in the review process ( Budden et al . , 2008 ; Engqvist and Frommen , 2008 ; Hammerschmidt et al . , 2008 ; Whittaker , 2008 ) has been to highlight a potential problem and to stimulate editors ( ourselves and others ) to assess their perfor - mance and review process ( e . g . , Anon , 2008 ; Cooke , 2008 ; Primack and Marrs , 2008 ) . It is reasonable that the editorial process should be audited and it is likely , given the almost universal use of elec - tronic submissions , that editors will perform audits more thor - oughly in the future . It is essential that all authors feel that the editorial process is fair , unbiased and rigorous . Acknowledgements Funding for this research was provided by Elsevier . Comments on the research and manuscript were provided by the editors : Richard Corlett , Markus Fischer , Andrew Gill , Julie Lockwood , Jean Paul Metzger , Andrew Pullin , Denis Saunders , Navjot Sodhi , and Kim With . Additional comments came from Heather Leeb , Krista McGuire , Farah Mohammadzadeh , Caroline Polgar , Tom Webb , and Robert Whittaker . References Anon , 2008 . Working double blind . Nature 451 , 605 – 606 . Budden , A . E . , Tregenza , T . , Aarssen , L . W . , Koricheva , J . , Leimu , R . , Lortie , C . J . , 2008 . Double - blind review favours increased representation of female authors . Trends in Ecology and Evolution 23 , 4 – 6 . Cooke , S . J . , 2008 . Truth , faith , and transparency in peer review : perspectives on the AFS peer review process . Fisheries 33 , 242 – 243 . Engqvist , L . , Frommen , J . G . , 2008 . Double - blind review and gender publication bias . Animal Behavior 76 , E1 – E2 . Hammerschmidt , K . , Reinhardt , M . , Rolff , J . , 2008 . Does double - blind review favor female authors ? Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 6 , 356 . Leimu , R . , Koricheva , J . , 2005a . What determines the citation frequency of ecological papers ? Trends in Ecology and Evolution 20 , 28 – 32 . Leimu , R . , Koricheva , J . , 2005b . Does scientiﬁc collaboration increase the impact of ecological articles ? BioScience 55 , 438 – 443 . Leimu , R . , Lortie , C . J . , Aarssen , L . , Budden , A . E . , Koricheva , J . , Tregenza , T . , 2008 . Does it pay to have a ‘‘bigwig” as a co - author ? Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 6 , 410 – 411 . Link , A . M . , 1998 . US and non - US submissions : an analysis of reviewer bias . Journal of the American Medical Association 280 , 246 – 247 . Primack , R . B . , Marrs , R . , 2008 . Bias in the review process . Biological Conservation 141 , 2919 – 2920 . R Development Core Team , 2007 . R : A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing . R Foundation for Statistical Computing , Vienna . Tregenza , T . , 2002 . Gender bias in the refereeing process ? Trends in Ecology and Evolution 17 , 349 – 350 . Ware , M . , 2008 . Peer Review Beneﬁts Perceptions and Alternatives . Publishing Research Consortium , London . < http : / / www . publishingresearch . net / documents / PRCsummary4Wareﬁnal . pdf > . Webb , T . J . , O’Hara , B . , Freckleton , R . P . , 2008 . Does double - blind review beneﬁt female authors ? Trends in Ecology and Evolution 23 , 351 – 353 . Wennerås , C . , Wold , A . , 1997 . Nepotism and sexism in peer - review . Nature 387 , 341 – 343 . Whittaker , R . J . , 2008 . Journal review and gender equality : a critical comment on Budden et al . . Trends in Ecology and Evolution 23 , 478 – 479 . 2418 R . B . Primack et al . / Biological Conservation 142 ( 2009 ) 2415 – 2418