Anim . Behav . , 1987 , 35 , 1838 - 1845 Search images not proven : a reappraisal of recent evidence TIM GUILFORD & MARIAN STAMP DAWKINS Animal Behaviour Research Group , Department of Zoology , South Parks Road , OxJbrd , OX1 3PS , U . K . Abstract . It is commonly agreed that predators hunting for cryptic prey have been demonstrated to adopt search images ( involving perceptual specialization ) for particular prey types . However , a simple alternative strategy , that of an appropriate reduction in search rate , may in many cases have the same effect as adopting a search image . The search image and search rate hypotheses are examined , and a series of critical predictions are proposed to distinguish them . Briefly , the search rate hypothesis predicts : ( 1 ) that adjusting search rate for one cryptic prey type will enhance the ability to detect other equally cryptic types ( the search image hypothesis predicts that this will interfere with the ability to detect other equally cryptic types ) ; ( 2 ) that adjusting search rate for cryptic prey will be achieved by learning to spend longer looking at each patch of the environment , and that the more cryptic the prey the longer will be the viewing time required to effect accurate detection ( the search image hypothesis makes no such predictions ) . Four recent studies purporting to demonstrate search images are re - examined in the light of these predictions , and it is found that the published data fail to distinguish the two hypotheses . In addition , some evidence that is better explained by the search rate hypothesis is discussed . A brief examination of the ecological consequences of the search rate hypothesis shows that , unlike the search image hypothesis , it does not predict apostatic selection . It is therefore argued that the distinction between the two mechanisms explaining how predators ' learn to see ' cryptic prey is important , but that the critical tests have not yet been made . The existence of search images remains not proven . Although it is widely believed that ' search images ' have been demonstrated in predators learning to find cryptic prey , we argue that none of the studies commonly cited as providing evidence for this view ( Dawkins 1971 ; Pietrewicz & Kamil 1977 , 1979 , 1981 ; Bond 1983 ; Lawrence 1985a , b , 1986 ; Gen - dron 1986 ) actually does so . We consider that most , if not all , of the published data are equally consistent with , or better explained by , a simpler ' variable search rate ' hypothesis . In this paper we make explicit the differences between the search image and the search rate hypotheses , and re - examine four studies that claim to have demon - strated the existence of search images , in the light of these critical differences . We find no unequivocal evidence in favour of search images . SEARCH IMAGE VERSUS SEARCH RATE In both its original formulation and its current usage , the search image hypothesis implies percep - tual changes in the predator that temporarily increase its ability to detect particular cryptic prey as a result of recent encounters with similar cyrptic prey ( reviewed in Lawrence & Allen 1983 ) . When the question of mechanisms is raised , some system of selective attention to cues is generally favoured ( e . g . Bond 1983 ; Lawrence & Allen 1983 ; Gendron 1986 ) , even though the concept of selective atten - tion itself may encompass a variety of mechanisms , and is often ill - defined ( Johnston & Dark 1986 ) . Certainly it seems agreed that peripheral changes in searching behaviour , such as learning where to look for prey , do not constitute search image formation , nor do changes in preference for one food over another ( Dawkins 1971 ; Krebs 1973 ; Lawrence & Allen 1983 ; Lawrence 1985a ) . Tinber - gen ( 1960 ) implied that a perceptual filter concen - trating on the image of a single prey type was what allowed increased detection using the specific search image . Hence , formation of a specific search image should interfere with the detection of other prey types with different appearances , because by concentrating on a specific configuration of stimuli the perceptual apparatus is less well equipped to detect other configurations . This ' interference ' is 1838