Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Personality and Individual Di ﬀ erences journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / paid Examining how the personality , self - e ﬃ cacy , and anticipatory cognitions of potential entrepreneurs shape their entrepreneurial intentions Bryan Fuller a , Yan Liu b , Saleh Bajaba c , Laura E . Marler d , ⁎ , Jon Pratt e a Department of Management , Louisiana Tech University , Ruston , LA , USA b Department of Management , West Virginia University Institute of Technology , Beckley , WV , USA c Department of Business Administration , King Abdulaziz University , Jeddah , Saudi Arabia d Department of Management and Information Systems , Mississippi State University , MS , USA e BetterVoice Inc . , USA A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords : Entrepreneurial intentions Entrepreneurial self - e ﬃ cacy Proactive personality Trait competitiveness Creative self - e ﬃ cacy Learning self - e ﬃ cacy Anticipatory entrepreneurial cognitions A B S T R A C T Using an expanded view of entrepreneurial feasibility , we hypothesize a model in which entrepreneurial in - tentions are fostered by proactive personality and trait competitiveness . In doing so , our study expands the concept of entrepreneurial feasibility to include anticipatory thinking and a generative view of entrepreneurial self - e ﬃ cacy by considering broader forms of self - e ﬃ cacy that proactive and competitive people are likely to develop – creative self - e ﬃ cacy and learning self - e ﬃ cacy . Results indicate multiple self - e ﬃ cacy beliefs account for anticipatory entrepreneurial cognitions and that the relationship between entrepreneurial self - e ﬃ cacy and entrepreneurial intentions is fully mediated by these cognitions . The practical implications of these ﬁ ndings are discussed . 1 . Introduction Entrepreneurs play a major role in fostering economic growth and job creation ( Baron , 2006 ; Bjørnskov & Foss , 2013 ) , hence the question of what spurs individuals to pursue entrepreneurial activities has been prevalent in the entrepreneurship literature . Recent research has tended to focus on a cognitive approach to the entrepreneurship process using intention - based models to explain that entrepreneurial behavior is predicated on individuals ' intentions ( Esfandiar , Shari ﬁ - Tehrani , Pratt , & Altinay , 2017 ) . These models have been empirically veri ﬁ ed and reveal that individuals ' entrepreneurial intentions predict both en - trepreneurial goal orientation ( Esfandiar et al . , 2017 ) and whether or not they will engage in entrepreneurial ventures such as business start - ups ( Drnov š ek , Wincent , & Carson , 2010 ) . One of the most commonly studied antecedents of entrepreneurial intentions is entrepreneurial self - e ﬃ cacy ( e . g . , Esfandiar et al . , 2017 ; Krueger & Brazeal , 1994 ; Lee , Wong , Foo , & Leung , 2011 ) , which is “ the strength of an individual ' s belief that he or she is capable of successfully performing the roles and tasks of an entrepreneur ” ( Chen , Greene , & Crick , 1998 : 301 ) . Entrepreneurial intention models often cast entrepreneurial self - ef - ﬁ cacy as a measure of perceived feasibility of venture creation ( Krueger & Brazeal , 1994 ; Shapero , 1975 ) or “ the degree to which one believes that she or he is personally capable of starting a business ” ( Krueger , 1993 : 7 ) . Perceived feasibility is thought to be important in moving individuals toward entrepreneurial action ( Barbosa , Gerhardt , & Kickul , 2007 ; Esfandiar et al . , 2017 ) . Thus , entrepreneurial self - e ﬃ cacy re - presents perceived feasibility ( e . g . , Krueger & Brazeal , 1994 ) and has been established as a key cognitive mechanism that underlies the re - lationship between antecedents such as personality and entrepreneurial intent / action ( e . g . , Chen et al . , 1998 ) . However , our current under - standing of how perceived entrepreneurial feasibility is developed re - mains inadequate ( e . g . , Luthans & Ibrayeva , 2006 ) . Accordingly , we seek to extend what we know about en - trepreneurial feasibility by employing social cognitive theory ( Bandura , 1997 ) which suggests that narrow speci ﬁ c self - e ﬃ cacy beliefs like en - trepreneurial self - e ﬃ cacy are “ generated ” from broader , less speci ﬁ c self - e ﬃ cacy belief . Using a generative view of self - e ﬃ cacy , we expand the notion of entrepreneurial feasibility by considering two broader self - e ﬃ cacy beliefs : individuals ' belief in their ability to learn new things ( i . e . , learning self - e ﬃ cacy ) and ability to think in new ways ( i . e . , creative self - e ﬃ cacy ) . The resulting entrepreneurial self - e ﬃ cacy beliefs of potential entrepreneurs high in these broad forms of self - e ﬃ cacy should stimulate cognitive simulations of what it would be like to create and run a new venture . These mental tests of ‘ how things might work ’ are important to developing the belief that becoming an entrepreneur is feasible ( c . f . Krueger & Brazeal , 1994 ) . Thus , our study introduces a https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . paid . 2018 . 01 . 005 Received 19 October 2017 ; Received in revised form 30 December 2017 ; Accepted 3 January 2018 ⁎ Corresponding author . E - mail addresses : bfuller @ latech . edu ( B . Fuller ) , yan . liu @ mail . wvu . edu ( Y . Liu ) , sbajaba @ kau . edu . sa ( S . Bajaba ) , lmarler @ business . msstate . edu ( L . E . Marler ) . Personality and Individual Differences 125 ( 2018 ) 120 – 125 0191 - 8869 / © 2018 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . T new construct anticipatory entrepreneurial cognitions – to capture im - portant cognitive aspects of the development of entrepreneurial inten - tions . Therefore , by considering broad forms of self - e ﬃ cacy and an - ticipatory thinking of potential entrepreneurs , we expand the notion of entrepreneurial feasibility ( see Fig . 1 ) . In addition to building a model based on previous research on en - trepreneurial self - e ﬃ cacy and intentions , we also introduce a model that incorporates narrow personality traits which are often useful in predicting entrepreneurial intentions ( Travis & Freeman , 2017 ) . Spe - ci ﬁ cally , we assess the extent to which two action - oriented personality traits underlie the development of entrepreneurial self - e ﬃ cacy and intentions of potential entrepreneurs : proactive personality and trait competitiveness . The proactive personality trait captures an individual ' s “ propensity to act ” ( Crant , 1996 ) which is important in entrepreneurial initiatives ( Esfandiar et al . , 2017 ; Shapero & Sokol , 1982 ) . The inclu - sion of trait competitiveness aligns with the notion that the success of entrepreneurs relates to their competitiveness ( Hornaday & Aboud , 1971 ) . 2 . Theory According to social cognitive theory , self - e ﬃ cacy is the perceived capability to perform a speci ﬁ c task and is “ concerned not with what one has , but with belief in what one can do with whatever resources one can muster ” ( Bandura , 2007 : 646 ) . Individuals can provide information about domains in which they have no previous experience which is useful when studying potential entrepreneurs . We build upon the proactivity literature which suggests proactive individuals are likely to perceive they can do . Proactive individuals “ scan for opportunities , show initiative , take action and persevere until they reach closure by bringing about change ” ( Bateman & Crant , 1993 : 105 ) . Entrepreneurial endeavors require this type of perseverance . Research tends to support the relation between proactive personality and entrepreneurial in - tentionality ( Crant , 1996 ) , ﬁ rm innovation ( e . g . Shaver & Scott , 1991 ) , and business creation as well as business success ( Rauch & Frese , 2007 ) . This paper also draws from the work of Schumpeter ( 1934 ) who described “ the will to conquer ” ( p . 93 ) as a central trait predicting entrepreneurial action . Trait competitiveness represents an individual ' s need to achieve or to excel and his / her “ enjoyment of interpersonal competition and the desire to win and be better than others ” ( Spence & Helmreich , 1983 : 41 ) . Trait competitive people are driven to achieve high - performance levels ( Brown , Cron , & Slocum Jr . , 1998 ) . They tend to seek out comparative information to help them understand where they stand relative to other people and to learn from other ' s mistakes and accomplishments ( Wang & Netemeyer , 2002 ) . The self - e ﬃ cacy of potential entrepreneurs may emerge , in part , due to their creative self - e ﬃ cacy or “ the belief that one has the ability to produce creative outcomes ” ( Tierney & Farmer , 2002 : 1138 ) . Crea - tive self - e ﬃ cacy is positively associated with the generation of novel and useful ideas as well as other forms of creative behavior ( Gong , Huang , & Farh , 2009 ; Tierney & Farmer , 2002 ) . Creativity is believed to be important to the entrepreneurial process because of its linkage with opportunity recognition and the development of new products and ventures ( Ko & Butler , 2007 ) as well as ﬁ rm innovation ( Ahlin , Drnov š ek , & Hisrich , 2014 ) . Because entrepreneurial self - e ﬃ cacy in - corporates many creativity - related aspects relevant to the en - trepreneurial domain , creative self - e ﬃ cacy should foster feelings of entrepreneurial capability that lead to entrepreneurial self - e ﬃ cacy . Entrepreneurial capability depends on an individuals ' ability to take on many di ﬀ erent roles and take charge of their own careers ( Chen et al . , 1998 ) which is consistent with the literature on proactive per - sonality . The proactive personality trait is related to a wide variety of self - e ﬃ cacy measures including role - breadth self - e ﬃ cacy and career self - e ﬃ cacy ( Fuller & Marler , 2009 ) . Crant and Bateman ( 2000 ) suggest that individuals with proactive personality seize new opportunities and use novel ways of doing things even if they entail some risk , and re - search shows proactive employees demonstrate creativity in their jobs ( Kim , Hon , & Lee , 2010 ) . Therefore , we expect that proactive person - ality will be positively related to entrepreneurial self - e ﬃ cacy and that this relationship will be mediated by creative self - e ﬃ cacy because highly proactive people will feel capable of undertaking broad roles . H1 . The positive relationship between proactive personality and entrepreneurial self - e ﬃ cacy will be partially mediated by creative self - e ﬃ cacy . Another potential source of self - e ﬃ cacy for potential entrepreneurs is learning self - e ﬃ cacy which represents an individual ' s belief that he / she has the ability to learn and adapt ( Potosky & Ramakrishna , 2002 ) and tends to increase engagement in task learning ( Schunk , 1989 ) . People who believe they have the capacity to learn and adapt tend to use cognitive processes that facilitate learning , rehearsing , reasoning , and mentally organizing information ( Warr & Bunce , 1995 ) . Learning self - e ﬃ cacy has also been positively linked to performance ( Herndon & Bembenutty , 2017 ) . The belief that they can learn the tasks associated with venture creation , management , and competitive advantage before forming entrepreneurial self - e ﬃ cacy beliefs is requisite for potential entrepreneurs ( Hagen , Tootoonchi , & Hassan , 2005 ) . Proactive in - dividuals believe in their ability to learn and adapt which is critical to the development of their entrepreneurial self - e ﬃ cacy . Because in - dividuals high in proactive personality are learning - oriented and Creative Self - Efficacy Trait Competitiveness Proactive Personality Learning Self - Efficacy Entrepreneurial Self - Efficacy Anticipatory Entrepreneurial Cognitions Entrepreneurial Intentions Fig . 1 . Theoretical Model . B . Fuller et al . Personality and Individual Differences 125 ( 2018 ) 120 – 125 121