L O N G P A P E R S Opening up the black box of scholarly synthesis : Intermediate products , processes , and tools Xin Qian | Katrina Fenlon | Wayne Lutters | Joel Chan College of Information Studies , University of Maryland , College Park , Maryland , USA Correspondence Xin Qian , College of Information Studies , University of Maryland , College Park , MD 20740 . Email : xinq @ umd . edu Abstract Synthesis is a foundational scholarly product that generates new conceptual wholes from independent intellectual sources . But effective synthesis products — such as literature reviews — are rare , in part due to inadequate sup - port from existing tools and information systems . A detailed , situated under - standing of the work practices behind synthesis is necessary to inform the development of synthesis tools . Previous work in scholarly primitives , active reading , and sensemaking provide partial explanations of aspects of synthesis , but a detailed explanation of scholarly synthesis , specifically , is lacking . This paper presents a foundational empirical examination of the work practices behind synthesis to address the gap , focusing on unpacking the intermediate products , processes , and tools through in - depth contextual interviews with scholars . Results shed light on the distinctive intermediate products generated during synthesis — including in - source annotations , per - source summaries , and cross - source syntheses — as well as effortful processes for nonlinear progression of these intermediate products towards a final synthesis product . These prod - ucts and practices were also embedded in a complex ecology of creative re - appropriated tools . This work enriches understanding of the complex scholarly practices that produce synthesis and opens up a research agenda for under - standing and supporting scholarly synthesis more generally . K E Y W O R D S active reading , interdisciplinary research , literature review , scholarly primitive , sensemaking 1 | INTRODUCTION In 2011 , an economist traced the genesis of her fruitful research agenda to a “ masterful survey of the literature on health , education , labor markets , and household behavior in development economics … [ that ] made two things very apparent : the questions could not be more important , and the answers were mostly unsatisfactory ” ( p . 5 ) . The economist was Esther Duflo , who shared the Nobel Prize in Economics in 2019 1 for this work on experimental approaches to alleviating global poverty . This example illustrates how synthesis — the creation of a new conceptual from independent intellectual sources — is a foundational process in scholarly work . The products of synthesis may take familiar forms like a literature review or systematic review . As Strike and Posner ( 1983 ) note , effective synthesis products can clarify inconsistencies and resolve tensions over multiple sources , DOI : 10 . 1002 / pra2 . 270 83rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Information Science & Technology October 25 - 29 , 2020 . Author ( s ) retain copyright , but ASIS & T receives an exclusive publication license Proc Assoc Inf Sci Technol . 2020 ; 57 : e270 . wileyonlinelibrary . com / journal / pra2 1 of 12 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / pra2 . 270 and enable progressive problem shifts with increased explanatory and predictive capacity , expand empirical evi - dence and scope of application , and strengthen theoretical support . In short , an effective synthesis is generative : it enables innovation in scholarly and scientific work . Despite their importance , effective synthesis products are rare . While most published scholarship includes some review of prior literature , a minority truly synthesize prior knowledge . Case in point : two empirically grounded stud - ies of committee review comments on the literature review sections of doctoral dissertations demonstrate that the bar for synthesis is substantially lower in practice than faculty ' s stated expectations ( Denholm & Philpott , 2009 ; Holbrook , Bourke , Lovat , & Dally , 2004 ) . For example , graduate stu - dents in psychology who are doing synthesis often use a sequential flow to organize related literature , instead of generating a new conceptual schema to integrate the prior literature ( Froese , Gantz , & Henry , 1998 ; Granello , 2001 ) . The problem is not confined to beginning researchers : as Bem ( 1995 ) notes , “ authors of literature reviews are at risk for producing mind - numbing lists of citations and findings that resemble a phone book — impressive case , lots of num - bers , but not much plot . In contrast , a coherent review emerges only from a coherent conceptual structuring of the topic itself . ” ( p . 172 ) . Frustrated by this tendency , some edi - tors have developed guides for how to write reviews that synthesize prior work to enable new conceptual break - throughs ( Bem , 1995 ; Webster & Watson , 2002 ) . Effective synthesis is rare because it is arduous and inadequately supported by existing tools and information systems . Designing tools and information systems for syn - thesis requires navigating the considerable variation among individual researchers ' practices and the nature of their research products . These practices and products are situated within a web of sociotechnical factors — including the domain of research , disciplinary traditions , team col - laboration , research resources , tool dependencies — which affect successful synthesis in unknown ways . Consider an illustrative scenario : Amani and Han are new scholars in Dr . Kopek ' s interdisciplinary health sci - ence lab focused on designing mobile games for behavior change . Both are working to identify the boundaries of a knowledge space . Amani is searching for models of effec - tive behavior change across the social sciences , a process she describes as simultaneously an overwhelming flood of possibilities and a continual defeat of dead - ends . While she maintains a Zotero ( Puckett , 2011 ) folder with cita - tions and synopses to share with Dr . Kopek and the team , she also maintains for herself a hand - sketched map of the different concepts and theories and their promising interconnections . She is currently working on a white paper that distills her map and relates it to particular aspects of the research problem . Han , on the other hand , is exploring game mechanics and their impact on players ' self - efficacy . While there is a growing academic literature on this , he finds that the most significant insights come from information leaked from proprietary industry reports of playtesting , which he finds on blogs . He maintains a running , loosely structured Excel spreadsheet with pairs of “ mechanic ” and “ impact ” claims , the source , and initial gut reaction . He also keeps a folder of screenshots from Twitch gameplay streams as personal memory triggers of examples of these mechanics at work . He wants to compile a video of clips demonstrat - ing the five highest impact designs , with links to research explaining why those mechanisms might be successful and to share out with the team . In both cases , Amani and Han are engaged in more than a traditional systematic lit - erature review . Instead , they are seeking to synthesize what is known to motivate new understanding . However , they rely on divergent workflows and tools and produce fundamentally different kinds of outcomes along the way . To develop the next generation of tools for synthesis work , we need a detailed , situated understanding of the work practices behind synthesis products . This effort should address critical questions about the fundamental “ data structures ” and “ operations ” in synthesis processes . Answers should encompass both the intermediate products , as well as the processes that produce and operate on them , moving from the raw input of experience and literature to the valuable final product of a synthesis . Informed by prior ethnomethodological insight ( Cetina , 1999 ; Orr , 1996 ; Suchman , 1987 ) , our explanatory power and resultant abil - ity to design tools will be significantly enhanced by treating the particulars of where / how the practices and products are situated in the world . Such an understanding would allow us to interrogate the key affordances and cost struc - tures involved in the practice of synthesis , and how they might vary across the tools , as well as identify the most critical pain points and opportunities for augmentation and optimization . In short , we need to open up the black box between sources and synthesis . There is a rich scholarly tradition within Information Science that examines the physical , social , and cognitive processes and products of research and learning . A long strand of research on information seeking and information practices has sought to distill descriptive studies of schol - arly processes into sets of primitives , or fundamental infor - mation activities , that are common across disciplines , such as “ browsing , ” “ chaining , ” “ accessing , ” “ notetaking , ” and “ re - reading . ” ( Blanke & Hedges , 2013 ; Ellis , 1993 ; Palmer , Teffeau , & Pirmann , 2009 ; Unsworth , 2000 ; Vilar , 2015 ) . In their synthesis of the literature on primitives , Palmer et al . ( 2009 ) show how 20 discrete primitives function across disciplines as building - blocks for higher - level scholarly activities such as searching , collecting , reading , 2 of 12 QIAN ET AL . writing , and collaborating . Building on this line of work , recent efforts to formally model workflows and scholarly communication as ontologies , for example , Gradmann et al . ( 2015 ) provide more holistic accounts of scholarly practices . They represent primitives as components within complex systems of actors , social contexts , domains , methods , goals , and tools . These models inform the design and development of research systems and tools to support widespread or cross - cutting research requirements ; how - ever , they do not explicitly address synthesis as a distinctive and problematic process . Another window into the human practice of synthesis is through their material interaction with relevant docu - ments . “ Active reading ” is a strand of research that focuses on understanding how people process individual papers . This work has revealed that people create inter - mediate products while reading , such as annotations and marginalia , and extracted content like snippets or quotes ( Tashman & Edwards , 2011b ) . It also identified key sub - processes such as navigating between a paper ' s various subsections or arranging materials on a surface to gain an overview of their contents . However , this work does not explicitly situate these activites in the specific task of producing a scholarly synthesis . Instead , the highest level of processing studied is often the comparative clustering of multiple documents ( O ' Hara , 1996 ; O ' hara & Sellen , 1997 ; Morris , Brush , & Meyers , 2007 ; Tashman & Edwards , 2011b , Tashman & Edwards , 2011a ) , stopping short of directly studying the intricate integration work in synthesis . Models of sensemaking provide additional explana - tory power for understanding synthesis , with several the - ories that specify objects and operations during sensemaking ( for a recent comprehensive review of sen - semaking models , see ( Zhang & Dagobert , 2014 ) ) . These theories might help characterize the products and pro - cesses of synthesis . For example , the “ Learning Loop Complex ” models sensemaking as cycles through three processes : searching for good representations to capture salient information from the data , instantiating represen - tations ( originally termed as “ encodons ” ) with captured information , and shifting the instantiated representations to incorporate missing but relevant data , to fit task opera - tions ( Russell , Stefik , Pirolli , & Card , 1993 ) . The “ Data / Frame Model ” models sensemaking as cycles of elabora - tion , presentation , questioning , and reframing to con - struct frames from data ( Klein , Moon , & Hoffman , 2006 ) . The Notional Model of Sensemaking in intelligence anal - ysis has a richer depiction of intermediate products . It has a looping structure from both between and within foraging and sensemaking loops , which progressively transforms raw information to reportable results , with intermediate products of “ shoe - box ” , evidence file , schemas , and hypotheses . These products are gradually more formal , and processes that produce each product are increasingly effortful ( Pirolli & Card , 2005 ) . The over - arching idea of sensemaking is a process of iterating between less processed data and more synthesized schemas . The synthesized schemas are then used to make some downstream tasks easier , such as decision - making . One key point of uncertainty is precisely how the models of sensemaking might inform our understanding of the complex activity of scholarly synthesis . In particu - lar , settings in which sensemaking models have been applied or developed vary considerably , with many focused on tasks that are quite different in complexity and focus from scholarly synthesis . Examples of these diverse settings include generating retirement investment plans , creating marketing plans , constructing a new story about a topic of choice ( Zhang & Soergel , 2016 ) , develop - ing library strategies to attract readers from certain eth - nographic groups ( Dervin , 1992 ) , learning how to develop a software system in Java language ( Baldonado & Winograd , 1997 ) , or identifying missing information in a journalistic task ( Attfield , 2005 ) . These diverse end products and raw sources tend to be substan - tially less complex than synthesis products and scholarly sources . When sensemaking has been studied in schol - arly setting , the tasks tend to be general , time - unbounded , or heavily focused foraging scholarly sources rather than synthesizing . For example , Pontis et al applied the Data / Frame Model of Sensemaking to the task of understanding the organization of a specific scien - tific community ( Pontis & Blandford , 2015 , 2016 ; Pontis , Blandford , Greifeneder , Attalla , & Neal , 2017 ) . Similarly , Faisal et al . proposed a model for sensemaking a litera - ture domain , with a vague and long - term goal of “ learn - ing and gaining knowledge of the domain ” ( Faisal , Cairns , & Blandford , 2006 ) . This variation in tasks and differences from synthesis is essential to address because the way that sensemaking unfolds is task - specific : the nature of the intermediate products and the dynamics of operations on those products varies with what kind of task the sensemaking is for ( Zhang & Dagobert , 2014 ) . Depending on the task , a simple spatial clustering might suffice , or more complex and structured representations like arguments , networks , or hierarchical structures might be necessary ( Faisal , Attfield , & Blandford , 2009 ) . The complexity of the sources themselves might yield additional work or requirements not seen in the less com - plex topics or more structure input data from other domains . In summary , more theoretical and empirical work is necessary to integrate advances from the domains of scholarly information practices , active reading , and sen - semaking , and bridge them with the understanding we QIAN ET AL . 3 of 12 need to support synthesis work . Because forerunning studies of scholarship and models of primitives and workflows do not highlight synthesis as a distinct pro - cess , it is unclear how that process manifests in or relates to known disciplinary , interdisciplinary practices , and the research infrastructures . Active reading research fre - quently focuses on the processing of individual scholarly sources and does not address the end synthesis product we care about . Finally , sensemaking theories are promis - ing starting points for understanding synthesis ; yet , most are domain - general or focused on more straightforward every - day sensemaking tasks . The output of those tasks is considerably less complex than scholarly synthesis prod - ucts . Sensemaking theory itself posits that the kinds of representations that sensemakers produce are task - dependent ; thus , there is uncertainty about how these models apply to the specific context of synthesis . In this paper , we take a step towards advancing these concepts with an empirical examination of the work practices behind scholarly synthesis . Through a set of contextual interviews with scholars , we investigate the following research questions : 1 . What intermediate products do scholars create in the course of synthesis , and for what purposes ? 2 . What processes operate on and between these interme - diate products , and to what ends ? 3 . What are points of friction or challenges do scholars confront in creating and using intermediate products ? 2 | METHODS To investigate these questions , we conducted in - depth , semi - structured , contextual interviews with early - career scholars regarding their synthesis and then performed a qualitative analysis to identify emerging themes . 2 . 1 | Setting Our interviews involved 10 first - year information studies Ph . D . students at a public research institution . Drawing inspiration from prior case studies ( Denholm & Philpott , 2009 ; Holbrook et al . , 2004 ) , this sample enabled us to draw an initial understanding of the questions . While our participant sample is small in absolute numbers , there was considerable diversity amongst the participants , both demographically and in terms of their disciplinary backgrounds and interests ( see Table 1 ) . Participants ' ages ranged from 23 to 37 ( M = 28 ; SD = 4 . 61 ) . Six are female , while four are male . Half of the participants finished their undergradu - ate education within 5 years of the study , while two fin - ished it more than 10 years ago . Most entered the doctoral program directly from a previous academic degree program , except one ( P7 ) who had intermediate full - time work experience . Finally , there was consider - able topical and disciplinary diversity in participants ' research interests . We anticipated that this diversity would allow us to both observe rich variation and idio - syncrasies in synthesis practices regarding the choices of tool adoption and knowledge management skills . At the same time , the shared context of being part of the same cohort of first - year PhD students in the same depart - ment and institution provides the opportunity for over - lap and repeating patterns amongst the participants . We note also that our sample was a near - exhaustive sample from this cohort ( the total number of students in the cohort was 12 ; two students dropped out of the study due to time considerations ) . 2 . 2 | Interview protocol Our interviews used the more familiar language of “ liter - ature reviews ” with participants to describe the task of synthesis . The interview began with a general question about the literature reviewing workflow : “ You know your regular workflow better than we do . How do you generally manage knowledge ( e . g . , reading papers , taking classes , etc . ) ? ” Then , the interview prompted participants to recall their experience of a recent synthesis effort , its develop - ment stage , and the ultimate purpose . Within that con - text , they described ( and show samples , where appropriate ) their workflow as applied to that recent lit - erature review . In addition to follow - up questions , the interview protocol also included a series of probing ques - tions to be asked where appropriate , such as “ Did you use any literature review tool ? Why that tool ? ” “ How do you organize your information ? ” “ How satisfied are you with your setup / workflow ? ” or “ Where did you encounter chal - lenge / friction ? ” Each interview lasted for approximately 1 hr , with a compensation of $ 20 in cash ( as approved by the University ' s human - subjects review board ) . Inter - views were audio - recorded , and screenshots / pictures were taken of participants ' workflow components where appropriate . 2 . 3 | Analysis approach We followed an iterative content - coding approach to analyzing the data from the interviews . The first and last authors iteratively went through the interview 4 of 12 QIAN ET AL . audio recordings , interviewer notes , and pictures / screenshots . The three research questions guided us to note emerging themes and observation memos from each data analysis session . The goal was to carefully describe the themes relevant to those questions as they emerged from , and were grounded in , the participants ' quotes . At appropriate points , the two authors met to compare notes and memos , crystallizing their shared understanding and divergent observations in a collaborative memo . 3 | FINDINGS This study identified different intermediate products that scholars produce as they work toward synthesis . These serve as benchmarks for scholars ' progression toward synthesis and help to frame our understanding of the complex and non - linear processes they undertake to pro - gress toward a final product . For each scholar , these pro - cesses and products are embedded in a complex ecology of tools . Analysis of scholars ' idiosyncratic use of these TABLE 1 Participant biographies , research interests , and their recent syntheses ID Biographical info ( Age , gender , and education trajectory ) Research interest Characteristics of a recent synthesis P1 27 years old ; female ; started PhD immediately after master ' s ; transfer student after 1st year in another PhD program Designing digital tools to help school children learn math concepts in every - day objects , drawing from the topic of embodied cognition Brainstorming a research project with the advisor P2 23 years old ; male ; started PhD immediately after undergraduate Analyzing communication problems in online communities with a business goal P3 24 years old ; female ; started PhD immediately after master ' s Studying and promoting peoples ' social and emotional behaviors in VR interactions while considering their personalities and cultural backgrounds P4 23 years old ; female ; started PhD immediately after undergraduate Augmenting and diversifying design and creative processes through the creation of novel configurations , methods , and creativity support tools P5 25 years old ; male ; started PhD immediately after master ' s Designing makerspaces with texture encoding / decoding and sensory technology P8 28 years old ; male ; started PhD immediately after master ' s ) Understanding data tracking in video streaming services , especially on how the platform conceptualizes user identity with the data P10 31 years old ; female ; transfer student , finished 3 years in the previous institution Educating first - generation immigrant children about their culture , specifically for Latino community in the US using gamification theories P6 33 years old ; female ; started PhD immediately after master ' s ; transfer student after 2nd year in another PhD program Developing a game - based curriculum for mathematics education Preparing for a proposal P7 37 years old ; female ; finished the previous master ' s in 2007 ) ; currently , a part - time PhD student , while working for a trusted agent and doing e - retail part - time Understanding the role and requirements ( esp . ethical ) of cybersecurity for financial information and intellectual property Writing a synthesis for a research - related course projectsover 40 + relevant literature P9 28 years old ; male ; started PhD immediately after master ' s Combating misinformation on social media with machine learning techniques Preparing a paper submission QIAN ET AL . 5 of 12 tools points to challenges and points of friction in the process of synthesis , some of which may be necessary and generative rather than merely disruptive . 3 . 1 | Three kinds of intermediate synthesis products Our coding identified three distinctive intermediate prod - ucts of synthesis work : 1 . In - source annotations , or marginalia within sources ( most often papers that align with scholars ' interests ) ; 2 . Per - source summaries , which distilled the concep - tual building blocks derived from in - source annotations ; 3 . Cross - source syntheses , which represent scholars ' overall understanding of a research area based on the set of papers being synthesized . Figure 1 shows examples of each of these intermedi - ate products . Each scholar created their products differ - ently , relying on a diversity of organizational schemes and tools . While participants themselves did not articu - late a three - part synthesis process , each participant pro - duced a series of outputs that are well represented by these three categories . Each of their synthesis processes demonstrated a gradual progression from each product to the next ( as described in section 3 . 2 ) . While the three cat - egories of intermediate products described here may be intuitive and unsurprising , they provide a useful frame - work for identifying the more evasive and complex pro - cesses that scholars undertake to progress toward synthesis . In - source annotations include markings and mar - ginal notes within a single source . Their primary function appears to be to mark elements and capture observations that align with a scholar ' s interest . Annotations ' granular - ity and functional goals varied considerably , including overview arguments , key definitions , inter - connections , and specific examples . P1 simply referred to them as “ fascinations . ” Half of the participants in our sample mentioned highlighting as one manifestation of in - source annota - tions on either printed or digital documents . For exam - ple , P1 prefers to print papers out and scribbles around on the margins . As shown in Figure 1 , P6 brought a set of printed papers as examples during their interviews . They read each of them for multiple iterations to decide which parts in the paper are important and need to highlight . Among participants who highlight , three use different visual styles , such as color highlights and underlines , to differentiate distinctive notions of interest . Figure 1 includes the color schemes from P10 , where purple high - lights are important themes , and underlines are supporting evidence for concepts . Similarly , P2 suggested a need to use different colors for the paper ' s central claims so that they could recognize them when revisiting the paper after several weeks . The three who highlighted also mentioned notes or scribbles on sources as another manifestation . P10 used the comment function ( the “ little yellow bubbles ” ) in their PDF viewer to create these . They explained the advantage of appending notes to papers as helping to strengthen their recall of the ideas . While the effort to scribble these simple - form notes , usually single words , was negligible , the benefits for memory for future reuse were substantial . The participant recalled an experience of searching scribbled notes more often than searching highlights , suggesting that scribbled notes were cues for memory . Per - source summaries are written distillations of the key conceptual building blocks of a single source that the scholar might want to use as part of a synthesis . The FIGURE 1 Screenshot examples of the three kinds of intermediate synthesis products : ( a ) In - source annotations ; ( b ) Per - source summaries ; ( c ) Cross - source syntheses 6 of 12 QIAN ET AL . types included findings , theories , concepts , and solutions , as well as questions and issues sparked by the paper . For example , P9 captures what a paper does , and how they do it , in question forms such as “ how they build knowl - edge graph from Wikipedia ? ” or “ What is the knowledge graph representing ? ” To most participants , per - source summaries manifested as a section or a paragraph dedicated to a paper . For example , P4 mentioned that they wrote a note for each paper aside from their highlights in the paper . Compared with the highlights which tend to be overused and overwhelming , the notes are much more succinct . Sometimes , the paragraphs reside as a note affiliated with an entry in reference managers like Mendeley ( Zaugg , West , Tateishi , & Randall , 2011 ) or Zotero . P10 , a partici - pant who aspired to adopt Zotero to manage their refer - ences , has been trying their “ ideal workflow of successfully foraging a paper , uploading it to Zotero , and taking notes from there . Figure 1 includes an example of the template that one participant undertook to write their per - source summaries . Participants sometimes implement the concept type as a selection of tags that scholars attached to the paper from a more extensive tag set pertinent to their research interest . P8 has been using a tagging system over time to accumulate papers that he could use when writing on a specific topic . Participants also noted that per - source summaries often happen after in - source annotations . For example , a few participants mentioned doing multiple passes of reading a source until it emerged into the form of a per - source summary . One participant , P9 , mentioned snapshots as another type of per - source summaries . Using the image capture tool from a specific PDF viewer , they took snapshots from a source and saved it to a separate location . P9 researches in computational methods and has a recurring need to capture formulas . Capturing the picture of one specific formula from one paper was useful to them to assemble into a presentation slide deck . Finally , cross - source syntheses are representations of an overall understanding of the research problem emerging from the synthesized sources . They manifested in diverse ways in our participants , such as narrative / out - line summaries of key ideas across a set of sources , an annotated bibliography or shared library , or even a mind map . Figure 1 shows a working draft of an annotated bib - liography from P9 shared via Overleaf , the online Latex collaborative editing platform . Participants noted that cross - source syntheses often occur as the final step in the synthesis process . Notably , cross - source syntheses are distinct from per - source summaries and in - source annotations because they are extrinsically motivated . Scholars tend to create them not for their own internal or cognitive synthesis , learning , or sensemaking , but to communicate with col - laborators or readers . Consistent with prior work on scholarly primitives ( Palmer et al . , 2009 ) , annotations and summaries tended to be organic byproducts of scholars ' reading and writing processes without external pressure or direction , even when scholars were not read - ing toward a specific synthesis goal . In contrast , cross - source syntheses only sometimes manifested as durable external representations . For example , P3 described doing a synthesis mostly for growing their own knowl - edge , as an exploration stage to get a sense of a domain . The synthesis they wrote was not fully externalized ; P3 preferred to orally communicate their synthesis with their advisor during a weekly meeting , while the cross - source synthesis product they constructed in OneNote will rarely reach their advisor . P3 noted that their reluc - tance to share the cross - source synthesis was in part due to the challenge for another person to understand at a glance ( “ I used this to present to my advisor for one time , but it was hard for them to read in real - time . They prefer to listen to me . ” ) In contrast , P2 ' s synthesis process began with their advisor providing a list of paper titles as the seeds to synthesize from , to get into a funded project . ( P2 later added other interesting readings to the set . ) . Thus , external motivations or scaffolding may influence the degree and form of the external manifestation of cross - source syntheses . 3 . 2 | Processes operating on and between intermediate synthesis products Three key themes emerged from the data regarding pro - cesses operating on and between intermediate synthesis products . First , participants described an upward progression of the products in increasing levels of structure and for - mality , transitioning from an earlier , casual , low - level phase , to a later , formal , high - level phase . Upward pro - gression happens from in - source annotations to per - source summaries , and occasionally from per - source summaries to an overall synthesis . The information flows from a lower - level to a higher - level , usually from a more scattered form to a more integrated form . While there was a distinctive sense of progression among the products described in section 3 . 1 . , it is clear that the process is rarely linear , and that it manifests differently for each scholar as they move between products and tools . Exemplifying the transition from in - source annota - tions to per - source summaries , P2 described a workflow using the Mac OS X “ preview ” software to read PDFs , annotating inside the paper using yellow highlights , QIAN ET AL . 7 of 12 mainly “ for personal use . ” Later , when they needed to export the yellow highlights into a Google Doc , to share with project collaborators , they chose not to directly copy - and - paste the yellow highlights but rather to para - phrase , as the former way “ is not well - structured ” . P4 used the same mechanism of yellow highlighting for in - source annotation . While yellow highlights are compre - hensive and overused , they kept a note as the per - source summary , which is more succinct and structured . P4 described their notes as “ always ( written ) in the same order , sometimes with page numbers for back - reference , ” and would better be recorded at a consistent location , such as the “ Notes ” section associated with the Zotero entry . Illustrating the transition from per - source summaries to cross - source syntheses , P3 considered the per - source summaries mainly for own use . When they needed to present with their advisor about the research topic , they would “ make a more structured version in ppt , or other documents , ” as the more readable , externalized form of cross - source synthesis . P9 also mentioned a need to cate - gorize altogether different papers ( see Figure 1 , the right - most snapshot ) , as their research projects consisted of multiple types of sources : “ this work is misinformation , these are checking types , these are computational approaches . ” Second , participants described the deliberate con - struction of the intermediate products with “ higher level ” products in mind . They selectively added , retained , or dropped key details from papers that might prove use - ful downstream for the construction of the next interme - diate product . 2 A scenario from P9 illustrates how information is selectively modified as he moves between the intermediate products . During the transition from in - source annotations to per - source summaries , P9 reads a source with two questions in mind : what this source does ( the “ problem ” ) and how they do it ( the “ solution ” ) . He tries to answer the two questions based on his under - standing about the source . For example , while showing the interviewer a specific source he had read , he noted “ this is a data mining paper that is building a knowledge graph from Wikipedia , and they are doing it by first defining the ontology of what the knowledge graph is representing . ” In the form of a schematized problem - solution statement , these answers become inputs to con - struct a structured per - source summary . These summa - ries then help construct the overall synthesis . P9 noted that writing a summary in this way keeps important things about a source at hand so that when he is deciding whether a source should go into the related work section in his manuscript , he could quickly recap what the source is about from the summary . In contrast , some - times information is added to per - source summaries to facilitate cross - source synthesis . For example , P2 showed the interviewer a cross - source synthesis , manifested in a Google doc , that they were working on for a group pro - ject on bike - sharing . Collaborators shared access to the Google doc such that everyone could look at it during an online brainstorming session . While P2 was the primary person who frequently edits the document offline , doing work such as adding background papers , re - structuring sections , they made sure to include necessary context whenever a new source got referenced with a per - source summary . Instead of directly copy - and - pasting contents from the paper to form the summary , he paraphrased . In this way , collaborators could better understand the con - text of the cited source without stepping in earlier pro - cesses and repeating what he did . A few of our participants also mentioned being selective about what contents to highlight based on the anticipated value of the contents for reuse in subsequent sub - processes . Finally , participants described the progression from annotations to cross - source synthesis as non - linear in that their intermediate per - source summaries were not always sufficient , requiring them to refer back to earlier in - source annotations . These backward engagements from the cross - source synthesis product down to in - source annotations were most common when there was a substantial time lapse between the stages . Recapitulation was achieved by connecting to the lowest - level in - source annotation or grounding the per - source summary in its context from the in - source annotation ( denoted by the red arrows in Figure 2 ) . P4 anticipated this need to back - reference and adopted a strategy of organizing the con - tent in their per - source summary in the same order as the page numbers . Sometimes even returning to the in - source annotations and per - source summaries was insuf - ficient because the information that was needed was not captured even at those lower levels . For example , P3 described a limitation in their current synthesis workflow , where they forget about the intentions behind writing specific in - source annotations or per - source sum - maries after several weeks . P3 also hypothesized that it is due to a lack of time to make important points to inte - grate into the notes during the initial progressing pass . P9 noted that often multiple passes through a paper was necessary , since his overall schema for the cross - source synthesis evolves , changing what details are relevant to highlight in lower - level intermediate products . Figure 2 integrates these observations about processes with the previous descriptions of the intermediate prod - ucts : the emerging model is similar in the overall struc - ture to the Notional Model of Sensemaking ( Pirolli & Card , 2005 ) , with iterative processes producing progres - sively more structured and formalized intermediate prod - ucts , but with frequent back - referencing . 8 of 12 QIAN ET AL . 3 . 3 | Intermediate synthesis products embedded in complex ecologies of tools Having identified themes about the nature of the inter - mediate products , as well as the processes operating on and between the intermediate products , we now turn our attention back to the particulars of the tools in which these products and processes operate . There was considerable diversity in the tools selected , both within the processes of individual scholars and across the whole group . As Figure 3 shows , our partici - pants used a wide selection of tools . None of the participants used one tool to do everything ; instead , each participant used 4 . 2 different tools on average . Likewise , not all participants followed the pattern of using one tool for one intermediate product . P2 and P9 used the same document editing software – Google Docs or Overleaf , respectively , for their per - source summary and cross - source synthesis . The document first consists of a less structured list of per - source summary , then gets orga - nized to become a cross - source synthesis . In addition to newer technologies like document editors , PDF readers , and reference managers , many of our participants still used printed paper in conjunction with other tools , often FIGURE 2 A model for scholarly synthesis that resembles the Notional Model of Sensemaking . The x - axis denotes the amount of effort to produce intermediate products . The y - axis denotes the level of structural formalization in the intermediate products . These both increase from in - source annotations to per - source summaries , and finally cross - source syntheses as denoted by the grey arrows . Within each intermediate product there are self - loops . Red arrows are backward engagements FIGURE 3 Tools used by each participant QIAN ET AL . 9 of 12 alongside PDF readers ( P5 , P6 , and P10 ) , citing benefits like enhanced concentration , tangibility , and ease of organization . Tools were frequently appropriated ( Carroll , Howard , Peck , & Murphy , 2002 ) to meet requirements for which they were not purpose - built to create and manipulate the intermediate products . For example , reference managers were initially used as a tool for tracking reading lists ( similar to its original design purpose ) . But half of the participants used the note section from reference man - agers to write per - source summaries . P4 considers the ref - erence manager an excellent tool to uniquely associate notes to the sources , especially for sources that are not locally saved ( “ Some of them don ' t have a PDF , but only links to online resources , but I still write notes under the Zotero file ” ) . A key point of friction that scholars confront in creat - ing and using intermediate products is tool separation . Despite some overlap in tools for intermediate products , patterns of usage in the tools also reinforced the three intermediate products ' separateness . We observed this chiefly in the additional appropriation of tools ' affordances to deal with decoupling between tools . The necessity of moving between numerous dedicated tools and platforms to produce different intermediate products during the overall process of synthesis was perceived as disrupting or hindering the synthesis process . Describing the friction of memorizing where and what ephemeral knowledge is , one participant ( P7 ) noted : “ so many pockets to put things in , I tend to forget . ” P8 mentioned several times the word “ consolidate ” : that they wanted to “ consolidate ( how they do ) the annotated bibliography . If it is a collaborative one , use Google drive ; if it is just me , I make a folder on my local machine and use a Word document to save those … take all those papers into a central location , easy enough to search on a local machine . ” In response to these challenges , a few participants developed coping mechanisms . For example , P4 showed their desktop setup with a left - to - right simultaneous dis - play of the first two intermediate synthesis products , with reading window for in - source annotations on the left and note - taking window for per - source summaries on the right . P5 abandoned the generic naming of the PDF in the file system , which was automatically created during the creation of a Mendeley entry . They consider it less organized “ when the number of papers grows , and you have so many tabs open in your PDF viewer . You do not know how to go back ( to a previous paper ) when the PDF is named generically . ” Instead , P5 chose to rename the PDFs with keywords that they could remember , to quickly access their in - source annotations through search in the file system . The overall picture seems to be a creatively appropri - ated , fluid ecology of tools , though not without signifi - cant frictions . 4 | DISCUSSION The above findings should be seen as the first step towards a richer understanding of the distinctive and problematic scholarly product of synthesis . In particular , further work should examine how our findings generalize to scholars who are not also beginning researchers : expert scholars may have practices that vary considerably from the pat - terns identified here , with different implications for tool design . That said , the resemblance of our identified pat - terns , such as non - linear sequences of intermediate prod - ucts to prior models of sensemaking , gives us hope that our findings can inform other populations ' . Additionally , our methodology limits our ability to observe the practices at the moment , separate from the recall of participants . While our anchoring of interviews in a specific recent syn - thesis experience helps mitigate concerns about recall bias , future work could significantly enrich our understanding with observational methods like protocol analysis or extended ethnographic observation . Despite these limitations , we believe our findings yield implications for understanding synthesis and schol - arly work more generally . First , there is a question of how to interpret the findings of friction and challenges that we observed . Backward engagement with “ earlier ” less refined intermediate products was described in par - tially negative terms as a friction . The first instinct from a tool designer would be to design mechanisms to remove that friction , perhaps by capturing more information that might be selectively dropped in earlier stages but become necessary later . However , this may not achieve the goal of augmenting synthesis . Practices such as selecting things for retention , adding contextual details , revisiting prior ideas , are reminiscent of fundamental activities in scholarship and sensemaking , such as rereading ( Palmer et al . , 2009 ) , or comparison and conceptual combination ( Zhang & Dagobert , 2014 ) . Thus , the described points of friction among tools and products might be necessary and productive for the process of synthesis in some cases . Creating a single end - to - end tool to support this work , or to facilitate a “ seamless ” synthesis experience , might remove opportunities for users to encounter obstacles that push them to do the intellectual work of synthesis . For example , the processes of scholars articulating sum - maries in a separate document and rationales for color - coded , in - source highlights and copying quotations may afford opportunities for them to generate new , synthetic understanding . More work is needed to carefully 10 of 12 QIAN ET AL . distinguish frictions which are extraneous and should be removed , streamlined , or automated , and frictions which are “ desirable difficulties ” ( Bjork , 1994 ) that are constitu - tive of synthesis work . Second , the tools and practices identified suggest that synthesis is a foundational scholarly process that both builds upon and pervades other recognized activities across disciplines , including reading , writing , and collab - orating ( Palmer et al . , 2009 ) . As described above , research in information seeking and practices has long sought to develop abstract models of researchers ' information activ - ities and primitives , intending to guide the development of broadly useful information systems and research tools . However , synthesis does not appear as a distinct activity or primitive in forerunning models of scholarly practices . It may be because these models have primarily focused on empirically observable , discrete activities . In contrast , synthesis may be better understood as a pervasive , com - plex , socio - cognitive process ( even when it generates tan - gible , even familiar products , like literature reviews ) . In particular , synthesis seems closely related to what Palmer et al . ( 2009 ) describe as “ cross - cutting primitives , ” or activities that cut across all facets of research . Examples of cross - cutting primitives include monitoring ongoing and relevant developments ; notetaking as a formative component of other processes ranging from reading to data collection , and translating for collaborators and audiences across disciplinary boundaries . Unlike these cross - cutting primitives , however , synthesis is generally directed toward a final goal or endpoint . It happens in a trajectory that seems to move through multiple stages before reaching that goal . By better understanding how synthesis relates to existing models of scholarly practice , researchers could align the intermediate products of syn - thesis work with emergent , formal models ( e . g . , ontologies ) of knowledge representation and schol - arly communication that have been developed to support next - generation research infrastructures . Finally , our results suggest that more advances in understanding and supporting synthesis can come from integrating ideas from the relatively disparate literature on scholarly primitives , active reading , and sensemaking . In isolation , the intermediate products and practices we identified are familiar to some of these literature ; how - ever , understanding how these intermediate products and practices combine to yield barriers to synthesis will likely be a productive avenue for future work . 5 | CONCLUSION In this paper , we sought to unpack the complex practices behind scholarly synthesis . Informed by prior theories of scholarly primitives , active reading , and sensemaking , we investigated the intermediate products , practices , and tools that scholars weave together to generate new intel - lectual wholes from diverse scholarly sources . Through in - depth interviews with our sample of scholars engaging in creating synthesis products , we found that our partici - pants created and manipulated three distinctive classes of intermediate products : in - source annotations , per - source summaries , and cross - source syntheses . They employed complex and effortful practices , which generally prog - ressed the products upward in terms of formality and structure , but in a complex , non - linear fashion . Finally , intermediate products and practices were embedded in a complex ecology of tools that are often appropriated for synthesis . Future work should examine how findings generalize to expert scholars , and observe synthesis prac - tices with “ in - the - moment ” observational methods . We believe our findings yield implications for understanding synthesis and scholarly work more generally . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors would also like to thank study participants for their interview contributions . ENDNOTES 1 Press release : The Prize in Economic Sciences 2019 . https : / / www . nobelprize . org / prizes / economic - sciences / 2019 / press - release / 2 A similar idea is “ look - ahead modeling ” in agile software develop - ment , also “ backlog grooming ” or “ backlog refinement , which is the ongoing process of reviewing product backlog items and checking that they are appropriately prepared and ordered in a way that makes them clear and executable for teams once they enter sprints via the sprint planning activity . REFERENCES Attfield , S . ( 2005 ) . Information seeking , gathering and review : Jour - nalism as a case study for the design of search and authoring systems ( Doctoral thesis ) University of London . Baldonado , M . Q . W . , & Winograd , T . ( 1997 ) . SenseMaker : An information - exploration interface supporting the contextual evolution of a user ' s interests . Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 11 – 18 , Atlanta , GA . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 258549 . 258563 Bem , D . J . ( 1995 ) . Writing a review article for psychological bulle - tin . Psychological Bulletin , 118 ( 2 ) , 172 – 177 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0033 - 2909 . 118 . 2 . 172 Bjork , R . A . ( 1994 ) . Memory and metamemory considerations in the training of human beings . In J . Metcalfe & A . P . Shim - amura ( Eds . ) , Metacognition : Knowing about knowing ( Vol . 185 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Blanke , T . , & Hedges , M . ( 2013 ) . Scholarly primitives : Building institutional infrastructure for humanities e - Science . Future Generation Computer Systems , 29 ( 2 ) , 654 – 661 . Carroll , J . , Howard , S . , Peck , J . , & Murphy , J . ( 2002 ) . A field study of perceptions and use of mobile telephones by 16 to 22 year QIAN ET AL . 11 of 12 olds . Journal of Information Technology Theory and Application , 4 ( 2 ) , 6 . Cetina , K . K . ( 1999 ) . Epistemic cultures : How the sciences make knowledge . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Denholm , C . J . , & Philpott , C . ( 2009 ) . Making the implicit explicit : Creating performance expectations for the dissertation . Quality Assurance in Education , 17 ( 2 ) , 204 – 206 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / 09684880910951408 Dervin , B . ( 1992 ) . From the mind ' s eye of the user : The sense - making qualitative - quantitative methodology . Sense - Making Methodology Reader . Retrieved from https : / / www . ideals . illinois . edu / bitstream / handle / 2142 / 2281 / Dervin1992a . htm Ellis , D . ( 1993 ) . Modeling the information - seeking patterns of aca - demic researchers : A grounded theory approach . The Library Quarterly , 63 ( 4 ) , 469 – 486 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1086 / 602622 Faisal , S . , Attfield , S . , & Blandford , A . ( 2009 ) . A classification of sen - semaking representations . CHI 2009 Workshop on Sensemaking , Boston , MA . Faisal , S . , Cairns , P . , & Blandford , A . ( 2006 ) . Developing user requirements for visualizations of literature knowledge domains . Proc . IV07 , pp . 264 – 269 , London , England . Froese , A . D . , Gantz , B . S . , & Henry , A . L . ( 1998 ) . Teaching students to write literature reviews : A meta - analytic model . Teaching of Psychology , 25 ( 2 ) , 102 – 105 . Gradmann , S . , Hennicke , S . , Tschumpel , G . , Dill , K . , Thoden , K . , Pichler , A . , & Morbidoni , C . ( 2015 ) . Beyond Infrastructure ! Modelling the Scholarly Domain . EU funded DM2E ( pp . 1 – 44 ) . Granello , D . H . ( 2001 ) . Promoting cognitive complexity in graduate written work : Using Bloom ' s taxonomy as a pedagogical tool to improve literature reviews . Counselor Education and Supervi - sion , 40 ( 4 ) , 292 – 307 . Holbrook , A . , Bourke , S . , Lovat , T . , & Dally , K . ( 2004 ) . Investigating PhD thesis examination reports . Doctoral Assessment in Australia , 41 ( 2 ) , 98 – 120 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijer . 2005 . 04 . 008 Klein , G . , Moon , B . , & Hoffman , R . R . ( 2006 ) . Making sense of sen - semaking 1 : Alternative perspectives . IEEE Intelligent Systems , 21 ( 4 ) , 70 – 73 . Morris , M . R . , Brush , A . B . , & Meyers , B . R . ( 2007 ) . Reading revisited : Evaluating the usability of digital display surfaces for active reading tasks , Proceedings of IEEE Tabletop 2007 , IEEE , pp . 79 – 86 , Newport , Rhode Island . O ' Hara , K . ( 1996 ) . Towards a typology of reading goals . O ' hara , K . , & Sellen , A . ( 1997 ) . A comparison of reading paper and on - line documents , Proceedings of CHI , pp . 335 – 342 , Atlanta , GA . Orr , J . E . ( 1996 ) . Talking about machines : An ethnography of a mod - ern job ( 1st ed . ) . Ithaca , NY : ILR Press . Palmer , C . L . , Teffeau , L . C . , & Pirmann , C . M . ( 2009 ) . Scholarly Information Practices in the Online Environment : Themes from the Literature and Implications for Library Service Devel - opment ( Report Commisioned by OCLC Research , p . 59 ) . Retrieved from http : / / www . oclc . org / programs / publications / reports / 2009 - 02 . pdf Pirolli , P . , & Card , S . ( 2005 ) . The sensemaking process and leverage points for analyst technology as identified through cognitive task analysis . Proceedings of International Conference on Intelli - gence Analysis , Vol . 5 , pp . 2 – 4 , McLean , VA . Pontis , S . , & Blandford , A . ( 2015 ) . Understanding “ influence : ” an exploratory study of academics ' processes of knowledge con - struction through iterative and interactive information seeking . Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technol - ogy , 66 ( 8 ) , 1576 – 1593 . Pontis , S . , & Blandford , A . ( 2016 ) . Understanding “ influence ” : An empirical test of the D ata - F rame T heory of S ensemaking . Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technol - ogy , 67 ( 4 ) , 841 – 858 . Pontis , S . , Blandford , A . , Greifeneder , E . , Attalla , H . , & Neal , D . ( 2017 ) . Keeping up to date : An academic researcher ' s informa - tion journey . Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology , 68 ( 1 ) , 22 – 35 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / asi . 23623 Puckett , J . ( 2011 ) . Zotero : A guide for librarians , researchers , and educators . Chicago , IL : Assoc of Cllge & Rsrch Libr . Russell , D . M . , Stefik , M . J . , Pirolli , P . , & Card , S . K . ( 1993 ) . The cost structure of sensemaking . Proceedings of the INTERACT ' 93 and CHI ' 93 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 269 – 276 , Amsterdam , The Netherlands . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 169059 . 169209 Strike , K . , & Posner , G . ( 1983 ) . Types of synthesis and their criteria . Suchman , L . A . ( 1987 ) . Plans and situated actions : The problem of human - machine communication . Cambridge , England : Cam - bridge University Press . Tashman , C . S . , & Edwards , W . K . ( 2011a ) . Active reading and its discontents : The situations , problems and ideas of readers . Pro - ceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Com - puting Systems , pp . 2927 – 2936 , Vancouver , Canada . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979376 Tashman , C . S . , & Edwards , W . K . ( 2011b ) . LiquidText : A flexible , multitouch environment to support active reading . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys - tems , pp . 3285 – 3294 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979430 Unsworth , J . ( 2000 ) . Scholarly Primitives : What Methods Do Humanities Researchers Have in Common , and How Might Our Tools Reflect This . Vilar , P . ( 2015 ) . Information behaviour of scholars . Libellarium : Jour - nal for the Research of Writing , Books , and Cultural Heritage Insti - tutions , 7 ( 1 ) , 17 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 15291 / libellarium . v7i1 . 194 Webster , J . , & Watson , R . T . ( 2002 ) . Analyzing the past to prepare for the future : Writing a literature review . MIS Quarterly , 26 , xiii – xxiii . Zaugg , H . , West , R . E . , Tateishi , I . , & Randall , D . L . ( 2011 ) . Men - deley : Creating communities of scholarly inquiry through research collaboration . TechTrends , 55 ( 1 ) , 32 – 36 . Zhang , P . , & Dagobert , S . ( 2014 ) . Towards a comprehensive model of the cognitive process and mechanisms of individual sen - semaking . Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology , 65 ( 9 ) , 1733 – 1756 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / asi . 23125 Zhang , P . , & Soergel , D . ( 2016 ) . Process patterns and conceptual changes in knowledge representations during information seek - ing and sensemaking : A qualitative user study . Journal of Infor - mation Science , 42 ( 1 ) , 59 – 78 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0165551515615834 How to cite this article : Qian X , Fenlon K , Lutters W , Chan J . Opening up the black box of scholarly synthesis : Intermediate products , processes , and tools . Proc Assoc Inf Sci Technol . 2020 ; 57 : e270 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / pra2 . 270 12 of 12 QIAN ET AL .