Search all BMJ Products Search bmj . com Advanced search A L Cochrane Royal Society of Medicine Press , £12 , pp 120 1 85315 394 X www . rsmpress . co . uk / bkcochra . htm Rating : BMJ 2004 ; 328 : 529 ( 28 February ) , doi : 10 . 1136 / bmj . 328 . 7438 . 529 Effectiveness and Efficiency : Random Reflections on Health Services Archie Cochrane was an epidemiologist with a maverick streak . In 1935 , as a lone medical student , he marched through London carrying a home made placard that read , " All effective treatments must be free . " According to him , nobody noticed . In this seminal book , first published in 1972 by the Nuffield Provincial Hospitals Trust and issued in this imprint in 1999 , he called for an international register of randomised controlled trials , and for explicit quality criteria for appraising published research , but neither goal was achieved in his lifetime . Today , the Cochrane Controlled Trials Register has more than 400 000 entries , and an international movement to improve the methodology of research synthesis also bears his name ( www . cochrane . org / index0 . htm ) . A passionate early advocate of the NHS , Cochrane described it in Effectiveness and Efficiency as " a favourite child who is now showing signs of delinquency . " Making treatments free had created two perverse incentives : patients expected a treatment for every complaint , and doctors felt compelled to provide one . Cochrane ' s wartime experience as the sole medical officer for 20 000 inmates in a German prisoner of war camp—in which only four people died , three of whom were shot by their guards—convinced him that the vast majority of illness was self limiting and that medical treatments were generally incidental to recovery . He made it his mission to save the public ( and the taxpayer ) from the perils of ineffective interventions . One of the most perceptive sections of the book is Cochrane ' s review of the Universities Group Diabetes Program study—a well designed , multi - centre randomised trial of the effects of sulphonylureas on the outcome of type 2 diabetes , which showed no benefit ( and , indeed , net harm ) from this class of drug . This controversial finding , newly published when Cochrane was writing , was largely ignored by diabetologists , perhaps because clinicians are less receptive to negative studies than they are to positive ones . Subsequent trials have , arguably , failed to refute the UGDP findings , but sulphonylureas remain widely prescribed . Cochrane lamented that the well - meaning prescription of ineffective medication had spawned a mushrooming industry of hospital outpatient services , whose knock - on effects included " . . . the increased size of outpatient buildings and the increased staff required to run them ; the increased ambulance services for the patients ; the increased parking space around hospitals ; the increased travelling for elderly ill patients ; and the increased loss of time from work by otherwise fit patients . " Effectiveness ( whether treatments work—a dimension we now call efficacy ) and efficiency ( optimal use of resources ) were , Cochrane said , two fundamental pillars on which the NHS ought to be run . He added a third—equality of provision across socioeconomic groups ( which we now call equity ) , and called for better data , better training , more systematic reflection on practice , greater use of computers , and the setting up of independent watchdogs to monitor standards in the NHS . As Cochrane recognised in the book , efficacy , efficiency , and equity are not exhaustive dimensions of quality . Along with acceptability , access , and relevance , they became the " Maxwell Six " ( Quality in Health Care 1992 ; 1 : 177 - 9 ) , which inspired the first attempt at a national performance framework for the NHS , published on the delinquent child ' s 50th birthday , and to which the contemporary quality connoisseur would now add risk management , cultural congruence , partnership , and probably several more besides . Cochrane was pilloried by colleagues for appearing on television to promote abortion and to claim ( rightly , at the time ) that there was no Effectiveness and Efficiency : Random Reflections on Health Services - - . . . http : / / www . bmj . com / cgi / content / full / 328 / 7438 / 529 ? ijKey = a291429bfe5 . . . 1 de 2 23 - 03 - 2010 12 : 07 evidence of benefit from routine cervical smears . He thumbed his nose at " expert opinion " and denounced the Medical Research Council for its snobbery towards applied and occupational research ( " the MRC investigated God - made diseases while others could investigate man - made diseases " ) . He delighted in the results of a randomised trial , published in the wake of a high profile American campaign to build a state - of - the - art coronary care unit in every hospital , which showed that heart attack patients might just as well stay at home ( BMJ 1972 ; 3 : 334 - 7 [ Free Full Text ] ) . Cochrane ' s raw moral courage , his indefatigable pursuit of the truth , and his irreverence towards the scientific establishment remain an inspiration to those of us whose research time is increasingly spent in petty correspondence with ethical committees , grant giving bodies , and journal editors . His predictions about the lack of efficacy of treatments ( for example , his hypothesis that thrombolysis would not influence outcome in myocardial infarction ) were wrong as often as they were right . But he taught us to question practice systematically , and as such prepared the ground for both applied research and quality improvement in the NHS . Trisha Greenhalgh , professor of primary health care University College London The BMJ is interested in publishing rereadings of other classic medical books . If you have any suggestions for titles that we might include , email tjackson @ bmj . com CiteULike Complore Connotea Del . icio . us Digg Reddit StumbleUpon Technorati Twitter What ' s this ? Alan Williams Alan Maynard BMJ 2005 331 : 51 . [ Extract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] Maynard , A . ( 2005 ) . Alan Williams . BMJ 331 : 51 - 51 [ Full text ] Read all Rapid Responses Compulsory reading David Crosby bmj . com , 9 Mar 2004 [ Full text ] Contact us - Privacy policy - Web site terms & conditions - Revenue sources - Site map HighWire Press - Feedback - Help - © 2004 BMJ Publishing Group Ltd . Effectiveness and Efficiency : Random Reflections on Health Services - - . . . http : / / www . bmj . com / cgi / content / full / 328 / 7438 / 529 ? ijKey = a291429bfe5 . . . 2 de 2 23 - 03 - 2010 12 : 07