DOCTORAL THESIS IN COMPUTER SCIENCE STOCKHOLM , SWEDEN , 2018 A Systems Biological Approach to Parkinson’s Disease KATHARINA FRIEDLINDE HEIL Akademisk avhandling framlägges till offentlig granskning för avläggande av teknologie doktorsexamen i datalogi fredagen den 27 April 2018 klockan 13 . 00 i ​ Kollegiesalen ​ , Brinellvägen 8 ​ , KTH Campus , Stockholm . Doctoral dissertation will be presented for public defence on Friday , April the 27 ​ th ​ , 2018 at 13 . 00 in ​ Kollegiesalen ​ , ​ Brinellvägen 8 ​ , KTH Campus , Stockholm . Abstract Parkinson’s Disease ( PD ) is the second most common neurodegenerative disease in the Western world . It shows a high degree of genetic and phenotypic complexity with many implicated factors , various disease manifestations but few clear causal links . Ongoing research has identified a growing number of molecular alterations linked to the disease . Dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra , specifically their synapses , are the key - affected region in PD . Therefore , this work focuses on understanding the disease effects on the synapse , aiming to identify potential genetic triggers and synaptic PD associated mechanisms . Currently , one of the main challenges in this area is data quality and accessibility . In order to study PD , publicly available data were systematically retrieved and analysed . 418 PD associated genes could be identified , based on mutations and curated annotations . I curated an up - to - date and complete synaptic proteome map containing a total of 6 , 706 proteins . Region specific datasets describing the presynapse , postsynapse and synaptosome were also delimited . These datasets were analysed , investigating similarities and differences , including reproducibility and functional interpretations . The use of Protein - Protein - Interaction Network ( PPIN ) analysis was chosen to gain deeper knowledge regarding specific effects of PD on the synapse . Thus I generated a customised , filtered , human specific Protein - Protein Interaction ( PPI ) dataset , containing 211 , 824 direct interactions , from four public databases . Proteomics data and PPI information allowed the construction of PPINs . These were analysed and a set of low level statistics , including modularity , clustering coefficient and node degree , explaining the network’s topology from a mathematical point of view were obtained . Apart from low - level network statistics , high - level topology of the PPINs was studied . To identify functional network subgroups , different clustering algorithms were investigated . In the context of biological networks , the underlying hypothesis is that proteins in a structural community are more likely to share common functions . Therefore I attempted to identify PD enriched communities of synaptic proteins . Once identified , they were compared amongst each other . Three community clusters could be identified as containing largely overlapping gene sets . These contain 24 PD associated genes . Apart from the known disease associated genes in these communities , a total of 322 genes was identified . Each of the three clusters is specifically enriched for specific biological processes and cellular components , which include neurotransmitter secretion , positive regulation of synapse assembly , pre - and post - synaptic membrane , scaffolding proteins , neuromuscular junction development and complement activation ( classical pathway ) amongst others . The presented approach combined a curated set of PD associated genes , filtered PPI information and synaptic proteomes . Various small - and large - scale analytical approaches , including PPIN topology analysis , clustering algorithms and enrichment studies identified highly PD affected synaptic proteins and subregions . Specific disease associated functions confirmed known research insights and allowed me to propose a new list of so far unknown potential disease associated genes . Due to the open design , this approach can be used to answer similar research questions regarding other complex diseases amongst others . TRITA - EECS - AVL - 2018 : 21 | ISBN : 978 - 91 - 7729 - 719 - 2