Facilitating Collaboration through Design Games Eva Brandt and Jörn Messeter Space Studio , The Interactive Institute Beijerskajen 8 S - 20506 Malmö , Sweden + 46 040 665 7117 { eva . brandt , jorn . messeter } @ tii . se ABSTRACT In recent years both companies and research communities call for collaborative work practices and user - centered approaches in various design fields . There are several challenges and issues to take into consideration . For instance there is a need to find ways of collaborating across various competences , interests , responsibilities and perhaps professional languages both within one organization , between several organizations and between the organizations and a group of ( potential ) users . It is necessary to find ways to learn about users and the contexts of use , and to create a common understanding of the development task . This paper presents a set of four design games , which offers solutions to the challenges mentioned . The design games have been developed in the Space Studio during several projects and years . Here experiences are discussed on the basis of two research projects carried out in collaboration with industrial partners and potential users , and use of the games in three educational settings . The overall aim of the design games is to help facilitate a user - centered design process for cross - disciplinary design groups early in the design process . Framing collaborative design activities in a game format , arguably improves idea generation and communication between stakeholders . By shifting focus to the game , power relations and other factors that might hamper idea generation , are downplayed . Categories and Subject Descriptors H . 1 . 2 [ User / Machine Systems ] : Human Factors . General Terms Design Keywords Collaborative design , design games , empowerment , stakeholders . 1 . INTRODUCTION The landscape of information technology is changing and over the last decade new research agendas have formed around notions like ubiquitous computing [ 24 ] , tangible interaction [ 14 ] and augmented reality [ 25 ] that take us beyond the technology of the traditional desktop PC . These changes have created an interest in new approaches to IT design that can better cope with the increased contingency of use brought by mobile devices and ubiquitous access to information and services . Scenario based approaches have since long been established in the field of interaction design . Scenarios in different forms , as short narratives describing technology in use , have proved to be a useful language for expressing design ideas [ 6 ] . In response to the increased contingency in IT use , developments in scenario based approaches have focused on creating a deeper understanding of subjective use experiences through bodily engagement and enacting of scenarios in real use contexts [ 4 , 12 , 13 , 19 ] . These approaches typically engage designers , users or both in constructing and enacting scenarios . However , as product development in ubiquitous computing typically involve network infrastructure as well as terminals and services , projects often have multiple stakeholders . Recognizing the contributions of later developments in scenario based design , we attempt to go further by expanding the scope of participation to include multiple stakeholders in concept design activities , and enhance their abilities of expressing and negotiating design ideas through a set of four design games . We first review related design approaches and describe the background for developing our design games . The four games are then presented followed by examples of their application . Finally , we conclude by discussing the implications of our examples for collaborative design . 2 . IMPROVING SCENARIO - BASED INTERACTION DESIGN Constructing scenarios has for long been recognized as a powerful vehicle in designing interaction . According to Carroll [ 6 ] scenarios have the advantage of being both concrete and flexible , making it easier to cope with the fluidity of the design situation . The scenario represents a particular interpretation of a design situation , but being deliberately incomplete it is also open for negotiation and change . This openness can be used to capture use on different levels of detail and present different views of the design problem . Some parts may be deliberately under - specified to prevent premature decisions , and other parts may be more elaborated to focus on critical issues . In Schön´s terms [ 22 ] , constructing a scenario is a design move in the sense that it restructures the current situation to provide new insights . Other design domains have rich languages to allow practitioners to Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Proceedings Participatory Design Conference 2004 , Toronto , Canada . Copyright 2004 ACM 1 - 58113 - 851 - 2 / 04 / 07… $ 5 . 00 . 121 create and explore situations quickly , e . g . different forms of sketching [ 6 ] . The use of scenarios provides the interaction designer with a language for expressing design ideas that to some extent corresponds to sketching for e . g . the architect . In response to the increased contingency of use that follows the development towards ubiquitous computing , many approaches to scenario construction have focused on creating a deeper understanding of the subjective use experience . Buchenau and Suri [ 4 ] present “Experience Prototyping” as an approach where the subjective experience of interacting with a product , space or system is emphasized . Explorative experiments are carried out with mock - ups , prototypes or existing products with the aim of conveying the subjective experience of use to designers or future users . Informance [ 5 ] or body storming is another technique where informal improvisations are used to act out and explore design alternatives in a setting that is constructed to capture the essence of the real use context . Inspired by Forum Theatre we have worked with similar approaches to stage use contexts and explore design alternatives by performing improvised scenarios [ 1 , 2 , 17 , 18 ] . Other researchers have stressed the importance of constructing scenarios in the real use context for exploring new concepts . In the SPES approach ( Situated and Participative Enactment of Scenarios ) a member of the user group is provided with a simple mock - up of a future device to help imagination [ 13 ] . The user is then followed by a designer through her daily activities and the mock - up is used to envision ideas of services and features of the product being designed . Another direction in developing the use of scenarios has been to involve professional performers in enacting scenarios . In the Focus Troupe approach [ 21 ] , traditional focus group sessions are expanded to include the enactment of scenarios around product concepts with live performers . They report that live theater can create strong shared contexts with focus on interaction , being less literal than videos or prototypes . In the same vein Howard et al [ 14 ] have developed a scenario - based design approach to increase stakeholders sense of immersion . They use professional actors for acting out scenarios with props , sometimes together with candidate users . The scenarios are staged in design contexts as well as real contexts of use . Finally , Garabet et al [ 10 ] have in an interesting and more experimental style done performances where they have presented wearable computing artwork in public and recorded their reactions . We recognize these developments towards a firmer grounding of scenarios in the context of use , and exploiting the expressive power of enactment , as valuable contributions to scenario - based design . It is clear that situated enactment of scenarios is useful not only for validating design ideas , but also to explore new possibilities . However , enacted scenarios in use contexts focus on a specific user doing specific things in a specific context . We have taken a broader stance by engaging different stakeholders in design activities that explore concepts across users , contexts and technologies . We have found the notion of games useful as a framework for these design activities . Through the course of a number of projects we have developed a set of four connected design games intended to function as a tentative platform for scenario - based design . 3 . DESIGN IS A GAME Playing games and designing are both social enterprises , evolve over time and are based on a set of rules . As an example Bucciarelli [ 3 ] reports from real life engineering design projects that the members of the design team often have different areas of responsibility and expertise , and thereby different roles and interests in the product . He argues that an important part of the development process therefore involves that the designers communicate and negotiate with each other , and enter compromises when making decisions . This is similar to playing games in that players have roles . In some games the roles are similar ( ex . chess , many card games ) and in other games the roles differ , e . g . Dungeons and Dragons . When playing a game the rules set the boundaries for what is possible and structure the play of the game . In design the designers have various roles and responsibilities . One example is the division between hardware and software design . The design assignment , the resources , the participant’s roles and responsibilities and the ways of working establish , like game rules , the boundaries for the work . In both playing games and designing the rules can be subject to negotiation and change . Using games in design is not new . Habraken and Gross [ 11 ] have developed a number of ‘concept design games’ . These games were used as a tool for research in design of built environments with the aim of improving the design communities working on buildings and urban environments . By observing the games being played they studied how designers manipulate and transform artifacts during the design process while making agreements and rules about how to go about their work . Playing games was in this case not part of real design projects but rather a vehicle for understanding design actions in a restricted environment that was , in their words , manipulable and well - bounded . By developing a set of games they managed to isolate and focus on ‘single aspects , each giving a clearer picture of what just some of designing is about’ ( ibid . p . 1 - 2 – 1 - 3 ) . Games have also been used in concrete participatory design projects . Ehn and Sjögren [ 8 ] describe how they supported participation in change processes in carpentry and newspaper production . They present two concrete games : the “Layout Kit” and the “Organizational Kit” . In the “Layout Kit” carpenters used cards representing carpentry machines placed on a map of a production facility to rework the layout of carpentry . In the “Organizational Kit” cards represented functions , artifacts and materials . The cards were organized on a flat surface to reconstruct the workflow description of a newspaper production facility . The main uses of the games have been to engage workers in a change process where they can create a common language , discuss existing reality , investigate future visions and make requirement specifications on aspects of work organization , technology and education . System descriptions produced in the games are regarded as design artifacts . In this sense focus is not on whether the system descriptions produced are correct or not , but rather on how they make sense to all participants . As design artifacts , their use in a Wittgensteinian language game of design , and to what extent they support good design moves , is what determines if the game is successful or not . While Habraken and Gross have used design games as a means for learning about design as a social activity , we use games in real - life projects as a means of staging collaborative design work 122 engaging various stakeholders . As one of the pioneering examples in the Scandinavian vein of participatory design , the focus in the project described by Ehn & Sjögren [ 8 ] was the empowerment of workers . Our aim is to address the challenges for IT design that is posed by ubiquitous computing . Product development in this context typically involves several stakeholders apart from users , e . g . providers of infrastructure , terminals and services . Our focus is therefore broader . The overall aim with our design games is to provide multiple stakeholders with means for developing , negotiating and expressing a shared understanding of users , use contexts and technology as part of concept design activities . Figure 1 . Moment - cards ( left ) and Sign - cards ( right ) . 4 . FOUR DESIGN GAMES For five years several members of the Space Studio have conducted action research projects to develop valuable approaches for involving various stakeholders in participatory inquiry and collaborative design . Developing various design games have been central to help facilitate a user - centered design process . Four games are presented in this paper . In the User game the players create stories about people as prospective users of new technology . In the Landscape Game context is created for the people portrayed in the first game . In the Technology Game technologies and the form factor are introduced and investigated . In the last game , The Scenario Game experiences from the previous games are condensed in scenarios involving persons , context , activities and the technology to be designed . These scenarios are constructed and enacted in situ . The three first games are played on a table . Estimated time to play each game is in between two and three hours . The game material consists of two types of game pieces called ‘Moment - cards’ and ‘Sign - cards’ ( see figure 1 ) . The Moment - cards are numbered and each card refers to a video clip of 30 seconds to two minutes from the field data . We avoid putting names or labels on the clips , as we believe this could spur associations forcing specific interpretations on to the game . It is important that the video clips are easily accessible for the players of the game . We have used RFID - tags to associate each card with a digitized video sequence , and by holding the card next to a RFID - tag reader the corresponding video can be played . The number of Moment - cards should be small enough to be manageable but large enough not to be constraining . In our projects we have normally used between 20 and 40 cards . The Sign - cards are used to label the stories created . We have provided a general set of 30 Sign - cards , each with a word printed . Examples of words in the general set include for example : ‘despair’ , ‘pace’ , ‘vibrant’ , ‘closeness’ , and ‘zones’ . However , the purpose of the Sign - cards is to provide a conceptual framework for the stories . Therefore , depending on the project , different sets of concepts or words can be entered into the game as Sign - cards . For example , in one project the client introduced a set of keywords for future trends they were interested in , which was transformed to Sign - cards . The games include playing pieces , game boards and rules , but unlike ordinary games , the design games are not about winning or loosing , but about trying out and exploring various aspects of design . The games are suggested to be played in the order presented as they continuously build on each other . We give examples of how each design game has been played . Even though we claim that the games should be played in combination the examples stems from two research projects . Preferably they should of course all be from the same project but as we experiment in each project with variations of the design games we have for pedagogical reasons chosen to give examples from two projects . 4 . 1 . 1 Playing the User Game The User Game is best played with the players gathered around a flat surface as ‘game board’ , e . g . a table . The Moment - cards are either ‘dealt’ to the players as an ordinary deck of cards , or simply spread out on the surface . In the first case , the player to start the game receives five extra cards . They can chose to either watch all the videos first to get an impression of the field material or they can begin to make game moves and watch the videos as they go along . The first player constructs a story using at least five cards of the ones available . When the first player has decided on a story , the corresponding cards are laid out horizontally on the game board and the story is presented . The next player chooses two to four Moment - cards that make up a second story and one Sign - card as label for the story . The new story is added to the first one by placing the sequence of cards on the game board so that it crosses the first one . The card at the intersection must be part of the story . This way each subsequent story will share one card with the previous story , and gradually a crossword - like structure will emerge on the game board ( see figure 2 ) . Several rounds are played until the participants agree that new stories do not add new information , and the image of the user created is ‘saturated’ . At 4 . 1 The User Game The intention of the User Game is to help the stakeholders involved develop a shared image of the intended users grounded in field data . During the course of the game the image develops through the collaborative creation of a web of interrelated stories about the user . The material in the User Game is based on video data from ethnographically inspired field studies . The game can be used to develop a deeper understanding of a single user . If the field studies cover a larger user group , the game can also be used to generate a smaller number of fictive users representing the larger group . In the latter case we suggest that 3 - 5 user representatives are created to broaden the generation of ideas and design concepts in later games . 123 this point , the players summarize the image they created of the user as a short story in text or as a list of keywords . Figure 2 . The User Game . 4 . 1 . 2 Example 1 : Experimental Office Project The goal of the Experimental Office Project was to develop new concepts for the future office , based on current technology and taking into account architectural , organizational and technological aspects [ 15 ] . Stakeholders in the project included a major international computer manufacturer , a national tele - communications network provider , an office furniture company and a real estate company . Field studies were conducted in the office environments of a number of project - oriented companies . Based on the field studies , a number of workshops were conducted where the different stakeholders collaborated in exploring new concepts for the future office . The following example is from playing the User Game at a workshop . Three groups worked in parallel . Three people from different stakeholders participated in one of the groups together with a facilitator from the group of researchers in the Space studio . The field data describes an office clerk called Camilla . As we enter the game a first story has been placed on the game board . Player number two seems to have story number two ready for presentation but she hesitates : Facilitator : What is the idea behind the story ? ( Player 2 browses the video cards ) Player 2 : This is how she leaves her place to come back later . ( Player 2 points to a card in the first sequence played out , which will be the first card in the current sequence ) . And then I thought she probably leaves work tasks behind that are unfinished . So she needs extra space to leave stuff for later . ( Player 2 touches the corresponding card ) Facilitator : Hmm . Player 3 : She really needs that . Player 2 : Yeah , so that’s why I included that card . ( Player 2 places the card in the sequence ) Actually this is also related ( points to a card in the first sequence ) , she even saves old… Facilitator : Maybe you can see if you could find some other card that is equivalent… ( Player 2 browses the cards ) …that one for instance ( points to a card ) In this excerpt the facilitator takes an active role and drives the process forward by making suggestions and encouraging the players to make moves . Yet , he refrains from making suggestions about concrete moves in the game . About thirty minutes into the game , the players largely drive the process with little need for support from the facilitator . At this point Player 3 is working on the 6 th story to put on the board with the Sign - card “Accessibility” . She is browsing the cards when the other players suddenly engage in her move : Player 1 : Does she really need to be that accessible ? She probably needs to be accessible . But she seems to be the one searching information . Player 3 : It can be her searching ( overlapping with Player 1 ) . Player 1 : Maybe it’s not that many phoning her to ask things , but that could happen too of course , because they must be able to… Player 2 : Mm . I wonder who uses , or needs that documentation ? Player 1 : But it seems to be more like that . She is working relatively undisturbed . Player 3 : Yes . Player 1 : There are not that many fighting to get hold of her . Player 3 : Right , that’s what I think . She is the one fighting to get hold of them , because they are sitting on the information . All players engage in discussing details about her accessibility and need for access to other people . We take their increased confidence and spontaneous collaboration in the move as a sign that a shared image of the user is emerging , and that the User Game well supported this process . 4 . 1 . 3 Example 2 : Cape Peninsula University of Technology Apart from design projects with industry professionals and researchers , we also tested the game in educational settings . In the second example product design students play the user game in the third year of the Product design program at Cape Peninsula University of Technology ( former Cape Technikon ) , Cape Town , South Africa . The students had not been exposed to collaborative or participatory design methods before , and we were interested in seeing if and how design game playing , as well as producing game material , could be adopted by young designers not familiar to participative approaches in design . The game activity was part of a six - week design project led by one of the researchers , where students had done field studies of South African professionals . In the example the game is used by three pairs of students to elaborate the image of Dave , a restaurant manager . Each student pair , or team , acted as one player in the game . Before playing the game , the students were asked to produce ten Sign - cards , each with a keyword reflecting one of Dave’s goals . In the variation of the User game played here the players were asked to negate the Sign - cards and produce stories were Dave’s goals were violated . As we enter the game , Team 3 has just had two proposed sequences rejected by the facilitator , pointing out that they were not proper stories . Team 3 browses their cards . Finally , A in Team 3 checks his idea with his teammate and is then ready to make another attempt at playing a new sequence : 124 Team 3 , player A : We can say he’s not effective in his job because there he has to double… or look up stuff ( points to the first card ) he is supposed to know . And there ( points to the second card ) he is not effective because the waiter is not doing his job , and he is going to do it . Figure 3 . Game boards ( left ) and Trace - cards ( right ) . Team 1 , player A : It’s not really a story ! Team 1 , player B : That’s not a story ! Team 3 , player A : ( smiling ) … freaking hell ! ( laughs ) Team 1 protests and refuses to accept the new attempt of Team 3 as a story . We take the rejection and its response as a strong indication of active engagement . Apparently the students had adopted the rules , as their own rather than relying on the facilitator to judge if moves in the game were acceptable . The game material includes game - boards , Moments - cards , and ‘Trace - cards’ . The game - boards are various generic conceptual maps . The Moments cards are the same as in the user game . Traces cards are pictures from the field material illustrating parts of the physical surroundings ( see figure 3 ) . The user , Dave , is known to prefer straightforward communication using his phone . Picking up on an earlier story from Team 1 where a supplier fails to deliver , Team 2 introduces a story where Dave uses SMS to tell his boss that a supplier did not deliver . This expands on the image of Dave’s communication habits . All teams agree that it makes sense that Dave uses a less confrontational mode of communication for bringing bad news to his boss . In the next round Team 1 picks up on the supplier problem where Team 2 focused on the communication . This time Team 1 expands the story about the failing supplier , and underlines the problem of having trustworthy suppliers . 4 . 2 . 1 Example 3 : Experimental Office Project The Landscape game was played during another workshop in the Experimental Office project . The task presented for the participants was to create images of future office environments using the persons and the game - pieces presented . Beforehand the researchers from the Space studio had labeled the generic game - boards , which simultaneously became a rule for how to play the game . The game - board with concentric circles were labeled ‘important things in the middle’ , an outlined square frame got the label ‘everyone will sit by the window’ , and several radial circles were described as ‘many centers’ . Team 1 , player A : People sitting in the restaurant don’t care whether the supplied delivers or not , it’s his… Three groups played the game during the workshop . One of the groups consisted of six people ; One or two persons from each of the four partners plus one researcher from the Space Studio . The game starts by each participant picking two or three game pieces , and present to the others why they chose the specific piece . Here the partners said : Facilitator : - They don’t care where it comes from , obviously . Team 1 , player A : - They ( the restaurant ) must basically just get it , so he really has to have a trustworthy relationship with the supplier . ( 1 ) Representative from the office furniture company : I have picked a conference room or corner for conversations , an informal room for coffee breaks . And this is a little piece of an individual workspace . There are stacks of paper and a paper calendar . This leads the players to probe deeper into the supplier issue , and to the idea of providing back - up suppliers when the primary suppliers fail . In this example the User game was easy to play for the students and it supported them in producing viable scenarios for Dave as a user , but it also helped them to explore Dave’s user world in more depth , and in particular to expand the problem framing to include new issues to address in the design work . ( 2 ) Telecommunication network provider : I took number 20 . The modern archive is not without papers I think . It is interesting . The other one that I found interesting is what will happen to the printer ? Where is it situated ? How does it work and who has the responsibility for it ? Then I found this little room . It looks very little this room with number 14 . 4 . 2 The Landscape Game The intention with the Landscape Game is to create context for the persons created in the Person Game in the sense that focus shifts from developing stories about the person , interests and relations to involve the physical surroundings . The task in the Landscape Game is to build a ( future ) landscape for the person highlighting physical surroundings or elements that augment various activities in the person’s everyday life . ( 3 ) Real Estate company : A small conference room or room for conversations . I think it looks pleasant . I took an image of an impressive office . It is light , has a nice view and lots of space . And then I took an image of a desk for working at while standing upright . It has a lot of wires but I definitely like the desk . ( 4 ) Computer manufacturer : I took an image with a football game as a symbol of a place to meet . A conference room with a conference phone which extend the use of the room very much . And then I took an image with strange [ electronic ] tools , which symbolizes new technology . 125 At this point they have not yet seen the corresponding video clips . Their comments are based on their reading of the images on the game - pieces . From the transcript it seems that they all chose an image to represent a space for meetings and conversations . The three first chose an image with a table and chairs while the computer manufacturer chose the football game , but they all focused on the meetings that the various settings could augment . ( 1 ) and ( 3 ) both talks about the personal workspace , while ( 2 ) and ( 4 ) talks about technologies and concerns about these . The partners have common interests but they also have differing interests as the example shows . Each person seems to present issues that are central to the companies they represent and which differs from person to person . The person from the office furniture company is concerned with the space ( furniture ) for papers and calendar , the network provider for what will happened to the printer in the future , the company letting office space , about a workspace with light , a nice view and lots of space , and the computer manufacturer mentions new technology . The game continues with discussing game - pieces and placing the ones agreed upon on the game - board . Suddenly the group realizes that they have placed almost all the game - pieces in the center . Everything that is placed on the game - board has equal importance . Three persons start moving some of the pieces . For instance the printer is moved to some of the outer circles . The storage for incoming mail is the same . They realize that they have several cards illustrating coffee break with colleagues and choose to take one of them off the game - board . The two others keep their position in the center of the board together with the soft meeting room . About 20 groups have been playing both the User game and Landscape game . Half of them in relation with research projects involving various industrial partners , potential users , and researchers . The other half of the groups playing the games have been students attending educations like Interaction Design , Industrial Design and Engineering Design in Sweden , Denmark and South Africa . Common for the plays are that the game materials based on ethnographic video - recordings help the participant getting insight into specific life - worlds of potential users . The game - pieces and the rules make it easy for everyone to engage in the games , as the material is so rich that it can be interpreted in various ways . Therefore the game - pieces function as boundary objects between people having various competencies [ 23 ] . When playing the games it becomes clearer to the individual what one find important , but also how other players interpret and value the material . Essential when playing the games are negotiation of meanings and interests . The players have to negotiate to solve conflicts of interests . In the Landscape game they now turn to choose one of the game - boards to work with . Everyone comments on the game - boards and have views about which one to choose . For instance one suggests that they choose the game - board with the concentric circles with the argument that ‘the center could be the center of a person’s workplace and then one could work oneself out in the other circles’ . He argues that in office work today one has to be able to work alone as well as in groups . He suggests that they choose this , but comments that it demands that they put the human in the center of the board . Another player says that the one with the four centers are better as it is always easier to work in smaller groups . After some time they end up choosing the game - board with one center and the concentric circles around it . 4 . 2 . 2 Example 4 : Students at Malmö University It is important not to follow the game rules presented here in a rigorous way but to develop and explore the games as to make them fit for the participants involved , their interests , and the specific design situation . A group of students from Malmö University played the Landscape game as part of a two weeks design workshop . Here one group first played a Landscape Game using the game - board with four centers . They decided that ‘each center should represent a zone in the persons life’ and hid one of the centers with books as they only needed three centers ( work , social life , and home ) . They placed Moment - and Trace cards both on the various circles surrounding each center and between the various centers . After finishing the game they decided to play another game about the same person but now they wanted to investigate what things needed to be changed in order to make the person more satisfied with his life . This time they chose the game - board with one center and concentric circles around it . They investigated various aspects in the users life and came up with suggestions for change . The most important changes were placed in the middle , while least important changes in the outer circles . The players had four game - pieces of potential users , which could be part of the game . They chose two of the users , which had very different ways of working , and place them in the center of the game - board . They now began to watch the video clips , which corresponded to the Moment - cards they have chosen . They share views and place the Moment - card they agree upon on the game - board . Sometimes they do not agree on what the Moment - cards or the Trace - cards represents or their value in relation to other game - pieces . There is an ambiguity in the game material , which opens for various views and understandings . After some time they discuss informal meeting places and how important they are for the work to be done . It comes forward that while informal meeting rooms are part of everyday work the more formal meetings are for instance once a week . One suggests having the informal meeting room in the center and moving the two users out of the center . They chose to do so . Figure 4 . The Landscape Game . 4 . 3 The Technology Game When designing concepts for future IT the stakeholders have different competencies but also various interests and agendas in relation to the object to be designed . The intention with the technology game is twofold . Firstly it makes the technology aspect explicit early in the design process so everybody can discuss technological constraints and possibilities in the open . 126 Secondly the form factor is introduced to help keep tangibility in mind and to embody design ideas . The technology game can be played in a variety of ways , but important is to create game - pieces , which can illustrate technology and form aspects . The assignment for the players is to create scenarios about the persons in the previous games , which involves functionalities ( from the involved partners ) and choosing or creating a foam / card - board form that represent the product to be . The scenarios are written on large pieces of paper and the game - pieces used are glued onto the paper ( see figure 5 ) . Figure 5 . Technology Game . 4 . 3 . 1 Example 4 : The COMIT Project The following example is from a research project called COMIT ( Contextualization Of Mobile IT ) . In COMIT we investigated how people move between various social contexts during their day , and how work and leisure time often blends . A central question was how to design for accommodation and coordination of multiple devices and services in situated use across different social spaces . The main objective was to develop future use scenarios and associated IT concepts in collaboration between potential users , industrial partners and researchers , which reflect design issues and use qualities related to contextualization and connectivity . A second objective was to further develop knowledge about how future scenarios with real users can be utilized in the design process [ 18 ] . The COMIT project involved four industrial partners ( tele - communications , mobile services and terminals , digital pen technology , handwriting recognition software ) plus three potential users . Each potential user was video - recorded at work and two to four hours after work twice . The video - material and a probing kit formed the basis of the games played before the Technology game . If users needs in various situations and settings shall be augmented by users configuring technologies themselves a pre - requisite for this is that functions are tangible , that they are easy to connect and use , and not least that each function is defined from a user - quality perspective and not a technical one . In advance of the first workshop in the COMIT project the partner’s technologies were de - constructed into a list of generic functions . For instance the functions included : ‘print text , sketches , images’ , ‘write with ink’ , ‘play back video and movies’ , ‘authentification through hand - written signature’ , ‘redirect phone calls to other device’ . ‘send information’ , ‘draw” , “transfer document’ , ‘transfer image’ , and ‘fetch e - mail’ . Each function was written on a LEGO - Duplo brick . During the workshop three groups worked in parallel . Each group had material about one of the users and all groups had a similar set of foam models and LEGO - Duplos with functions on . The group we shall follow had four participants . A potential user ( user ) , a designer from at large mobil services and terminals company ( mobile services and terminals ) , and two researchers ( researcher ) from the Space studio where one operated the video camera . We come in where the group have created two future scenarios and are just to begin with the third . ‘Here are all the ones about the family’ the designer from the mobile services and terminal company said . He has spent some time collecting images from the table about the users and his family . At this point they have discussed for less than two minutes . They continue for three more minutes . First they all silently look at the cards about the family and think for a little while . Then they discuss if it is the morning situation that they should work with . Today the father ; Ronny has a conflict with his sons in he morning . The children want to watch cartoons on the TV , while Ronny has to take the sons to the Daycare Center before leaving for work . At present Ronny solves it by programming the TV to stop at a certain time . The workshop group soon agrees that this solution is not very good and it could be nice if the mornings were less stressed and all needs was satisfied . For the children it is important to watch the whole TV show . Various suggestions for solutions come forward . Maybe the children have some glasses where they can watch the film ? , maybe they have a TV in the car ? The researcher would like to have a more mobile solution . She does not want the children to miss some of the TV - program while getting dressed and walking to the car . Suddenly the designer from the mobile services and terminals company says : Mobile services and terminals : That’s just it . More people have more things . It is not just Ronny’s device . Maybe the children also have a little ( take one of the foam models to illustrate ) Moggy - vision . ( everyone laugh ) Then one of the researchers takes another foam model and says : Researcher : And maybe when he sits on the train then he knows when Oggy and the cockroaches ( the favorite cartoon - program ) is finished , and then he does something so they cannot watch more . Because if the children got the chance they would just ( takes the model in front of her eyes ) sit all day in kinder - garden and watch TV . Mobile services and terminals : He can turn it off . He can control other device ( takes a stick with a series of LEGO - Duplos with functions that are attached to one another , take them apart and pick the one with ‘control other device’ and put it on the table ) . User : Control other device . Yes , good thought . Mobile services and terminals : Yes ( looks at the Lego - Duplo bricks with functions again – takes another and says ) play back video ( and puts it firmly on the table together with the one about control other device ) . The participating user starts writing down the scenario on a paper . They discuss how to formulate it and decide that the scenario should have a beginning which frame the morning situation as a situation involving a conflict . Ronny , his wife and children are having breakfast , but in separate places . Ronny and his wife in the 127 4 . 4 . 1 Example 6 : The COMIT Project kitchen , the children in the living room in front of the favorite TV - show : ‘Oggy and the cockroaches’ . They look for an image to glue onto the paper as the prelude of the scenario . Following example is taken from the COMIT project . The scenarios were enacted in one of the potential users ; Helle’s work space . Helle is a fashion designer and has her own shop in Malmö , which also is her workshop for creating the garments . When visiting Helle in her shop we brought the models created in earlier games and a large amount of foam material for creation of new models if needed . Helle chose to produce new models and used a knife to produce models of the product concepts : the image device , image editing tablet , and portable printer . In the enacted scenario Helle demonstrates how she uses the three design concepts to produce a personalized catalogue with annotations for a retailer , showing a selected set of garments from her collection . In the scenario Elisabeth who is working in Helles shop act to be the retailer . Four minutes later they suddenly realize that in the workshop break Ronny said that he most often takes the train to work . The solution about the TV or screen in the car is not very good then . They decide that the function you take with you can also be connected to other devises than TV for instance the Game - boy . Then the issue becomes how much you can take with you . Researcher : There is also a problematic issue about how much you take with you from the TV . Is it just the program one is watching ? Is it the whole channel ? Is it all channels ? How much can this ( holds a LOGO brick up ) do ? Can it be that when ‘Oggy’ is finished then it is finished ? Tele - company : Yes , I think it is only Oggy you can take with you . That what you have is like a sort of cards – like Pokemon - cards . Today one exchange Pokemon figures tomorrow one maybe exchange Pokemon - programs . The scenario ( see figure 6 ) takes place in Helle ' s shop and atelier in the centre of Malmö . Helle has just finished a number of new garments for her fall collection . a ) Helle shows her new collection to Elisabeth , a company representative . b ) Together they browse through the collection and Helle comments the different garments and answers questions from Elisabeth . c ) Helle takes pictures using her ‘image device’ of the garments Elisabeth is interested in . d ) Helle annotates the pictures with comments regarding prices , colors , etc . , using her ‘image - editing tablet’ . e ) Finally , Helle sends the set of annotated pictures from her ‘image editing tablet’ to her ‘portable printer’ , producing a personalized catalogue . Figure 6 . Enacted scenario in user context . They decide on two devices , one to have on the TV and for taking and moving the program being watched , and one devise like a Game - boy . Two foam models are found to represent the two devices , and they are glue onto the scenario . They repeat the functions included in each device and agree on writing a list with functions to put next to the papers with the scenario . The example illustrates that the game pieces in the Technology Game were often used while creating the scenario . Making both the generic function and the various generic shapes tangible using for instance LEGO - Duplos and the foam models were used for generating ideas and explaining or as arguing ideas or potential design concepts . The collection of game pieces also helped them keeping track of which functions were chosen as necessary for the user in order to handle a specific situation . In the transcript above the designer and researchers are more active than the user . Viewing the videotapes from all groups in the workshop this is not the general picture . It varies from group to group and from scenario to scenario who of the participants are most active . Still one can say that talking about functions and functionalities belong more to the life worlds and language - game of designers and researchers than the users . 4 . 4 The Scenario Game In the Scenario Game the intention is that experiences from the previous games are condensed in enacted scenarios describing possible futures . The scenarios are to involve person ( s ) , activities , contexts and the models of the product be designed . The persons enacting the scenarios can be potential users , stakeholders , the design - or research team or a combination of these . The aim is to develop empathy for the users and the situations of use but also to elaborate the design concept while the players taking on roles , creating scenarios and acting them out themselves in the physical environment . The foam models from the Technology Game or elaborations of these in combination with artifacts from the physical environment are used as props . 128 5 . 1 Empowering Stakeholders with Game Pieces as Props The resulting personalized catalogue includes images and information about the garments the retailer has shown interests in . It also includes information for that specific retailer , for instance changes of the colors of the buttons and the prices offered . The notion of objects or props as carriers of meaning in the language game of design is not new , and neither is the use of games and game pieces to support design activities . In their design games Ehn & Sjögren [ 8 ] describe mock - ups and other design representations as design artifacts that become reminders of reflections about future computer artifacts and their use . In a similar way Star [ 23 ] use the term boundary objects for artifacts that carry a shared meaning between different domains of knowledge . The enacted scenario illustrates how mobile technology can be powerful in supporting the contextualization of information content . Helle configures a set of devices , each having simple functionality , available in off - the - shelf products that act in concert to provide the function of a “portable print shop” . Helle operates on a competitive market and in promoting her products she regularly visits companies to present her current collection . Therefore the “portable print shop” fulfills her needs of the particular context – the business meeting with a retailer . What we focus on here is rather how the game pieces support different stakeholders in making design moves on a conceptual level . In the User Game , playing with different stories about a user by combining sequences of video cards seem to help participants creating a shared image of the user and probing deeper into the user world , finding new issues to address in design . For Dave , the restaurant manager , a chain of moves led the design students to focus on the problem of reliability of stock suppliers and spurred the idea of having backup suppliers . The enacted scenario was video recorded and part of the design material for the last workshop in the COMIT project . In all eleven scenarios with the three potential users were made . At the workshop the industrial partners , users and participating researchers from the Space Studio engaged in exploring and discussing use experiences from the scenarios . The task was to get an understanding of how the participants made sense of the relationship between product concept , physical and social context . In the Landscape Game different stakeholders get the chance to bring in elements in the context for the user that reflect their different interests . Since the Landscape Game board has no concrete relation to any physical space , the relation between different places in the use context can be described on a conceptual level , postponing physical , technological or organizational constraints . In the Experimental Office , stakeholders could bring together meeting spaces , printing needs and light requirements in the same representation without the restriction of floor plans , networks or workflows . In the example it is easy for Helle and Elisabeth to try out and elaborate on the product concepts produced earlier by enacting the scenario in Helle ' s shop . This is in line with our good experiences with users using simple design models as props while enacting scenarios in their own environment from other projects [ see for instance : 1 , 2 , 18 ] . In the beginning we as researchers provided the design models but now we give the players the possibility to create their own props themselves . We find that the latter approach both empowers the users and increase their engagement in the design work . The use of the props in the Technology Game resembles the infamous cardboard box representing a desktop laser printer in Ehn & Sjögren [ 8 ] . But in the COMIT project our props also became an inherent part of the language and argumentation . Making a design move regarding functions of a device was naturally accompanied by putting together two labeled LEGO™ - blocks . As Matthews [ 16 ] has proposed , props make arguments tangible in the dialogue of design . 5 . Discussion - Design Games as Design Practice Scenario based approaches are well established in the field of interaction design and the development towards ubiquitous computing have put a stronger focus on subjective use experiences and on enacting scenarios in the real context of use . The notion of scenarios as open - ended narratives describing artifacts in use is very powerful for participatory design . However , one inherent aspect of enacted scenarios in use contexts is that they focus on a specific user doing specific things in a specific context . Our aim has been to explore scenario based techniques engaging different stakeholders , but from a broader stance where concepts can be explored across users , contexts and technologies . In our view , such techniques can supplement enacted scenarios and support different stakeholders in a constructive dialogue with designers in earlier phases of the design process . The notion of design games has been central to us as a means for providing structure to design activities where the rules of the game become a driving force in the dialogue rather than restricting creativity . In the final section of this paper we discuss our experiences so far starting from two main properties we have identified in design games : the use of game pieces as vehicles for expressing design moves ; and the structuring of concept design activities through game and play . In the Scenario Game , constructing the mock - ups on the fly becomes an important part of staging an enacted scenario . Even if Helle’s props largely corresponded to existing technology in displaying her collection of garments , she framed the concept of a portable print shop for producing personalized catalogues . We would like to argue that the game pieces , or props , used in the design games allow stakeholders to become more fluent in the language of expressing design moves . The activities somewhat resemble the sketching of architects . Having objects at hand to play with is important as it speeds up the process and help participants to focus . As design material game pieces and props create a common ground that everybody can relate to and at the same time they act as ' things - to - think - with ' [ 20 ] . They function both as grounding for the design work and as boundary objects allowing different participants to read and interpret the material differently . A crucial property of game pieces is that they are rich enough in content to span the gap between different understandings and / or interests of different stakeholders . 129 5 . 2 Structuring Concept Design Activities through Game and Play [ 7 ] Ehn p , and Kyng M . Cardboard Computers : Mocking - it - up or hands - on the Future . In ‘Design at work’ edited by Joan Greenbaum and Morten Kyng , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , publishers . 1991 . We decided early to work with the notion of design games as a means of structuring concept design activities . Although we do not have any strong indications , it seems the temporary shift in focus from the goals of the design process , and its current activities and deliverables , to the rules of the game arguably makes it easier to generate design moves . Earlier studies in creativity [ 9 ] have showed that heavy restrictions on idea generation activities actually can improve the outcome . In our trial sessions the rules of the design games seem to play such a positive role of restriction . For instance , in the User Game producing a story with the restrictions of using the video cards at hand that fit into the current “crossword” of the game seem to be an easier task for the player than openly generating use stories firmly grounded in ethnographic field data with the main goal of producing good design . [ 8 ] Ehn P , and Sjögren D : From System Descriptions to Scripts for Action . In ‘Design at work’ edited by Joan Greenbaum and Morten Kyng , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , publishers . 1991 . [ 9 ] Finke R . A , Ward , T . B . and Smith , S . M : Creative Cognition – Theory , Research , and Applications . A Bradford Book . The MIT press . 1992 . [ 10 ] Garabet , A . , Mann , S . , and Fung , J . : Exploring Design through Wearable Computing Art ( ifacts ) . In Proceedings of CHI 2002 , Interactive Posters . April 20 - 25 , 2002 , Minneapolis , Minnesota , USA . ACM Press , 634 - 635 . [ 11 ] Habraken H J and Gross M D : Concept design Games ( Book 1 and 2 ) . A report submitted to the National Science Foundation Engineering Directorate , Design Methodology Program . Department of Architecture , MIT , Cambridge , Massachusetts 02139 . 1987 . By entering into the game the participants also implicitly agree to play by the rules . Arguably , this plays down external factors like power relations between participants or conflicts in organizations . According to Burns et al [ 5 ] games may smooth collaboration in design by making it more independent on credentials : “in this context , members of the design team are removed from their common views and might contribute less self - consciously” ( ibid . p . 1 ) . Apart from directing design moves to a conceptual level , we believe that the games also contribute to the leveling of stakeholders with different interest leading to a more constructive dialogue . [ 12 ] Howard , S . , Carroll , J . , Murphy , J . and Peck , J . Using ‘Endowed Props’ in Scenario - Based Design . Proceedings of NordiCHI 2002 . October 19 - 23 , 2002 , Aarhus , Denmark . [ 13 ] Iacucci , G . and Kuutti , K : Everyday Life as a Stage in Creating and Performing Scenarios for Wireless Devices . Personal and Ubiquitous Computing . 2002 , 6 : 299 - 306 . [ 14 ] Ishii , H . and Ullmer , B : Tangible Bits : Towards Seamless Interfaces between People , Bits and Atoms . Proceedings of CHI’97 , 1997 , pp . 234 - 241 . The set of design games we present here have been played in many variations , and they should not be viewed as finished . Rather , we invite others to develop them further . In our view , the development of conceptual design games seems to be a promising approach for supporting collaboration between different stakeholders in collaborative design . [ 15 ] Johansson . M . , Fröst , P . , Brandt , E . , Binder , T . and Messeter , J . Partner Engaged Design – New challenges for workplace design , in Proceedings of Participatory Design Conference ( PDC ) 2002 , Malmö Sweden . [ 16 ] Matthews , B , Buur , J , and Brereton M : Brick Games in Boardrooms : Making Use Context Tangible . In : Lloyd , P Christiaans , H . Designing in Context . Design Thinking Research Symposium , Delft 2001 . pp . 187 - 198 . 6 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Binder , T : Setting the Stage for Improvised Video Scenarios . CHI99 Conference . 1999 . [ 2 ] Brandt , E . , and Grunnet , C : Evoking the future : drama and props in user centered design . In Cherkasky , T . , Greenbaum , J . , Mambrey , P . ( Editors ) , Proceedings of Participatory Design Conference , New York , CPSR , 2000 . pp . 11 - 20 . [ 17 ] Nilsson J , Sokoler T , Binder T , Wetcke N : Beyond the control room - mobile devices for spatially distributed interaction on industrial process plants , Proceedings from Second International Symposium on Handheld and Ubiquitous Computing 2000 , pp . 30 - 45 . [ 3 ] Bucciarelli , L L : Designing Engineers . The MIT Press , Cambridge , Massachusetts , London , England . 1994 . [ 18 ] Messeter J , Brandt E , Halse J , and Johansson M . Contextualizing Mobile IT . To be presented at the DIS’04 conference . Boston 2004 . [ 4 ] Buchenau , M . and Suri , J . Fulton : Experience Prototyping . In Proceedings of DIS 2000 conference , Designing Interactive Systems . New York City , USA . ACM Press , 2000 . pp . 424 - 433 . [ 19 ] Oulasvirta , A . , Kurvinen , E . , and Kankainen , T . Understanding contexts by being there : case studies in bodystorming . Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 2003 , 7 : 125 - 134 . [ 5 ] Burns , C . , Dishman , E . , Verplank , B . , and Lassiter , B : Actors , hair - dos and videotape : Informance design . Presented at Presence Forum ( Royal College of Art , London , November , 1997 ) . Paper available at http : / / www . presenceweb . i3net . org / papers / frameset . html [ 20 ] Papert , S : Mindstorms – Children , Computers and Powerful Ideas . Basic Books Inc . Publishers , New York . 1980 . [ 21 ] Sato , S . , and Salvador , T : Playacting and Focus Troupes : Theater techniques for creating quick , intense , immersive , and engaging focus group sessions . Interactions , September - October , 1999 , pp . 35 - 41 . [ 6 ] Carroll , J : Making Use : Scenario - Based Design of Human - Computer Interactions . MIT Press . 2000 . 130 [ 24 ] Weiser , M : The Computer for the 21st Century . Scientific American , 265 ( 3 ) , 1991 , pp . 94 - 104 . [ 22 ] Schön , D : The Reflective Practitioner : How Professionals Think in Action . Basic Books . 1983 . [ 25 ] Wellner , P . , Mackay , W . , and Gold , R . : Computer Augmented Environments : Back to the Real World . Commun . ACM , Vol . 36 , No . 7 , July 1993 . [ 23 ] Star , Leigh S : The structure of Ill - structures Solutions : Heterogeneous Problem - Solving , Boundary Objects and Distributed Artificial Intelligence . In the Distributed Artificial Intelleigence , Vol . 2 . Edited by Kuhns and Gasser , 1989 pp . 37 - 54 ) , San Mateo , CA , Morgan Kaufman . 131