A multiscale theory for spreading and migration of adhesion - reinforced mesenchymal cells Wenya Shu 1 , 2 and C . Nadir Kaplan 1 , 2 ∗ 1 Department of Physics , Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University , Blacksburg , VA 24061 , USA . 2 Center for Soft Matter and Biological Physics , Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University , Blacksburg , VA 24061 , USA . ∗ To whom correspondence should be addressed : nadirkaplan @ vt . edu Abstract We present a chemomechanical whole - cell theory for the spreading and migration dynamics of mesenchy - 5 mal cells that can actively reinforce their adhesion to an underlying viscoelastic substrate as a function of its stiffness . Our multiscale model couples the adhesion reinforcement effect at the subcellular scale with the nonlinear mechanics of the nucleus - cytoskeletal network complex at the cellular scale to explain the concur - rent monotonic area - stiffness and non - monotonic speed - stiffness relationships observed in experiments : We consider that large cell spreading on stiff substrates flattens the nucleus , increasing the viscous drag force 10 on it . The resulting force balance dictates a reduction in the migration speed on stiff substrates . We also re - produce the experimental influence of the substrate viscosity on the cell spreading area and migration speed by elucidating how the viscosity may either maintain adhesion reinforcement or prevent it depending on the substrate stiffness . Additionally , our model captures the experimental directed migration behavior of the adhesion - reinforced cells along a stiffness gradient , known as durotaxis , as well as up or down a viscosity 15 gradient ( viscotaxis or anti - viscotaxis ) , the cell moving towards an optimal viscosity in either case . Overall , our theory explains the intertwined mechanics of the cell spreading , migration speed and direction in the presence of the molecular adhesion reinforcement mechanism . 1 Keywords . Mechanobiology , mesenchymal migration , adhesion reinforcement , durotaxis , viscotaxis . 1 Introduction 20 Cell motion plays a crucial role in various biological processes ranging from tissue formation to metastasis . The mechanical properties of the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) are critical environmental cues that orchestrate the spreading and migration of adherent ( mesenchymal ) cells [ 1 – 8 ] . Focal adhesion ( FA ) sites play a key role in cell mechanosensitivity by mediating the chemical and mechanical interactions between the cell and ECM . The FA dynamics can directly impact the chemically driven localized protrusions and contractions 25 across the cell , governed by the tightly coupled spatiotemporal distributions of the proteins , such as the Rho GTPases , ROCK , or CDC42 , which influence the migration dynamics [ 9 – 14 ] . Thus , a rigorous mathemati - cal description of cell migration must include accurate modeling of the adhesion forces at different FA sites and their coupling with the cytoskeletal dynamics driven by the intracellular signaling pathways . Although some cells such as the U - 251MG glioblastoma cells exhibit a biphasic dependence of the trac - 30 tion force on the rigidity of the underlying matrix [ 15 , 16 ] , which can be explained by the classical motor - clutch theory [ 17 , 18 ] , many other systems , such as endothelial cells and fibroblasts , display a monotonic rigidity - force relationship [ 19 , 20 ] . This behavior is attributed to active adhesion reinforcement triggered by the unfolding of the talin molecules that leads to the vinculin binding and in turn to an increased inte - grin density at an FA site [ 21 , 22 ] . While an augmented motor - clutch theory with adhesion reinforcement 35 successfully captures the monotonic increase of the traction force with the matrix stiffness [ 23 ] , it cannot explain the non - monotonic dependence of the migration speed on the ECM rigidity measured in the exper - iments [ 5 – 8 ] . This suggests that the mutual dynamics of the many FA sites across the cell along with the cytoskeletal dynamics must be considered to relate the migration speed to the traction forces and in turn to the matrix rigidity , rather than at a single FA site . To reproduce the cell migration dynamics as a coordinated 40 sequence of peripheral protrusion and contractions [ 4 , 24 , 25 ] , whole - cell level formulations with multiple FA sites have been developed , including our recent theory that integrates the chemomechanical coupling between the Rho GTPase concentrations , the FA sites , the cytoskeletal network and the nucleus dynam - ics [ 26 – 28 ] . However , none of these studies have incorporated the adhesion reinforcement mechanism into the whole - cell dynamics . Importantly , we anticipate that a mere addition of the adhesion reinforcement 45 effect to the whole - cell - scale model would still lead to a monotonic rigidity - speed relationship , implying 2 further subtleties associated with the collective intracellular dynamics under adhesion reinforcement . Here we generalize our multiscale theory in Ref . [ 28 ] to elucidate the spreading and migration dy - namics of adhesion - reinforced cells on viscoelastic substrates , overcoming the limitations of our previ - ous model without adhesion reinforcement . Our model demonstrates how the nonlinear mechanics of the 50 nucleus – cytoskeletal network complex must play a critical role in the experimental spreading and non - monotonic stiffness - speed profiles : Large cell spreading on stiff substrates induced by the augmented local traction forces due to adhesion reinforcement , an effect accurately captured by our model , deforms the nu - cleus [ 29 ] and increases both the cytoplasmic viscosity and cytoskeletal stiffness [ 8 , 30 – 32 ] . Consequently , the drag force on the nucleus increases , making it harder for the cell to translocate the nucleus on stiff sub - 55 strates , as evidenced by a theoretical non - monotonic stiffness - speed relationship in quantitative agreement with experiments . By using the standard linear solid model for the substrate viscoelasticity , we also inves - tigate the effect of the substrate stress relaxation on cell migration across a broad stiffness range , which is experimentally well documented [ 23 , 33 – 35 ] . We show that , on a substrate with high elastic stiffness , fast stress relaxation ( low viscosity ) may preempt the effect of adhesion reinforcement whereas slow relaxation 60 ( high viscosity ) may promote it . That way , our model quantitatively reproduces the experimental spreading area and migration speed profiles of the HT - 1080 human fibrosarcoma cells [ 27 ] . Furthermore , we demon - strate that adhesion - reinforced cells persistently move up the stiffness gradients , i . e . , durotaxis [ 36 – 38 ] , in good agreement with the experimental migration patterns of the MDA - MB - 231 cells [ 16 ] . We also reveal the effect of the viscosity gradients on directed migration , a . k . a . viscotaxis , which sheds light on the mi - 65 gration of human mesenchymal stem cells from high to low loss moduli on collagen coated polyacrylamide gels [ 39 ] . Our theory provides a rigorous understanding of how the nucleus drag as a function of cell spreading gives rise to the experimentally observed complex migration dynamics , in contrast with the previous phe - nomenological treatments that assumed a direct functional relationship between the drag force , the traction 70 force , and substrate stiffness [ 40 , 41 ] . Furthermore , because our model takes into account additional intra - cellular components beyond just the FA sites , it provides a plausible mechanism for the emergent nonuni - form stiffness - speed relation that complements the cell model which relates cell speed only to the resultant traction force from the collective adhesion - reinforced FA dynamics [ 42 ] . 3 2 Methods 75 Mesenchymal migration entails the spatiotemporal coordination of front protrusion driven by actin poly - merization and focal adhesion ( FA ) followed by rear contraction due to focal de - adhesion and actomyosin activity . The front - rear symmetry is primarily broken by the chemical polarization of the active and inactive Rho GTPase proteins , which govern the dynamics of the FA sites . Here we generalize our previous multiscale framework for the talin - low cell migration , which accounted 80 for this complexity by considering the feedback between the biological components in Fig . 1 A , by including the effect of focal adhesion reinforcement due to talin unfolding ( Fig . 1 B ) [ 28 ] . Our modified multiscale model takes into account the nonlinear strain - stiffening of the cytoskeleton and the augmented viscous drag force on the deformed cell nucleus under cell flattening , as well as uses the standard linear solid ( SLS ) model for the ECM viscoelasticity . At the subcellular scale , a motor - clutch model with adhesion reinforcement is 85 employed to determine the effect of substrate rigidity on traction forces at each FA site ( Fig . 1 C ) . Since cells operate in low Reynolds numbers , we only consider the viscous forces arising from the nucleus - cytoplasm and cell membrane - substrate frictions at the cellular scale . In our model , the forces across the two scales are transmitted by the cytoskeleton , and the augmented viscous drag force on the deformed cell nucleus in turn determines the active motion of the cell ( Fig . 1D and E ) . 90 2 . 1 Equations of motion at subcellular scale We first present the calculation of the cell vertex displacements due to the FA site dynamics and the mechani - cal balance at the corresponding vertex . For a vertex i with position vector x i ( t ) , the local spreading velocity V i s ≡ ˙x i needs to be determined at every time step . In our model , the radial component V i s , n ≡ V i s · ˆn i is controlled by the active processes , i . e . , actin polymerization and actomyosin contraction regulated by the 95 Rho GTPase proteins , while the polar spreading speed V is , τ ≡ V is · ˆ τ i is set by the balance between the polar components of the passive forces due to the cell deformations ( ˆn i , ˆ τ i defined in Fig . 1 D ) . The active radial spreading of a vertex with a speed V is , n is fueled mainly by F - actin formation with a polymerization speed V ip and counteracted by the retrograde G - actin flow with a speed V ir , which yields V is , n = V ip − V ir . ( 1 ) 100 4 ! ! " # ! $ % # ! & # ! % # ' ! % # ( ! ) # " * ' " * ( # + * $ + * ! % & + ' ( + ) , + ) - + * . / 0 + * 12 + + - − + . - 3 * 4 + . 566 + . 57 + ( 0 1 ) - 1 " * 8 + # $ % 2 2 + 7 2 219 & ! " # 2 23 : $ % $ # ECM Integrin Talin unfolding A c ti n P o l y m e r i za ti on Myosin II ECM FA Microtubule Nucleus Centrosome Membrane Stress fiber Cytoskeleton networks B A C D E $ # $ % Maxwell arm 3 + Figure 1 : Multiscale whole - cell theory schematics . ( A ) Intracellular organization involved in mesenchy - mal migration . ( B ) Close - up view of the cytoskeleton – ECM linkage via integrins and the adaptor proteins ( e . g . , talin ) . ( C ) The parameters and variables of the motor - clutch model with adhesion reinforcement at each FA site . ( D ) The vertex - based model that couples the cell - matrix interactions at the subcellular scale to the chemomechanical dynamics at the cellular scale . The Rac1 concentration R and RhoA concentration ρ can each be in a membrane - bound active ( red dots ) or inactive state ( orange squares ) , or dissolved in the cytoplasm ( gray triangles ) . The conversion rates between these states are A iG , I iG , M − G , M + G ( G ≡ { R , ρ } ) , D is the diffusion constant of the membrane - bound species ( Eq . 15 ) . The angle between the two membrane sections at a vertex is denoted by θ i . ( E ) The principal dimensions l max , l med , l min of a deformed nucleus . The polymerization rate at the vertex i is given by the ratio of the active Rac1 concentration R ia to its mean ⟨ R i a ⟩ averaged over all vertices as V i p ≡ R ia ⟨ R i a ⟩ V 0 p , where V 0 p is the reference polymerization speed . The retrograde actin flow speed V ir is promoted by the net resistance force against protrusion F ip due to the cell membrane elasticity and myosin contractions ( Fig . 1B , C ) and impeded by an elastic restoring force F ic due to the formation of molecular bonds by proteins such as integrins , talin , and vinculin between F - actin and 105 ECM . We thus propose a phenomenological relation V ir = V 0 (cid:18) 1 − F iam N i m f m (cid:19) , F iam ≡ F ic − F ip , ( 2 ) where V 0 is the unloaded myosin motor speed , N im is the number of active myosin motors , and f m is the 5 force that stalls the activity of one myosin motor . Due to the increased iteration requirements for calculating V ir when reaching its minimum during loading - unloading focal adhesion cycles , we enforce the condition 110 V r = max ( V r , 0 ) to ensure a non - negative retrograde velocity when convergence is not attained within a limited number of iterations ( see Sec . S1 and Fig . S1 ) . We have demonstrated that this condition does not affect the predictive accuracy of our whole - cell model ( see Sec . S1 and Fig . S2 ) . RhoA is known to induce myosin motor activation , leading to stress fiber formation and contractility [ 43 , 44 ] . Therefore , we assume that the myosin motor number is controlled by the active RhoA concentration ρ ia and its mean ⟨ ρ ia ⟩ averaged 115 over all vertices as N im ( t ) ≡ ρ ia ⟨ ρ ia ⟩ N 0 m , where N 0 m is the reference myosin motor number . Note that this assumption guarantees the constancy of the total motor number in the cell , in accordance with the conser - vation of mass [ 16 , 26 ] . In Eq . 2 , the elastic restoring force F ic is determined from the FA dynamics with adhesion reinforcement , which is triggered by the stiffness of the viscoelastic substrate . On the other hand , the protrusion force F ip is set by the local force balance at each vertex in the presence of the nonlinear strain 120 stiffening of the cytoskeleton . To calculate these two force strengths , we detail each of those processes next . 2 . 1 . 1 Focal adhesion dynamics with adhesion reinforcement To account for the adhesion reinforcement due to talin unfolding , we extend the augmented motor - clutch model for FA dynamics introduced in Refs . [ 21 , 23 ] in order to calculate the clutch force F ic at each vertex . 125 By denoting average displacements of all bounded clutches at the filament end by x ir ( t ) and the displacement of the substrate by x isub , the engaged clutch is represented by a Hookean spring with tension f ic = K c ( x ir − x isub ) ( K c : spring stiffness ) [ 45 , 46 ] . At any instant t , the unbounded clutches must associate with a rate k i on . For the talin - low cells , a constant association rate k 0 on is typically assumed , corresponding to a constant clutch binding timescale τ 0 on ≡ 1 / k 0 on [ 17 , 23 , 28 ] . We introduce the adhesion reinforcement by assuming 130 that , when the time - averaged clutch force (cid:10) f ia (cid:11) τ l ≡ (cid:82) τ l 0 ˜ f ic d ˜ t / τ l ( τ l : variable focal adhesion lifetime ) is above a threshold force f cr , the clutch binding rate will increase per [ 21 , 23 ] , k ion = k 0 on (cid:18) 1 + e ζ ( ⟨ f ia ⟩ τl − f cr ) (cid:19) , ( 3 ) where ζ is a characteristic inverse force scale . Note that (cid:10) f ia (cid:11) τ l is determined by solving an isolated motor - clutch system separately ( Eqs . 2 - 6 , see inset in Fig . S4 and Sec . S2 ) , considering the updated protrusion force 135 6 F ip and the updated number of clutches N ic and motors N im at vertex i . The clutch force ˜ f ic and the time ˜ t are variables in isolated motor - clutch modeling , distinct from the variables in our whole cell modeling . Due to the time dependence of F ip , N ic , and N im , the variable (cid:10) f ia (cid:11) τ l at every vertex must be updated at every N time steps . Our simulations have demonstrated that using N = 4000 time steps provides accurate predictions on cell migration speeds on stiff substrates , comparable to results obtained from more frequent 140 updates of (cid:10) f ia (cid:11) τ l ( see Fig . S5 ) , while keeping computational costs reasonable . Once formed , the molecular clutches must unbind at a dissociation rate k ioff that depends on the clutch tension f ic . To that end , we use the functional form k ioff ≡ k r 0 exp (cid:0) f ic / f r 0 (cid:1) + k c 0 exp (cid:0) − f ic / f c 0 (cid:1) . Here , k r 0 and k c 0 denote the unloaded off - rate and the unloaded catch - rate , respectively , f r 0 is the characteristic rupture force , and f c 0 is the characteristic catch force . It follows that the fraction of the engaged clutches 145 ( 0 ≤ P i ( t ) ≤ 1 ) is governed by the mean - field rate equation [ 23 , 45 , 46 ] , dP i dt = k ion (cid:0) 1 − P i (cid:1) − k ioff P i . ( 4 ) Denoting the number of available clutches as N ic , the total clutch force at the vertex i is then given by F ic = P i N ic f ic . Here we incorporate the critical role of the Rac1 proteins in focal complex assembly by relating N ic to the local Rac1 concentration , i . e . , N ic ( t ) ≡ R ia ⟨ R ia ⟩ N 0 c , where N 0 c denotes the reference clutch 150 number [ 47 – 49 ] . This assumption implies that the total count of clutches (cid:80) Ni = 1 N ic remains constant at any given moment , thereby adhering to the conservation of mass [ 16 , 26 ] . The mechanical equilibrium condition at the cell - substrate interface demands that the total force sustained by the engaged clutches must be balanced by the substrate deformation , leading to F isub = F ic = P i N ic K c (cid:0) x ir − x isub (cid:1) . ( 5 ) 155 In Eq . 5 , the substrate displacement x isub is an unknown to be determined from a constitutive model for the substrate viscoelasticity , which we focus on next . 7 2 . 1 . 2 Constitutive model for substrate viscoelasticity Our previous implementation utilized the classical Kelvin - Voigt model for the substrate relaxation dynam - 160 ics [ 28 ] . However , since the Kelvin - Voigt model predicts a very rigid nonphysical behavior when t < τ r ( τ r : substrate relaxation timescale ) [ 50 ] , it can result in a premature adhesion reinforcement . Compara - tively , the standard linear solid ( SLS ) model allows for a better physical modeling by including a Maxwell arm ( Fig . 1 ) [ 51 ] . It has also been demonstrated that the SLS model can capture the prominent relaxation timescale of the viscoelastic substrates fabricated by combining covalent and supramolecular crosslinking 165 [ 23 ] . The SLS model expresses the constitutive relationship between x isub and the substrate force F isub as ( Fig . 1 C ) ( K e + K a ) γ ˙ x isub + K a K e x i sub = K a F isub + γ ˙ F i sub , ( 6 ) where K e is the elastic stiffness at t → ∞ , γ is the substrate viscosity , and K a is the additional stiffness that governs the substrate relaxation with a timescale τ r ≡ γ / K a . A stress relaxation test from a constant strain 170 yields the instantaneous and long - term stiffness of the substrate as K t → 0 = K e + K a and K t →∞ = K e , respectively . The instantaneous stiffness K t → 0 characterizes the initial elastic response of the substrate when the viscous deformation and stress relaxation have not yet taken place in the limit t → 0 . Thus , cells with a very short focal adhesion lifetime ( τ l < τ r ) can only sense the instantaneous stiffness . In contrast , the long - term stiffness K t →∞ refers to the residual substrate stiffness after the viscous stresses have relaxed . 175 2 . 1 . 3 Cytoskeletal stiffening The passively deforming cell cytoskeleton , which consists of microtubules and intermediate filaments , is represented by multiple springs in our model ( Fig . 1 D ) . Here we will assume that these cytoskeletal “springs” undergo strain - stiffening during large spreading events and thus exhibit nonlinear elasticity . This 180 assumption is backed by the experiments performed , e . g . , on NIH - 3T3 fibroblasts that reveal a strong cor - relation between the cell rigidity and cell area during large spreading events [ 8 ] . Assuming this behavior is mechanically driven and thus must be generic across animal cells , we propose a phenomenological equation for the cytoskeletal stiffness K cs in terms of the cell area A : Denoting the position vector of the cell nucleus by x nuc and defining the length of a cytoskeletal spring as r i ≡ | ( x nuc − x i ) | , the cytoskeletal restoring 185 8 force in our model is governed by the differential equation dF ics dr i = K cs ( A ) = K bcs + ∆ K cs e βA , ( 7 ) where K bcs denotes the baseline stiffness . The term ∆ K cs e βA is introduced to describe the exponential hyperelastic behavior [ 52 , 53 ] , with the values of ∆ K cs and β obtained through linear regression of the experimental data in [ 8 ] ( Sec . S3 and Fig . S6 A ) . 190 2 . 1 . 4 Local mechanical equilibrium We enforce local force balance at each vertex to determine the radial protrusion force F ip and the polar spreading speed V is , τ . The cell membrane possesses a notable mechanical rigidity that enables it to endure a variety of stresses , which is vital for maintaining the integrity of cell structures [ 41 , 54 – 56 ] . We model 195 it as a closed loop of Hookean springs with stiffness K m between neighboring vertices . The tensile forces acting on the i th vertex can be expressed as F im , ± = K m ( l i ± − l 0 ) , where l i + and l i − are the distance vectors between vertex i and its two neighbors , and l 0 is the initial distance between two adjacent vertices . The drag force on vertex i , resulting from hydraulic resistance in the extracellular medium , can be expressed as F iη = η im l i V is , where l i ≡ ( | l i + | + | l i − | ) / 2 defines the average membrane length about the i th vertex . The 200 drag coefficient η im is proportional to the fluid viscosity but inversely proportional to the matrix permeability ( see Sec . S4 for details ) [ 57 – 60 ] . In addition to the membrane forces , each vertex experiences a protrusion force F ip and a cytoskeletal radial force F ics . Thus , the net force balance at each vertex in the radial direction ˆn i and the polar direction ˆ τ i is given by F ip − F ics + (cid:0) F im , + + F im , − (cid:1) · ˆn i − η m l i V is , n = 0 , ( 8a ) 205 (cid:0) F im , + + F im , − (cid:1) · ˆ τ i − η m l i V is , τ = 0 . ( 8b ) Eq . 8a and 8b yield F ip and V is , τ , respectively . Altogether , Eq . 1 – 8b fully determine the vertex spreading velocities V is when the nucleus displacement x nuc and the dynamical GTPase concentrations at each vertex are computed at the cellular scale . 210 9 2 . 2 Equations of motion at cellular scale Next , we explain the global mechanical equilibrium that governs the nucleus motion and the intracellular Rho - GTPase dynamics , which directly influence the aforementioned subcellular processes . 2 . 2 . 1 Viscous drag on deformed nucleus 215 Our model quantifies cell translocation by the net translation of the cell nucleus , which balances the forces between the cytoskeletal microtubules and intermediate filament bundles . At the cell periphery , these cy - toskeletal complexes are linked to the F - actin at the FA sites , transmitting the net traction force from the extracellular matrix ( F i sub ) and the protrusion force from the cell boundary ( F ip ) to the cell nucleus ( Fig . 1 ) . This tight linkage to the rest of the cell can deform the nucleus when the cell flattens under large spreading 220 on stiff substrates [ 29 ] . To balance these peripheral and cytoskeletal forces , the nucleus undergoes viscous drag within the cytoplasm while it deforms under cell flattening . The viscous drag force on a particle is commonly described by the product of a drag coefficient , a characteristic particle size , and the velocity of the particle relative to the surrounding medium . Although the cytoplasm as the surrounding medium may undergo convective flows due to the intracellular biomolecular and organelle dynamics , its velocity around 225 the nucleus can point in any direction at a certain time instant , either facilitating or opposing the movement of the nucleus at that instant . Thus , over extended periods of time , the contribution of the cytoplasmic flow to the motion of the nucleus can be neglected , and we treat the cytoplasm as a stationary viscous medium for the calculation of the nucleus velocity . In the case of a deformed nucleus with irregularities , we incorporate a shape factor denoted as f shape into the analysis [ 61 ] . This leads to the following expression for the drag 230 force : F ηnuc = − f shape L nuc η cp ˙ x nuc , ( 9 ) where η cp represents the viscosity of the cytoplasm and L nuc is the characteristic particle size . For simplicity , we take L nuc ≡ 6 πr 0 nuc corresponding to Stokes’ flow as a first - order approximation to the cytoplasmic domain within finite cell height ( r 0 nuc : the initial radius of the nucleus ) . The shape factor f shape quantifies 235 the deviation of the nucleus from a perfect sphere with f shape = 1 . The Corey shape function can be used 10 to determine f shape based on the nucleus’s three principal lengths ( Fig . 1 E ) [ 61 , 62 ] , f shape = (cid:18) l max l med l 2 min (cid:19) α , ( 10 ) where the exponent α = 0 . 09 was obtained by fitting the experimental drag coefficient of non - spherical particles under Stokes flow [ 61 ] . For the deformed nucleus , the aspect ratio defined by the longest and the 240 shortest dimensions can be related to the cell spreading area by δ ≡ l max l min = χA + 1 , where the exponent χ = 0 . 0024 is obtained by fitting the experimental cell shape data in Ref . [ 63 ] ( Fig . S6 B ) . The intermediate dimension l med corresponds to the length of the minor axis of the nucleus on the x − y plane , and it was found to have a constant ratio to the length of the major axis in experiments ( l med = 0 . 8 l max ) [ 29 ] . Consequently , the nucleus shape factor can be simply related to the cell spreading area A by , 245 f shape = 0 . 98 ( χA + 1 ) 2 α . ( 11 ) Experiments have demonstrated that the cytoplasm viscosity , like the strain stiffening , is strongly corre - lated with the cell spreading area [ 31 , 32 ] . These experiments also indicate that the cell viscosity and cell stiffness exhibit the same trend with increasing substrate stiffness . Therefore , we assume an area - dependent cytoplasm viscosity ( similar to that in Eq . 7 ) as 250 η cp ( A ) = η 0 cp + ∆ η cp e βA , ( 12 ) where η 0 cp is the cytoplasm viscosity on soft substrates [ 64 ] and ∆ η cp controls the rate of viscosity increase with the cell spreading area A . At the frame of the nucleus , the condition for the mechanical equilibrium between Eq . 9 , the cytoskeletal and the subcellular forces 255 N (cid:88) i = 1 (cid:0) F isub + F ics − F ip (cid:1) ˆn i − F ηnuc = 0 ( 13 ) yields the nucleus migration velocity , ˙ x nuc , equivalent to the cell velocity in our model . 11 2 . 2 . 2 Reaction - diffusion dynamics of GTPase concentrations As with our previous work [ 28 ] , here we adopt the biochemical reaction - diffusion equations introduced in 260 [ 65 , 66 ] to describe the dynamics of active and inactive GTPases . Since the active forms of the GTPases are predominantly associated with the cell membrane , which also serves as a major site for the conver - sion between active and inactive forms , we track the volume fractions of the signaling proteins in three forms [ 67 , 68 ] : the active membrane - bound form ( G ia ( t ) ≡ { R ia ( t ) , ρ ia ( t ) } ) , the inactive membrane - bound form ( G iin ( t ) ≡ { R iin ( t ) , ρ iin ( t ) } ) , and the inactive cytosolic form ( G cp ( t ) ≡ { R cp ( t ) , ρ cp ( t ) } ) . Given 265 the rapid diffusion of inactive proteins in the cytosol , we assume G cp ( t ) remains uniformly distributed in the cytosol at all times . Both active and inactive membrane - bound forms diffuse with a diffusion constant D across the vertices . The corresponding diffusive fluxes are given by the Fick’s law in a finite difference formulation as J iy ≡ − D (cid:32) G i + 1 y / l i + 1 − G iy / l i | l i + | (cid:33) . ( 14 ) 270 Eq . 14 takes into account the effect of the deformed cell shape on the diffusive flux by updating the ver - tex coordinates at each time step . Different forms of the proteins on a vertex are interconvertible with the inactive - to - active rates A iG , active - to - inactive rates I iG , and inactive - to - cytosolic association and disassoci - ation rates M + G , M − G ( Fig . 1 D ) . Altogether , the reaction - diffusion kinetics is governed by   ˙ G ia = A iG G iin − I iG G ia + (cid:0) J i − 1 a − J ia (cid:1) , ˙ G iin = − A iG G iin + I iG G ia + (cid:0) J i − 1 in − J iin (cid:1) + M + G G cp N − M − G G iin , ˙ G cp = − M + G G cp + N (cid:88) i = 1 M − G G iin . ( 15 ) 275 The total amounts of Rac1 and RhoA are constant due to the conservation law (cid:80) Ni = 1 ˙ G ia + (cid:80) Ni = 1 ˙ G iin + ˙ G cp = 0 . The active Rac1 and RhoA GTPase volume fractions R ia , ρ ia regulate the cell migration by controlling the actin polymerization speed V ip ( Eq . 1 ) , the number of myosin motors N im ( Eq . 2 ) , and the clutch number N ic at each FA site ( Eq . 5 ) . Different from Refs . [ 65 , 66 ] , the rate terms A iG in our formulation account for the reverse coupling from the cell deformation to the signaling pathways in addition to the mutual inhibition 280 of the Rac1 and RhoA ( Sec . A1 ) . Since the filopodial protrusions of a mesenchymal cell grow and shrink at timescales comparable to the migration times , this chemo - mechanical feedback prevents the Rac1 and RhoA 12 dynamics from reaching a steady bistable polarized state . Instead , when the transient chemical polarity ceases , our simulation algorithm reinstates the polarization stochastically to sustain the random migration patterns in many mesenchymal phenotypes [ 26 , 27 ] . 285 2 . 3 Simulation procedure We represent the initial vertex configuration of the cell as a regular 16 - sided polygon due to its decent convergence properties [ 28 ] . All initial forces , velocities , displacements , and substrate deformations are set to zero . Since chemical signaling drives cell polarization followed by directional locomotion on uniform substrates [ 28 ] , a nonuniform initial distribution of the active Rac1 protein volume fraction R ai is enforced 290 with a higher value at the cell front . Likewise , a polarized initial distribution of the active RhoA protein volume fractions ρ ai is taken with accumulation at the cell rear ( manual polar symmetry breaking ) . In contrast , the initial conditions for R iin , ρ iin are uniform at time t = 0 , and the cytoplasmic form R cp , ρ cp can be determined from the total volume fraction conservation ( Fig . S9 ) . For directed migration on nonuniform substrates , uniform initial signaling distributions must be assumed since the polarity will be set by the 295 gradients of the ECM stiffness or viscosity . Starting from these initial conditions , the vertex spreading and the nucleus velocities are calculated by solving Eq . 1 – 13 , and the Rho - GTPase volume fractions are updated by solving Eq . 14 , 15 , A1 , A2 by following the algorithm in Fig . S4 . When the cytoplasmic inactive Rac1 volume fraction R cp reaches a steady state , we reinitialize R ia and ρ ia stochastically to mimic the random nature of the protrusion formations in the mesenchymal cells . To incorporate the adhesion reinforcement 300 ( Eq . 3 ) , we fix ζ = 0 . 5 pN − 1 since it leads to a good agreement between the simulated spreading areas and the experimental data in Ref . [ 8 ] ( Fig . S10 ) . The parameters ∆ K cs = 2 . 8 pN / µm and β = 0 . 00185 ( Eq . 7 ) and χ = 2 . 4 × 10 − 3 ( Eq . 11 ) provide the best fit to the experimental data from Ref . [ 8 ] and are kept constant in all simulations ( Fig . S6 ) . All fixed simulation parameters are listed in Table S1 . We present the simulation results in dimensionless form by introducing a position scale L ≡ 2 πr 0 = 305 10 π µm , speed scale V 0 = 120 nm / s , migration timescale T ≡ L / V ≈ 260 s , and force scale F 0 ≡ N 0 m f m = 200 pN . For each simulation , we run M > 10 6 time steps with a time step of approximately ∆ t = 1 . 5 × 10 − 3 s ( ∆ t ≈ 5 . 7 × 10 − 6 in dimensionless units ) , corresponding to the migration dynamics over at least an hour in real units . The spreading area A is calculated as the average cell area over the last 10 6 time steps in a simulation . We define the migration speed V as the nucleus trajectory length X ≡ 310 | x nuc ( M ∆ t ) − x nuc ( 0 ) | divided by the total time t total ≡ M ∆ t , i . e . , V ≡ X / t total . The ranges of the 13 Table 1 : Residual substrate stiffness K e , additional stiffness K a , and viscosity γ ranges in simulations . Parameter Real units Dimensionless units K e 0 . 1 - 100 pN / nm [ 17 , 23 , 46 ] 5 π − 5000 π K a 0 . 1 − 20 pN / nm 20 π − 4000 π γ 0 . 01 − 100 . 0 pN · s / nm [ 23 ] 0 . 06 − 60 Table 2 : Characteristic scales for spreading and migration dynamics . For a viscoelastic substrate , K a is the additional stiffness , and γ is the viscosity in the SLS model . Additionally , N 0 m is the reference myosin motor number , V 0 is the unloaded myosin motor speed , f m is the force that stalls the activity of one myosin motor , and k 0 on denotes the reference clutch binding rate . The scales denoted by ∗ are valid for substrates with a stiffness lower than K 0 . Quantity clutch binding timescale ∗ clutch lifetime ∗ threshold stiffness substrate relaxation timescale optimal viscosity Definition τ 0 on ≡ 1 k 0 on τ l ≡ N 0 m f m V 0 K e K 0 ≡ N 0 m f m k 0 on V 0 τ r ≡ γK a γ 0 ≡ K a k 0 on Value 1 / 3 s 1 / 3 − 50 / 3 s ≈ 5 . 0 pN / nm 10 − 2 − 10 2 s ≤ 5 / 3 pN · s / nm ECM material parameters used in the simulations are listed in Table 1 . For each set of the ECM parameters , we run n simulations to compute the sample mean spreading area , A , and the mean migration speed , V . The effects of the ECM viscoelasticity on the spreading area , migration speed , and migration direction are validated by the experimental data taken from Refs . [ 6 , 16 , 27 ] . 315 3 Results 3 . 1 Simulations reproduce experimental cell spreading and migration speed dependence on substrate stiffness With increasing stiffness K e on an elastic substrate ( γ = 0 , K a = 0 ) , the cell spreading area increases monotonically , in agreement with the experiments on the adhesion - reinforced U373 - MG human glioma 320 cell spreading on polyacrylamide hydrogels ( Fig . 2 A ) [ 6 ] . This can be understood by inspecting the FA dynamics at the subcellular scale : According to Eq . 2 , 5 , the cell spreading speed at a vertex V is , n is set by the competition between the polymerization speed V ip and the actin retrograde flow speed V ir , which is counteracted by the stiffness - dependent focal traction force ( Sec . A2 ) F sub = N 0 m f m (cid:16) 1 − e − t / τ l (cid:17) , τ l ≡ N 0 m f m V 0 K e . ( 16 ) 325 14 B A C D E 8 0 F Figure 2 : Cell spreading area and migration speed on elastic substrates . ( A ) The dimensionless mean cell area A / L 2 ( full line ) as a function of the dimensionless substrate elastic stiffness K e / K 0 . For compar - ison , the dots and error bars are the experimental data from Ref . [ 6 ] [ 69 ] . ( B ) The average dimensionless substrate traction force versus K e / K 0 at vertex 0 ( cell front ) and vertex 8 ( cell rear ) . The red dash - doted line gives the upper bound of the substrate traction force on very stiff substrates . The calculation of the averaged substrate traction forces (cid:10) F isub (cid:11) t total from the full focal adhesion cycles is illustrated in Fig . S11 . ( C ) The dimensionless mean and standard deviations of the net traction force versus K e / K 0 . The calculation of the time - averaged net traction force is illustrated in Fig . S12 . ( D ) Cell - spreading induced nucleus viscous drag increase f shape η cp / η 0 cp versus K e / K 0 , which is calculated by using Eqs . 9 , 11 , 12 for the mean spreading area values in A . ( E ) The simulated dimensionless mean migration speed V / V 0 versus K e / K 0 ( full curve ) and the experimental data for the U373 - MG human glioma cells ( dots and error bars ) [ 6 ] . ( F ) The influ - ence of the shape factor f shape of the deformed nucleus and the area - dependent cytoplasm viscosity η cp on the migration speed ( Eq . 11 , 12 ) . The mean values or the standard deviations are calculated over n = 10 simulations at each data point in A , C , D , E , F . Eq . 16 is derived for an isolated motor clutch system where the engaged clutch fraction is assumed to be saturated on a compliant substrate ( P i ≈ 1 ; K e ≪ N 0 c K c ) . For sufficiently low K e where the adhesion reinforcement mechanism is not triggered ( see Eq . 3 ) , the traction force starts building up at an FA site after the molecular clutches form at a timescale τ 0 on ≡ 1 / k 0 on , and develops with a characteristic time τ l ( Eq . 16 ) . The comparison between the two timescales ( τ 0 on = τ l ) defines a threshold stiffness K 0 ≡ 330 N 0 m f m k 0 on / V 0 ≈ 5 pN / nm ( Table 2 ) . On soft substrates ( K e ≤ K 0 ) , since the force build - up time τ l is much longer than the clutch formation time τ on , the adhesion force mostly remains low , i . . e , F isub < N 0 m f m ( Eq . 16 ; Fig . 2 B ) . For a stiff substrate with K e > K 0 , the decrease in the force build - up time τ l must 15 cause a steep increase in the average force per bond ( ⟨ f a ⟩ τ l > f cr ) , triggering the adhesion reinforcement mechanism with an augmented binding rate k on ( Eq . 3 , Fig . S3 ) . The reinforced binding rate can even 335 saturate the bounded clutches on a very stiff substrate , i . e . , P i → 1 ( Fig . S3 F ) . Moreover , a higher ⟨ f a ⟩ τ l on stiff substrates lead to higher disassociation rates k off , which must balance the binding rate in Eq . 4 to reach a steady bound clutch fraction P i ∼ 1 . This condition yields an estimate for the instantaneous force per bond as f ic ∝ ζ ( ⟨ f a ⟩ τ l − f cr ) f r 0 ( Sec . A3 ) . This allows us to estimate an upper bound of the substrate traction force on a stiff substrate as F isub = N ic f ic ≈ 8 ζN ic > N 0 m f m , in agreement with the simulations 340 ( Fig . 2 B ) . This elevated traction at K e > K 0 across the cell is the main driving factor behind enhanced cell spreading . Furthermore , the Rho GTPase polarization leads to a higher traction force at the cell front than at the rear since the motor clutch number N ic is controlled by the Rac1 concentration ( Fig . 2 B ) . Due to the chemically induced polarization , the cell acquires a larger net traction force on stiff substrates than on soft ones ( Fig . 2 C ) . 345 The cell motility is governed by the competition between the net traction force and the viscous drag of the nucleus since the remaining forces are negligible in Eq . 13 ( Fig . S13 ) . Because large cell spreading on stiff substrates can deform the nucleus ( Fig . 2 D ) and alter the cytoplasmic viscosity ( Eq . 12 ) , the viscous drag force on the nucleus must increase , resisting the net traction force . Consequently , the migration efficiency decreases beyond the threshold stiffness K 0 , creating a non - monotonic stiffness - speed profile , which also 350 quantitatively reproduces the U373 - MG human glioma cell speed on polyacrylamide hydrogels ( Fig . 2 E ) [ 6 ] . To consider the effect of potential cytoplasmic flows to the nucleus motion , we made a first - order approximation by linking the drag force to the relative velocity between the nucleus and the cytoplasm . Fig . S8 demonstrates that this approximation do not substantially influence the efficiency of cell movement over long times , supporting the validity of Eq . 9 . In our simulations , ignoring the nucleus shape change and 355 assuming constant cytoplasmic viscosity recovers a monotonic relationship between the migration speed and substrate stiffness , which validates their role in the non - monotonic speed - stiffness relation ( Fig . 2 F ) . Furthermore , we have performed parametric studies to explore the relative impact of the nucleus shape change and the cytoplasmic viscosity increase on the non - monotonic speed - rigidity relationship ( Fig . S14 ) . We found that while both factors influence the migration speed on soft substrates , the effect of cytoplasmic 360 viscosity increase becomes more significant on stiff substrates , emphasizing its critical role in capturing the non - monotonic relationship . 16 3 . 2 Substrate viscosity affects cell spreading area and migration speed C B A E D F 20 Figure 3 : Effect of substrate viscosity on spreading area and migration speed . ( A ) Contour plot of the mean dimensionless cell area A / L 2 on viscoelastic substrates as a function of the additional stiffness K a and substrate viscosity γ ( K e = 0 . 1 pN / nm ) . The white line denotes the threshold stiffness K 0 . ( B ) A / L 2 and its standard deviation ( shaded area ) versus the ratio of the material relaxation timescale τ r ≡ γ / K a to the clutch binding timescale τ 0 on ≡ 1 / k 0 on on soft substrates . ( C ) For a fixed instantaneous stiffness K e + K a = 2 . 6 pN / nm , the simulated spreading area A and its standard deviation ( n > 50 ) and experimental data for HT - 1080 cells ( data from [ 27 ] ) . By fitting the stress - time data in the stress relaxation test , the viscosities of the fast , intermediate ( med ) , and slow relaxing substrates are found as γ fast = 1 pN · s / nm , γ med = 60 pN · s / nm , γ slow = 360 pN · s / nm ( Fig . S16 ) . ( D ) The dimensionless spreading area A / L 2 and its standard deviation as a function of γ for different K a > K 0 . Since the clutch binding timescale τ on depends on the adhesion reinforcement on stiff substrates , A / L 2 is plotted against the substrate viscosity γ . ( E ) The mean migration speed V and its standard deviation in the simulations ( n > 50 ) versus experiments of HT - 1080 cells ( data from [ 27 ] ) on fast - relaxing and slow - relaxing soft substrates , for which the material parameters are extracted from fitting the stress - time data ( Fig . S16 ) . ( F ) The dimensionless mean migration speed V / V 0 and its standard deviation as a function of γ for two additional stiffness values K a = 8 pN / nm and K a = 20 pN / nm . The contour plot in A contains 180 data points . The mean and standard deviations are calculated with n ≥ 5 simulations at each point in B , D , F . In C and E , statistical analyses were conducted using the t - test to compare simulation results with experimental data . Levels of statistical significance ( p ) are indicated as follows : ∗ ∗ ∗∗ : p < 0 . 0001 , and ∗ ∗ ∗ : p < 0 . 001 . We next discuss the effect of substrate viscosity on the cell area and migration speed on a substrate that is soft in the long time limit , K e = 0 . 1 pN / nm . When K e + K a < K 0 ( soft regime ) , the adhesion 365 reinforcement effect can be neglected even on viscous substrates . However , when K e + K a ≥ K 0 ( stiff regime ) , a large viscosity may trigger the adhesion reinforcement regime and alter the spreading behavior . 17 We discuss both regimes below . On substrates with a low instantaneous stiffness ( K e + K a < K 0 ) , the cell spreading area varies in a non - monotonic manner with increasing viscosity ( Fig . 3 A , B ) . This can be explained by examining the FA dynamics at the subcellular scale , similar to the cell spreading on elastic substrates . At an FA site without adhesion reinforcement , time averaging the traction force ( see Fig . S15 A , B ) over a clutch lifetime τ l leads to ( Sec . A2 ) (cid:10) F isub (cid:11) τ l ≈   N 0 m f m exp (cid:34) − τ l τ l + τ r ( 1 + K a K e ) (cid:35) , if τ r ≤ τ 0 on N 0 m f m exp ( − 1 ) , if τ r ≥ τ l , ( 17a ) ( 17b ) where the timescales τ l , τ 0 on , τ r are defined in Table . 2 . Eq . 17a indicates that the average traction force at an FA site must increase with increasing viscosity when τ r ≤ τ 0 on . At τ r > τ 0 on , since slower substrate 370 relaxation leads to the FA lifetime reduction when ( Fig . S15 C ) , the average traction force should exhibit a decreasing profile with a lower bound that is estimated in Eq . 17b . That way , Eq . 17 indicate the presence of a non - monotonic traction force - viscosity profile in an isolated motor - clutch system on soft substrates . Note that when τ 0 on < τ r < τ l , the average substrate force is not amenable to an analytical approximation . Still , given the biphasic profile suggested by Eq . 17 , it is plausible to assume that the average substrate 375 force reaches a maximum when τ r ≈ τ 0 on , equivalently at an optimal viscosity γ 0 ≡ K a τ 0 on ( Fig . S15 C ) , thereby maximizing the cell spreading area . To further validate our model , we simulated spreading areas of human fibrosarcoma cells HT - 1080 on viscoelastic substrates consisting of interpenetrating alginate net - works ( IPN ) [ 27 ] . The experimental material parameters of the substrates with different relaxation rates were obtained by data fitting to the stress relaxation tests in Ref . [ 27 ] ( Sec . S3 and Fig . S16 ) . Clearly , our 380 whole - cell model accurately replicates the experimentally observed spreading areas of the HT - 1080 cells on soft substrates with different stress relaxation rates ( Fig . 3 C ) , indicating that cell spreading is suppressed with increasing viscosity when τ r > τ 0 on . At a larger instantaneous substrate stiffness K e + K a ≥ K 0 , the cells only perceive the long - term stiffness K e and maintain small spreading areas at a low substrate viscosity γ ( Fig . 3 D ) . For higher γ , 385 the slowly relaxing substrate maintains the stiffness K e + K a ≥ K 0 at later times , sustaining the adhesion reinforcement regime and thus promoting cell spreading . Moreover , because the adhesion reinforcement effect becomes more pronounced on stiffer substrates , a larger additional stiffness , such as K a = 20 pN / nm further increases the cell spreading area at high γ ( Fig . 3 D ) . 18 As opposed to the spreading area that can be understood at the single FA level , the change in the cell 390 migration speed as a function of γ must be examined by virtue of the net traction force (cid:80) i F isub at the cellular scale . At an instantaneous substrate stiffness K a + K e < K 0 , where the adhesion reinforcement is not activated , the high viscosity of γ > γ 0 can result in a decrease of the FA lifetime and thus a lower traction force ( Sec . A2 and Fig . S15 D ) . Our simulations reveal that migration on fast relaxing substrates ( τ r ∼ τ 0 on ) is more efficient than on slow relaxing substrates ( τ r ≫ τ 0 on ) ( Fig . 3 E ) . This is in quantitative agreement 395 with the migration speeds of the MDA - MB - 231 human breast cancer adenocarcinoma cells on fast and slow relaxing IPN [ 27 ] . A more comprehensive parametric study demonstrates the presence of a biphasic speed - viscosity relation ( Fig . S17 A , B ) . The optimal viscosity corresponding to the maximum migration speed tends to be slightly higher than γ 0 ( for maximum cell spreading ) , primarily due to the prolonged FA lifetime at the front of the cell ( Sec . A2 ) . On substrates with high instantaneous stiffness ( K a + K e ≥ K 0 ) , 400 the net traction force increases with viscosity due to the adhesion reinforcement effect ( Fig . S17 C ) . Since cells have limited spreading areas due to the weak engagement of the adhesion reinforcement regime at K a = 8 pN / nm ( Fig . 3 D ) , the change in the nucleus drag force is marginal . Thus , we obtain a nearly monotonic increase in the migration speed with viscosity ( Fig . 3 F ) . However , with a very large additional stiffness of K a ≫ K 0 , strong adhesion reinforcement on the viscous substrate results in very large spreading 405 areas ( Fig . 3 D ) , which significantly increases the nucleus drag forces and in turn leads to a biphasic speed - viscosity profile ( Fig . 3 F ) . 3 . 3 Migration direction is set by stiffness or viscosity variation on nonuniform substrates Having elucidated the effect of substrate stiffness and viscosity on cell area and migration speed , we inves - tigate the sensitivity of cell migration to a stiffness gradient on elastic substrates or a viscosity gradient on 410 viscoelastic substrates . To eliminate the effect of chemical polarity on migration direction in the simulations , we specify the initial conditions of a chemical apolar cell by assigning a random distribution of the active Rac1 concentration R ia and setting the other membrane - bound Rho GTPase concentrations ρ ia , R iin , ρ iin constant ( Fig . S18 ) . Migrating cells exhibit limited migration speeds ( V < 50 µm / h ) , leading to a substan - tial amount of time required for simulating cell locomotion over long distances . Therefore , for the sake of 415 computational efficiency , we adopt a 200 µm × 300 µm domain at about a 1 : 10 scale of the experimen - tal platform Fig . 4 A ) . We compared our migration simulations of 83 individual cells on elastic gradient substrates to the experimental migration patterns of the MDA - MB - 231 cells on polyacrylamide hydrogels 19 A B 0 h 7 . 2 h A B 0 h > 7 . 2 h Figure 4 : Simulations reproduce cell durotaxis on elastic gradient substrates . ( A ) Trajectories of 30 simulated cells over > 7 . 2 hours in real units on an elastic substrate with a linear stiffness variation between K e = 0 . 5 − 22 pN / nm in the y − direction . ( B ) The percentage of the simulated cells out of n = 83 simulations on the bottom - , middle - , and top - third of the gradient substrate as a function of time , i . e . , at t = 0 h ( initial condition ) , t = 7 . 2 h , t > 12 h , which are compared to the distributions of the MDA - MB - 231 cells ( gray dashed lines ) that are seeded on polyacrylamide hydrogels with a stiffness gradient and observed for 72 hours [ 16 ] . with a stiffness gradient 0 . 5 − 22 . 0 kP a [ 16 ] . We record the migration trajectory of each simulated cell for 7 . 2 hours , which is 1 / 10 of the experimental observation time ( 72 h ) . Due to the difficulty in quanti - 420 fying the substrate gradient in the experiments , we assume a constant gradient ∇ K e ≈ 72 pN / µm 2 in the + y − direction in the simulations ; non - dimensionalization by the initial cell diameter 2 r 0 and the threshold stiffness K 0 yields the unitless gradient ˜ ∇ ˜ K e ≈ 0 . 14 < 1 . The simulated cell trajectories indicate that all cells with random locations at t = 0 move up the stiffness gradient regardless of their initial positions , i . e . , the cells undergo robust durotaxis ( Fig . 4 A ) . Also , the percentages of the simulated cells in three substrate 425 portions demonstrate the strong migration trend towards the stiffest region ( Fig . 4 B ) , in good agreement with the gradient sensitivity of the MDA - MB - 231 cells with talin - and vinculin - mediated FA formations [ 16 ] . We further confirm that almost all cells eventually migrate to the stiffest region after > 12 h ( Fig . 4 B ) . The robust durotaxis behavior is mainly due to the monotonic increase of the traction force as a function of the substrate stiffness at an FA site due to the adhesion reinforcement ( Fig . 2 B ) . In other words , the FA sites 430 attached to the stiffer regions generate a higher traction force than those attached to the softer regions on a nonuniform substrate , driving the cell up the stiffness gradient . We next sought to understand the impact of substrate stress relaxation on the directed migration of cells on soft substrates . In our simulations , the two stiffness values in the SLS model are set to be K a = 20 B Number of cells 0 h > 3 h 1 0 h > 3 h 0 h > 3 h A C D E F G ! ! " # > ! ! " $ ! ! " # < ! ! " $ 9 . ≈ 9 68 " 0 1 - . / ! ! " # > ! ! " $ ! ! " # < ! ! " $ 9 . ≈ 9 68 " 2 1 - . / = 459 > = 45 : = 459 < = 45 : E . ≈ E / 3 ' Figure 5 : Directed migration is regulated by viscosity gradient on soft substrates . Representative trajectories of 20 cells and angular displacements of ≈ 50 cells on a viscoelastic substrate ( K a = 0 . 1 pN / nm , K e = 2 . 9 pN / nm ) with ( A ) , ( B ) a linearly varying viscosity γ = 0 . 0 − 1 pN · s / nm , ( C ) , ( D ) γ = 1 . 0 − 20 pN · s / nm , and ( E ) , ( F ) a uniform viscosity γ = 10 pN · s / nm . ( G ) The simu - lated versus analytical traction forces ( averaged over τ l ) as a function of the ratio of the material relaxation timescale τ r ≡ γ / K a to the clutch binding timescale τ 0 on ≡ 1 / k 0 on ( Table 2 ) . The traction forces at the two opposite ends of a cell along the direction of the motion are labeled by F Ram or F Lam , respectively . 2 . 9 pN / nm and K e = 0 . 1 pN / nm . We assume a nonuniform viscosity γ < γ 0 ≈ 1 pN · s / nm with a 435 constant gradient ∇ γ = 12 . 5 pN · s / µm 2 in + x − direction , equivalent to ˜ ∇ ˜ γ ≈ 0 . 125 in the unitless form ( non - dimensionalized by γ 0 and 2 r 0 ) . For computational efficiency , we used a 80 µm × 40 µm domain , which still much larger than a migrating cell size in ± x − direction . The simulations demonstrate that cells migrate from the soft elastic region ( γ → 0 ) to the viscoelastic region , which is also evidenced by the biased angular displacement towards the + x − direction ( Fig . 5 A , B ) . The same trend was observed in human 440 mesenchymal stem cells that migrate towards regions with a larger relaxation modulus on a collagen - coated polyacrylamide gel . This behavior is referred to as viscotaxis [ 39 ] . Once the substrate viscosity surpasses the threshold ( γ > γ 0 ) , cells migrate against the viscosity gradient with the angular displacements biased toward faster relaxation regions , which can be referred to as “anti - viscotaxis” ( Fig . 5 C , D ) . As a control , the random cell trajectories and unbiased angular displacements were observed on a uniform viscoelastic 445 substrate ( Fig . 5 E , F ) . These findings suggest that a viscosity gradient draws the cells to a region with τ r ≈ τ 0 on . The underlying mechanism for the dependence of the migration direction on the viscosity gradient can be explained by inspecting the biphasic viscosity - traction force relationship at an FA site . On soft substrates with a relaxation timescale τ r < τ 0 on , an increasing viscosity contributes to an enhanced substrate traction force that counteracts retrograde actin flow . This leads to a substrate - induced polarity along the 450 21 gradient . In contrast , slower relaxing substrates ( τ r > τ 0 on ) lead to decreasing clutch lifetime ( Fig . S15 C ) and the reduced mean traction forces ( Eq . 17 ) . As a result , the edges of the cell attached to the faster relaxing substrate regions gain more traction , navigating the cell against the viscosity gradient ( Fig . 5 G ) . 4 Discussion Our multiscale theory involves a detailed description of the adhesion reinforcement regime at each FA site 455 and includes the cytoskeleton strain - stiffening effect , which quantitatively reproduces the large cell spread - ing areas on stiff substrates . Importantly , by incorporating the viscous drag force increase due to the nucleus shape change and nonlinear cytoplasmic viscosity as a function of the spreading area , we have reproduced the non - monotonic dependence of the migration speed on substrate stiffness . Our findings indicate that the interplay among larger spreading areas on stiff substrates , variable cytoplasmic viscosity , and nucleus 460 flattening can influence the drag forces in cell migration and give rise to the non - monotonic speed profile . Therefore , the mechanism underlying the non - monotonic speed - stiffness relation in this study is distinct from the biphasic speed - stiffness relation discussed in our previous work [ 28 ] . The biphasic speed profile in [ 28 ] is attributed to the biphasic dependence of the focal adhesion force on substrate stiffness in cells that lack an adhesion reinforcement . A limitation of our previous model was that it cannot reproduce the 465 monotonic increase of spreading area with stiffness . In contrast , our current model effectively reconciles both the observed monotonic spreading area - stiffness relationship and the non - monotonic speed - stiffness relationship , as reported in many experiments [ 5 – 7 ] . Another important addition in our current study com - pared to our previous model is the inclusion of the cytoskeletal strain - stiffening effect . This effect plays a crucial role in accurately quantifying both cell spreading and migration efficiency of cells with adhesion 470 reinforcement ( see Fig . S19 ) . Ignoring this effect could lead to a significant overestimation of the spreading area on stiff substrates , leading to a migration behavior that nearly comes to a halt . Our simulations on viscoelastic substrates also reveal the influence of substrate viscosity on cell mi - gration by tuning the engagement of the adhesion reinforcement regime . On a substrate with low instanta - neous stiffness ( K a + K e < K 0 ) where the adhesion reinforcement regime is absent , we have analytically 475 shown the presence of a biphasic traction force - viscosity relationship at an FA site , with the traction force maximized on fast - relaxing substrates ( τ r ≈ τ 0 on ) . The analytical relation helps us explain the simulation results , which quantitatively agree with the experiments . On substrates with a large instantaneous stiffness 22 ( K a + K e ≥ K 0 ) , the substrate viscosity can greatly enhance the cell spreading area due to the engagement of the adhesion reinforcement regime . Notably , although the net traction force also increases with viscosity , 480 we observe a biphasic speed - viscosity profile with a very large additional stiffness of K a ≫ K 0 . This is because high viscosity on a very stiff substrate triggers strong adhesion reinforcement , which induces a large cell spreading area , in turn raising the nucleus drag force that counteracts the net traction force . Finally , we have investigated the influence of substrate viscoelasticity on directed migration . Our model successfully captures the robust durotaxis behavior of the MDA - MB - 231 cells with talin - / vinculin - mediated 485 clutch reinforcement on elastic gradient substrates . These results complement our previous findings regard - ing the talin - low cells that operate without adhesion reinforcement and thus exhibit the co - occurrence of durotaxis and anti - durotaxis on gradient substrates . As a result , our investigations have successfully repli - cated the complete spectrum of directed migration behaviors displayed by MDA - MB - 231 cells reported in Ref . [ 16 ] . This underscores the pivotal influence of the adhesion reinforcement regime in governing cell 490 durotactic responses on gradient substrates . Furthermore , our simulated cells also exhibit both viscotaxis and anti - viscotaxis , with all cells migrating towards the fastest - relaxing substrate region where the trac - tion force at an FA site is maximum when τ r ≈ τ 0 on . This reveals the critical role of stress relaxation in modulating the migration direction . Our framework has inherent physical and mathematical limitations in that it is built by coupling cellu - 495 lar processes that are not yet fully understood . For instance , the model only takes into account the active regimes of the actin cytoskeleton at the sub - cellular level using the motor - clutch model . A rigorous mod - eling of the actin cytoskeleton could involve adopting the active gel theory , which characterizes dynamic structures formed by the interactions of actin filaments and associated proteins [ 70 – 72 ] . Moreover , the in - terplay between the cytoplasmic flow and the actin cytoskeleton plays a pivotal role in cellular function and 500 behavior [ 73 ] . Incorporating fluid mechanics into the active gel theory of the cytoskeleton can enrich our comprehension of the dynamic nature of cells and enable us to understand certain unresolved phenomena , such as the transition between amoeboid and mesenchymal migration [ 74 , 75 ] . These limitations notwithstanding , our theory provides a valuable tool to understand how the intricate interplay between cellular signaling and mechanics along with cell - ECM interactions regulates migration 505 on viscoelastic substrates . Hence , the theory paves the way for the development of novel experimental platforms for the manipulation of cell migration patterns . 23 Supporting Material . Supplementary text , 12 figures , and two tables are available in the appended PDF document . Author Contributions . W . S . : conceptualization , formal analysis , investigation , software , validation , visu - 510 alization , writing – original draft , review and editing ; C . N . K . : conceptualization , formal analysis , project administration , resources , validation , writing – original draft , review and editing . Declaration of Interests . The authors declare no competing interest . Acknowledgements . We thank the College of Science at Virginia Tech for financial support . Data availability . The source codes of the simulations can be downloaded at https : / / github . com / nadirkaplan / 515 adhesion - reinforced migration . Appendix A1 Rate coefficients in Rho GTPase reaction - diffusion model Definitions of rates A iG in Eq . 15 accommodate autoactivation and antagonistic effects as well as the feedback from the mechanical deformations of the cell membrane . The RhoA activation rate A iρ at the i th vertex is composed of three terms , A iρ = α ρ ρ ia 3 (cid:16) ρ 03 + ρ ia 3 (cid:17) + β ρ R 03 (cid:16) R 03 + R ia 3 (cid:17) + e −H ( − ∆ θ i − c 0 θ 0 ) ∆ θiθ 0 κ + b , ( A1 ) where R 0 and ρ 0 are reference levels of the active Rac1 and RhoA on the vertex , respectively . The first term takes into account positive feedback from the active RhoA itself . The magnitude of the autoactivation effect 520 is represented by α ρ [ 76 , 77 ] . The second term describes the mutual inhibition effect between Rac1 and RhoA with a rate β ρ [ 76 , 77 ] . The last term couples the active level of RhoA to the mechanical deformations of the cell at the i th vertex . H ( ) denotes the Heaviside step function . The initial angle at a cell vertex is labeled by θ 0 , and ∆ θ i ≡ θ i − θ 0 denotes the change in angle at the vertex ( Fig . 1 E ) . Here we assume that the active rate of RhoA increases when the vertex angle satisfies ∆ θ i < − c 0 θ 0 due to the cell polarization . 525 24 Similarly , Rac1 activation rate A iR at the i th vertex also consists of three terms , A iR = α R R ia 3 (cid:16) R 03 + R ia 3 (cid:17) + β R ρ 03 (cid:16) ρ 03 + ρ ia 3 (cid:17) + e H ( ∆ θ i − c 0 θ 0 ) ∆ θiθ 0 K + b . ( A2 ) We assume that the active rate of Rac1 soars once the increase of the vertex angle exceeds the threshold c 0 θ 0 due to the cell contraction . Coupling Rac1 and RhoA to the mechanical deformations enables recurrent polarization and the recovery of cell deformations . Specifically , an excessive increase in θ i at the retracting cell rear builds up R ia to increase actin polymerization and thus reverses the retraction at the end of each migration step . A large decrease in θ i at the protruding cell front boosts ρ a that increases actomyosin 530 contraction to resist further protrusion . A2 Analytical derivation of the soft substrate force and deformation We have derived an analytical expression for the substrate force F sub at a single FA site to explain the influence of viscosity on a soft substrate . The derivation focuses on isolated motor - clutch dynamics that can also be numerically solved by Eq . 2 – 6 ( Fig . S15 A ) . For a steady - state solution , we neglect the time - 535 dependence of the variables N c , N m , F p by setting N c = N 0 c , N m = N 0 m , F p = 0 , which are otherwise determined by the chemo - mechanical dynamics at the cellular scale . It is important to note that our goal is not to replicate the substrate force at each FA site of the proposed whole - cell model but to decipher the mechanism of the non - monotonic profile between the viscosity and substrate force on soft substrates . Such motor - clutch analyses that ignore the details of the global dynamics prove to be effective in understanding 540 the influence of matrix mechanics on traction forces [ 17 , 23 , 45 , 46 ] . To that end , the analytical derivations presented are aimed at mathematically demonstrating the effect of viscosity . The molecular clutches bind between the actin filaments and the substrate with a reference association rate k 0 on , or equivalently at a timescale τ 0 on ≡ 1 / k 0 on . At any instant , the number of the associated clutches is n c ≡ P N 0 c . The substrate force builds up at an FA site with the actin filaments moving toward the cell nu - cleus with the retrograde speed ( V r ≡ ˙ x r ) . The total restoring force of the bounded clutches is balanced by the substrate deformation . By first considering an elastic substrate , we have K e x sub = n c K c ( x r − x sub ) . Since n c ≫ 1 , it is easy to show that the clutch deformation ( x r − x sub ) is insignificant compared with the substrate deformation x sub , or x r ≈ x sub [ 45 ] . Therefore , we have the force - velocity relation in an 25 alternative form , ˙ x sub ≈ V 0 (cid:18) 1 − F sub N 0 m f m (cid:19) . ( A3 ) On an elastic substrate , Eq . A3 only contains one unknown x sub and can be solved with the initial condition x sub | t = 0 = 0 , x sub = N 0 m f m K e (cid:16) 1 − e − t / τ l (cid:17) . ( A4 ) The substrate force is thus given by , F sub = N 0 m f m (cid:16) 1 − e − t / τ l (cid:17) . ( A5 ) The timescale τ l = N 0 m f m V 0 K e sets the substrate deformation rate and can approximate the lifetime of a binding – unbinding cycle in the FA dynamics [ 28 ] . By comparing the substrate deformation timescale τ l with the binding timescale τ 0 on , we defined a threshold stiffness K 0 = N m f m k 0 on V 0 ( Table . 2 ) . On soft substrates with 545 K e / K 0 < 1 , the clutch tension builds up slowly , and a long lifetime ( τ l > τ 0 on ) allows for the association of a large number of clutches , i . e . , n c ∼ N 0 c . On stiff substrates , the traction force increases rapidly , and a short lifetime ( τ l < τ 0 on ) limits the clutch association . Consequently , the force of a single engaged clutch increases significantly ( f > f cr in Eq . 3 ) , triggering adhesion reinforcement . By describing a viscoelastic substrate by the SLS model , the substrate force - displacement relation is 550 given by ( K e + K a ) γ ˙ x sub + K a K e x sub = K a F sub + γ ˙ F sub . ( A6 ) Since Eq . A3 still holds on viscoelastic substrates as long as the instantaneous stiffness is below the thresh - old , i . e . , K e + K a < K 0 , we substitute Eq . A3 into Eq . A6 to eliminate F sub , which gives τ r ¨ x sub + (cid:20) 1 + τ r τ l (cid:18) 1 + K a K e (cid:19)(cid:21) ˙ x sub + 1 τ l x sub = V 0 , ( A7 ) where τ r ≡ γ / K a defines the relaxation timescale . With the initial conditions x sub = 0 and F sub = 0 at t = 0 , the solution of the substrate force is obtained as , F sub = N 0 m f m (cid:18) 1 − ˙ x sub V 0 (cid:19) = N 0 m f m (cid:20) 1 + (cid:18) τ 2 − τ l τ 1 − τ 2 (cid:19) exp (cid:18) − t τ 1 (cid:19) + (cid:18) τ l − τ 1 τ 1 − τ 2 (cid:19) exp (cid:18) − t τ 2 (cid:19)(cid:21) , ( A8 ) 26 where τ 1 and τ 2 represent two characteristic times with τ 1 ≡ τ l + τ r (cid:16) 1 + K a K e (cid:17) , and τ 2 ≈ τ r τ l / τ 1 . For soft substrates with a low equilibrium stiffness K e ≪ K a ( i . e . , K a / K e ≫ 1 ) , we have τ 2 / τ l = 1 ( 1 + K a / K e ) + τ l / τ r ≪ 1 and τ 2 / τ 1 = 1 2 ( 1 + K a / K e ) + τ l / τ r + τ r / τ l ( 1 + K a / K e ) 2 ≪ 1 . We can thus simplify the equation as F sub = N 0 m f m   1 − τ l τ l + τ r (cid:16) 1 + K a K e (cid:17) exp (cid:18) − t τ 1 (cid:19) − τ r (cid:16) 1 + K a K e (cid:17) τ l + τ r (cid:16) 1 + K a K e (cid:17) exp (cid:18) − t τ 2 (cid:19)  . ( A9 ) The solutions have good agreement with the numerical results prior to the clutch rupturing at t ≈ τ l ( Fig . S15 B ) . Eq . A9 can be simplified if we focused on two extreme cases . For a substrate with a short relaxation time ( τ r ≤ τ 0 on ) , the long duration of the binding - unbinding cycles allows us to neglect the influence of short characteristic time τ 2 , which gives , F sub ≈ N 0 m f m (cid:20) 1 − τ l τ 1 exp (cid:18) − t τ 1 (cid:19)(cid:21) , when τ r ≤ τ 0 on . ( A10 ) In contrast , a very viscous substrate corresponds to a long relaxation timescale τ r ≥ τ l , making the contri - bution of the second term in the square bracket negligible , i . e . , F sub ≈ N 0 m f m (cid:20) 1 − exp (cid:18) − t τ 2 (cid:19)(cid:21) , when τ r ≥ τ l , ( A11 ) where τ 2 ≈ N 0 m f m K a + K e , same as the characteristic time on an elastic substrate ( Eq . A5 ) with the stiffness K a + K e . With these analytical solutions , we can calculate the average substrate force of binding / unbinding cycle by F sub = (cid:82) τl 0 F sub dt τ l . When τ r ≤ τ 0 on , the clutch system preserves the lifetime on an elastic substrate , i . e . , τ l ≈ N 0 m f m V 0 K e . In contrast , a long relaxation time means that the substrate deforms like an elastic substrate with a stiffness K a + K e . As a result , the shortened lifetime is comparable to the characteristic timescale τ 2 of the substrate deformation when τ r > τ l . Thus , the average substrate force in two limits is given by , ⟨ F sub ⟩ τ l ≈    N 0 m f m exp (cid:34) − τ l τ l + τ r ( 1 + K a K e ) (cid:35) , if τ r ≤ τ 0 on N 0 m f m exp ( − 1 ) , if τ r ≥ τ l . ( A12 ) 27 Although the average substrate traction force is difficult to solve for when τ 0 on < τ r ≤ τ l , our numerical 555 results demonstrate a fast decrease of the clutch lifetime when τ r > τ 0 on , leading to a quick drop of the average substrate force ( Fig . S15 C ) . Taken together , the average traction force must vary in a biphasic fashion with increasing viscosity and achieve a maximum when τ r ≈ τ 0 on ( Fig . S15 D ) . The above derivations approximate the dynamics of the traction force at a single FA site with N c ≈ N m . We next briefly explain the impact of viscosity on the net traction force , which is the traction difference 560 between the cell front and rear . On soft substrates with K a + K e < K 0 , the traction force decreases with increasing viscosity beyond γ > τ 0 on K a due to the reduced FA lifetime ( Fig . S15 C ) . Consequently , the net traction force must also vary biphasically with increasing viscosity . Due to the regulation of Rho GTPase molecules , the front of the cell has a higher number of clutches than motors ( N ic > N im ) , reducing the tension ( f ic ) shared by each bond and thus prolonging the clutch lifetime ( Fig . S15 E ) . The extended FA 565 lifetime preserves the high traction force at the front of the cell even when τ r > τ 0 on ( Fig . S15 F ) . This explains why the viscosity that maximizes the net traction force is slightly higher than the viscosity that produces the maximum traction force at the rear FA sites . A3 Estimation of individual clutch force under adhesion reinforcement On very stiff substrates , the rapid building of tension f ic on an individual clutches contributes to a large 570 average bond force far beyond the threshold force ( i . e . , ⟨ f a ⟩ τ l ≫ f cr ) , giving rise to very strong adhesion reinforcement effect . The association rate can thus be approximated by k ion ≈ k 0 on exp [ ζ ( ⟨ f a ⟩ τ l − f cr ) ] . For an engaged clutch with well developed tension f ic , the clutch disassociation rate is mainly dominated by effect of the slip bond , i . e . , k ioff ≈ k r 0 exp ( f ic / f r 0 ) . For the saturation of the bounded clutches on very stiff substrates , we must have dP i dt = 0 and k ion = 1 − P i P i k i off ≈ ck i off ( Eq . 4 ) , where c denotes a constant . 575 Therefore , we know that the bond force sustained by an individual clutch can be related to the adhesion reinforcement coefficient by , f ic / f r 0 ∝ ζ ( ⟨ f a ⟩ τ l − f cr ) . Typically , the maximum of ⟨ f a ⟩ τ l in our numerical analyses is around 10 − 12 pN . We can thus further obtain that f ic / f r 0 ∝ 8 ζ pN . References [ 1 ] Tony Yeung , Penelope C Georges , Lisa A Flanagan , Beatrice Marg , Miguelina Ortiz , Makoto Funaki , 580 Nastaran Zahir , Wenyu Ming , Valerie Weaver , and Paul A Janmey . “Effects of substrate stiffness on 28 cell morphology , cytoskeletal structure , and adhesion” . In : Cell motility and the cytoskeleton 60 . 1 ( 2005 ) , pp . 24 – 34 . [ 2 ] Bo Cheng , Min Lin , Guoyou Huang , Yuhui Li , Baohua Ji , Guy M Genin , Vikram S Deshpande , Tian Jian Lu , and Feng Xu . “Cellular mechanosensing of the biophysical microenvironment : a review 585 of mathematical models of biophysical regulation of cell responses” . In : Physics of life reviews 22 ( 2017 ) , pp . 88 – 119 . [ 3 ] Marileen Dogterom and Gijsje H Koenderink . “Actin – microtubule crosstalk in cell biology” . In : Na - ture Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 20 . 1 ( 2019 ) , pp . 38 – 54 . [ 4 ] Revathi Ananthakrishnan and Allen Ehrlicher . “The forces behind cell movement” . In : International 590 journal of biological sciences 3 . 5 ( 2007 ) , p . 303 . [ 5 ] Shelly R Peyton and Andrew J Putnam . “Extracellular matrix rigidity governs smooth muscle cell motility in a biphasic fashion” . In : Journal of cellular physiology 204 . 1 ( 2005 ) , pp . 198 – 209 . [ 6 ] Amit Pathak and Sanjay Kumar . “Independent regulation of tumor cell migration by matrix stiffness and confinement” . In : Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109 . 26 ( 2012 ) , pp . 10334 – 595 10339 . [ 7 ] Kimberly M Stroka and Helim Aranda - Espinoza . “Neutrophils display biphasic relationship between migration and substrate stiffness” . In : Cell motility and the cytoskeleton 66 . 6 ( 2009 ) , pp . 328 – 341 . [ 8 ] J´erˆome Solon , Ilya Levental , Kheya Sengupta , Penelope C Georges , and Paul A Janmey . “Fibroblast adaptation and stiffness matching to soft elastic substrates” . In : Biophysical journal 93 . 12 ( 2007 ) , 600 pp . 4453 – 4461 . [ 9 ] Shijie He and Baohua Ji . “Mechanics of cell mechanosensing in protrusion and retraction of lamel - lipodium” . In : ACS Biomaterials Science & Engineering 3 . 11 ( 2017 ) , pp . 2943 – 2953 . [ 10 ] Sanjay Kumar , Iva Z Maxwell , Alexander Heisterkamp , Thomas R Polte , Tanmay P Lele , Matthew Salanga , Eric Mazur , and Donald E Ingber . “Viscoelastic retraction of single living stress fibers and its 605 impact on cell shape , cytoskeletal organization , and extracellular matrix mechanics” . In : Biophysical journal 90 . 10 ( 2006 ) , pp . 3762 – 3773 . 29 [ 11 ] Alfonso Bolado - Carrancio , Oleksii S Rukhlenko , Elena Nikonova , Mikhail A Tsyganov , Anne Wheeler , Amaya Garcia - Munoz , Walter Kolch , Alex von Kriegsheim , and Boris N Kholodenko . “Periodic propagating waves coordinate RhoGTPase network dynamics at the leading and trailing edges during 610 cell migration” . In : Elife 9 ( 2020 ) , e58165 . [ 12 ] Jared L Johnson , Jon W Erickson , and Richard A Cerione . “New insights into how the Rho guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitor regulates the interaction of Cdc42 with membranes” . In : Journal of Biological Chemistry 284 . 35 ( 2009 ) , pp . 23860 – 23871 . [ 13 ] Brian D Slaughter , Jay R Unruh , Arupratan Das , Sarah E Smith , Boris Rubinstein , and Rong Li . 615 “Non - uniform membrane diffusion enables steady - state cell polarization via vesicular trafficking” . In : Nature communications 4 . 1 ( 2013 ) , p . 1380 . [ 14 ] Amit Pathak and Sanjay Kumar . “From molecular signal activation to locomotion : an integrated , multiscale analysis of cell motility on defined matrices” . In : PloS one 6 . 3 ( 2011 ) , e18423 . [ 15 ] Benjamin Yeoman , Gabriel Shatkin , Pranjali Beri , Afsheen Banisadr , Parag Katira , and Adam J En - 620 gler . “Adhesion strength and contractility enable metastatic cells to become adurotactic” . In : Cell reports 34 . 10 ( 2021 ) , p . 108816 . [ 16 ] Aleksi Isomursu , Keun - Young Park , Jay Hou , Bo Cheng , Mathilde Mathieu , Ghaidan A Shamsan , Benjamin Fuller , Jesse Kasim , M Mohsen Mahmoodi , Tian Jian Lu , Guy M Genin , Feng Xu , Min Lin , Mark D Distefano , Johanna Ivaska , and David J Odde . “Directed cell migration towards softer 625 environments” . In : Nature Materials ( 2022 ) , pp . 1 – 10 . [ 17 ] Clarence E Chan and David J Odde . “Traction dynamics of filopodia on compliant substrates” . In : Science 322 . 5908 ( 2008 ) , pp . 1687 – 1691 . [ 18 ] Benjamin L Bangasser , Steven S Rosenfeld , and David J Odde . “Determinants of maximal force trans - mission in a motor - clutch model of cell traction in a compliant microenvironment” . In : Biophysical 630 journal 105 . 3 ( 2013 ) , pp . 581 – 592 . [ 19 ] Joseph P Califano and Cynthia A Reinhart - King . “Substrate stiffness and cell area predict cellular traction stresses in single cells and cells in contact” . In : Cellular and molecular bioengineering 3 ( 2010 ) , pp . 68 – 75 . 30 [ 20 ] Saba Ghassemi , Giovanni Meacci , Shuaimin Liu , Alexander A Gondarenko , Anurag Mathur , Pere 635 Roca - Cusachs , Michael P Sheetz , and James Hone . “Cells test substrate rigidity by local contrac - tions on submicrometer pillars” . In : Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109 . 14 ( 2012 ) , pp . 5328 – 5333 . [ 21 ] Alberto Elosegui - Artola , Roger Oria , Yunfeng Chen , Anita Kosmalska , Carlos P´erez - Gonz´alez , Na - talia Castro , Cheng Zhu , Xavier Trepat , and Pere Roca - Cusachs . “Mechanical regulation of a molec - 640 ular clutch defines force transmission and transduction in response to matrix rigidity” . In : Nature cell biology 18 . 5 ( 2016 ) , pp . 540 – 548 . [ 22 ] Bo Cheng , Min Lin , Yuhui Li , Guoyou Huang , Hui Yang , Guy M Genin , Vikram S Deshpande , Tian Jian Lu , and Feng Xu . “An integrated stochastic model of matrix - stiffness - dependent filopodial dynamics” . In : Biophysical journal 111 . 9 ( 2016 ) , pp . 2051 – 2061 . 645 [ 23 ] Ze Gong , Spencer E Szczesny , Steven R Caliari , Elisabeth E Charrier , Ovijit Chaudhuri , Xuan Cao , Yuan Lin , Robert L Mauck , Paul A Janmey , Jason A Burdick , and Vivek B Shenoy . “Matching mate - rial and cellular timescales maximizes cell spreading on viscoelastic substrates” . In : Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115 . 12 ( 2018 ) , E2686 – E2695 . [ 24 ] Alberto Elosegui - Artola , Xavier Trepat , and Pere Roca - Cusachs . “Control of mechanotransduction 650 by molecular clutch dynamics” . In : Trends in Cell Biology 28 . 5 ( 2018 ) , pp . 356 – 367 . [ 25 ] Bahador Marzban , Jiming Kang , Ningwei Li , Yubing Sun , and Hongyan Yuan . “A contraction – reaction – diffusion model : Integrating biomechanics and biochemistry in cell migration” . In : Extreme Mechanics Letters 32 ( 2019 ) , p . 100566 . [ 26 ] Benjamin L Bangasser , Ghaidan A Shamsan , Clarence E Chan , Kwaku N Opoku , Erkan T¨uzel , Ben - 655 jamin W Schlichtmann , Jesse A Kasim , Benjamin J Fuller , Brannon R McCullough , Steven S Rosen - feld , and David J Odde . “Shifting the optimal stiffness for cell migration” . In : Nature Communications 8 . 1 ( 2017 ) , pp . 1 – 10 . [ 27 ] Kolade Adebowale , Ze Gong , Jay C Hou , Katrina M Wisdom , Damien Garbett , Hong - pyo Lee , Sungmin Nam , Tobias Meyer , David J Odde , Vivek B Shenoy , and Ovijit Chaudhuri . “Enhanced 660 substrate stress relaxation promotes filopodia - mediated cell migration” . In : Nature materials 20 . 9 ( 2021 ) , pp . 1290 – 1299 . 31 [ 28 ] Wenya Shu and C Nadir Kaplan . “A multiscale whole - cell theory for mechanosensitive migration on viscoelastic substrates” . In : Biophysical Journal 122 . 1 ( 2023 ) , pp . 114 – 129 . [ 29 ] David B Lovett , Nandini Shekhar , Jeffrey A Nickerson , Kyle J Roux , and Tanmay P Lele . “Modu - 665 lation of nuclear shape by substrate rigidity” . In : Cellular and molecular bioengineering 6 . 2 ( 2013 ) , pp . 230 – 238 . [ 30 ] Paul A Janmey , Daniel A Fletcher , and Cynthia A Reinhart - King . “Stiffness sensing by cells” . In : Physiological reviews 100 . 2 ( 2020 ) , pp . 695 – 724 . [ 31 ] Carmela Rianna and Manfred Radmacher . “Comparison of viscoelastic properties of cancer and nor - 670 mal thyroid cells on different stiffness substrates” . In : European Biophysics Journal 46 . 4 ( 2017 ) , pp . 309 – 324 . [ 32 ] Juan Carlos Gil - Redondo , Andreas Weber , Barbara Zbiral , Vivanco Maria dM , and Jos´e L Toca - Herrera . “Substrate stiffness modulates the viscoelastic properties of MCF - 7 cells” . In : Journal of the Mechanical Behavior of Biomedical Materials 125 ( 2022 ) , p . 104979 . 675 [ 33 ] Ovijit Chaudhuri , Justin Cooper - White , Paul A Janmey , David J Mooney , and Vivek B Shenoy . “Effects of extracellular matrix viscoelasticity on cellular behaviour” . In : Nature 584 . 7822 ( 2020 ) , pp . 535 – 546 . [ 34 ] Elisabeth E Charrier , Katarzyna Pogoda , Robin Li , Rebecca G Wells , and Paul A Janmey . “Elasticity - dependent response of malignant cells to viscous dissipation” . In : Biomechanics and Modeling in 680 Mechanobiology 20 . 1 ( 2021 ) , pp . 145 – 154 . [ 35 ] Ovijit Chaudhuri , Luo Gu , Max Darnell , Darinka Klumpers , Sidi A Bencherif , James C Weaver , Nathaniel Huebsch , and David J Mooney . “Substrate stress relaxation regulates cell spreading” . In : Nature communications 6 . 1 ( 2015 ) , pp . 1 – 7 . [ 36 ] Abdel - Rahman Hassan , Thomas Biel , and Taeyoon Kim . “Mechanical Model for Durotactic Cell 685 Migration” . In : ACS biomaterials science & engineering 5 . 8 ( 2019 ) , pp . 3954 – 3963 . [ 37 ] Brian J DuChez , Andrew D Doyle , Emilios K Dimitriadis , and Kenneth M Yamada . “Durotaxis by human cancer cells” . In : Biophysical journal 116 . 4 ( 2019 ) , pp . 670 – 683 . [ 38 ] Adam Shellard and Roberto Mayor . “All roads lead to directional cell migration” . In : Trends in cell biology 30 . 11 ( 2020 ) , pp . 852 – 868 . 690 32 [ 39 ] Pallavi Uday Shirke , Hiya Goswami , Vardhman Kumar , Darshan Shah , Sarayu Beri , Siddhartha Das , Jayesh Bellare , Satyajit Mayor , KV Venkatesh , Jyoti R Seth , and Abhijit Majumder . ““Viscotaxis” - directed migration of mesenchymal stem cells in response to loss modulus gradient” . In : Acta bioma - terialia 135 ( 2021 ) , pp . 356 – 367 . [ 40 ] Irina V Dokukina and Maria E Gracheva . “A model of fibroblast motility on substrates with different 695 rigidities” . In : Biophysical journal 98 . 12 ( 2010 ) , pp . 2794 – 2803 . [ 41 ] Amit Pathak . “Modeling and predictions of biphasic mechanosensitive cell migration altered by cell - intrinsic properties and matrix confinement” . In : Physical biology 15 . 6 ( 2018 ) , p . 065001 . [ 42 ] Peng - Cheng Chen , Xi - Qiao Feng , and Bo Li . “Unified multiscale theory of cellular mechanical adap - tations to substrate stiffness” . In : Biophysical Journal 121 . 18 ( 2022 ) , pp . 3474 – 3485 . 700 [ 43 ] Bharesh K Chauhan , Ming Lou , Yi Zheng , and Richard A Lang . “Balanced Rac1 and RhoA activ - ities regulate cell shape and drive invagination morphogenesis in epithelia” . In : Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108 . 45 ( 2011 ) , pp . 18289 – 18294 . [ 44 ] Oula El Atat , Amira Fakih , and Mirvat El - Sibai . “RHOG activates RAC1 through CDC42 leading to tube formation in vascular endothelial cells” . In : Cells 8 . 2 ( 2019 ) , p . 171 . 705 [ 45 ] Benjamin L Bangasser and David J Odde . “Master equation - based analysis of a motor - clutch model for cell traction force” . In : Cellular and molecular bioengineering 6 . 4 ( 2013 ) , pp . 449 – 459 . [ 46 ] Partho Sakha De and Rumi De . “Stick - slip dynamics of migrating cells on viscoelastic substrates” . In : Physical Review E 100 . 1 ( 2019 ) , p . 012409 . [ 47 ] Matteo Parri and Paola Chiarugi . “Rac and Rho GTPases in cancer cell motility control” . In : Cell 710 communication and signaling 8 . 1 ( 2010 ) , pp . 1 – 14 . [ 48 ] K Rottner , A Hall , and JV Small . “Interplay between Rac and Rho in the control of substrate contact dynamics” . In : Current Biology 9 . 12 ( 1999 ) , 640 – S1 . [ 49 ] Catherine D Nobes and Alan Hall . “Rho , rac , and cdc42 GTPases regulate the assembly of multi - molecular focal complexes associated with actin stress fibers , lamellipodia , and filopodia” . In : Cell 715 81 . 1 ( 1995 ) , pp . 53 – 62 . 33 [ 50 ] Will Zhang , Adela Capilnasiu , and David Nordsletten . “Comparative analysis of nonlinear viscoelas - tic models across common biomechanical experiments” . In : Journal of Elasticity 145 . 1 ( 2021 ) , pp . 117 – 152 . [ 51 ] Alessandra Bonfanti , Jonathan Louis Kaplan , Guillaume Charras , and Alexandre Kabla . “Fractional 720 viscoelastic models for power - law materials” . In : Soft Matter 16 . 26 ( 2020 ) , pp . 6002 – 6020 . [ 52 ] Hossein Darijani and Reza Naghdabadi . “Hyperelastic materials behavior modeling using consistent strain energy density functions” . In : Acta Mechanica 213 . 3 ( 2010 ) , pp . 235 – 254 . [ 53 ] K Narooei and M Arman . “Generalization of exponential based hyperelastic to hyper - viscoelastic model for investigation of mechanical behavior of rate dependent materials” . In : Journal of the me - 725 chanical behavior of biomedical materials 79 ( 2018 ) , pp . 104 – 113 . [ 54 ] Yuan Qin , Yuhui Li , Li - Yuan Zhang , and Guang - Kui Xu . “Stochastic fluctuation - induced cell polar - ization on elastic substrates : A cytoskeleton - based mechanical model” . In : Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 137 ( 2020 ) , p . 103872 . [ 55 ] Melda Tozluo˘glu , Alexander L Tournier , Robert P Jenkins , Steven Hooper , Paul A Bates , and Erik 730 Sahai . “Matrix geometry determines optimal cancer cell migration strategy and modulates response to interventions” . In : Nature cell biology 15 . 7 ( 2013 ) , pp . 751 – 762 . [ 56 ] Tommy Heck , Diego A Vargas , Bart Smeets , Herman Ramon , Paul Van Liedekerke , and Hans Van Oosterwyck . “The role of actin protrusion dynamics in cell migration through a degradable viscoelas - tic extracellular matrix : Insights from a computational model” . In : PLoS computational biology 16 . 1 735 ( 2020 ) , e1007250 . [ 57 ] Yizeng Li and Sean X Sun . “Transition from actin - driven to water - driven cell migration depends on external hydraulic resistance” . In : Biophysical journal 114 . 12 ( 2018 ) , pp . 2965 – 2973 . [ 58 ] Jordi Gonzalez - Molina , Xiaoli Zhang , Michela Borghesan , Joana Mendonc¸a da Silva , Maooz Awan , Barry Fuller , N´uria Gavara , and Clare Selden . “Extracellular fluid viscosity enhances liver cancer cell 740 mechanosensing and migration” . In : Biomaterials 177 ( 2018 ) , pp . 113 – 124 . [ 59 ] Nikolce Gjorevski and Celeste M Nelson . “Mapping of mechanical strains and stresses around quies - cent engineered three - dimensional epithelial tissues” . In : Biophysical journal 103 . 1 ( 2012 ) , pp . 152 – 162 . 34 [ 60 ] William J Polacheck , Joseph L Charest , and Roger D Kamm . “Interstitial flow influences direction of 745 tumor cell migration through competing mechanisms” . In : Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108 . 27 ( 2011 ) , pp . 11115 – 11120 . [ 61 ] E Loth . “Drag of non - spherical solid particles of regular and irregular shape” . In : Powder Technology 182 . 3 ( 2008 ) , pp . 342 – 353 . [ 62 ] Seyed Jamaleddin Mousavi and Mohamed Hamdy Doweidar . “Three - dimensional numerical model 750 of cell morphology during migration in multi - signaling substrates” . In : PloS one 10 . 3 ( 2015 ) , e0122094 . [ 63 ] Yuan Li , David Lovett , Qiao Zhang , Srujana Neelam , Ram Anirudh Kuchibhotla , Ruijun Zhu , Gregg G Gundersen , Tanmay P Lele , and Richard B Dickinson . “Moving cell boundaries drive nuclear shaping during cell spreading” . In : Biophysical journal 109 . 4 ( 2015 ) , pp . 670 – 686 . [ 64 ] K Wang , XH Sun , Y Zhang , T Zhang , Y Zheng , YC Wei , P Zhao , DY Chen , HA Wu , WH Wang , R 755 Long , JB Wang , and J Chen . “Characterization of cytoplasmic viscosity of hundreds of single tumour cells based on micropipette aspiration” . In : Royal Society Open Science 6 . 3 ( 2019 ) , p . 181707 . [ 65 ] Brian Merchant , Leah Edelstein - Keshet , and James J Feng . “A Rho - GTPase based model explains spontaneous collective migration of neural crest cell clusters” . In : Developmental biology 444 ( 2018 ) , S262 – S273 . 760 [ 66 ] Cole Zmurchok and William R Holmes . “Simple Rho GTPase dynamics generate a complex regula - tory landscape associated with cell shape” . In : Biophysical Journal 118 . 6 ( 2020 ) , pp . 1438 – 1454 . [ 67 ] C´eline DerMardirossian and Gary M Bokoch . “GDIs : central regulatory molecules in Rho GTPase activation” . In : Trends in cell biology 15 . 7 ( 2005 ) , pp . 356 – 363 . [ 68 ] Konstadinos Moissoglu and Martin Alexander Schwartz . “Spatial and temporal control of Rho GT - 765 Pase functions” . In : Cellular logistics 4 . 2 ( 2014 ) , e943618 . [ 69 ] We converted the the experimental substrate modulus E sub ( kP a ) to the stiffness K sub ( pN / nm ) by using the relation K sub ≈ 2 E sub R FA , where 2 R FA ≈ 1 . 0 µm approximates the diameter of the nearly circular FA region [ 78 , 79 ] . [ 70 ] Jacques Prost , Frank J¨ulicher , and Jean - Franc¸ois Joanny . “Active gel physics” . In : Nature physics 770 11 . 2 ( 2015 ) , pp . 111 – 117 . 35 [ 71 ] Shiladitya Banerjee , Margaret L Gardel , and Ulrich S Schwarz . “The actin cytoskeleton as an active adaptive material” . In : Annual review of condensed matter physics 11 ( 2020 ) , pp . 421 – 439 . [ 72 ] P S´aez and Chiara Venturini . “Positive , negative and controlled durotaxis” . In : Soft matter 19 . 16 ( 2023 ) , pp . 2993 – 3001 . 775 [ 73 ] Alex Mogilner and Angelika Manhart . “Intracellular fluid mechanics : Coupling cytoplasmic flow with active cytoskeletal gel” . In : Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics 50 ( 2018 ) , pp . 347 – 370 . [ 74 ] Yan - Jun Liu , Ma¨el Le Berre , Franziska Lautenschlaeger , Paolo Maiuri , Andrew Callan - Jones , M´elina Heuz´e , Tohru Takaki , Rapha¨el Voituriez , and Matthieu Piel . “Confinement and low adhesion induce fast amoeboid migration of slow mesenchymal cells” . In : Cell 160 . 4 ( 2015 ) , pp . 659 – 672 . 780 [ 75 ] Kenneth M Yamada and Michael Sixt . “Mechanisms of 3D cell migration” . In : Nature Reviews molec - ular cell biology 20 . 12 ( 2019 ) , pp . 738 – 752 . [ 76 ] William R Holmes and Leah Edelstein - Keshet . “Analysis of a minimal Rho - GTPase circuit regulating cell shape” . In : Physical Biology 13 . 4 ( 2016 ) , p . 046001 . [ 77 ] Cole Zmurchok , Dhananjay Bhaskar , and Leah Edelstein - Keshet . “Coupling mechanical tension and 785 GTPase signaling to generate cell and tissue dynamics” . In : Physical biology 15 . 4 ( 2018 ) , p . 046004 . [ 78 ] Utku Horzum , Berrin Ozdil , and Devrim Pesen - Okvur . “Step - by - step quantitative analysis of focal adhesions” . In : MethodsX 1 ( 2014 ) , pp . 56 – 59 . [ 79 ] Sam Walcott and Sean X Sun . “A mechanical model of actin stress fiber formation and substrate elasticity sensing in adherent cells” . In : Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107 . 17 790 ( 2010 ) , pp . 7757 – 7762 . 36