Conceptual Spaces and the Consequences of Category Spanning ⇤ Balázs Kovács University of Lugano Michael T . Hannan Stanford University October 22 , 2014 Abstract A general ﬁnding in economic and organizational sociology shows that objects that span categories lose appeal to audiences . This paper argues that the negative consequences of crossing boundaries are more severe when the categories spanned are distant and have high - contrast . Available empirical strategies do not incorporate information on the distances among categories . Here we introduce novel measures of distance in conceptual space and derive measures for typicality , category contrast , and categorical niche width . Using the proposed measurement approach , we test our theory using data on online reviews of books and restaurants . ⇤ We appreciate the helpful comments of Glenn Carroll , Amir Goldberg , Greta Hsu , Gaël Le Mens , Gia - como Negro , László Pólos , and Elizabeth Pontikes . We thank the University of Lugano , Stanford Graduate School of Business , the Stanford GSB Faculty Trust , and the John Osterweis and Barbara Ravizzi Faculty Fellowship at the Stanford GSB for generous ﬁnancial support for this project . 1 Introduction Recent research has reopened the classic sociological problem of how social categorization shapes social life ( Durkheim and Mauss 1969 [ 1903 ] ; Zuckerman 1999 ; Hsu 2006 ; Kovács and Hannan 2010 ; Koçak , Hannan , and Hsu 2014 ) . Much of this research works in the spirit of what Garﬁnkel ( 1968 ) called breaching experiments . It seeks to understand the role of categorical boundaries by examining what happens to actors who ignore them . In this context , ignoring boundaries means claiming membership in multiple categories or adopting feature values that cause audience members to assign multiple categories . The literatures in cognitive science on which we build examines mental representations and their mappings to objects in the world . Mental representations are generally called concepts , and the sets of objects to which a concept refers are called categories . Much sociological work has used the term category to refer to both the mental representation and its extension , its mapping to objects . Because this usage impedes analysis , we reserve the term category to its classic meaning . Sociological analysis treats concepts that have a social standing , some degree of consensus about meaning in an audience . In many situations of interest ( including the ones we study ) , the concepts refer to what can be considered broadly to be genres 1 Category - spanning objects have patterns of feature values that ﬁt more than one genre ( or other social concept ) and , sometimes , their producers claim membership in more than one genre at one time or over time in a sequence of a ﬃ liations . Sociological studies show that conceptual boundaries do prove consequential in diverse domains : combining genres generally generates some form of direct or indirect devaluation ( for reviews , see Hannan ( 2010 ) and Negro , Koçak , and Hsu ( 2010b ) ) . The line of research on boundary crossing has not reached its full potential because it has not yet considered the structure of conceptual spaces . In the interest of tractability , researchers have treated all pairs of social concepts alike , meaning that all kinds of spanning are expected to have the same consequences . This assumption lacks credulity . Indeed it 1 As explained above , concepts , categories and genres do not exactly have the same meaning ( see Goldberg , Hannan , Hsu , Kovács , Mens , Negro , Pólos , Pontikes , and Sharkey ( 2014a ) ) . However , both in the current literature and in everyday life these terms are used interchangeably because these terms usually go together . As being too pedantic about di ﬀ erentiating the usage of concepts , categories and genres would result in awkward prose , throughout the text we use these terms interchangeably unless we explicitly want to evoke a speciﬁc meaning , in which cases we note this . 1 is amazing that research that builds on it has managed to ﬁnd clear patterns of results . Perhaps this is testimony to the strength of the boundaries . Nonetheless , continued development of this lines of theory and research demands that this simplifying assumption be made problematic and that strategies of conceptualization and measurement be devised for addressing more credible accounts of conceptual structure . It builds models that take account of distances in conceptual space and proposes an empirical strategy for using commonly available data to estimate them . Before turning to these matters , we brieﬂy sketch the range of sociological applications for which our proposed models and methods have relevance . Sociological research has addressed the consequences of combining genres for diverse kinds of entities . For instance , research on individuals in markets ﬁnds that bridging lowers : the probability that ﬁlm actors will gain additional roles ( Zuckerman , Kim , Ukanwa , and Rittmann 2003 ) , the odds of winning a bid for contract work ( Leung 2014 ) , the productivity and earnings of researchers in linguistics and sociology ( Leahey 2007 ) , the odds of receiving funding in an online market for lending ( Leung and Sharkey 2014 ) and of completing a sale on eBay ( Hsu , Hannan , and Koçak 2009 ) . Research on organizations ﬁnds that mixing genres reduces : the probability that listed ﬁrms receive coverage from stock market analysts , which in turn diminishes valuations ( Zuckerman 1999 ) , ratings of feature ﬁlms by critics and general audiences and also box - o ﬃ ce revenues ( Hsu et al . 2009 ) , ratings of restaurants by critics ( Rao , Monin , and Durand 2005 ) and by the general audience ( Kovács and Hannan 2010 ) , critical evaluations and prices of elite Italian wines ( Negro , Hannan , and Rao 2011 ; Negro and Leung 2013 ) , sales of software products ( Pontikes 2012a ) , 2 and the ability of terrorist organizations to generate lethal actions ( Olzak and Roy 2013 ) . In addition , work underway explores the implications of spanning for the success of social movements and of terrorist organizations as well as for the technical impact of discoveries ( patents ) and patent classes ( Wezel , Kovács , and Carnabuci 2014 ) . Finally , some research examines the e ﬀ ects of spanning for the genres themselves . Per - vasive spanning weakens boundaries , which lowers the penalties for spanning ( Rao et al . 2005 ) . But it also reduces the value of membership in the sense that appeal to the audience 2 Two studies ﬁnd that investors are much less sensitive to genre combination than members of general audiences ( Pontikes 2012b ; Smith 2011 ) . 2 falls even for those who do not stray over the boundary ( Negro , Hannan , and Rao 2010a , 2011 ) . Although this style of research has produced useful new knowledge , it could yield sharper and deeper insight by changing how we assess multiple - category memberships . Understand - ing the consequences of moving across boundaries requires analysts to incorporate informa - tion about the distances among concepts and categories and the strength of the boundaries , which has not yet been done . Audience members regard domains such as cuisine , ﬁlms , software , and scholarly disciplines as populated by genres arrayed over a ( largely shared ) conceptual space with similar ones arrayed close to one another and dissimilar ones standing at large distances . Genres also di ﬀ er considerably in the clarity of their boundaries , the de - gree to which their memberships stand out in the domain . Knowledge of the typography of such a socio - cultural space provides essential information about the audience’s conceptual structure ( Pontikes and Hannan 2014 ) . The ﬁrst part of the paper argues that objects that bridge distant concepts have two problems . They are more di ﬃ cult to interpret than those combining neighboring ones . 3 Second , it is less likely that the objects meet the expectations of distant concepts In designing a new research strategy , we seek to represent conceptual distances in a way that plausibly maps to what audiences see . We build on research in social cognition and computational linguistics to propose a simple co - occurrence approach for building a repre - sentation of conceptual structure . A key premise holds that concepts whose instances tend to co - occur ( in the sense that entities often share the labels ) lie close in the socio - cultural space , while those that rarely co - occur are distant ( Church and Hanks 1990 ) . Therefore we use the pattern of co - occurrences for calculating distances . The second step uses these distances to calculate typicalities ( or graded memberships ( Hannan , Pólos , and Carroll 2007 ) ) . 4 The current approach to assigning typicalities assumes that objects that get classiﬁed into multiple categories are unlikely to be typical members of each ( Hsu et al . 2009 ) . We claim that this pattern gets exaggerated when the concepts lie far apart . For example , a scholar whose work gets labeled as < sociology > and < genetics > 3 We restrict attention to the concepts and categories in the same domain , e . g . , cuisine or banking . In general , if sets of concepts are seen as unrelated , then establishing membership in more than one does not seem to cause problems . 4 We build on the recent body of research that considers the interface between two roles : producer and audience . Incumbents of the producer role create o ﬀ ers ; incumbents of the audience role inspect , evaluate , and consume the o ﬀ ers . 3 likely publishes research atypical of each discipline . But this might not be the case when the concepts are close . To continue the example , a scholar whose work is tagged as < sociology > and < gender studies > can plausibly produce research that ﬁts well in each . We want to allow for such di ﬀ erences in assessing the e ﬀ ect of categorical overlaps . Based on this distance - based approach to calculating typicalities , we propose measures of niche width in the space of categories and of categorical contrast that also make adjust - ments for distances in the conceptual space . The section of the paper that outlines these developments has a methodological ﬂavor . After explaining the new approach , we report tests of our argument . A prior study ap - plied part of this argument ( but ignored distance ) to reviews of restaurants in San Francisco ( Kovács and Hannan 2010 ) . Here , we re - examine these issues in light of the structure of the conceptual space . We use greatly expanded data . These data contain categorizations of the objects in one or more genres as well as consumers’ assessments of restaurant quality . We also test the implications of our arguments using online reviews of books . This application is especially appealing because the site records label assignments by audience members , not site curators as has been the case in previous research using on - line reviews . This empirical part of our study has both substantive and methodological goals . We want to learn whether the consequences of spanning depend on ( 1 ) the distances involved and ( 2 ) fuzziness . The methodological goal involves learning whether bringing the conceptual structure into the picture improves over the approach used previously . In the Discussion , we relate our theoretical and methodological approach to a broader set of sociological domains , such as cultural sociology and the sociology of consumption , and describe the importance of taking conceptual spaces into account in studies of various sociological topics , such as that of omnivore consumers . Genre Spanning and Appeal As we explain below , we infer distances in conceptual space based on the relative frequency of co - occurrence of the objects that bear the associated labels—how common it is for agents playing the producer role to be jointly categorized in each pair of genres . This approach places genres close to each other if their categories commonly overlap and far apart if they rarely ( or never ) overlap . Co - occurrence can be rare for three broad reasons , and each has given rise to sociological theories of the consequences of spanning . 4 The ﬁrst reason concerns skills and learning . The skills involved in gaining membership in a pair of categories might be so di ﬀ erent ( or , especially in the case of organizations , so di ﬃ cult to integrate ) that few agents attempt to acquire mastery of both or succeed in doing so . This is the jack - of - all trades problem ( Hsu 2006 ) . Because spanning makes it hard to develop expertise in any genre , spanners generally accumulate less skill for any one than do specialists . Appeal to an audience increases with the level of genre - speciﬁc skills . So those that attempt ( certain ) combinations will appeal less to the audience . Second , audiences might believe that jacks - of - all trades are generally inferior to special - ists ( and , according to the argument just sketched , this belief might have a rational basis ) . According to typecasting arguments , audiences use generalism as an indicator of low skill by invoking the default that the master - of - none rule applies ( Phillips and Zuckerman 2001 ; Hsu , Hannan , and Pólos 2011 ) . Even actors who do manage to develop high skill in multiple genres ( by dint of superior overall ability or some kind of resource advantage ) have di ﬃ culty convincing audiences of this . Such categorical attributions generally make generalists less appealing . Third audience members usually ﬁnd it hard to make sense of objects whose character - istics cause them to be assigned to multiple genres . As mentioned above , objects that get assigned to several ( widely separated ) genres have feature values that make them dissimilar to the objects that specialize in each . Hannan et al . ( 2007 ) argue that audiences generally ﬁnd more appealing the o ﬀ ers of the more typical object in a category . Again , this argument implies that objects whose genre spanning causes di ﬃ culties of interpretation will ﬁnd it di ﬃ cult to appeal to the audience . We do not regard the three arguments as rivals . It seems likely that all three operate in most empirical settings ; indeed they are likely intertwined . For instance , an absence of certain co - occurrences due to the technical di ﬃ culty of mastering the requisite skills causes the combination to be unfamiliar to the audience and likely confusing when they do encounter it . Therefore the three mechanisms are di ﬃ cult to discriminate empirically in the absence of natural or controlled experiments , e . g . , Leung and Sharkey ( 2014 ) . We not attempt to make such a discrimination with our non - experimental data . Instead we concentrate on the importance of bringing the conceptual space into the picture in analyzing any of these arguments . We believe that the typography of this space shapes all three explanations : distant genres are harder to master ; spanning distant genres is more likely evoke in audiences the impression of dilettantism and is more likely to cause confusion . 5 Contexts Lacking a Single Categorical Focus Making precise arguments about combination and appeal requires attention to the setting in which audience members encounter objects . Sometimes audience members see producers portraying di ﬀ erent roles , as instances of a sequence of di ﬀ erent labels . For instance , some studies analyze the success of sellers in online markets , where sellers make o ﬀ ers in one genre but buyers can see histories of participation over others ( Hsu et al . 2009 ; Leung 2011 ) . Such contexts provide a clear focal genre for evaluating o ﬀ ers . Many other studies collect overall assessments of objects without knowing the evaluators’ conceptual focus . For instance , Zuckerman ( 1999 ) observes decisions by analysts to cover or not cover ﬁrms as entities , not as a set of business segments , each to be considered separately . Hsu ( 2006 ) observes what ratings ﬁlmgoers give to a ﬁlm , but not what they think of a ﬁlm as a drama , comedy , horror , musical , and so forth . In these cases researchers observe overall appeal , not appeal as an instance of any of the relevant genres . The di ﬀ erence we highlight concerns the mode in which the audience members typically encounter an object . If these encounters are specialized to a genre context , the context presumably shapes the audience’s focus and ties their assessments of appeal to it . Otherwise , audience members likely make assessments that consider all of the assigned labels . Indeed it might be very hard for audience members to parse out their separate reactions with respect to each label . So the analysis must be modiﬁed to deal with the di ﬀ erence between these two generic situations . The view that categorical memberships shape expectations about objects suggests that spanning causes problems because audience members ﬁnd it hard to make sense of the combinations . According to our reading of the wave of research on categories and markets , audience members prefer objects that they ﬁnd easy to grasp and avoid dealing with hard - to - interpret objects and devalue them . Here we specialize the arguments to contexts that do not supply a genre focus . That is , we assume that audience members consume and evaluate particular o ﬀ ers ( restaurant meals and books in our empirical studies ) and that they try to make sense of their producers and evaluate their skills in light of their conceptual inventories . We propose that investigating such issues requires attention to the distances among concepts , speciﬁcally the distances among an audience member’s schemas . 6 Fit to Schemas Schemas are cognitive representations of patterns of attributes and / or social ties . In the context of concepts and categories , schemas tell what it means to be a full - ﬂedged member or instance ( Rosch 1975 ) . Building on work in cognitive psychology , attention to schemas has helped sharpen theory in cognitive and cultural sociology ( e . g . , DiMaggio 1997 ; Cerulo 2006 ; Vaisey 2009 ) , as well as in organizational and economic sociology ( Hannan et al . 2007 ) . Here we build on the latter work , which formalizes and speciﬁes the general arguments in cognitive psychology and applies them to sociological questions . Hannan et al . ( 2007 ) assert that organizational schemas are sets of proﬁles of feature values , where each proﬁle identiﬁes a prototype . Speciﬁcally , a schema is a subset of the feature space that contains the prototypes ( Pontikes and Hannan 2014 ) . That is , schemas are the sets of proﬁles of feature values that yield full membership . As an organization’s ﬁt to a schema can be partial , Hannan et al . ( 2007 ) developed a fuzzy - membership approach : an object that ﬁts fully the constraints expressed by an audience member’s schema for a label has full grade of membership , is fully typical , in that agent’s meaning of the label . Partial ﬁts produce partial memberships . In other words , ﬁt to a schema tells the degree of typicality . Full membership means possessing a proﬁle of feature values that falls in the schema by matching one of the prototypes ( distance from the schema is zero ) . Otherwise , the degree of typicality of an object as an instance of a concept is inversely proportional to the distance of its proﬁle of feature values from the closest prototype in the schema ( Pontikes and Hannan 2014 ) . ( This is a classical point - to - set distance : the minimum of the distances of the point from the members of the set . ) Categorization and Typicality Issues of partiality pertain to the categorization of objects as instances of concepts . As we noted at the outset , a category is a set of objects that get classiﬁed as belonging to a concept . < Bureaucracy > is a concept ; the set of objects that an agent regards as bureaucracies is a category . The main lines of research on categorization regards the process of assignment as a probabilistic function of typicality . In formal terms , an object x ’s typicality as an instance of the concept l to an ( unspeciﬁed ) audience member , in notation ✓ ( l , x ) , is inversely proportional to the distance ,   , between its proﬁle of feature values , f x , and the audience member’s schema for the concept ,   l . Because it is consistent with experimental evidence , we 7 build on Hampton’s ( 2007 ) threshold model of categorization using the following negative - logistic form ( see Pontikes and Hannan ( 2014 ) ) . ✓ ( l , x ) = 1 1 + a exp ( b   ( f x ,   l ) ) , a , b > 0 . ( 1 ) Most sociological work on typicality has focused on label assignments—not proﬁles of feature values—because labels are generally easier to observe from available records . Below we describe how label assignments have been used to measure grades of membership , and we analyze the conditions under which the common approach coincides with this feature - based approach . Before doing so , we discuss why distances in conceptual space matter . The socio - cultural distance between a pair of concepts depends on the distance in the feature space between their associated schemas ( Pontikes and Hannan 2014 ) . If the schemas for a pair of concepts lie far apart in the socio - cultural space , an o ﬀ er that gets labeled as an instance of both cannot ﬁt either schema well . Any o ﬀ er that partly ﬁts a pair of distant schemas must be a very atypical instance of the labels associated with these schemas . Based on this reasoning , we propose that an o ﬀ er’s typicality in any label falls with ( 1 ) the number of labels used to describe it and ( 2 ) the distances among the schemas associ - ated with these labels . When many ( distant ) labels are applied to an object , atypicality characterizes the object as a whole : not only is it atypical for some label , it is atypical for all of the applied labels . That is its overall typicality is low . We develop the implications of this idea in the context of the new approach below A New Approach Empirical progress on issues of spanning has been rapid ( Hannan 2010 ; Negro et al . 2010b ) . This is due partly to the proliferation of archives and websites that assign categorical mem - berships to objects and also provide audience reactions . For instance Pontikes ( 2012a ) analyzes the relationship between the positions of software producers in “knowledge space” ( induced from patterns of patent citations ) and claims to membership in product types as coded from press releases ; Hsu ( 2006 ) and Hsu et al . ( 2009 ) analyze data drawn from websites that provide reviews by professional critics and members of the general audience of ﬁlms assigned to one or more genres ; Hsu et al . ( 2009 ) analyze producers that a ﬃ liate ( by listing products for sale ) with one or more of eBay’s product classes ; and Carroll , Feng , 8 Mens , and McKendrick ( 2010 ) code producers of tape drives as participating in various tech - nical formats , and Leung ( 2014 ) analyzes the e ﬀ ects on employment chances of spanning occupations in job histories . Researchers have devised ways to use these data to characterize the strength of producers’ association with genres and to relate patterns of a ﬃ liation to the audience reaction . The current empirical strategy for relating label assignments to typicalities does not pay attention to the distances spanned . We propose generalizations of the measures used in prior research ; the new measures use information on the structure of conceptual spaces . Multiple - genre classiﬁcation relates directly to the nature of boundaries . Until fairly recently sociologists , following the so - called called the classical perspective on concepts , ignored the possibility that the entities assigned a concept label might di ﬀ er in the degree to which they typify the concept , the degree to which they “belong . ” . However , a long tradition of research in cognitive psychology shows that familiar concepts such as < fruit > and < furniture > have an internal structure : apples and oranges are viewed as typical fruits and olives and pineapples as atypical fruits and so forth ( Rosch 1975 ; Rosch and Mervis 1975 ; Hampton 2007 ; Verheyen , Hampton , and Storms 2010 ) . One useful way to represent such internal structure views labels as referring to fuzzy sets , sets with partial membership ( Hannan et al . 2007 ) . Our research implements this view . Recent research attempts to construct meaningful typicalities from sparse data contain - ing label assignments but not feature values and schemas . 5 The now - common study design obtains assignments to a predetermined list of genre labels . In most settings studied , in - cluding one of ours , a market intermediary ( e . g . , managers of publications or websites that post reviews ) assigns the labels . The analyst does not know how audience members would apply the labels . This means that using such data to test arguments stated at the level of the audience member , as above , requires an assumption that the audience uses the language in a homogenous manner , that they associate similar schemas with the labels of the domain . Suppose a domain language contains a set of labels for objects , which we denote by L . The label assignments made to an object x during an ( unspeciﬁed ) interval is the tuple : l ( x ) = h n ( 1 , x ) , n ( 2 , x ) , . . . , n ( L , x ) i , 5 Obviously we would prefer to have access to data that tell what schemas audience members associate with the relevant labels . Then categories could be represented as sets in a space of the values of conceptually relevant features and relations . Questions about combining genres could then be addressed in terms of positions in the feature space . 9 where each element in the tuple records how many assignments are to the particular label , i . e . , n ( i , x ) denotes the number of times that the label indexed by i has been applied to x ( during an unspeciﬁed period ) . ( Throughout we denote sets with bold font . ) What we call the general label function gives , for each label used in the domain , the proportion of the assignments of that label that are made to the entity x : p ( i , x ) = n ( i , x ) P j 2 L n ( j , x ) . ( 2 ) This deﬁnition allows for the possibility that the observable data contain multiple label assignments . These can be multiple assignments by the same agent , as in the case of ﬁrms’ assigning labels to themselves in a series of press releases during the unspeciﬁed period ( the application studied by Pontikes ( 2008 ) ) or assignments by multiple agents during the period . For instance , goodreads . com reports that reviewers of Mario Puzo’s novel The Godfather categorized it as < mystery / crime > ( 448 times ) , < classics > ( 418 ) , < thriller > ( 188 ) , < historical ﬁction > ( 104 ) , < mystery > ( 101 ) , and a set of other labels with less frequent assignment . Prior research , with the exception of Pontikes ( 2012b , a ) , is tuned to contexts in which some agent , usually a market intermediary such as a website curator or regulator , assigns labels or provides a ﬁxed set of labels from which a seller can choose . Crucially labels are assigned but there are no weights that tell how well the label applies . So we learn from IMBD . com , say , that the Francis Ford Coppola’s ﬁlm version of The Godfather is classiﬁed simply as < crime > and < drama > . What we call a binary label function tells for each label whether it has been applied at all to the producer / o ﬀ er during the unspeciﬁed interval . 6 In this case , the data on label assignments can be represented as a vector that assigns to an object a value ( say one ) for each label assigned and a value ( zero ) for those that are not . A binary label function has the form : l ( i , x ) = 8 < : 1 if p ( i , x ) > 0 ; 0 if p ( i , x ) = 0 . ( 3 ) A binary label assignment vector for an object x is an L - long vector of ones and zeros . We 6 In an important study on which we build , Hsu ( 2006 ) analyzed data from multiple intermediaries to specify a generalized label function . Her research focused on consensus among the intermediaries as indicative of typicality . 10 denote the number of positive binary assignments as l x . A basic analytical question asks how to use these two kinds of label proﬁles to make inferences about memberships in the concepts / genres that correspond to the labels . We next consider some answers to this question . A Discrete Approach Much recent work follows what we call the discrete approach ( for instance , Pontikes 2008 ; Hsu et al . 2009 ; Pontikes 2012a ; Carroll et al . 2010 ; Negro et al . 2010a ; Kovács and Hannan 2010 ; Negro et al . 2011 ) . It uses only the number of labels applied to the object , in notation l x . This strategy is discrete , because it does not use any metric information about the conceptual space , speciﬁcally the distances among the concepts . That is , it does not adjust for the fact that some pairs are closer than others . The discrete approach works as follows . In the ﬁrst ( largely implicit ) step , which we discussed above , the analyst assumes that , because the schemas for the various labels dif - fer ( they impose di ﬀ erent constraints ) , objects with only one label generally ﬁt better the schema for that label than those assigned two labels . For instance , a ﬁlm classiﬁed as < Com - edy > and < Horror > likely lacks the typical features of either genre . Similarly a restaurant labeled as < Mexican > and < Thai > can hardly typify either label . 7 The reasoning then makes a similar assertion about two - label versus three - label entities , and so forth . Following this reasoning , an object’s typicality as an instance of any label ( interpretabil - ity ) generally declines with the number of labels it bears ( at the same level of label speciﬁcity , with no label nested within another ) . In particular this reasoning suggests that the typi - cality ( a grade - of - membership function ) in any assigned label decreases monotonically with the number of labels assigned : ✓ ( i , x ) = g ( l x ) , with g 0 ( l x ) < 0 subject to the condition that g lies in the unit interval : 0  g ( l x )  1 . Hsu et al . ( 2009 ) proposed the following functional form for relating binary label assignments and typicality . Their discrete / binary measure , ✓ DB , has the form : ✓ DB ( i , x ) = l ( i , x ) P j 2 L l ( j , x ) . ( 4 ) For example , if three binary labels are applied to an entity , then its membership in each of these labels is 1 / 3 , and its membership in each of the other labels is set to zero . 7 One of the datasets that we analyze actually contains a restaurant with this pair of labels . 11 The second case combines a generalized label function with the discrete analytic strategy . This yields the discrete / general measure of typicality : ✓ DG ( i , x ) = p ( i , x ) P j 2 L p ( j , x ) . ( 5 ) For example , if reviewers apply the label A to an object 8 times and apply labels B and C each one time , then ✓ DG ( A ) = 0 . 8 and ✓ DG ( B ) = 0 . 1 = ✓ DG ( C ) . A Metric Approach : Incorporating Distance To build metric measures we deﬁne distance in label space ( as contrasted with   , which gives distances in a space of feature - values proﬁles ) . Let d ( i , j ) be a metric that tells the distance between the labels l i and l j . ( We discuss below how we calculate this distance from the pattern of co - occurrences . ) The metric / binary analog to the standard measure in eqn . ( 4 ) is ✓ MB ( i , x ) = l ( i , x ) l ( i , x ) + P j 2 L l ( j , x ) d ( i , j ) . ( 6 ) For the metric / general case , we deﬁne typicality as ✓ MG ( i , x ) = p ( i , x ) p ( i , x ) + P j 2 L p ( j , x ) d ( i , j ) = 1 1 + P j 2 L ⇣ p ( j , x ) p ( i , x ) ⌘ d ( i , j ) . ( 7 ) This deﬁnition , like the discrete one ( eqn . 4 ) , sets ✓ ( i , x ) = 1 if i is the only label assigned to x during the interval , and it sets ✓ ( j , x ) = 0 for j 6 = i in such cases . The addition of each label lowers typicality , but it does so much more when the added label lies far from the others . Remark 1 . How do these intuitively motivated measures relate to threshold models for grades of membership based on distance from the applicable schema in feature space ? Con - sider this issue for the most general measure , ✓ MG ( i , x ) . Comparing equations 1 and 7 shows that the grade of membership in a label based on distance between the object’s position in feature space from the applicable schema equals the grade of membership in that label 12 based on label assignments ( ✓ ( i , x ) = ✓ MG ( i , x ) ) if and only if a = 1 p ( i , x ) ; ( 8 )   ( f x ,   l ) = ( 1 / b ) ln ⇣P j 2 L p ( j , x ) d ( i , j ) ⌘ . ( 9 ) Making the connections between the two spaces shows clearly what the key intuitions imply . The key constraint is that the addition of inter - label distance decreases the ﬁt of object to an agent’s schema for a focal label at a decreasing rate . In other words , once an object has been assigned several distant labels , the addition of another has a smaller e ﬀ ect on decreasing typicality than if the same label were assigned to an object with no categorical a ﬃ liations other than the focal one . We cannot demonstrate that this relation holds , because we do not have data on feature values and schemas . But we assume that it holds at least roughly . Checking this assumption is an important issue for future research . Distance from Co - occurrence The relatedness of concepts gets reﬂected in their tendency to co - occur in systems of clas - siﬁcation ( Gärdenfors 2004 ; Widdows 2004 ) . For example , if < Western > ﬁlms also tend to be classiﬁed as < drama > , then these labels have more similar meanings than pairs that do not tend to co - occur , e . g . , < Western > and < comedy > . Such a frequentist approach enables researchers to map out the relationships among social concepts as we show below . The procedure is based on the assumption that co - occurence maps to similarity . A basic intuition , backed by research in cognitive psychology , holds that similarity and distance are inversely related . Following the foundational work of Shepard ( 1987 ) ( see also Tenenbaum and Gri ﬃ ths 2002 ; Chater and Vitányi 2003 ) , we posit a negative exponential relationship between perceived socio - cultural distance and similarity : sim ( i , j ) = exp (     d ( i , j ) ) ,   > 0 . ( 10 ) We use a simple and widely used measure of category similarity due to Jaccard ( 1901 ) . 8 The Jaccard similarity of a pair of labels amounts to a simple calculation on their exten - 8 For a detailed discussion of alternative similarity and dissimilarity measures , see Batagelj and Bren ( 1995 ) . Some preliminary results show that the main ﬁndings of this paper apply to other measures as well , but we leave this direction of investigation for further research . 13 sions . 9 Let i denote the extension of l i , that is , i = { x | l i 2 l x } . Then the similarity of labels l i and l j can be deﬁned as the ratio of the number of objects categorized as both l i and l j to the number categorized as l i and / or l j . Formally , if | i \ j | denotes the cardinality of the set of objects categorized as both l i and l j , and | i [ j | denotes the cardinality of the set of objects categorized as l i and / or l j , then J ( i , j ) = | i \ j | | i [ j | . ( 11 ) This index takes values in the [ 0 , 1 ] range , with 0 denoting perfect dissimilarity and 1 denot - ing perfect similarity . For example , the dataset on restaurants analyzed below contains nine restaurants labeled as < Malaysian > and eleven < Singaporean > . Four of these restaurants receive both labels . Thus the similarity of < Malaysian > and < Singaporean > in these data is 4 / ( 9 + 11   4 ) = 0 . 25 . Categorical Niche Width The concept of the width of a categorical niche provides a useful way to analyze typicality in the context of multiple - category memberships . 10 Hsu et al . ( 2009 ) deﬁned the width of an object’s niche in conceptual space as a way to summarize the di ﬀ erences among market participants in the degree to which they specialize in terms of categorical memberships . As we noted above , a genre specialist belongs to only one category . A genre generalist is a partial member of several . The category - membership niche , deﬁned in terms of label - based typicalities , is a tuple : ✓ x = h ✓ x ( 1 ) , . . . , ✓ x ( L ) i . Hannan et al . ( 2007 ) deﬁned the width of a fuzzy niche using the Simpson ( 1949 ) index of dissimilarity applied to a tuple of memberships ( typicalities ) . When applied to categorical niches , the Simpson index , in notation S ( ✓ x ) , can be expressed as : S ( ✓ x ) = 1   P i 2 L ✓ ( i , x ) 2 . ( 12 ) The measure of niche width proposed by Hsu et al . ( 2009 ) can be shown to be a special case of eqn . ( 12 ) applied to binary label functions ( eqn . 4 ) . In this case , niche width of an 9 In the usual language of logic and linguistics , the extension of a label refers to the set of objects that bear the label . 10 We refer to categorical niche width ( not genre niche width ) because what we can observe are the categorical assignments . 14 object depends only on the number of distinct labels assigned to it , which we have denoted by l x . This binary / discrete measure of niche width can be written : S DB ( ✓ x ) = l x   1 l x . ( 13 ) Unlike the discrete approach , our proposal does not constrain the sum of squared typ - icalities to lie in the unit interval . As a result , niche width calculated as a Simpson index can be negative , which does not make sense . As we see it , new thinking about niche width is needed once distance enters the picture . Our proposed measures depend on the the total distance among the labels assigned to a market participant for both general and binary cases : D x = 8 < : P i 2 L P j 2 L p ( i , x ) p ( j , x ) d ( i , j ) if labels are general ; P i 2 L P j 2 L l ( i , x ) l ( j , x ) d ( i , j ) if labels are binary . ( 14 ) In devising a measure of niche width we want to satisfy four desiderata . The measure should be ( 1 ) non - negative and ( 2 ) have a minimal value of zero ( if an agent gets assigned to a single label ) , and ( 3 ) increase with the number of labels assigned and with the distances among them . Moreover , we want the measure to reﬂect the intuition that a given increment of distance spanned has a bigger impact on niche width at low levels of total distance spanned than at higher levels . In other words , if a producer has a narrow niche and adds a label at a ﬁxed distance , its niche width increases more than if it initially had a broad niche . Speciﬁcally we want a measure that implements the intuition that niche width grows with increasing D x , holding constant the number of labels applied ( i . e . , @ W / @ D x > 0 ) , but this e ﬀ ect is weaker at higher levels of total distance ( @ 2 W / @ D 2 x < 0 ) . With this deﬁnition , niche width shrinks as the number of labels applied increases , when total distance is held constant ( i . e . , @ W / @ l x < 0 ) . There might be many alternatives that meet our desiderata . We propose a particularly simple measure : W ( ✓ x ) = 1   ✓ 1 1 + D x ◆ . ( 15 ) When the labels are binary , D x will almost surely be much larger than the comparable sum for the general label assignments ; even a single assignment of many labels causes the binary function to equal one when each assignment is lowing relative frequency . This 15 is because , as we explained above , binary measurements are insensitive to the di ﬀ erence between commonly applied and rarely applied labels . So we need to adjust for this di ﬀ erence . We experimented with a variety of cases that resemble observations in our data and got measures of niche width that ﬁt the above mentioned intuitions when we convert the total distance into an average distance per label ( minus one ) . We use that speciﬁcation in our empirical analysis below for the binary case ( restaurants ) , with D B ( x ) = D B ( x ) / ( l x   1 ) . That is , we use the following measure of niche width for the metric / binary case in our analysis : f W ( ✓ x ) = 1   ✓ 1 1 + D x ◆ if l x > 1 , ( 16 ) and it equals zero if only one label is applied ( l x = 1 ) . We obtain very similar results with the normed measure in ( 16 ) and with the unformed one ( 15 ) . Whether the normed distance better marches sociological intuitions in other applications is an open question . Category Contrast Contrast refers to the degree to which a set stands out from the background , the clarity of its boundary . Hannan et al . ( 2007 ) deﬁned the contrast of a category as the average typicality among those with the label who have a nonzero typicality . Using our notation for label functions and extensions , we have C ( l j ) = P x 2 o ✓ ( j , x ) / | o | , ( 17 ) where o denotes the set of objects to be classiﬁed and | o | denotes the number of objects in the set . Obviously the discrete approach tends to understate the contrasts of categories that lie close to others in the conceptual space and overstates contrasts for categories that overlap distant ones . In our empirical analysis below , we show that adjusting for distances in calculating contrasts does indeed make a di ﬀ erence . Categorical Niche Width , Contrast , and Intrinsic Appeal The rest of the paper illustrates and evaluates the new approach by using it to analyze the e ﬀ ects of categorical specialism / generalism on appeal to an audience . We adopt the 16 standard notion that audiences seek to interpret and evaluate the o ﬀ ers of producers on a market . ( In the two empirical analyses presented below , the o ﬀ ers are restaurant meals and books . ) We focus on the interpretability of an o ﬀ er . As we suggested above , o ﬀ ers whose feature values ﬁt partially to multiple genres are hard to interpret . Moreover , this problem is compounded when the genres spanned are distant . We gain empirical leverage by connecting interpretability to appeal to the audience . We develop the implications of this intuition in terms of niche width and contrast . Objects that get associated with multiple labels are neither ﬁsh nor fowl . Such generalism can be expressed well in terms of the width of the categorical niche . Objects associated with a single label—specialists—have a niche width of zero . Niche width increases with the number and diversity of categorical a ﬃ liations . We propose that an object’s interpretability declines with its categorical niche width . Following Hannan et al . ( 2007 ) we focus on genres with positive valuation : those where the intrinsic appeal of the object for audience members with typical tastes increases with the ﬁt to an applicable schema . A testable implication of the overall argument is 11 Hypothesis 1 . The intrinsic appeal of an o ﬀ er decreases with its categorical niche width . The second part of the argument concerns a category - level variable : contrast . ( This is the part of the argument that bears most distinctly on interpretation rather than skill . ) According to Hannan et al . ( 2007 ) , categories with very fuzzy boundaries exert less social power than crisper ones . A relatively crisp category stands out from the social background and likely serves as a basis of enduring expectations about those who bear the genre label . The main intuition holds that membership in a high - contrast category conveys greater advantage than membership in a fuzzy one . This intuition has been found to hold in diverse contexts , as we noted in the Introduction . Negro , Hannan , and Rao ( 2011 ) argue that pervasive spanning by members of a cate - gory lowers its contrast and thereby reduces the appeal of all of its members . This process likely works in two ways . One way involves the relationships among the categories . Fuzzi - ness implies a loss of distinctiveness relative to the other categories , raising questions about what comparisons are appropriate for the members of a category . With increasing fuzzi - ness , clusters of objects become less salient and elicit lower attention . Previous research 11 A formal version of the argument can be found in Kovács and Hannan ( 2013 ) . 17 shows that comparisons become more di ﬃ cult ; audience members have trouble using dis - tinct descriptors , and develop attitudes of reserve , strangeness , even aversion or repulsion ( Griswold 1987 ) . Negative evaluations are more common , and audience members claim previous judgments were too generous or neglected important di ﬀ erences . A second way involves the loss of agreement about the meaning of the genre ( Hannan et al . 2007 ) . Declining contrast means that the set of objects to which some audience members apply a label share fewer schema - relevant feature values . Such a situation sparks disagreement about about which objects merit and what the label means . According to Simmel ( 1978 [ 1907 ] ) , the loss of distinctiveness “hollows out the core of things . ” Hence , low - contrast categories lack intrinsic appeal relative to higher - contrast ones . A challenge is to translate these intuitions about the advantages of a ﬃ liation with a high - contrast category to the context of spanning . If contrast matters , which category’s contrast ? After considering a number of possible answers to this question , Kovács and Hannan ( 2010 ) concluded that two facets of this matter need to be considered : ( 1 ) whether the object is associated with any high - contrast category , and ( 2 ) how much the highest - contrast membership dominates the others . If belonging to any high - contrast category makes it easier to make sense of social actors or artifacts , then having at least one membership in a high - contrast category will be beneﬁcial . We posit that the interpretability of an object increases with the maximum of the contrasts of the categories assigned . But membership in two or more high - contrast categories likely confuses the audience ( Kovács and Hannan 2010 ) . For instance , the combination of the high - contrast < Soul food > and < Thai > would be more di ﬃ cult to interpret than the combination of the low - contrast < new American > and < Asian fusion > . So it is clearly not enough to analyze only maximum contrast . We need to know the consequences of having second ( and third , fourth ) high - contrast memberships . We reason that , net of the e ﬀ ect of the maximum - contrast membership , having another high - contrast membership will confuse the audience and thereby reduce intrinsic appeal . Given assignment of multiple labels , interpretability is low when a label other than the one with maximum contrast also has high contrast . We use the term secondary contrast to refer to the next - to - maximal contrast . In this case we posit that the interpretability of an object decreases with its secondary contrast . Again we have a testable implication of the argument : 18 Hypothesis 2 . The intrinsic appeal of an o ﬀ er a . increases with the maximum contrast of the set of categories assigned . b . decreases with the secondary contrast of the set . Empirical Applications : Reviews of Books and Restaurants We turn now to empirical application to books and restaurants . We take advantage of the upsurge in interest and involvement in online websites that publish critical reviews by general audience members . The hypotheses tested , the theoretically relevant measures used , and the method of estimation used is the same for both studies . So we begin by describing these matters . Our theory pertains to intrinsic appeal , and the ratings reﬂect actual appeal , which , according to Hannan et al . ( 2007 ) , depends on intrinsic appeal and engagement . It seems clear that book publishers and restaurant sta ﬀ have engaged the audience , but we do not know much about the intensity of engagement . We assume that actual appeal is proportional to intrinsic appeal . ( In the case of restaurants , we do control for engagement outside the food domain , which likely serves as the major source of variation in engagement as a restaurant . ) We assume that variations in intrinsic appeal overwhelm variations in engagement so that actual appeal is proportional to intrinsic appeal . Measurement Dependent Variable . Both data sources , Goodreads . com and Yelp . com , allow registered users to submit one or more reviews of book ( for Goodreads ) or any producer / product ( for Yelp ) and to record summary ratings , the outcome variable in our analyses . These ratings range from one to ﬁve stars ( the highest rating ) on both sites . The distribution of ratings of books is as follows : the modal rating is four stars ( 37 % of the reviews ) , followed by ﬁve stars ( 31 . 5 % ) , three stars ( 21 % ) , two stars ( 7 . 5 % ) , and one star ( 3 % ) . Most restaurant reviews give three or more stars : the mode of the distribution is four stars , and the mean is 3 . 7 . 12 12 The ratings in both sites represent the overall satisfaction of users with the book or restaurant . Admit - tedly , the rating might relate to multiple dimensions of value , such as food quality or service for restaurants ( Kovács and Johnson ( 2014 ) found that the most important dimension is food quality ) and the quality of the writing or the reputation of the author in the case of books . We do not attempt to disentangle these dimensions here . Rather , we take a constructivist stance and leave it for the user to decide what dimensions are important for her . 19 Covariates Based on Categorical Dimensions . In terms of the notation , introduced above , we calculate typicalities using ✓ DB and ✓ MB with the Yelp data ( because we have only binary labels ) . With the goodreads . com data we can calculate all four variations . In our analysis we concentrate on ✓ DB and ✓ MG which allows us to compare the full - blown new approach to the standard used in the earlier studies . Typicality measures do not appear directly as variables in the stochastic speciﬁcations we estimate . Rather they form the basis for calculations of niche width and contrast . We conduct analyses using the three alternative measures of niche width : the purely discrete measure used in previous research S DB and our proposed alternatives : W MG ( for book reviews ) and W MB ( for restaurant reviews ) . In analyzing the restaurant reviews , we can also pay attention to another aspect of the niche . Any restaurant that engages outside the very broad < food > class has a very wide niche . We constructed a dummy variable to capture this dimensions of niche width , labeled “any non - food genre , ” equals one for restaurants with an assignment to a non - food genre , such as < art gallery > or < gas station > , and equals zero otherwise . We do not have a comparable situation for books . What we call the maximum contrast of an o ﬀ er is the maximum of the contrasts ( average typicality in a label for those o ﬀ ers with positive typicality ) over the labels assigned to it ; and its secondary contrast is set to the value for the next - highest contrast label assigned . Of course , the values of these two variables depend on the method used for measuring typicality . The distributions of these theoretically relevant variables can be found in Table 1 . Note that we discriminate among the various combinations of measurements of interest . Note that there are large and systematic di ﬀ erences by type of measurement , especially for books . We report these distributions for all cases and separately for cases with multiple labels . For books , the distributions are quite similar for all books and only those assigned to multiple genres . But this is not so for our sample of restaurants , because three - quarters bear only one genre label . On average , secondary contrast and niche width are much greater in the sample of specialists than for the whole sample . As we will see below , this has a big impact on the results . We illustrate the implications of adjusting for distance for particular cases , using the data on restaurants . Table 2 shows the implications for measuring contrast . The discrete approach assigns a typicality of 0 . 5 in each label to a restaurant categorized as both < Span - ish > and < Basque > . What happens under the alternative that pays attention to distance 20 Table 1 : Distributions of theoretically relevant variables with alternative measurements Variable Measure Mean S . D . Min . Max . All Books Maximum contrast ✓ DG 0 . 241 0 . 076 0 . 041 1 . 000 Maximum contrast ✓ MG 0 . 553 0 . 042 0 . 363 1 . 000 Secondary contrast ✓ DG 0 . 189 0 . 080 0 . 008 0 . 626 Secondary contrast ✓ MG 0 . 525 0 . 053 0 . 310 1 . 000 Niche width W DG 0 . 742 0 . 127 0 . 000 1 . 000 Niche width W MG 0 . 428 0 . 080 0 . 000 0 . 609 Books with multiple genre assignments Maximum contrast ✓ DG 0 . 241 0 . 076 0 . 041 0 . 842 Maximum contrast ✓ MG 0 . 553 0 . 042 0 . 363 1 . 000 Secondary contrast ✓ DG 0 . 189 0 . 080 0 . 008 0 . 626 Secondary contrast ✓ MG 0 . 525 0 . 053 0 . 310 1 . 000 Niche width W DG 0 . 744 0 . 120 0 . 025 1 . 000 Niche width W MG 0 . 432 0 . 069 0 . 054 0 . 609 All Restaurants Maximum contrast ✓ DB 0 . 784 0 . 091 0 . 417 1 . 000 Maximum contrast ✓ MB 0 . 695 0 . 112 0 . 240 1 . 000 Secondary contrast ✓ DB 0 . 231 0 . 320 0 . 000 0 . 879 Secondary contrast ✓ MB 0 . 192 0 . 270 0 . 000 0 . 805 Niche width S DB 0 . 185 0 . 255 0 . 000 0 . 750 Niche width W MB 0 . 292 0 . 402 0 . 000 0 . 946 Restaurants with multiple genre assignments Maximum contrast ✓ DB 0 . 759 0 . 082 0 . 417 0 . 975 Maximum contrast ✓ MB 0 . 670 0 . 095 0 . 240 0 . 961 Secondary contrast ✓ DB 0 . 659 0 . 101 0 . 400 0 . 879 Secondary contrast ✓ MB 0 . 547 0 . 119 0 . 138 0 . 805 Niche width S DB 0 . 528 0 . 063 0 . 500 0 . 750 Niche width W MB 0 . 833 0 . 102 0 . 505 0 . 946 21 Table 2 : Contrasts of selected restaurant genres constructed using alternative measures of grade of membership : discrete / binary and the metric / binary Measure of category contrast Genre ✓ DB ✓ MB Asian fusion 0 . 739 0 . 596 Barbecue 0 . 733 0 . 598 Chinese 0 . 899 0 . 840 Gastropub 0 . 669 0 . 490 Indian 0 . 693 0 . 661 Italian 0 . 796 0 . 709 Japanese 0 . 715 0 . 669 Modern European 0 . 591 0 . 436 Pakistani 0 . 513 0 . 543 Steakhouses 0 . 739 0 . 605 Thai 0 . 926 0 . 885 Vegetarian 0 . 627 0 . 468 spanned ( with   = 1 ) ? Because the similarity of < Spanish > and < Basque > in the com - bined data equals 0 . 48 , the distance between these genres equals   ln ( 0 . 42 ) / 1 = 0 . 73 . So our measurement strategy assigns typicality of 1 / ( 1 + 0 . 73 ) = 0 . 54 in both labels . What about dissimilar labels ? Consider the pair < Chinese > and < French > , whose similarity is 0 . 0007 . Using the Shepard transformation , this gives a distance 7 . 2 , which means that a restaurant in the intersection has a typicality of 1 / ( 1 + 7 . 2 ) = 0 . 12 in each genre according to our ( binary , metric ) measure . Recall that the binary , discrete measure assigns a typicality of 0 . 5 in each genre to such cases . We expect that incorporating distance in calculation of typicality would increase or keep constant the contrasts of such highly overlapping pairs as < Indian > / < Pakistani > and < Japanese > / < sushi bar > . Because some members of these categories do not restrict their memberships to the pairs , contrasts generally rise even for them when we adjust for distances as can be seen in Table 2 . Only for < Pakistani > does contrast rise . However , it declines only slightly for others such as < Chinese > and < Italian > . At the other extreme , contrast falls considerably with the distance correction for < Asian fusion > , < barbecue > , 22 Table 3 : Examples of alternative calculations of categorical niche width for restaurants with assignments to three labels using the binary - discrete approach and binary - metric approach Labels applied S DB W MB Seafood ; Food Stands ; Sandwiches 0 . 667 0 . 942 Mexican ; American ( New ) ; Burgers 0 . 667 0 . 940 Chinese ; Vegetarian ; Kosher 0 . 667 0 . 932 Pizza ; Burgers ; Sandwiches 0 . 667 0 . 930 French ; American ( New ) ; Brasseries 0 . 667 0 . 922 Indian ; Bu ﬀ ets ; Pakistani 0 . 667 0 . 901 Middle Eastern ; Halal ; Mediterranean 0 . 667 0 . 901 Mediterranean ; Middle Eastern ; Turkish 0 . 667 0 . 886 Middle Eastern ; Greek ; Mediterranean 0 . 667 0 . 852 Singaporean ; Malaysian ; Indonesian 0 . 667 0 . 829 Spanish ; Tapas ; Bars ; Basque 0 . 667 0 . 792 and < vegetarian > . What matters here are not the exact magnitudes of changes in contrasts ( as these depend on the speciﬁc distance measure used ) but that incorporating distance alters the ordering in terms of contrast . Adjustments for distance also a ﬀ ect measures of niche width . Table 3 compares the two measures for some restaurants with three label assignments . Of course , S DB , does not discriminate cases with the same number of labels assigned . However , the distance - based measures do . The combinations in the ﬁrst rows of Table 3 span a very considerable distance , and they receive high values for S DB . However , the restaurant in the bottom rows , which also bear three labels , combine closer genres , and the distance - based measures of niche width are lower . Controls . In both studies we control for variation among reviewers in engagement in the genre and the website using ( the natural log of ) the number of reviews posted for restaurants , following Hsu et al . ( 2009 ) . We refer to this variable as the reviewer’s activism . We also control for the book’s / restaurant’s prominence ( on the website ) , measured as the natural log of the number of reviews it receives ; and we include the date of a review to control for secular trends in appeal . Finally , we control for price levels . We have been able to collect actual retail prices ( taken in May 2013 from the online sites Amazon . com and Barnesandnoble . com ) for 78 % of the books , accounting for 85 % of the reviews . There is little price variation in the 23 books reviewed . However , there is considerable variation in prices of restaurant meals . In the Yelp . com data , price can take four ordered values : coded 1 ( for “cheap” ) to 4 ( “splurge” ) . Estimation We estimate ordered logit speciﬁcations by maximum likelihood with random e ﬀ ects for reviewer 13 to assess the e ﬀ ect of the theoretically relevant variables on appeal , because the outcome variable ( number of stars ) is discrete and ordered . The stochastic speciﬁcation used is A ⇤ it = x 0 it   + ⌫ i + ✏ it , where x it denotes a time - varying vector of covariates ,   denotes a vector of parameters , ⌫ i are independently and identically distributed distributed with N ( 0 ,   ⌫ ) and ✏ it has a logistic distribution with mean zero and variance equal to ⇡ / 3 , and A ⇤ it = i if   i   1  A ⇤ <   i , where   i ( i = 1 , . . . , I ) are cut points ,   0 =  1 , and   I = 1 Study 1 : Books In the ﬁrst study we explore the consequences of genre spanning in the setting of online reviews of books . This domain and the data source we use o ﬀ er two advantages over restau - rants , which makes the book domain especially useful for our purposes . First , evaluations of restaurants are a ﬀ ected by variations in service quality which introduces noise in the re - lation between spanning and appeal . This does not seem to be an issue in the case of books . Second , the data source we use for book reviews allows us to construct generalized label functions based on categorizations made by the audience members , not the site curators . Our data come from the online book - review website , Goodreads . com . This is the largest such website with more than a million reviewers and more than ten million ratings of books . The website , founded in 2007 , provides a free interface for reviewers to create a proﬁle , review books , and connect to other registered users . Importantly , Goodreads . com provides 13 We do not estimate models with ﬁxed e ﬀ ects because ML estimators for ordered logit models with ﬁxed e ﬀ ects are not consistent ( Greene 2004 ) . 24 information about how reviewers categorize books . Each reviewer can assign one or more labels to a book but assigning them to a labeled “bookshelf . ” These labels are freely chosen by the reviewer . They could be those already used by others , or they could be idiosyncratic . Goodreads . com aggregates these individual tags by book and lists for each book the ten most commonly applied tags and the number of reviewers who applied that tag to the book . For example , Venetia Kelly’s Traveling Show was classiﬁed as < historical ﬁction > ( 29 times ) < Ireland > ( 18 ) , < adult ﬁction > ( 3 ) , < Irish literature > ( 2 ) , and < mystery > ( 2 ) . Note that these tags can have partially overlapping meanings and do not typically form a neat and nested classiﬁcation hierarchy . Table 4 contains additional examples . This more reﬁned information about labeling obviously allows more accurate assessments of typicalities . A book whose tags are half < mystery > and half < romance > is less typical as a mystery and more typical as a < romance > than the one categorized as 80 / 20 . In April 2013 , we selected all 2 , 075 English language books that were ﬁrst published in February and March 2010 from the records available on Goodreads . com . 14 We downloaded all the reviews of these books : 620 , 594 reviews posted by 111 , 185 reviewers . Readers who post reviews on goodreads . com appear to provide a representative sample of the reading public in the U . S . : the average age ( 38 . 4 years ) and the female dominance ( 73 % of the registered users are female ) match the demographic distribution of ﬁction readers ( Griswold , McDonnell , and Wright 2005 ) . The count of reviews has a skewed distribution : the average number of reviews per book is 299 , 25 % get ten or fewer reviews , 40 % get more than 100 , and 10 % of the books get more than 1 , 000 . On average , reviewers ( of any of the books in our sample ) posted 5 . 6 reviews of the 2075 books ; 29 % reviewed only one book in our sample , 16 % reviewed two books , 19 % reviewed more than ten , and about 2 % posted more than 25 reviews . Table 1 reports descriptive statistics for the theoretically relevant variables . Table 4 illustrates the niche widths of a few randomly selected books as calculated using the two alternative measures of grade of membership . Take for example A Vampire’s Mistress , labeled 4 times as < paranormal - romance > and twice as < harlequin > . Suppose we collapsed the label assignment to binary labels . Then S DB = 1   ( ( 4 / 6 ) 2 + ( 2 / 6 ) 2 ) = 0 . 44 . In contrast the metric approach indicates a much wider niche because the two genres assigned are dissimilar in the sense that they rarely appear together . In other cases , metric niche 14 We intentionally excluded January because the system uses January 1st as a default if no exact day is speciﬁed for publishing date . 25 width fall below the discrete ones . Such is the case with Sword of My Mouth , which is classiﬁed as < comics > , < graphic novels > , < dystopia > , and < fantasy > , which are close to each other . 26 T a b l e 4 : E x a m p l e s o f a l t e r n a t i v e c a l c u l a t i o n s o f c a t e go r i c a l n i c h e w i d t h f o r b oo k s u s i n g t h e d i s c r e t e - b i n a r y a pp r oa c h a nd m e tr i c - g e n e r a l a pp r oa c h T i t l e G e n r e w e i g h t s S D B W M G G e n r e s A V a m p i r e ’ s M i s t r e ss 4 ; 2 0 . 444 0 . 493 p a r a n o r m a l - r o m a n ce ; h a r l e q u i n A u t o b i o g r aph y o f a S adh u 3 ; 3 ; 2 0 . 656 0 . 558 s p i r i t u a li t y ; a u t o b i og r a ph y ; H i ndu i s m D i m a n c h e a n d O t h e r S t o r i e s 20 ; 7 ; 5 ; 3 ; 2 0 . 644 0 . 557 s h o rt s t o r i e s ; F r a n ce ; h i s t o r i c a l ﬁ c t i o n li t e r a r y ﬁ c t i o n ; W o r l d W a r II S c r y e r ’ s G u l c h E p i s od e s 1 – 10 5 ; 4 0 . 494 0 . 448 f a n t a s y ; s t e a m pun k T h e P e n da n t 6 ; 3 ; 3 0 . 625 0 . 567 h i s t o r i c a l ﬁ c t i o n ; I t a l y ; m e d i e v a l S i g n e d D e a l e d a n d D e l i ve r e d 4 ; 3 0 . 490 0 . 393 b i og r a p h y ; m u s i c C o n t a i n e r G a r d e n i n g F o r D u mm i e s 7 ; 3 ; 2 0 . 569 0 . 505 ga r d e n i n g ; n o n ﬁ c t i o n ; h o w - t o O b a m a Z o m b i e s 27 ; 10 ; 2 ; 2 ; 2 ; 2 ; 2 ; 2 0 . 645 0 . 470 p o li t i c s ; n o n ﬁ c t i o n ; s c i e n ce ; li t e r a r y ﬁ c t i o n ; e ss a y s c o ll ec t i o n s ; b i og r a ph y ; a u t o b i og r a ph y C a t h e r i n e ’ s G if t 3 ; 3 0 . 500 0 . 245 b i og r a p h y ; n o n ﬁ c t i o n A n ge l i n a a n d t h e R o y a l W e dd i n g 5 ; 2 0 . 408 0 . 203 p i c t u r e b oo k s ; c h il d r e n s S w o r d o f M y M o u t h 9 ; 8 ; 2 ; 2 0 . 653 0 . 418 c o m i c s ; g r a ph i c n o v e l s ; d y s t o p i a ; f a n t a s y A dd i c t e d t o H e r 6 ; 5 ; 3 ; 2 0 . 711 0 . 317 y o un g - a d u l t ; t ee n ; r o m a n ce ; r e a li s t i c ﬁ c t i o n S hado w o f t h e S u n 35 ; 19 ; 11 ; 5 ; 5 ; 3 ; 2 0 . 723 0 . 342 p a r a n o r m a l ; f a n t a s y ; y o un g - a du l t ; r o m a n ce s u s p e n s e ; p a r a n o r m a l - r o m a n ce ; m ag i c W i cke d G a m e s 5 ; 3 0 . 469 0 . 224 c h i c k - li t ; r o m a n ce C ha s i n g t h e D e ad 7 ; 3 ; 2 0 . 569 0 . 264 c r i m e ; m y s t e r y ; s u s p e n s e T h e S e r i a l i s t 9 ; 5 ; 4 0 . 623 0 . 253 m y s t e r y ; m y s t e r y - t h r ill e r ; c r i m e C ap t a i n A m e r i c a 70 ; 46 ; 20 ; 9 ; 4 ; 4 ; 2 0 . 686 0 . 308 c o m i c s ; g r a ph i c n o v e l s ; M a r v e l ; s up e r h e r o e s g r a ph i c - n o v e l s - c o m i c s ; c o m i c b oo k ; t i m e tr a v e l 27 Applying the new conceptualization and measurement strategy requires that we supply a value for the free parameter   that relates distance and similarity in eqn . ( 10 ) . In the analyses reported below we use   = 2 because this provided the best model ﬁt , but we note that the empirical patterns are quite robust for the choice of gamma . Results We ask two questions about the empirical results . First do these data support our hypotheses about typicality , interpretability , and appeal ? Second does the new conceptualization , based on the structure of a conceptual space , make a substantive di ﬀ erence ? We see in Table 5 that adopting the distance - based approach improves the ﬁt greatly : the di ﬀ erence in log - likelihoods between the discrete approach ( col . 1 ) and the distance - based approach ( col . 2 ) is 498 . In addition there is a slight improvement in terms of ( mean squared ) prediction error . All three hypotheses are supported with both approaches to measurement . The e ﬀ ect of maximum contrast on appeal is positive and signiﬁcant . The e ﬀ ect of the next higher contrast ( secondary contrast ) is negative and signiﬁcant . And the e ﬀ ect of niche width is negative and signiﬁcant . This is the case in column 1 , which gives results with covariates measured using the discrete approach and in column 2 , which is based on metric measures ( with generalized label functions ) . According to these results , books that hew to genre conventions and eschew themes associated with other genres , especially crisp ones , have higher appeal to this general audience . Net of these e ﬀ ects , books that get associated with many dissimilar genres fail to appeal . Beyond these qualitative implications , choice of measurement strategy has a very big impact on the estimated magnitudes of the e ﬀ ects . Both contrast e ﬀ ects are much larger in absolute value with the metric measurements : the e ﬀ ect of maximum contrast is three times larger with the metric measurement and the e ﬀ ect of secondary contrast is roughly 50 % larger in absolute value . On the other hand , the estimated e ﬀ ect of niche width is only about 20 % as large with the metric measure . So adjusting for distances appears to have heightened the important of contrast relative to niche width . The e ﬀ ects of the control variables are in line with expectations . Popular books receive higher ratings , longer books get lower ratings , and more expensive books get higher ratings . Activist reviewers are more critical and give lower ratings . 28 Table 5 : E ﬀ ects of categorical contrast and niche width on the appeal of books : ML estimates of ordered - logit speciﬁcations with reviewer random e ﬀ ects Measurement DB MG Maximum contrast 2 . 25 7 . 47 ( 0 . 090 ) ( 0 . 180 ) Secondary contrast   0 . 994   1 . 56 ( 0 . 076 ) ( 0 . 128 ) Niche width   0 . 924   0 . 853 ( 0 . 058 ) ( 0 . 106 ) Book prominence 0 . 527 0 . 486 ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 005 ) ln ( Price ) 0 . 071 0 . 105 ( 0 . 009 ) ( 0 . 009 ) ln ( pagecount )   0 . 027   0 . 015 ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 005 ) Review date ( in years )   0 . 114   0 . 115 ( 0 . 008 ) ( 0 . 008 ) Reviewer activism   0 . 166   0 . 197 ( 0 . 017 ) ( 0 . 017 ) Cut points   6 . 32   3 . 23   3 . 29 - 0 . 217 0 . 023 3 . 11 4 . 10 7 . 19 ˆ   2 ⌫ 21 . 69 21 . 60 Observations 530 , 296 530 , 296 Mean sq . pred . error 1 . 086 1 . 078 Log - likelihood   471 , 422   470 , 924 Note : ﬁgures in parentheses are standard errors ; all e ﬀ ects as signiﬁcant at the 0 . 001 level . Study 2 : Restaurants The domain of restaurants contains many broadly understood genres ( Carroll and Wheaton 2009 ) . 15 We draw our data from Yelp . com , which categorizes restaurants in 78 genres . These 15 Kovács and Hannan ( 2010 ) reported estimates of e ﬀ ects of niche width and contrast on appeal—but without adjusting for distances—for a subset of the establishments that we analyze here . 29 genre labels appear prominently on the site . 16 A call for reviews of restaurants for some location yields a screen with the list of 78 genre labels . Clicking through to a label produces a list of establishments shown by name , address , neighborhood , and a set of categorizations . Our data include all the organizations in San Francisco categorized in at least one genre in the restaurant domain . Restaurants receive very frequent reviews ; and they are distributed over a broad diversity of genres . Some labels concern various ethnic / national cuisines , e . g . , < Basque > , < soul food > , and < Thai > . Others refer to the mode of service , e . g . , < bu ﬀ et > and < food stand > . Still others pertain the key ingredient ( s ) or dishes , e . g . , < burgers > and < seafood > , and some refer to food codes , e . g . , < halal > and < vegan > . Some restaurants also get classiﬁed in non - food genres such as < art gallery > and < bowling alley > . We analyze reviews posted between October 2004 and September 2011 . The sample contains 767 , 268 reviews written by 59 , 473 reviewers about 3 , 976 producers . This website encompasses a broader audience than most food and gourmet magazines and media outlets ( Johnston and Baumann 2007 ) . It is decidedly non - elite in nature and reaches a broad population . Genre Classiﬁcations Most restaurants ( 73 % ) are assigned to only one restaurant genre . About a quarter ( 24 % ) are assigned two , and roughly 3 % get three or more . The most common labels are < Mexican > ( 1 , 907 instances ) , < Chinese > ( 1 , 205 ) , < Japanese > ( 1 , 024 ) , and < pizza > ( 997 ) . An overall view on the similarity structure can be seen in Figure 1 , which shows the result of an agglomerative hierarchical clustering of the food labels ( not just the restaurant labels in the combined data ) . 17 This classiﬁcation uses the average clustering method applied to all labels that contain ﬁve or more members , in which each step joins two clusters if the average 16 Yelp . com curates the categorization of restaurants . The the owner or a patron who ﬁrst adds the restaurant can choose from a drop - down list of all possible genres . This label assignment , before it goes online , has to be approved by the maintainers of Yelp . com . Later on any user or the owner can submit a modiﬁcation request . For example , if a restaurant is labeled as < Italian > but a patron ﬁnds that the restaurant also serves sushi , then she can suggest that Yelp . com change the categorization . Nonetheless , the editors at Yelp . com need to approve all changes in categorization . 17 We also explored various multidimensional scaling representations of the similarity structure of labels ( Kruskal and Wish 1978 ) , and we found that multidimensional scaling does not represent the structure of the data well . We obtained high stress measures ( 37 . 9 for the two - dimensional solution , and 28 . 4 for the three - dimensional solution ) , which indicates that the underlying similarity structure is not metric . Indeed , the hierarchical clustering ﬁgure supports this conclusion as well . 30 distance between the members of the clusters is smaller than any other possible combinations of clusters at that point of the classiﬁcation . 18 The numbers at the top of the ﬁgure indicate the average distance between the members in that joint cluster . Consider the branch at the bottom of this ﬁgure . At the ﬁrst level it combines < tea rooms > with the set consisting of < Moroccan > , < Turkish > , < Middle Eastern > , < Greek > and < Mediterranean > . At the next branching point , it breaks out < Moroccan > , and so forth . The main branch ends with the pair < Greek > and < Mediterranean > , which are very close according to this analysis . Results Our analysis of restaurant reviews is complicated by the fact that nearly three - quarters of the restaurants in the sample get categorized in only one restaurant genre . These genre specialists do not provide much relevant information because ( 1 ) secondary contrast is not deﬁned for them and ( 2 ) distance does not enter the picture for producers associated with only one label . So our proposed revision to conceptualization and measurement will not make a di ﬀ erence in such cases . Table 6 reports estimates of comparable speciﬁcations that use di ﬀ erent measurements of niche width , indicated at the top of each column ; so column ( 1 ) reports estimates for the discrete approach ( where NW refers to S DB ) , and col . ( 5 ) for the metric approach with binary label assignments ( where NW refers to e D MB , the normed measure given by eqn . 16 ) . In both speciﬁcations , the e ﬀ ect of maximum contrast is positive and signiﬁcant , as predicted . 19 ( We do not estimate an e ﬀ ect of secondary contrast because it is not deﬁned for the many specialists . ) But the e ﬀ ect of niche width is also positive and signiﬁcant , which runs against H1 . In earlier research with a subset of these data ( with discrete measures ) Kovács and Hannan ( 2010 ) found that the e ﬀ ect of niche width varies greatly with price . So we report estimates with such interactions in cols . ( 2 ) and ( 6 ) . In each case there is a very substantial and signiﬁcant improvement in ﬁt over the models with a single parameter for the niche width e ﬀ ect . Nonetheless we get a di ﬃ cult - to - interpret non - monotonic pattern of niche width by price . These results do not provide support for H1 . 18 We used the hclus procedure in R with the average distance option . We measured distance using eqn . ( 10 ) with the distance between pairs with similarity of zero ( nonintersecting extensions ) set to 0 . 001 . 19 Note that the log - likelihood increases by 72 in col . ( 5 ) , although the mean squared prediction errors are essentially the same . 31 Burmese Indonesian SingaporeanMalaysian Portuguese GermanFondueRussian Modern EuropeanArgentine Tapas / Small PlatesCreperiesBelgian Fish & Chips Irish GastropubsBritish Cafes EthiopianAfrican Tapas Bars SpanishBasque French BrasseriesSoul Food Cajun / CreoleCaribbeanCuban Cambodian Himalayan / Nepalese Persian / Iranian Halal Indian Pakistani Filipino MoroccanKosher Chicken Wings Latin AmericanPeruvian SteakhousesSeafoodBrazilianBuffetsChineseTaiwaneseHawaiianKoreanBarbeque JapaneseSushi Bars Asian FusionThaiTurkish Middle Eastern MediterraneanGreek Tex − Mex Mexican Burgers Fast FoodItalianPizzaAmerican ( New ) American ( Traditional ) Breakfast & BrunchDiners Soup VietnameseDelis SandwichesFood Stands Hot Dogs VegetarianVeganGluten − Free Live / Raw Food 0 5 10 15 20 C l u s t e r D e nd r og r a m h c l u s t ( * , " a v e r age " ) d i s t Height Figure 1 : Hierarchical clustering of the food genres ( “average distance” method—see text ) We think that the predominance of specialists obscures the core issues , for the reasons stated above . So we also estimated speciﬁcations parallel to those just discussed for the multiple - category restaurants only . We calculated likelihood - ratio tests of joint hypothesis 32 that the single - category cases can be pooled with the others ( that there are no interactions between having NW = 0 and the other covariates ) . Speciﬁcally we compared the ﬁt of the pooled model in col . ( 5 ) with the ﬁts of the model in col . ( 7 ) and a comparable model for specialists with the same covariates as in col . ( 5 ) . The likelihood - ratio test statistic , which is distributed as chi - square with 10 degrees of freedom , equals 756 with p < . 001 . The pooling hypothesis is rejected decisively . Given the result of the test just discussed , the most relevant results for our purposes come from comparisons of the estimates reported in cols . ( 4 ) and ( 8 ) . Again the metric estimates ﬁt better than the discrete : the di ﬀ erence in log - likelihoods is 483 . In this case the metric measure also provides a model with a slightly lower prediction error ( 1 . 219 vs 1 . 217 ) . The e ﬀ ect of maximum contrast is again positive and signiﬁcant in both sets of estimates . Now we can also estimate the e ﬀ ect of secondary contrast . It turns out to be positive and signiﬁcant ( opposite the prediction in H2b ) in col . ( 4 ) , but negative and not signiﬁcant in col . ( 8 ) . So H2b is not supported . The biggest di ﬀ erences concern the e ﬀ ects of niche width by price level . In col . ( 4 ) , the e ﬀ ect is positive at all four price levels and the e ﬀ ect is signiﬁcant for three of them . In sharp contrast , the metric measures produce a monotonic pattern : the e ﬀ ect of niche width is positive for “cheap” restaurants and negative for all higher price levels and the e ﬀ ect gets more negative at each higher price level . Here the metric measurement yields a much more interpretable pattern : niche width matters and the way it matters depends on price . At the “cheap” level , consumers appear to value a broad niche , consistent with the popularity of “food courts” in many takeaway food venues . However , as the stakes rise , consumers place more value on genre focus . Indeed this e ﬀ ect is particularly strong at the “splurge” level . It remains to be seen if other research ﬁnds a similar pattern . For present purposes what matters most is that getting this pattern requires taking conceptual distances into account . 33 T a b l e 6 : E ﬀ ec t s o f c o n tr a s t a nd n i c h e w i d t h o n t h e a pp e a l o f r e s t a u r a n t s : M L e s t i m a t e s o f o r d e r e d - l og i t s p ec i ﬁ c a - t i o n s w i t h r e v i e w e r - r a nd o m - e ﬀ ec t s ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) M e a s u r e o f N W S D B S D B S D B S D B f W M B f W M B f W M B f W M B F u ll s a m p l e F u ll s a m p l e S D B 0 S D B > 0 F u ll s a m p l e F u ll s a m p l e f W M B > 0 f W M B > 0 P r i ce l e v e l 2   0 . 277 * * *   0 . 291 * * *   0 . 221 * * * 0 . 203 * * *   0 . 281 * * *   0 . 281 * * *   0 . 216 * * * 1 . 990 * * * ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 006 ) ( 0 . 010 ) ( 0 . 079 ) ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 006 ) ( 0 . 010 ) ( 0 . 074 ) P r i ce l e v e l 3   0 . 135 * * *   0 . 193 * * * 0 . 010 0 . 763 * * *   0 . 138 * * *   0 . 181 * * * 0 . 003 2 . 58 * * * ( 0 . 007 ) ( 0 . 009 ) ( 0 . 012 ) ( 0 . 102 ) ( 0 . 007 ) ( 0 . 009 ) ( 0 . 012 ) ( 0 . 092 ) P r i ce l e v e l 4 0 . 366 * * * 0 . 430 * * * 0 . 162 * * * 0 . 349 0 . 366 * * * 0 . 444 * * * 0 . 166 * * * 3 . 86 * * * ( 0 . 014 ) ( 0 . 016 ) ( 0 . 030 ) ( 0 . 248 ) ( 0 . 014 ) ( 0 . 016 ) ( 0 . 030 ) ( 0 . 301 ) N o n - f oo d g e n r e 0 . 034 * * * 0 . 034 * * * 0 . 069 * * * 0 . 070 * * * 0 . 033 * * * 0 . 033 * * * 0 . 056 * * * 0 . 036 * * * ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 011 ) ( 0 . 011 ) ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 011 ) ( 0 . 011 ) F oo d s t a nd 0 . 598 * * * 0 . 618 * * * 0 . 615 * * * 0 . 626 * * * 0 . 605 * * * 0 . 610 * * * 0 . 610 * * * 0 . 518 * * * ( 0 . 019 ) ( 0 . 019 ) ( 0 . 024 ) ( 0 . 024 ) ( 0 . 019 ) ( 0 . 019 ) ( 0 . 024 ) ( 0 . 024 ) R e v i e w d a t e 0 . 038 * * * 0 . 039 * * * 0 . 025 * * * 0 . 025 * * * 0 . 039 * * * 0 . 039 * * * 0 . 025 * * * 0 . 025 * * * ( 0 . 001 ) ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 001 ) ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 002 ) R e s t . p r o m i n e n ce 0 . 253 * * * 0 . 251 * * * 0 . 225 * * * 0 . 228 * * * 0 . 254 * * * 0 . 252 * * * 0 . 232 * * * 0 . 255 * * * ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 004 ) R e v i e w e r a c t i v i s m   0 . 049 * * *   0 . 046 * * *   0 . 043 * * *   0 . 043 * * *   0 . 047 * * *   0 . 048 * * *   0 . 044 * * *   0 . 044 * * * ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) N W 0 . 041 * * * 0 . 632 * * * 0 . 014 * * * 0 . 073 * * ( 0 . 009 ) ( 0 . 058 ) ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 037 ) N W ⇥ p r i ce 1   0 . 054 * * * 1 . 38 * * *   0 . 008 2 . 23 * * * ( 0 . 017 ) ( 0 . 130 ) ( 0 . 010 ) ( 0 . 075 ) N W ⇥ p r i ce 2 0 . 044 * * * 0 . 563 * * * 0 . 004   0 . 442 * * * ( 0 . 011 ) ( 0 . 072 ) ( 0 . 007 ) ( 0 . 048 ) N W ⇥ p r i ce 3 0 . 241 * * *   0 . 071 0 . 125 * * *   0 . 877 * * * ( 0 . 020 ) ( 0 . 144 ) ( 0 . 012 ) ( 0 . 080 ) N W ⇥ p r i ce 4   0 . 590 * * * 1 . 01 * *   0 . 401 * * *   2 . 11 * * * ( 0 . 060 ) ( 0 . 447 ) ( 0 . 036 ) ( 0 . 334 ) M a x . c o n t r a s t 0 . 268 * * * 0 . 261 * * * 0 . 228 * * * 0 . 200 * * * 0 . 150 * * * 0 . 137 * * * 0 . 279 * * * 0 . 240 * * * ( 0 . 024 ) ( 0 . 024 ) ( 0 . 055 ) ( 0 . 055 ) ( 0 . 019 ) ( 0 . 019 ) ( 0 . 045 ) ( 0 . 046 ) S ec . c o n t r a s t 0 . 129 * * * 0 . 152 * * * 0 . 039   0 . 053 ( 0 . 044 ) ( 0 . 045 ) ( 0 . 035 ) ( 0 . 035 ) C u t - o ﬀ p o i n t s   1 . 173 * * *   1 . 21 * * *   1 . 01 * * *   0 . 618 * * *   1 . 28 * * *   1 . 30 * * *   1 . 29 * * * 0 . 539 * * * ( 0 . 025 ) ( 0 . 025 ) ( 0 . 053 ) ( 0 . 082 ) ( 0 . 022 ) ( 0 . 022 ) ( 0 . 046 ) ( 0 . 072 )   0 . 117 * * *   0 . 149 * * * 0 . 070 0 . 463 * * *   0 . 224 * * *   0 . 248 * * *   0 . 214 * * * 1 . 62 * * * ( 0 . 025 ) ( 0 . 025 ) ( 0 . 052 ) ( 0 . 081 ) ( 0 . 021 ) ( 0 . 022 ) ( 0 . 046 ) ( 0 . 072 ) 0 . 997 * * * 0 . 967 * * * 1 . 204 * * * 1 . 598 * * * 0 . 891 * * * 0 . 865 * * * 0 . 920 * * * 2 . 76 * * * ( 0 . 025 ) ( 0 . 025 ) ( 0 . 052 ) ( 0 . 081 ) ( 0 . 021 ) ( 0 . 022 ) ( 0 . 046 ) ( 0 . 072 ) 2 . 71 * * * 2 . 68 * * * 2 . 93 * * * 3 . 32 * * * 2 . 61 * * * 2 . 58 * * * 2 . 65 * * * 4 . 49 * * * ( 0 . 025 ) ( 0 . 025 ) ( 0 . 052 ) ( 0 . 082 ) ( 0 . 022 ) ( 0 . 022 ) ( 0 . 046 ) ( 0 . 072 ) ˆ   2 ⌫ 0 . 033 * * * 0 . 048 * * * 0 . 054 * * * 0 . 054 * * * 0 . 048 * * * 0 . 033 * * * 0 . 054 * * * 0 . 054 * * * ( 0 . 001 ) ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 001 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) O b s e r v a t i o n s 766 , 229 766 , 229 268 , 996 268 , 996 766 , 229 766 , 229 268 , 996 268 , 996 N o . o f r e v i e w e r s 59 , 441 59 , 441 40 , 938 40 , 938 59 , 441 59 , 441 40 , 938 40 , 938 M e a n s q . p r e d . e rr o r 1 . 242 1 . 242 1 . 219 1 . 219 1 . 242 1 . 242 1 . 219 1 . 217 L og - li k e li h oo d   1 , 080 , 5 43   1 , 080 , 027   377 , 918   377 , 890   1 , 080 , 471   1 , 080 , 182   377 , 974   377 , 407 S t a nd a r d e rr o r s i n p a r e n t h e s e s * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 34 Popular and more expensive restaurants and food stands receive higher ratings ; activist reviewers give lower ratings . Surprisingly , being categorized with a non - food label has a small positive e ﬀ ect on ratings . This result runs against the spirit of the category - spanning story . It is worth further investigation . Discussion We began with a general pattern emerging in contemporary research : objects categorized in multiple genres su ﬀ er diminished appeal in the eye of audience members . We argued that better understanding of the consequences of spanning requires consideration of the struc - ture of the underlying conceptual space . We made two arguments . First , the socio - cultural distances between the genres being combined a ﬀ ects evaluations : the less similar are the spanned genres , the more confusing is the identity of the object . Such confusion lowers appeal to audience members . Second , the contrasts of categories also inﬂuence the conse - quences of combination . Because high - contrast categories come with stronger expectations and norms , we expect that combining high - contrast categories leads to more confusion and therefore to lower appeal to audience members . Studying these propositions empirically required rethinking how multiple - category mem - bership inﬂuences objects’ appeal to audience members . We took as a starting point the approach of Hsu et al . ( 2009 ) , which by now has become a widespread approach to study multiple memberships . This approach assumes that , because the schemas for the various labels di ﬀ er , organizations that get assigned only one label generally ﬁt to that genre schema better than do those that get assigned two or more labels . Therefore , Hsu et al . ( 2009 ) argue that typicality in each genre falls as more labels get assigned . They propose that typicalities can be measured simply in terms of the count of labels assigned . Our goal to take conceptual space into account led us to rework this approach . We proposed that distances in conceptual space be built directly into the categorization function in a way that yields lower typicalities for objects that combine more distant concepts . We then use the new measure of typicality to calculate contrast . Thus we arrive at a measure of contrast that builds on the agents’ conceptual structure of the domain . We also introduced two alternative measures to niche width that incorporate the similarity structure of the concepts . 35 In the empirical part of the paper we analyzed customers’ evaluations of books and restaurants . We found strong support for two theoretical propositions in the book setting and mixed support in the restaurant setting . Importantly , we found that the proposed measures provide better model ﬁts than the approach used previously , suggesting that they provide a more precise description of the data . In other words , incorporating information about the structure of conceptual spaces indeed leads to a better understanding of the consequences of genre spanning . Our proposed approach could be useful in diverse empirical settings . Organizational examples include law ﬁrms ( some practices are closer to others ) , wineries ( looking at di ﬀ erent blends of varietals to calculate distances among varietals ) , movies ( certain movie genres are closer to others ) , ﬁnancial organizations such as hedge funds ( some stocks and ﬁnancial instruments are closer to each other than others , thus hedge funds di ﬀ er in their focus ) . Other possible applications include genre combination in work ( Leahey 2007 ) innovation ( Wezel et al . 2014 ) , and culture ( Goldberg , Hannan , and Kovács 2014b ) , More generally , we believe that taking conceptual distances into account matters not only for issues in organizational and economic sociology but for other domains of sociological research as well . For example , in cultural sociology , the question of “omnivore” consumers has attracted considerable interest ( e . g . , Peterson ( 1992 ) ; Goldberg ( 2011 ) ; Goldberg et al . ( 2014b ) ) , but extant research has not taken distance in conceptual space into account when measuring omnivorousness . Rather , researchers typically take a list of the genres consumed by the actor and measure omnivorousness with the number of genres consumed and / or appreciated . The results in the current paper suggest that such practice might lead to erroneous conclusions by failing to take distances into account . For instance , a person who consumes < opera > and < blues > is more omnivore than a person who consumes < opera > and < chamber music > . Yet a measure that only counts the number of genres consumed will miss this distinction . The framework developed in the current paper suggests using an approach that incorporates genre distances into the measure of omnivorousness . A possible approach could be to measure omnivorousness with the niche width of the consumption portfolio of the consumer . We leave for future research the exploration of this idea and its consequences for cultural sociology . A potential limitation of the current paper is the assumption that audience members share the same cognitive schemata and conceptual space . For instance , in the case of restau - rants , we have assumed that the < Italian > and < Mexican > cuisines are perceived to be 36 similar to the same extent by all restaurant patrons in San Francisco , and , as a consequence , restaurants that span these two cuisines would similarly confuse patrons . Relatedly , we as - sumed that audience member perceive the same contrasts . These assumptions are likely to be only partially true ( Goldberg 2011 ) . Di ﬀ erent audience members have di ﬀ erent tastes and preferences , and they might have been exposed to a di ﬀ erent set of genres and genre combinations . While we do not address this possible diversity in this paper , future research can build on our approach in investigating the implications of heterogeneity in audience members’ perception of conceptual structure . Ideally , one would build a dynamic under - standing of audience members’ tastes , similarity perceptions , and sampling behaviors . Using labels to infer category membership could be more tenuous than we have assumed . For instance , multiple labels do not di ﬀ erentiate between < food - court > and < fusion > sit - uations ( Baron 2004 ) . That is , a < Mexican > / < French > restaurant might list Mexican dishes on one side of its menu and French dishes on the other side ; or , it might serve only dishes that fuse elements of the two cuisines . These are qualitatively distinct forms of spanning , and these restaurants would attract di ﬀ erent audiences . We cannot , however , tell these cases apart in our data . Future work is needed to address this distinction both theoretically and empirically , for example , by analyzing restaurant menus—see Kovács and Johnson ( 2014 ) . Relatedly , we argued that spanning restaurants and books get devalued because they confuse audience members . It is possible that in certain cases the fact that the restaurant or the book is classiﬁed into multiple genres actually clariﬁes the expectations of audience members . For example , it could be the case that a restaurant that is classiﬁed as < vegan > and < sushi > only serves vegetarian sushi . To explore this possibility , we collected the menus of multiple panning restaurants . Although we did not conduct a formal analysis of the menus , it seems to us that spanners are more likely to o ﬀ er a wide range of dishes than a speciﬁc set of dishes that lie in the overlap between the listed categories . The measures proposed for estimating distances in conceptual spaces could aid re - searchers in studying the evolution of genres over time . Genres that are distant in one time period might move closer in subsequent ones . Adjusting for the dissimilarity of genres seems particularly useful when the conceptual structure is in ﬂux . Indeed the ﬁnding that distance among concepts and the contrast of the associated categories inﬂuence objects’ eval - uation might have interesting dynamic consequences . If objects in low - contrast categories are more likely to get categorized in multiple genres , then the contrasts of these categories further decrease ; and the contrasts of crisper categories would further increase or at least 37 remain stable . Pontikes and Hannan ( 2014 ) ﬁnd evidence of such a pattern in the software industry . These processes would imply a tendency toward the macro - level polarization of categories’ contrasts . Another possibly interesting dynamic links genre similarity and the distances among them . On one hand , distance a ﬀ ects the prevalence of spanning . Genre combination , how - ever , inﬂuences how audiences perceive the distance among genres : research in cognitive psychology and linguistics show that categories that tend to occur together are perceived to be similar Church and Hanks 1990 . This feedback loop between spanning and genre distances implies a polarization of distances between genres : initially similar pairs will get combined more often thereby increasing their similarity ; and dissimilar pairs will rarely be combined , keeping their similarity low . The arguments we developed and tested in this paper relate to the general reactions to genre spanning . This is not to say that we think more speciﬁc argumentation cannot be developed to predict cases in which genre spanning could be beneﬁcial . A potentially useful line of argument builds on the middle - status conformity argument ( Phillips and Zuckerman 2001 ) . Producers with a strong organizational identity ( net of the categorical identities that apply ) likely face weaker pressures to conform to audience expectations . If so , then spanner with high status and high visibility might face little penalty for spanning distant categories so long as the spanning is consistent with the individual identity . Using this kind of argument in empirical research requires a priori identiﬁcation of the contours if individual identities . So a strategic move in this direction requires greater knowledge about audience schemas for individual objects than has been available in any research we know . Another potential extensions could be to use the proposed approach to study the diver - sity of organizations entering a given category ( McKendrick and Carroll 2001 ) . The process of legitimation would likely change if de - alio entrants come from a set of industries that are close versus distant from one another . Future research might look at how , when novel forms ﬁrst emerge , their distance relative to others a ﬀ ects legitimation ( Ruef 2000 ) . Future research could also explore alternative measurement approaches . For example , one could put more emphasis on the analysis of audience structures and on the taste of audience members regarding genre spanning by using the novel approach of relational class analysis ( Goldberg 2011 ) . Future research that uses review data should also consider the selection problems that arise in such data : while this paper analyzed how genre spanning inﬂuences whether the restaurants get high or low ratings , we did not model the chance that 38 these restaurants are visited or reviewed . We suspect that genre spanning does inﬂuence selection , but our data do not allow us to investigate this question further . References Baron , James N . 2004 . “Employing Identities in Organizational Ecology . ” Industrial and Corporate Change 13 : 3 – 32 . Batagelj , Vladimir and Matevz Bren . 1995 . “Comparing Resemblance Measures . ” Journal of Classiﬁcation 12 : 73 – 90 . Carroll , Glenn R . , Mi Feng , Gaël Le Mens , and David G . McKendrick . 2010 . “Organizational Evolution with Fuzzy Technological Formats : Tape Drive Producers in the World Market , 1951 – 1998 . ” Research in the Sociology of Organizations 31 : 203 – 234 . Carroll , Glenn R . and Dennis R . Wheaton . 2009 . “The Organizational Construction of Authenticity : An Examination of Contemporary Food and Dining in the U . S . ” Research in Organizational Behavior 29 : 255 – 282 . Cerulo , Karen A . 2006 . Never Saw It Coming : Cultural Challenges to Envisioning the Worst . University of Chicago Press . Chater , Nick and Paul M . B . Vitányi . 2003 . “The Generalized Universal Law of Generaliza - tion . ” Journal of Mathematical Psychology 47 : 346 – 369 . Church , Kenneth W . and Patrick Hanks . 1990 . “Word Association Norms , Mutual Informa - tion , and Lexicography . ” Computational Linguistics 16 : 22 – 29 . DiMaggio , Paul J . 1997 . “Culture and Cognition . ” Annual Review of Sociology 23 : 263 – 287 . Durkheim , Emile and Marcel Mauss . 1969 [ 1903 ] . Primitive Classiﬁcation . London : Rout - ledge . Gärdenfors , Peter . 2004 . Conceptual Spaces : The Geometry of Thought . Cambridge : MIT Press . Garﬁnkel , Harold . 1968 . Studies in Ethnomethodology . Cambridge : Polity Press . 39 Goldberg , Amir . 2011 . “Mapping Shared Understandings Using Relational Class Analy - sis : The Case of the Cultural Omnivore Reconsidered . ” American Journal of Sociology 116 : 1397 – 1436 . Goldberg , Amir , Michael Hannan , Greta Hsu , Balázs Kovács , Gaël Le Mens , Giacomo Negro , László Pólos , Elizabeth Pontikes , and Amanda Sharkey . 2014a . “Conceptual Spaces and Label Spaces : A Geometric Model . ” Unpublished Manuscript . Goldberg , Amir , Michael T . Hannan , and Balázs Kovács . 2014b . “What Does It Mean to Span Cultural Boundaries . ” Presented at the Analytical Sociology Conference , Mannheim . Greene , William . 2004 . “The Behaviour of the Maximum Likelihood Estimator of Limited Dependent Variable Models in the Presence of Fixed E ﬀ ects . ” Econometrics Journal 7 : 98 – 119 . Griswold , Wendy . 1987 . “The Fabrication of Meaning : Literary Interpretation in the United States , Great Britain , and the West Indies . ” American Journal of Sociology 92 : 1077 – 1117 . Griswold , Wendy , Terry McDonnell , and Nathan Wright . 2005 . “Reading and the Reading Class in the Twenty - First Century . ” Annual Review of Sociology 31 : 127 – 141 . Hampton , James A . 2007 . “Typicality , Graded Membership , and Vagueness . ” Cognitive Science 31 : 355 – 383 . Hannan , Michael T . 2010 . “Partiality of Memberships in Categories and Audiences . ” Annual Review of Sociology 36 : 159 – 181 . Hannan , Michael T . , László Pólos , and Glenn R . Carroll . 2007 . Logics of Organization Theory : Audiences , Codes , and Ecologies . Princeton , N . J . : Princeton University Press . Hsu , Greta . 2006 . “Jacks of All Trades and Masters of None : Audiences’ Reactions to Spanning Genres in Feature Film Production . ” Administrative Science Quarterly 51 : 420 – 450 . Hsu , Greta , Michael T . Hannan , and Özgeçan Koçak . 2009 . “Multiple Category Member - ships in Markets : An Integrative Theory and Two Empirical Tests . ” American Sociological Review 74 : 150 – 169 . 40 Hsu , Greta , Michael T . Hannan , and László Pólos . 2011 . “Typecasting , Legitimation , and Form Emergence : A Formal Theory . ” Sociological Theory 29 : 97 – 123 . Jaccard , Paul . 1901 . “Étude Comparative de la Distribution Florale dans une Portion des Alpes et des Jura . ” Bulletin de la Société Vaudoise des Sciences Naturelles 37 : 547 – 579 . Johnston , Josée and Shyon Baumann . 2007 . “Democracy Versus Distinction : A Study of Omnivorousness in Gourmet Food Writing . ” American Journal of Sociology 113 : 165 – 204 . Koçak , Özgeçan , Michael T . Hannan , and Greta Hsu . 2014 . “Emergence of Market Orders : Audience Interaction and Vanguard Inﬂuence . ” Organization Studies 35 : 765 – 790 . Kovács , Balázs and Michael T . Hannan . 2010 . “The Consequences of Category Spanning Depend on Contrast . ” Research in the Sociology of Organizations 31 : 175 – 201 . Kovács , Balázs and Michael T . Hannan . 2013 . “Category Spanning , Distance , and Appeal . ” Research Report 2081R , Stanford Graduate School of Business . Kovács , Balázs and Rebeka Johnson . 2014 . “Contrasting Alternative Explanations for the Consequences of Category Spanning : A Study of Restaurant Reviews and Menus in San Francisco . ” Strategic Organization 12 : 7 – 37 . Kruskal , Joseph B . and Myron Wish . 1978 . Multidimensional Scaling . Beverly Hills , Calif . : Sage . Leahey , Erin . 2007 . “Not by Productivity Alone : How Visibility and Specialization Con - tribute to Academic Earnings . ” American Sociological Review 72 : 533 – 561 . Leung , Ming and Amanda Sharkey . 2014 . “Out of Sight , Out of Mind : Evidence of Percep - tual Factors in the Multiple - Category Discount . ” Organization Science 25 : 171 – 184 . Leung , Ming D . 2011 . “Apples to Oranges : How Category Overlap Faciliates Commensu - ration in an Online Market for Services . ” Presented at the Meetings of the Academy of Management . Leung , Ming D . 2014 . “Dilettante or Renaissance Man ? How the Order of Job Experiences A ﬀ ects Perceptions of Ability in an External Labor Market . ” American Sociological Review 79 : 136 – 158 . 41 McKendrick , David G . and Glenn R . Carroll . 2001 . “On the Genesis of Organizational Forms : Evidence from the Market for Disk Drive Arrays . ” Organization Science 12 : 661 – 683 . Negro , Giacomo , Michael T . Hannan , and Hayagreeva Rao . 2010a . “Categorical Contrast and Audience Appeal : Niche Width and Critical Success in Winemaking . ” Industrial and Corporate Change 19 : 1397 – 1425 . Negro , Giacomo , Michael T . Hannan , and Hayagreeva Rao . 2011 . “Category Reinterpre - tation and Defection : Modernism and Tradition in Italian Winemaking . ” Organization Science 22 : 1449 – 1463 . Negro , Giacomo , Özgeçan Koçak , and Greta Hsu . 2010b . “Research on Categories in the Sociology of Organizations . ” Research in the Sociology of Organizations 31 : 1 – 35 . Negro , Giacomo and Ming D . Leung . 2013 . “‘Actual’ and Perceptual E ﬀ ects of Category Spanning . ” Organization Science 24 : 684 – 696 . Olzak , Susan and Nandini Roy . 2013 . “Does Spanning Ideological Categories A ﬀ ect Terrorist Organizations ? ” Presented at the Organizational Ecology Conference , Budapest . Peterson , Richard A . 1992 . “Understanding Audience Segmentation : From Elite and Mass to Omnivore and Univore . ” Poetics 21 : 243 – 258 . Phillips , Damon J . and Ezra W . Zuckerman . 2001 . “Middle - status Conformity : Theoret - ical Reﬁnement and Empirical Demonstration in Two Markets . ” American Journal of Sociology 107 : 379 – 429 . Pontikes , Elizabeth G . 2008 . Fitting In or Starting New ? An Analysis of Invention , Con - straint , and the Emergence of New Categories in the Software Industry . Ph . D . thesis , Stanford University . Pontikes , Elizabeth G . 2012a . “Fitting In or Starting New ? An Analysis of Invention , Constraint , and the Emergence of New Categories in the Software Industryn or starting new ? Invention , leniency , and category emergence in the software industry , 1990 – 2002 . ” Technical report , University of Chicago Booth School of Business . Pontikes , Elizabeth G . 2012b . “Two Sides of the Same Coin : How Ambiguous Classiﬁcation A ﬀ ects Multiple Audience Evaluations . ” Administrative Science Quarterly 57 : 81 – 118 . 42 Pontikes , Elizabeth G . and Michael T . Hannan . 2014 . “An Ecology of Social Categories . ” Sociological Science 1 : 311 – 343 . Rao , Hayagreeva , Philippe Monin , and Rodolphe Durand . 2005 . “Border Crossing : Bricolage and the Erosion of Categorical Boundaries in French Gastronomy . ” American Sociological Review 70 : 968 – 991 . Rosch , Eleanor and Carolyn B . Mervis . 1975 . “Family Resemblances : Studies in the Internal Structure of Categories . ” Cognitive Psychology 7 : 573 – 605 . Rosch , Eleanor H . 1975 . “Cognitive Representations of Semantic Categories . ” Journal of Experimental Psychology : General 104 : 192 – 233 . Ruef , Martin . 2000 . “The Emergence of Organizational Forms : A Community Ecology Approach . ” American Journal of Sociology 106 : 658 – 714 . Shepard , Roger N . 1987 . “Toward a Universal Law of Generalization for Psychological Science . ” Science 237 : 1317 – 1323 . Simmel , Georg . 1978 [ 1907 ] . The Philosophy of Money . Boston : Routledge . Simpson , Edward H . 1949 . “Measurement of Diversity . ” Nature 163 : 688 . Smith , Edward Bishop . 2011 . “Identities as Lenses : How Organizational Identity A ﬀ ects Audiences’ Evaluation of Organizational Performance . ” Administrative Science Quarterly 56 : 61 – 94 . Tenenbaum , Joshua B . and Thomas L . Gri ﬃ ths . 2002 . “Generalization , Similarity , and Bayesian Inference . ” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 24 : 629 – 640 . Vaisey , Stephen . 2009 . “Motivation and Justiﬁcation : A Dual - Process Model of Culture in Action . ” American Journal of Sociology 114 : 1675 – 1715 . Verheyen , Steven , James A . Hampton , and Gert Storms . 2010 . “A Probabilistic Threshold Model : Analyzing Semantic Categorization Data With the Rasch Model . ” Acta Psycho - logica 135 : 216 – 225 . 43 Wezel , Filippo , Balázs Kovács , and Gianluca Carnabuci . 2014 . “Being There : Patent Class Contrast and the Impact of Technological Innovations . ” Unpublished manuscript , Uni - versity of Lugano . Widdows , Dominic . 2004 . Geometry and Meaning . Stanford CA : CSLI Publications . Zuckerman , Ezra W . 1999 . “The Categorical Imperative : Securities Analysts and the Legit - imacy Discount . ” American Journal of Sociology 104 : 1398 – 1438 . Zuckerman , Ezra W . , Tai - Young Kim , Kalinda Ukanwa , and James von Rittmann . 2003 . “Robust Identities or Non - entities ? Typecasting in the Feature Film Labor Market . ” American Journal of Sociology 108 : 1018 – 1075 . 44