Article A Human Interactome in Three Quantitative Dimensions Organized by Stoichiometries and Abundances Graphical Abstract Highlights d Human interactome dataset connecting 5 , 400 proteins with 28 , 500 interactions d Three quantitative dimensions measure speciﬁcities , stoichiometries , and abundances d Stable complexes are rare but stand out by a signature of balanced stoichiometries d Weak interactions dominate the network and have critical topological properties Authors Marco Y . Hein , Nina C . Hubner , Ina Poser , . . . , Frank Buchholz , Anthony A . Hyman , Matthias Mann Correspondence hyman @ mpi - cbg . de ( A . A . H . ) , mmann @ biochem . mpg . de ( M . M . ) In Brief Weak interactions shape the cellular protein interaction network as determined from proteomic measures of cellular interaction speciﬁcities , the strength of those interactions , and the cellular copy numbers of the proteins involved . Hein et al . , 2015 , Cell 163 , 712 – 723 October 22 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2015 . 09 . 053 Article A Human Interactome in Three Quantitative Dimensions Organized by Stoichiometries and Abundances Marco Y . Hein , 1 , 6 , 8 Nina C . Hubner , 1 , 6 , 9 Ina Poser , 2 Ju¨rgen Cox , 1 Nagarjuna Nagaraj , 1 Yusuke Toyoda , 2 , 10 Igor A . Gak , 3 Ina Weisswange , 4 , 5 Jo¨rg Mansfeld , 3 Frank Buchholz , 2 , 4 Anthony A . Hyman , 2 , 7 , * and Matthias Mann 1 , 7 , * 1 Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry , 82152 Martinsried , Germany 2 Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics , 01307 Dresden , Germany 3 Cell Cycle , Biotechnology Center , TU Dresden , 01307 Dresden , Germany 4 Medical Systems Biology , UCC , Medical Faculty Carl Gustav Carus , TU Dresden , 01307 Dresden , Germany 5 Eupheria Biotech GmbH , 01307 Dresden , Germany 6 Co - ﬁrst author 7 Co - senior author 8 Present address : Howard Hughes Medical Institute , University of California San Francisco , San Francisco , CA 94143 , USA 9 Present address : Department of Molecular Biology , Faculty of Science , Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences , Radboud University Nijmegen , Nijmegen 6525 GA , the Netherlands 10 Present address : Institute of Life Science , Kurume University , Kurume , Fukuoka 839 - 0864 , Japan * Correspondence : hyman @ mpi - cbg . de ( A . A . H . ) , mmann @ biochem . mpg . de ( M . M . ) http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2015 . 09 . 053 SUMMARY The organization of a cell emerges from the inter - actions in protein networks . The interactome is criti - cally dependent on the strengths of interactions and the cellular abundances of the connected proteins , both of which span orders of magnitude . However , these aspects have not yet been analyzed globally . Here , we have generated a library of HeLa cell lines expressing 1 , 125 GFP - tagged proteins under near - endogenous control , which we used as input for a next - generation interaction survey . Using quantita - tive proteomics , we detect speciﬁc interactions , estimate interaction stoichiometries , and measure cellular abundances of interacting proteins . These three quantitative dimensions reveal that the protein network is dominated by weak , substoichiometric in - teractions that play a pivotal role in deﬁning network topology . The minority of stable complexes can be identiﬁed by their unique stoichiometry signature . This study provides a rich interaction dataset con - necting thousands of proteins and introduces a framework for quantitative network analysis . INTRODUCTION Proteins are central protagonists of life at the molecular level . They interact for structural , regulatory , and catalytic purposes , forming macromolecular structures as well as stable or transient multi - protein complexes . Accordingly , protein interactions vary greatly in their biophysical properties , while protein abundances range from a few to millions of copies per cell . The interactome is therefore the product of two factors : binary afﬁnities between protein interfaces ( Rual et al . , 2005 ; Stelzl et al . , 2005 ; Rolland et al . , 2014 ) and the cellular proteome , which itself is character - ized by subcellular localization , post - translational modiﬁcations and protein concentrations ( Hein et al . , 2013 ; Mann et al . , 2013 ) . Mapping the protein interactome landscape has been a long - standing goal of modern biology and a variety of methods have been developed to this end ( Seebacher and Gavin , 2011 ) . Afﬁnity puriﬁcation followed by mass spectrometry ( AP - MS ) can in prin - ciple determine the members of protein complexes in their cellular context in an unbiased manner ( Gingras et al . , 2007 ) and has enabled large - scale protein interaction studies of several model organisms , including human cells ( Ewing et al . , 2007 ; Malovannaya et al . , 2011 ) . Nanoscale liquid chromatog - raphy ( LC ) coupled to sensitive and fast mass spectrometers has boosted interaction proteomics technology in recent years , increasing coverage and minimizing false negative rates . It has also enabled a paradigm shift from identiﬁcation to quantiﬁcation of interacting proteins ( Bantscheff et al . , 2012 ) . Quantitative ap - proaches permit the use of mild immunoprecipitation ( IP ) proto - cols and allow speciﬁc binders to stand out by their quantitative signature even from very large backgrounds of unspeciﬁc pro - teins ( Mellacheruvu et al . , 2013 ; Keilhauer et al . , 2015 ) . Addition - ally , MS - based proteomics is now able to characterize entire cellular proteomes with increasingly complete coverage ( Beck et al . , 2011 ; Mann et al . , 2013 ) , providing abundances and copy - number estimates of the expressed proteins . This should now allow studying the quantitative interactome as a function of the underlying proteome . To generate model systems that closely recapitulate in vivo conditions , we have previously devel - oped bacterial artiﬁcial chromosome ( BAC ) transgeneomics : GFP - tagged proteins are expressed in mammalian cell lines from BAC transgenes with near - endogenous expression pat - terns from human or orthologous mouse loci ( Poser et al . , 2008 ) . GFP - based tags are dual - purpose in that they can be used for both imaging and as afﬁnity handle . Combining these 712 Cell 163 , 712 – 723 , October 22 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . cell lines with the quantitative proteomics workﬂow resulted in a versatile and highly speciﬁc method that we termed quantitative BAC - GFP interactomics ( QUBIC ) ( Hubner et al . , 2010 ) . Here , we applied QUBIC in a proteome - wide manner , using 1 , 125 bait proteins to assemble a large - scale map of the human interactome . We characterize individual interactions in three quantitative dimensions that address statistical signiﬁcance , interaction stoichiometry , and cellular abundances of interac - tors . This concept provides a unique perspective on the interac - tome , enabling the discovery and characterization of stable and transient protein complexes , guiding their functional interpreta - tion and shedding light on the topological architecture of the entire network . RESULTS Quantitative BAC - GFP Interactomics Collections of strains or cell lines expressing tagged proteins are indispensable tools for many systems biology approaches ( Huh et al . , 2003 ) . Expressing GFP - tagged proteins from engi - neered BAC transgenes maintains the endogenous promoters , intron - exon - structures and regulatory elements , ensuring near - endogenous expression levels and patterns ( Poser et al . , 2008 ) ( Figure S1A ) . We have previously used this system to study chromosome segregation and the function of motor proteins ( Hutchins et al . , 2010 ; Maliga et al . , 2013 ) . To map the protein in - teractome globally , we generated a resource of 1 , 330 stable BAC - GFP HeLa cell lines ( Figure 1A ; Table S1 ) . Mouse BACs are excellent surrogates for their human orthologs and offer additional options , such as resistance to RNAi against their endogenous counterparts , streamlining functional studies of the tagged proteins ( Kittler et al . , 2005 ) . In 615 cell lines , we used mouse BACs with a median sequence identity of 94 % with their respective orthologs ( Figure S1B ) . Overall , our collec - tion encompasses 1 , 125 distinct bait proteins across all protein classes ( Figures S1C – S1E ) , some present as C - and N - terminally tagged versions , or as mouse and human sequences ( not counted as distinct ) . We performed QUBIC in three biological replicate experiments , resultingin3 , 990LC - MSrunsrecordedonanOrbitrapmassspec - trometer , takingaboutayearofnetmeasuringtime ( Figure1B ) . To deﬁne speciﬁc interactors , we employed MaxLFQ , the label - free quantiﬁcation ( LFQ ) module of the MaxQuant software ( Cox and Mann , 2008 ; Cox et al . , 2014 ) . Bait proteins and their interactors are characterized by quantitative co - enrichment compared to their intensity proﬁles across many samples ( Figures 1B and 1C ) , and we used generic statistical testing to determine signiﬁ - cantly enriched cases ( Keilhauer et al . , 2015 ) . To set thresholds for accepting a given candidate as an interactor , we developed an entirely data - driven , false discovery rate ( FDR ) - controlled approach that harnesses the absence of ‘‘negative’’ interactions and the concomitant asymmetry of the outlier population ( Figures S1F and S1G ) . This approach does not rely on reference datasets orpriorknowledgefortraining , butnonethelessvalidatesfavorably against gold standards ( Figures S1I – S1K ) . In addition to local co - enrichment , we found the intensity pro - ﬁles of interacting proteins to be closely correlated globally ( Sup - plemental Experimental Procedures ) . Proﬁle correlations alone can indicate protein interactions when proteome samples are subjected to extensive native fractionation ( Havugimana et al . , 2012 ; Kristensen et al . , 2012 ) . Here , we use them as additional classiﬁers ( Keilhauer et al . , 2015 ) and the combination of enrich - ment FDRs and proﬁle correlation coefﬁcients deﬁnes the conﬁ - dence class of each interaction ( Figure S1H ) . Overall , using the information in this ﬁrst dimension of proteo - mic quantiﬁcation , our analysis resulted in 28 , 504 unique and statistically signiﬁcant interactions involving 5 , 462 distinct pro - teins ( Table S2 ) . Interaction Stoichiometries and Protein Abundances A second dimension of quantiﬁcation can in principle be applied to determine the stoichiometries of proteins within complexes . BAC library GFP - taggedlocus BAC - transgenicHeLa line 1 , 330 BAC - GFP lines 1 , 125 distinct bait proteins inter - actor GFP bait back - ground single - step anti - GFP IP single shot LC - MS / MS biological triplicates 3 , 990 MS samples Intensity p r e ys specific interactors s t o i c h i o - m e t r i es ce ll u l a r a bund a n ces ba i t 1 ba i t 2 ba i t n p r o t e - o m e . . . • co - enrichment (cid:129) correlation 10 2 10 3 10 4 10 5 10 6 10 7 10 8 n . d . 10 − 10 10 − 9 10 − 8 10 − 7 10 − 6 10 − 5 10 − 4 HeLa proteome interactorsbaits 161 58 8804 5305 1068 copies / cell mol / l A B C D Figure 1 . Quantitative BAC - GFP Interactomics ( A ) BAC recombineering workﬂow for generating transgenic HeLa lines . ( B ) Single - step afﬁnity - puriﬁcation , single - run liquid chromatography - tandem mass spectrometry ( LC - MS / MS ) workﬂow . ( C ) Schematic protein quantiﬁcation matrices in interactome and proteome samples with three dimensions of quantiﬁcation . ( D ) Proteome coverage and abundance distribution of the bait proteins and their interactors . See also Tables S1 , S2 , and S3 . Cell 163 , 712 – 723 , October 22 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . 713 These can be computationally extracted from label - free afﬁnity puriﬁcation data with accuracies reaching those of methods us - ing isotopically labeled reference standards ( Wepf et al . , 2009 ; Smits et al . , 2012 ) . If a protein complex contained one copy of each subunit , one might expect them to be retrieved in equimolar amounts after immunoprecipitation ( IP ) . However , in practice , measured stoichiometries between preys and baits span orders of magnitude ( Collins et al . , 2013 ; Hauri et al . , 2013 ) . This is because the observed stoichiometries depend on more than the initial composition of the individual complexes in the cell . For instance , limited kinetic and thermodynamic stability can result in substoichiometric recovery . Proteins may also reside in different alternative molecular assemblies with fractions of their total cellular pools . Hence , we hypothesized that globally , interaction stoichiometries might reﬂect the stability of a given protein - protein interaction and depend on the extent that inter - actors are engaged with each other . The cellular abundance of an interactor can be limiting for how much is recoverable after immunoprecipitation ( IP ) , setting a lower bound for the interaction stoichiometry . We therefore reasoned that cellular copy numbers would provide a crucial third quantitative dimension . For each pair of interacting proteins , we ﬁrst quantiﬁed their stoichiometry in the immunoprecipitates using a sophisticated label - free strategy for absolute protein quantiﬁcation ( Supple - mental Experimental Procedures ) . To determine the precision of our method , we systematically compared interaction stoichi - ometries from experiments where the same bait proteins were tagged on different termini , representing entirely separate exper - iments ( Figures S2A and S2E ) . Stoichiometries showed high cor - relation , precision within a factor of three , and no systematic bias for a given terminus . This conﬁrmed that our approach robustly delivers interaction stoichiometries in high throughput ; however , these may not always be sufﬁciently accurate to reliably specify copy numbers of each subunit , even for stable complexes . We repeated the analysis for cases where either the mouse or human ortholog of a protein was used as bait , demonstrating the same level of reliability and no species bias ( Figures S2B – S2D ) . This highlights the extraordinary degree of conservation of protein function in evolutionary time ( Kachroo et al . , 2015 ) and suggests that our human - centric dataset is representative not only of the human but other mammalian species . To add a third dimension of proteomic quantiﬁcation , we next performed a whole proteome quantiﬁcation experiment on the parental HeLa cell line that all our BAC - transgenic lines are derived from , to a depth of about 9 , 000 proteins . To estimate cellular protein abundances , we applied our label - free approach and scaled the values to copies per cell using the ‘‘proteomic ruler’’ concept ( Wi (cid:1) sniewski et al . , 2014 ) ( Supplemental Experi - mental Procedures ) . The proteome dataset provided cellular copy numbers for 5 , 305 proteins of the interactome dataset , covering 97 % of all interactors ( Figure 1D ) . The abundances of interacting proteins closely follow the distribution of bait abun - dances , covering the entire dynamic range of the proteome . This demonstrates that our BAC - based system recapitulates the in vivo situation , enabling us to probe the interactome as a function of the endogenous cellular proteome . Quantifying the Interactome in Two Additional Dimensions Having established a set of speciﬁc interactions with the ﬁrst dimension of quantiﬁcation , we next combined our second and third dimension of quantiﬁcation , namely the interaction stoichi - ometries and relative cellular abundances of interactors . A plot of the stoichiometry landscape for each bait protein is a powerful tool to organize its interactome , because each region reﬂects a different scenario ( Figures 2A and 2B ) : stable , one - to - one , and fully recovered complexes in which the partners have equal cellular abundance appear around the origin of the plot ( case 1 in Figure 2B ) . Superstoichiometry , the recovery of more prey than bait , is only expected for stable complexes containing more prey than bait copies and indeed we ﬁnd few of these . If in - teractions are weak and complexes dissociate partially during IP , or if interactions involve only part of the bait pool , interactors are recovered at substoichiometric levels ( case 2 ) , reﬂecting lower occupancy of interaction interfaces of the bait . A vast pre - dominance of sub - over superstoichiometry conﬁrms our initial hypothesis that stability and occupancy are the main determi - nants for most interactions . We observed many cases of stable interactors ( (cid:1) 1 : 1 interac - tion stoichiometry ) that involved a more abundant prey ( case 3 ) , such as the interaction of the abundant GTP - binding protein RAN with its guanine - nucleotide releasing factor RCC1 or that of a - tubulin with the NEK9 kinase ( see Table S2 ) . The reciprocal A B C Figure 2 . The Stoichiometry Plot ( A ) Overlay of all interaction and abundance stoi - chiometry data for all interactions . ( B ) The characteristic triangular shape is a conse - quence of the dynamic range limits in the inter - actome ( left border ) , in the proteome ( top border ) and the stoichiometry limit imposed by the relative cellular protein abundances ( diagonal ) . Schematic interaction scenarios : ( 1 ) equal cellular abundance , stable interaction ; ( 2 ) equal cellular abundance , weak interaction ; ( 3 ) stable interaction with greater cellular abundance of the prey ; and ( 4 ) reciprocal case : quantitative recovery of a stably bound , less abundant prey . ( C ) Stoichiometry plot of interactions between proteins annotated as CORUM complex members . The area of highest density can be approximated by a circle containing 58 % of CORUM interactions . See also Data S1 . 714 Cell 163 , 712 – 723 , October 22 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . interaction stoichiometry readouts are necessarily smaller than one , because any higher abundant bait can maximally recover the entire pool of its lower abundant prey ( case 4 ) . ( Note that this would be the default case for overexpressed baits . ) We retrieved substoichiometric interactions over an estimated ﬁve orders of magnitude ; for example , NEK9 was recovered at 6 3 10 (cid:3) 6 3 the amount of a - tubulin . The proteome - interactome relationship requires that interactors can only be recovered to the extent permitted by their abundance and translates into a diagonal cut - off in the plot , which results in a characteristic trian - gular shape of the ‘‘cloud’’ of interactions ( Figure 2A ) . Approximately 10 % of our interactions connected members of well - characterized complexes annotated in the CORUM database ( Ruepp et al . , 2010 ) . They populate a conﬁned area characterized by a signature of balanced stoichiometries ( case 1 in Figure 2B ) . Thus the prototypical case of a stable protein complex as typically described in the literature mostly consists of proteins of equal cellular abundances that are all constitutively bound to each other . Extrapolating from the signature of known complexes , we reasoned that deduction of similar complexes should be possible solely from the stoichiometry signature of individual baits as opposed to analysis of the entire network ( Collins et al . , 2007 ; Hart et al . , 2007 ) . We ﬁltered our data for those featuring the core stoichiometry signature ( Figure 3B ) , yielding a larger cluster connecting several molecular assemblies such as major cytoskeletal proteins , the nuclear pore complex and the ribosome as well as 194 isolated putative core complexes ( Figure 3A ) . These recapitulated the majority of CORUM - anno - tated complexes that involve our bait proteins ( Figure 3C ) . We conﬁrmed the known tendency of large complexes to be well annotated ( Havugimana et al . , 2012 ) , while smaller assem - blies lacked previous description ( Figure 3D ) . The largest of our 125 networks with no database annotation at the time is the recently discovered COMMD / CCDC22 / CCDC93 ( CCC ) complex ( Phillips - Krawczak et al . , 2015 ) . The stoichiometry plot offers a unique opportunity for com - paring the overlap of our dataset with published data ( Figures S3A – S3C ) . For instance , the intersection with a recent co - fractionation interactome study ( Havugimana et al . , 2012 ) closely recapitulated the core - complex signature , with 26 % of our core - interactions overlapping with that study . This indicates that the co - fractionation methodology offers an attractive short - cut to ﬁnding stable , obligate core complexes . Conversely , the overlap with iRefWeb , a portal of consolidated protein interactions from different sources ( Turner et al . , 2010 ) , reached much further into the substoichiometric region , beyond stable complexes , but still only covered 16 % of our dataset . Finally , the overlap with recent large - scale yeast - two - hybrid data ( Rolland et al . , 2014 ) was low ( 0 . 4 % ) and mostly limited to cases characterized by quantitative A B C D Figure 3 . The Core - Complex Network ( A ) Sub - networks of interactions matching the CORUM - characteristic core stoichiometry signature . Red edges are known interactions annotated in UniProt or CORUM . ( B ) Graphical deﬁnition of the core stoichiometry signature . Center : (cid:3) 0 . 5 , 0 ; radius : 1 ( log 10 units ) . ( C ) Quantiﬁcation of the CORUM overlap . A total of 125 isolated networks remain unannotated ; 70 networks are annotated with 548 partially redundant CORUM terms ; 286 terms assigned to our baits were not shared by any interactor . ( D ) Size distribution of annotated versus unannotated networks . See also Figure S3 . Cell 163 , 712 – 723 , October 22 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . 715 prey recovery to the extent permitted by cellular abundance . Moreover , the stoichiometry plot quantitatively conﬁrmed the intuitive notion that high - stoichiometry interactions are easier to detect as they are enriched in the 1 % FDR compared to the 5 % FDR cohort ( Figures S3D and S3E ) . This is also reﬂected in the overlap of gene ontology ( GO ) annotations in pairs of inter - acting proteins ( Figure S3F ) . Interactions Explain Phenotypes and Genetic Associations Our dataset provides an extensive resource that can be mined for new or poorly characterized protein interactions . For instance , among the interactors of SUCO , one other protein , TAPT1 , stood out by its core stoichiometry signature , suggesting a novel , stable complex consisting of these two low abundant in - tegral membrane proteins of the ER ( Figures 4A , 4B , and S4A – S4C ) . Mutants of their murine orthologs exhibit severe defects during skeletal development : Truncation of TAPT1 causes trans - formations in the axial skeleton and perinatal lethality ( Howell et al . , 2007 ) , whereas loss of the SUN domain - containing ossiﬁ - cation factor SUCO ( also known as OPT ) impairs postnatal bone formation , causing fractures and neonatal death ( Sohaskey et al . , 2010 ) . The latter study linked the phenotype to impaired rough ER expansion and consequent failure of osteoblasts to secrete collagen required for bone formation . Knockdown of hu - man SUCO increased the cells’ resistance against ricin , whose toxicity depends on endocytosis and retrograde trafﬁcking to the ER ( Bassik et al . , 2013 ) . Similarly , the yeast ortholog of TAPT1 , EMP65 ( YER140W ) , is involved in protein folding in the ER and shows buffering genetic and physical interactions with the SUN domain protein SLP1 ( YOR154W ) ( Jonikas et al . , 2009 ; Friederichs et al . , 2012 ) . We used our interaction method - ology on GFP - tagged strains to conﬁrm this complex ( Figures S4D and S4E ) . Similarly , we validated the reciprocal interaction in the mammalian system using TAPT1 as bait ( Figure S4B ) . Together , our ﬁndings establish TAPT1 – SUCO as the higher eukaryote ortholog of SLP1 - EMP65 : a low abundant ER mem - brane complex that is required for normal skeletal development . Going beyond stable complexes , we discovered an interaction between the anaphase promoting complex or cyclosome ( APC / C ) and the uncharacterized protein KIAA1430 . The stoichiometry plot indicated that KIAA1430 is of lower cellular abundance and is not an obligate member of the APC / C , as the partners were recovered substoichiometrically at (cid:1) 1 % of the respective baits in reciprocal experiments ( Figures 4C and 4D ) . To independently test whether KIAA1430 was indeed a tran - sient interactor of the APC / C , we performed a purify - after - mixing ( PAM ) - SILAC experiment ( Wang and Huang , 2008 ) ( Figures 4E and 4F ; Supplemental Experimental Procedures ) . We mixed differentially SILAC - labeled lysates from tagged and control cell lines before the afﬁnity step . Subsequently measured SILAC ratios are indicative of the stability of the interaction , because transient interactors exchange dynamically with unbound coun - terparts , shifting their ratio toward unity , whereas stable interac - tors maintain their label ratio . Our results conﬁrmed that only known subunits of the APC / C are stably bound to the core sub - unit CDC23 . Consistently , only some of them were recovered when assayed for binding to KIAA1430 and with ratios indicating a high degree of dynamic exchange . Next , we tested whether KIAA1430 is a substrate of the APC / C by monitoring its levels during mitosis and early G1 phase . Unlike known substrates , KIAA1430 levels remained stable ( Figure S4F ) . In interphase , a fraction of GFP - tagged KIAA1430 localized to the centrosomes , in particular the centrioles , and was largely excluded from the nucleus ( Figures 4G , 4H , S4G , and S4H ) , while the APC / C is known to be predominantly nuclear ( Kraft et al . , 2003 ; Hubner et al . , 2010 ) . During mitosis , after nuclear envelope breakdown ( NEBD ) , APC / C accumulates on mitotic spindles , centromeres , and centrosomes ( Kraft et al . , 2003 ; Acquaviva et al . , 2004 ) , reﬂecting a partially common localization with KIAA1430 . Consistently , we conﬁrmed the APC / C – KIAA1430 interaction in mitotically arrested , but not in interphase cells ( Fig - ure 4I ) . To functionally investigate the mitotic interaction , we used time - lapse microscopy to determine the time cells require from NEBD to the onset of anaphase as a function of APC / C ac - tivity . KIAA1430 knockdown resulted in a mild delay that was sensitive to reversine , a small molecule inhibitor of the mitotic checkpoint kinase MPS1 ( Figures 4J and 4K ) ( Santaguida et al . , 2010 ) . These ﬁndings suggest that the depletion of KIAA1430 activates the spindle assembly checkpoint , thereby postponing the activation of the APC / C . Recent reports identi - ﬁed the ciliary protein hemingway as the Drosophila ortholog of KIAA1430 ( Soulavie et al . , 2014 ) and implicated the APC / C in regulating ciliary length and polarity ( Ganner et al . , 2009 ; Wang et al . , 2014 ) . Given that centrioles are common features of cilia and centrosomes , our data suggest that in human cells , KIAA1430 recruits a sub - fraction of the APC / C to the centro - some to facilitate mitotic progression . These examples illustrate how the combination of three quan - titative dimensions offers a unique view on the interactions of individual proteins that extends beyond their identiﬁcation and facilitates their functional investigation . We have compiled this information into an easily usable resource , provided as Data S1 and available via the IntAct database . For each of the 1 , 330 tagged cell lines , we present a concise , one - page summary outlining the abundance of the bait protein , the co - enrichment and conﬁdence classiﬁcation of candidate interactors along with the stoichiometry plot and the predictions of the core complexes . A reading guide is presented in Figure S5 . The Relevance of Substoichiometric Interactions Our study revealed that interactions within obligate complexes constitute only a small minority of the interactome . We reasoned that the majority of remaining interactions should be of a func - tionally and conceptually different nature , as indicated by our example of the KIAA1430 - APC / C interaction . To investigate the interplay of the different types of interac - tions , we interrogated the chaperonin TRiC ( also called CCT ) , which is known to act on a large number of client proteins ( Hartl et al . , 2011 ) . Its core machinery of eight subunits was clearly identiﬁed as an abundant obligate complex ( Figure 5A ) and rep - resents a prominent hub in our interactome dataset . Virtually all interactors co - enriched with tagged TRiC core subunits were co - chaperones , regulatory proteins of the phosducin family or pro - teins containing known substrate motifs ( Yam et al . , 2008 ) ( Table 716 Cell 163 , 712 – 723 , October 22 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . A B C D G E F H I J K Figure 4 . The TAPT1 - SUCO Complex and the KIAA1430 - APC / C Interaction ( A ) Stoichiometry plot indicates stable TAPT1 - SUCO complex . ( B ) Immunoﬂuorescence of TAPT1 and SUCO in HeLa shows ER localizations . ( C ) Stoichiometry plot of APC / C interactors ( bait : CDC23 ) . Known core complex members ( blue ) and KIAA1430 ( red ) as novel substoichiometric interactor . ( D ) Stoichiometry plot of KIAA1430 ( red ) interactors shows APC / C subunits ( blue ) as substoichiometric interactors . ( E ) PAM - SILAC ratios plotted as medians of forward triplicate against label - swapped reverse triplicate ( bait : CDC23 ) . ( F ) PAM - SILAC data using KIAA1430 as bait . Baits and stable interactors are recovered at ratios corresponding to label incorporation levels . Ratios of transient interactors are shifted toward 1 : 1 . ( G ) Maximum intensity projections of living interphase and mitotic cells expressing KIAA1430 - LAP and histone 3 . 1 - iRFP indicate that KIAA1430 localizes to centrioles . ( H ) Co - localization of KIAA1430 with centrosomal marker g - tubulin and the centriolar protein CEP135 . ( I ) Western blot analysis of ANAPC3 IPs and corresponding ﬂow - throughs ( FT ) from interphase and mitotically arrested cells expressing KIAA1430 - LAP . ( legend continued on next page ) Cell 163 , 712 – 723 , October 22 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . 717 S4 ) . Characteristic of all was a lower cellular abundance than TRiC ( except for some cytoskeletal proteins ) and substoichio - metric recovery , classifying these interactors as distinct from the core subunits . When we performed a PAM - SILAC experi - ment to test for stable versus transient binding , the core complex composition that we had already established by the stoichiometry plot was conﬁrmed , as these were all found to be stable binders ( Figure 5B ) . Other interactors were tran - sient , as their SILAC ratios indicated full dynamic exchange . Notable exceptions were some regulatory proteins and abun - dant cytoskeletal substrates , whose ratios lay between stable and fully dynamic binders . We consistently found the unchar - acterized protein FAM203A / B as a substoichiometric inter - actor with intermediate dynamic exchange behavior . Its ortholog in Caenorhabditis elegans shows a cytoskeletal knockdown phenotype ( Fievet et al . , 2013 ) . All of this was reminiscent of phosducin proteins , which TRiC requires to fold actin and tubulin ( Hayes et al . , 2011 ) and we therefore speculate that FAM203A / B might have a similar function . In reciprocal interaction experiments , TRiC core complex members were co - enriched by (cid:1) 5 % of all bait proteins ( Fig - ure 5C ; Table S5 ) . This is in line with estimates of TRiC being involved in folding of 5 % – 10 % of the proteome ( Hartl et al . , 2011 ) . However , only some of these baits were also found in the reciprocal TRiC IPs . This asymmetry can be explained with knowledge of the underlying proteome : At 1 . 3 million copies of the hexadecameric complex , TRiC is much more abundant than most substrates , of which only a fraction will be in the pro - cess of folding at any given time ( Table S3 ) . Consequently , only a minute fraction of the TRiC pool will be acting on each substrate and its recovery will be ‘‘diluted’’ to substoichiometric levels . In the reciprocal case , however , TRiC occupies a signiﬁcant frac - tion of the client protein population—the fraction in the state of folding—rendering the interaction more readily detectable within the dynamic range ( Figure 5C ) . The stoichiometry of TRiC recovery in the substrate IPs ranges from less than 10 (cid:3) 3 to above 10 (cid:3) 1 ( Figure 5B ) . With TRiC sub - strates comprising 5 % – 10 % of all protein molecules ( a HeLa cell contains an estimated at 6 3 10 9 protein molecules ) , our stoi - chiometry data imply that on average 0 . 2 % – 0 . 4 % of them are bound to the chaperone at any time . While substoichiometry may be thought to be of lower biological relevance , these inter - actions fulﬁl important functions as they connect very diverse set of protein classes . Moreover , our data also illustrate how the proteome - interactome relationship balances the amount of TRiC with the cumulative amount of its substrates . Extrapolating from our APC / C , KIAA1430 , and TRiC case studies , we investigated whether the different stoichiometric classiﬁcations of interactions carry over to other characteristics : ﬁrst , we systematically compared interaction stoichiometries with dynamic exchange data for all interactions for which both orthogonal pieces of information were available ( Figure 5D ) . There was almost perfect congruence of stoichiometric interac - tors with kinetically stably bound proteins and a surprisingly good overall correlation of substoichiometric recovery and the extent of dynamic exchange . This indicates that interaction stoi - chiometries are globally predictive of the biophysical stability of an interaction . Next , we investigated whether interaction stoichi - ometry is indicative of co - expression across tissues or cell types . We extracted protein abundance correlation proﬁles across ( J ) Western analyses showing the extent of KIAA1430 depletion before and after the time - lapse analyses presented in ( K ) . ( K ) Time KIAA1430 - depleted cells require to proceed from NEBD to anaphase , compared to control cells ( n = 300 each ) ; 0 . 5 m M reversine rescues the delay ( n = 200 each ) . Red lines , mean . Signiﬁcance according to two - tailed Mann - Whitney test . Scale bars , 10 m M . See also Figure S4 . A B C D Figure 5 . The TRiC Interactome Is Deﬁned by Substoichiometric Links ( A ) Stoichiometry plot of CCT3 interactors , representative of TRiC core subunits . ( B ) PAM - SILAC results from the same bait protein . ( C ) Reciprocalstoichiometryplot ofaveragedpositionsoftheTRiCsubunitsfromallbaitpull - downs enrichingatleastthreeTRiCsubunits . Symbolsizeindicates proﬁle correlation . See also Tables S4 and S5 . ( D ) Systematic comparison of interaction stoichiometries and PAM - SILAC ratios for all interactions observed using CDC23 , KIAA1430 , and CCT3 as baits . 718 Cell 163 , 712 – 723 , October 22 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . many tissues from a recent human proteome draft dataset ( Kim et al . , 2014 ) . While co - expression coefﬁcients scattered widely , there was still a notable relationship with interaction stoichiometry , with high - stoichiometry interactors more likely to be coherently expressed ( Figure S6A ) . This is in agreement with earlier ﬁndings in yeast showing that members of stable complexes are enriched in co - regulated modules ( Simonis et al . , 2006 ) . Conversely , substoichiometric interactions involve proteins that are not necessarily tightly co - regulated . Finally , we tested whether interaction stoichiometry is predic - tive of the role of an interaction in network topology . We analyzed a sub - network of interactors surrounding RNA polymerases I , II , and III , recapitulating shared subunits and interactions with other complexes , such as general transcription factor complexes , the negative elongation factor ( NELF ) complex , the mediator complex , and the polymerase - associated factor ( PAF ) complex ( Figure 6A ) . Sequential in silico removal of the most substoichio - metric interactions from the network leads to fragmentation events , in which the individual complexes gradually lose their in - terconnections and emerge as individual modules ( Figure 6B ) . Finally , the three polymerases remain internally connected via their shared subunits . Removing interactions in the reverse order does not lead to any network fragmentation , but rather results in roughly linear shrinkage of the network ( Figure S6A ) . Taking this approach to a global level , we probed the response of our entire network to the removal of edges according to their stoichiometry characteristics . Seminal studies on the topology of networks have shown that scale - free networks are resilient to random removal of edges , but sensitive to targeted attacks ( Al - bert et al . , 2000 ) . Speciﬁcally , analysis of the network structure identiﬁes the topologically most critical edges , removal of which leads to rapid network fragmentation . In our case , we targeted edges for removal solely by their ‘‘local’’ interaction stoichiometry readout , agnostic to their global network roles . We removed edges sequentially , starting at either the lowest or highest interaction stoichiometry , comparing this with random removal of edges . This revealed vastly different network responses ( Figure 6C ) . The most substoichiometric interactions turned out to be most critical for network topology : Their preferential removal led to a rapid increase of the number of isolated network fragments , whereas removing the strongest 50 % of edges hardly resulted in any network fragmentation ( Figure 6C ) . The largest connected component , which causes the typical ‘‘hairball’’ appearance of large - scale networks , shrunk about linearly with removal of weak interactions ( Figure 6D ) and also left more proteins entirely unconnected ( Figure S6A ) . Conversely , preferential removal of edges from the other end of the stoichiometry scale led to a A B C D E Figure 6 . Strong and Weak Interactions Have Different Global Properties ( A ) Sub - network of complexes surrounding RNA polymerases I / II / III . Proteins are colored by complex , edges by proﬁle correlation , edge widths represent interaction stoichiometries . ( B ) Effect of sequential removal of substoichiometric interactions on network sizes . Indicated are points where edge removal results in two fragmented sub - networks . ( C ) Global network effect of random or targeted removal of interactions on the total number of isolated sub - networks . ( D ) Effect on the number of proteins present in the largest entirely connected sub - network . ( E ) Effect on the fraction of total connected proteins that are part of this largest sub - network . See also Figure S6 . Cell 163 , 712 – 723 , October 22 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . 719 network response that increased its small - world characteristics : the largest network encompasses the vast majority of connected proteins ( Figure 6E ) , fewer proteins are left without connections ( Figure S6B ) and isolated network fragments are smaller ( Fig - ure S6C ) . Similar patterns of network response were observed in a study analyzing mobile phone communication networks by removing the strongest versus the weakest interactions ( Onnela et al . , 2007 ) . In analogy to that study , and based on our ﬁndings of the relationship between interaction stoichiometries and ki - netic stabilities ( Figure 5D ) , we propose a strong / weak terminol - ogy for interaction stoichiometries and term interactions with near - stoichiometric recovery of the prey ‘‘strong’’ and substoi - chiometric interactors ‘‘weak . ’’ Together , our analyses show that interaction stoichiometries , which are local properties derived from single interaction exper - iments , predict the global behavior of the proteins involved : strong interactions are indicative of proteins that are co - regu - lated across cell types . In the network , they form modules of high interconnectivity , rendering the network topologically resil - ient to their removal . Weak interactions , on the other hand , domi - nate the network both in numbers and by their topologically critical role as long - range interactions between more diverse sets of proteins . As a consequence , interaction networks can be fragmented into individual , deﬁned modules , by identifying and removing weak links . In summary , availability of interaction stoichiometries on a global scale effectively allows us to ‘‘comb’’ the interactome hairball , to identify modules , and visu - alize their interconnectedness . DISCUSSION Here , we have introduced a novel concept of interactome anal - ysis . Using an efﬁcient , low - stringent IP protocol , accurate label - free quantiﬁcation of both the IPs and the complete prote - ome , we extracted three quantitative dimensions , all of which proved critical for characterizing protein interactions . While the ﬁrst dimension identiﬁes statistically signiﬁcant interactions , the second and third dimension deﬁne their stoichiometric contexts . Earlier large - scale studies did not include or interpret these additional dimensions , in part because of the challenges involved in extracting accurate quantitative values . Moreover , past studies often employed overexpression of bait proteins , precluding meaningful stoichiometry readout ( Gibson et al . , 2013 ) , and near - complete proteome coverage was also often not attainable . Finding stable protein complexes is usually a major goal of interactomics studies . We showed that obligate protein complexes feature a unique signature of balanced stoichiome - tries—an infrequent occurrence among the multitude of inter - actions . Such a signature led us to discover the TAPT1 - SUCO complex in the ER membrane . This complex ties together a body of available evidence , including knockout phenotypes of both TAPT1 and SUCO and genetic interactions of their yeast or - thologs . As a representative of the majority of weaker , non - obli - gate interactions , we characterized the binding of KIAA1430 to the APC / C , suggesting that low interaction stoichiometries are the result of an interaction that is limited to centrioles in mitotic cells and biophysically weaker than interactions between APC / C core members . Furthermore , our stoichiometry - based classiﬁcation subdivided the interactome of the TRiC chaperonin into obligate core complex subunits , regulatory interactors , and a large number of substrates . We found that lack of reciprocal veriﬁcation can be indicative of an inherently asymmetric nature of biologically relevant interactions , particularly outside obligate core complexes . This example also illustrates how the observed interactome is shaped by protein abundances and , conversely , implies overall regulation of protein abundances by protein inter - actions . Therefore , the interactome always has to be interpreted as a function of the underlying proteome . We have shown that interaction stoichiometries generally correlate with the biophysical stability of an interaction . Weak in - teractions have frequently gone undetected in interactome studies and may be thought to be less important ; nevertheless they are crucial features of networks in general and social net - works in particular ( Granovetter , 1973 ; Csermely , 2006 ) . Our studydirectlyandquantitativelydemonstratesthepredominance of weak interactions in the protein interactome . MS - based methods cover more than four orders of magnitude of interaction stoichiometry ( Collins et al . , 2013 ) , and our low - stringency biochemicalworkﬂowideallyharnessesthissensitivity . However , substoichiometric interactions involving low abundance preys can still be challenging to detect ( Figures S3D and S3E ) . There - fore , the prevalence of weak interactions is likely to be even more pronounced and their relevance vastly underappreciated . Previous studies typically counted all interactions as equal , once they had been accepted based on their statistical parame - ters or scores . Therefore , the roles of individual interactions had to be predicted from prior knowledge or from global network properties . Highly connected proteins were described as inter - action hubs , regions of high clustering coefﬁcients with many shared pathway annotations were characterized as complexes ( Collins et al . , 2007 ; Hart et al . , 2007 ) , and weak interactions were inferred from weaker connectivity patterns ( Malovannaya et al . , 2011 ) . However , limited coverage of the interactome is a confounding factor for such strategies . In contrast , we here have shown directly that local stoichiom - etry data reﬂect global network topological properties of interac - tions , setting the stage for quantitative network analysis from the ground up . Substoichiometric interactions form the ‘‘glue’’ that holds the cellular network together—as shown speciﬁcally for the RNA po - lymerase network and globally for the entire network—and are hence critical for network structure . This property , which may seem counterintuitive at ﬁrst , prompted us to propose interac - tion stoichiometry as a measure of interaction strength . Of note , a range of underlying mechanisms can cause a weak inter - action according to this terminology , for instance low biophysical afﬁnity , high kinetic exchange rates , limited spatiotemporal over - lap of interactors , or indirect interactions that are bridged via other biomolecules , all of which may result in a substoichiometric readout . If such weak links are removed from the network , it col - lapses into deﬁned modules that are tightly interconnected by the remaining strong links . Translated into biological terms , sta - ble complexes would remain in isolation , but without weak links , they would not be able to connect to each other or to transient , dynamic regulators . 720 Cell 163 , 712 – 723 , October 22 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . A major contribution of this study lies in the characterization of the interactomes surrounding more than 1 , 100 different baits , which together cover a large part of the expressed proteome with more than 28 , 000 interactions . We present our results in an accessible format that can be easily mined and interpreted by non - specialists . Our resource of mammalian cell lines ex - pressing GFP - tagged proteins under endogenous control can beemployedforotherstudies ( e . g . , focusing onsubcellularlocal - ization or functional characterization of individual proteins ) . The interaction data validate these cell lines for such uses and the use of mouse orthologs as surrogates . They also imply remark - ably similar protein interactomes between human and mouse . We approach saturation with respect to the number of proteins that can be covered ( Figure S6D ) , but observe only part of the entire interactome directly , which our data predicts to encom - pass between 80 , 000 and 180 , 000 detectable interactions in HeLa ( Figure S6E ) . Our additional quantitative dimensions may prove helpful for increasing interactome coverage in silico , for example , by selective matrix expansion ( Seebacher and Gavin , 2011 ) . Given its usefulness in interpreting interaction data , the stoichiometry readout developed here can become a general basis for future interactome studies and for the analysis of inter - actome dynamics , which will manifest foremost as quantitative alteration of occupancies rather than qualitative gain or loss of interactors . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Cell Culture HeLa Kyoto cell lines expressing N - or C - terminally tagged proteins from BAC transgenes were generated , cultured , and imaged as previously described ( Poser et al . , 2008 ) . Tags are based on the ‘‘localization and afﬁnity puriﬁcation’’ ( LAP ) tag , consisting of GFP and a functionalized linker . All BAC cell lines and tag sequences are listed in Table S1 along with proteome and interactome metadata on the bait proteins . Cells were grown to near - conﬂu - ency on two 15 - cm cell culture dishes per interaction experiment , detached with Accutase , and snap frozen . Three replicates were harvested in at least two different passages . Afﬁnity Puriﬁcation and Mass Spectrometry Cell pellets were lysed and subjected to afﬁnity puriﬁcation on a robotic sys - tem , followed by single - shot mass spectrometric analysis on an Orbitrap in - strument ( Hubneretal . , 2010 ) . Weprocessedtriplicatesseparatelyondifferent days and carried out MS - analyses in randomized order over the course of weeks to months . Whole Proteome Measurements HeLa cells were lysed in guanidinium chloride lysis buffer and digested sequentially with LysC and trypsin as described ( Kulak et al . , 2014 ) . Peptides were desalted on stacked C18 reverse phase ( Waters Sep - Pak ) and strong cation exchange cartridges and eluted using 70 % acetonitrile . Pooled eluates were separated into six fractions on strong anion exchange ( SAX ) StageTips ( Wi (cid:1) sniewski et al . , 2010 ) . MS measurements were performed in three repli - cates on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer ( Kulak et al . , 2014 ) . Data Processing Raw ﬁles were processed with MaxQuant ( Cox and Mann , 2008 ) ( version 1 . 3 . 9 . 10 ) in several sets , each containing (cid:1) 600 randomly assigned AP - MS runs and the HeLa proteome fractions . Tandem mass spectrometry ( MS / MS ) spectra were searched against a modiﬁed version of the November 2012 release of the UniProt complete human proteome sequence database . For each bait protein expressed from a mouse BAC locus , the human sequence in the fasta ﬁle was concatenated with the mouse sequence ( unless identical ) . Human identiﬁers were used for mapping purposes . We used MaxLFQ , MaxQuant’s label - free quantiﬁcation ( LFQ ) algorithm to calculate protein intensity proﬁles across samples ( Cox et al . , 2014 ) . We required one ratio count for each pairwise comparison step and activated the FastLFQ settingwithtwominimumandtwoaveragecomparisonstoenablethenormal - ization of large datasets in manageable computing time . Detection of Protein Interactions Protein identiﬁcations were ﬁltered , removing hits to the reverse decoy data - base as well as proteins only identiﬁed by modiﬁed peptides . We required that each protein be quantiﬁed in all replicates from the AP - MS samples of at least one cell line . Protein LFQ intensities were logarithmized and missing values imputed by values simulating noise around the detection limit . For each protein , a non - parametric method was used to select a subset of sam - ples that provide a distribution of background intensities for this protein ( Sup - plemental Experimental Procedures ) . This subset was used ﬁrst to normalize all protein intensities to represent relative enrichment and then to serve as thecontrolgroupforatwo - tailedWelch’sttest . Speciﬁcoutliersinthevolcano plots of logarithmized p values against enrichments were determined by an approach making use of the asymmetry in the outlier population ( Figures S1E and S1F ) . We used two cut - offs of different stringencies , representing 1 % and 5 % of enrichment false discovery rate ( FDR ) , respectively . Correlation coefﬁcients between the intensity proﬁles of interacting proteins were calcu - lated as additional quality parameters ( Keilhauer et al . , 2015 ) . Enrichment FDR ( classes A – C ) and proﬁle correlation ( modiﬁer + or – ) deﬁne the conﬁ - dence class of an interaction ( Figure S1G ) . Interaction Stoichiometries and Cellular Copy Numbers Estimatinginteractionstoichiometriesrequiresthecomparisonoftheamounts ofdifferentproteinsrelativetoeachotherinoneIP . Weﬁrstsubtractedtheme - dian intensity across all samples to account for background binding . We then divided LFQ intensities by the number of theoretically observable peptides for this protein ( Schwanha¨usser et al . , 2011 ) . Finally , we expressed stoichiome - tries relative to the bait protein . Cellular copy numbers and abundances werecalculatedusingasimilarapproach ( Wi (cid:1) sniewskietal . , 2014 ) onthewhole proteome data and brought to absolute scale by normalization to a total pro - tein amount of 200 pg in a cell volume of 1 pl for a HeLa cell . Network Analyses NetworkanalyseswereperformedbasedonthedatalistedinTableS2 . Forthe purpose of counting unique interactions and for the histogram of the numbers of interactors , we regarded interactions as non - directional , ﬂattened multiple proteingroupsmappingtothesamegenenameandtothemostabundantiso - form and considered interactions found multiple times only once . For network perturbationanalyses , weselectedallnon - self - interactionsofconﬁdenceclas - ses A + , A , and B + and assembled them into graphs . We then removed edges sequentially according to their interaction stoichiometry readout . Prey - bait combinations discovered multiple times were treated as separate edges . Once a protein had lost all its edges , it was removed . As control , we deleted edges randomly and represented the median of 100 random repetitions and represent the scatter as the ﬁrst or third quartile ± 1 . 5 interquartile ranges . ACCESSION NUMBERS The accession number for the protein interaction data reported in this paper , submitted through IntAct ( Orchard et al . , 2014 ) , to the IMEx Consortium ( http : / / www . imexconsortium . org ) : IM - 24272 . The accession numbers for the raw mass spectrometric data , deposited via PRIDE ( Vizcaino et al . , 2013 ) to the ProteomeXchange Consortium ( http : / / proteomecentral . proteomexchange . org ) : PXD002815 and PXD002829 . SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Procedures , six ﬁgures , ﬁve tables , and one data set and can be found with this article online at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2015 . 09 . 053 . Cell 163 , 712 – 723 , October 22 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . 721 AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS M . Y . H . did the experiments , conceived and implemented the bioinformatics methods , andanalyzedandinterpretedthedata . N . C . H . developedtheQUBIC pipeline in a high throughput format . J . C . developed the MaxQuant software modules for label - free quantiﬁcation of very large datasets and contributed to data analysis . N . N . provided the whole proteome data . I . P . and Y . T . gener - ated the BAC - GFP cell lines . I . P . performed ﬂuorescence microscopy and western blot analyses . I . A . G . , I . W . , and J . M . generated the data shown in Fig - ures 4G – 4K . J . M . and F . B . conceived , supervised , and interpreted the exper - imentsinFigures4G – 4K . M . M . andA . A . H . conceivedthestudyandsupervised the experiments . M . Y . H . and M . M . wrote the manuscript . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was performed within the project framework of the German medical genome research funded by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research ( FKZ01GS0861 , DiGtoP ) . We acknowledge funding from the Max Planck Society and the European Commission’s Sixth and Seventh Framework Programs ( FP6 - LSHG - CT - 2004 - 503464 , MitoCheck ; FP7 - HEALTH - F4 - 2008 - 201648 , PROSPECTS ; FP7 - HEALTH - 2009 - 241548 , MitoSys ) . J . M . is sup - ported by the German Research Foundation ( DFG ) ( Emmy Noether , MA 5831 / 1 - 1 ) , I . A . G . is a member of the DIGS - BB PhD program . Antibodies for BAC validation were a gift from C . Stadler and E . Lundberg . We thank M . Leuschner , A . Ssykor , M . Augsburg , A . Schwager , M . T . Pham , G . Sowa , K . Mayr , I . Paron , B . Splettsto¨ßer , D . Vogg , B . Chatterjee , M . Gro¨tzinger , and S . Kroiß for technical assistance . C . Schaab , S . Schloissnig , P . Porras , and M . Oroshi provided bioinformatics support . We thank M . Sarov , M . Seiler , M . C . Bassik , S . Pinkert , A . Bracher , H . C . Eberl , T . Viturawong , E . C . Keilhauer , A . Hrle , G . Pichler , N . A . Kulak , and M . Ra¨schle for helpful discussions . Received : February 5 , 2015 Revised : July 6 , 2015 Accepted : September 17 , 2015 Published : October 22 , 2015 REFERENCES Acquaviva , C . , Herzog , F . , Kraft , C . , and Pines , J . ( 2004 ) . The anaphase pro - motingcomplex / cyclosome is recruited tocentromeres by thespindle assem - bly checkpoint . Nat . Cell Biol . 6 , 892 – 898 . Albert , R . , Jeong , H . , and Barabasi , A . L . ( 2000 ) . Error and attack tolerance of complex networks . Nature 406 , 378 – 382 . Bantscheff , M . , Lemeer , S . , Savitski , M . M . , and Kuster , B . ( 2012 ) . Quantitative mass spectrometry in proteomics : critical review update from 2007 to the pre - sent . Anal . Bioanal . Chem . 404 , 939 – 965 . Bassik , M . C . , Kampmann , M . , Lebbink , R . J . , Wang , S . , Hein , M . Y . , Poser , I . , Weibezahn , J . , Horlbeck , M . A . , Chen , S . , Mann , M . , et al . ( 2013 ) . A systematic mammaliangeneticinteractionmaprevealspathwaysunderlyingricinsuscep - tibility . Cell 152 , 909 – 922 . Beck , M . , Claassen , M . , and Aebersold , R . ( 2011 ) . Comprehensive prote - omics . Curr . Opin . Biotechnol . 22 , 3 – 8 . Collins , S . R . , Kemmeren , P . , Zhao , X . C . , Greenblatt , J . F . , Spencer , F . , Hol - stege , F . C . , Weissman , J . S . , and Krogan , N . J . ( 2007 ) . Toward a comprehen - sive atlas of the physical interactome of Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol . Cell . Proteomics 6 , 439 – 450 . Collins , B . C . , Gillet , L . C . , Rosenberger , G . , Ro¨st , H . L . , Vichalkovski , A . , Gstaiger , M . , and Aebersold , R . ( 2013 ) . Quantifying protein interaction dynamics by SWATH mass spectrometry : application to the 14 - 3 - 3 system . Nat . Methods 10 , 1246 – 1253 . Cox , J . , and Mann , M . ( 2008 ) . MaxQuant enables high peptide identiﬁcation rates , individualized p . p . b . - range mass accuracies and proteome - wide pro - tein quantiﬁcation . Nat . Biotechnol . 26 , 1367 – 1372 . Cox , J . , Hein , M . Y . , Luber , C . A . , Paron , I . , Nagaraj , N . , and Mann , M . ( 2014 ) . Accurate proteome - wide label - free quantiﬁcation by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction , termed MaxLFQ . Mol . Cell . Proteomics 13 , 2513 – 2526 . Csermely , P . ( 2006 ) . Weak Links : Stabilizers of Complex Systems from Pro - teins to Social Networks , First Edition ( Springer ) . Ewing , R . M . , Chu , P . , Elisma , F . , Li , H . , Taylor , P . , Climie , S . , McBroom - Cera - jewski , L . , Robinson , M . D . , O’Connor , L . , Li , M . , etal . ( 2007 ) . Large - scalemap - ping of human protein - protein interactions by mass spectrometry . Mol . Syst . Biol . 3 , 89 . Fievet , B . T . , Rodriguez , J . , Naganathan , S . , Lee , C . , Zeiser , E . , Ishidate , T . , Shirayama , M . , Grill , S . , andAhringer , J . ( 2013 ) . Systematicgenetic interaction screens uncover cell polarity regulators and functional redundancy . Nat . Cell Biol . 15 , 103 – 112 . Friederichs , J . M . , Gardner , J . M . , Smoyer , C . J . , Whetstine , C . R . , Gogol , M . , Slaughter , B . D . , and Jaspersen , S . L . ( 2012 ) . Genetic analysis of Mps3 SUN domain mutants in Saccharomyces cerevisiae reveals an interaction with the SUN - like protein Slp1 . G3 ( Bethesda ) 2 , 1703 – 1718 . Ganner , A . , Lienkamp , S . , Scha¨fer , T . , Romaker , D . , Wegierski , T . , Park , T . J . , Spreitzer , S . , Simons , M . , Gloy , J . , Kim , E . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Regulation of ciliary polarity by the APC / C . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 17799 – 17804 . Gibson , T . J . , Seiler , M . , and Veitia , R . A . ( 2013 ) . The transience of transient overexpression . Nat . Methods 10 , 715 – 721 . Gingras , A . C . , Gstaiger , M . , Raught , B . , and Aebersold , R . ( 2007 ) . Analysis of protein complexes using mass spectrometry . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 , 645 – 654 . Granovetter , M . S . ( 1973 ) . The Strength of Weak Ties . Am . J . Sociol . 78 , 1360 – 1380 . Hart , G . T . , Lee , I . , and Marcotte , E . R . ( 2007 ) . A high - accuracy consensus map of yeast protein complexes reveals modular nature of gene essentiality . BMC Bioinformatics 8 , 236 . Hartl , F . U . , Bracher , A . , and Hayer - Hartl , M . ( 2011 ) . Molecular chaperones in protein folding and proteostasis . Nature 475 , 324 – 332 . Hauri , S . , Wepf , A . , van Drogen , A . , Varjosalo , M . , Tapon , N . , Aebersold , R . , and Gstaiger , M . ( 2013 ) . Interaction proteome of human Hippo signaling : modular control of the co - activator YAP1 . Mol . Syst . Biol . 9 , 713 . Havugimana , P . C . , Hart , G . T . , Nepusz , T . , Yang , H . , Turinsky , A . L . , Li , Z . , Wang , P . I . , Boutz , D . R . , Fong , V . , Phanse , S . , et al . ( 2012 ) . A census of human soluble protein complexes . Cell 150 , 1068 – 1081 . Hayes , N . V . L . , Josse´ , L . , Smales , C . M . , andCarden , M . J . ( 2011 ) . Modulationof phosducin - likeprotein3 ( PhLP3 ) levelspromotes cytoskeletalremodelling ina MAPK and RhoA - dependent manner . PLoS ONE 6 , e28271 . Hein , M . Y . , Sharma , K . , Cox , J . , and Mann , M . ( 2013 ) . Proteomic Analysis of Cellular Systems . In Handbook of Systems Biology , Chapter 1 , Walhout A . J . M . , Vidal M . , and Dekker J . , eds . ( Academic Press ) , pp . 3 – 25 . Howell , G . R . , Shindo , M . , Murray , S . , Gridley , T . , Wilson , L . A . , and Schimenti , J . C . ( 2007 ) . Mutation of a ubiquitously expressed mouse transmembrane pro - tein ( Tapt1 ) causes speciﬁc skeletal homeotic transformations . Genetics 175 , 699 – 707 . Hubner , N . C . , Bird , A . W . , Cox , J . , Splettstoesser , B . , Bandilla , P . , Poser , I . , Hy - man , A . , and Mann , M . ( 2010 ) . Quantitative proteomics combined with BAC TransgeneOmics reveals in vivo protein interactions . J . Cell Biol . 189 , 739 – 754 . Huh , W . K . , Falvo , J . V . , Gerke , L . C . , Carroll , A . S . , Howson , R . W . , Weissman , J . S . , andO’Shea , E . K . ( 2003 ) . Globalanalysisofproteinlocalizationinbudding yeast . Nature 425 , 686 – 691 . Hutchins , J . R . , Toyoda , Y . , Hegemann , B . , Poser , I . , He´riche´ , J . K . , Sykora , M . M . , Augsburg , M . , Hudecz , O . , Buschhorn , B . A . , Bulkescher , J . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Systematic analysis of human protein complexes identiﬁes chromo - some segregation proteins . Science 328 , 593 – 599 . Jonikas , M . C . , Collins , S . R . , Denic , V . , Oh , E . , Quan , E . M . , Schmid , V . , Weibe - zahn , J . , Schwappach , B . , Walter , P . , Weissman , J . S . , and Schuldiner , M . ( 2009 ) . Comprehensive characterization of genes required for protein folding in the endoplasmic reticulum . Science 323 , 1693 – 1697 . 722 Cell 163 , 712 – 723 , October 22 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . Kachroo , A . H . , Laurent , J . M . , Yellman , C . M . , Meyer , A . G . , Wilke , C . O . , and Marcotte , E . M . ( 2015 ) . Evolution . Systematic humanization of yeast genes re - veals conserved functions and genetic modularity . Science 348 , 921 – 925 . Keilhauer , E . C . , Hein , M . Y . , and Mann , M . ( 2015 ) . Accurate protein complex retrieval by afﬁnity enrichment mass spectrometry ( AE - MS ) rather than afﬁnity puriﬁcation mass spectrometry ( AP - MS ) . Mol . Cell . Proteomics 14 , 120 – 135 . Kim , M . S . , Pinto , S . M . , Getnet , D . , Nirujogi , R . S . , Manda , S . S . , Chaerkady , R . , Madugundu , A . K . , Kelkar , D . S . , Isserlin , R . , Jain , S . , etal . ( 2014 ) . Adraftmapof the human proteome . Nature 509 , 575 – 581 . Kittler , R . , Pelletier , L . , Ma , C . , Poser , I . , Fischer , S . , Hyman , A . A . , and Buch - holz , F . ( 2005 ) . RNA interference rescue by bacterial artiﬁcial chromosome transgenesis in mammalian tissue culture cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 2396 – 2401 . Kraft , C . , Herzog , F . , Gieffers , C . , Mechtler , K . , Hagting , A . , Pines , J . , and Pe - ters , J . M . ( 2003 ) . Mitotic regulation of the human anaphase - promoting com - plex by phosphorylation . EMBO J . 22 , 6598 – 6609 . Kristensen , A . R . , Gsponer , J . , and Foster , L . J . ( 2012 ) . A high - throughput approach for measuring temporal changes in the interactome . Nat . Methods 9 , 907 – 909 . Kulak , N . A . , Pichler , G . , Paron , I . , Nagaraj , N . , and Mann , M . ( 2014 ) . Minimal , encapsulated proteomic - sample processing applied to copy - number estima - tion in eukaryotic cells . Nat . Methods 11 , 319 – 324 . Maliga , Z . , Junqueira , M . , Toyoda , Y . , Ettinger , A . , Mora - Bermu´dez , F . , Klemm , R . W . , Vasilj , A . , Guhr , E . , Ibarlucea - Benitez , I . , Poser , I . , et al . ( 2013 ) . A genomic toolkit to investigate kinesin and myosin motor function in cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 15 , 325 – 334 . Malovannaya , A . , Lanz , R . B . , Jung , S . Y . , Bulynko , Y . , Le , N . T . , Chan , D . W . , Ding , C . , Shi , Y . , Yucer , N . , Krenciute , G . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Analysis of the human endogenous coregulator complexome . Cell 145 , 787 – 799 . Mann , M . , Kulak , N . A . , Nagaraj , N . , andCox , J . ( 2013 ) . Thecomingageofcom - plete , accurate , and ubiquitous proteomes . Mol . Cell 49 , 583 – 590 . Mellacheruvu , D . , Wright , Z . , Couzens , A . L . , Lambert , J . P . , St - Denis , N . A . , Li , T . , Miteva , Y . V . , Hauri , S . , Sardiu , M . E . , Low , T . Y . , etal . ( 2013 ) . TheCRAPome : acontaminantrepository for afﬁnity puriﬁcation - mass spectrometry data . Nat . Methods 10 , 730 – 736 . Onnela , J . P . , Sarama¨ki , J . , Hyvo¨nen , J . , Szabo´ , G . , Lazer , D . , Kaski , K . , Ker - te´sz , J . , and Baraba´si , A . L . ( 2007 ) . Structure and tie strengths in mobile communication networks . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 7332 – 7336 . Orchard , S . , Ammari , M . , Aranda , B . , Breuza , L . , Briganti , L . , Broackes - Carter , F . , Campbell , N . H . , Chavali , G . , Chen , C . , del - Toro , N . , et al . ( 2014 ) . The MIn - tAct project—IntAct as a common curation platform for 11 molecular interac - tion databases . Nucleic Acids Res . 42 , D358 – D363 . Phillips - Krawczak , C . A . , Singla , A . , Starokadomskyy , P . , Deng , Z . , Osborne , D . G . , Li , H . , Dick , C . J . , Gomez , T . S . , Koenecke , M . , Zhang , J . S . , et al . ( 2015 ) . COMMD1 is linked to the WASH complex and regulates endosomal trafﬁcking of the copper transporter ATP7A . Mol . Biol . Cell 26 , 91 – 103 . Poser , I . , Sarov , M . , Hutchins , J . R . , He´riche´ , J . K . , Toyoda , Y . , Pozniakovsky , A . , Weigl , D . , Nitzsche , A . , Hegemann , B . , Bird , A . W . , et al . ( 2008 ) . BAC Trans - geneOmics : a high - throughput method for exploration of protein function in mammals . Nat . Methods 5 , 409 – 415 . Rolland , T . , Tas x an , M . , Charloteaux , B . , Pevzner , S . J . , Zhong , Q . , Sahni , N . , Yi , S . , Lemmens , I . , Fontanillo , C . , Mosca , R . , etal . ( 2014 ) . Aproteome - scalemap of the human interactome network . Cell 159 , 1212 – 1226 . Rual , J . F . , Venkatesan , K . , Hao , T . , Hirozane - Kishikawa , T . , Dricot , A . , Li , N . , Berriz , G . F . , Gibbons , F . D . , Dreze , M . , Ayivi - Guedehoussou , N . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Towards a proteome - scale map of the human protein - protein interaction network . Nature 437 , 1173 – 1178 . Ruepp , A . , Waegele , B . , Lechner , M . , Brauner , B . , Dunger - Kaltenbach , I . , Fobo , G . , Frishman , G . , Montrone , C . , and Mewes , H . W . ( 2010 ) . CORUM : the comprehensive resource of mammalian protein complexes – 2009 . Nucleic Acids Res . 38 , D497 – D501 . Santaguida , S . , Tighe , A . , D’Alise , A . M . , Taylor , S . S . , andMusacchio , A . ( 2010 ) . Dissecting the role of MPS1 in chromosome biorientation and the spindle checkpoint through the small molecule inhibitor reversine . J . Cell Biol . 190 , 73 – 87 . Schwanha¨usser , B . , Busse , D . , Li , N . , Dittmar , G . , Schuchhardt , J . , Wolf , J . , Chen , W . , and Selbach , M . ( 2011 ) . Global quantiﬁcation of mammalian gene expression control . Nature 473 , 337 – 342 . Seebacher , J . , and Gavin , A . C . ( 2011 ) . SnapShot : Protein - protein interaction networks . Cell 144 , 1000 . Simonis , N . , Gonze , D . , Orsi , C . , van Helden , J . , and Wodak , S . J . ( 2006 ) . Modularity of the transcriptional response of protein complexes in yeast . J . Mol . Biol . 363 , 589 – 610 . Smits , A . H . , Jansen , P . W . , Poser , I . , Hyman , A . A . , and Vermeulen , M . ( 2012 ) . Stoichiometry of chromatin - associated protein complexes revealed by label - free quantitative mass spectrometry - based proteomics . Nucleic Acids Res . 41 , e28 . Sohaskey , M . L . , Jiang , Y . , Zhao , J . J . , Mohr , A . , Roemer , F . , and Harland , R . M . ( 2010 ) . Osteopotentia regulates osteoblast maturation , bone formation , and skeletal integrity in mice . J . Cell Biol . 189 , 511 – 525 . Soulavie , F . , Piepenbrock , D . , Thomas , J . , Vieillard , J . , Duteyrat , J . L . , Cortier , E . , Laurenc¸on , A . , Go¨pfert , M . C . , and Durand , B . ( 2014 ) . hemingway is required for sperm ﬂagella assembly and ciliary motility in Drosophila . Mol . Biol . Cell 25 , 1276 – 1286 . Stelzl , U . , Worm , U . , Lalowski , M . , Haenig , C . , Brembeck , F . H . , Goehler , H . , Stroedicke , M . , Zenkner , M . , Schoenherr , A . , Koeppen , S . , et al . ( 2005 ) . A hu - man protein - protein interaction network : a resource for annotating the prote - ome . Cell 122 , 957 – 968 . Turner , B . , Razick , S . , Turinsky , A . L . , Vlasblom , J . , Crowdy , E . K . , Cho , E . , Mor - rison , K . , Donaldson , I . M . , and Wodak , S . J . ( 2010 ) . iRefWeb : interactive anal - ysis of consolidated protein interaction data and their supporting evidence . Database ( Oxford ) 2010 , baq023 . Vizcaino , J . A . , Cote , R . G . , Csordas , A . , Dianes , J . A . , Fabregat , A . , Foster , J . M . , Griss , J . , Alpi , E . , Birim , M . , Contell , J . , et al . ( 2013 ) . The PRoteomics IDEntiﬁ - cations ( PRIDE ) database and associated tools : status in 2013 . Nucleic Acids Res . 41 , D1063 – D1069 . Wang , X . , and Huang , L . ( 2008 ) . Identifying dynamic interactors of protein complexes by quantitative mass spectrometry . Mol . Cell . Proteomics 7 , 46 – 57 . Wang , W . , Wu , T . , and Kirschner , M . W . ( 2014 ) . The master cell cycle regulator APC - Cdc20 regulates ciliary length and disassembly of the primary cilium . eLife 3 , e03083 . Wepf , A . , Glatter , T . , Schmidt , A . , Aebersold , R . , and Gstaiger , M . ( 2009 ) . Quantitative interaction proteomics using mass spectrometry . Nat . Methods 6 , 203 – 205 . Wi (cid:1) sniewski , J . R . , Nagaraj , N . , Zougman , A . , Gnad , F . , and Mann , M . ( 2010 ) . Brain phosphoproteome obtained by a FASP - based method reveals plasma membrane protein topology . J . Proteome Res . 9 , 3280 – 3289 . Wi (cid:1) sniewski , J . R . , Hein , M . Y . , Cox , J . , andMann , M . ( 2014 ) . A‘‘proteomicruler’’ for protein copy number and concentration estimation without spike - in stan - dards . Mol . Cell . Proteomics 13 , 3497 – 3506 . Yam , A . Y . , Xia , Y . , Lin , H . T . , Burlingame , A . , Gerstein , M . , and Frydman , J . ( 2008 ) . Deﬁning the TRiC / CCT interactome links chaperonin function to stabi - lizationofnewlymadeproteinswithcomplextopologies . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 15 , 1255 – 1262 . Cell 163 , 712 – 723 , October 22 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . 723