Oliver Gassmann and Maximillian von Zedtwitz ( 2003 ) Trends and determinants of managing virtual R & D teams The final version of this manuscript is published in R & D Management , 33 ( 3 ) : 243 - 262 . The final publication is available at www . onlinelibrary . wiley . com : http : / / onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / 10 . 1111 / 1467 - 9310 . 00296 / pdf DOI : 10 . 1111 / 1467 - 9310 . 00296 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / 1467 - 9310 . 00296 Please note that differences between this manuscript and the final publication may exist . Incase of questions , please contact the corresponding author as indicated below . Gassmann / Zedtwitz : Virtual R & D Teams 2 Trends and determinants of managing virtual R & D teams Oliver Gassmann 1 , Maximilian von Zedtwitz 2 1 University of St . Gallen , Institute of Technology Management , CH - 9000 St . Gallen , Switzerland , oliver . gassmann @ unisg . ch 2 IMD - International , CH - 1001 Lausanne , Switzerland , zedtwitz @ imd . ch In the past years we have witnessed a strong decentralization of R & D to local customers and centers - of - excellence . Facilitated by modern information and communication technologies , „virtual project teams“ have been formed . With their boundaries expanding and shrinking flexibly with changing project necessities , virtual teams are believed to be an important element in future R & D organization . Based on 204 interviews with R & D directors and project managers in 37 technology - intensive multinational companies we identify four forms of virtual team organization for the execution of R & D projects across multiple locations . Ordered by increasing degree of central project authority , these four team concepts are : ( 1 ) decentralized self - organization , ( 2 ) system inte - grator as a coordinator , ( 3 ) core team as a system architect , and ( 4 ) centralized venture team . Our contingency approach for organizing a transnational R & D project is based on four principal determinants : ( 1 ) the type of innovation ( radical / incremental ) , ( 2 ) the systemic nature of the project ( systemic / autonomous ) , ( 3 ) the mode of knowledge involved ( tacit / explicit ) , and ( 4 ) the degree of resource bundling ( complementary / redundant ) . According to our analysis the success of virtual teams depends on the appropriate consideration of these determinants . I . Project Management within Virtual R & D Teams A . Trends in International R & D The nineties have seen the largest expansion of international R & D ever . Consequent power decentralization to divisions and the endeavor to be more market oriented have led to a ' jungle growth ' of dispersed R & D activities . Addition - ally , corporate R & D is trying to tap into local knowledge pools with dedicated research labo - ratories . This internationalization of R & D has reached more than 50 % in small countries such as the Netherlands and Switzerland , 30 % in all of Western Europe , and about 10 % in the United States ( e . g . , Dunning , 1994 ; Patel , 1995 ; Roberts , 1995 ; von Zedtwitz , Gassmann 2002 a ) . While strategic guidelines for identifying and evaluating potential R & D locations are well established , the real challenge for management is to integrate new R & D units so that they become productive partners in the company ' s global R & D network . In parallel with the rise of international R & D , inter - unit R & D collaboration increases and cross - border innovation projects become more common . But these projects have a notorious reputation for being difficult to manage , costly to execute , never on - time , and ineffective towards their goal . Regarding transnational R & D projects , R & D managers are thus divided into two groups : one believing in the additional poten - tials offered by multiculturalism and multiple perspectives , and one balking at the extra costs and inefficiencies incurred . Virtual teams organization have been hailed as a flexible and modern solution for interna - tional project management ( see e . g . , O ' Hara - Devereaux and Johansen , 1994 ; Howells , 1995 ; Boutellier et al . , 1998 , 1999 ) . But what are virtual organizations ? During the past decade , the term ' virtual ' has been used differently in a number of management concepts . For instance , Goldman , Nagel and Preiss ( 1994 ) define the virtual organization as an opportunistic alliance of core competencies distributed among a number of distinct operating entities within a single large company or group of companies . Other notions of virtual organization include Gassmann / Zedtwitz : Virtual R & D Teams 2 temporary networks linked by information to share skills , costs and access to one another’s resources . Some authors exclude the presence of central coordination or supervision , often deny - ing hierarchy and vertical integration ( see e . g . Handy , 1995 ; Chesbrough an Teece , 1996 ; Harris et al , 1996 ; Upton and McAfee , 1996 ; Chiesa and Manzini , 1997 ) . For the scope of this work we define the concept of a virtual R & D team as a goal - oriented group of organizational units or indi - viduals . The team ' s expanding and shrinking boundaries depend on specific requirements of the task it is trying to achieve . A virtual R & D team , spanning several companies , does not necessarily rely on modern information and communication technology ( ICT ) , although this is becoming the norm ; and its members may pursue their own rationales , although they contribute to a shared goal . B . Review of Project Management Literature Despite substantial research in project manage - ment , R & D managers acknowledge the inade - quacy of traditional project management train - ing for managing transnational innovation proc - esses . In literature , few authors present descrip - tions of transnational R & D project organization , and even less authors provide an guiding framework for project execution . In our analysis , we have considered ten characteristics describing project management and organiza - tion : Power , funding mechanism , goals , owner - ship , system interdependencies and knowledge , project coherence , cross - functional integration , communication tools , organizational structure and processes , globalization and externalization of R & D ( Table 1 lists important literature devoted to these factors ) . Our empirical research indicated that virtual projects differed substan - tially in these factors ( see Appendix ) . The four typical forms of virtual projects that we suggest in the next chapter therefore pay special atten - tion to these fundamental project characteristics . C . Aims of this Paper Today , no one would argue that the world of R & D has not become a global one . But high project costs , travel intensity , weak international coordination tools and project incertainties make international R & D projects challenging . Therefore the decision to use a virtual team is a necessity because of global R & D and technology centers not a choice ; being ‘virtual’ Table 1 . Short overview of relevant literature on factors affecting managing virtual R & D teams . Project determinants References Power of the project manager . Burgelman ( 1984 ) , Katz and Allen ( 1985 ) ; Wheelwright and Clark ( 1992 ) ; Thamhain and Wilemon ( 1987 ) ; Roussel , Saad , and Erickson ( 1991 ) Funding mechanism Madauss ( 1994 ) , EIRMA ( 1994 ) , ( 1995 ) ; Ellis ( 1988 ) ; Szakonyi ( 1994a , b ) ; Borgulya ( 1999 ) ; Wyleczuk ( 1999 ) ; Crawford ( 1992 ) Project goals Roussel , Saad , and Erickson ( 1991 ) ; Dimanescu and Dwenger ( 1996 ) Project Owner Rubenstein et al . ( 1976 ) ; Katzenbach and Smith ( 1993a ) ; Leavitt and Lipman - Blumen ( 1995 ) System interdependencies and knowledge Madauss ( 1994 ) ; Henderson and Clark ( 1990 ) ; Nadler and Tushman ( 1987 ) ; Nonaka and Takeuchi ( 1995 ) Project coherence Roussel , Saad , and Erickson ( 1991 ) ; van de Ven ( 1986 ) ; Thamhain and Wilemon ( 1987 ) Cross functional integration Burgelman ( 1983 ) ; Imai , Nonaka , and Takeuchi ( 1985 ) ; Szakonyi ( 1994a , b ) ; Nadler and Tushman ( 1987 ) ; Wheelwright and Clark ( 1992 ) Communication tools Allen ( 1977 ) ; Tushman ( 1979 ) ; Dimanescu and Dwenger ( 1996 ) ; Albers and Eggers ( 1991 ) ; Jensen and Meckling ( 1996 ) ; Gassmann and Zedtwitz ( 1999 ) Organizational structures and processes Cooper and Kleinschmidt ( 1991 ) ; Madauss ( 1994 ) ; O ' Connor ( 1994 ) ; de Meyer ( 1991 ) ; Gassmann and Zedtwitz ( 1998 ) ; O ' Hara - Devereaux and Johansen ( 1994 ) ; Bartlett and Ghoshal ( 1990 ) ; de Meyer ( 1991 ) ; Ancona and Caldwell ( 1997 ) Globalization and externalization of R & D Rubenstein ( 1989 ) ; de Meyer and Mizushima ( 1989 ) ; von Boehmer , Brockhoff , and Pearson ( 1992 ) ; Ridderstråle ( 1992 ) ; Beckmann and Fischer ( 1994 ) ; de Meyer and Mizushima ( 1989 ) ; Campagna and Roeder ( 1999 ) ; Howells ( 1995 ) ; Gassmann ( 1997 ) ; Gassmann and Zedtwitz ( 1998 ) ; Naman , Dahlin , and Krohn ( 1998 ) ; Reger ( 1999 ) ; Zedtwitz and Gassmann ( 2002a , b ) . Gassmann / Zedtwitz : Virtual R & D Teams 3 is in most cases not a strategy but an operational reality . Modern information and communication technologies do reduce the necessity to collocate project activities , but they cannot solve prob - lems related to trust building , team spirit , and the transfer of tacit knowledge . What is missing is a guiding framework that adequately consid - ers the many additional challenges and constraints of international R & D projects . Based on our analysis , we observe four typical team structures for the execution of international R & D projects : 1 ) Self - organizing decentralized teams ; 2 ) teams with a system integrator ; 3 ) teams with a core coordination team ; and 4 ) centralized venture teams . There is no single optimal solution for all projects and companies ; therefore we have chosen a contingency approach . We identify four principal determinants for transnational project organization : 1 ) the type of innovation pursued ; 2 ) the systemic nature of the project ; 3 ) the modes of knowledge conversion ; and 4 ) the degree of resource bundling . We conclude with five trends that we observe as shaping the future of virtual R & D organization . II . Research Methodology The focus of our investigation was the virtual R & D project . The data for this research was gathered in 204 semi - structured research inter - views with senior R & D representatives of 37 technology - intensive companies between 1994 and 2000 . Interview data were complemented by desk research , namely the analysis of corporate annual reports , company journals , internal memos , reports and presentations . Moreover , in follow - up sessions with our interview partners , we confirmed our interpretations at each company ( Yin , 1988 ) . In the set of the 37 companies , 21 had their home bases in Europe , 5 in the USA , and 11 in Japan . All companies are highly international - ized and operate in the electrical , telecommuni - cations , automotive , machinery , chemicals , and pharmaceuticals industries . These industries rank among the highest in terms of average R & D to sales ratio ; ranging between 4 . 2 % for motor vehicles and 12 . 6 % for telecommunica - tions ( Schonfeld , 1996 ) . Furthermore , they are characterized by a high degree of international division of labor . Some of the investigated companies carried out almost 90 % of their R & D abroad . Typically , companies with high degrees of R & D interna - tionalization are the results of mergers of their parent companies . The acquisition of foreign R & D units increases their international R & D dispersion but not necessarily the degree of transnational R & D collaboration . Many strongly decentralized companies aim to take advantage of distinct competencies in local R & D units by trying to link the process of knowledge creation across many R & D sites . III . Four Types of Organization for Virtual R & D Teams We identified four principal concepts of orga - nizing virtual R & D teams ( Fig . 1 ) . Ordered by increasing degree of centralized control in dispersed project teams , these are 1 . Decentralized self - coordination , 2 . System integration coordinator , 3 . Core team as system architect , 4 . Centralized venture team . We present these concepts in this order . Each concept is explained in reference to the major project descriptors identified by our literature review . Particular emphasis is placed on inter - face management , both technical and inter - personal , as well as project management and project organization . A . Decentralized Self - Coordination In decentralized self - coordinating teams there is no strong central project manager , and no single authority enforces a rigid time schedule ( Fig . 2 ) . Project objectives are not vital to the company ' s business and hence receive only casual management attention . Due to the high degree of Inter - local Intra - local Decentralized Self - Coordination HP System Integrator as Coordinator IBM Core Team as System Architect Rockwell Centralized Venture Team ABB Fig . 1 . Four case studies exemplify virtual project organization in technology - intensive companies . Gassmann / Zedtwitz : Virtual R & D Teams 4 decentralization , communication and coordi - nation is primarily based on modern information and communication technologies such as the Internet , shared databases , groupware , as well as telephone and fax . A strong corporate or profes - sional micro - culture sometimes compensates for the absence of team or project spirit found in traditional project teams . Intrinsic motivation is important . The team itself must come up with a bracket for balancing potentially diverging indi - vidual interests and relatively weak forms of coordination . Company - wide soft management practices and company culture provide guide - lines for project members . Because of the lack of a formal project authority , self - organized teams often start out as part of a bootlegging R & D activity . But decen - tralized self - coordinating teams may also be set up by a superior manager who later yields project control to the group ( e . g . collaborative basic research projects ) . Once initiated , only some administrative support is necessary ( see Kuwahara , 1999 ) . In research , the goal of such projects is to stay in touch with leading scien - tists around the world and draw on their ideas and insight for the benefit of related internal R & D projects . In these very early stages of R & D , system integration is often not an issue as it is still unclear what systems , technologies , and products are affected . Decentralized self - coordinating teams in development can only emerge if standards for interfaces between locally developed modules are already available and clearly defined , i . e . IBM’s established VSE and MVS system . Such modules result in relatively autonomous prod - ucts with low specificity and can be produced and distributed independently . This is the case in dominant design industries in which the over - all product architecture is shared by all major parties and the focus of innovation is on process improvement , i . e . elevetor industry . In the computer industry , dominant designs have emerged at the OEM level : Independent providers of memory modules , integrated circuits , software , peripheral components , and system integration compete in a highly contested market . Decentralized self - coordination is well suited for organizations with independent business units that have a high self - interest in the devel - opment of the product component they manu - facture . The overall project is supervised by a steering committee that approves and assigns the project budget . Regional line managers assume control over local module development . Such an independent and multilateral coordina - tion of teams succeeds best in incremental or highly modular innovation . The system or prod - uct architecture not only has to remain unchanged but must be explicitly known and understood by all participating R & D teams from the onset of the decentralized project , in addition to all applicable standards and norms . Since technical interfaces are well defined , potentially diverging project objectives for component development have only a limited impact on the entire project . Since there is relatively little interaction between remote decentralized self - coordinating teams , no integrated problem solutions will be found . Moreover , there is no central project coordination with strong authority and decision power . Should critical project situations arise and priorities need to be set , overall project goals may be sacrificed at the expense of local interests ( e . g . resources , local over global design , local autonomy ) . A possible escape is to endow the steering committee with directive S Steering Committee Member PM Project Manager P X Project Leader of Team X P XY Person Y in Team X LM Regional Line Manager of Project Members Intensive Interaction Coordination and Information Exchange Directives and Reporting Authority P 23 P 2 P 22 P 21 LM Team 2 P 11 PM P 12 P 13 LM Team 1 R & D Site 1 R & D Site 2 S 1 S 2 S 3 S 4 Budget Allocation Legend : SteeringCommittee Gassmann ( 1997 ) Fig . 2 . Decentralized self - coordination between remote project teams . Gassmann / Zedtwitz : Virtual R & D Teams 5 power over line managers in regional R & D units . „Mirror organizations“ in the involved R & D site help to identify required specialists in more complex settings ( Galbraith , 1993 : 48 ) . Such a symmetrical organization of teams greatly supports direct communication between corre - sponding specialists at the operative project level without expanding administrative project chores . Decentralized self - organizing teams emerge if a more powerful central project organization is prevented by market forces ( e . g . , autonomous web developers ) and company - internal princi - ples ( e . g . , inter - divisional competition ) . However , if a decentralized self - organized project rises in importance to the company and managerial problems are expected , an individual will be vested with formal coordination author - ity to ensure more efficient system integration . Case Study A : Decentralized Self - coordinating Teams - Hewlett - Packard’s Technology Transfer Project The Technology Transfer Project at Hewlett - Packard ( HP ) was initiated by a HP scientist because he was discontented by the serious challenges that research labs faced when trying to impact HP businesses with new technologies divisions ( see Wyleczuk , 1999 ; Fig . 4 ) . He raised the interests of colleagues , the support of his management , and the financial commitment of the WBIRL grant committee . The product he envisioned was a management tool - base for project leaders and scientists . As such , this product had to be created with the help of a multitude of HP managers , scientists and engineers . As the project initia - tor , he identified supporters in HP Labs research centers in the US , England , and Italy ; these participants in turn recruited new members . The workload was highly distributed , and most of the communication took place by e - mail or videoconference , except for some daylong face - to - face meetings that were critical to developing a common vision . The early attempts to „get going on the work” failed because the distributed team members had not yet established common goals and objectives . These early difficulties and frustrations disappeared after the crucial goal - setting meeting , when all members met face - to - face for two days . The team could then proceed with briefer monthly video or telephone project meetings . The team experienced great support from other HP scientists , who offered their advice and experience on best - practice tools . based on this know - how pool and an external benchmark on existing industry practices , the team came up with a technology transfer toolbox . Most of their work and the final product were supported and dependent on Internet technologies . The team selected some pre - existing process reference documentation templates for packaging the findings as it was considered important to reuse any tools available ; this template was already a de facto standard internal to HP for capturing best practices . B . System Integrator as R & D Coordinator Interface problems that occur in self - organizing teams can be reduced if a system integrator assumes a coordination role . A system integrator harmonizes interfaces between modules , defines work packages , and coordinates decentralized R & D activities ( Fig . 3 ) . Interface management encompasses four aspects : 1 . A system integrator harmonizes physical , logical and process interfaces between modules and supervises overall system integration ( technical interface management ) . 2 . The system integrator is also responsible that the work packages in a project are completed on time ( temporal interface management ) . 3 . The system integrator tracks and controls the contribution of all participating profit centers ( administrative interface management ) . 4 . Moreover , the system integrator must build a common project understanding between dif - ferent functional and regional units in the project team ( social interface management ) . The system integrator has a central role in an otherwise highly decentralized project . Several system integrators or a dedicated project inte - gration office may supervise particular complex or collaborative decentralized projects . The integrator facilitates the coordination between integrated product management teams and local teams , and he ensures coherence of individual project team aims . These teams act highly independently , but as long as they fulfill previously agreed specifications the system integrator is reluctant to interfere . Often , this project organization is used to tap locally available expertise for product upgrades or refinement work . As a ‘global knowledge engineer’ , the system integrator is responsible for managing knowl - edge transformation processes ( between explicit and tacit knowledge ) and the aggregation of the locally created knowledge . He must translate between teams of different contexts : languages , business vs . technical aspects , and culture . In order to overcome functional differences , a system integrator must opt for system thinking in favor for local technological optimization . Gassmann / Zedtwitz : Virtual R & D Teams 6 Although project coordination is considerably aided by modern information technology , an initial workshop with principal team members and subsequent regular face - to - face contacts are crucial for system integration . A central location of the integrator ' s office is hence important in order to reduce the otherwise significant travel burden , and to facilitate meetings between teams and integrator . Differing interests of project teams can endanger project success , since the system inte - grator has still only little decision authority over the decentralized teams . Through intensive communication , strong personal commitment and frequent travel the system integrator aims to build an informal network and some form of team spirit . If conflicts still cannot be handled this way , he will summon team leaders to meet face - to - face in order to settle the dispute or solve the problem . Integrating diverging inter - ests in a multi - cultural background demands high inter - personal skills from the system inte - grator who cannot rely on top - management support or directive power over the dispersed teams . Much patience , sensitivity and experience is required to align the individual objectives of each partner team , making sure that they agree on a shared understanding of what is to be achieved and how each partner would contribute to this goal . Mutual demonstrated appreciation of each other’s work ( e . g . in top - management reviews ) is crucial for continuous motivation in an extremely complex international environment . Case Study B : System Integrator as an R & D Coordinator - VSE Development at IBM The development of IBM ' s Virtual Storage Extended ( VSE ) system software is distributed over eleven R & D units . For reasons of compatibility , each release requires mostly incre - mental improvements in specific functions ( 90 % is reused ) . Project management and system responsibility reside in the German R & D unit at Böblingen near Stuttgart . Acting as a steering committee , the Investment Review Board is located in New York ( Gassmann , 1997 : 92 - 108 ) . Coordination requirements and interaction between project teams are dependent on the degree of interdependencies of VSE product components . As a rule , they are relatively low . Not every unit participates by default in a new release , only the four R & D units in Böblingen , Hursley , Santa Theresa and New York developing vital components are involved in each release . The high degree of platform management and system compatibility with MVS reduces parallel development , system complexity , interface mismatches and product maintenance costs . There is a substantial potential for conflict between teams since each development team is part of an independent profit center . Direct instructions from one team to another team are usually not possible . The overall project manager wields rela - tively low authority . Although this empowerment promotes self - coordination , a unit ' s autonomy is limited by IBM - internal inte - gration . The system integrator must rely on the readiness to cooperation of the other R & D teams , often relying on softer forms of persuasion . If no agreement can be reached , Böblingen considers internal development or outsourcing . This often results in complex profit distribution schemes and intellectual property conflicts . System integration is located in a project office in Böblingen . Four integrators coordinate all development work of 20 VSE components . Their responsibilities include the collection and technical evaluation of new project ideas , technical system design , project supervision and coordination , project documen - tation and VSE product planning . Ideas for completely new functions and products ( leading to radical innovation ) are also reviewed , considered for potential development in Böblingen , or assigned to a better - suited IBM R & D location . After many years of VSE development experience , project planning is a highly standardized process with clearly defined project goals , interfaces and abundant boundary conditions . The project office tends to restrict developmental freedom in project teams . Once the VSE development reaches a predefined check - point , the specifications are ' frozen ' . Component design is almost completely entrusted to local R & D units , but the project office also supervises and coordinates the entire development process ( including system design , implementation , code scaffolding , module integration , customer testing ) . C . The Core Team as a System Architect Gassmann / Zedtwitz : Virtual R & D Teams 7 Companies whose R & D teams work closely together control their product development proc - esses better ( Takeuchi and Nonaka , 1986 : 78 ) . Studies on communication and team performance suggest a physical collocation of R & D in one place ( e . g . Allen , 1977 ; Katz and Allen , 1985 ; Takeuchi and Nonaka , 1986 : 40 ; Katzenbach and Smith , 1993b ) . But the advan - tages of intralocation are in fundamental contrast to the many multi - site necessities in R & D projects ( Lullies et al . , 1993 : 193 ) . Collocating all project members and equip - ment may be very costly and sometimes impos - sible . The second - best solution is to form a core team of key decision - makers who meet regularly in one location to direct decentralized R & D work ( Fig . 4 ) . In comparison to the concepts of decentralized self - coordination teams and system integrators , this approach is characterized by the highest intensity of interlocal communication , and most integrated problem solution . The core team typically consists of a project manager , team leaders of decentralized projects teams , and internal business customers . External customers as well as consultants have been seen to be part of core teams , although their involve - ment in the project is on a part - time basis . The size of a core team usually does not exceed 10 to 15 people . The core team develops the system architecture of a new product and maintains coherence of the system during the entire project duration . Essentially , it assumes the role of a system architect and integrator ( inter - face management ) but has the direc - tive authority to enforce its instruc - tions . Hence the core team is better prepared to resolve diverging interests of functional and local organizational units and to translate between differing cognitive contexts ( ' cognitive bridging ' , Ridderstråle , 1992 : 14 ) . Day - to - day management takes place through the use of collaborative tools such as intra - and internets , groupware , videoconferencing , significantly reducing the requirement , frequency and costs of face - to - face meetings . Good linkages between the core team and the supervising project steering committee are a must : They guarantee direct information flow between project teams and the product champi - ons . In strategic projects , the steering committee should also have direct influence on the line managers concerning the prioritization of projects and resource allocation , as to resolve the many responsibility conflicts occurring in a complex matrix organization . Since core teams can address problems on a more integrative level , new solutions can be found outside predefined concepts and frame - works ( ' architectural ' or ' radical innovation ' , Henderson and Clark , 1990 : 9 ) . Problem solving in core teams differs substantially from inde - pendent search paths of self - coordinating teams or the mediation by system integrators . Core teams are inevitable if highly innovative prod - ucts are to be developed and intralocal project execution is not possible because of restricted resources . If the core team is unable to solve a specific problem , specialists from other R & D units or local teams will be temporarily included . The boundary of the project team expands and shrinks according to the project tasks and P 33 P 3 P 32 P 31 P 11 P 12 PM P 13 P 2 P 21 P 23 P 22 LM Team 3 Example of Project Organization at R & D Site 3 System Integrator S 1 S 2 S 3 S 4 Team 2 Team 1 Information exchange on project progress SteeringCommittee S Steering Committee Member PM Project Manager P X Project Leader of Team X P XY Person Y in Team X LM Line Manager of Project Members Intensive Interaction Coordination and Information Exchange Directives and Reporting Authority Legend : Gassmann ( 1997 ) Fig . 3 . System integrator as coordinator of decentralized R & D teams . Gassmann / Zedtwitz : Virtual R & D Teams 8 project difficulties , although the size of core team must not exceed an upper limit in order to guarantee operational efficiency . The core team may address limited and clearly defined prob - lems by contacting specialists of participating R & D units directly for joint problem solving . Tele - or videoconferences may suffice to bring together the input from specialists , but if the problem is particularly complex and involves several modules , specialist ' s teams are created and supervised by the core team . Case Study C : The Core Team as a System Architect - Intelligent Machine Development at Rockwell Automation Rockwell Automation has built a reputation for developing intelligent machinery and machinery diagnostics . In January 1996 , representatives of 18 major customers were invited to establish a business need and technical requirements for a vari - ety of applications of intelligent machines . As competition was perceived to catch up , Rockwell Automation decided to initiate an ambitious 18 - month program to develop an intelligent motor product ( see also Discenzo , Schaefer , and Marik , 2000 ) . The product specification outline was based on customer input and Rockwell Automation ' s experience with several earlier concept systems , integrating existing experience as well as novel , yet - to - be - developed technologies . A core team of three senior staff members from marketing , R & D , and engineering was formed . A senior vice president sitting in the review committee ' owned ' the project . As the core team did not want to afford the risk of failure with unproven resources or the delay for learning new technologies in - house , new team members were included in the team as needed . Often the best staff was found in another Rockwell division , hence expanding the project boundary again . A one - page , graphic product brochure was created which served to motivate and communicate a clear and common objective to the team . The projects internal visibility , strong customer - drive and a keen sense - of - urgency ensured team coherence , although only one person was employed full - time and everyone else had other responsibilities to attend to as well . Formal project management tools were intro - duced to support communication and reporting . A concise project reporting format and tracking form was developed specifically for this project , including a one - page summary that graphical project status representations . A standard repository uniformly maintained the timely validity and accuracy of technical information ; software code revision and document control were administered by the core team . Still , a key success factor was the considerable amount of informal communication . During the day - to - day development activities it was customary for team participants to contact anyone in the project as needed . E - mail , intranet , video - conferencing , and telephone conference calls were heavily used . Issues and results from this semi - formal communication were copied easily to the appropriate core team leader responsible for the area of activity . The most critical element , however , was the selection of dedicated , communicative and trust - worthy people : Just professional competence alone was not sufficient for decentralized R & D work . Many segments of the team had collaborated previously , resulting in a high degree of trust and open communication . Individual team members from remote locations spent time at other team member sites performing joint R & D tasks . Ensuring trust and transparency of leadership to project management was also highly important . The R & D representative in the core team spent up to 25 % of his time travelling and coordinating R & D activities with local team engineers , contractors and customers . Competent and empowered team leaders in each location helped align local activities with the overall project objective . Despite the adversities of geographical separation , the project turned out to be very successful : The overall development time was shortened from the projected 18 months to 12 months while staying within the predefined budget . A testament of the novelty of this accomplishment is multiple trade industry awards and patent awards for this work . D . Centralized Venture Team Spatial distance between R & D employees decreases the likelihood of communication significantly ( Allen , 1977 ) : Coordination and know - how exchange become more problematic in international R & D settings . Physical colloca - tion of scientists , engineers , and project manag - ers thus tend to make the execution of R & D projects more productive . Due to high costs of relocating dispersed R & D personnel and resources in one location ( and the resulting local overcapacity once the project is concluded ) , the centralized venture team is used only for strate - P 33 P 3 P 32 P 31 PM P 1 P 3 P 2 P 2 P 21 P 23 P 22 LM Team 3 Project Organization at R & D Site 3 S 1 S 2 S 3 PM Team 2 Core Team Directives and priorities concerning resource allocation SteeringCommittee S Steering Committee Member PM Project Manager P X Project Leader of Team X and Member X in Core Team P XY Person Y in Team X LM Line Manager of Project Members Intensive Interaction Coordination and Information Exchange Directives and Reporting Authority Identical People Legend : P 13 P 11 P 1 P 12 Team 1 P x P x Virtual Teams of Specialists Situative integration of specialists in the core team Task force for special problems Gassmann ( 1997 ) Fig . 4 . Core team as a system architect . Gassmann / Zedtwitz : Virtual R & D Teams 9 gic innovation projects of utmost importance ( Fig . 5 ) . The geographically centralized venture team is responsible for planning and execution of an R & D project , including idea generation , product system definition , technology and product development , testing , and often even the product’s market intro - duction . In order to justify the magnitude of expenses and efforts , a sense of urgency is required . A heavyweight project manager wields unrestricted command over the resources assigned to him , and he employs all available tools of project coordination . To effectively implement his decisions , he is fully empowered to pursue new and original solutions without repeatedly asking for approval . Full technical and business responsi - bility is likely to lead to radical new product and process concepts . Due to its strategic impor - tance , project funding is often provided from corporate sources . One or several steering committees supervise the project . Through physical proximity and intensive project - internal communication , the centralized venture team seeks to implement integrated solutions . Physical collocation for face - to - face communication and good informal linkages between team members ( preferably in the same building or room ) are regarded as the principal factors for effective and short - time develop - ment . Simultaneous engineering ( rugby team approach ) is possible if cross - functional collo - cation overcomes compartmental thinking . Known as „High - Impact - Projects“ at ABB , „Top projects“ at Bosch , or „Golden badge projects“ at Sharp , centralized venture teams can be extremely expensive and therefore only used for strategic projects . Staying within project budgets is less of a priority than achieving tech - nical goals and time - to - market . Frequently , such projects are crucial for developing attractive business opportunities or for closing gaps to fast - moving competitors . Being dispatched to the central project location , the project members are exempted from their line duties in other R & D locations . Specialists are often intensively engaged in such activities , and their removal from their parent location imposes great oppor - tunity costs for venture teams . Direct costs are less important compared to the opportunity costs of collocating the team . The development of a strong project culture complicates the reintegra - tion of the project members into their previous line functions . Although the centralized venture team is pulled together in one place , this location is not necessarily the corporate R & D center . The venture team ' s separation and independent organization from its original research depart - ment is often considered critical . Removed from the company’s line organization , a venture team allows the unrestricted cooperation of specialists from several functional areas . As in Daimler - Benz ' s ' Project - House Necar ' , the team settled in Nabern , about 30 km away from the headquar - ters in Stuttgart , but close enough to other Mercedes - Benz development units in Ulm and Friedrichshafen . R & D teams of cooperation partners ( DBB Fuel Cell Engines and others ) are collocated with the Project - House , such that almost 200 R & D people are working on fuel - cell development in Nabern . Similarly , ABB ' s GT24 / 26 development took place in rural Gebenstorf , but still within a short ride from either the Research Center in Baden or the R & D headquarters in Zurich ( see ABB case for more details ) . S 1 S 2 S 3 PM SteeringCommittee P 1 PM P 8 P 2 P 5 P 3 P 10 P 11 P 6 P 7 P 9 P 4 R & D Site 3 R & D Site 2 R & D Site 1 S Steering Committee Member PM Project Manager P X Project Leader of Team X Intensive Interaction Directives and Reporting Authority Identical People Legend : P x P x Gassmann ( 1997 ) Fig . 5 . Centralized venture team : collocation of all participating R & D teams under heavyweight project management . Gassmann / Zedtwitz : Virtual R & D Teams 10 Despite their strong centralization , these venture teams are increasingly international . Even very large companies do no possess all technological capabilities to pull off a high - risk high - impact project all by themselves . Strong international partners help in setting technical and market standards . Technological coopera - tion with lead customers , specialized suppliers and research partners require the integration of teams from across the border . Centralized venture teams are the most costly approach to virtual R & D teams and result in difficult overcapacity situations during the termination of the project . But centralizing research teams may be the only way to achieve challenging goals under intense time pressure until information and communication technolo - gies used in transnational R & D become more powerful . Especially when information can eas - ily be converted to code and team members know each other already from previous projects , a substantial amount of cost - intensive centrali - zation can be reduced to kick - off and review meetings . Yet , modern information and commu - nication technologies cannot replace face - to - face contacts for extended periods of time . Case Study D : Centralized Venture Teams - ABB’s Think - Tank for the Gas Turbine Development GT24 / 26 With several international R & D units involved for component development and testing , the GT24 / 26 gas turbine development at ABB is an example for a strongly centralized yet transnational R & D project . The GT24 / 26 project represented a breakthrough innovation in gas turbine development—for instance , more than a hundred patents were filed . In the 1980s , ABB reduced its commitment and R & D engagement in high - power turbines , until a 1991 market analysis indicated a multi - billion - dollar market for turbines generating more than 130 Megawatts ( ' high end turbines ' ) . Lagging three to five years behind General Electric , Siemens and Westinghouse , ABB had to catch up with its competitors in terms of quality , time , and price . The short development time in particular seemed unattain - able , since technological foundations had still to be developed . Because market entry timing was paramount , new management methods were called for to ensure fast - cycle development time , competitive advantage and customer orientation . An R & D project team of several hundred people from 20 nations was created ( Fig . 10 ) . Specialists from basic technologies , such as material and environmental sciences , but also from different functional departments , such as production , assembly , and service formed a highly interdisciplinary team ; the know - how gathered was highly complementary . The project structure was characterized by high international division of labor . The ABB Research Center in Baden , Switzer - land , provided the new combustion technologies , and Baden researchers were subsequently engaged in integrating these technologies in the new turbine . The main share of the turbine development took place in Baden , including the development and production of the combustion chamber and turbine blades as well as final assembly of the turbine . ABB Mannheim was responsible for R & D and production of rotors , requiring profound technological know - how . Less technology - intensive components were developed in locations with cost advantages . In addition to ABB R & D units , external companies participated in the turbine development through contract R & D , development cooperation , and integration as a lead user . All project members were concentrated in a single open - space office in a two - story building in Gebensdorf , a village near Baden , Switzerland . Since ABB had enlisted many contributors outside ABB for integrating external know - how , the central project location of this ' think - tank ' facilitated cross - functional communication and helped to keep critical know - how inside the project . The strategic importance , the high - flying objectives , and the seal of confidentiality supported the creation of a common project spirit and innovation culture . ABB was cautious not to accidentally release any information to competitors : All project members were sworn to secrecy , and even the Gebensdorf building retained an innocent residential housing exterior . The GT24 / 26 development project enjoyed high priority within ABB ' s Power Generation unit . The project leader reported directly to the head of development and the general manager . The steering committee met once a month . In critical phases of the project , even the Board of Management was involved . Most of the project members were completely assigned to the project and reported only to the project manager . The project manager was responsible for all activities between research , development and production , including the completion of the first two gas turbines and their installation at the customer sites . The strong position of the project manager facilitated his access to critical and limited resources , such as functional specialists in particular technical areas . The design of production tools was started before the product development phase was concluded . Even more acute than in sequential development projects , the parallel execution of the turbine development in combination with the spatial distances between product and production tool development units created serious coordination challenges . For instance , the rotor devel - opment team and its manufacturing personnel were relocated from Mannheim to Baden in order to ensure the necessary inten - sity of communication . Due to high R & D costs and urgent time pressures , ABB deployed the concept of innovation marketing : the close inter - action of R & D , marketing , and innovative product users . Inno - vation marketing aims to aligning internal and external techno - logical constraints by coordination among the main innovation participants , improving technology transfer , cross - functional communication , and market introduction times . The principal management approach combines heavyweight project manage - ment , design - for - manufacturability , benchmarking , and simulta - neous engineering . GT24 / 26 was the first simultaneous engineering project at ABB . Since vital technological know - how was lacking and the pressure to reduce development time was enormous , ABB engaged in this project before the necessary materials research was completed . In order to simultaneously develop end - product components while fundamental research was still under way , research and development was collocated in one building in Gebensdorf , Switzerland . The main success factors of the GT24 / 26 development were the centralization of the project team in one location , or think - tank , the coordinated parallelization of activities and cross - functional cooperation , strong top - management commitment , Gassmann / Zedtwitz : Virtual R & D Teams 11 and the integration of potential and lead customers . ABB’s top management fully supported the project , yielding considerably authority and decision power to the GT24 / 26 project manager . Cross - functional teams , lead users , researchers , and devel - opment engineers collaborated during the entire project . The GT24 / 26 generation was a technological breakthrough and moved ABB from a late follower into a technical leader in the field of high - end turbines within a short time frame . Compared to previous projects , time - to - market could be reduced by 60 % and the number of modules by nearly 50 % . IV . Determinants of Transnational R & D Organization In the previous section , we have outlined four paradigmatic forms of project organization : self - organizing decentralized teams , R & D teams coordinated by a system integrator , core - team guided R & D projects , and centralized venture teams . These four concepts differ in various ways , the most visible differences being the power of the project manager and the geo - graphic location of the main part of the team . However , these differences do not explain why a particular organization of virtual R & D project execution was chosen—they only high - light how an organization prefers to address more fundamental determinants and constraints of transnational R & D work . The question remains , what are these fundamental determi - nants for virtual R & D projects ? In this section we suggest four determinants that shape virtual R & D project organization . Our propositions are based on our empirical investigation and analysis of the project descriptors that we used in the above concepts , complemented by literature relevant to R & D , project management and knowledge creation . In total , we identified four determinants as relevant for choosing a specific organizational form of transnational R & D organization . 1 . Type of innovation : Incremental versus radical ; 2 . Nature of the project : Systemic versus autonomous ; 3 . Knowledge mode : Explicit versus tacit ; 4 . Degree of resource bundling : Redundant versus complementary . A . Type of Innovation : Incremental versus Radical The novelty of an innovation is given by the number , extent , and predictability of deviations from the experience and know - how base of a company . If the affinity of an R & D effort to existing technology and processes is strong , we speak of incremental innovation . Incremental R & D projects are characterized by higher conti - nuity , routinization , and more gradual improvement . Examples for strong process affinity are efforts to reduce tolerance levels or improve pass - yield quotas ; products with a high affinity to existing technologies are e . g . soft - ware application updates such as Word 6 . 1 or platform - based car derivatives . Radical innovation is typically the result of a break - through project in a new technology or process , involving completely new markets , new technological designs , or the integration of formerly unrelated technologies for novel appli - cations . Since the affinity to existing technology or processes is weak , project dynamics and hence uncertainties concerning attainability and execution are higher . For example , the pharma - ceutical industry is currently embracing drug - by - design processes and other revolutionary approaches to drug development . Products that opened new markets or involved novel tech - nologies are ABB ' s GT24 / 26 or Daimler ' s Smart mobile . Incremental innovation is better suited for decentralized execution as the required tech - nologies are known and system interfaces are defined . R & D is more likely to target module - internal innovation , leaving the overall product system intact . While incremental innovation is often a sine - qua - non condition for maintaining or expanding an existing line of business , its R & D projects usually do neither enjoy the same visibility nor attract the same attention from top - management . Gassmann / Zedtwitz : Virtual R & D Teams 2 B . Nature of the Project : Systemic versus Autonomous The systemic nature of the innovation project depends on the interdependence and structura - bility of individual project work tasks . Highly structured projects with separable work tasks are examples of autonomous innovation projects . Structure implies a defined input - output process as well as cause - and - effect knowledge about individual tasks . Work is split up into work packages with well - defined interfaces . The execution of a project can easily be planned in advance ; clear tasks and responsibilities are assigned to all project participants . Work tasks that are highly separable from the development of the product system are , for instance , personal computer components such as memory chips , disk drives , and integrated circuits . The rigorous testing and research process established in many academic and industrial R & D laboratories is a good example for highly structured innovation . In pharmaceutical R & D , this is embodied e . g . in well - maintained laboratory manuals and rigid guidelines for clinical development . Highly interdependent work tasks indicate a systemic nature of innovation . Interdependence occurs often in the early phases of R & D projects , when technical and procedural concepts have not been fully defined yet . In product development , wide tolerances between functional parts also reduce separability . Thompson ( 1967 ) describes four types of interdependence relevant for R & D projects : pooled , sequential , reciprocal , and team - oriented . Pooled interdependence is based on restricted access to shared resources . Sequential interdependence links the output of a work package with the input of another work task . Reciprocal interdependence implies mutual coordination of temporal and logic dependencies as in technical specifications of highly inte - grated products . In team - oriented interdepend - ence , high module - internal interdependencies require a strong coordination and mutual inte - gration of work package goals within every team . We have found these constraints e . g . in laptop development , where tightly packed modules require close physical and functional alignment which makes a clear separability of module development impossible . Also , highly creative processes such as brainstorming perform best when structural rigidities are removed . First - of - a - kind development projects are often systemic since there is little previous relevant experience available by which the project should be structured . With increasing knowledge and experience , work tasks and interdependencies are delineated better and better . In complex R & D projects , however , many technical design interfaces are initially unknown and emerge only in the course of the project ( see also Sosa , Eppinger , and Rowles , 2000 ) . Systemic innovation is better approached with cross - disciplinary teams not only because their input may be more diverse but also because they are believed to adapt faster to unexpected change . System integration is tedious and conflict resolution is difficult : they are inevitable and take place between multiple stakeholders . This requires strong interpersonal and superior coordination skills . In autonomous innovation , system integration occurs at a lower level and is typically not time critical . Coordination and communication is asynchronous and determined beforehand by technical and managerial constraints . Hence , the separability of a project decreases with the diversity of information , communica - tion frequency , and unpredictability of commu - nication . High interdependence and systemic projects are unsuited for interlocal execution , whereas autonomous work packages and highly structured projects may be decentralized to remote but higher qualified R & D units . C . Knowledge Mode : Explicit versus Tacit The pooling and transfer of knowledge among team members is crucial , particularly in interna - tional projects which aim at exploiting specific location advantages . In the context of knowl - edge exchange across great distances , the distinction between tacit and explicit knowledge becomes even more important ( see Nonaka and Takeuchi , 1995 ; Polanyi , 1966 ) . Explicit knowl - edge is easily articulated and documented , but tacit knowledge is difficult to communicate . We further discern two types of knowledge : individual knowledge and social knowledge . Gassmann / Zedtwitz : Virtual R & D Teams 3 Social knowledge is knowledge shared among a group of individuals , its interpretation being subjective to the composition of this group . Nevertheless , there is a high degree of redundant knowledge that provides identity to this group . Individual knowledge is specific to every human being ; it is present and producible without other people having to be around . In R & D projects , individuals as well as teams engage in knowledge creation and knowledge transfer . Learning occurs both at the individual level as well as at the team level . The codifi - ability of knowledge defines learning modes and knowledge exchange patterns . Highly codifiable individual knowledge is fact - based accounts or low - context - specific results . Codified social knowledge is found in laws and written norms and standards , as for instance in R & D project manuals , ISO certifications , or password - recov - ery functions . Difficult to codify individual knowledge are many individual ' how - to ' skills at the border to what we may call art or intuition ; it may also be more trivial knowledge that an individual is unaware of and assigns little rele - vance to be articulated . Hard to codify social knowledge is at the base of group dynamics and the success of assembling the ' right ' team . Tacit knowledge includes both individual knowledge and social knowledge . Examples are decisions based on intuition and ' coordination without words ' . The transformation of knowl - edge ( socialization , externalization , internaliza - tion , combination ) from one mode to another is not trivial and crucial for effective learning and know - how transfer . In the start - up phase of an R & D project , mutual agreements and proce - dures must be established ( socialization ) . This tacit knowledge is eventually externalized ( i . e . codified and transformed into standards and specifications ) . The processing of explicit knowledge into more explicit knowledge ( combination ) is increasingly supported by modern information technologies , particularly multimedia - based means of context - rich com - munication . These transformations are highly affected by the cultural and behavioral background of the project members . Project coherence may be based on shared cultural or social knowledge , or that mutually shared social knowledge can be established in order to reduce difficulties resulting from cultural differences . Interlocal project execution presupposes that tacit knowl - edge can be externalized and communicated over distance . It is the project manager ' s respon - sibility to facilitate the transformation of indi - vidual know - how to knowledge available to the entire team . D . Resource Bundling : Redundant versus Complementary In international R & D projects , resources such as capital , equipment , and people are pooled over a number of locations . Within a project , the deployment and bundling of these resources can be either redundant or complementary . We consider bundling of resources both in functional as well as technological capacities . Strong functional redundancy is present in projects with team members performing similar functions . Project - internal communication then tends to be less problematic since all members use the same terminology and share the same referential framework . Functional redundancy is low if different functions are involved , such as R & D , suppliers and lead users . As their contexts are not strongly related , communication tends to be more complicated and requires more face - to - face contact and externalization . Strong func - tional redundancy occurs when subteams are deployed in parallel to prepare competing solu - tions to the same problem ; cross - functional teams are typically characterized by low func - tional dependency . If only few technological areas are involved in an R & D project , redundancy in technology is relatively high : All participating teams or R & D units share similar technological competencies . Researchers of the same scientific discipline also share the same cognitive base and termi - nology , which , as with functional redundancy , helps low - context ICT or telephone communi - cation by making reference to well - understood frameworks . An example for strong technologi - cal redundancy are projects in clinical drug development , where a specific drug candidate is being tested in similar circumstances across a multitude of hospitals . Low technological redundancy is given if many different technolo - gies are to be combined and only few experts Gassmann / Zedtwitz : Virtual R & D Teams 4 are available . This is the case in cutting - edge R & D where the number of experts is limited such as in intelligent machine design or laser research . Redundancy is often associated with the duplication of R & D efforts and the waste of available resources . However , redundancy in resources and competencies ( usually tied to people or teams ) provides a buffer against the unforeseeable loss of key people or the elimination of technical alternatives . Epistemological redundancy thus improves the knowledge creation process in R & D projects . Redundant and overlapping knowledge improves the parallelization of R & D work and cross - functional collaboration . Interlocal projects are more difficult to carry out if there is little or no functional and technological redundancy . V . Towards a Contingency Approach to Organizing Virtual R & D Teams We have started our discussion with a review of some important characteristics of project organization and project management . These project descriptors guided us through four concepts of virtual R & D organization , spanning highly centralized to self - organizing decentral - ized projects . We have argued that four funda - mental determinants are responsible for the observed spatial distribution of project teams and their organization . These four determinants are the type of innovation ( radical vs . incre - mental ) , the systemic nature of the project ( systemic vs . autonomous ) , the knowledge mode conversion ( tacit vs . explicit ) , and the degree of resource bundling ( redundant vs . complementary ) . The four fundamental determinants demarcate spatial organization of R & D projects ( Fig . 11 ) , establishing whether centralization is necessary or decentralization is possible . We suggest two propositions of virtual R & D project organiza - tion : P1 : The centralization of R & D projects is necessary for radical innovation , systemic project work , prevalence of tacit knowledge and the presence of complementary resources . The centralization of projects is necessary if the needed know - how is still tacit or difficult to externalize . The more tacit knowledge abounds , the higher are the interdependencies between teams and between product components . Frequently recurring interface issues make unproblematic and straightforward face - to - face communication imperative . The project ' s complexity is large and not discernable into smaller subsystems . Resources are thus bundled and subjected to centralized management . If successful , such projects make significant contributions to knowledge - building , i . e . , radical innovation . P2 : The decentralization of R & D projects is possi - ble for incremental innovation , autonomous project work , prevalence of explicit knowledge and the presence of redundant resources . Decentralized projects are possible if technical data and project information are easy to share among subteams , leaving little ambiguity of interpretation . Work and technical interfaces are predefined and need not be negotiated before - hand . Each team enjoys high work and technical autonomy . Teams have access to their own resources , without the need to share them with other project subteams . Project complexity in its ResourceBundlingResourceBundling Type of InnovationType of Innovation KnowledgeModeKnowledgeMode ProjectWorkProjectWork TacitKnowledge ExplicitKnowledge Systemic Project Work AutonomousProject Work RedundantResources IncrementalInnovation Radical Innovation ComplementaryResources Decentralized Self - Coordination System Integrator as Coordinator Core Team as System Architect CentralizedVenture Team Gassmann ( 1997 ) Fig . 6 . Four fundamental project determinants and their fit with the four concepts of virtual R & D project organization . Gassmann / Zedtwitz : Virtual R & D Teams 5 entirety may still be significant ; however , specific module complexity of each decentral - ized team is relatively low and requires no intensive coordination with other project teams . We want to reiterate that all four described concepts are in fact virtual project organiza - tions . Even centralized venture teams are often transnational R & D projects , integrating local lead - users or outsourcing clearly defined subtasks . Like in any other virtual R & D team , the scope and size of centralized venture teams change and adapt with the project tasks at hand . As we remember , expanding and shrinking team boundaries are at the core of the definition of virtual R & D teams . VI . Conclusions and Future Trends The use of virtual teams , especially in international R & D projects now seems well established and likely to continue . Powerful information and communication technologies , growing experience with managing transnational R & D processes , and the globalization of technology are harbingers of a new standard in international R & D organization . In this paper we proposed four concepts of virtual R & D project organization , describing principal management responsibilities and organizational pitfalls . We also suggest specific conditions and circumstances that must be in place in order to determine the appropriate degree of spatial and organizational decentralization . In the centralized venture team , all project members are collocated in one place . In the core team as a system architect , all relevant team leaders and project managers meet in one centralized location . The system integrator moves between geographically dispersed R & D teams trying to coordinate them . There is little face - to - face contact between self - coordinating teams . The fundamental determinants that we identi - fied as critical in transnational R & D projects were the type of the innovation pursued , the systemic nature of the project , the necessary knowledge conversion mode , and the degree of resource bundling . In their entirety , these deter - minants and concepts may serve as a guideline for the conception of virtual R & D organization . Looking ahead we observe the following trends in organizing virtual R & D teams : Trend 1 : As the internationalization of R & D con - tinues , the importance of virtual R & D teams in - creases . The internationalization of research , develop - ment and technology will continue . Decentral - ized structures of research , development and knowledge creation will become the standard in companies of all sizes and technological concentration . The accumulation of technologi - cal know - how in centers - of - excellence , in asso - ciation with increasing returns - to - scale in knowledge production , necessitate the estab - lishment of local R & D units and technology listening posts . Ethnocentric and geocentric centralized R & D organization will need to open up and outsource R & D on a global scale in order to secure technological competitiveness . Profit center thinking leads to more empower - ment of decentralized business units , carrying out more designated activities along the entire value creation chain . This is the paradigm of market orientation in product development . In pulling these dispersed R & D capabilities back together into targeted innovation projects , virtual R & D teams play a vital role . Trend 2 : Transnational R & D projects follow talent in new industrialized countries . The rise of transnational R & D projects is carried forward by the availability of talented engineers and scientists in an increasing number of centers - of - excellence around the globe - and our awareness of their existence . Company clusters and local governments create the bases for new technical knowledge in regions formerly insignificant to international R & D ; multinational companies try to tap these bases with local R & D offices in regions such as East - ern China , India , Taiwan , Korea , Singapore , Eastern Europe , Mexico , and parts of South America . Students and scientists who have gone to the US and Europe for training and education return to their home countries . Being highly computer - literate and proficient in English , the dominant language in international science and business , they can translate between explicit ICT - based communication and their often Gassmann / Zedtwitz : Virtual R & D Teams 6 context - rich local cultures . Particular industries with modular product development processes ( e . g . , software ) already exploit the possibilities of 24 - hour laboratories and local wage advan - tages . Furthermore , since the virtual integration of dispersed teams can take place from anywhere , ICT - based R & D offers great oppor - tunities for customer - oriented R & D . Trend 3 : Better ICT enhance the functionality of virtual R & D teams . Besides the conventional telecommunication support such as telephone , e - mail and fax , the best ICT current virtual R & D teams support systems that use are groupware , videoconferences and real - time multi - site simulations . During the short time period of our interviews ( 1994 - 2000 ) we have experienced fast progress in new state - of - the - art iinformation and communication technologies . Future communication technologies are expected to convey a sufficient amount of tacit information to create the illusion of virtual presence . Haptic as well as holographic technologies are being developed . The internet expands both in reach ( net - periphery and backbone ) as well as in information throughput ( bandwidth ) . Advances in microelectronics , data transmission and information processing are pulling down the barriers project managers today have to overcome with time - consuming long - distance travel . Project management tools are developed with decentralized work execution in mind . Already today many scientists and engineers have gained a familiarity with conventional internet tools that go beyond the expectations of yesterday ' s communication researchers . Not only will ICT become more powerful , but also their perceived disadvantages will become less of a burden . Trend 4 : Relative costs of running virtual R & D projects will decrease due to learning curve effects . Like any other group effort , teams will become better at doing virtual R & D projects the more they get engaged in international R & D . Once a company has moved up the learning curve , we see a reduction of time - to - market and of R & D costs . Project participants become increasingly savvy in utilizing ICT and working in a diverse team environment . Project leaders and R & D management enhance their understanding on how such projects should be set up and run . Moreover , overall coordination costs fall as the most competent local companies are integrated in global R & D processes in order to optimize the use of external resources . Trend 5 : Highly decentralized virtual R & D teams gain importance in open system architectures such as internet - based applications . With the advent of the Internet and the World Wide Web , a powerful and highly transparent standard has emerged . In internet - based indus - tries , technical interfaces define social inter - faces . Hardware and software specifications as well as web development tools are publicly available , making the Internet a product devel - opment platform par excellence . Web - integra - tion means system integration . Already today , companies of the new economy use the Internet as their main referential fix - point for establish - ing a network of worldwide R & D competence . Software engineers and programmers are highly independent of actual locus of work ; some of them work on a purely contractual basis for far - away headquarters . Knowing that their skills are highly contested in a dry labor market , they chose to pursue professional challenges that match their individual interests . But this is only possible because software engineers are highly ICT - literate people , being accustomed to communicate via E - mail and other means of ICT . Todays success of open source products , such as Linnux , Apache web server or sendmail , have triggered an academic discussion on virtual and open organizations ( Gassmann 2001 ) . New ways of incentive systems and operating modes have avised in these user and hacker communities . Research agenda on this empirical phenomenon is just starting to evolve . Decentralization is generally justified by the need to tap local resources and talent . This is certainly a major driving force in virtual R & D projects . However , the dispersion of R & D work is also motivated by finding adequate assistance for ' the few great minds ' in an R & D organiza - tion , top - notch scientists and researchers with exceptional productivity and creativity . Virtual Gassmann / Zedtwitz : Virtual R & D Teams 7 R & D teams cater both needs : tapping local diversity as well as supporting central creativity . The boundaries between virtual R & D projects become blurry—some members are key experts in several teams . Hybrid forms of virtual teams , one overlaying the other , become possible . With this contribution we hope to have added to the understanding of spatial distribution of R & D teams and its effects on project manage - ment . Especially in emerging technologies or large and costly projects , virtual R & D can help to spread the risk and distribute costs among a network of stakeholders . It is crucial to identify appropriate target technologies , project members , and modern support tools . Neverthe - less , traditional coordination methods and tools are still required . Not every project or innova - tion is suited to virtual execution . The decision whether a project should be carried out by a virtual R & D team must be made case by case . References Albers , S . ; Eggers , S . ( 1991 ) : Organisatorische Gestaltungen von Produktinnovations - Prozessen . Führt der Wechsel des Organi - sationsgrades zu Innovationserfolg ? , in : Zeitschrift für Be - triebswirtschaftliche Forschung 43 , 1 , 44 - 64 . Allen , T . J . ( 1977 ) : Managing the flow of technology – tech - nology transfer and the dissemination of technological infor - mation within the R & D organization . Cambridge University Press : London . Ancona , D . ; Caldwell , D . ( 1997 ) : Making Teamwork Work : Boundary Management in Product Development Teams , in : Tushman , M . ; Anderson , P . ( 1997 , Eds ) : Managing Strategic Innovation and Change . New York : Oxford University Press , 433 - 442 . Bartlett , C . A . ; Ghoshal , S . ( 1990 ) : Managing Innovation in Transnational Corporation , in : Bartlett , C . A . ; Doz , Y . ; Hed - lund , G . ( Eds ) : Managing the Global Firm . London , New York , 215 - 255 . Beckmann , C . ; Fischer , J . ( 1994 ) : Einflußfaktoren auf die Inter - nationalisierung von Forschung und Entwicklung in der Chemischen und Pharmazeutischen Industrie , in : Zeitschrift für Betriebswirtschaftliche Forschung 46 , 7 / 8 , 630 - 657 . Borguyla , P . ( 1999 ) : Hoffmann - La Roche : Global Differentiation between Research and Development , in : Boutellier , R . ; Gassmann , O . ; von Zedtwitz , M . ( 1999 ) : Managing Global Innovation . Berlin , New York , Tokyo : Springer , 236 - 248 . Boutellier , R . ; Gassmann , O . ; Macho , H . ; Roux , M . ( 1998 ) : Management of dispersed R & D teams , in : R & D Management , Vol 28 , No . 1 , 13 - 25 . Boutellier , R . ; Gassmann , O . ; von Zedtwitz , M . ( 1999 ) : Manag - ing Global Innovation . Springer : Berlin , New York , Tokyo . Burgelman , R . ( 1983 ) : A Model of Internal Corporate Venturing in the Diversified Major Firm , in : Administrative Science Quarterly , June , 223 - 244 . Burgelman , R . ( 1984 ) : Managing the Internal Corporate Ven - turing Process , in : Sloan Management Review , Winter , 33 - 48 . Campagna , M . ; Roeder , T . ( 1999 ) : ABB : Technology Manage - ment : Think Global , Act Local , in : Boutellier , R . ; Gass - mann , O . ; von Zedtwitz , M . ( 1999 ) : Managing Global Inno - vation . Berlin , New York , Tokyo : Springer , 443 - 452 . Chesbrough , H . W . ; Teece , D . J . ( 1996 ) : When is virtual virtuous ? Organizing for innovation , in : Harvard Business Manager 1 , 65 - 73 . Chiesa , V . ; Manzini , R . ( 1997 ) : Managing virtual R & D organi - sations : lessons from the pharmaceutical industry , in : Interna - tional Journal of Technology Management , vol . 13 , n . 5 / 6 . Cooper , R . G . ; Kleinschmidt , E . J . ( 1991 ) : New Product Processes at Leading Industrial Firms , in : Industrial Marketing Man - agement 20 , 137 - 147 . Crawford , C . ( 1992 ) : The Hidden Costs of Accelerated Product Development , in : Journal of Product Innovation Management , 9 , 188 - 199 . De Meyer , A . ( 1991 ) : Tech Talk : How Managers Are Stimulat - ing Global R & D Communication , in : Sloan Management Re - view 32 , 3 , 49 - 58 . De Meyer , A . , Mizushima , A . ( 1989 ) : Global R & D Manage - ment , in : R & D - Management 19 , 2 , 135 - 146 . Dimanescu , D . ; Dwenger , K . ( 1996 ) : World - Class New Product Development . New York : Amacom . Discenzo , F . ; Schaefer , R . ; Marik , V . ( 2000 ) : Multi - national Virtual Organization for Rapid Product Innovation , in : Khalil , T . ; Lefebvre , L . ( Eds ) : Proceedings of the 9 th International Conference on Management of Technology , 21 - 25 Feb , 2000 . Dunning , J . ( 1994 ) : Multinational enterprises and the globaliza - tion of innovatory capacity , in : Research Policy 23 , 67 - 88 . EIRMA ( 1994 ) : Funding and Financing Industrial R & D . Paris : EIRMA Conference papers XLIII . EIRMA ( 1995 ) : Funding R & D for Industrial Innovation . Paris . Ellis , L . W . ( 1988 ) : Managing Financial Resources , in : Research Technology Management 31 , 4 , 21 - 38 . Galbraith , J . R . ( 1993 ) : The business unit of the future , in : Galbraith , J . R . ; Lawler , E . E . ( Eds ) : Organizing for the future . The new logic for managing complex organizations . San Fran - cisco , 43 - 65 . Gassmann , O . ( 1997 ) : Internationales F & E - Management . München , Oldenbourg . Gassmann , O . ; von Zedtwitz , M . ( 1998 ) : Organization of in - dustrial R & D on a global scale ; in : R & D Management , Vol . 28 , No . 3 , 147 - 161 . Gassmann , O . ; von Zedtwitz , M . ( 1999 ) : New Concepts and Trends in International R & D Organization : in Research Pol - icy , Vol . 28 , 231 - 250 . Gassmann , O . ( 2001 ) : E - Technologien in dezentralen Innovationsprozessen ; in : Zeitschrift für Betriebswirtschaft , ZfB - Ergänzungsheft 3 / 2001 , 73 - 90 . Goldman , S . L . ; Nagel , R . N . ; Preiss , K . ( 1994 ) : Agile competitors and virtual organizations : strategies for enriching the customer . New York : Van Nostrand Reinhold . Handy , C . ( 1995 ) : Trust and the virtual organization , in : Harvard Business Review ( May - June ) , 40 - 50 . Harris , C . ; Insinga , R . ; Morone , J . ; Werle , M . ( 1996 ) : The virtual R & D lab , in : Research Technology Management 39 , 32 - 36 . Henderson , R . M . ; Clark , K . B . ( 1990 ) : Architectural innovation : the reconfiguration of existing product technologies and the failure of established firms , in : Administrative Science Quar - terly 35 , 9 - 30 . Howells , J . ( 1995 ) : Going global : the use of ICT networks in Research and Development , in : Research Policy 24 , 169 - 184 . Imai , K . ; Nonaka , I . ; Takeuchi , H . ( 1985 ) : Managing the New Product Development Process : How Japanese Companies Learn and Unlearn , in : Clark , K . ; Hayes , R . ; Lorenz , C . ( Eds ) : The Uneasy Alliance . Cambridge : Harvard University Press . Jensen , M . C ; Meckling , W . H ( 1996 ) : Specific and General Knowledge , and Organizational Structure , in : Myers , P . S . Gassmann / Zedtwitz : Virtual R & D Teams 8 ( Ed . ) : Knowledge Management and Organizational Design , Newton , 17 - 38 . Katz , R . ; Allen , T . ( 1985 ) : Project Performance and the Locus of Influence in the R & D Matrix , in : Academy of Management Journal , 28 , 1 , 67 - 87 . Katzenbach , J . ; Smith , D . ( 1993a ) : The Discipline of Teams , in : Harvard Business Review , Vol . 17 , 111 - 120 . Katzenbach , J . ; Smith , D . K . ( 1993b ) : The wisdom of teams . Boston . Kuwahara , Y . ( 1999 ) : Hitachi : Management Practices for In - novation in Global Industrial Research , in : Boutellier , R . ; Gassmann , O . ; von Zedtwitz , M . ( 1999 ) : Managing Global In - novation . Berlin , New York , Tokyo : Springer , 500 - 523 . Leavitt , H . ; Lipman - Blumen , J . ( 1995 ) : Hot Groups , in : Harvard Business Review , Vol . 73 , 109 - 116 . Lullies , V . ; Bolinger , H . ; Weltz , F . ( 1993 ) : Wissenslogistik : Über den betrieblichen Umgang mit Wissen bei Entwick - lungsvorhaben . Frankfurt , New York . Madauss , B . J . ( 1994 ) : Handbuch Projektmanagement , 5 . Aufl . , Stuttgart : Schaeffer - Poeschel . Nadler , D . ; Tushman , M . ( 1987 ) : Strategic Organization Design . Scott , Foresman and Company . Naman , J . ; Dahlin , K . ; Krohn , M . ( 1998 ) : Managing Interna - tional R & D for Global Platforms and Local Adaptations . Car - negie - Bosch Institute working paper No . 98 - 1 . Nonaka , I . ; Takeuchi , H . ( 1995 ) : The knowledge - creating com - pany . How Japanese companies create the dynamics of inno - vation . New York : Oxford University Press . O ' Connor , P . ( 1994 ) : Implementing a Stage - Gate Process : A Multi - Company Perspective , in : Journal of Product Innovation Management , Vol . 11 , 183 - 200 . O ' Hara - Devereaux , M . ; Johansen , R . ( 1994 ) : Globalwork . Bridging distance , culture , and time . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Patel , P . ( 1995 ) : Localised Production of Technology in Global Markets , in : Cambridge Journal of Economy 19 , 141 - 153 . Polanyi , M . ( 1966 ) : The Tacit Dimension , London . Ridderstråle , J . ( 1992 ) : Developing product development : holo - graphic design for successful creation in the MNC . Competi - tive Paper for EIBA Annual Meeting . Reading . Reger , G . ( 1999 ) : How R & D is coordinated in Japanese and European multinationals , in : R & D Management 29 , 1 , 71 - 88 . Roberts , E . B . ( 1995 ) : Benchmarking the Strategic Management of Technology I , in : Research Technology Management 38 , 1 , 44 - 56 . Roussel , P . A . ; Saad , K . N . ; Erickson , T . J . ( 1991 ) : Third Gen - eration R & D : Managing the Link to Corporate Strategy , Bos - ton . Rubenstein , A . ; Chakrabarti , A . ; O ' Keefe , R . ; Souder , W . ; Young , H . ( 1976 ) : Factors Influencing Innovation Success at the Project Level , Research Management 19 , 3 . Schonfeld ( 1996 ) : R & D ratios & budgets . Schonfeld & Associ - ates , Inc . Lincolnshire IL , June . Sosa , M . ; Eppinger , S . ; Rowles , C . ( 2000 ) : Analyzing the Effects of Product Architecture on Technical Communication in Product Development Organizations . MIT Sloan Working Pa - per . Szakonyi , R . ( 1994 ) : Measuring R & D Effectiveness - I , in : Re - search Technology Management 37 , 3 , 27 - 32 . Szakonyi , R . ( 1994 ) : Measuring R & D Effectiveness - II , in : Research Technology Management 37 , 3 , 44 - 55 . Takeuchi , H . ; Nonaka , I . ( 1986 ) : Das neue Produktentwick - lungsspiel , in : Harvard Business Manager 3 , 40 - 47 . Thamhain , H . ; Wilemon , D . ( 1987 ) : Building High Performing Engineering Project Teams , in : IEEE Transactions on Engi - neering Management , Vol . EM - 34 , No . 3 , 130 - 137 . Tushman , M . L . ( 1979 ) : Managing Communication Network in R & D Laboratories , in : Sloan Management Review 4 , 37 - 49 . Upton , D . M . ; McAfee , A . ( 1996 ) : The real virtual factory , in : Harvard Business Review ( Jul - Aug ) , 123 - 133 . Van de Ven , A . ( 1986 ) : Central Problems in the Management of Innovation , in : Management Science 32 , 5 , 590 - 607 . von Boehmer , A . ; Brockhoff , K . ; Pearson , A . W . ( 1992 ) : The Management of International Research and Development , in : Buckley , P . J . ; Brooke , M . Z . ( Eds . ) : International Business Studies , Oxford , 495 - 509 . von Zedtwitz , M . ; Gassmann , O . ( 2002a ) : Market versus Technology Drive in R & D Internationalization : Four Different Patterns of Managing Research and Development , in : Research Policy , Vol . 31 , 2002 , No . 4 , 569 - 588 . von Zedtwitz , M . ; Gassmann , O . ( 2002b ) : Managing Customer - Oriented Research , in : International Journal of Technology Management , Vo . 24 , 2002 , No . 2 / 3 , 165 - 193 . Wheelwright , S . ; Clark , K . ( 1992 ) : Revolutionizing Product Development – quantum leaps in speed , efficiency , and qual - ity . New York : The Free Press . Wyleczuk , R . ( 1999 ) : Planet - wide patterns in technology tapes - try , in : Boutellier , R . ; Gassmann , O . ; von Zedtwitz , M . : Man - aging global innovation . Berlin , New York , Tokyo : Springer , 334 - 380 . Yin , R . K . ( 1988 ) : Case study research : design and methods . Newbury Park , London , New Delphi . Appendix — Case Studies Case Study D : Centralized Venture Teams - ABB’s Think - Tank for the Gas Turbine Development GT24 / 26 With several international R & D units involved for component development and testing , the GT24 / 26 gas turbine development at ABB is an example for a strongly centralized yet transnational R & D project . The GT24 / 26 project represented a breakthrough innovation in gas turbine development—for instance , more than a hundred patents were filed . In the 1980s , ABB reduced its commitment and R & D engagement in high - power turbines , until a 1991 market analysis indicated a multi - billion - dollar market for turbines generating more than 130 Megawatts ( ' high end turbines ' ) . Lagging three to five years behind General Electric , Siemens and Westinghouse , ABB had to catch up with its competitors in terms of quality , time , and price . The short development time in particular seemed unattain - able , since technological foundations had still to be developed . Because market entry timing was paramount , new management methods were called for to ensure fast - cycle development time , competitive advantage and customer orientation . An R & D project team of several hundred people from 20 nations was created ( Fig . 10 ) . Specialists from basic technologies , such as material and environmental sciences , but also from different functional departments , such as production , assembly , and service formed a highly interdisciplinary team ; the know - how gathered was highly complementary . The project structure was characterized by high international division of labor . The ABB Research Center in Baden , Switzer - land , provided the new combustion technologies , and Baden researchers were subsequently engaged in integrating these technologies in the new turbine . The main share of the turbine development took place in Baden , including the development and production of the combustion chamber and turbine blades as well as final assembly of the turbine . ABB Mannheim was responsible for R & D and production of rotors , requiring profound technological know - how . Less technology - intensive components were developed in locations with cost advantages . In addition to ABB R & D units , external companies participated Gassmann / Zedtwitz : Virtual R & D Teams 9 in the turbine development through contract R & D , development cooperation , and integration as a lead user . All project members were concentrated in a single open - space office in a two - story building in Gebensdorf , a village near Baden , Switzerland . Since ABB had enlisted many contributors outside ABB for integrating external know - how , the central project location of this ' think - tank ' facilitated cross - functional communication and helped to keep critical know - how inside the project . The strategic importance , the high - flying objectives , and the seal of confidentiality supported the creation of a common project spirit and innovation culture . ABB was cautious not to accidentally release any information to competitors : All project members were sworn to secrecy , and even the Gebensdorf building retained an innocent residential housing exterior . The GT24 / 26 development project enjoyed high priority within ABB ' s Power Generation unit . The project leader reported directly to the head of development and the general manager . The steering committee met once a month . In critical phases of the project , even the Board of Management was involved . Most of the project members were completely assigned to the project and reported only to the project manager . The project manager was responsible for all activities between research , development and production , including the completion of the first two gas turbines and their installation at the customer sites . The strong position of the project manager facilitated his access to critical and limited resources , such as functional specialists in particular technical areas . The design of production tools was started before the product development phase was concluded . Even more acute than in sequential development projects , the parallel execution of the turbine development in combination with the spatial distances between product and production tool development units created serious coordination challenges . For instance , the rotor devel - opment team and its manufacturing personnel were relocated from Mannheim to Baden in order to ensure the necessary inten - sity of communication . Due to high R & D costs and urgent time pressures , ABB deployed the concept of innovation marketing : the close inter - action of R & D , marketing , and innovative product users . Inno - vation marketing aims to aligning internal and external techno - logical constraints by coordination among the main innovation participants , improving technology transfer , cross - functional communication , and market introduction times . The principal management approach combines heavyweight project manage - ment , design - for - manufacturability , benchmarking , and simulta - neous engineering . GT24 / 26 was the first simultaneous engineering project at ABB . Since vital technological know - how was lacking and the pressure to reduce development time was enormous , ABB engaged in this project before the necessary materials research was completed . In order to simultaneously develop end - product components while fundamental research was still under way , research and development was collocated in one building in Gebensdorf , Switzerland . The main success factors of the GT24 / 26 development were the centralization of the project team in one location , or think - tank , the coordinated parallelization of activities and cross - functional cooperation , strong top - management commitment , and the integration of potential and lead customers . ABB’s top management fully supported the project , yielding considerably authority and decision power to the GT24 / 26 project manager . Cross - functional teams , lead users , researchers , and devel - opment engineers collaborated during the entire project . The GT24 / 26 generation was a technological breakthrough and moved ABB from a late follower into a technical leader in the field of high - end turbines within a short time frame . Compared to previous projects , time - to - market could be reduced by 60 % and the number of modules by nearly 50 % .