Data on Demand I . : Allen Morgan * nergy Management Systems E @ MS ) are the primary source of data for many operations with - in an electric utility . The scope of an EMS is so broad that the data requirements for the EMS overlap with transmission , distribution , and production missions . Constrained more by the lack of interoperability than anything else , the depth and breath of data sharing have been relatively small . To meet today’s and future business goals the dissemination of EMS data is no longer a luxury but a necessity . The data must be provided faster ( to reflect chang - ing conditions accurately ) and in a timely manner ( when needed ) . Displaying a large vol - ume of rapidly changing information requires a method t o present the data in a concise , easily understood format . Simply listing the data in tables or forms may not be effective . This is espe cially true for the amount of data the user would have to scan to obtain a clear idea of the status of the electrical network . The ideal technique is graphical , where symbols replace numbers , dia - grams replace tables , with differing views of the data , e . g . , summary views , net - work topology views , etc . The EMS traditionally * Public Service E ! ectric and Gas Company uses one - line displays to present the network view . Figure 1 shows a typical EMS one line display , which has almost 400 points of information . Each line , switch , breaker , and numeric value is dynamic . On the Public Service Electric and Gas Company ( PSE & G ) EMS system , almost 300 such displays exist . To meet current and future business goals , dissemination of EMS data is no longer a Fourth - Generation EMS System luxury but a necessity With the recent installation of its fourth generation EMS , PSE & G took the opportunity to provide E s s e x I I I KU Figure 1 . Typical one - line display , showing approximately 400 points of data . Square boxes are breakers and open circles are generators . Colors show voltage classes . The gray status bar at the top of the display shows current time ( Zen ) and date capture time ( middle ) . January 1993 39 ISSN O8950156 / 93 / $ 3 . W1993 IEEE timely EMS data throughout the corporation because the new Digital Equipment Corporation ( DEC ) based computer system has extensive networking capabil - ity that allows a tie directly to the corporate local - area network and wide - area network ( LAN / WAN ) . As Figure 2 indicates , the EMS has links to production support sys - tems , corporate mainframe sys - tems , and to the PC LAN system . The communication glue that con - nects these various nets together is transport control protocol and Internet protocol ( TCP / lP ) . Using simple file transfers , 95 percent of the operations data is moved from the EMS to the other com - puter systems . To a lesser extent , data comes into the EMS system from these other computer sys - tems . PSE & G provides timely EMS data throughout the corporation using the new computer system’s extensive networking capability , which allows direct LAN / wAN ties Display Design Since PSE & G has already achieved a high degree of PC integration , the PC was the ideal vehicle for presenting EMS data to the corporate clients . Furthermore , various departments had already created their own online monitoring - type PC displays . These displays used custom programs and special data - base transfers from the EMS system . To leverage the EMS system data , while minimizing the cost of such a grand strategy , the question was , “What if the same pictures on the EMS system could be displayed on PCs ? ” That is , if the same displays the elec - tric system operators used were available to PC users throughout the company , the bulk of the EMS data would be accessible in a proven format . A considerable amount of manpower and design has gone into the EMS displays . Each display takes about 1 man - week to design and validate . More importantly , the maintenance of these displays is an ongoing effort . New or modified displays are checked for accuracy and human factors . The design goals for the PC emulation were : To be able to call up all of the one - line displays and as many tabular displays as easily available Display call - up in under 10 seconds Data updates of at least every 5 minutes . Several problems were imme - diately apparent in using a PC . The typical PC user has a video graphic array ( VGA ) monitor with 640 by 480 resolution . The EMS system resolution is 1024 by 1280 , considerably higher . How would a one - line display such as the one shown in Figure 1 look on a PC ? Also , the color palette available on the EMS displays has 256 colors out of 32 , 000 . The PC VGA has only 16 out of a palette of 256 . Another perceived problem was that the PC was slower displaying the data so it would take too long to draw the picture , and frustrate the user . To address the resolution , performance , and color problems , a working prototype of the PC base display system was developed . The prototype used a simple EMS display ( see Figure 3 ) for testing . A program to snapshot the data in that display was developed on the EMS system , and the snapshot data was used to test the display’s dynamic behavior . With this prototype , the resolution of the PC did have a noticeable effect on the displays , but were still remark - ably readable . In the performance area , display call - up times well under 15 seconds were achieved ( later under 5 seconds was typical ) . As far as color problems , the EMS display design incorporated human factors that Product Platforms Corporate Gateway LAN Mainframe [ Network 1 ’ Figure 2 . The energy management system has links to production sup - port systems , corporate mainframe systems , and the PC LAN system . minimized the number of primary colors . The VGA colors on the PC were close matches . Confident that a PC could show EMS displays , further development was started . To signify the EMS data sharing , the program was named Liberty . Another design issue was how to get the data to the PC in a timely manner without tax - ing the EMS computer system ? After experi - menting with file transfers for the data in each display , it became more efficient to simply take snapshots of the entire EMS database and send it to a LAN disk server . Moving the EMS 40 IEEE Computer Applicutions in f‘ouw to under 10 seconds , well within the goal of a 5 - minute update rate . The final design question was how to implement the displays on the PC . To avoid developing a new display design , the display file structure used on the EMS sys - Figure 3 . The working prototype used a simple EMS display to test and resolve resolution , performance , and color problems . There are over 25 dynamic elements that may change color , shape , or position . Arrows next to green numbers indicate direction of measured values . ment , which was a major consideration that effected great savings . Development A prime consideration in the development of the pro - gram was to reduce rein - venting the wheel . The displays on the EMS use a UNK - like , C - based , pro - prietary workstation . The dynamics of the display ( lines , breakers , values ) were coded in the C pro - gramming language . It was very important to port the same code from the workstation to the PC . This not only saved development time but gave assurance that the displays would work the same way on the PC as on the EMS . By careful crafting , the code was reused almost intact ( include file path names where changed ) , and , in the future as more dynamic graphics are created , it will be very easy to port them to the PC . Another criterion was to provide a display sys - tem that a typical PC user January 1 . 9 . 9 . 3 41 Distribution departments . As usage increases , the pc Server databases are being distributed to the field loca - tions to reduce network traffic . Incremental changes to increased performance steadily . Typical call - up times for the real - time data transfer and Liberty program have displays are less then 10 seconds on LANs ( local depart - 1 access the data from their PCs . Ultimately , SQL access will be provided when EPRI ' s Utility Communications Architecture and Data Access integration computers at Services ( DAIS ) specifications are applied to make - - I N - 2240 UARI NFINCO KU Figure 4 . Typical help window for a display . Almost all one - line displays have help mes - sages available on the PC . The help information is for the display underneath the help window . Biography F . Allen Morgan received his BE in mechanical engi - neering from Stevens Institute of Technology ( Hoboken , New Jersey ) in 1977 . He joined Detroit Edison in 1977 . After 2 years as engineer in the Performance department , he joined Public Service Electric and Gas . At PSE & G , he developed power plant related com - puter systems . Since 1987 , he has worked on the installation of PSE & G ' s lat - est Energy Management System , specifically on its man - machine interface . He currently holds the posi - tion of senior engineer in the Technology Develop - ment Services department . He is a member of the IEEE and is chairman or the working group Computer Applications for Plant Automation . 42 IEEE Computer Applrccitions in Pou er