Signal transduction underpins the activation , regula - tion and resolution of protective immune responses , and it also has a central role in immune dysfunction . Throughout the past 30 years , scientists have applied the tools of biochemistry , molecular biology and genetics to investigate these topics in depth . Their work has identi - fied networks of secreted ligands , cell - surface receptors , intracellular signalling pathways and transcriptional regulators that coordinately control various aspects of cell behaviour . These networks are generally thought of as chemical entities , largely because their components have been characterized as individual molecules that function through noncovalent molecular interactions and / or enzymatic activity . Although this chemical conception is not incor - rect , it ignores the effects of mechanical force on sig - nalling networks and also the possible influence of signalling networks on the mechanical environment within and outside of the cell . This omission is relevant because the life of an immune cell is intensely physical , being characterized by comprehensive morpho logical change , rapid movement through tight interstitial spaces , adhesion under shear flow and the formation of dynamic interfaces with other cells . The receptor – ligand interactions that govern cellular function take place in these dynamic environments , where they are influenced by cellular motion , bulk fluid flow and the local stiff - ness of the extracellular matrix . In addition to binding to their cognate ligands , many cell - surface proteins also interact with the cortical actin cytoskeleton , which effec - tively couples them physically to each other and also to a variety of intracellular signalling pathways that use the cortex as a platform for their assembly . Hence , the molecular machinery involved in signal transduction is well positioned to propagate physical information about the extracellular environment into the cell and also to translate biochemical signals in the cytoplasm into physical forces exerted against the environment . Although the idea that mechanical forces regulate and are regulated by intracellular signalling is not new 1 , it has been difficult to study in the immune system owing to problems in applying biophysical approaches to leuko - cytes , which are non - adherent , structurally plastic and often quite small . Recent technical advances , however , have enabled investigators to explore the mechanical properties of these challenging cell types in greater depth ( BOX 1 ) . As a result , we are beginning to appreciate the myriad ways in which cellular forces influence immune function . This Review highlights recent progress in the field . I briefly discuss how cells generate force , and I then focus on how force regulates several key aspects of immune cell behaviour . How cells generate and sense force Cells exert force against their environment through dynamic cytoskeletal remodelling . In most cases , it is the filamentous actin ( F - actin ) cytoskeleton that bears most of the mechanical load . The paradigmatic model of F - actin - dependent force exertion is the contrac - tion of antiparallel actin filaments by the myosin II motor ( FIG . 1a ) . Although myosin II - based pulling was initially characterized as the mediator of muscle contraction , it is now clear that it drives shape change in most eukary - otic cells , thereby influencing a range of processes that include cell adhesion , motility and division 2 – 4 . Consistent with this pervasive role , myosin II activity has been implicated in force exertion by multiple immune cell types 5 – 10 . In principle , force can also be generated by actin polymerization , independent of myosin II ( FIG . 1b ) . F - actin nucleators such as the actin - related protein 2 / 3 Immunology Program , Memorial Sloan - Kettering Cancer Center , 1275 York Avenue , New York , New York 10065 , USA . husem @ mskcc . org doi : 10 . 1038 / nri . 2017 . 74 Published online 31 Jul 2017 Mechanical forces in the immune system Morgan Huse Abstract | Leukocytes can completely reorganize their cytoskeletal architecture within minutes . This structural plasticity , which facilitates their migration and communicative function , also enables them to exert a substantial amount of mechanical force against the extracellular matrix and the surfaces of interacting cells . In recent years , it has become increasingly clear that these forces have crucial roles in immune cell activation and subsequent effector responses . Here , I review our current understanding of how mechanical force regulates cell - surface receptor activation , cell migration , intracellular signalling and intercellular communication , highlighting the biological ramifications of these effects in various immune cell types . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY VOLUME 17 | NOVEMBER 2017 | 679 © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Focal adhesions Force - bearing multiprotein complexes ( composed of integrins , cytoskeletal adaptors and signalling molecules ) that anchor the cortical filamentous actin cytoskeleton of adherent cells to the extracellular matrix . ( ARP2 / 3 ) complex , which catalyses the formation of branched F - actin arrays , and the formins , which induce linear F - actin cables , have crucial roles in shape change during cell migration and polarity induction 11 , 12 . Protrusive F - actin - based structures can deform under - lying substrates as well as the surfaces of other cells 13 – 15 , and this implies that they are capable of transmitting forces . However , there have been no unambiguous measure - ments of actin polymerization - based force exertion at a cellular level . This could be because the protrusive forces are quite transient and easily masked by the longer - lived , contractile forces . To generate force , both contractile and protrusive F - actin dynamics must be coupled to contacts between the cell and the environment that create frictional drag ( FIG . 1a , b ) . The best - understood contacts of this kind are focal adhesions ( REFS 16 , 17 ) . Focal adhesions display a fixed architecture in which integrins and F - actin are bridged by a specialized layer of scaffolding proteins that regulate integrin affinity , F - actin crosslinking and mechanosensing 17 , 18 . These structures are readily observed in cultured adherent cells , such as fibroblasts , which use them to anchor their cortex to matrix proteins that are immobilized on plastic or glass . Focal adhe - sions require force exertion for their growth and main - tenance 19 – 23 ; consequently , they shrink in the absence of myosin contractility , and they are less apparent on softer substrates than on harder substrates . Indeed , classical focal adhesions are difficult to find in vivo 24 , where the extracellular matrix is more pliable . However , adhesion - like structures have been documented in cer - tain tissues , implying that the organizational features observed in vitro may indeed be physiologically rele - vant 24 . Interestingly , many immune cell types do not form classical focal adhesions in vitro or in vivo , which possibly reflects their structural plasticity . However , they do form more transient adhesive contacts that contain cell - surface receptors , F - actin and some of the intracellular machinery that is typically found in focal adhesions 25 – 27 . These structures probably serve as anchor points for force exertion during migration and cell – cell contact formation . Throughout the past decade , it has become clear that cells sense the mechanical properties of their envi - ronment and use the information that they acquire to inform gene expression and cell fate decisions . Cells do this by translating the physical perturbations experi - enced by their constituent proteins into chemical signals through a process known as mechano transduction 28 , 29 . At the centre of any mechanotransduction path - way is a molecule that is characterized by having a structure and / or activity that is modulated by force . Mechanosensitive channels of the Piezo family , for example , undergo an activating conformational change in response to membrane stretch , thereby coupling cell tension to ion flux 30 – 32 ( FIG . 1c ) . Force - induced con - formational changes can also reveal cryptic binding sites within a mechanosensitive protein , leading to the nucleation of signalling complexes ( FIG . 1d ) . Mechanical stretching of the scaffolding protein talin , for example , promotes focal adhesion assembly by exposing sur - faces that interact with the adaptor vinculin 33 , 34 . Force can also influence intracellular signalling by changing the strength of protein – protein interactions . Most bio - molecular contacts behave as slip bonds , which become weaker under applied force . However , certain mechano - sensitive interactions show an increased lifetime under tension , which is the defining feature of a catch bond 35 , 36 . Box 1 | Measuring cellular forces Modern mechanobiology relies on technical approaches that enable the quantification of forces at the single - cell and / or single - molecule level . Several of the most important strategies are described briefly below , and they have been more comprehensively reviewed elsewhere 151 – 153 . Atomic force microscopy This approach measures minute forces applied to a flexible , calibrated cantilever . The cantilever tip can be pressed into a sample from the top , generating positive deflections that reflect the physical properties of the sample ( for example , stiffness ) . Alternatively , the cantilever tip and sample surface can be coated with interacting proteins and placed into contact . The subsequent withdrawal of the tip will induce negative deflections that can be used to measure binding strength . Optical trapping This approach makes use of a focused laser beam to capture a micron - sized particle ( for example , a polystyrene bead ) within the imaging field . Particles inside an optical trap are subject to piconewton - scale restoring forces that can be modelled as a simple spring . If the particle in question is tethered to another surface via a biomolecular linkage , the strength of the linkage can be determined by moving the trap away and measuring the displacement of the particle from the trap centre ; this displacement is directly proportional to the pulling force . Biomembrane force probe This system uses red blood cells ( RBCs ) as sensitive and adjustable force transducers . A stimulatory bead is attached to a RBC , which is then immobilized on the end of a micropipette . Pushing or pulling against the bead induces distortions in the RBC , which behaves as a spring under these conditions . Importantly , the stiffness of the RBC can be modulated across a wide range simply by changing the level of suction within the micropipette . This enables the measurement of forces ranging from 0 . 01 pN to 1 nN ( REF . 154 ) . Traction force microscopy In this system , cells are imaged on deformable substrates that contain fluorescent fiducial probes . Traction force microscopy ( TFM ) was initially implemented by embedding fluorescent beads into hydrogel matrices 155 . Bead movements induced by cells in this context are converted into force maps by Fourier techniques using the known elasticity of the gel . TFM has also been implemented using arrays of micropillars that are made from the deformable plastic polydimethylsiloxane 156 . Cells attached to these arrays induce pillar deflections that can be converted into force vectors using the known height , width and composition of the pillars . Tension gauge tethers In this approach , the ligands for receptors of interest are immobilized on surfaces using short DNA duplexes 157 . The rupture force of each duplex is dictated by its sequence , length and the point of junction with the attached ligand . Hence , by using duplexes of increasing strength , the force per receptor required to maintain cell attachment can be determined . In recent years , second - generation tension gauge tethers have been developed that couple duplex rupture with the unquenching of a fluorophore 146 , 147 ; this enables the detection of single - molecule pulling events above a given force threshold in real time by live fluorescence imaging . Intracellular tension sensors In recent years , fluorescent sensors have been developed to report cytoskeletal tension in cells 148 – 150 . These constructs typically contain a Förster resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) donor and acceptor separated by a folded peptide sequence that can be extended under tension . Force application above a threshold pulls the donor and acceptor fluorophores apart , decreasing FRET . Constructs like this enable the visualization of intracellular forces at subcellular resolution . R E V I E W S 680 | NOVEMBER 2017 | VOLUME 17 www . nature . com / nri © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Nature Reviews | Immunology Myosin II F - actin Talin Actinnucleators Focaladhesion Matrix a Myosin contractility c Mechanosensitive channel d Conformational change b Actin protrusion + + + + + + + + + + + + + Signalling Mechanosensing The capacity of cells or molecules to detect physical properties or perturbations . Mechanotransduction The process through which cells sense and respond to their mechanical environment , such as the extracellular matrix , adjacent cells or external stresses . During mech - anotransduction , mechanical signals are sensed and activate intracellular biochemical signalling pathways . Slip bonds Bonds that are characterized by having a lifetime that decreases with applied force . Catch bond A bond that is characterized by having a lifetime that increases up to an optimal applied force , after which it decreases with increasing force . Lamellipodium A broad , flat protrusion at the leading edge of a moving cell that is enriched with a branched network of elongating actin filaments that generate the force to push the cell membrane forwards . Uropod A slender appendage that is formed at the trailing , rear edge of fast - migrating cells such as amoebae , neutrophils and lymphocytes . Inside - out signalling The process by which intracellular signalling mechanisms result in the activation of a cell - surface receptor , such as an integrin . By contrast , outside - in signalling is the process by which the ligation of a cell - surface receptor activates signalling pathways inside the cell . As detailed below , catch - bond formation is emerging as a central event in leukocyte migration , cell – cell contact formation and antigen recognition . It is important to note that force exertion and mechanotransduction are tightly linked processes . Mechanically induced conformational changes only occur under applied force . Hence , effective mechano - transduction requires that a cell exerts force on its environ ment or receives force either from bulk flow or from a closely interacting cell . Conversely , force exertion is itself regulated by feedback from mechanosensing pathways . Adherent cells and lympho cytes , for example , require myosin - based contractility to sense extracellular matrix stiffness 37 – 40 . They also modulate their contractile forces to match matrix properties , exerting stronger forces on stiffer surfaces and weaker forces on softer ones 5 , 34 , 41 – 43 . The mechanical life of a cell is therefore dependent on continuous cytoskeletal remodelling and signal transduction . Leukocyte movement 2D migration . Throughout the past decade , studies in multiple systems have revealed how forces that origi - nate from within and outside of a migrating cell fun - damentally enable and also continuously regulate the molecular machinery that is involved in movement . The simplest and perhaps best understood of these experimental systems is leukocyte crawling on a 2D matrix . In this context , attachment to the surface is medi - ated by integrin binding to immobilized matrix proteins or adhesion molecules 44 . Some integrins ( such as MAC1 ( also known as αMβ2 integrin ) and αXβ2 integrin ) can also bind directly to denatured proteins or even uncoated plastic 45 , 46 . Lymphocytes and neutrophils migrating in 2D adopt an elongated morphology containing an F - actin - rich lamellipodium at the leading edge followed by a trailing , tail - like uropod ( FIG . 2a ) . Forward propul - sion in adhesive environments is generated by the retro - grade flow of F - actin against integrin adhesions that are located at the base of the lamellipodium or further back in the cell body 17 , 47 , 48 . Retrograde flow is caused both by actin polymerization against the plasma membrane , which drives the growing fibres backwards 49 – 51 , and by myosin II contractility , which collapses the leading - edge F - actin network into linear bundles 17 , 52 , 53 . Myosin II also contributes to migration by retracting the uropod from the matrix as the cell moves forwards 54 , 55 . Integrins are heterodimeric proteins comprising one α - chain and one β - chain . Each subunit contains a long extracellular stalk that binds to ligand ; a trans membrane helix ; and a short intracellular tail that interacts with cytoplasmic signalling and cytoskeletal proteins 56 . In their resting , low - affinity state , integrins adopt a bent conformation in which their ligand - binding pockets are oriented towards their own plasma membrane . Inside - out signalling from inside the cell can induce the extension of the extracellular domain , facilitating ligand recognition 57 . The peak binding affinity , however , is only achieved under applied tangential force , which originates from the actin cytoskeleton and is transferred to the inte - grin via interactions between cytoskeletal adaptors such as talin and the tail of the β - subunit 58 – 60 ( FIG . 2b ) . Pulling force separates the tails of the α - chains and β - chains , inducing a conformational change in the β - chain stalk domain that increases its affinity for ligand 100 - fold . Throughout the past decade , biophysical experiments have directly quantified this catch - bond behaviour . For example , α5β1 integrin achieves maximal affinity for fibronectin at an applied force of 30 pN ( REF . 61 ) , whereas lymphocyte function - associated antigen 1 ( LFA1 ; also known as αLβ2 integrin ) and MAC1 function optimally at 10 – 15 pN ( REFS 62 , 63 ) . Figure 1 | Force exertion and mechanotransduction . Cells exert forces against their environment through myosin contractility ( part a ) and filamentous actin ( F - actin ) - based protrusion ( part b ) . The mechanical gating of a plasma membrane channel can be controlled by membrane tension ( part c ) . Mechanotransduction induced by force depends on conformational changes in adhesion molecules ( part d ) . The dashed red arrows indicate forces . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY VOLUME 17 | NOVEMBER 2017 | 681 © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Nature Reviews | Immunology Retrogradeﬂow Selectin Leukocyte Leukocyte Lamellipodium Uropod Catch bonds Integrin Endothelial cell F - actin Firm adhesion ILP formation Transmigration a c d e b Integrin - dependent motility Integrin - independent blebbing motility Selectin ligand Integrin ligand Blood ﬂow Myosin Myosin II Signalling Adhesion Talin Integrin Inactive integrin conformation F - actin Catch bond Directionof migration Directionof migration Matrixinterdigitation Molecular clutch During 2D migration , the coupling between retro - grade flow and integrin adhesion is not absolute . Varying degrees of slippage are typically observed , leading many to characterize the F - actin – talin – integrin system as a “molecular clutch” ( REFS 64 , 65 ) . Recent studies have demonstrated that this clutch regulates motility by adjusting F - actin dynamics to fit the prevailing adhesive conditions 47 . For example , when dendritic cells ( DCs ) migrate on highly adhesive surfaces , the clutch is fully engaged , and the cells exhibit tight coupling between protrusive actin polymerization and forward motion . By contrast , on low - adhesion substrates , strong retro - grade F - actin flow is observed and is indicative of slip - page . Interestingly , DCs compensate for this slippage by increasing the rate of actin polymerization . Ultimately , this enables them to move at equivalent speeds on both strongly and weakly adhesive matrices . As DCs cross from one substrate to another , the retrograde flow changes to match the level of clutch engagement . This system relies on the capacity of integrins to function as bidirectional mechanosensors . The retrograde flow unleashes integrin catch - bond activity by applying lat - eral tension to the β - subunit . The level of subsequent matrix adhesion then feeds back from integrins to the F - actin cytoskeleton to modulate the rate of actin poly - merization . The F - actin – talin – integrin clutch facilitates more efficient migration in two ways . First , it localizes strong adhesive contacts only to regions that contain both strong matrix deposition and active F - actin pro - trusion . This prevents the creation of unnecessary adhe - sions that do not contribute to — and that may actually impede — locomotion . Second , the application of the clutch limits the use of rapid actin polymerization , which is energetically costly , only to those regions where it is absolutely necessary . As cells strain against adhesions to move forwards , they exert force against the underlying matrix . A number of laboratories have applied traction force microscopy ( TFM ; see BOX 1 ) to measure these forces directly . These studies have revealed intriguing differences between leuko cyte cell types . In neutrophils , force exertion con - centrates at the rear , near the boundary between the cell body and the uropod 9 , 66 . Extended , fully activated inte - grins also cluster in this region 67 , 68 . The same pattern of integrin activation is seen in migrating T cells 25 , implying that T cells have a similar force profile to that of neutro - phils . By contrast , in macrophages and DCs , peak trac - tion forces are observed near the front of the advancing cell 69 , 70 . This suggests a profile that is more similar to those of fibroblasts and endothelial cells , which form strong integrin - mediated adhesions at the base of their lamel - lipodia 17 , 44 . Thus , although the F - actin – talin – integrin clutch drives motility in all leukocytes , precisely where the clutch is engaged differs between cell types . Neutrophils and lympho cytes apply a ‘rear - wheel drive’ mechanism , whereas macrophages and DCs exhibit ‘front - wheel drive’ behaviour . It is tempting to speculate that the rear - wheel drive mechanism is a defining characteristic of more dynamic and motile cells that form less - stable contacts with their surroundings and change direction quickly . Directionally persistent movement depends on the maintenance of migratory cell polarity . Recent studies have identified plasma membrane tension as a crucial regulatory parameter . The plasma membrane has the properties of a 2D liquid , and the rapid diffusion of its constituent lipids ensures that tensional changes in one region can propagate almost instantaneously to distal domains 71 ; this enables the rapid transmission of physical Figure 2 | Mechanical forces in cell migration . a | An image depicting the hand - mirror - shaped morphology that is adopted by leukocytes migrating in 2D . b | A diagram showing integrin catch - bond and molecular clutch formation during cell migration . c | Selectin and integrin catch bonds mediate leukocyte rolling and firm adhesion to endothelial walls under shear stress . d | Transendothelial migration is initiated by the formation of an invadosome - like protrusion ( ILP ) , followed by the extrusion of the entire cell through the resulting pore . Force exertion is primarily seen in the transmigration step . e | Schematics that compare adhesion - dependent lamellipodial migration ( left panel ) and adhesion - independent blebbing migration ( right panel ) . The dashed red arrows indicate forces . F - actin , filamentous actin . R E V I E W S 682 | NOVEMBER 2017 | VOLUME 17 www . nature . com / nri © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . WASP - family verprolin - homologous protein 2 complex ( WAVE2 complex ) . A complex that comprises five proteins and that regulates actin - related protein 2 / 3 ( ARP2 / 3 ) complex - mediated actin assembly . The defining member of this complex , WAVE , is related to Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein and directly stimulates the ARP2 / 3 complex to nucleate actin assembly , while other components of the complex regulate WAVE . Extravasate To move out of the circulatory system , typically through vessel walls . Extravasation is also called diapedesis . information from one side of the cell to another . Leading - edge actin polymerization increases membrane tension by pushing against the plasma membrane . In migrating neutrophils , this tensional increase was shown to inhibit F - actin growth at the sides and back of the cell , thus blocking the formation of alternative leading edges and thereby maintaining cell polarity 72 . A tensioned mem - brane inhibits actin polymerization in at least two ways . First , it functions as a physical barrier that stalls filament growth , particularly in regions where filament density is low 73 . Second , it also activates phospholipase D2 ( PLD2 ) , which in turn stimulates mechanistic target of rapamy - cin complex 2 ( mTORC2 ) 74 . This mechanosensing path - way ultimately inhibits actin polymerization by blocking the membrane recruitment of WASP - family verprolin - homologous protein 2 complex ( the WAVE2 complex ) , which is a protein complex that stimulates F - actin growth via ARP2 / 3 . Mathematical modelling suggests that each of these feedback mechanisms has a distinct function in regulating F - actin 74 . PLD2 – mTORC2 signalling resolves competition between competing cell fronts , whereas the direct physical inhibition of filament growth is crucial for organizing leading - edge formation . Despite these new insights , how cells coordinate physically distant compo - nents during migration remains poorly understood and is likely to be an exciting area for future investigation . Leukocyte rolling . Blood vessels and lymphatics serve as essential conduits for the long - range transport of immune cells . To exit these compartments , leukocytes must adhere to vessel walls . One might expect that the strong shear forces resulting from fluid flow in these contexts would impede leukocyte adhesion and subsequent migration . However , studies have shown that shear forces have an essential role in the localized activation of adhesion molecules . This process is best understood for selectins , which mediate attachments to glyco proteins and other glycoconjugates 75 . These interactions induce leukocyte rolling over endothelial surfaces in the direction of flow . It has been known for some time that optimal selectin - dependent adhesion requires shear force 76 , 77 . The mechanism that underlies this behaviour is now thought to involve selectin catch bonds ( FIG . 2c ) . Pioneering studies of single receptor – ligand interactions using atomic force microscopy and the controlled application of microscopic shear forces initially revealed that selectins form catch bonds with an optimal force of < 20 pN ( REF . 78 ) . Subsequently , detailed measurements of leukocyte rolling in flow chambers containing varying ligand densities , flow rates and fluid viscosities indicated that selectin catch bonds keep the rolling speed constant at or below an optimal shear force ; higher levels of flow , however , are able to overcome these catch bonds and increase rolling speeds 79 . Selectin - induced rolling enables leukocytes to probe the endo - thelial surface for chemokines , which induce inside - out integrin activation , leading to the full arrest of the leuko cyte on the vessel wall 80 , 81 . It is generally thought that catch - bond formation is also crucial for integrin - mediated adhesion in this context ( FIG . 2c ) . Indeed , shear force has been observed to increase integrin adhesion in T cells 60 , 82 . However , this increased activity has not as yet been directly attributed to catch - bond formation . Nevertheless , the interpretation makes sense given that integrins are known to form catch bonds and have been observed to undergo force - dependent conformational transitions in other systems 58 , 61 , 62 , 83 , 84 . The formation of shear force - induced selectin and integrin catch bonds provides an elegant mechanism for the precise spatiotemporal regulation of adhesion under flow . In this regime , high - affinity contacts only form at interfaces that are exposed to shear force , and this lim - ited contact formation presumably inhibits unnecessary cell clumping and also prevents arrest in low - flow areas , such as capillaries . The mechanical manipulation of adhesive bonds may also provide directional informa - tion , enabling migrating cells to polarize appropriately with respect to blood flow . Investigating these hypo - theses will require molecular perturbations that allow investigators to eliminate or increase catch - bond forma - tion in complex systems . Interestingly , point mutations have been identified that switch specific selectin – ligand interactions from catch bonds to slip bonds , and vice versa 85 , 86 . It will be interesting to see whether mutations like these alter the migratory behaviour of cells in vivo . 3D migration . Immune cells move through a variety of mechanically distinct 3D environments in vivo , and they presumably require a correspondingly unique set of mechanobiological mechanisms to navigate through each one . Unfortunately , our understanding of these mechanisms is currently limited by our ability to make biophysical measurements in living tissues . However , some progress has been made using in vitro systems that model specific mechanical features of more complex settings . Following tight adhesion to vessel walls , leukocytes must extravasate through the endothelium to access the surrounding tissue . Leukocytes egress through inter - cellular spaces between adjacent endothelial cells ( the paracellular route ) and also by moving through pores that form in individual endothelial cells ( the trans - cellular route ) 87 . Transit via either of these paths is associated with dramatic shape changes . Leukocytes initially form F - actin - rich protrusive structures — also known as invadosome - like protrusions ( ILPs ) — which ‘palpate’ the surface of the endothelium , presumably in search of cell – cell boundaries and other permissive regions 14 , 88 . ILPs serve as initiating structures for trans - endothelial migration , interdigitating between adjacent endothelial cells ( in the case of paracellular transit ) or inducing an invagination in the endothelial cell sur - face ( for transcellular transit ; FIG . 2d ) . The remainder of the cell subsequently follows the ILP through the pore , adopting an extended configuration that is well suited to squeezing through tight spaces . Although it is clear that mechanical force is crucial for this highly distortive process , its precise role has been difficult to determine , largely because the endothelium is not a passive participant . To facilitate trans migration , endothelial cells undergo coordinated changes in intra - cellular signalling , cytoskeletal architecture and adhesion R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY VOLUME 17 | NOVEMBER 2017 | 683 © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Immunological synapse A large junctional structure that forms between a lymphocyte and its antigen - presenting cell ( APC ) . The immunological synapse regulates lymphocyte activation , cell adhesion and the directional secretion of cytokines and cytolytic factors . molecule expression , which reduce their barrier proper - ties and promote their interactions with leukocytes 87 , 89 . Indeed , it can be argued that , under inflammatory conditions , endothelial cells form a path for leukocyte transmigration and ‘pave’ it with permissive ligands . Accordingly , studies that aim to discern the role of force in this context must necessarily include an endothelial monolayer . To address this issue , an imaging - based biophysical system was developed in which a confluent monolayer of endothelial cells was grown on top of an array of deformable micropillars 90 ( BOX 1 ) . Distortions of the endothelium induced by neutrophil extravasation resulted in the deflection of the pillars beneath , thus enabling the quantification of associated forces . In this manner , it was shown that transmigrating neutrophils exert strong lateral forces that are of the order of 60 nN per cell . Interestingly , peak force exertion was not cor - related with initial pore formation but rather with cell body transit through the pore ( FIG . 2d ) . Hence , although mechanical force may not be required for generating a transmigration path , it seems to be crucial for squeez - ing the less deformable components of the neutrophil through it . Indeed , recent studies have demonstrated that cells must employ particularly strong forces to extrude their nuclei through narrow spaces 91 , 92 . The capacity of this squeezing to induce DNA damage has been documented 93 , 94 . Transmigration also promotes leukocyte maturation 87 , 89 , and it is tempting to speculate that extravasation forces and mechanosensing pathways might contribute to this process . After their extravasation from vessels , leukocytes migrate through a diverse array of 3D environments . Studies suggest that motility mechanisms may vary sub - stantially depending on the cell type and the properties of the surrounding matrix ( FIG . 2e ) . In certain contexts , cells adopt an alternative mode in which actin - hypodense blebs are projected forwards by actomyosin - based forces that originate from the back of the cell 44 , 95 . These blebs then acquire actin and form adhesions with the sub - strate , effectively advancing the cell through the matrix . This rear - wheel drive mechanism contrasts starkly with the front - wheel drive character of leading - edge - driven migration , and it may have substantial functional con - sequences for certain cell types . For example , DC migra - tion through 3D microchannels largely depends on formin - dependent actin polymerization and myosin contractility at the rear of the cell 96 , 97 . This enables the DC to devote its leading edge to endocytosis , which is crucial for antigen capture and presentation . The tight spatial confinement that is inherent to 3D migration also makes specific adhesive interactions less important for motility . This is evident from an in vivo analysis of integrin - deficient leukocytes , which migrate normally through many tissues despite exhibiting considerable defects in extravasation 8 . Additional studies have sug - gested that friction between cellular interdigitations and the surrounding matrix can provide counterforces that are sufficient to enable propulsion without molecularly specific adhesive contacts 47 , 98 ( FIG . 2e ) . In retrospect , the focus of published research on canonical , adhesion - based motility probably reflects our dependence on 2D systems in which cells must bind strongly to the surface to avoid being swept away by currents in the medium . Indeed , under conditions of high viscosity and consequently low current flow , it has been shown that 2D lympho - cyte migration switches from standard leading - edge propulsion to a ‘walking’ mode that is characterized by transient , myosin - rich contacts with the surface 99 . Further progress in our biophysical understanding of interstitial migration will require robust strategies for measuring forces in 3D . Unfortunately , standard TFM substrates ( such as polyacrylamide ) are impenetrable to migrating cells , and more physiologically relevant matrices ( such as collagen ) form heterogeneous , irregu - lar structures that are difficult to analyse using standard approaches . The problem is particularly acute for leuko - cytes , which are small and highly motile . Recent meth - odological developments for quantifying cell movement and matrix distortions using 3D TFM provide possible strategies for addressing this issue 100 , 101 . One could also imagine developing an approach in which fluorescent tension - sensing probes ( BOX 1 ) are incorporated into matrix proteins . Visualizing the pattern of force exer - tion in 3D will provide important insights into why leukocytes use specific migration strategies in certain environ ments and how these strategies contribute to other aspects of their function . Immune cell – cell interactions Lymphocyte activation . B cells and T cells recognize their cognate antigens on the surfaces of other cells , either as immobilized whole protein in the case of B cells or as short peptides bound to MHC molecules in the case of T cells . The engagement of antigenic ligands by the B cell receptor ( BCR ) or T cell receptor ( TCR ) rap - idly induces robust intracellular signalling responses , which lead within minutes to the formation of an immunological synapse between the lymphocyte and the antigen - presenting cell ( APC ) . Classical immunological synapses are defined by a stereotyped concentric archi - tecture in which a central cluster of antigen receptors is surrounded by concentric , annular accumulations of integrins and F - actin 102 , 103 ( FIG . 3a ) . This organization pro - motes strong adhesion to and cytoskeletal polarization towards the APC , and it also excludes inhibitory mol - ecules such as the phosphatase CD45 . Immunological synapses can persist for hours , and they represent the cell - biological context in which T cells and B cells undergo activation and mount effector responses . It is now well established that lymphocyte activa - tion is a mechanosensitive process . This property was initially documented by experiments in which T cells and B cells were stimulated on deformable matrices that had been coated with activating ligands 40 , 104 – 106 . In general , lymphocytes exhibited stronger signalling responses and cytokine secretion on stiff surfaces than they did on softer surfaces , which is consistent with the idea that antigen receptors pull against their ligands to achieve an optimal signalling capacity . Interestingly , peak ligand - induced proliferation was observed at intermediate , rather than high , levels of substrate stiff - ness . Although the basis for this discrepancy remains R E V I E W S 684 | NOVEMBER 2017 | VOLUME 17 www . nature . com / nri © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Nature Reviews | Immunology APC Lymphocyte Integrin ring Actin ﬁbre Retrograde ﬂow Retrograde ﬂow LFA1 ICAM1 Catch bond Catch bond Myosin II F - actin TCR MHC BCR Signalling Signalling Ligand rigidiﬁcation Tension T cell B cell CTL Perforin Granzyme Target cell APC Dendritic cell b a c d Talin High - aﬃnity antigen Low - aﬃnity antigen Retrograde F - actin ﬂow unclear , it is possible that the robust signalling observed for high - stiffness substrates triggers activation - induced cell death , which could adversely affect lymphocyte expansion . Nevertheless , these studies made it clear that the mechanical properties of antigen - presenting surfaces strongly influence lymphocyte activation . The molecular basis for this mechanosensitivity has been traced back to the antigen receptors them - selves . Pioneering optical trap experiments ( BOX 1 ) ini - tially suggested that the TCR is sensitive to mechanical manipulation 107 . Subsequently , it was found that the TCR , similarly to selectins and integrins , forms ligand - induced catch bonds 108 , 109 . These studies relied on inno - vative biomembrane force probe and optical trap systems in which constant piconewton - scale forces could be applied to single receptor – ligand interactions ( BOX 1 ) . In this manner , it was shown that bond lifetimes for agonist peptide – MHC – TCR interactions are maximal at ~ 10 pN of applied force . The formation of peptide – MHC – TCR bonds under tension was associated with more robust and long - lived TCR - induced Ca 2 + flux , suggesting that catch - bond formation is required for stronger T cell activation . By contrast , mutated peptide – MHC ligands with less stimulatory activity exhibited more rapid dis - sociation from the TCR with increasing force , which is indicative of slip - bond behaviour . One of the outstand - ing questions in the field of lymphocyte signalling is how T cells discriminate between bona fide antigens and self - derived peptides , particularly in situations in which a self - peptide – MHC complex differs in its affinity for the TCR by less than an order of magnitude relative to a bona fide antigen – MHC complex . These studies addressed this quandary by demonstrating that , by activating catch bonds , applied force can increase the discriminatory power of TCR recognition as much as 15 - fold . Force exertion may also have a crucial role in trans - forming ligand binding by the TCR into the phospho - rylation of its associated CD3 signalling chains . Studies indicate that in the unphosphorylated state , the cyto - plasmic tails of the CD3 complex associate with the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane , thus effectively shielding their immunoreceptor tyrosine - based activa - tion motifs ( ITAMs ) 110 , 111 . Ligand binding by the TCR induces conformational changes in the CD3 chains that expose these ITAMs , allowing them to be phosphoryl - ated by SRC - family kinases 112 , 113 ( FIG . 3b ) . The phospho - rylated ITAMs can then be bound by the SYK - family kinase ZAP70 , which propagates signals downstream . Although definitive studies have not , as yet , directly linked mechanical force to conformational changes within CD3 , an intriguing experiment using stimula - tory antibodies that target the TCR suggests that this might be the case 109 . Although they bind very tightly , TCR - specific antibodies form slip bonds that decrease in lifetime with increasing tension . Nevertheless , when TCRs bind to these antibodies , they display peak sig - nal transduction at 10 pN of applied force . This result implies that force can promote TCR activation inde - pendent of catch - bond formation , possibly by driving conformational change . The mechanosensitive properties of the BCR were explored extensively in a recent study in which sur - face - bound antigens were presented to B cells attached to tension gauge tethers ( TGTs ) 114 . Each TGT contains a DNA duplex for which the rupture force depends on the pattern and extent of its base pairing ( BOX 1 ) . It was found that antigens attached to easily ruptured tethers ( that is , those with a rupture force of ≤16 pN ) failed to stimulate naive B cells . By contrast , moderately tethered ( 23 – 43 pN ) antigens induced measurable levels of signal - ling , whereas strongly attached ( > 50 pN ) antigens caused Figure 3 | Mechanical forces in immune cell – cell interactions . a | A diagram showing the lymphocyte immunological synapse . Actin fibres radiate from the central cluster of integrins ( the integrin ring ) . b | Retrograde flow is responsible for driving the centripetal motion of T cell receptors ( TCRs ) and lymphocyte function - associated antigen 1 ( LFA1 ) , and this motion is thought to contribute to the formation of catch bonds , receptor conformational change and subsequent mechanotransduction . Dendritic cells restrain the movement of cell - surface intercellular adhesion molecule 1 ( ICAM1 ) to increase LFA1 binding and signalling . c | Myosin - based contractility enables B cells to selectively internalize high - affinity antigens . d | Synaptic forces augment cytotoxic T lymphocyte ( CTL ) - mediated killing by applying tension to the target cell , thereby potentiating perforin pore formation in the target - cell membrane . The dashed red arrows indicate forces . APC , antigen - presenting cell ; BCR , B cell receptor ; F - actin , filamentous actin . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY VOLUME 17 | NOVEMBER 2017 | 685 © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . robust B cell activation . These results indicated that a ten - sioned BCR is a prerequisite for activation , although they left unresolved whether tension functions by increasing the strength of ligand binding , increasing signal trans - duction or both . Interestingly , whereas high levels of tension were crucial for the full activation of IgM , which is the isotype expressed by naive B cells , neither IgG nor IgE , which are expressed by memory B cells , depended on force exertion for signalling . It is tempting to specu - late that these differences in mechanosensitivity reflect the functional properties of each cell type . Setting a force threshold for IgM activation would presumably prevent naive B cells from mounting autoreactive responses against suboptimal self - antigens for which the BCR has a suboptimal affinity . This sort of mechanical checkpoint would presumably be less important for memory B cells , which express optimized IgG and IgE that are highly specific for cognate antigens . It is generally thought that F - actin dynamics within the immunological synapse apply the forces that are required for the activation of mechanosensitive receptors ( FIG . 3b ) . Upon ligand binding , TCRs and BCRs coalesce into signalling microclusters that contain > 10 receptors each 115 . These microclusters are then swept towards the centre of the synapse by retrograde F - actin flow at the periphery and then by myosin II - dependent actin arcs closer to the centre 115 , 116 . The disruption of centri petal trafficking inhibits TCR signalling from microclusters within seconds 115 , implying that force exertion is essential for maintaining receptor activation . Recent studies have demonstrated that TCR microclusters assemble at the tips of actin - rich protrusive structures that also require the actin nucleation - promoting factor Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein 117 , 118 . These protrusions share striking similarities with the ILPs that have been documented in T cell – endothelial cell contacts 88 , and some research - ers have speculated that they are identical structures 118 . Regardless of their precise classification , they seem to promote signalling by enabling the T cell to penetrate the APC glycocalyx and thereby bring its TCRs into close apposition with peptide – MHC ligands 117 . Synaptic F - actin dynamics are also crucial for the activation of LFA1 . LFA1 is the predominant integrin on T cells and B cells , and it binds tightly to the adhesion molecules intercellular adhesion molecule 1 ( ICAM1 ) and ICAM2 . LFA1 has an essential role in lymphocyte activation as it mediates tight adhesion to the target cell and then transduces outside - in signals that promote effector responses 119 . Perturbations that arrest retrograde F - actin flow reduce the accumulation of high - affinity , extended LFA1 within the immunological synapse and also compromise the capacity of T cells to bind strongly to ICAMs 120 . Hence , the adhesiveness of the synapse largely depends on its dynamic structure . Interestingly , it seems that APCs can also contribute mechanically to integrin - mediated adhesion at the synapse . In a recent study , fluorescence recovery after photo bleaching analysis revealed that DCs immobilize a substantial proportion of their cell - surface ICAM1 ( REF . 121 ) . This immobilization was shown to augment the mechanical effects of retrograde F - actin flow on the T cell side of the synapse by providing a strong counterforce for integrins under tension ( FIG . 3b ) . This discovery is groundbreaking because it suggests that cells can regulate intercellular communication by modulating the physical status of the signalling molecules in question , and not just by mod - ulating their expression level or localization pattern . It will be interesting to explore the extent to which this paradigm applies to other receptor – ligand systems in other immune cells . Although studies of immunological synapse forma - tion have largely focused on lymphocytes , it is impor - tant to note that other immune cell types — including innate lineages — also form highly organized interfaces in response to activating stimulation . One of the most interesting of these contacts , from a mechanical perspec - tive , is the phagocytic cup that is used by macrophages and other innate leukocytes to internalize large parti - cles 122 – 124 . The phagocytic cup and the immunological synapse are both bounded by a peripheral ring of F - actin that drives lamellipodia growth , and both structures often exhibit an annular accumulation of activated β2 integrins . Recently , it has also been shown that phago - cytic contacts exclude CD45 ( REF . 125 ) . These structural similarities imply analogous ontogeny , and indeed , many phagocytic receptors — including the C - type lectin dec - tin 1 ( also known as CLEC7A ) and multiple Fc recep - tors — contain ITAM or ITAM - like motifs that drive phosphotyrosine signalling through SRC - family and SYK - family kinases 122 . As with lymphocyte synapses , these ITAM - dependent signals drive actin remodelling and inside - out integrin upregulation , leading to the for - mation of an ordered , adhesive contact . Given these par - allels , a role for mechanotransduction in the phagocytic synapse seems probable . Indeed , the application of bio - physical techniques that have initially been applied to the study of T cell and B cell systems have begun to provide insights into the mechanical properties of phagocytic recognition . The biomembrane force probe approach , for instance , has been used to analyse the catch - bond behaviour of the phagocytic integrin MAC1 ( REF . 63 ) . Recent work has also revealed that catch bonds formed between the bacterial adhesin FimH and the glyco - protein CD48 have a crucial role in macrophage uptake of Escherichia coli 126 . Phagocytes can internalize parti - cles that have a wide range of sizes , shapes and rigidities . In this context , mechanosensitivity is likely to be crucial for phagocytic receptors , which must effectively tune the physical properties of the recognition and internalization responses to those of the target particle . Effector responses . Many of the functional responses that mediate immunity occur in the context of immuno - logical synapses , and recent studies have begun to explore the extent to which these functional responses are influenced by synaptic forces . This section discusses three systems in which force modulates the effector phase : namely , antigen extraction by B cells , particle internalization during phagocytosis and target - cell killing by cytotoxic T lymphocytes ( CTLs ) . After binding to cognate antigen , B cells internal - ize it for processing and presentation to CD4 + T cells . R E V I E W S 686 | NOVEMBER 2017 | VOLUME 17 www . nature . com / nri © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . The T cells then provide stimulatory cytokines and cell - surface ligands that ‘help’ the B cells to differentiate into antibody - secreting effectors . To ensure that only the appropriate B cell clones are selected and expanded , it is crucial that the extraction process internalizes only bona fide , high - affinity antigens . Recent studies have revealed that B cells apply a mechanical threshold to accomplish this task . To observe the extraction process directly , B cells have been imaged on membrane sheets coated with cognate antigen 7 . In this context , the B cells pulled BCR clusters containing associated antigens into deep invaginations within the synapse ( FIG . 3c ) . The forma - tion of these invaginations , which depended on myosin contractility , was a prerequisite for subsequent clathrin - mediated endocytosis . These observations suggested that only antigen clusters with a high enough affinity to remain attached to the BCR during invagination could be effectively internalized . Consistent with this idea , it was found that blocking invagination formation with a myosin inhibitor not only reduced total extraction , but also eliminated the capacity of B cells to discriminate between high - affinity and low - affinity antigens . After activation , a subset of B cells move into ger - minal centres ( GCs ) , where they undergo iterative rounds of somatic hypermutation in order to increase their BCR affinity 127 . During this process , successfully evolving B cells are selected on the basis of their ability to extract antigens from the surface of follicular DCs and present them to T follicular helper cells . Given that the objective of somatic hypermutation is to gen - erate receptors of even higher affinity , it is logical to predict that antigen extraction by GC B cells might be subjected to a mechanical threshold that is higher than the threshold of naive B cells . Indeed , GC B cells seem to organize their synapses differently from their naive counterparts , trafficking antigens into smaller periph - eral clusters rather than larger , centralized ones 128 . This limits the number of engaged BCRs in each cluster , thus reducing their overall avidity and thereby increasing the mechanical demands on each individual receptor . Using DNA - based fluorescent tension sensors ( BOX 1 ) , it has also been shown that GC B cells exert higher extraction forces than do naive B cells 128 . Taken together , these results indicate that the mechanical antigen internal - ization threshold can be regulated to optimize the functionality of distinct B cell subsets . Phagocytosis requires the distortion of the plasma membrane and underlying cytoskeleton , and it can also involve the forcible separation of the engulfed particle from its extracellular environment . It is gener - ally thought that myosin contractility has some role in the process , but how and where it occurs is unclear 122 . One might imagine that myosin could promote parti - cle uptake by driving the retrograde pulling of integ - rins and other phagocytic receptors that are coupled to the F - actin cytoskeleton . This would have the effect of dragging the particle into the cell . Myosin II , which participates in the centripetal flow of integrins in the T cell immunological synapse , would seem to be a good candidate for such a process . Consistent with this idea , inhibitor - based experiments have suggested a role for myosin II in both Fc receptor - mediated and complement - mediated phagocytosis 129 , 130 . Whether myosin II functions in this context by driving the retrograde flow of surface receptors , however , is not known . Myosin contractility could also promote inter - nalization by mediating a purse - string - like contraction at the periphery of the phagocytic cup , thereby closing the plasma membrane over the particle . Studies have suggested that monomeric class I myosins may be involved in this kind of process 131 , 132 . Both myosin IG and myosin IC have been localized to phagocytic cups , and myosin IC , in particular , accumulates near the dis - tal edges of the lamellipodia as they constrict around the particle . Myosin X , which is an atypical isoform that contains lipid - binding pleckstrin homology domains , has also been implicated in phagocytosis 133 . This protein is particularly interesting because it binds specifically to phosphatidylinositol trisphosphate , which is a lipid second messenger that is crucial for particle uptake 122 . Deciphering the mechanisms of action of these myo - sin isoforms and establishing their respective roles will require more specific loss - of - function approaches coupled with high - resolution imaging methods . Membrane tension has recently been implicated as an important regulator of phagocytosis 134 . Macrophages keep 20 – 40 % of their surface area in reserve as plasma membrane folds . Phagocytic synapse formation exhausts these folds , leading to a rapid increase in membrane tension as the phagocytic cup reaches its maximal size . This tensional spike has been shown to induce the re organization of synaptic F - actin and also to drive a switch from synapse growth to particle internaliza - tion . This switch was associated with the exocytosis of new membrane into the phagocytic cup . Interestingly , although tension - induced exocytosis was shown to be required for particle internalization , myosin activity was dispensable . It is difficult to imagine how membrane insertion at the base of the phagocytic cup could drive internalization on its own , in the absence of at least some purse - string - like contractility . Phagocytosis is a diverse process , however , and internalization mechanisms could vary widely depending on the size of the particle , its stiffness and the set of receptors it engages . CTLs destroy target cells by secreting a toxic mixture of the hydrophobic protein perforin and several gran - zyme proteases . Perforin forms pores in the target - cell membrane , inducing a membrane damage response that enables granzymes to access the cytoplasm , where they induce apoptosis 135 , 136 . Cytolytic molecules are secreted directionally into the immunological synapse , and this is thought to augment the potency and specificity of tar - get - cell killing by restricting the extent of perforin and granzyme diffusion 137 . Recent work has revealed that the mechanical activity of the synapse also has a crucial role in potentiating cytotoxicity . This discovery was enabled by the adaptation of single - cell biophysical approaches to measure synaptic forces . Using both standard gel - based TFM and a higher - resolution approach in which cells are imaged on arrays of deformable micropillars ( BOX 1 ) , it was found that T cells exert nano newton - scale forces against antigen - presenting surfaces 138 . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY VOLUME 17 | NOVEMBER 2017 | 687 © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Similar observations were made using a study in which individual T cells are presented with stimulatory beads attached to long , mechanically calibrated micropipettes 6 . The application of these systems to CTLs has revealed an intriguing correlation between cytotoxicity and syn - aptic force exertion . Previously , it had been shown that phosphoinositide 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) signalling through the exchange factor dedicator of cytokinesis protein 2 ( DOCK2 ) was crucial for both TCR - induced F - actin remodelling and target - cell killing 139 . Interestingly , whereas loss - of - function and gain - of - function perturba - tions in the PI3K – DOCK2 pathway dramatically altered cytotoxicity , they had no effect on lytic granule release . These results implied a physical role for the synapse in target - cell killing . Consistent with this idea , it was found that CTLs lacking DOCK2 exerted less synaptic force , whereas CTLs with increased PI3K – DOCK2 signalling exerted much more 6 . Amplification of the PI3K – DOCK2 pathway dramati - cally accelerates perforin pore formation in the target cell 6 , suggesting that there is a link between synaptic force and perforin function . Earlier studies had suggested that the pore - forming activity of hydrophobic proteins such as perforin could be increased by the application of tension to the target - cell membrane 140 – 142 . Consistent with this idea , chemical and physical perturbations that increase cell tension have been shown to sensitize target cells to perforin pore formation and CTL - mediated lysis 6 . These results suggest a model in which synaptic force promotes killing by straining the target - cell membrane , thereby facilitating the formation of perforin pores ( FIG . 3d ) . The idea that the physical disposition of the synapse is crucial for cytotoxicity has interesting implications for immune evasion . Studies have suggested that transformation and malignancy are associated with cellular softening 143 – 145 ; it will therefore be interesting to see whether tumour cells modulate their physical properties to circumvent immune - mediated attack . Concluding remarks Throughout the past decade , a conceptual framework has emerged for measuring and interpreting mechan - ical forces in immune cells . In general , however , the field remains in its infancy . Our understanding of immunoreceptor mechanotransduction , for example , is limited to antigen receptors and a small number of well - characterized cell adhesion molecules . A sub - stantial amount of intercellular communication in the immune system is mediated by membrane - associated ligands that bind to their receptors within specialized cell – cell contacts such as the immunological synapse . The extent to which these interactions and the signal - ling that results from them are modulated by interfacial forces is largely unknown . The observation that applied force increases the activity of perforin within the immunological synapse reveals that immune cells combine mechanical and secretory outputs to maximize the power of their effec - tor responses . This physicochemical synergy — known as mechanopotentiation — is conceptually distinct from canonical mechanotransduction , and it represents a pre - viously unappreciated way in which leukocytes use force to transmit information to other cells . It seems likely that force influences immune cell function through a variety of mechanisms , and exploring this diversity will be an interesting topic for future research . The role of force is best understood in controlled , in vitro systems in which it is easily measured . Extending mechanobiological studies into more com - plex settings , both in vitro and in vivo , will require the further development of tools that enable precise physi - cal measurements to be made in living cells . The recent emergence of fluorescent TGTs highlights one possible tool for use in future research 146 , 147 , and it will be inter - esting to see whether probes like these can be incorpo - rated into 3D culture systems and organ preparations . Genetically encoded tension sensor modules have also been developed , in which an extendable , force - sensitive domain is placed between a Förster resonance energy transfer donor and an acceptor ( BOX 1 ) . These modules , when incorporated into cytoskeletal scaffolds and adhe - sion proteins , have enabled the dynamic measurement of cytoskeletal tension in living cells 148 – 150 . This is very exciting because constructs like this could , in principle , be incorporated into in vivo systems . At present , how - ever , these sensors detect only a limited range of forces and have been applied to a limited set of contexts . New probes that target different physical parameters , such as membrane tension , will be essential for further pro - gress . We can only study what we can measure , and as the field of mechanobiology moves forwards , it will be advisable to keep this obvious dictum in mind . 1 . Iskratsch , T . , Wolfenson , H . & Sheetz , M . P . Appreciating force and shape — the rise of mechanotransduction in cell biology . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 15 , 825 – 833 ( 2014 ) . 2 . Vicente - Manzanares , M . , Ma , X . , Adelstein , R . S . & Horwitz , A . R . Non - muscle myosin II takes centre stage in cell adhesion and migration . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 778 – 790 ( 2009 ) . 3 . Smith , A . et al . The role of the integrin LFA - 1 in T - lymphocyte migration . Immunol . Rev . 218 , 135 – 146 ( 2007 ) . 4 . Matsumura , F . Regulation of myosin II during cytokinesis in higher eukaryotes . Trends Cell Biol . 15 , 371 – 377 ( 2005 ) . 5 . Hui , K . L . , Balagopalan , L . , Samelson , L . E . & Upadhyaya , A . Cytoskeletal forces during signaling activation in Jurkat T - cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 26 , 685 – 695 ( 2015 ) . 6 . Basu , R . et al . Cytotoxic T cells use mechanical force to potentiate target cell killing . Cell 165 , 100 – 110 ( 2016 ) . This study reveals that CTLs use mechanical force to increase the activity of secreted perforin , thus demonstrating that immune cells use a physical output to potentiate chemical responses . 7 . Natkanski , E . et al . B cells use mechanical energy to discriminate antigen affinities . Science 340 , 1587 – 1590 ( 2013 ) . This study shows that B cells apply myosin II‑dependent forces during antigen internalization that allow them to discriminate between high‑affinity and low‑affinity antigens . 8 . Lammermann , T . et al . Rapid leukocyte migration by integrin - independent flowing and squeezing . Nature 453 , 51 – 55 ( 2008 ) . 9 . Jannat , R . A . , Dembo , M . & Hammer , D . A . Traction forces of neutrophils migrating on compliant substrates . Biophys . J . 101 , 575 – 584 ( 2011 ) . 10 . Toyjanova , J . , Flores - Cortez , E . , Reichner , J . S . & Franck , C . Matrix confinement plays a pivotal role in regulating neutrophil - generated tractions , speed , and integrin utilization . J . Biol . Chem . 290 , 3752 – 3763 ( 2015 ) . 11 . Chesarone , M . A . , DuPage , A . G . & Goode , B . L . Unleashing formins to remodel the actin and microtubule cytoskeletons . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 , 62 – 74 ( 2010 ) . 12 . Goley , E . D . & Welch , M . D . The ARP2 / 3 complex : an actin nucleator comes of age . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 713 – 726 ( 2006 ) . 13 . Yu , C . H . , Law , J . B . , Suryana , M . , Low , H . Y . & Sheetz , M . P . Early integrin binding to Arg - Gly - Asp peptide activates actin polymerization and contractile movement that stimulates outward translocation . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 20585 – 20590 ( 2011 ) . 14 . Carman , C . V . et al . Transcellular diapedesis is initiated by invasive podosomes . Immunity 26 , 784 – 797 ( 2007 ) . 15 . Buccione , R . , Orth , J . D . & McNiven , M . A . Foot and mouth : podosomes , invadopodia and circular dorsal ruffles . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 , 647 – 657 ( 2004 ) . R E V I E W S 688 | NOVEMBER 2017 | VOLUME 17 www . nature . com / nri © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . 16 . Geiger , B . , Spatz , J . P . & Bershadsky , A . D . Environmental sensing through focal adhesions . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 21 – 33 ( 2009 ) . 17 . Gardel , M . L . , Schneider , I . C . , Aratyn - Schaus , Y . & Waterman , C . M . Mechanical integration of actin and adhesion dynamics in cell migration . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 26 , 315 – 333 ( 2010 ) . 18 . Kanchanawong , P . et al . Nanoscale architecture of integrin - based cell adhesions . Nature 468 , 580 – 584 ( 2010 ) . The study applies super‑resolution imaging to define the nanoarchitecture of focal adhesions . 19 . Prager - Khoutorsky , M . et al . Fibroblast polarization is a matrix - rigidity - dependent process controlled by focal adhesion mechanosensing . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 , 1457 – 1465 ( 2011 ) . 20 . Goffin , J . M . et al . Focal adhesion size controls tension - dependent recruitment of α - smooth muscle actin to stress fibers . J . Cell Biol . 172 , 259 – 268 ( 2006 ) . 21 . Galbraith , C . G . , Yamada , K . M . & Sheetz , M . P . The relationship between force and focal complex development . J . Cell Biol . 159 , 695 – 705 ( 2002 ) . 22 . Riveline , D . et al . Focal contacts as mechanosensors : externally applied local mechanical force induces growth of focal contacts by an mDia1 - dependent and ROCK - independent mechanism . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 1175 – 1186 ( 2001 ) . 23 . Balaban , N . Q . et al . Force and focal adhesion assembly : a close relationship studied using elastic micropatterned substrates . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 466 – 472 ( 2001 ) . 24 . Wolfenson , H . , Lavelin , I . & Geiger , B . Dynamic regulation of the structure and functions of integrin adhesions . Dev . Cell 24 , 447 – 458 ( 2013 ) . 25 . Stanley , P . et al . Intermediate - affinity LFA - 1 binds α - actinin - 1 to control migration at the leading edge of the T cell . EMBO J . 27 , 62 – 75 ( 2008 ) . 26 . Monks , C . R . , Freiberg , B . A . , Kupfer , H . , Sciaky , N . & Kupfer , A . Three - dimensional segregation of supramolecular activation clusters in T cells . Nature 395 , 82 – 86 ( 1998 ) . 27 . Santos , L . C . et al . Actin polymerization - dependent activation of Cas - L promotes immunological synapse stability . Immunol . Cell Biol . 94 , 981 – 993 ( 2016 ) . 28 . Ingber , D . E . Cellular mechanotransduction : putting all the pieces together again . FASEB J . 20 , 811 – 827 ( 2006 ) . 29 . Orr , A . W . , Helmke , B . P . , Blackman , B . R . & Schwartz , M . A . Mechanisms of mechanotransduction . Dev . Cell 10 , 11 – 20 ( 2006 ) . 30 . Pathak , M . M . et al . Stretch - activated ion channel Piezo1 directs lineage choice in human neural stem cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 111 , 16148 – 16153 ( 2014 ) . 31 . Lee , W . et al . Synergy between Piezo1 and Piezo2 channels confers high - strain mechanosensitivity to articular cartilage . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 111 , E5114 – E5122 ( 2014 ) . 32 . Ranade , S . S . et al . Piezo1 , a mechanically activated ion channel , is required for vascular development in mice . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 111 , 10347 – 10352 ( 2014 ) . 33 . del Rio , A . et al . Stretching single talin rod molecules activates vinculin binding . Science 323 , 638 – 641 ( 2009 ) . This study shows that the physical stretching of talin generates binding sites for vinculin , thus providing a mechanism for mechanotransduction in focal contacts . 34 . Elosegui - Artola , A . et al . Mechanical regulation of a molecular clutch defines force transmission and transduction in response to matrix rigidity . Nat . Cell Biol . 18 , 540 – 548 ( 2016 ) . 35 . Dembo , M . , Torney , D . C . , Saxman , K . & Hammer , D . The reaction - limited kinetics of membrane - to - surface adhesion and detachment . Proc . R . Soc . Lond . B Biol . Sci . 234 , 55 – 83 ( 1988 ) . This theoretical paper provides the conceptual basis for the existence of catch bonds . 36 . Thomas , W . E . , Vogel , V . & Sokurenko , E . Biophysics of catch bonds . Annu . Rev . Biophys . 37 , 399 – 416 ( 2008 ) . 37 . Engler , A . J . , Sen , S . , Sweeney , H . L . & Discher , D . E . Matrix elasticity directs stem cell lineage specification . Cell 126 , 677 – 689 ( 2006 ) . 38 . Assoian , R . K . & Klein , E . A . Growth control by intracellular tension and extracellular stiffness . Trends Cell Biol . 18 , 347 – 352 ( 2008 ) . 39 . Trichet , L . et al . Evidence of a large - scale mechanosensing mechanism for cellular adaptation to substrate stiffness . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 6933 – 6938 ( 2012 ) . 40 . Judokusumo , E . , Tabdanov , E . , Kumari , S . , Dustin , M . L . & Kam , L . C . Mechanosensing in T lymphocyte activation . Biophys . J . 102 , L5 – L7 ( 2012 ) . 41 . Saez , A . , Buguin , A . , Silberzan , P . & Ladoux , B . Is the mechanical activity of epithelial cells controlled by deformations or forces ? Biophys . J . 89 , L52 – L54 ( 2005 ) . 42 . Califano , J . P . & Reinhart - King , C . A . Substrate stiffness and cell area predict cellular traction stresses in single cells and cells in contact . Cell . Mol . Bioeng . 3 , 68 – 75 ( 2010 ) . 43 . Ghibaudo , M . et al . Traction forces and rigidity sensing regulate cell functions . Soft Matter 4 , 1836 – 1843 ( 2008 ) . 44 . Renkawitz , J . & Sixt , M . Mechanisms of force generation and force transmission during interstitial leukocyte migration . EMBO Rep . 11 , 744 – 750 ( 2010 ) . 45 . Yakubenko , V . P . , Lishko , V . K . , Lam , S . C . & Ugarova , T . P . A molecular basis for integrin α M β 2 ligand binding promiscuity . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 48635 – 48642 ( 2002 ) . 46 . Vorup - Jensen , T . et al . Exposure of acidic residues as a danger signal for recognition of fibrinogen and other macromolecules by integrin α X β 2 . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 1614 – 1619 ( 2005 ) . 47 . Renkawitz , J . et al . Adaptive force transmission in amoeboid cell migration . Nat . Cell Biol . 11 , 1438 – 1443 ( 2009 ) . 48 . Vicente - Manzanares , M . , Choi , C . K . & Horwitz , A . R . Integrins in cell migration — the actin connection . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 199 – 206 ( 2009 ) . This study demonstrates that the engagement of the F‑actin – talin – integrin clutch regulates the speed of retrograde F‑actin flow , enabling cells to adjust their migratory strategy in response to substrate adhesiveness . 49 . Lin , C . H . & Forscher , P . Growth cone advance is inversely proportional to retrograde F - actin flow . Neuron 14 , 763 – 771 ( 1995 ) . 50 . Pollard , T . D . & Borisy , G . G . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin filaments . Cell 112 , 453 – 465 ( 2003 ) . 51 . Ponti , A . , Machacek , M . , Gupton , S . L . , Waterman - Storer , C . M . & Danuser , G . Two distinct actin networks drive the protrusion of migrating cells . Science 305 , 1782 – 1786 ( 2004 ) . 52 . Medeiros , N . A . , Burnette , D . T . & Forscher , P . Myosin II functions in actin - bundle turnover in neuronal growth cones . Nat . Cell Biol . 8 , 215 – 226 ( 2006 ) . 53 . Wilson , C . A . et al . Myosin II contributes to cell - scale actin network treadmilling through network disassembly . Nature 465 , 373 – 377 ( 2010 ) . 54 . Sanchez - Madrid , F . & Serrador , J . M . Bringing up the rear : defining the roles of the uropod . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 353 – 359 ( 2009 ) . 55 . Eddy , R . J . , Pierini , L . M . , Matsumura , F . & Maxfield , F . R . Ca 2 + - dependent myosin II activation is required for uropod retraction during neutrophil migration . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 1287 – 1298 ( 2000 ) . 56 . Luo , B . H . , Carman , C . V . & Springer , T . A . Structural basis of integrin regulation and signaling . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 25 , 619 – 647 ( 2007 ) . 57 . Kim , C . , Ye , F . & Ginsberg , M . H . Regulation of integrin activation . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 27 , 321 – 345 ( 2011 ) . 58 . Astrof , N . S . , Salas , A . , Shimaoka , M . , Chen , J . & Springer , T . A . Importance of force linkage in mechanochemistry of adhesion receptors . Biochemistry 45 , 15020 – 15028 ( 2006 ) . 59 . Friedland , J . C . , Lee , M . H . & Boettiger , D . Mechanically activated integrin switch controls α 5 β 1 function . Science 323 , 642 – 644 ( 2009 ) . 60 . Woolf , E . et al . Lymph node chemokines promote sustained T lymphocyte motility without triggering stable integrin adhesiveness in the absence of shear forces . Nat . Immunol . 8 , 1076 – 1085 ( 2007 ) . 61 . Kong , F . , Garcia , A . J . , Mould , A . P . , Humphries , M . J . & Zhu , C . Demonstration of catch bonds between an integrin and its ligand . J . Cell Biol . 185 , 1275 – 1284 ( 2009 ) . 62 . Chen , W . , Lou , J . & Zhu , C . Forcing switch from short - to intermediate - and long - lived states of the α A domain generates LFA - 1 / ICAM - 1 catch bonds . J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 35967 – 35978 ( 2010 ) . 63 . Rosetti , F . et al . A lupus - associated Mac - 1 variant has defects in integrin allostery and interaction with ligands under force . Cell Rep . 10 , 1655 – 1664 ( 2015 ) . 64 . Case , L . B . & Waterman , C . M . Integration of actin dynamics and cell adhesion by a three - dimensional , mechanosensitive molecular clutch . Nat . Cell Biol . 17 , 955 – 963 ( 2015 ) . 65 . Chan , C . E . & Odde , D . J . Traction dynamics of filopodia on compliant substrates . Science 322 , 1687 – 1691 ( 2008 ) . This study combines computational modelling with biophysical measurements to investigate the applicability of the molecular clutch hypothesis to cell shape changes and migration . 66 . Smith , L . A . , Aranda - Espinoza , H . , Haun , J . B . , Dembo , M . & Hammer , D . A . Neutrophil traction stresses are concentrated in the uropod during migration . Biophys . J . 92 , L58 – L60 ( 2007 ) . 67 . Dixit , N . , Yamayoshi , I . , Nazarian , A . & Simon , S . I . Migrational guidance of neutrophils is mechanotransduced via high - affinity LFA - 1 and calcium flux . J . Immunol . 187 , 472 – 481 ( 2011 ) . 68 . Green , C . E . et al . Dynamic shifts in LFA - 1 affinity regulate neutrophil rolling , arrest , and transmigration on inflamed endothelium . Blood 107 , 2101 – 2111 ( 2006 ) . 69 . Ricart , B . G . , Yang , M . T . , Hunter , C . A . , Chen , C . S . & Hammer , D . A . Measuring traction forces of motile dendritic cells on micropost arrays . Biophys . J . 101 , 2620 – 2628 ( 2011 ) . 70 . Hind , L . E . , Dembo , M . & Hammer , D . A . Macrophage motility is driven by frontal - towing with a force magnitude dependent on substrate stiffness . Integr . Biol . ( Camb . ) 7 , 447 – 453 ( 2015 ) . 71 . Kozlov , M . M . & Mogilner , A . Model of polarization and bistability of cell fragments . Biophys . J . 93 , 3811 – 3819 ( 2007 ) . 72 . Houk , A . R . et al . Membrane tension maintains cell polarity by confining signals to the leading edge during neutrophil migration . Cell 148 , 175 – 188 ( 2012 ) . This study reveals that leukocytes use membrane tension to maintain cell polarity during migration . 73 . Keren , K . et al . Mechanism of shape determination in motile cells . Nature 453 , 475 – 480 ( 2008 ) . 74 . Diz - Munoz , A . et al . Membrane tension acts through PLD2 and mTORC2 to limit actin network assembly during neutrophil migration . PLoS Biol . 14 , e1002474 ( 2016 ) . 75 . Ley , K . The role of selectins in inflammation and disease . Trends Mol . Med . 9 , 263 – 268 ( 2003 ) . 76 . Finger , E . B . et al . Adhesion through L - selectin requires a threshold hydrodynamic shear . Nature 379 , 266 – 269 ( 1996 ) . 77 . Lawrence , M . B . , Kansas , G . S . , Kunkel , E . J . & Ley , K . Threshold levels of fluid shear promote leukocyte adhesion through selectins ( CD62L , P , E ) . J . Cell Biol . 136 , 717 – 727 ( 1997 ) . 78 . Marshall , B . T . et al . Direct observation of catch bonds involving cell - adhesion molecules . Nature 423 , 190 – 193 ( 2003 ) . This study is the first to document the existence of catch bonds in biological systems . 79 . Yago , T . et al . Catch bonds govern adhesion through L - selectin at threshold shear . J . Cell Biol . 166 , 913 – 923 ( 2004 ) . 80 . Thelen , M . & Stein , J . V . How chemokines invite leukocytes to dance . Nat . Immunol . 9 , 953 – 959 ( 2008 ) . 81 . Shamri , R . et al . Lymphocyte arrest requires instantaneous induction of an extended LFA - 1 conformation mediated by endothelium - bound chemokines . Nat . Immunol . 6 , 497 – 506 ( 2005 ) . 82 . Alon , R . & Ley , K . Cells on the run : shear - regulated integrin activation in leukocyte rolling and arrest on endothelial cells . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 20 , 525 – 532 ( 2008 ) . 83 . Zhu , J . et al . Structure of a complete integrin ectodomain in a physiologic resting state and activation and deactivation by applied forces . Mol . Cell 32 , 849 – 861 ( 2008 ) . 84 . Nordenfelt , P . , Elliott , H . L . & Springer , T . A . Coordinated integrin activation by actin - dependent force during T - cell migration . Nat . Commun . 7 , 13119 ( 2016 ) . 85 . Sarangapani , K . K . et al . Regulation of catch bonds by rate of force application . J . Biol . Chem . 286 , 32749 – 32761 ( 2011 ) . 86 . Klopocki , A . G . et al . Replacing a lectin domain residue in L - selectin enhances binding to P - selectin glycoprotein ligand - 1 but not to 6 - sulfo - sialyl Lewis x . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 11493 – 11500 ( 2008 ) . 87 . Nourshargh , S . & Alon , R . Leukocyte migration into inflamed tissues . Immunity 41 , 694 – 707 ( 2014 ) . 88 . Sage , P . T . et al . Antigen recognition is facilitated by invadosome - like protrusions formed by memory / effector T cells . J . Immunol . 188 , 3686 – 3699 ( 2012 ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY VOLUME 17 | NOVEMBER 2017 | 689 © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . 89 . Nourshargh , S . , Hordijk , P . L . & Sixt , M . Breaching multiple barriers : leukocyte motility through venular walls and the interstitium . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 , 366 – 378 ( 2010 ) . 90 . Rabodzey , A . , Alcaide , P . , Luscinskas , F . W . & Ladoux , B . Mechanical forces induced by the transendothelial migration of human neutrophils . Biophys . J . 95 , 1428 – 1438 ( 2008 ) . 91 . Thiam , H . R . et al . Perinuclear Arp2 / 3 - driven actin polymerization enables nuclear deformation to facilitate cell migration through complex environments . Nat . Commun . 7 , 10997 ( 2016 ) . 92 . Davidson , P . M . , Denais , C . , Bakshi , M . C . & Lammerding , J . Nuclear deformability constitutes a rate - limiting step during cell migration in 3D environments . Cell . Mol . Bioeng . 7 , 293 – 306 , ( 2014 ) . 93 . Raab , M . et al . ESCRT III repairs nuclear envelope ruptures during cell migration to limit DNA damage and cell death . Science 352 , 359 – 362 ( 2016 ) . 94 . Denais , C . M . et al . Nuclear envelope rupture and repair during cancer cell migration . Science 352 , 353 – 358 ( 2016 ) . 95 . Charras , G . & Paluch , E . Blebs lead the way : how to migrate without lamellipodia . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 , 730 – 736 ( 2008 ) . 96 . Chabaud , M . et al . Cell migration and antigen capture are antagonistic processes coupled by myosin II in dendritic cells . Nat . Commun . 6 , 7526 ( 2015 ) . 97 . Vargas , P . et al . Innate control of actin nucleation determines two distinct migration behaviours in dendritic cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 18 , 43 – 53 ( 2016 ) . 98 . Bergert , M . et al . Force transmission during adhesion - independent migration . Nat . Cell Biol . 17 , 524 – 529 ( 2015 ) . 99 . Jacobelli , J . , Bennett , F . C . , Pandurangi , P . , Tooley , A . J . & Krummel , M . F . Myosin - IIA and ICAM - 1 regulate the interchange between two distinct modes of T cell migration . J . Immunol . 182 , 2041 – 2050 ( 2009 ) . 100 . Franck , C . , Maskarinec , S . A . , Tirrell , D . A . & Ravichandran , G . Three - dimensional traction force microscopy : a new tool for quantifying cell – matrix interactions . PLoS ONE 6 , e17833 ( 2011 ) . 101 . Stout , D . A . et al . Mean deformation metrics for quantifying 3D cell – matrix interactions without requiring information about matrix material properties . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 113 , 2898 – 2903 ( 2016 ) . 102 . Dustin , M . L . , Chakraborty , A . K . & Shaw , A . S . Understanding the structure and function of the immunological synapse . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 2 , a002311 ( 2010 ) . 103 . Harwood , N . E . & Batista , F . D . Early events in B cell activation . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 28 , 185 – 210 ( 2010 ) . 104 . O’Connor , R . S . et al . Substrate rigidity regulates human T cell activation and proliferation . J . Immunol . 189 , 1330 – 1339 ( 2012 ) . 105 . Wan , Z . et al . B cell activation is regulated by the stiffness properties of the substrate presenting the antigens . J . Immunol . 190 , 4661 – 4675 ( 2013 ) . 106 . Zeng , Y . et al . Substrate stiffness regulates B - cell activation , proliferation , class switch , and T - cell - independent antibody responses in vivo . Eur . J . Immunol . 45 , 1621 – 1634 ( 2015 ) . 107 . Kim , S . T . et al . The αβ T cell receptor is an anisotropic mechanosensor . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 31028 – 31037 ( 2009 ) . 108 . Das , D . K . et al . Force - dependent transition in the T - cell receptor β - subunit allosterically regulates peptide discrimination and pMHC bond lifetime . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 112 , 1517 – 1522 ( 2015 ) . 109 . Liu , B . , Chen , W . , Evavold , B . D . & Zhu , C . Accumulation of dynamic catch bonds between TCR and agonist peptide – MHC triggers T cell signaling . Cell 157 , 357 – 368 ( 2014 ) . This study demonstrates that the TCR forms catch bonds with peptide – MHC complexes and that catch bonds are crucial for discrimination between high‑affinity and low‑affinity antigens . 110 . Aivazian , D . & Stern , L . J . Phosphorylation of T cell receptor ζ is regulated by a lipid dependent folding transition . Nat . Struct . Biol . 7 , 1023 – 1026 ( 2000 ) . 111 . Xu , C . et al . Regulation of T cell receptor activation by dynamic membrane binding of the CD3 ε cytoplasmic tyrosine - based motif . Cell 135 , 702 – 713 ( 2008 ) . 112 . Lee , M . S . et al . A mechanical switch couples T cell receptor triggering to the cytoplasmic juxtamembrane regions of CD3 ζζ . Immunity 43 , 227 – 239 ( 2015 ) . 113 . Swamy , M . et al . A cholesterol - based allostery model of T cell receptor phosphorylation . Immunity 44 , 1091 – 1101 ( 2016 ) . 114 . Wan , Z . et al . The activation of IgM - or isotype - switched IgG - and IgE - BCR exhibits distinct mechanical force sensitivity and threshold . eLife 4 , e06925 ( 2015 ) . 115 . Varma , R . , Campi , G . , Yokosuka , T . , Saito , T . & Dustin , M . L . T cell receptor - proximal signals are sustained in peripheral microclusters and terminated in the central supramolecular activation cluster . Immunity 25 , 117 – 127 ( 2006 ) . 116 . Yi , J . , Wu , X . S . , Crites , T . & Hammer , J . A . 3rd . Actin retrograde flow and actomyosin II arc contraction drive receptor cluster dynamics at the immunological synapse in Jurkat T cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 23 , 834 – 852 ( 2012 ) . 117 . Cai , E . et al . Visualizing dynamic microvillar search and stabilization during ligand detection by T cells . Science 356 , eaal3118 ( 2017 ) . 118 . Kumari , S . et al . Actin foci facilitate activation of the phospholipase C - γ in primary T lymphocytes via the WASP pathway . eLife 4 , e04953 ( 2015 ) . 119 . Pribila , J . T . , Quale , A . C . , Mueller , K . L . & Shimizu , Y . Integrins and T cell - mediated immunity . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 22 , 157 – 180 ( 2004 ) . 120 . Comrie , W . A . , Babich , A . & Burkhardt , J . K . F - Actin flow drives affinity maturation and spatial organization of LFA - 1 at the immunological synapse . J . Cell Biol . 208 , 475 – 491 ( 2015 ) . 121 . Comrie , W . A . , Li , S . , Boyle , S . & Burkhardt , J . K . The dendritic cell cytoskeleton promotes T cell adhesion and activation by constraining ICAM - 1 mobility . J . Cell Biol . 208 , 457 – 473 ( 2015 ) . This study shows that DCs immobilize cell‑surface ICAM1 to promote integrin catch‑bond formation within the immunological synapse , thus demonstrating that cells control the function of adhesion molecules by regulating their biophysical state . 122 . Freeman , S . A . & Grinstein , S . Phagocytosis : receptors , signal integration , and the cytoskeleton . Immunol . Rev . 262 , 193 – 215 ( 2014 ) . 123 . Goodridge , H . S . et al . Activation of the innate immune receptor dectin - 1 upon formation of a ‘phagocytic synapse’ . Nature 472 , 471 – 475 ( 2011 ) . 124 . Niedergang , F . , Di Bartolo , V . & Alcover , A . Comparative anatomy of phagocytic and immunological synapses . Front . Immunol . 7 , 18 ( 2016 ) . 125 . Freeman , S . A . et al . Integrins form an expanding diffusional barrier that coordinates phagocytosis . Cell 164 , 128 – 140 ( 2016 ) . 126 . Moller , J . , Luhmann , T . , Chabria , M . , Hall , H . & Vogel , V . Macrophages lift off surface - bound bacteria using a filopodium - lamellipodium hook - and - shovel mechanism . Sci . Rep . 3 , 2884 ( 2013 ) . 127 . Victora , G . D . & Nussenzweig , M . C . Germinal centers . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 30 , 429 – 457 ( 2012 ) . 128 . Nowosad , C . R . , Spillane , K . M . & Tolar , P . Germinal center B cells recognize antigen through a specialized immune synapse architecture . Nat . Immunol . 17 , 870 – 877 ( 2016 ) . 129 . Olazabal , I . M . et al . Rho - kinase and myosin - II control phagocytic cup formation during CR , but not Fc γ R , phagocytosis . Curr . Biol . 12 , 1413 – 1418 ( 2002 ) . 130 . Araki , N . , Hatae , T . , Furukawa , A . & Swanson , J . A . Phosphoinositide - 3 - kinase - independent contractile activities associated with Fc γ - receptor - mediated phagocytosis and macropinocytosis in macrophages . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 247 – 257 ( 2003 ) . 131 . Dart , A . E . , Tollis , S . , Bright , M . D . , Frankel , G . & Endres , R . G . The motor protein myosin 1G functions in Fc γ R - mediated phagocytosis . J . Cell Sci . 125 , 6020 – 6029 ( 2012 ) . 132 . Swanson , J . A . et al . A contractile activity that closes phagosomes in macrophages . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 307 – 316 ( 1999 ) . 133 . Cox , D . et al . Myosin X is a downstream effector of PI ( 3 ) K during phagocytosis . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 469 – 477 ( 2002 ) . 134 . Masters , T . A . , Pontes , B . , Viasnoff , V . , Li , Y . & Gauthier , N . C . Plasma membrane tension orchestrates membrane trafficking , cytoskeletal remodeling , and biochemical signaling during phagocytosis . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 110 , 11875 – 11880 ( 2013 ) . This study identifies membrane tension as a key trigger for particle internalization during phagocytosis . 135 . Keefe , D . et al . Perforin triggers a plasma membrane - repair response that facilitates CTL induction of apoptosis . Immunity 23 , 249 – 262 ( 2005 ) . 136 . Thiery , J . et al . Perforin pores in the endosomal membrane trigger the release of endocytosed granzyme B into the cytosol of target cells . Nat . Immunol . 12 , 770 – 777 ( 2011 ) . 137 . Stinchcombe , J . C . & Griffiths , G . M . Secretory mechanisms in cell - mediated cytotoxicity . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 23 , 495 – 517 ( 2007 ) . 138 . Bashour , K . T . et al . CD28 and CD3 have complementary roles in T - cell traction forces . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 111 , 2241 – 2246 ( 2014 ) . 139 . Le Floc’h , A . et al . Annular PIP 3 accumulation controls actin architecture and modulates cytotoxicity at the immunological synapse . J . Exp . Med . 210 , 2721 – 2737 ( 2013 ) . 140 . Huang , H . W . , Chen , F . Y . & Lee , M . T . Molecular mechanism of peptide - induced pores in membranes . Phys . Rev . Lett . 92 , 198304 ( 2004 ) . 141 . Lee , M . T . , Hung , W . C . , Chen , F . Y . & Huang , H . W . Mechanism and kinetics of pore formation in membranes by water - soluble amphipathic peptides . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 5087 – 5092 ( 2008 ) . 142 . Polozov , I . V . , Anantharamaiah , G . M . , Segrest , J . P . & Epand , R . M . Osmotically induced membrane tension modulates membrane permeabilization by class L amphipathic helical peptides : nucleation model of defect formation . Biophys . J . 81 , 949 – 959 ( 2001 ) . 143 . Guck , J . et al . Optical deformability as an inherent cell marker for testing malignant transformation and metastatic competence . Biophys . J . 88 , 3689 – 3698 ( 2005 ) . 144 . Hou , H . W . et al . Deformability study of breast cancer cells using microfluidics . Biomed . Microdevices 11 , 557 – 564 ( 2009 ) . 145 . Xu , W . et al . Cell stiffness is a biomarker of the metastatic potential of ovarian cancer cells . PLoS ONE 7 , e46609 ( 2012 ) . 146 . Liu , Y . et al . DNA - based nanoparticle tension sensors reveal that T - cell receptors transmit defined pN forces to their antigens for enhanced fidelity . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 113 , 5610 – 5615 ( 2016 ) . 147 . Zhang , Y . , Ge , C . , Zhu , C . & Salaita , K . DNA - based digital tension probes reveal integrin forces during early cell adhesion . Nat . Commun . 5 , 5167 ( 2014 ) . 148 . Grashoff , C . et al . Measuring mechanical tension across vinculin reveals regulation of focal adhesion dynamics . Nature 466 , 263 – 266 ( 2010 ) . 149 . Borghi , N . et al . E - Cadherin is under constitutive actomyosin - generated tension that is increased at cell – cell contacts upon externally applied stretch . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 12568 – 12573 ( 2012 ) . 150 . Conway , D . E . et al . Fluid shear stress on endothelial cells modulates mechanical tension across VE - cadherin and PECAM - 1 . Curr . Biol . 23 , 1024 – 1030 ( 2013 ) . 151 . Polacheck , W . J . & Chen , C . S . Measuring cell - generated forces : a guide to the available tools . Nat . Methods 13 , 415 – 423 ( 2016 ) . 152 . Liu , B . , Chen , W . & Zhu , C . Molecular force spectroscopy on cells . Annu . Rev . Phys . Chem . 66 , 427 – 451 ( 2015 ) . 153 . Cost , A . L . , Ringer , P . , Chrostek - Grashoff , A . & Grashoff , C . How to measure molecular forces in cells : a guide to evaluating genetically - encoded FRET - based tension sensors . Cell . Mol . Bioeng . 8 , 96 – 105 ( 2015 ) . 154 . Evans , E . , Ritchie , K . & Merkel , R . Sensitive force technique to probe molecular adhesion and structural linkages at biological interfaces . Biophys . J . 68 , 2580 – 2587 ( 1995 ) . 155 . Dembo , M . & Wang , Y . L . Stresses at the cell - to - substrate interface during locomotion of fibroblasts . Biophys . J . 76 , 2307 – 2316 ( 1999 ) . 156 . Tan , J . L . et al . Cells lying on a bed of microneedles : an approach to isolate mechanical force . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 1484 – 1489 ( 2003 ) . 157 . Wang , X . & Ha , T . Defining single molecular forces required to activate integrin and Notch signaling . Science 340 , 991 – 994 ( 2013 ) . Acknowledgements The author thanks L . Kam and S . Grinstein for advice and discussions . This work was supported by the US National Institutes of Health National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases ( grant R01AI087644 ) and the US National Science Foundation ( grant CMMI - 1562905 ) . Competing interests statement The author declares no competing interests . Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . R E V I E W S 690 | NOVEMBER 2017 | VOLUME 17 www . nature . com / nri © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved .