of April 13 , 2017 . This information is current as Presentation by Dendritic Cells Required for Antigen Uptake and The Actin Regulatory Protein HS1 Is BurkhardtFiona Clarke , Stefania Gallucci , Yair Argon and Janis K . Dehring , Uma Sriram , Edward K . Williamson , Shuixing Li , Yanping Huang , Chhanda Biswas , Deborah A . Klos http : / / www . jimmunol . org / content / 187 / 11 / 5952 doi : 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 1100870 October 2011 ; 2011 ; 187 : 5952 - 5963 ; Prepublished online 26 J Immunol References http : / / www . jimmunol . org / content / 187 / 11 / 5952 . full # ref - list - 1 , 51 of which you can access for free at : cites 113 articles This article Subscription http : / / jimmunol . org / subscription is online at : The Journal of Immunology Information about subscribing to Permissions http : / / www . aai . org / About / Publications / JI / copyright . html Submit copyright permission requests at : Email Alerts http : / / jimmunol . org / alerts Receive free email - alerts when new articles cite this article . Sign up at : Print ISSN : 0022 - 1767 Online ISSN : 1550 - 6606 . Immunologists , Inc . All rights reserved . Copyright © 2011 by The American Association of 1451 Rockville Pike , Suite 650 , Rockville , MD 20852 The American Association of Immunologists , Inc . , is published twice each month by The Journal of Immunology by gu e s t on A p r il 13 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . ji mm uno l . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m by gu e s t on A p r il 13 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . ji mm uno l . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m The Journal of Immunology The Actin Regulatory Protein HS1 Is Required for Antigen Uptake and Presentation by Dendritic Cells Yanping Huang , * , 1 Chhanda Biswas , * , 1 Deborah A . Klos Dehring , * , 2 Uma Sriram , † , 3 Edward K . Williamson , * Shuixing Li , * Fiona Clarke , * Stefania Gallucci , † , 3 Yair Argon , * and Janis K . Burkhardt * The hematopoietic actin regulatory protein hematopoietic lineage cell - speciﬁc protein 1 ( HS1 ) is required for cell spreading and signaling in lymphocytes , but the scope of HS1 function in Ag presentation has not been addressed . We show that dendritic cells ( DCs ) from HS1 2 / 2 mice differentiate normally and display normal LPS - induced upregulation of surface markers and cytokines . Consistent with their normal expression of MHC and costimulatory molecules , HS1 2 / 2 DCs present OVA peptide efﬁciently to CD4 + T cells . However , presentation of OVA protein is defective . Similarly , MHC class I - dependent presentation of VSV8 peptide to CD8 + T cells occurs normally , but cross - presentation of GRP94 / VSV8 complexes is defective . Analysis of Ag uptake pathways shows that HS1 is required for receptor - mediated endocytosis , but not for phagocytosis or macropinocytosis . HS1 interacts with dynamin 2 , a protein involved in scission of endocytic vesicles . However , HS1 2 / 2 DCs showed decreased numbers of endocytic invaginations , whereas dynamin - inhibited cells showed accumulation of these endocytic intermediates . Taken together , these studies show that HS1 promotes an early step in the endocytic pathway that is required for efﬁcient Ag presentation of exogenous Ag by DCs . The Journal of Immunology , 2011 , 187 : 5952 – 5963 . D endritic cells ( DCs ) are highly specialized for presenta - tion of Ags to naive T cells . DCs survey peripheral tis - sues , ingesting large volumes of material by receptor - mediated endocytosis , phagocytosis , and macropinocytosis ( 1 – 5 ) . In the presence of inﬂammatory signals , DCs undergo a mat - uration process that results in diminished endocytosis of Ag , enhanced acidiﬁcation of Ag processing compartments , redis - tribution of MHC molecules to the cell surface , upregulation of costimulatory molecules , and increased cell motility . As they mature , DCs migrate to lymphoid organs , where they present peptides derived from non - self Ags to T cells , initiating an adaptive immune response . Many of these aspects of DC function rely on actin and its regulatory proteins . During endocytosis , actin polymerization pro - duces forces that promote internalization of plasma membrane vesicles . This is particularly obvious for phagocytosis and mac - ropinocytosis , which involve large actin - rich cell surface protru - sions ( 6 – 8 ) . However , receptor - mediated endocytosis is also dependent on actin ﬁlaments , which work together with clathrin and other proteins such as dynamin 2 to drive the internalization of plasma membrane vesicles ( 9 , 10 ) . After vesicle internalization , the actin cytoskeleton serves as a highway to transport vesicles to compartments where Ag is processed , loaded onto MHC mole - cules , and transported back to the cell surface for recognition by T cells ( 1 , 2 , 11 ) . Macropinocytosis and phagocytosis depend on the Rho family GTPases CDC42 and Rac ( 12 – 14 ) , and diminished uptake through these pathways in mature DCs has been linked to downregulation of CDC42 function ( 13 ) . Notably , however , receptor - mediated endocytosis is not dependent on Rho GTPases , nor is it down - regulated in mature DCs ( 13 ) . In keeping with this ﬁnding , recent analysis has shown that mature DCs take up Ags efﬁciently via receptor - mediated endocytosis ( 15 ) , a process that may be very important for presentation of Ags by lymphoid - resident DCs ( 16 ) . Receptor - mediated Ag uptake by both immature and mature DCs is likely to be particularly important at low Ag dose . In addition to playing an important role in normal immune responses , the ability of DCs to take up material by receptor - mediated endocytosis has been widely exploited to target these cells for therapeutic purposes ( e . g . , Refs . 17 – 21 ) . Defects in actin regulatory proteins have far - reaching effects on DC function . Mutations in Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASp ) and its binding partner WASp interacting protein ( WIP ) lead to defects in Ag uptake , migration , and immunological syn - apse formation ( 22 – 27 ) . We have recently found that WASp and WIP interact in DCs with a third protein , hematopoietic lineage cell - speciﬁc protein 1 ( HS1 ; also called HCLS1 , LckBP1 ) ( 28 ) . HS1 is the hematopoietic lineage - speciﬁc homolog of the more * Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine , The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia and Perelman School of Medicine , University of Pennsylvania , Phila - delphia , PA 19104 ; and † Division of Rheumatology , Department of Pediatrics , The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia and Perelman School of Medicine , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA 19104 1 Y . H . and C . B . contributed equally to this work . 2 Current address : Department of Cell and Molecular Biology , Feinberg School of Medicine , Northwestern University , Chicago , IL . 3 Current address : Department of Microbiology and Immunology , Temple University School of Medicine , Philadelphia , PA . Received for publication April 22 , 2011 . Accepted for publication September 29 , 2011 . This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grants T32AI05542806A1 and F32AI08006901 ( to D . A . K . D . ) and R21AI088376 ( to J . K . B . and Y . A . ) . Address correspondence and reprint requests to Dr . Janis K . Burkhardt , Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine , Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia , 3615 Civic Center Boulevard , 816D Abramson Research Center , Philadelphia , PA 19104 . E - mail address : jburkhar @ mail . med . upenn . edu Abbreviations used in this article : BMDC , bone marrow - derived dendritic cell ; DAB , 3 , 3 9 - diaminobenzidine ; DC , dendritic cell ; GRP94 , glucose regulated protein of 94 kDa ; HS1 , hematopoietic lineage cell - speciﬁc protein 1 ; NP - 40 , Nonidet P - 40 ; WASp , Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ; WIP , WASp interacting protein ; WT , wild - type . Copyright (cid:1) 2011byTheAmericanAssociationofImmunologists , Inc . 0022 - 1767 / 11 / $ 16 . 00 www . jimmunol . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 1100870 by gu e s t on A p r il 13 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . ji mm uno l . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m widely expressed protein cortactin ( 29 ) , and we have shown that HS1 is the only cortactin family member expressed in murine bone marrow - derived dendritic cells ( 28 ) . Like WASp , HS1 can activate the Arp2 / 3 complex to drive the formation of branched actin ﬁla - ments ( 30 , 31 ) . However , HS1 also binds to F - actin and stabilizes the branched actin network generated by WASp and other proteins ( 32 ) . HS1 is a modular protein , with an N - terminal domain that binds to the Arp2 / 3 complex followed by a repeat region that binds to actin ﬁlaments ( 30 , 31 , 33 , 34 ) . The C - terminal half of the protein functions as a signaling adapter and consists of an extended proline - rich region and a C - terminal SH3 domain . The proline - rich region contains sites for immunoreceptor - induced tyrosine phos - phorylation ( 35 – 37 ) and provides docking sites for several SH3 and SH2 domain - containing proteins , including Lck , Vav1 , PLC g 1 , and Itk ( 38 – 40 ) . The HS1 SH3 domain mediates binding to the WIP / WASp heterodimer ( 28 ) . The SH3 domain of cortactin also binds to dynamin 2 ( 41 ) , though this interaction has not been shown for HS1 . The full scope of HS1 function within leukocyte lineages is not known . Mutations and polymorphisms in HS1 are associated with autoimmune disease ( 42 , 43 ) , though the mechanistic basis for this association has not been determined . Aberrant HS1 expression and / or phosphorylation in B cells are associated with chronic lymphocytic leukemia ( 44 – 46 ) . Deﬁciency for HS1 is associated with disruption of actin responses and Ca 2 + signaling events lead - ing to IL - 2 promoter activation in T cells ( 39 , 40 ) , with defects in activation - induced cell death in B cells ( 47 , 48 ) , and with defects in chemotaxis and cytolysis in NK cells ( 49 ) . In comparison with lymphocytes and NK cells , much less is known about HS1 function in professional APCs . As we recently showed , wild - type ( WT ) murine bone marrow - derived dendritic cells ( BMDCs ) do not express cortactin , and DCs from HS1 2 / 2 mice lack both cortactin family members ( 28 ) . These cells exhibit defects in podosome organization and lamellipodial protrusion , resulting in a diminished directional persistence during chemo - taxis . Because several studies have demonstrated a role for cor - tactin in endocytosis ( 50 – 56 ) , we asked whether HS1 expression is required for Ag uptake and presentation by DCs . Our results demonstrate that HS1 expression is essential for efﬁcient Ag processing and presentation to T cells and that this is due , at least in part , to a requirement for HS1 in receptor - mediated endocytosis of protein Ags . Materials and Methods Mice HS1 2 / 2 mice ( 48 ) were fully back - crossed onto C57BL / 6J or BALB / c backgrounds . DO - 11 . 10 mice , which express a TCR speciﬁc for chicken OVA 323 – 339 / I - A d , and C57BL / 6J mice were obtained from The Jackson Laboratory . OTII mice , which express a TCR speciﬁc for chicken OVA 323 – 339 / I - A b , were obtained from Taconic . Mice were housed under pathogen - free conditions in the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia animal facility . All studies involving animals were reviewed and approved by the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee . Cell culture Primary cultures of BMDCs were prepared as previously described ( 57 ) . Brieﬂy , bone marrow progenitor cells were ﬂushed from femurs and tibia of 2 - to 4 - mo - old mice , and cells were cultured in IMDM supplemented with 10 % FBS , recombinant mouse GM - CSF , glutamine , 2 - mercaptoethanol , and penicillin / streptomycin . Medium was replaced every 2 d , and cells were used between 6 and 8 d of culture , when . 70 % of the cells are CD11c + . Maturation of BMDCs was induced by culturing for 16 – 24 h in the presence of 100 ng / ml LPS ( Escherichia coli 055 : B5 ; Sigma ) or , where indicated , 500 nM CpG ( ODN 1668 ) or control oligonucleotides ( InvivoGen ) . Primary CD4 + T cells from DO - 11 . 10 or OTII mice were prepared as described previously ( 40 ) . Brieﬂy , CD4 + T cells were enriched from spleens and lymph nodes by negative selection with anti - CD8 and anti - MHC class II using anti - rat IgG magnetic beads ( Qiagen ) . The T cell hybridoma N15 , which expresses a TCR speciﬁc for VSV8 / H2 - Kb ( 58 ) , was obtained from Dr . E . Reinherz ( Dana - Farber Cancer Institute , Boston , MA ) and cultured in RPMI 1640 , 10 % FCS , 0 . 1 mg / ml G418 , and 0 . 2 mg / ml hygromycin . N15 cells were incubated overnight with PMA ( 10 ng / ml ) prior to use in Ag presentation assays , a treatment necessary for optimal activation ( 58 ) . Maximal activation of N15 cells was measured by cross - linking with plate - bound anti - CD3 . Analysis of BMDC maturation For ﬂow cytometry , BMDCs were incubated with rat anti - mouse CD16 / CD32 ( clone 2 . 4G2 ) to block Fc g R , followed by staining with the fol - lowing mAbs ( all from BD Biosciences ) : allophycocyanin - conjugated hamster anti - mouse CD11c , FITC - conjugated hamster anti - mouse CD40 , PE - conjugated rat anti - mouse mAbs to CD80 , CD86 , and MHC class I and class II . Nonspeciﬁc staining was deﬁned using isotype - matched Abs . Cells were analyzed on a FACSCalibur ( BD Biosciences ) using FlowJo software ( Tree Star ) . To measure TNF - a production , BMDC culture supernatants were harvested at the indicated times and assayed by ELISA ( R & D Systems ) . Protein binding studies and Western blotting For GST - pulldown studies , recombinant GST - tagged SH3 domain of HS1 ( aa 415 – 486 ) and a variant bearing an inactivating mutation ( W456Y ) were generated in bacteria as described ( 28 ) . BMDCs were lysed in Nonidet P - 40 ( NP - 40 ) lysis buffer ( 50 mM Tris - HCl pH 8 , 1 % NP - 40 , 100 mM NaCl , 5 mM EDTA , 0 . 5 mM CaCl 2 , protease inhibitors , 1 mM Na 3 VO 4 , and 5 mM NaF ) . Lysates were clariﬁed by centrifugation and exposed to gluta - thione resin - bound GST fusion proteins for 2 h . Beads were washed in NP - 40 lysis buffer , eluted , and analyzed by Western blotting . For coim - munoprecipitation studies , 293T cells were transiently transfected with FLAG - tagged HS1 ( FLAG . HS1 FL ) , an N - terminal deletion mutant lacking amino acids 1 – 335 , which contain the Arp2 / 3 complex and actin binding regions ( FLAG . HS1 D N ) or a variant of FLAG . HS1 D N bearing the W456Y mutation ( FLAG . HS1 D N W - . Y ) . In addition , cells were transfected with either enhanced GFP - tagged dynamin 2 ( GFP . Dyn2 FL ) or a dynamin 2 mutant lacking the proline - rich domain ( GFP . Dyn2 D PRD ) ( 41 ) ( gifts from Drs . H . Cao and M . McNiven , Mayo Clinic , Rochester , MN ) . Cells were lysed in NP - 40 lysis buffer , and HS1 was immunoprecipitated using M2 anti - FLAG agarose ( Sigma ) . For Western blotting , proteins were separated by SDS - PAGE , transferred to nitrocellulose , and blocked in 3 % BSA in PBS . Blots were probed with primary Abs as indicated . Rabbit anti - mouse HS1 was described previously ( 28 , 40 ) . Goat anti - dynamin 2 ( C - 18 ) and rabbit anti - WIP ( H - 224 ) were from Santa Cruz , rabbit anti - WASp was from Upstate , rabbit anti - GFP was from Invitrogen , and mouse anti - GAPDH ( 6C5 ) was from EMD Chem - icals . Primary Abs were detected with secondary Abs coupled to IR800 ( Rockland ) or Alexa Fluor 680 ( Invitrogen ) and visualized using an Od - yssey Imager ( Licor ) . Quantitation was performed within the linear range . Macropinocytosis and phagocytosis assays To measure macropinocytosis , BMDCs were washed and resuspended at 8 3 10 6 / ml in IMDM containing 0 . 5 % BSA . Cells were mixed with pre - warmed FITC – dextran ( 70 , 000 m . w . ; Invitrogen ) or Lucifer yellow ( In - vitrogen ) at 1 mg / ml ﬁnal concentration and incubated at 37˚C for the indicated times . After washing three times with cold FACS buffer ( 5 % FBS , 1 mM EDTA in PBS ) , internalized tracers were measured by ﬂow cytometry . Time points were performed in duplicate , and mean ﬂuores - cence intensity values were calculated . To analyze phagocytosis , BMDCs were plated on coverslips in 6 - well plates and cultured overnight . Media was replaced with ice - cold media containing 25 m g / ml FITC – zymosan ( Invitrogen ) and incubated for 1 h at 4˚C . After washing three times with cold media , prewarmed media was added to initiate uptake . Cells were incubated at 37˚C for the indicated times and then ﬁxed in 3 % paraformaldehyde / PBS . Cells were perme - abilized with 0 . 3 % Triton X - 100 , blocked with 0 . 05 % saponin / 1 . 25 % ﬁsh skin gelatin in Tris buffered saline , and labeled with Alexa Fluor 594 – phalloidin or with anti - LAMP1 ( 1D4B ) followed by Alexa Fluor 647 anti - Rat Ig . The 1D4B mAb developed by Dr . J . T . August was obtained from the Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank , developed under the auspices of the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development and maintained by The University of Iowa Department of Biology ( Iowa City , IA ) . Cells were imaged using a Leica SP2 confocal microscope . Zymosan particles were scored as internalized if they were surrounded by phalloidin or LAMP1 staining . The Journal of Immunology 5953 by gu e s t on A p r il 13 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . ji mm uno l . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Ag presentation assays VSV8 peptide ( RGYVYQGL ) from the vesicular stomatitis virus N protein and OVA 323 – 339 peptide ( ISQAVHAAHAEINEAGR ) from chicken OVA were synthesized at the University of Chicago peptide facility , puriﬁed by HPLC , and veriﬁed by mass spectrometry . OVA protein was purchased from Worthington and further puriﬁed by size exclusion chromatography to ensure removal of contaminating peptides and LPS . For phagocytosis studies , latex beads ( polystyrene 3 - m m microspheres ; Polysciences ) were freshly coated by overnight incubation with the indicated ratios of OVA and BSA , maintaining a concentration of 10 mg / ml total protein . Com - plexes of the VSV8 peptide and the chaperone glucose regulated protein of 94 kDa ( GRP94 ) were generated as described in Ref . 57 . The N - terminal portion of GRP94 ( N1 - 355 ) , is sufﬁcient to mediate peptide binding , receptor - mediated uptake by DCs , and cross - presentation of peptide Ags to T cells ( 57 ) . N1 - 355 was expressed in SF9 cells and puriﬁed by afﬁnity and size exclusion chromatography under LPS - free conditions as detailed in Vogen et al . ( 59 ) . Peptide – GRP94 complex was prepared as previously described ( 57 , 59 ) . Brieﬂy , N1 - 355 and VSV8 were mixed in buffer A ( 20 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 2 , 150 mM NaCl , 10 mM KCl , 1 mM MgCl 2 and 0 . 1 mM CaCl 2 ) , heat shocked for 10 min at 50˚C and then incubated at room temperature for 30 min . The complex was separated from unbound peptide by size exclusion chromatography . To measure Ag presentation on MHC class II molecules , BMDCs were harvested and replated at 5 3 10 4 cells / well in ﬂat - bottom 96 - well plates in quadruplicate . Cells were then pulsed with either OVA protein or OVA 323 – 339 peptide at the indicated concentrations for 4 h . To control for contaminating peptide in the OVA protein , some DCs were pre - ﬁxed with paraformaldehyde prior to addition of protein . Where indicated , mannose receptors were blocked by incubation with 3 mg / ml mannan from Sac - charomyces cerevisiae ( Sigma ) for 1 h prior to addition of soluble OVA . For presentation of phagocytosed OVA , cells were incubated for 4 h with OVA / BSA - coated beads at a ratio of 60 beads per cell . Ag - pulsed DCs were washed and cocultured with 2 3 10 5 CD4 + T cells for 24 h . Cells and supernatants were lysed together , and IL - 2 was measured by ELISA ( R & D Systems ) . Presentation on MHC class I molecules was performed similarly , except that BMDCs were pulsed with N1 - 355 – VSV8 complex or free VSV8 peptide for 3 – 4 h , and then an equal number of N15 hy - bridoma cells was added to each well . IL - 2 released after 24 h was measured by ELISA . Biochemical analysis of receptor - mediated endocytosis Seventy - ﬁve to one hundred micrograms of GRP94 N1 - 355 , mouse trans - ferrin , or OVA ( US Biological ) were each labeled with 1 . 0 mCi [ 125 I ] iodine ( Amersham ) in Tris buffered saline , pH 7 . 2 , using IODOBEADS ( Amer - sham ) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations . The unbound [ 125 I ] iodine was removed on Biogel P10 columns ( Bio - Rad , Hercules , CA ) . Final sp . act . was 2000 – 6000 cpm / ng protein . To assay receptor - mediated endocytosis , BMDCs were harvested , washed with HBSS , 0 . 1 % BSA , and adjusted to 1 3 10 7 / ml . Cells were then loaded with [ 125 I ] GRP94 , [ 125 I ] transferrin , or [ 125 I ] OVA ( 10 m g / ml ) for 1 h at 4˚C . After washing with ice - cold HBSS / BSA , cells were resuspended in the same buffer , and aliquots of 1 3 10 6 cells each were warmed to 37˚C for the indicated times before returning to 4˚C . Surface - bound transferrin was stripped by mixing cells with an equal volume of acid ( 0 . 25 M acetic acid , 0 . 5 M NaCl , pH 2 . 3 ) for 6 – 10 s , followed by immediate neutrali - zation with 50 m l 1 M sodium acetate , pH 8 . Surface - bound GRP94 or OVA was stripped by treatment with 1 . 25 mg / ml pronase ( Roche ) in DMEM for 45 min at 4˚C . After stripping , cells were washed , and cell - associated radioactivity was measured on a gamma - counter . Electron microscopy WT and HS1 2 / 2 BMDCs were grown on 35 - mm tissue culture dishes . To inhibit dynamin , some dishes were treated with 80 m M of the dynamin inhibitor dynasore monohydrate ( Sigma ) for 60 min at 37˚C in serum - free media . Cells were then washed with HBSS and ﬁxed as monolayers with 2 . 5 % glutaraldehyde , 50 mM sodium cacodylate , pH 7 . 4 , containing 1 . 25 mM MgCl 2 and 1 . 25 mM CaCl 2 . Cells were washed with 100 mM sodium cacodylate , postﬁxed in 2 % aqueous OsO 4 followed by 2 % aqueous uranyl acetate , and dehydrated in graded EtOH . Dishes were then processed using a modiﬁcation of Grifﬁths et al . ( 60 ) to release cell monolayers and a thin layer of polystyrene , and cell sheets were embedded in EPON - 812 ( Elec - tron Microscopy Sciences ) . Ultrathin cross - sections of the cell sheets were contrasted with aqueous 1 . 5 % uranyl acetate followed by Reynold’s lead citrate and viewed using a JEOL 1011 electron microscope operated at 100 kV . Images were acquired with an Orius CCD camera using Digital Micrograph software ( Gatan ) . To label receptor - mediated endocytic compartments , cells were allowed to internalize 50 m g / ml mouse transferrin – HRP ( Thermo Scientiﬁc ) for 15 min at 37˚C . To label the ﬂuid - phase pathway , cells were allowed to in - ternalize 15 mg / ml soluble HRP ( Sigma ) for 30 min at 37˚C . In both cases , cells were washed and ﬁxed with glutaraldehyde as described previously . After ﬁxation , cells were incubated for 30 min with 1 mg / ml 3 , 3 9 - dia - minobenzidine ( DAB ; Sigma ) and 0 . 01 % H 2 O 2 in 200 mM sodium cacodylate , pH 7 . 4 . Cells were then washed with 100 mM sodium caco - dylate and incubated with 2 % aqueous OsO 4 to generate an electron - dense HRP – DAB reaction product and postﬁx the cells . Subsequent processing was as described earlier . To determine the number of endocytic invaginations , cell proﬁles were examined at random at 3 60 , 000 or higher magniﬁcation , and structures were counted by an individual blinded to experimental conditions . Shallow , wide - neck pits were distinguished from non - pit regions of the membrane on the basis of clearly deﬁned edges , relatively regular size , and , in some cases , an obvious clathrin coat . Pits and wide - neck invaginations were collectively deﬁned as structures where the width of the structure at the plasma membrane was larger than its depth . Narrow - neck invaginations were deﬁned as structures where the width of the mouth was less than the diameter of the invagination . Structures of an unclear nature were excluded from analysis . To determine density of these structures as a function of plasma membrane length , low - magniﬁcation ( 3 5000 ) micrographs were captured , and the total length of the plasma membrane in each cell proﬁle was measured using ImageJ v . 1 . 42 ( National Institutes of Health ) . Filo - podia were excluded from analysis , as these were difﬁcult to measure ac - curately and were almost never observed to have endocytic invaginations . Results HS1 is not required for differentiation or maturation of DCs One of the key changes occurring during DC maturation is the reprogramming of actin regulatory pathways ( 13 , 61 ) . This in - volves changes in expression patterns of actin regulatory proteins ( 62 , 63 ) and functional downregulation of Rho family GTPases that drive the formation of branched actin ﬁlaments . We recently showed that DCs express HS1 , a protein that promotes the for - mation of branched actin ﬁlaments in a Rho GTPase - independent manner ( 28 ) . To ask whether HS1 expression is also downregu - lated upon DC maturation , we cultured BMDCs from WT mice for 24 h with LPS or CpG DNA to induce maturation and ana - lyzed cell lysates by Western blotting for HS1 . As shown in Fig . 1 A and 1 B , mature DCs do not downregulate HS1 expression . Instead , these cells express ∼ 2 - fold more HS1 than immature DCs , indicating that HS1 expression is upregulated as part of the maturation program . We showed previously that BMDCs from HS1 2 / 2 mice lack both HS1 and the related protein cortactin ( 28 ) . To ask whether HS1 is required for DC development and / or maturation , BMDCs generated from WT and HS1 2 / 2 mice were cultured for 24 h with or without LPS or CpG DNA , and surface marker expression was analyzed by ﬂow cytometry . Although the proﬁles of individual surface markers varied somewhat between DC preparations , cul - tures from HS1 2 / 2 and WT mice generated equivalent numbers of CD11c + cells , and maturation - induced upregulation of MHC molecules and costimulatory proteins was similar in the two pop - ulations ( Fig . 1 C and data not shown ) . Secretion of TNF - a was also comparable in the two populations of cells ( Fig . 1 D ) . Taken together , these results show that HS1 is not required for devel - opment or maturation of BMDCs . HS1 is required for presentation of protein Ags We next asked whether HS1 is required for Ag presentation . As shown in Fig . 2 A , HS1 2 / 2 DCs could present OVA peptide efﬁ - ciently to CD4 + T cells , as measured by IL - 2 production by T cells from DO - 11 . 10 mice . However , if HS1 2 / 2 DCs were pulsed instead with intact OVA protein , they activated T cells much less efﬁciently than WT DCs . Although Ag insolubility precluded our ability to reach plateau levels of T cell activation , comparison of the Ag dose - 5954 HS1 - DEPENDENT Ag PRESENTATION IN DENDRITIC CELLS by gu e s t on A p r il 13 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . ji mm uno l . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m response shows that HS1 2 / 2 DCs required 30 - to 100 - fold more protein than WT DCs to achieve comparable levels of T cell acti - vation ( Fig . 2 B ) . Similar results were obtained with OTII cells and HS1 2 / 2 BMDCs on the C57BL / 6 background ( Fig . 2 C ) . To analyze Ag presentation on MHC class I molecules , we took advantage of our experience working with the endoplasmic reticulum chaperone GRP94 . We showed previously that GRP94 binds to various pep - tides , and the complex is taken up by DCs through a receptor - mediated process and transported to degradative organelles ( 57 ) . GRP94 - bound peptides then escape the endocytic pathway and are loaded onto MHC class I molecules in the endoplasmic reticulum . As shown in Fig . 2 E and 2 F , HS1 2 / 2 DCs presented VSV8 peptide efﬁciently to the H2 - K b – restricted hybridoma N15 , whose TCR is speciﬁc for VSV8 . However , presentation of GRP94 – VSV8 peptide complexes to this hybridoma was 10 - fold less efﬁcient than pre - sentation by WT DCs . Taken together , these results indicate that HS1 is required for the uptake or processing of protein Ags , and thereby for their presentation , but is not needed for later events leading to productive T cell activation . HS1 is required for efﬁcient receptor - mediated endocytosis DCs take up Ag by multiple mechanisms , including phagocytosis , macropinocytosis , and receptor - mediated endocytosis . Because phagocytosis and macropinocytosis are heavily dependent on actin polymerization to mobilize large pseudopodial extensions , we ﬁrst asked whether HS1 is required for Ag uptake through these pathways . To assess macropinocytosis , immature WT and HS1 2 / 2 DCs were allowed to take up FITC – dextran ( Fig . 3 A ) or Lucifer yellow ( Fig . 3 B ) , for various times , and uptake was assessed by ﬂow cytometry . In both cases , the time course of ﬂuid phase uptake was identical in control and HS1 - deﬁcient cells . To ask whether the maturation - associated downregulation of macro - pinocytic activity is intact in HS1 2 / 2 DCs , mature DCs were generated by culturing overnight in the presence of LPS . As re - ported previously ( 13 ) , WT DCs showed diminished ﬂuid - phase endocytosis upon maturation ( Fig . 3 B ) . Mature HS1 2 / 2 DCs ( open squares ) behaved similarly , indicating that HS1 is not re - quired for reprogramming of the macropinocytic pathway . To test the role of HS1 in phagocytosis , WT and HS1 2 / 2 DCs were incubated with FITC - conjugated zymosan particles at 4˚C , warmed to 37˚C to allow uptake , and analyzed by immunoﬂuo - rescence microscopy . As shown in Fig . 3 C , both WT and HS1 2 / 2 DCs exhibited F - actin – rich phagocytic cups at early times of in - ternalization . To assess the kinetics of phagocytosis , cells ﬁxed at various times after warming were labeled with ﬂuorescent phal - loidin to deﬁne cell boundaries , and the percentage of cells with FIGURE 1 . HS1 2 / 2 DCs differentiate normally in response to LPS stimulation . A , HS1 expression in immature and mature DCs . BMDCs from WT and HS1 2 / 2 mice were stimulated with 100 ng / ml LPS , 500 nM CpG , or control oligonucleotides . After 24 h of stimulation , cell lysates were made and blotted with anti - HS1 . GAPDH was used as a loading control . B , Quantitation of HS1 expression in DCs . Bands from blots as in A were scanned , and the intensity of HS1 was normalized to that of GAPDH . Data represent means 6 SD from at least three independent experiments . * p , 0 . 05 , * * p , 0 . 01 ( relative to untreated WT DCs ) . C , BMDCs from WTor HS1 2 / 2 mice were stimulated for 24 h with 100 ng / ml LPS to induce maturation . The cells were then analyzed by ﬂow cytometry for expression of the indicated surface proteins . Shaded proﬁles , isotype control ; solid lines , unstimulated immature DCs ; dashed lines , LPS - stimulated DCs . D , WT ( s ) and HS1 2 / 2 ( n ) BMDCs were stimulated with LPS for the indicated times , and TNF - a in the culture supernatants was measured by ELISA . Data represent means 6 SD from replicate wells of one representative experiment . The Journal of Immunology 5955 by gu e s t on A p r il 13 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . ji mm uno l . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m internalized FITC – zymosan was determined . As shown in Fig . 3 D , the kinetics of zymosan internalization were unaffected by HS1 deﬁciency . Moreover , labeling for the lysosomal protein LAMP1 showed that internalized particles were transported to lysosomal compartments with normal kinetics ( data not shown ) . Similarly , phagocytosis of apoptotic cell debris or of ﬂuorescent Listeria were not impaired in HS1 2 / 2 DCs ( data not shown ) . Taken together , these studies show that HS1 is not required for macropinocytosis or phagocytosis by DCs . We next asked whether receptor - mediated endocytosis is de - pendent on HS1 . Initially , we tested endocytosis of transferrin , with is taken up by transferrin receptors via clathrin - coated vesicles ( 64 ) . To obtain a quantitative measure of transferrin internaliza - tion , WT and HS1 2 / 2 DCs were surface - labeled with [ 125 I ] trans - ferrin at 4˚C , washed , and warmed to 37˚C for various times . Residual surface - bound transferrin was then removed by washing at low pH , and cell - associated radioactivity was determined . As shown in Fig . 4 A , HS1 2 / 2 DCs internalized transferrin at only 30 – 40 % of the efﬁciency of WT cells . The diminished uptake was apparent both in terms of the rate of uptake and the overall amount of transferrin taken up . Although diminished ligand uptake can theoretically reﬂect either reduced endocytosis or enhanced ligand recycling , starting transferrin receptor levels were similar in WT and HS1 2 / 2 DCs , and the initial rates of endocytosis were already signiﬁcantly different , arguing against a signiﬁcant contribution from differential recycling . Thus , we conclude that the diminished overall uptake of transferrin by HS1 2 / 2 DCs reﬂects a defect in initial endocytic internalization . OVA is taken up in a receptor - mediated fashion by the mannose receptor ( 65 , 66 ) , and GRP94 is taken up by CD91 and other scavenger receptors ( 57 , 67 – 70 ) . To ask whether HS1 deﬁciency also leads to reduced endocytosis of these proteins , we analyzed their internalization using the same assay . As shown in Fig . 4 B and 4 C , uptake of both OVA and GRP94 was signiﬁcantly reduced in HS1 2 / 2 DCs , indicating that the requirement for HS1 is a general one . As an independent means of assessing endocytosis , HS1 2 / 2 DCs were incubated for 15 min in the presence of transferrin – HRP . Cells were then ﬁxed and processed for cytochemistry and elec - tron microscopy . As shown in Fig . 5 A , WT BMDCs showed nu - merous vesicles and tubular endosomes ﬁlled with HRP reaction FIGURE 2 . HS1 is required for presentation of protein Ags . A and B , BMDCs cultured from WT and HS1 2 / 2 mice on the BALB / c back - ground were pulsed with the class II - restricted OVA 323 – 339 peptide ( A ) or with the whole OVA protein ( B ) at the indicated doses for 4 h . They were then cocultured with OVA - speciﬁc DO - 11 . 10 T cells , and 24 h later , IL - 2 levels in the culture supernatants were measured by ELISA . C , BMDCs cultured from WTand HS1 2 / 2 mice on the C57BL / 6 background were incubated in the presence or absence of mannan to block mannose receptors , and then OVA protein was added , so that any residual uptake would be by macropinocytosis . Ag presentation to OTII T cells was then assayed as in A and B . In this experiment ( representing two of four rep - licates ) , mannan completely blocked the re - sponse , indicating that even very high doses of OVA are taken up almost exclusively by re - ceptor - mediated endocytosis . s , WT DCs with - out mannan ; n , HS1 2 / 2 DCs without mannan ; D , WT DCs with mannan ; ♦ , HS1 2 / 2 DCs with mannan . Inset , Data from a separate experiment ( representing two of four replicates ) where T cell responses to mannan - blocked DCs were measurable at high OVA doses . Open bars , WT DCs with mannan ; ﬁlled bars , HS1 2 / 2 DCs with mannan ; differences between WT and HS1 2 / 2 DCs in the presence of mannan were not statistically signiﬁcant at any dose of OVA . D , WT and HS1 2 / 2 BMDCs ( C57BL / 6 back - ground ) were allowed to phagocytose latex beads coated with OVA and serum albumin in the indicated ratios , holding total protein and bead number constant . OTII T cell responses were then measured . E and F , WT and HS1 2 / 2 BMDCs were pulsed with free VSV8 peptide ( E ) or VSV8 peptide prebound to GRP94 ( F ) at the indicated doses for 4 h . VSV8 - speciﬁc N15 T hybridoma cells were incubated with Ag - pulsed BMDCs for 24 h , and IL - 2 levels in the supernatants were measured by ELISA . Data represent means 6 SD from replicate wells of one representative experiment . 5956 HS1 - DEPENDENT Ag PRESENTATION IN DENDRITIC CELLS by gu e s t on A p r il 13 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . ji mm uno l . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m product . By comparison , HS1 2 / 2 BMDCs contained far fewer HRP + endocytic structures ( Fig . 5 B ) . Indeed , most cell proﬁles lacked labeled endosomes ; the image shown in Fig . 5 B was se - lected because it contains one rare HRP - positive organelle ( ar - rowhead ) . Importantly , HS1 2 / 2 DCs took up free HRP by ﬂuid - phase endocytosis as efﬁciently as WT cells . As shown in Fig . 5 C and 5 D , both cell types exhibited numerous macropinosomes con - taining electron - dense reaction product . Together with the bio - chemical analysis of ligand internalization , these data show that HS1 is speciﬁcally required for efﬁcient uptake of ligands via receptor - mediated endocytosis into early endocytic compartments . On the basis of our ﬁnding that HS1 is selectively required for receptor - mediated endocytosis in DCs , we asked whether the Ag presentation defects in HS1 2 / 2 DCs are limited to Ags taken up via this pathway . To facilitate comparisons , we targeted the same protein , OVA , for uptake via different endocytic mechanisms . First , cells were incubated with soluble OVA in the presence of excess mannan to inhibit receptor - mediated endocytosis and drive ﬂuid - phase uptake . As shown in Fig . 2 C , mannan treatment strongly inhibited Ag presentation , conﬁrming that OVA is taken up by receptor - mediated endocytosis , even at very high doses . In two of four replicate experiments , no residual Ag presentation could be detected , making it impossible to assess the effects of HS1 deﬁciency on presentation of OVA taken up by ﬂuid - phase endocytosis . In two of four experiments , although T cell activation in response to mannan - treated DCs was low ( ∼ 10 % of that ob - served in the absence of mannan ) , it was measurable at the highest doses of OVA ( Fig . 2 C , inset ) . In such experiments , WT and HS1 2 / 2 DCs activated T cells equally well at all doses of OVA where a response could be measured . We conclude that HS1 2 / 2 DCs are competent to present OVA taken up by ﬂuid - phase en - docytosis . We also tested the presentation of phagocytosed OVA using latex beads coated with varying ratios of OVA protein and serum albumin . As shown in Fig . 2 D , the response to phagocy - tosed OVA was similar in T cells activated by WT and HS1 2 / 2 DCs . Taken together , these studies show that the requirement for HS1 in presentation of protein Ags is linked to its role in receptor - mediated endocytosis and that HS1 is not needed for presentation of Ags taken up by other routes . HS1 binds to dynamin 2 and promotes formation of plasma membrane invaginations The HS1 homolog cortactin has been shown to interact through its SH3 domain with several proteins that promote endocytosis , in - cluding WASp , WIP , and dynamin 2 ( 41 , 52 , 71 ) . In particular , cortactin interacts physically and functionally with dynamin 2 to drive the internalization of endocytic vesicles ( 51 , 56 , 72 – 75 ) . We have shown that HS1 binds via its SH3 domain to the actin reg - ulatory proteins WASp and WIP ( 28 ) . To ask whether HS1 in - teracts in a similar way with dynamin 2 , we probed DC lysates with the GST - tagged HS1 SH3 domain and blotted the bound proteins for dynamin 2 . WASp and WIP were used as positive controls . As shown in Fig . 6 A , all three proteins are associated with the HS1 SH3 domain . Mutation of tryptophan 465 , a residue required for canonical binding to proline - rich ligands , disrupted binding , demonstrating the speciﬁcity of these interactions . To conﬁrm that binding of HS1 and dynamin 2 takes place in intact cells and to map the relevant region of dynamin 2 , we performed coimmunoprecipitation studies on cells coexpressing epitope - FIGURE 3 . HS1 is not required for macropinocytosis or phagocytosis . A , Immature WT and HS1 2 / 2 BMDCs were incubated with 1 mg / ml FITC – dextran for the indicated times at 37˚C , and ﬂuorescence intensity was assessed by ﬂow cytometry . B , WT and HS1 2 / 2 BMDCs were cul - tured for 24 h in the absence or presence of 100 ng / ml LPS to induce maturation . The cells were then incubated at 37˚C in the presence of 1 mg / ml Lucifer yellow for the indicated times , and ﬂuorescence intensity was assessed by ﬂow cytometry . C , WT and HS1 2 / 2 BMDCs were incubated with FITC – zymosan particles ( green ) at 4˚C and warmed to 37˚C to induce uptake . Cells were ﬁxed and stained with Alexa Fluor 594 – phalloidin to reveal the actin distribution ( red ) . D , The percentage of cells containing FITC – zymosan particles over time was determined . Data represent means 6 SD from replicate coverslips of one representative experiment . The Journal of Immunology 5957 by gu e s t on A p r il 13 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . ji mm uno l . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m tagged HS1 and dynamin 2 constructs . As shown in Fig . 6 B , full - length HS1 and dynamin 2 could be coimmunoprecipitated from cells . This interaction does not require the Arp2 / 3 - or actin - binding domains of HS1 , as an N - terminal deletion mutant lack - ing these regions bound dynamin 2 efﬁciently . Indeed , on a mole - per - mole basis , this mutant showed . 200 - fold more binding to dynamin 2 compared with that of full - length HS1 . The enhanced binding ability of this HS1 truncation mutant also allowed de - tection of binding to endogenous dynamin 2 ( Fig . 6 B , “end” ) . Mutation of W465 within the SH3 domain of the HS1 D N mutant dramatically diminished dynamin 2 binding , conﬁrming that the SH3 domain of HS1 mediates interaction with dynamin 2 . Con - versely , a dynamin 2 mutant lacking the C - terminal proline - rich domain ( 41 ) failed to coimmunoprecipitate efﬁciently with either full - length HS1 or the HS1 deletion mutant ( Fig . 6 B , “ D PRD” ) . Low levels of association of HS1 and dynamin 2 were detectable under conditions where SH3 – PRD interactions were abrogated , suggesting that a secondary interaction outside these domains may exist . Nonetheless , our results indicate that HS1 and dynamin 2 interact primarily through binding of the HS1 SH3 domain to the proline - rich domain of dynamin 2 . Dynamin is known to drive the scission of plasma membrane invaginations during receptor - mediated endocytosis , and cells ex - pressing a dominant - negative dynamin mutant or treated with the dynamin inhibitor dynasore generate increased numbers of deep , wide - neck ( U - shaped ) and narrow - neck ( O - shaped ) endocytic in - vaginations ( 76 ) . To ask whether HS1 is required at the same step in endocytic trafﬁc , we analyzed plasma membrane invagi - nations in WT and HS1 2 / 2 BMDCs . Fig . 7 A shows examples of shallow pits and wide - neck invaginations ( top row ) , as well as narrow - neck invaginations ( bottom row ) found in WT cells . The number of these structures per linear micrometer of plasma membrane was determined as described in Materials and Meth - ods . As anticipated , treatment of WT cells with dynasore resulted in a signiﬁcant increase in the surface density of endocytic inva - ginations ( Fig . 7 B ) . These consisted primarily of deep invagina - tions with a wide neck . In contrast , HS1 2 / 2 DCs showed only about half as many endocytic invaginations as WT cells , and this FIGURE 4 . HS1 is necessary for efﬁcient receptor - mediated endocyto - sis . A – C , WT and HS1 2 / 2 BMDCs were incubated with [ 125 I ] transferrin ( A ) , [ 125 I ] OVA ( B ) , or [ 125 I ] GRP94 ( C ) at 4˚C for 1 h . Cells were then washed and warmed to 37˚C for the indicated times . At each time point , residual surface - bound proteins were removed by acid wash ( transferrin ) or pronase treatment ( GRP94 and OVA ) . Radioactivity in the cell pellets was then determined and uptake calculated . Data represent means 6 SD from independent experiments , each done in duplicate or triplicate . The number of binding sites for each protein did not differ between WT and HS1 2 / 2 BMDCs within experimental error . We calculate 6000 – 8500 binding sites for transferrin per cell , 20 , 000 – 40 , 000 sites for GRP94 , and ∼ 80 , 000 sites for OVA . FIGURE 5 . Analysis of ﬂuid - phase and receptor - mediated endocytosis by electron microscopy . WT ( A , C ) or HS1 2 / 2 ( B , D ) BMDCs were in - cubated with transferrin – HRP ( A , B ) for 15 min at 37˚C to load endocytic compartments via receptor - mediated endocytosis . Alternatively , BMDCs were incubated with soluble HRP ( C , D ) for 30 min at 37˚C to load the endocytic pathway via ﬂuid - phase endocytosis ( macropinocytosis ) . Cells were ﬁxed and processed with DAB to generate an electron - dense reaction product and visualized by transmission electron microscopy . Representa - tive images from three independent experiments are shown . Arrowheads indicate compartments ( early endosomes and macropinosomes ) ﬁlled with electron - dense HRP reaction product . Note the relative paucity of electron - dense deposits in the HS1 2 / 2 cells when HRP is delivered by receptor - mediated endocytosis ( compare A and B ) , but not macropinocytosis ( com - pare C and D ) . Scale bars , 2 m m . G , Golgi complex ; N , nucleus ; PM , plasma membrane ; V , macropinocytic vacuoles . 5958 HS1 - DEPENDENT Ag PRESENTATION IN DENDRITIC CELLS by gu e s t on A p r il 13 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . ji mm uno l . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m decrease was observed for both wide - neck and narrow - neck invag - inations . These data indicate that HS1 and dynamin affect distinct steps of endocytosis in DCs and support a model in which an HS1 - dependent step occurs early in the formation of membrane inva - ginations , whereas dynamin is needed to complete later steps of membrane deformation and vesicle scission . Discussion DC sentinel function depends on the ability of these cells to take up a wide variety of antigenic materials . This is achieved through a combination of phagocytosis , macropinocytosis , and receptor - mediated endocytosis ( 1 , 3 , 4 , 11 ) . We have found that HS1 plays an important role in this process by promoting receptor - mediated endocytosis of protein Ags . DCs from HS1 2 / 2 mice show diminished receptor - mediated endocytosis of multiple pro - teins and impaired presentation of exogenous protein - derived Ags on both MHC class I and MHC class II . The requirement for HS1 in Ag trafﬁcking and presentation appears to be restricted to receptor - mediated endocytic pathway . HS1 2 / 2 DCs presented peptide Ags efﬁciently , indicating that HS1 is not required for actin - dependent events at the DC side of the immunological synapse ( 27 , 77 – 79 ) . Moreover , although there is strong evidence that actin polymerization is important for mac - ropinocytosis and phagocytosis ( 12 , 14 , 80 ) , HS1 expression was not required for these processes . By extension , as we ﬁnd no cor - tactin expression in murine BMDCs ( 28 ) , cortactin family mem - bers generally are dispensable . Both macropinocytosis and phago - FIGURE 6 . The SH3 domain of HS1 interacts with the proline - rich domain of dynamin 2 . A , GST alone , the SH3 domain of HS1 fused to GST , or the inactive SH3 W → Y mutant fused to GST was immobilized on glutathione resin and incubated with DC lysates . Bound proteins were analyzed by SDS - PAGE and immunoblotting with anti - dynamin 2 , anti - WASp , or anti - WIP . Total , protein expression in whole - cell lysates . B , 293T cells were transiently transfected with full - length GFP - tagged dy - namin 2 ( GFP . Dyn2 FL , black arrowheads ) or a mutant lacking the pro - line - rich domain ( D PRD , gray arrowheads ) , together with FLAG - tagged HS1 ( FLAG . HS1 FL ) , an N - terminal deletion mutant of HS1 lacking the actin regulatory region ( D N ) , or the D N mutant bearing a point mutation in the SH3 domain ( D N W → Y ) . Cells were lysed , immunoprecipitated with anti - FLAG , and Western blots were probed as indicated . Note that the D PRD mutant is not detected by the anti - dynamin 2 ( which was generated against this C - terminal region of dynamin 2 ) but is readily detectable in the WCL using anti - GFP Ab . end , endogenous dynamin 2 ; * HS1 variants . WCL , whole - cell lysate from which immunoprecipitation was performed . FIGURE 7 . HS1 promotes endocytic invagination . A , Electron micro - graphs illustrating various stages in the process of coated vesicle forma - tion . All images are from WT BMDCs ; structures in HS1 2 / 2 BMDCs were comparable in morphology . Top row , Examples of shallow pits and wide - necked invaginations . Bottom row , Examples of narrow - neck invagina - tions . B , Quantitation of the frequency of the structures shown in A in WT cells , WT cells treated with 80 m M dynasore , and HS1 2 / 2 DCs . Cell proﬁles were photographed at random , and the number of structures in each category per linear micrometer of plasma membrane was determined as described in Materials and Methods . Values represent mean 6 SEM from three to four independent experiments , totaling 66 – 68 cells and 100 – 500 pits or invaginations per experimental condition . * * * p , 0 . 001 ( rel - ative to untreated WT cells ) . The Journal of Immunology 5959 by gu e s t on A p r il 13 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . ji mm uno l . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m cytosis are downregulated upon DC maturation ( 13 , 65 ) , whereas receptor - mediated endocytosis proceeds unabated in mature DCs ( 13 , 15 , 81 ) . Phagocytosis and macropinocytosis depend on the actin nucleating proteins WASp and WAVE , and the downregu - lation of these processes is linked to diminished activation of the Rho family GTPase CDC42 upstream of these events ( 13 ) . No - tably , HS1 differs from WASp and WAVE in that it does not de - pend on activation by Rho GTPases , and so is not subject to downregulation at this level . Indeed , we ﬁnd that HS1 expression is modestly upregulated upon DC maturation . Moreover , HS1 is enriched in podosomes , which are largely dissolved on DC mat - uration ( 28 ) , presumably increasing the pool of HS1 available to support endocytic functions in mature DCs . Our analysis of HS1 2 / 2 DCs shows a 2 - fold decrease in the maximal uptake of endocytosed proteins , yet these cells require 30 - to 100 - fold more protein Ag to achieve the same level of T cell activation as that of WT DCs . The assay we used for receptor - mediated endocytosis measures only a single , synchronized round of protein uptake . When multiplied by the many rounds of en - docytosis that take place within the 4 - h period of the Ag pulse , the defects we observe could readily account for at least 30 - to 50 - fold reduction in overall Ag uptake . Thus , the requirement for HS1 to facilitate endocytosis is likely to be the primary cause of the di - minished Ag presentation that we observe in HS1 - deﬁcient DCs . The ﬁnding that Ags taken up by phagocytosis and macro - pinocytosis are presented efﬁciently further supports this conclu - sion . Nonetheless , it is possible that HS1 is also required for additional intracellular steps of Ag trafﬁcking . Testing this pos - sibility will require quantitative analysis of the fate of the endo - cytosed pool of protein . Although the DC literature tends to focus on phagocytosis and macropinocytosis , receptor - mediated endocytosis is also an im - portant means of Ag uptake . Typically , it is argued that receptor - mediated endocytosis is particularly important at low ligand concentrations . While this is no doubt true , our side - by - side comparison of presentation of OVA - derived peptides after up - take by receptor - mediated endocytosis and macropinocytosis shows that receptor - mediated uptake is dominant even at very high Ag doses . DCs express numerous cell surface receptors that preferentially bind non - self molecules and take them up in a highly efﬁcient manner . OVA is taken up by mannose receptors ( 65 , 66 ) ( Fig . 2 C ) , which is important for uptake of pathogen - derived glycoproteins ( 82 – 84 ) . Uptake and cross - presentation of GRP94 – peptide complexes also require receptor - mediated endocytosis , though the relevant receptor ( s ) remain controversial ( 57 , 67 – 70 ) . Other receptors also play an important physiological role . Among these are the C - type lectin DC - SIGN , which promotes the endo - cytosis of HIV and other viruses and their presentation on MHC class I ( 85 – 88 ) . The multilectin receptor DEC205 plays a similar role ( 89 , 90 ) . Even Fc g Rs , which are best known for their role in phagocytosis , carry out receptor - mediated endocytosis of small immune complexes ( 91 – 94 ) . CD1b recycling occurs via receptor - mediated endocytosis and continues in mature DCs ( 81 ) , a phe - nomenon that has been proposed to be the basis of effective presentation of lipid Ags from mycobacteria , under conditions where presentation of Ags on MHC class II fails ( 95 ) . We show here that HS1 is required for receptor - mediated uptake via three distinct receptors , and it seems likely that this is a general re - quirement . Going forward , it will be interesting to ask whether HS1 expression has an important impact on DC function in vivo , particularly in the context of viruses , lipid Ags , or DC vaccines that rely on receptor - mediated uptake . Moreover , as HS1 is also expressed in B cells , it will be interesting to ask whether BCR - dependent uptake of Ags is also HS1 dependent . HS1 functions both as an actin regulatory protein and an adapter molecule , and it seems likely that both of these functions are called into play to promote receptor - mediated endocytosis . We show that HS1 interacts with dynamin 2 through binding of its C - terminal SH3 domain to the proline - rich domain of dynamin 2 , the same mechanism used to mediate cortactin – dynamin 2 interaction ( 41 ) . Notably , however , the endocytic phenotype of HS1 2 / 2 DCs does not mirror that of cells treated with the dynamin GTPase inhibitor dynasore . In keeping with studies in other cell types ( 76 ) , we found that treatment of DCs with dynasore led to the accumula - tion of deep endocytic invaginations . The accumulation of wide - necked ( U - shaped ) structures was predominant , though narrow - necked ( O - shaped ) endocytic invaginations were also observed . The latter structures are also seen in cells expressing dominant - negative dynamin mutants and are thought to represent a require - ment for dynamin in the ﬁssion of fully formed coated pits ( 9 , 96 ) . The U - shaped invaginations represent an earlier endocytic inter - mediate and are proposed to represent an additional requirement for dynamin in driving membrane deformation ( 76 ) . In contrast to dynamin - inhibited cells , HS1 - deﬁcient DCs exhibited abnormally low numbers of both U - shaped and O - shaped endocytic invagi - nations . The simplest interpretation of this ﬁnding is that HS1 is required for an early step in membrane invagination , preceding the deep invaginations formed by dynamin activity . These early intermediates are thought to be metastable ( 97 , 98 ) , perhaps explaining why no clear accumulation of shallow pits was ob - served in HS1 - deﬁcient DCs . This interpretation is consistent with a two - step model for dynamin function , in which dynamin ﬁrst serves as regulatory GTPase to ensure vectorial coat assembly and enhance membrane curvature , and subsequently , in an assem - bled state , uses GTPase - driven mechano - chemical activity to drive vesicle scission ( 96 ) . According to this model , SH3 domain - containing proteins such as HS1 sense the status of cargo load - ing , membrane curvature , and / or coat assembly and regulate this functional switch . In addition to binding dynamin 2 , HS1 activates the Arp2 / 3 complex , binds actin ﬁlaments , and interacts with the actin regu - latory proteins WASp and WIP ( 28 , 30 ) . Thus , it is also likely that HS1 promotes actin - dependent aspects of endocytosis . The liter - ature regarding the requirement for actin polymerization in en - docytosis is conﬂicting . In S . cerevisiae , actin recruitment occurs after clathrin coat formation and provides an essential force for membrane deformation ( 99 ) . In mammalian cells , however , results are variable and depend on the cell type and the nature of the endocytic structure ( 100 – 103 ) . Recent work from the Kirchhausen group ( 104 – 106 ) has shown that actin regulatory proteins are recruited to long - lived endocytic structures and are particularly important for internalization of large structures , such as clathrin plaques and some virus particles . On the basis of this work , it seems that actin polymerization provides the force needed to gen - erate oversized clathrin - coated structures and to overcome other obstacles , such as high membrane tension ( 107 ) . Because HS1 promotes the formation of branched - actin ﬁlaments , it may play a key role in this process . Importantly , the interactions of HS1 with the actin cytoskeleton and dynamin are likely to be coupled . Indeed , we ﬁnd that interactions between HS1 and dynamin are dramatically enhanced by deletion of the N - terminal actin regu - latory region of HS1 . This and similar observations regarding HS1 binding to WASp and WIP ( 28 ) are compatible with a model in which the N terminus of HS1 partially restricts availability of the SH3 domain , such that interaction with the actin cytoskeleton releases the SH3 domain and promotes binding to dynamin 2 and other molecules . This model explains our inability to coim - munoprecipitate endogenous dynamin 2 and HS1 , as the pool of 5960 HS1 - DEPENDENT Ag PRESENTATION IN DENDRITIC CELLS by gu e s t on A p r il 13 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . ji mm uno l . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m active HS1 would be selectively associated with the insoluble actin cytoskeleton . A positive feedback loop may also be at play , as engagement of the dynamin proline - rich domain by SH3 domains has been shown to promote dynamin GTPase activity ( 108 , 109 ) . Such a mechanism would promote the coupled as - sembly of actin and dynamin at endocytic invaginations . An important unresolved question is to what extent HS1 function is distinct from that of its morewidely expressed homolog cortactin . In non - hematopoietic cells , theweight of the evidence indicates that cortactin plays a key role in endocytic uptake ( 51 , 56 , 72 – 75 , 110 , 111 ) , although some studies challenge this view ( 112 , 113 ) . Cor - tactin is recruited to long - lived clathrin - rich regions of the mem - brane , and kinetic analysis shows that cortactin recruitment peaks at a late time point , close to the time of dynamin recruitment ( 72 , 104 ) . Furthermore , phosphorylation of cortactin promotes its as - sociation with dynamin ( 56 , 74 ) , and the tyrosine phosphorylation sites that have been linked to regulated cortactin function are conserved in HS1 . Given all the biochemical and cell biological similarities between cortactin and HS1 , why did hematopoietic lineages evolve a distinct family member ? There are , in fact , some important functional differences between HS1 and cortactin . The structural features necessary for F - actin binding are distinct ( 31 ) . Moreover , HS1 is less efﬁcient than cortactin at driving Arp2 / 3 complex - nucleated actin polymerization ( 30 ) . Actin binding pro - motes cortactin interaction with dynamin ( 74 ) , and our evidence suggests that the same is true for HS1 . Thus , the difference in mode of actin binding between HS1 and cortactin may translate into important differences in the mechanisms by which these pro - teins link the actin cytoskeleton to dynamin function . Because BMDCs from HS1 2 / 2 mice lack both HS1 and cortactin , they provide an ideal experimental system in which to carry out com - parative reconstitution studies to address this possibility . Acknowledgments We thank Drs . H . Cao and M . McNiven for providing dynamin constructs , Dr . T . Svitkina and the University of Pennsylvania Electron Microscopy Resource Laboratory for providing access to equipment for electron micros - copy , and Dr . A . Mantegazza for help with analysis of macropinocytosed and phagocytosed Ags . We thank Drs . T . Svitkina , M . Marks , and T . Laufer and members of the Burkhardt laboratory for helpful discussions . Disclosures The authors have no ﬁnancial conﬂicts of interest . References 1 . Watts , C . , and S . Amigorena . 2000 . Antigen trafﬁc pathways in dendritic cells . Trafﬁc 1 : 312 – 317 . 2 . Trombetta , E . S . , and I . Mellman . 2005 . Cell biology of antigen processing in vitro and in vivo . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 23 : 975 – 1028 . 3 . Norbury , C . C . 2006 . Drinking a lot is good for dendritic cells . Immunology 117 : 443 – 451 . 4 . Savina , A . , and S . Amigorena . 2007 . Phagocytosis and antigen presentation in dendritic cells . Immunol . Rev . 219 : 143 – 156 . 5 . Burgdorf , S . , C . Scho¨lz , A . Kautz , R . Tampe´ , and C . Kurts . 2008 . Spatial and mechanistic separation of cross - presentation and endogenous antigen presen - tation . Nat . Immunol . 9 : 558 – 566 . 6 . May , R . C . , and L . M . Machesky . 2001 . Phagocytosis and the actin cytoskel - eton . J . Cell Sci . 114 : 1061 – 1077 . 7 . Niedergang , F . , and P . Chavrier . 2004 . Signaling and membrane dynamics during phagocytosis : many roads lead to the phagos ( R ) ome . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 16 : 422 – 428 . 8 . Kerr , M . C . , and R . D . Teasdale . 2009 . Deﬁning macropinocytosis . Trafﬁc 10 : 364 – 371 . 9 . Schafer , D . A . 2002 . Coupling actin dynamics and membrane dynamics during endocytosis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 14 : 76 – 81 . 10 . Kaksonen , M . , C . P . Toret , and D . G . Drubin . 2006 . Harnessing actin dynamics for clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 : 404 – 414 . 11 . Banchereau , J . , F . Briere , C . Caux , J . Davoust , S . Lebecque , Y . J . Liu , B . Pulendran , and K . Palucka . 2000 . Immunobiology of dendritic cells . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 18 : 767 – 811 . 12 . Cox , D . , P . Chang , Q . Zhang , P . G . Reddy , G . M . Bokoch , and S . Greenberg . 1997 . Requirements for both Rac1 and Cdc42 in membrane rufﬂing and phagocytosis in leukocytes . J . Exp . Med . 186 : 1487 – 1494 . 13 . Garrett , W . S . , L . M . Chen , R . Kroschewski , M . Ebersold , S . Turley , S . Trombetta , J . E . Gala´n , and I . Mellman . 2000 . Developmental control of endocytosis in dendritic cells by Cdc42 . Cell 102 : 325 – 334 . 14 . West , M . A . , A . R . Prescott , E . L . Eskelinen , A . J . Ridley , and C . Watts . 2000 . Rac is required for constitutive macropinocytosis by dendritic cells but does not control its downregulation . Curr . Biol . 10 : 839 – 848 . 15 . Platt , C . D . , J . K . Ma , C . Chalouni , M . Ebersold , H . Bou - Reslan , R . A . Carano , I . Mellman , and L . Delamarre . 2010 . Mature dendritic cells use endocytic receptors to capture and present antigens . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 107 : 4287 – 4292 . 16 . Allenspach , E . J . , M . P . Lemos , P . M . Porrett , L . A . Turka , and T . M . Laufer . 2008 . Migratory and lymphoid - resident dendritic cells cooperate to efﬁciently prime naive CD4 T cells . Immunity 29 : 795 – 806 . 17 . Lou , Q . , T . F . Conway , Jr . , N . K . Egilmez , J . L . Loyall , S . H . Bernstein , R . J . Kelleher , Jr . , and R . B . Bankert . 2006 . B cell tumor vaccine enhanced by covalent attachment of immunoglobulin to surface proteins on dendritic cells . Clin . Immunol . 118 : 66 – 76 . 18 . Trumpfheller , C . , J . S . Finke , C . B . Lo´pez , T . M . Moran , B . Moltedo , H . Soares , Y . Huang , S . J . Schlesinger , C . G . Park , M . C . Nussenzweig , et al . 2006 . In - tensiﬁed and protective CD4 + T cell immunity in mice with anti - dendritic cell HIV gag fusion antibody vaccine . J . Exp . Med . 203 : 607 – 617 . 19 . Akutsu , Y . , H . Matsubara , T . Urashima , A . Komatsu , H . Sakata , T . Nishimori , Y . Yoneyama , I . Hoshino , K . Murakami , A . Usui , et al . 2007 . Combination of direct intratumoral administration of dendritic cells and irradiation induces strong systemic antitumor effect mediated by GRP94 / gp96 against squamous cell carcinoma in mice . Int . J . Oncol . 31 : 509 – 515 . 20 . Nchinda , G . , J . Kuroiwa , M . Oks , C . Trumpfheller , C . G . Park , Y . Huang , D . Hannaman , S . J . Schlesinger , O . Mizenina , M . C . Nussenzweig , et al . 2008 . The efﬁcacy of DNAvaccination is enhanced in mice by targeting the encoded protein to dendritic cells . J . Clin . Invest . 118 : 1427 – 1436 . 21 . Nchinda , G . , D . Amadu , C . Trumpfheller , O . Mizenina , K . Uberla , and R . M . Steinman . 2010 . Dendritic cell targeted HIV gag proteinvaccine provides help to a DNAvaccine including mobilization of protective CD8 + T cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 107 : 4281 – 4286 . 22 . Calle , Y . , H . C . Chou , A . J . Thrasher , and G . E . Jones . 2004 . Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein and the cytoskeletal dynamics of dendritic cells . J . Pathol . 204 : 460 – 469 . 23 . de Noronha , S . , S . Hardy , J . Sinclair , M . P . Blundell , J . Strid , O . Schulz , J . Zwirner , G . E . Jones , D . R . Katz , C . Kinnon , and A . J . Thrasher . 2005 . Impaired dendritic - cell homing in vivo in the absence of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein . Blood 105 : 1590 – 1597 . 24 . Snapper , S . B . , P . Meelu , D . Nguyen , B . M . Stockton , P . Bozza , F . W . Alt , F . S . Rosen , U . H . von Andrian , and C . Klein . 2005 . WASP deﬁciency leads to global defects of directed leukocyte migration in vitro and in vivo . J . Leukoc . Biol . 77 : 993 – 998 . 25 . Chou , H . C . , I . M . Anto´n , M . R . Holt , C . Curcio , S . Lanzardo , A . Worth , S . Burns , A . J . Thrasher , G . E . Jones , and Y . Calle . 2006 . WIP regulates the stability and localization of WASP to podosomes in migrating dendritic cells . Curr . Biol . 16 : 2337 – 2344 . 26 . Olivier , A . , L . Jeanson - Leh , G . Bouma , D . Compagno , J . Blondeau , K . Seye , S . Charrier , S . Burns , A . J . Thrasher , O . Danos , et al . 2006 . A partial down - regulation of WASP is sufﬁcient to inhibit podosome formation in dendritic cells . Mol . Ther . 13 : 729 – 737 . 27 . Pulecio , J . , E . Tagliani , A . Scholer , F . Prete , L . Fetler , O . R . Burrone , and F . Benvenuti . 2008 . Expression of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein in den - dritic cells regulates synapse formation and activation of naive CD8 + T cells . J . Immunol . 181 : 1135 – 1142 . 28 . Dehring , D . A . , F . Clarke , B . G . Ricart , Y . Huang , T . S . Gomez , E . K . Williamson , D . A . Hammer , D . D . Billadeau , Y . Argon , and J . K . Burkhardt . 2011 . Hematopoietic lineage cell - speciﬁc protein 1 functions in concert with the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein to promote podosome array organization and chemotaxis in dendritic cells . J . Immunol . 186 : 4805 – 4818 . 29 . van Rossum , A . G . , E . Schuuring - Scholtes , V . van Buuren - van Seggelen , P . M . Kluin , and E . Schuuring . 2005 . Comparative genome analysis of cortactin and HS1 : the signiﬁcance of the F - actin binding repeat domain . BMC Genomics 6 : 15 . 30 . Uruno , T . , P . Zhang , J . Liu , J . J . Hao , and X . Zhan . 2003 . Haematopoietic lineage cell - speciﬁc protein 1 ( HS1 ) promotes actin - related protein ( Arp ) 2 / 3 complex - mediated actin polymerization . Biochem . J . 371 : 485 – 493 . 31 . Hao , J . J . , J . Zhu , K . Zhou , N . Smith , and X . Zhan . 2005 . The coiled - coil domain is required for HS1 to bind to F - actin and activate Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Biol . Chem . 280 : 37988 – 37994 . 32 . Burkhardt , J . K . , E . Carrizosa , and M . H . Shaffer . 2008 . The actin cytoskeleton in T cell activation . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 26 : 233 – 259 . 33 . Higgs , H . N . 2002 . Actin nucleation : cortactin caught in the act . Curr . Biol . 12 : R593 – R595 . 34 . Weaver , A . M . , J . E . Heuser , A . V . Karginov , W . L . Lee , J . T . Parsons , and J . A . Cooper . 2002 . Interaction of cortactin and N - WASp with Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 12 : 1270 – 1278 . 35 . Yamanashi , Y . , M . Okada , T . Semba , T . Yamori , H . Umemori , S . Tsunasawa , K . Toyoshima , D . Kitamura , T . Watanabe , and T . Yamamoto . 1993 . Identiﬁ - cation of HS1 protein as a major substrate of protein - tyrosine kinase ( s ) upon B - The Journal of Immunology 5961 by gu e s t on A p r il 13 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . ji mm uno l . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m cell antigen receptor - mediated signaling . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 90 : 3631 – 3635 . 36 . Takemoto , Y . , M . Furuta , X . K . Li , W . J . Strong - Sparks , and Y . Hashimoto . 1995 . LckBP1 , a proline - rich protein expressed in haematopoietic lineage cells , directly associates with the SH3 domain of protein tyrosine kinase p56lck . EMBO J . 14 : 3403 – 3414 . 37 . Ruzzene , M . , A . M . Brunati , O . Marin , A . Donella - Deana , and L . A . Pinna . 1996 . SH2 domains mediate the sequential phosphorylation of HS1 protein by p72syk and Src - related protein tyrosine kinases . Biochemistry 35 : 5327 – 5332 . 38 . Takemoto , Y . , M . Sato , M . Furuta , and Y . Hashimoto . 1996 . Distinct binding patterns of HS1 to the Src SH2 and SH3 domains reﬂect possible mechanisms of recruitment and activation of downstream molecules . Int . Immunol . 8 : 1699 – 1705 . 39 . Gomez , T . S . , S . D . McCarney , E . Carrizosa , C . M . Labno , E . O . Comiskey , J . C . Nolz , P . Zhu , B . D . Freedman , M . R . Clark , D . J . Rawlings , et al . 2006 . HS1 functions as an essential actin - regulatory adaptor protein at the immune synapse . Immunity 24 : 741 – 752 . 40 . Carrizosa , E . , T . S . Gomez , C . M . Labno , D . A . Klos Dehring , X . Liu , B . D . Freedman , D . D . Billadeau , and J . K . Burkhardt . 2009 . Hematopoietic lineage cell - speciﬁc protein 1 is recruited to the immunological synapse by IL - 2 - inducible T cell kinase and regulates phospholipase Cgamma1 microcluster dynamics during T cell spreading . J . Immunol . 183 : 7352 – 7361 . 41 . McNiven , M . A . , L . Kim , E . W . Krueger , J . D . Orth , H . Cao , and T . W . Wong . 2000 . Regulated interactions between dynamin and the actin - binding protein cortactin modulate cell shape . J . Cell Biol . 151 : 187 – 198 . 42 . Sawabe , T . , T . Horiuchi , R . Koga , H . Tsukamoto , T . Kojima , S . Harashima , Y . Kikuchi , J . Otsuka , H . Mitoma , S . Yoshizawa , et al . 2003 . Aberrant HS1 molecule in a patient with systemic lupus erythematosus . Genes Immun . 4 : 122 – 131 . 43 . Otsuka , J . , T . Horiuchi , S . Yoshizawa , H . Tsukamoto , T . Sawabe , Y . Kikuchi , D . Himeji , T . Koyama , H . Mitoma , T . Watanabe , and M . Harada . 2004 . As - sociation of a four - amino acid residue insertion polymorphism of the HS1 gene with systemic lupus erythematosus : molecular and functional analysis . Arthritis Rheum . 50 : 871 – 881 . 44 . Scielzo , C . , P . Ghia , A . Conti , A . Bachi , G . Guida , M . Geuna , M . Alessio , and F . Caligaris - Cappio . 2005 . HS1 protein is differentially expressed in chronic lymphocytic leukemia patient subsets with good or poor prognoses . J . Clin . Invest . 115 : 1644 – 1650 . 45 . Muzio , M . , C . Scielzo , M . Frenquelli , A . Bachi , M . De Palma , M . Alessio , P . Ghia , and F . Caligaris - Cappio . 2007 . HS1 complexes with cytoskeleton adapters in normal and malignant chronic lymphocytic leukemia B cells . Leukemia 21 : 2067 – 2070 . 46 . Scielzo , C . , M . T . Bertilaccio , G . Simonetti , A . Dagklis , E . Ten Hacken , C . Fazi , M . Muzio , V . Caiolfa , U . Restuccia , A . Bachi , et al . 2010 . HS1 has a central role in the trafﬁcking and homing of leukemic B cells . Blood 116 : 3537 – 3546 . 47 . Fukuda , T . , D . Kitamura , I . Taniuchi , Y . Maekawa , L . E . Benhamou , P . Sarthou , and T . Watanabe . 1995 . Restoration of surface IgM - mediated apoptosis in an anti - IgM - resistant variant of WEHI - 231 lymphoma cells by HS1 , a protein - tyrosine kinase substrate . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 92 : 7302 – 7306 . 48 . Taniuchi , I . , D . Kitamura , Y . Maekawa , T . Fukuda , H . Kishi , and T . Watanabe . 1995 . Antigen - receptor induced clonal expansion and deletion of lymphocytes are impaired in mice lacking HS1 protein , a substrate of the antigen - receptor - coupled tyrosine kinases . EMBO J . 14 : 3664 – 3678 . 49 . Butler , B . , D . H . Kastendieck , and J . A . Cooper . 2008 . Differently phosphor - ylated forms of the cortactin homolog HS1 mediate distinct functions in natural killer cells . Nat . Immunol . 9 : 887 – 897 . 50 . Schafer , D . A . , S . A . Weed , D . Binns , A . V . Karginov , J . T . Parsons , and J . A . Cooper . 2002 . Dynamin2 and cortactin regulate actin assembly and ﬁla - ment organization . Curr . Biol . 12 : 1852 – 1857 . 51 . Cao , H . , J . D . Orth , J . Chen , S . G . Weller , J . E . Heuser , and M . A . McNiven . 2003 . Cortactin is a component of clathrin - coated pits and participates in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Mol . Cell . Biol . 23 : 2162 – 2170 . 52 . Kowalski , J . R . , C . Egile , S . Gil , S . B . Snapper , R . Li , and S . M . Thomas . 2005 . Cortactin regulates cell migration through activation of N - WASP . J . Cell Sci . 118 : 79 – 87 . 53 . Luxenburg , C . , J . T . Parsons , L . Addadi , and B . Geiger . 2006 . Involvement of the Src - cortactin pathway in podosome formation and turnover during polari - zation of cultured osteoclasts . J . Cell Sci . 119 : 4878 – 4888 . 54 . Webb , B . A . , R . Eves , and A . S . Mak . 2006 . Cortactin regulates podosome formation : roles of the protein interaction domains . Exp . Cell Res . 312 : 760 – 769 . 55 . Buday , L . , and J . Downward . 2007 . Roles of cortactin in tumor pathogenesis . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1775 : 263 – 273 . 56 . Zhu , J . , D . Yu , X . C . Zeng , K . Zhou , and X . Zhan . 2007 . Receptor - mediated endocytosis involves tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin . J . Biol . Chem . 282 : 16086 – 16094 . 57 . Biswas , C . , U . Sriram , B . Ciric , O . Ostrovsky , S . Gallucci , and Y . Argon . 2006 . The N - terminal fragment of GRP94 is sufﬁcient for peptide presentation via professional antigen - presenting cells . Int . Immunol . 18 : 1147 – 1157 . 58 . Liu , J . , A . G . Tse , H . C . Chang , J . Liu , J . Wang , R . E . Hussey , Y . Chishti , B . Rheinhold , R . Spoerl , S . G . Nathenson , et al . 1996 . Crystallization of a deglycosylated T cell receptor ( TCR ) complexed with an anti - TCR Fab frag - ment . J . Biol . Chem . 271 : 33639 – 33646 . 59 . Vogen , S . , T . Gidalevitz , C . Biswas , B . B . Simen , E . Stein , F . Gulmen , and Y . Argon . 2002 . Radicicol - sensitive peptide binding to the N - terminal portion of GRP94 . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 40742 – 40750 . 60 . Grifﬁths , G . , G . Warren , P . Quinn , O . Mathieu - Costello , and H . Hoppeler . 1984 . Density of newly synthesized plasma membrane proteins in intracellular mem - branes . I . Stereological studies . J . Cell Biol . 98 : 2133 – 2141 . 61 . Burns , S . , S . J . Hardy , J . Buddle , K . L . Yong , G . E . Jones , and A . J . Thrasher . 2004 . Maturation of DC is associated with changes in motile characteristics and adherence . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 57 : 118 – 132 . 62 . Al - Alwan , M . M . , G . Rowden , T . D . Lee , and K . A . West . 2001 . Fascin is involved in the antigen presentation activity of mature dendritic cells . J . Immunol . 166 : 338 – 345 . 63 . Pereira , S . R . , V . M . Fac¸a , G . G . Gomes , R . Chammas , A . M . Fontes , D . T . Covas , and L . J . Greene . 2005 . Changes in the proteomic proﬁle during differentiation and maturation of human monocyte - derived dendritic cells stimulated with granulocyte macrophage colony stimulating factor / interleukin - 4 and lipopolysaccharide . Proteomics 5 : 1186 – 1198 . 64 . Dautry - Varsat , A . 1986 . Receptor - mediated endocytosis : the intracellular journey of transferrin and its receptor . Biochimie 68 : 375 – 381 . 65 . Sallusto , F . , M . Cella , C . Danieli , and A . Lanzavecchia . 1995 . Dendritic cells use macropinocytosis and the mannose receptor to concentrate macromolecules in the major histocompatibility complex class II compartment : downregulation by cytokines and bacterial products . J . Exp . Med . 182 : 389 – 400 . 66 . Burgdorf , S . , V . Lukacs - Kornek , and C . Kurts . 2006 . The mannose receptor mediates uptake of soluble but not of cell - associated antigen for cross - pre - sentation . J . Immunol . 176 : 6770 – 6776 . 67 . Wassenberg , J . J . , C . Dezfulian , and C . V . Nicchitta . 1999 . Receptor mediated and ﬂuid phase pathways for internalization of the ER Hsp90 chaperone GRP94 in murine macrophages . J . Cell Sci . 112 : 2167 – 2175 . 68 . Singh - Jasuja , H . , R . E . Toes , P . Spee , C . Mu¨nz , N . Hilf , S . P . Schoenberger , P . Ricciardi - Castagnoli , J . Neefjes , H . G . Rammensee , D . Arnold - Schild , and H . Schild . 2000 . Cross - presentation of glycoprotein 96 - associated antigens on major histocompatibility complex class I molecules requires receptor - mediated endocytosis . J . Exp . Med . 191 : 1965 – 1974 . 69 . Berwin , B . , J . P . Hart , S . Rice , C . Gass , S . V . Pizzo , S . R . Post , and C . V . Nicchitta . 2003 . Scavenger receptor - A mediates gp96 / GRP94 and cal - reticulin internalization by antigen - presenting cells . EMBO J . 22 : 6127 – 6136 . 70 . Jockheck - Clark , A . R . , E . V . Bowers , M . B . Totonchy , J . Neubauer , S . V . Pizzo , and C . V . Nicchitta . 2010 . Re - examination of CD91 function in GRP94 ( gly - coprotein 96 ) surface binding , uptake , and peptide cross - presentation . J . Im - munol . 185 : 6819 – 6830 . 71 . Kinley , A . W . , S . A . Weed , A . M . Weaver , A . V . Karginov , E . Bissonette , J . A . Cooper , and J . T . Parsons . 2003 . Cortactin interacts with WIP in regulating Arp2 / 3 activation and membrane protrusion . Curr . Biol . 13 : 384 – 393 . 72 . Merriﬁeld , C . J . , D . Perrais , and D . Zenisek . 2005 . Coupling between clathrin - coated - pit invagination , cortactin recruitment , and membrane scission observed in live cells . Cell 121 : 593 – 606 . 73 . Sauvonnet , N . , A . Dujeancourt , and A . Dautry - Varsat . 2005 . Cortactin and dynamin are required for the clathrin - independent endocytosis of gammac cytokine receptor . J . Cell Biol . 168 : 155 – 163 . 74 . Zhu , J . , K . Zhou , J . J . Hao , J . Liu , N . Smith , and X . Zhan . 2005 . Regulation of cortactin / dynamin interaction by actin polymerization during the ﬁssion of clathrin - coated pits . J . Cell Sci . 118 : 807 – 817 . 75 . Cao , H . , J . Chen , E . W . Krueger , and M . A . McNiven . 2010 . SRC - mediated phosphorylation of dynamin and cortactin regulates the “constitutive” endo - cytosis of transferrin . Mol . Cell . Biol . 30 : 781 – 792 . 76 . Macia , E . , M . Ehrlich , R . Massol , E . Boucrot , C . Brunner , and T . Kirchhausen . 2006 . Dynasore , a cell - permeable inhibitor of dynamin . Dev . Cell 10 : 839 – 850 . 77 . Al - Alwan , M . M . , G . Rowden , T . D . Lee , and K . A . West . 2001 . The dendritic cell cytoskeleton is critical for the formation of the immunological synapse . J . Immunol . 166 : 1452 – 1456 . 78 . Al - Alwan , M . M . , R . S . Liwski , S . M . Haeryfar , W . H . Baldridge , D . W . Hoskin , G . Rowden , and K . A . West . 2003 . Cutting edge : dendritic cell actin cytoskeletal polarization during immunological synapse formation is highly antigen - dependent . J . Immunol . 171 : 4479 – 4483 . 79 . Rothoeft , T . , S . Balkow , M . Krummen , S . Beissert , G . Varga , K . Loser , P . Oberbanscheidt , F . van den Boom , and S . Grabbe . 2006 . Structure and du - ration of contact between dendritic cells and T cells are controlled by T cell activation state . Eur . J . Immunol . 36 : 3105 – 3117 . 80 . Park , H . , and D . Cox . 2009 . Cdc42 regulates Fc gamma receptor - mediated phagocytosis through the activation and phosphorylation of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) and neural - WASP . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 : 4500 – 4508 . 81 . van der Wel , N . N . , M . Sugita , D . M . Fluitsma , X . Cao , G . Schreibelt , M . B . Brenner , and P . J . Peters . 2003 . CD1 and major histocompatibility complex II molecules follow a different course during dendritic cell maturation . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 : 3378 – 3388 . 82 . Apostolopoulos , V . , and I . F . McKenzie . 2001 . Role of the mannose receptor in the immune response . Curr . Mol . Med . 1 : 469 – 474 . 83 . Taylor , P . R . , S . Gordon , and L . Martinez - Pomares . 2005 . The mannose re - ceptor : linking homeostasis and immunity through sugar recognition . Trends Immunol . 26 : 104 – 110 . 84 . Li , J . , H . Jiang , W . Wen , J . Zheng , and G . Xu . 2010 . The dendritic cell mannose receptor mediates allergen internalization and maturation involving notch 1 signalling . Clin . Exp . Immunol . 162 : 251 – 261 . 85 . Alvarez , C . P . , F . Lasala , J . Carrillo , O . Mun˜iz , A . L . Corbı´ , and R . Delgado . 2002 . C - type lectins DC - SIGN and L - SIGN mediate cellular entry by Ebola virus in cis and in trans . J . Virol . 76 : 6841 – 6844 . 86 . Engering , A . , T . B . Geijtenbeek , S . J . van Vliet , M . Wijers , E . van Liempt , N . Demaurex , A . Lanzavecchia , J . Fransen , C . G . Figdor , V . Piguet , and Y . van 5962 HS1 - DEPENDENT Ag PRESENTATION IN DENDRITIC CELLS by gu e s t on A p r il 13 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . ji mm uno l . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Kooyk . 2002 . The dendritic cell - speciﬁc adhesion receptor DC - SIGN inter - nalizes antigen for presentation to T cells . J . Immunol . 168 : 2118 – 2126 . 87 . Moris , A . , C . Nobile , F . Buseyne , F . Porrot , J . P . Abastado , and O . Schwartz . 2004 . DC - SIGN promotes exogenous MHC - I - restricted HIV - 1 antigen pre - sentation . Blood 103 : 2648 – 2654 . 88 . Cambi , A . , I . Beeren , B . Joosten , J . A . Fransen , and C . G . Figdor . 2009 . The C - type lectin DC - SIGN internalizes soluble antigens and HIV - 1 virions via a clathrin - dependent mechanism . Eur . J . Immunol . 39 : 1923 – 1928 . 89 . Mahnke , K . , M . Guo , S . Lee , H . Sepulveda , S . L . Swain , M . Nussenzweig , and R . M . Steinman . 2000 . The dendritic cell receptor for endocytosis , DEC - 205 , can recycle and enhance antigen presentation via major histocompatibility complex class II - positive lysosomal compartments . J . Cell Biol . 151 : 673 – 684 . 90 . Kamphorst , A . O . , P . Guermonprez , D . Dudziak , and M . C . Nussenzweig . 2010 . Route of antigen uptake differentially impacts presentation by dendritic cells and activated monocytes . J . Immunol . 185 : 3426 – 3435 . 91 . Hedin , U . , K . Stenseth , and J . Thyberg . 1984 . Receptor - mediated endocytosis of immunoglobulin - coated colloidal gold particles in cultured mouse peritoneal macrophages . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 35 : 41 – 48 . 92 . Tse , S . M . , W . Furuya , E . Gold , A . D . Schreiber , K . Sandvig , R . D . Inman , and S . Grinstein . 2003 . Differential role of actin , clathrin , and dynamin in Fc gamma receptor - mediated endocytosis and phagocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 3331 – 3338 . 93 . Huang , Z . Y . , D . R . Barreda , R . G . Worth , Z . K . Indik , M . K . Kim , P . Chien , and A . D . Schreiber . 2006 . Differential kinase requirements in human and mouse Fc - gamma receptor phagocytosis and endocytosis . J . Leukoc . Biol . 80 : 1553 – 1562 . 94 . Andersson , L . I . , P . Hellman , and H . Eriksson . 2008 . Receptor - mediated en - docytosis of particles by peripheral dendritic cells . Hum . Immunol . 69 : 625 – 633 . 95 . Hava , D . L . , N . van der Wel , N . Cohen , C . C . Dascher , D . Houben , L . Leo´n , S . Agarwal , M . Sugita , M . van Zon , S . C . Kent , et al . 2008 . Evasion of peptide , but not lipid antigen presentation , through pathogen - induced dendritic cell maturation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 : 11281 – 11286 . 96 . Mettlen , M . , T . Pucadyil , R . Ramachandran , and S . L . Schmid . 2009 . Dis - secting dynamin’s role in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 37 : 1022 – 1026 . 97 . Ehrlich , M . , W . Boll , A . Van Oijen , R . Hariharan , K . Chandran , M . L . Nibert , and T . Kirchhausen . 2004 . Endocytosis by random initiation and stabilization of clathrin - coated pits . Cell 118 : 591 – 605 . 98 . Loerke , D . , M . Mettlen , D . Yarar , K . Jaqaman , H . Jaqaman , G . Danuser , and S . L . Schmid . 2009 . Cargo and dynamin regulate clathrin - coated pit maturation . PLoS Biol . 7 : e57 . 99 . Kaksonen , M . , C . P . Toret , and D . G . Drubin . 2005 . A modular design for the clathrin - and actin - mediated endocytosis machinery . Cell 123 : 305 – 320 . 100 . Merriﬁeld , C . J . , B . Qualmann , M . M . Kessels , and W . Almers . 2004 . Neural Wiskott Aldrich Syndrome Protein ( N - WASP ) and the Arp2 / 3 complex are recruited to sites of clathrin - mediated endocytosis in cultured ﬁbroblasts . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 83 : 13 – 18 . 101 . Yarar , D . , C . M . Waterman - Storer , and S . L . Schmid . 2005 . A dynamic actin cytoskeleton functions at multiple stages of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 : 964 – 975 . 102 . Boucrot , E . , S . Saffarian , R . Massol , T . Kirchhausen , and M . Ehrlich . 2006 . Role of lipids and actin in the formation of clathrin - coated pits . Exp . Cell Res . 312 : 4036 – 4048 . 103 . Batchelder , E . M . , and D . Yarar . 2010 . Differential requirements for clathrin - dependent endocytosis at sites of cell - substrate adhesion . Mol . Biol . Cell 21 : 3070 – 3079 . 104 . Cureton , D . K . , R . H . Massol , S . Saffarian , T . L . Kirchhausen , and S . P . Whelan . 2009 . Vesicular stomatitis virus enters cells through vesicles incompletely coated with clathrin that depend upon actin for internalization . PLoS Pathog . 5 : e1000394 . 105 . Saffarian , S . , E . Cocucci , and T . Kirchhausen . 2009 . Distinct dynamics of endocytic clathrin - coated pits and coated plaques . PLoS Biol . 7 : e1000191 . 106 . Cureton , D . K . , R . H . Massol , S . P . Whelan , and T . Kirchhausen . 2010 . The length of vesicular stomatitis virus particles dictates a need for actin assembly during clathrin - dependent endocytosis . PLoS Pathog . 6 : e1001127 . 107 . Liu , A . P . , D . Loerke , S . L . Schmid , and G . Danuser . 2009 . Global and local regulation of clathrin - coated pit dynamics detected on patterned substrates . Biophys . J . 97 : 1038 – 1047 . 108 . Gout , I . , R . Dhand , I . D . Hiles , M . J . Fry , G . Panayotou , P . Das , O . Truong , N . F . Totty , J . Hsuan , G . W . Booker , et al . 1993 . The GTPase dynamin binds to and is activated by a subset of SH3 domains . Cell 75 : 25 – 36 . 109 . Scaife , R . M . , and R . L . Margolis . 1997 . The role of the PH domain and SH3 binding domains in dynamin function . Cell . Signal . 9 : 395 – 401 . 110 . Chen , L . , Z . W . Wang , J . W . Zhu , and X . Zhan . 2006 . Roles of cortactin , an actin polymerization mediator , in cell endocytosis . Acta Biochim . Biophys . Sin . ( Shanghai ) 38 : 95 – 103 . 111 . Williams , M . R . , J . C . Markey , M . A . Doczi , and A . D . Morielli . 2007 . An essential role for cortactin in the modulation of the potassium channel Kv1 . 2 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 104 : 17412 – 17417 . 112 . Barroso , C . , S . E . Rodenbusch , M . D . Welch , and D . G . Drubin . 2006 . A role for cortactin in Listeria monocytogenes invasion of NIH 3T3 cells , but not in its intracellular motility . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 63 : 231 – 243 . 113 . Lai , F . P . , M . Szczodrak , J . M . Oelkers , M . Ladwein , F . Acconcia , S . Benesch , S . Auinger , J . Faix , J . V . Small , S . Polo , et al . 2009 . Cortactin promotes mi - gration and platelet - derived growth factor - induced actin reorganization by signaling to Rho - GTPases . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 : 3209 – 3223 . The Journal of Immunology 5963 by gu e s t on A p r il 13 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . ji mm uno l . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m