Distributed Cognition as a Theoretical Framework for HCI : Don ' t Throw the Baby Out With the Bathwater — The Importance of the Cursor in Air Traffic Control Christine A . Halverson August 1994 Report 9403 Department of Cognitive Science University of California , San Diego La Jolla , California 92093 - 0515 Copies of this report are available for $ 5 . 00 each from the Department of Cognitive Science , UCSD , La Jolla , CA 92093 - 0515 . A PostScript version of this report is available by anonymous ftp from cogsci . ucsd . edu in / pub / tr . Copyright © 1994 by Christine A . Halverson . Distributed Cognition as a Theoretical Framework for HCI : Don ' t Throw the Baby out with the Bathwater – the Importance of the Cursor in Air Traffic Control 1 Christine A . Halverson Department of Cognitive Science , 0515 University of California , San Diego 9500 Gilman Drive La Jolla CA , 92093 - 0515 USA email : halverso @ cogsci . ucsd . edu PH : 619 - 534 - 4348 FAX : 619 - 534 - 1128 Introduction Two of the roles of theory in human computer interaction ( HCI ) are to aid design and analysis . However , theories can often be unwieldy in their application . Thus the demonstration of a particular theory in application to a problem in HCI may be the best demonstration of that theory ' s utility . In this paper , I present the theory of distributed cognition and apply it to the analysis of an automation tool for air traffic control ( ATC ) . This example demonstrates how : 1 ) the theory of distributed cognition influences and informs every step of the process of analysis and redesign ; 2 ) any interaction is embedded in a domain and thus a socio - cultural context that must be considered ; and 3 ) that understanding what to retain of an existing design is as important as the evaluation of enhancements . 1 Originally presented as a position paper for the InterCHI ' 93 Workshop – Rethinking Theoretic Frameworks for Human - Computer Interaction . Yvonne Rogers , Liam Bannon , and Grahm Button , Chairs . Research support was provided by cooperative agreement NCC2 - 591 to Edwin Hutchins from the Ames Research Center of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( NASA ) in the Safety / Automation in Aviation Program . Everett Palmer served as technical monitor . Additional support was provided by the Flight Systems and Simulation Research Division , Center TRACON Automation System Project , also at NASA - Ames Research Center . Initially under Tom Davis as supervisor , then under NASA Grant NAG2 - 873 . Len Tobias served as technical monitor . I am indebted to Ed Hutchins , Robert Bowdidge , Seana Coulson , and Yvonne Rogers for their input and comments . Distributed Cognition as a Theoretical Framework for HCI C . Halverson 2 A Domain , A Problem and A Theory ATC Automation In the summer of 1991 I became involved with a group that was developing automation tools for air traffic control ( ATC ) . The Center TRACON Automation System , or CTAS , is a comprehensive ATC automation system , developed at NASA Ames Research Center , for handling the flow of arrival traffic in congested enroute and terminal airspace ( Erzberger , 1992 ) . It integrates three air traffic environments — Center , Terminal Radar Approach Control ( TRACON ) , and traffic management — in a way that both safely maximizes capacity and is usable for the controller . CTAS provides intelligent decision support to air traffic controllers in each of these three environments . The tool that is the focus of this paper is the Final Approach Spacing Tool ( FAST ) . Designed for the TRACON controller , FAST provides decision support in the form of speed and turn advisories . These advisories are presented via a graphical interface integrated with the current radar display . The process used to develop these automation tools is what HCI practitioners would characterize as user - centered design . The researcher - developers " sat in " 2 with controllers in the field and observed how they performed their jobs . An extensive period of design and testing at NASA then commenced . The test environment simulated an air traffic control facility using computer displays worked by retired controllers and experienced pilots . ( Davis , Erzberger , & Bergeron , 1989 ; Erzberger & Nedell , 1989 ; Tobias , Volkers , & Erzberger , 1989 ; Davis , Erzberger , Green , & Nedell , 1991 ) . The Problem and the Theory Feedback from the controllers during testing was used to adapt the design . By the summer of 1991 the project had reached a stage where the controllers were comfortable with the automation - generated advisories , and were demanding more realistic simulations with greater complexity . However , no one understood whether the controllers were actually using the advisories as intended , if at all . To determine how controllers were using the tool , I 2 The notion of " sitting in " with a controller involves sitting with them at their work station , usually plugged in and listening to their communications , while they do their normal work . Distributed Cognition as a Theoretical Framework for HCI C . Halverson 3 proposed an analysis using the theoretical framework of distributed cognition ( Hutchins , in press ) . This theoretical perspective has been previously applied in other aviation contexts ( Halverson , 1991 ; Hutchins , submitted ; Hutchins & Klausen , 1992 ; Hutchins & Palen , 1993 ) , as well as in other domains ( Flor , 1991 ; Flor & Hutchins , 1991 ; Hutchins , 1990 ; Hutchins , 1991 ) . Distributed cognition is a theoretical framework that differs from mainstream cognitive science by not privileging the individual human actor as the unit of analysis . Distributed cognition acknowledges that in a vast majority of cases cognitive work is not being done in isolation inside our heads but is distributed among people , between persons and artifacts , and across time . This has a natural fit for HCI , where the behavior we ' re interested in is the interaction of the whole collection – the system of people and artifacts . 3 What makes a system cognitive is the presence of processes applied to representational states that result in cognitive work . Tracking the representational states can uncover the specific cognitive processes being employed . In a system , these representational states can be directly observable . While the movement of the boundary of the unit of analysis from individual to system facilitates observation , there is still the difficult task of deciding which observed representations are actually relevant representational states for a particular cognitive activity . Theory and domain expertise work together during observation to aid an analyst in determining these task relevant representational states . The observational method employed within the distributed cognition framework draws on anthropology and sociology . However , the method differs from these others fields by the pervasive influence of the distributed cognition theory . 3 These are systems in the sense that they are collections of entities over which the cognitive work is distributed for a particular task or activity . An individual can of course be viewed as a system displaying distributed cognition at the neuronal level . However , since HCI is concerned with designing for collections of computers and people , it is the more generic sense of system as a collection that I use here . Distributed Cognition as a Theoretical Framework for HCI C . Halverson 4 Distributed Cognition Theory + domain expertise Phenomenon - > recording - > encoding - > analysis - > design / redesign Figure 1 . Influence of theory and domain expertise on the process of analysis . Figure 1 sketches the process involved in the analysis of a particular phenomenon . Each step in the analysis process is influenced by both the theory and domain expertise . This can be best shown by example . Application of the Theory to the Domain : An Example The problem the CTAS project faces is one shared by many HCI practitioners . It is important to know if a design is being used as it was intended . When a design is being used differently than intended , then it is important to discover if that use is compatible with current domain practice . Finally , since most designs add to , or replace existing systems , we must be sure that the best aspects of the present system are retained . To answer these questions requires an understanding of the appropriate context . The CTAS project requires domain knowledge of air traffic control ( ATC ) . Although I had three years of experience as a controller , I did not have any experience in terminal area control , the domain for which FAST was designed . To enhance my domain knowledge , I started by sitting in with controllers in a working Terminal Radar Approach Control ( TRACON ) . Observations at the TRACON produced field notes that were influenced by both my previous knowledge of the domain and the theory of distributed cognition . Domain knowledge helps focus on task relevant observations . This expertise also makes it difficult to see some subtle actions as meaningful enough to record , 4 even though such small subtle occurrences may be important . The theory , on the other hand , stipulates the examination of task relevant representational states . During field observations , this stipulation shifted my perspective from activities that seemed important based on my experience to the need to identify representations in terms of representational 4 The job of an ethnographer , as compared to a domain expert , is to make explicit what is implicit to a domain participant . This is done by making explicit the grounds for interpretation of an observation , in addition to explicating the phenomenon . Distributed Cognition as a Theoretical Framework for HCI C . Halverson 5 state for cognitive functions . For example , with this new focus issuing a clearance for an aircraft to climb is task relevant , while a discussion of how an emergency was handled on last night ' s shift , is probably not . However , within the structure of that verbal clearance only the cleared altitude and the direction of change may be task relevant representational states . Field notes from the TRACON showed me that this domain consists of a large number of representations . An example of the density of visual representations is shown in Figure 2 . This is a simplified drawing of what one TRACON controller ' s airspace display looks like . In the current ATC system , a controller is responsible for a specific piece of airspace . This airspace is displayed to the controller as a collection of lines that are map referents to the physical world , as well as virtual boundaries used by controllers to divide airspace . Aircraft appear as moving radar targets coupled with alphanumeric information that associates a target to a particular aircraft . The space of possible representational states is expanded by including controller talk . Audible representations include clearances to these aircraft , coordination with controllers of contiguous airspace and some miscellaneous chatting . Added to all of this is physical behavior : for example , gesturing and controller - artifact interactions such as keyboard entries . ♦ UAL679 DAL583 ♦ ♦ RMA455 ♦ RMA342 ♦ ASP54 ♦ TWA22H . Figure 2 . Example of a TRACON display showing static map referents , several aircraft and simplified alphanumeric information . Usually the alphanumeric information is 3 - 4 lines . The size of this information has been increased to make it readable . Distributed Cognition as a Theoretical Framework for HCI C . Halverson 6 However , some important representations are neither visible nor audible . Controllers must make decisions about where to change an aircraft ' s speed or altitude , and where to turn them . Currently many of these decisions take place in the controller ' s head . Outside factors , such as wind and aircraft performance , are taken into consideration , but how much these factors influence a decision depends on the controller ' s individual experience . A major function of the automation tool is to calculate these outside factors for the controller . Using these calculations , the automation projects the path of the aircraft into the future , and advises the controller where speed changes or turns should take place . These advisories are presented to the controller via the graphical interface ( Figure 3 ) . As an analyst , one advantage of the automation display is that it makes visible some of the decisions that are usually hidden inside controller ' s heads . However , the advisories add to the density of the visual representation on the display . ♦ UAL679 DAL583 ♦ ♦ RMA455 ♦ RMA342 ♦ ASP54 ♦ TWA22H x170 x 200 . . Figure 3 . Example of a FAST display including automation - generated turn advisories . Usually the alphanumeric information is 4 lines . The size of this information has been increased to make it readable . There are methodological implications of both the large amount of visible representations and the implicit hidden nature of other representations . The theory requires examination of the visual representations and their relationships to representations in other media ( such as talk ) . Since the Distributed Cognition as a Theoretical Framework for HCI C . Halverson 7 analysis of FAST must be done under simulated conditions , any simulation scenario must handle these two issues . Using the insights gained from field observations , matched with theoretical demands , I designed a simulation scenario to analyze the FAST automation tool . In order to make a controller ' s implicit decisions more explicit , and therefore open to observation , I used the device of a training scenario . Applying the lessons of constructive interaction ( Miyake , 1986 ) the scenario was designed to facilitate task relevant talk by having one controller experienced with the automation tool train another controller in the tool ' s use . This device was intended to make controller decisions more explicit by providing a situation where the experienced controller would explain the behavior of the automation tool to the novice , in terms more familiar to them . It was hoped that these explanations would be indicative of internal controller decisions . My domain knowledge of the wealth of visual representations , coupled with the theory ' s requirements to examine representations for their task relevance , led to the decision to use video tape for sampling and recording . Video tape captures a large amount of very rich , fine grained data across a range of modalities . This means that a comprehensive analysis of the data from a one or two hour scenario is beyond the scope of one paper . It also means that one small sample of less than a minute will serve to demonstrate the process of analysis . Using distributed cognition to guide analysis provides insight into automation use beyond the expected result of understanding the use of the FAST advisories as designed . The discovery of unexpected use of structure provided in the automation environment is one example . The example presented here is particularly important because analysis focused on the use of new automation uncovered unexpected use of a standard taken - for - granted feature . Initial transcription and viewing of the video is guided by domain expertise and theory in the same manner as the earlier field observations . In watching for the use of the new automation advisories I was struck by the controller ' s delay in performing a particular action – accepting control of one aircraft from Distributed Cognition as a Theoretical Framework for HCI C . Halverson 8 an adjacent sector . ( This action is called a hand - off . ) It was important to determine if his delay with this aircraft ( twice as long as normal ) was somehow related to the advisories . It was conceivable that the advisories were distracting the controller from his other duties . In order to determine why the delay occurred I needed to see what task relevant representational states were involved in the cognitive work of accepting this aircraft . The verbal transcript showed no mention of this particular aircraft . Instead , the controllers ' talk centered around another aircraft turning on approach that had an inaccurate advisory displayed . The lack of verbal reference led to looking more closely at the controllers ' display to decide which of the displayed items were relevant . ( See appendix for complete transcript and figures for this example . ) I noticed that while the controllers were talking about the aircraft with the incorrect advisory , the cursor was moving about on the screen . This movement could be random playing , or it could be pertinent to the situation . In fact , a closer look seemed to reveal a pattern to the cursor ' s movement . This pattern appeared to parallel the order of priorities that a controller is taught to follow . These priorities , from most time critical to least time critical , are a guide for both what needs to be done next as well as monitoring what might need attention soon . In practice these priorities are used to view the aircraft on the display in an order that corresponds spatially to runway first , then sweeping out along the standard approach path ( Figure 4 ) . Distributed Cognition as a Theoretical Framework for HCI C . Halverson 9 . . scan pattern approach path runways Figure 4 . Scan pattern juxtaposed against the approach pattern flown by aircraft . The inner curved path ( in black ) is the scan pattern , the outer paths ( in grey ) are the approach course . I knew that the standard is to teach this scan pattern to controllers , but I had never seen explicit evidence of its use . The more important question was whether the movement of the cursor was relevant to the phenomenon I was interested in – that is , the delay in accepting the aircraft . Following a complete circuit of the cursor through the scan pattern , it became clear that the cursor was following a pattern appropriate for the situation . Starting with the aircraft nearest the runway , which the controllers were discussing , the cursor continued moving to the next closest aircraft on the north side , then the aircraft southwest , and finally the aircraft farthest out to the northwest . This last aircraft was the one that needed to be accepted , an action that occurred when the cursor reached the aircraft ' s displayed radar target . This complete pattern of movement demonstrated that the cursor was clearly relevant to the delay in accepting the hand - off . This was confirmed by coordinating the verbal transcription with the cursor movement . Not only was the hand - off performed at the time appropriate to the scan pattern , but the controllers ' discussion was interrupted to give a clearance to another aircraft , also at the appropriate point as described by the scan pattern . Distributed Cognition as a Theoretical Framework for HCI C . Halverson 10 While the location of the cursor is clearly a relevant representational state for the task of accepting the hand - off , it is also relevant for the task of controlling the scan pattern itself . To understand the cursor ' s role in the controllers ' work requires a shift in perspective . Up to now it has been assumed that some cognitive work is taking place that is resulting in the controller ' s interaction with the display to take the hand - off . The analytic focus is what task relevant representational states are involved in that cognitive process . Now we want to understand what role this use of the cursor plays in the cognitive work of the system comprised of controller and display . To do this we focus more on the overall behavior of the system , rather than the representational states that are the building blocks of that behavior . The sequential control of action and attention is a basic cognitive problem that needs to be solved . A successful solution to this problem must employ a mechanism that is robust and not susceptible to disruption . That is , when a distraction occurs , the focus of attention , the pattern of action and the priorities dictated by a particular situation , must be recoverable . The controller ' s use of the cursor provides such a robust mechanism for control of sequential action and attention . Review of the transcripts and figures in the appendix show how the cursor is halted during the scan pattern , while other tasks are occurring . These pauses provide the position for quick re - entry into the sequence of priorities and their attendant actions . The structure of the scan pattern learned by the controller , in combination with the availability and use of the cursor , is what provides a robust mechanism for the execution of the scan pattern ' s priorities of action in the work of the air traffic control system . 5 The cursor was not explicitly designed for this use . Discovery of this use however , has important implications for design of the automation aid . On one level , discovery of the cursor ' s use demonstrated that in this case the automation aids were not causing a distraction from the overall pattern of the cognitive work . Although the intent was to uncover the benefits of the advisories , it is still important to make sure new functionality does not 5 Subsequent informal observation of other controllers in both simulation and field conditions shows about 50 % use this technique . Distributed Cognition as a Theoretical Framework for HCI C . Halverson 11 interfere with other tasks . A second finding is about the value and importance of the existing portion of the display . One thing that we often forget is that it is just as important to understand what is working , and why , as it is to understand what is not working . In the rush to add new functionality we need to make sure that useful functions are not discarded . In this case the cursor is something that needs to be retained . This may seem trivial , but it ' s not . It is not that hard to imagine how it might be proposed to eliminate the cursor . One argument might be that , at a time critical juncture , it simply takes too long to move the cursor to the specific aircraft target . An alternative argument is that perhaps the actions of using the trackball for the cursor interfere with keyboard interactions . A suggested solution might be direct keyboard entry of the aircraft ' s unique three digit computer identifier ( CID ) as the first part of any entry . A second argument might be made on the basis that removing the display of the cursor would reduce screen clutter . An alternative solution could be the use of eye tracking for selecting a particular aircraft for entry . None of these proposals would provide any way to keep track of your place in the pattern . Application of distributed cognition to the analysis of the interaction shows that eliminating the cursor would likely be a mistake . While the arguments for the cursor ' s removal sound reasonable , they must be considered in light of the cursor ' s role in the functioning of the system . No Perfect Theory From this example we can glean some of the benefits of using this approach . Distributed cognition ' s application does lead to discovery . While these discoveries may feel like confirmations of intuition , they would not necessarily have been uncovered otherwise . It was only the focus first on task relevant representational state , and second on the cognition of the system , that uncovered the importance of the cursor . Discoveries can be used to enhance the design . For example , discovery of opportunistic uses early enough in the design process means that those aspects of the interface can be enhanced , or at least retained . The video record of observational data helps Distributed Cognition as a Theoretical Framework for HCI C . Halverson 12 uncover how the users are really using the tool by allowing a repeated and principled analysis of the interactions . An analysis of the distribution of cognitive work provides clues to the cognition internal to the person . Finally , this approach is flexible , in that it can be used at many stages in the design process , and on changing configurations of the system . One thing that needs to be noted here is that some kinds of systems lend themselves to study by this method and theory . This is not to say that distributed cognition can not be applied in other cases , but that its application is facilitated by certain properties of the system being studied . These include being culturally elaborated , well documented and highly rationalized systems . Some examples are ATC , the aviation community , the military , and teams of computer programmers ( Flor , 1991 ; Flor & Hutchins , 1991 ; Halverson , 1992 ; Halverson , Harwood , Davis , & Brinton , 1992 ; Hutchins , 1990 ; Hutchins , submitted ; Hutchins & Klausen , 1992 ) . . These are all highly complex systems , but the support provided by the formal and informal documentation of such systems can aid the analysis . Many of the drawbacks to the application of this theory are shared with many other evaluation techniques used in HCI , particularly those recording on video or audio tape . It is possible to end up with too much data . One advantage of distributed cognition with respect to too much data , is that the theory helps focus where to look in the data by the emphases on domain expertise and task relevant representational state . A second problem is that you may not be able to record observations using the medium you want . Of course , for some situations this will not be true . In - house lab testing during software development is unlikely to have subjects who refuse to have their interactions recorded in some way . However , in situations such as ATC , and other computer - mediated work environments in the real world , an analyst is more likely to face a fear of recording by video tape or other means . The only answers to this are not theoretically motivated . They are related to any work with human subjects and rely on gaining your subjects ' trust . The emphasis in distributed cognition on domain expertise may aid in the gaining of that trust , but it is impossible to tell . The final difficulty is that this method is time consuming , like all analysis . Again , this is a problem that many analysis methods face , even those not video based . It is a problem faced in virtually Distributed Cognition as a Theoretical Framework for HCI C . Halverson 13 all industries using HCI , where the pressure to " get the product out " is essential . The theory provides the means to reduce the time for analysis , just as in the problem of too much data . Theory and domain knowledge can help to gauge the needed depth of analysis in order to glean the appropriate amount of information in a timely manner . Summary Through this example , I have tried to show why distributed cognition is a theory that can aid HCI . The nature of the theory makes it a rapprochement between the sometimes conflicting influences on HCI : theories that focus on either individual cognition , or social aspects of the interaction . Application of distributed cognition uses domain knowledge to warrant judgements about cognitive processes and aid in sifting through massive amounts of data . While no theoretical framework will ever be perfect , distributed cognition provides a good fit for the needs of the HCI community . Distributed Cognition as a Theoretical Framework for HCI C . Halverson 14 Bibliography Davis , T . J . , Erzberger , H . , & Bergeron , H . ( 1989 ) . Design of a Final Approach Spacing Tool for TRACON Air Traffic Control ( Technical Memorandum No . 102229 ) . Moffett Field , CA . : National Aeronautics and Space Administration , Ames Research Center . Davis , T . J . , Erzberger , H . , Green , S . M . , & Nedell , W . ( 1991 ) . Design and Evaluation of an Air Traffic Control Final Approach Spacing Tool . Journal of Guidance , Control , and Dynamics , 14 ( 4 ) , 848 - 854 . Erzberger , H . , & Nedell , W . ( 1989 ) . Design of Automated System for Management of Arrival Traffic ( Technical Memorandum No . 102201 ) . Moffett Field , CA . : National Aeronautics and Space Administration , Ames Research Center . Erzberger , H . ( 1992 ) CTAS : Computer Intelligence for Air Traffic Control in the Terminal Area . ( Technical Memorandum No . 103959 ) . Moffett Field , CA . : National Aeronautics and Space Administration , Ames Research Center . Flor , N . V . ( 1991 ) Modeling distributed cognition in complex cognitive systems : A case study of collaborative programming during adaptive software maintenance . Unpublished Masters Thesis , University of California , San Diego . Flor , N . V . , & Hutchins , E . L . ( 1991 ) . Analyzing distributed cognition in software teams : A case study of team programming during adaptive software maintenance . In J . Koenemann - Belliveau , T . Moher , & S . Robertson ( Eds . ) , Empirical Studies of Programmers 4 . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Also in R . Baecker ( Ed . ) , Readings in groupware and computer - supported cooperative work . San Mateo , CA : Morgan - Kaufman , 1993 . Halverson , C . A . ( 1991 , August ) . An altitude excursion . In E . Palmer ( Chair ) , Aviation / Safety and Automation – NASA Contractors ' Conference . Moffett Field , CA . : National Aeronautics and Space Administration , Ames Research Center . Distributed Cognition as a Theoretical Framework for HCI C . Halverson 15 Halverson , C . A . ( 1992 ) Analyzing a cognitively distributed system : A terminal radar approach control . Unpublished Masters Thesis , University of California , San Diego . Halverson , C . A . , Harwood , K . , Davis , T . J . , & Brinton , C . R . ( 1992 ) . A systems approach to design : developing a usable automation tool for air traffic control . In Eleventh Digital Avionics Systems Conference , Seattle , WA . : IEEE Press . Hutchins , E . ( 1990 ) . The technology of team navigation . In J . Galegher , R . E . Kraut , & C . Egido ( Eds . ) , Intellectual teamwork : Social and technical bases of collaborative work . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum , Inc . Hutchins , E . ( 1991 ) . The social organization of distributed cognition . In L . Resnick & J . Levine ( Eds . ) , Perspectives on Socially Shared Cognition . Washington , D . C . : APA Press . Hutchins , E . ( in press ) . Cognition in the wild . Cambridge , MA . : Bradford Books - MIT Press . Hutchins , E . ( submitted ) . How a Cockpit Remembers Its Speeds . Cognitive Science . Hutchins , E . , & Klausen , T . ( 1992 ) . Distributed cognition in an airline cockpit . In D . Middleton & Y . Engestrom ( Eds . ) , Communication and Cognition at Work . Beverly Hills , CA . : Sage Books . Hutchins , E . , & Palen , L . ( 1993 , November ) . Constructing meaning from space , gesture and talk . In L . Resnick ( Chair ) NATO Conference on Discourse , Tools , and Reasoning . Lucca , Italy . Miyake , N . ( 1986 ) . Constructive Interaction and the Iterative Process of Understanding . In Cognitive Science , 10 , 151 - 177 . Tobias , L . , Volkers , U . , & Erzberger , H . ( 1989 ) . Controller evaluations of the descent advisor automation aid . In AIAA Guidance , Navigation and Control Conference . Boston , MA : IEEE Press . Distributed Cognition as a Theoretical Framework for HCI C . Halverson 16 Appendix ♦ DAL583 ♦ ♦ RMA455 ♦ RMA342 ♦ ASP54 ♦ TWA22H x170 . Figure 5 . PVD as it appears at the beginning of the video segment . The simulation is of Denver Stapleton airport , landing to the West . The approach pattern that the aircraft fly is shown in Figure 4 in the text . This incident is about fifteen minutes into the last of five training simulations , and traffic is moving smoothly . The trainee , M . , is by this point handling a moderate traffic load and the trainer , H . , is mostly explaining rationales and giving feedback rather than walking M . through the tasks . At the opening of this clip M . and H . are concerned about two Rocky Mountain airliners on the north side downwind that are close to each other and losing separation . 6 ( 1 : 05 : 47 7 : checking separation between RMA342 and RMA455 . ) While issuing a speed reduction to RMA342 ( the lead aircraft ) , the data block for United 679 ( UAL679 ) appears at the left edge of the screen ( 1 : 06 : 06 ) and soon begins flashing ( 1 : 06 : 49 ) , signaling M . that this aircraft is being handed off to him . 6 Even if the two aircraft are going the same speed they will continue to lose separation as they are maneuvered for the pattern . This is because the first one is inevitably slowed first – either through turns or speed reductions – and the second will continue to overtake before they are slowed or turned . This can require the controller to slow the second aircraft before the first aircraft begins maneuvering for the base and final turns . 7 Parentheses show time on the videotape of the occurrence and a brief description where necessary . Distributed Cognition as a Theoretical Framework for HCI C . Halverson 17 As the handoff begins , M . and H . are finishing up with the two Rocky Mountain aircraft 8 , when an advisory pops up for Aspen Airlines Flight 54 ( ASP54 ) to turn for final approach ( 1 : 06 : 41 ) . Due to proximity to the airport , this aircraft has a higher priority than any of the other aircraft on the screen . The advisory displayed is a left turn to a heading of 200 . The aircraft ' s present heading is probably close to 350 , so this is a greater turn than normal , almost a u - turn . In addition the advisory displays a turn across the course of the localizer . 9 For both of these reasons the advised turn is not appropriate to issue ASP54 . After some discussion H . tells M . to clear ASP54 for approach with a turn to 240 instead . ( Due to the delay in issuing the clearance ASP54 will still cross the localizer , although without the excessive turn . ) As M . issues the clearance , FAST recomputes the advisory , and the display changes to the correct heading . The displayed heading changes again just after he finishes the clearance . Meanwhile , UAL679 is moving closer to the boundary of the dump zone , still waiting for M . to accept the handoff . It might appear that M . is in error as he continues to perform other duties for the next twenty seconds before finally accepting the handoff ( 1 : 07 : 29 ) . Perhaps he is distracted by H . ' s continuing speculation about FAST ' s plan for ASP54 that led to an advisory for vectors across the localizer . However , a closer look shows that the delay in accepting the handoff is not an error . M . follows the priority of actions as set up by the scan pattern and mediated by FAST ' s advisories . This is observable because M . uses the cursor while moving through the scan pattern . 8 They discuss the spacing between the two , as well as issuing a speed reductions for both , and a base turn for the lead aircraft 9 The localizer is a component of the instrument landing system ( ILS ) . The ILS provides an exact approach path for alignment and descent of an aircraft on final approach to a runway . The localizer provides guidance information . It is a directional signal that is transmitted from the far end of the runway , along the centerline , and extending 18 nm from the antenna . Since there are parallel runways at Denver , crossing the localizer will put the aircraft into the no transgression zone ( NTZ ) , violating separation with the other runway . When controllers do want the aircraft to cross the localizer , usually to provide a longer path , the controller must tell the pilot she is crossing the localizer to make sure the pilot does not prematurely turn onto the localizer course . Distributed Cognition as a Theoretical Framework for HCI C . Halverson 18 While discussing the turn for ASP54 the cursor is in neutral space , just to the right of RMA342 . When the clearance is complete , and H . begins to discuss why FAST displayed that advisory , the cursor begins to follow the scan pattern . During this entire discussion M . moves the cursor as follows . From RMA342 M . moves the cursor to RMA455 , the aircraft following on the downwind . From there , the next aircraft out from the runway is on the south downwind , DAL583 . By the time the cursor gets to this point , DAL583 is now aligned with the dump zone boundary , a cue for issuing a descent clearance . M . again removes the cursor to neutral space , to the right of DAL583 , as he begins to issue the clearance . Even as M . delivers the clearance , he moves the cursor through the rest of the pattern up to UAL679 , where he accepts the handoff . A second walk through the segment can be broken down into seven time slices as shown in the following figures . The cursor follows the scan pattern , first to the two Rocky Mountain aircraft on downwind , then to DAL583 , just entering the dump zone , and finally to UAL679 . To show the synchrony between words and cursor movement I have used superscripts to match cursor position with the verbal transcript . Transcription conventions are as follows . Time , from the videotape , is represented as hours : minutes : seconds . Actions are in brackets [ ] . Slashes indicate pauses , with numbers being the number of seconds . Backslashes show where speech is inserted into another ' s speech . Underline shows where speech overlaps with another ' s speech . Outline shows where speech overlaps action . Curly brackets are ambiguous utterances . Parentheses are editorial comments for clarification . Distributed Cognition as a Theoretical Framework for HCI C . Halverson 19 ♦ UAL679 DAL583 ♦ ♦ RMA455 ♦ RMA342 ♦ ASP54 ♦ TWA22H x170 x 200 . . Figure 6 . 1 : 06 : 47 M : I was thinking about turning him ( referring to ASP54 ) 1 : 06 : 48 H : nah I wouldn ' t do 1 : 06 : 49 [ UAL679 starts flashing ] 1 : 06 : 50 H : now . I would turn him too he ' s heavy now so wait just a second / 2 / that ' s not a good advisory . I would turn him probably two fifty or two forty cause he ' s going to go across \ M : uh huh \ go ahead and issue it now 1 : 07 : 06 M : Aspen fifty four turn left heading two four zero vector across the ILS cleared for ILS runway two six left approach ♦ UAL679 DAL583 ♦ ♦ RMA455 ♦ RMA342 ♦ ASP54 ♦ TWA22H x170 x 240 . . Figure 7 . 1 : 07 : 07 [ advisory changes ] 1 : 07 : 09 H : there it is ( M continuing : ) maintain eight thousand until established contact tower at the marker good day / / yeah uh huh Distributed Cognition as a Theoretical Framework for HCI C . Halverson 20 ♦ UAL679 DAL583 ♦ ♦ RMA455 ♦ RMA342 ♦ ASP54 ♦ TWA22H x170 x 250 . . Figure 8 . 1 : 07 : 13 The advisory for ASP54 changes again ♦ UAL679 DAL583 ♦ ♦ RMA455 ♦ RMA342 ♦ ASP54 ♦ TWA22H x170 x 250 . . Figure 9 . 1 : 07 : 19 ( H . talking about advisory ) two hundred { knot } I don ' t know why the two hundred came up ( M moves cursor from neutral space over RMA455 ) Distributed Cognition as a Theoretical Framework for HCI C . Halverson 21 ♦ UAL679 DAL583 ♦ ♦ RMA455 a ♦ RMA342 ♦ ASP54 ♦ TWA22H x 250 . . d c b 170 Figure 10 . 1 : 07 : 22 it ' s saying a ess b turn c but d 10 ♦ UAL679 DAL583 ♦ ♦ RMA455 ♦ RMA342 ♦ ASP54 ♦ TWA22H x 250 . . 170 a Figure 11 . 1 : 07 : 23 M : aDelta five eighty three 10 ‘S’ turns are a technique to gain additional spacing between two aircraft . The aircraft is turned one way and then almost immediately turned back so the aircraft track describes the shape of the letter S . The time it takes for the aircraft to do this maneuver slows the aircraft , putting more distance between the two aircraft . Distributed Cognition as a Theoretical Framework for HCI C . Halverson 22 c b ♦ UAL679 DAL583 ♦ ♦ RMA455 ♦ RMA342 ♦ ASP54 ♦ TWA22H x 250 . . 170 a Figure 12 . 1 : 07 : 26 descenda andb maintainc eight thousand