Cunningham et al . RESEARCH Author Multidisciplinarity and Disciplinary Roles in Field of Study Networks Eoghan Cunningham 1 , 2 * , Barry Smyth 1 , 2 and Derek Greene 1 , 2 * Correspondence : eoghan . cunningham @ ucdconnect . ie 1 School of Computer Science , University College Dublin , Ireland Full list of author information is available at the end of the article Abstract When studying large research corpora , “distant reading” methods are vital to understand the topics and trends in the corresponding research space . In particular , given the recognised beneﬁts of multidisciplinary research , it may be important to map schools or communities of diverse research topics , and to understand the multidisciplinary role that topics play within and between these communities . This work proposes Field of Study ( FoS ) networks as a novel network representation for use in scientometric analysis . We describe the formation of FoS networks , which relate research topics according to the authors who publish in them , from corpora of articles in which ﬁelds of study can be identiﬁed . FoS networks are particularly useful for the distant reading of large datasets of research papers when analysed through the lens of exploring multidisciplinary science . In an evolving scientiﬁc landscape , modular communities in FoS networks oﬀer an alternative categorisation strategy for research topics and sub - disciplines , when compared to traditional prescribed discipline classiﬁcation schemes . Furthermore , structural role analysis of FoS networks can highlight important characteristics of topics in such communities . To support this , we present two case studies which explore multidisciplinary research in corpora of varying size and scope ; namely , 6 , 323 articles relating to network science research and 4 , 184 , 011 articles relating to research on the COVID - 19 - pandemic . Keywords : Network analysis ; Scientometrics ; Multidisciplinarity 1 Introduction With the increased recognition of the beneﬁts of multidisciplinary and interdisci - plinary collaboration [ 1 , 2 ] , a trend has recently been established towards greater levels of interdisciplinary research [ 3 ] . A common approach for understanding these research processes is through the lens of network analysis . For instance , given a corpus of research papers and their associated metadata , we can construct a variety of network representations to reveal diﬀerent aspects of the underlying data , such as co - authorship networks [ 4 , 5 ] , citation networks [ 6 ] , and co - citation networks [ 7 ] . These diﬀerent representations can help us to identify collaboration patterns between individual researchers at a micro level . In other cases we might be more interested in examining collaboration patterns between researchers coming from dif - ferent disciplines at the macro level . For example , we might wish to study how these patterns evolve over time in response to a changing research funding landscape or impactful exogenous events , such as the COVID - 19 pandemic . In this work , we propose a practical “distant reading” approach to help reveal collaboration patterns in large scientiﬁc corpora in order to understand better the a r X i v : 2203 . 12504v1 [ c s . D L ] 23 M a r 2022 Cunningham et al . Page 2 of 20 nature and implications of these patterns . Distant reading has been used in other contexts , such as digital humanities , as a means of exploring large volumes of data from a macro level view , in order to identify speciﬁc areas of interest for closer examination [ 8 ] . As the core contribution of this work , we present a novel graph representation , referred to as the Field of Study ( FoS ) network , which facilitates the investigation of multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary research in corpora of scientiﬁc research articles at the macro level . A key aspect of ﬁeld of study net - works is the use of author - topic relations . Speciﬁcally , a FoS network is populated by ﬁelds of study ( or research topics ) , which are related to one another according to the authors who publish in them . In Section 3 we describe how these networks can be constructed from the topics / ﬁelds of study that have been assigned to re - search papers . Later in Section 4 we describe two cases studies , which analyse the FoS networks arising from datasets of diﬀering scope and size . The ﬁrst case study in Section 4 . 1 relates to multidisciplinary research in the area of applied net - work science , while the second study in Section 4 . 2 pertains to the changing nature of author multidisciplinarity in response to the COVID - 19 pandemic . These case studies demonstrate that FoS networks can provide a useful tool for the distant reading of large collections of research articles . In particular , we show how simple characteristics computed on a FoS network can highlight important topics in the research corpus . Further , we use community detection methods to identify speciﬁc multidisciplinary schools within a larger body of research , and we conduct a ‘role analysis’ of the topics within these communities to understand the role that they play in multidisciplinary collaborations . Crucially , we demonstrate our methods us - ing datasets or varying size and scope , and , ﬁnally , we discuss some techniques that may be employed to drill - down on interesting interactions in the graph for further “close - reading” . 2 Related Work While a range of diﬀerent deﬁnitions exist for multidisciplinary research , it is most commonly characterised as work which draws on expertise , data or methodology from two or more distinct disciplines . Most formal deﬁnitions distinguish interdis - ciplinary research as an extension of multidisciplinary research , which involves the integration of methods from the contributing disciplines [ 9 ] . There are numerous analyses which have explored multi - or interdisciplinary research , and investigated the relationship between diﬀerent scientiﬁc disciplines . Many of these studies pro - posed metrics to quantify research interdisciplinarity , either at the author or at the paper level [ 10 , 11 ] , often in order to investigate a correlation between interdisci - plinarity and research impact [ 1 , 2 ] , productivity or visibility [ 12 ] . Typically , works which integrate methods and ideas from a diverse set of disciplines are found to have greater research impact and visibility compared to those that do not [ 2 , 12 ] . No - tably , there are several examples of works which have investigated cross - disciplinary collaboration , often drawing on representations and methods from network science [ 4 , 6 , 13 , 14 , 15 ] . Most frequently , co - authorship networks have been used as a means of represent - ing the collaborations between diﬀerent researchers , both in small - scale studies and when analysing large - scale bibliographic collections [ 16 ] . In this type of network , re - searchers are represented by nodes and collaborations ( i . e . , articles jointly authored Cunningham et al . Page 3 of 20 by a pair of researchers ) are encoded by the undirected edges between them . Thus , research teams are identiﬁed as fully - connected components of the graph . In cases where research backgrounds can be identiﬁed among the authors in the network , this can be used to measure the extent to which authors engage in multidisciplinary collaborations . The analysis of co - authorship networks has often revealed a strong disciplinary homophily between researchers , despite the fact that those with diverse neighbourhoods in these networks tend to have a higher level of research impact [ 4 ] . Another common representation used to investigate interdisciplinary research is the citation network , which is typically constructed at the article or journal level [ 17 ] . Analyses of citation networks can highlight inﬂuential or “disruptive” articles in interdisciplinary research [ 13 ] , as well as “boundary” papers which span multiple disciplines [ 6 ] . Indeed community ﬁnding approaches have been employed to au - tomatically group articles in citation networks into their respective ﬁelds of study [ 14 ] , so that interdisciplinary interactions can then be explored at the macro level . An alternative strategy for analysing research collections is to apply text mining to article abstracts or full - texts in order to group articles together which relate to similar research themes , using techniques such as document clustering or topic modelling [ 14 , 15 , 18 ] . This is typically based on word co - occurrence patterns , rather than based on article citation patterns . Of course , the patterns which emerge from textual analysis can be quite diﬀerent from those generated using network - based approaches , as ﬁelds of study which are distant in their authorship or citation representations may still potentially be closely linked semantically . Here we propose an alternative network representation , which relates ﬁelds of study according to the authors who typically publish in those ﬁelds . This kind of network may be used in conjunction with more conventional network representations — in much the same way that semantic networks have been shown to complement citation networks [ 14 ] . However , later in Section 4 . 2 we show that , on their own , FoS networks can provide an eﬀective means of exploring large scientiﬁc collections , particularly in revealing aspects around author multidisciplinarity . 3 Methods In this section we formalise the deﬁnition of a Field of Study ( FoS ) network and explain how such a network can be generated from existing research resources . In Sections 3 . 2 and 3 . 3 we describe two FoS variations : the static FoS network and the temporal FoS network respectively . 3 . 1 Field of Study Networks Formally , a Field of Study network is deﬁned as a general graph representation of a collection of research articles ( R ) , written by a set of authors ( A ) , and denoted F = ( N , E ) . The nodes ( N ) represent identiﬁable research topics ( i . e . the ﬁelds of study ) and the edges ( E ) represent authorship relations between pairs of topics . These relations are aggregated across multiple associated research papers . Below we describe how a FoS network can be constructed from a more conventional authorship graph and we argue that FoS networks are particularly well - suited to analysing the nature of collaboration within the scientiﬁc literature , especially as they relate scientiﬁc ﬁelds of study according to the researchers / authors who publish in them . Cunningham et al . Page 4 of 20 The formation of a FoS network depends on the availability of appropriate ﬁelds of study labels for a given set of research papers . These could be derived via manual annotations by domain experts , the application of automated text mining methods , or some combination of the two . For instance , topic modelling techniques have been shown to be successful in extracting research topics from corpora of research articles and assigning papers to those ﬁelds [ 15 , 19 ] . In fact , many research databases and search engines employ these techniques ( or manual classiﬁcation ) to assign articles or academic journals to ﬁelds of study . For example , the Microsoft Academic Graph ( MAG ) [ 1 ] maintains a deep hierarchy of Fields of Study which they assign to papers ; Web of Science ( WOS ) [ 2 ] group journals in 258 Subject Categories ; Scopus [ 3 ] employs experts to assign All Science Journal Classiﬁcation ( ASJC ) codes to all journals covered by their index . For the purpose of the case studies described later in Section 4 , we use MAG ﬁelds of study to categorise research papers and construct FoS networks . The deep MAG ﬁeld of study hierarchy is desirable as it supports the construction of FoS networks at varying levels of detail , from the broadest research disciplines ( level 0 ) to the speciﬁc topics and sub - topics that exist within a particular discipline ( levels 4 and 5 ) . It is important to note that the Microsoft Academic Graph may not always be an appropriate source for ﬁeld of study data . For instance , the corpus does not provide full coverage of all research disciplines and the corresponding hierarchy of ﬁelds may contain some spurious connections due to its size and the semi - automated nature of its construction . However , the methods that we propose are not speciﬁc to the MAG hierarchy . Rather , they are agnostic in the sense that they are designed to generalise to any case where ﬁelds of study can be identiﬁed at an appropriate level of detail . 3 . 2 Static FoS Networks The formation of a static FoS network from a collection of research articles is best described as the two - step process illustrated in Figure 1 . In the ﬁrst step , an un - weighted bipartite graph is generated from identiﬁable ﬁelds of study and their contributing authors ; see Figure 1a . In the second step , this graph is used to gen - erate a projection ( the FoS Network ) in which a weighted undirected edge exists between two ﬁelds if and only if at least one author has published research in both ﬁelds ; see Equation 1 for all a ∈ A , where N is the set of ﬁelds identiﬁable in R . The resulting edge weights correspond to the number of such authors who publish in both ﬁelds ( Equation 2 ) . E = (cid:8) ( n i , n j ) : published ( a , n i ) ∧ published ( a , n j ) (cid:9) ( 1 ) w (cid:0) n i , n j (cid:1) = | (cid:8) a : published ( a , n i ) ∧ published ( a , n j ) (cid:9) | ( 2 ) [ 1 ] https : / / www . microsoft . com / en - us / research / project / microsoft - academic - graph / [ 2 ] https : / / clarivate . com / webofsciencegroup / solutions / web - of - science / [ 3 ] https : / / www . scopus . com / home . uri Cunningham et al . Page 5 of 20 3 . 3 Temporal FoS Networks It is further possible to encode temporal information in a FoS Network as directed edges , which allows us to study changes in multidisciplinarity research patterns over time . Temporal FoS networks can be visualised in a time - unfolded representation , where the data is divided into a sequence of two or more discrete time steps , as frequently employed in dynamic network analysis tasks . Nodes are duplicated for each time step so that authors can be connected to any ﬁelds in which they publish research during a given time step . As an example , Figures 2a and 2b illustrate the two stages in the formation of a temporal FoS network , showing an instance of a temporal FoS network with respect to two time - points ( t n and t n + 1 ) on either side of some event ( e ) ; thus t n < t e < t n + 1 ) . The temporal FoS network in Figure 2b contains a directed edge between two ﬁelds ( n i , n j ) if an author published in ﬁeld n i at time t n ( before event e ) and in ﬁeld n j at time t n + 1 ( after event e ) , as given by E (cid:48) = (cid:8) ( n i , n j ) : published ( a , n i , t n ) ∧ published ( a , n j , t n + 1 ) (cid:9) ( 3 ) In the next section we present two illustrative examples which demonstrate the utility of static and temporal FoS representations , as described above . 4 Case Studies In our ﬁrst case study , presented in Section 4 . 1 , we consider the use of static FoS networks to explore aspects of multidisciplinary research in the area of network science . The second case study , described in Section 4 . 2 , considers the use of both static and temporal FoS networks in the context of a large - scale dataset of research publications relating to the COVID - 19 pandemic . 4 . 1 Multidisciplinary Research in Network Science Network construction . Firstly , we focus on research published in the journal Applied Network Science ( ANS ) [ 4 ] , to use as a smaller case study with which we can highlight our methods . We choose ANS as it is a journal with multidisciplinary implications , and we consider the year 2019 as the period with the best coverage in our data source . Figure 3 presents two resulting static FoS networks , which we create to explore author multidisciplinarity in our data . These networks are produced using Microsoft Academic Graph metadata for 6 , 323 research articles . This set of articles represents 131 papers published in the journal Applied Network Science , supplemented by any additional research published by the same authors in the three years prior ( 2016 - 2018 inclusive ) . We use MAG ﬁelds of study metadata to categorise these research papers . The MAG uses hierarchical topic modelling to identify and assign research topics to individual papers , each of which represents a speciﬁc ﬁeld of study [ 20 ] . To produce a more useful categorisation of articles , we consider only those topics at the ﬁrst two levels of the MAG hierarchy : 1 The 19 ﬁeld labels at level 0 , which we refer to as ‘disciplines’ . 2 The 292 ﬁeld labels at level 1 , which we refer to as ‘sub - disciplines’ [ 4 ] https : / / appliednetsci . springeropen . com Cunningham et al . Page 6 of 20 Thus , each article is associated with at least one discipline ( e . g . ‘Medicine’ , ‘Physics’ , ‘Engineering’ ) and at least one sub - discipline ( e . g . ‘Virology’ , ‘Particle Physics’ , ‘Electronic Engineering’ ) . Note some MAG sub - disciplines belong to more than one discipline . For example , ‘Biochemistry’ is a child of both ‘Chemistry’ and ‘Biology’ . To center the FoS networks in Applied Network Science research , we include only those edges that originate from ANS papers . We apply weight thresholding to represent the FoS network as unweighted graphs . All analysis is completed on the unweighted graph produced with threshold 5 ( the mean edge weight in the weighted network ) . In order to provide the clearest visualisations , we further prune the networks with threshold 10 before plotting . Figure 3a illustrates the resulting FoS network when network science articles are categorised at the discipline level . Each node ( or discipline ) in this FoS network can then be decomposed into its sub - disciplines , as shown in Figure 3b . Network characterisation . From Figure 3 , we can begin to understand the mul - tidisciplinarity of authors publishing in Applied Network Science , as the nodes rep - resent a diverse set of sub - disciplines , coloured according to their parent - disciplines . Highly central in Figure 3b are the ﬁelds which represent the technical and method - ological foundations of network science research . Sub - disciplines of Mathematics and Computer Science , such as ‘Theoretical Computer Science’ and ‘Topology’ , have high degree centrality ( ranked 1st and 4th respectively ) , because they are identiﬁed across the majority of network science research papers . Modern network science methods , such as ‘Artiﬁcial Intelligence’ , ‘Machine Learning’ and applica - tions , such as ‘Information Retrieval’ , have similarly high degree centrality ( ranked 2nd , 3rd , and 6th respectively ) . Some ﬁelds beyond the disciplines of Computer Science and Mathematics , such as ‘Applied Psychology’ , ‘Econometrics’ , and ‘Neu - roscience’ have high betweenness centrality in the FoS Network ( ranked 3rd , 5th and 8th , respectively ) . This is likely because they represent interdisciplinary appli - cations of network science published by authors who have backgrounds in other , more distant topics . For example , in the bottom of Figure 3b we can see a group of medical ﬁelds which are linked to topics in Mathematics and Computer Science through ‘Applied Psychology’ and ‘Social Psychology’ . Community detection . The MAG FoS hierarchy oﬀers one possible deﬁnition of science’s traditional disciplinary taxonomy , grouping ﬁelds ( or sub - disciplines ) into broader schools of research . We can explore an alternative categorisation of the top - ics in the ANS graph by employing community detection methods . Figure 4 shows the network from Figure 3b , but with the nodes colour - coded to show cluster mem - berships identiﬁed using the Louvain method [ 21 ] ( with resolution parameter value 1 . 0 ) . This technique identiﬁed 7 clusters which maximise modularity in the graph , and group topics according to authorship relations . Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for the communities . Such communities represent multidisciplinary clus - ters of ﬁelds across which authors – in particular , those authors who contributed to ANS in 2019 – are likely to publish . Louvain found clusters containing as few as 2 , and as many as 26 topics . Broadly , the clusters can be categorised as : ( i ) central ap - plied network science topics and applications ( ii ) networks in machine learning and neuroscience , ( iii ) psychology , biology and medicine , ( iv ) mathematics , statistics Cunningham et al . Page 7 of 20 and natural language processing , ( v ) product development and process manage - ment , ( vi ) physics and economics , ( vii ) transport networks and microeconomics . Role analysis . In addition to categorising ANS - related topics according to ( i ) a traditional disciplinary hierarchy ( Figure 3b ) , and ( ii ) author - related communities ( Figure 4 ) , it is also possible to group ﬁelds according to the “role” they play within the Field of Study network . Using the popular struc2vec algorithm [ 22 ] , we learn dense vector representations for the ﬁelds in the FoS network , which preserve structural equivalence between nodes . That is , nodes having similar structural fea - tures in the graph will have similar representations ( commonly known as their role embedding ) [ 23 ] . We then cluster the embedding space to identify a discrete set of disciplinary roles . Figure 5 illustrates the role assignments learned in the ANS graph according to a k - means clustering ( k = 9 ) of struc2vec role embeddings , where k = 9 represents the elbow of the curve when silhouette scores are plotted for clusterings of increasing values of k . Table 2 shows the mean network central - ity scores computed for the diﬀerent clusters such that we can explain the roles that they represent . Fields in cluster # 1 exhibit “hub - like” behaviour , as they score highly for all centrality measures . For each of the largest Louvain communities ( i . e . excluding communities ( v ) and ( vii ) ) , the most central node was assigned to role # 1 . We will refer to these as the “core” nodes since they represent the ﬁelds most commonly identiﬁed in ANS research and are the most central in the FoS graph . Clusters # 6 , # 7 , # 8 and # 9 all represent peripheral / leaf nodes with degree 1 and very low centrality scores . None of the topics in the peripheral clusters can be iden - tiﬁed in ANS published research . Instead , these topics appear in the 2016 – 2018 portion of the data and we refer to them as “distant background” topics . Clusters # 5 , # 4 and # 3 are made up of increasingly prevalent background topics . Similar to the distant background roles , a majority of the topics in these clusters never appear in ANS research published in 2019 . However , with greater degree than the more peripheral nodes , topics in clusters # 5 , # 4 and # 3 appear more frequently in author backgrounds . In the particular case of cluster # 3 , we identify a set of “ANS - adjacent” disciplines , i . e . the ﬁelds in which ANS authors publish the most readily . Finally , cluster # 2 includes non - core topics that have high degree and betweenness centrality . The set of 9 ﬁelds in this cluster are separate to the dense communities at the core of the graph . Instead topics like ‘Applied Psychology’ , ‘Computational Biology’ and ‘Regional Science’ link distant background subjects to the rest of the network . With all ﬁelds in cluster # 2 represented in ANS research published in 2019 , we anticipate that the research assigned to these topics oﬀer multidisciplinary applications of network science research , published by authors with diverse research backgrounds . The roles identiﬁed in clusters # 1 , # 2 and # 6 are apparent in clusterings with 5 ≤ k ≤ 10 ( i . e . , identical clusters are found for those parameter values ) . 4 . 2 Author Multidisciplinarity in COVID - 19 Research Field of Study networks generated on yearly data snapshots have been implemented to quantify author multidisciplinarity , according to the extent to which authors pub - lish across diﬀerent disciplines [ 24 , 25 ] . They show a stable trend with author mul - tidisciplinarity increasing year - on - year , with a much larger than expected increase Cunningham et al . Page 8 of 20 for COVID - 19 - related research . In particular , these analyses grouped research top - ics ( sub - disciplines ) according to the MAG disciplinary hierarchy . In the following case study , we explore richer groupings of COVID - 19 related research topics in an FoS network , to identify modular communities of sub - disciplines , and to explore their disciplinary roles . Network construction . Using a large dataset of COVID - 19 related research – COVID - 19 Open Research Dataset ( CORD - 19 ) [ 5 ] – we identify all authors who published COVID - 19 related research in 2020 , and collect MAG metadata for their COVID - 19 - related articles , along with any available articles that they published between 2016 and 2019 , inclusive . This result is 4 , 184 , 011 articles , with 166 , 356 related to COVID - 19 . We then construct a FoS network using MAG sub - disciplines identiﬁed in the papers . Similar to the ANS example in Section 4 . 1 , we consider the graph induced by only those edges which originate in COVID - 19 research . That is , we do not consider authorship relations between the topics in the pre - COVID - 19 portion of the data ( 2016 - 2019 ) . Again , we apply thresholding to produce an unweighted graph where edges with weight greater than or equal to the mean edge weight ( 50 ) are preserved . Community detection . When applied to the COVID - 19 - related FoS network , the Louvain [ 21 ] method ( with resolution 1 . 0 ) identiﬁes 7 communities , leaving 42 nodes unassigned to any community . Summary statistics for these communities are provided in Table 3 . Community ( i ) groups the core topics in Medicine . It is a dense community with many authors publishing across almost all pairs of topics . ‘Surgery’ , ‘Pathology’ and ‘Radiology’ are the most central ﬁelds . Community ( ii ) is more multidisciplinary than community ( i ) . In addition to many medical ﬁelds ( ‘Intensive Care Medicine’ , ‘Emergency Medicine’ , etc . ) , it contains a number of sub - disciplines in Engineering ( e . g . ‘Engineering Management’ and ‘Electrical Engineering’ ) . As such , the authors who link topics in this community may represent those who tackled the medical emergency posed by the pandemic and , in particular , the challenges associated with the massive strain on intensive care units and relevant equipment like ventilators . Community ( iii ) clearly demarcates those topics relevant to the study of the socioeconomic implications of the pandemic . In addition to topics in Economics , this community links many sub - disciplines of Business and Sociology ( e . g . ‘Financial Systems’ and ‘Demography’ ) . Topics in Biology , Chemistry , Physics and Engineering are linked in community ( iv ) . As the largest and least dense of the communities , ( iv ) represents the many STEM research areas that are relevant to the study of epidemiology . ‘Virology’ , ‘Immunology’ , ‘Computational Biology’ and Pharmacology’ are among the most central sub - disciplines in community ( iv ) . Community ( v ) contains topics relevant to Machine Learning and Mathematics and is likely formed as a result of the sizeable eﬀort to apply machine learning and data science methods to detecting and tracking the spread of COVID - 19 [ 26 ] . Finally , communities ( vi ) and ( vii ) represent the smallest and most dense communities in the FoS network . The topics in community ( vi ) relate to studies of the environmental impact of the COVID - 19 pandemic and associated lockdowns , while nodes in community ( vii ) [ 5 ] https : / / www . semanticscholar . org / cord19 Cunningham et al . Page 9 of 20 are related to ‘Astrophysics’ . Further inspection of the sub - disciplines in commu - nity ( vii ) ( ‘Astrophysics’ , ‘Astronomy’ , ‘Classical Mechanics’ , and ‘Computer En - gineering’ ) highlights a portion of the CORD - 19 dataset that is unrelated to the COVID - 19 pandemic . We believe these papers were included in the collection in error . The modular FoS communities represent groups of topics which are strongly related according to the authors who publish in them . As such , these communities highlight the diﬀerent schools / disciplines which emerged in COVID - 19 research , to - gether with the diﬀerent research backgrounds and expertise with which authors contributed to them . Crucially , these disciplines oﬀer an alternative classiﬁcation of sub - disciplines to the more traditional MAG scheme , highlighting instead a more nuanced , multidisciplinary set of topics , speciﬁc to the pandemic . Role analysis . We also conduct a role analysis of the topics in the COVID - 19 - related FoS network , using the methods described in the ANS case study above . As before , we identify a discrete set of roles via k - means clustering of struc2vec role embeddings . We consider an optimal clustering to be the elbow of the silhouette score curve when plotted for increasing values of k . Consistent with the greater scope of the COVID - 19 - related dataset ( when compared with that of the ANS dataset ) , we identify a larger set of clusters in the COVID - 19 - related FoS network ( k = 21 ) . Statistics for these clusters are provided in Table 4 . Although the clusters appear more numerous and complex than in the ANS case study , a number of distinct roles are evident . We now discuss the predominant roles in turn . The disciplinary hubs in the graph are captured in role # 1 . ‘Internal Medicine’ , ‘Environmental Health’ , ‘Virology’ , and ‘Artiﬁcial Intelligence’ are clustered in role # 1 as the core nodes in the network , with each topic among the most central nodes in the Louvain communities ( ii ) , ( iii ) , ( iv ) and ( iv ) respectively . Topics in role # 4 have high betweenness scores , despite being outside of the most the central core of the graph ( according to eigenvector centrality ) . Similar to role # 2 in the ANS case study , these topics likely play a bridging role , linking otherwise disconnected topics to the rest of the graph . Role # 4 contains topics such as ‘Economic Growth’ , ‘Al - gorithm’ , ‘Social Psychology’ and ‘Risk Analysis’ , which all fall outside of the scope of virology or epidemiology . These topics occur in COVID - 19 - related research that is published by authors with research backgrounds that are more peripheral in the graph . We hypothesise that topics attributed to this bridging role occur in multidis - ciplinary applications of one or more ﬁelds to a external problem . A similar bridging role may be described by role # 9 , which has high betweenness centrality ( ranked 4th ) , but relatively low eigenvector centrality ( ranked 9th ) . With lower eigenvector centrality , it is unlikely that nodes in role # 9 are adjacent to highly central topics in the graph and , as such , likely represent more peripheral “bridging” disciplines . Topics in role # 9 are ‘Composite Materials’ , ‘Computer Network’ , ‘Atmospheric Sciences’ and ‘Climatology’ . The largest cluster in the graph is role # 15 . With rela - tively low degree ( mean = 3 . 2 , median = 3 ) and greater eigenvector centrality than nodes with similarly low degree , it is likely that this cluster represents background topics which are adjacent to two or more of the more central COVID - 19 - related topics . Although the topics in this role are quite diverse , the cluster contains many sub - disciplines of Engineering , Chemistry , and Physics . Cunningham et al . Page 10 of 20 Through the role analysis outlined above , it is possible to further categorise the topics in the FoS graph according to the role they play within and between the disciplines described by the Louvain clusters . In particular , we identify those topics that ( i ) are at the core of the discipline ( s ) ( i . e . , hubs ) , ( ii ) represent multidisci - plinary applications ( i . e . , bridges ) , ( iii ) are relevant in the research backgrounds of contributing authors ( i . e . , leaf or peripheral nodes ) . Close reading . For very large datasets , such as the COVID - 19 - related research explored in this case study , it can be diﬃcult to parse FoS network visualisations . Thus , we rely on computational methods such as community detection and role analysis to understand the relationship between ﬁelds of study . Such methods de - scribe the network structure and the multidisciplinary role of the associated research topics as we have shown . Additionally , these methods can highlight cases of multi - disciplinary research which can be explored in greater detail . For example , Figure 6 presents the FoS subgraph containing the topics in Louvain community ( iii ) . We highlight these topics as they represent one of the larger , more multidisciplinary communities that were identiﬁed in COVID - 19 - related research dataset . This com - munity groups many topics from the disciplines Medicine , Economics , Psychology , Sociology and Political Science . The authors who link these topics likely represent those who contributed research relating to the socioeconomic impact of the pan - demic . Highly central in the subgraph are sub - disciplines of Medicine such as ‘Family Medicine’ and ‘Gerontology’ ( the study of the social , psychological and biological aspects of ageing ) , in addition to non - Medical topics like ‘Economic Growth’ and ‘Demography’ ( the statistical study of populations ) . Many topics from Psychology and Economics are present in the more peripheral nodes in the graph , as are sub - disciplines of Mathematics and Computer Science ( e . g . ‘Internet Privacy’ and ‘Statistics’ ) and even topics from Political Science ( e . g . ‘Public Relations’ and ‘Public Administration’ ) . The FoS subgraph helps to illus - trate the highly diverse school of research that developed around the study of the socioeconomic impacts of the pandemic . We can further investigate the multidis - ciplinary nature of the research in this subset by using Temporal FoS networks to compare the pre - COVID ( 2016 – 2019 ) and COVID ( COVID - 19 related research in 2020 ) time periods . For example , we might ask the question – ‘What were the research backgrounds / expertise of the authors who published COVID - 19 - related research in the ﬁeld of Economics ? ’ . Figure 7 presents COVID - 19 related research in the ﬁeld of Economics , with pre - COVID nodes on the left ( representing the authors’ research backgrounds ) and COVID nodes on the right ( representing the FoS characterisation of the COVID related research ) . To highlight the strongest trends that exist , the FoS network shows only the top - 30 edges by weight prior to thresholding . The multidisciplinary nature of this research subset is apparent in the diverse set of topics illustrated on the left hand side of the plot . In accordance with the broad spectrum of fac - tors ( social , political and economic ) which inﬂuenced economic growth during the pandemic , we identify many authors who have published previously in sociology , psychology and political science in the graph . Additionally , those topics which may have useful , transferable skills such as ‘Statistics’ and ‘Data Science’ are also found to contribute . Cunningham et al . Page 11 of 20 To conduct further close reading , we can ﬁlter the list of articles by considering only those papers that contribute a particular edge to the FoS network . For example , we can search for COVID - related papers which result in the edge between ‘Social Psychology’ and ‘Economic Growth’ . These will correspond to COVID - related arti - cles containing the topic ‘Economic Growth’ , in which the authors have previously published research in the ﬁeld of social psychology . To better understand the papers in this subset , we can explore the lower - level MAG topics that are most commonly identiﬁed amongst them , or the keywords which occur most frequently in their titles and abstracts . 5 Conclusions In this work we have demonstrated that our proposed Field of Study ( FoS ) networks provide a useful means of exploring author multidisciplinarity in a body of research . The two case studies , provided in Sections 4 . 1 and 4 . 2 , have shown the utility of FoS networks for this purpose in mid - ( ≈ 6 , 000 ) and large - sized ( ≈ 5 , 000 , 000 ) research corpora . Modular communities in FoS networks oﬀer an alternative categorisation strategy for research topics and sub - disciplines , when compared to traditional pre - scribed discipline classiﬁcation schemes . Such communities represent the broader , multidisciplinary trends in a body of research , together the diﬀerent backgrounds and expertise with which authors contribute to them . Furthermore , role analysis , using methods such as struc2vec role embeddings , can be employed to parse the respective roles of topics within and between these communities . In particular , we have highlighted core and background roles , which serves to distinguish the central topics in a ﬁeld from the background expertise of the authors . In addition , less central topics with high betweenness centrality may highlight multidisciplinary ap - plications in the body of research . In the case of very large corpora , visualising FoS networks can be challenging . As such , in Section 4 . 2 we have outlined methods for drilling down to conduct closer reading of research corpora , at greater detail , using dynamic FoS networks . There are a number of avenues for potential further research in this area . For example , in a corpus where full paper texts or abstracts are available , it may be informative to explore semantic relationships between the ﬁelds of study represented in the network . Similarly , citation information could be used to explore the ﬂow or diﬀusion of information between communities . Recent work in [ 14 ] suggests that a multi - dimensional approach , which combines these methods , may prove to be a useful tool for scientometric analysis . Declarations FundingThisresearch was supported by Science Foundation Ireland ( SFI ) under Grant Number SFI / 12 / RC / 2289 P2 . Consent for Publication Not applicable . Availability of data and materials An archive of the relevant metadata for both case studies will be made available online before any ﬁnal publication . Ethics approval and consent to participate Not applicable . Cunningham et al . Page 12 of 20 Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests . Authors’ contributions EC proposed the methods , implemented the code , and performed the experiments . EC , DG and BS wrote , read , and approved the manuscript . AcknowledgementsNotapplicable . Author details 1 School of Computer Science , University College Dublin , Ireland . 2 Insight Centre for Data Analytics , University College Dublin , Ireland . References 1 . Larivi ` ere , V . , Haustein , S . , B¨orner , K . : Long - distance interdisciplinarity leads to higher scientiﬁc impact . PloS one 10 ( 3 ) , 0122565 – 0122565 ( 2015 ) 2 . Okamura , K . : Interdisciplinarity revisited : evidence for research impact and dynamism . Palgrave Communications 5 ( 1 ) , 141 ( 2019 ) 3 . Leahey , E . : From sole investigator to team scientist : Trends in the practice and study of research collaboration . Annual Review of Sociology 42 ( 1 ) , 81 – 100 ( 2016 ) 4 . Feng , S . , Kirkley , A . : Mixing patterns in interdisciplinary collaboration networks : Assessing interdisciplinarity through multiple lenses . arXiv preprint 2002 . 00531 ( 2020 ) 5 . Gl¨anzel , W . , Schubert , A . : Analysing scientiﬁc networks through co - authorship . Handbook of quantitative science and technology research , 257 – 276 ( 2004 ) 6 . Karunan , K . , Lathabai , H . H . , Prabhakaran , T . : Discovering interdisciplinary interactions between two research ﬁelds using citation networks . Scientometrics 113 ( 1 ) , 335 – 367 ( 2017 ) 7 . Gm¨ur , M . : Co - citation analysis and the search for invisible colleges : A methodological evaluation . Scientometrics 57 ( 1 ) , 27 – 57 ( 2003 ) 8 . Moretti , F . : Distant Reading . Verso Books , London ( 2013 ) 9 . Choi , B . C . , Pak , A . W . : Multidisciplinarity , interdisciplinarity and transdisciplinarity in health research , services , education and policy : 1 . Deﬁnitions , objectives , and evidence of eﬀectiveness . Clin Invest Med 29 ( 6 ) , 351 – 364 ( 2006 ) 10 . Rafols , I . , Meyer , M . : Diversity and network coherence as indicators of interdisciplinarity : case studies in bionanoscience . Scientometrics 82 ( 2 ) , 263 – 287 ( 2010 ) 11 . Porter , A . , Cohen , A . , David Roessner , J . , Perreault , M . : Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity . Scientometrics 72 ( 1 ) , 117 – 147 ( 2007 ) 12 . Leahey , E . , Beckman , C . M . , Stanko , T . L . : Prominent but less productive : The impact of interdisciplinarity on scientists’ research . Administrative Science Quarterly 62 ( 1 ) , 105 – 139 ( 2017 ) 13 . Wu , L . , Wang , D . , Evans , J . A . : Large teams develop and small teams disrupt science and technology . Nature 566 ( 7744 ) , 378 – 382 ( 2019 ) 14 . Raimbault , J . : Exploration of an interdisciplinary scientiﬁc landscape . Scientometrics 119 ( 2 ) , 617 – 641 ( 2019 ) 15 . Laﬁa , S . , Kuhn , W . , Caylor , K . , Hemphill , L . : Mapping research topics at multiple levels of detail . Patterns 2 ( 3 ) , 100210 ( 2021 ) 16 . Arnaboldi , V . , Dunbar , R . I . M . , Passarella , A . , Conti , M . : Analysis of co - authorship ego networks . In : International Conference and School on Network Science , pp . 82 – 96 ( 2016 ) . Springer 17 . Newman , M . : Networks . Oxford University Press , ? ? ? ( 2018 ) 18 . Yau , C . - K . , Porter , A . , Newman , N . , Suominen , A . : Clustering scientiﬁc documents with topic modeling . Scientometrics 100 ( 3 ) , 767 – 786 ( 2014 ) 19 . Paul , M . , Girju , R . : Topic modeling of research ﬁelds : An interdisciplinary perspective . In : Proceedings of the International Conference RANLP - 2009 , pp . 337 – 342 ( 2009 ) 20 . Shen , Z . , Ma , H . , Wang , K . : A web - scale system for scientiﬁc knowledge exploration . arXiv preprint 1805 . 12216 ( 2018 ) 21 . Blondel , V . D . , Guillaume , J . - L . , Lambiotte , R . , Lefebvre , E . : Fast unfolding of communities in large networks . Journal of Statistical Mechanics : Theory and Experiment 2008 ( 10 ) , 10008 ( 2008 ) 22 . Ribeiro , L . F . , Saverese , P . H . , Figueiredo , D . R . : struc2vec : Learning node representations from structural identity . In : Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , pp . 385 – 394 ( 2017 ) 23 . Rossi , R . A . , Jin , D . , Kim , S . , Ahmed , N . K . , Koutra , D . , Lee , J . B . : On proximity and structural role - based embeddings in networks : Misconceptions , techniques , and applications . ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data ( TKDD ) 14 ( 5 ) , 1 – 37 ( 2020 ) 24 . Cunningham , E . , Smyth , B . , Greene , D . : Collaboration in the Time of COVID : A Scientometric Analysis of Multidisciplinary SARS - CoV - 2 Research . arXiv preprint 2108 . 13370 ( 2021 ) 25 . Cunningham , E . , Smyth , B . , Greene , D . : Navigating multidisciplinary research using ﬁeld of study networks . In : Benito , R . M . , Cheriﬁ , C . , Cheriﬁ , H . , Moro , E . , Rocha , L . M . , Sales - Pardo , M . ( eds . ) Complex Networks & Their Applications X , pp . 104 – 115 . Springer , Cham ( 2022 ) 26 . Nguyen , T . T . , Nguyen , Q . V . H . , Nguyen , D . T . , Hsu , E . B . , Yang , S . , Eklund , P . : Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Battle against Coronavirus ( COVID - 19 ) : A Survey and Future Research Directions . arXiv preprint 2008 . 07343 ( 2021 ) Cunningham et al . Page 13 of 20 Figures ( a ) ( b ) Figure 1 : The formation of a static Field of Study ( FoS ) network involving two steps : ( a ) creation of a bipartite network of authors and ﬁelds ; ( b ) projection to an undirected network of ﬁelds . ( a ) ( b ) Figure 2 : Illustrative example of a temporal Field of Study ( FoS ) network , in - volving two steps : ( a ) creation of a bipartite network of authors and ﬁelds ; ( b ) projection to a directed network of ﬁelds . Cunningham et al . Page 14 of 20 ( a ) Disciplines or level 0 ﬁelds of study . ( b ) Sub - disciplines or level 1 ﬁelds of study . Figure 3 : FoS Network for research published in related to the journal “Applied Network Science” during 2016 – 2019 . Node size encodes the number of papers attributed to a ﬁeld of study . In ( b ) nodes are coloured to represent the parent discipline of the ﬁeld of study . Edges are coloured to show the parent discipline if the edge is within a discipline / community . Edges between communities are not coloured . Cunningham et al . Page 15 of 20 Figure 4 : FoS Network for research published in related to the journal “Applied Network Science” during 2016 – 2019 . Nodes are coloured to show clusters identi - ﬁed by Louvain . Cunningham et al . Page 16 of 20 Figure 5 : FoS Network for research published in related to the journal “Applied Network Science” during 2016 – 2019 . Nodes are coloured to show role assignments according to 9 clusters generated on struc2vec embeddings . Cunningham et al . Page 17 of 20 Figure 6 : FoS Network for a community of COVID - 19 - related research published during 2015 – 2020 . Louvain community ( iii ) . Nodes are coloured according to their MAG parent discipline . Cunningham et al . Page 18 of 20 Figure 7 : Temporal FoS Network presenting COVID - 19 - related research in Eco - nomics , produced from 1 , 355 COVID - related research papers which were at - tributed to the MAG ﬁeld ‘Economics’ . Cunningham et al . Page 19 of 20 Tables Table 1 : Louvain communities in ANS - related research and their size , network den - sity , most central topics ( according to degree centrality ) and the most frequent MAG disciplines that are identiﬁed in them ( ≥ 20 % of topics ) . size density most central nodes MAG disciplines ( i ) 67 0 . 04 theoretical computer science computer science ( ii ) 15 0 . 39 artiﬁcial intelligence , machine learning computer science ( iii ) 16 0 . 23 algorithm , applied psychology medicine , biology ( iv ) 9 0 . 14 statistical physics , pattern recognition biology , computer science , medicine ( v ) 11 0 . 04 process management , food science physics ( vi ) 18 0 . 14 econometrics , topology , industrial org economics , physics ( vii ) 5 0 . 40 computer network , regional science economics Table 2 : Roles identiﬁed in Applied Network Science Research and their mean net - work attributes , including centrality scores , cluster size ( count ) , and the proportion of topics in the cluster identiﬁed in ANS research ( ANS prop ) . role degree betweenness closeness eigenvector ANS prop count # 1 28 . 7 0 . 025 0 . 279 0 . 503 1 . 00 15 # 2 12 . 2 0 . 014 0 . 223 0 . 171 1 . 00 9 # 3 7 . 2 0 . 002 0 . 245 0 . 220 0 . 29 21 # 4 2 . 9 0 . 002 0 . 229 0 . 108 0 . 15 27 # 5 1 . 7 0 . 000 0 . 187 0 . 038 0 . 10 31 # 6 1 . 0 0 . 000 0 . 221 0 . 061 0 . 00 25 # 7 1 . 0 0 . 000 0 . 148 0 . 005 0 . 00 4 # 8 1 . 0 0 . 000 0 . 159 0 . 011 0 . 17 6 # 9 1 . 0 0 . 000 0 . 169 0 . 011 0 . 00 3 Table 3 : Louvain communities in COVID - 19 - related research and their size , network density , most central topics ( according to degree centrality ) and the most frequent MAG disciplines that are identiﬁed in them ( ≥ 10 % of topics ) . size density most central nodes MAG disciplines ( i ) 23 0 . 69 surgery , pathology , radiology medicine ( ii ) 22 0 . 26 intensive care medicine , emergency medicine medicine ( iii ) 70 0 . 30 public relations , economic growth , demography economics ( iv ) 82 0 . 18 virology , nanotechnology , cell biology biology ( v ) 42 0 . 27 artiﬁcial intelligence , algorithm , data science computer science , mathematics ( vi ) 5 0 . 90 atmospheric sciences , climatology geography ( vii ) 4 0 . 83 astrophysics , astronomy , classical mechanics physics , engineering Cunningham et al . Page 20 of 20 Table 4 : Roles identiﬁed in COVID - 19 related research and their mean network attributes , including centrality scores and cluster size ( count ) . role degree betweenness closeness eigenvector count # 1 132 . 2 0 . 076 0 . 570 0 . 951 4 # 2 112 . 2 0 . 025 0 . 534 0 . 925 5 # 3 84 . 3 0 . 005 0 . 495 0 . 811 29 # 4 65 . 2 0 . 013 0 . 474 0 . 570 12 # 5 49 . 3 0 . 000 0 . 446 0 . 535 24 # 6 45 . 5 0 . 003 0 . 437 0 . 418 22 # 7 19 . 8 0 . 001 0 . 380 0 . 128 26 # 8 15 . 0 0 . 000 0 . 384 0 . 154 21 # 9 13 . 5 0 . 006 0 . 384 0 . 074 4 # 10 9 . 2 0 . 001 0 . 350 0 . 042 19 # 11 8 . 2 0 . 000 0 . 303 0 . 016 4 # 12 5 . 8 0 . 000 0 . 324 0 . 031 6 # 13 4 . 7 0 . 000 0 . 306 0 . 011 3 # 14 3 . 7 0 . 000 0 . 300 0 . 011 3 # 15 3 . 2 0 . 000 0 . 329 0 . 036 51 # 16 2 . 4 0 . 000 0 . 264 0 . 001 7 # 17 2 . 0 0 . 000 0 . 249 0 . 000 2 # 18 1 . 0 0 . 000 0 . 306 0 . 007 2 # 19 1 . 0 0 . 000 0 . 332 0 . 014 5 # 20 1 . 0 0 . 000 0 . 319 0 . 013 2 # 21 1 . 0 0 . 000 0 . 323 0 . 013 2