Cross - Classification and Category Representation in Children’s Concepts Simone P . Nguyen University of North Carolina Wilmington Items commonly belong to many categories . Cross - classification is the classification of a single item into more than one category . This research explored 2 - to 6 - year - old children’s use of 2 different category systems for cross - classification : script ( e . g . , school - time items , birthday party items ) and taxonomic ( e . g . , animals , clothes ) . The results of Experiments 1 and 2 show that by a young age , children are able to cross - classify items into both category systems . Experiment 3 found that children mentally represent cross - classified items as simultaneously belonging to both taxonomic and script categories . Experiment 4 found that children often , but do not always , spontaneously activate taxonomic and script cross - classifications . Overall , the results demonstrate that from an early age children form and use both taxonomic and script categories for cross - classification . Keywords : cross - classification , categorization , category representation , category accessibility Researchers in conceptual development have identified a num - ber of different categories that children use for classifying different items . For example , taxonomic categories are based on similarity or shared common properties ( e . g . , dogs breathe and bark ) . These common properties allow a hierarchical structure in which items at the subordinate level have all the properties of items at the basic level and the more abstract superordinate level , plus further dis - tinguishing properties ( e . g . , poodle – dog – mammal ; Horton & Markman , 1980 ; Markman , 1989 ; Markman & Hutchinson , 1984 ; Rosch , Mervis , Gray , Johnson , & Boyes - Braem , 1976 ; Waxman & Gelman , 1988 ) . S cript categories include items that play the same role in a routine or event such as breakfast time or a birthday party ( e . g . , Lucariello , Kyratzis , & Nelson , 1992 ; K . Nelson , 1986 , 1988 ; see also Mandler , Fivush , & Reznick , 1987 ) . Items in a script category need not be spatially or temporally contiguous ( e . g . , cereal and oatmeal are interchangeable in a breakfast script such that one can be eaten without the other ) . Script categories are somewhat different than thematic categories ; items in a thematic category are classified together because they play complementary roles and co - occur in time and space ( e . g . , cat – yarn , spoon – bowl ; e . g . , Greenfield & Scott , 1986 ; Smiley & Brown , 1979 ) . Recently , there has been increased recognition within the adult concept literature that people use categories not only for classifi - cation but also cross - classification . Whereas classification in - volves categorizing a single item into just one category , cross - classification involves flexibly categorizing a single item into more than one category . Research has shown that adults sponta - neously form categories that often include the same items such as taxonomic ( e . g . , grains ; Ross & Murphy , 1999 ) , script ( e . g . , break - fast foods ; Ross & Murphy , 1999 ) , thematic ( e . g . , cereal - bowl ; Lin & Murphy , 2001 ; Murphy , 2001 ) , and even ad hoc or goal - derived ( e . g . , things to eat in a hurry ; Barsalou , 1983 , 1991 ) categories . In one study , Ross and Murphy ( 1999 ) found that adults spontane - ously grouped foods according to both taxonomic ( e . g . , dairy products , meats , vegetables ) and script ( e . g . , appetizers , desserts , and dinner foods ) relations . For example , adults considered a bagel to be both a grain ( taxonomic ) and a breakfast food ( script ) . Spontaneous cross - classification with common categories such as taxonomic , script , and thematic has not been examined extensively within the conceptual development literature , and thus there is currently little understanding of the development of this ability in children . Although a number of important studies have shown that children can form these different cat - egories ( see Murphy , 2002 , for a review ) , few studies have shown that children can cross - classify a single object into these categories . For example , studies have typically required chil - dren to form different categories using different sets of items ( e . g . , Lucariello et al . , 1992 ; Smiley & Brown , 1979 ) . Also , many studies have typically used a between - participants design , showing that different groups of children can form different categories under certain circumstances or contexts ( e . g . , Wax - man & Namy , 1997 ; although see Blaye & Bonthoux , 2001 ) . True cross - classification , however , entails categorizing a single object into more than one type of category by the same indi - vidual . A major developmental task for children , then , is to learn how to cross - classify items . If an item potentially belongs to many categories , it is essential for children to know these categories in order to fully understand the item and to interact with it appropriately . Theoretically , cross - classification is of critical importance in cognitive development because it reflects the degree to which children flexibly organize and coordinate different systems of categorization when considering the same items . This research was supported by a Cahill Award for Faculty Research and Development from the University of North Carolina Wilmington . I am extremely grateful to Gregory Murphy for invaluable feedback on earlier drafts . Special thanks go to Mary Beth McCullough , Heather Mosier , Heather Rath , Kristen Wilfong , and Tess Young for their research assistance as well as Cameron Gordon for discussions regarding this research . I also thank the schools , children , and parents who were involved in this research . Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Simone Nguyen , Department of Psychology , University of North Carolina Wil - mington , 601 South College Road , Wilmington , NC 28403 - 5612 . E - mail : nguyens @ uncw . edu Developmental Psychology Copyright 2007 by the American Psychological Association 2007 , Vol . 43 , No . 3 , 719 – 731 0012 - 1649 / 07 / $ 12 . 00 DOI : 10 . 1037 / 0012 - 1649 . 43 . 3 . 719 719 The Present Research The present research examines the emerging use of both taxo - nomic and script systems of categorization for thinking about the same items . In particular , in a series of four experiments , this research focuses on children’s ability to spontaneously cross - classify items based on taxonomic and script relations . One goal of the present research was to replicate and extend the work of Nguyen and Murphy ( 2003 ) . These researchers examined cross - classification in 4 - year - olds , 7 - year - olds , and adults by focusing on taxonomic ( e . g . , vegetables , meats ) and script ( e . g . , breakfast foods , dessert ) relations within the domain of food . Nguyen and Murphy ( 2003 ) found that by age 4 years , children spontaneously cross - classify foods into both taxonomic and script categories , classifying ice cream , for example , as a dairy product and as a dessert on different occasions . By using a diverse set of items , Experiment 1 of the present research was designed to replicate the findings of Nguyen and Murphy ( 2003 ) with food and to extend these findings to other domains . The items for Experiment 1 came from a variety of domains in addition to food , including animals , clothing , and furniture . It is important to examine other domains beyond food to ensure that the results of Nguyen and Murphy ( 2003 ) were not due to some idiosyncrasy of that domain . Given that children have the ability for cross - classification , and that children are knowledgeable about other domains , considerable overlap was expected to be found in children’s cross - classification across domains . An additional goal of the present research was to document the developmental trajectory of cross - classification by focusing on 2 - to 6 - year - olds and adults as a developmental endpoint . Although Nguyen and Murphy ( 2003 ) only looked at 4 - and 7 - year - olds , there is closely related research on cognitive flexibility , particu - larly the ability to switch classification strategies or responses as a result of changing context cues or task demands , that provides support for the possibility that cross - classification emerges at an early age . For example , a number of studies have found improve - ments in children’s executive functioning and flexible rule use between the ages of 3 – 5 years , as documented by a card sorting task in which children must sort cards based on two conflicting rules ( e . g . , sorting based on color first and then based on shape ; e . g . , Frye , Zelazo , & Palfai , 1995 ; Zelazo , Frye , & Rapus , 1996 ; see also Jacques & Zelazo , 2001 , 2005 ) . Research has also shown that even 3 - year - olds can shift between different rules in a card sorting task under some circumstances ( e . g . , Bohlmann & Fenson , 2005 ; Dea´k , Ray , & Pick , 2004 ; Perner & Lang , 2002 ) . Other research has also found that 4 - year - olds can hold two rules in mind and resist the temptation to make a preponent response when the inhibitory demand is reduced in a task ( e . g . , saying semantically unrelated words such as “dog” in response to a picture of a sun and “pig” to a picture of a moon , instead of saying semantically related words such as “night” and “day , ” respectively ; Diamond , Kirkham , & Amso , 2002 ) . Additional evidence for cognitive flexibility comes from the infant cognitive development literature . In particular , research has found that even very young children and infants are responsive to changing context cues and task demands . For example , Ribar , Oakes , and Spalding ( 2004 ) have shown that infants can form new category representations , depending upon the particular stimuli that they are initially presented with during the familiarization phase of a study . For example , when infants were familiarized with land animals that had variable coloring , they subsequently formed an inclusive category that included a variety of land animals . However , when infants were familiarized with black - and - white land animals , they subsequently formed a more exclusive category of black - and - white land animals . Additional research has also shown that very young children and infants will categorize objects differently , depending upon the objects’ perceptual properties ( e . g . , classifying objects with eyes based on shape and texture but eyeless objects based on shape only ; Jones , Smith , & Landau , 1991 ) as well as their functional parts ( e . g . , categorizing animals and furniture together when they have legs but categorizing ani - mals with vehicles when they do not have legs ; Rakison & But - terworth , 1998 ; Rakison & Cohen , 1999 ) . Another goal of the present research was to explore how chil - dren mentally represent taxonomic and script category systems , that is , how they conceptualize items that are cross - classified into these categories . In particular , Experiment 3 examined whether children can represent a cross - classified item as belonging to both taxonomic and script categories simultaneously . In this experi - ment , children were asked to verify the joint category membership of cross - classified items . This is somewhat different than asking whether children are able to cross - classify an item into a taxo - nomic and script category on different occasions . For example , when a child sees ice cream , can the child think of it as being both a dairy product and a dessert at the same time ? Certainly it would be helpful to represent ice cream in both ways simultaneously . If a child who is lactose intolerant is trying to pick out a treat , thinking of ice cream as not only a dessert , but also a dairy product simultaneously , will help the child make a wiser choice . Although this aspect of cross - classification was not previously addressed by Nguyen and Murphy ( 2003 ) , related research on children’s language provides support for the possibility that chil - dren are able to mentally represent an item as belonging to both a taxonomic and script category simultaneously . Several researchers have found that young children commonly accept and produce multiple terms for a single referent ( e . g . , labeling a cat as a cat , pet , and animal ; e . g . , Blewitt , 1994 ; Clark & Svaib , 1997 ; Mervis , Golinkoff , & Bertrand , 1994 ; Waxman & Hatch , 1992 ) . Clark ( 1997 ) has argued that a child’s word choice reflects different conceptual perspectives on a single item . Depending upon the goals of the conversation , a child may want to take on one conceptual perspective ( e . g . , cat ) or several different conceptual perspectives ( e . g . , cat , pet , animal ) on a single item . Also , Dea´k and Maratsos ( 1998 ) have shown that children can use two or more labels to describe representational objects that have distinct func - tions such as a crayon shaped like a dinosaur , saying it is a dinosaur and crayon at the same time . In addition , Hansen and Markman ( 2005 ) have found that children can provide contrasting labels for deceptive items such as a sponge painted as a rock , saying that it looks like a rock but is really a sponge . Others have also found that children frequently coin novel compound nouns by combining two words together that mark the specific subcategories of a more general category ( e . g . , lion – book , duck – book ; Clark , Gelman , & Lane , 1985 ; Gelman , Wilcox , & Clark , 1989 ) . The final goal of the present research was to explore category accessibility , which is closely related to the issue of category representation . Category accessibility is especially relevant when considering cross - classified items because a single item may acti - 720 NGUYEN vate more than one category . For example , when children see a cross - classifiable item such as an apple , does this lead them to spontaneously access their knowledge of both fruit and things to take on a picnic ? Whether children do so may impact how they interpret the item and comprehend the current situation . Experi - ment 4 of the present research explores category accessibility in children . Because this aspect of cross - classification was not previously addressed by Nguyen and Murphy ( 2003 ) , research on adults can be used as insight and as a basis for predictions . In one study , Ross and Murphy ( 1999 ) used a priming paradigm to examine the accessibility of script and taxonomic categories of food . Adults in this study were asked to rate the similarity of pairs of food words ( unaccompanied by pictures ) preceded or not by a category label ( e . g . , breakfast food : bagel – bacon ) . So that differences in typical - ity would not affect the results , an independent group of adults had previously rated these foods ; the foods from the two categories had equally high levels of typicality . Ross and Murphy ( 1999 ) found that the words for the taxonomic and script foods usually activated the categories on their own , suggesting that these categories are spontaneously activated much of the time for adults . However , Ross and Murphy ( 1999 ) also found that the labels had somewhat more of an effect on the ratings of the script pairs of foods , suggesting that the activation of script categories may not be as strong as that of taxonomic categories ( see also Barsalou , 1982 ) . This priming effect was also replicated when Ross and Murphy ( 1999 ) used another version of this priming paradigm in a follow - up study . This effect of priming was interpreted as reflect - ing the degree to which different categories of food used in cross - classification are well established in memory . To test the category accessibility of taxonomic and script categories with children , a similar priming procedure was used in Experiment 4 of the present investigation ( see also Ackerman , 1988 ; Ceci & Howe , 1978 ; Melkman , Tversky , & Baratz , 1981 ; Steinberg & Anderson , 1975 ) . Given the findings with adults , it was predicted that chil - dren would activate taxonomic and script categories much of the time but that the presence of category labels would also result in a priming effect , depending upon how well a category representation is embedded in memory . To summarize , the present research is a series of four experi - ments that aim to understand the emerging use of taxonomic and script systems of categorization for cross - classification . Experi - ments 1 and 2 examined the development of children’s cross - classification of items from different domains . Given the findings of Nguyen and Murphy ( 2003 ) , it was predicted that children could spontaneously cross - classify items from different domains into taxonomic and script categories . In light of the body of research on cognitive flexibility with young children and infants , it was pre - dicted that cross - classification would emerge at an early age . Experiment 3 explored whether children can represent a cross - classified item as belonging to both taxonomic and script catego - ries simultaneously . Also , in light of the body of research on children’s language , it was predicted that children are able to represent an item as simultaneously belonging to both categories . Finally , Experiment 4 explored whether these categories are spon - taneously activated when children think about cross - classified items . Given the findings of Ross and Murphy ( 1999 ) with adults , it was predicted that the activation of cross - classifications would depend upon the degree to which the individual categories are well established in memory . Experiment 1 : Cross - Classification Experiment 1 was designed to replicate and extend Nguyen and Murphy’s ( 2003 ) finding that children can cross - classify foods into taxonomic and script categories . Experiment 1 included noncon - flict triads that were composed of a target , an alternative that shared a taxonomic or script relationship with the target , and an unrelated alternative . Specifically , eight objects that came from the domains of food , clothing , vehicles , toys , furniture , animals , peo - ple , and buildings were used as the targets in both the taxonomic and script triads . For example , in one trial , children were asked if a rubber duck was the same kind of thing as a puzzle ( taxonomic choice ) or a police officer ( unrelated choice ) . In another trial , children were asked if the rubber duck was the same kind of thing as soap ( script choice ) or paper ( unrelated choice ) . This task permitted independent tests of children’s knowledge of taxonomic and ( in other trials ) script relations as well as cross - classification . When examining cross - classification it is es - sential to establish that children know the categories that are being tested . Thus , if children fail to cross - classify , the results can be attributed to a lack of cross - classification abilities as opposed to ignorance regarding the categories . If children form taxonomic and script categories , then they should select the script alternatives on the script trials and taxonomic alternatives on the taxonomic trials . In addition , if children cross - classify , then they should select the choice that shares a categorical relationship with the targets in both taxonomic and script trials . Method Participants . Participants were 42 children : fourteen 3 - year - olds ( mean age 3 . 66 years , range (cid:1) 3 . 44 – 3 . 92 ; 6 boys and 8 girls ) ; fourteen 4 - year - olds ( mean age 4 . 47 years , range (cid:1) 4 . 01 – 4 . 98 ; 6 boys and 8 girls ) ; and fourteen 6 - year - olds ( mean age 6 . 57 years , range 6 . 00 – 7 . 10 ; 3 boys and 11 girls ) . Fourteen adults also par - ticipated ( mean age 18 . 62 years , range (cid:1) 18 . 05 – 20 . 23 ; 2 males and 12 females ) . An additional set of 34 adults also provided ratings of the stimuli . The participants were predominately middle - class European - Americans recruited from schools or day cares and a university located in the southeastern United States . Materials . Color photographs ( 2 . 5 (cid:2) 3 in . [ 6 . 35 (cid:2) 7 . 62 cm ] ) of items from different domains were collected from Internet sources . Photographs were arranged into 16 triads consisting of a target , category choice , and an unrelated choice . To prevent per - ceptual similarity from dominating the choices , a group of 16 adults were asked to rate the visual similarity between the targets and the category choices and the targets and the unrelated choices on a scale ranging from 1 ( not at all visually similar ) to 7 ( very visually similar ) . The targets had equally low visual similarity between their category choices ( M (cid:1) 1 . 19 , SD (cid:1) 0 . 29 ) and their unrelated choices ( M (cid:1) 1 . 01 , SD (cid:1) 0 . 03 ) . Several steps were also taken to ensure that the items were readily identifiable as typical and familiar members of the tested categories . A different group of 18 adults were asked to rate the typicality and familiarity of the targets and the category choices , separately . The scale ranged from 1 ( not at all typical / familiar ) to 721 CROSS - CLASSIFICATION 7 ( very typical / familiar ) . Script ( M (cid:1) 6 . 50 , SD (cid:1) 0 . 43 ) and taxonomic ( M (cid:1) 6 . 09 , SD (cid:1) 0 . 85 ) typicality ratings did not differ significantly from each other nor did script ( M (cid:1) 6 . 68 , SD (cid:1) 0 . 35 ) and taxonomic ( M (cid:1) 6 . 49 , SD (cid:1) 0 . 49 ) familiarity ratings . Al - though the typicality and familiarity ratings were uniformly high , it should be acknowledged that these items may be more readily identifiable as typical and familiar members of the tested catego - ries by adults than by children . The 16 triads were then printed on 8 . 5 (cid:2) 11 in . ( 21 . 6 (cid:2) 7 . 9 cm ) pieces of paper and placed in a three - ring binder ( see Appendix A ) . There were two blocks . The first block included eight targets placed into 4 taxonomic triads and 4 script triads . The second block included the same eight targets placed in triads from the untested category with different category and unrelated choices . Procedure . Children were tested individually by a researcher in a quiet area of their schools or day cares . Children initially completed 2 warm - up trials in which they were asked to categorize a white flower into two different categories . The first warm - up was , “This is a white flower . Is a blue flower or square the same kind of thing as the white flower ? ” The second warm - up was , “This is a white flower . Is a circle or flower pot the same kind of thing as the white flower ? ” If children selected the incorrect pictures ( i . e . , square or circle ) , the researcher corrected them and repeated the warm - up until it was clear that they understood the procedures . Next , children completed the 16 test trials . For each of these trials , the researcher labeled the pictures in the triad and asked children which of the two choices was the same kind of thing as the target . If children did not make a clear choice , the researcher repeated the question . No feedback was given on the test trials . The same researcher tested the adults in a group , using a paper and pencil format of the children’s task , unaccompanied by the pictures . The test trials were presented in one of two random orders and the order of the two blocks was also counterbalanced . Results and Discussion The data were examined in two ways . The goal of the first set of analyses was to establish that children have knowledge of taxonomic and script categories . A 1 was assigned to category choices and a zero to unrelated choices . Two summary scores were then created , one for taxonomic and one for script categories . These scores were then converted into percentages ( see Table 1 ) . A 2 ( category type : taxonomic and script ) (cid:2) 4 ( age group : 3 - year - olds , 4 - year - olds , 6 - year - olds , and adults ) repeated measures anal - ysis of variance ( ANOVA ) was then conducted on these data . Overall , categorization ability improved by age group : 3 - year - olds ( M (cid:1) 71 % , SD (cid:1) 10 % ) ; 4 - year - olds ( M (cid:1) 91 % , SD (cid:1) 8 % ) ; 6 - year - olds ( M (cid:1) 95 % , SD (cid:1) 8 % ) ; and adults ( M (cid:1) 99 % , SD (cid:1) 3 % ) , F ( 3 , 52 ) (cid:1) 36 . 93 , MSE (cid:1) 0 . 43 , p (cid:3) . 05 , (cid:4) p2 (cid:1) 0 . 68 . There was a significant difference between 3 - year - olds and all of the other age groups , Tukey’s HSD tests , p s (cid:3) . 05 , 95 % confidence intervals ( CI 95 ) (cid:1) 11 – 35 % . There was also a significant difference between 4 - year - olds and adults , Tukey’s HSD test , p (cid:3) . 05 , CI 95 (cid:1) 0 – 15 % . There was not a significant difference between 6 - year - olds and these two age groups , however . Categorization ability also varied by category type : script ( M (cid:1) 93 % , SD (cid:1) 13 % ) and taxonomic ( M (cid:1) 85 % , SD (cid:1) 16 % ) , F ( 1 , 52 ) (cid:1) 13 . 16 , MSE (cid:1) 0 . 15 , p (cid:3) . 05 , (cid:4) p2 (cid:1) 0 . 20 . There was not an interaction between age group and category type . All age groups were above chance ( 50 % ) on both the taxonomic and script trials , t s ( 13 ) (cid:5) 3 . 0 , p s (cid:3) . 05 , two - tailed tests . Order effects were also examined to see if the performance on the first trial of an item interfered with perfor - mance on the second trial of that item . There were no order effects , however . Performance was similar on both sets of trials when each age group was considered separately ( p s (cid:5) . 05 ) . Thus , the first set of analyses reveal that children have knowledge of both taxonomic and script categories by age 3 years . Yet , do children use these categories for cross - classification ? True cross - classification involves an individual categorizing a single item into both a taxonomic and script category . The goal of the second set of analyses was to examine cross - classification . Thus , a 1 was assigned when children cross - classified , selecting both the taxonomic and script category choices for the same target . Otherwise , a zero was assigned when children did not cross - classify , selecting only one of the category choices or neither for the same target . These scores were then summed and converted into percentages . An ANOVA was then conducted on these data with cross - classification being the dependent variable . The results reveal that cross - classification improved by age group : 3 - year - olds ( M (cid:1) 50 % , SD (cid:1) 16 % ) ; 4 - year - olds ( M (cid:1) 82 % , SD (cid:1) 14 % ) ; 6 - year - olds ( M (cid:1) 92 % , SD (cid:1) 14 % ) ; and adults ( M (cid:1) 97 % , SD (cid:1) 5 % ) , F ( 3 , 52 ) (cid:1) 36 . 70 , MSE (cid:1) 0 . 62 , p (cid:3) . 01 , (cid:4) p 2 (cid:1) 0 . 67 . There was a significant difference between 3 - year - olds and all of the other age groups , Tukey’s HSD tests , ps (cid:3) . 05 , CI 95 (cid:1) 19 – 60 % . There was also a significant difference between 4 - year - olds and adults , Tukey’s HSD test , p (cid:3) . 05 , CI 95 (cid:1) 2 – 28 % . There were no other significant difference between 6 - and 4 - year - olds as well as between 6 - year - olds and adults . Performance on each trial was also examined individually to see whether the results were due to particular domains . There were no apparent differences , however . All of the age groups had above - chance ( 25 % ) performance , t s ( 13 ) (cid:5) 5 . 0 , p s (cid:3) . 05 . Chance was set at 25 % because there are four possible response patterns across the taxonomic and script trials for a given target ( correct – correct , correct – incorrect , incorrect – correct , incorrect – incorrect ) and successful cross - classification is one of these patterns ( correct – correct ) . Taken together , these results demonstrate that by age 3 years , children are able to cross - classify items from a variety of domains into taxonomic and script categories . These results replicate the findings of Nguyen and Murphy ( 2003 ) with older children and the domain of food . These results also extend these researchers’ find - ings to younger children and different domains beyond food , including animals , clothing , furniture , toys , etc . The present find - ings are consistent with a number of studies that have documented signs of cognitive flexibility in childhood ( e . g . , Bohlmann & Fenson , 2005 ; Dea´k , Ray , & Pick , 2002 ; Dea´k et al . , 2004 ; Perner & Lang , 2002 ) . Table 1 Mean ( SD ) Percentage Accuracy on Categorization in Experiment 1 by Category Type and Age Group Category type 3 - year - olds 4 - year - olds 6 - year - olds Adults Taxonomic 63 ( 13 ) 86 ( 12 ) 95 ( 6 ) 97 ( 5 ) Script 79 ( 15 ) 95 ( 9 ) 96 ( 13 ) 100 ( 0 ) 722 NGUYEN Experiment 2 : Cross - Classification With 2 - Year - Olds Experiment 1 revealed that children as young as age 3 can classify items into taxonomic and script categories and use these categories for cross - classification . However , it is possible that the ability to cross - classify with taxonomic and script categories ap - pears at an earlier age , especially given previous work on flexible categorization in infancy and early childhood ( e . g . , Jones et al . , 1991 ; Rakison & Butterworth , 1998 ; Rakison & Cohen , 1999 ; Ribar et al . , 2004 ) . This would be important to know in order to document the emergence and development of cross - classification in childhood . The aim of Experiment 2 was to examine cross - classification in a younger age group , particularly 2 - year - olds , using a modified version of the procedure from Experiment 1 . If 2 - year - olds have knowledge of taxonomic and script categories and are able to cross - classify items into these categories , then they should demonstrate above - chance performance . Method Participants . Participants were fourteen 2 - year - olds ( mean age 2 . 61 years , range (cid:1) 2 . 15 – 2 . 99 ; 6 boys and 8 girls ) . The participants were predominately middle - class European - Americans and were recruited from day cares located in the southeastern United States . Materials . Half of the 16 nonconflict triads from Experiment 1 were used in Experiment 2 to accommodate the attention spans of 2 - year - olds . These triads were randomly selected and are indi - cated with asterisks in Appendix A . The color photographs in the triads were reduced in size to approximately 1 . 25 (cid:2) 1 . 5 in . ( 3 . 17 (cid:2) 3 . 81 cm ) and printed on 5 . 5 (cid:2) 8 . 5 in . ( 13 . 97 (cid:2) 21 . 59 cm ) pieces of paper . This was done so that the triads could be placed into a small three - ring binder that would fit on children’s laps . As before , there were two blocks of triads . The first block included four targets placed into 2 taxonomic and 2 script triads . The second block included the same four targets but in triads from the untested category . Procedures . A slightly modified version of the procedure in Experiment 1 was used in Experiment 2 . An additional step was added to the beginning of the procedure to allow young children the opportunity to practice pointing to pictures . Children were presented with pictures of three familiar television characters ( Bar - ney , Big Bird , and Winnie the Pooh ) , one at a time . Children were asked , for example , “Where is Barney ? Point to Barney . ” After - wards , children were presented with the two warm - up trials from Experiment 1 and then the eight test trials . The trials were pre - sented in one of two random orders . The order of the two blocks was also counterbalanced . Results and Discussion The data were scored and analyzed as in Experiment 1 . The first set of analyses focused on 2 - year - olds’ ability to classify items into taxonomic and script categories . The results showed that 2 - year - olds were able to classify items into taxonomic ( M (cid:1) 67 % , SD (cid:1) 24 % ) and script ( M (cid:1) 66 % , SD (cid:1) 23 % ) categories and that performance on these two types of categories did not differ sig - nificantly , t ( 13 ) (cid:1) (cid:6) 0 . 20 , p (cid:5) . 05 . The results also showed that performance on the first trial of an item did not interfere with performance on the second trial of an item , t ( 13 ) (cid:1) 2 . 11 , p (cid:5) . 05 . Overall , 2 - year - olds’ performance was just above chance ( 50 % ) on both taxonomic and script categories , t s ( 13 ) (cid:5) 2 . 5 , p s (cid:3) . 05 , CI 95 (cid:1) 2 – 32 % , demonstrating that they had knowledge of these two types of relations . The second set of analyses focused on whether 2 - year - olds use both types of category relations for cross - classification . The results reveal that 2 - year - olds are indeed able to cross - classify items into both taxonomic and script categories ( M (cid:1) 41 % , SD (cid:1) 23 % ) . There were no apparent domain differences in children’s cross - classification when each trial was examined individually . Overall , 2 - year - olds’ level of cross - classification was just above chance ( 25 % ) , t ( 13 ) (cid:1) 2 . 59 , p (cid:3) . 05 , CI 95 (cid:1) 2 – 29 % . What insights do the findings from Experiments 1 and 2 offer about the emergence and development of cross - classification ? To examine how the results from 2 - year - olds compare to those of older children in Experiment 1 , I conducted an analysis focusing on just the eight trials used in Experiment 2 . The results of this analysis showed a clear developmental pattern , F ( 4 , 69 ) (cid:1) 29 . 87 , MSE (cid:1) 0 . 90 , p (cid:3) . 05 . Adults , 6 - year - olds , and 4 - year - olds per - formed significantly better than 3 - and 2 - year - olds , Tukey’s HSD tests , p s (cid:3) . 05 , CI 95 (cid:1) 13 – 74 % . There was not a significant difference between adults , 6 - year - olds , and 4 - year - olds , or be - tween the two younger age groups , p s (cid:5) . 05 . Yet , a concern in making this direct comparison across the two experiments is that if performance on a task is generally worse at the beginning ( as children are trying to understand the demands of the task ) , the reduced number of trials in Experiment 2 might place 2 - year - olds at an unfair disadvantage when compared to older children from Experiment 1 . Perhaps a fairer comparison is to focus on 2 - year - olds’ performance relative to older children’s performance on the first eight trials that they were presented with in Experiment 1 . However , when this comparison was made , the same developmental pattern was obtained , F ( 4 , 69 ) (cid:1) 20 . 49 , MSE (cid:1) 0 . 31 , p (cid:3) . 05 . As before , adults , 6 - year - olds , and 4 - year - olds performed significantly better than 3 - and 2 - year - olds , Tukey’s HSD tests , p s (cid:3) . 05 , CI 95 (cid:1) 10 – 40 % . There was also not a significant difference between adults , 6 - year - olds , and 4 - year - olds , or between the two younger age groups , p s (cid:5) . 05 . Overall , the results of these two sets of analyses are quite similar , suggesting that the ability to classify and cross - classify items into taxonomic and script categories emerges by age 2 years and that important developments in these abilities occur between the ages of 3 and 4 years . Although it would be difficult to test children under age 2 using the current procedure , future research should use an age appropriate procedure to examine the develop - ment of cross - classification in infancy . Experiment 3 : Category Representation The results of Experiments 1 and 2 show that when an item is presented in a taxonomic and then a script trial ( or vice versa ) sequentially , children can cross - classify the item into both catego - ries . This finding suggests that children are able to represent a single item in terms of taxonomic and script relations at different times . However , are children capable of maintaining both taxo - nomic and script representations for a single item simultaneously ? Although this question has yet to be tested with taxonomic and script categories , related research documenting representational 723 CROSS - CLASSIFICATION flexibility in early childhood offers support for the possibility that children are capable of representing a single item based on both types of relations simultaneously . For example , research has dem - onstrated that children can use two or more labels at the same time , denoting different types of category membership , to distinguish the appearance and reality of deceptive objects ( e . g . , rock – sponge , Hansen & Markman , 2005 ) and to describe representational ob - jects with distinct functions ( e . g . , dinosaur – crayon , Dea´k & Ma - ratsos , 1998 ) . Research has also demonstrated that children as young as age 2 frequently create compound nouns by combining two nouns together in order to label the different subcategories of a single category ( e . g . , race – car , taxi – car ; Clark et al . , 1985 ; Gelman et al . , 1989 ) . Thus , Experiment 3 was designed to address the issue of simul - taneous category representations with taxonomic and script cate - gories . In this experiment , children were asked to verify the joint category membership of items that were given a category label that combined individual taxonomic and script labels . For example , children were asked , “Are pajamas bedtime clothes ? ” This ap - proach is somewhat different than showing children a picture of pajamas and asking , “Are these pajamas clothes ? Are these paja - mas for bedtime ? ” which would assess children’s ability to repre - sent an item in two ways on different occasions but not necessarily at the same time . The prediction was that if children are capable of representing a single item as belonging to both taxonomic and script categories simultaneously , children should be attentive to both parts of the category label . Method Participants . Participants were 42 children : fourteen 3 - year - olds ( mean age 3 . 65 years , range (cid:1) 3 . 41 – 3 . 92 ; 6 boys and 8 girls ) , fourteen 4 - year - olds ( mean age 4 . 68 years , range (cid:1) 4 . 22 – 5 . 14 ; 6 boys and 8 girls ) , and fourteen 6 - year - olds ( mean age 6 . 67 years , range (cid:1) 6 . 13 – 7 . 10 ; 6 boys and 8 girls ) . Two - year - olds were not included because of their relatively limited amount of cross - classification in the previous experiment . Fourteen adults also participated ( mean age 18 . 63 years , range (cid:1) 17 . 96 – 21 . 01 ; 3 males and 11 females ) . The participants were predominately European - American and were recruited from middle - class communities lo - cated in the midwestern and southeastern United States . In partic - ular , children were recruited from schools and day cares whereas adults were recruited from universities . Materials . The materials included a series of 16 “yes” or “no” questions about the joint category membership of cross - classified items , unaccompanied by pictures . All of the items were derived from Experiment 1 ( see Appendix B ) . Half of the items were created by combining the appropriate taxonomic and script cate - gory labels for each of the targets from Experiment 1 . The script category always modified the taxonomic category in these com - bined labels . Previous work examining children’s understanding of grammatical compound nouns ( e . g . , Clark & Barron , 1988 ) and children’s naming practices with script categories ( Lucariello et al . , 1992 ; K . Nelson & Nelson , 1990 ) guided the decision to structure the joint labels in this way . For example , in Experiment 1 , pajamas belonged to the taxonomic category of clothes and the script category of bedtime things , and in the present experiment children were asked , “Are pajamas bedtime clothes ? ” The other half of the items were created by combining inappro - priate taxonomic and script category labels for various nontargets from Experiment 1 , in which the taxonomic category was correct , but the script category was incorrect , and vice versa . For example , in Experiment 1 , library was in the taxonomic category of build - ings but not in the script category of bedtime . In the present experiment , children were asked if a library is a bedtime building . These questions were included to allow children the opportunity to say “no” and to see if children were responding “yes” to only one category . Procedure . Children were tested individually in a quiet area of their school or daycare by a researcher . The researcher initially presented children with a warm - up task to allow children an opportunity to practice answering “yes / no” questions . The warm - up task consisted of two questions . For the first question , the researcher pointed to a picture of a blue square and asked , “Is this a blue square ? ” For the second question , the researcher pointed to a picture of a white circle and asked , “Is this a red circle ? ” If children responded incorrectly to a question ( i . e . , “no , ” “yes , ” respectively ) , then the researcher provided corrective feedback and then repeated the question . After the warm - up task , children were asked a series of 16 test questions ( e . g . , “Are pajamas bedtime clothes ? ” ) . If children did not respond , the researcher repeated the question . No feedback was given . The questions were presented in one of two random orders . Adults were tested in a group by a researcher , using a paper and pencil version of the children’s task . Results and Discussion The data were scored by assigning a 1 to correct answers ( i . e . , “yes” to items with appropriate category labels ; “no” to items with inappropriate category labels ) and a zero to incorrect answers ( i . e . , “no” to items with appropriate category labels ; “yes” to items with inappropriate category labels ) . The scores were then converted into two summary scores , one for items with appropriate category labels and one for items with inappropriate category labels . These scores were converted into percentages . The data are presented in Table 2 . A 4 ( age group : 3 - year - olds , 4 - year - olds , 6 - year - olds , adults ) (cid:2) 2 ( category label : appropriate , inappropriate ) repeated measures ANOVA was then conducted on these data . The results indicated a main effect of category label , F ( 1 , 52 ) (cid:1) 33 . 99 , MSE (cid:1) 0 . 68 , p (cid:3) . 05 , (cid:4) p 2 (cid:1) 0 . 39 ( appropriate (cid:5) inappropriate ) and age group , F ( 3 , 52 ) (cid:1) 15 . 89 , MSE (cid:1) 0 . 27 , p (cid:3) . 05 , (cid:4) p 2 (cid:1) 0 . 47 ( adults (cid:1) 6 - year - olds (cid:1) 4 - year - olds (cid:5) 3 - year - olds ) . These main effects were mediated by an interaction between category label and age group , F ( 3 , 52 ) (cid:1) 7 . 59 , MSE (cid:1) 0 . 15 , p (cid:3) . 05 , (cid:4) p2 (cid:1) 0 . 30 . A follow - up analysis to this interaction was conducted to compare the performance between the different age groups . The four age Table 2 Mean ( SD ) Percentage Accuracy in Experiment 3 by Category Label and Age Group Category label 3 - year - olds 4 - year - olds 6 - year - olds Adults Appropriate 93 ( 10 ) 91 ( 10 ) 97 ( 5 ) 99 ( 3 ) InappropriateTaxonomic true 69 ( 38 ) 88 ( 23 ) 98 ( 6 ) 94 ( 10 ) Script true 41 ( 27 ) 71 ( 32 ) 84 ( 18 ) 89 ( 18 ) 724 NGUYEN groups performed equally well on the items with appropriate category labels , but there were significant age group differences on the items with inappropriate category labels , F ( 3 , 55 ) (cid:1) 3 . 04 , MSE (cid:1) . 006 , p (cid:3) . 05 . Adults , 4 - year - olds , and 6 - year - olds , who did not differ significantly from each other , performed better than 3 - year - olds on items with inappropriate category labels , Tukey’s HSD tests , p s (cid:3) . 05 . An additional follow - up analysis to the interaction was also conducted to compare performance between the items with the two types of category labels . Each age group ( with the exception of 4 - year - olds ) performed better on items with appropriate versus inappropriate category labels , t s ( 13 ) (cid:5) 2 , p s (cid:3) . 05 . Four - year - olds performed similarly on both types of items ( p (cid:5) . 05 ) . Performance on items with appropriate and inappropriate cate - gory labels was also compared to chance ( 50 % ) . Four - year - olds , 6 - year - olds , and adults were above chance on all of the items , t s ( 13 ) (cid:5) 2 , p s (cid:3) . 05 . Three - year - olds were only above chance on the items with appropriate category labels , t ( 13 ) (cid:1) 15 . 06 , p (cid:3) . 05 . The finding that 4 - year - olds , 6 - year - olds , and adults were above chance on both types of items suggests that , for these age groups , a partially true category label was insufficient and provides sup - port for the conclusion that older children and adults are attending to both taxonomic and script labels simultaneously . In other words , older children and adults are able to represent a cross - classified item as belonging to both a taxonomic and script category at the same time . However , 3 - year - olds’ chance - level performance on the items with inappropriate labels suggests that younger children were inconsistently rejecting these labels , perhaps indicating that children were answering “yes” most of the time regardless of whether the labels were appropriate or inappropriate . To examine 3 - year - olds’ performance more closely , I conducted an analysis of children’s “yes” responses . Three - year - olds’ percentage of “yes” responses for items with appropriate , inappropriate ( script - true ) , and inappropriate ( taxonomic - true ) labels was : 93 % , 31 % , and 59 % , respectively . Three - year - olds tended to say “yes” signifi - cantly more often for items with appropriate labels than for items with either type of inappropriate label , t s ( 13 ) (cid:5) 4 , p s (cid:3) . 05 , CI 95 (cid:1) 17 – 89 % . There was not a significant difference between “yes” responses for the two types of items with inappropriate labels ( p (cid:3) . 05 ) indicating at least some sensitivity in 3 - year - olds to both taxonomic and script categories simultaneously . To be sure , I also conducted an additional analysis of 3 - year - olds’ individual response patterns . Three - year - olds were classified into one of three response pattern groups based on binomial probability ( p (cid:3) . 05 ) : ( a ) consistently accurate ( 12 – 16 accurate responses out of 16 ) , ( b ) inconsistent ( 6 – 11 accurate responses ) , and ( c ) consistently inaccurate ( 0 – 5 accurate responses ) . Fifty - seven percent of the 3 - year - olds ( 8 out of 14 total ) were classified as consistently accurate . Forty - three percent ( 6 ) of the 3 - year - olds were classified as inconsistent ( 3 of these children tended to respond “yes” over 75 % of the time ) . None of the 3 - year - olds was classified as consistently inaccurate . Thus , over half of the 3 - year - olds were quite accurate at responding to items with appropriate and inappropriate labels . These findings provide additional confir - mation that there is at least some sensitivity to both taxonomic and script categories for cross - classified items in younger children . Thus , Experiment 3 demonstrates that by age 4 years , and to some degree age 3 years , children consider both taxonomic and script systems of categorization simultaneously when thinking about the same items . This finding is consistent with several studies that have shown that children can entertain more than one label for an item at the same time ( e . g . , Clark et al . , 1985 ; Dea´k & Maratsos , 1998 ; Gelman et al . , 1989 ; Hansen & Markman , 2005 ) . Experiment 4 : Category Accessibility So far , Experiments 1 – 2 have shown that children are capable of cross - classifying a single item into a taxonomic and script cate - gory . Experiment 3 showed that children are also capable of mentally representing a cross - classified item as belonging to both categories simultaneously . However , a crucial issue that has yet to be examined is the accessibility of the taxonomic and script categories that children use to cross - classify an item . When chil - dren encounter an item that belongs to both a taxonomic and script category , to what degree are these categories spontaneously acti - vated and made accessible for cross - classification ? This is an important question because children’s perspective on an item can be influenced by which type ( s ) of category information gets acti - vated . As described earlier , research on adults has revealed that the categories used in cross - classification are not always accessible . This research has demonstrated that the presence of category labels can prime the activation of cross - classifications that are not usually activated on their own . For example , script categories tend to show some priming effect whereas taxonomic categories do not ( Bar - salou , 1982 ; Ross & Murphy , 1999 ) . In Experiment 4 of the present research , a priming task was also used to test whether children spontaneously activate taxonomic and script categories when thinking about cross - classified items . Children were initially primed with either a category label , arbi - trary label , or no label . The arbitrary labels were included to see if priming effects are unique to category relevant labels . Then , chil - dren were asked to indicate whether items in a taxonomic ( e . g . , rubber duck – puzzle ) or script ( e . g . , rubber duck – soap ) pair are similar . Given the research on adults ( e . g . , Barsalou , 1982 ; Ross & Murphy , 1999 ) , it seems likely that at least one , if not more of these categories , will be affected by the presence of category labels . Thus , if children do not always spontaneously activate taxonomic or script cross - classifications , then the presentation of labels should have some effect on children’s similarity ratings . However , this effect should be limited to appropriate category labels because arbitrary labels are irrelevant to identifying cate - gory membership . Thus , performance in the arbitrary label condi - tion should be similar to performance in the no label condition . Method Participants . The participants were 54 children : 27 three - year - olds ( mean age 3 . 57 years , range (cid:1) 3 . 00 – 3 . 98 ; 13 boys and 14 girls ) ; 27 four - year - olds ( mean age 4 . 55 years , range (cid:1) 4 . 10 – 5 . 02 ; 17 boys and 10 girls ) and 27 six - year - olds ( mean age 6 . 22 years , range (cid:1) 5 . 50 – 7 . 04 ; 17 boys and 10 girls ) . Twenty - seven adults ( mean age 19 . 0 years , range (cid:1) 18 . 55 – 21 . 05 ; 12 males and 15 females ) also participated . Participants were randomly assigned to one of the following three conditions : category label , arbitrary label , or no category label . Materials . The materials were derived from Experiment 1 . The triads from Experiment 1 were converted into pairs , consisting of a target and a correct category choice . Thus , there were eight 725 CROSS - CLASSIFICATION taxonomic pairs and eight script pairs . There were also eight unrelated pairs that served as fillers ( shampoo – fork , jump rope – cheese , Christmas tree – police , school – pillow , sofa – paper , socks – airplane , doctor – bag , candle – dog ) . The picture pairs were printed on 8 . 5 (cid:2) 11 in . ( 21 . 6 (cid:2) 7 . 9 cm ) pieces of paper and arranged in a three - ring binder . Procedure . Children were tested individually by a researcher in a quiet area of their school or daycare . The procedure was introduced to children as a fun game in which they would be presented with a series of two pictures and would be asked whether the items in the pictures are alike . Children initially completed a warm - up task , so that they could practice answering “yes” and “no . ” In the warm - up task children were presented with four pairs of pictures ( rose – daisy , rose – chair , shovel – rake , shovel – book ) , one at a time , and for each pair , children were asked if the items in the pictures are alike . Children were provided with corrective feedback during the warm - up task as necessary . After the warm - up task , children were presented with a series of 24 pairs of pictures , one at a time . Children in the category label condition were initially primed with a label for each picture pair . For example , taxonomic trials received a taxonomic label , “We’re going to talk about toys now , can you say toys ? Are a rubber duck and puzzle like each other ? ” Script trials received a script label , “We’re going to talk about bath - time things now , can you say bath - time things ? Are a rubber duck and soap like each other ? ” The fillers received either a taxonomic or script label that corre - sponded to only one of the items in the pair , as the items in the pair were otherwise unrelated . In contrast , children in the arbitrary label condition were provided with labels that did not correspond to the pairs of items . For example , children heard , “We’re going to talk about buildings now , can you say buildings ? Are a rubber duck and puzzle like each other ? ” Finally , children in the no - category label condition were not primed with a category label . Rather , they were presented with the test questions immediately . For example , “Are a rubber duck and puzzle like each other ? ” Adults were tested by the researcher in a group using a paper and pencil version of the procedures used with children . Results and Discussion The data were scored by assigning a 1 when participants made “related” responses , that is , reported that pairs of taxonomic or script items are similar . A score of zero was assigned otherwise . Summary scores were then created for the taxonomic and script trials and then converted into percentages . The data are presented in Table 3 . A 4 ( age group : 3 - year - olds , 4 - year - olds , 6 - year - olds , adults ) (cid:2) 3 ( category trial : taxonomic , script , unrelated ) (cid:2) 3 ( priming condition : label , arbitrary label , no label ) repeated - measures ANOVA was then conducted on these data . The results reveal three main effects : ( a ) age group , F ( 3 , 96 ) (cid:1) 5 . 84 , MSE (cid:1) 0 . 65 , p (cid:3) . 01 , (cid:4) p2 (cid:1) 0 . 15 ( adults (cid:1) 6 - year - olds (cid:1) 4 - year - olds (cid:5) 3 - year - olds ) ; ( b ) category trial , F ( 2 , 192 ) (cid:1) 284 , MSE (cid:1) 10 . 5 , p (cid:3) . 01 , (cid:4) p2 (cid:1) 0 . 74 ( script (cid:5) taxonomic (cid:5) unrelated ) ; and ( c ) priming condition , F ( 2 , 96 ) (cid:1) 4 . 39 , MSE (cid:1) 0 . 48 , p (cid:3) . 05 , (cid:4) p2 (cid:1) 0 . 08 ( category (cid:5) arbitrary (cid:1) no label ) . There were also two interac - tions . The first interaction was between category trial and age group , F ( 6 , 192 ) (cid:1) 10 . 67 , MSE (cid:1) 0 . 39 , p (cid:3) . 05 , (cid:4) p2 (cid:1) 0 . 25 . Because the aim of Experiment 4 was to examine the extent to which taxonomic and script categories are spontaneously acti - vated , of particular interest is the second interaction between category trial and priming condition , F ( 4 , 192 ) (cid:1) 13 . 34 , MSE (cid:1) 0 . 49 , p (cid:3) . 05 , (cid:4) p 2 (cid:1) 0 . 21 . Thus , two sets of follow - up analyses were conducted on this interaction . The first set examined perfor - mance within each of the conditions separately . In the absence of priming in the no label condition , script categories were sponta - neously activated more often than taxonomic and unrelated cate - gories . This pattern of results was also true in the presence of priming in the arbitrary label condition . In both conditions , there were significant differences between all three category trials , t ( 35 ) (cid:5) (cid:6) 4 , p s (cid:3) . 05 , CI 95 (cid:1) 7 – 29 % . However , in the presence of priming in the category label condition , both script and taxo - nomic categories were activated more often than unrelated ones . There was not a significant difference between script and taxo - nomic category trials , but there was a significant difference be - tween these two trial types and the unrelated ones , t s ( 35 ) (cid:5) (cid:6) 4 , Table 3 Mean ( SD ) Percentage of Related Responses in Experiment 4 by Condition , Age Group , and Trial Condition Totals 3 - year - olds 4 - year - olds 6 - year - olds Adults Taxonomic No label 57 ( 30 ) 79 ( 36 ) 44 ( 22 ) 51 ( 23 ) 51 ( 29 ) Arbitrary label 59 ( 27 ) 64 ( 32 ) 51 ( 33 ) 63 ( 23 ) 55 ( 20 ) Category label 86 ( 18 ) 75 ( 25 ) 85 ( 17 ) 88 ( 16 ) 98 ( 4 ) Script No label 74 ( 34 ) 82 ( 33 ) 69 ( 33 ) 84 ( 27 ) 58 ( 41 ) Arbitrary label 74 ( 26 ) 77 ( 21 ) 70 ( 31 ) 79 ( 20 ) 69 ( 31 ) Category label 91 ( 17 ) 90 ( 15 ) 85 ( 22 ) 89 ( 20 ) 98 ( 4 ) Unrelated No label 23 ( 33 ) 68 ( 33 ) 16 ( 19 ) 0 ( 0 ) 6 ( 9 ) Arbitrary label 25 ( 32 ) 61 ( 26 ) 21 ( 36 ) 15 ( 20 ) 2 ( 5 ) Category label 13 ( 23 ) 23 ( 15 ) 27 ( 38 ) 0 ( 0 ) 1 ( 4 ) 726 NGUYEN p s (cid:3) . 05 , CI 95 (cid:1) 63 – 88 % . Thus , category labels had a similar priming effect on both script and taxonomic categories . The second set of follow - up analyses examined performance on each of the category trials across the three conditions . The results indicate that performance on the unrelated category trials did not vary as a function of condition . However , performance on the taxonomic category trials did vary as a function of condition , F ( 2 , 107 ) (cid:1) 14 . 70 , MSE (cid:1) 1 . 00 , p (cid:3) . 05 . This pattern of results was also true for script category trials , F s ( 2 , 107 ) (cid:1) 4 . 63 , MSE (cid:1) 0 . 33 , p (cid:3) . 05 . For both taxonomic and script trials , the presence of category labels had the largest priming effect compared to arbi - trary labels or no labels , Tukey’s HSD tests , p s (cid:3) . 05 , CI 95 (cid:1) 1 – 44 % . There was not a significant difference between the pres - ence of arbitrary labels or no labels . Thus , these results suggest that the priming effect is limited to category labels that appropri - ately identify the category membership of an item . A caveat needs to be made about the category trial by priming condition interaction . This interaction showed that category labels had a large influence on taxonomic categories ; without priming , participants made fewer “related” responses on taxonomic versus script trials , but this difference disappeared when participants were primed with category labels . These results contrast with those of Ross and Murphy ( 1999 ) . These researchers actually found the opposite pattern of results with adults : Category labels had little priming effect on taxonomic categories of food but rather had some effect on script categories of food . The reason for this difference in results is most likely due to the fact that these two studies used taxonomic categories from differ - ent levels of abstraction . The taxonomic categories in the present study were at the superordinate level ( e . g . , animals , furniture , vehicles ) , whereas the taxonomic categories in Ross and Murphy ( 1999 ) were at the basic level ( e . g . , fruits , vegetables , meats ) . Much research has shown that young children learn basic level taxonomic categories easier and earlier than superordinate level categories ( see Murphy , 2002 , for a review ) . Thus , in this study , the taxonomic categories were at a disadvantage because they were at the superordinate level , not the basic level . Indeed , the data bear this out ; participants in the no label condition provided “related” responses on taxonomic category trials only 57 % of the time . This level of performance could suggest that taxonomic catego - ries are not as accessible as script categories . However , this inter - pretation is highly unlikely given the previous results of Ross and Murphy ( 1999 ) and the overwhelming evidence documenting the presence of taxonomic categorization in early childhood ( e . g . , Horton & Markman , 1980 ; Markman , 1989 ; Markman & Hutchin - son , 1984 ; Rosch et al . , 1976 ; Waxman & Gelman , 1988 ) . Alternatively , this level of performance seems to indicate more convincingly that the “alike” phrasing of the test question set a threshold that was too high , even for adults . First , although items in a superordinate level taxonomic category belong to the same category , they may not necessarily be alike , especially in terms of concrete properties . In fact , items in a superordinate level ( vs . basic ) taxonomic category are quite heterogeneous in that they usually have only a few properties in common , and these tend to be relatively abstract ( see Murphy , 2002 ) . Second , the “alike” phrasing was not neutral with respect to taxonomic and script categories . Indeed , research has shown that the specific wording of instructions influences children’s preference for different types of categories by emphasizing some , but not other , relations ( e . g . , Bauer & Mandler , 1989 ; Dea´k & Bauer , 1995 , 1996 ; Scheuner , Bonthoux , Cannard , & Blaye , 2004 ; Waxman & Namy , 1997 ) . In particular , the “like each other” wording may have emphasized script , but not taxonomic , relations in the present study ( see Greenfield & Scott , 1986 ) . With that said , it is also important to point out that the fact that a significant priming effect was found for taxonomic as well as script categories does not mean that these categories were never activated on their own . Although general conclusions cannot nec - essarily be made about the relative strength of taxonomic and script categories , what can be concluded is that these categories are indeed spontaneously activated on their own much of the time . Looking at the absolute levels of performance in the no label condition , the participants were still 66 % accurate without prim - ing . Of course , the categories were not evoked all of the time , as the presence of a category label improved performance 89 % , which is an increase of 23 % in “related” responses . Thus , overall , it appears that children do have a fairly well - established mental structure for different types of categories early on . However , as children continue to learn different types of categories for an item , these categories may become more deeply entrenched in memory . General Discussion Summary of Findings Three questions guided the present examination . First , do chil - dren cross - classify items from different domains into taxonomic and script categories ? The answer to this question is yes . The results from Experiments 1 and 2 replicate those of Nguyen and Murphy ( 2003 ) , who found evidence for cross - classification within the domain of food . The results from Experiments 1 and 2 also extend Nguyen and Murphy ( 2003 ) by demonstrating that children not only cross - classify foods but also animals , clothing , furniture , and toys . These results suggest that cross - classification involving taxonomic and script organization is not domain specific . Rather , in this case , cross - classification is potentially applicable to any domain in which it is possible for the same items to be organized based on both taxonomic and script relations . As seen in Experi - ments 1 and 2 , the degree to which cross - classification occurs , of course , depends on how familiar children are with one or more of these relations and the relevance of both relations to the current situation ( in this case , an experimental setting ) . These experiments also document the developmental trajectory of cross - classification . The results show that by age 2 – 3 years , and with improvements around age 4 years , children have knowledge of both taxonomic and script organization and use these two very different systems of organization for cross - classification . These results build upon past research that has identified taxonomic and script organization in children ( e . g . , Lucariello et al . , 1992 ; K . Nelson , 1986 , 1988 ) . These results are also consistent with a number of studies that have shown similar age - related changes in children’s cognitive flexibil - ity associated with the development of the prefrontal cortex ( see Jacques & Zelazo , 2005 , for a review ) , perhaps pointing to broader cognitive changes that are occurring during this period of devel - opment . Second , do children think that an item can simultaneously belong to both taxonomic and script categories ? The answer to this question is yes by age 4 years and somewhat by age 3 years . In 727 CROSS - CLASSIFICATION Experiment 3 , 4 - and 6 - year - olds were able to verify the joint taxonomic and script membership of a single item , whereas 3 - year - olds showed some limited sensitivity to both categories . Overall , these results are consistent with several studies that have shown that children can produce more than one label for a single referent ( e . g . , Blewitt , 1994 ; Clark , 1997 ; Clark & Svaib , 1997 ; Dea´k & Maratsos , 1998 ; Hansen & Markman , 2005 ; Mervis et al . , 1994 ; Waxman & Hatch , 1992 ) . Third , do children readily activate taxonomic and script catego - ries when thinking about a cross - classified item ? The answer to this question is yes , most of the time . In Experiment 4 , children were often quite accurate without any priming , which suggests that the taxonomic and script categories were evoked spontaneously most of the time . But these categories were not evoked spontane - ously all of the time , because accuracy did improve with the presence of category labels . Thus , these results indicate that al - though children have a fairly well - established mental structure to draw from during cross - classification , it is also somewhat sensitive to priming as children continue to learn the many ways to cross - classify a single item . Future research should continue to investigate category repre - sentation and accessibility as it is especially germane to the realm of social cognition . Research has revealed that when adults cross - classify people , they do not always activate all of the relevant information such that priming one category ( e . g . , Chinese for Chinese woman ) can inhibit the activation of the other category ( e . g . , woman ; Macrae , Bodenhausen , & Milne , 1995 ) . Although Experiment 4 examined category activation , it did not examine inhibition per se . Thus , it remains to be seen whether a taxonomic or script prime will activate one , but inhibit the activation of another , category during cross - classification . Whether taxonomic or script primes do so could potentially provide insight into chil - dren’s stereotyped beliefs , including ones about gender ( see Gelman , Taylor , & Nguyen , 2004 ) . Cross - Classification and Induction The present results have important implications for children’s induction or the ability to generalize information from one cate - gory member to another . Children’s induction is currently an area of much debate within the conceptual development literature , particularly the mechanisms underlying children’s inductive infer - ences . One perspective is that children’s early induction is category - based , that is , when faced with an induction problem , children will spontaneously identify an item as belonging to a particular category and then use this category knowledge as a basis for making inferences ( see Murphy , 2002 , for a review ) . Another perspective is that children’s early induction is similarity - based . The view is that children’s spontaneous form of induction is driven by the perceptual similarity between items , and because items in a category are typically perceptually similar , children will use this similarity to generalize properties to other category members in an induction task ( Fisher & Sloutsky , 2005 ; Sloutsky & Fisher , 2004a , 2004b ) . The results from Experiment 4 provide support for the category - based view of induction . The results showed that taxonomic and script categories are spontaneously activated much of the time , suggesting that children have access to these categories for induction . In addition , the results of Experiments 1 – 3 with cross - classification raise the possibility that although children’s spontaneous form of induction is category - based , children may also be quite capable of flexibly using both types of information , category membership and similarity , as a basis for induction . In fact , an area of growing interest in cognitive development is inductive selectivity , or the ability to flexibly choose different categories for different types of inferences . In one study , Kalish and Gelman ( 1992 ) showed that when thinking about objects with overlapping material and object categories ( e . g . , wooden pillow ) , children considered the material category but not the object cate - gory as crucial to inferring information about the properties of fragility and texture ( e . g . , saying that a wooden pillow is hard but not soft ) . In another study , Nguyen and Murphy ( 2003 ) also found that children use taxonomic categories of food to make biochem - ical inferences about the internal properties of foods , whereas children use script categories of food to make situational infer - ences about when foods are eaten . Research from the adult con - cepts literature suggests at least three possibilities for how people might decide which category to use as a basis for induction . One possibility is that experience and knowledge within a particular domain guides decisions about which category to use for infer - ences ( Heit & Rubinstein , 1994 ; Medin , Lynch , Coley , & Atran , 1997 ) . Another possibility is that decisions about inferences are influenced by the distinctiveness of the categories . For example , L . J . Nelson and Miller ( 1995 ) found that the more distinctive category of skydiver , but not dog owner , is used as a basis for inferences about people who are both dog owners and skydivers . Finally , a third possibility is that category coherence , the degree to which members of a category hang together in a meaningful way , affects decisions about induction with cross - classified items ( Pata - lano , Chin - Parker , & Ross , 2006 ) . Indeed , cross - classifications pose an interesting challenge to inductive inferences , and much is to be learned about how children make decisions about which category to use . Cross - Classification and Conceptual Organization Taxonomic and script categories capture very different types of information about items ; taxonomic categories are based on shared similarity between items , whereas script categories are derived from the roles that items play in a routine or event . How might children mentally organize these two types of categorization sys - tems ? Because items can be cross - classified into both categories , children might organize these category relations in a type of nonhierarchical network described below . Similar networks have also been described in the past by other researchers , including Lakoff ( 1986 ) and Ross and Murphy ( 1999 ) . A nonhierarchical network is less structured than a hierarchical or taxonomic net - work . Although parts of the nonhierarchical network may be organized hierarchically , this network is distinct in that items are connected to many categories . Therefore , categories coexist and are noncompeting . Consider the case of an apple that could be connected to the taxonomic category of fruits and the script cate - gory of picnic foods . Individual items in the network are then related to each other through shared category membership . Thus , a sandwich and apple may be related because they are both picnic foods . The lack of order effects in Experiments 1 and 2 provide support for the coexistence of taxonomic and script categories . Because there is not a sole entry point into this nonhierarchical network , how do children decide how to cross - classify an item ? 728 NGUYEN For example , how does a child decide whether to categorize an apple as a fruit or picnic food ? One possibility is that children’s decisions may be influenced by the context of the situation . The results of Experiment 4 suggest that context may influence chil - dren’s decisions when a category is not yet well established in memory . For instance , if the category of picnic foods is not deeply entrenched , then this category may only be activated in certain contexts such as when an apple and sandwich are seen together in a picnic basket . Otherwise , if an apple and lemon are seen together at the grocery store , then the category of fruit may be activated . Another possibility is that children’s decisions are also goal di - rected . For example , if a child is helping to plan a picnic , then an apple and sandwich may immediately come to mind . In fact , there is increasing evidence in the adult concepts literature that everyday categories have components of goals ( e . g . , things to take out of burning house , Barsalou , 1982 , 1983 , 1985 , 1991 ) . Can different connections be simultaneously activated for a single item in a nonhierarchical network ? For example , can an apple be represented as a picnic fruit at the same time ? The results from Experiment 3 would argue yes . Additional supporting evi - dence comes from studies that have demonstrated that children are willing to accept more than one label for an item at a time ( e . g . , Dea´k & Maratsos , 1998 ) and commonly combine two nouns together to form novel compound nouns ( e . g . , Clark et al . , 1985 ; Gelman et al . , 1989 ) . Being able to activate more than one con - nection at a time could be extremely useful . If a child who is allergic to cats is trying to figure out what pet to adopt , it would be helpful to know that a kitten is both a cat and pet . However , the usefulness of being able to activate different category relations simultaneously may depend upon whether children can effectively coordinate and use the information provided by the categories . If a kitten activates the concepts of cat and pet , and if children can make sense of these concepts , then it may be possible for children to successfully entertain the thought that a kitten is a pet that is a cat . As mentioned , there are also parts of the nonhierarchical net - work that are structured hierarchically , particularly in the case of taxonomic categories . To what extent are children able to negotiate these parts of the network ? One the one hand , classic research by Piaget , showing that children fail class - inclusion problems with hierarchically nested categories , suggests that children do not understand that an item can belong to both a class and a subclass simultaneously ( e . g . , a pine tree is a tree ; Inhelder & Piaget , 1964 ; Piaget , 1952 ) . On the other hand , subsequent research has shown that several task variables can be manipulated to improve young children’s performance on class inclusion problems , such as using collection nouns ( e . g . , forest , army ) that highlight the part – whole relations of the items in a set ( Markman & Seibert , 1976 ) . More - over , other research has shown that even 2 - to 3 - year - olds will refer to a single object by using different words from varying levels of a taxonomy , saying that something is both a dog and animal , for example ( e . g . , Clark & Svaib , 1997 ; Dea´k & Maratsos , 1998 ; Waxman & Hatch , 1992 ) . Thus , there appears to be evidence that children are indeed able to maneuver the hierarchical aspects of the network . As we continue to gain an understanding of children’s cross - classification , future research could explore this nonhierarchical network and provide direct tests of its different features . References Ackerman , B . P . ( 1988 ) . Cued recall for category , thematic , and ad hoc classified events in children and adults . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 45 , 88 – 118 . Barsalou , L . W . ( 1982 ) . Context - independent and dependent information in concepts . Memory & Cognition , 10 , 82 – 93 . Barsalou , L . W . ( 1983 ) . Ad hoc categories . Memory & Cognition , 11 , 211 – 227 . Barsalou , L . W . ( 1985 ) . Ideals , central tendency , and frequency of instan - tiation as determinants of graded structure in categories . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory and Cognition , 11 , 629 – 654 . Barsalou , L . W . ( 1991 ) . Deriving categories to achieve goals . In G . H . Bower ( Ed . ) , The psychology of learning and motivation : Advances in research and theory ( pp . 1 – 64 ) . San Diego : Academic Press . Bauer , P . J . , & Mandler , J . M . ( 1989 ) . Cognitive Psychology , 21 , 156 – 184 . Blaye , A . , & Bonthoux , F . ( 2001 ) . Thematic and taxonomic relations in preschoolers : The development of flexibility in categorization choices . British Journal of Developmental Psychology , 19 , 395 – 412 . Blewitt , P . ( 1994 ) . Understanding categorical hierarchies : The earliest levels of skills . Child Development , 6 , 1279 – 1298 . Bohlmann , N . L . , & Fenson , L . ( 2005 ) . The effects of feedback on preservative errors in preschool aged children . Journal of Cognition and Development , 6 , 119 – 131 . Ceci , S . J . , & Howe , M . J . ( 1978 ) . Age - related differences in free recall as a function of retrieval flexibility . Journal of Experimental Child Psy - chology , 26 , 432 – 442 . Clark , E . V . ( 1997 ) . Conceptual perspective and lexical choice in acquisi - tion . Cognition , 64 , 1 – 37 . Clark , E . V . , & Barron , B . J . S . ( 1988 ) . A thrower - button or a button - thrower ? Children’s judgments of grammatical and ungrammatical com - pound nouns . Linguistics , 26 , 3 – 19 . Clark , E . V . , Gelman , S . A . , & Lane , N . M . ( 1985 ) . Noun compounds and category structure in young children . Child Development , 56 , 84 – 94 . Clark , E . V . , & Svaib , T . A . ( 1997 ) . Speaker perspective and reference in young children . First Language , 17 , 57 – 74 . Dea´k , G . O . , & Bauer , P . J . ( 1995 ) . The effects of task comprehension on preschoolers’ and adults’ categorization choices . Journal of Experimen - tal Child Psychology , 60 , 393 – 427 . Dea´k , G . O . , & Bauer , P . J . ( 1996 ) . The dynamics of preschoolers’ categorization choices . Child Development , 67 , 140 – 168 . Dea´k , G . O . , & Maratsos , M . ( 1998 ) . On having complex representations of things : Preschoolers use multiple words for objects and people . Developmental Psychology , 34 , 224 – 240 . Dea´k , G . O . , Ray , S . D . , & Pick , A . D . ( 2002 ) . Matching and naming objects by shape or function : Age and context effects in preschool children . Developmental Psychology , 38 , 503 – 518 . Dea´k , G . O . , Ray , S . D . , & Pick , A . D . ( 2004 ) . Effects of age , reminders , and task difficulty on young children’s rule - switching flexibility . Cog - nitive Development , 19 , 385 – 400 . Diamond , A . Kirkham , N . , & Amso , D . ( 2002 ) . Conditions under which young children can hold two rules in mind and inhibit a prepotent response . Developmental Psychology , 38 , 352 – 362 . Fisher , A . V . , & Sloutsky , V . M . ( 2005 ) . When induction meets memory : Evidence for gradual transition from similarity - based to category - based induction . Child Development , 76 , 583 – 597 . Frye , D . , Zelazo , P . D . , & Palfai , T . ( 1995 ) . Theory of mind and rule - based reasoning . Cognitive Development , 10 , 483 – 527 . Gelman , S . A . , Taylor , M . , & Nguyen , S . P . ( 2004 ) . Mother - child conver - sations about gender . Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development , 69 ( 1 ) . Gelman , S . A . , Wilcox , S . A . , & Clark , E . V . ( 1989 ) . Conceptual and lexical hierarchies in young children . Cognitive Development , 4 , 309 – 326 . Greenfield , D . B . , & Scott , M . S . ( 1986 ) . Young children’s preference for 729 CROSS - CLASSIFICATION complementary pairs : Evidence against a shift to a taxonomic prefer - ence . Developmental Psychology , 22 , 19 – 21 . Hansen , M . B . , & Markman , E . M . ( 2005 ) . Appearance questions can be misleading : A discourse - based account of the appearance - reality prob - lem . Cognitive Psychology , 50 , 233 – 263 . Heit , E . , & Rubinstein , J . ( 1994 ) . Similarity and property effects in induc - tive reasoning . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 20 , 411 – 422 . Horton , M . S . , & Markman , E . M . ( 1980 ) . Developmental differences in the acquisition of basic and superordinate categories . Child Develop - ment , 51 , 708 – 719 . Inhelder , B . , & Piaget , J . ( 1964 ) . The early growth of logic in the child : Classification and seriation . London : Routledge . Jacques , S . , & Zelazo , P . D . ( 2001 ) . The Flexible Item Selection Task ( FIST ) : A measure of executive function in preschoolers . Developmental Neuropsychology , 20 , 573 – 591 . Jacques , S . , & Zelazo , P . D . ( 2005 ) . On the possible roots of cognitive flexibility . In B . D . Homer & C . S . Tamis - LeMonda ( Eds . ) , The devel - opment of social cognition and communication ( pp . 53 – 81 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Jones , S . S . , Smith , L . B . , & Landau , B . ( 1991 ) . Object properties and knowledge in early lexical learning . Child Development , 62 , 499 – 516 . Kalish , C . W . , & Gelman , S . A . ( 1992 ) . On wooden pillows : Multiple classifications and children’s category - based induction . Child Develop - ment , 63 , 1536 – 1557 . Lakoff , G . ( 1986 ) . A figure of thought . Metaphor & Symbolic Activity , 1 , 215 – 225 . Lin , E . L . , & Murphy , G . L . ( 2001 ) . Thematic relations in adults’ concepts . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 130 , 3 – 28 . Lucariello , J . , Kyratzis , A . , & Nelson , K . ( 1992 ) . Taxonomic knowledge : What kind and when ? Child Development , 63 , 978 – 998 . Macrae , C . N . , Bodenhausen , G . V . , & Milne , A . B . ( 1995 ) . The dissection of selection in person perception : Inhibitory processes in social stereo - typing . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 69 , 397 – 407 . Mandler , J . M . , Fivush , R . , & Reznick , J . S . ( 1987 ) . The development of contextual categories . Cognitive Development , 2 , 339 – 354 . Markman , E . M . ( 1989 ) . Categorization and naming in children : Problems of induction . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Markman , E . M . , & Hutchinson , J . E . ( 1984 ) . Children’s sensitivity to constraints on word meaning : Taxonomic versus thematic relations . Cognitive Psychology , 16 , 1 – 27 . Markman , E . M . , & Seibert , J . ( 1976 ) . Classes and collections : Internal organization and resulting holistic properties . Cognitive Psychology , 8 , 561 – 577 . Medin , D . L . , Lynch , E . B . , Coley , J . D . , & Atran , S . ( 1997 ) . Categoriza - tion and reasoning among tree experts : Do all roads lead to Rome ? Cognitive Psychology , 32 , 49 – 96 . Melkman , R . , Tversky , B . , & Baratz , D . ( 1981 ) . Developmental trends in the use of perceptual and conceptual attributes in grouping , clustering , and retrieval . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 31 , 470 – 486 . Mervis , C . B . , Golinkoff , R . M . , & Bertrand , J . ( 1994 ) . Two - year - olds readily learn multiple labels for the same basic - level category . Child Development , 65 , 1163 – 1177 . Murphy , G . L . ( 2001 ) . Causes of taxonomic sorting by adults : A test of the thematic - to taxonomic shift . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 8 , 834 – 839 . Murphy , G . L . ( 2002 ) . The big book of concepts . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Nelson , K . ( 1986 ) . Event knowledge : Structure and function in develop - ment . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Nelson , K . ( 1988 ) . Where do taxonomic categories come from ? Human Development , 31 , 3 – 10 . Nelson , K . , & Nelson , A . P . ( 1990 ) . Category production in response to script and category cues by kindergarten and second - grade children . Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology , 11 , 431 – 446 . Nelson , L . J . , & Miller , D . T . ( 1995 ) . The distinctiveness effect in social categorization : You are what makes you unusual . Psychological Science , 6 , 246 – 249 . Nguyen , S . P . , & Murphy , G . L . ( 2003 ) . An apple is more than a fruit : Cross - classification in children’s concepts . Child Development , 74 , 1 – 24 . Patalano , A . L . , Chin - Parker , S . , & Ross , B . H . ( 2006 ) . The importance of being coherent : Category coherence , cross - classification , and reasoning . Journal of Memory and Language , 54 , 407 – 424 . Perner , J . , & Lang , B . ( 2002 ) . What causes 3 - year - olds’ difficulty on the dimensional change card sorting task ? Infant and Child Development , 11 , 93 – 105 . Piaget , J . ( 1952 ) . The child’s concept of number . New York : W . W . Norton . Rakison , D . H . , & Butterworth , G . E . ( 1998 ) . Infants’ use of object parts in early categorization . Developmental Psycholog y , 34 , 49 – 62 . Rakison , D . H . , & Cohen , L . B . ( 1999 ) . Infants’ use of functional parts in basic - like categorization . Developmental Science , 2 , 423 – 431 . Ribar , R . , Oakes , L . M . , & Spalding , T . L . ( 2004 ) . Infants can rapidly form new categorical representations . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 11 , 536 – 541 . Rosch , E . , Mervis , C . B . , Gray , W . , Johnson , D . , & Boyes - Braem , P . ( 1976 ) . Basic objects in natural categories . Cognitive Psychology , 3 , 382 – 439 . Ross , B . H . , & Murphy , G . L . ( 1999 ) . Food for thought : Cross - classification and category organization in a complex real - world domain . Cognitive Psychology , 38 , 495 – 553 . Scheuner , N . , Bonthoux , F . , Cannard , C . , & Blaye , A . ( 2004 ) . The role of associative strength and conceptual relations in matching tasks in 4 - and 6 - year - old children . International Journal of Psychology , 39 , 290 – 304 . Sloutsky , V . M . , & Fisher , A . V . ( 2004a ) . Induction and categorization in young children : A similarity - based model . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 133 , 166 – 188 . Sloutsky , V . M . , & Fisher , A . V . ( 2004b ) . When development and learning decrease memory : Evidence against category - based induction in chil - dren . Psychological Science , 15 , 553 – 558 . Smiley , S . S . , & Brown , A . L . ( 1979 ) . Conceptual preference for thematic or taxonomic relations : A nonmonotonic trend from preschool to old age . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 28 , 437 – 458 . Steinberg , E . R . , & Anderson , R . C . ( 1975 ) . Hierarchical semantic orga - nization in 6 - year - olds . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 19 , 544 – 553 . Waxman , S . R . , & Gelman , R . ( 1988 ) . Preschoolers’ use of superordinate relations in classification and language . Cognitive Development , 1 , 139 – 156 . Waxman , S . R . , & Hatch , T . ( 1992 ) . Beyond the basics : Preschool children label objects flexibly at multiple hierarchical levels . Journal of Child Language , 19 , 153 – 166 . Waxman , S . R . , & Namy , L . R . ( 1997 ) . Challenging the notion of a thematic preference in young children . Developmental Psychology , 33 , 555 – 567 . Zelazo , P . D . , Frye , D . , & Rapus , T . ( 1996 ) . An age - related dissociation between knowing rules and using them . Cognitive Development , 11 , 37 – 63 . 730 NGUYEN Appendix A Stimuli for Experiments 1 and 2 Target Correct Incorrect Script Pajamas Blanket ( bedtime ) Candles ( birthday ) * Cake Present ( birthday ) Shampoo ( bath - time ) * Bus Backpack ( school ) Christmas tree ( Christmas ) * Rubber duck Soap ( bath - time ) Paper ( school ) Table Plate ( dinner - time ) Bag ( shopping ) Reindeer Santa Claus ( Christmas ) Doctor ( doctor’s office ) * Nurse Band - aid ( doctor’s office ) Fork ( dinner - time ) Store Shopping cart ( shopping ) Pillow ( bedtime ) Taxonomic Pajamas Sweater ( clothing ) Dog ( animals ) * Cake Hot dog ( food ) Socks ( clothing ) * Bus Fire truck ( vehicles ) Sofa ( furniture ) * Rubber duck Puzzle ( toys ) Police officer ( people ) Table Bed ( furniture ) Jump rope ( toys ) Reindeer Elephant ( animals ) School ( buildings ) * Nurse Daddy ( people ) Cheese ( food ) Store Library ( buildings ) Airplane ( vehicles ) Note . Nonconflict triads used in Experiment 2 are marked with an asterisk . Appendix B Stimuli for Experiment 3 Appropriate category labels Inappropriate category labels pajamas : bedtime clothes library : bedtime building table : dinner - time furniture puzzle : dinner - time toy reindeer : Christmas animal hot dog : doctor’s office food rubber duck : bath - time toy fire truck : Christmas vehicle store : shopping building presents : birthday animal bus : a school vehicle shampoo : bath - time clothing cake : birthday food backpack : school person nurse : doctor’s office person bag : shopping furniture Received February 20 , 2006 Revision received January 8 , 2007 Accepted January 22 , 2007 (cid:1) 731 CROSS - CLASSIFICATION