Volume 27 November 1 , 2016 3305 MBoC | ARTICLE Moesin and cortactin control actin - dependent multivesicular endosome biogenesis ABSTRACT We used in vivo and in vitro strategies to study the mechanisms of multivesicular endosome biogenesis . We found that , whereas annexinA2 and ARP2 / 3 mediate F - actin nucle - ation and branching , respectively , the ERM protein moesin supports the formation of F - actin networks on early endosomes . We also found that moesin plays no role during endocytosis and recycling to the plasma membrane but is absolutely required , much like actin , for early - to - late - endosome transport and multivesicular endosome formation . Both actin network for - mation in vitro and early - to - late endosome transport in vivo also depend on the F - actin – bind - ing protein cortactin . Our data thus show that moesin and cortactin are necessary for formation of F - actin networks that mediate endosome biogenesis or maturation and trans - port through the degradative pathway . We propose that the primary function of endosomal F - actin is to control the membrane remodeling that accompanies endosome biogenesis . We also speculate that this mechanism helps segregate tubular and multivesicular membranes along the recycling and degradation pathways , respectively . INTRODUCTION In higher eukaryotic cells , solutes , ligands , and membrane compo - nents that have been endocytosed are delivered to common early endosomes . From there , some proteins and lipids are recycled back to the plasma membrane , whereas others are routed to the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) or toward late endosomes and lysosomes for degradation ( Huotari and Helenius , 2011 ; Scott et al . , 2014 ) . The early endosome thus serves as an initial sorting nexus in the vacuolar apparatus that controls notably the reutilization versus degradation of membrane components . In early endosomes , the sorting of protein along the recycling and degradation pathways is accompanied by major and concomi - tant membrane remodeling and deformation processes . Retrograde transport to the TGN and recycling to the plasma membrane are mediated by membrane tubules , which form in a process that de - pends on the retromer , branched actin , and the WASP and SCAR homologue ( WASH ) complex ( Puthenveedu et al . , 2010 ; Seaman et al . , 2013 ; Burd and Cullen , 2014 ) . By contrast , activated signaling receptors and other molecules destined for late endosomes and ly - sosomes are incorporated into vesicular portions of the early endo - some and sorted by endosomal sorting complexes required for transport ( ESCRT ) into luminal invaginations , which are pinched off as free cargo - containing intraluminal vesicles ( ILVs ; Woodman and Futter , 2008 ; Henne et al . , 2011 ; Scott et al . , 2014 ) . These multive - sicular regions expand and then detach or mature from early endo - somes , becoming free multivesicular endosomal intermediates , re - ferred to as endosomal carrier vesicles ( ECVs ) or multivesicular bodies ( MVBs ) , which transport cargoes to late endosomes . We previously reported that the biogenesis of ECV / MVBs re - quires polymerized actin nucleated on the early endosomal mem - brane via the lipid - binding protein annexinA2 ( ANXA2 ; Emans et al . , 1993 ; Mayran et al . , 2003 ; Morel et al . , 2009 ) . On the endosomal membrane , ANXA2 was found closely associated with small F - actin patches that also contained moesin ( MSN ; Harder et al . , 1997 ; Morel et al . , 2009 ; Puthenveedu et al . , 2010 ) , a member of the ezrin , radixin , and moesin ( ERM ) family that may play a role in endosome maturation together with the homotypic fusion and protein sorting ( HOPS ) complex ( Chirivino et al . , 2011 ) . Actin also plays a role in Monitoring Editor Laurent Blanchoin CEA Grenoble Received : Dec 22 , 2015 Revised : Aug 31 , 2016 Accepted : Aug 31 , 2016 This article was published online ahead of print in MBoC in Press ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E15 - 12 - 0853 ) on September 7 , 2016 . † Present address : Section of Cell Biology , Division of Diabetes , Endocrinology and Metabolism , Department of Medicine , Imperial College London , London W12 0NN , United Kingdom . * Address correspondence to : Jean Gruenberg ( jean . gruenberg @ unige . ch ) . © 2016 Muriel et al . This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell Biology under license from the author ( s ) . Two months after publication it is avail - able to the public under an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unport - ed Creative Commons License ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 ) . “ASCB ® , ” “The American Society for Cell Biology ® , ” and “Molecular Biology of the Cell ® ” are registered trademarks of The American Society for Cell Biology . Abbreviations used : ECV , endosomal carrier vesicle ; EGF , epidermal growth fac - tor ; EGFR , epidermal growth factor receptor ; ESCRT , endosomal sorting com - plexes required for transport ; ILV , intralumenal vesicle ; MVB , multivesicular body ; TF , transferrin ; TFR , transferrin receptor ; TGN , trans - Golgi network . Olivia Muriel , Alejandra Tomas † , Cameron C . Scott , and Jean Gruenberg * Department of Biochemistry , University of Geneva , 1211 Geneva 4 , Switzerland 3306 | O . Muriel et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell cargo transport toward lysosomes ( Durrbach et al . , 1996 ; Taunton et al . , 2000 ; Morel et al . , 2009 ) together with myosin 1B ( Raposo et al . , 1999 ; Taunton et al . , 2000 ) , which is also involved in the sort - ing of the protein cargo PMEL17 into multivesicular endosomes ( Salas - Cortes et al . , 2005 ) . Here we studied the mechanisms of actin - dependent endo - some biogenesis along the degradative pathway using in vivo and in vitro strategies . We find that MSN is required for the formation of ECV / MVBs and for early - to - late endosome transport , as is the F - actin – binding protein cortactin ( CTTN ) , and that MSN or CTTN depletion fully recapitulates the effects of actin depolymerization in vivo . We conclude that patches of F - actin discriminate the site of ECV / MVB formation on early endosome membranes and thus the membrane - remodeling process that accompanies endosome biogenesis . RESULTS Moesin is associated with early endosomes Because MSN had been found in the vicinity of ANXA2 - containing actin patches ( Morel et al . , 2009 ) , we decided to analyze the intra - cellular distribution of MSN in more detail . By immunofluorescence , MSN showed a diffuse cytosolic pattern with puncta as well as plasma membrane labeling ( Bonilha et al . , 1999 ) . Cells were there - fore prepermeabilized to reduce the contribution of the cytosolic pool , and endosomes were enlarged by overexpression of the RAB5 dominant - active mutant Q79L to increase spatial resolution ( Raiborg et al . , 2002 ; Pons et al . , 2008 ) . Endogenous MSN was observed on enlarged endosomes , where it partially colocalized with ANXA2 ( Figure 1A ; background fluorescence is due to the permeabilization / fixation protocol necessary to visualize ANXA2 ) . Similarly , MSN – green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) colocalized with F - actin on enlarged early endosomes ( Supplemental Figure S1A ) , and GFP tagging did not affect MSN membrane association ( Supplemental Figure S1B ) . After subcellular fractionation , MSN copurified with early endo - somes containing RAB5 and ANXA2 and not with late endosomes containing RAB7 ( Figure 1B ) . When fractionation was repeated us - ing cells expressing monomeric red fluorescent protein ( mRFP ) – RAB5 and MSN - GFP , individual early endosomes labeled with both markers were readily observed in the early endosomal fraction ( Sup - plemental Figure S1C ) . Finally , we analyzed endogenous MSN dis - tribution by immunogold labeling of cryosections ( Figure 1 , C and D , and Supplemental Figure S2 ) . To label early endosomes , we incu - bated cells for 15 min at 37°C with an antibody against the extracel - lular domain of the epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) receptor ( EGFR ) coupled to gold ( Tomas et al . , 2015 ) and challenged them with EGF . MSN was observed on the membrane of endosomes containing en - docytosed EGFR at a density similar to that observed on the plasma membrane ( Figure 1 , C and D ; a gallery of additional micrographs is shown in Supplemental Figure S2 ; quantification in Figure 1E ) . Labeling was specific since the number of gold particles per micro - meter was significantly lower on mitochondrial and nuclear mem - branes in the same samples ( Figure 1E ) . Taken together , these data demonstrate that MSN , in addition to its known distribution to the plasma membrane , is also present on early endosomes . Moesin is unevenly distributed on endosomal membranes Close inspection of the micrographs showed that MSN staining on early endosomes in vivo ( Figure 1A ) did not completely overlap with RAB5 , consistent with the notion that early endosomes contain dif - ferent membrane regions or domains ( Gruenberg , 2001 ; Miaczynska and Zerial , 2002 ) . To gain better insight into MSN distribution , we FIGURE 1 : Localization of moesin to early endosomes . ( A ) BHK cells were transfected with mCherry - RAB5Q79L . After 24 h , they were prepermeabilized and processed for immunofluorescence with antibodies against MSN ( green ) and ANXA2 ( gray ) followed by secondary antibodies and analyzed by confocal fluorescence microscopy . Bar , 10 μm . ( B ) BHK cells were fractionated by flotation in gradients . Early endosomes ( EE ) , late endosomes ( LE ) , and heavy membranes ( HM ) were collected and analyzed by SDS – PAGE and Western blotting using antibodies against ANXA2 , MSN , RAB5 , and RAB7 . Molecular weight ( MW ) markers are indicated . ( C , D ) HeLa cells were incubated with anti - EGFR antibody coupled to colloidal gold ( 6 – 8 nm , large arrow ) and challenged with EGF . Thawed cryosections were prepared and labeled with anti - MSN antibody followed by Protein A – gold ( 10 nm ; small arrows ) . Bar , 100 nm . ( E ) Quantification of the number of gold particles per linear micrometer in the experiments in C and D : plasma membrane ( PM ; 6 micrographs ) , endosomes ( End ; 13 micrographs ) , mitochondrial membrane ( Mit ; 6 micrographs ) , and nuclear envelope ( Nuc ; 5 micrographs ) . Data are means ± SEM . Endosomes vs . plasma membrane ( ns , p = 0 . 7983 ) , endosomes vs . mitochondria ( * * p = 0 . 0012 ) , and endosomes vs . nucleus ( * * p = 0 . 0072 ) . Micrographs were pooled from three different sections of a single labeling experiment from a gelatin - embedded cell pellet . Volume 27 November 1 , 2016 Endosome biogenesis | 3307 the situation after ANXA2 depletion with siRNA ( Figure 2A ) . These observations indicate that MSN is not directly involved in the traffick - ing of receptors between plasma membrane and early endosomes . Next we investigated whether MSN played a role at a later step of the endocytic pathway . Cells treated with control siRNAs were incubated with EGF - 488 for 10 min at 37°C as before and then chased for 50 min without EGF . The staining initially present at 10 min ( Figure 2A ) disappeared after the chase , presumably because the receptor / ligand couple had been transported to lysosomes and degraded ( Figure 2A ) . By contrast , the EGF staining did not de - crease upon chase in cells lacking MSN ( Figure 2A ) , and EGF was retained in early endosomes containing EEA1 ( Figure 2A ) . The re - tention of EGFR in EEA1 - positive early endosomes was not due to some off - target effects of siRNAs , since the export from early endo - somes was restored by the overexpression of mouse Msn ( resistant to siRNAs against human MSN ) in the MSN KD background ( Sup - plemental Figure S6B ; quantification in Supplemental Figure S6C ) . Consistent with the observations that MSN plays a role in cargo export from early endosomes , EGFR degradation was significantly delayed upon MSN KD ( Figure 2B ; uncropped blots in Supplemen - tal Figure S7 , A – C ; quantification in Figure 2C ) . However , EGFR degradation , much like export from early endosomes ( Supplemen - tal Figure S6 , B and C ) , was partially restored after overexpression of RNA interference ( RNAi ) – resistant Msn in the MSN KD background ( Figure 2B ; uncropped blots in Supplemental Figure S7 , A – C ; quan - tification in Figure 2C ) . Msn overexpression itself had no effect in control cells and thus did not cause some gain - of - function pheno - type ( Figure 2 , B and C ; uncropped blots in Supplemental Figure S7 , A – C ) . These observations demonstrate not only that the effects of anti - MSN siRNAs on EGFR degradation are specific and do not re - sult from some off - target effects of the siRNAs , but also that GFP tagging does not interfere with Msn functions—hence , that GFP - Msn is fully active . Finally , the siRNAs against MSN had no effect on the other two ERM family members , radixin and ezrin ( Supplemental Figure S8A ) , and , conversely , the depletion of radixin or ezrin with siRNAs ( Sup - plemental Figure S8 , B and C ) did not affect the degradation of EGFR ( Supplemental Figure S8D ) . Taken together , these observa - tions indicate that MSN , but not radixin or ezrin , is necessary for cargo transport or endosome maturation beyond early endosomes toward late endosomes and lysosomes . The depletion of ANXA2 with siRNAs caused EGF retention in early endosomes ( Figure 2A ) and delayed EGFR degradation ( Figure 2D ; uncropped blots in Supplemental Figure S7 , D – G ; quantifica - tion in Figure 2E ) , much like MSN depletion ( Figure 2 , A – E ) , demon - strating that ANXA2 KD fully recapitulated the effects of MSN KD . Moreover , no additive effects were observed after double KD of both MSN and ANXA2 ( Figure 2 , A , D , and E ; uncropped blots in Supplemental Figure S7 , D – G ) . Hence our observations indicate that MSN and ANXA2 regulate EGF receptor transport from early endosomes toward lysosomes and that both proteins likely function in the same molecular pathway . Ultrastructural analysis of endosomes after MSN depletion Because MSN is present on the early endosome and MSN KD de - lays EGFR release from these endosomes and its subsequent degra - dation , we analyzed the ultrastructure of endosomes after MSN KD to gain further insights into the precise role of MSN . In mock - treated controls , BSA - gold endocytosed for 15 min at 37ºC was often ob - served within multivesicular structures that resemble the ECV / MVBs that mediate early - to - late endosome transport ( Figure 3A and Sup - plemental Figure S9 , A – F ) . By contrast , after the depletion of MSN prepared early endosome fractions from cells expressing RAB5Q79L using the same protocol as used to prepare endosomes from cells expressing mRFP - RAB5 ( Supplemental Figure S1C ) . Strikingly , Msn - GFP was not evenly distributed but concentrated locally on the limiting membrane of the enlarged endosomes , much like other en - dosomal machineries ( Raiborg et al . , 2002 ; Pons et al . , 2008 ) . Msn - GFP was indeed present in distinct patches that only partially colocalized with mRFP - RAB5Q79L ( Supplemental Figure S3 ; quan - tification in Supplemental Figure S3 , C – E ) and occupied a smaller fraction of the endosome membrane than mRFP - RAB5Q79L ( Sup - plemental Figure S3 , D – E ) . In line with these results , knockdown ( KD ) of ANXA2 had no ef - fect on the endosome association of MSN , demonstrating that MSN membrane association is ANXA2 independent ( Supplemental Figure S4A ) . Conversely , MSN KD had no effect on ANXA2 endo - some association ( Supplemental Figure S4A ) . Consistent with these observations , MSN did not copurify with ANXA2 - GFP after ANXA2 - GFP immunoprecipitation from purified early endosomes or after recombinant glutathione S - transferase ( GST ) – ANXA2 pull down , suggesting that the two proteins do not interact directly ( Supple - mental Figure S4 , B and C ) . Next , given that MSN is an actin linker protein , we wondered whether endosome association was medi - ated by F - actin . However , excessive actin polymerization with jas - plakinolide or depolymerization with cytochalasin D did not affect MSN recruitment to endosomes as analyzed by subcellular fraction - ation ( Supplemental Figure S4D ) and immunofluorescence ( Supple - mental Figure S4E ) . Taken together , these observations strongly suggest that MSN association to endosomes does not depend on actin and ANXA2 . We thus wondered whether MSN interacted di - rectly with lipids . Purified recombinant GST - MSN efficiently bound liposomes containing phosphatidylethanolamine ( PE ) , cholesterol , and the negatively charged phospholipids phosphatidic acid ( PA ; Supplemental Figure S5A ) and phosphatidylinositol ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphos - phate ( PIP2 ; Supplemental Figure S5B ) . No binding was observed when PA or PIP2 was replaced with phosphatidylcholine ( PC ; Sup - plemental Figure S5 , A and B ) . Moreover , liposomes containing PIP2 could recruit full - length Msn - GFP from cytosolic extracts but not an N - terminal deletion mutant that lacks the FERM domain containing the PIP2 - binding site ( Supplemental Figure S5C ) , as expected ( McClatchey , 2014 ) . Taken together , these data show that MSN can bind negatively charged lipids , including PIP2 , suggesting that these interactions may contribute to MSN recruitment onto endosomal membranes . Indeed , PIP2 may be present not only at the plasma membrane but also on intracellular membranes , including early en - dosomes ( Tan et al . , 2015 ) . We conclude that MSN associates with specialized regions of early endosome membranes in a process that depends on negatively charged lipids but not on actin or ANXA2 . Moesin is required for early - to - late endosome transport Because MSN is present on the early endosome , we investigated whether the protein is involved in endocytic trafficking . Depletion of MSN with small interfering RNAs ( siRNAs ) did not affect the internal - ization of transferrin ( TF ) receptor ( TFR ; Supplemental Figure S6A ) . Moreover , the bulk of endocytosed TF was returned to the medium within 20 – 30 min in cells lacking MSN , much like in control cells ( Supplemental Figure S6A ) . These observations demonstrate that MSN is not involved in TFR internalization and recycling back to the plasma membrane . Similarly , after EGF challenge , MSN KD had no effect on EGFR internalization ( Supplemental Figure S6A ) . Consis - tent with these observations , the appearance of endocytosed EGF - 488 in early endosomes containing EEA1 during a 10 - min incubation at 37°C was not affected by MSN depletion ( Figure 2A ) , much like 3308 | O . Muriel et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell with siRNAs , gold particles were mostly found in atypical ring - like structures con - nected to tubulocisternal elements reminis - cent of the multivesicular region of early endosome rather than fully mature ECV / MVBs ( Figure 3A and Supplemental Figure S9 , G – L ) . Similar early endosome – like struc - tures were also observed after ANXA2 KD ( Mayran et al . , 2003 ) and actin depolymer - ization ( Morel et al . , 2009 ) . Again , no addi - tive effects were observed after MSN and ANXA2 double KD ( Figure 3A and Supple - mental Figure S9 , M – R ) . Interestingly , ILVs could still be observed in endosomes after MSN KD , demonstrating that delayed EGFR degradation cannot be accounted for by a defect in ILV formation . Our observations thus indicate that MSN does not play a role in the ESCRT - dependent sorting of EGFR into the ILVs of early endosomes but is nec - essary for the detachment of these multive - sicular regions from early endosomes in or - der to become fully mature ECV / MVBs . To better determine which endocytic step was affected by MSN KD , we labeled cells with the fluid - phase tracer horseradish peroxidase ( HRP ) endocytosed for 10 min at 37ºC , followed by a 40 - min chase in marker - free medium after depolymerization of the microtubules with nocodazole . Under these conditions , HRP leaves the early endosome but fails to reach late endosomes and re - mains in ECV / MVBs , which rely on polymer - ized microtubules for transport ( Gruenberg et al . , 1989 ; Aniento et al . , 1993 ) . In mock - treated controls , 80 % HRP was indeed found in spherical multivesicular structures with the characteristic appearance of ECV / MVBs ( Figure 3B and Supplemental Figure S10 , A – G ; quantification in Figure 3C ) . By contrast , the bulk of HRP ( > 70 % ) remained in tubular and ring - like structures resem - bling early endosomes after MSN and ANXA2 single or double KD ( Figure 3B and Supplemental Figure S10 , H – U ; quantifica - tion in Figure 3C ) , consistent with our ex - periments after BSA - gold internalization ( Figure 3A and Supplemental Figure S9 ) . Taken together , these observations strongly suggest that MSN plays a crucial role in the full maturation program of ECV / MVB from early endosome membranes . We therefore conclude that MSN plays a direct role in the biogenesis or maturation of the ECV / MVB multivesicular intermediates that mediate cargo transport toward late endosomes . Nucleation and polymerization of F - actin onto early endosomes in vitro To gain insights into the role of MSN in the formation of F - actin patches on early endo - some membranes , we used an in vitro assay FIGURE 2 : Moesin controls EGFR degradation . ( A ) HeLa cells were transfected with control siRNAs or siRNA to ANXA2 or MSN . Alternatively , they were double transfected with siRNAs to ANXA2 and MSN . Cells were treated for 1 h in serum - free medium , stimulated with 100 ng / μl EGF – Alexa 488 for 10 and 50 min , fixed , processed for immunofluorescence with an antibody against EEA1 followed by secondary antibody ( red ) , and analyzed by fluorescence confocal microscopy . Bar , 25 μm ( main images ) , 5 μm ( insets ) . ( B ) HeLa cells were transfected with control ( ctrl ) siRNAs or siRNAs to MSN . Alternatively , they were double transfected with siRNAs ( control or anti - MSN ) and RNAi - resistant Msn - GFP , treated for 1 h in serum - free medium and 20 μg / ml cycloheximide , and stimulated or not with 100 ng / μl EGF for 90 min in the presence of 20 μg / ml cycloheximide . Cells were lysed and analyzed by SDS – PAGE and Western blotting using anti - EGFR antibody . γ - Tubulin ( Tub ) was used as a loading control . The uncropped versions of the same blots are shown in Supplemental Figure S7 , A – C . MW markers are indicated . ( C ) Densitometric quantification of EGFR levels relative to tubulin from experiments as in B , using ImageJ software . Data are means of fold decrease at 90 min ± SEM ( n = 6 ) . siRNA control vs . siRNA MSN ( * * p = 0 . 0059 ) , siRNA control vs . siRNA control + Msn - GFP ( ns , p = 0 . 9039 ) , siRNA control vs . siRNA MSN + Msn - GFP ( ns , p = 0 . 2273 ) , and siRNA MSN vs . siRNA MSN + Msn - GFP ( * * p = 0 . 0081 ) . ( D ) HeLa cells were transfected with control siRNAs or siRNAs to ANXA2 or MSN or double transfected with siRNAs to both ANXA2 and MSN ( A + M ) . Cells were then treated with EGF and analyzed as in B . The uncropped versions of the same blots are shown in Supplemental Figure S7 , D – G . MW markers are indicated . ( E ) Densitometric quantification of the relative EGFR levels relative to tubulin from experiments as in A , using ImageJ software . Data are means ± SEM ( n = 3 ) . siRNA control vs . siRNA ANXA2 ( 90 min : p = 0 . 00426 ; 180 min : p = 0 . 025 ) , siRNA control vs . siRNA MSN ( 90 min : p = 0 . 0569 ; 180 min : p = 0 . 0111 ) and siRNA control vs . siRNAs ANXA2 + Msn ( 90 min : p = 0 . 0461 ; 180 min : p = 0 . 0166 ) . Volume 27 November 1 , 2016 Endosome biogenesis | 3309 mRFP - RAB5 and Msn - GFP nucleated de novo actin poly merization selectively ( Figure 4A ) , since no actin polymerization was de - tected when either the endosome or the cytosol was omitted ( Supplemental Figure S11A ) . The actin nucleation and polymeriza - tion process was rapid , since F - actin could already be detected on some endosomes after 1 min ( Supplemental Figure S11B ) . These short actin structures rapidly grew in length and became interconnected and branched , eventually forming a filamentous network ( Figure 4B and Supplemental Figure S11B ) , presumably reflecting unbal - anced actin dynamics in vitro . These obser - vations demonstrate that early endosomes have the intrinsic and specific capacity to trigger actin nucleation and polymerization ( Morel et al . , 2009 ) . ANXA2 KD essentially abolished actin nucleation and subsequent polymerization ( Figure 4B ) , consistent with the proposed role of ANXA2 in actin nucleation ( Morel et al . , 2009 ) . By contrast , MSN KD did not seem to affect the capacity of endosomes to nucleate actin ( Figure 4B ) . However , actin - containing structures , whether individual fila - ments or filament bundles , remained mostly isolated from each other after MSN KD ( Figure 4B ) , and the formation of an intercon - nected and branched network was markedly reduced after 30 min ( Figure 4 , B and C ; quantification in Figure 4D ) . These effects of MSN KD did not result from some mechani - cal perturbation of the sample , since they were fully recapitulated when the assay was carried out with purified rhodamine - labeled actin in glass - bottomed dishes so that struc - tures could be imaged directly , in the ab - sence of any perturbation ( Supplemental Figure S11C ) . Moesin depletion inhibited the process selectively , since the formation of F - actin networks was fully restored by expres - sion of RNAi - resistant Msn - GFP in the MSN KD background ( Figure 4C and Supplemen - tal Figure S11D ; quantification in Figure 4D ) . Moesin is required for the formation of endosomal F - actin networks in vitro Because MSN seems to play a role in the formation of actin network in vitro , we ana - lyzed the process at early time points , when actin - containing structures can still be dis - criminated . However , the history and the complexity of branched actin network for - mation are not easily studied . To quantify network complexity , we therefore counted the number of structures originating from each endosome ( primary structures ) and compared this number with the number of all other actin - based structures that could be identified in the networks and that did not originate from endosomes ( other structures ) ( Figure 5A ; quantification in Figure 5B ) . After MSN KD , much like in the controls , each endosome was able to nucleate one that reconstitutes the polymerization of actin on purified early en - dosomes ( Morel et al . , 2009 ) . In this assay , early endosomes purified from cells expressing GFP - or mRFP - RAB5 ( as in Figure 1B and Sup - plemental Figure S1C ) were incubated with cytosol as a source of actin and other factors . At the desired time , the assay mixture was fixed , sampled , and placed on a microscopic slide , and F - actin was visualized with phalloidin . In the assay , early endosomes containing FIGURE 3 : Endosome ultrastructure . ( A ) HeLa cells were transfected with control siRNA or siRNA to MSN or double transfected with siRNAs to MSN and ANXA2 , and then treated for 1 h in serum - free medium . Cells were then incubated with BSA – gold ( 5 nm ) ( OD 520 = 5 ) for 15 min at 37ºC , fixed , and processed for electron microscopy . Arrows point at BSA – gold particles . Bars , 100 nm . ( B ) HeLa cells were transfected with control siRNAs or siRNAs to MSN . After microtubule depolymerization with 10 μM nocodazole for 2 h , HRP was endocytosed for 5 min followed by a 40 - min chase , always in the presence of 10 μM nocodazole . Cells were processed for electron microscopy and HRP revealed using a cytochemical reaction ( DAB ) . Bars , 1 μm ( main images ) , 100 nm ( insets ) . ( C ) Quantification of the percentage of HRP - containing endosomes with a tubular / ring - like morphology or spherical morphology from B . Data are means ± SD ( n = 3 ) . siRNA control vs . siRNA ANXA2 ( * * * * p < 0 . 0001 ) , siRNA control vs . siRNA MSN ( * * * p = 0 . 0007 ) , and siRNA control vs . siRNAs ANXA2 + Msn ( * * * p = 0 . 0001 ) . Anx + Msn , ANXA2 + Msn ; Ctrl , control . 3310 | O . Muriel et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell ing that MSN depletion did not affect the actin nucleation capacity of early endo - somes . However , in marked contrast to con - trols , few actin - based structures that did not originate from endosomes were observed after MSN KD ( Figure 5A ; quantification in Figure 5B ) . Note that the approximate length of individual actin - based structures was similar with or without MSN depletion both at early ( Figure 5C ) and late time points ( Supplemental Figure S11F ) , perhaps sug - gesting that the observed decrease in com - plexity did not result from altered F - actin polymerization per se . This reduced capacity to generate F - ac - tin networks was reminiscent of defective F - actin branching capacity , a process that de - pends on the ARP2 / 3 complex ( Pollard , 2007 ) . Much like MSN KD , depletion of the p34ARP / APRC2 subunit of ARP2 / 3 complex with an siRNA pool ( Supplemental Figure S12A ) inhibited the formation of actin net - works ( Figure 5D ) , and most endosomes re - tained the capacity to nucleate F - actin ( Sup - plemental Figure S11E ) . However , in contrast to MSN KD , the length of actin structures ( Supplemental Figure S11F ) and conse - quently the number of endosomes captured by actin structure ( Figure 5E ) were signifi - cantly increased by ARP2 / 3 depletion , pre - sumably because branching is limiting dur - ing filament growth . Indeed , the effects of the double ARP2 / 3 and MSN KD were iden - tical to the single ARP2 / 3 KD rather than MSN KD ( Figure 5E and Supplemental Figures S11 , E and F , and S12B ) . These data demonstrate that formation of actin net - works on endosomes requires both func - tional MSN and the branching activity of ARP2 / 3 and that both MSN and Arp 2 / 3 act downstream of ANXA2 , since the double MSN and ANXA2 KD or ARPC2 and ANXA2 KD were identical to the single ANXA2 KD ( Supplemental Figure S12B ) . Formation of F - actin networks in vivo As a next step , we investigated whether MSN is also involved in the formation of F - actin patches or networks on early endo - somes in vivo . To this end , we used CTTN , a well - established marker of branched actin networks ( Cosen - Binker and Kapus , 2006 ; Derivery et al . , 2009 ) . After prepermeabiliza - tion to reduce the cytosolic pool , as in Figure 1A , CTTN showed a punctate staining pat - tern ( Figure 6A ) and colocalized with EEA1 on early endosomes ( Figure 6A ; quantifica - tion in Figure 6B ) , consistent with previous observations ( Cabezas et al . , 2005 ; Rosse et al . , 2014 ) . After depletion of ARPC2 , the CTTN staining of early endosomes was essentially abolished , concomitant with an overall decrease in CTTN staining ( Figure 6A ; quantification in Figure 6B ) , or two actin - based structures after a short incubation time ( Figure 5A ; blue bars in Figure 5B ) and two or three actin - based structures at later time points ( Supplemental Figure S11E ) , further demonstrat - FIGURE 4 : Nucleation and polymerization of F - actin on early endosomes in vitro . ( A ) BHK cells were transfected with mRFP - RAB5 and Msn - GFP . Cells were fractionated ( as in Figure 1B ) , and early endosomes ( EEs ) were collected . In parallel , BHK cells were separately transfected with Msn - GFP as described , and cytosol was prepared . In the assay , EEs were mixed with cytosol , and the mixture was incubated for 7 min . The mixture was then fixed , labeled with phalloidin , and analyzed by fluorescence confocal microscopy . Bar , 5 μm . ( B ) The assay was as in A , except that EEs and cytosol were prepared from HeLa cells expressing GFP - RAB5 and transfected with control siRNAs or siRNA to ANXA2 or MSN . In the assay , EEs and cytosol were incubated for 5 or 30 min , and at the end of the reaction , the mixture was analyzed as in A . Bars , 10 μm ( main images ) , 5 μm ( insets ) . ( C ) The assay was as in B , except that EEs and cytosol were prepared from cells expressing GFP - RAB5 and transfected with control siRNA or siRNA against MSN . Alternatively , cells were cotransfected with siRNA against MSN and with an RNAi - resistant form of Msn - GFP ( as in Figure 2B ) . Bar , 10 μm ( main images ) , 5 μm ( insets ) . The Western blots corresponding to these samples are shown in Supplemental Figure S6C . ( D ) Amounts of polymerized actin in C were quantified relative to the number of endosomes using the Cell Profiler software and were normalized to controls . Data are median ± SEM ( n = 3 ) . siRNA control vs . siRNA MSN ( * * * * p < 0 . 0001 ) , siRNA control vs . siRNA MSN + Msn - GFP ( ns , p = 0 . 6929 ) , and siRNA MSN vs . siRNA MSN + Msn - GFP ( * * p = 0 . 0066 ) . Volume 27 November 1 , 2016 Endosome biogenesis | 3311 activates ARP2 / 3 and stabilizes actin branches after their formation ( Uruno et al . , 2001 ; Weaver et al . , 2001 ) . We therefore in - vestigated whether CTTN functions in the same pathway as MSN . In our in vitro actin polymerization assay , GFP - CTTN was found on early endosomes labeled with mRFP - RAB5 ( Figure 7A ) , as anticipated . Strikingly , CTTN depletion with siRNA abrogated actin network formation in a manner reminiscent of MSN KD ( Figure 7B ) . We then investigated whether CTTN plays a role in endocytic membrane transport . CTTN KD did not af - fect TF binding to its receptor at the plasma membrane or TFR internalization and recy - cling ( Supplemental Figure S13A ) . Similarly , EGF binding to EGFR at the plasma mem - brane and internalization into EEA1 - labeled early endosomes for 15 min at 37°C were not affected by CTTN depletion ( Figure 7C ) . These data demonstrate that CTTN does not play a role during endocytosis . By contrast , some EGF remained in early endosomes af - ter a 45 - min incubation time at 37°C in cells depleted of CTTN ( Figure 7C ) , and EGFR degradation was significantly delayed ( Figure 7D ; quantification in Figure 7E ) , much like af - ter MSN KD ( Figure 2 and Supplemental Figures S6 , B and C , and S7 ) . Our data thus demonstrate that early - to - late endosome transport depends on F - actin networks po - lymerized onto early endosomes in a manner dependent on MSN and CTTN . DISCUSSION Actin plays a crucial role in membrane dy - namics and intracellular transport in addi - tion to its general roles in cell shape main - tenance , adhesion , motility , and division ( Clarke and Spudich , 1977 ; Mitchison and Cramer , 1996 ; Vale , 2003 ; Michelot and Drubin , 2011 ) . In particular , phagocytosis and micropinocytosis are actin dependent , as are other endocytic processes ( Soldati and Schliwa , 2006 ; Swanson , 2008 ; Mooren et al . , 2012 ) , including the formation of clathrin - coated vesicles in yeast ( Kaksonen et al . , 2005 ) and mam - malian cells when the plasma membrane is under tension ( Boulant et al . , 2011 ) . In the endosomal system , actin plays a role along both the recycling ( Huber et al . , 2000 ) and degradative pathways ( Durrbach et al . , 1996 ; Taunton et al . , 2000 ) and in melanosome biogenesis ( Salas - Cortes et al . , 2005 ) . F - actin also plays a crucial role in the two major membrane deformation processes that occur on early endosome membranes—the formation of membrane tu - bules involved in retrograde transport and recycling ( Seaman et al . , 2013 ) and the biogenesis of ECV / MVB ( Morel et al . , 2009 ) , which mediate transport toward late endosomes . In previous studies , we found that ECV / MVB formation and de - tachment or maturation from early endosome membranes requires branched actin patches of short filaments nucleated by ANXA2 in a process that also depends on the actin nucleation factor Spire1 and ARP2 / 3 ( Mayran et al . , 2003 ; Morel et al . , 2009 ) . We also found that ANXA2 binds cholesterol - rich membranes , which seem to form consistent with an extensive decrease in cellular branched actin . By contrast , MSN KD did not significantly affect total CTTN levels ( Sup - plemental Figure S12C ) , but the association of CTTN with endo - somes was drastically affected ( Figure 6A ; quantification in Figure 6B ) . As a control , WASH1 was depleted using siRNAs ( Supplemental Figure S12D ) in order to inactivate the WASH complex , an activator of ARP2 / 3 involved in retromer - dependent sorting and TFR recycling to the plasma membrane ( Derivery et al . , 2009 ; Gomez and Bil - ladeau , 2009 ) . As expected , WASH1 KD also reduced CTTN recruit - ment to early endosomes ( Figure 6A ; quantification in Figure 6B ) . CTTN recruitment to early endosomes was significantly lower after double MSN and WASH1 KD compared with each single KD ( Figure 6A ; quantification in Figure 6B ) , suggesting that MSN and WASH act independently in recruiting CTTN and thus actin onto endosomes . CTTN is required for the formation of endosomal F - actin networks Our data indicate that CTTN is associated to endosomes in a MSN - dependent manner in vivo , whereas others have shown that CTTN FIGURE 5 : Moesin and endosomal F - actin networks in vitro . ( A ) Cells and cytosol were prepared as in Figure 4B after KD of MSN and the assay was carried out as in Figure 4B , except that samples were fixed after 7 min . Top and bottom , the same micrographs , but with structures overlaid with traces drawn using the NeuronJ plug - in of ImageJ at the bottom . Bar , 10 μm . ( B ) Quantification of the number of actin structures in A that originate ( primary ) or not ( other ) from endosomes . Data are means ± SD ( n = 3 ) . siRNA control vs . siRNA MSN ( primary : ns , p = 0 . 2181 ; others : * p = 0 . 0107 ) . ( C ) The assay was as in A , and the length of actin structures was measured after 7 min . Data are means ± SEM ( n = 3 ) . * p = 0 . 0354 . ( D ) Cells and cytosol were prepared as in Figure 4B but after ARPC2 KD and the assay was carried out for 30 min as in Figure 4B . Bar , 10 μm ( main images ) , 3 μm ( insets ) . ( E ) The assay was as in Figure 4B using extracts from cells prepared after KD of MSN or ARPC2 ( ARP ) or double KD of MSN and ARPC2 ( M + A ) . The number of endosomes per actin structure was quantified at 30 min . Data are means ± SEM ( n = 5 ) . siRNA control vs . siRNA MSN ( ns , p = 0 . 3693 ) , siRNA control vs . siRNA ARPC2 ( * * p = 0 . 0088 ) , siRNA MSN vs . siRNA ARPC2 ( * p = 0 . 0122 ) , and siRNA ARPC2 vs . siRNAs MSN + ARPC2 ( ns , p = 0 . 5792 ) . 3312 | O . Muriel et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell been nucleated in an Anx2 - dependent manner ( see model in Supplemental Figure S13B ) . These filaments in turn can recruit the F - actin – binding protein CTTN , which may induce branched actin nucleation through ARP2 / 3 activation and stabilization of the branches ( Uruno et al . , 2001 ; Goley and Welch , 2006 ; Hong et al . , 2015 ) . Alter - natively , CTTN may serve as a platform to scaffold nucleation - promoting factors and ARP2 / 3 to generate actin assembly in a pro - cess similar to adherens junctions in epithe - lial cells ( Han et al . , 2014 ) . In any case , CTTN contributes to the formation and sta - bilization of the branched actin network ob - served on endosomes , consistent with find - ings that CTTN and ARP2 / 3 regulate actin assembly on endosomes together with WASH ( Puthenveedu et al . , 2010 ; Ohashi et al . , 2011 ; Monteiro et al . , 2013 ) . This ANXA2 - , MSN - , CTTN - , and ARP2 / 3 - de - pendent process is absolutely required for transport beyond early endosomes , since interfering with any one of these compo - nents arrests the endosome maturation process and thus prevents downstream transport toward late endosomes and lyso - somes and degradation . One may envision that the primary role of endosomal F - actin is to deform the mem - brane mechanically in a process akin to en - docytosis at the plasma membrane ( Toret and Drubin , 2006 ) . However , it is not clear how membrane - anchored F - actin could contribute to deform the membrane of rela - tively small ( 0 . 5 – 1 μm ) and highly plastic en - dosomes . In addition , our ultrastructural analysis shows that MSN depletion does not prevent the membrane deformation pro - cess per se but hampers the separation of maturing ECV / MVBs ( containing ILVs ) from recycling membranes . It thus seems very at - tractive to conclude that the primary func - tion of F - actin networks is to help segregate the tubular and multivesicular membranes of early endosomes along the recycling and degradation pathways , respectively ( model in Supplemental Figure S13B ) . Once nucleated , presumably by ANXA2 , F - actin filaments may be stabilized by WASH on nascent recycling tubules ( Derivery et al . , 2009 ) and by MSN on nascent ECV / MVBs ( this study ) . We conclude that patches of F - actin discrim - inate the site of ECV / MVBs formation on early endosome mem - branes and thus the membrane - remodeling process that accompa - nies endosome biogenesis . MATERIALS AND METHODS Cells , antibodies , and reagents HeLa and BHK - 21 cells were maintained as described ( Morel and Gruenberg , 2007 ) . Cells were transfected according to the manufac - turer’s recommendation with DNA and siRNA using FuGENE HD ( Promega Corporation , Madison , WI ) and Lipofectamine RNAiMax ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) , respectively . The monoclonal antibodies morphologically visible domains that may serve as actin nucleation / polymerization platforms ( Harder et al . , 1997 ; Morel et al . , 2009 ) pre - sumably corresponding to the membrane – actin contact sites we observe by light microscopy in this study . We now find that the as - sembly of F - actin patches on early endosome membranes , but not the actin nucleation process , depends on the ERM protein MSN . ERM proteins function as plasma membrane – cytoskeleton cross - link - ers , coordinating signal transduction with cytoskeleton remodeling and membrane protein transport and activity ( Tsukita and Yonemura , 1997 ; Bretscher et al . , 1997 ; Mangeat et al . , 1999 ; Bezanilla et al . , 2015 ) . Increasing evidence indicates that ERM proteins are also in - volved in endocytic and phagocytic trafficking ( Barroso - Gonzalez et al . , 2009 ; Chirivino et al . , 2011 ; Marion et al . , 2011 ) . It is thus very attractive to propose that the primary role of endo - some - associated MSN is to capture the F - actin filaments that have FIGURE 6 : Recruitment of cortactin to early endosome in vivo . ( A ) HeLa cells transfected with control siRNAs or siRNAs to MSN , WASH1 , or ARPC2 or double transfected with siRNAs to MSN and WASH1 were prepermeabilized ( as in Figure 1A ) and processed for immunofluorescence with antibodies against CTTN ( green ) and EEA1 ( red ) . The upper row shows low magnification views ( bar , 25 μm ) , and the indicated areas are shown at higher magnification in the middle row ( bar , 10 μm ) . Similarly , the indicated areas in the middle row are shown at higher magnification in the lower row ( bar , 3 μm ) . ( B ) The intensity of the CTTN staining was quantified per endosome labeled with EEA1 in A using the Cell Profiler software . ARPC , ARPC2 ; M + W , MSN and WASH1 . Data are means ± SEM ( n = 3 ) . siRNA control vs . siRNA MSN ( * * * * p < 0 . 0001 ) , siRNA control vs . siRNA WASH1 ( * p = 0 . 0146 ) , siRNA control vs . siRNA ARPC2 ( * * * * p < 0 . 0001 ) , siRNA control vs . siRNAs MSN + WASH1 ( * * * * p < 0 . 0001 ) , siRNA MSN vs . siRNA WASH1 ( ns , p = 0 . 8357 ) , siRNA MSN vs . siRNA ARPC2 ( * * p = 0 . 0012 ) , siRNA MSN vs . siRNAs MSN + WASH1 ( * * p = 0 . 0029 ) , and siRNA ARPC2 vs . siRNA MSN + WASH1 ( * p = 0 . 0111 ) . Volume 27 November 1 , 2016 Endosome biogenesis | 3313 against RAB5 and ANXA2 ( HH7 ) were gifts from R . Jahn ( Max - Planck Institute for Bio - physical Chemistry , Göttingen , Germany ) and V . Gerke ( University of Münster , Münster , Germany ) , respectively ; the polyclonal anti - bodies against MSN and WASH1 were gifts from P . Mangeat ( University of Montpellier II , Montpellier , France ) and A . Gautreau ( Ecole Polytechnique , Palaiseau , France ) , respec - tively . Mouse monoclonal antibodies were obtained from the following sources : EEA1 from Enzo ( Lausanne , Switzerland ) ; GFP from Roche ( Mannheim , Germany ) ; tubulin from Sigma - Aldrich ( St . Louis , MO ) ; cortactin from Millipore ( Schaffhausen , Switzerland ; clone 4F11 ) ; and EGFR from BD Biosciences ( San Jose , CA ) . Rabbit monoclonal antibodies against actin , ezrin , radixin , or moesin ( Cell Signaling , Danvers , MA ) were from Cell Signaling . Rabbit polyclonal antibodies against WASH1 and RAB7 were from Sigma - Aldrich and against ARPC2 from Abcam ( Cambridge , UK ; p34Arc ) . Sheep antibody against human EGFR used for Western blot was from Fitzgerald ( Acton , MA ) , per - oxidase - conjugated secondary antibodies from Bio - Rad ( Hercules , CA ) , and Cy2 - , Cy3 - , and Cy5 - conjugated fluorescent anti - bodies from Jackson Immuno Research ( West Grove , PA ) . Alexa Fluor 488 – EGF and Alexa Fluor 555 – TF were from Invitrogen . F - actin was labeled with Alexa Fluor cou - pled to phalloidin ( Invitrogen ) . Latrunculin B , cytochalasin D , nocodazole , cyclohex - amide , and HRP were from Sigma - Aldrich , and jasplakinolide was from Calbiochem . Colloidal gold sols ( British Biocell Interna - tional ) were coupled to anti - EGFR 108 anti - body ( raised against the extracellular do - main of the receptor isolated from the mouse 108 hybridoma ; American Type Cul - ture Collection ) or bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) by incubation with protein at pH 9 . 3 or 5 . 5 , respectively , followed by secondary stabilization with 1 % BSA as described ( Slot and Geuze , 1985 ) . Antibody – gold conju - gate was diluted in serum - free medium containing 0 . 2 % BSA and incubated with living cells . Lipids were obtained from Avanti Polar Lipids ( Alabaster , AL ) . Purified rhodamine nonmuscle actin was obtained from Cytoskeleton ( Denver , CO ) . Plasmids and RNAi We received plasmids from the follow - ing sources : GFP - RAB5 from M . Zerial ( Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics , Dresden , Germany ) ; full - length Msn - GFP from P . Sánchez - Mateos ( Complutense University School of Medicine , FIGURE 7 : Cortactin and the formation of endosomal F - actin networks . ( A ) Endosomes were prepared from BHK cells transfected with mRFP - RAB5 and GFP - CTTN , whereas cytosol was prepared from cells transfected with GFP - CTTN only . The assay was as in Figure 4A . Bar , 5 μm . ( B ) Cells and cytosol were prepared as in Figure 4B after KD of CTTN with siRNAs . Assay was carried out as in Figure 4B . Bar , 10 μm . ( C ) HeLa cells transfected with control siRNAs or siRNAs to CTTN were treated for 1 h in serum - free medium and then incubated with 100 ng / μl EGF – Alexa 488 for 1 h at 4ºC to allow binding to EGFR . After washing , cells were incubated at 37ºC for the indicated times , fixed , labeled with an antibody against EEA1 followed by secondary antibody ( red ) , and analyzed by fluorescence confocal microscopy . Scale bar , 25 μm ( main images ) , 5 μm ( zoom ) . ( D ) HeLa cells were transfected with control siRNAs or siRNAs to CTTN . Cells were treated for 1 h in serum - free medium and 20 μg / ml cycloheximide and stimulated or not with 100 ng / μl EGF for 45 , 90 , and 180 min in the presence of 20 μg / ml cycloheximide and lysed . Lysates were analyzed by SDS – PAGE and Western blotting using anti - EGFR antibody . γ - Tubulin ( Tub ) was used as a loading control . MW markers are indicated . ( E ) Densitometric quantification of EGFR levels relative to tubulin from D using ImageJ software . Data are means ± SD ( n = 5 ) . siRNA control vs . siRNA CTTN ( 45 min : * * p = 0 . 0021 ; 90 min : * * p = 0 . 0043 ; and 180 min : * * p = 0 . 0067 ) . 3314 | O . Muriel et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell with HeLa cytosol ( final concentration ≈ 1 mg / ml ) , 125 mM KCl , 20 mM HEPES ( pH 7 . 0 ) , 2 . 5 mM MgOAc2 , 1 . 6 mM dithiothreitol , and a cocktail of protease inhibitors ( Gruenberg et al . , 1989 ) . Tubes were placed at 37ºC without shaking . At the desired time , the assay mixture was sampled and placed on a microscopic slide . The reac - tion was stopped with 4 % paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) on ice , polymer - ized actin was stained with Alexa Fluor 555 conjugated to phal - loidin , and samples were analyzed by confocal microscopy . Alternatively , the assay was carried out in the absence of any me - chanical perturbation . Microscopic chambers created by placing a 18 - mm coverslip in a 35 - mm dish with a 20 - mm glass bottom ( 0 . 16 – 0 . 19 mm ) were cleaned for 1 min with plasma cleaner , coated with 1 % casein to minimize protein binding to the glass , and washed twice with 3 mM imidazole , pH 7 . 4 . Actin polymerization was initi - ated by adding to the chamber the same assay mixture as described but also containing 0 . 1 μg / μl rhodamine - actin , and the final refrac - tion index was adjusted with 39 % sucrose and 3 mM imidazole , pH 7 . 4 . Chambers were placed at 37ºC without shaking , and images were acquired by confocal microscopy . Electron microscopy To study the ultrastructure of endosomes by electron microscopy , HeLa cells were preincubated or not for 2 h with 10 μM nocodazole in serum - free medium . Cells were then incubated for 5 min with 10 mg / ml HRP and 2 mg / ml BSA in DMEM containing 10 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 4 , and further chased for 40 min at 37ºC in the pres - ence of 10 μM nocodazole . The cells were fixed for 1 h with 2 % PFA and 2 % glutaraldehyde in 0 . 1 M phosphate buffer at pH 7 . 4 . The presence of HRP was revealed using 3 , 3’ - diaminobenzidine ( DAB ) as substrate ( Gruenberg et al . , 1989 ) , and cells were flat - embedded and processed for transmission electron microscopy . Ultrathin 70 - nm sections were stained with lead citrate and examined with a JEOL 1010 TEM , and images were acquired in a Gatan OriusSC100B charge - coupled device camera . Alternatively , cells were incubated with 5 nm BSA - gold ( OD 520 ≈ 5 ) for 15 min at 37°C and then fixed and processed as described . To monitor EGFR in endosomes , HeLa cells that had been serum starved were challenged with antibodies to the extracellular domain of EGFR bound to colloidal gold particles ( 6 – 8 nm ) and 100 ng / ml EGF for 15 min at 37°C . Cells were fixed with 4 % PFA and 0 . 1 % glu - taraldehyde in 0 . 1 M phosphate buffer at pH 7 . 4 , scrapped off the dish , and pelleted in 12 % gelatin . Subsequently , after infusion with 2 . 3 M sucrose , 80 - nm sections were cut at 120°C and collected in 2 . 3 M sucrose / 2 % methylcellulose ( 1 : 1 ) . The sections were immunola - beled with rabbit anti - moesin antibody at 1 : 5 dilution , followed by Protein A – gold ( UMC Utrecht ; size range 10 – 12 nm ) as described pre - viously ( Slot et al . , 1991 ) . The number of gold particles was quantified using ImageJ ( National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , MD ) and ex - pressed per linear micrometer of plasma membrane and endosomes , as well as mitochondria and the nuclear membrane as controls . Image analysis To assess endosome association , fluorescence micrographs were processed using Cell Profiler ( version 2 . 1 . 1 ; Kamentsky et al . , 2011 ) . Endosomes were first identified as the primary object using the GFP - RAB5 ( Figure 4 ) or EEA1 ( Figure 6 ) signal , and the associated material was determined either by propagation of the secondary signal ( actin ; Figure 4 ) or by expanding the primary object ( CTTN ; Figure 6 ) . Amounts of associated material for each object were aver - aged and normalized to the control condition . The analysis of actin polymerization and network formation was performed using ImageJ . The length of actin structures , Madrid , Spain ; Estecha et al . , 2009 ) and C - MSN - GFP ( C - terminal actin - binding region , amino acids 382 – 557 ) from H . Furthmayr ( Stan - ford University , Palo Alto , CA ; Amieva et al . , 1999 ) , both tagged at the C - terminus ; and ANXA2 - GFP from V . Gerke ( Münster , Germany ) . ANXA2 - GFP was generated by cloning ANXA2 cDNA into pdsRED - monomer plasmid using Xho and Bam hI sites . CFP - RAB5 was gener - ated by cloning RAB5 cDNA into pECFR - C1 plasmid using Kpn I and Bam hI sites . GFP - CTTN was generated using Gateway technology . MSN was depleted using the ON - TARGETplus Human MSN ( 4478 ) siRNA SMARTpool , which includes the sequences CGTAT - GCTGTCCAGTCTAA ; GAGGGAAGTTTGGTTCTTT ; TCGCAAGCC - TGATACCATT ; and GGCTGAAACTCAATAAGAA . ANXA2 was depleted using the Qiagen siRNA Hs _ ANXA2 _ 10 , CACGGCCTGAGCGTCCAGAAA , which was validated previously by reexpression of siRNA - resistant ANXA2 ( Morel et al . , 2009 ) . We depleted p34Arc using the ON - TARGETplus human ARPC2 ( 10109 ) siRNA SMARTpool , which includes the sequences CCATG - TATGTTGAGTCTAA ; GCTCTAAGGCCTATAUUCA ; GGACAGAGT - CACAGTAGTC ; and GTACGGGAGTTTCTTGGTA . WASH1 was down - regulated using three different ON - TARGET - plus human WASH1 siRNAs : AGACCTATGCCGTGCCCTT ; GTGCA - GGCCATTGGAGAGA ; and AGACCTACAAGATGGGGTA . Ezrin was down - regulated using the ON - TARGETplus Human EZR ( 7430 ) siRNA SMARTpool , which includes the sequences GCG - CAAGGAGGATGAAGTT ; GGAAATCAACTATTTCGAGA ; GCTCA - AAGATAATGCTATG and ; GCGCGGAGCTGTCTAGTGA . Radixin was down - regulated using the ON - TARGETplus Human RDX ( 5962 ) siRNA SMARTpool , which includes the sequences GGGCACAATTAGAGAATGA ; CTACATGGCTTAAACTAAA ; GGCA - TTAAGTTCAGAATTA ; and GAGCTAATGGAACGTCTAA . Cortactin was down - regulated using the ON - TARGETplus Human CTTN ( 2017 ) siRNA SMARTpool , which includes the sequences CCACGAAUAUCAGUCGAAA ; GAACAAGACCGAAUGGAUA ; GAGCAUAUCAACAUACACA ; and CAAGUAACAUCAGAGCUAA . All target sequences are listed in the 5 ′ - to - 3 ′ direction . In vivo experiments To monitor EGFR endocytic transport , cells were starved overnight and preincubated for 1 h at 37ºC with 20 μg / ml cyclohexamide in serum - free medium . The cells were then incubated for the indicated time periods at 37ºC with 20 μg / ml cyclohexamide and 100 ng / ml EGF in DMEM containing 10 mM 4 - ( 2 - hydroxyethyl ) - 1 - pipera - zineethanesulfonic acid ( HEPES ) at pH 7 . 4 . Cells were lysed in RIPA buffer containing protease inhibitors , and the samples were ana - lyzed by SDS gel electrophoresis , followed by Western blotting with antibodies against EGFR . In vitro experiments In our in vitro experiments , early and late endosome fractions , as well as heavy membranes , were prepared from cells expressing GFP - RAB5 by flotation in sucrose gradients using a well - established fractionation protocol ( Aniento et al . , 1993 ) . Briefly , after homogenization , a post - nuclear supernatant was prepared adjusted to 40 . 6 % sucrose in 3 mM imidazole , pH 7 . 4 , loaded at the bottom of an ultracentrifuge tube , and overlaid sequentially with 35 , 25 , and 8 . 5 % sucrose in the same buffer . After centrifugation , early and late endosomes were collected at the 35 / 25 % and 25 / 8 . 5 % interfaces , respectively , whereas heavy membranes were recovered at the load / 35 % interface . Fractions were then used in our in vitro actin polymerization assay or flash - frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at − 80°C . In the actin polymerization assay ( Morel et al . , 2009 ) , purified GFP - RAB5 endosomes ( final concentration ≈ 100 μg / ml ) were mixed Volume 27 November 1 , 2016 Endosome biogenesis | 3315 REFERENCES Amieva MR , Litman P , Huang L , Ichimaru E , Furthmayr H ( 1999 ) . Disruption of dynamic cell surface architecture of NIH3T3 fibroblasts by the N - terminal domains of moesin and ezrin : in vivo imaging with GFP fusion proteins . J Cell Sci 112 , 111 – 125 . Aniento F , Emans N , Griffiths G , Gruenberg J ( 1993 ) . Cytoplasmic dynein - dependent vesicular transport from early to late endosomes . J Cell Biol 123 , 1373 – 1387 . Barroso - Gonzalez J , Machado JD , Garcia - Exposito L , Valenzuela - Fernandez A ( 2009 ) . Moesin regulates the trafficking of nascent clathrin - coated vesicles . J Biol Chem 284 , 2419 – 2434 . Bezanilla M , Gladfelter AS , Kovar DR , Lee WL ( 2015 ) . Cytoskeletal dynamics : a view from the membrane . J Cell Biol 209 , 329 – 337 . Bonilha VL , Finnemann SC , Rodriguez - Boulan E ( 1999 ) . Ezrin promotes mor - phogenesis of apical microvilli and basal infoldings in retinal pigment epithelium . J Cell Biol 147 , 1533 – 1548 . Boulant S , Kural C , Zeeh JC , Ubelmann F , Kirchhausen T ( 2011 ) . Actin dynamics counteract membrane tension during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat Cell Biol 13 , 1124 – 1131 . Bradford MM ( 1976 ) . A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein - dye binding . Anal Biochem 72 , 248 – 254 . Bretscher A , Reczek D , Berryman M ( 1997 ) . Ezrin : a protein requiring con - formational activation to link microfilaments to the plasma membrane in the assembly of cell surface structures . J Cell Sci 110 , 3011 – 3018 . Burd C , Cullen PJ ( 2014 ) . Retromer : a master conductor of endosome sorting . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 6 , a016774 . Cabezas A , Bache KG , Brech A , Stenmark H ( 2005 ) . Alix regulates corti - cal actin and the spatial distribution of endosomes . J Cell Sci 118 , 2625 – 2635 . Chirivino D , Del Maestro L , Formstecher E , Hupe P , Raposo G , Louvard D , Arpin M ( 2011 ) . The ERM proteins interact with the HOPS complex to regulate the maturation of endosomes . Mol Biol Cell 22 , 375 – 385 . Clarke M , Spudich JA ( 1977 ) . Nonmuscle contractile proteins : the role of actin and myosin in cell motility and shape determination . Annu Rev Biochem 46 , 797 – 822 . Cosen - Binker LI , Kapus A ( 2006 ) . Cortactin : the gray eminence of the cytoskeleton . Physiology ( Bethesda ) 21 , 352 – 361 . Derivery E , Sousa C , Gautier JJ , Lombard B , Loew D , Gautreau A ( 2009 ) . The Arp2 / 3 activator WASH controls the fission of endosomes through a large multiprotein complex . Dev Cell 17 , 712 – 723 . Durrbach A , Louvard D , Coudrier E ( 1996 ) . Actin filaments facilitate two steps of endocytosis . J Cell Sci 109 , 457 – 465 . Emans N , Gorvel JP , Walter C , Gerke V , Kellner R , Griffiths G , Gruenberg J ( 1993 ) . Annexin II is a major component of fusogenic endosomal vesicles . J Cell Biol 120 , 1357 – 1369 . Estecha A , Sanchez - Martin L , Puig - Kroger A , Bartolome RA , Teixido J , Samaniego R , Sanchez - Mateos P ( 2009 ) . Moesin orchestrates cortical polarity of melanoma tumour cells to initiate 3D invasion . J Cell Sci 122 , 3492 – 3501 . Goley ED , Welch MD ( 2006 ) . The ARP2 / 3 complex : an actin nucleator comes of age . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 7 , 713 – 726 . Gomez TS , Billadeau DD ( 2009 ) . A FAM21 - containing WASH complex regu - lates retromer - dependent sorting . Dev Cell 17 , 699 – 711 . Gruenberg J ( 2001 ) . The endocytic pathway : a mosaic of domains . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2 , 721 – 730 . Gruenberg J , Griffiths G , Howell KE ( 1989 ) . Characterization of the early endosome and putative endocytic carrier vesicles in vivo and with an assay of vesicle fusion in vitro . J Cell Biol 108 , 1301 – 1316 . number of endosomes per actin structure , and number of actin structures per endosome were quantified manually , and tracing and quantitation of actin network complexity was performed with the NeuronJ plug - in ( Meijering et al . , 2004 ) . MSN distribution on early endosome membranes was also analyzed with ImageJ . The perimeter of the limiting membrane was traced , and the intensity profiles of both Msn - GFP and mCherry - RAB5Q79L were deter - mined . A threshold of 20 % of the maximum value for each chan - nel was used to discriminate the distribution of patched versus nonpatched regions . The number of peaks was calculated manu - ally . The percentage of coverage represents the fraction of the endosome perimeter occupied by protein . Density was esti - mated from the integral of the fluorescence intensity signal above threshold . Biochemical methods GST - MSN and GST - ANXA2 were produced in the BL21 bacteria strain . When indicated , the GST tag was removed by factor Xa cleavage and benzamidine treatment ( Amersham Biosciences ) . The quality of recombinant protein was always assessed by SDS – PAGE , Coomassie blue staining , and Western blotting . In GST pull downs , GST - ANXA2 or GST alone was incubated with glutathione - Sepharose beads ( GE - Healthcare 4B ) for 2 h at 4ºC . Purified MSN was added , and the mixture was incubated for 2 h at 4ºC . After sedimentation of the beads , bound and nonbound materials were analyzed by SDS – PAGE , Coomassie blue staining , and Western blotting . To measure MSN binding , liposomes were prepared with the fol - lowing compositions : PA : PE : cholesterol ( 2 : 2 : 1 ) , PC : PE : cholesterol ( 2 : 2 : 1 ) , PE : PC : cholesterol ( 2 : 2 : 1 ) , PE : PC : cholesterol : PIP2 ( 2 : 1 . 5 : 1 : 0 . 5 or 1 : 1 : 1 : 2 ) after lipid hydration and sonication . Liposomes were in - cubated with purified GTS - MSN in 50 mM HEPES - NaOH , pH 7 . 4 , containing 100 mM KCl for 90 min at room temperature . Alterna - tively , GST - MSN was replaced with cytosol prepared from cells over - expressing Msn - GFP ( full length or mutant lacking FERM domain ) . The liposome - bound protein was separated from free protein by flotation in sucrose gradients . The liposome – protein mixture was adjusted to 40 . 6 % sucrose , overlaid with 35 % and 8 . 5 % sucrose , and centrifuged for 1 h at 55 , 000 rpm . Fractions of the 8 . 5 % inter - phase containing the liposomes , the 35 % sucrose cushion , and the load were collected and analyzed by SDS – PAGE and Western blotting . For immunoprecipitation , early endosomal fractions extracted from BHK cells transfected with ANXA2 - GFP were diluted with twice - concentrated TNE buffer to a final concentration of 20 mM Tris , pH 7 . 4 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 mM EDTA , 0 . 2 % NP - 40 , and 10 % glycerol in the presence of proteases inhibitors ( aprotinin , leu - peptin , and pepstatin ) . The endosomal extracts were then incu - bated with GFP - Trap _ A beads ( ChromoTek ) under constant mix - ing for 1 h at 4ºC . Beads were washed with TNE buffer containing 10 % glycerol , resuspended in Laemmli buffer , and analyzed by SDS – PAGE and Western blotting . The analysis of total membranes and cytosol was carried out by high - speed centrifugation of postnuclear supernatants ( 55 , 000 rpm for 50 min ) . Membranes and cytosol were recovered from the high - speed pellet and high - speed supernatant , respectively . Other methods The determination of protein concentration ( Bradford , 1976 ) and SDS – PAGE ( Laemmli , 1970 ) were described previously . Western blot was carried out by using WesternBright ECL ( Advansta ) , and blot exposure times were always within the linear range of detection . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We are grateful to members of our laboratory for fruitful discussions . We also thank Marie - Claire Velluz , Marie Hélène Beuchat , and Brigitte Bernadets for technical support . Support was provided by the Swiss National Science Foundation , the Swiss Sinergia Pro - gramme , the Polish - Swiss Research Programme ( PSPB - 094 / 2010 ) , and the National Centre of Competence in Research in Chemical Biology and LipidX from the Swiss SystemsX . ch initiative , evaluated by the Swiss National Science Foundation ( to J . G . ) . O . M . was sup - ported by a European Molecular Biology Organization long - term fellowship ( ALTF - 516 - 2012 ) . 3316 | O . Muriel et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell Pons V , Luyet PP , Morel E , Abrami L , van der Goot FG , Parton RG , Gruenberg J ( 2008 ) . Hrs and SNX3 functions in sorting and membrane invagination within multivesicular bodies . PLoS Biol 6 , e214 . Puthenveedu MA , Lauffer B , Temkin P , Vistein R , Carlton P , Thorn K , Taunton J , Weiner OD , Parton RG , von Zastrow M ( 2010 ) . Sequence - dependent sorting of recycling proteins by actin - stabilized endosomal microdo - mains . Cell 143 , 761 – 773 . Raiborg C , Bache KG , Gillooly DJ , Madshus IH , Stang E , Stenmark H ( 2002 ) . Hrs sorts ubiquitinated proteins into clathrin - coated microdomains of early endosomes . Nat Cell Biol 4 , 394 – 398 . Raposo G , Cordonnier MN , Tenza D , Menichi B , Durrbach A , Louvard D , Coudrier E ( 1999 ) . Association of myosin I alpha with endo - somes and lysosomes in mammalian cells . Mol Biol Cell 10 , 1477 – 1494 . Rosse C , Lodillinsky C , Fuhrmann L , Nourieh M , Monteiro P , Irondelle M , Lagoutte E , Vacher S , Waharte F , Paul - Gilloteaux P , et al . ( 2014 ) . Control of MT1 - MMP transport by atypical PKC during breast - cancer progres - sion . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111 , E1872 – E1879 . Salas - Cortes L , Ye F , Tenza D , Wilhelm C , Theos A , Louvard D , Raposo G , Coudrier E ( 2005 ) . Myosin Ib modulates the morphology and the protein transport within multi - vesicular sorting endosomes . J Cell Sci 118 , 4823 – 4832 . Scott CC , Vacca F , Gruenberg J ( 2014 ) . Endosome maturation , transport and functions . Semin Cell Dev Biol 31 , 2 – 10 . Seaman MN , Gautreau A , Billadeau DD ( 2013 ) . Retromer - mediated endosomal protein sorting : all WASHed up . Trends Cell Biol 23 , 522 – 528 . Slot JW , Geuze HJ ( 1985 ) . A new method of preparing gold probes for multiple - labeling cytochemistry . Eur J Cell Biol 38 , 87 – 93 . Slot JW , Geuze HJ , Gigengack S , Lienhard GE , James DE ( 1991 ) . Immuno - localization of the insulin regulatable glucose transporter in brown adipose tissue of the rat . J Cell Biol 113 , 123 – 135 . Soldati T , Schliwa M ( 2006 ) . Powering membrane traffic in endocytosis and recycling . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 7 , 897 – 908 . Swanson JA ( 2008 ) . Shaping cups into phagosomes and macropinosomes . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9 , 639 – 649 . Tan X , Thapa N , Choi S , Anderson RA ( 2015 ) . Emerging roles of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 – beyond the plasma membrane . J Cell Sci 128 , 4047 – 4056 . Taunton J , Rowning BA , Coughlin ML , Wu M , Moon RT , Mitchison TJ , Larabell CA ( 2000 ) . Actin - dependent propulsion of endosomes and lyso - somes by recruitment of N - WASP . J Cell Biol 148 , 519 – 530 . Tomas A , Vaughan SO , Burgoyne T , Sorkin A , Hartley JA , Hochhauser D , Futter CE ( 2015 ) . WASH and Tsg101 / ALIX - dependent diversion of stress - internalized EGFR from the canonical endocytic pathway . Nat Commun 6 , 7324 . Toret CP , Drubin DG ( 2006 ) . The budding yeast endocytic pathway . J Cell Sci 119 , 4585 – 4587 . Tsukita S , Yonemura S ( 1997 ) . ERM ( ezrin / radixin / moesin ) family : from cyto - skeleton to signal transduction . Curr Opin Cell Biol 9 , 70 – 75 . Uruno T , Liu J , Zhang P , Fan Y , Egile C , Li R , Mueller SC , Zhan X ( 2001 ) . Activation of Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin polymerization by cortactin . Nat Cell Biol 3 , 259 – 266 . Vale RD ( 2003 ) . The molecular motor toolbox for intracellular transport . Cell 112 , 467 – 480 . Weaver AM , Karginov AV , Kinley AW , Weed SA , Li Y , Parsons JT , Cooper JA ( 2001 ) . Cortactin promotes and stabilizes Arp2 / 3 - induced actin filament network formation . Curr Biol 11 , 370 – 374 . Woodman PG , Futter CE ( 2008 ) . Multivesicular bodies : co - ordinated pro - gression to maturity . Curr Opin Cell Biol 20 , 408 – 414 . Han SP , Gambin Y , Gomez GA , Verma S , Giles N , Michael M , Wu SK , Guo Z , Johnston W , Sierecki E , et al . ( 2014 ) . Cortactin scaffolds Arp2 / 3 and WAVE2 at the epithelial zonula adherens . J Biol Chem 289 , 7764 – 7775 . Harder T , Kellner R , Parton RG , Gruenberg J ( 1997 ) . Specific release of membrane - bound annexin II and cortical cytoskeletal elements by sequestration of membrane cholesterol . Mol Biol Cell 8 , 533 – 545 . Henne WM , Buchkovich NJ , Emr SD ( 2011 ) . The ESCRT pathway . Dev Cell 21 , 77 – 91 . Hong NH , Qi A , Weaver AM ( 2015 ) . PI ( 3 , 5 ) P2 controls endosomal branched actin dynamics by regulating cortactin - actin interactions . J Cell Biol 210 , 753 – 769 . Huber LA , Fialka I , Paiha K , Hunziker W , Sacks DB , Bahler M , Way M , Gagescu R , Gruenberg J ( 2000 ) . Both calmodulin and the unconven - tional myosin Myr4 regulate membrane trafficking along the recycling pathway of MDCK cells . Traffic 1 , 494 – 503 . Huotari J , Helenius A ( 2011 ) . Endosome maturation . EMBO J 30 , 3481 – 3500 . Kaksonen M , Toret CP , Drubin DG ( 2005 ) . A modular design for the clathrin - and actin - mediated endocytosis machinery . Cell 123 , 305 – 320 . Kamentsky L , Jones TR , Fraser A , Bray MA , Logan DJ , Madden KL , Ljosa V , Rueden C , Eliceiri KW , Carpenter AE ( 2011 ) . Improved structure , func - tion and compatibility for CellProfiler : modular high - throughput image analysis software . Bioinformatics 27 , 1179 – 1180 . Laemmli UK ( 1970 ) . Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage T4 . Nature 227 , 680 – 685 . Mangeat P , Roy C , Martin M ( 1999 ) . ERM proteins in cell adhesion and membrane dynamics . Trends Cell Biol 9 , 187 – 192 . Marion S , Hoffmann E , Holzer D , Le Clainche C , Martin M , Sachse M , Ganeva I , Mangeat P , Griffiths G ( 2011 ) . Ezrin promotes actin assembly at the phagosome membrane and regulates phago - lysosomal fusion . Traffic 12 , 421 – 437 . Mayran N , Parton RG , Gruenberg J ( 2003 ) . Annexin II regulates multivesicu - lar endosome biogenesis in the degradation pathway of animal cells . EMBO J 22 , 3242 – 3253 . McClatchey AI ( 2014 ) . ERM proteins at a glance . J Cell Sci 127 , 3199 – 3204 . Meijering E , Jacob M , Sarria JC , Steiner P , Hirling H , Unser M ( 2004 ) . Design and validation of a tool for neurite tracing and analysis in fluorescence microscopy images . Cytometry A 58 , 167 – 176 . Miaczynska M , Zerial M ( 2002 ) . Mosaic organization of the endocytic path - way . Exp Cell Res 272 , 8 – 14 . Michelot A , Drubin DG ( 2011 ) . Building distinct actin filament networks in a common cytoplasm . Curr Biol 21 , R560 – R569 . Mitchison TJ , Cramer LP ( 1996 ) . Actin - based cell motility and cell locomo - tion . Cell 84 , 371 – 379 . Monteiro P , Rosse C , Castro - Castro A , Irondelle M , Lagoutte E , Paul - Gilloteaux P , Desnos C , Formstecher E , Darchen F , Perrais D , et al . ( 2013 ) . Endosomal WASH and exocyst complexes control exocytosis of MT1 - MMP at invadopodia . J Cell Biol 203 , 1063 – 1079 . Mooren OL , Galletta BJ , Cooper JA ( 2012 ) . Roles for actin assembly in endocytosis . Annu Rev Biochem 81 , 661 – 686 . Morel E , Gruenberg J ( 2007 ) . The p11 / S100A10 light chain of annexin A2 is dispensable for annexin A2 association to endosomes and functions in endosomal transport . PLoS One 2 , e1118 . Morel E , Parton RG , Gruenberg J ( 2009 ) . Annexin A2 - dependent polymer - ization of actin mediates endosome biogenesis . Dev Cell 16 , 445 – 457 . Ohashi E , Tanabe K , Henmi Y , Mesaki K , Kobayashi Y , Takei K ( 2011 ) . Receptor sorting within endosomal trafficking pathway is facilitated by dynamic actin filaments . PLoS One 6 , e19942 . Pollard TD ( 2007 ) . Regulation of actin filament assembly by Arp2 / 3 complex and formins . Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 36 , 451 – 477 .