© 200 6 Nature Publishing Group The eukaryotic actin cytoskeleton has an important role in remarkably diverse processes , including cell migration , endocytosis , vesicle trafficking and cytokinesis , many of which are essential for the survival of the cell . The core constituent of the actin cytoskeleton is monomeric globular ( G ) - actin , a 43 - kDa ATPase that can self - assemble into filamentous ( F ) - actin . Each asymmetric filament pos - sesses a fast growing barbed end and a slower growing pointed end that are distinguishable by their structural characteristics and kinetic properties . ATP hydrolysis in the filament is tightly coupled to polymerization and regulates the kinetics of assembly and disassembly , as well as the association of interacting proteins . These bio - chemical properties are integral to the cellular activities of actin 1 . In cells , actin filaments function as force - generating polymer motors , structural scaffolds and tracks for motor proteins . The dynamic assembly and disassembly of filaments and the formation of larger scale filament structures are crucial aspects of actin’s function , and are therefore under scrupulous control by over a hundred actin - binding proteins . These proteins bind directly to filaments or monomers and control actin structure and dynamics by : nucleating ; capping ; stabilizing ; severing ; depolymerizing ; crosslinking ; bundling ; sequestering or delivering monomers ; or by promoting monomer nucleotide exchange . The coordinated actions of specific subsets of actin - binding proteins regulate the dynamics of distinct arrays of actin filaments at specific times and places within the cell 1 . An important set of actin regulators initiate formation of new actin filaments by a process that is called nucleation ( BOX 1 ) . Spontaneous nucleation is a kinetic hurdle in the process of actin polymerization , and , therefore , factors that can accelerate or bypass this step are important for efficient actin assembly in the cell . So far , three classes of protein have been identified that initiate new filament polymerization : the actin - related protein - 2 / 3 ( ARP2 / 3 ) complex , the formins and spire ( BOX 1 ) . Formins and spire have been reviewed in detail recently 2 , 3 and are not discussed further . Instead , this review focuses on the ARP2 / 3 complex , which was the first of these molecules to be identified , and has since been shown to have a crucial role in the form - ation of branched - actin - filament networks during diverse processes ranging from cell motility to endocytosis . This review introduces the ARP2 / 3 complex , describes recent advances in understanding its molecular mechanism of action and details the cellular processes that use its activity . We conclude by discussing the ways in which the ARP2 / 3 complex is misregulated during disease . ARP2 / 3 complex 101 The intact ARP2 / 3 complex was first purified from Acanthamoeba castellanii based on its affinity for the actin - binding protein profilin 4 , and was shown to consist of a stable assembly of seven polypeptides ( FIG . 1a – c ) . Two of the subunits were actin - related proteins of the ARP2 and ARP3 subfamilies , giving the complex its name . These proteins had been previously identified by genetic and genomic approaches in Saccharomyces cerevisiae , Schizosaccharomyces pombe 5 , 6 , Drosophila melanogaster 7 and Caenorhabditis elegans 8 . The remaining five subunits were originally named by size , but are now referred to as ARPC1 ( actin - related protein complex - 1 ) , ARPC2 , ARPC3 , ARPC4 and ARPC5 . ARPC1 ( which is present in two isoforms in humans , ARPC1A and ARPC1B ) is a WD - repeat - containing protein , whereas the other four ARPC subunits do not contain common sequence motifs . Since its isolation from A . castellanii , the entire complex has been purified from yeasts 9 , 10 and verte - brates 11 , 12 . Moreover , most eukaryotes for which genomes have been sequenced contain genes that are predicted to Department of Molecular and Cell Biology , University of California , Berkeley , California 94720 , USA . Correspondence to M . D . W . e - mail : welch @ berkeley . edu doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2026 Barbed end ( also called the + end ) . The more dynamic end of the actin filament , where growth and shrinkage are fast . In the actin monomer , the barbed end is on the side of the molecule opposite the nucleotide - binding cleft . Pointed end ( also called the – end ) . The less dynamic end of the actin filament . In the actin monomer , the pointed end is on the same side of the molecule as the nucleotide - binding cleft . The ARP2 / 3 complex : an actin nucleator comes of age Erin D . Goley and Matthew D . Welch Abstract | The cellular functions of the actin cytoskeleton require precise regulation of both the initiation of actin polymerization and the organization of the resulting filaments . The actin - related protein - 2 / 3 ( ARP2 / 3 ) complex is a central player in this regulation . A decade of study has begun to shed light on the molecular mechanisms by which this powerful machine controls the polymerization , organization and recycling of actin - filament networks , both in vitro and in the living cell . NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | OCTOBER2006 | 713 REVIEWS © 200 6 Nature Publishing Group NPF Pointed Barbed a Actin alone b The ARP2 / 3 complex c Spire d Formins encode all seven subunits , with the apparent exception of some protistan parasites including the Apicomplexa 13 and Leishmania major 14 . The ARP2 / 3 complex possesses little biochemical activity on its own . However , when engaged by nucleation - promoting factor ( NPF ) proteins , it is activated to initiate the formation of a new ( daughter ) filament that emerges from an existing ( mother ) filament in a y - branch con - figuration with a regular 70 o branch angle 15 , 16 ( FIG . 1d ) . This coupling of nucleation and branching by the ARP2 / 3 complex is referred to as autocatalytic branching or dendritic nucleation , and is central to its functions in vivo . Subunit organization and structure . Early attempts to gain insight into the structure of the ARP2 / 3 complex relied on genetics , biochemical reconstitution and chemical crosslinking in vitro 17 – 21 . These techniques led to a crude picture of the interactions between subunits that has held up well in light of more recent structural studies . The details of the ARP2 / 3 complex organiza - tion were revealed when a crystal structure of the bovine complex was solved at 2 . 0 - Å resolution 22 ( FIG . 1b ) . In this structure , ARP2 and ARP3 are structurally similar to actin , as predicted from their sequences 23 . However , their nucleotide - binding clefts are empty and open compared to ATP - bound actin , a result of the fact that the complex was purified in the absence of ATP . A nucleotide - bound structure has also been solved 24 ( see below ) . Of the other subunits , ARPC2 and ARPC4 form the structural core of the complex , with the remaining subunits organized around them , consistent with information from genetic and biochemical reconstitution experiments 18 , 20 , 21 . ARPC1 is a seven - bladed β - propeller protein , whereas ARPC3 and ARPC5 are primarily α - helical and are the most peripheral of the subunits . The ARP2 / 3 complex captured in the crystal is pro - posed to be in an inactive conformation because none of the binding partners that are required for activity are present . Moreover , ARP2 and ARP3 are splayed apart in the structure , which is inconsistent with the leading hypothesis that they function as an actin - like heterodimer to template the nucleation of the daughter filament . Therefore , activation of the complex is proposed to require a significant conformational change 22 ( FIG . 1b , c ) . So far , there are no high - resolution structures of activation intermediates , so further structural studies are needed to define the transitions that occur during activation . There is also only limited structural information available about how the ARP2 / 3 complex crosslinks actin filaments at a y - branch junction . Nevertheless , new data is emerging and two models have recently been proposed 25 , 26 ( FIG . 1e ) . One is based on the mapping of conserved surface residues on the complex together with data from cryo - electron microscopy ( EM ) , the crystal structure and biochemical studies 25 . The other is based on recent cryo - EM of activated ARP2 / 3 - containing bulky tags that were used to map the positions of indi - vidual subunits in the branch point 26 . These two models differ in their details , but each proposes the following Box 1 | Paths to nucleation The spontaneous initiation of actin - filament assembly requires the formation of a trimeric nucleus in a process that is called nucleation ( part a ) . Spontaneous nucleation is kinetically unfavourable and is the rate - limiting step in polymerization , because the actin dimer intermediate is very unstable 1 . So far , three main classes of protein have been identified that bypass the need for spontaneous nucleation and promote the initiation of new filament assembly . These factors , commonly referred to as nucleators , are the actin - related protein - 2 / 3 ( ARP2 / 3 ) complex , spire and formins . Each promotes nucleation by a distinct mechanism . The ARP2 / 3 complex is thought to mimic an actin dimer or trimer and to function as a template for the initiation of a new actin filament that branches off of an existing filament , generating y - branched actin networks ( part b ) . The spire proteins , which are conserved among metazoan species , were recently discovered to nucleate actin assembly . Biochemical studies with Drosophila melanogaster spire indicate that its four tandem G - actin - binding Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) - homology - 2 ( WH2 ) domains mediate longitudinal association of four actin subunits and function as a scaffold for polymerization into an unbranched filament 167 ( part c ) . Spire might remain associated with the pointed end of the filament , as it can cap pointed ends and prevent their depolymerization in vitro 167 . The formins , which are conserved in most eukaryotes , also promote the nucleation of unbranched filaments 3 . Biochemical and structural studies with yeast and mammalian formins indicate that a dimer of formin - homology - 2 ( FH2 ) domains stabilizes an actin dimer or trimer to facilitate the nucleation event ( part d ) . In contrast to spire and ARP2 / 3 , formins remain associated with the growing barbed ends of filaments , and sequential binding and release interactions might allow formins to ‘walk’ with the polymerizing barbed end . The existence of multiple classes of nucleator gives the cell the flexibility to assemble distinct populations of actin filaments with particular geometries and polymerization characteristics in response to diverse signals . NPF ; nucleation - promoting factor . R E V I E W S 714 | OCTOBER2006 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 200 6 Nature Publishing Group 2 3 4 5 1 ARP2 ARP3 ARPC2 ARP2 ARP3 ARPC3 ARPC4 ARPC5 ARPC1 a d e b c Barbed Barbed Pointed Pointed Motherﬁlament Motherﬁlament Daughterﬁlament Daughterﬁlament ARP2 / 3 complex FRET A technique for measuring changes in the distance and orientation between two fluorescent molecules that can be used to monitor protein – protein interactions , or protein conformational dynamics . common principles : ARP2 and ARP3 interact with the pointed end of the daughter filament , and ARPC2 and ARPC4 make substantial contacts with the mother filament ( FIG . 1e ) . However , the resolution of EM is still too low to present a clear picture of these interactions at the atomic level . Future structural studies are required to incorporate activating factors such as NPFs , actin filaments and G - actin into the picture during ARP2 / 3 complex activation and branching . Regulation of ARP2 / 3 complex activity by ATP The mechanisms of the transition of the ARP2 / 3 com - plex from the inactive state to the active form that is found in a branch point , and the transition back again , have been the subject of intense study since the activities of the complex were first characterized . As with actin , nucleotide binding and hydrolysis by ARP2 and ARP3 influence the structure and function of the complex . ARP2 and ARP3 each bind to ATP with micromolar affinity 27 – 30 , and mutations that lower the affinity of either ARP for ATP cause severe reductions in activity 29 , 30 , indicating that nucleotide binding to both ARPs is important . The crystal structure of the ATP - bound complex 24 and fluorescence resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) experiments 29 showed that the binding of ATP to ARP3 closes its nucleotide - binding cleft and causes a global conformational change in the complex . However , the ATP - bound structure still does not resemble the pre - dicted active conformation . Notably , subdomain - 1 and - 2 of ARP2 are flexible and disordered in the presence and absence of ATP 24 . The disordered structure of ARP2 could result from a constraint that was introduced by the method of crystallization , which involved soaking nucleotide - free crystals in ATP , rather than crystal - lization in the presence of ATP . On the other hand , the structure might reflect a physiological role for NPFs or actin in ATP binding . Consistent with this idea , bind - ing of an NPF to the complex increases its affinity for nucleotide 27 , 28 and the nucleotide bound to the complex influences its affinity for NPF 27 . In addition to nucleotide binding , nucleotide hydro - lysis also has a role in the function of the ARP2 / 3 complex . ATP hydrolysis on ARP2 is observed using the purified ARP2 / 3 complex in vitro , but only in the presence of actin and an NPF 31 – 33 . Curiously , hydrolysis has not been observed on ARP3 , although its ATPase activity might require as yet unidentified cofactors . Nucleotide hydrolysis by ARP2 and / or ARP3 was initially thought to be essential for ARP2 / 3 activity , as nucleation and branching are inhibited by the non - hydrolysable ATP analogue AMP – PNP 27 , 28 . However , recently character - ized Arp2 and Arp3 yeast mutants that are incapable of ATP hydrolysis are as active as the wild - type proteins in promoting actin assembly in vitro 33 . The role of hydrolysis by ARP2 is controversial , as it has been linked temporally to the nucleation event 32 , or temporally and functionally to branch disassembly and the recycling of the ARP2 / 3 complex 31 ( FIG . 2 ) . The most recent evidence from hydrolysis - defective mutants in yeast indi - cates that both ideas are likely to be correct 33 , as hydrolysis was found to be temporally linked to nucleation and func - tionally important for promoting branch disassembly 33 . How hydrolysis is coupled to branch disassembly remains to be determined , but it might involve the weakening of ARP – actin contacts , similar to the role of ATP hydrolysis and phosphate release in the actin filament . Activation of the ARP2 / 3 complex by NPFs Since the discovery of the first NPF nearly a decade ago , many more have been identified ( FIG . 3 ) . These proteins are classified into two main groups , class I and class II , based on the mechanism by which they activate the ARP2 / 3 complex and their effect on the y - branching reaction . Importantly , the activities of NPFs are regulated by signal - transduction pathways that coordinate actin poly - merization in space and time . The best studied of these pathways involve the activation of class I NPFs by the Rho - family GTPases CDC42 and Rac ( BOX 2 ) . Because the regulation of NPFs has been the focus of several recent reviews 34 , 35 , this section focuses instead on the molecular mechanisms by which NPFs interact with and activate ARP2 / 3 , and on the cellular processes that NPFs direct . Figure 1 | Structure and function of the ARP2 / 3 complex . a | Cartoon representation of the subunit organization in the inactive actin - related protein - 2 / 3 ( ARP2 / 3 ) complex . ARP2 , ARP3 and ARP complex - 1 ( ARPC1 ) through ARPC5 are shown ( labelled as 1 – 5 ) . b | Ribbon diagram of the crystal structure of the bovine ARP2 / 3 complex ( Protein Data Bank ( PDB ) accession code 1A8K ) with subunits labelled and displayed in different colours . Subdomain - 1 and - 2 of ARP2 were modelled on the corresponding subdomains of actin ( PDB accession code 1ATN ) 22 . c | Ribbon diagram of the predicted active conformation of the ARP2 / 3 complex . Structure was modelled after that proposed by Robinson et al . 22 . Subunits are coloured as in part b . d | Cartoon diagram of ARP2 / 3 complex binding to the side of the mother filament and the pointed end of the daughter filament in the y - branch . The two filaments are oriented at a ~ 70 o angle . e | Two models for the orientation of the ARP2 / 3 complex at a y - branch junction . Subunits are coloured as in part b . Both models propose that ARP2 ( light blue ) and ARP3 ( yellow ) associate with the pointed end of the daughter filament , and ARPC2 ( grey ) , ARPC4 ( pink ) and other subunits mediate contacts with the mother filament . In the Egile et al . model 26 ( displayed on the right ) , the complex is rotated ~ 100 o anticlockwise relative to the axis of the mother filament compared to the Beltzner and Pollard model 25 ( displayed on the left ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | OCTOBER2006 | 715 © 200 6 Nature Publishing Group W C A ? 1 2 6 3 4 5 ARP2 / 3 ATP Actin : ARPs : ADP ADP ATP ADP – P i ADP – P i Class I NPFs . The first class I NPF to be identified was ActA 36 , a protein that is found on the surface of the bac - terial pathogen Listeria monocytogenes and is required for actin - based bacterial motility in the host cytoplasm . The characterization of ActA was quickly followed by the identification of two eukaryotic class I NPFs : Wiskott— Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) , and suppressor of cyclic AMP repressor ( SCAR ; also called WASP - family verprolin - homologous protein ( WAVE ) ) 18 , 37 – 40 . Other class I NPFs that were recently identified include fungal type I myosins 41 , 42 , metazoan CARMIL ( capping protein ARP2 / 3 and myosin - I linker ) 43 and pathogen proteins such as RickA from Rickettsia 44 , 45 . The number and diversity of class I NPFs varies from one organism to another ; S . cerevisiae and S . pombe each have one WASP homo - logue ; D . melanogaster and C . elegans have both WASP and SCAR / WAVE ; plants only have SCAR / WAVE ; and mammals have WASP , the closely related neural ( N ) - WASP , and three SCAR / WAVE isoforms . Class I NPFs are diverse in their overall domain organization ( FIG . 3 ) . They only possess a common WCA domain , which consists of a WASP - homology - 2 ( WH2 or W ; also called verprolin - homology ) domain that binds to G - actin in a manner that enables polymerization onto the barbed end of a growing filament 46 and a central ( C ; also called cofilin - homology or connector ) and acidic ( A ; both regions together are known as CA ) region that mediates binding to ARP2 / 3 ( REFS 47 , 48 ) ( note that CARMIL and type I myosins might lack some elements of WCA ) . The WCA domain is sufficient for the acti - vation of the ARP2 / 3 complex in vitro to polymerize branched actin filaments . The simplest model for the action of the WCA domain is that it delivers an actin monomer to the complex , forming a trimer of ARP2 , ARP3 and actin that functions as the nucleus for the new filament . However , several lines of evidence indicate that the actual mechanism is more complex . For example , NPFs differ in their capability to activate ARP2 / 3 , but NPF activity does not correlate directly with the affinities of NPFs for either the ARP2 / 3 complex or G - actin 48 , 49 . Moreover , kinetic modelling of ARP2 / 3 - mediated nucleation indicates the existence of a distinct activa - tion step that occurs subsequently to formation of the NPF – ARP2 / 3 – actin assembly 49 . Last , tethering of a WH2 domain to the ARP2 / 3 complex is not sufficient to promote activation ; the ARP2 / 3 - binding CA region is also required in trans 29 . Therefore , the CA region seems to have a more complex function than simply delivering G - actin . Recent evidence indicates that CA promotes a confor - mational change in the ARP2 / 3 complex that depends on conserved residues in the central region of an NPF . This structural rearrangement in the complex , which brings ARP2 and ARP3 closer together , has been observed by both FRET 29 and cryo - EM 50 . Consistent with the idea that NPF binding closes a gap between ARP2 and ARP3 , WCA fragments have been chemically crosslinked to ARP2 , ARP3 and the neighbouring ARPC1 and ARPC3 subunits 51 – 53 . Moreover , cryo - EM places the WCA domain near the interface of these subunits 50 . As well as modulating ARP2 / 3 conformation , the central region of the WCA domain has been shown to interact with an actin monomer in a manner that is mutually exclusive Figure 2 | Model for activation and recycling of the ARP2 / 3 complex . Actin - related protein - 2 / 3 ( ARP2 / 3 ) complex is shown in blue and actin in red . The nucleotide state of ARPs and actin is indicated by different shading ( ARPs : ARP2 / 3 – ATP , blue ; ARP2 / 3 – ADP – inorganic - phosphate ( P i ) , grey ; ARP2 / 3 – ADP , light grey . Actin : actin – ATP , red ; actin – ADP – P i , pink ; actin – ADP , light pink ) . The ARP2 / 3 complex starts in an inactive , open conformation . ( step 1 ) Binding of WCA ( Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) - homology - 2 , central , acidic ) domain promotes a conformational change that primes the complex for activation , which occurs upon binding of the WCA – actin – ARP2 / 3 assembly to the mother filament , preferentially near the barbed end . WCA domain presents an ATP – actin monomer to the complex and / or possibly to the barbed end of the mother filament . ( step 2 ) ATP is hydrolyzed on ARP2 concomitant with or shortly after nucleation of the daughter filament . The WCA dissociates , although the trigger for this is unknown . ( step 3 ) Phosphate is released from ARP2 . Mother and daughter filaments elongate and age by ATP hydrolysis and phosphate release . ( step 4 ) Phosphate release from ARP2 and filament ageing weaken the interactions between ARP2 / 3 and the daughter and / or mother filament , ( step 5 ) allowing branch disassembly and release of the ARP2 / 3 complex , presumably in an inactive , ADP - bound conformation . ( step 6 ) Nucleotide exchange on ARP2 ( and possibly on ARP3 ) occurs and the cycle begins again . R E V I E W S 716 | OCTOBER2006 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 200 6 Nature Publishing Group A TR PP TR TR TR TR TR SH3 Cortactin a Class I NPFs b Class II NPFs WASP WH1 GBD PP WH2 C A B N - WASP WH1 GBD PP WH2 C A B WH2 SCAR / WAVE SHD B PP WH2 C A ActA PP SS WH2 TM C A PP PP PP Abp1 ADFH A A PP SH3 Myosin - I motor IQ TH1 C A IQ TH2 SH3 Pan1 A PP CC LR EH LR EH CARMIL NT LRR WH2 A PP PP WH2 C A RickA Cellular NPFs Pathogen - encoded NPFs Hs WASP Hs N - WASP Hs SCAR1 Lm ActA Sc Abp1N Sc Abp1C Hs Cortactin 465 GLVGALMHVMQKRSRAIHSS DE - - - G ED QAG DEDEDDE WD D 502 466 GIVGALMEVMQKRSKAIHSS - DEDEDEDDEED G EDDDE W ED 505 526 RIENDVATILSRRIAVEYS D S - - - - - - - EDD S E F DE V D WL E 559 137 GLPSDSAAEIKKRRKAIASS D S 33 D S ED SSLNT DE W 45 196 D NN DDDD WN E P E 207 425 E A D N EEE P EE N DDD W DDDEDE 445 15 DD AGA DD W E T D P D 27 Central Acidic with its binding to the ARP2 / 3 complex , indicating that it undergoes a dynamic series of interactions with both G - actin and ARP2 / 3 ( REF . 54 ) . Taken together , these data indicate a model for class I NPF function in which ( FIG . 2 ) the acidic region medi - ates binding to ARP2 / 3 , the central region initiates an activating conformational change in the complex and the WH2 and central regions present an actin monomer to the complex , facilitating the formation of a nucleus for the polymerization of the daughter filament . After the initiation of a y - branch , class I NPFs dissociate from the ARP2 / 3 complex 26 and might function catalytically in multiple rounds of ARP2 / 3 activation . The precise nature and timing of the dynamic interactions between the class I NPFs , G - actin and the ARP2 / 3 complex that result in actin nucleation still remain to be defined . Class II NPFs . Class II NPFs include S . cerevisiae actin - binding protein - 1 ( Abp1 ) 55 and Pan1 ( REF . 56 ) , as well as metazoan cortactin 57 – 59 . Like class I NPFs , these proteins contain an ARP2 / 3 - binding acidic region , but they lack a G - actin - binding region . Instead , they contain an F - actin - binding region that is required for the activa - tion of ARP2 / 3 ( FIG . 3 ) . This is a functionally relevant distinction , as Abp1 , Pan1 and cortactin are far less potent activators of the ARP2 / 3 complex in vitro than class I NPFs . The mechanism of ARP2 / 3 activation by class II NPFs is not entirely clear . Cortactin lacks a central region and fails to promote an activating conformational change in the ARP2 / 3 complex 29 , perhaps explaining its weak NPF activity . The mechanism by which class II NPFs activate ARP2 / 3 might involve a capability to promote the association of ARP2 / 3 with F - actin 55 , 58 , 59 , which itself is an activator of the complex ( see below ) . Cortactin and N - WASP can bind simultaneously to the ARP2 / 3 complex 52 ; N - WASP is released after y - branching , whereas cortactin remains associated with the complex at the branch point 26 and inhibits branch dissociation 59 . Therefore , rather than serving as primary activators of the ARP2 / 3 complex , the more important function of class II NPFs might be to stabilize the y - branched organization of actin networks that are generated by the ARP2 / 3 complex and class I NPFs . It remains to be determined how the activities of class I and class II NPFs are coordinated to regulate the dynamics of actin networks in the cell . Actin branching and debranching Preformed actin filaments are also activators of ARP2 / 3 - mediated nucleation in vitro 37 , 60 . Kinetic models indicate that actin polymerization by the ARP2 / 3 complex is auto - catalytic , with the rate of the reaction increasing as more polymer is generated 61 . This conclusion is corroborated by other functional evidence , for example , anti - ARP2 / 3 antibodies that prevent binding to filaments diminish nucleation activity 62 . These observations indicate that filament nucleation and y - branching are tightly coupled , perhaps inseparable , activities . Exactly how the nucleation and branching activities are linked together has been a matter of debate , and two competing models have been suggested . The first one proposes that branching occurs from the sides of existing filaments , and the second proposes that it occurs from the barbed ends of filaments . The most compelling experimental evidence supports the side - branching model , as branching from the sides of filaments can be directly observed with purified pro - teins in vitro using fluorescence microscopy 16 , 63 , 64 . Other Figure 3 | Domain organization of nucleation - promoting factors . a | Domain organization of representative class I and class II nucleation - promoting factors ( NPFs ) . For class I NPFs , activation of actin - related protein - 2 / 3 ( ARP2 / 3 ) requires binding of globular ( G ) - actin through the Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) - homology - 2 ( WH2 ) region and binding of ARP2 / 3 complex through the central ( C ) and acidic ( A ) region . Note that CARMIL ( capping protein ARP2 / 3 and myosin - I linker ) lacks a discernible central region and myosin - I lacks a WH2 region . Activation of the ARP2 / 3 complex by class II NPFs requires binding to the ARP2 / 3 complex through the A region and to filamentous ( F ) - actin through the central tandem repeat ( TR ) of cortactin , the actin - depolymerizing - factor homology ( ADFH ) of actin - binding protein - 1 ( Abp1 ) , or the coiled - coil ( CC ) of Pan1 . Other regions of NPFs bind to signalling molecules and other cytoskeletal regulators . IQ is a calmodulin - binding motif . B , basic ; EH , Eps15 homology ; GBD , GTPase - binding domain ; LRR , Leu - rich repeat ; LR , long repeat ; NT , N - terminal ; PP , poly - proline ; SCAR , suppressor of cyclic AMP repressor ; SHD , SCAR - homology domain ; SH3 , Src - homology - 3 ; SS , signal sequence ; TH , tail homology ; TM , transmembrane ; WAVE , WASP - family verprolin - homologous protein . b | Alignment of the ARP2 / 3 - binding central and acidic regions of human ( Hs ) NPFs , ActA from Listeria monocytogenes ( Lm ) and Abp1 from Saccharomyces cerevisiae ( Sc ) . Grey boxes highlight conserved residues in the predicted amphipathic helix in the central region and the conserved tryptophan residue in the acidic region . Acidic residues are in bold . N , neural . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | OCTOBER2006 | 717 © 200 6 Nature Publishing Group a b PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 WH1 GBD PP W H 2 C A B WIP ? WIP CDC42 SH3 T o c a 1 WH1 GBD PP B SHD B PP W H 2 C A Stimuli Active Autoinhibited SHD B PP W H 2 C A HSPC300 HSPC300 ABI NAP125 PIR121 Rac ABI NAP125 PIR121 Rac SHD B PP WH2 C A ABI NAP125 PIR121 HSPC300 Stimuli Activation and localization model Repression model ? ? WH2 C A experimental results are more equivocal . For example , some studies conclude that capping barbed ends has no effect on ARP2 / 3 activation and branching , in sup - port of the side - branching model 65 , whereas others conclude that capping inhibits branching , in support of the barbed - end - branching model 66 , 67 . Support for the barbed - end - branching model is also derived from EM data , which shows a correlation between mother - filament and daughter - filament lengths at the branch point 61 . An attractive compromise between these models ( FIG . 2 ) is based on observations that side branching is biased to newer ATP - containing portions near the barbed ends of mother filaments compared to older ADP - containing portions towards the pointed ends 16 , 64 . Further support for this biased - side - branching mecha - nism comes from kinetic modelling , which indicates that this model gives the best fit to kinetic data 68 . Biased side branching would ensure that new filament ends are generated proximal to sites that require actin - mediated Box 2 | Signalling to WASP and SCAR / WAVE The capability of nucleation - promoting factors ( NPFs ) to activate the actin - related protein - 2 / 3 ( ARP2 / 3 ) complex is regulated by signal - transduction pathways that involve Rho - family GTPases and lipid second messengers . The mechanism of regulation has been well characterized for two class I NPFs , Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP and neural ( N ) - WASP ) and SCAR ( suppressor of cyclic AMP repressor ; also known as WAVE ( WASP - family verprolin - homologous protein ) ) , and differs between the two protein families 35 . Under resting conditions , WASP and N - WASP exist in an autoinhibited conformation in which intramolecular interactions between the GTPase - binding domain ( GBD ) and the central ( C ) region obscure the regions that are required for ARP2 / 3 activation ( part a ) . WASP - interacting protein ( WIP ) or related proteins interact with WASP and N - WASP through the WASP - homology - 1 ( WH1 ) domains and modulate activation . Autoinhibition is regulated by the binding of the lipid second messenger phosphatidylinositol - ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ) to the basic ( B ) region , the binding of GTP - loaded CDC42 to the GBD region , and the binding of Src - homology - 3 ( SH3 ) - domain - containing proteins such as Nck , Grb2 and Toca1 to the poly - proline ( PP ) region . These factors function both individually and in combination to relieve autoinhibition and to promote ARP2 / 3 activation . Regulation of SCAR / WAVE proteins is less well mechanistically understood ( part b ) . Nevertheless , it is clear that under resting conditions these proteins form a complex with four other proteins : PIR121 ( p53 - inducible mRNA ) , NAP125 ( Nck - associated protein ) , ABI ( Abl - interactor ) , and HSPC300 ( haematopoietic stem - cell progenitor ) . ABI and HSPC300 directly bind to SCAR / WAVE , and ABI links PIR121 and NAP125 to the NPF . Upon stimulation , GTP - bound Rac binds directly to PIR121 and leads to SCAR / WAVE activation . Two models have been proposed to explain the activation of actin nucleation . In the repression model , association of PIR121 , NAP125 and ABI with SCAR / WAVE inhibits SCAR / WAVE activity and Rac binding dissociates these factors to activate actin nucleation . In the activation and localization model , binding of activated Rac causes the recruitment of the entire SCAR / WAVE complex to the membrane , where it can then function to promote nucleation . A , acidic ; SHD , SCAR - homology domain . R E V I E W S 718 | OCTOBER2006 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 200 6 Nature Publishing Group Ring canal Intercellular bridges that connect the developing D . melanogaster oocyte to the nurse cells and serve as conduits for the transfer of cytoplasmic components . Lamellipodia Flat , sheet - like cellular protrusions that contain a network of actin filaments that mediate the protrusion of the leading edge of a migrating cell . Pseudopodia Large cellular protrusions that contain a network of actin filaments that mediate the protrusion of the leading edge of an amoeboid cell or a phagocyte during crawling migration . Filopodia Thin , finger - like structures with a bundled core of actin filaments that form at the leading edge of migrating animal cells . force generation in cells . Future experiments will address how the branching reaction occurs and what contributes to the autocatalytic nature of this reaction . Mechanisms of debranching . Release of the mother or daughter filament from the ARP2 / 3 complex , known as debranching , is crucial for recycling actin networks in the cell . In vitro , the half - life of a y - branch ranges from 8 to 27 minutes 31 , 33 , 69 . This half - life is probably much shorter in cells , as actin filaments turn over in less than a minute in regions of dynamic actin disassembly 70 . Several factors have been reported to contribute to debranching . Nucleotide hydrolysis and release of in organic phosphate ( P i ) by actin subunits in the mother filament have been proposed to affect branching frequency 64 , 69 , however , these data did not distinguish between effects on branch initiation or dissociation . ATP hydrolysis and P i release from actin subunits in the daughter filament have also been reported to reduce the affinity of the ARP2 / 3 complex for pointed ends and to promote dissociation 69 . These results are inconsistent with observations showing that locking actin in the ADP – P i state has no effect on debranching 31 , and that ATP hydrolysis and P i release from actin occur much more rapidly than debranching . Resolution of these issues might require the development of more physiological and quantitative debranching assays . Despite this confusion , it is becoming clear that ATP hydrolysis and P i release from ARP2 has an important role in debranching 31 , 33 . Although the precise timing of ARP2 ATP hydrolysis in relation to debranching has been a matter of debate 31 , 32 ( see above ) , a recent study using a mutant ARP2 that cannot hydrolyze ATP showed that hydrolysis is temporally linked to nucleation but func - tionally important for the facilitation of debranching 33 . This intriguing result indicates that nucleotide hydro - lysis on ARP2 might initiate the debranching clock , but does not directly trigger the branch dissociation . Actin - binding proteins , similarly to nucleotide , can regulate y - branch lifetime . For example , debranching can be accelerated by actin - depolymerizing factor ( ADF ; also known as cofilin ) 69 , and can be inhibited by the class II NPF cortactin 59 . These and other regulatory factors are likely to function in the cell to ensure that the ARP2 / 3 complex and actin are recycled and that the actin network is remodelled as required . Cellular functions of the ARP2 / 3 complex Coordinated nucleation and branching by the ARP2 / 3 complex has an important role in several cellular processes . Evidence from genetics . Genetic studies have shown that the ARP2 / 3 complex is essential for viability of both unicellular and multicellular organisms . In S . cerevisiae and S . pombe , inactivating or deleting genes that encode subunits of the ARP2 / 3 complex causes severe growth defects or lethality 5 , 9 , 10 , 19 , 71 . In D . melanogaster , the dis - ruption of ARP2 / 3 function causes lethality before adult - hood , with defects in cytoplasmic organization in the blastoderm , axon development , ring canal expansion and eye morphology 72 , 73 . RNA interference ( RNAi ) - mediated knockdown of ARP2 / 3 subunits in C . elegans results in lethality and affects ventral enclosure in the developing worm 74 . Although there are no published reports of ARP2 / 3 - knockout mammals , the inactivation of ARPC3 in human HeLa cells by RNAi is lethal 75 . Furthermore , inactivation or knockout of individual NPFs in mice results in defects ranging from embryonic or post - natal mortality to more mild tissue - specific irregularities 76 – 81 . The function of the ARP2 / 3 complex is clearly impor - tant for some organisms , however , it is not essential for all eukaryotes . In Arabidopsis thaliana , mutations in subunits of the ARP2 / 3 complex cause defects in the shape of epidermal cells but do not affect the viability of the plant 82 – 84 . Also , apicomplexan parasites completely lack the ARP2 / 3 complex 13 and L . major encodes only some of the subunits 14 . Nevertheless , the severity of the phenotypes that are induced when the function of the ARP2 / 3 complex is perturbed in diverse species reflects its role in fundamental and conserved cellular processes ( see following sections ) . Cell migration and adhesion . Crawling cell migration is a basic behaviour of many cell types , ranging from uni - cellular amoeba that migrate to forage for food , to cells in multicellular organisms that migrate during develop - ment , wound healing and immune response . Efficient migration involves dynamic actin assembly adjacent to the plasma membrane in structures known as lamellipodia , pseudopodia and filopodia , which are protrusions that drive the advance of the leading edge of the cell 1 . The ARP2 / 3 complex is localized to lamellipodia and pseudopodia , usually within several micrometers of the leading edge 23 , 85 – 87 , but not to filopodia . Moreover , the ARP2 / 3 complex has been observed by immuno - EM to organize actin into y - branched networks in lamellipodia , similar to its activity in vitro 15 , 88 . The notion that the ARP2 / 3 complex has an important role in lamellipodial protrusion is supported by findings showing that this process is inhibited when ARP2 / 3 activity is reduced in various cell types using RNAi 89 , 90 , inhibitory antibodies 62 or dominant - negative fragments of NPFs 18 . There is a conflicting report that silencing ARP3 expression by RNAi does not inhibit lamellipodial protrusion 91 , but in this case RNAi also failed to completely inhibit L . monocytogenes motility , a process that is known to depend on ARP2 / 3 activity 40 , 92 . Some of these discrepancies might be due to a differ - ential role for the ARP2 / 3 complex in different cell types , as ARP2 / 3 activity was also found to be dispensable for leading - edge protrusion during neuronal growth cone translocation 93 . Moreover , the failure to form detectable lamellipodia that contain ARP2 / 3 does not necessarily inhibit leading - edge protrusion or whole - cell migration 94 . With regard to filopodia , it has been pro - posed that their bundled filament cores originate from ARP2 / 3 - generated y - branched - filament networks in lamellipodia 95 , 96 . Nevertheless , a recent study concludes that ARP2 / 3 is not required for filopodia formation 90 . These observations highlight the potential importance of other actin - polymerization pathways . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | OCTOBER2006 | 719 © 200 6 Nature Publishing Group RhoGTPases WASP / N - WASP Cortactin Integrins Rac CDC42 CDC42 SCAR / WAVE Cortactin Receptor ARF1 Coatomer N - WASP ? CDC42 WASP Fc γ R CDC42 WASP Coat Dynamin Adaptors Cortactin c d e a f b g Nucleus Golgi Actin ﬁlaments N - WASP The NPFs that are responsible for activating the ARP2 / 3 complex in lamellipodia and pseudopodia are the SCAR / WAVE proteins ( FIG . 4 ) . In mammalian cells there are three SCAR / WAVE isoforms that exhibit tissue - specific expression patterns 97 , 98 , all of which localize to the leading edge of migrating cells 99 – 101 . By examining fibroblasts and other cells types that are depleted of these proteins by mutations or RNAi , it has become clear that SCAR2 / WAVE2 ( REFS 80 , 81 ) and SCAR3 / WAVE3 ( REF . 102 ) are crucial for lamellipodia formation and directed cell migration , whereas SCAR1 / WAVE1 is important for dorsal ruffle formation and stabiliza - tion of lamellipodial protrusions 103 , 104 . The importance of SCAR / WAVE proteins is not unique to mammals , as the loss of these proteins in D . melanogaster S2 cells also prevents formation of lamella 89 . The function of SCAR / WAVE proteins at the leading edge is thought to be controlled by the small GTPase Rac , which has a key role in lamellipodia formation 105 ( BOX 2 ) . Future work is needed to understand how the SCAR / WAVE – ARP2 / 3 pathway cooperates with other pathways to mediate actin polymerization during cell migration . Actin remodelling in the lamellipodium is coupled to the formation of adhesive contacts that link the actin cytoskeleton to the extracellular matrix or to neighbouring cells . Emerging evidence indicates that the ARP2 / 3 complex might be transiently associated with nascent focal contacts through its direct binding to the integrin - associated protein vinculin , perhaps functioning to link adhesion with membrane protrusion 106 . Similarly , it was Figure 4 | Cellular functions of the ARP2 / 3 complex . The actin - related protein - 2 / 3 ( ARP2 / 3 ) complex organizes actin filaments ( red lines ) into branched networks that are capable of generating protrusive force and resisting mechanical deformation . Its nucleation and branching activities are implicated in ( a ) lamellipodial protrusion , ( b ) adhesion and podosome formation , ( c ) phagocytosis , ( d ) endocytosis , ( e ) vesicle and organelle motility , ( f ) trafficking within and from the Golgi apparatus , and ( g ) exocytosis . Insets illustrate the nucleation - promoting factors ( NPFs ) that have been demonstrated to be involved in each process ( Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) , blue ; neural ( N ) - WASP , light blue ; suppressor of cyclic AMP repressor ( SCAR ; also known as WASP - family verprolin - homologous protein ( WAVE ) ) , green ; cortactin , purple ) , and a subset of the molecules involved in recruiting and / or activating the NPFs at the sites of actin polymerization . During lamellipodia protrusion ( a ) , adhesion ( b ) , and phagocytosis ( c ) , engagement of transmembrane proteins ( integrins and receptors ) causes activation of Rho - family GTPases ( CDC42 and Rac ) and NPFs , leading to ARP2 / 3 - mediated actin polymerization . At sites of endocytosis ( d ) and internal membranes ( e , f ) , coat proteins ( coatamer as well as others ) , Rho - family GTPases , and other molecules ( for example , dynamin and ARF1 ) activate NPFs and the ARP2 / 3 complex . Fc γ R , Fc γ receptor . R E V I E W S 720 | OCTOBER2006 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 200 6 Nature Publishing Group Fc γ receptor A family of receptors found on the surface of phagocytic cells . They bind to the constant ( Fc ) region of immunoglobulins and mediate the phagocytosis of pathogens . Complement receptor A family of receptors found on the surface of phagocytic cells . They bind to complement proteins and mediate the phagocytosis of pathogens . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis The uptake of material into the cell by a mechanism that involves the assembly of a clathrin protein into a cage - like structure on the cytoplasmic surface of the membrane . Type III secretion system A needle - like complex of proteins used by many Gram - negative bacterial pathogens to inject virulence factors ( called effectors ) directly into the cytoplasm of a host cell . recently observed that E - cadherin interacts with the ARP2 / 3 complex to promote local actin assembly and lamellipodial protrusion during the formation of early cell – cell adhesive contacts 107 , an effect that is reduced upon maturation of adhesion sites 108 . This provides an explanation for the transition of these sites from dynamic contact sites to quiescent junctions that are required for a stable interaction between cells . Moving membranes and their cargoes . Actin polymeriz - ation has also been linked to the generation of forces that remodel or transport membranes during trafficking events . Phagocytosis , or engulfment of large ( greater than 0 . 5 µ m in diameter ) particles such as bacteria , requires actin polymerization to drive the extension of the plasma membrane around the particle surface ( FIG . 4 ) . The ARP2 / 3 complex localizes to both Fc γ receptor - mediated and complement receptor - mediated phagosomes and is essential for actin polymerization in the phagocytic cup as well as subsequent particle engulfment 109 . This function is likely to be of primary importance in profes - sional phagocytes of the immune system , which help to clear infectious agents . The only NPF so far implicated in phagocytosis is WASP , which is specifically expressed in haematopoietic cells in mammals . WASP localizes to Fc γ - receptor - induced phagocytic cups 110 , 111 , and cells from patients with Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome ( WAS ) that have null alleles for WASP show a reduced capacity for phagocytosis and defects in actin accumulation at phagocytic structures 112 . Actin is also involved in the internalization of small cargoes by endocytosis ( FIG . 4 ) . In S . cerevisiae , the ARP2 / 3 complex and NPFs including Pan1 , myosin - 5 , Las17 ( the WASP homologue ) and Abp1 are recruited to endocytic sites prior to , or concomitant with , actin polymerization 113 , 114 . Likewise , in mammalian cells , N - WASP , cortactin and the ARP2 / 3 complex localize to sites of clathrin - mediated endocytosis 115 , 116 . Disrupting the activity of the ARP2 / 3 complex and its activators in yeasts or mammalian cells causes defects in endocytosis 117 – 120 . The precise role of ARP2 / 3 - mediated actin poly - merization in endocytosis is not yet clear . Actin polymer - ization might assist in invaginating the membrane , pinching off vesicles , and / or driving vesicles away from the plasma membrane 121 . The possibility that actin polymerization drives vesicles away from the plasma membrane is supported by the observations that endo - somes , phagosomes , macropinosomes and lysosomes can rocket through the cytoplasm or through cell - free extracts by the polymerization of a closely associated comet tail of actin filaments 122 – 125 . Rocketing motil - ity of endosomes involves the activity of the NPFs WASP or N - WASP , which localize to the surface of motile vesicles 124 and are functionally important for actin assembly 122 , 126 . ARP2 / 3 - mediated actin polymerization has also been implicated in other membrane trafficking events ( FIG . 4 ) . Actin and actin - binding proteins associate with the Golgi apparatus and have a role in both anterograde and retro - grade transport 127 . Initiation of actin polymerization at Golgi membranes is regulated by the recruitment of the ARP2 / 3 complex , N - WASP and its upstream regulator CDC42 ( REFS 128 – 131 ) . The precise role of actin in trans - port to and from the Golgi remains to be shown , but similarly to its roles in endocytosis , it might function in vesicle scission or motility . The ARP2 / 3 complex might also have a role in exocytosis . Although the details of its involvement are unclear , the ARP2 / 3 complex has been localized to secretory granules in PC12 neuroendocrine cells , and N - WASP and CDC42 have been shown to promote exocytosis 132 . Understanding the biophysical role of ARP2 / 3 in membrane remodelling and how this process is controlled in cells are important areas for future investigation . The ARP2 / 3 complex and disease Given the range of important cellular functions that are attributed to the ARP2 / 3 complex , it is not surprising that its malfunction is associated with disease . Pathogens abuse the ARP2 / 3 complex’s power . Numerous microbial pathogens manipulate the ARP2 / 3 complex to their advantage during infection ( FIG . 5 ) . Microbes differ considerably in the mechanism by which they access and activate the ARP2 / 3 complex , but they can generally be grouped into two classes : those that activate the ARP2 / 3 complex from the outside of the cell , and those that activate the complex intracellularly . Pathogens that activate ARP2 / 3 from the outside have evolved strategies to mimic or tap into receptor - mediated - signalling events that lead to actin polymeriza - tion at the plasma membrane . Two related examples of this are the diarrhoeagenic agents enteropathogenic and enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli ( EPEC and EHEC ) , which form actin - rich pedestals that mediate bacterial attachment to and motility across intestinal epithelial cells 133 . EPEC uses a type III secretion system to introduce the translocated intimin receptor ( Tir ) into the host cell’s plasma membrane . Tir in turn recruits host factors including the NPF N - WASP , leading to activation of the ARP2 / 3 complex 76 , 134 , 135 . In a slight variation on this strategy , EHEC uses the bacterial effector protein EspFU in combination with Tir to recruit host N - WASP and the ARP2 / 3 complex 136 . Vaccinia virus , a relative of the caus - ative agent of smallpox , forms pedestals upon exit from host cells in a process that is thought to promote cell – cell spread 137 . Similar to EPEC and EHEC , the vaccinia A36R protein mimics receptor - tyrosine - kinase signalling , leading to activation of host N - WASP and the ARP2 / 3 complex 138 . Another example is Salmonella enterica , which induces actin polymerization in non - phagocytic cells to promote bacterial internalization . Like E . coli , S . enterica uses type III secretion to deliver bacterial effectors into the host cell cytoplasm 139 . However , the S . enterica effectors activate CDC42 and Rac , which in turn activate WASP or N - WASP and SCAR / WAVE , leading to ARP2 / 3 - mediated membrane ruffling that gathers up and internalizes bacteria 140 – 142 . In contrast to the example above , pathogens that reside within the cytoplasm have direct access to the ARP2 / 3 complex and NPFs . Many of these pathogens have evolved the capability to recruit and activate R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | OCTOBER2006 | 721 © 200 6 Nature Publishing Group Nucleus a EPEC / EHEC b Salmonella d Shigella c Vaccinia virus e Listeria f Rickettsia CDC42Rac N - WASP / WASP / SCAR / WAVE N - WASP IcsA ? RickA ActA A36R N - WASP N - WASP P P Nck Grb2 EspFU EHEC EPEC P Nck ? Tir Intimin Eﬀectors Antigen - presenting cell A cell that displays on its surface a foreign antigen in association with a major histocompatibility complex ( MHC ) protein . Antigen presentation can lead to T - cell activation . ARP2 / 3 at their surface , leading to actin polymerization and actin - based motility that promotes bacterial cell – cell spread ( FIG . 5 ) . This type of motility was first described for L . monocytogenes and Shigella flexneri , and was later observed with phylogenetically diverse bacteria including Rickettsia species , Burkholderia pseudomallei and Mycobacterium marinum 133 . In the case of L . monocytogenes and Rickettsia species , the bac - teria encode their own NPFs ( ActA and RickA , respec - tively ) that directly activate the ARP2 / 3 complex 36 , 44 , 45 . By contrast , S . flexneri expresses a protein called IcsA that recruits host N - WASP 143 , and M . marinum also recruits host WASP or N - WASP by an unknown mechanism 144 . The precise mechanisms used by B . pseudomallei to poly - merize actin are not yet understood 145 . The actin - based motility of L . monocytogenes and S . flexneri can now be reconstituted with purified components in vitro 146 , serving as a beautiful model for understanding the bio - chemical and biophysical properties of force - generating actin networks . The ARP2 / 3 complex and human disease . In addition to abuse by invading microorganisms , the improper function of the ARP2 / 3 complex and its regulators can lead to disease . One important example is WAS , a rare recessive X - linked genetic disorder that involves defects in blood - cell function 147 and leads to susceptibility to infection , eczema and internal haemorrhages . The gene that is mutated in WAS encodes WASP , an NPF that is specifically expressed in haematopoietic cells 148 . In T cells , mutations in WASP cause specific defects in the function of the actin - rich immunological synapse that forms the interface between the T cell and the antigen - presenting cell 149 , 150 , leading to defects in T - cell receptor signalling , interleukin - 2 production and T - cell prolifer - ation 147 . Recent work indicates that SCAR / WAVE proteins also have a prominent role in mediating actin dynamics at the immunological synapse 151 , 152 . In platelets , mutations in WASP cause cytoskeletal defects that result in low platelet number and vol - ume 147 . Moreover , mutations in WASP cause defects Figure 5 | Pathogens use ARP2 / 3 complex activities during infection . Several viral and bacterial pathogens have adapted mechanisms that tap into actin - related protein - 2 / 3 ( ARP2 / 3 ) - mediated actin nucleation and branching . Some activate the ARP2 / 3 complex from outside the cell to promote actin polymerization at the plasma membrane , facilitating attachment ( a , enteropathogenic and enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli ( EPEC and EHEC ) ) , cell – cell spread ( c , vaccinia virus ) , or phagocytosis ( b , Salmonella ) . Others ( d , Shigella ; e , Listeria ; f , Rickettsia ) initiate actin assembly at their surface after entry into the cytoplasm by recruitment and activation of the ARP2 / 3 complex to form a comet tail of filaments that mediates their motility and cell – cell spread . Insets illustrate the nucleation - promoting factors ( NPFs ) that have been demonstrated to be involved in each process ( neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( N - WASP ) , light blue ; suppressor of cyclic AMP repressor ( SCAR ; also known as WASP - family verprolin - homologous protein ( WAVE ) ) , green ; ActA and RickA , light purple ) , and the molecules involved in recruiting and activating NPFs at the sites of actin polymerization . EPEC and EHEC ( a ) , as well as vaccinia ( c ) insert proteins ( Tir ( which binds to bacterial intimin ) and A36R ) into the plasma membrane , thereby recruiting adaptor proteins ( Grb2 and Nck ) , that bind and activate N - WASP . Salmonella ( b ) injects effectors into the cytoplasm , thereby activating Rac and CDC42 , leading to NPF activation and actin polymerization . The Shigella ( d ) protein IcsA recruits N - WASP to the bacterial surface , whereas Listeria ( e ) and Rickettsia ( f ) produce their own NPFs ( ActA and RickA ) that initiate ARP2 / 3 - mediated actin polymerization . R E V I E W S 722 | OCTOBER2006 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 200 6 Nature Publishing Group in actin - rich podosome formation in macrophages 153 and osteoclasts 154 , phagocytic efficiency in macro - phages 112 and chemotaxis in macrophages and den - dritic cells 155 – 157 . The severity of the disease that results when the function of this single NPF is compromised emphasizes the importance of the precise regulation of the ARP2 / 3 complex in the immune response , and highlights the potential relevance of these factors in understanding and treating diseases of immunity and inflammation . ARP2 / 3 complex dysfunction might also be associated with cancer metastasis , which relies on the capability of cancer cells to migrate away from primary tumours and invade healthy tissues 158 . The expression of ARP2 / 3 mRNAs and their protein levels 159 – 161 , together with N - WASP 162 , WAVE2 ( REF . 161 ) and other factors that are functionally associated with cell motility 158 , are upregulated in some tumour tissues and invasive cells . Cancer - cell invasion into tissues also requires the formation of actin - rich structures such as podosomes and invadopodia that have adhesive and protrusive activities and promote the degradation of the extracellular matrix . The activation of the ARP2 / 3 complex is required for podosome formation 153 , 154 , 163 , and the complex has been colocalized with WASP 163 , N - WASP 164 and cortactin 165 in the F - actin - rich podo - some core ( FIG . 4 ) . Likewise , the ARP2 / 3 complex and N - WASP localize to invadopodia and are required for their formation 166 . The ARP2 / 3 complex and its activ - ators are therefore likely to be crucial participants in the process of tumour - cell invasion and metastasis , and might represent targets for therapeutic intervention . Concluding remarks Ten years of research into the function and regulation of the ARP2 / 3 complex has produced abundant information about this fascinating molecular machine . Nevertheless , many questions remain to be answered . One important area for exploration relates to how the activity of ARP2 / 3 is regulated in the cell . For example , we know little about how the activities of distinct NPFs are coordinated to mediate actin polymerization and organization dur - ing different cellular behaviours . Moreover , we need to determine whether there are undiscovered NPFs that link the ARP2 / 3 complex to unique signalling path - ways , subcellular locales and actin - dependent events . A second important area for exploration relates to the precise mechanism of actin nucleation and organization by the ARP2 / 3 complex . What is missing is a detailed molecular map of the complex when it is engaged with an NPF , mother filament , and daughter filament . Last , we are beginning to characterize the role of the ARP2 / 3 complex in pathogenesis , immunity , inflammation and cancer progression , and the information we gain from basic studies could be relevant to translational research that is aimed at diagnosing and treating disease . With the basic paradigms of ARP2 / 3 complex regulation and function defined , we are poised to begin exploring the complex web of interactions that allow it to function precisely in the complicated cellular world . 1 . Pollard , T . D . & Borisy , G . G . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin filaments . Cell 112 , 453 – 465 ( 2003 ) . 2 . Baum , B . & Kunda , P . Actin nucleation : spire - actin nucleator in a class of its own . Curr . Biol . 15 , R305 – R308 ( 2005 ) . 3 . Kovar , D . R . Molecular details of formin - mediated actin assembly . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 18 , 11 – 17 ( 2006 ) . 4 . Machesky , L . M . , Atkinson , S . J . , Ampe , C . , Vandekerckhove , J . & Pollard , T . D . Purification of a cortical complex containing two unconventional actins from Acanthamoeba by affinity chromatography on profilin - agarose . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 107 – 115 ( 1994 ) . Initial purification and characterization of the ARP2 / 3 complex . 5 . Lees - Miller , J . P . , Henry , G . & Helfman , D . M . Identification of act2 , an essential gene in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe that encodes a protein related to actin . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 89 , 80 – 83 ( 1992 ) . 6 . Schwob , E . & Martin , R . P . New yeast actin - like gene required late in the cell cycle . Nature 355 , 179 – 182 ( 1992 ) . 7 . Fyrberg , C . & Fyrberg , E . A Drosophila homologue of the Schizosaccharomyces pombe act2 gene . Biochem . Genet . 31 , 329 – 341 ( 1993 ) . 8 . Waterston , R . et al . A survey of expressed genes in Caenorhabditis elegans . Nature Genet . 1 , 114 – 123 ( 1992 ) . 9 . Winter , D . , Podtelejnikov , A . V . , Mann , M . & Li , R . The complex containing actin - related proteins Arp2 and Arp3 is required for the motility and integrity of yeast actin patches . Curr . Biol . 7 , 519 – 529 ( 1997 ) . The S . cerevisiae Arp2 / 3 complex is characterized in vitro and in vivo and is shown to be important for the function of cortical actin patches . 10 . Morrell , J . L . , Morphew , M . & Gould , K . L . A mutant of Arp2p causes partial disassembly of the Arp2 / 3 complex and loss of cortical actin function in fission yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 4201 – 4215 ( 1999 ) . 11 . Welch , M . D . , Iwamatsu , A . & Mitchison , T . J . Actin polymerization is induced by the Arp2 / 3 protein complex at the surface of Listeria monocytogenes . Nature 385 , 265 – 269 ( 1997 ) . The Arp2 / 3 complex is biochemically isolated as a host factor that promotes actin nucleation at the surface of the bacterial pathogen L . monocytogenes . 12 . Ma , L . , Rohatgi , R . & Kirschner , M . W . The Arp2 / 3 complex mediates actin polymerization induced by the small GTP - binding protein Cdc42 . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 15362 – 15367 ( 1998 ) . 13 . Gordon , J . L . & Sibley , L . D . Comparative genome analysis reveals a conserved family of actin - like proteins in apicomplexan parasites . BMC Genomics 6 , 179 ( 2005 ) . 14 . Berriman , M . et al . The genome of the African trypanosome Trypanosoma brucei . Science 309 , 416 – 422 ( 2005 ) . 15 . Mullins , R . D . , Heuser , J . A . & Pollard , T . D . The interaction of Arp2 / 3 complex with actin : nucleation , high affinity pointed end capping , and formation of branching networks of actin filaments . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 6181 – 6186 ( 1998 ) . Shows that the ARP2 / 3 complex binds to the sides and pointed ends of actin filaments and mediates filament branching . 16 . Amann , K . J . & Pollard , T . D . Direct real - time observation of actin filament branching mediated by Arp2 / 3 complex using total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 15009 – 15013 ( 2001 ) . Initiation of ARP2 / 3 - mediated daughter - filament formation from the sides of mother filaments is observed in real time . 17 . Mullins , R . D . , Stafford , W . F . & Pollard , T . P . Structure , subunit topology , and actin - binding activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex from Acanthamoeba . J . Cell Biol . 136 , 331 – 343 ( 1997 ) . 18 . Machesky , L . M . & Insall , R . H . Scar1 and the related Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein , WASP , regulate the actin cytoskeleton through the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 8 , 1347 – 1356 ( 1998 ) . WASP and SCAR1 are shown to interact physically with the ARP2 / 3 complex and to regulate the actin cytoskeleton . 19 . Winter , D . C . , Choe , E . Y . & Li , R . Genetic dissection of the budding yeast Arp2 / 3 complex : a comparison of the in vivo and structural roles of individual subunits . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 7288 – 7293 ( 1999 ) . 20 . Gournier , H . , Goley , E . D . , Niederstrasser , H . , Trinh , T . & Welch , M . D . Reconstitution of human Arp2 / 3 complex reveals critical roles of individual subunits in complex structure and activity . Mol . Cell 8 , 1041 – 1052 ( 2001 ) . 21 . Zhao , X . , Yang , Z . , Qian , M . & Zhu , X . Interactions among subunits of human Arp2 / 3 complex : p20 – Arc as the hub . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 280 , 513 – 517 ( 2001 ) . 22 . Robinson , R . C . et al . Crystal structure of Arp2 / 3 complex . Science 294 , 1679 – 1684 ( 2001 ) . The crystal structure of the inactive ARP2 / 3 complex shows molecular details of its organization and provides insights into its mechanism of action . 23 . Kelleher , J . F . , Atkinson , S . J . & Pollard , T . D . Sequences , structural models , and cellular localization of the actin - related proteins Arp2 and Arp3 from Acanthamoeba . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 385 – 397 ( 1995 ) . 24 . Nolen , B . J . , Littlefield , R . S . & Pollard , T . D . Crystal structures of actin - related protein 2 / 3 complex with bound ATP or ADP . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 15627 – 15632 ( 2004 ) . 25 . Beltzner , C . C . & Pollard , T . D . Identification of functionally important residues of Arp2 / 3 complex by analysis of homology models from diverse species . J . Mol . Biol . 336 , 551 – 565 ( 2004 ) . 26 . Egile , C . et al . Mechanism of filament nucleation and branch stability revealed by the structure of the Arp2 / 3 complex at actin branch junctions . PLoS Biol 3 , e383 ( 2005 ) . The most recent cryo - EM structure of the activated ARP2 / 3 complex in which the subunits of the complex are localized in a branch point by addition of bulky tags . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | OCTOBER2006 | 723 © 200 6 Nature Publishing Group 27 . Dayel , M . J . , Holleran , E . A . & Mullins , R . D . Arp2 / 3 complex requires hydrolyzable ATP for nucleation of new actin filaments . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 14871 – 14876 ( 2001 ) . 28 . Le Clainche , C . , Didry , D . , Carlier , M . F . & Pantaloni , D . Activation of Arp2 / 3 complex by Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein is linked to enhanced binding of ATP to Arp2 . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 46689 – 46692 ( 2001 ) . 29 . Goley , E . D . , Rodenbusch , S . E . , Martin , A . C . & Welch , M . D . Critical conformational changes in the Arp2 / 3 complex are induced by nucleotide and nucleation promoting factor . Mol . Cell 16 , 269 – 279 ( 2004 ) . FRET studies show that conformational changes induced by activating factors are important for the activation of the ARP2 / 3 complex . 30 . Martin , A . C . et al . Effects of Arp2 and Arp3 nucleotide - binding pocket mutations on Arp2 / 3 complex function . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 315 – 328 ( 2005 ) . 31 . Le Clainche , C . , Pantaloni , D . & Carlier , M . F . ATP hydrolysis on actin - related protein 2 / 3 complex causes debranching of dendritic actin arrays . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 6337 – 6342 ( 2003 ) . ATP hydrolysis on ARP2 is found to be temporally and functionally linked to actin branch dissociation . 32 . Dayel , M . J . & Mullins , R . D . Activation of Arp2 / 3 complex : addition of the first subunit of the new filament by a WASP protein triggers rapid ATP hydrolysis on Arp2 . PLoS Biol . 2 , E91 ( 2004 ) . The timing of and requirements for ATP hydrolysis on ARP2 are defined . 33 . Martin , A . C . , Welch , M . D . & Drubin , D . G . Arp2 / 3 ATP hydrolysis - catalyzed branch dissociation is critical for endocytic force generation . Nature Cell Biol . 8 , 826 – 833 ( 2006 ) . In vivo and in vitro characterization of hydrolysis defective mutants in yeast Arp2 and Arp3 supports a functional role for ATP hydrolysis on Arp2 in debranching and remodelling of actin networks in yeast . 34 . Bompard , G . & Caron , E . Regulation of WASP / WAVE proteins : making a long story short . J . Cell Biol . 166 , 957 – 962 ( 2004 ) . 35 . Stradal , T . E . & Scita , G . Protein complexes regulating Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin assembly . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 18 , 4 – 10 ( 2006 ) . 36 . Welch , M . D . , Rosenblatt , J . , Skoble , J . , Portnoy , D . & Mitchison , T . J . Interaction of human Arp2 / 3 complex and the Listeria monocytogenes ActA protein in actin filament nucleation . Science 281 , 105 – 108 ( 1998 ) . ActA is identified as the first activator for ARP2 / 3 . 37 . Machesky , L . M . et al . Scar , a WASp - related protein , activates nucleation of actin filaments by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 3739 – 3744 ( 1999 ) . Shows that SCAR / WAVE proteins and pre - formed actin filaments are activators of the ARP2 / 3 complex . 38 . Rohatgi , R . et al . The interaction between N - WASP and the Arp2 / 3 complex links Cdc42 - dependent signals to actin assembly . Cell 97 , 221 – 231 ( 1999 ) . Shows that CDC42 and phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate activate N - WASP , which in turn activates the ARP2 / 3 complex . 39 . Winter , D . , Lechler , T . & Li , R . Activation of the yeast Arp2 / 3 complex by Bee1p , a WASP - family protein . Curr . Biol . 9 , 501 – 504 ( 1999 ) . 40 . Yarar , D . , To , W . , Abo , A . & Welch , M . D . The Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein directs actin - based motility by stimulating actin nucleation with the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 9 , 555 – 558 ( 1999 ) . 41 . Lee , W . L . , Bezanilla , M . & Pollard , T . D . Fission yeast myosin - I , Myo1p , stimulates actin assembly by Arp2 / 3 complex and shares functions with WASp . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 789 – 800 ( 2000 ) . 42 . Lechler , T . , Jonsdottir , G . A . , Klee , S . K . , Pellman , D . & Li , R . A two - tiered mechanism by which Cdc42 controls the localization and activation of an Arp2 / 3 - activating motor complex in yeast . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 261 – 270 ( 2001 ) . 43 . Jung , G . , Remmert , K . , Wu , X . , Volosky , J . M . & Hammer , J . A . 3rd . The Dictyostelium CARMIL protein links capping protein and the Arp2 / 3 complex to type I myosins through their SH3 domains . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 1479 – 1497 ( 2001 ) . 44 . Gouin , E . et al . The RickA protein of Rickettsia conorii activates the Arp2 / 3 complex . Nature 427 , 457 – 461 ( 2004 ) . 45 . Jeng , R . L . et al . A Rickettsia WASP - like protein activates the Arp2 / 3 complex and mediates actin - based motility . Cell Microbiol . 6 , 761 – 769 ( 2004 ) . 46 . Chereau , D . et al . Actin - bound structures of Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) - homology domain 2 and the implications for filament assembly . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 16644 – 16649 ( 2005 ) . 47 . Marchand , J . B . , Kaiser , D . A . , Pollard , T . D . & Higgs , H . N . Interaction of WASP / Scar proteins with actin and vertebrate Arp2 / 3 complex . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 76 – 82 ( 2001 ) . 48 . Panchal , S . C . , Kaiser , D . A . , Torres , E . , Pollard , T . D . & Rosen , M . K . A conserved amphipathic helix in WASP / Scar proteins is essential for activation of Arp2 / 3 complex . Nature Struct . Mol . Biol . 10 , 591 – 598 ( 2003 ) . Identifies conserved residues in the central region of the WCA domain that contribute to ARP2 / 3 activation and autoinhibition of N - WASP . 49 . Zalevsky , J . , Lempert , L . , Kranitz , H . & Mullins , R . D . Different WASP family proteins stimulate different Arp2 / 3 complex - dependent actin - nucleating activities . Curr . Biol . 11 , 1903 – 1913 ( 2001 ) . 50 . Rodal , A . A . et al . Conformational changes in the Arp2 / 3 complex leading to actin nucleation . Nature Struct . Mol . Biol . 12 , 26 – 31 ( 2005 ) . Cryo - EM is used to visualize conformational changes that are required for the activation of the ARP2 / 3 complex . 51 . Zalevsky , J . , Grigorova , I . & Mullins , R . D . Activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex by the Listeria ActA protein . ActA binds two actin monomers and three subunits of the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 3468 – 3475 ( 2001 ) . 52 . Weaver , A . M . et al . Interaction of cortactin and N - WASp with Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 12 , 1270 – 1278 ( 2002 ) . 53 . Kreishman - Deitrick , M . et al . NMR analyses of the activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex by neuronal Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein . Biochemistry 44 , 15247 – 15256 ( 2005 ) . 54 . Kelly , A . E . , Kranitz , H . , Dotsch , V . & Mullins , R . D . Actin binding to the central domain of WASP / Scar proteins plays a critical role in the activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 10589 – 10597 ( 2006 ) . 55 . Goode , B . L . , Rodal , A . A . , Barnes , G . & Drubin , D . G . Activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex by the actin filament binding protein Abp1p . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 627 – 634 ( 2001 ) . 56 . Duncan , M . C . , Cope , M . J . , Goode , B . L . , Wendland , B . & Drubin , D . G . Yeast Eps15 - like endocytic protein , Pan1p , activates the Arp2 / 3 complex . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 687 – 690 ( 2001 ) . 57 . Weed , S . A . et al . Cortactin localization to sites of actin assembly in lamellipodia requires interactions with F - actin and the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 29 – 40 ( 2000 ) . 58 . Uruno , T . et al . Activation of Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin polymerization by cortactin . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 259 – 266 ( 2001 ) . 59 . Weaver , A . M . et al . Cortactin promotes and stabilizes Arp2 / 3 - induced actin filament network formation . Curr . Biol . 11 , 370 – 374 ( 2001 ) . Shows that the class II NPF cortactin functions to stabilize ARP2 / 3 - mediated branches . 60 . Higgs , H . N . , Blanchoin , L . & Pollard , T . D . Influence of the C terminus of Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASp ) and the Arp2 / 3 complex on actin polymerization . Biochemistry 38 , 15212 – 15222 ( 1999 ) . 61 . Pantaloni , D . , Boujemaa , R . , Didry , D . , Gounon , P . & Carlier , M . F . The Arp2 / 3 complex branches filament barbed ends : functional antagonism with capping proteins . Nature Cell Biol . 2 , 385 – 391 ( 2000 ) . 62 . Bailly , M . et al . The F - actin side binding activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex is essential for actin nucleation and lamellipod extension . Curr . Biol . 11 , 620 – 625 ( 2001 ) . 63 . Fujiwara , I . , Suetsugu , S . , Uemura , S . , Takenawa , T . & Ishiwata , S . Visualization and force measurement of branching by Arp2 / 3 complex and N - WASP in actin filament . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 293 , 1550 – 1555 ( 2002 ) . 64 . Ichetovkin , I . , Grant , W . & Condeelis , J . Cofilin produces newly polymerized actin filaments that are preferred for dendritic nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 12 , 79 – 84 ( 2002 ) . Shows that ATP – actin - containing mother filaments support more ARP2 / 3 - mediated branching than ADP - containing or ADP – P i - containing mother filaments . 65 . Amann , K . J . & Pollard , T . D . The Arp2 / 3 complex nucleates actin filament branches from the sides of pre - existing filaments . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 306 – 310 ( 2001 ) . 66 . Boujemaa - Paterski , R . et al . Listeria protein ActA mimics WASp family proteins : it activates filament barbed end branching by Arp2 / 3 complex . Biochemistry 40 , 11390 – 11404 ( 2001 ) . 67 . Falet , H . et al . Importance of free actin filament barbed ends for Arp2 / 3 complex function in platelets and fibroblasts . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 16782 – 16787 ( 2002 ) . 68 . Carlsson , A . E . , Wear , M . A . & Cooper , J . A . End versus side branching by Arp2 / 3 complex . Biophys . J . 86 , 1074 – 1081 ( 2004 ) . 69 . Blanchoin , L . , Pollard , T . D . & Mullins , R . D . Interactions of ADF / cofilin , Arp2 / 3 complex , capping protein and profilin in remodeling of branched actin filament networks . Curr . Biol . 10 , 1273 – 1282 ( 2000 ) . 70 . Theriot , J . A . & Mitchison , T . J . Actin microfilament dynamics in locomoting cells . Nature 352 , 126 – 131 ( 1991 ) . 71 . Balasubramanian , M . K . , Feoktistova , A . , McCollum , D . & Gould , K . L . Fission yeast Sop2p : a novel and evolutionarily conserved protein that interacts with Arp3p and modulates profilin function . EMBO J . 15 , 6426 – 6437 ( 1996 ) . 72 . Hudson , A . M . & Cooley , L . A subset of dynamic actin rearrangements in Drosophila requires the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Cell Biol . 156 , 677 – 687 ( 2002 ) . 73 . Zallen , J . A . et al . SCAR is a primary regulator of Arp2 / 3 - dependent morphological events in Drosophila . J . Cell Biol . 156 , 689 – 701 ( 2002 ) . 74 . Sawa , M . et al . Essential role of the C . elegans Arp2 / 3 complex in cell migration during ventral enclosure . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 1505 – 1518 ( 2003 ) . 75 . Harborth , J . , Elbashir , S . M . , Bechert , K . , Tuschl , T . & Weber , K . Identification of essential genes in cultured mammalian cells using small interfering RNAs . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 4557 – 4565 ( 2001 ) . 76 . Lommel , S . et al . Actin pedestal formation by enteropathogenic Escherichia coli and intracellular motility of Shigella flexneri are abolished in N - WASP - defective cells . EMBO Rep . 2 , 850 – 857 ( 2001 ) . 77 . Snapper , S . B . et al . N - WASP deficiency reveals distinct pathways for cell surface projections and microbial actin - based motility . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 897 – 904 ( 2001 ) . References 76 and 77 describe the effects of N - WASP deficiency on murine development and on actin - dependent events in mouse fibroblasts . 78 . Dahl , J . P . et al . Characterization of the WAVE1 knock - out mouse : implications for CNS development . J . Neurosci . 23 , 3343 – 3352 ( 2003 ) . 79 . Soderling , S . H . et al . Loss of WAVE - 1 causes sensorimotor retardation and reduced learning and memory in mice . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 1723 – 1728 ( 2003 ) . 80 . Yamazaki , D . et al . WAVE2 is required for directed cell migration and cardiovascular development . Nature 424 , 452 – 456 ( 2003 ) . 81 . Yan , C . et al . WAVE2 deficiency reveals distinct roles in embryogenesis and Rac - mediated actin - based motility . EMBO J . 22 , 3602 – 3612 ( 2003 ) . References 80 and 81 describe the effects of WAVE2 deficiency on murine development and on cell migration . 82 . Le , J . , El - Assal Sel , D . , Basu , D . , Saad , M . E . & Szymanski , D . B . Requirements for Arabidopsis ATARP2 and ATARP3 during epidermal development . Curr . Biol . 13 , 1341 – 1347 ( 2003 ) . 83 . Mathur , J . , Mathur , N . , Kernebeck , B . & Hulskamp , M . Mutations in actin - related proteins 2 and 3 affect cell shape development in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 15 , 1632 – 1645 ( 2003 ) . 84 . Mathur , J . et al . Arabidopsis CROOKED encodes for the smallest subunit of the ARP2 / 3 complex and controls cell shape by region specific fine F - actin formation . Development 130 , 3137 – 3146 ( 2003 ) . 85 . Machesky , L . M . et al . Mammalian actin - related protein 2 / 3 complex localizes to regions of lamellipodial protrusion and is composed of evolutionarily conserved proteins . Biochem . J . 328 , 105 – 112 ( 1997 ) . 86 . Welch , M . D . , DePace , A . H . , Verma , S . , Iwamatsu , A . & Mitchison , T . J . The human Arp2 / 3 complex is composed of evolutionarily conserved subunits and is localized to cellular regions of dynamic actin filament assembly . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 375 – 384 ( 1997 ) . 87 . Weiner , O . D . et al . Spatial control of actin polymerization during neutrophil chemotaxis . Nature Cell Biol . 1 , 75 – 81 ( 1999 ) . R E V I E W S 724 | OCTOBER2006 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 200 6 Nature Publishing Group 88 . Svitkina , T . M . & Borisy , G . G . Arp2 / 3 complex and actin depolymerizing factor / cofilin in dendritic organization and treadmilling of actin filament array in lamellipodia . J . Cell Biol . 145 , 1009 – 1026 ( 1999 ) . EM study that shows that filaments in lamellipodia are organized into branched networks with the ARP2 / 3 complex localized to branch points . 89 . Rogers , S . L . , Wiedemann , U . , Stuurman , N . & Vale , R . D . Molecular requirements for actin - based lamella formation in Drosophila S2 cells . J . Cell Biol . 162 , 1079 – 1088 ( 2003 ) . 90 . Steffen , A . et al . Filopodia formation in the absence of functional WAVE - and Arp2 / 3 - complexes . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 2581 – 2591 ( 2006 ) . 91 . Di Nardo , A . et al . Arp2 / 3 complex - deficient mouse fibroblasts are viable and have normal leading - edge actin structure and function . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 16263 – 16268 ( 2005 ) . 92 . May , R . C . et al . The Arp2 / 3 complex is essential for the actin - based motility of Listeria monocytogenes . Curr . Biol . 9 , 759 – 762 ( 1999 ) . 93 . Strasser , G . A . , Rahim , N . A . , VanderWaal , K . E . , Gertler , F . B . & Lanier , L . M . Arp2 / 3 is a negative regulator of growth cone translocation . Neuron 43 , 81 – 94 ( 2004 ) . 94 . Gupton , S . L . et al . Cell migration without a lamellipodium : translation of actin dynamics into cell movement mediated by tropomyosin . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 619 – 631 ( 2005 ) . 95 . Svitkina , T . M . et al . Mechanism of filopodia initiation by reorganization of a dendritic network . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 409 – 421 ( 2003 ) . 96 . Biyasheva , A . , Svitkina , T . , Kunda , P . , Baum , B . & Borisy , G . Cascade pathway of filopodia formation downstream of SCAR . J . Cell Sci . 117 , 837 – 748 ( 2004 ) . 97 . Suetsugu , S . , Miki , H . & Takenawa , T . Identification of two human WAVE / SCAR homologues as general actin regulatory molecules which associate with the Arp2 / 3 complex . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 260 , 296 – 302 ( 1999 ) . 98 . Sossey - Alaoui , K . , Head , K . , Nowak , N . & Cowell , J . K . Genomic organization and expression profile of the human and mouse WAVE gene family . Mamm . Genome 14 , 314 – 322 ( 2003 ) . 99 . Miki , H . , Suetsugu , S . & Takenawa , T . WAVE , a novel WASP - family protein involved in actin reorganization induced by Rac . EMBO J . 17 , 6932 – 6941 ( 1998 ) . 100 . Nozumi , M . , Nakagawa , H . , Miki , H . , Takenawa , T . & Miyamoto , S . Differential localization of WAVE isoforms in filopodia and lamellipodia of the neuronal growth cone . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 239 – 246 ( 2003 ) . 101 . Stovold , C . F . , Millard , T . H . & Machesky , L . M . Inclusion of Scar / WAVE3 in a similar complex to Scar / WAVE1 and 2 . BMC Cell Biol . 6 , 11 ( 2005 ) . 102 . Sossey - Alaoui , K . , Ranalli , T . A . , Li , X . , Bakin , A . V . & Cowell , J . K . WAVE3 promotes cell motility and invasion through the regulation of MMP - 1 , MMP - 3 , and MMP - 9 expression . Exp . Cell Res . 308 , 135 – 145 ( 2005 ) . 103 . Suetsugu , S . , Yamazaki , D . , Kurisu , S . & Takenawa , T . Differential roles of WAVE1 and WAVE2 in dorsal and peripheral ruffle formation for fibroblast cell migration . Dev . Cell 5 , 595 – 609 ( 2003 ) . Shows differential roles for WAVE1 and WAVE2 in the formation of actin - rich structures during cell migration using WAVE1 - or WAVE2 - deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts . 104 . Yamazaki , D . , Fujiwara , T . , Suetsugu , S . & Takenawa , T . A novel function of WAVE in lamellipodia : WAVE1 is required for stabilization of lamellipodial protrusions during cell spreading . Genes Cells 10 , 381 – 392 ( 2005 ) . 105 . Ridley , A . J . , Paterson , H . F . , Johnston , C . L . , Diekman , D . & Hall , A . The small GTP - binding protein rac regulates growth factor - induced membrane ruffling . Cell 70 , 401 – 410 ( 1992 ) . 106 . DeMali , K . A . , Barlow , C . A . & Burridge , K . Recruitment of the Arp2 / 3 complex to vinculin : coupling membrane protrusion to matrix adhesion . J . Cell Biol . 159 , 881 – 891 ( 2002 ) . 107 . Kovacs , E . M . , Goodwin , M . , Ali , R . G . , Paterson , A . D . & Yap , A . S . Cadherin - directed actin assembly : E - cadherin physically associates with the Arp2 / 3 complex to direct actin assembly in nascent adhesive contacts . Curr . Biol . 12 , 379 – 382 ( 2002 ) . 108 . Drees , F . , Pokutta , S . , Yamada , S . , Nelson , W . J . & Weis , W . I . α - catenin is a molecular switch that binds E - cadherin – β - catenin and regulates actin - filament assembly . Cell 123 , 903 – 915 ( 2005 ) . 109 . May , R . C . , Caron , E . , Hall , A . & Machesky , L . M . Involvement of the Arp2 / 3 complex in phagocytosis mediated by Fc γ R or CR3 . Nature Cell Biol . 2 , 246 – 248 ( 2000 ) . Shows that the ARP2 / 3 complex is functionally important for actin polymerization during phagocytosis . 110 . Castellano , F . , Le Clainche , C . , Patin , D . , Carlier , M . F . & Chavrier , P . A WASp – VASP complex regulates actin polymerization at the plasma membrane . EMBO J . 20 , 5603 – 5614 ( 2001 ) . 111 . Coppolino , M . G . et al . Evidence for a molecular complex consisting of Fyb / SLAP , SLP - 76 , Nck , VASP and WASP that links the actin cytoskeleton to Fc γ receptor signalling during phagocytosis . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 4307 – 4318 ( 2001 ) . 112 . Lorenzi , R . , Brickell , P . M . , Katz , D . R . , Kinnon , C . & Thrasher , A . J . Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein is necessary for efficient IgG - mediated phagocytosis . Blood 95 , 2943 – 2946 ( 2000 ) . 113 . Kaksonen , M . , Sun , Y . & Drubin , D . G . A pathway for association of receptors , adaptors , and actin during endocytic internalization . Cell 115 , 475 – 487 ( 2003 ) . Uses live - cell microscopy to temporally define the assembly of actin cytoskeletal proteins , including the ARP2 / 3 complex and NPFs , during endocytosis in yeast , providing insights into how the actin cytoskeleton and endocytosis are coordinated . 114 . Kaksonen , M . , Toret , C . P . & Drubin , D . G . A modular design for the clathrin - and actin - mediated endocytosis machinery . Cell 123 , 305 – 320 ( 2005 ) . 115 . Merrifield , C . J . , Qualmann , B . , Kessels , M . M . & Almers , W . Neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( N - WASP ) and the Arp2 / 3 complex are recruited to sites of clathrin - mediated endocytosis in cultured fibroblasts . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 83 , 13 – 18 ( 2004 ) . 116 . Merrifield , C . J . , Perrais , D . & Zenisek , D . Coupling between clathrin - coated - pit invagination , cortactin recruitment , and membrane scission observed in live cells . Cell 121 , 593 – 606 ( 2005 ) . 117 . Moreau , V . , Galan , J . M . , Devilliers , G . , Haguenauer - Tsapis , R . & Winsor , B . The yeast actin - related protein Arp2p is required for the internalization step of endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 8 , 1361 – 1375 ( 1997 ) . 118 . Schaerer - Brodbeck , C . & Riezman , H . Functional interactions between the p35 subunit of the Arp2 / 3 complex and calmodulin in yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 1113 – 1127 ( 2000 ) . 119 . Jonsdottir , G . A . & Li , R . Dynamics of yeast Myosin I : evidence for a possible role in scission of endocytic vesicles . Curr . Biol . 14 , 1604 – 1609 ( 2004 ) . 120 . Benesch , S . et al . N - WASP deficiency impairs EGF internalization and actin assembly at clathrin - coated pits . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 3103 – 3115 ( 2005 ) . 121 . Kaksonen , M . , Toret , C . P . & Drubin , D . G . Harnessing actin dynamics for clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 404 – 414 ( 2006 ) . 122 . Rozelle , A . L . et al . Phosphatidylinositol4 , 5 - bisphosphate induces actin - based movement of raft - enriched vesicles through WASP – Arp2 / 3 . Curr . Biol . 10 , 311 – 320 ( 2000 ) . 123 . Schafer , D . A . , D’Souza - Schorey , C . & Cooper , J . A . Actin assembly at membranes controlled by ARF6 . Traffic 1 , 896 – 907 ( 2000 ) . 124 . Taunton , J . et al . Actin - dependent propulsion of endosomes and lysosomes by recruitment of N - WASP . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 519 – 530 ( 2000 ) . 125 . Zhang , F . , Southwick , F . S . & Purich , D . L . Actin - based phagosome motility . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 53 , 81 – 88 ( 2002 ) . 126 . Benesch , S . et al . Phosphatidylinositol4 , 5 - biphosphate ( PIP2 ) - induced vesicle movement depends on N - WASP and involves Nck , WIP , and Grb2 . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 37771 – 37776 ( 2002 ) . 127 . Stamnes , M . Regulating the actin cytoskeleton during vesicular transport . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 14 , 428 – 433 ( 2002 ) . 128 . Fucini , R . V . , Chen , J . L . , Sharma , C . , Kessels , M . M . & Stamnes , M . Golgi vesicle proteins are linked to the assembly of an actin complex defined by mAbp1 . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 621 – 631 ( 2002 ) . 129 . Luna , A . et al . Regulation of protein transport from the Golgi complex to the endoplasmic reticulum by CDC42 and N - WASP . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 866 – 879 ( 2002 ) . 130 . Chen , J . L . , Lacomis , L . , Erdjument - Bromage , H . , Tempst , P . & Stamnes , M . Cytosol - derived proteins are sufficient for Arp2 / 3 recruitment and ARF / coatomer - dependent actin polymerization on Golgi membranes . FEBS Lett . 566 , 281 – 286 ( 2004 ) . 131 . Matas , O . B . , Martinez - Menarguez , J . A . & Egea , G . Association of Cdc42 / N - WASP / Arp2 / 3 signaling pathway with Golgi membranes . Traffic 5 , 838 – 846 ( 2004 ) . 132 . Gasman , S . , Chasserot - Golaz , S . , Malacombe , M . , Way , M . & Bader , M . F . Regulated exocytosis in neuroendocrine cells : a role for subplasmalemmal Cdc42 / N - WASP - induced actin filaments . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 520 – 531 ( 2004 ) . 133 . Stevens , J . M . , Galyov , E . E . & Stevens , M . P . Actin - dependent movement of bacterial pathogens . Nature Rev . Microbiol . 4 , 91 – 101 ( 2006 ) . 134 . Gruenheid , S . et al . Enteropathogenic E . coli Tir binds Nck to initiate actin pedestal formation in host cells . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 856 – 859 ( 2001 ) . 135 . Lommel , S . , Benesch , S . , Rohde , M . , Wehland , J . & Rottner , K . Enterohaemorrhagic and enteropathogenic Escherichia coli use different mechanisms for actin pedestal formation that converge on N - WASP . Cell Microbiol . 6 , 243 – 254 ( 2004 ) . 136 . Campellone , K . G . , Robbins , D . & Leong , J . M . EspFU is a translocated EHEC effector that interacts with Tir and N - WASP and promotes Nck - independent actin assembly . Dev . Cell 7 , 217 – 228 ( 2004 ) . 137 . Munter , S . , Way , M . & Frischknecht , F . Signaling during pathogen infection . Sci . STKE 16 May 2006 ( doi : 10 . 1126 / stke . 3352006re5 ) . 138 . Frischknecht , F . et al . Actin - based motility of vaccinia virus mimics receptor tyrosine kinase signalling . Nature 401 , 926 – 929 ( 1999 ) . 139 . Patel , J . C . & Galan , J . E . Manipulation of the host actin cytoskeleton by Salmonella — all in the name of entry . Curr . Opin . Microbiol . 8 , 10 – 15 ( 2005 ) . 140 . Stender , S . et al . Identification of SopE2 from Salmonella typhimurium , a conserved guanine nucleotide exchange factor for Cdc42 of the host cell . Mol . Microbiol . 36 , 1206 – 1221 ( 2000 ) . 141 . Criss , A . K . & Casanova , J . E . Coordinate regulation of Salmonella enterica Serovar Typhimurium invasion of epithelial cells by the Arp2 / 3 complex and Rho GTPases . Infect . Immun . 71 , 2885 – 2891 ( 2003 ) . 142 . Unsworth , K . E . , Way , M . , McNiven , M . , Machesky , L . & Holden , D . W . Analysis of the mechanisms of Salmonella - induced actin assembly during invasion of host cells and intracellular replication . Cell Microbiol . 6 , 1041 – 1055 ( 2004 ) . 143 . Egile , C . et al . Activation of the CDC42 effector N - WASP by the Shigella flexneri IcsA protein promotes actin nucleation by Arp2 / 3 complex and bacterial actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 146 , 1319 – 1332 ( 1999 ) . 144 . Stamm , L . M . et al . Role of the WASP family proteins for Mycobacterium marinum actin tail formation . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 14837 – 14842 ( 2005 ) . 145 . Stevens , M . P . et al . Identification of a bacterial factor required for actin - based motility of Burkholderia pseudomallei . Mol . Microbiol . 56 , 40 – 53 ( 2005 ) . 146 . Loisel , T . P . , Boujemaa , R . , Pantaloni , D . & Carlier , M . F . Reconstitution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins . Nature 401 , 613 – 616 ( 1999 ) . Describes the minimal set of cytoskeletal components sufficient to support actin - based motility of bacterial pathogens in vitro . 147 . Thrasher , A . J . WASp in immune - system organization and function . Nature Rev . Immunol . 2 , 635 – 646 ( 2002 ) . 148 . Derry , J . M . , Ochs , H . D . & Francke , U . Isolation of a novel gene mutated in Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome . Cell 79 , 922 ( 1994 ) . 149 . Dupre , L . et al . Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein regulates lipid raft dynamics during immunological synapse formation . Immunity 17 , 157 – 166 ( 2002 ) . 150 . Badour , K . et al . The Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein acts downstream of CD2 and the CD2AP and PSTPIP1 adaptors to promote formation of the immunological synapse . Immunity 18 , 141 – 154 ( 2003 ) . 151 . Nolz , J . C . et al . The WAVE2 complex regulates actin cytoskeletal reorganization and CRAC - mediated calcium entry during T cell activation . Curr . Biol . 16 , 24 – 34 ( 2006 ) . 152 . Zipfel , P . A . et al . Role for the Abi / Wave protein complex in T cell receptor - mediated proliferation and cytoskeletal remodeling . Curr . Biol . 16 , 35 – 46 ( 2006 ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | OCTOBER2006 | 725 © 200 6 Nature Publishing Group 153 . Linder , S . et al . The polarization defect of Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome macrophages is linked to dislocalization of the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Immunol . 165 , 221 – 225 ( 2000 ) . 154 . Calle , Y . et al . WASp deficiency in mice results in failure to form osteoclast sealing zones and defects in bone resorption . Blood 103 , 3552 – 3361 ( 2004 ) . 155 . Zicha , D . et al . Chemotaxis of macrophages is abolished in the Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome . Br . J . Haematol . 101 , 659 – 665 ( 1998 ) . 156 . Burns , S . , Thrasher , A . J . , Blundell , M . P . , Machesky , L . & Jones , G . E . Configuration of human dendritic cell cytoskeleton by Rho GTPases , the WAS protein , and differentiation . Blood 98 , 1142 – 1149 ( 2001 ) . 157 . de Noronha , S . et al . Impaired dendritic - cell homing in vivo in the absence of Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein . Blood 105 , 1590 – 1597 ( 2005 ) . 158 . Wang , W . et al . Tumor cells caught in the act of invading : their strategy for enhanced cell motility . Trends Cell Biol . 15 , 138 – 145 ( 2005 ) . 159 . Otsubo , T . et al . Involvement of Arp2 / 3 complex in the process of colorectal carcinogenesis . Mod . Pathol . 17 , 461 – 467 ( 2004 ) . 160 . Wang , W . et al . Identification and testing of a gene expression signature of invasive carcinoma cells within primary mammary tumors . Cancer Res . 64 , 8585 – 8594 ( 2004 ) . 161 . Semba , S . et al . Coexpression of actin - related protein 2 and Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome family verproline - homologous protein 2 in adenocarcinoma of the lung . Clin . Cancer Res . 12 , 2449 – 2454 ( 2006 ) . 162 . Yanagawa , R . et al . Genome - wide screening of genes showing altered expression in liver metastases of human colorectal cancers by cDNA microarray . Neoplasia 3 , 395 – 401 ( 2001 ) . 163 . Linder , S . , Nelson , D . , Weiss , M . & Aepfelbacher , M . Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein regulates podosomes in primary human macrophages . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 9648 – 9653 ( 1999 ) . 164 . Mizutani , K . , Miki , H . , He , H . , Maruta , H . & Takenawa , T . Essential role of neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein in podosome formation and degradation of extracellular matrix in src - transformed fibroblasts . Cancer Res . 62 , 669 – 674 ( 2002 ) . 165 . Hiura , K . , Lim , S . S . , Little , S . P . , Lin , S . & Sato , M . Differentiation dependent expression of tensin and cortactin in chicken osteoclasts . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 30 , 272 – 284 ( 1995 ) . 166 . Yamaguchi , H . et al . Molecular mechanisms of invadopodium formation : the role of the N - WASP – Arp2 / 3 complex pathway and cofilin . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 441 – 452 ( 2005 ) . 167 . Quinlan , M . E . , Heuser , J . E . , Kerkhoff , E . & Mullins , R . D . Drosophila Spire is an actin nucleation factor . Nature 433 , 382 – 388 ( 2005 ) . Acknowledgements We thank A . Siripala and K . Campellone for comments on the manuscript , and members of the Welch laboratory for helpful discussion . Research in the Welch laboratory is supported from National Institutes of Health and National Institute of General Medicine Sciences , the National Research Initiative of the United States Department of Agriculture Cooperative State Research , Education and Extension Service , and an Established Investigator Award from the American Heart Association . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing financial interests . DATABASES The following terms in this article are linked online to : OMIM : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / entrez / query . fcgi ? db = OMIM Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome Protein Data Bank : http : / / www . rcsb . org / pdb 1A8K | 1ATN UniProtKB : http : / / ca . expasy . org / sprot Abp1 | ActA | ARP2 | ARP3 | ARPC1A | ARPC1B | ARPC2 | ARPC3 | ARPC4 | ARPC5 | CDC42 | cortactin | N - WASP | Pan1 | WASP | WAVE1 | WAVE2 | WAVE3 FURTHER INFORMATION Matthew Welch’s homepage : http : / / mcb . berkeley . edu / labs / welch Access to this links box is available online . R E V I E W S 726 | OCTOBER2006 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio