Endocytic trafficking pathways have become established in recent years as important players in the regulation of intracellular signalling pathways during processes such as cell division and migration . The ability of the endo‑ cytic and recycling pathways to sort cargos to a range of subcellular compartments , each with distinct lipid and protein constituents , provides the platform to conduct cellular processes in a spatiotemporally regulated man‑ ner . Indeed , it is now apparent that trafficking events can establish and maintain polarity , redefine signalling pathways and control adhesion events to dictate a cellular response . Integrins are a family of adhesion molecules involved in interactions between the cell and the surrounding extracellular matrix ( ECM ) . The heterodimerization of 19 α‑integrin and 8 β‑integrin subunits is thought to yield 25 integrin αβ heterodimers , which form recep‑ tors for an overlapping group of ECM molecules in almost every cell type 1 . Through interactions with the ECM , integrins control many cellular processes that occur during develop ment and in the progression of diseases such as cancer . As well as mediating attachment to the ECM , integrins act ( directly or indirectly ) as bi‑ directional transducer molecules that function to convey signals either from the outside to the inside of cells or vice versa 1 , 2 . Although they lack any known enzymatic activity of their own , integrins can initiate ‘outside‑in’ signalling by recruiting signalling moieties ( such as focal adhesion kinase ) that generate and convey signals to the migratory and proliferative machinery of the cell . Another way in which integrins can convey outside‑in signals is through their ability to influence the manner by which growth factor receptors ( such as epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) and fibroblast growth factor receptor ( FGFR ) ) respond to their ligands 3 . Integrin function can also be controlled from within the cell , and this is often termed ‘inside‑out’ signalling 1 . Indeed , integrins can be switched from a low‑affinity conformation to a high‑affinity active conformation through the association of the β‑integrin cytoplasmic tail with the FERM domain‑containing proteins talin and kindlin . This process is important not only for platelet activation , but also for the coordination of adhesion during the migration of various cell types 4 – 7 . The way in which integrins are trafficked by the endo‑ somal pathway is now recognized to influence their func‑ tion 8 – 11 , and recent developments indicate that trafficking pathways not only dictate the polarized distribution of integrins , but also the way in which they and their associ‑ ated growth factor receptors signal to the cell’s migratory machinery . Moreover , it is now clear that the engagement of integrins can reprogramme the trafficking of other receptors and structures , such as cholesterol‑rich mem‑ brane microdomains , in a way that has a marked influence on processes such as cell migration and angiogenesis . Past descriptions of integrin endocytosis and recycling led to proposals that these processes drive cell migration by moving adhesion receptors from the back to the front of moving cells 12 . Although there is not yet evidence that this type of long‑range transport operates during cell migration , recent data indicate that endosomes mediate the redistribution of integrins from one end of the cell to the other during cytokinesis 13 . Conversely , the influence of integrin trafficking on cell migration is probably medi‑ ated by controlling the spatial restriction of integrins 14 , by modulating Rho GTPase signalling 15 and by altering recycling of other receptors , such as EGFR 16 and vas‑ cular endothelial growth factor receptor ( VEGFR ) 17 . Furthermore , new data indicate that these processes contribute to cell migration in three‑dimensional ( 3D ) Beatson Institute for Cancer Research , Cancer Research UK , Glasgow , G61 3BX , Scotland . Correspondence to J . C . N . e - mail : j . norman @ beatson . gla . ac . uk doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2799 Published online 11 Novemeber 2009 Integrin A member of a large family of transmembrane proteins that traverse the plasma membrane as heterodimers of α‑ and β - subunits . An important role for integrins is to mediate the interaction of cells with ECM components such as fibronectin , and with the intracellular cytoskeleton . Extracellular matrix ( ECM ) . A network of secreted proteins ( such as fibronectin and collagen ) and polysaccharides that largely fills the extracellular milieu of many tissues and organs . The ECM provides structural support for cells and acts as a fulcrum on which cells must exert force to migrate . Integrins : masters and slaves of endocytic transport Patrick T . Caswell , Suryakiran Vadrevu and Jim C . Norman Abstract | Since it has become clear that adhesion receptors are trafficked through the endosomal pathway and that this can influence their function , much effort has been invested in obtaining detailed descriptions of the molecular machinery responsible for internalizing and recycling integrins . New findings indicate that integrin trafficking dictates the nature of Rho GTPase signalling during cytokinesis and cell migration . Furthermore , integrins can exert control over the trafficking of other receptors in a way that drives cancer cell invasion and tumour angiogenesis . R E V I E W S nATuRE REVIEws | Molecular cell Biology VoluME 10 | DECEMbER 2009 | 843 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Fibronectin A high - molecular weight ECM glycoprotein that binds to integrins . microenvironments , to polymerization of fibronectin and to tumour angiogenesis in a way that is likely to influ‑ ence cancer progression . In this Review we present recent advances in our understanding of the molecular events that are involved in internalizing integrins . we discuss how new evidence is helping us to place many of these events in the context of established clathrin‑dependent and clathrin‑independent endocytic pathways . The focus of the Review is to explore how recent advances in our understanding of integrin recycling have altered our view of how trafficking links integrins to cell migration , cyto‑ kinesis and angiogenesis , particularly with regard to the way in which integrins enlist the Rho GTPase and other signalling pathways for these processes . Endocytosis of integrins The endocytosis of many integrin heterodimers occurs by clathrin‑dependent and clathrin‑independent endo‑ cytic mechanisms . It is clear that a given integrin hetero‑ dimer can follow more than one internalization route . For example , α5β1 integrin can be internalized by both clathrin‑dependent 13 and caveolar 18 endocytosis , and αvβ3 integrin is recruited to caveolae and internalized in a cholesterol‑ and caveolin 1‑dependent manner 19 and can also enter the cell in clathrin‑coated structures 20 . below , we review the recent advances in our understanding of clathrin‑dependent and clathrin‑independent endo‑ cytosis of integrins , with particular focus on work that elucidates the molecular connection between the integrin and endocytic machineries ( TABLE 1 ) . Clathrin - dependent integrin endocytosis . The cytoplasmic tails of the integrin β‑subunit contain conserved nXXY ( in which X denotes any amino acid ) motifs , which are known to recruit transmembrane receptors to clathrin‑ coated structures through interactions with endocytic adaptor proteins such as AP2 . Early observations , which relied on overexpression of mutated β1 integrins , indicated that integrin internalization does not depend on nXXY signals 21 . However , more recently , β1 integrin endocytosis has been studied in fibroblasts that have been isolated from mice in which the tyrosines of the β1 integrin nXXY motifs were substituted with phenylalanines ( β1YYFF ) 13 . This elegant genetic approach , in combination with exper‑ iments using a clathrin inhibitor ( monodansylcadaverine ) in cultured cells , clearly indicates an involvement of the nXXY motifs and clathrin in β1 integrin endocytosis . Apart from rare examples of a direct association of receptor cargo with clathrin triskelions , recruitment into clathrin‑coated structures ( CCss ) requires the action of a bridging protein or an adaptor . HCls1‑associated pro‑ tein X1 ( HAX1 ) is a ubiquitously expressed protein that , together with cortactin , is involved in clathrin‑mediated endocytosis 22 . HAX1 binds directly to the cytoplasmic tail of β6 integrin , and this interaction is necessary for the clathrin‑dependent internalization of αvβ6 integrin 23 . This event is integral to αvβ6 integrin‑dependent cell migration in both 2D and 3D matrices . Although the β6 integrin – HAX1 interaction does not involve nXXY motifs , this work was the first to show a direct association between an integrin and a functional component of the clathrin endocytic machinery . some of the alternative clathrin adaptors , such as disa‑ bled ( Dab ) and numb , which contain phosphotyrosine‑ binding ( PTb ) domains , can interact with integrin nPXY motifs 24 , and it is now apparent that they contribute to the clathrin‑mediated endocytosis of integrins . numb can interact directly with β1 and β3 integrins , and knock‑ down of numb or modulation of proteinase‑activated receptor 3 ( PAR3 ; also known as F2Rl2 ) – protein kinase Cζ ( PKCζ ) signalling ( which alters the ability of numb to be recruited to integrin cytoplasmic domains ) inhibits α5β1 and αvβ3 integrin internalization 20 . More recently , two independent studies have obtained good evidence to support the involvement of an alternative clathrin adaptor , DAb2 , in β1 integrin endocytosis 25 , 26 ( FIG . 1a ) . Table 1 | Pathways for the internalization of integrins integrin heterodimer adaptors and associated proteins * other factors and / or comments * refs Clathrin - dependent pathway α v β 6 HAX1 ‡ Required for tumour cell invasion 23 α v β 5 Clathrin ‡ Shown by electron microscopy to be localized to clathrin - coated structures 74 α 5 β 1 and α v β 3 Numb ‡ Localized at the cell front by PKC ζ – PAR3 ( F2RL2 ) 20 α 5 β 1 , α 6 β 1 and α 3 β 1 AP2 through CD151 ‡ Requires the association of the YXX θ motif in CD151 with AP2 75 α 5 β 1 Proteins with an NPXY binding motif Clathrin requirement is overridden by RAB21 overexpression 13 α 3 β 1 AP2 through L1CAM Requires the association of the RSLE motif in L1CAM with AP2 76 α 1 β 1 , α 2 β 1 and α 3 β 1 DAB2 ‡ Internalization sites are evenly distributed over the cell surface 26 α ? β 1 § DAB2 ‡ or AP2 Occurs at focal adhesions 25 α 5 β 1 § NRP1 ‡ , GIPC1 and myosin VI Occurs at fibrillar adhesions 28 Caveolin - dependent pathway α 5 β 1 Unknown Required for fibronectin internalization 18 α ? β 1 PKC α ‡ Required for chemotaxis 35 , 77 α v β 3 Unknown Occurs in endothelial cells 19 α L β 2 Unknown Increased by fMLP treatment of neutrophils 37 Clathrin - independent pathway α 5 β 1 and α 2 β 1 RAB21 ‡ RAB21 is also required for recycling 13 α 5 β 1 Unknown Identified in an early K + depletion study 78 Pathway with undetermined mechanism α ? β 1 JAMA A new role for a JAMA 79 α ? β 1 Unknown The role of BRAG2 provides direct evidence for ARF6 involvement 80 * Alternative protein names are provided in brackets . ‡ A direct physical association with integrins has been shown . § Active conformation . AP2 , adaptor protein 2 ; ARF6 , ADP - ribosylation factor 6 , BRAG2 , brefeldin - resistant Arf - GEF 2 protein ; DAB2 , disabled 2 ; fMLP , N - formyl - methionyl - leucyl - phenylalanine ; HAX1 , HCLS1 - associated protein X1 ; JAMA , junctional adhesion molecule A ; L1CAM , L1 cell adhesion molecule ; NRP1 , neuropilin 1 ; GIPC , GAIP carboxy terminus - interacting protein ; PKC , protein kinase C ; PAR3 , proteinase - activated receptor 3 . R E V I E W S 844 | DECEMbER 2009 | VoluME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved NRP1 Clathrin Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Cell membrane Endosome FAK Dynamin 2 Dynamin 2 Nucleus RAB11compartment MTOC Nucleus D A B 2 D A B 2 Nocodazole treatment 10 minutes after nocodazole removal 10 – 60 minutes after nocodazole removal Nucleus FAK Microtubule RAB5 Early endosome G I P C G I P C Myosin VI Barbed end Pointed end Actin filament β 1 integrin α 5 β 1 integrin FAK Fibronectin fibril a b Focaladhesion SEA motif To find the preferred cargos of the DAb2 endocytic route , Teckchandani et al . 26 carried out a quantitative proteomic analysis that identified β1 integrins as the main glyco‑ proteins that are depleted from the plasma membrane in DAb2‑deficient cells . This study provides clear evidence that certain β1 integrin heterodimers ( α1β1 , α2β1 and α3β1 integrins ) are recruited to DAb2‑rich CCss across the cell surface and that endocytosis ( but not recycling ) of β1 integrins is DAb2 dependent . Moreover , these authors carried out several experiments indicating that it is the flux of integrins through the endocytic pathway ( and not simply their levels at the cell surface ) that dictates the speed of cell migration . Further evidence supporting a role for DAb2 in integrin endocytosis comes from a study that used an approach to generate simultaneous focal adhesion disas‑ sembly and endocytosis of integrins 27 . when cells were treated with nocodazole , the microtubular cytoskeleton was disrupted and , as a result , integrins accumulated in large focal adhesions . Following the removal of nocoda‑ zole the microtubules re‑grew , and when they contacted focal adhesions , integrin‑containing complexes rapidly disassembled . A requirement for the dynamin protein dynamin 2 in this process suggested that this microtubule‑ driven adhesion disassembly was due to integrin endo‑ cytosis 27 . More recently , this type of synchronous focal adhesion disassembly was shown to be mediated by the recruitment of clathrin and DAb2 ( and AP2 ) to the adhe‑ sion sites , followed by rapid endocytosis of the integrins into CCss 25 . Interestingly , this study compared the results obtained with an antibody that bound to all β1 integrins ( MAb1981 ) with one that selected for hetero dimers that were in an active , ligand‑associated conformation ( 12G10 ) and concluded that only β1 integrins in their active conformation were endocytosed during focal adhe‑ sion disassembly . Although this study concurs with that of Teckchandani et al . 26 with regard to a requirement for DAb2 in β1 integrin endocytosis , the two studies differ somewhat in their assessment of the need for integrins to be active to be internalized by this route . Thus , although it is now clear that DAb2 mediates clathrin‑dependent endocytosis of integrins , there are still issues to be resolved regarding where this occurs ( near focal adhe‑ sions 20 , 25 or across the entire cell surface 26 ) and whether the integrin heterodimer must be active to follow this route into the cell . In assessing these points , caution must be exercised when interpreting data from experiments in which integrin internalization is measured by the addi‑ tion of activating antibodies to living cells , as it is possible that these results are influenced by the effects of immune complex formation at the cell surface . The view that a defined endocytic mechanism can select for integrin heterodimers in particular active con‑ formations is supported by recent studies on the role of neuropilin 1 ( nRP1 ) on integrin trafficking in endo‑ thelial cells 28 . This transmembrane glycoprotein , which is expressed by neurons , endothelial cells and numer‑ ous tumour types and tumour‑derived cell lines , was originally identified as a surface protein mediating cell adhesion 29 and was subsequently found to also act as a co‑receptor for both pro‑ and anti‑angiogenic factors 30 , 31 . Figure 1 | endocytosis of integrin heterodimers . a | Disabled 2 ( DAB2 ) - and clathrin - dependent endocytosis of active integrins at focal adhesions . When cells are treated with nocodazole , the resulting disruption of the microtubular cytoskeleton leads to the accumulation of β 1 integrin , clathrin and DAB2 in large focal adhesions . Following removal of nocodazole , the microtubules re - grow and , when they contact focal adhesions , this leads to rapid DAB2 - and clathrin - dependent endocytosis of β 1 integrin heterodimers in their active conformation near the front of the cell . Following internalization , active β 1 integrins are transported backwards along the microtubules to RAB5 - positive early endosomes and subsequently to the RAB11 compartment in the perinuclear region . b | Neuropilin 1 ( NRP1 ) – GAIP carboxy terminus - interacting protein ( GIPC ) – myosin VI - dependent endocytosis of active α 5 β 1 integrin at fibrillar adhesions . In endothelial cells , α 5 β 1 integrins in their active conformation are localized to fibrillar adhesions . In these structures , α 5 β 1 integrin is associated with NRP1 , which , in turn , recruits the multimeric adaptor protein GIPC through an association involving its C - terminal serine – glutamate – alanine ( SEA ) motif . GIPC1 can then initiate endocytosis of active α 5 β 1 integrin , which is powered by the unconventional , pointed - end directed myosin motor , myosin VI . FAK , focal adhesion kinase ; MTOC , microtubule - organizing centre . R E V I E W S nATuRE REVIEws | Molecular cell Biology VoluME 10 | DECEMbER 2009 | 845 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Focal adhesion A large , dynamic protein complex in which the cytoskeleton of a cell connects to the ECM through integrins . Dynamin A GTPase that is responsible for endocytosis in the eukaryotic cell . Dynamin has been extensively studied with respect to clathrin - coated vesicle budding from the cell membrane . Total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy A type of microscopy that uses an evanescent field to illuminate a thin region of a specimen ( usually less than 200 nm ) . Perinuclear recycling compartment A vesicular compartment that is located in the juxtanuclear region , often close to the microtubule organizing centre . Following endocytosis , many receptors are delivered here before returning to the plasma membrane . The RAB11 family of GTPases are commonly enriched in this compartment and are essential for its function and the maintenance of its morphology In endothelial cells , nRP1 is required for the efficient internalization of an active form of α5β1 integrin , even though the endo cytosis of inactive α5β1 integrin simul‑ taneously occurs in the same cells by nRP1‑independent mechanisms 28 ( FIG . 1b ) . Moreover , this study used the novel approach of photoactivation in total internal reflec - tion fluorescence microscopy to show that nRP1‑dependent integrin internal ization occurred along the length of fibronectin‑rich fibrillar structures ( often termed fibrilla r adhesions ) , which are rich in active α5β1 integrin at the ventral surface of the cell . Actomyosin processes have an established role in regulating endocytosis , and the pointed‑end‑directed unconventional motor myosin VI has been shown to contribute to the clathrin‑dependent internalization of nRP1 ( REFs 32 , 33 ) . The internalization of α5β1 integrin – nRP1 complexes in endothelial cells also requires the recruitment of myosin VI , which is bridged by the association of a serine – glutamate – alanine ( sEA ) motif at the carboxy terminus of nRP1 with the homomultimeric endocytic adaptor , GAIP C terminus‑ interacting protein ( GIPC1 ) 28 . Thus , a physical link con‑ necting α5β1 integrin to a myosin motor has a role in the formation and transport of endocytic vesicles along fila‑ mentous actin filaments that are associated with fibrilla r adhesions ( FIG . 1b ) . Clathrin - independent integrin endocytosis . some recep‑ tors seem to follow only a single route into the cell . For example , the transferrin receptor can enter cells only by CCss , and disruption of clathrin‑mediated endocyto‑ sis completely opposes its internalization . Indeed , αvβ6 integrin is internalized by a clathrin‑dependent mecha‑ nism , and there is no evidence that it can enter the cell by other means 23 . However , many receptors ( such as EGFR1 ) , can be internalized by more than one mecha‑ nism 34 , and some integrins are similarly promiscuous with respect to their chosen route into the cell . For example , α5β1 and αvβ3 integrins are internalized into CCss , but have also been shown to enter the cell by other routes . Pellinen et al . 13 have shown that the internalization of α5β1 integrin , which normally depends on nXXY motifs and clathrin , can be rendered clathrin and nXXY independent ( in the same cell type ) by the overexpression of RAb21 . This is probably because RAb21 can activate β1 integrin endocytosis by alternative , cholesterol‑sensitive caveo‑ lar routes . Although in some cell types αvβ3 and α5β1 integrins have been shown to be internalized by CCss , in endothelial cells and myofibroblasts these integrins localize to caveolae 18 , 19 , and their internalization requires caveo lin 1 and is sensitive to cholesterol‑sequestering agents ( J . C . n . , unpublished observations ) . A direct association of PKCα with the cytoplasmic domains of β1 integrins has long been known to promote integrin internalization 35 . The long‑standing connection between PKCα and caveolar endocytosis suggests that this kinase drives β1 integrins into the cell by this route 36 . Furthermore , neutro phils use a cholesterol‑sensitive clathrin‑independent endocytic route to internalize αlβ2 integrin ( also known as lFA1 ) during migration across ligands such as intracellular adhesion molecule 1 ( ICAM1 ) 37 , 38 . However , when compared to what is known about the molecular mechanisms of clathrin‑dependent processes , the ways in which integrins are recruited into clathrin‑independent pathways are poorly defined . This is an area that requires further attention if the control of integrin endocytosis is to be fully understood . Spatiotemporal aspects of integrin traffic Following endocytosis by either clathrin‑ or caveolin‑ dependent mechanisms , integrins travel to early endo‑ somes . It is in this subcellular compartment that sorting decisions are made that determine whether receptors are sent to late endosomes and lysosomes for degradation or are recycled by one of two spatially and temporally dis‑ tinct routes . Generally , integrins are not degraded but are efficiently recycled to the plasma membrane either by a RAb4‑dependent route or by moving to the perinuclear recycling compartment before returning to the plasma membrane through mechanisms requiring RAb11 and / or ADP‑ribosylation factor 6 ( ARF6 ) 8 – 11 . These recycling routes were originally described for endocytic cargos such as the transferrin receptor . However , the flux of integrins through the RAb4‑ and RAb11‑dependent pathways is specifically controlled by several kinases and GTPases , some of which are physically recruited to the cytoplasmic domains of integrins . Much of the published literature describing these processes has been reviewed previously ( see REFs 8 – 11 and TABLE 2 ) . Here , we focus on how integrin endocytosis and recycling is organized in moving and dividing cells , and how these processes can drive both spatial restriction and en masse redistribution of integrins and also alter the trafficking and signalling of other receptors . Spatial restriction . localized endocytosis and exocyto‑ sis can function spatially to concentrate receptors and restrict signalling to defined cellular subdomains . Indeed , a role for vesicular transport in receptor partitioning has been identified in numerous biological contexts across a range of organisms . For instance , the concentration of the yeast snARE ( soluble‑ N ‑ethylmaleimide‑sensitive factor accessory protein receptor ) protein , snc1 , to shmoo tips ( the cellular bulge that is produced by a yeast cell in response to a pheromone ) is maintained by continuous cycles of endocytosis followed by its targeted return to the appropriate plasma membrane subdomain 39 . similarly , the protein tyrosine kinase PDGFR‑ and VEGFR‑related ( PVR ) is proposed to be restricted to the front portion of migrating Drosophila melanogaster border cells by a local endocytic and exocytic cycle that is controlled by the RAb5 exchange factor sprint and the E3 ubiquitin ligase Casitas b‑lineage lymphoma ( Cbl ) 40 ( FIG . 2a ) . More recently , internalization and recycling was shown to restrict the localization of active Rac to dorsal ruffles — short‑lived , dynamic structures that are char‑ acterized by explosive , but spatially restricted , bursts of actin poly merization across the top surface of a cell 41 . During this pro cess , dynamin‑dependent endocytosis retrieves in active Rac from the cell surface and delivers it to endosomes containing T lymphoma invasion and metastasis‑inducin g protein 1 ( TIAM1 ) , a guanine nucleo‑ tide exchange factor for Rac , leading to Rac activation . R E V I E W S 846 | DECEMbER 2009 | VoluME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Sorting endosome The first station to which internalized cargo is delivered following the uncoating of endocytic vesicles . Endocytic cargo is triaged within the sorting endosome and then sent to numerous cellular destinations including multivesicular bodies and the perinuclear recycling compartment . Alternatively , some cargos may be returned directly to the plasma membrane . Lamellipodium A flat , actin - rich fan - shaped feature at the leading edge of some motile cells . Pseudopod A projection that emanates from cells and normally extends in the direction of migration . The term pseudopod is used here to describe a projection that is longer and thinner than a lamellipodium . Cleavage furrow The indentation that begins the process of cleavage and by which animal cells , and some algal cells , undergo cytokinesis . Active Rac then returns to the plasma membrane by an ARF6‑dependent recycling route , and this maintains the poly merization of actin in the dorsal ruffles ( FIG . 2a ) . It has been known for some time that sorting endosomes , which are the first port of call for receptors following internalization , are located near to the front of migrating cells , at the leading edge 42 . Consistently , it is now apparent that clathrin‑dependent endocytosis is sharply polarized towards the leading edge 43 , and more recently it has become clear that integrins are internalized at focal adhesions near the leading edge and then transported backwards to the recycling compartment in the perinuclear region 25 , 44 . There is also copious evidence that membrane traffic ema‑ nating from the perinuclear region , including recycling cargos and newly synthesized material from the trans ‑ Golgi network 45 – 47 , travel forwards in migrating cells to sites of focal exocytosis near the lamellipodium . Taken together , these findings support the view that , although integrins can undertake an intracellular journey from the cell front to the RAb11 compartment and back again , the heterodimers are both internalized and recycled near the lamellipodium , thus spatially restricting a particular population of integrins to the front portion of the cell . Much of this work has been carried out by imaging protein transport during migration on glass or plastic surfaces , but there are indications that integrin endo‑ cytosis and exocytosis may be even more tightly restricted when cells migrate in 3D matrices . RAb25 , a member of the RAb11 subfamily , localizes to a compartment that resides close to the tips of invading pseudopods while they extend into the surrounding 3D matrix 14 . Photoactivation approaches in ovarian cancer cells have revealed the presence of a spatially restricted subpopulation of α5β1 integrin that cycles between an intracellular RAb25 com‑ partment and the plasma membrane , in the confines of the pseudopodial tip region 14 ( FIG . 2a ) . In view of these observations , it is not realistic to suggest that endocytosis at the cell rear is coupled to en masse anterograde move‑ ment of receptors followed by their re‑exocytosis at the cell front . Instead , the recently published literature sup‑ ports the idea that integrins are transported to and from the cell front in a way that acts to localize signalling , thus promoting focal adhesion turnover and reassembly as well as actin dynamics to drive membrane protrusion and a forwards motion . En masse movement . In late telophase , vesicles are known to traffic from the perinuclear region to the cleavage furrow , where they are thought to contribute to abscission events that complete the separation of daughter cells during cytokinesis . The RAb5‑related GTPase RAb21 associates with the cytoplasmic domains of α‑integrins to control trafficking of α5β1 and α2β1 integrins during cell migra‑ tion 48 . RAb21‑driven integrin trafficking also has a key role in cytokinesis . Indeed , RAb21 - expressing vesicles travel en masse to carry α5β1 integrin from other parts of the cell to the cleavage furrow during late telophase 13 ( FIG . 2b ) . Furthermore , during post‑mitotic spreading RAb21‑expressing vesicles transport α5β1 integrin from the cleavage furrow towards the newly established cell front to enable the daughter cells to move away from each other 13 ( FIG . 2b ) . Thus , during mitosis , when cells funda‑ mentally alter their shape and re‑draw their axes of polar‑ ity , endocytosis and exocytosis move adhesion receptors en masse from one side of the cell to the other . However , during cell migration and other situations in which the front – back polarity axis is well established , integrin traf‑ ficking seems to spatially restrict integrin subpopulations to maintain migrational polarity and localize integrin signalling to the cell front . Table 2 | Pathways for integrin recycling gTPase involvement integrin heterodimer associated proteins * other factors and / or comments * refs RAB4 α v β 3 PKD1 ‡ Phosphorylation of PKD1 on Ser916 is required 15 , 81 α v β 3 RABIP4 ( RUFY1 ) A PDGF - driven pathway 82 RAB11 α 5 β 1 RCP ‡ Requires PKB ( AKT ) ; drives random migration on 2D surfaces and invasion in 3D matrices 16 α ? β 1 PKC ε PKC ε phosphorylates vimentin to release tethered integrin vesicles for recycling 83 , 84 α 5 β 1 EHD1 Recycling increases focal adhesion disassembly 85 α 5 β 1 VAMP3 ( cellubrevin ) Required for cell spreading , migration and focal adhesion assembly 86 RAB25 α 5 β 1 RAB25 ‡ Dictates the spatial restriction of α 5 β 1 integrin at the tips of invasive pseudopods during migration in 3D matrices 14 RAB21 α 5 β 1 RAB21 ‡ Has a role in localizing active Rho during cytokinesis 13 α 2 β 1 RAB21 ‡ Is required for cell migration 48 ARF6 α ? β 1 ACAP1 ‡ Phosphorylation of AKAP1 by PKB recruits β 1 integrin ; clathrin is involved in recycling . 87 * Alternative protein names are provided in brackets . ‡ A direct physical association with integrins has been shown . 2D , two - dimensional ; ACAP1 , Arf - GAP with coiled coil , ANK repeat and PH domain - containing protein 1 ; ARF6 , ADP - ribosylation factor 6 ; EHD1 , EH domain - containing protein 1 ; PDGF , platelet - derived growth factor ; PK , protein kinase ; RABIP4 , RAB4 - interacting protein ; RCP , Rab - coupling protein ; VAMP3 , vesicle - associated membrane protein 3 . R E V I E W S nATuRE REVIEws | Molecular cell Biology VoluME 10 | DECEMbER 2009 | 847 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Border cell migration Cytokinesis Post - mitotic spreading Dorsal ruffles Cleavage furrow RAB21 – α 5 β 1 integrin vesicles PVR Dynamin Migration of ovarian cancer cells RAB25 α 5 β 1 integrin Sprint CBL Dynamin RAB5 TIAM1 ARF6 Rac Rac Rac GDP GDP GTP GTP a Spatial restriction of traffic b En masse movement of receptors Rab - coupling protein ( RCP ) . A member of the FIP family of RAB11 - interacting proteins . It contains a domain responsible for interacting with RAB11 family members ( including RAB11A , RAB11B and RAB25 ) and a C2 domain that has been shown to bind to membrane lipids such as phosphatidic acid . RCP is a key effector for RAB11 with regard to the trafficking of integrins . Integrin trafficking and Rho signalling Integrins influence cell migration not only by providing a mechanical link between the actin cytoskeleton and the ECM to enable the cell to exert traction forces , but also by controlling actin polymerization and cell contractility through the activity of Rho GTPases . below , we review the relationship between integrin activation of Rho GTPases and the influence that trafficking of integrins has on these processes during cell migration and cytokinesis . Integrin trafficking and Rho signalling in cell migration . It is well established that the balance between the activities of Rac and RHoA GTPases determines the way in which cells migrate . Cells of fibroblastic and epithelial lineages typically move on 2D surfaces in a directionally persist‑ ent manner while maintaining a fan‑like morphology . under these circumstances , Rac stabilizes the extension of a broad , flat lamellipodium at the cell front , and RHoA promotes actomyosin contraction that limits lamellipodial activity to the cell front and helps to retract the rear of the cell 49 . If this balance of Rac and RHoA is altered , the persistence of cell migration is disturbed . High Rac activ‑ ity drives the extension of multiple lamellipodia , leading to loss of directionality 50 . However , loss of directionality also occurs when RHoA signalling is increased relative to Rac signalling , as this opposes the stability of adhesions near the cell front , thus driving lamellipodial collapse . Rho GTPase signalling is closely linked to endosomal transport . As discussed above , TIAM1 catalyses the exchange of GDP for GTP to activate Rac when the two proteins meet on endosomal membranes , and this controls the targeting of active Rac to dorsal ruffles on the plasma membrane 41 ( FIG . 2a ) . Endocytic dynamics are also known to coordinate RHoA signalling . The endocytic receptor for collagen , EnDo180 ( also known as MRC2 ) , promotes de‑adhesion of the cell rear by activating RHoA – RoCK ( Rho‑associated coiled coil‑containing protein kinase ) signalling from endosomes that are located near the back of the migrating cell 51 . An alteration in the balance between Rac and Rho signalling can be a consequence of switched integrin heterodimer expression . Indeed , in epithelial cells , which express high levels of αvβ3 integrin and no α5β1 integrin , active Rac supports stable lamellipodium formation and persistent migration , whereas expression of α5β1 integrin ( and no αvβ3 integrin ) activates RHoA to oppose this and drive random movement 52 . Interestingly , it is now clear that in cells that abundantly express both αvβ3 and α5β1 integrins , such as nIH3T3 fibroblasts 15 and the A2780 ovarian carcinoma cell line 16 , alterations in the way that integrin heterodimers are trafficked can influence the balance of their signalling to Rho GTPases . when αvβ3 integrin is actively cycling and can engage ECM ligands , the RAb11 effector Rab - coupling protein ( RCP ; also known as RAb11FIP1 ) is associated with β3 integrin ( FIG . 3a ) . when αvβ3 integrin function is disturbed , RCP dissoci‑ ates from αvβ3 integrin and binds to β1 integrin to con‑ nect α5β1 integrin to RAb11 and increase its recycling to the plasma membrane 16 ( FIG . 3b ) . Thus , RCP is directly involved in mediating the crosstalk between αvβ3 and α5β1 integrin , and this has important implications for the way in which these integrins signal to Rho GTPases . Indeed , the faster‑cycling α5β1 integrin has an enhanced ability to drive the RHoA‑dependent phosphorylation of coffilin , thus favouring the collapse of broad lamellipodia and the promotion of fast random migration ( FIG . 3b ) . Endosomal transport and Rho contractility in cytokinesis . Vesicle delivery to the cleavage furrow is essential for cytokinesis , but until recently the role of vesicular cargos during mitosis was not clear . Active RHoA accumulates in a narrow band at the site of the forming contractile ring during cytokinesis 53 . The dual effector for RAb11 and ARF6 , RAb11FIP3 ( known as nuF in D . melanogaster ) , controls endosomal trafficking to the cleavage furrow during late telophase 54 , and there is evidence in D . mela - nogaster that this pathway carries a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for RHoA , RHoGEF2 , to this region 55 . Activated RHoA might then activate the Rho effectors Diaphanous homologue 1 ( DIAPH1 ) , RoCK and citron kinase in this region , which work together to assemble and contract the cytokinetic ring 56 . Figure 2 | organization of endocytic cargo during cell migration and cytokinesis . a | Three examples of spatially restricted endocytosis and exocytosis are shown . PDGFR - and VEGFR - related ( PVR ) signalling is spatially restricted to the leading edge of migrating Drosophila melanogaster border cells by an endocytic and exocytic cycle that requires dynamin , the E3 ubiquitin ligase Casitas B - lineage lymphoma ( CBL ) and the RAB5 exchange factor Sprint . Dynamin - dependent endocytosis retrieves inactive Rac from the cell surface and delivers it to endosomes containing T lymphoma invasion and metastasis - inducing protein 1 ( TIAM1 ) , leading to Rac activation . Active Rac then returns to the plasma membrane by an ADP - ribosylation factor 6 ( ARF6 ) - dependent recycling route , and this maintains the polymerization of actin within the dorsal ruffle . When RAB25 - expressing ovarian cancer cells move in a three - dimensional microenvironment , RAB25 associates with the cytoplasmic domain of β 1 integrin to maintain a spatially restricted population of cycling α 5 β 1 integrin heterodimers near the tips of invading pseudopods . b | During mitosis , integrins undergo en masse redistribution . In late telophase , RAB21 associates with internalized integrins and participates in the transport of vesicular integrin to the cleavage furrow . Following cytokinesis , RAB21 - expressing vesicles containing integrin cargo move en masse from the point of abscission to the newly forming lamellipodia at the opposite ends of the cells . R E V I E W S 848 | DECEMbER 2009 | VoluME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology a c Earlyendosome RAB4 α v β 3 integrin α v β 3 integrin b Early endosome Recyclingendosome RAB11 α 5 β 1 integrin Rapidrandommigration ROCK CofilinP ECM ECM ECM Cellmembrane RCP Fast recycling PKD1RAB4 Endosome Endosome RAB21 RAB21 α 5 β 1 integrin Clathrin P ROCK Citron DIAPH1 RHOA F - actin MLC Cellmembrane Persistent migration Localization of Rac to leading edge Actin assembly and contraction Fastrecycling α v β 3 integrin α 5 β 1 integrin α 5 β 1 integrin More recently , Pellinen and co‑workers 13 noticed that the cleavage furrow does not hover at the equatorial plane of the dividing cells ( as is commonly thought ) , but that integrins concentrated in this region engage with the ECM and seem to anchor the cleavage furrow to the substratum ( FIG . 3c ) . The close apposition of the cleavage furrow to the substratum suggested that integrin‑mediated adhesion and / or integrin signalling might play a functional part in cytokinesis . These researchers used an affinity probe based on the Rho‑binding domain of Rhotekin ( a RHoA effector that binds only to the GTP‑loaded , active confor‑ mation of RHoA ) to show that delivery of α5β1 integrin by the RAb21 pathway and its engagement with the fibronectin matrix is necessary for RHoA activation and actomyosin contractility , which is required for completion of the abscission reaction 13 ( FIG . 3c ) . Key questions still remain concerning the relationship between RAb21 and RAb11FIP3 ( or nuF ) trafficking dur‑ ing cytokinesis , and it will be interesting to see how vesicular delivery of integrins and RhoGEFs are coordinated and how these components collaborate to recruit the contractile apparatus during the final stages of cytokinesis . Integrin control of endosomal trafficking In addition to being endosomal passengers , several lines of evidence have now established that an important function of integrins is to direct the trafficking of other receptors and cargos . Figure 3 | effects of integrin trafficking on rho gTPase signalling . a | When α v β 3 integrin returns to the plasma membrane through the RAB4 pathway ( which depends on protein kinase D1 ( PKD1 ) ) and engages extracellular matrix ( ECM ) ligands , the recycling of α 5 β 1 is slow . The cells move persistently with a fan - like morphology , and this type of migration is thought to be largely supported by the action of Rac at the leading edge of the cell . b | Following inhibition of α v β 3 integrin , recycling of α 5 β 1 integrin is increased by a pathway that requires Rab - coupling protein ( RCP ; also known as RAB11FIP1 ) and RAB11 . Trafficking of α 5 β 1 integrin by this pathway increases Rho GTPase activity , which triggers ROCK ( Rho - associated coiled coil - containing protein kinase ) phosphorylation and the inactivation of cofilin to increase random cell migration . c | During late telophase , α 5 β 1 integrin is internalized by a mechanism that requires clathrin and the NXXY motifs in its β 1 cytoplasmic domain . At endosomes , RAB21 associates with the cytoplasmic domain of α 5 integrin , and this promotes vesicular delivery of the integrin to the newly formed cleavage furrow . Once they reach the midbody , the integrins engage with the ECM , thereby anchoring the cleavage furrow to the substratum and allowing the activation of RHOA . Activated RHOA can then recruit the Rho effectors Diaphanous homologue 1 ( DIAPH1 ) , ROCK and citron kinase to this region , which work together to assemble and contract the cytokinetic ring . MLC , myosin light chain ; F - actin , filamentous actin . R E V I E W S nATuRE REVIEws | Molecular cell Biology VoluME 10 | DECEMbER 2009 | 849 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Cilengitide A cyclic peptide with the sequence cyclo - RGDfN me V . Cilengitide is a high affinity antagonist of α v β 3 and α v β 5 integrins and was developed with the view to being a potential anti - angiogenic and anti - cancer drug . Integrin engagement controls lipid raft trafficking . Integrins regulate Rac signalling by controlling endocytosis and the recycling of lipid rafts . when located at the plasma membrane , lipid rafts provide anchorage sites from which active Rac can signal in a localized manner to downstream targets , such as p21‑activated kinase ( PAK ) 57 . In adherent cells , integrins can inhibit lipid raft endo cytosis by retain‑ ing phosphorylated caveolin in focal adhesions , thereby keeping active Rac at the cell surface ( FIG . 4a ) . when cells are detached , phosphorylated caveolin is released from focal adhesions and recruited to caveolae , which triggers endocytosis of lipid rafts and their sub sequent transport along microtubules to a vesicular compart‑ ment in the perinuclear region 58 . Cell re‑attachment reverses this process , both by promoting the localization of phosphorylated caveolin to focal adhesions , which shuts down raft internalization 58 , and by activating ARF6 to promote the rapid recycling of rafts 59 , which recruits active Rac to the plasma membrane ( FIG . 4a ) . Interestingly , although this recycling pathway trans‑ ports material from the perinuclear region to the plasma membrane and requires ARF6 , a lack of involvement of RAb11 indicates that it is distinct from the pathways that carry integrins in a similar direction 59 . It will be interesting to determine the receptor cargos of this ARF6‑regulated lipid raft trafficking pathway and how this pathway is co ordinated with integrin recycling . Furthermore , as ARF6 has been shown to target endosomally activated Rac to dor‑ sal ruffles on the plasma membrane 41 , it will be important to determine the contribution made by lipid raft traffick‑ ing to the spatial restriction of TIAM1 function and Rac signalling during cell migration and invasion . αvβ3 integrin suppresses receptor tyrosine kinase recycling . In addition to controlling lipid raft trafficking and Rac activation , it is now clear that integrin engagement influ‑ ences the recycling of receptor tyrosine kinases ( RTKs ) in a way that markedly affects the progression of cancer , both in terms of tumour angiogenesis and the invasive migration of tumour cells in 3D microenvironments . Experiments in some ex vivo models indicated that inhibi‑ tion of αvβ3 integrin can oppose cell migration and angio‑ genesis ; these observations triggered the development of RGD‑mimetic integrin inhibitors that target αvβ3 integrin as potential anti‑cancer drugs 60 , 61 . The cyclic peptide αvβ3 integrin inhibitor Cilengitide is currently being tested in clinical trials ( Phase I and Phase II ) , but has shown disap‑ pointing results 62 , 63 . The lack of efficacy of Cilengitide is probably explained by recent studies showing that αvβ3 integrin can have an inhibitory role during tumour angio‑ genesis and in invasive migration of tumour cells , and that it does this by influencing receptor trafficking . Tumour angiogenesis is initiated by the secretion of VEGF by tumours in response to hypoxia . VEGF then binds to VEGFR2 on the neighbouring endothelium , which , in turn , activates signalling pathways leading to endothelial cell proliferation , migration and tubulation to form vessels 30 . Thus , VEGFR2 signalling is central to the angiogenic process , and the influence of any potential anti‑angiogenic therapy on the behaviour of this receptor cannot be ignored . Indeed , in the absence of agents that inhibit αvβ3 integrin function , recycling of VEGFR2 is slow and the addition of VEGF drives rapid internalization and degradation of VEGFR2 ( FIG . 4b ) . However , the presence of αvβ3 integrin blocking agents , such as Cilengitide or s36578 , promotes the activation of a RAb4‑regulated recycling pathway that carries internalized VEGFR2 from early endosomes back to the plasma membrane 17 . This RAb4‑ regulated recycling route protects VEGFR2 from degrada‑ tion , thus boosting VEGFR2 levels at the cell surface , which promotes the endothelial cell migration , sprouting and tubulation that drives tumour angiogenesis 17 ( FIG . 4b ) . These findings are surprising as many studies had previously reported that αvβ3 integrin blocking agents can have anti‑ angiogenic effects . but the concentration of Cilengitide and s36578 required to block angiogenesis is much higher ( in the μM range ) than that necessary to block the binding of vitronectin and fibrinogen to isolated immobilized αvβ3 integrin . Indeed , the half maximal inhibition concentration ( IC50 ) of Cilengitide that is required to oppose the binding of vitronectin to αvβ3 is 0 . 58 nM 64 , which is similar to the concentration found by Reynolds et al . 65 to promote angio genesis and VEGFR2 trafficking in vivo and ex vivo . Furthermore , results obtained with low nM concentra‑ tions of αv integrin inhibitors are consistent with the pheno type of β3 integrin‑knockout mice ; these mice dis‑ play markedly enhanced tumour angiogenesis 65 , which again is largely due to increased levels of VEGFR2 . In addition to promoting angiogenesis , Cilengitide activates RTK trafficking and signalling to drive the inva‑ sive migration of cancer cells through 3D matrices . As mentioned above , inhibition of αvβ3 integrin drives the recruitment of RCP to the cytoplasmic tail of β1 integrin , but this also enables RCP to associate with EGFR1 ( REF . 16 ) . α5β1 integrin and EGFR1 are then coordinately recycled to the plasma membrane , and this has a striking effect on EGFR1 signalling . Indeed , RCP recycling potentiates EGFR1 autophosphorylation and modulates its down‑ stream signalling such that activation of protein kinase b ( PKb ; also known as AKT ) is favoured . PKb is well known to promote tumour cell invasion 66 , and it is possible that the contribution of RCP‑dependent α5β1 integrin – EGFR1 recycling to invasive migration is largely due to its ability to potentiate PKb signalling 16 ( FIG . 4c ) . Interestingly , RCP has recently been identified as an oncogene that can con‑ tribute to the aggressiveness of human breast cancers 67 , 68 . This study also showed ( largely consistent with the find‑ ings of Caswell et al . 16 ) that modulation of RCP in various cell lines regulates invasion and metastatic potential 67 , 68 . Taken together , these studies indicate that a key function of αvβ3 integrin is to suppress the trafficking of receptors that promote cell migration . Thus , an important consequence of αvβ3 integrin inhibition is the increased recycling of other integrins and RTKs . This drives downstream signalling and has important impli‑ cations for the migratory behaviour of cancer cells and endothelial cells lining the blood vessels that vascularize tumours . Moreover , these findings indicate that because αvβ3 integrin‑blocking drugs increase recycling , they could be used in conjunction with RTK immunotherapies ( such as Herceptin ) , which require the target receptor to be exposed at the cell surface . R E V I E W S 850 | DECEMbER 2009 | VoluME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology a c b Rac Rac Lipid raft Caveolin Perinuclear ARF6 compartment Activationof ARF6 RAB4 Early endosome VEGFR2 Cilengitide Cilengitide EGFR1 α 5 β 1 integrin α 5 β 1 integrin Earlyendosome Recyclingendosome RCP PKB Cellmembrane Cellmembrane ECM Increased vascularsprouting and tumour angiogenesis Extension of invasive pseudopods in 3D matrix α v β 3 integrin α v β 3 integrin α 5 β 1 integrin P 2 1 3 4 Focaladhesion Integrin trafficking in ECM remodelling Integrins have an integral role in the organization and maintenance of the ECM , and it is now clear that endo‑ cytosis and recycling influences the deposition and remodelling of fibronectin . Initially , fibronectin mono‑ mers are recruited to the cell by associating with surface α5β1 integrin . Fibronectin polymerization then proceeds through the exposure of cryptic sites in the fibronectin amino‑terminal domain , which is triggered by mechani‑ cal deformation . The force for this is generated by the Rho GTPase‑dependent actomyosin contractility that is conveyed to fibronectin by α5β1 integrin binding 69 . A requirement for integrin endocytosis in fibronectin remodelling was first reported by shi et al . 18 , who found that in myofibroblasts , caveolin‑dependent internaliza‑ tion of α5β1 integrin is required for ECM turnover . More recently , it has been shown that in endothelial cells the nRP1 – GIPC1‑dependent mechanism that drives endocy‑ tosis of active α5β1 integrin heterodimers occurs primarily at plasma membrane regions that are rich in fibronectin 28 . Furthermore , following internalization , these integrins are returned to adhesion sites at the cell surface , which indicates that endocytic and exocytic trafficking of active α5β1 integrin might function to take material to and from the fibronectin fibrillar network and potentially to local‑ ize α5β1 integrin‑activated Rho signalling to this cellular subdomain . Indeed , knockdown of nRP1 or other com‑ ponents of this endocytic recycling process compromises fibronectin fibrillogenesis , indicating its importance in the deposition and remodelling of the ECM 28 . Although α5β1 integrin is the main fibronectin recep‑ tor involved in ECM assembly , other integrins contribute to this process . For instance , α5β1 integrin is initially recruited to peripheral αvβ3 integrin‑containing focal adhesions and then translocates away from these struc‑ tures to catalyse fibril assembly at sites that are further away from the cell edge 70 . Thus , in cells expressing both α5β1 integrin and αvβ3 integrin ( particularly when αvβ3 integrin is abundant ) , the way in which αvβ3 integrin is trafficked might have a key role in modulating the ability of α5β1 integrin to remodel fibronectin . In endothelial cells , the deposition of a fibrillar fibronectin matrix is driven by RAb4‑dependent recycling of αvβ3 integrin 71 , and this is probably linked to an increased ability of this Figure 4 | role of integrins in controlling lipid raft and receptor tyrosine kinase trafficking . a | When cells are adherent , integrin engagement with fibronectin leads to the retention of phosphorylated caveolin in focal adhesions ( 1 ) , which opposes the endocytosis of lipid rafts . Cell detachment triggers the release of phosphorylated caveolin from focal adhesions ( 2 ) , thus allowing its association with caveolae to induce the endocytosis of lipid rafts ( 3 ) . Re - engagement of α 5 β 1 integrin ( 1 ) reverses this process , both by sequestering phosphorylated caveolin to shut down lipid raft internalization and by activating ADP - ribosylation factor 6 ( ARF6 ) to promote rapid recycling of lipid rafts , which recruits active Rac to the plasma membrane ( 4 ) . b | α v β 3 integrin inhibitors , such as Cilengitide , promote the activation of a RAB4 - regulated pathway that diverts vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 ( VEGFR2 ) from the degradative route back to the plasma membrane . This boosts the levels of VEGFR2 at the cell surface to promote endothelial cell migration , sprouting and tubulation , which drives tumour angiogenesis . c | Inhibition of α v β 3 integrin , for example by Cilengitide , also promotes the assembly of an endosomal complex containing Rab - coupled protein ( RCP ; also known as RAB11FIP1 ) , α 5 β 1 integrin and epidermal growth factor receptor 1 ( EGFR1 ) . α 5 β 1 integrin and EGFR1 are then coordinately recycled to the plasma membrane . This potentiates protein kinase B ( PKB ) signalling , which contributes to the extension of invasive pseudopods and promotes the migration of tumour cells into three - dimensional ( 3D ) matrices . R E V I E W S nATuRE REVIEws | Molecular cell Biology VoluME 10 | DECEMbER 2009 | 851 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved integrin to activate Rho signalling and contractility . Furthermore , the RAb4‑dependent pathway and αvβ3 integrin are required for branching of endothelial vessels growing in an organotypic culture 71 . branching reactions during the development of epithelial tissues such as the salivary gland are also known to be dictated by integrin‑ mediated deposition of fibronectin 72 . Further work will be needed to define the roles of integrin recycling in tissue morphogenesis during normal development and how these processes may be deregulated in cancer . Concluding remarks The original descriptions of integrin recycling prompted the proposal of a mechanism by which vesicular trans‑ port could contribute to cell migration by internalizing integrins at the cell rear to facilitate detachment and then transporting them forward in vesicles for re‑exocytosis at the leading edge . Although there is no substantial evidence to support this proposal , the vigour with which these assertions were made and disseminated has led many to think that adhesion receptors are moved en masse in vesicles from the back to the front of cells as they migrate . over the past 5 years , much of the molecular machinery responsible for internalizing and recycling integrins has been described , and there is little evidence to support such a model of en masse , back‑to‑front integrin vesicular transport . Instead , it is now generally accepted that integrins are both internalized and recycled towards the cell front . Moreover , this occurs in a way that guides the trafficking of other key signalling receptors ( such as EGFR1 and VEGFR2 ) and leads to spatial restriction of signalling pathways that direct actin poly‑ merization to drive the extension of the leading edge of the cell . However , it is important to note that this view has emerged primarily from the study of integrin trafficking in migrating cells , and data obtained from cells under‑ going cell division indicate that adhesion receptors can indeed be transported en masse across the length of the cell during cytokinesis and before post‑mitotic spreading . Further work is required to address this dichotomy and to describe the way in which integrins are transported under situations in which cells radically re‑align their polarity axes , and how the transition from gross integrin redistribution to spatial restriction may be managed dur‑ ing the generation , establishment and maintenance of cell polarity . There are now clear indications that integrin traf‑ ficking is important during cancer progression , and this must be considered while assessing the efficacy of emerging potential anti‑cancer agents . Indeed , new evi‑ dence describing the interaction between integrin and RTK trafficking not only reveals the likely mechanism and molecular explanation for the ineffectiveness of αvβ3 integrin‑blocking therapy , but also highlights the fact that it is not good practice to block the engagement or traf‑ ficking of an integrin without considering the changes in recycling of other integrins and growth factor receptors that could be caused by this . Furthermore , the recently described requirement for RAb21‑mediated integrin traf‑ ficking in cytokinesis highlights the need to consider the possibility that targeting integrin function may promote genetic instability , as this would restrict the efficacy of any potential anti‑cancer agents . The use of photoactivatable integrins has greatly enhanced our ability to study the spatiotemporal dynam‑ ics of integrin trafficking during cell migration in ex vivo systems by enabling the selective visualization of endo‑ cytic and recycling events . Recently , photoactivation approaches have been used to study the dynamics of cell – cell junctions in tumours in situ 73 . Thus , continued effort in the development of photoactivatable integrin probes , and the use of two‑photon lasers for the deep penetration of photoactivating light into tissues , will probably allow us to achieve the ‘holy grail’ of visualizing vesicular dynamics in cells migrating in living animals and therefore address many of the key issues regarding integrin trafficking dur‑ ing the generation of cell polarity and the migration of cancer cells in vivo . 1 . Hynes , R . O . Integrins : bidirectional , allosteric signaling machines . Cell 110 , 673 – 687 ( 2002 ) . 2 . Schwartz , M . A . Integrin signaling revisited . Trends Cell Biol . 11 , 466 – 470 ( 2001 ) . 3 . Walker , J . L . , Fournier , A . K . & Assoian , R . K . Regulation of growth factor signaling and cell cycle progression by cell adhesion and adhesion - dependent changes in cellular tension . Cytokine Growth Factor Rev . 16 , 395 – 405 ( 2005 ) . 4 . Harburger , D . S . , Bouaouina , M . & Calderwood , D . A . Kindlin - 1 and - 2 directly bind the C - terminal region of β integrin cytoplasmic tails and exert integrin - specific activation effects . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 11485 – 11497 ( 2009 ) . 5 . Moser , M . et al . Kindlin - 3 is required for β 2 integrin - mediated leukocyte adhesion to endothelial cells . Nature Med . 15 , 300 – 305 ( 2009 ) . 6 . Moser , M . , Legate , K . R . , Zent , R . & Fassler , R . The tail of integrins , talin , and kindlins . Science 324 , 895 – 899 ( 2009 ) . 7 . Wegener , K . L . et al . Structural basis of integrin activation by talin . Cell 128 , 171 – 182 ( 2007 ) . 8 . Caswell , P . & Norman , J . Endocytic transport of integrins during cell migration and invasion . Trends Cell Biol . 18 , 257 – 263 ( 2008 ) . 9 . Caswell , P . T . & Norman , J . C . Integrin trafficking and the control of cell migration . Traffic 7 , 14 – 21 ( 2006 ) . 10 . Jones , M . C . , Caswell , P . T . & Norman , J . C . Endocytic recycling pathways : emerging regulators of cell migration . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 18 , 549 – 557 ( 2006 ) . 11 . Pellinen , T . & Ivaska , J . Integrin traffic . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 3723 – 3731 ( 2006 ) . 12 . Bretscher , M . S . Moving membrane up to the front of migrating cells . Cell 85 , 465 – 467 ( 1996 ) . 13 . Pellinen , T . et al . Integrin trafficking regulated by Rab21 is necessary for cytokinesis . Dev . Cell 15 , 371 – 385 ( 2008 ) . Shows that integrins are trafficked under the control of Rab21 to the cytokinetic cleavage furrow , where they engage with the ECM to activate Rhoa and drive the abscission reaction . This also indicates that the loss of Rab21 may drive genetic instability in cancer . 14 . Caswell , P . T . et al . Rab25 associates with α 5 β 1 integrin to promote invasive migration in 3D microenvironments . Dev . Cell 13 , 496 – 510 ( 2007 ) . 15 . White , D . P . , Caswell , P . T . & Norman , J . C . α v β 3 and α 5 β 1 integrin recycling pathways dictate downstream Rho kinase signaling to regulate persistent cell migration . J . Cell Biol . 177 , 515 – 525 ( 2007 ) . 16 . Caswell , P . T . et al . Rab - coupling protein coordinates recycling of α 5 β 1 integrin and EGFR1 to promote cell migration in 3D microenvironments . J . Cell Biol . 183 , 143 – 155 ( 2008 ) . Shows that RCP has a pivotal role in the recycling of α 5 β 1 integrin and in coordinating its trafficking with that of EGFR1 as cells migrate on 3D matrices . The ability of RCP to function in this way is activated following inhibition of α v β 3 integrin . 17 . Reynolds , A . R . et al . Stimulation of tumor growth and angiogenesis by low concentrations of RGD - mimetic integrin inhibitors . Nature Med . 15 , 392 – 400 ( 2009 ) . Reveals that treatment with competitive inhibitors of α v β 3 integrin promotes angiogenesis in a similar manner to genetic knockout of β 3 integrin . This is owing to upregulation of Rab4 - dependent recycling of VEGFR2 , which opposes receptor degradation . 18 . Shi , F . & Sottile , J . Caveolin - 1 - dependent β 1 integrin endocytosis is a critical regulator of fibronectin turnover . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 2360 – 2371 ( 2008 ) . 19 . Galvez , B . G . et al . Caveolae are a novel pathway for membrane - type 1 matrix metalloproteinase traffic in human endothelial cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 678 – 687 ( 2004 ) . 20 . Nishimura , T . & Kaibuchi , K . Numb controls integrin endocytosis for directional cell migration with aPKC and PAR - 3 . Dev . Cell 13 , 15 – 28 ( 2007 ) . 21 . Vignoud , L . , Usson , Y . , Balzac , F . , Tarone , G . & Block , M . R . Internalization of the α 5 β 1 integrin does not depend on “NPXY” signals . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 199 , 603 – 611 ( 1994 ) . 22 . Ortiz , D . F . et al . Identification of HAX - 1 as a protein that binds bile salt export protein and regulates its abundance in the apical membrane of Madin - Darby canine kidney cells . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 32761 – 32770 ( 2004 ) . R E V I E W S 852 | DECEMbER 2009 | VoluME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 23 . Ramsay , A . G . et al . HS1 - associated protein X - 1 regulates carcinoma cell migration and invasion via clathrin - mediated endocytosis of integrin α v β 6 . Cancer Res . 67 , 5275 – 5284 ( 2007 ) . Reveals that α v β 6 integrin is likely to be important in the progression and invasion of cancer . haX1 binds to the cytodomain of β 6 integrin and promotes its trafficking in a way that drives invasion . 24 . Calderwood , D . A . et al . Integrin β cytoplasmic domain interactions with phosphotyrosine - binding domains : a structural prototype for diversity in integrin signaling . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 2272 – 2277 ( 2003 ) . 25 . Chao , W . T . & Kunz , J . Focal adhesion disassembly requires clathrin - dependent endocytosis of integrins . FEBS Lett . 583 , 1337 – 1343 ( 2009 ) . 26 . Teckchandani , A . et al . Quantitative proteomics identifies a Dab2 / integrin module regulating cell migration . J . Cell Biol . 186 , 99 – 111 ( 2009 ) . a novel proteomic approach to the identification of endocytic cargos highlights β 1 integrins as the main clients of Dab2 - regulated , clathrin - dependent internalization . 27 . Ezratty , E . J . , Partridge , M . A . & Gundersen , G . G . Microtubule - induced focal adhesion disassembly is mediated by dynamin and focal adhesion kinase . Nature Cell Biol . 7 , 581 – 590 ( 2005 ) . 28 . Valdembri , D . et al . Neuropilin - 1 / GIPC1 signaling regulates α 5 β 1 integrin traffic and function in endothelial cells . PLoS Biol . 7 , e25 ( 2009 ) . Use of novel photoactivation and FRET – FLIM microscopy to define an interaction between α 5 β 1 integrin and NRP1 and how this functions in integrin trafficking and fibronectin polymerization during angiogenesis . 29 . Shimizu , M . , Murakami , Y . , Suto , F . & Fujisawa , H . Determination of cell adhesion sites of neuropilin - 1 . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 1283 – 1293 ( 2000 ) . 30 . Olsson , A . K . , Dimberg , A . , Kreuger , J . & Claesson - Welsh , L . VEGF receptor signalling — in control of vascular function . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 359 – 371 ( 2006 ) . 31 . Soker , S . , Takashima , S . , Miao , H . Q . , Neufeld , G . & Klagsbrun , M . Neuropilin - 1 is expressed by endothelial and tumor cells as an isoform - specific receptor for vascular endothelial growth factor . Cell 92 , 735 – 745 ( 1998 ) . 32 . Naccache , S . N . , Hasson , T . & Horowitz , A . Binding of internalized receptors to the PDZ domain of GIPC / synectin recruits myosin VI to endocytic vesicles . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 12735 – 12740 ( 2006 ) . 33 . Salikhova , A . et al . Vascular endothelial growth factor and semaphorin induce neuropilin - 1 endocytosis via separate pathways . Circ . Res . 103 , e71 – e79 ( 2008 ) . 34 . Sigismund , S . et al . Clathrin - mediated internalization is essential for sustained EGFR signaling but dispensable for degradation . Dev . Cell 15 , 209 – 219 ( 2008 ) . 35 . Ng , T . et al . PKC α regulates β 1 integrin - dependent cell motility through association and control of integrin traffic . EMBO J . 18 , 3909 – 3923 ( 1999 ) . 36 . Upla , P . et al . Clustering induces a lateral redistribution of α 2 β 1 integrin from membrane rafts to caveolae and subsequent protein kinase C - dependent internalization . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 625 – 636 ( 2004 ) . 37 . Fabbri , M . et al . Dynamic partitioning into lipid rafts controls the endo – exocytic cycle of the α L / β 2 integrin , LFA - 1 , during leukocyte chemotaxis . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 5793 – 5803 ( 2005 ) . 38 . Fabbri , M . et al . A tyrosine - based sorting signal in the β 2 integrin cytoplasmic domain mediates its recycling to the plasma membrane and is required for ligand - supported migration . EMBO J . 18 , 4915 – 4925 ( 1999 ) . 39 . Valdez - Taubas , J . & Pelham , H . R . Slow diffusion of proteins in the yeast plasma membrane allows polarity to be maintained by endocytic cycling . Curr . Biol . 13 , 1636 – 1640 ( 2003 ) . 40 . Jekely , G . , Sung , H . H . , Luque , C . M . & Rorth , P . Regulators of endocytosis maintain localized receptor tyrosine kinase signaling in guided migration . Dev . Cell 9 , 197 – 207 ( 2005 ) . 41 . Palamidessi , A . et al . Endocytic trafficking of Rac is required for the spatial restriction of signaling in cell migration . Cell 134 , 135 – 147 ( 2008 ) . Shows that endocytosis is required to bring Rac into contact with one of its exchange factors , TIaM1 , at endosomal membranes . active Rac is then returned to the nearby plasma membrane by an aRF6 - dependent recycling pathway to maintain localized actin polymerization in dorsal ruffles . 42 . Pierini , L . M . , Lawson , M . A . , Eddy , R . J . , Hendey , B . & Maxfield , F . R . Oriented endocytic recycling of α 5 β 1 in motile neutrophils . Blood 95 , 2471 – 2480 ( 2000 ) . 43 . Rappoport , J . Z . & Simon , S . M . Real - time analysis of clathrin - mediated endocytosis during cell migration . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 847 – 855 ( 2003 ) . 44 . Laukaitis , C . M . , Webb , D . J . , Donais , K . & Horwitz , A . F . Differential dynamics of α 5 integrin , paxillin , and α - actinin during formation and disassembly of adhesions in migrating cells . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 1427 – 1440 ( 2001 ) . 45 . Hopkins , C . R . , Gibson , A . , Shipman , M . , Strickland , D . K . & Trowbridge , I . S . In migrating fibroblasts , recycling receptors are concentrated in narrow tubules in the pericentriolar area , and then routed to the plasma membrane of the leading lamella . J . Cell Biol . 125 , 1265 – 1274 ( 1994 ) . 46 . Prigozhina , N . L . & Waterman - Storer , C . M . Protein kinase D - mediated anterograde membrane trafficking is required for fibroblast motility . Curr . Biol . 14 , 88 – 98 ( 2004 ) . 47 . Schmoranzer , J . , Kreitzer , G . & Simon , S . M . Migrating fibroblasts perform polarized , microtubule - dependent exocytosis towards the leading edge . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 4513 – 4519 ( 2003 ) . 48 . Pellinen , T . et al . Small GTPase Rab21 regulates cell adhesion and controls endosomal traffic of β 1 - integrins . J . Cell Biol . 173 , 767 – 780 ( 2006 ) . 49 . Ridley , A . J . et al . Cell migration : integrating signals from front to back . Science 302 , 1704 – 1709 ( 2003 ) . 50 . Pankov , R . et al . A Rac switch regulates random versus directionally persistent cell migration . J . Cell Biol . 170 , 793 – 802 ( 2005 ) . 51 . Sturge , J . , Wienke , D . & Isacke , C . M . Endosomes generate localized Rho – ROCK – MLC2 - based contractile signals via Endo180 to promote adhesion disassembly . J . Cell Biol . 175 , 337 – 347 ( 2006 ) . 52 . Danen , E . H . et al . Integrins control motile strategy through a Rho – cofilin pathway . J . Cell Biol . 169 , 515 – 526 ( 2005 ) . 53 . Bement , W . M . , Benink , H . A . & von Dassow , G . A microtubule - dependent zone of active RhoA during cleavage plane specification . J . Cell Biol . 170 , 91 – 101 ( 2005 ) . 54 . Wilson , G . M . et al . The FIP3 – Rab11 protein complex regulates recycling endosome targeting to the cleavage furrow during late cytokinesis . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 849 – 860 ( 2005 ) . 55 . Cao , J . , Albertson , R . , Riggs , B . , Field , C . M . & Sullivan , W . Nuf , a Rab11 effector , maintains cytokinetic furrow integrity by promoting local actin polymerization . J . Cell Biol . 182 , 301 – 313 ( 2008 ) . 56 . Narumiya , S . & Yasuda , S . Rho GTPases in animal cell mitosis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 18 , 199 – 205 ( 2006 ) . 57 . del Pozo , M . A . et al . Integrins regulate Rac targeting by internalization of membrane domains . Science 303 , 839 – 842 ( 2004 ) . 58 . del Pozo , M . A . et al . Phospho - caveolin - 1 mediates integrin - regulated membrane domain internalization . Nature Cell Biol . 7 , 901 – 908 ( 2005 ) . 59 . Balasubramanian , N . , Scott , D . W . , Castle , J . D . , Casanova , J . E . & Schwartz , M . A . Arf6 and microtubules in adhesion - dependent trafficking of lipid rafts . Nature Cell Biol . 9 , 1381 – 1391 ( 2007 ) . Shows that aRF6 contributes to Rac activation by promoting the recycling of internalized lipid rafts to the plasma membrane . 60 . Nisato , R . E . , Tille , J . C . , Jonczyk , A . , Goodman , S . L . & Pepper , M . S . α v β 3 and α v β 5 integrin antagonists inhibit angiogenesis in vitro . Angiogenesis 6 , 105 – 119 ( 2003 ) . 61 . Maubant , S . et al . Blockade of α v β 3 and α v β 5 integrins by RGD mimetics induces anoikis and not integrin - mediated death in human endothelial cells . Blood 108 , 3035 – 3044 ( 2006 ) . 62 . Stupp , R . & Ruegg , C . Integrin inhibitors reaching the clinic . J . Clin . Oncol . 25 , 1637 – 1638 ( 2007 ) . 63 . Tucker , G . C . Integrins : molecular targets in cancer therapy . Curr . Oncol . Rep . 8 , 96 – 103 ( 2006 ) . 64 . Dechantsreiter , M . A . et al . N - methylated cyclic RGD peptides as highly active and selective α V β 3 integrin antagonists . J . Med . Chem . 42 , 3033 – 3040 ( 1999 ) . 65 . Reynolds , L . E . et al . Enhanced pathological angiogenesis in mice lacking β 3 integrin or β 3 and β 5 integrins . Nature Med . 8 , 27 – 34 ( 2002 ) . 66 . Irie , H . Y . et al . Distinct roles of Akt1 and Akt2 in regulating cell migration and epithelial – mesenchymal transition . J . Cell Biol . 171 , 1023 – 1034 ( 2005 ) . 67 . Mills , G . B . , Jurisica , I . , Yarden , Y . & Norman , J . C . Genomic amplicons target vesicle recycling in breast cancer . J . Clin . Invest . 119 , 2123 – 2127 ( 2009 ) . 68 . Zhang , J . et al . RCP is a human breast cancer - promoting gene with Ras - activating function . J . Clin . Invest . 119 , 2171 – 2183 ( 2009 ) . a novel genetic screen that identifies RCP as an oncogenic driver in a common form of breast cancer . Increased RCP levels are shown to contribute to increased migration of cancer cells . 69 . Zhong , C . et al . Rho - mediated contractility exposes a cryptic site in fibronectin and induces fibronectin matrix assembly . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 539 – 551 ( 1998 ) . 70 . Pankov , R . et al . Integrin dynamics and matrix assembly : tensin - dependent translocation of α 5 β 1 integrins promotes early fibronectin fibrillogenesis . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 1075 – 1090 ( 2000 ) . 71 . Jones , M . C . et al . VEGFR1 ( Flt1 ) regulates Rab4 recycling to control fibronectin polymerization and endothelial vessel branching . Traffic 10 , 754 – 766 ( 2009 ) . 72 . Sakai , T . , Larsen , M . & Yamada , K . M . Fibronectin requirement in branching morphogenesis . Nature 423 , 876 – 881 ( 2003 ) . 73 . Serrels , A . et al . Real - time study of E - cadherin and membrane dynamics in living animals : implications for disease modeling and drug development . Cancer Res . 69 , 2714 – 2719 ( 2009 ) . 74 . De Deyne , P . G . et al . The vitronectin receptor associates with clathrin - coated membrane domains via the cytoplasmic domain of its β 5 subunit . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 2729 – 2740 ( 1998 ) . 75 . Liu , L . et al . Tetraspanin CD151 promotes cell migration by regulating integrin trafficking . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 31631 – 31642 ( 2007 ) . 76 . Panicker , A . K . , Buhusi , M . , Erickson , A . & Maness , P . F . Endocytosis of β 1 integrins is an early event in migration promoted by the cell adhesion molecule L1 . Exp . Cell Res . 312 , 299 – 307 ( 2006 ) . 77 . Parsons , M . et al . Site - directed perturbation of protein kinase C – integrin interaction blocks carcinoma cell chemotaxis . Mol . Cell . Biol . 22 , 5897 – 5911 ( 2002 ) . 78 . Altankov , G . & Grinnell , F . Fibronectin receptor internalization and AP - 2 complex reorganization in potassium - depleted fibroblasts . Exp . Cell Res . 216 , 299 – 309 ( 1995 ) . 79 . Cera , M . R . et al . JAM - A promotes neutrophil chemotaxis by controlling integrin internalization and recycling . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 268 – 277 ( 2009 ) . 80 . Dunphy , J . L . et al . The Arf6 GEF GEP100 / BRAG2 regulates cell adhesion by controlling endocytosis of β 1 integrins . Curr . Biol . 16 , 315 – 320 ( 2006 ) . 81 . Woods , A . J . , White , D . P . , Caswell , P . T . & Norman , J . C . PKD1 / PKC μ promotes α v β 3 integrin recycling and delivery to nascent focal adhesions . EMBO J . 23 , 2531 – 2543 ( 2004 ) . 82 . Vukmirica , J . , Monzo , P . , Le Marchand - Brustel , Y . & Cormont , M . The Rab4A effector protein Rabip4 is involved in migration of NIH 3T3 fibroblasts . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 36360 – 36368 ( 2006 ) . 83 . Ivaska , J . et al . PKC ε - mediated phosphorylation of vimentin controls integrin recycling and motility . EMBO J . 24 , 3834 – 3845 ( 2005 ) . 84 . Ivaska , J . , Whelan , R . D . , Watson , R . & Parker , P . J . PKC ε controls the traffic of β 1 integrins in motile cells . EMBO J . 21 , 3608 – 3619 ( 2002 ) . 85 . Jovic , M . , Naslavsky , N . , Rapaport , D . , Horowitz , M . & Caplan , S . EHD1 regulates β 1 integrin endosomal transport : effects on focal adhesions , cell spreading and migration . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 802 – 814 ( 2007 ) . 86 . Tayeb , M . A . et al . Inhibition of SNARE - mediated membrane traffic impairs cell migration . Exp . Cell Res . 305 , 63 – 73 ( 2005 ) . 87 . Li , J . et al . Phosphorylation of ACAP1 by Akt regulates the stimulation - dependent recycling of integrin β 1 to control cell migration . Dev . Cell 9 , 663 – 673 ( 2005 ) . acknowledgements J . C . N , P . T . C and S . V are supported by funding from Cancer Research UK . DATABASES UniProtKB : http : / / www . uniprot . org ARF6 | DAB2 | DIAPH1 | GIPC1 | HAX1 | NRP1 | ICAM1 | Numb | PAR3 | PKB | PKC α | PKC ζ | PVR | RAB4 | RAB11 | RAB11FIP3 | RAB21 | RAB25 | RCP | Snc1 | TIAM1 FURTHER INFORMATION Jim C . Norman’s homepage : http : / / www . beatson . gla . ac . uk / Regulation - of - Cancer - Cell - Invasion / Jim - Norman - Integrin - Cell - Biology . html all links are acTive in The online Pdf R E V I E W S nATuRE REVIEws | Molecular cell Biology VoluME 10 | DECEMbER 2009 | 853 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved