It Takes More Than One Hand to Clap : On the Role of ‘Care’ in Maintaining Design Results . Max Krüger Universität Siegen Anne Weibert Universität Siegen Débora de Castro Leal Universität Siegen Siegen , Germany Siegen , Germany Siegen , Germany maximilian . krueger @ uni - siegen . de anne . weibert @ uni - siegen . de debora . dleal @ uni - siegen . de Dave Randall Universität Siegen Siegen , Germany dave . randall @ uni - siegen . de ABSTRACT Within Participatory - and Co - Design projects , the issue of sustain - ability and maintenance of the co - designed artefacts is a crucial yet largely unresolved issue . In this paper , we look back on four years of work on co - designing tools that assist refugees and migrants in their eforts to settle in Germany , the last of which the project has been independently maintained by our community collaborators . We refect on the role of pre - existing care practices amongst our community collaborators , and a continued openness throughout the project , that allowed a complex constellation of actors to be involved in its ongoing maintenance and our own , often mundane activities which have contributed to the sustainability of the results . Situating our account within an HCI for Social Justice agenda , we thereby contribute to an ongoing discussion about the sustainability of such activities . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Empirical studies in HCI ; Participatory design ; Empirical studies in interaction design . KEYWORDS Sustainability , Migration , Care , Maintenance , Co - Design , Participa - tory Design ACM Reference Format : Max Krüger , Anne Weibert , Débora de Castro Leal , Dave Randall , and Volker Wulf . 2021 . It Takes More Than One Hand to Clap : On the Role of ‘Care’ in Maintaining Design Results . . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’21 ) , May 8 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 14 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445389 Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the frst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specifc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . CHI ’21 , May 8 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan © 2021 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 8096 - 6 / 21 / 05 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445389 Volker Wulf Universität Siegen Siegen , Germany volker . wulf @ uni - siegen . de 1 INTRODUCTION In 2015 , during what has elsewhere been termed the Long Summer of Migration [ 45 , 52 ] , millions of people fed from war and poverty , with one of their destinations being Germany . Between 2015 and 2016 about one million people arrived in the country [ 48 ] . While for most the journey was already challenging and dangerous , not least due to European and member states’ border regimes [ 45 , 52 ] , these troubles were far from over after arrival in Germany . Settling in this new host country was and continues to be a difcult task for many , requiring voluntary and professional support . In this account we report on a research and design project in which we developed a series of digital tools and resources embedded in a website with the aim of assisting migrants 1 , and their profes - sional and volunteer supporters . For three years we have worked in two cities in Germany on co - designing these tools , collaborating with migrants , volunteers , city administrators , NGO workers , gov - ernment employees , education advisors and more over a period of three years , in a third - party funded project . But while challenges were signifcant and the diverse array of collaborators were flled with ideas and expertise on how to address them , a crucial question throughout the entire time was : what happens when the funding ends ? Our explicit goal was above and beyond the typical scope of an academic research and design project , and entailed developing a practical and valuable resource . Within the feld of HCI we are certainly not alone with this aim , and for several years HCI work has aimed to address a large variety of social issues and develop useful applications beyond the prototype stage , including related work that takes up challenges faced by migrants . Mostly , such eforts are fnanced through temporary grants from predominantly public funds ofered by ministries or science foundations and the 1 The term “refugee” is uncomfortable for many of the people it is applied to , as we have learned . Furthermore , such terms are used to govern movements of migration , such as a distinction between “refugees” and “migrants” , and which determine , for instance , levels of access to public services . As has been mentioned elsewhere and will become apparent in our own account , the term ? refugee ? is rejected by many of the people it is applied to . Furthermore , we have come to learn how such terms take on a political / moral force , notably in the case of ? refugees ? and ? migrants ? ? since they implicate diferent rules of access to support . To avoid this distinction , as well as the casual labelling of people , we will in this paper either use the term precarious migrants or migrants , with both of which we refer to refugees , who have fed from war and confict , as well as migrants who have to come to Germany for other reasons , such as escaping poverty , and fnd themselves in highly precarious situations in their new host country . CHI ’21 , May 8 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Krüger et al . expectation that at least some of such projects and their results fnd application beyond the project’s runtime seems reasonable . Yet the question of how to sustain these eforts after the funding ends remains difcult and underexplored . Answers are , for the most part , highly contextual and contingent . In this paper then , we ofer an account of how we managed to sustain our eforts and enable ongoing maintenance of the tech - nological artefacts developed during the project . The funding for the project ended in October 2019 after three years . Since then , the results have been handed over to community collaborators and are being sustained by a network of voluntary and profes - sional eforts , with the ongoing but minimal involvement of the researchers . We refect both on circumstances and activities that have supported and hindered this ongoing maintenance work on the part our collaborators , and conceptualise this in relation to feminist conceptualizations of care [ 23 , 88 ] . Our contribution is a refection on the reasons for the continued maintenance of the project and we ofer suggestions as to how sustainability can be achieved . 2 RELATED WORKS 2 . 1 Sustainability Our work can be thought of , in a very broad sense , as contributing to a line of work within HCI that addresses issues of social justice [ 27 , 36 , 79 ] . A crucial issue within this body of work is a concern for sustainability which has , we suggest , taken centre stage in what we might call the ‘critical computing’ turn . There is , without question , a substantial literature dealing with the problem of conceptualizing sustainability , and to what ends . Not least , we can distinguish at an analytic level between ‘sustainable development’ , ‘social sustain - ability’ and ‘project sustainability’ . We will argue that , although the literature on sustaining , maintaining or ’handing over’ the results of collaborative and participatory research and design projects has somewhat diverged , there are clear overlaps in respect of what below ( following Bellacasa [ 22 , 23 ] ) we term , matters of care . The literature on " sustainability " in its various forms is vast , going back to at least the infuential Brundtland report [ 17 ] . In the context of HCI a large part of the literature on sustainability has historically concerned itself with sustainable development ( see for instance [ 57 , 87 , 90 ] ) . It is clear that the desire to produce sustainable outcomes ( in whatever sense ) is bedevilled by a number of problems . Firstly , there is the issue of what ‘sustainability’ might mean [ 5 , 25 , 26 , 68 ] or how it should be measured ( see e . g . [ 55 , 63 , 72 ] ) . Secondly , Pade et al . [ 67 ] , point to the many challenges faced when using ICTs for rural development projects and the difculty of determining whether they can be said to ‘succeed’ . As Heeks points out [ 42 , 43 ] , sustainability is not in any case necessarily the same thing as success , since , projects can survive without ever meeting initial goals . Thirdly , there is the issue of ‘sustainability by whom’ [ 71 ] [ 44 , p . 40 ] . The relevant dimensions may include [ 54 ] , who participates , in what they participate , how they are invited to participate and why they are asked to participate . We might , in parallel , mention a literature which is concerned with project sustainability , but which is seldom addressed in HCI . The project management literature tends to treat sustainability agendas in a systematic way , suggesting that they typically entail a temporary organization established in pursuit of specifc goals and with specifc resources allocated ( see eg . [ 77 ] ) and within the so - called ‘iron triangle’ of scope , time and budget . Regardless , as Okeniyi [ 66 ] points out , few attempts to link the project develop - ment literature with a sustainability agenda have been made . He points out that , in this literature , sustainability is conceived of in terms of risk management and the minimization of uncertainty . Aarseth et al . [ 2 ] , in a systematic review of this literature , argue for ‘qualitative case - based research that would address how sus - tainability is managed particularly in complex projects” and ask the question , “are sustainability management activities typically conducted by the main contractor or by the project owner or to what extent do the other actors within the entire network of frms that participate in the project facilitate sustainability management and thinking ? " Within HCI , Pierce et al . [ 70 ] call for the extension of our inter - est in sustainability into , inter alia , “Engaging underrepresented and marginalized communities” , to expand the perceptions on mat - ters of sustainability and related social issues that are represented within CHI and to challenge and expand what constitutes as sus - tainability . Busse et al . [ 19 ] , similarly , argue for , and point to , a widening remit for sustainability research , pointing to the wider agenda of ‘social sustainability’ . They suggest social sustainability relates to communities which are “equitable , diverse , connected and democratic and provide a good quality of life . " [ 19 , p . 1152 ] Volpato et al . [ 91 ] defne social sustainability as “ [ software sys - tem ] support to create benefts for social communities , as well as activities or processes these systems that promote social well - being” . This wider remit is important for our work , as we report below . These various formulations all contribute something to our work , although the very diferent ways in which concepts of sustainability can be applied has led to the observation that it is " a concept in chaos " [ 89 ] . Similarly , [ 33 ] constitute that social sustainability lacks a clear , coherent and utilizable defnition . To avoid this ambiguity , we note that in this paper we are specifcally concerned with issues of sustaining and maintaining the results of HCI research and de - sign projects , including technological artefacts , beyond the runtime of such projects and beyond the role that researchers played within the project context . We nevertheless acknowledge that sustainabil - ity in what we describe here is hardly distinct from the ‘social’ in this context . 2 . 2 Sustaining and maintaining design results The problem of how to sustain the results of research and design projects and ensure the ongoing value and use of artefacts designed in settings of social sustainability , has been a concern of HCI for some time . Reporting on two projects , Taylor et al . [ 86 ] refect on the handover of the developed technologies and factors that have hindered or supported this handover and the life of the technology after the end of the project . For a successful handover , they suggest nurturing a feeling of ownership over the technology amongst re - search participants early on , building or leveraging technological capacity or continuing relationships with communities into new projects , amongst other factors . Similarly , Balestrini et al . [ 10 , 11 ] detail how practices developed during a project in a rural commu - nity were taken up and further developed by a variety of actors , It Takes More Than One Hand to Clap : On the Role of ‘Care’ in Maintaining Design Results . CHI ’21 , May 8 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan including local schools , and were even extended to other nearby towns . They identifed ownership , face - to - face meetings between stakeholders and a preference for of - the - shelf technology as im - portant factors contributing to sustaining engagement . Together with mutual learning and relationship building , the latter has also been highlighted by Hou & Lampe [ 46 ] as crucial in the uptake of several short - term civic hacking projects . Others [ 11 ] further - more highlight the potentially crucial role local champions play in orchestrating sustained participation . Meurer et al . [ 61 ] highlight the importance of the circumstances under which a project takes place , such as the diferent actors involved during various phases of the project , the potentially divergent goals of these actors , the conditions under which funding is acquired and the invisible and often non explicitly funded work of bringing these actors together , building and sustaining trust and engagement – aspects we fnd mirrored in our own work . They call for carefully documenting the design experiences that afect the sustainability of projects in order to arrive at a design and research practice that takes sustain - ability of HCI projects more seriously . HCI work taking an Action Research approach ( e . g . [ 39 , 41 ] ) also focusses on the long - lasting social impact of research and design work , as outlined by Gillian Hayes [ 40 ] and points to challenges resulting from heterogeneous goals related to knowledge creation . She outlines how a focus on the production of technical knowledge within Action Research projects , for example by testing technological interventions based on specifc techo - scientifc theories , can produce results that are comfortable for an HCI audience but rarely create the lasting social change at the heart of Action Research . In contrast , practical - deliberative or critical - emancipatory approaches more reliably result in social change but not necessarily in innovative artefacts . She also points to a diference between sustained social change and sustained technol - ogy use , with the two not necessarily being mutually constitutive . As Action Research projects within HCI often include the deploy - ment of technological artefacts , the question of how to ensure that researchers are not needed to maintain these artefacts arises [ 39 ] . Diferent research partners have diferent resources at their disposal for the maintenance of the designed technological artefacts , with some very comfortable in taking up such an additional task , with others rather hard - pressed due to already scarce resources including time . This , specifcally , is the challenge our paper addresses . Sustaining research results beyond project runtime involves ele - ments of maintenance and even repair , both of which have in the past decade been increasingly the focus of media studies and HCI ( see e . g . [ 18 , 32 , 37 , 49 – 51 , 60 , 73 , 74 , 94 ] ) . In an infuential text [ 49 ] Jackson has proposed “broken world thinking” as a lens through which the fragility of the worlds we inhabit and the urgency of ongoing destruction , breakdown , dissolution of material and social structures become visible , as well as the ongoing activities that aim to maintain it , prevent breakdown or put things back together . The author also notices a tension between moments of innovation and moments of maintenance , highlighting the generative capacity for HCI of broken world thinking and maintenance . Some authors have drawn a connecting line between practices of maintenance and repair and an ethics of care , understanding maintenance practices as a form of care . Tronto & Fisher’s defni - tion of care provides fertile ground for this : “On the most general level , we suggest that caring be viewed as a species activity that includes everything that we do to maintain , continue , and repair our ’world’ so that we can live in it as well as possible” [ 88 ] . Such moves have been promoted by Mattern [ 60 ] who draws on Jacksons “broken world thinking” as well as the notion of care to analyse diferent contexts of care and maintenance [ 49 ] and by Dye et al . [ 32 ] , studying the upkeep of Cuba’s community network SNET . Perhaps best known is Maria Puig de la Bellacasa’s work , building on Latour’s concept of “matter of concern” to develop “matters of care” in technoscience [ 22 , 23 ] . In her view , caring for technology is both a practice of maintenance and an ethical obligation . This entails engaging with the ‘becoming’ of an artefact and the assem - blage of artefacts , actors and concerns that hold it together . This , however , holds potential for confict , embodied in uneven relations between caregivers and receivers , as has been noted already by Tronto [ 88 ] , and between diferences in what to care for and how to care [ 22 ] . Murphy [ 64 ] warns thus of romanticizing care , and sub - sequently maintenance and repair , as heroic individual acts , which can blind us to inequalities , colonialist assumptions , and oppression and obscures that repair practices often stem out of precarity ( e . g . [ 32 ] ) . Our own work sits at the intersection of these various concerns . While we do not provide an account of repair and maintenance practices , we take up the challenge provided by Rosner et al . [ 74 ] and aim to detail how we have collaboratively prepared for the maintenance of a co - designed digital tool . Working with volunteers who assist migrants in their eforts to make themselves at home in Germany , our work builds on , incorporates and supports their care practices . We will show how this care is predominantly a care for the issues associated with migration and the people they work with , constituting a motivation for the joint design work but extending throughout the course of the project and beyond . Activities , ultimately , became activities dedicated to the care for the co - designed technology , but only secondarily so . 2 . 3 HCI & Migration In the last fve years , academic communities including Media Stud - ies , Migration Studies and HCI have paid increasing attention to the role of ICT in processes of migration and resettling . Resultant studies have examined , for example , the use and importance of social media for refugees with regards of planning their migration and actually moving [ 24 , 65 ] . However , they also point out that the same technologies are used , for instance , by European agencies to control or prevent migration [ 38 ] . Digital technology has thus not only become crucial infrastructure for making migration possi - ble , it has equally become crucial for the control of migration by trafckers , digital companies and especially the European Union [ 58 ] . Investigating the role of digital technologies in the challenges of not only migrating but also settling [ 4 , 20 , 21 , 47 , 53 , 76 , 95 ] , studies have found phones to play a crucial if unsurprising role [ 53 ] , and are used , for example , for the translation and learning of unfamiliar languages [ 4 ] or staying in touch with family [ 95 ] . They are equally used by support organizations of refugees and migrants [ 59 , 62 ] , such as those we have been working with , or for example to support unaccompanied youth that are exposed to increased mental health risks [ 80 ] . However , others have found that accessing critical information has become more difcult for some , CHI ’21 , May 8 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Krüger et al . through the ubiquity of alternative digital technologies [ 20 , 76 ] , meaning that navigating bureaucratic space has not become easier [ 53 ] . CHI and related communities such as CSCW have also noticed the importance of HCI for issues of migration and settling ( see e . g . [ 1 , 81 , 82 , 84 , 85 ] ) . Specifc studies included the evaluation of existing solutions for refugees and migrants in Germany [ 31 ] or an investigation of design opportunities to address challenges faced by refugees and migrants in Australia [ 7 , 8 ] . A few projects have also attempted to design technological applications for these challenges of settling , such as difculties associated with language [ 3 , 16 , 92 ] , spatial orientation [ 12 , 28 , 30 ] , social contacts [ 9 ] and dealing with stress and trauma [ 6 ] . A few accounts have directly addressed the challenges of researching and ( co - ) designing for these issues , high - lighting for example the role of care , especially when designing with participants that sufer from prior traumatic experiences [ 15 ] , the importance of providing safe spaces in the design process [ 29 ] and the need to tailor the design process according to the needs and preferences of participants [ 83 ] . While it is obvious that an extensive amount of work has been done that investigates the challenges refugees and migrants face in various countries around the world , and that attempts have been made to design applications that address these problems , less work has engaged with the issue of the sustainability of these eforts . An exception here is work by Pei & Nardi [ 69 ] . In their study they detail participatory design engagements with refugees in a midwestern US city , refecting on the efects of focusing on needs and problems a community faces versus assets they have . They advocate for an Assets - Based design approach that minimizes novelty , in favor of an increased likelihood of sustainable change through participatory design engagement . Below , we report on the factors that contributed to , and hindered , the sustainability of our design project . The maintenance of the websites is just a small piece of a more complex system that afects all of us personally , technically and professionally . Caring about the technology goes hand in hand with caring about the people that are using it , and the availability of efort and the motivations for making it , as we shall see . 3 BACKGROUND AND METHODS 3 . 1 Context This study is based on a 3 - year research project attempting to de - sign tools to assist migrants in their eforts to settle in Germany . Throughout this project we co - designed and implemented several web applications , addressing issues such as fnding suitable lan - guage classes , providing general orientation in the new city and assisting in continuing education or professional development . The project took place in two medium - sized cities in the west of Ger - many : one located in one of Europe’s most populated areas ( and one of the frst cities to welcome large numbers of people in what has been called the “long summer of migration” [ 45 ] in 2015 / 2016 ) , which we will call city A and where one of us lived , the other lo - cated in a rural area of the country and signifcantly smaller , which we will call city B , where our university is located . In both locations we aimed for a participatory design process , engaging migrants , volunteer and professional supporters , as well as a software devel - opment company as a consortium partner in the design process . This was rather challenging , as the diference in motivations and the diferent situations our partners were in did not always result in equal participation . Despite the seriousness of this challenge ( to be reported in a diferent paper ) , we developed four distinct interactive tools and additionally a variety of simpler sites , e . g . link lists , blogs , a collection of alphabetically organized local support organisations , etc . These tools were embedded in a WordPress - based website , an instance of which was developed and launched in each of the two locations . Some parts of these websites were thus custom - made dur - ing the project , others are appropriations of the existing features of the chosen WordPress theme . The frst versions of the two websites went online early on in the project , in 2017 in City A and at the beginning of 2018 in City B . They were continuously updated and gradually expanded with new subpages and tools . Both websites are being used , as we know both through qualitative evaluation with existing users us as well as through logging of the number of daily visits . The local nature of the information the websites present , as well as the specifc topics they address , limits the number of possible users , but the degree of qualitative user feedback and an average of 70 - 80 regular users per day means we can reasonably assume that they do provide value to users . The project funding ofcially ended in October 2019 . Since then , the websites have been taken over by two separate NGOs in each city , and are maintained by volunteers , professionals , developers and researchers . In City A , it is largely volunteers that sustain the site . in City B it is professionals , employees of the city administra - tion and of NGOs . In both cities , we researchers remain engaged and provide technical and organizational assistance , albeit in a much - reduced capacity , and now as volunteers , not as paid researchers . Maintenance , in the case of our project , includes a variety of tasks and responsibilities . A crucial aspect is the assumption of legal responsibility for the site . In Germany , the responsible person or organization has to be named on the website , including their address and contact data , and is responsible for the content and any copyright or data protection violations . The main active task is keeping the information on the website , and the tools which give access to it , up to date , but also keeping the WordPress and Theme updated . This maintenance work is crucial to keeping the website useable and useful . In the following chapter we will describe the forms this maintenance work takes in the two locations and how we , together with our collaborators , prepared for this maintenance to take place after the end of the funding period . 3 . 2 Methods Overall , the project followed an action - oriented approach [ 78 ] with the aim of co - designing useful technologies . Throughout the entire project we engaged with over 80 people , with varying degrees of intensity . The account presented here is based on feld notes and research diary entries collected over the entire time by Author One and Author Two , as well as notes from conversations we had with collaborators in the two locations . The data was collected both during the funded phase of the project as well as after it was handed over . For the purpose of this paper , we made a very broad selection from the entire corpus of data to create a set of data broadly relevant for the question of ongoing maintenance , as suggested by Braun & Clarke [ 13 , p . 6 ] , which resulted in a nevertheless It Takes More Than One Hand to Clap : On the Role of ‘Care’ in Maintaining Design Results . CHI ’21 , May 8 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan rather large data set . This dataset was subsequently shared with a limited number of colleagues and thematically coded [ 13 , 14 ] in a collaborative manner . We did not engage with any literature regarding maintenance prior to selecting and coding . During the process of coding and theme creation we constantly refected on the relevance of particular events to our interests and revisited the corpus where necessary . This process resulted in the narrative presented in the chapter four of this paper . All names that appear in this paper are pseudonyms , to protect the anonymity of our collaborators . 4 FINDINGS In the following we will present our fndings , along three broad lines . In the frst part we present fndings regarding pre - existing motivations of the various actors that underlie the work and play a crucial role in the sustainability of the design results insofar as exist - ing practices of care become the foundation on which maintenance relies . The second part of this chapter is related to our engagement with wider networks of very diverse stakeholders . The local par - ticipants in our project are part of complex social and professional networks , networks which researchers were not familiar with at the outset . These complex networks became crucial in the ongo - ing maintenance work as they ofered various resources , including time , expertise and money . The consequences are both positive and negative . There was : 1 ) a continued openness on our side to include new actors and adapt the project according to their needs and goals , which allowed us to create the social base on which continued maintenance rests but 2 ) not all of the relevant actors were friendly collaborators or easily accessible . The problem , put simply , is that one cannot anticipate in a lengthy and organizationally complex project how actors’s goals and practices may impact on progress . This is illustrated by our initial difculties in identifying collabora - tors in City B and our less - than - ideal relationship with volunteers there . Accordingly , this section is divided into two subchapters . The third and last section presents fndings on the role of tech - nological choices and related knowledge . Here we detail how tech - nological choices infuenced ongoing maintenance as well as any activities we engaged in that afected the join creation of techno - logical knowledge and skills . 4 . 1 The foundation : underlying motivations Many , if not all of the collaborators that we engaged with in the project had a long - standing engagement with the issue of migration . The writing of the grant proposal that enabled the development of the platform was largely motivated by the personal as well as aca - demic engagement of the researchers , through which the complex and often initially chaotic situation of migrants arriving in large numbers was experienced frst - hand . Both volunteers and professionals had been providing assistance and support to persons that had arrived recently in the country for decades : “the topic of refugees and migration has been important to me all my life” , as Hans , a volunteer collaborator in City A told us . This engagement with the topic extended to their general view on the nature of the collaboration in the project , where it became visible early on , that a committed , if not personal relation with the topic was somewhat expected and necessary . A dialogue from the very frst project meeting illustrates this , where volunteers sought to know the personal relationship of the programmers and designers from the company implementing the platform : “So , what’s your personal involvement with the topic after all ? ” Volunteers aiding with the process of arrival understood early on how they had taken on a hugely signifcant task , in that it helped to ease circumstances that ofcials and institutions in cities and districts around the country were having difculties managing . With many migrants arriving , the task of organizing the distribution of initial help upon arrival , such as housing etc . was very difcult . Here , volunteers stepped in many times to support authorities with help , that way easing a situation that they perceived as inhumane , as one of the volunteers participating in our project expressed in an interview : “I had been to the BAMF 2 , I knew how their interviews worked , and all these abominations , this waiting hall - I took pictures , this was so unbelievable and ignoble , how they treated these people . This really emotionally grabbed me . ” Through this practice , there was an early learning process , lead - ing to the insight that providing help and care for the arriving migrants was made difcult by two particular challenges . One chal - lenge was the organization and distribution of materials ( such as clothing donations ) and aid ( such as volunteer language classes , or assistance with appointments ) : “In the refugee accommodation close to my home I started a newspaper announcement that we want to ofer language classes in the shelter . [ . . . ] This was a crazy time , in one meeting we organised , 400 people showed up that wanted to volunteer , more [ people ] than were even living in the shelter ! Three times as many ! ” The second challenge was concerned with a quickly evolving political atmosphere , where the initial positive reaction demonstrated publicly was increasingly challenged by countervail - ing forces . This was creating emotionally challenging situations , as the tightening regulations kept families separate and imposed additional difculties for the newly arrived when seeking to estab - lish a new home , fnd work , make friends . One of the volunteers in our project talked about this , describing how he was helping an unaccompanied underage refugee get his family to Germany , assisting him in talking with all the institutions , the foreign author - ities , etc . , until the parents , too , arrived in Germany : “Maybe that is my Christian background , somehow I can’t preach love and not act . It’s just kind of inside you , but maybe that is too much , maybe even a normal humanistic view on mankind is enough to say I have to do something . I also had the time to do something and doing this is according to my mentality . ” Professional “care - givers” – advisors supporting migrants in deci - sions about education and work , but also administrators responsible for example for managing or coordinating educational opportuni - ties - also experienced these challenges , e . g . being confronted with rather hostile feedback when seeking to support migrants in mak - ing their way into an employment in Germany , as was regularly experienced by an advisor working at a job counselling organiza - tion in city A : “Some people in the immigration ofce create massive problems for people and also for us ! They refuse to issue papers , even for people that cannot return legally to their home countries and not 2 Bundesamt für Migration und Flüchtlinge – Federal Agency for Migration and Refugees CHI ’21 , May 8 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Krüger et al . be forcefully returned . They just hide behind a legal position . ” Two other advisors in city B further detailed how for them the issue was overridingly a professional one . They had been working for more than a decade on the issue of access to education for migrants in various capacities . For many years they had been advisors for peo - ple who wish to continue their education at whatever stage in life , and for the past two years they had been tasked with coordinating educational measures for migrants in the region and thus had a well - developed professional practice of providing care . The prospect of a set of digital tools in response to the identifed challenges motivated participation in our project on the part of both volunteer and professional helpers . This pre - existing feeling and practice of care was a crucial foundation for our work during the project and for its sustainability . One of the migrant participants in city A expressed this feeling of mutual support and working together on a joint cause in a saying from her country : " One hand alone does not clap well . . . " 4 . 2 Complex social constellations A crucial aspect of supporting maintenance work is , of course , de - veloping an answer to the question : who does the maintenance ? In this chapter we detail both the importance and difculties of en - gaging with wider social constellations beyond initial collaborators as well as the consequences of neglecting actors and their existing practices of care . 4 . 2 . 1 Including wider constellations of actors . The process of fnd - ing potential collaborators that would maintain design results in the long - term began even before the start of the project . While writing the grant application we got engaged with a network of volunteers in City A , where Author Two lives and was also ac - tive as a volunteer , and where Author Two has a long history of research and project work ( see e . g . [ 93 ] ) . The members of this net - work had already unsuccessfully tried to develop a website for themselves . They had wanted to publish crucial information for other volunteers , to improve their care for migrants , but found the efort beyond them . They issued a letter of support for the ap - plication , stating that a platform to integrate discrete eforts had been a matter of debate for months and was still crucially missing . From the beginning it was thus clear that the tools we develop would in City A come under the stewardship of the volunteers . They were throughout the entire project one of the most crucial and active collaborators , taking a very active role in the design of the individual tools and the website as a whole in City A . They also took on legal responsibility for the content early on . Since their organization was not formalized , a member of the network , Hans , took on this role as an individual , until the network could form an association to take on this responsibility . This , however , failed . Several members of the network lost interest in the website and the network as a whole about two years after the start of the project , and no association was formed . Hans thus remained individually responsible for the website , and since he was uncomfortable with the legal responsibility , another organization needed to be found . We had been continuously building connections and collabora - tions with several organisations in City A , ranging from profes - sional advisors , to city administrators to a variety of NGOs , who had become engaged into the design process with various degrees of in - tensity . In addition to including them into weekly design meetings , we had also organized presentations by experts to our migrant col - laborators about educational opportunities in Germany or hosted our design meetings in the ofces of a large local NGO that sup - ported migrants in their eforts to settle . We had expressly tried to be very open and collaborative to avoid creating unnecessarily parallel structures but instead provide a platform for all existing initiatives and activities . A few months before the project ofcially ended , some of our participants who were also members of the NGO whose ofces we had been allowed to use , suggested we ask them to take over the website . We thus began discussions with our existing group of collaborators and with this NGO . Both were some - what reluctant for diferent reasons . The NGO was worried about the time commitment , a lack of technical skills and experience in maintaining the site and the associated legal risks if they did not have full control over the content – several people had become active contributors , responsible for the content of various parts of the site , and we did not want to change this . It was precisely these collaborators that were worried about limits to their freedom , as and when the NGO took over the site . This freedom had increasingly been used to publish explicitly political content . During our project , national politics in Germany completed a turnaround from “we can do this” in the summer of 2015 to the signing of a refugee agreement with Turkey to keep forced migrants out of Europe , and the closing of the Balkan Route . New laws and regulations to the detriment of migrants were passed . This produced the feeling among many of our partners that there was a need to “be more political” , as one of the volunteers voiced it . The website came about as a technical means to provide space for this : the blog element was increasingly used to collaboratively write small opinion pieces , or to advertise protests and gatherings of a political association “Seebrücke” , protesting and lobbying for the rescue of refugees in the Mediterranean Sea and elsewhere . This was a contested issue , as there was a view among migrants and their supporters that being political could potentially cause harm . The specifc NGO in question even had the principle that it was their task to provide help only , and not “be political” in doing so enshrined in their statutes . We solved the dilemma by appointing one member as the liaison between the editorial group and the NGO , but also by convincing the NGO that editorial freedom was the means for them to limit their time commitment to the site while guaranteeing quality and timely content . Over the years we had already established roles and responsibilities already that maintained the content of the site from which the NGO would now proft . In City B this process evolved in a very diferent manner . Even though we worked in City B , none of us lived there , and as a result we did not have the same amount of contact with local organiza - tions , on which we could base our eforts . During the application process we had thus not found equally strong collaborators in this city , although we did fnd sympathetic potential partners , including members of the local regional government . When the project began , we initially focused on City A and the existing engagement , also because our volunteer collaborators in City A were eager to see tangible results – at this point we had not encountered the same eagerness in City B . We began our work in City B nine months later . It Takes More Than One Hand to Clap : On the Role of ‘Care’ in Maintaining Design Results . CHI ’21 , May 8 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Since interest had been expressed by our contacts in local govern - ment , we were hoping to engage them in similar manner as we had the volunteer network in City A and decide at the outset who would eventually take over stewardship of the website later . However , for political and organizational reasons our contacts were not able to take on legal responsibility through the respective government departments . With their support , however , we began organizing regular open meetings through which we hoped to identify further collaborators and either fnd or create the necessary social network and engagement locally . These early meetings were attended by volunteers and professionals , employees both of NGOs , care and welfare organisations such as Caritas as well as government of - fces and migrants , although the professionals far outnumbered everybody else . Through these meetings , in City B , we met two members of a dif - ferent local government department who were tasked to coordinate measures around education and access to education for migrants , who in this paper we will call Barbara and Magdalena . Barbara and Magdalena saw signifcant overlap with our work , perceiving mu - tual goals . They became our strongest local collaborators “That this project existed was for us like winning the lottery . It ft so well ! In our own work we had formulated goals that could be represented , taken up by the project . This then nourished our motivation to participate , and I would say that we were one of the motors of the project and we put a lot of work into the project over a long period of time” , as Barbara told us in a conversation after the project ofcially ended . However , about a year before the end of the funding period we had still not found a partner who would be able to take on legal responsibility . We began developing several scenarios with our collaborators in the diferent government ofces , Barbara and Magdalena but also with our earliest collaborators , mentioned above . One of them sum - marized the situation : “at that point together we had three scenarios in mind : that the local government takes it over , which was difcult ; that the local Red Cross or other larger organisations like Caritas might get involved or that a specifc local NGO takes stewardship” . As part of their job to coordinate educational measures , Barbara and Magdalena had been organizing monthly regional network - ing meetings , targeting organizations involved in education and assistance for migrants in accessing professional opportunities , in which we also participated . These meetings had been organized in collaboration with the specifc local NGO already mentioned , working on a wide range of issues of social inclusion and they had built a strong relationship . This NGO was well aware of our joint activities but were not engaged at all at this point . Based on this relationship we asked them , if they could imagine taking over the website and under what conditions : “I assume that this is also a result of our close cooperation in the circle of experts . During this time , so much trust has developed between us that it was possible for him to say : ok , I know now who is behind this , I know what has happened so far” ( Magdalena ) . A main condition was that the work of maintaining the site would be distributed , and not solely the NGO’s responsibility . At this point we engaged again with our government contacts from the beginning of the project , who had followed the developments at a distance , yet never fully disengaged . They agreed that Magdalena and Barbara could continue to spend their professional time working on the site and engaged a separate department to support the project through editorial work , updating specifc sections of the site and maintaining information up to date . They also drew in further persons , working for yet another govern - ment ofce , to join this project team and ofer support as well . We , the research team , also agreed to assist with technical questions on a voluntary basis after the project ended . This arrangement thus meant minimal work for the NGO while ensuring maintenance of the site . At the request of the NGO we signed a formal legal agree - ment about our individual roles and responsibilities . Just before the end of the funded period we formed a fxed editorial team , where each member had distinct responsibilities , and which would meet regularly . At this point , our initial government contact reached out to the NGO directly , as they had found an opportunity to supply the NGO with funds necessary to employ technical and editorial staf for six months , to not only maintain the site , but also develop specifc aspects further , such as improving technical aspects and researching information in order to develop new sections . 4 . 2 . 2 Neglecting actors . Although our engagement in City B was predominantly with professionals working in care provision for refugee _ migrants , we did engage with a few local volunteers at the monthly meetings we organised . However , our project was met with scepticism . Volunteers voiced concerns about the amount of funding the project had received , which was published in a local newspaper , and thought other solutions rather than digital tools might be more deserving of fnancial support . They also voiced a strong disbelief in the sustainability of the project at several times , worrying that after the funding ended nothing would remain of the project . We were not able to overcome these concerns and our engagement with volunteers in City B never developed further . In both cities we managed to engage various people into the project and leverage their specifc expertise . In addition to the vol - unteers and professionals mentioned above , this also included in City A a government employee whose task it was to create an up - to - date overview over all available language classes in the city . The tool we had developed to provide such an overview for migrants provided an important resource for her to display the results of her work , while the tool in turn came to rely on her input . In a similar manner the expertise of our collaborators in City B became crucial input for the site , as they used it to provide an overview over local ofers and programs and organizations that support migrants in their eforts to continue educational and professional careers or create and maintain a library of external informational resources . We also engaged with an employee of the department , responsible for maintenance of the department’s technical infrastructure , to support the teams in both cities . In City A we furthermore worked with a journalist , to assist with content and the creation and distri - bution of a regular newsletter . Engaging these people in the project at various stages required us to be fexible as researchers and de - signers , both in our methods and in our research and design goals . We frequently adapted our procedures and means of engagement as well as our aims to what was requested by our collaborators and the evolving local context . Two rather substantial changes we made throughout the project illustrate this . When we applied for the project we had planned for tools to address issues that arise just after a migrant had arrived in the city , since at that time , in 2016 , people were arriving daily and needed to fnd a place to sleep , fnd clothing and food and apply for asylum . As our project progressed , CHI ’21 , May 8 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Krüger et al . however , these issues became less important . The challenges for those that had come in 2016 were now quite diferent , and included for example , improving their German language skills or fnding work . We adjusted our design goals accordingly . Secondly , we had initially planned that the tools and information available through the website would primarily address migrants directly . During our work it became clear , that existing supporters of migrants were very keen on having tools for their care practice , similar to those we were developing already . We thus shifted our design goals slightly to address this group as well , now trying to combine the goals and challenges of both groups and design in a way that takes all concerns into account . We should mention that a lot of the ongoing maintenance work is voluntary . A crucial role continues to be played by a member of the development company . While the work they had agreed to under the conditions of the grant was almost completely accom - plished , he was personally not satisfed with the result , worrying that the website would be too difcult to maintain and too limited in its functionality . He thus approached us after the end of the funding period and asked if he could continue working as a volun - teer . Author One and Two , the main researchers of the project , also continue to be engaged , assisting with certain technical questions , mediating between diferent partners in the diferent locations , but now no longer as paid researchers but as volunteers ( although a professional interest remains , making a clear distinction between professional and voluntary engagement difcult ) . Lastly , a further critical remark is necessary . We initially set out to involve both migrants and their supporters into the project , following a participatory design approach . As mentioned above however , this participation was difcult in practice . We did involve the intended stakeholder groups into the project , although in difer - ing capacities and levels of engagement . While these challenges are detailed in a separate publication , for the sake of the present paper they ultimately result in the fact , that migrants are not involved in the maintenance of the websites . 4 . 3 Technological Choices and Skillbuilding When it comes to maintaining a certain technology or set of related technologies , unsurprisingly the nature of this technology mat - ters . In our project we made early choices that heavily infuenced maintainability , yet also the design space . Most important in this regard was our choice to create a website that runs on the content management system ( CMS ) WordPress . While we did not solely rely on an existing template which we flled with information , but created custom functionalities and elements , this still limited what could be done . For example , this made it more difcult to include a chatbot interface , which might have enabled a more suitable inter - action with the website for some our participants . Yet the choice of WordPress greatly improved the maintainability of the site : because of its simple and user - friendly interfaces and vast library of docu - mentation , even participants with no relevant experience were able to quickly grasp how to edit and add content . The use of an existing theme allowed for a high level of fexibility in the design : while cer - tain elements required the engagement of the technology company , other participants were able to add , edit or delete content and pages by themselves , using it to design new elements . A collaborator in City B , refected on this experience : “I thought in the beginning : Oh ! This is a challenge for me ! Do I really want this ? But then I realised that it is actually fun , because you can create , you have something in your hand . I think I really learned something , technology - wise . ” Such experiences were crucial to sustaining engagement . Another collaborator in City B made this very clear to us : “This is a part of my motivation to stick with it , that it [ the editing of the website ] is in my hands ! That , when I need to change a part of the website , I do not need to call anybody and ask to please please change this , but that my energy directly goes into the change I want to make . I can decide to type something and just do it . “ Despite the user - friendly interface of WordPress’ backend , to - gether with our participants we needed to build new technological skills together in order to sustain and maintain the website and adapt this interface . This was especially so for the newly devel - oped elements of the site . The development company went to great lengths to create a backend interface for these tools , allowing easy provision and maintenance of data . Furthermore , we needed to further develop the necessary technological skills for managing the site , including the new backend interfaces , for example through specifc workshops in which we trained and explored maintenance , through manuals , explanatory ( phone ) conversations or through simply doing the maintenance together . In City B this co - creation of knowledge involved several longer meetings , in which we explored the input mechanisms together and tried them out in practice with the professionals who would take over maintenance of the site . Additionally , we had short but fre - quent conversations over the phone and via email to fnd solutions to difculties they experienced . For several tasks we created short manuals that included annotated pictures , which became crucial support tools . One of our collaborators in City B refected : “Most useful were the manuals , because with those we could independently look up things and what the right steps are . Yes , this is the deciding factor : independence ! Independent in the design of our section . Of course , we are always in negotiation with the rest of the editorial team , but nevertheless we are independent in the design of what we think is relevant and can continue to work on that . “ Lastly , we also needed to not only overcome hurdles rooted in lack of familiarity with the technology , but also in pre - existing tech - nological and legal arrangements . This included restricted access to cloud applications such as Dropbox , Google Documents and others by the professionals in City B , as their ofce IT blocked access to them as well as to the installation of new software such as image editing software . We were thus only able to collaborate on texts via email and images needed to be edited by others in a cumbersome fashion . Also in city B , cooperation with a specifc department of local government was halted right at the beginning , one reason being that they were using a diferent content management sys - tem and did not want to introduce WordPress into their system . In both locations the associations taking over the responsibility of the website had concerns about legal aspects , being worried if they would violate copyright or data protection law . To address these worries , we were in frequent contact with the legal department and the data regulation ofcer of the university . They audited the website to provide a general assessment of its compliance with data protection and copyright laws and frequently answered specifc questions that arose . It Takes More Than One Hand to Clap : On the Role of ‘Care’ in Maintaining Design Results . CHI ’21 , May 8 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan 5 DISCUSSION Our discussion of the project aims at providing both an explanation of the kinds of difculty entailed in working with a heterogeneous group of actors in a project which had sustainability as a desired outcome , as well as the measures which have led to us overcoming these difculties . In passing , we should note that the literature on project management and sustainability does not for the most part engage with projects which involve the heterogeneous and evolving engagements over time that we describe . As mentioned already , Silvius et al . [ 77 ] list clearly defned deliverables , specifed resources and budget and links to a permanent organization as some of the characteristics of successful projects . In our case , however , these characteristics do not apply . While we started out with defned goals , these shifted during the process , we did have a specifed budget of course but managed to leverage additional resources in the form of people and their time , knowledge and care , and we had the outset no link to a permanent organization that would take over the project . In other words , according to this literature , our project should have had very limited chances of success . After all this , however , the striking feature of our project is that it the resulting artefacts and the information contained , have been and still are in constant use . This is absent of a major role for the researchers who instigated the project . In the following then , we will discuss factors that have contributed to the sustainability of our project . 5 . 1 Expanding Care We began the previous chapter with a description of the motiva - tions and engagements of our collaborators with migrants and the difculties they face in their eforts to settle in Germany , prior to our engagement with them . Although these engagements and ac - tivities difer , they can all be considered forms of care . According the defnition by Fisher & Tronto [ 34 ] , “care is an activity [ . . . ] to maintain , continue and repair our world” . As we tried to show above , most of our collaborators were engaging in a pre - existing practice of providing care for migrants , whether based on political and personal convictions or professional commitments . Actively maintaining the co - designed website can also be adequately de - scribed as a care activity . One important question for us then was how to include the care for the designed artefacts into pre - existing forms of care . Regardless , the process of transformation involved in moving from heterogeneous actors with equally heterogeneous practices to one where there is a sustained commitment to main - taining a service was often problematic . What is clear is that a successful outcome did not depend on shared ideology , clear goals , organizational congruence , common practices or sophisticated skill sets . This , we believe , is an important point . Although we planned carefully , had some clear goals and a ( fairly ) clear picture of who our collaborators would be , none of these things enabled us to overcome the various obstacles and challenges experienced . We believe that , in our case , the project provided sufcient room for our collaborators to project their own diferent caring goals into the design process . In City A , this was clearly expressed in the en - thusiasm of the volunteer group and the letter of support they had provided that stated a perceived need for a website . in City B the professional advisors mentioned that the project was “like winning the lottery” as their own professional tasks can be achieved through the site , such as creating transparency , for instance , to the available education ofers . While the tools were not necessarily used at an early stage by our collaborators ( with exceptions ) and were not central to their existing care activities , they became part of the care they continue to ofer over time . Recognizing their care and incor - porating it into the design project enabled the collaborators then to feel a sense of ownership over the designed artefacts and expand their care to the maintenance of these artefacts , to feel responsible for their ’becoming’ , turning the artefacts into matters of care , as conceptualized by Puig de la Bellacasa [ 22 ] . This care represents the speculative , open - ended and non - predetermined mode of thinking that Bellacasa refers to . It stands in contradistinction to universalist conceptions of how best to proceed in project work as , indeed , any kind of intervention . It entails both modes of thinking and modes of feeling . It can manifest in the sense of ownership we describe below . It is also important to recognise that this care pre - dates our engagement , and that the design project merely provided a canvas for it to emerge in the form it eventually took . The importance of recognizing pre - existing care and including it into a design project as an element towards maintenance and sustainability of the design results was further illustrated by what happened when we did not recognize existing forms of caring . In City B , a scene of volunteers providing care for migrants also existed , but at the beginning of the project we had no knowledge of them and no contacts with them . Once we started to work in City B , these volunteers felt that they and what they would have deemed important were excluded from the project , and we did not manage to include their care practice into our project . The caring supportive work of the volunteers in City B could have provided a valuable platform for sustaining the design results , as it did in city A , yet this path turned out to be closed to us . Although not central to our collaboration or the engagements described in this paper , the issue of money and payment arose sev - eral times during the project . While this project was a matter of care for the involved researchers as well , it was also a paid full - time academic job . This raised some questions amongst the volunteers . In City A , the volunteers sought an explanation of our and the developers’ engagement with the topic of migration , gauging our commitment . In City B , the funding granted to the project raised criticism about its legitimacy amongst the local volunteers . Even though it has been suggested [ 35 ] that there is not necessarily a di - chotomy between working for money or working for love , receiving payment for work where others provide substantial care voluntarily is a potential source of mistrust and a risk to sustainability . On the other hand , the fact that people are capable of working “for money and for love” is also illustrated by Heinrich , the developer - turned - volunteer . Although initially paid by the company that was part of the consortium , he continued to ofer maintenance and devel - opment after the project ended as a volunteer – a commitment to care that emerged through the project . While we do believe that care practices play a crucial role in eforts to sustain project results , we also note that care is not unprob - lematic . This danger has been expressed very clearly by Murphy in her argument to ‘unsettle care’ [ 64 ] : As matters of care also become situated in postcolonial , transnational or racialized contexts , afec - tion and care can become tools supporting and expanding “empire and capital” [ 64 , p . 722 ] . The context of migration and arrival is CHI ’21 , May 8 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Krüger et al . clearly a postcolonial and racialized one , and the stakeholders we brought together in this project do not meet on equal ground . The volunteers are able to ofer their support due to pre - existing privi - lege , having the necessary resources such as free time to engage in this form of care . Both volunteers as well as professionals ( re - ) enact a hierarchical , even oppressive relationship through their caring . Through the design project , its specifc aims and the developments described here , we as researchers are necessarily also bound up in these unequal relationships through forms of care . This raises vexed questions concerning the structural conditions which pro - duce the situations our carers are trying to ameliorate . Recognizing the immediate situatedness of experience and providing support for it does not preclude care of a diferent kind , embodied in awareness of wider conditions . Our eforts are , however , necessarily bounded . Nevertheless , the care we have witnessed as practiced by many volunteers and professionals we met through the project we uphold as a sincere and committed attempts to support people . Yet , when supporting care practices and caring relations , and making them as central as we have done in our work and in this account , it is necessary to also point out the danger of inequality and oppression that exists within matters of care , including our own roles . 5 . 2 Expanding Networks Equally important a consideration when including the care practices of our collaborators in the project was the heterogeneous nature of the group of actors that became engaged . We aimed to be open to new and evolving collaboration and participation , rather than work - ing with a specifc organization or department . As the topics we addressed , and challenges our project encountered , emerged over time we had to build and expand our connections to various groups and individuals , fnding ways to collaborate , and incorporating their issues and work into the project . This included the volunteers and professionals who would become our main collaborators , but also included migrants , government ofcials in both cities , professional advisors in City A and several NGOs . Some of these connections were not immediately fruitful , such as our early collaboration with the regional government of City B . Yet the same persons we had not been able to work with at this point provided crucial resources towards the end of the project , by opening up a small funding op - portunity through which the local NGO was able to pay technical and editorial staf , and by enabling our collaborators to continue working on the project in their work time . The NGOs that would become the responsible organizations in both cities were not strong collaborators throughout the paid phase of the project . With each of them we had only feeting contact : using their ofces for our meetings in City A or attending the regular regional meetings the NGO organized with our government collaborators . Both became only crucial partners at the end , when they agreed to assume legal responsibility for the sites . Sustainability would have been dif - cult to impossible without this . Yet even though early engagement was feeting it was nevertheless important since it established the necessary familiarity and trust . At the end of the project we were , for example , able in City B to draw together collaborators from at least four organisations : the regional government , two public institutions that ofer advice and support to migrants and a local NGO . With the exception of our collaborators in one of the public institutions , none of the others had been actively and continuously engaged in the project , although we had contact at a few irregular points . Whatever the stage of the project at which people became in - volved , a sense of ownership was critical . Building the technological skills together was not a last - minute activity , conducted just before the funding ended or even afterwards , as in City B , but was ongoing . We were able to explore functionalities and difculties together during the project , crucially while the coding experience of the development company was still available . In City B , a considerable amount of the necessary skills and experience for maintaining the site were developed in the very last funded phase of the project or even afterwards . Our non - existent relationship with the volunteers in City B and the difculties that followed such as their critical attitude towards the sustainability of the project and their lack of engagement were a result of our lack of strong local connections in the city . At this early stage , some had evidently already felt ex - cluded , as some crucial decisions had already been made during the phase of writing the proposal or in the early phase of the project ( see e . g . [ 56 ] for a discussion of similar challenges ) . A stronger existing local network would have enabled us to draw in local ex - periences and actors early on , potentially raising the chances of a sense of ownership developing earlier . These connections , however , are not sufcient by themselves . The actors we drew into our project were a very heterogeneous group . While they had shared interests and clearly cared about the issues the project aimed to address , their goals did not always align . As a result , not all of these connections could easily be sustained and utilized as a foundation for maintenance . Also , given the complexity of the social structures and institutions involved , many of the actors we came in contact with had long standing relations with each other , pre - dating by far our research project . In City B , for example , the collaboration between the NGO and the two persons from the public institution evolved by itself , unrelated to our engagement with them , yet this connection proved crucial to the ongoing maintenance . In a similar sense , a relation between the local government that ofered funding for technical support and the NGO that received this funding existed independently of us . Likewise , in City A , the volunteer network we worked with had strong connection to the NGO that fnally assumed responsibility for the site . Some of our early frustrations with volunteer groups led us to recognize the need for an openness towards evolving institutional relations . Emerging relations across a complex constellation of several actors proved , in the end , crucial in the realization of outcomes . Both of these connections however also illustrate the importance of aligning goals with actors . In both cases , the wish of our design group and its members to be explicitly political and use the website as an outlet and a platform for critical positions , became an obstacle for the engagement of the NGO and the government actors in City A . These considerations also highlight a difculty that has already been pointed out by Meurer et al . [ 61 ] , with regards to acquiring funding for the networking activities that lead to these connections . While actively building and managing social connections , prior and during the actual project , proves to be crucial to supporting the ongoing maintenance of the design and its ultimate sustainability , these activities are rarely fundable . While funding bodies often require proposals that already bring together several actors , unless It Takes More Than One Hand to Clap : On the Role of ‘Care’ in Maintaining Design Results . CHI ’21 , May 8 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan these connections are already stable and trustful , considerable time needs to be invested into building trust and aligning goals . It is one thing to build a technological artefact in accordance with project proposals , it is quite another to build an artefact which is both seen to be useful and which supports appropriation and maintenance over a lasting period . 5 . 3 Managing the research agenda Recognising and incorporating care and remaining open to ongoing and sometimes opaque social relations in order to create a base for maintenance also required us to react fexibly to the emerging needs , requests and ideas of our evolving group of collaborators . We , in short , had to expand both on what was promised under the grant agreement and on what might be commonly considered to be HCI research . As mentioned above , we deliberately chose WordPress as a platform for its ease of use for those responsible for the site , but this limited technological innovation or novelty . Nevertheless , in keeping with arguments presented above , taking care seriously requires us to engage in modes of thinking which transcend simple technicist approaches . There is an evident tension between innovation and maintainability , as has been noted by oth - ers [ 32 , 49 , 75 ] , which we did not resolve , but decided in favor of maintainability . We consider it vital , in contexts such as this , that ‘care oriented’ modes of thinking , to paraphrase Bellacasa [ 23 ] , are seen as interventions which enable us to reposition ourselves in relation to evolving contexts . We also engaged in a variety of activities to build technological skills with our collaborators . We wrote manuals , organized work - shops , had frequent conversations on the phone and in person to solve problems and questions related to the maintenance of the sites – activities that are normally neither thought of as research nor design . Neither were they budgeted for . These activities extend be - yond the project runtime and are ongoing in a voluntary capacity by us as well as others like Heinrich , the developer - turned - volunteer . These and other activities ( formal meetings , organizing presenta - tions , meeting for breakfast or lunch ) were not accounted for in the project proposal yet were crucial to support for maintenance work . They can , we believe , be described as a care practice and constituted bringing people together and trying to align goals of these various collaborators , making specifc decisions that entailed divergence from initial plans and goals . Early on we had decided that the tools to be designed would address migrants directly and exclusively . Throughout the project , the needs and wishes collabo - rators brought to the project pushed it in a diferent direction , one which was relevant in their specifc practice contexts . 6 CONCLUSION Our contribution to the HCI discourse does not lie in technologi - cal innovation . It lies instead in the lessons we learned from the experiences and refections outlined above , and which we believe contribute to the ongoing discussion within the wider HCI com - munity about the role of the maintenance of research and design artefacts : Valuing existing care . As has been discussed before , maintenance can be understood as a form of care ( e . g . [ 60 ] ) . The pre - existing care practices of our collaborators provided the foundation for the ongoing maintenance of the websites . The research project needed be fexible enough to allow our collaborators to include this care into the project , so that the maintenance would become a part of their care practices , which required negotiating between diferent goals : while this increased chances of maintenance , maintenance in itself is not a goal and we needed to ensure that the websites are not only maintained but provide value in the frst place . Valuing care also means paying attention to a potential diference between intended benefciaries of a technological artefact and those that maintain it . In our case , these were clearly not the same . While migrants were intended to beneft from the websites , either through direct use or as a vehicle for improved care and were thus crucial to involve in the co - design process , they turned out to have very little interest in maintaining it ( or even designing it ) but were primarily interested in solving practical problems – ideally directly , not via a yet - to - be - created website . Early on , we made unfounded assump - tions about participation ( which we discuss elsewhere ) , largely due to a naïve and unjustifed belief that we knew what envisaged participants wanted . Care is problematic precisely because of an imbalance between the interests and beliefs of researchers and our various stakeholder groups , and the unequal relationships that ex - isted between them , rooted in relations of care . Addressing this inequality and jointly improving care practices to become less un - equal is a crucial aspect of future co - design projects to overcome hurdles to the possibility of participation . Ongoing Openness . We did not limit ourselves to a specifc partici - pant group , but actively maintained an openness to new participants throughout the project that allowed us to draw in a wide variety of stakeholders in various forms and levels of engagement . This wide and evolving network of collaborators created a fexible yet strong social foundation amongst which the duties of maintenance could be provided . At the same time , however , the heterogeneity of our collaborators , their interconnections and the evolving nature of our project made it difcult to anticipate and plan how maintenance would be realized , and - as already mentioned - assumptions we had at the beginning , for example about the central role of migrants in our project and its ongoing maintenance , turned out , at a later stage of the project , to be due to our own inexperience . Navigating Trade - ofs . Our fndings echo observations by oth - ers ( see e . g . [ 49 , 75 ] about the trade - of between innovation and maintenance . We made specifc technological choices at various stages in favour of maintainability but at the expense of technolog - ical innovation . A similar trade - of can be observed for research activities : While carefully planned design workshops might deliver concrete results quicker , a variety of rather mundane activities were much more important for the ongoing maintenance of the site . These activities , however , can hardly be described as research . Even so , they were crucial in enabling our collaborators to take over maintenance duties . Similarly , a considerable amount of time and efort was invested into building and maintaining social rela - tionships , the importance of which has been observed numerous times before , but which equally do not constitute design or research . Despite their importance , they are usually not budgetable in grant proposals , complicating researchers’ ability to invest the necessary time . To increase chances of ongoing maintenance after a project ends would require funding bodies to encourage and enable re - searchers to invest time and efort into the activities of building CHI ’21 , May 8 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Krüger et al . social foundations and technological skills on which maintenance relies . Lastly , it needs to be said , that while the ongoing maintenance is an accomplishment for our project and – we believe – also holds valuable lessons for other HCI projects , especially those that sim - ilarly address the challenges of migrants in various contexts and locations , the sustainability of a technology is just one small step within a complex setting that , even on a local level , involves a myriad of actors , organizations , institutions , laws and programs that ultimately make it extremely difcult for people to start a new life in Germany , as we have witnessed numerous times during our project . Despite the support our design work tries to ofer , much more is needed to deal with a systemic hostility to migrants . The contribution of HCI projects can only be a humble one . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS First of all and most importantly we would like to thank all our collaborators in City A and B who ever trusted us enough to work with us . It was and continues to be a privilege and joy to collaborate with you . Secondly , we thank our colleagues and our anonymous reviewers and ACs for their supportive and constructive feedback . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Konstantin Aal , Anne Weibert , Reem Talhouk , Vasilis Vlachokyriakos , Karen Fisher , and Volker Wulf . 2018 . Refugees & Technology : Determining the Role of HCI Research . [ 2 ] Wenche Aarseth , Tuomas Ahola , Kirsi Aaltonen , Andreas Økland , and Bjørn Andersen . 2017 . Project Sustainability Strategies : A Systematic Literature Review . International Journal of Project Management 35 , 6 ( Aug . 2017 ) , 1071 – 1083 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijproman . 2016 . 11 . 006 [ 3 ] Victoria Abou - Khalil , Samar Helou , Brendan Flanagan , Niels Pinkwart , and Hiroaki Ogata . 2019 . Language Learning Tool for Refugees . ( Sept . 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 18452 / 20923 [ 4 ] Amanda Alencar . 2018 . Refugee Integration and Social Media : A Local and Experiential Perspective . Information , Communication & Society 21 , 11 ( Nov . 2018 ) , 1588 – 1603 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 1369118X . 2017 . 1340500 [ 5 ] Maryam Ali and Savita Bailur . 2007 . The Challenge of “Sustainability” in ICT4D—Is Bricolage the Answer . In Proceedings of the 9th International Con - ference on Social Implications of Computers in Developing Countries . Citeseer , 54 – 60 . [ 6 ] Asam Almohamed , Arindam Dey , Jinglan Zhang , and Dhaval Vyas . 2019 . Ex - tended Reality for Refugees : Pragmatic Ideas through Ethnographic Research with Refugees in Australia . In 2019 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality Adjunct ( ISMAR - Adjunct ) . IEEE , Beijing , China , 422 – 425 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ISMAR - Adjunct . 2019 . 00046 [ 7 ] Asam Almohamed and Dhaval Vyas . 2016 . Vulnerability of Displacement : Chal - lenges for Integrating Refugees and Asylum Seekers in Host Communities . ACM Press , 125 – 134 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3010915 . 3010948 [ 8 ] Asam Almohamed and Dhaval Vyas . 2019 . Rebuilding Social Capital in Refugees and Asylum Seekers . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction 26 , 6 ( Dec . 2019 ) , 1 – 30 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3364996 [ 9 ] Asam Almohamed , Dhaval Vyas , and Jinglan Zhang . 2018 . Designing for Refugees : Insights from Design Workshop . In Proceedings of the 30th Australian Conference on Computer - Human Interaction - OzCHI ’18 . ACM Press , Melbourne , Australia , 92 – 96 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3292147 . 3292196 [ 10 ] Mara Balestrini , Jon Bird , Paul Marshall , Alberto Zaro , and Yvonne Rogers . 2014 . Understanding Sustained Community Engagement : A Case Study in Heritage Preservation in Rural Argentina . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’14 ) . Association for Computing Ma - chinery , Toronto , Ontario , Canada , 2675 – 2684 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557323 [ 11 ] M . Balestrini , T . Diez , P . Marshall , A . Gluhak , and Y . Rogers . 2015 . IoT Com - munity Technologies : Leaving Users to Their Own Devices or Orchestration of Engagement ? EAI Endorsed Transactions on Internet of Things 1 , 1 ( Oct . 2015 ) , 150601 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4108 / eai . 26 - 10 - 2015 . 150601 [ 12 ] Jennifer Baranof , R . Israel Gonzales , Jay Liu , Heidi Yang , and Jimin Zheng . 2015 . Lantern : Empowering Refugees Through Community - Generated Guidance Using Near Field Communication . ACM Press , 7 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702613 . 2726950 [ 13 ] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke . 2006 . Using Thematic Analysis in Psychology . Qualitative Research in Psychology 3 , 2 ( Jan . 2006 ) , 77 – 101 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1191 / 1478088706qp063oa [ 14 ] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke . 2012 . Thematic Analysis . In APA Handbook of Research Methods in Psychology , Vol 2 : Research Designs : Quantitative , Qualitative , Neuropsychological , and Biological . , Harris Cooper , Paul M . Camic , Debra L . Long , A . T . Panter , David Rindskopf , and Kenneth J . Sher ( Eds . ) . American Psychological Association , Washington , 57 – 71 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 13620 - 004 [ 15 ] Alice V . Brown and Jaz Hee - jeong Choi . 2018 . Refugee and the Post - Trauma Journeys in the Fuzzy Front End of Co - Creative Practices . In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference on Full Papers - PDC ’18 . ACM Press , Hasselt and Genk , Belgium , 1 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3210586 . 3210598 [ 16 ] Deana Brown and Rebecca E . Grinter . 2016 . Designing for Transient Use : A Human - in - the - Loop Translation Platform for Refugees . ACM Press , 321 – 330 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858230 [ 17 ] Gro Brundtland . 1987 . Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development : Our Common Future . Technical Report . [ 18 ] Jenna Burrell . 2012 . Invisible Users : Youth in the Internet Cafés of Urban Ghana . MIT Press . [ 19 ] Daniela Busse , Eli Blevis , Richard Beckwith , Shaowen Bardzell , Phoebe Sengers , Bill Tomlinson , Lisa Nathan , and Samuel Mann . 2012 . Social Sustainability : An HCI Agenda . In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Annual Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems Extended Abstracts - CHI EA ’12 . ACM Press , Austin , Texas , USA , 1151 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2212776 . 2212409 [ 20 ] Lizzie Coles - Kemp and Rikke Bjerg Jensen . 2019 . Accessing a New Land : De - signing for a Social Conceptualisation of Access . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’19 . ACM Press , Glas - gow , Scotland Uk , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300411 [ 21 ] Lizzie Coles - Kemp , Rikke Bjerg Jensen , and Reem Talhouk . 2018 . In a New Land : Mobile Phones , Amplifed Pressures and Reduced Capabilities . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 584 : 1 – 584 : 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174158 [ 22 ] Maria Puig de la Bellacasa . 2011 . Matters of Care in Technoscience : Assembling Neglected Things . Social Studies of Science 41 , 1 ( Feb . 2011 ) , 85 – 106 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0306312710380301 [ 23 ] María Puig de la Bellacasa . 2017 . Matters of Care : Speculative Ethics in More than Human Worlds . Number 41 in Posthumanities . University of Minnesota Press , Minneapolis . [ 24 ] Rianne Dekker , Godfried Engbersen , Jeanine Klaver , and Hanna Vonk . 2018 . Smart Refugees : How Syrian Asylum Migrants Use Social Media Information in Migration Decision - Making . Social Media + Society 4 , 1 ( 2018 ) , 2056305118764439 . [ 25 ] Carl DiSalvo , Phoebe Sengers , and Hrönn Brynjarsdóttir . 2010 . Mapping the Landscape of Sustainable HCI . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’10 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1975 – 1984 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753625 [ 26 ] Carl DiSalvo , Phoebe Sengers , and Hrönn Brynjarsdóttir . 2010 . Navigating the Terrain of Sustainable HCI . Interactions 17 , 4 ( July 2010 ) , 22 – 25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1806491 . 1806497 [ 27 ] Lynn Dombrowski , Ellie Harmon , and Sarah Fox . 2016 . Social Justice - Oriented Interaction Design : Outlining Key Design Strategies and Commitments . In Pro - ceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 656 – 671 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2901790 . 2901861 [ 28 ] Ana Maria Bustamante Duarte . 2018 . Participation & ( Re ) Settlement : Envisioning Mobile Services with Young Forced Migrants . ( Nov . 2018 ) . [ 29 ] Ana Maria Bustamante Duarte , Mehrnaz Ataei , Auriol Degbelo , Nina Brendel , and Christian Kray . 2019 . Safe Spaces in Participatory Design with Young Forced Migrants . CoDesign 0 , 0 ( Sept . 2019 ) , 1 – 23 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710882 . 2019 . 1654523 [ 30 ] Ana Maria Bustamante Duarte , Nina Brendel , Auriol Degbelo , and Christian Kray . 2018 . Participatory Design and Participatory Research : An HCI Case Study with Young Forced Migrants . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 25 , 1 ( Feb . 2018 ) , 3 : 1 – 3 : 39 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3145472 [ 31 ] Ana Maria Bustamante Duarte , Auriol Degbelo , and Christian Kray . 2018 . Ex - ploring Forced Migrants ( Re ) Settlement & the Role of Digital Services . ( 2018 ) , 21 . [ 32 ] Michaelanne Dye , David Nemer , Neha Kumar , and Amy S . Bruckman . 2019 . If It Rains , Ask Grandma to Disconnect the Nano : Maintenance & Care in Havana’s StreetNet . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( Nov . 2019 ) , 1 – 27 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359289 [ 33 ] Efrat Eizenberg and Yosef Jabareen . 2017 . Social Sustainability : A New Conceptual Framework . Sustainability 9 , 1 ( Jan . 2017 ) , 68 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / su9010068 [ 34 ] Berenice Fisher and Joan Tronto . 1990 . Toward a Feminist Theory of Caring . In Circles of Care : Work and Identity in Women’s Lives , Emily K . Abel and Margaret K . Nelson ( Eds . ) . SUNY Press , 35 – 62 . [ 35 ] Nancy Folbre and Julie A Nelson . 2000 . For Love or Money—Or Both ? Journal of Economic Perspectives 14 , 4 ( Nov . 2000 ) , 123 – 140 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1257 / jep . 14 . 4 . 123 It Takes More Than One Hand to Clap : On the Role of ‘Care’ in Maintaining Design Results . CHI ’21 , May 8 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan [ 36 ] Sarah Fox , Mariam Asad , Katherine Lo , Jill P . Dimond , Lynn S . Dombrowski , and Shaowen Bardzell . 2016 . Exploring Social Justice , Design , and HCI . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 3293 – 3300 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2851581 . 2856465 [ 37 ] Sarah E . Fox , Rafael M . L . Silva , and Daniela K . Rosner . 2018 . Beyond the Prototype : Maintenance , Collective Responsibility , and Public IoT . In Proceedings of the 2018 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference 2018 - DIS ’18 . ACM Press , Hong Kong , China , 21 – 32 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3196709 . 3196710 [ 38 ] Marie Gillespie , Souad Osseiran , and Margie Cheesman . 2018 . Syrian Refugees and the Digital Passage to Europe : Smartphone Infrastructures and Afordances . Social Media + Society 4 , 1 ( 2018 ) , 2056305118764440 . [ 39 ] Gillian R . Hayes . 2011 . The Relationship of Action Research to Human - Computer Interaction . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction 18 , 3 ( July 2011 ) , 1 – 20 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1993060 . 1993065 [ 40 ] Gillian R . Hayes . 2014 . Knowing by Doing : Action Research as an Approach to HCI . In Ways of Knowing in HCI , Judith S . Olson and Wendy A . Kellogg ( Eds . ) . Springer , New York , NY , 49 – 68 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4939 - 0378 - 8 _ 3 [ 41 ] Gillian R . Hayes . 2018 . Design , Action , and Practice . In Socio - Informatics , Volker Wulf , Volkmar Pipek , Dave Randall , Markus Rohde , Kjeld Schmidt , and Gunnar Stevens ( Eds . ) . Vol . 1 . Oxford University Press . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / oso / 9780198733249 . 003 . 0010 [ 42 ] Richard Heeks . 2002 . Failure , Success and Improvisation of Information Systems Projects in Developing Countries . Development Informatics Working Paper 11 ( 2002 ) . [ 43 ] R Heeks . 2005 . Sustainability and the Future of E - Development . eDevelopment Briefng No . 10 . Institute for Development Policy and Management , University of Manchester . ( 2005 ) . [ 44 ] Minu Hemmati , Felix Dodds , Jasmin Enayati , and Jan McHarry . 2002 . Multi - Stakeholder Processes for Governance and Sustainability : Beyond Deadlock and Confict . Routledge . [ 45 ] Sabine Hess , Bernd Kasparek , Stefanie Kron , Mathias Rodatz , Maria Schwertl , and Simon Sontowski ( Eds . ) . 2017 . Der lange Sommer der Migration . Assoziation A , Berlin , Germany . [ 46 ] Youyang Hou and Clif Lampe . 2017 . Sustainable Hacking : Characteristics of the Design and Adoption of Civic Hacking Projects . In Proceedings of the 8th Interna - tional Conference on Communities and Technologies ( C & amp ; T ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , Troyes , France , 125 – 134 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3083671 . 3083706 [ 47 ] Joey Chiao - Yin Hsiao and Tawanna R . Dillahunt . 2018 . Technology to Support Immigrant Access to Social Capital and Adaptation to a New Country . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 2 , CSCW ( Nov . 2018 ) , 1 – 21 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3274339 [ 48 ] Mediendienst Integration . 2020 . Zahl der Flüchtlinge | Flucht & Asyl | Zahlen und Fakten . https : / / mediendienst - integration . de / migration / fucht - asyl / zahl - der - fuechtlinge . html . [ 49 ] Steven J . Jackson . 2014 . Rethinking Repair . In Media Technologies , Tarleton Gillespie , Pablo J . Boczkowski , and Kirsten A . Foot ( Eds . ) . The MIT Press , 221 – 240 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7551 / mitpress / 9780262525374 . 003 . 0011 [ 50 ] Steven J . Jackson , Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed , and Md . Rashidujjaman Rifat . 2014 . Learning , Innovation , and Sustainability among Mobile Phone Repairers in Dhaka , Bangladesh . In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Designing Interactive Systems - DIS ’14 . ACM Press , Vancouver , BC , Canada , 905 – 914 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2598510 . 2598576 [ 51 ] Steven J . Jackson , Alex Pompe , and Gabriel Krieshok . 2012 . Repair Worlds : Maintenance , Repair , and ICT for Development in Rural Namibia . In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work - CSCW ’12 . ACM Press , Seattle , Washington , USA , 107 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2145204 . 2145224 [ 52 ] Bernd Kasparek and Marc Speer . 2015 . Of Hope . Ungarn und der lange Sommer der Migration | bordermonitoring . eu . ( Sept . 2015 ) . [ 53 ] Katja Kaufmann . 2018 . Navigating a New Life : Syrian Refugees and Their Smart - phones in Vienna . Information , Communication & Society 21 , 6 ( June 2018 ) , 882 – 898 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 1369118X . 2018 . 1437205 [ 54 ] Linus Kendall and Andy Dearden . 2018 . Disentangling Participatory ICT Design in Socioeconomic Development . In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference : Full Papers - Volume 1 ( PDC ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machin - ery , Hasselt and Genk , Belgium , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3210586 . 3210596 [ 55 ] Linus Kendall and Andy Dearden . 2020 . The Politics of Co - Design in ICT for Sustainable Development . CoDesign 16 , 1 ( Jan . 2020 ) , 81 – 95 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710882 . 2020 . 1722176 [ 56 ] Helena Kraf . 2020 . A Critical Exploration of Agonistic Participatory Design . The Design Journal 23 , 1 ( Jan . 2020 ) , 31 – 48 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14606925 . 2019 . 1684730 [ 57 ] Neha Kumar and Nicola Dell . 2018 . Towards Informed Practice in HCI for Development . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 2 , CSCW ( Nov . 2018 ) , 99 : 1 – 99 : 20 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3274368 [ 58 ] Mark Latonero and Paula Kift . 2018 . On Digital Passages and Borders : Refugees and the New Infrastructure for Movement and Control . Social Media + Society 4 , 1 ( 2018 ) , 2056305118764432 . [ 59 ] Thomas Ludwig , Christoph Kotthaus , and Robin Stumpf . 2016 . Koordination der ungebundenen Flüchtlingshilfe durch soziale Medien . ( 2016 ) , 8 . [ 60 ] Shannon Mattern . 2018 . Maintenance and Care . Places Journal ( Nov . 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 22269 / 181120 [ 61 ] Johanna Meurer , Claudia Müller , Carla Simone , Ina Wagner , and Volker Wulf . 2018 . Designing for Sustainability : Key Issues of ICT Projects for Ageing at Home . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) 27 , 3 ( Dec . 2018 ) , 495 – 537 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 018 - 9317 - 1 [ 62 ] Paul Mihailidis . 2016 . Digital Crossroads . Civic Media and Migration . ( 2016 ) , 64 . [ 63 ] Emilie Mollenbach , Jens Hof , and Kasper Hornbæk . 2012 . HCI and Sustainability : The Role of Macrostructures . In CHI ’12 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’12 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 2159 – 2164 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2212776 . 2223769 [ 64 ] Michelle Murphy . 2015 . Unsettling Care : Troubling Transnational Itineraries of Care in Feminist Health Practices . Social Studies of Science 45 , 5 ( Oct . 2015 ) , 717 – 737 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0306312715589136 [ 65 ] Sarah Nikkhah , Andrew D . Miller , and Alyson L . Young . 2018 . Telegram as An Immigration Management Tool . In Companion of the 2018 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing ( CSCW ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , Jersey City , NJ , USA , 345 – 348 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3272973 . 3274093 [ 66 ] Johnson O Okeniyi . 2013 . Project Sustainability : An Overview of Sustainability in Project Management . ( 2013 ) , 17 . [ 67 ] C . Pade - Khene , B . Mallinson , and D . Sewry . 2011 . Sustainable Rural ICT Project Management Practice for Developing Countries : Investigating the Dwesa and RUMEP Projects . Information Technology for Development 17 , 3 ( July 2011 ) , 187 – 212 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 02681102 . 2011 . 568222 [ 68 ] Daniel Pargman and Barath Raghavan . 2014 . Rethinking Sustainability in Computing : From Buzzword to Non - Negotiable Limits . In Proceedings of the 8th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Fun , Fast , Foundational ( NordiCHI ’14 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 638 – 647 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2639189 . 2639228 [ 69 ] Lucy Pei and Bonnie Nardi . 2019 . We Did It Right , But It Was Still Wrong : Toward Assets - Based Design . In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290607 . 3310434 [ 70 ] James Pierce , Hronn Brynjarsdottir , Phoebe Sengers , and Yolande Strengers . 2011 . Everyday Practice and Sustainable HCI : Understanding and Learning from Cultures of ( Un ) Sustainability . In CHI ’11 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’11 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 9 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1979742 . 1979583 [ 71 ] Giacomo Poderi and Yvonne Dittrich . 2018 . Participatory Design and Sustain - ability : A Literature Review of PDC Proceedings . In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Situated Actions , Workshops and Tutorial - Volume 2 ( PDC ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 5 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3210604 . 3210624 [ 72 ] Christian Remy , Oliver Bates , Vanessa Thomas , and Elaine M . Huang . 2017 . The Limits of Evaluating Sustainability . In Proceedings of the 2017 Workshop on Computing Within Limits ( LIMITS ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 103 – 110 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3080556 . 3080567 [ 73 ] Daniela K . Rosner . 2014 . Making Citizens , Reassembling Devices : On Gender and the Development of Contemporary Public Sites of Repair in Northern California . Public Culture 26 , 1 ( 2014 ) , 51 – 77 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1215 / 08992363 - 2346250 [ 74 ] Daniela K . Rosner and Morgan Ames . 2014 . Designing for Repair ? Infrastruc - tures and Materialities of Breakdown . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Confer - ence on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’14 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , Baltimore , Maryland , USA , 319 – 331 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2531602 . 2531692 [ 75 ] Andrew L . Russell and Lee Vinsel . 2018 . After Innovation , Turn to Maintenance . Technology and Culture 59 , 1 ( 2018 ) , 1 – 25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1353 / tech . 2018 . 0004 [ 76 ] Dina Sabie and Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed . 2019 . Moving into a Technology Land : Exploring the Challenges for the Refugees in Canada in Accessing Its Computerized Infrastructures . In Proceedings of the Conference on Computing & Sustainable Societies - COMPASS 19 . ACM Press , Accra , Ghana , 218 – 233 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3314344 . 3332481 [ 77 ] Gilbert Silvius , Ron Schipper , and Julia Planko . 2012 . Sustainability in Project Management . Gower Publishing , Ltd . [ 78 ] Stephen A . Small and Lynet Uttal . 2005 . Action - Oriented Research : Strategies for Engaged Scholarship . Journal of Marriage and Family 67 , 4 ( 2005 ) , 936 – 948 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1741 - 3737 . 2005 . 00185 . x [ 79 ] Angelika Strohmayer , Jenn Clamen , and Mary Laing . 2019 . Technologies for Social Justice : Lessons from Sex Workers on the Front Lines . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300882 CHI ’21 , May 8 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan [ 80 ] Franziska Tachtler , Toni Michel , Petr Slovák , and Geraldine Fitzpatrick . 2020 . Supporting the Supporters of Unaccompanied Migrant Youth : Designing for Social - Ecological Resilience . arXiv : 2003 . 04799 [ cs ] ( March 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376458 arXiv : 2003 . 04799 [ cs ] [ 81 ] Reem Talhouk , Konstantin Aal , Anne Weibert , Max Krüger , Volker Wulf , Karen Fisher , Franziska Tachtler , Suleman Shahid , Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed , and Ana Maria Bustamante Duarte . 2019 . Refugees & HCI SIG : Situating HCI Within Human - itarian Research . In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , Glasgow , Scotland Uk , 1 – 4 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290607 . 3311754 [ 82 ] Reem Talhouk , Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed , Volker Wulf , Clara Crivellaro , Vasilis Vlachokyriakos , and Patrick Olivier . 2016 . Refugees and HCI SIG : The Role of HCI in Responding to the Refugee Crisis . ACM Press , 1073 – 1076 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2851581 . 2886427 [ 83 ] Reem Talhouk , Madeline Balaam , Austin L . Toombs , Andrew Garbett , Chaza Akik , Hala Ghattas , Vera Araujo - Soares , Balsam Ahmad , and Kyle Montague . 2019 . Involving Syrian Refugees in Design Research : Lessons Learnt from the Field . In Proceedings of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , San Diego , CA , USA , 1583 – 1594 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3322276 . 3322335 [ 84 ] Reem Talhouk , Ana Bustamante , Konstantin Aal , Anne Weibert , Koula Charitonos , and Vasilis Vlachokyriakos . 2018 . HCI and Refugees : Experiences and Refections . interactions 25 , 4 ( 2018 ) , 46 – 51 . [ 85 ] Reem Talhouk , Vasillis Vlachokyriakos , Anne Weibert , Konstantin Aal , Syed Ish - tiaque Ahmed , Karen Fisher , and Volker Wulf . 2017 . Refugees & HCI Workshop : The Role of HCI in Responding to the Refugee Crisis . ACM Press , 558 – 565 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3027063 . 3027076 [ 86 ] Nick Taylor , Keith Cheverst , Peter Wright , and Patrick Olivier . 2013 . Leaving the Wild : Lessons from Community Technology Handovers . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’13 . ACM Press , Paris , France , 1549 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2466206 [ 87 ] Kentaro Toyama . 2013 . Refections on HCI for Development . Interactions 20 , 6 ( Nov . 2013 ) , 64 – 67 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2527298 [ 88 ] Joan C . Tronto . 1993 . Moral Boundaries : A Political Argument for an Ethic of Care . Routledge , New York . Krüger et al . [ 89 ] Suzanne Vallance , Harvey C . Perkins , and Jennifer E . Dixon . 2011 . What Is Social Sustainability ? A Clarifcation of Concepts . Geoforum 42 , 3 ( June 2011 ) , 342 – 348 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . geoforum . 2011 . 01 . 002 [ 90 ] Judy van Biljon and Karen Renaud . 2019 . Human - Computer Interaction for Devel - opment ( HCI4D ) : The Southern African Landscape . In Information and Commu - nication Technologies for Development . Strengthening Southern - Driven Cooperation as a Catalyst for ICT4D ( IFIP Advances in Information and Communication Technol - ogy ) , Petter Nielsen and Honest Christopher Kimaro ( Eds . ) . Springer International Publishing , Cham , 253 – 266 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 030 - 19115 - 3 _ 21 [ 91 ] Tiago Volpato , Ana Allian , and Elisa Yumi Nakagawa . 2019 . Has Social Sus - tainability Been Addressed in Software Architectures ? . In Proceedings of the 13th European Conference on Software Architecture - Volume 2 ( ECSA ’19 ) . As - sociation for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 245 – 249 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3344948 . 3344979 [ 92 ] Anne Weibert , Max Krüger , Konstantin Aal , Setareh Sadat Salehee , Renad Khatib , Dave Randall , and Volker Wulf . 2019 . Finding Language Classes : Designing a Digital Language Wizard with Refugees and Migrants . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( Nov . 2019 ) , 116 : 1 – 116 : 23 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359218 [ 93 ] Anne Weibert , Dave Randall , and Volker Wulf . 2017 . Extending Value Sensitive Design to Of - the - Shelf Technology : Lessons Learned from a Local Intercultural Computer Club . Interacting with Computers 29 , 5 ( Sept . 2017 ) , 715 – 736 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / iwc / iwx008 [ 94 ] Susan Wyche , Tawanna R . Dillahunt , Nightingale Simiyu , and Sharon Alaka . 2015 . " If God Gives Me the Chance i Will Design My Own Phone " : Exploring Mobile Phone Repair and Postcolonial Approaches to Design in Rural Kenya . In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing ( UbiComp ’15 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 463 – 473 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2750858 . 2804249 [ 95 ] Susan P . Wyche and Rebecca E . Grinter . 2012 . " This Is How We Do It in My Country " : A Study of Computer - Mediated Family Communication among Kenyan Migrants in the United States . In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’12 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , Seattle , Washington , USA , 87 – 96 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2145204 . 2145222