V8 Storming : How Far Should Two Ideas Be ? Yui Kita The University of Tokyo 7 - 3 - 1 Hongo Bunkyo - ku , Tokyo 113 - 8654 yuikita21 @ gmail . com Jun Rekimoto The University of Tokyo Sony Computer Science Laboratories , Inc . 7 - 3 - 1 Hongo Bunkyo - ku , Tokyo 113 - 8654 rekimoto @ acm . org ABSTRACT All innovative ideas are said to be pairings of existing ideas . In col - laborative ideation , various methods are used to suggest words for stimulating ideation based on the theory that suggesting strongly related words to the ideation topic will activate and enhance the ideation . However , the relationship between the words suggested by the system and the words that users associate remains unclear . Solving this issue will help selecting words suggestion in computer - supported ideation systems , in which the information flow is fluid and , therefore , users have strictly limited time for interaction . To address this issue , we studied the relationship between pairs of words suggested by computer and the quantity of associated ideas by users . We also conducted a user study on practical applications . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Empirical studies in HCI ; Col - laborative interaction ; Systems and tools for interaction design ; KEYWORDS Human Computer Interaction , Collaborative Ideation , Association ACM Reference format : Yui Kita and Jun Rekimoto . 2018 . V8 Storming : How Far Should Two Ideas Be ? . In Proceedings of The 9th Augmented Human International Conference , Seoul , Republic of Korea , February 7 – 9 , 2018 ( AH2018 ) , 8 pages . DOI : 10 . 1145 / 3174910 . 3174937 1 INTRODUCTION Ideas can arise in a number of contexts . Ideation is a framework for generating ideas more efficiently by maximizing the quality and quantity of produced ideas . Collaborative ideation is a form of ideation in which multiple individuals participate in group stimulus by producing ideas through inspiration or the serendipitous pairing of ideas . 1 . 1 Collaborative Ideation Collaborative ideation is one method for enriching creative pro - ductivity , and advances in collaborative ideation techniques have Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM mustbehonored . Abstractingwithcreditispermitted . Tocopyotherwise , orrepublish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . AH2018 , Seoul , Republic of Korea © 2018 ACM . 978 - 1 - 4503 - 5415 - 8 / 18 / 02 . . . $ 15 . 00 DOI : 10 . 1145 / 3174910 . 3174937 Figure 1 : V8 Storming is a collaborative ideation support system . We conducted a user study involving the use of V8 Storming in a practical application . In this experiment , par - ticipants discussed two different types of topics to enable observation of applicable topic ranges . Participants sat be - fore a screen on which the system displays related words , which float on the display . V8 Storming continuously mon - itors the conversation and abstracts nouns , which were dis - played back to the users on the screen along with related words . For example , if a participant stated that " A dog is a mammal " in the course of the conversation , the system might displays " animal " or " pets " in the center of the screen . led to its use in venues such as laboratory studies and creative cooperation . In such settings , ideation plays an important role in improving productivity . Csikszentmihalyi pointed out that , despite the conventional view of creative individuals as solitary thinkers , collaboration actually enhances their creative capabilities [ 7 ] . Ideation can also be applied in the daily problem - solving process . Although the concept has become highly sophisticated with ad - vances in the science of collaboration , ideation itself is seamlessly connected to personal and daily activities used to improve aspects of life such as interpersonal relationships and in making decisions regarding important life events . 1 . 2 Computational Supports on Collaborative Ideation Ben Shneiderman suggested that various creative processes can be supported , reinforced , and enhanced by computers [ 14 ] . An example of this is Idea Wall , a groupware that reacts to conversation AH2018 , February 7 – 9 , 2018 , Seoul , Republic of Korea Y . Kita et al . by abstracting essential information and providing visual stimuli to enhance the conversational process of collaborative ideation [ 13 ] . Most collaborative ideation process supporting systems use large displays [ 8 ] [ 13 ] [ 15 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] . Such configurations are implicit in the fact that the surface of the display has limited resources to support the ideation demand . Intuition would suggest that a back - end sys - tem for generating suggestions would have to be super smart to support conversation through a small display ( although there is no clear proof of this assertion ) . By contrast , a large display could be seen as relaying advice to users by forcing them to search for high quality suggestions from a number of alternatives . However , it is difficult to read and consider suggestions appear - ing on a display . Humans are used to using their eyes in face - to - face communication , a mode of interaction that induces people to imag - ine the thoughts of others , consider and examine ideas , and track the context of a conversation . Our pilot study on collaboration ideation , in which one person served as an intelligent agent to suggest related web information , resulted in the calming of conversation among participants who read a suggested Wikipedia article . Thus , selection of words to be displayed is critical in designing collaborating ideation support systems . In order to make conversa - tion contents and screens visible at the same time in parallel , it is necessary to make the contents of the screen as simple as possible . Although there is room for discussion , ideation can be evaluated by the quantity and quality of the idea produced . From this point of view , it is thought that an approach that let participants to associate more words with fewer words improves the performance of the system . 1 . 3 Distance of Suggesting Words The introduction of strongly related words into conversation is believed to activate associative memories . In fact , most collabo - rative ideation support systems suggest words of a similar type [ 13 ] [ 3 ] . For example , a system detecting that the participants are discussing " pets " will suggest " cat " or " dog " to help the flow of the conversation . Suggesting similar words has been confirmed to have specific positive effects on conversation . However , such related words represent only a fragment of the set of words that can improve collaborative ideation performance . The framework in which innovation arises where two different ideas meet is hindered by the fact that people with expertise in different fields tend to be less conversational because they have fewer topics to share . Determining the distance between words that maximizes the quantity and quality of ideation is therefore important in designing collaborative ideation systems in which there are limitations in terms of display area and / or cognitive load . On the other hand , innovation is said to be born in areas where distant fields intersect . From this point of view it is preferable to combine words far from closer words . Also , it is easy to imagine that active discussions will not occur when people with uniformed knowledge and words collaborate . Therefore , there is a need for a system that presents words that are not too far and not too close to the topics of ideation . To this end , it is necessary to know the relationship between the distance between multiple words handled simultaneously in an ideation and the performance of the ideation . 2 CONTRIBUTION In this paper , we ( 1 ) determine the relationship between words suggested by the system and the quantity of words generated by users , and ; ( 2 ) explore several issues regarding collaborative ideation sup - port systems . To measure the distances between words , we applied Word2Vec [ 11 ] to full - Japanese Wikipedia articles [ 2 ] . To explore the issues involved in practical use , we created a system called V8 Storming ( Figure 1 ) and used it to conduct a user study . 3 EXPERIMENT 1 The object of this experiment is to determine the relationship be - tween suggested words and the words associated from the sugges - tion . This metric is useful when both the display area and cognitive load are limited . To determine the relationship between suggested words and the words associated from the suggestion , we asked participants to produce as many words as possible when reading a pair of words on a display . The naive hypothesis for this experiment is that there are many words that can be associated with suggesting closer word distances . This hypothesis seems to be certain from an example below . For example , when " dog " and " cat " are displayed , since there are many common items such as " pet " and " mammal " in " dog " and " cat " , the participants can remind the common item even if they make less effort . However , when the words " dog " and " station " are presented instead of " dog " and " cat " , it is hard to find common items in these two items , so the participant needs to make effort to produce words . Therefore , closer words seem to have more words to be associated . In other words , it is expected that there is a strong negative correla - tion between the distance of the presented word and the amount of words that can be associated from them . This hypothesis is actually premised on several existing studies . 3 . 1 Dataset We used Word2Vec [ 11 ] to measure the distance between words . Word2Vec is a word embedding technique that translates words to vectors whose distance corresponds to the distance between the words . The technique takes as a hypothesis that the mean of two words will be closer when they appear more often in the same context . In this paper , " the distance of words " is mathematically given as the cosine similarity of two words . A total of 1 , 081 , 665 Japanese language Wikipedia articles [ 2 ] were fed into the machine learner . It can be considered Wikipedia is a suitable source for supporting a wide variety of topics , because it is edited by people with various backgrounds . Such topics and terms include technical or new terms such as " TCP " or " Prague Spring " as well as general words such as " dog " or " cat . " In addition , Wikipedia sources are generally available on the Internet . Thus , Wikipedia articles can be considered a suitable source of experimental data in terms of reproductivity and good qualitative character . V8 Storming : How Far Should Two Ideas Be ? AH2018 , February 7 – 9 , 2018 , Seoul , Republic of Korea Figure 2 : In experiment 1 , a participant sat before a dis - play and attempted to produce as many words related to suggested words as possible . The computer generated and displayed randomly selected words on its display every 20 seconds ( 1 ) . We logged participants’ associated words and counted them , to compare the number to the distance of sug - gested words . Each of the eight participants performed this procedure ten times in a row . 3 . 2 Procedure Figure 2 shows the setup and procedure of experiment1 . The experimental setup is shown in Figure 2 . The participants sat before a conversational display on which two randomly selected words were displayed . The participants were then asked to associate as many words as possible in 20 seconds . This interval was determined from pre - liminary experiments by the experimenter . In the preliminary ex - periments we figured out that 20 seconds is the maximum time users can spare to come up with ideas when users are engaged in fluid communication with system’s supports . This process was repeated 10 times for each participant . Prior to each experiment , we conducted an exercise to help the participants familiarize them - selves with the system and confirm their understanding of the experimental procedure . Eight participants—seven male and one female—were recruited and tested . Most of the participants were computer science students sharing similar interests . Note that the numerical distance between provided two words was hidden to the participants . Thus , even if the participants under - stand the experimenter’s ideal result by chance , they are not able to control the result . This experiment configuration assumes a collaborative ideation support system where the system will provide words so to encour - age the conversation . In order to eliminate various factors on word productivity , we created a situation in which only two words are displayed in this experiment . Therefore , the results of this exper - iment can be expected to be useful for designing a system that presents words during conversation . Figure 3 : Results of experiment 1 . The horizontal axis corre - sponds to the distance between two words displayed on the screen . The vertical axis corresponds to the number of words associated when each set of proposed words was displayed . Figure 4 : The figure shows the mean word production num - ber for each participant . The vertical axis is the mean word production number of 10 experiments and the horizontal axis is the participant ID . There is a dominant difference be - tween participants with low productivity ( participant 2 and participant 8 ) and participants with high productivity ( par - ticipants 1 , 3 , 4 , 5 ) . 4 RESULT 1 Figure 3 shows the result of experiment 1 . The horizontal axis shows the distances between each set of two words displayed on the screen ( 0 = nearest , 1 = furthest . Cosine similarity of Word2Vec was mapped to 0 to 1 for convenience ) . The vertical axis shows the number of words associated for each pair words displayed . A weak inverse correlation was found between the word distance and the associative word amount ( spearman r = - 0 . 28 , p = 0 . 012 < 0 . 05 ) . This result is weakly corresponding to the hypothesis ( the more AH2018 , February 7 – 9 , 2018 , Seoul , Republic of Korea Y . Kita et al . two words are close , the more we can come up with ideas ) that was assumed for most of collaborative ideation support systems . Given that innovation comes from the synthesis of distant ideas , this result suggests that the system should present a more distant topics . There was a difference in the productivity of words by partici - pants . Figure 4 shows the mean word production number for each participant . The vertical axis is the mean word production num - ber of 10 experiments and the horizontal axis is the participant ID . There is a dominant difference between participants with low productivity ( participant 2 and participant 8 ) and participants with high productivity ( participants 1 , 3 , 4 , 5 ) . The bias of the presented words for each participant cannot be considered as the cause of this result , because the words are randomly selected . Therefore , it is considered that there is a difference in word productivity among participants . Our observation confirmed the difference in word productivity due to presented words . Productivity increased , especially when there were words that could be associated in parallel with the pre - sented word . For example , from the word " curry " you can associate parallel meals such as " stew " , " omelette " , " ramen " . However , this phenomenon was recognized only with words closely related to the participant’s life . Even if " animal " and " fungus " are in a par - allel relationship on a dictionary , the same phenomenon can not be recognized because " fungus " is less likely to be associated with " animal " in everyday life in parallel unless he or she is a biologist . 5 V8 STORMING As a practical application of our proposed collaborative ideation support system , we created V8 Storming , a collaborative ideation support system that continuously suggests words in reaction to conversation . The system has been created and tested with the goal of better understanding the behavior of users and exploring issues related to simple collaborative ideation support systems . 5 . 1 System Figure 5 shows the UI of V8 Storming and Figure 6 shows the V8 Storming system configuration . V8 Storming uses a Python script to continuously listen to con - versationoccurringaroundamicrophone . It thengeneratesaconversation - buffer using the Google Cloud Speech API [ 1 ] . A conversation - buffer is a text file with three lines corresponding to the three previously recognized sentences in a conversation . The size of the buffer is fixed experimentally to enable the system to smoothly follow conversations and avoid reacting to exceptional sentences or recognition errors . The conversation - buffer is then parsed into word items and nouns abstracted using MeCab [ 10 ] . Word2Vec generates up to ten related nouns for each noun abstracted from conversation - buffer and then displays the generated words . A link is created between each pair of words for which the distance is below a threshold ; the links are used to determine the position of each word on the display that is not shown explicitly . 6 EXPERIMENT 2 To examine the effects of the system on conversation , we conducted a user study in which we focused particularly on exploring users’ qualitative reactions to the system . Instead of evaluation of system performance , we focused on observations and descriptions , as V8 Storming is designed to be as simple as possible as an entry point to a more sophisticated , complicated , multi - functional system that can support the overall functionality of collaborative ideation . 6 . 1 Topics In practical situations , the character of collaborative ideation varies depending on the topic being discussed . To generalize the results of the experiment , we carefully selected the topics used . We selected two topics : ( 1 ) " How to enjoy music " ( topic 1 ) , and ; ( 2 ) " How technology can solve problems in large - scale disas - ters " ( topic 2 ) . Although both topics are open - ended , the first is a casual topic in which the conclusion of a discussion depends on personal pref - erence . This topic requires participants to associate the discussion with personal information such as lifestyle , music preference , or devices used to enjoy music . By contrast , topic 2 is a formal , problem - solving topic in which the conclusion depends on the nature of technology , the physical environment , and the limitations of both . This topic requires par - ticipants to bring to the table subjective facts or information that can be used to solve problems . 6 . 2 Participants Six participants—two females and four men—were recruited . The average age was 25 ( ranging from 22 to 30 ) and most participants were from a computer science background , suggesting shared in - tellectual backgrounds . This setup was ideal because collaborative ideations are ideally carried out in laboratories or in cooperative efforts in which the participants share similar background . 6 . 3 Procedure The configuration of the experiment is shown in Figure 5 . We used the same display as was used in experiment 1 . Participants sat facing one another as in a normal daily conversational setting . To reduce the effects of the system , we avoided the use of idea externalization tools and eliminated the memo pad typically used in collaborative ideation . As in experiment 1 , Japanese language Wikipedia articles were fed into a machine learner . The results of the previous experiment had revealed that the wide variety of topics in Wikipedia contributes to system capability . At the beginning of the experiment , participants were asked to discuss topics 1 and 2 , with the order of the topics randomized to avoid inter - topic effects . We asked the participants to discuss each topic for six minutes . To examine the effects of the system , it was kept off for the first three minutes and on for the final three minutes . The two phases were seamlessly connected and participants smoothly continued discussion between them without explanation of the phasing . V8 Storming : How Far Should Two Ideas Be ? AH2018 , February 7 – 9 , 2018 , Seoul , Republic of Korea Figure 5 : Interface of V8 Storming ( a ) . ( b ) and ( c ) are details of the interface ( English words were appended to each words in details ) . Related words will be displayed while users are talking in front of the system . Each words are continuously floating optimizing its position so that it will be close to related words . Thus users can see similar words side by side . Displayed words will be deleted , added or left when users changed their topics . Similar words will be generated based on Word2Vec . Figure 6 : System configuration . The system consists of a lap - top in the front - end and a desktop PC in the back - end . The front - end computer is continously listening to conversation around the computer . The conversation will be immediately converted to text by Google Cloud Speech API . Then the sys - tem extract nouns from the text and input it to the back - end computer . The back - end computer then finds up to 10 words similar to a given noun for each noun . These words are pre - sented to the user . The distance of the word will be adjusted by the degree of similarity . To familiarize the participants with the system , we also asked them discuss any topic with the system activated for a period pre - ceding the experiment . We had confirmed that this exercise was necessary , as the interactivity of the system attracted too much attention and distracted from the natural conversation when the participants were not used to it . We began the experiments after participants became sufficiently inured to the system to continue conversation as usual . 7 RESULT 2 7 . 1 Frequency and strength of attention to the system The system attracted participants frequently . This indicates that the system follows the flow of the conversation smoothly . At the same time , however , it means that the participants are away from the face - to - face communication . To prevent excessive interaction , we exercised to get used to the system before the experiment . However , because theresponseof thesystemvaries dependingon thecontents of the conversation , the participants intermittently focused on the screen . We discuss this issue again in the discussion part . The formal conversation was more influenced by the system than the informal conversation . Informal topics ( topic 1 ’How to enjoy music’ ) spread the conversation by allowing participants ac - tively share the experience and information that they have , rather than actively reading the screen information . On the other hand , the system had a positive affects in topic 2 , " How technology can AH2018 , February 7 – 9 , 2018 , Seoul , Republic of Korea Y . Kita et al . solve problems in large - scale disasters " . In this topic there are few information that can be shared among participants . Therefore , top - ics that can be associated with words that can be shared among participants affect the flow of conversation . When the system was turned on , we cloud observe several scenes where participants be - gan a new discussion on the basis of related words presented by computers from a few keywords that could be shared . 7 . 2 Reactions to known words and unknown words There was a interesting response to unexpected words . The words presented by the system include proper nouns . The participants tried to infer the meaning from unknown proper nouns from sur - rounding words or tired to use the mobile device to search the meaning . This behavior suggests that the system can let the users to associate topics and simultaneously stimulate learning motiva - tion for unknown words or knowledge . In this experiment , we conducted experiments on participants mainly from our laboratory where we are strongly motivated to fulfill intellectual curiosity . However , the same system may also serve as a learning tool for children unfamiliar with computer operation . Especially since this system does not require the user to perform any special operation other than normal conversation , this system may help students with low aggressiveness to learning . These learning tools will cre - ate a positive learning loop by presenting a wider range of words by expanding the user’s knowledge , and then again encourage users to use new words . Participants were often surprised when known words were pre - sented . Also , when a known word was presented , a phenomenon of repeating the presented word itself was seen . This phenomenon suggests participants’ motivations trying to make this system rec - ognize new words . After this phenomenon , we were able to observe the phenomenon trying to examine the associative model of the system for speech . For example , when a word such as " guitar " or " piano " is presented to " music " , participants tried " sports " which is the same hobby was recognized . Although this phenomenon is different from the original purpose of the system , it becomes a clue to know the model owned by the participants . 7 . 3 Contribution to a practical solution In topic 2 , participants discussed solutions to the problem at the time of disaster . Some participants associated solutions from the word presented . In the first half of the discussion , the participant said that " you should use snake - like robots that can go to dangerous places such as nuclear power plants . " After that , the group discussed a problem which became clear during the Great East Japan Earthquake for a while . The same participant said " communication trouble will be solved by artificial satellite " . At this time , the system presented " Weather News " in relation to " satellite " . Weather news is an agency that provides information on Japan’s weather forecast . Participants discovered this word and said that " prediction before a problem occurs in disasters is important " and the topic has converged on the prediction technology against disasters in the discussion . An interesting point of this result is that the final topic is not directly related to the words presented . " Weather news " is a system of weather forecasts , but participants extracted " forecast " from this word and " forecast " became the center of discussion in the next few minutes . 7 . 4 Impact on participants’ association In the above example there was an interactive association between the participant and the system . The system acted as a third par - ticipant rather than supporting participants’ discussion . Partici - pants associated with words stimulated by the system . Based on this words the system reminded of new words . Furthermore , par - ticipants reminisced new words based on this word . Before the experiment , we assumed that the system will unilaterally expand the topic of participants . In fact , however , the system functioned as a group member who was involved in a chain of associations . Also , the system prevented divergence of discussion . In ordinary conversation , words disappear simultaneously with speech , so it is difficult for members participating in the discussion to proceed without discussion diverging . Especially when there are many par - ticipants , a chain of association expands , and the topic diverges . In this system , the system buffers the utterance contents in order to follow the flow of conversation smoothly . This buffer has a queue structure , and it will be erased in order when a certain new utter - ance is detected . Therefore , words presented on the screen associate and present new words to the content uttered at least one minute ago . Divergence of discussion was prevented by this buffer entering the chain of ideas . This shows the possibility that this system can manipulate the discussion . 8 DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK 8 . 1 Smooth Connection with Face - to - Face Communication Although we introduced exercises to enable participants to become used to the system , the system ' s high degree of responsiveness to conversation made it impossible for the users to fully focus on their conversation . This reflects a common problem with collabo - rative ideation support systems in which even systems carefully designed to maintain conversation that is as natural as possible while producing suggestions will inevitably distract from users’ natural conversation . Although it is unclear as to whether natural conversation ( e . g . , face - to - face communication ) is superior to ideation systems in terms of productivity , system distractions require users to switch from a natural conversation to one with the system ; this switching eliminates the normal seamless interactions that enable improvisa - tional open - minded or instant communication in daily life . A practical example is illustrated in this problem . If the system used in experiment 2 were to be introduced into a business meeting room , it would be incapable of supporting the flow of natural com - munication while performing its role of suggesting words . Meeting participants would either be paying attention to the display or disregarding it . Thus , a system compatible with dual roles would require more than one display , necessitating the use of another user interface ( UI ) in the meeting room . A mirror display [ 12 ] can serve as an alternative to a normal display to avoid distraction in face - to - face communication . Mir - ror displays are displays embedded in mirrors , enabling users to see reflections of their faces or eyes while displaying additional V8 Storming : How Far Should Two Ideas Be ? AH2018 , February 7 – 9 , 2018 , Seoul , Republic of Korea information . Similar setups can be effected by superimposing in - formation onto UIs in video conference feeds , although this can create additional communication problems through delay or the degradation of stereoscopic information . Mobile augmented reality ( AR ) [ 9 ] is another alternative for en - abling ideation . Although collaborative ideation is a formal case of daily conversation that has as its goal attaining a certain level of productivity , casual conversation and chatting share some common - alities with it and can potentially be supported by a collaborative ideation system . Considering that casual conversation occurs re - gardless of situation , the mobility of conversational support systems is an additional important factor in improving productivity . Ad - vances in mobile AR techniques have made it possible to envision a situation in which two people begin chatting and then start to discuss an interesting issue , at which point they are joined via mo - bile AR by a collaborative ideation support system that provides conversational support . In such cases , both situational convenience and face - to - face communication are supported . 8 . 2 Cognitive Peripheral Vision Colors and shapes may help to pick up information faster than reading letters , as other systems introduced [ 13 ] [ 6 ] . Experiment 2 gave an observation result which will be the basis of an ideal collaborative ideation system by keeping presenting only character information . However , with this configuration , users are not able to know if they should read the words on the display . This situa - tion is equal to searching information in a library where a lot of books stored , but all of them consists of only a unified font without pictures on their cover . When letters are color coded according to meaning , users might be able to send your line of sight near the information you want quickly while taking advantage of the peripheral vision . Moreover , inserting pictures and pictures can also be expected to suppress the cognitive load . In anticipation of these effects , we conducted an experiment with wizerd - of - oz before constructing all the systems . Three col - laborators will participate in this experiment . As in Experiment 2 , the two make conversations while referring to the display . The remaining one searches related articles , photos , videos and presents them on the display with a standard web browser while listening to the conversation of the two people . In other words , the last one pretends to be perfect artificial intelligence . Experiments in such an environment can identify problems in an ideal system . Contrary to our expectations , we could not observe the improved conversation in this experiment . The person who pretended to be an artificial intelligence extracted a keyword from a conversation and used a search engine of a web browser . However , he could not catch up with the speed of the conversation . Even when the speed of conversation slows and he was able to catch up with speed , it was not possible to display sufficiently useful information . Although contents that requires low cognitive load such as pictures , photos and movies were presented on the screen , the two people in conversation gradually began to talk over ignoring the display Since the presented information is useless for conversation . From this preliminary experiment , we learned two things about the contents to present . One thing is that the system will be ignored unless it tells the information the conversation thinks is really necessary . The other is that the quality ( the closeness to things in users’ mind ) has stronger impact to users’ experience than the type of information presented . In the future work , we will need to carefully design UI and contents to be presented to lower users cognitive burden , rather than naively adding rich contents . Studies to visualize the flow of conversation may be useful for such design problems [ 5 ] [ 16 ] . 9 CONCLUSION Collaborative ideation is a tool for producing new and better ideas . A number of techniques are currently being developed to enhance the process for application under various conditions . It can be said that the potential range of applicability of such systems is as wide as the overall concept of ideation , with an end goal being the development of numerous systems seamlessly connected to our daily conversation . Even given the mature state of internet access , this area of study is still emergent . People often bring PCs into meetings and other public venues , disconnecting from other people as they connect into their devices . Although documents are shared through online document sharing services , people are still in the habit of copying and pasting important or apparently important links or documents ; this is a problem of interaction design rather than technology , as tools could be developed to perform such activities . Systems that support or enhance conversational interaction re - quire strong UI design . In fluid interactions , it is necessary to seek out new and unique interactivities rather than using traditional UIs . While it is easy to scroll up and down while browsing a web page , moving the course of a conversation backwards and forwards is both troublesome and disruptive to improvisational creation . Advances in artificial intelligence might be used to further design interactions for fluid conversations . As real - time speech recognition becomes more common , essential tools to enable fluid interaction are emerging . In particular , the generation of content will allow for the provision of rich , precise , and imgergey support with reduced cognitive load . Reaching these goals can make support systems effectively part of our brains if the interactions are smooth enough to enable literally externalized short - long - term memory . A better understanding of how users react to fluid intelligent systems will be necessary in the advanced design of such systems . Through its proposed metric , this paper introduced the use of the relationship between the distance between suggested words and the number of words produced to enable a system to provide instant re - action to conversation . The development of this metric contributes to advanced collaborative ideation by enabling the selection and focusing of suggested content given a limited display area or ability to handle cognitive load . REFERENCES [ 1 ] 2017 . Google Cloud Speech API . ( 30 Oct 2017 ) . Retrieved Oct 30 , 2017 from https : / / cloud . google . com / speech / . [ 2 ] 2017 . Wikipedia Dump ( Japanese Version ) . ( 30 Oct 2017 ) . Retrieved Oct 30 , 2017 from https : / / dumps . wikimedia . org / jawiki / . [ 3 ] Salvatore Andolina , Khalil Klouche , Diogo Cabral , Tuukka Ruotsalo , and Giulio Jacucci . 2015 . InspirationWall : supporting idea generation through automatic information exploration . In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity and Cognition . ACM , 103 – 106 . [ 4 ] SalvatoreAndolina , HendrikSchneider , JoelChan , KhalilKlouche , GiulioJacucci , and Steven Dow . 2017 . Crowdboard : Augmenting In - Person Idea Generation AH2018 , February 7 – 9 , 2018 , Seoul , Republic of Korea Y . Kita et al . with Real - Time Crowds . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity and Cognition . ACM , 106 – 118 . [ 5 ] Tony Bergstrom and Karrie Karahalios . 2007 . Conversation Clock : Visualizing audio patterns in co - located groups . In System Sciences , 2007 . HICSS 2007 . 40th Annual Hawaii International Conference on . IEEE , 78 – 78 . [ 6 ] Tony Bergstrom and Karrie Karahalios . 2008 . Conversation clusters : human - computer dialog for topic extraction . In CHI’08 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 2829 – 2834 . [ 7 ] MihalyCsikszentmihalyi . 1996 . Flowandthepsychologyofdiscoveryandinvention . New York : Harper Collins . [ 8 ] Otmar Hilliges , Lucia Terrenghi , Sebastian Boring , David Kim , Hendrik Richter , and Andreas Butz . 2007 . Designing for collaborative creative problem solving . In Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGCHI conference on Creativity & cognition . ACM , 137 – 146 . [ 9 ] TobiasHöllerer , StevenFeiner , TachioTerauchi , GusRashid , andDrexelHallaway . 1999 . ExploringMARS : developingindoorandoutdooruserinterfacestoamobile augmented reality system . Computers & Graphics 23 , 6 ( 1999 ) , 779 – 785 . [ 10 ] TakuKudo . 2005 . Mecab : Yetanotherpart - of - speechandmorphologicalanalyzer . http : / / mecab . sourceforge . net / ( 2005 ) . [ 11 ] Tomas Mikolov , Ilya Sutskever , Kai Chen , Greg S Corrado , and Jeff Dean . 2013 . Distributed representations of words and phrases and their compositionality . In Advances in neural information processing systems . 3111 – 3119 . [ 12 ] Kenneth Schofield and Niall R Lynam . 2001 . Vehicle rearview mirror display system . ( March 6 2001 ) . US Patent 6 , 198 , 409 . [ 13 ] Yang Shi , Yang Wang , Ye Qi , John Chen , Xiaoyao Xu , and Kwan - Liu Ma . 2017 . IdeaWall : Improving Creative Collaboration through Combinatorial Visual Stim - uli . In Proceedingsofthe2017ACMConferenceonComputerSupportedCooperative Work and Social Computing . ACM , 594 – 603 . [ 14 ] Ben Shneiderman . 2007 . Creativity support tools : Accelerating discovery and innovation . Commun . ACM 50 , 12 ( 2007 ) , 20 – 32 . [ 15 ] DanielWigdor , HaoJiang , CliftonForlines , MichelleBorkin , andChiaShen . 2009 . WeSpace : the design development and deployment of a walk - up and share multi - surface visual collaboration system . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 1237 – 1246 . [ 16 ] Rebecca Xiong and Judith Donath . 1999 . PeopleGarden : creating data portraits for users . In Proceedings of the 12th annual ACM symposium on User interface software and technology . ACM , 37 – 44 .