Existence of an Equilibrium for a Competitive Economy Kenneth J . Arrow ; Gerard Debreu Econometrica , Vol . 22 , No . 3 . ( Jul . , 1954 ) , pp . 265 - 290 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0012 - 9682 % 28195407 % 2922 % 3A3 % 3C265 % 3AEOAEFA % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - B Econometrica is currently published by The Econometric Society . Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR ' s Terms and Conditions of Use , available at http : / / www . jstor . org / about / terms . html . JSTOR ' s Terms and Conditions of Use provides , in part , that unless you have obtained prior permission , you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles , and you may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal , non - commercial use . Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work . Publisher contact information may be obtained at http : / / www . jstor . org / journals / econosoc . html . Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed page of such transmission . The JSTOR Archive is a trusted digital repository providing for long - term preservation and access to leading academic journals and scholarly literature from around the world . The Archive is supported by libraries , scholarly societies , publishers , and foundations . It is an initiative of JSTOR , a not - for - profit organization with a mission to help the scholarly community take advantage of advances in technology . For more information regarding JSTOR , please contact support @ jstor . org . http : / / www . jstor . org Tue Oct 9 16 : 31 : 53 2007 E C O N O M E T R I C A VOLUME 22 July , 1954 NUMBER 3 EXISTENCE OF AN EQUILIBRIUM FOR A COMPETITIVE ECONOMY A . Wald has presented a model of production and a model of exchange and proofs of the existence of an equilibrium for each of them . Here proofs of the existence of an equilibrium are given for an integrated model of production , ex - change and consumption . In addition the assumptions made on the technologies of producers and the tastes of consumers are significantly weaker than Wald ' s . Finally a simplification of the structure of the proofs has been made possible through use of the concept of an ahstract economy , a generalization of that of a game . INTRODUCTION L . WALRAS [ 24 ] first formulated the state of the economic system at any point of time as the solution of a system of simultaneous equations representing the demand for goods by consumers , the supply of goods by producers , and the equilibrium condition that supply equal demand on every market . I t was as - sumed that each consumer acts so as to maximize his utility , each producer acts so as to maximize his profit , and perfect competition prevails , in the sense that each producer and consumer regards the prices paid and received as in - dependent of his own choices . Walras did not , however , give any conclusive arguments to show that the equations , as given , have a solution . The investigation of the existence of solutions is of interest both for descrip - tive and for normative economics . Descriptively , the view that the competitive model is a reasonably accurate description of reality , at least for certain purposes , presupposes that the equations describing the model are consistent with each other . Hence , one check on the empirical usefulness of the model is the prescrip - tion of the conditions under which the equations of competitive equilibrium have a solution . Perhaps as important is the relation between the existence of solutions to a competitive equilibrium and the problems of normative or welfare economics . It is well known that , under suitable assumptions on the preferences of consumers and the production possibilities of producers , the allocation of resources in a competitive equilibrium is optimal in the sense of Pareto ( no redistribution of goods or productive resources can improve the position of one individual without making at least one other individual worse off ) , and conversely every Pareto - optimal allocation of resources can be realized by a competitive equilibrium ( see for example Arrow [ I ] , Debreu [ 4 ] and the references given there ) . From the 1 This paper was read at a meeting of the Econometric Society , Chicago , December 27 , 1952 . The work of the authors was prepared for the Office of Naval Research under contracts N6onr - 25133 ( NR - 047 - 004 ) and Nonr - 358 ( 01 ) ( NR - 047 - 006 ) , respectively . 266 KENNETH J . ARROW AND GERARD DEBRELT point of view of normative economics the problem of existence of an equilibrium for a competitive system is therefore also basic . To study this question , it is first necessary to specify more carefully than is generally done the precise assumptions of a competitive economy . The main results of this paper are two theorems stating very general conditions under which a competitive equilibrium will exist . Loosely speaking , the first theorem asserts that if every individual has initially some positive quantity of every com - modity available for sale , then a competitive equilibrium will exist . The second theorem asserts the existence of competitive equilibrium if there are some types of labor with the following two properties : ( 1 ) each individual can supply some positive amount of at least one such type of labor ; and ( 2 ) each such type of labor has a positive usefulness in the production of desired commodities . The conditions of the second theorem , particularly , may be expected to be satisfied in a wide variety of actual situations , though not , for example , if there is insuf - ficient substitutability in the structure of production . The assumptions made below are , in several respects , weaker and closer to economic reality than A . Wald ' s [ 23 ] . Unlike his models , ours presents an in - tegrated system of production and consumption which takes account of the circular flow of income . The proof of existence is also simpler than his . Neither the uniqueness nor the stability of the competitive solution is investigated in this paper . The latter study would require specification of the dynamics of a competitive market as well as the definition of equilibrium . Mathematical techniques are set - theoretical . A central concept is that of an abstract economy , a generalization of the concept of a game . The last section contains a detailed historical note . 1 . STATEMENT OF THE FIRST EXISTENCE THEOREM FOR A COMPETITIVE EQUILIBRIUh5 1 . 0 . In this section , a model of a competitive economy will be described , and certain assumptions will be made concerning the production and consump - tion units in the economy . The notion of equilibrium for such an economy will be defined , and a theorem stated about the existence of this equilibrium . 1 . 1 . We suppose there are a finite number of distinct commodities ( including all kinds of services ) . Each commodity may be bought or sold for delivery at one of a finite number of distinct locations and one of a finite number of future time points . For the present purposes , the same commodity at two different locations or two different points of time will be regarded as two different com - modities . Hence , there are altogether a finite number of commodities ( when the concept is used in the extended sense of including spatial and temporal specifica - tions ) . Let the number of commodities be I ; the letter h , which runs from 1 to I , will designate different commodities . 1 . 2 . 0 . The commodities , or at least some of them , are produced in production units ( e . g . , firms ) . The number of production units will be assumed to be a finite number n ; different production units will be designated by the letter j . Certain bmic assumptions will be made about the technological nature of the production process ; before stating them , a few elements of vector and set notation d l be given . EQUILIBRIUM FOR A COMPETITIVE ECONOMY 1 . 2 . 1 . x L y means xh I yh for each component h ; x > y means x h y but not x = y ; x > y means xh > yh for each component h . R ' is the Euclidean space of 1 dimensions , i . e . , the set of all vectors with 1 components . 0 is the vector all of whose components are 0 . ( x 1 ) , where the blank is filled in by some statement involving x , means the set of all x ' s for which that statement is true . For any set of vectors A , let - A = { x 1 - x e A ) For any sets of vectors A , ( 1 = 1 , . . . , v ) , let 1 . 2 . 2 . For each production unit j , there is a set Y j of possible production plans . An element yj of Y j is a vector in R ' , the hth component of which , yhj , designates the output of commodity h according to that plan . Inputs are treated as negative components . Let Y Y j ; then the elements of Y represent = zj " , l all possible input - output schedules for the production sector as a whole . The following assumptions about the sets Y j will be made : 1 . a . Y j is a closed convex subset of R1 containing 0 ( j = 1 , . . . , n ) . Assumption 1 . a . implies non - increasing returns to scale , for if y , e Y , and 0 5 X 5 1 , then Xyj = Xyj + ( 1 - X ) O E Y j , since 0 e Y j and Y j is convex . If we assumed in addition the additivity of production possibility vectors , Y j would be a convex cone , i . e . , constant returns to scale would prevail . If , however , we assume that among the factors used by a firm are some which are not trans - ferable in the market and so do not appear in the list of commodities , the pro - duction possibility vectors , if we consider only the components which cor - respond to marketable commodities , will not satisfy the additivity axiom . ' The closure of Y j merely says that if vectors arbitrarily close to yj are in Y , , then so is y j . Naturally , 0 e Y j , since a production unit can always go out of existence . It is to be noted that the list of production units should include not 2 The existence of factors private to the firm is the standard justification in economic theory for diminishing returns to scale . See , e . g . , the discussion of " free rationed goods " by Professor Hart [ 9 ] , pp . 4 , 38 ; also , Hicks [ lo ] , pp . 82 - 83 ; Samuelson [ 18 ] , pp . 84 . 268 KENNETH J . - 4RROW AND GERARD DEBREU only actually existing ones but those that might enter the market under suitable price conditions . 1 . b . says that one cannot have an aggregate production possibility vector with a positive component unless at least one component is negative . I . e . , it is im - possible to have any output unless there is some input . 1 . c . asserts the impossibility of two production possibility vectors which ex - actly cancel each other , in the sense that the outputs of one are exactly the in - puts of the other . The simplest justification for 1 . c . is to note that some type of labor is necessary for any production activity , while labor cannot be produced by production - units . If y e Y , and y Z 0 , then y1 , < 0 for some h corresponding to a type of labor , so that - y , > 0 , ( here , yh is the hth component of the vector y ) . Since labor cannot be produced , - g cannot belong to Y . ~ Since commodities are differentiated according to time as well as physical characteristics , investment plans which involve future planned purchases and sales are included in the model of production used here . 1 . 2 . 3 . The preceding assumptions have related to the technological aspects of production . Under the usual assumptions of perfect competition , the economic motivation for production is the maximization of profits taking prices as given . One property of the competitive equilibrium must certainly be 1 . yT maximizes p * . yj over the set Yi , for each j . Here , the asterisks denote equilibrium values , and p * denotes the equilibrium price ~ e c t o r . ~ he above condition is the first of a series which , taken together , define the notion of competitive equilibrium . 1 . 3 . 0 . Analogously to production , we assume the existence of a number of consumption units , typically families or individuals but including also institu - tional consumers . The number of consumption units is m ; different consumption units will be designated by the letter i . For any consumption unit i , the vector in R ' representing its consumption will be designated by x i . The hth compo - nent , xhi , represents the quantity of the hth commodity consumed by the ith individual . For any commodity , other than a labor service supplied by the in - dividual , the rate of consumption is necessarily non - negative . For labor services , the amount supplied may be regarded as the negative of the rate of " consump - t ' ion , " so that xhi 5 0 if h denotes a labor service . Let d : denote the set of com - modities which are labor services . For any h e C , we may suppose there is some upper limit to the amount supplied , i . e . , a lower limit to xhi , since , for example , he cannot supply more than 24 hours of labor in a day . 11 . The set of consumption vectors X i available to individual i ( = 1 , . . . , m ) is a closed convex subset of R ' which is bounded from below ; i . e . , there is a vector f ; such that 5 xi for all xi E Xi . The assumptions about production used here are a generalization of the " linear pro - gramming " assumptions . The present set is closely related to that given by Professor Koop - mans ( 121 . In particular , 1 . b . is Koopmans ' " Impossibility of the Land of Cockaigne , " 1 . c . is " Irreversibilitp " ; see [ 12 ] , pp . 48 - 50 . For any two vectors u , v , the notation u . 0 denotes their inner product , i . e . , ui , vh . h Since ~ ~ h j is positive for outputs , negative for inputs , p * . y , denotes the profit from t , he production plan yj at prices p * . EQUILIBRIUM FOR - 4 COMPETITIVE ECONOI \ IY 269 The set Xi includes all consumption vectors among which the individual could conceivably choose if there were no budgetary restraints . Impossible combinations of commodities , such as the supplying of several types of labor to a total amount of more than 24 hours a day or the consumption of a bundle of commodities insufficient to maintain life , are regarded as excluded from Xi . 1 . 3 . 1 . As is standard in economic theory , the choice by the consumer from a given set of alternative consumption vectors is supposed to be made in accord - ance with a preference scale for which there is a utility indicator function ui ( ~ i ) such that ui ( xi ) 2 ui ( x : ) if and only if xi is preferred or indifferent to z : according to individual i . 1II . a . ua ( xi ) is a continuous function on Xi . 1II . b . For awy x ; a Xi , there is an x : E Xi such that ui ( xl ) > u , ( xi ) . 1II . c . If ui ( xi ) > ui ( x : ) and 0 < t < I , then ui [ txi + ( I - t ) xi ] > ui ( x : ) . 1II . a . is , of course , a standard assumption in consumers ' demand theory . I t is usually regarded as a self - evident corollary of the assumption that choices are made in accordance with an ordering , but this is not accurate . Actually , for Xi a subset of a Euclidean space ( as is ordinarily taken for granted ) , the existence of a continuous utility indicator is equivalent to the following assump - tion : for all xi , the sets ( xi I xi a Xi and xi preferred or indifferent to xi ] and { xi I xi a Xi and xi preferred or indifferent to x ) f are closed ( in Xi ) ; see Debreu [ 6 ] . The assumption amounts to a continuity assumption on the preference relation . 1II . b . assumes that there is no point of saturation , no consumption vector which the individual would prefer to all others . It should be noted that this assumption can be weakened to state merely that no consumption vector attain - able with the present technological and resource limitations is a point of satura - tion . Formally , the revised assumption would read , III ' . b . for any xi a xi , there is an xi a Xi such that 24i ( x ; ) > ui ( xi ) , where xi has the meaning given it in 3 . 3 . 0 . below . 1II . c . corresponds to the usual assumption that the indifference surfaces are convex in the sense that the set [ xi I xi a Xi and ui ( xi ) 1 a ] is a convex set for any fixed real number a . The last statement , which asserts the quasi - concavity of the function ui ( zi ) is indeed implied by 1II . c . ( but is obviously weaker ) . For suppose z1 and z2 are such that ui ( z " ) 2 a ( n = 1 , 2 ) and 0 < t < 1 . Let za = tzl + ( 1 - 2 ) zZ . Without loss of generality , we may suppose that ui ( zl ) 2 ui ( z2 ) . If the strict inequality holds , then u . i ( x3 ) > ui ( zZ ) 2 a , by 1II . c . Suppose now ~ ai ( zl ) = ui ( z2 ) , and suppose ui ( xa ) < ui ( z2 ) . Then , from III . a . , we can find z4 , a strict convex combination of 23 and zl , such that ui ( x3 ) < ui ( z4 ) < u , ( zl ) = ui ( z2 ) . The point zS can be expressed as a strict convex combination of x4 and 22 ; since ui ( x4 ) < tii ( z2 ) , it follows from 1II . c . that ui ( x3 ) > 1 ~ i ( x4 ) , which contradicts the inequality just stated . Hence , the supposition that ui ( x3 ) < ui ( z5 ) is false , so that 2si ( x3 ) 2 14i ( x2 ) 2 a . Actually , it is customary in consumers ' demand theory to make a slightly stronger assumption than the quasi - concavity of ud ( xi ) , namely , that ui ( xi ) is strictly quasi - concave , by which is meant that if ui ( zi ) 2 ui ( xi ) and 0 < t < 1 , then ui [ tzi + ( 1 - t ) zi ] > ui ( z : ) . This is equivalent to saying that the indifference surfaces do not contain any line segments , 270 KENNETH J . ARROW AND GERARD DEBREU which again is equivalent to the assumption that for all sets of prices and incomes , the demand functions , which give the coordinat , es of the consumption vector which maximizes utility for a given set of prices and income , are single - valued . Clearly , strict quasi - concavity is a stronger assumption than III . c . 6 1 . 3 . 2 . We also assume that the ith consumption unit is endowed with a vec - tor li of initial holdings of the different types of commodities available and a contractual claim to the share aij of the profit of the jth production unit for each j . 1V . a . { i 6 R ' ; for some xi E X i , xi < Ti ; 1V . b . for all i , j , crij 2 0 ; for all j , EL1 crij = 1 The component [ hi denotes the amount of commodity h held initially by indi - vidual i . We may extend this to include all debts payable in terms of commodity h , debts owed to individual i being added to { hi and debts owed by him being deducted . Thus , for h E 2 , { hi would differ from 0 only by the amount of debts payable in terms of that particular labor service . ( It is not necessary that the debts cancel out for the economy as a whole ; thus debts to or from foreigners may be included , provided they are payable in some commodity . ) The second half of 1V . a . asserts in effect that every individual could consume out of his initial stock in some feasible way and still have a positive amount of each commodity available for trading in the market . & This assumption is clearly unrealistic . However , the necessity of this assumption or some parallel one for the validity of the existence theorem points up an important principle ; to have equilibrium , it is necessary that each individual possess some asset or be capable of supplying some labor service which commands a positive price at equilibrium . In IV . a , this is guaranteed by insisting that an individual be capable of supplying something of each commodity ; at least one will be valuable ( in the sense of having a price greater than zero ) at equilibrium since there will be at least one positive price at equilibrium , as guaranteed by the assumptions about the nature of the price system made in 1 . 4 below . A much weaker assumption of the same type is made in Theorem 11 . 1 . 3 . 3 . The basic economic motivation in the choice of a consumption vector is that of maximizing utility among all consumption vectors which satisfy the budget restraint , i . e . , whose cost at market prices does not exceed the indi - vidual ' s income . His income , in turn , can be regarded as having three com - ponents : wages , receipts from sales of initially - held stocks of commodities and 6 The remarks in the text show that strict quasi - concavity implies III . c . , while 1II . c . implies quasi - concavity . To show that strict quasi - concavity is actually a stronger as - sumption than III . c . , we need only exhibit a utility function satisfying 1II . c . but not strictly quasi - concave . The function u , ( ~ , ) = E 7 sh , has these properties . h - 1 6 This assumption plays the same role as the one made by Professor von Neumann in his study of a dynamic model of production [ 16 ] that each commodity enters into every production process either as an input or as an output . EQUILIBRIUM FOR , 4 COMPETITIVE ECONOMY 27 1 claims expressible in terms of them , and dividends from the profits of produc - tion units . This economic principle must certainly hold for equilibrium values of prices and of the profits of the production units . 2 . 21 maximizes u ~ ( x , ) ovep the set ( xi / xi E X i , p * . xi 5 p * . < i + C . L ~ ~ i , p * . YT 1 . This , like Condition 1 in 1 . 2 . 3 . , is a condition of a competitive equilibrium . Because of the definition of labor services supplied as negative components of xi , p * . xi represents the excess of expenditures on commodities over wage income . The term p * - ti represents the receipts from the sale of initially - held commodities . The term aijp * . yg denotes the revenue of consumption unit i from dividends . 1 . 4 . 0 . It remains to discuss the system of prices and the meaning of an equi - librium on any market . Condition 3 basically expresses the requirement that prices be nonnegative and not all zero . Without any loss of generality , we may normalize the vector p * by ~ equiring that the sum of its coordinates be 1 , since all relations are homoge - neous ( of the first order ) in p . 1 . 4 . 1 . Conditions 1 and 2 are the conditions for the equilibrium of the pro - duction and consumption units , respectively , for given p * . Hence , the supply and demand for all commodities is determined as a function of p ( not necessarily single - valued ) if we vary p and at the same time instruct each production and consumption unit to behave as if the announced value of p were the equilibrium value . The market for any commodity is usually considered to be in equilibrium when the supply for that commodity equals the demand ; however , we have to consider the possibility that at a zero price , supply will exceed demand . This is the classical case of a free good . Let The vector z has as its components the excess of demand over supply ( including both produced and initially - available supply ) for the various commodities . 4 . z * 5 o , p * . z * = 0 . Condition 4 expresses the discussion of the preceding paragraph . We have broadly the dynamic picture of the classical " law of supply and demand " ; see , e . g . , [ 18 ] , p . 263 . That is , the price of a commodity rises if demand exceeds supply , falls if supply exceeds demand . Equilibrium is therefore incompatible with excess demand on any market , since price would simply rise ; hence the first part of Condition 4 for equilibrium is justified . An excess of supply over demand drives price down , but , in view of Condition 3 , no price can be driven below 0 . Hence , x ; < 0 for some commodity h is possible , but only if ph * = 0 . 272 KENNETI - I J . ARROW AND GERARD DEBREU Since pt 2 0 for all h and zhX S 0 for a11 h , p * . z * = xh $ zh * is a sum of non - positive terms . This sum can be zero if and only if ph * zh * = 0 for all h , i . e . , either zhX = 0 or zh * < 0 and pt = 0 . Condition 4 , therefore , sums up precisely the equilibrium conditions that are de ~ ired . ~ 1 . 4 . 2 . In the preceding paragraph , it was implicitly assumed that for a com - modity with a positive price the entire initial stock held by a consumption unit was available as a supply on the market along with amounts supplied by pro - duction and consumption units as a result of profit - and utility - maximization respectively ( in this context , consumption by a consumption unit out of his own stocks counts both as aupply on the market and as demand to the same numerical amount ) . This becomes evident upon noting that each individual spends his entire potential income because of the absence of saturation ( and since the model covers his entire economic life ) . More precisely , 1II . b . shows that there exists an z : such that where x : is the equilibrium value of x i . Let t be an arbitrarily small positive number ; by III . c . , u ; [ tx ; + ( 1 - t ) x : ] > ui ( x : ) . That is , in every neighborhood of x : , there is a point of Xi preferred to x : . From Condition 2 , Suppose the strict inequality held . Then we could choose a point of Xi for which the inequality still held and which was preferred to x : , a contradiction of Con - dition 2 . To achieve his equilibrium consumption plan , x : , individual i must actually receive the total income given on the right - hand side . He cannot therefore withhold any initial holdings of commodity h from the market if ph * > 9 . 1 . 5 . 0 . DEFINITION : A set of vectors ( xT , . . . , x : , YT , . . . , y * n , p * ) is said to be a competitive equilibrium if it satisjies Conditions 1 - 4 . 1 . 5 . 1 . THEOREM I - I V , I . For any economic system satisfying Assumptions there i s a competitive equilibrium . 2 . A LEMMA ON ABSTRACT ECONOMIES 2 . 0 . In this section , the concept of an abstract economy , a generalization of that of a game , will be introduced , and a definition of equilibrium given . A lemma giv - 7 The view that some commodities might be free goods because supply always exceeded demand goes back to the origins of marginal utility theory ; eee Menger [ IS ] , pp . 98 - 100 . The critical importance of rephrasing the equilibrium condition for prices in the form of Condition 4 for the problem of the existence of a solution to the Walrasian equilibrium equations was first perceived by Schlesinger [ 19 ] . EQUILIBRIUM FOR A COMPETITIVE ECONOMY 273 ing conditions for the existence of equilibrium of an abstract economy will be stated . The lemma is central in the proofs of the theorems stated in this paper . 2 . 1 . Let there be v subsets of R ' , % , ( L = 1 , . . . , v ) . Let 8 = X ? Is X - . X 8 , , i . e . , 8 is the set of ordered V - tuples a = ( al , . . . , a , ) , where a , E 8 , for L = 1 , - . . , v . For each L , suppose there is a real function J , defined over 8 . Let $ 8 , = 911 X 21p X . . . X X 81 + 1 X . . . X z v , i . e . , the set of ordered ( v - 1 ) - tuples a , = ( al , . - , a , - l , a , + l , - . . , av ) , where a , , e8 , , for each L ' # L . Let A , ( a , ) be a function defining for each point 6 , E % , a subset of % , . Then the sequence [ ? Il , . . . , 8 , , fl , . . . , f , , Al ( bl ) , . . . , A , ( a , ) ] will be termed an abstract economy . 2 . 2 . To motivate the preceding definition , consider first the special case where the functions A , ( @ , ) are in fact constants , i . e . , A , ( d , ) is a fixed subset of a , , independent of a , ; for simplicity , suppose that A , ( @ , ) = 8 , . Then the follow - ing interpretation may be given : there are v individuals ; the ~ t h can choose any element a , e % , ; after the choices are made , the 6th individual receives an amount f , ( a ) , where a = ( al , . . . , a , ) . In this case , obviously , the abstract economy reduces to a game . In a game , the pay - off to each player depends upon the strategies chosen by all , but the domain from which strategies are to be chosen is given to each player independently of the strategies chosen by other players . An abstract economy , then , may be characterized as a generalization of a game in which the choice of an action by one agent affects both the pay - off and the domain of ac - tions of other agents . The need for this generalization in the development of an abstract model of the economic system arises from the special position of the consumer . His " actions " can be regarded as alternative consumption vectors ; but these are restricted by the budget restraint that the cost of the goods chosen at current prices not exceed his income . But the prices and possibly some or all of the com - ponents of his income are determined by choices made by other agents . Hence , for a consumer , who is one agent in the economic system , the function A , ( @ , ) must not be regarded as a constant . 2 . 3 . In [ 14 ] , Professor Nash has formally introduced the notion of an equi - librium point for a game . 8 The definition can easily be extended to an abstract economy ( see Debreu [ 5 ] , p . 888 . ) DEFINITION : a * is an equilibrium point of [ % I , - - . , 8 , , fl , . . . , f , , Al ( Gl ) , . , AI ( ~ Y ) ] = 1 , . . , V , a : e A1 ( 8 ) and f , ( dT , a : ) = maz , , , ~ , , a ; , if , for all L fl ( 6 : , a , ) . Thus an equilibrium point is characterized by the property that each indi - vidual is maximizing the pay - off to him , given the actions of the other agents , over the set of actions permitted him in view of the other agents ' actions . 2 . 4 . We repeat here some definitions from [ 5 ] , pp . 888 - 889 . The graph of A , ( a , ) is the set { a / a , E A , ( a , ) 1 . This clearly generalizes to the multi - valued functions A , ( 6 , ) the ordinary definition of the graph of a function . 8 Actually , the concept had been formulated by Cournot [ 3 ] in the special case of an oligopolistic economy , see pp . 80 - 81 . 274 KENNETH J . ARROW AND GERARD DEBREU The function A , ( d , ) is said to be continuous at 6 ; if for every a : e ~ , ( a : ) and every sequence { d : ) converging to a : , there is a sequence ( a : ) converging to a : such that a : e A , ( & : ) for all n . Again , if A , ( d , ) were a single - valued func - tion , this definition would coincide with the ordinary definition of continuity . 2 . 5 . LEMMA : If , for each L , 3 , is compact and convex , f , ( d , , a , ) is continuous on ' 3 and quasi - concaveg in a , for every ti , , A , ( & , ) is a continuous function whose graph is a closed set , and , for every & , , the set A , ( d , ) is convex and non - empty , then the abstract economy [ gl , . , ' 3 , , fl , . . , f , , A1 ( dl ) , . . , A , ( & , ) ] has an equilibrium point . This lemma generalizes Mash ' s theorem on the existence of equilibrium points for games [ 14 ] . It is a special case of the Theorem in [ El , when taken in conjunc - tion with the Remark on p . 889 . ' ' 3 . PROOF OF THEOREM I 3 . 1 . 0 . We will here define an abstract economy whose equilibrium points will have all the properties of a competitive equilibrium . There will be m + n + 1 participants , the m consumption units , the n production units , and a fictitious participant who chooses prices , and who may be termed the market participant . For any consumption unit i , let Zi denote a point in X1 X . . . X Xi - l X Xi + l X . . . X X , X Y1 X . . . X Y , X P , i . e . , Zi has as components xit ( if # i ) , yj ( j = 1 , . . . , n ) , p . Define We will then study the abstract economy E = [ XI , . . . , X , , Yl , . . . , Y , , P , UI ( XI ) , ' , ~ m ( xm ) , p . yl , . . . , p . yn , p . 2 , AI ( ~ I ) , . . . , Am ( Zm ) , YI , . . . , Y , , PI . That is , each of the first m participants , the consumption units , chooses a vector xi from X i , subject to the restriction that xi e Ai ( zi ) , and receives a pay - off ui ( x4 ) ; the jth out of the next n participants , the production units , chooses a vector yj from Yj ( unrestricted by the actions of other participants ) , and receives a pay - off p . yi ; and the last agent , the market participant , chooses p from P ( again the choice is unaffected by the choices of other participants ) , and receives p . z . Here , z is defined as in 1 . 4 . 1 . in terms of xi ( i = 1 , . . . , m ) and y j ( j = 1 , . . - , n ) . The domains Xi , Yi , P have been defined in 1 . 3 . 0 . , 1 . 2 . 2 . , 1 . 4 . 0 . , respectively . 3 . 1 . 1 . Only two of the component elements of the abstract economy E call for special comment . One is the pay - off function of the market participant . Note that z is determined by xi and yj . Suppose the market participant does 9 For the definition of a quasi - concave function , see 1 . 3 . 1 . above . 10 To see this , we need only remark that a compact convex set is necessarily a contractible polyhedron ( the definition of a contractible polyhedron is given in [ 5 ] pp . 887 - 8238 ) , that the compactness of the graph of A , ( a , ) follows from its closure , as assumed here , and the com - pactness and hence boundedness of ' 3 which contains the graph of A , ( a , ) , and that the set ( a , 1 a , e A , ( d , ) , f , ( d , , a , ) = m & Xo : r , i , ( ~ , ) f , ( a , , a : ) ) is , for any given d , , a convex and therefore contractible set when f , ( 6 , , a , ) is quasi - concave in a , . 275 EQUILIBRIUM FOR A COMPETITIVE ECONOMY not maximize instantaneously but , taking other participants ' choices as given , adjusts his choice of prices so as to increase his pay - off . For given 2 , p . 2 is a linear function of p ; it can be increased by increasing ph for those commodities for which zh > 0 , decreasing ph if zh < 0 ( provided ph is not already 0 ) . But this is precisely the classical " law of supply and demand " ( see 1 . 4 . 1 . above ) , and so the motivation of the market participant corresponds to one of the elements of a competitive equilibrium . This intuitive comment is not , however , the justi - fication for this particular choice of a market pay - off , that justification will be found in 3 . 2 . " 3 . 1 . 2 . In the definition of A ; ( Za ) , the expression xj " = l cuijp . yj is replaced by max [ O , Z ; = I cuijp . yj ] . For arbitrary choices of p and yj ( within their respective domains , P and Yj ) , it is possible that ( xi / aijp ' yj } xi E Xi , pxi 6 p . { i + ~ , L I is empty . To avoid this difficulty , we make the replacement indicated . Since , for some z ' i a X i , Ti 2 x : ( by Assumption 1V . a . 1 . 3 . 2 . above ) , p . ( i 2 pex ' i , and so that Ad ( & ) is non - empty . Of course , it is necessary to show that the substitution makes no difference at equilibrium . By definition of E - equilibrium ( see 2 . 3 . above ) , y : maximizes p * . yj subject to the condition that y , E Yj ( here asterisks denote E - equilibrium values ) . By Assumption 1 . a ( see 1 . 2 . 2 . above ) , 0 a Yi ; hence , in particular By Assumption 1V . b . ; Cjal aijp * . y : 2 0 , and max [ O , xi " , l aijp * . y : ] = xj " - l aijp * . y : . Therefore , From the definition of an equilibrium point for an abstract economy and the pay - off for a consumption unit , ( 2 ) Condition 2 is satisfied at an equilibrium point of the abstract economy E . 3 . 2 . Before establishing the existence of an equilibrium point for E , it will be shown that such an equilibrium point is also a competitive equilibrium in the sense of 1 . 5 . 0 . It has already been shown that Condition 2 is satisfied , while Conditions 1 and 3 follow immediately from the definition of an equilibrium point and the pay - offs specified . In 1 . 4 . 2 . , it was shown that equation ( I ) of that section followed from Con - dition 2 , which we have already shown to hold here , and Assumptions 1II . b . and 1II . c . Sum over i , and recall that , from 1V . b . ELl aij = 1 . Then , from the definition of x 11 A concept similar to that of the present market pay - off is found i11 Debreu [ 4 ] sections 11 , 12 . 276 KENNETH J . ARROW AND GERARD DEBREU Let 6h be the vector in which every component is 0 , except the hth , which is 1 . Then ah a P ( see Condition 3 , 1 . 4 . 0 . ) . Hence , by definition of an equilibrium point , ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) together assert Condition 4 . It has been shown that any equilibrium point of E satisfies Conditions 1 - 4 and hence is a competitive equilibrium . The converse is obviously also true . 3 . 3 . 0 . Unfortunately , the Lemma stated in 2 . 5 is not directly applicable to El since the action spaces are not compact . Let xi = { xi I xi a X i , there exist sit a Xi , for each it # i and y , a Y j for each j such that z 5 01 , Pj = { yj I yj a Y j , there exist xi a Xi for each i , yjt a Yjj for each j ' # j such that z S 0 ) . is the set of consumption vectors available to individual i if he had complete control of the economy but had to take account of resource limitations . Pi has a similar interpretation . We wish to prove that these sets are all bounded . It is clear that an E equilibrium x ? must belong to x i and that an E equilibrium yf must belong to Pi . 3 . 3 . 1 . Suppose P1 is unbounded . Then there exist sequences y : , x : such that Let Then , from Assumption 11 , Xi k 2 t , so that k Let 2 = maxi / y ; 1 ; for k sufficiently large , p 2 1 . From Assumption I . a . , ( l / p " ) y 5 ( 1 - E Y j . From ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) , 1 / ~ ~ ~ ) 0 n ( 3 ) ( y ; / $ ) 2 ( f - { ) / pk ; & / $ E Y j for k sufficiently large ; j - 1 limp li = m ; / y5 / pk / $ 1 . k - w EQUILIBRIUM FOR A COMPETITIVE ECONOMY 277 From the last statement , a subsequence ( kg ) can be chosen so that for every j From ( 3 ) , ( 4 ) , and the closure of Y j ( see Assumption I . a . ) , ? a gQ 2 0 , and yp a Yj . 3 - 1 From ( 5 ) , EGl yg E y ; = 0 , or , for any given j ' , Y . From Assumption I . b . , xjn _ ~ Since 0 E Y j for all j , both the left - hand side and y ; , belong to Y . The right hand side therefore belongs to both Y and - Y ; by I . c . , yg7 = 0 for any j ' . From ( 4 ) , then , the equality 1 y ; q 1 = pb , can hold for at most finitely many q for fixed j . But this is a contradiction since , from the definition of rkq , the equality must hold for at least one j for each q , and hence for infinitely many q for some j . It has therefore been shown that PI is bounded , and , by the same argument , ( 7 ) Pj is bounded for all j . 3 . 3 . 2 . Let xi E x i . By definition , By definition , again , it follows that yj a Y j for all j ; also xi ! 1 Es . From ( 7 ) in 3 . 3 . 1 . , the right - hand side is bounded . ( 2 ) zi is bounded for all i . 3 . 3 . 3 . We can therefore choose a positive real number c so that the cube C = { X I I xh 1 5 c for all hj contains in its interior all X ( and all pj . Let xi = xi n C , P , = yj n C . 3 . 3 . 4 . Now introduce a new abstract economy g , identical with E in 3 . 1 . , except that Xi is replaced by xi and Yj by ' iTi everywhere . Let A " i ( Zi ) be the resultant modification of A & ( ) ( See 3 . 1 . 0 . ) . It will now be verified that all the conditions of the Lemma are satisfied for this new abstract economy . From I1 and I . a . , X , and Yj are closed convex sets ; the set C is a compact convex set ; therefore , xi and Pj are compact convex sets . P is obviously com - pact and convex . For a consumption unit , the continuity and quasi - concavity of % ( xi ) are assured by 1II . a . and 1II . c . ( see the discussion in 1 . 3 . 1 . ) . For a production 278 KENNETH J . ARROW AND GERARD DEBREU unit or the market participant , the continuity is trivial , and the quasi - concavity holds for any linear function . For a production unit or the market participant , Yj or P is a constant and therefore trivially continuous ; the closure of the graph is simply the closure of 9 = x1 X . . . X I ? , X F1 X . . . X F , X P . The sets Y j , P are certainly convex and non - empty . For a consumption unit , the set xi ( & ) is defined by a linear inequality in xi ( 3 . 1 . 0 . ) and hence is certainly convex . For each i , let xi have the property x : 6 fi , : Xi ( see Assumption 1V . a . ) ; set y ; = 0 . Since ELl x : - x ; , y : - { 5 0 , X i e Xi for each i , by definition , and hence xi e C . It was shown in 3 . 1 . 2 . that xi eAi ( Zi ) for all Zi ; since A " i ( 5 ; ) = [ A , ( & ) ] n 6 , A " ; ( & ) contains x : and there - fore is non - null . Since the budget restraint is a weak inequality between two continuous func - tions of a , it is obvious that the graph of A " ; ( & ) is closed . 3 . 3 . 5 . It remains only to show that Ai ( zj ) is continuous . REMARK : If p . { a > min , , , z , p . zi , then Ai ( 3i ) is continuous at the point 2 ; = ( XI , . . . , xi - 1 , Xi + l 7 . . , xm , yl 7 . . . Vn PI . PROOF : Let Ti = p . { i + max [ O , xi " , l C Y ; , ~ . yj ] . When 2 : converges to 2 ~ , limr , , , p k = p , limk , , ri k = ri . Consider a point xi e xi ( % ) ; then , ( a ) If p . xi < r i , then pk . zi < r : for all k sufficiently large , and xi e xi ( f ! ) . Then we need only choose x : = xi for all k sufficiently large . ( See the definition of continuity in 2 . 4 ) . ( b ) If p . xi = T i , choose xi , by hypothesis , so that xi e ; Pi , p . x : < p . ( i 6 ri . For k sufficiently large , pk . x { < r : . Define xi @ ) = Ax ; + ( 1 - A ) $ : . , and consider the set of values of X for which 0 5 X 6 1 , xi @ ) e A " ; ( & ) . Since xi is convex , xi ( A ) e X i . Then one must have if we note that the denominator is positive for k sufficiently large , since p . x ; = 1 . ; > p . x : . The largest value of X satisfying the above conditions is , then Xk = min [ I , ( Ti k - p " x ~ ) / ( pk . xi - p " xi ) ] . For k sufficiently large , A " 0 . Then xi ( X9 e A & : ) for all k sufficiently large . But also . k Jim Tk = Ti = 11m p . xi , SO that lim X " 1 , and lim xi ( hk ) = xi . k - rm k - m k - rm k - m The continuity of A i ( ~ i ) is therefore established . If Assumption 1V . a holds , then the condition of the Remark is trivially satis - fiedfor any p e P , and y j e pj ( ' j = 1 , . . . , n ) . EQUILIBRIUM FOR A COMPETITIVE ECONOMY 279 * * * 3 . 4 . 0 . The existence of an equilibrium point ( x : , - - . , x , , yl , . - - , y n , p * ) for the abstract economy 8 has , therefore , been demonstrated . I t will now be shown that this point is also an equilibrium point for the abstract economy E described in 3 . 1 . The converse is obvious ; therefore a competitive equilibrium is equivalent to an equilibrium . ( See end of 3 . 2 . ) . 3 . 4 . 1 . From Assumption 1 . a . and the definition of C ( 3 . 3 . 3 . ) it follows that 0 r pg for each j . So that , as in 3 . 1 . 2 . ) From the definition of A ; ( & ) , Sum over i ; then p * . x * 5 p * . { + p * - y * , or p * . z * 5 0 . For fixed z * , p * maxi - mizes p - z * for p r P ; by an argument similar to that used in 3 . 2 . , this implies that From ( 1 ) and the definitions in 3 . 3 . 0 . , x ? r 2 ; , y : r pj for all i and j , and , by 3 . 3 . 3 . , x : and y : are interior points of C . Suppose , for some x : r A & : ) , ui ( x : ) > ui ( x5 ) . By I11 . c . ) u , [ tz : + ( I . - t ) xt ] > ui ( x5 ) if 0 < t < 1 . But for t sufficiently small , tx : + ( 1 - t ) x5 belongs to C . Since tx : + ( 1 - t ) zf r A ~ ( z ? ) , by the convexity of the latter set , , txi - t - ( 1 - t ) x ? r Ai ( f ? ) , for t small enough , which contradicts the definition of xf as an equilib - rium value for i ? . ( 2 ) xf maximizes ui ( xi ) for x ; r A ; ( & . Suppose , for some yj r Yj , p * . yg > p * . y ; . Then , p * . [ lyg + ( 1 - t ) y ; ] > p * . y ; for 0 < t < 1 . As in the preceding paragraph , the convex combination belongs to pi for t sufficiently small , a contradiction to the equilibrium character of yf for E . ( 3 ) yT maximizes p * . y j for yj r Yf . That p * maximizes p . z * for p r P is directly implied by the definition of equilib - rium point for 8 , since the domain of p is the same in both abstract economies . * * It has been shown , therefore , that the point ( x : , - . , x , , y1 , . . , y * , , p * ) is also an equilibrium point for E ; as sho ~ vn in 3 . 2 . , it is , therefore , a competitive equilibrium . Theorem I has thus been proved . 4 . STATEMEKT OF THE SECOND EXISTENCE THEOREM FOR - 4 COMPETITIVE EQUILIBRIUM 4 . 0 . As noted in 1 . 3 . 2 . , Assumption IVa , which states in effect that a consump - tion unit has initially a positive amount of every commodity available for trad - 280 KENNETH J . ARROW AND GERARD DEBREU ing , is clearly unrealistic , and a weakening is very desirable . Theorem I1 ac - complishes this goal , though at the cost of making certain additional assumptions in different directions and complicating the proof . Assumptions 1 - 111 are re - tained . The remaining assumptions for Theorem I1 are given in the following paragraphs of this section . 4 . 1 . Assumption 1V . a . is replaced by the following : IV1 . a . { i e R ' ; for some zi e Xi , xi S < i and , for at least one h E 6 , < { hi . The set 6 is defined more closely in 4 . 4 below ; briefly , it consists of all types of labor that are always productive . IV . ' a . is a weakening of 1V . a . ; it is now only supposed that the individual is capable of supplying at least one type of productive labor . IV . ' a . and 1V . b . together will be denoted by IV ' . 4 . 2 . Let X = ELl Xi . V . There exist x e X and y e Y such that x < y + < . V asserts that it is possible to arrange the economic system by choice of pro - duction and consumption vectors so that an excess supply of all commodities can be achieved . 4 . 3 . As in 3 . 2 . , 6 " will be the positive unit vector of the hth axis in R ' . For any X > 0 , xi + Xah represents an increase A in the amount of the hth commodity over xi , with all other commodities remaining unchanged in consumption . DEFINITIOX : Let 9 be the set of commodities such that if i = 1 , . . . , m , xi e X i , h E a ) , then there exists X > 0 such that xi + Xah e X i and is the set of commodities which are always desired by every consumer . VI . The set a ) is not empty . Assumption VI is a stronger form of 1II . b . as given in 1 . 3 . 1 . In the same man - ner as noted there , VI can be weakened to assert that the set a ) ' of commodities desired for all consumption vectors compatible with existing resource and tech - nological conditions is not empty . Formally we could introduce the DEFINITION : Let D ' be the set of commodities such that if i = 1 , . . . , m , xi e xi , h e a ) ' , then there exists X > 0 such that xi + ~ 6 ~ e Xi and VI can then be replaced by : VI ' . The set D ' is not empty . 4 . 4 . DEFINITION : Let 6 be the set of commodities such that if y e Y , h e 6 , then ( a ) yh S 0 and ( b ) for some y ' e Y and all h ' # h , 1 yhl , while for at least one hN e 9 , & * > yhe . VII . The set 6 is not empty . Assumption VII plays a key role in the following proof . We interpret the set 6 as consisting of some types of labor . Part ( a ) simply asserts that no labor service , at least of those included in 6 , can be produced by a production unit . Part ( b ) asserts that , if no restriction is imposed on the amount ( consumed ) of EQUILIBRIUM FOR A COMPETITIVE ECONOMY 28 1 some one type of " productive " labor , then it is possible to increase the output . of at least one " desired " commodity ( a commodity in 3 ) without decreasing the output or increasing the input of any commodity other than the type of productive labor under consideration . A case where VII might not hold is an economic system with fixed technological coeffi - cients where production requiring a given type of labor also requires , directly or indirectly , some complementary factors . It is easy to see intuitively in this case how an equilibrium may be impossible . Given the amount of complementary resources initially available , la there will be a maximum to the quantity of labor that can be employed in the sense that no further increase in the labor force will increase the output of any commodity . Now , as is well known , the supply of labor may vary either way as real wages vary ( see Robbins 1171 ) and broadly speaking is rather inelastic with respect to real wages . In particular , as real wages tend to zero , the supply will not necessarily become zero ; on the contrary , as real incomes decrease , the necessity of satisfying more and more pressing needs may even work in the direction of increasing the willingness to work despite the increasingly less favorable terms offered . It is , therefore , quite possible that for any positive level of real wages , the supply of labor will exceed the maximum employable and hence a fortiori the demand by firms . Thus , there can be no equilibrium at positive levels of real wages . At zero real wages , on the contrary , demand will indeed be positive but of course supply of labor will be zero , so that again there will be no equilibrium . The critical point in the argument is the dis - continuity of the supply curve for labor as real wages go to zero . Assumption VII rules out any situation of limitations1 factors in which the marginal productivity of all types of labor in terms of desired commodities is zero . In conjunction with IV1 . a . , on the one hand , and VI , on the other , it insures that any individual possesses the ability to supply a commodity which has at least derived value . I t may be remarked that Assumption VII is satisfied if there is a productive process turning a form of labor into a desired commodity without the need of complementary commodities . Domestic service or other personal services may fall in this category . 13 Let $ ' = f y I y r Y , there exists zi r Xi for all i such that z 5 0 ) . I t may be remarked that VII can be effectively weakened ( in the same way that VI could be weakened to VI ' ) to VII ' . The set 6 ' i s not empty , where DEFINITION : Let 6 ' be the set of commodities such that if h r 6 ' and ( a ) y r Y , then yh 5 0 , ( b ) y r Y , then for some y ' 6 Y and all h ' # h , 2 yhf , while for at least & I one hN r 9 , y ; " > yhr . Note that III . b . , VI and VII can simultaneously be weakened to III1 . b . , VI ' , and VII ' . 4 . 5 . THEOREM 11 . For an economic system satisfying Assumptions I - 111 , IV ' , and V - VII , there is a competitive equilibrium . I2 These complementary resources may be land , raw materials critical in certain indus - trial processes , or initial capital equipment . l3 The possibility of disequilibrium and therefore unemployment through failure of Assumption VII to hold corresponds to so - called " structural unemployment . " 282 KENNETH J . ARROW AND GERARD DEBREU 5 . PROOF OF THEOREM I1 5 . 0 . Let r be the number of elements of 6 . For any E , 0 < E 5 xr , define PC = { p 1 p EP , ph 2 & for allh e 6 ) . From IV ' a , we can choose xi E Xi so that xhi 5 chi for & ll h , xhti < rhti for some h ' E 6 . For any p E Pe , ( 1 ) for some xi E Xi , paxi < p . li . 5 . 1 . 0 . The basic method of proof of Theorem I1 will besimilar to that of Theorem I . We seek to show that an equilibrium point for the abstract economy E , defined in 3 . 1 . 0 , exists . As already shown in 3 . 2 , such an equilibrium point would define a competitive equilibrium . First , the economy E is replaced by the economy Ee 1x1 , Xm , Y1 , , Yay PC , ul ( xl ) , , ~ rn ( ~ rn ) , p ' yl , , p ' yn a . e p . 2 , Al ( Zl ) , . . , A , ( Z , ) , Y1 , . , Y , , PC ] . Clearly , Ee is the same aa E , ex - cept that the price domain haa been contracted to Pe . The existence of an equi - librium point for Ee for each E will first be shown ; then , it will be shown that for some E , an equilibrium point of Ee is also an equilibrium point of E . 14 To show the existence of an equilibrium point for Ee , the same technique will be used as in proving the existence of an equilibrium point for E in Theorem I . The argument is that the equilibrium point , if it exists at all , must lie in a certain bounded domain . Hence , if we alter the abstract economy Ee by intersecting the action domains with a suitably chosen hypercube , we will not disturb the equi - librium points , if any ; but the Lemma of 2 . 5 . will now be applicable , and the existence of an equilibrium point shown ( see 3 . 3 . above ) . 5 . 1 . 1 . This section will be purely heuristic , designed to motivate the choice of the hypercube mentioned in the previous paragraph . Suppose an equilibrium * * point [ x : , . . . , x , , y1 , . . . , y * , , p * ] exists for the abstract economy Ee . Since xf E for all i , by definition ( see 3 . 1 . 0 . ) , ~ ~ ( 2 ; ) ( see also 3 . 1 . 2 . ) If we sum over i and recall that zLl ai = 1 , l4 The introduction of E ' is made necessary by the following fact : ( 1 ) of 5 . 0 may not hold for all p t P and the condition of the Remark in 3 . 3 . 5 . , may not be satisfied for all p e P . EQUILIBRIUM FOR A COMPETITIVE ECONOMY 283 Since p * maximizes p - z * for p E PE , by definition of equilibrium , p . z * d 0 for all p e PE , or , Note that , since lJ ? I ( 0 for h E 6 , by ( a ) of the first Definition in 4 . 4 by If . 3 - and 4 are defined in 1 . 4 . 1 . and 3 . 3 . I . , respectively . For any given h ' , define p as follows : ph = e for h e 6 and h # h ' ; pi , = 0 for h 4 6 and h # h ' ; phr = 1 - C h Z h l ph . Then , if h ' e 6 , phc = 1 - ( r - 1 ) s ( which is indeed Z E if E 5 $ in ) ; if h ' 4 6 , ph . = 1 - a & . From ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) , If 0 < e I ( $ $ T ) , then certainly 1 - TE > 0 , 1 - ( T - 1 ) ~ > 0 , and neces - sarily Finally , for any h , fh - ( ~ n 2 0 from IV ' a and 11 . If we divide through the first inequality in ( 3 ) by [ I - ( r - I ) & ] , ( ph - & ) , for h ' E 6 . h c 6 The same inequality between the extreme items holds for h ' ( f 6 , as can be seen by dividing through in the second inequality in ( 3 ) by ( 1 - re ) . But if e 5 ( XT ) , then we see in turn that 2re 1 , TE 5 1 - re , and , by division by r ( 1 - TE ) , & / ( I - re ) 5 l / r . From ( 4 ) , Let = lh + ( 1 , ' ~ ) ( ph - [ h ) , with 5 - ' being the vector whosecomponents are f1 , . . , t r ; then ( 5 ) z * - y * 5 p ' . The equilibrium point then will lie in a region defined by ( 5 ) and the conditions z : e X , , y : e Y j , p * e Pe . These are exactly the same as the requirements for E in the proof of Theorem I , except that f has been replaced by p ' , and P by Pe . 5 . 2 . 0 . The proof proper will now be resumed . Define 284 KENNETH J . ARROW AND GERARD DEBREU 2 : = { xi / xi e X i , and there exist xi1 e Xi ' for all if Z i , y , e Y j for all j such thatx - y 6 1 ' 1 , Pi = { y j / yj 6 Yj , and there exist xi a Xi for all i , yj , e Yj , for all j ' # j such that x - y $ f ' ) . These definitions are identical with those of x i , P j in 3 . 3 . 0 . , except that f has been replaced by c ' . The arguments of 3 . 3 . 0 . - . 3 . may therefore be repeated exactly . We can choose a positive real number c ' so that the cube contains in its interior all 2 : and all Pi . Let ki = X i n C ' , = Y , II C ' . 5 . 2 . 1 . Let be an abstract economy identical with Ee in 5 . 1 . 0 . , except that Xi is replaced by $ : and Yj by Pi everywhere . Let a [ : ( & ) be the resultant modification of A & ) . It is easy to see that the argument of 3 . 3 . 4 . remains completely applicable in showing that all the requirements of the Lemma are satisfied other than the continuity of a [ : ( & ) . The last follows immediately from the Remark of 3 . 3 . 5 . , and ( 1 ) in 5 . 0 . , since si e X : and hence to 2 : . Hence , Ee * has an equilibrium point [ x : , . . . , x , , yl * , . , y * , , p * ] for each E , 0 < E 6 ( % TI . We show now that an equilibrium point of Be is an equilibrium point of Ec ( the converse is obvious ) . 5 . 2 . 2 . Since 0 e Fi , so that xy - ' , l aijp * . y : I 0 , and , as in 5 . 1 . 1 . , p * . z * 6 0 , from which it can be concluded that , as in equation ( 5 ) , section 5 . 1 . 1 . , x * - y * 5 T ' . From the definitions of X : , pj in 5 . 2 . 0 . , x : c X : , yf E Pi for all i and j ; hence , as shown in that section , ( 2 ) sT , yf are interior points of Cf . From the definition of an equilibrium point , xr maximizes ui ( xi ) for xi E A : ( zT ) . From ( 2 ) , it follows exactly as in 3 . 4 . 1 . , that ( 3 ) xf maximizes ui ( xi ) for xi ~ i ( 3T ) . In the same way , ( 4 ) y : maximizes p * . yj for y j E Y j From the definition of equilibrium for Elc , ( 5 ) p * maximizes pax * for p E PC . 5 . 3 . 0 . Suppose that , for some E , 0 < E 6 > $ rr , ( 1 ) ph * > E for all h E @ . EQUILIBRIUM FOR A COMPETITIVE ECONOMY 285 Let p be any element of P , p ' = tp + ( 1 - t ) p * , where 0 < t 5 1 . Suppose p . z * > p * z * ; then p ' z * > p * . z * . But , from ( I ) , p ' e PC for t sufficiently small , which contradicts ( 5 ) of the preceding paragraph . Thus , if ( 1 ) holds for some E , p . z * 5 p * . z * for all p E P , i . e . , p * maximizes p , z * for p e P ( and not merely p e PC ) . In conjunction with ( 3 ) and ( 4 ) of the preceding paragraph , this shows that the abstract economy E has an equilibrium point and therefore , aa shown in 3 . 2 . , ( 2 ) If ( 1 ) holds , there is a competitive equilibrium . 5 . 3 . 1 . It will therefore now be assumed that ( 1 ) of 5 . 3 . 0 . does not hold for any E > 0 . Then , for each E , 0 < E I % ? r , ( 1 ) ph * = E for at lemt one h e 6 ' . * For all E , p * e P , x ? e C ' , yj e C ' ( see 5 . 2 . 2 ( 2 ) ) . P and C ' are compact sets ; a set of converging sequences can therefore be chosen so that k k k ( 2 ) lime , , ~ k = 0 , ( x : , , , , x . , y ~ , , , p . , ; k ) is an equilibrium point for k 0 k 0 ECk , limk , , Xi = Z ; , limk , , yj = yj , limk , , p = p . Since the sets X i , Y j , P are closed , xP e X i , y : t : Y j , p0 e P . From ( I ) , there must be at least one h e P for which phk = for infinitely many k , and hence by ( 2 ) p ; = 0 for that h . For convenience , let h = 1 . As shown in 3 . 2 . , statement ( 3 ) of 5 . 2 . 2 . ) which is Condition 2 , implies equation ( 1 ) of 3 . 2 . , namely , p k . 2 = 0 . Let k approach a ; by ( 2 ) , For any fked y j , statement ( 4 ) of 5 . 2 . 2 . teUs us that pk y ; I pk y , . Let k ap - proach a ; then p 0 yj 0 2 p 0 . yj . ( 5 ) y ; maximizes pO , vj for y j e Y j 5 . 3 . 2 . Choose any xi e Xi such that ui ( x ; ) > ui ( x : ) . For k sufficiently large , ui ( xi ) > u ~ ( x : ) , from 5 . 3 . 1 . ( 2 ) and the continuity of ui . This is not compatible with the statement that xi e Ai ( 2 : ) , by 5 . 2 . 2 . ( 3 ) ) so that pk . zi > pk . z ! . Let k approach a . ( 1 ) If xi E Xi and ui ( xi ) > ui ( xP ) , then pO . xi L p0 . xP . 5 . 3 . 3 . This section is a digression which may be of some interest for general techniques in the theory of the consumer . It can easily be shown that from 5 . 3 . 3 . ( 1 ) ( 1 ) x ! minimizes pO . xi on ( xi 1 xi e xi , u < ( x ~ ) 2 U / ( Z ! ) ) and that pO maximizes p . zVor p e P . In conjunction with 5 . 3 . 1 . ( 5 ) , it is then shown that all the conditions for a competitive equilibrium are satisfied , except that utility - maximiza - 286 KENNETH J . ARROW AND GERARD DEBREU tion by a consumption unit under a budget restraint has been replaced by minimization of cost for a given utility level ( compare ( 1 ) with Condition 2 ) . The duality between cost - minimization and utility - maximization is indeed valid almost everywhere , i . e . , in the interior of P , where all prices are posit , ive , hut not everywhere . From the viewpoint of welfare economics , it is the principle that the consumption vector chosen should be the one which achieves the given utility at least cost which is primary , and the principle of maximizing utility at a given cost only relevant when the two give identical results . 16 For a descriptive theory of behavior under perfect competition , on the other hand , it is , of course , the concept of utility maximization which is primary . To the extent that the duality is valid , the principle of cost minimization leads to much simpler derivations , for example , of Slutzky ' s relations . Actually , minimization of oost for a given utility is essentially minimization of a linear function when tho argument is limited to a convex set ; mathematically , the problem is identical with that of maximizing profits sub - ject to the transformation conditions , so that the theories of the consumer and the firm become identical . 16 However , the failure of the duality to hold in all cases shows that there are delicate questions for which t , he principle of utility maximization cannot be replaced by that of cost minimization . 5 . 3 . 4 . From 5 . 3 . 1 . ( 3 ) , 1 E 6 . By ( b ) of the first Definition in 4 . 4 , there exists y ' e Y such that ( 1 ) y ; I Y ! for all h f 1 ; y ; t > yhOt for some h ' E a . Here , yo = ELl y : . From 5 . 3 . 1 . ( 5 ) , 5 pO . y : for all j . Summing over j then gives With the aid of ( I ) and 5 . 3 . 1 . ( 3 ) , 0 0 I ( ( y ' yo ) = phO ( yL - yhO ) = C phO ( y ; - yh ) 2 ph ' ( yhf - yhO1 ) . h f 1 Since y ; t - y ! J > 0 , ( 2 ) requires that phOl = 0 . ( 3 ) = 0 for a t least one h ' E a . Let xi 6 X i , xi ( t ) = txi + ( I - t ) xP , where 0 < t 5 1 . From the first Definition in 4 . 3 , there exists Since xi ( t ) + ~ 6 ~ ' approaches xq + Xsh ' as t approaches 0 , it follows from ( 4 ) that , ( 5 ) ui [ xi ( t ) + ~ 6 " ' ] > ui ( xB ) for t sufficiently small . l6 See Arrow [ I ] , Lemma 4 , p . 513 ; a brief discussion of the conditions for the duality to be valid is given in Lemma 5 , pp . 5134 . See also Debreu [ 4 ] , Friedman [ 8 ] . 16 Professors Knight [ ll ] and Friedman [ 7 ] ( esp . pp . 469474 ) have therefore gone so far as to argue that it is always better to draw up demand functions as of a given real in - come ( i . e . , utility ) instead of a given money income . EQUILIBRIUM FOR A COMPETITIVE ECONOMY From ( 5 ) and 5 . 3 . 2 . ( I ) , pO . [ xi ( t ) + h6 " ] L pO . x ! . But , from ( 3 ) ) Since pO - [ xi ( t ) + X ~ ~ ' I - follows ea . sily = tpO - xi + ( I t ) pO - s8 + pO - ( xG ~ ' ) , it that pO - xi 2 pO . x ! . ( 6 ) x ! minimizes pO . xi over X ; . Let X be defined as in 4 . 2 . Since pO . x = pO . xi , it follows immediately x ? - ' , l from ( 6 ) that , ( 7 ) so minimizes pO . x over X 5 . 3 . 5 . In accordance with AssumptionV , choose x a X , y a Y so that x < y Then , with the aid of 5 . 3 . 4 . ( 7 ) , pO - ( y + { ) > pO . x 2 pO - xO , or + I [ . From 5 . 3 . 1 . ( 4 ) , This , combined with ( I ) , gives But this implies that , for some j , pO . yj > while yj 6 Y j , a contradiction to 5 . 3 . 1 . ( 5 ) . Thus , the assumption made at the beginning of 5 . 3 . 1 . , that for every E > 0 , p h * = E for at least one h e 6 , has led to a contradiction and must be false . Statement 5 . 3 . 0 . ( 1 ) must then be valid , and by statement ( 2 ) in the same paragraph , Theorem I1 has been proved . 5 . 3 . 6 . The following theorem , slightly more general than theorem 11 , can easily be proved in a way practically identical to the above . Assumption IV ' a . is replaced by 1V " a . a R ' ; for some xi E X i , xi 5 { ; and , for at least one h e a ) U 6 , xhi < { h i . IVUa . and IVb . together are denoted by IV " . THEOREM 11 ' . For an economic system satisfying Assunzptions I - III , IVN , V , and VI there is a competitive equilibrium . The earliest discussion of the existence of competitive equilibrium centered around the version presented by Cassel [ 2 ] . There are four basic principles of his system : ( 1 ) demand for each final good is a function of the prices of all final goods ; ( 2 ) zero profits for all producers ; ( 3 ) fixed technical coefficients re - lating use of primary resources to output of final commodities ; and ( 4 ) equality of supply and demand on each market . Let xi be the demand for final commodity i , pi the price of final commodity i , a ; $ the amount of primary resource j used 288 KENNETH J . ARROW AND GERARD DEBREU in the production of one unit of commodity i , q j the price of resource j and r j the amount of resource j available initially . Then Cassel ' s system may be written , for all i , for all j . Professor Neisser [ 15 ] remarked that the Casselian system might have nega - tive values of prices or quantities as solutions . ( [ 15 ] , pp . 424 - 425 ) . Negative quantities are clearly meaningless and , at least , in the case of labor and capital , negative prices cannot be regarded as acceptable solutions since the supply at those prices will be zero . Neisser also observed that even some variability in the technical coefficients might not be sufficient to remove the inconsistency . ( p . 448453 ) . Stackelberg [ 20 ] pointed out that if there were fewer commodities than re - sources , the equations ( 3 ) would constitute a set of linear equations with more equations than unknowns and therefore possess , in general , no solution . He cor - rectly noted that the economic meaning of this inconsistency was that some of the equations in ( 3 ) would become inequalities , with the corresponding resources becoming free goods . He argued that this meant the loss of a certain number of equations and hence the indeterminacy of the rest of the system . For this rea - son , he held that the assumption of fixed coefficients could not be maintained and the possibility of substitution in production must be admitted . This reason - ing is incorrect ; the loss of the equations ( 3 ) which are replaced by inequalities is exactly balanced by the addition of an equal number of equations stating that the prices of the corresponding resources must be zero . Indeed , this suggestion had already been made by Professor Zeuthen [ 25 ] ( see pages 2 - 3 , 6 ) , though not in connection with the existence of solutions . He argued that the resources which appeared in the Casselian system were properly only the scarce resources ; but it could not be regarded as known a priori which re - sources are free and which are not . Hence equations ( 3 ) should be rewritten as inequalities , with the additional statement that if the strict inequality holds for any j , then the corresponding price q j = 0 . Schlesinger [ 19 ] took up Zeuthen ' s modification and suggested that it might resolve the difficulties found by Neisser and Stackelberg . It was in this form that the problem was investigated by Wald [ 21 , 221 under various specialized assumptions . These studies are summarized and commented on in [ 23 ] . From a strictly mathematical point of view the first theorem proved by Wald [ 23 ] p . 372 - 373 neither contains nor is contained in our results . In the assump - 289 EQUILIBRIUM FOR A COMPETITIVE ECONOMY tions concerning the productive system , the present paper is much more general since Wald assumes fixed proportions among the inputs and the single output of every process . On the demand side , he makes assumptions concerning the de - mand functions instead of deriving them , as we do , from a utility maximization assumption . It is on this point that no direct comparison is possible . The as - sumptions made by Wald are somewhat specialized ( [ 23 ] , p . 373 , assumptions 4 , 5 and 6 ) . One of them , interestingly enough , is the same as Samuelson7s postulate ( [ 18 ] , pp . 108 - Ill ) , but applied to the collective demand functions rather than to individual ones . Wald gives a heuristic argument for this assump - tion which is based essentially on utility - maximization grounds . In the same model , he also assumes that the demand functions are independent of the dis - tribution of income , depending solely on the total . In effect , then , he msumes a single consumption unit . In his second theorem , 2233 , pp . 382 - 383 , about the pure exchange case , he assumes utility maximization but postulates that the marginal utility of each commodity depends on that commodity alone and is a strictly decreasing non - negative function of the amount of that commodity . The last clause implies both the convexity of the indifference map and nonsaturation with respect to every commodity . This theorem is a special case of our Theorem 11 ' , when 6 is the null set and 9 contains all commodities ( See 5 . 3 . 6 ) . Wald gives an example , under the pure exchange case , where competitive equilibrium does not exist ( [ 23 ] , pp . 389 - 391 ) . In this case , each individual has an initial stock of only one commodity , so that Theorem I is not applicable . At the same time only one commodity is always desired by all , but two of the three consumers have a null initial stock of that commodity . Hence Theorem 11 ' is not applicable . It may be added that Wald has also investigated the uniqueness of the solu - tions ; this has not been done here . Stanford University and Cowles Commission for Research in Economics REFERENCES [ I1 ARROW , K . J . , " An Extension of the Basic Theorems of Classical Welfare Economics , " in Proceedings of the Second Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability , J . Neyman ( ed . ) , Berkeley and I ~ os Angeleu : University of California Press , 1951 , pp . 507 - 532 . 121 CASSEL , G . , The Theory of Social Econow ~ y , Ken - York : Harcourt , Brace and Company , 1924 . [ 3 ] COURMOT , A . A , , Eesearches into the Mathenzatical Principles of the Theory of Wealth , New York and London : The Macmillan Company , 1897 , 213 pp . [ 4 ] DEBREU , G . , " The Coefficient of Resource Utilization , " ECONOMETRICA , Volume 19 , July 1951 , pp . 273 - 292 . [ 6 ] DEBREU , G . , " A Social Equilibrium Existence Theorem , " Proce ~ dings of the National Academy of Sciences , Vol . 38 , No . 10 , 1952 , pp . 886 - 893 . [ 6 ] DEBRED , G . , " Representation of a Preference Ordering by a Numerical Function , " in Decision Processes , R . M . Thrall , C . H . Coombs , and R . L . Davis , eds . , Kew York : John Wiley and Sons , forthcoming . 290 KENNETH J . ARROW AND GERARD DEBREU [ 7 ] FRIEDMAN , M . , " The Marshallian Demand Curve , " Journal of Political Economy , Vol . 57 ( 1949 ) , pp . 463495 . [ 8 ] FRIEDMAN , M . , " The ' Welfare ' Effects of an Income Tax and an Excise Tax , " Journal of Political Economy , Vol . 60 , February , 1952 , pp . 25 - 33 . [ S ] HART , A . G . , Anticipations , Uncertainty , and D ? / namic Planning , Chicago : The Uni - versity of Chicago Press , 1940 , 98 pp . [ lo ] HICKS , J . R . , Value and Capital , Oxford : The Clarendon Press , 1939 , 331 pp . [ ll ] KNIGHT , I ? . H . , " Realism and Relevance in the Theory of Demand , " Joz ~ rnal of Polit - ical Economy , Vol . 52 ( 1944 ) , pp . 289 - 318 . [ la ] KOOPMANS , T . C . , " Analysis of Production as an Efficient Combination of Activities , " in Activity Analysis of Production and Allocation , Cowles Commission Monograph No . 13 , T . C . Koopmans , ed . , New York : John Wiley and Sons , 1951 , Chapter 111 , pp . 33 - 97 . [ 13 ] MENGER , C . , Principles of Economics , ( tr . ) , Glencoe , Illinois : The Free Press , 1950 , 328 pp . [ 14 ] NASH , J . F . , JR . , " Equilibrium Points in X - Person Games , " Proceedings of the Na - tional Academy of Sciences , Volume 36 ( 1950 ) , pp . 48 - 49 . [ 15 ] NEISSER , H . , " Lohnhohe und Beschaftigungsgrad im Marktgleichgewicht , " Welt - wirtschaftliches Archiv , Vol . 36 , 1932 , pp . 415455 . [ 16 ] v o ~ J . , " uber ein ijkonomisches Gleichungssystem und eine Verallgemeine - NEUMANN , rung des Brouwerschen Fixpunktsatzes , " Ergebnisse eines mathemtischen Kollo - quiums , No . 8 ( 1937 ) , pp . 73 - 83 , translated as , " A Model of General Econonlic Equilibrium , " Review of Economic Studies , Vol . 13 No . 33 , 1945 - 46 , pp . 1 - 9 . [ 17 ] ROBBINS , L . , " On the Elasticity of Demand for Income in Terms of Effort , " Econo - mica , Vol . 10 ( 1930 ) , pp . 123 - 129 . [ 18 ] SAMUELSON , P . A . , Foundations of Economic Analysis , Cambridge , Massachusetts : Harvard University Press , 1947 , 447 pp . [ IS ] SCHLESINGER , K . , " Uber die Produktionsgleichungen der okonomischen Wertlehre , " Ergebnisse eines mathematischen Kolloquiums , No . 6 ( 19334 ) , pp . 10 - 11 . [ 2O ] STACKELBERQ , H . , " Zwei Kritische Bemenkurgen zur Preistheorie Gustav Cassels , " Zeitschrift fur Nationalokonomie , Vol . 4 , 1933 , pp . 456 - 472 . [ all WALD , A , , " ~ b e r die eindeutige positive Losbarkeit der neuen Produktionsgleichun - gen , " Ergebnisse eines mathematischen Kolloquiums , No . 6 ( 19334 ) , pp . 12 - 20 . [ 22 ] WALD , A . , " uber die Produktionsgleichungen der okonomischen Wertlehre , " Ergeb - nisse eines mathematischen Kolloquiums , No . 7 ( 1934 - 5 ) , pp . 1 - 6 . [ 23 ] WALD , A . , " Uber einige Gleichungssysteme der mathematischen Gkonomie , " Zeit - schrijt fGr Nationalokonomie , Vol . 7 ( 1936 ) , pp . 637 - 670 , translated as " On Some Systems of Equations of Mathematical Economics , " ECONOMETRIC - % , Vo1 . 19 , Octo - ber 1951 , pp . 368403 . [ 24 ] WALRAS , L . , l ? l6ments d ' dconomie politique pure , 46me Bdition , Lausanne , Paris , 1900 , 20 + 491 pp . [ 25 ] ZEUTHEN , F . , " Das Prinzip der Knrtppheit , technische Kombination , und Okono - mische Qualitat , " Zeitschrift jar Nationalokonomie , Vol . 4 , 1933 , pp . 1 - 24 . You have printed the following article : Existence of an Equilibrium for a Competitive Economy Kenneth J . Arrow ; Gerard Debreu Econometrica , Vol . 22 , No . 3 . ( Jul . , 1954 ) , pp . 265 - 290 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0012 - 9682 % 28195407 % 2922 % 3A3 % 3C265 % 3AEOAEFA % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - B This article references the following linked citations . If you are trying to access articles from an off - campus location , you may be required to first logon via your library web site to access JSTOR . Please visit your library ' s website or contact a librarian to learn about options for remote access to JSTOR . [ Footnotes ] 11 The Coefficient of Resource Utilization Gerard Debreu Econometrica , Vol . 19 , No . 3 . ( Jul . , 1951 ) , pp . 273 - 292 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0012 - 9682 % 28195107 % 2919 % 3A3 % 3C273 % 3ATCORU % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - 4 15 The Coefficient of Resource Utilization Gerard Debreu Econometrica , Vol . 19 , No . 3 . ( Jul . , 1951 ) , pp . 273 - 292 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0012 - 9682 % 28195107 % 2919 % 3A3 % 3C273 % 3ATCORU % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - 4 15 The " Welfare " Effects of an Income Tax and an Excise Tax Milton Friedman The Journal of Political Economy , Vol . 60 , No . 1 . ( Feb . , 1952 ) , pp . 25 - 33 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0022 - 3808 % 28195202 % 2960 % 3A1 % 3C25 % 3AT % 22EOAI % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - 0 16 Realism and Relevance in the Theory of Demand Frank H . Knight The Journal of Political Economy , Vol . 52 , No . 4 . ( Dec . , 1944 ) , pp . 289 - 318 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0022 - 3808 % 28194412 % 2952 % 3A4 % 3C289 % 3ARARITT % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - 5 http : / / www . jstor . org LINKED CITATIONS - Page 1 of 3 - NOTE : The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list . 16 The Marshallian Demand Curve Milton Friedman The Journal of Political Economy , Vol . 57 , No . 6 . ( Dec . , 1949 ) , pp . 463 - 495 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0022 - 3808 % 28194912 % 2957 % 3A6 % 3C463 % 3ATMDC % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - T References 4 The Coefficient of Resource Utilization Gerard Debreu Econometrica , Vol . 19 , No . 3 . ( Jul . , 1951 ) , pp . 273 - 292 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0012 - 9682 % 28195107 % 2919 % 3A3 % 3C273 % 3ATCORU % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - 4 7 The Marshallian Demand Curve Milton Friedman The Journal of Political Economy , Vol . 57 , No . 6 . ( Dec . , 1949 ) , pp . 463 - 495 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0022 - 3808 % 28194912 % 2957 % 3A6 % 3C463 % 3ATMDC % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - T 8 The " Welfare " Effects of an Income Tax and an Excise Tax Milton Friedman The Journal of Political Economy , Vol . 60 , No . 1 . ( Feb . , 1952 ) , pp . 25 - 33 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0022 - 3808 % 28195202 % 2960 % 3A1 % 3C25 % 3AT % 22EOAI % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - 0 11 Realism and Relevance in the Theory of Demand Frank H . Knight The Journal of Political Economy , Vol . 52 , No . 4 . ( Dec . , 1944 ) , pp . 289 - 318 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0022 - 3808 % 28194412 % 2952 % 3A4 % 3C289 % 3ARARITT % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - 5 http : / / www . jstor . org LINKED CITATIONS - Page 2 of 3 - NOTE : The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list . 16 A Model of General Economic Equilibrium J . V . Neumann The Review of Economic Studies , Vol . 13 , No . 1 . ( 1945 - 1946 ) , pp . 1 - 9 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0034 - 6527 % 281945 % 2F1946 % 2913 % 3A1 % 3C1 % 3AAMOGEE % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - H 17 On the Elasticity of Demand for Income in Terms of Effort Lionel Robbins Economica , No . 29 . ( Jun . , 1930 ) , pp . 123 - 129 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0013 - 0427 % 28193006 % 291 % 3A0 % 3A29 % 3C123 % 3AOTEODF % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - 2 23 On Some Systems of Equations of Mathematical Economics Abraham Wald Econometrica , Vol . 19 , No . 4 . ( Oct . , 1951 ) , pp . 368 - 403 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0012 - 9682 % 28195110 % 2919 % 3A4 % 3C368 % 3AOSSOEO % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - V http : / / www . jstor . org LINKED CITATIONS - Page 3 of 3 - NOTE : The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list .