Technology Innovation Management Review August 2015 ( Volume 5 , Issue 8 ) 25 www . timreview . ca Technological Public – Private Innovation Networks : A Conceptual Framework Describing Their Structure and Mechanism of Interaction Rabeh Morrar Introduction The last 20 years have witnessed different forms of col - laborative relationships that have been theorized , for example , in terms of innovation systems , innovation networks , and innovation clusters ( e . g . , Edquist , 1997 ; Freeman , 1987 , 1995 ; Hamdouch , 2009 ; Lundvall , 1992 ; Nelson , 1993 ) . Recently , collaboration between public and private actors has extended from production - ori - ented public – private partnership to include innovation - oriented public – private partnership ( Gallouj et al . , 2013 ) , and public – private innovation networks , or PPINs . In these new concepts , public and private organ - izations cooperate to access complementary cognitive resources ( e . g . , knowledge and technological resources , information , skills , and know - how ) , which are mainly employed to develop and diffuse innovation outputs . Innovation - oriented cooperation between public and private actors has emerged , in part , due to the substan - tial growth in knowledge and technology accompanied by globalization and the invasive character of the new informational paradigm . Public – private innovation net - works mobilize complex knowledge and technology to produce new artefacts or technological innovation , mainly in manufacturing sectors , where they can be more aptly described as technological public – private in - novation networks , or TechPPINs . In such networks , public and private actors collaborate and interact to mobilize complex knowledge that is used to produce technological innovation . The main objective in this work is to develop a concep - tual framework to describe the working mechanism of technological public – private innovation networks that leads to efficient interactions between network mem - bers ( i . e . , public and private actors ) and better innova - tion outputs . But , before proposing such framework , we briefly present an overview of the concepts of innov - ations networks that are intensively discussed in the lit - Technological public – private innovation networks , or TechPPINs , enable cooperation between public and private actors in a complex , dynamic , social , and interactive network structure . In this article , the literature on innovation networks is used to construct a con - ceptual framework that describes the structure and mechanism of interaction in technolo - gical public – private innovation networks . In the framework , innovation is created through a dynamic process of interaction between the public and private actors along the network lifecycle . In each stage of network lifecycle , social capital enables various interactions to oc - cur and different modes and quantities of knowledge and technological resources to be ex - changed and reinforced . Through a combination of the product lifecycle model and social network analysis , the structure of technological public - private innovation networks are ex - amined at each stage of the lifecycle to reveal information about how the roles of public and private actors are embodied . Innovation is not an isolated process of individuals or firms but is the outcome of the interaction between firms , customers , suppliers , competitors and various other private and public organizations in a system . Bengt - Åke Lundvall Organizational theorist In National Systems of Innovation ( 1992 ) “ ” Technology Innovation Management Review August 2015 ( Volume 5 , Issue 8 ) 26 www . timreview . ca Technological Public – Private Innovation Networks : A Conceptual Framework Rabeh Morrar erature , because they help to define the structures of public – private innovation networks and the factors that may lead to the efficient exchange of knowledge between network actors . The second part of this article discusses the evolution of the public – private innovation network concept from public – private partnerships , to innovation networks and systems , and then to technological public – private innovation networks . In the third section , we develop a conceptual framework to understand the mechanism driving technological public – private innovation net - works . A final section offers conclusions . The Conceptual Evolution of Public – Private Innovation Networks Public – private innovation networks have their roots in the well - known concept of public – private partnerships , or PPPs . Both concepts share a similar structure in terms of the key relationship between public and private actors . A public – private partnership is defined as a form of co - operative venture between public and private firms ( Kanakoudis et al . , 2007 ; Moskalyk , 2008 ) or a contrac - tual agreement between a public agency ( e . g . , federal , state , or local ) and a for - profit corporation ( e . g . , a na - tional council ) or a new way to design , build , finance , and manage ( operate ) ( DBFO ) public building and in - frastructure ( Carassus , 2005 ) . Public – private partner - ships depend on public and private actors cooperating with each other to overcome budget constraints , share risk , and deliver a more cost - effective public product . A public – private partnership is a production - oriented network : production is the main purpose of the partner - ship . Public institutions resort to the private sector to reduce production costs and because , in most cases , the private sector is more efficient than the public sec - tor . Thus , innovation is not at the core of public – private partnerships , although it might emerge as a by - product of the main activity for which a production - oriented public – private partnership was set up ( Gallouj et al . , 2013 ) . The evolution from public – private partnerships to in - novation networks and public – private innovation net - works reveals a shift from a perspective focused on cost to a knowledge - based perspective based on evolution - ary economics . The mobilization of complementary knowledge and technologies is the main purpose of in - novation networks , which emphasizes cognitive and technological objectives . In this view , Pellegrin and col - leagues ( 2010 ) observe that the interactions between actors in innovation networks change from being com - mercial - , financial - , and production - oriented in nature to “cover a wide spectrum that goes far beyond market relations and contractual relations of cooperation” . An innovation network consists of several actors collab - orating in a social , dynamic , and economic environ - ment . This arrangement leads to “intensive communication and collaboration between different actors , private firms , and other organizations such as universities , innovation centers , educational and finan - cing institutions , standard setting bodies , industry asso - ciations , and government agencies” ( Toedtling & Trippl , 2005 ) , which assures the diffusion and produc - tion of innovation output . The major motivations for the emergence of innovation networks are rapid globalization , convergence of con - sumer preferences , high competition for limited sci - entific resources ( Tushman , 2004 ) , intensive and permanent changes in technologies , and rapid develop - ments in information and communication technologies ( ICTs ) . All these factors have led to technological and structural deficiencies in many innovative firms and in - stitutions , and thus local connections are becoming in - sufficient to solely provide the resources and competences that innovative firms might need to offset high costs and keep pace with new technologies . This trend has led to a reduction in the sustainability of the innovation processes and to major limitations on in - novation in the absence of global connections to obtain knowledge and information from the surrounding en - vironment . Therefore , organizations must enlarge their boundaries to access a wide range of corporate expert - ise and technological fields ( Cantwell & Santangelo , 2006 ; Castells , 1996 ) , and to implement new changes to their innovation processes , taking them from a tradi - tional to a more system - centred approach . Substantial debate about innovation networks can be found in the literature , at theoretical ( e . g . , Callon , 1991 ; Pyka & Scharnhorst , 2009 ) , empirical ( e . g . , Becker & Di - etz , 2004 ; Morrar et al . , 2013 ) , and methodological ( e . g . , Pyka & Schön , 2009 ; Sundbo , 2010 ) levels . The innova - tion network is an application of the non - linear or open model of innovation , and it represents a sustainable way of accessing the external knowledge and technolo - gical resources needed to produce innovations in today’s environment . In other words , innovation net - Technology Innovation Management Review August 2015 ( Volume 5 , Issue 8 ) 27 www . timreview . ca Technological Public – Private Innovation Networks : A Conceptual Framework Rabeh Morrar works “provide timely access to knowledge and re - sources that are otherwise unavailable” ( Powell et al . , 1996 ) . The evolution of the innovation network concept is “of - ten shadowed by the recent evolution of the innovation systems concept” ( Pellegrin et al . , 2010 ) , which is recog - nized as a broader perspective or concept that includes many of the ideas contained in other interactive innova - tion concepts such as , networks , clusters development blocks , complexes , innovation milieu , complex products and systems , competence blocs ( Manly , 2002 ) . The concept of innovation systems has been fre - quently discussed in the literature ( e . g . , Edquist , 1997 ; Lundvall , 1988 , 1992 ; Nelson , 1993 ) . Edquist ( 1997 ) defined a system of innovation as “all important eco - nomic , social , political , organizational , and other factors that influence the development , diffusion , and use of innovations” . In contrast , Nelson ( 1993 ) defined a national innovation system as “a set of institutions whose interactions determine the innovative perform - ance of national firms” . The discussion of innovation networks in the literature mainly highlights the role of the private sector as the main constituent element . In other words , innovation networks may be ( and often are ) primarily private – private partnerships . In some cases , in basic re - search networks , innovation networks may also take the form of public – public partnerships ( Gallouj et al . , 2013 ) . But , the analysis of innovation in a particular sys - tem might require interaction or collaboration between both public and private actors ( e . g . , industry , govern - ment , and academia ) in the production of innovation ( Manley , 2002 ) . Edquist and McKelvey ( 2000 ) highlight that the public actors are presented in the realms of public innovation policy to support and enhance innov - ation activities . For example , Buesa and colleagues ( 2006 ) indicate that a regional innovation system in - cludes both public and private actors in one network and a specific area to adopt and produce new know - ledge . Thus , it is important to shed light on public – private in - novation networks as an important type of innovation network , and a main source of knowledge and technolo - gical competences . The need for public – private innova - tion networks arises due to the increasing demand for complex networks that involve complex knowledge , sophisticated innovation practices , and the production of technological innovation and in which universities and public research centres play an important role in producing the needed knowledge and R & D . In other words , a significant part of the complex knowledge is obtained through universities , research centres , and R & D institutions , which are defined in many countries as public bodies . In this view , technological pub - lic – private innovation networks , or TechPPINs , re - form - alize the innovation networks to highlight the roles of both public and private organizations in the innovation process , and create new channels for knowledge that mainly flows through the public actors . Many applications of technological public – private in - novation networks can be found in the literature . For ex - ample , in Germany , Musiolik and Markard ( 2010 ) discussed the traditional public – private innovation net - works formed between the fuel cell industry and federal governments to speed up the technology development and market formation for fuel cells . Markard and Truffer ( 2008 ) used the technological system of innova - tion to show the importance of collaboration between public and private agents in the generation , diffusion , and utilization of different modes of technologies and products . The EMC innovation network ( tinyurl . com / pyozbke ) is also a prominent example , where research and advanced technology groups across EMC , universit - ies , and RSA laboratories collaborate to discover and ex - plore technologies that will shape the information infrastructure of the future . The International Develop - ment Innovation Network ( IDIN ; d - lab . mit . edu / idin ) is a global public – private innovation network that includes : universities such as the Massachusetts Institute of Tech - nology , the United States Agency for International De - velopment , the United States Global Development Lab , and firms from the industrial sector . Its aim is to design , develop , and disseminate low - cost technologies to im - prove the lives of people living in poverty . The Nordic Health Research and Innovation Networks ( NRI Net - works ; nordicnetworks . org ) is a public – private innovation network that promotes health research and innovation in the Nordic region . It includes both public and private partners such as university hospitals ( e . g . , Oslo Uni - versity Hospital ) , universities ( e . g . , Aalborg University and the University of Copenhagen ) and other research organizations , the pharmaceutical industry , the medic - al technical industry , governmental bodies , and patient organizations . The European Workplace Innovation Network ( EUWIN ; tinyurl . com / oldm6vs ) was launched in 2013 to modernize the workplace in order to create bet - ter working conditions and increased organizational performance in terms of productivity , innovativeness , and competitiveness . The network enables collabora - tion between members from enterprise , chambers of commerce , business federations , social partner organiz - ations , public agencies , and research institutions . Technology Innovation Management Review August 2015 ( Volume 5 , Issue 8 ) 28 www . timreview . ca Technological Public – Private Innovation Networks : A Conceptual Framework Rabeh Morrar The literature also contains many empirical studies ex - amining collaboration between public research and private actors ( e . g . , Cohen et al . , 2002 ; Perkmann & Walsh , 2007 ; Tether & Tajar , 2008 ) . These studies mainly focus on the actors in the network , the factors determining the collaboration , its purpose and forms , and the evaluation of its performance ( Djellal & Gallouj , 2015 ) . Constructing the Conceptual Framework for Technological Public – Private Innovation Networks A conceptual framework for technological pub - lic – private innovation networks is a theoretical attempt to explain the cooperation and configuration of these networks , and to show the innovation process as an outcome of a collaborative relationship between hetero - geneous public and private actors to produce new tech - nological outputs . The theoretical framework is based on a review of literature based on general theory - bridging insights from evolutionary theory , social net - work theory , lifecycle theory , etc . The framework ex - presses the dynamic process between the network actors to ensure efficient interaction that might lead to better innovation output . Empirically , this conceptual framework can be applied to describe the interaction mechanism or the innovation process in actual techno - logical public – private innovation networks . The conceptual framework is developed from four ba - sic theoretical components or concepts , each of which explains an action or function . First , the framework considers the public – private partnerships for innova - tion between heterogeneous public and private actors in the process of technology creation and diffusion . Second , the framework considers the dynamic and evol - utionary process of the interactions between the net - work actors ( David , 1985 ; Nelson & Winter , 1973 ) , which is responsible for the network formation , or structure , over time . Third , the decoupling and frag - mentation of ties within technological public – private innovation networks are enveloped by social network analysis ( Cowan et al . , 2004 ; Messica , 2007 ; Pyka et al . , 2010 ) , which generates knowledge disclosure between network actors and stimulates the interaction and in - novation processes . Finally , the framework considers that an innovation network has an evolutionary path or lifecycle growth model ( Jovanovic , 1994 ; Klepper , 1996 , 1997 ; Pyka et al . , 2010 ; Weber , 2009 ) . In each stage of the lifecycle , new interactions are re - arranged to con - struct the network structure over time . The public actor role in technological public – private innovation networks In a public – private network , as opposed to a private – private network , the presence of public actors as key participants in the innovation process adds new complexity to the interaction process in the innovation network . Therefore , it is important to know how the rela - tionships or interactions between the public and private actors are developed in the production and diffusion of technological innovation . In technological public – private innovation networks , public actors are mainly involved in providing technical resources for technological innovation . Therefore , uni - versities , public research centres , and R & D institutions are key public participants , because of their ability to provide complex knowledge and technological capabilit - ies . Nevertheless , the public role changes from one pub - lic – private network to another , depending on the complexity of the network , the power - sharing arrange - ments between the public and private actors , and their relative influence on the innovation . Public actors can also provide non - R & D knowledge such as organizational and institutional competences ( Manly , 2002 ) . A public actor might work as an intermediate or - ganization that provides institutional arrangements re - quired for managing conflicts , regulating relations ( i . e . , cooperating ) , and improving the coordination mechan - ism between network actors . These institutional compet - ences include new rules , routines , approaches , legal and government policies , new types of intervention tools , the design of political initiatives that foster learning and knowledge - exchange processes , and supporting func - tions that ensure the cross - flows of knowledge and in - formation between other network actors . A social network analysis of technological public – private innovation networks Social interaction is a key process in the functioning of technological public – private innovation networks . The decoupling and fragmentation of ties ( i . e . , interactions ) between network actors are simultaneously combined with the development of a social network ( Agapitova , 2003 ) , which means that technological innovation in public – private innovation networks is produced using social capital . In this view , the technical and economic factors alone are not sufficient to explain social interac - tions process in technological public – private innovation networks ; a socio - economic framework is important to incorporate both technological and social dimensions of the network interaction processes . Technology Innovation Management Review August 2015 ( Volume 5 , Issue 8 ) 29 www . timreview . ca Technological Public – Private Innovation Networks : A Conceptual Framework Rabeh Morrar Generally , social capital in the networks enhances the collective learning between heterogeneous actors and impacts the exchange behaviour ( Granovetter , 1985 ; Uzzi , 1997 ) , which also applies to technological pub - lic – private innovation networks . In a causal mechanism related to innovation , the social proximity in the innov - ation network has an impact on knowledge spillovers ( Coulon , 2005 ) . Social capital also has an important role in forging rela - tionships , first - stage performance , and maintaining the cooperation between network actors in the long run . It is necessary to recognize the social dimension to trade - off the deficiency when using economic dimensions to describe social entities , mainly using physical artifacts and the corresponding R & D to describe the different li - fecycle stages of technological public – private innova - tion networks ( Pyka et al . , 2010 ) . Social network analysis is one of the most prominent techniques used to incorporate social capital in the ana - lysis of networks ( Salavisa , 2009 ) , to describe the shape the evolution of innovation in innovation networks , and to determine the position receptivity or popularity of network actors ( Wasserman & Faust , 1994 ) . It has been employed by many researchers in the study of in - novation networks . For example , Messica ( 2007 ) , in a static analysis of innovation networks in the high - tech - nology sector used social network analysis metrics , in - cluding the clustering coefficient , the extent of the network , and connectivity , to provide a taxonomy for innovation networks . He classified innovation networks into five categories : ring , mesh , star , fully connected , and line . In a dynamic analysis of innovation networks , Cowan , Jonard , and Özman ( 2004 ) used a set of social network analysis metrics including local order ( or cliquishness ) , path lengths , and density . They found that knowledge creation through an emerging network was the cornerstone of the innovation process . Watts ( 2003 ) used the distance between nodes to estimate the effect of network structure and the behaviour of actors . Pyka and colleagues ( 2010 ) classified social network analysis measures into two groups . The first group in - cludes actor - related measures : degree centrality , close - ness centrality , and betweenness centrality . The second group includes network - related measures to describe the structure of the whole network : density , connectiv - ity , distance , degree distribution , and clustering . Consequently , public – private innovation networks can be seen as social vehicles that provide the social struc - ture for enabling the interactions between the cognitive components of the network and that facilitate the flow or exchange of knowledge and information along the network lifecycle . The dynamic aspect of technological public – private in - novation networks The dynamic of a network refers to the state of the net - work in one period determining its state in subsequent periods . Therefore , the initial form of the network has a fundamental role in the evolution of the network at later stages . It determines its final structure . The dynamic of a network should match between two network specificit - ies : i ) the enormous complexity of the interaction pat - terns and ii ) the different incentives and information that determine the behaviour and preferences of net - work actors ( Schweitzer et al . , 2009 ) In technological public – private innovation networks , the innovation process not only depends on the charac - teristics of the network members , but also on the inter - actions between them . Meanwhile , the interaction processes between network actors are dynamic ( evolu - tionary processes ) ( Arechavala - Vargas et al . , 2009 ) and are associated with ties decoupling and fragmentation processes ( i . e . , the entry of new actors and the exit of others ) . In this view , it is important to describe or ex - plain innovation in technological public – private innova - tion networks in the spirit of evolutionary theory ( Nelson & Winter , 1973 ) , and path dependence theories ( David , 1985 ) , which describe the networks’ dynamic processes . The dynamic process of an innovation net - work induces knowledge accumulation and learning overtime ( Garcia - Pont & Nohria , 2002 ; Gulati , 1999 ; Pow - ell et al . , 1996 ) , and allow access to new technologies that promote the production of innovation . It also leads to different structures with different roles over time . Lifecycle growth model of technological public – private in - novation networks Away from the traditional view of public – private partner - ships , which focus on the interaction between public and private actors in a static way , it is important to dis - cuss the question of the public – private relationship in technological public – private innovation networks dy - namically , by focusing on the lifecycle of networks ( Gal - louj et al . , 2013 ) . In the literature , there are many models or approaches that describe the dynamic of the network . Li ( 2005 ) pro - posed a socio - cognitive model for newly developed products , which illustrates the dynamic of interaction between technological platform / hard architecture of knowledge and communities / soft architecture of know - ledge that lead to open innovative and new products . Technology Innovation Management Review August 2015 ( Volume 5 , Issue 8 ) 30 www . timreview . ca Technological Public – Private Innovation Networks : A Conceptual Framework Rabeh Morrar Podolny , Stuart , and Hannan ( 1996 ) used the concept of niches in evolutionary theory and applied it to tech - nological networks , giving rise to the notion of techno - logical network niches . Weber ( 2009 ) proposed a theoretical model that explains the network lifecycle us - ing chaos theory and cybernetics for public – private net - works . The network lifecycle growth model is the most well - known theoretical concept employed to describe the growth of networks ( Jovanovic , 1994 ; Klepper , 1996 , 1997 ; Pyka et al . , 2010 ; Weber , 2009 ) . This model con - sists of three main stages : i ) prototype industry ; ii ) com - mercialization and entrepreneurial ; iii ) and consolidation and firm growth . Gallouj , Rubalcaba , and Windrum ( 2013 ) describes the lifecycle model for public – private innovation networks , which is divided into three main stages : i ) the proto - in - dustry ( crystallization ) stage , ii ) the commercialization and entrepreneurial stage , and iii ) the consolidation and firm growth stage . Each stage of the network life - cycle requires different knowledge bases , resources , act - ors , demands , and policies . Different modes of interaction between network actors are also expected in each stage ; in other words , the exchanged knowledge to produce output “X” will certainly be different from that of producing output “Y” . Two important points should be considered when ap - plying lifecycle growth model to technological pub - lic – private innovation networks . First , the social dimension , which requires the introduction of “a socio - economic approach” that consists of both economic measures ( relative performance ) and relevant social in - dicators ( Cowan , 2004 ; Koenig et al . , 2007 ; Pyka et al . , 2010 ) . Second , in some cases , it is difficult to follow en - tire stages of a network lifecycle . This difficulty might be explained by the disappearance of the network be - fore the decline stage or the start of a new cycle within the same network ( Tushman & Anderson , 1996 ) . In oth - er cases , the network may follow more than one evolu - tionary path ( Weber , 2009 ) . A conceptual framework for technological public – private innovation networks Finally , we collect or summarize the previous theories in a conceptual framework that could present a clear mechanism for the interaction process between net - work actors that might lead to better innovation per - formance . This framework shows how an efficient collaboration or interaction between public and private actors is happening dynamically along the network product lifecycle , reinforced by social capital so as to have better innovation output and performance . Within the framework ( Figure 1 ) , the innovation process proceeds as follows : the public and private actors com - municate and interact between each other , where com - plex knowledge and technologies are exchanged between them in a collaborative environment and sup - ported by the social capital , to produce better technolo - gical innovation output . The complementarities between actors’ knowledge and technological resources are crucial for successful and efficient interaction pro - cesses . The interaction processes and the production of innovation output are dynamically evolving along the network lifecycle . In each stage of the network lifecycle , the nature of the interaction processes and innovation activities are different ( e . g . , the mode of innovation in the first stage of network formation is different from that at the growth or maturity stage ) , determined by the type of actors , the dimensions of social network analysis and the mode of knowledge and technologies that are exchanged among network actors . Following the innovation network lifecycle developed by Gallouj , Rubalcaba , and Windrum ( 2013 ) , described earlier , we expect that the role of network actors ( private and public ) change from one stage to another depending on the nature of required knowledge and technologies and the degree of involvement of each act - ors . For example , in the crystallization stage , the role of public actors represented by universities and public re - search centres is the most important among the other members for the initiation of innovation networks , no demand is articulated yet in this stage , and the particip - ation of private organizations is not high . The dynamic process of the technological public – private innovation networks allows for the transition from one stage to an - other along the network lifecycle ( e . g . , from crystalliza - tion , passing commercialization , to the consolidation and firm growth phase ) and shows how the compet - ences and preferences of one actor co - evolve over time with the competences and preferences of the other net - work actors supported by a feedback mechanism . Net - work actors either reinforce each other to produce and diffuse new technological resources or , conversely , hamper each other . Social network analysis indicators are important to explain how innovation network safe - guards continue the process of knowledge and technolo - gies flowing within the network , therefore they also change from one stage to another along the network life - cycle . Technology Innovation Management Review August 2015 ( Volume 5 , Issue 8 ) 31 www . timreview . ca About the Author Rabeh Morrar is an Assistant Professor of Innova - tion Economics at An - Najah National University in Nablus , Palestine . Rabeh ' s doctoral dissertation from Lille1 University in France focused on pub - lic – private innovation networks in the service sec - tor , and his current research is focused on innovation in the service sector , R & D management , and technology management . Rabeh is also CEO of BEST , a small business in Palestine that provides in - novation solutions and training . Technological Public – Private Innovation Networks : A Conceptual Framework Rabeh Morrar Conclusion In this article , we have developed a conceptual frame - work to account for technological public – private innov - ation networks . This framework accounts for the cooperation between public and private actors in a complex , dynamic , social , and interactive network structure that might lead to efficient interaction pro - cesses between network actors and might lead to better innovation outputs . In such a framework , innovation output is produced through dynamic interaction pro - cesses between the public and private actors along the network lifecycle . In each stage , various interactions oc - cur and different modes and various quantities of know - ledge and technological resources are exchanged , reinforced by the existence of social capital . The com - bination of the product lifecycle model and social net - work analysis allows us to analyze the structure of technological public – private innovation networks at each stage of the lifecycle and to reveal important in - formation about how the roles of public and private act - ors are manifesting . Figure 1 . A conceptual framework for technological public – private innovation networks Technology Innovation Management Review August 2015 ( Volume 5 , Issue 8 ) 32 www . timreview . ca References Agapitova , N . 2003 . The Impact of Social Networks on Innovation and Industrial Development : Social Dimensions of Industrial Dynamics in Russia . Paper presented at the DRUID Summer Conference 2003 , June 12 – 14 , Copenhagen , Denmark . Arechavala - Vargas , R . , Diaz - Perez , C . , & Holbrook , J . A . 2009 . Globalization of Innovation and Dynamics of a Regional Innovation Network : The Case of the Canadian Fuel Cell Cluster . Paper presented at the Atlanta Conference on Science and Innovation Policy , October 2 – 3 , Atlanta , GA , USA . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ACSIP . 2009 . 5367826 Becker , W . , & Dietz , J . 2004 . R & D Cooperation and Innovation Activities of Firms – Evidence for the German Manufacturing Industry . Research Policy , 33 ( 2 ) : 209 – 223 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2003 . 07 . 003 Buesa , M . , Heijs , J . , Martínez Pellitero , M . , & Baumert , T . 2006 . Regional Systems of Innovation and the Knowledge Production Function : The Spanish Case . Technovation , 26 ( 4 ) : 463 – 472 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . technovation . 2004 . 11 . 007 Callon , M . 1991 . Réseaux technico - économique et irréversibilités . In R . Boyer , B . Chavance , & O . Godard ( Eds . ) , Les figures de l ' irréversibilité en économie : 195 – 230 . Paris : Editions de l ' Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales . Cantwell , J . , & Santangelo , G . D . 2006 . The Boundaries of Firms in the New Economy : M & As as a Strategic Tool toward Corporate Technological Diversification . Structural Change and Economic Dynamics , 17 ( 2 ) : 174 – 199 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . strueco . 2005 . 06 . 001 Carassus , J . 2005 . Public Private Partnership : A Service Innovation – The Treasury Building Case . Paris : Centre Scientifique et Technique du Bâtiment ( CSTB ) . Castells , M . 1996 . The Rise of the Network Society . Oxford , UK : Blackwell . Cohen , W . M . , Nelson , R . R . , & Walsh , J . P . 2002 . Links and Impacts : The Influence of Public Research on Industrial R & D . Management Science , 48 ( 1 ) : 1 – 23 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1287 / mnsc . 48 . 1 . 1 . 14273 Coulon , F . 2005 . The Use of Social Network Analysis in Innovation Research : A Literature Review . Paper presented at the DRUID Academy Winter 2005 PhD Conference , Conference , January 27 – 29 , Aalborg , Denmark . Cowan , R . 2004 . Network Models of Innovation and Knowledge Diffusion . Research Memoranda 016 . Maastricht : Maastricht Economic Research Institute on Innovation and Technology ( MERIT ) . Cowan R . , Jonard , N . , & Özman , M . 2004 . Knowledge Dynamics in a Network Industry . T echnological Forecasting and Social Change , 71 ( 5 ) : 469 – 484 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0040 - 1625 ( 03 ) 00045 - 3 David , P . A . 1985 . Clio and the Economics of QWERTY . American Economic Review , 75 ( 2 ) : 332 – 337 . http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 1805621 Djellal , F . , & Gallouj , F . 2015 . Services and Crisis : Stop Shooting at the Ambulance ! Journal of Innovation Management , 3 ( 1 ) : 5 – 8 . Edquist , C . , & McKelvey , M . 1997 . Systems of Innovation : Growth , Competitiveness and Employment . Cheltenham , UK : Edward Elgar Publishing . Freeman , C . 1987 . Technology Policy and Economic Performance : Lessons from Japan . London : Pinter . Freeman , C . 1995 . The “National System of Innovation” in Historical Perspective . Cambridge Journal of Economics , 19 ( 1 ) : 5 – 24 . Gallouj , F . , Rubalcaba , L . , & Windrum , P . ( Eds ) . 2013 . Public – Private Innovation Networks in Services . Cheltenham , UK : Edward Elgar Publishing . Garcia - Pont , C . , & Nohria , N . 2002 . Local versus Global Mimetism ; The Dynamics of Alliance Formation in the Automobile Industry . Strategic Management Journal , 23 : 307 – 321 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / smj . 225 Granovetter , M . 1985 . Economic Action and Social Structure : The Problem of Embeddedness . American Journal of Sociology , 91 ( 3 ) : 481 – 510 . http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 2780199 Gulati , R . 1999 . Network Location and Learning : The Influence of Network Resources and Firm Capabilities on Alliance Formation . Strategic Management Journal , 20 ( 5 ) : 397 – 420 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / ( SICI ) 1097 - 0266 ( 199905 ) 20 : 5 < 397 : : AID - SMJ35 > 3 . 0 . CO ; 2 - K Hamdouch , A . 2009 . Networking , Clustering and Innovation Dynamics in the Global Economy : Features , Challenges and Open Issues . Journal of Innovation Economics , 2 ( 4 ) : 5 – 13 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3917 / jie . 004 . 0005 Jovanovic , B . , & MacDonald , G . M . 1994 . The Life Cycle of a Competitive Industry . Journal of Political Economy , 102 ( 2 ) : 322 – 347 . http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 2138664 Kanakoudis , V . , Podimata , M . , and Papotis , A . 2007 . PPPs in the Renewable Sources Energy Sector : The Greek Experience of a Medium - Scale Hydropower Plant . European Water , 17 / 18 : 41 – 49 . Klepper , S . 1996 . Entry , Exit , Growth , and Innovation over the Product Life Cycle . American Economic Review , 86 ( 3 ) : 562 – 583 . http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 2118212 Klepper , S . 1997 . Industry Life Cycles . Industrial Corporate Change , 6 ( 1 ) : 145 – 182 . Koenig , S . , Battiston , M . , Napoletano , F . , & Schweitzer , F . 2007 . On Algebraic Graph Theory and the Dynamics of Innovation Networks . Networks and Heterogeneous Media , 3 ( 2 ) : 201 – 219 . Li , J . 2005 . Unleashing Innovation : A Socio - Cognitive Approach . Paper presented at the Druid Tenth Anniversary Summer Conference 2005 , June 27 – 29 , Copenhagen , Denmark . Lundvall , B . - Å . 1988 . Innovation as an Interactive Process : From User - Producer Interaction to the National System of Innovation . In G . Dosi , C . Freeman , R . Nelson , G . Silverberg , & L . Soete . ( Eds . ) , Technical Change and Economic Theory : 349 – 369 . London : Pinter . Lundvall , B . - Å . ( Ed . ) . 1992 . National Systems of Innovation : Towards a Theory of Innovation and Interactive Learning . London : Pinter . Manley , K . 2002 . The System Approach to Innovation Studies . Australian Journal of Information Systems , 9 ( 2 ) : 94 – 102 . Technological Public – Private Innovation Networks : A Conceptual Framework Rabeh Morrar Technology Innovation Management Review August 2015 ( Volume 5 , Issue 8 ) 33 www . timreview . ca Citation : Morrar , R . 2015 . Technological Public – Private Innovation Networks : A Conceptual Framework Describing Their Structure and Mechanism of Interaction . Technology Innovation Management Review , 5 ( 8 ) : 25 – 33 . http : / / timreview . ca / article / 920 Keywords : networks , innovation networks , technological public – private innovation networks , TechPPINs , public – private partnership , conceptual framework , network lifecycle , social network analysis Markard , J . , & Truffer , B . 2008 . Technological Innovation Systems and the Multi - Level Perspective : Towards an Integrated Framework . Research Policy , 37 ( 4 ) : 596 – 615 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2008 . 01 . 004 Messica , A . 2007 . Innovation Networks Taxonomy and Efficiency – Toward Innovation Engineering . Holon , Israel : Center for Entrepreneurship and Innovation Management , Holon Institute of Technology . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2139 / ssrn . 1023964 Morrar , R . , Gallouj , F . , & Hammadou , H . 2013 . Public - Private Innovation Networks and Innovation Activities in French Service Sector . Journal of Innovation Economics & Management , 10 ( 2 ) : 191 – 217 . Moskalyk , A . 2008 . The Role of Public - Private Partnerships in Funding Social Housing in Canada . Ottawa , Canada : Canadian Policy Research Networks . Musiolik , J . , & Markard , J . , 2010 . Innovation Networks and Resources in Technological Innovation Systems : Insights from the Field of Stationary Fuel in Germany . Paper presented at the DRUID - DIME Academy Winter 2010 PhD Conference , January 21 – 23 , Aalborg , Denmark . Nelson , R . R . ( Ed . ) 1993 . National Innovation Systems . A Comparative Analysis . Oxford , UK : Oxford University Press . Nelson , R . R . , & Winter , S . 1973 . Toward an Evolutionary Theory of Economic Capabilities . American Economic Review , 63 ( 2 ) : 440 – 449 . http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 1817107 Pellegrin , I . , Balestro , M . V . , Júnior , J . A . V . , & Vaz Dias , S . L . 2010 . Dynamizing Innovation Systems through Induced Innovation Networks : A Conceptual Framework and the Case of the Oil Industry in Brazil . Journal of Technology Management & Innovation , 5 ( 3 ) : 15 – 35 . Perkmann , M . , & Walsh , K . 2007 . University - Industry Relationships and Open Innovation : Towards a Research Agenda . I nternational Journal of Management Review , 9 ( 4 ) : 259 – 280 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1468 - 2370 . 2007 . 00225 . x Podolny , J . M . , Stuart , T . E . , & Hannan , M . T . 1996 . Networks , Knowledge , and Niches : Competition in the Worldwide Semiconductor Industry , 1984 – 1991 . American Journal of Sociology , 102 ( 3 ) : 659 – 689 . http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 2782460 Powell , W . W . , Koput , K . W . , & Smith - Doerr , L . 1996 . Interorganizational Collaboration and the Locus of Innovation : Networks of Learning in Biotechnology . Administrative Science Quarterly , 41 ( 1 ) : 116 – 145 . http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 2393988 Pyka , A . , & Scharnhorst , A . ( Eds ) . 2009 . Innovation Networks : New Approaches in Modelling and Analyzing . Berlin : Springer - Verlag . Pyka A . , & Schön , A . 2009 . Taxonomy of Innovation , Cooperation and Networks in Service Industries . ServPPIN Project , European Commission . Pyka , A . , Schon , , B . , Triulzi , G . , Windrum , P . , Filiou , D . , Frenken , K . , Sundbo , J . , Sceuer , J . , & Fuglsang , L . 2010 . Cooperation for Innovation in Services : Taxonomy of Innovation , Cooperation , and Networks in Service Industries . ServPPIN Project , European Commission . Salavisa , I . 2009 . Entrepreneurship and Social Networks in IT Sectors : The Case of the Software Industry in Portugal . Journal of Innovation Economics , 2 ( 4 ) : 15 – 39 . Schweitzer , F . , Fagiolo , G . , Sornette , D . , & Vega - Redondo , F . 2009 . Economic Networks : What Do We Know and What Do We Need to Know ? Advances in Complex Systems , 12 ( 4 - 5 ) : 407 – 422 . Sundbo , J . 2010 . Public - Private Networks and Service Innovation in Knowledge Intensive Services : A Report of European Case Studies . ServPPIN Project , European Commission . Tether , B . , & Tajar , A . 2008 . Beyond Industry - University Links : Sourcing Knowledge for Innovation from Consultants , Private Research Organisations and the Public Science - Base . Research Policy , 37 ( 6 - 7 ) , 1079 - 1095 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2008 . 04 . 003 Toedtling , F . , & Trippl , M . 2005 . One Size Fits All ? Towards a Differentiated Regional Innovation Policy Approach . Research Policy , 34 ( 8 ) : 1203 – 1219 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2005 . 01 . 018 Tushman , M . L . 2004 . From Engineering Management / R & D Management , to the Management of Innovation , to Exploiting and Exploring over Value Nets : 50 Years of Research Initiated by IEEE - TEM . IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management , 51 ( 4 ) : 409 – 411 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TEM . 2004 . 836365 Tushman , M . L . , & Anderson , P . 1996 . Technological Discontinuities and Organizational Environments . Administrative Science Quarterly , 31 ( 3 ) : 439 – 465 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 2392832 Uzzi , B . 1997 . Social Structure and Competition in Interfirm Networks : The Paradox of Embeddedness . Administrative Science Quarterly , 42 ( 1 ) : 35 – 67 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 2393808 Wasserman , S . , & Faust , A . 1994 . Social Network Analysis : Methods and Applications . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Watts , D . J . 2003 . Six Degrees : The Science of a Connected Age . New York : Norton . Weber , M . 2009 . Public Private Innovation Network in Transport . Servppin Project , European Commission . Technological Public – Private Innovation Networks : A Conceptual Framework Rabeh Morrar