Structural Basis of Membrane Bending by the N - BAR Protein Endophilin Carsten Mim , 1 , 2 Haosheng Cui , 3 Joseph A . Gawronski - Salerno , 1 , 2 Adam Frost , 5 Edward Lyman , 4 Gregory A . Voth , 3 and Vinzenz M . Unger 1 , 2 , * 1 Department of Molecular Biosciences , Northwestern University , 2205 Campus Drive , Evanston , IL 60208 , USA 2 Chemistry of Life Processes Institute , Northwestern University , 2170 Campus Drive , Evanston , IL 60208 , USA 3 Department of Chemistry , Institute for Biophysical Dynamics , James Franck Institute , and Computation Institute , University of Chicago , 5735 South Ellis Avenue , Chicago , IL 60637 , USA 4 Department of Physics and Astronomy and Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry , University of Delaware , Newark , DE 19716 , USA 5 Department of Biochemistry , University of Utah , 15 North Medical Drive East , Salt Lake City , UT 84112 , USA * Correspondence : v - unger @ northwestern . edu DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2012 . 01 . 048 SUMMARY Functioning as key players in cellular regulation of membrane curvature , BAR domain proteins bend bilayers and recruit interaction partners through poorly understood mechanisms . Using electron cryo - microscopy , we present reconstructions of full - length endophilin and its N - terminal N - BAR domain in their membrane - bound state . Endophilin lattices expose large areas of membrane surface and are held together by promiscuous interactions between endophilin’s amphipathic N - terminal helices . Coarse - grained molecular dynamics simulations reveal that endophilin lattices are highly dynamic and that the N - terminal helices are required for formation of a stable and regular scaffold . Furthermore , endophi - lin accommodates different curvatures through a quantized addition or removal of endophilin dimers , which in some cases causes dimerization of endo - philin’s SH3 domains , suggesting that the spatial presentation of SH3 domains , rather than afﬁnity , governs the recruitment of downstream interaction partners . INTRODUCTION The cell membrane is a dynamic barrier whose shape is constantly remodeled with high spatial and temporal accuracy during essential cellular processes ranging from cell motility and signaling , to maintenance and generation of organelles ( Gallop and McMahon , 2005 ; Hurley et al . , 2010 ) . Though critical for normal cell function , the mechanisms by which cells control membrane remodeling are only beginning to come into focus ( Dawson et al . , 2006 ) . At the molecular level , proteins of the Bin / Amphiphysin / Rvs ( BAR ) domain superfamily have emerged as major players in membrane remodeling ( Farsad et al . , 2001 ; Frost et al . , 2009 ) . Divided into four distinctive subfamilies , N - terminal - BAR ( N - BAR ) , extended - FCH - BAR ( F - BAR ) , inverse BAR ( I - BAR ) ( Ren et al . , 2006 ) , and Pinkbar proteins ( Pyka¨la¨inen et al . , 2011 ) , the majority of BAR domain proteins are scaffolding proteins that combine a membrane - remodeling BAR domain with additional protein : protein interaction or catalytic domains , which are responsible for the biological coupling of speciﬁc processes to distinct membrane curvature states . At the struc - tural level , BAR domains are dimers of an antiparallel helix bundle ( Peter et al . , 2004 ; Shimada et al . , 2007 ; Weissenhorn , 2005 ) that display various degrees of intrinsic curvature . The simple design of these modules allows cells to generate a large range of different curvature states , including membrane invagi - nations , like tubules , or extrusions like ﬁlopodia ( Guerrier et al . , 2009 ; Lee et al . , 2002 ) . At the mechanistic level , high - resolution structures and spectroscopic studies have inspired two major models for how BAR domains accomplish changes in membrane curvature . One model holds that membranes are remodeled through a pure scaffolding mechanism in which a ‘‘banana - shaped’’ BAR domain dimer binds the bilayer through electro - static interactions and imposes its intrinsic curvature on the substrate bilayer . In the second model , curvature sensing and generation are thought to critically depend on the membrane insertion of amphipathic wedges like the N - terminal helix 0 ( H0 ) that are found in N - BAR proteins such as endophilin and amphi - physin ( Chernomordik and Kozlov , 2003 ; Farsad et al . , 2001 ; Johannes and Mayor , 2010 ) . There is good experimental evidence in support of both models , yet mechanistic details remain largely unknown , in part because direct visualization of BAR domain proteins in membrane - bound states has proven to be challenging . The structure of the membrane - bound CIP4 F - BAR domain demonstrated that bending of the membrane can be realized solely through scaffolding ( Frost et al . , 2008 ) . However , the same study also revealed a second physiologically relevant binding mode in which the F - BAR domains engage planar bila - yers through an alternate , ﬂat binding interface . This suggested that the repertoire and mechanistic complexity of BAR : mem - brane interactions likely is larger than was previously anticipated . In contrast , how insertion of amphipathic sequences into the bilayer promotes curvature sensing and generation remains less clear . A recent study showed that N - BAR domains of Cell 149 , 137 – 145 , March 30 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 137 endophilin are able to form ordered surface lattices on membranes . However , the study focused on tubular structures with very narrow diameter . Individual N - BAR domain dimers were not resolved , and details about how the N - BAR domains interact with the membrane were not provided ( Mizuno et al . , 2010 ) . Here we present reconstructions of full - length endophilin and its N - terminal N - BAR domain bound on tubules whose diameters are in a range that is relevant for action by down - stream interaction partners , such as the GTPase dynamin ( Chappie et al . , 2011 ; Faelber et al . , 2011 ; Roux et al . , 2010 ; Sundborger et al . , 2011 ) . Our key ﬁndings are that at their struc - tural level N - BAR lattices are fundamentally different from F - BAR scaffolds , that highly promiscuous and generic interactions between N - terminal H0 helices are essential for the formation of ordered scaffold structures , and that the geometry of the N - BAR endophilin lattice in some cases results in dimerization of the SH3 domain . Combined with our observation that the concentration of SH3 domains close to the scaffold surface is independent of curvature , our study suggests that recruitment of downstream partners is driven by steric selection rather than thermodynamic afﬁnity . RESULTS N - BAR Lattices Expose Large Membrane Areas To directly visualize the design principles of membrane - bound N - BAR lattices , we used electron cryomicroscopic imaging , maximum likelihood classiﬁcation and an iterative helical real space reconstruction approach ( Egelman , 2007 ; Sorzano et al . , 2004 ) to determine class averages and the 3D structures of tubules decorated with either the endophilin N - BAR domain or full - length endophilin ( Figure 1 and Figure S1 and Table S1 avail - able online ) . Starting from data sets of (cid:1) 75 , 000 overlapping segments for endophilin , and (cid:1) 35 , 000 segments for tubes coated with the endophilin N - BAR domain , we were able to determine structures of tubules of different diameters for each sample ( see Extended Experimental Procedures ) . In addition , we also obtained a class average for another N - BAR protein , amphiphysin ( (cid:1) 2 , 000 overlapping segments [ Figure S1A ] ) to test whether the smaller number of amphipathic wedges in amphiphysin ( two versus four in endophilin ) resulted in a change in overall scaffold design . Class averages obtained from our data sets showed a distinc - tive pattern where dark and light regions alternated along the vertical axis of the membrane tubule with a period of (cid:1) 50 A˚ ( Figures 1 , S1A , and S1B ) . Moreover , the pattern was highly conserved regardless of differences in the number of amphi - pathic wedges ( endophilin versus amphiphysin ) , the presence / absence of domains other than the N - BAR domain ( full - length endophilin / amphiphysin versus endophilin N - BAR domain ) , or different curvatures of the underlying membrane ( Figure S1C ) . This suggested that N - BAR lattices were highly pliable , which was further supported by the observation that tube diameters readily and frequently changed , even along a single tube . To better understand the lattice design , we generated 3D reconstructions of full - length endophilin ( Figure 1 ) and endo - philin’s N - BAR domain ( Figure S1E ) . In the reconstructions , indi - vidual N - BAR domains were easily recognizable ( Figure 1 ) . Inspection of the structures revealed that tip - to - tip interactions betweenconsecutive N - BAR dimers didnotseem toplay amajor Figure 1 . Endophilin Scaffold Structure ( A ) Class averages ( top ) and reconstructed volumes ( bottom ) of membrane tubules decorated withfull - lengthendophilin . Thesizeofthescalebar is the same in corresponding reconstructions and class averages . The bilayer is yellow and the protein green . Apparent holes seen in the bilayer of the 32 nm tube reconstruction are dueto the thresholding level , which was chosen to emphasize the molecular envelope of the protein component . ( B ) Modelofendophilinlattice , viewedfromthetop ( left ) andincross - sectionperpendiculartothetube axis ( right ) . The high - resolution crystal structure of rat endophilin A1 ( pdb : 1ZWW , orange ) was ﬁtted into the reconstructions of the 28 nm full - length endophilin tubule . Only one full dimer of the BAR domaincoreisshownforclarity . Thedisposition of H0 ( magenta ) and insert ( cyan ) helices is indicated by cylinders . The molecular envelope ( gray mesh ) suggests that H0 helices from adjacent BAR domaindimerspairinanantiparallelfashion . Atthe same contouring threshold , one of the insert helices is not fully accounted for , reﬂecting the partially disordered state of this element in our reconstructions . Thelengthof thevertical thinblue lines ( right ) is 30 A˚ and marks the approximate positioning of the hydrophobic core of the bilayer . At the chosen contouring threshold we did not observe density for the leaﬂet that is in direct contact with the BAR domain . This indicates that the bilayer is highly disordered and stressed . See also Figure S1 and Table S1 . 138 Cell 149 , 137 – 145 , March 30 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . role in stabilizing the lattice and also seemed to switch between two modes . In the 25 nm and 32 nm tubes , the N - BAR domains were oriented perpendicular to the tube’s long axis and appeared to have little to no direct tip - to - tip contact , whereas in the 28 nm tubes , direct tip - to - tip interactions seemed to link consecutive dimers that were inclined by (cid:1) 10 (cid:3) with respect to the tube’s long axis . Cross - sections of these tubes revealed that the distinct orientations coincided with lattices that differed by an integral number of N - BAR dimers around the circumfer - ence of the tube ( data not shown ) . Moreover , N - BAR dimers in adjacent rows of the lattice did not show direct lateral interac - tions between the coiled - coil core domains of N - BAR dimers , which had been identiﬁed as a deﬁning structural feature in scaf - folds formed by the F - BAR protein CIP4 ( Frost et al . , 2008 ) . This marked difference in lattice design exposed large areas of continuous membrane surface between adjacent lattice ridges ( e . g . , (cid:1) 350 nm 2 from one notch to the next in 28 nm tubules ) that , independent of curvature , were spaced (cid:1) 50 A˚ apart from each other . Endophilin’s Amphipathic H0 Helix Provides Key Contacts in the N - BAR Scaffold The absence of lateral interactions between the N - BAR cores , and the apparently weak or absent tip - to - tip interactions between consecutive N - BAR dimers suggested that interactions between the amphipathic helices of endophilin played an impor - tant role in lattice formation and stability . To better understand the role of these structural elements , we sought to identify their positioning in our reconstructions . For this purpose , reconstruc - tions were thresholded to tightly ﬁt the backbone of endophilin’s high - resolution N - BAR crystal structure to emphasize the molec - ular envelope of the protein components ( Protein Data Bank [ pdb ] : 1ZWW ) . At this contouring level , additional densities bridged adjacent windings of the surface lattice and likely repre - sented contributions from the amphipathic helices ( Figure 1B ) . Based on the envelope , the reconstructions suggested that , in the 28 nm tubes , H0 helices from adjacent rows of the N - BAR lattice interacted in an antiparallel fashion , placing the helix pair roughly parallel to both the membrane surface and the long axis of the tube ( Figure 1B ) . In contrast to the H0 helices , posi - tioning of the insert helices was less certain because the volume elements accounting for this helix were less well deﬁned than the envelope for enclosing H0 ( Figure 1B ) . Whether this poorer deﬁ - nition was due to ﬂexible linkers that connected the insert helix to the BAR domain core or was caused by a spread of orientations of the insert helix could not be resolved at the resolution of our reconstructions . However , the molecular envelopes suggested that the insert helix was tilted toward the bilayer core and in the 28 nm tubules did not make direct contacts with insert helices from the adjacent N - BAR domain dimer ( Figure 1B ) . Interactions between H0 Helices Are Essential for Lattice Stability The conclusion that interactions between the H0 helices from neighboring N - BAR dimers were essential to lattice formation and stability was independently established by coarse - grained molecular dynamics simulations ( Figure 2A ; see Extended Experimental Procedures and Figure S2 for details ) . The simula - tions revealed that the oligomer structure was retained during the course of simulation for the N - BAR system ( Figure 2A , ‘‘H0 + BAR’’ ) , whereas the oligomer rapidly became scrambled for the system where H0 had been deleted ( Figure 2A , ‘‘BAR’’ ) . Notably , even in the presence of H0 , the lattices had order parameters of only (cid:1) 0 . 8 ( Figure S2B ) . This further emphasized that endophilin lattices were very dynamic and explained why segment sorting and classiﬁcation were necessary to obtain reli - able class averages for reconstruction of the volumes . To further test the importance of H0 : H0 interactions for the formation of the lattices , mutant endophilins with serial deletions lacking 3 , 6 , 9 , 12 , 16 , or 20 residues along H0 were tested for their ability to tubulate liposomes . Of these mutants the D 2 – D 17 and D 2 – D 21 mutants did not tubulate liposomes ( data not shown ) . However , the shorter partial deletion mutants were still functional in this assay , but displayed a lower efﬁciency than wild - type protein if the amounts of endophilin were lowered to the smallest amount necessary to yield robust tubulation ( data not shown ) . Moreover , cryoEM data collected from tubes formed by the D 2 – D 10 and D 2 – D 13 mutants lacked the characteristic striation pattern that was observed for tubes formed by wild - type endophilin ( Figure 2C ) . This suggested a higher degree of lattice disorder in the tubes formed by the mutant endophilins and further supported the idea that antiparallel interactions between H0 helices were necessary for the formation of a well - deﬁned lattice structure . The Interactions between H0 Helices Are Degenerate and Dynamic To further characterize the interactions between H0 helices , we generated 12 single Cys mutants along H0 in a Cys - less endo - philin background and determined their ability to spontaneously form crosslinked dimers in their membrane - bound state ( Figures 3A and S3 ) . Surprisingly , all mutants were able to crosslink , and the efﬁciency increased toward the C - terminal end of H0 , except in the case of the Q9C mutant , which for unknown reasons crosslinked less well than other mutants in this region of H0 . At the same time , all mutants retained their ability to tubulate lipo - somes ( Figure S3D for examples ) . This indicated that the mutant endophilins were functional and that the observed crosslinks occurred in the context of a scaffold . The latter implied that the helices were able to interact in many different registers , including pairings on either side of the helix . To acknowledge this observa - tion , H0 helices are represented by generic cylinders in Figure 1B to indicate that the observed densities represent an ensemble average over all possible lateral alignments of H0 pairs . Consis - tent with the crosslinking experiments , all - atom molecular dynamics calculations revealed a very smooth energy landscape for H0 : H0 interactions , with the exception of two conﬁgurations that were slightly more stable , and a more general trend that small overlaps toward the N - terminal ends of the helices were energetically slightly less favorable than more extensive overlaps ( Figure 2B ) . The hypothesis that lattice formation depended on lateral interactions between H0 helices implicitly made the prediction that both tubulation and crosslinking of the various mutants would be sensitive to the presence of chemically synthesized H0 peptide . As shown in Figure 3B , this condition was met , as Cell 149 , 137 – 145 , March 30 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 139 two different H0 peptides ( wild - type and a T14D mutant peptide that mimicked a naturally phosphorylated H0 variant [ Kaneko et al . , 2005 ] ) signiﬁcantly reduced crosslinking for all but the most N - terminal mutants of H0 . The latter observation not only served as an internal negative control , but was also consistent with the slightly less favorable interactions that were observed in the molecular dynamics simulations ( Figure 2B ) . In further agreement with the crosslinking results , tubulation was reduced in the presence of submillimolar concentrations of the peptide and almost absent at nominal peptide concentrations of 2 mM that were used to carry out the competitive crosslinking experi - ments ( Figure 3B ) . Moreover , wild - type endophilin H0 peptide also blocked membrane tubulation by another N - BAR protein , an isoform of amphiphysin 2 , with the same concentration dependence , but had a much less inhibitory effect on membrane tubulation by the F - BAR domain of FBP17 , which does not employ amphipathic wedges to induce membrane curvature ( Figures 3B and S3E for titration results of N - BAR proteins ) . This suggested that the presence of the free peptide in the membrane did not interfere with membrane bending per se but acted by disrupting the cooperative assembly of a coherent lattice that required a permissive spatial positioning of H0 helices . A rough estimate revealed that in fully assembled scaf - folds , H0 is present at a concentration of (cid:1) 14 mM within the leaﬂet that accommodates the wedging element . With this in mind , the inhibition we observed at a nominal peptide concentra - tion of 2 mM was deemed signiﬁcant . At this concentration , the peptide alone did not cause tubulation or disruption of the bilayer ( data not shown ) . However , our reconstruction revealed that insertion of the much higher concentrations of amphipathic wedges in the actual scaffolds caused signiﬁcant stress on the bilayer . This stress manifested itself in the absence of density Figure 2 . The N - Terminal Helix H0 Plays a Crucial Role in Lattice Formation ( A ) Starting ( top ) and ﬁnal ( bottom ) snapshots of coarse - grained molecular dynamics simulations ofendophilinoligomers ( N - BARontheleftandH0 - deleted BAR on the right ) . Green represents the coiled - coil BAR scaffold , blue represents the H0 helix , and white represents the insert helix . ( B ) Free energy proﬁle for antiparallel H0 pairs as afunctionofdisplacementagainsteachother . The helix pair is shoulder - to - shoulder when the offset is 0 A˚ . Error bars represent the SEM . The free energywascalculatedfromtheumbrellasampling data by the weighted - histogram analysis method and the error bar was calculated by the bootstrap method . The orange line is for reference purposes only and shows that the energy is slightly higher in the direction of positive displacement . The label ‘‘a’’ ( at (cid:4) 13 A ˚ ) refers to one of the conﬁgurations shown in C . ( C ) Two stable conﬁgurations for the helix pair . The pair labeled ‘‘a’’ corresponds to the same label in B . ( D ) CryoEM images ( top ) and single - particle class averages ( bottom ) of endophilin wild - type ( wt ) and partial H0 - deletion mutants of endophilin ( Δ 2 – D 10 and Δ 2 – D 13 ) . For the D 2 – D 10 mutant , 294 out of 1 , 641 segments overlapping segments in the data set contributed to the average shown . For the D 2 – D 13 mutant , 156 out of 561 overlapping segments in the data set contributed to the average shown . The small number of usable segments was caused by the small number of well - preserved tubes formed by this mutant en - dophilin . The scale bar in the cryoEM images is 25 nm . The scale bar in the single - particle class averagesis5nm . Tubulesofendophilin ( wt ) exhibit acharacteristic ‘‘studded’’appearance , indicating a coherent protein coat with a repeat distance of (cid:1) 5 nm . This spacing is not detectable in tubules formed by either of the H0 - truncation mutants of endophilin ( Δ 2 – D 10 and Δ 2 – D 13 ) , suggesting a loss of coherence within the protein coat . See also Figure S2 . 140 Cell 149 , 137 – 145 , March 30 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . for the bilayer leaﬂet closest to the N - BAR domain if the recon - structions were thresholded to emphasize the protein compo - nent of the ensemble ( Figure 1B ) . It should be pointed out that the missing leaﬂet was visible at a less signiﬁcant thresholding level . However , at this level the deﬁnition of the BAR domains was lowered to the point where individual dimers were no longer visible . Thus , the reconstructions shown in Figure 1 were the best overall compromise for representing the structures . Some , but Not All , Lattice Geometries Induce Dimerization of Endophilin’s SH3 Domains As is the case in many BAR domain proteins , endophilin employs src3 - homology domains for the recruitment of its two down - stream interaction partners , dynamin and synaptojanin ( Chang - Ileto et al . , 2011 ; Llobet et al . , 2011 ; Ringstad et al . , 1997 ; Takei et al . , 1999 ) . How each of these partners is selectively recruited is unknown , which prompted us to compare reconstructions of membrane - bound full - length endophilin with reconstructions of membrane - bound N - BAR domain alone to determine whether the SH3 domains adopted well - deﬁned spatial patterns above Figure 3 . Interactions between H0 Helices Are Nonspeciﬁc and Degenerate ( A ) Crosslinking efﬁciency for 12 unique Cys substitutions alongH0 . Alldataarepresentedasthemeanofthe " dimer / total endophilin ratio " + SEM ( triplicates ) . ( B ) Impact of synthetic H0 peptides on crosslinking of unique Cys - substituted endophilin mutants . Shown are crosslinking efﬁciencies in the absence of the peptide ( striped bars ) , and in the presence of 22 - residue wild - type endophilin H0 peptide ( gray bars ) and phosphomimetic mutant peptide ( T14D ) ( black bars ) . All but one mutant ( S2C ) showed a signiﬁcant reduction in crosslinking efﬁ - ciency in the presence of either H0 peptide . In these experiments , peptideswereusedat2mMconcentrations . All data are presented as mean + SEM ( triplicate ) . Signiﬁ - cance levels : * p > 0 . 05 , * * p > 0 . 01 , with Student’s t test . The error bars represent the SEM . ( C ) Negative - stain EM images of tubulation reactions with liposomes in the absence ( left ) and presence ( right ) of 2 mM of endophilin H0 peptide ( residues 1 – 22 ) . Concen - trations of 2 mM effectively inhibited the ability of endo - philin to bend membranes . This block of tubule formation was also observed with amphiphysin 2 , an N - BAR protein similar to endophilin . In contrast , tubulation by the F - BAR protein FBP17 was less affected , indicating that the inhi - bition of N - BAR - dependent curvature generation was caused by a disruption of H0 : H0 interactions between N - BAR dimers . Scale bar = 2 m m . See also Figure S3 . the scaffold surface . Overlay of the reconstruc - tions of the 25 nm tubes for both proteins failed to show any signiﬁcant differences . This indicated that the SH3 domains were highly mobile above the scaffold surface , which caused their density to be averaged out during the reconstruction . In contrast , overlay of the 28 nm tubes revealed additional densities in the case of the full - length endophilin lattice ( Figures 4 and S1E for data of N - BAR - only tubes ) . The additional densities were large enough to accommo - date the backbone of the high - resolution structure of an endophilin SH3 domain dimer ( pdb : 3IQL [ Trempe et al . , 2009 ] ) . Interestingly , the putative SH3 domain dimers were located above the region where the tips of two consecutive en - dophilin dimers come close to each other and thus provided additional lattice contacts in this case ( Figure 4 ) . Based on this model , placement of Cys residues into the putative dimerization interface should allow the spontaneous formation of disulﬁde bridges . To test this prediction , we generated a Thr320Cys mutant in an otherwise Cys - less background . Consistent with our model , this mutant efﬁciently formed crosslinks when bound to bilayers , which set it apart from wild - type endophilin A1 , in which the nearby Cys294 in the SH3 domain failed to form signif - icant amounts of disulﬁde - linked dimers . The fact that the cross - linking was less than 100 % was likely due to the fact that only a fraction of the tubes in any given population had a diameter that would allow dimerization to occur ( Figure S1D ) . Neverthe - less , the pronounced difference in the behavior of the T320C mutant and wild - type endophilin A1 was consistent with the Cell 149 , 137 – 145 , March 30 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 141 idea that SH3 dimers can form above the surface of some , but not all , endophilin lattices . DISCUSSION N - BAR Scaffolds Are Fundamentally Different Than F - BAR Scaffolds Based on their structure , BAR domains are very similar to each other overall ( Frost et al . , 2009 ) . Once assembled into scaffolds , however , lattices of F - BAR ( Frost et al . , 2008 ) and N - BAR domains are remarkably different . The extensive lateral contacts between the coiled - coil regions of the F - BAR protein CIP4 , a deﬁning hallmark of the coats it forms on membranes , were entirely absent from any of the N - BAR lattices we reconstructed . Similarly , tip - to - tip interactions between consecutive F - BAR dimers made a signiﬁcant contribution to controlling the curva - ture state of the bilayer ( Frost et al . , 2008 ) , yet corresponding N - BAR dimer interactions did not seem to make notable contri - butions to the formation of N - BAR lattices . These fundamental differences in lattice design both led to the same conclusion , that antiparallel interactions between H0 helices from N - BAR domains in adjacent rows of the lattice are essential for scaffold assembly and stabilization of membrane curvature because the limited or absent tip - to - tip interactions between consecutive N - BAR domain dimers would be too weak on their own to main - tain the highly curved membrane tubules ( Lyman et al . , 2010 ) . As a direct consequence , the lateral association of H0 helices along the tube axis and between adjacent ridges of the lattice exposed large areas of membrane surface , which may be critical to allowing access for proteins like the GTPase dynamin or the inositol 5 - phosphatase synaptojanin that in endocytosis act downstream of N - BAR proteins ( Ringstad et al . , 1997 ; Sund - borger et al . , 2011 ; Takei et al . , 1999 ) ( Figure 5 ) . Also very different from the F - BAR domain of CIP4 , cross - sections of endophilin - covered tubes revealed that they differ by an integral number of dimers around the circumference of the tube ( data not shown ) . This suggested that the N - BAR domains accommodate different curvatures primarily through a ‘‘quantized’’ addition / removal of dimers , which contrasts with CIP4 scaffolds , in which different curvatures are accommodated by a combination of lattice reorientation and noninteger changes in F - BAR dimers around the circumference of the tubule ( Frost et al . , 2008 ) . H0 : H0 Interactions Are Generic and Degenerate One of the most surprising and counterintuitive ﬁndings of our work was that interactions between the H0 helices appeared to be extremely pliable and nonspeciﬁc . Fortifying the crosslinking data , the observation that the endophilin H0 peptide was able to poison lattice formation by another N - BAR protein , amphiphysin 2 , was perhaps the most striking illustration of the nonspeciﬁc nature of H0 interactions because the sequences of the H0 helices from the two proteins do not share high homology . The notion that these types of amphipathic wedges provide a generic , low - afﬁnity amphiphilic hook seemed at odds with their indisputable importance for establishing ordered arrays . Speciﬁcally , our ﬁndings raise the question of how such generic interactions allow for proper biological function . In part , an answer may arise from the observation that N - BAR decorated tubes are very ﬂexible in vitro and readily accommodate changes in diameter even within a given lattice . If ﬂexibility were a func - tional requirement , then pliable interactions between the main lattice contact points would be necessary , and such interactions could not be accomplished with a scaffold design , as seen in F - BAR lattices of CIP4 , where extensive lateral interactions between F - BAR coiled - coil domains create a very rigid cast ( Frost et al . , 2008 ) . Similarly , a low - afﬁnity interaction facilitates lattice disassembly , which may be necessary after a given process has run to completion . Contemplating possible reasons Figure 4 . Disposition of SH3 Domains ( A ) Partial overlay of the envelopes for reconstructions of full - length endophilin ( black ) and the endophilin N - BAR domain only ( red ) . Shown are the overlays for tubes of 28 nm ( left ) and 25 nm ( right ) diameter . An additional volume element was observed in the full - length endophilin reconstruction of the 28 nm tube . ( B ) The volume of the additional density was large enough to accommodate the high - resolution crystal structure of theratendophilinA1SH3domaindimer ( pdb : 3IQL ) , which was ﬁtted without any modiﬁcations to the coordinates . ( C ) The positions of Cys294 ( pink ) and Thr320 ( yellow ) are marked in the structure ( left ) . The black scale bar above the dimer is 10 A˚ . Shown to the right are Coomassie - stained , nonreducing SDS - PAGE gels of wild - type endo - philin and a Thr320Cys mutant after tubulation and crosslinking ; M , molecular weight marker . In the crystal structure of the SH3 domain dimer , the pair of Cys294 residues isjustover 10A ˚ apart , slightlytoofar toefﬁciently crosslink . However , substituting Thr320 for Cys should , anddid , allowefﬁcientcrosslinking of endophilin based on the appearance of the (cid:1) 75 kD endophilin dimer . This is consistent with the idea that in some cases , SH3 domains dimerize above the BAR domain scaffold . 142 Cell 149 , 137 – 145 , March 30 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . other than lattice dynamics , a highly speciﬁc recognition between amphipathic wedges may also not be necessary , as the concentration of unrelated segments is likely to be small in the vicinity of the site where membrane remodeling occurs . Though without doubt , a ﬁnal explanation for the perplexing lack of speciﬁcity still needs to be found , it seems that part of the answer may lie in a cell’s need to mount a versatile , yet robust , response in cases for which assembly of N - BAR lattices is required . Reorientation of the Insert Helix May Be Associated with Curvature Generation Although the resolution of our reconstructions did not allow the assignment of a clear position for endophilin’s insert helix , a reasonable ﬁt for this helix within the molecular envelope would require it to be tilted toward the membrane core ( Figure 1B ) . Interestingly , the direction of tilt would be the opposite of that observed in the only crystal structure in which the insert helix was resolved ( pdb : 2Z0V ) and also would contrast with recent spectroscopic evidence showing that a membrane - bound insert helix bound at an angle that made it slope away from the hydro - phobic core ( Jao et al . , 2010 ) . Notably , these latter studies had to be performed on liposomes that were too small to support tubulation because tubulation would hinder interpretation of the spectra . In an attempt to reconcile these disparate observa - tions , we suggest that in order to efﬁciently induce curvature at a macroscopic scale , the bilayer environment must be permissive for lateral H0 : H0 interactions to occur and to allow the insert helix to undergo a conformational change that would cause it to tip toward the hydrophobic core of the bilayer . How these two components individually contribute to curvature sensing , stabilization , and generation is a question that remains unanswered . Scaffold Structure Suggests a Steric Selection Mechanism for Interacting Proteins By nature , most BAR domain proteins are scaffolding compo - nents that drive curvature - dependent biological processes through the recruitment of other proteins . Selection of interaction partners in many cases depends on SH3 domains , which often are able to interact with multiple different proteins ( Ferguson et al . , 2009 ; Solomaha et al . , 2005 ) . This promiscuity raises the important question of how BAR - dependent scaffolds accom - plish speciﬁcity in recruiting only those components that are required to drive any given biological process . The question becomes more pressing in light of the observation , based on our reconstructions , that endophilin coats generate effective SH3 domain concentrations of 3 – 5 mM within a 100 A˚ annulus above the scaffold surface . Notably , this concentration is inde - pendent of curvature , as the same number is obtained for tubes of different width . Even more unsettling , calculations for the scaf - folds formed by the F - BAR domain of CIP4 ( Frost et al . , 2008 ) yield the same result . Considering that proline - rich target peptides typically bind SH3 domains with nanomolar to low - micromolar afﬁnities ( Demers and Mittermaier , 2009 ) , our reconstructions reveal that selection of downstream interaction partners cannot be based on binding afﬁnities because the high local concentration of SH3 domains would cause nonselective recruitment , even of low - afﬁnity binding partners , to any type of BAR domain lattice , and in a curvature - independent manner . Our ﬁnding that SH3 domains dimerize above the surface of some , but not all , lattices offers a potential solution to this vexing problem , as it suggests that unique spatial presentation signatures , rather than binding afﬁnities , identify the type of BAR - scaffold and communicate the curvature state of an underlying membrane to potential inter - action partners . For instance , the 28 nm tubes present SH3 domains as dimers . This spatial arrangement may be particularly useful for recruitment of the GTPase dynamin , which has two spatially close proline - rich segments within its proline - rich domain . Incidentally , a diameter of 28 nm of the endophilin - covered tube is also in the middle of the range of diameters sug - gested to be appropriate for dynamin - dependent membrane ﬁssion ( Faelber et al . , 2011 ) . Consequently , the 28 nm tubes not only may recruit dynamin more readily than tubes of different diameters but also may aid membrane scission by matching the curvature state of the target membrane with what is required for dynamin action . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Protein Puriﬁcation cDNA fragments encoding rat endophilin A1 , rat endophilin A1 N - BAR domain ( 1 – 247 ) , and rat amphiphysins 1 and 2 were subcloned into pGEX6P - 1 ( GE Healthcare , Piscataway , NJ ) via polymerase chain reaction . Cysteine mutants were generated by site - directed mutagenesis ( QuikChange , StrataGene , Santa Clara , CA ) . cDNA for rat endophilin A1 , rat amphiphysin 1 , and rat amphiphysin 2 were kindly provided from P . DeCamilli , Yale University , New Haven , CT . Fusion proteins were bacterially expressed and puriﬁed ﬁrst on a GST - glutathione afﬁnity column ( GE Healthcare ) . The GST tag was cleaved Figure 5 . N - BAR Scaffolds Compartmentalize the Membrane Surface for Interactions with Downstream Effectors In contrast to F - BAR lattices , endophilin lattices expose large membrane surface areas . This ﬁgure shows how the size of these areas is matched to the size of membrane - binding domains from downstream effectors that are re - cruitedbyendophilin . Speciﬁcally , thePHdomainofdynamin ( pdb : 2DYN ) and the inositol polyphosphate phosphatase catalytic domain ( IPP5C ) of syn - aptojanin from S . pombe ( pdb : 1I9Z ) are perfectly accommodated within the constraints of the endophilin lattice . Cell 149 , 137 – 145 , March 30 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 143 by PreScission protease followed by gel ﬁltration chromatography ( see Supplemental Information for composition ) . Endophilin H0 - truncation mutants were cloned and generated in pET24 ( Novagen / EMD Chemicals , Gibbstown , NJ ) to improve yield . H0 - truncation mutants were generated by site - directed mutagenesis ( QuikChange , StrataGene ) . The fusion proteins were puriﬁed on a Talon - metal - afﬁnity column ( Clonetech , Mountain View , CA ) . Aliquots of 4mg / ml ( endophilinNBAR ) protein , 10mg / ml ( endophilin ) , 25mg / ml ( endophi - lin H0 - truncation mutants ) , and 2 mg / ml ( amphiphysin 1 and amphiphysin 2 ) were stored at (cid:4) 80 (cid:3) C . Liposome Preparation and Tubulation In Vitro For all experiments , synthetic lipids were used ( Avanti , Alabaster , AL ) . For the imaged sample we prepared lipids with the compositions ( w / w ) 50 % DOPS , 45 % DOPE , and 5 % cholesterol ( endophilin ) , and 75 % DOPS , 25 % DOPE , and 5 % cholesterol ( amphiphysin , endophilin N - BAR ) . These mixtures were driedunderastreamofdryargonwithgentlevortexinginglassvials , dissolved inabsolutehexane , driedwithargonagain , anddesiccatedunderhighvacuum for 1 hr . Lipids were then hydrated with buffer A ( 50 mM K - aspartate , 10 mM Tris / HCl , and 1mM EGTA , pH 7 . 5 ) , sonicated , and used immediatelyor stored in aliquots at (cid:4) 80 (cid:3) C . The in vitro tubulation was performed with liposomes ( 0 . 1 – 0 . 25 mg / ml ) equilibrated at room temperature before adding the protein at a lipid / protein ratio ( w / w ) of 1 . 4 : 1 ( endophilin N - BAR ) or 1 : 1 ( amphiphysin 1 N - BAR ) . Cysteine Crosslinking of Lipid - Bound Endophilin Endophilin cysteine mutants were reduced in buffer A containing 1 mM tris ( 2 - carboxyethyl ) phosphine ( TCEP ) before adding liposomes . After an additional incubation period , TCEP was removed by repeated centrifugation and resus - pensionofthepelletwithTCEP - freeandEGTA - freebufferA . Theresuspended pellet wasincubated inbuffer A containing 1mMCu - O - phenanthroline for 1hr and the reaction was stopped with 1 mM EDTA . The pellet and supernatant were analyzed by nonreducing SDS - PAGE and stained with Coomassie Blue . An aliquot of the pellet of all tested mutants was assessed by electron microscopy . For competition experiments with H0 peptides , nominal peptide concentrations of 2 mM were used . Electron Microscopy Imaging The tubulation reaction was screened using 1 % uranyl - acetate - stained samples and a Tecnai 12 microscope ( Philips , FEI , Eindhoven , The Netherlands ) operatingat120kV . Imagesofunstainedsampleswereacquired at a sample temperature of (cid:4) 170 (cid:3) C on a Tecnai F20 Twin transmission elec - tron microscope operating at 120 kV , and recorded with a Tietz F415 4k 3 4k pixel CCD camera using the Leginon data collection software ( Suloway et al . , 2005 ) at nominal magniﬁcations of 29k 3 , and defocus values of (cid:4) 1 . 5 m mto (cid:4) 2 m m . Electroncryomicrographsusedintheﬁgureswerecontrast enhanced to increase visibility of ﬁne molecular features . Detailed methods can be found in the Extended Experimental Procedures . Helical Image Processing Fourier - Bessel reconstruction proved to be impossible due to the lack of high - resolution features in the power spectrum from these tubules . Moreover , variations in the diameter over the length of even a single tubule precluded reciprocal space averaging . We therefore decided to sort overlapping segments of the tubules into deﬁned classes using maximum - likelihood methods ( XMIPP ) ( Sorzano et al . , 2004 ) before initiating reconstruction by an iterative helical real - space reconstruction ( IHRSR ) single - particle algorithm asimplementedinSPIDER ( Egelman , 2007 ; Franketal . , 1996 ) . Theresolutions of our reconstructions ( Table S1 ) were calculated with the program RMEAS - URE ( Sousa and Grigorieff , 2007 ) . See Extended Experimental Procedures for a detailed description of the reconstruction strategy . ACCESSION NUMBERS Volume ﬁles for the reconstructions have been deposited at EMDB under the following accession numbers : N - BAR - only ( 25 nm ) EMD - 5365 , N - BAR - only ( 28 nm ) EMD - 2007 , endophilin ( 25 nm ) EMD - 5366 , endophilin ( 28 nm ) EMD - 5367 , and endophilin ( 32 nm ) EMD - 5368 . SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes Extended Experimental Procedures , three ﬁgures , and one table and can be found with this article online at doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2012 . 01 . 048 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Pietro De Camilli and members of his lab for critical discussions and feedback . The majority of data for this work were collected at the National Resource for Automated Molecular Microscopy , which is supported by the National Institutes of Health through the National Center for Research Resources’ P41 program ( RR017573 ) . We are also indebted to David Morgan for letting us use the cryoEM facility at Indiana University . This work was funded by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft ( C . M . ) and the Cancer Research Institute ( C . M . ) , as well as PHS grants DA24101 ( V . M . U . ) , GM094479 ( V . M . U . ) , and GM063796 ( G . A . V . ) from the National Institutes of Health . Received : March 5 , 2011 Revised : July 29 , 2011 Accepted : January 25 , 2012 Published : March 29 , 2012 REFERENCES Chang - Ileto , B . , Frere , S . G . , Chan , R . B . , Voronov , S . V . , Roux , A . , andDiPaolo , G . ( 2011 ) . Synaptojanin 1 - mediated PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 hydrolysis is modulated by membrane curvature and facilitates membrane ﬁssion . Dev . Cell 20 , 206 – 218 . Chappie , J . S . , Mears , J . A . , Fang , S . , Leonard , M . , Schmid , S . L . , Milligan , R . A . , Hinshaw , J . E . , and Dyda , F . ( 2011 ) . A pseudoatomic model of the dynamin polymer identiﬁes a hydrolysis - dependent powerstroke . Cell 147 , 209 – 222 . Chernomordik , L . V . , and Kozlov , M . M . ( 2003 ) . Protein - lipid interplay in fusion and ﬁssion of biological membranes . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 72 , 175 – 207 . Dawson , J . C . , Legg , J . A . , and Machesky , L . M . ( 2006 ) . Bar domain proteins : a role in tubulation , scission and actin assembly in clathrin - mediated endocy - tosis . Trends Cell Biol . 16 , 493 – 498 . Demers , J . P . , and Mittermaier , A . ( 2009 ) . Binding mechanism of an SH3 domain studied by NMR and ITC . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 131 , 4355 – 4367 . Egelman , E . H . ( 2007 ) . Single - particlereconstructionfromEMimagesofhelical ﬁlaments . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 17 , 556 – 561 . Faelber , K . , Posor , Y . , Gao , S . , Held , M . , Roske , Y . , Schulze , D . , Haucke , V . , Noe´ , F . , and Daumke , O . ( 2011 ) . Crystal structure of nucleotide - free dynamin . Nature 477 , 556 – 560 . Farsad , K . , Ringstad , N . , Takei , K . , Floyd , S . R . , Rose , K . , and De Camilli , P . ( 2001 ) . Generation of high curvature membranes mediated by direct endophi - lin bilayer interactions . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 193 – 200 . Ferguson , S . M . , Raimondi , A . , Paradise , S . , Shen , H . , Mesaki , K . , Ferguson , A . , Destaing , O . , Ko , G . , Takasaki , J . , Cremona , O . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Coordinated actions of actin and BAR proteins upstream of dynamin at endocytic clathrin - coated pits . Dev . Cell 17 , 811 – 822 . Frank , J . , Radermacher , M . , Penczek , P . , Zhu , J . , Li , Y . , Ladjadj , M . , and Leith , A . ( 1996 ) . SPIDER and WEB : processing and visualization of images in 3D electron microscopy and related ﬁelds . J . Struct . Biol . 116 , 190 – 199 . Frost , A . , Perera , R . , Roux , A . , Spasov , K . , Destaing , O . , Egelman , E . H . , DeCamilli , P . , andUnger , V . M . ( 2008 ) . Structural basisof membraneinvagina - tion by F - BAR domains . Cell 132 , 807 – 817 . Frost , A . , Unger , V . M . , and DeCamilli , P . ( 2009 ) . TheBAR domain superfamily : membrane - molding macromolecules . Cell 137 , 191 – 196 . Gallop , J . L . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 2005 ) . BAR domains and membrane curva - ture : bringing your curves to the BAR . Biochem . Soc . Symp . 72 , 223 – 231 . Guerrier , S . , Coutinho - Budd , J . , Sassa , T . , Gresset , A . , Jordan , N . V . , Chen , K . , Jin , W . - L . , Frost , A . , and Polleux , F . ( 2009 ) . The F - BAR domain of srGAP2 144 Cell 149 , 137 – 145 , March 30 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . induces membrane protrusions required for neuronal migration and morpho - genesis . Cell 138 , 990 – 1004 . Hurley , J . H . , Boura , E . , Carlson , L . A . , and Ro´ _ zycki , B . ( 2010 ) . Membrane budding . Cell 143 , 875 – 887 . Jao , C . C . , Hegde , B . G . , Gallop , J . L . , Hegde , P . B . , McMahon , H . T . , Haworth , I . S . , and Langen , R . ( 2010 ) . Roles of amphipathic helices and the bin / amphi - physin / rvs ( BAR ) domain of endophilin in membrane curvature generation . J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 20164 – 20170 . Johannes , L . , and Mayor , S . ( 2010 ) . Induced domain formation in endocytic invagination , lipid sorting , and scission . Cell 142 , 507 – 510 . Kaneko , T . , Maeda , A . , Takefuji , M . , Aoyama , H . , Nakayama , M . , Kawabata , S . , Kawano , Y . , Iwamatsu , A . , Amano , M . , and Kaibuchi , K . ( 2005 ) . Rho medi - atesendocytosisofepidermalgrowthfactorreceptorthroughphosphorylation of endophilin A1 by Rho - kinase . Genes Cells 10 , 973 – 987 . Lee , E . , Marcucci , M . , Daniell , L . , Pypaert , M . , Weisz , O . A . , Ochoa , G . C . , Farsad , K . , Wenk , M . R . , and De Camilli , P . ( 2002 ) . Amphiphysin 2 ( Bin1 ) and T - tubule biogenesis in muscle . Science 297 , 1193 – 1196 . Llobet , A . , Gallop , J . L . , Burden , J . J . , Camdere , G . , Chandra , P . , Vallis , Y . , Hopkins , C . R . , Lagnado , L . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 2011 ) . Endophilin drives the fast mode of vesicle retrieval in a ribbon synapse . J . Neurosci . 31 , 8512 – 8519 . Lyman , E . , Cui , H . , and Voth , G . ( 2010 ) . Water under the BAR . Biophys . J . , 1783 – 1790 . Mizuno , N . , Jao , C . C . , Langen , R . , and Steven , A . C . ( 2010 ) . Multiple modes of endophilin - mediated conversion of lipid vesicles into coated tubes : implica - tions for synaptic endocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 23351 – 23358 . Peter , B . J . , Kent , H . M . , Mills , I . G . , Vallis , Y . , Butler , P . J . , Evans , P . R . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 2004 ) . BAR domains as sensors of membrane curvature : the amphiphysin BAR structure . Science 303 , 495 – 499 . Pyka¨la¨inen , A . , Boczkowska , M . , Zhao , H . , Saarikangas , J . , Rebowski , G . , Jansen , M . , Hakanen , J . , Koskela , E . V . , Pera¨nen , J . , Vihinen , H . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Pinkbar is an epithelial - speciﬁc BAR domain protein that generates planar membrane structures . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 18 , 902 – 907 . Ren , G . , Vajjhala , P . , Lee , J . S . , Winsor , B . , and Munn , A . L . ( 2006 ) . The BAR domain proteins : molding membranes in ﬁssion , fusion , and phagy . Microbiol . Mol . Biol . Rev . 70 , 37 – 120 . Ringstad , N . , Nemoto , Y . , and De Camilli , P . ( 1997 ) . The SH3p4 / Sh3p8 / SH3p13 protein family : binding partners for synaptojanin and dynamin via a Grb2 - like Src homology 3 domain . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 8569 – 8574 . Roux , A . , Koster , G . , Lenz , M . , Sorre , B . , Manneville , J . B . , Nassoy , P . , andBas - sereau , P . ( 2010 ) . Membrane curvature controls dynamin polymerization . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 4141 – 4146 . Shimada , A . , Niwa , H . , Tsujita , K . , Suetsugu , S . , Nitta , K . , Hanawa - Suetsugu , K . , Akasaka , R . , Nishino , Y . , Toyama , M . , Chen , L . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Curved EFC / F - BAR - domain dimers are joined end to end into a ﬁlament for membrane invagination in endocytosis . Cell 129 , 761 – 772 . Solomaha , E . , Szeto , F . L . , Yousef , M . A . , and Palfrey , H . C . ( 2005 ) . Kinetics of Src homology 3 domain association with the proline - rich domain of dynamins : speciﬁcity , occlusion , and the effects of phosphorylation . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 23147 – 23156 . Sorzano , C . O . , Marabini , R . , Vela´zquez - Muriel , J . , Bilbao - Castro , J . R . , Scheres , S . H . , Carazo , J . M . , and Pascual - Montano , A . ( 2004 ) . XMIPP : a new generation of an open - source image processing package for electron micros - copy . J . Struct . Biol . 148 , 194 – 204 . Sousa , D . , andGrigorieff , N . ( 2007 ) . Abinitioresolutionmeasurementforsingle particle structures . J . Struct . Biol . 157 , 201 – 210 . Suloway , C . , Pulokas , J . , Fellmann , D . , Cheng , A . , Guerra , F . , Quispe , J . , Stagg , S . , Potter , C . S . , and Carragher , B . ( 2005 ) . Automated molecular microscopy : the new Leginon system . J . Struct . Biol . 151 , 41 – 60 . Sundborger , A . , Soderblom , C . , Vorontsova , O . , Evergren , E . , Hinshaw , J . E . , andShupliakov , O . ( 2011 ) . Anendophilin - dynamincomplexpromotesbudding of clathrin - coated vesicles during synaptic vesicle recycling . J . Cell Sci . 124 , 133 – 143 . Takei , K . , Slepnev , V . I . , Haucke , V . , and De Camilli , P . ( 1999 ) . Functional part - nership between amphiphysin and dynamin in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 33 – 39 . Trempe , J . F . , Chen , C . X . , Grenier , K . , Camacho , E . M . , Kozlov , G . , McPherson , P . S . , Gehring , K . , and Fon , E . A . ( 2009 ) . SH3 domains from a subset of BAR proteins deﬁne a Ubl - binding domain and implicate parkin in synaptic ubiqui - tination . Mol . Cell 36 , 1034 – 1047 . Weissenhorn , W . ( 2005 ) . Crystal structure of the endophilin - A1 BAR domain . J . Mol . Biol . 351 , 653 – 661 . Cell 149 , 137 – 145 , March 30 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 145