1 | Everyware : The dawning age of ubiquitous computing | Introduction ©2006 Adam Greenfield . This document is always available from http : / / www . studies - observations . com / everyware / samples / everyware _ intro . pdf Everyware The dawning age of ubiquitous computing Adam Greenfield Introduction 1 . This book is an attempt to describe the form computing will take in the next few years . Specifically , it ' s about a vision of processing power so distributed throughout the environment that computers per se effectively disappear . It ' s about the enormous consequences this disappearance has for the kinds of tasks computers are applied to , for the way we use them , and for what we understand them to be . Although aspects of this vision have been called a variety of names - ubiquitous computing , pervasive computing , physical computing , tangible media , and so on - I think of each as a facet of one coherent paradigm of interaction that I call everyware . In everyware , all the information we now look to our phones or Web browsers to provide becomes accessible from just about anywhere , at any time , and is delivered in a manner appropriate to our location and context . In everyware , the garment , the room and the street become sites of processing and mediation . Household objects from shower stalls to coffee pots are reimagined as places where facts about the world can be gathered , considered , and acted upon . And all the familiar rituals of daily life , things as fundamental as the way we wake up in the morning , get to work , or shop for our groceries , are remade as an intricate dance of information about ourselves , the state of the external world , and the options available to us at any given moment . In all of these scenarios , there are powerful informatics underlying the apparent simplicity of the experience , but they never breach the surface of awareness : things Just Work . Rather than being filtered through the clumsy arcana of applications and files and sites , interactions with everyware feel natural , spontaneous , human . Ordinary people finally get to benefit from the full power of information technology , without having 2 | Everyware : The dawning age of ubiquitous computing | Introduction ©2006 Adam Greenfield . This document is always available from http : / / www . studies - observations . com / everyware / samples / everyware _ intro . pdf to absorb the esoteric bodies of knowledge on which it depends . And the sensation of use - even while managing an unceasing and torrential flow of data - is one of calm , of relaxed mastery . This , anyway , is the promise . 2 . The appeal of all this is easy to understand . Who wouldn ' t desire a technology that promised to smooth the edges of modern life , subtly intervening on our behalf to guide us when we ' re lost , and remind us of the things we ' ve forgotten ? Who could object to one that dispensed with the clutter of computers and other digital devices we live with , even while doing all the things they do better ? The vision is , without doubt , a lovely one : deeply humane , even compassionate . But getting from here to there may prove unexpectedly difficult . Everyday life , after all , is something that we already understand and already manage to muddle through , however gracelessly or inelegantly . We will have to balance whatever improvement we hope to achieve by overlaying our lives with digital mediation against the risk of unduly complicating that which is presently straightforward , breaking that which now works , and introducing new levels of frustration and inconvenience into all the most basic operations of our lives . We will have to account for what happens when such mediation breaks down - as it surely will from time to time , given its origins in the same institutions , and the same development methodologies , that brought us unreliable mobile phone connections , mandatory annual operating system upgrades , and the Blue Screen of Death . We will have to accept that privacy as we have heretofore understood it may be a thing of the past : that people will be presented with a bargain where access to the most intimate details of their lives is traded away in return for increased convenience , and that many will accept . And we will have to reckon with the emergent aspects of our encounter with everyware , with all the ways in which its impact turns out to be something unforeseeably more than 3 | Everyware : The dawning age of ubiquitous computing | Introduction ©2006 Adam Greenfield . This document is always available from http : / / www . studies - observations . com / everyware / samples / everyware _ intro . pdf the sum of its parts . What we can already see is this : everyware will surface and make explicit facts about our world that perhaps we would be happier ignoring . In countless ways , it will disturb unwritten agreements about workspace and homespace , the presentation of self and the right to privacy . It contains an inherent , unsettling potential for panoptical surveillance , regulation and " rationalization . " Its presence in our lives will transfigure our notions of space and time , self and other , citizen and society in ways that we haven ' t begun to contemplate . We ' re just not very good at doing " smart , " and yet it would seem that in everyware we ' re proposing to remake the very relations that define our lives , remodeling them on a technical paradigm nobody seems to be particularly satisfied with . A close reading of the existing literature on ubiquitous and pervasive systems is all that is necessary to feel the dissonance , trip over the odd dislocations that crop up whenever we follow old maps into a new territory . We become acutely aware of our need for a more sensitive description of the terrain . 3 . We will surely need one , at any rate , if we are to make sense of the wave of change even now bearing down on us . And we will feel this need in short order , because whether we ' re ready for it or not , everyware is coming . It is coming because there are too many too powerful institutions vested in its coming , knowing what enormous market possibilities are implied by the conquest of the everyday . It is coming because it is an irresistable , " technically sweet " challenge , for designers no less than engineers . It is coming because something like it effectively became inevitable , the moment each of the tools , products and services we ' re interested started communicating in ones and zeroes . It is coming - and as yet , the people who will be most affected by it , the overwhelming majority of whom are nontechnical , nonspecialist , ordinary citizens of the developed world , barely know it even exists . This is not due to any inherent obscurity or lack of interest in the broader field ; to date , 4 | Everyware : The dawning age of ubiquitous computing | Introduction ©2006 Adam Greenfield . This document is always available from http : / / www . studies - observations . com / everyware / samples / everyware _ intro . pdf there have been some seven annual Ubicomp conferences , three Pervasives , and a wide scatter of smaller but otherwise similar colloquia . These are established events , in academic terms : well - attended , underwritten by companies such as Intel , Sony , Nokia and Samsung . There are at least three peer - reviewed professional journals exclusively dedicated to ubiquitous or pervasive computing . There has been no dearth of discussion of everyware . . . but little of this discussion , and virtually none that might offer enough information on which to build meaningful choices , has reached the mainstream . There is a window of time before the issues we ' ve touched upon become urgent daily realities for most of us , but it is quite literally narrowing by the day . As of this writing , " u - " for " ubiquitous " has already joined " e - " and " i - " in the parade of content - free buzz - prefixes used by the marketers of technology to connote trendiness ; literally not a day goes by without the appearance of some relevant news item . We hear about RFID tags being integrated into employee ID cards , a new modular sensor grid on the architectural market , a networking scheme proposing to use the body ' s own electrical field to carry information - and this in the general press , not the specialist journals . There ' s already a steady stream of prototype everyware emerging from the research labs and the more advanced corporate design studios , no matter if they ' re answers to questions nobody ' s much asked . With actual , consumer - facing applications ( and implications ) starting to appear , it ' s time for discussions about its potential for risk and reward to leave the tight orbit of academic journals and conferences behind . If everyware hasn ' t yet reached its Betamax vs . VHS stage - that stage in the adoption of any new technology where the standards that will determine the particulars of its eventual shape are ironed out - we can see that it ' s not so terribly far off . It ' s time for the people who have the most at stake in the emergence of this technology to be invited to the table . The challenge before us now is to begin thinking about just how we can mold that emergence to suit our older prerogatives of personal agency , civil liberty and simple sanity . 4 . I ' m afraid that readers looking for a technical explanation of RFID tag readers , gestural interfaces , or operating systems capable of juggling the multiple , distributed events of ubiquitous environments , will be sorely disappointed . My intention in this book is simply 5 | Everyware : The dawning age of ubiquitous computing | Introduction ©2006 Adam Greenfield . This document is always available from http : / / www . studies - observations . com / everyware / samples / everyware _ intro . pdf to describe what ubiquitous computing is ; establish that it is a very real concern for all of us , and in the relatively near term ; explore some of the less - obvious implications of its spread as a paradigm ; and finally develop some ideas about how we might improve it . How can we deliver the promise of everyware - the part about calm and relaxed mastery , the part that proposes to replace our balky computers with the effortless simplicity of the everyday - while forestalling some of the pitfalls that are already apparent ? How can we , as users and consumers , hope to influence something that is already in the process of unfolding ? The pages to come will frame an answer to these questions . In the balance of this book , we ' ll explore what the emergence of robust , real - world everyware will mean , in terms useful to the designers and developers of such systems , to the marketers tasked with selling them , and to the policymakers charged with bringing them into conformance with our other agreements about the world . We ' ll consider some of the deeper context in which notions of everyware arise , in the hope that if we stand back far enough we can see how all its pieces fit together , and what is implied in their joining . And we ' ll do this without ever losing sight of the individual human being encountering everyware , in the hope that what we choose to build together will prove to be useful and valuable to that person , and supportive of the best that is in us . If we make wise choices about the terms on which we accept it , we can extend the utility and convenience of ubiquitous computing to billions of lives . We stand a real chance of improving the experience of the everyday , addressing dissatisfactions as old as human history . Alternately , we can watch passively as the world fills up with ubiquitous systems not designed with our interests at heart - at best presenting us with moments of hassle , disruption and frustration beyond number , and at worst laying the groundwork for the kind of repression the despots of the twentieth century could only dream about . The stakes , this time , are unusually high . A mobile phone is something that can be switched off , or left at home . A computer is something that can be shut down , unplugged , walked away from . But the technology we ' re discussing here - ambient , ubiquitous , insinuative into all the apertures everyday life affords it - will be environment - 6 | Everyware : The dawning age of ubiquitous computing | Introduction ©2006 Adam Greenfield . This document is always available from http : / / www . studies - observations . com / everyware / samples / everyware _ intro . pdf forming in a way neither of those are . There should be little doubt that its advent will profoundly shape both the world and our experience of it in the years ahead . As to whether we come to regard that advent as boon , burden or blunder , that is very much up to us , and the decisions we make now .