Multimodal Analysis in Participatory Design with Children : A Primary School Case Study Jan Derboven 1 , Maarten Van Mechelen 1 , Karin Slegers CUO | Social Spaces , iMinds - KU Leuven Parkstraat 45 bus 3605 , 3000 Leuven firstname . lastname @ soc . kuleuven . be ABSTRACT We describe a multimodal method for the analysis of co - design outcomes in participatory design ( PD ) with children . The multimodal approach we take allows researchers to treat both verbal ( notes , writings ) and tangible material out - comes as complementary ways of communicating design ideas . We argue that an integrated approach in which both PD outcomes are compared and contrasted can result in a richer analysis , in which underlying values can be identified more clearly . To illustrate the method , we describe a PD process with primary school children . Author Keywords Participatory Design ; Values ; Multimodality . ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . INTRODUCTION Participatory design with children Participatory Design ( PD ) is often defined as “a set of theo - ries , practices , and studies related to end - users as full par - ticipants in activities leading to software and hardware computer products and computer - based activities” [ 12 ] . Future users are at the core of the methodology : in PD , these users are considered co - designers of their technology , and of the practices that are reified in that technology [ 2 ] . Participatory designers , in turn , are seen as ‘facilitators’ who try to empower users in making design decisions to - gether [ 14 ] . Generative techniques such as ‘co - design’ are often used in PD . The basic principle behind co - design is to let people make designerly artifacts and tell a story about what they have made . These stories are then used to inform and inspire the design process [ 13 ] . Within the area of Child Computer Interaction ( CCI ) , chil - dren have participated in the design of technology for over two decades , using a variety of established methods ( e . g . [ 4 , 10 , 16 ] ) . Nevertheless , it has been acknowledged that it is not easy to involve children as design partners in open - ended , future directed work . Scaife and Rogers [ 10 ] for instance , say that : “On the one hand , the kids come up with many wonderful suggestions [ . . . ] , on the other hand , many of their ideas are unworkable in computing terms” . This statement is exemplary for a tendency to analyze co - design artifacts solely in ‘computing terms’ , that is , on a functional or attribute level ( e . g . [ 4 , 16 ] ) . However , the values that are embedded in co - design artifacts are often more interesting than the ideas or functionalities per se [ 5 ] . Unfortunately , these values ( things a person or a group considers important in life [ 9 ] ) are rarely expressed explicitly . Shifting the focus from functionalities and attributes to the underlying motives behind design choices made during co - design can reveal why specific design attributes are important and how they serve children’s values . This is in line with recent work by Iversen et al [ 6 ] who have attempted to rekindle values in a more ‘authentic’ approach to PD by focusing on the values that emerge and develop in the course of the design process . Besides this tendency to focus on concrete design ideas or a set of functionalities when co - designing technology with children , PD researchers often limit themselves to a de - scriptive analysis of co - design artifacts or rely exclusively on what children say or write about their creations ( e . g . [ 4 , 13 ] ) . However , co - design artifacts should not be regard - ed as neutral means of accessing children’s perspectives . They are always ‘constructed’ and therefore do not give access to the participants’ personal values in a direct and unmediated way . Buckingham [ 3 ] refers to this approach as ‘naïve empiricism’ , arguing that data from creative research cannot be taken at face value : “these data need to be ana - lyzed with special attention for its visual dimensions” . Both ‘textual outcomes’ ( i . e . , written ideas and what children say about their creation ) and ‘tangible outcomes’ ( i . e . , the co - design artifact ) should be analyzed and interpreted in rela - tion to each other . Nevertheless , the current literature on PD offers little guidance on how to do this in a structured way . The contribution of this paper lies in offering a method that will enable PD researchers to analyze co - design outcomes by identifying the dominant themes and underlying values , 1 Both authors contributed equally to this paper . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for per - sonal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . CHI 2015 , April 18 – 23 , 2015 , Seoul , Republic of Korea . Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 3145 - 6 / 15 / 04… $ 15 . 00 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702475 Kids Social , Emotional & Special Needs CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2825 and to integrate both textual and tangible co - design out - comes in a structured analysis . This method is based on multimodal social semiotics [ 7 , 8 ] . Multimodality provides an interesting perspective on the analysis of co - design out - comes , as it provides an integrated framework for analyzing various ways of communicating , including spoken and writ - ten language , but also visual and other modes of communi - cation . As such , it allows for an integration of both textual and tangible co - design outcomes , treating them as different modes used to communicate the same ideas and values . Case Study : ( Cyber ) Bullying in Primary School In this paper , we describe the analysis of a series co - design sessions with children , focusing on the dominant themes and underlying values . We focus on a case study in which 49 primary school children aged 9 to 10 were involved in two co - design sessions . These sessions aimed at designing tangible , digital tools to make primary school children more self - regulatory in combating traditional bullying and cyber - bullying . This goal was translated into an understandable design challenge for children : what tools do they need to improve the class atmosphere and prevent bullying ? To make it more tangible , we used a fictional story of a class with a negative atmosphere as a starting point for co - design . METHOD Participatory Design Process The co - design sessions took place in two schools . In total , 49 children aged 9 to 10 participated and the sessions re - sulted in 11 co - design artifacts created by an equal number of groups of 4 to 5 children ( see [ 15 ] for an in - depth de - scription of the method used ) . One researcher was involved in each co - design session facilitating two to three groups of children at the same time without intervening in the crea - tion process . The co - design sessions resulted in various outcomes . For each group , we analyzed : 1 . a collage of two problematic class situations defined by the children ( e . g . children excluding each other from playing games , bullying , . . . ) ; 2 . verbal descriptions on post - its of how a super hero would solve these problems ( e . g . Spiderman capturing ‘bad’ children in a web ) . From these solutions , the children picked two for further elaboration ; 3 . an artifact designed by the children that embodies the super heroes’ solutions chosen in 2 ; 4 . transcripts of verbal presentations of the artifact . Multimodal Analysis Multimodality , an interdisciplinary approach based on so - cial semiotics , considers communication and representation to be “more than language , and attends systematically to the social interpretation of a range of forms of making meaning” [ 7 ] . While this type of analysis has been used for researching e . g . games and social networking [ 7 ] , we argue this approach is useful in PD for analyzing both textual and tangible co - design outcomes . Text and tangible artifacts , as different modes , have different affordances : each have spe - cific characteristics that make it suitable for communicating specific information . For instance , while speech is more suitable for narratives , material objects can be easier to communicate moods and emotion . While one specific mode might communicate more information than another , the multimodal approach integrates all modes in the analysis . Through this integration , the analysis becomes a holistic study of the central message that all modes contribute to . Visual and material objects can , however , be interpreted in different ways , and it can be difficult to make interpreta - tions that are valid in the context of the PD process . Through a comparative analysis between the original ideas and the results , we were able to trace how ideas emerged and evolved throughout the PD process , from initial ideas to results . As such , we were able to interpret the ideas in the co - design artifacts in the light of their origins in the super hero solutions ( 2 ) and the description of class situations ( 1 ) . Tracing this evolution was crucial , as it allowed us to ‘ground’ the analyses of artifacts ( 3 ) and presentations ( 4 ) and , as such , add validity to the interpretations . Besides grounding the analyses in the evolution from original ideas to co - design outcomes , we used a hermeneutic approach [ 11 ] in order to strengthen the validity : we checked the analysis of the artifact against the verbal transcription , and vice versa . Considering the material artifact and the verbal transcripts as different forms of the same idea , it is the co - herence between text and artifact that validates the analysis . This hermeneutic approach was applied in a ‘close reading’ [ 1 ] : this is an analytic method originating in the humanities that examines formal and thematic elements in texts and artifacts . It consisted of two main steps : 1 . Two researchers independently identify recurring themes and underlying values through a detailed analy - sis of the data . This step comprises several activities : § Tracing the evolution from the children’s problem definition ( 1 ) and original ideas ( 2 ) to the eventual results ( 3 & 4 ) . § Performing a low - level analysis of functionality and attributes of co - design artifacts ( 3 ) and verbal presentations ( 4 ) . Special attention is given to ele - ments highlighted in and across modes . § Performing a high - level analysis of recurring themes by identifying the discourses ( i . e . , chil - dren’s view on social reality ) that underly the arti - facts and presentations ( 3 & 4 ) . § Performing a meta - analysis of values underpinning tangible ( 3 ) and textual outcomes ( 4 ) ; these are seldom explicitly expressed . 2 . Both researchers collaboratively refine recurring themes and underlying values to arrive at a common understanding of the data . This is an iterative process of going back and forth between the different steps . Kids Social , Emotional & Special Needs CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2826 RESULTS In this section , we describe the analysis of both textual and tangible co - design outcomes . We highlight our main find - ings , illustrating the use of multimodality to analyze the values underpinning these outcomes . While the PD sessions resulted in four outcomes , the collage and post - its served as intermediate stages and have been used to validate the anal - ysis . We focus on the final artifacts and their presentation . From Attributes to Underlying Themes Friendly Authority : Transduction from Artifact to Presentation Groups 3 , 7 and 10 created artifacts with human - shaped figures , and groups 4 , 5 , 6 and 8 all created ‘robots’ . These groups associated all kinds of functionality with their fig - ures , ranging from ringing a bell when things threaten to go wrong ( group 3 ) , to a DJ robot for a class party ( group 4 – figure 1 , right ) . Beyond these specific functionalities , these anthropomorphic figures all represented some type of au - thority , influencing the children’s behavior . Generally , the robots did not look sterile , but had some kind of personality that was implicitly described in the participants’ presenta - tions ( e . g . “he tells very good jokes” ) , and more explicitly visualized in the artifacts . While all robots had some kind of regulatory function , most robots looked funny or friendly in some way . For instance , group 3 made a kind - looking figure with a big red heart . The DJ robot by group 4 created a fun atmosphere , and would “ eat all bad ideas” . Only group 6 created a rather severe - looking robot ( figure 1 , left ) , with a clearly regulating , authoritative function ( visualized in a traffic light on his body ) . However , while the severe component was present in the visual appearance of the robot and mentioned in the children’s presentation , it was not present in the further material elaboration . Whereas the robot did contain games to reward well - behaved chil - dren , the punishing aspect was not elaborated : the artifact only ‘highlighted’ ( gave special weight to [ 8 ] ) the rewards . This observation suggests that disciplinary punishment was not central to the children’s understanding of a tool to pre - vent and combat ( cyber - ) bullying in a class context . While many artifacts took the shape of an authoritative figure , the ‘transduction’ ( i . e . , the translation from one mode to anoth - er [ 8 ] ) from the textual to the tangible added an important nuance . The objects showed that the authority is always friendly , focused on rewarding rather than on punishment . Good and Bad Children : Agency and Group Processes Although the children were asked to invent objects that would improve the classroom atmosphere , none of the PD groups made representations of the class , the teacher , or other actors in their artifacts . Therefore , it was important to analyze the children’s presentations to determine whether or not the artifacts themselves had agency , and to determine their orientation [ 8 ] : whether the artifacts are oriented at specific bullies , victims , or the class group as a whole . In analyzing artifact orientation , three dominant artifact categories emerged . The first category consisted of artifacts with agency that concentrated on the class group as a whole ( 3 out of 11 artifacts ) . Children explained their function without referring to ‘good’ or ‘bad’ children . For example , the DJ robot ( figure 1 , right ) improved the class atmosphere by telling jokes and by ‘eating all bad ideas’ , while another robot gave children a magic potion to make them friendly . The remaining 8 artifacts were clearly targeted at either bullies or ‘bad’ children and victims or ‘good’ children . We distinguish two further categories . Artifacts in the second category ( 5 artifacts out of 11 ) distinguish between ‘bad’ and ‘good’ but were not targeted at punishing bad children . Two artifacts with agency focused on mediation instead of punishment , and three tools without agency made children forget their bad behavior , or resolved tensions through play . A third category ( 3 artifacts without agency ) mentioned both rewarding and punishment , but focused on the rewards ( e . g . allowing good children to play games ) . In these arti - facts , punishment was not elaborated , or only minimally . The analysis above shows that not only the artifact itself and its attributes are important , but also the way it mediates between other actors on a more abstract level . On the one hand , the first two categories ( 8 out of 11 artifacts ) either made no reference to bullies and victims , or concentrated on resolving tensions between bullies and victims while also avoiding punishment . On the other hand , the remaining artifacts ( 3 out of 11 ) more clearly encouraged good chil - dren and punished bad children . In these artifacts , however , the punishing was understated : the focus was on rewarding . Figure 1 : Goofy DJ robot ( right ) vs . severe - looking robot ( left ) , groups 4 and 6 . From Themes to Values From the themes emerging from the analysis above , infor - mation on the children’s values can be deduced . The arti - facts in the first two categories , focusing on the class at - mosphere as a whole or on mediation and play , fit in a ‘no - blame’ discourse . In this discourse , it is important not to single out the bad children to punish them , but to take a preventive attitude by defusing tensions in the classroom . On the other hand , the artifacts in the third category did use a discourse focused on rewards and punishment ; still , these artifacts highlighted the positive aspect of rewarding . Kids Social , Emotional & Special Needs CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2827 In general , however , both the ‘no - blame’ artifacts and the artifacts differentiating between good and bad children pointed towards an emphasis on values of soft authority and positivity in various ways . The ‘no - blame’ artifacts did this by focusing on the class group as a whole or used strategies such as mediation or play . The artifacts with agency had a friendly type of authority , rather than a strict , punishing one . Even the artifacts centered around good and bad be - havior had a heavy focus on rewarding good behavior , un - derstating the punishment aspect . Going beyond specific functionalities , these emerging values of ‘soft’ authority and positivity provide designers with a well - grounded start - ing point for designing tangible , digital anti - bullying tools . ANALYZING PARTICIPATORY DESIGN VALUES When analyzing the outcomes of co - design sessions , it is essential to pay attention to both textual and tangible out - comes . As textual and tangible co - design outcomes are dif - ferent ways of communicating the same ideas , it is im - portant to analyze which aspects have been transduced [ 8 ] from the textual to the tangible and vice versa , and which have not . This way , it becomes clear how different modes complement each other in communicating a message . The multimodal analysis allowed us to create rich analyses of both textual and tangible outcomes . The analysis teased out dominant themes and values , going beyond the surface of functionalities and attributes . For instance , the appear - ance of the anthropomorphic figures added important nu - ances to their interpretation . The analysis did not focus only on the functionalities of the figures , but on their ‘personali - ty’ , implicitly present in the verbal presentations of the arti - facts , and more explicitly in their tangible form . As these personalities can be linked to underlying values concerning the prevention and reconciliation of conflicts , the artifact analysis was important to arrive at a nuanced interpretation . While the current PD literature offers little guidance on the analysis of material outcomes , multimodality offers a struc - tured framework to analyze both textual and material out - comes , and the transduction between the two . The case study above focuses on tangible and verbal modes , but mul - timodality can be useful in the analysis of other modes as well [ 7 ] . As such , we believe that the approach is applicable in various PD situations , with different design challenges and materials . Especially analytic concepts ( e . g . highlight - ing , agency , orientation ) are instrumental in analyzing dis - course and values underpinning co - design outcomes . In the case study presented above , multimodality provided a framework to identify the values underlying the children’s design choices within and across co - design teams . Using the framework , designers can go beyond the surface level of cherry - picking participants’ ideas . In future work , we will further tailor the multimodal framework to the analysis of co - design outcomes , and apply it to various case studies . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This study is part of the EMSOC project , funded by IWT ( Agency for Innovation by Science and Technology ) , and two PhD projects funded by UHasselt and iMinds . REFERENCES 1 . Bardzell , J . ( 2011 ) . Interaction criticism : An introduc - tion to the practice . Interact . Comput . 23 ( 6 ) , 604 - 621 . 2 . Bjerknes , G . Ehn , P . , and Kyng , M . ( 1987 ) . Computers and democracy : A Scandinavian challenge . Brookfield . 3 . Buckingham , D . ( 2009 ) . ‘Creative’ visual methods in media research : possibilities , problems and proposals . Media , Culture and Society , 31 , 633 - 652 . 4 . Guha , M . L . , Druin , A . & Fails , J . A . ( 2013 ) . Cooperative Inquiry revisited : Reflections of the past and guidelines for the future of intergenerational co - design . Int . J . of Child - Computer Interaction , 1 ( 1 ) , 14 - 23 . 5 . Halloran , J . , Hornecker , E . , & Stringer , M . ( 2009 ) . The value of values : Resourcing co - design of ubiquitous computing . CoDesign 4 ( 5 ) , 245 - 273 . 6 . Iversen , O . S . , Halskov , K . , & Leong , T . W . ( 2010 ) . Re - kindling values in participatory design . In Proc . PDC ' 10 , p . 92 - 100 . ACM Press . 7 . Jewitt , C . ( 2013 ) Multimodal Methods for Researching Digital Technologies . In : Price , S . , Jewitt , C . , Brown , B . ( Eds . ) The SAGE Handbook of Digital Technology Re - search , pp . 250 - 265 . Sage . 8 . Kress , G . ( 2010 ) Multimodality . A Social Semiotic Ap - proach to Contemporary Communication . Routledge . 9 . Rokeach , M . ( 1973 ) . The Nature of Human Values . Free Press . 10 . Scaife , M . and Rogers , Y . ( 1999 ) . Kids as informants : Telling us what we didn’t know or confirming what we knew already , in A . Druin ( Ed . ) , The design of chil - dren ' s technology , pp . 29 - 50 . Morgan Kaufmann . 11 . Schön , D . ( 1984 ) . The Reflective Practitioner : How Professionals Think In Action . Basic Books . 12 . Schuler , D . and Namioka , A . ( 1993 ) . Participatory De - sign : Principles and Practices . L . Erlbaum Assoc . Inc . 13 . Sleeswijk Visser , F . , Stappers , P . J . , van der Lugt , R . , Sanders , E . B . N . ( 2005 ) . Contextmapping : Experiences from practice . CoDesign 1 ( 2 ) , 119 - 149 . 14 . Spinuzzi C . , 2005 , The Methodology of Participatory Design . In : Technical Communication . 52 ( 2 ) , 163 - 175 . 15 . Van Mechelen , M . , Gielen , M . , Vanden Abeele , V . , Laenen , A . and Zaman , B . ( 2014 ) . Exploring challeng - ing group dynamics in participatory design with chil - dren . In Proc . IDC ' 14 , 269 - 272 . ACM Press . 16 . Walsh , G . , Druin , A . , Guha , M . L . , Foss , E . , Golub , E . , Hatley , L . , Bonsignore , E . and Franckel , S . ( 2010 ) Lay - ered elaboration : a new technique for co - design with children . In Proc . CHI 2010 , 1237 - 1240 . ACM Press . Kids Social , Emotional & Special Needs CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2828