Developmental Cell Review Epithelial - Mesenchymal Transition : At the Crossroads of Development and Tumor Metastasis Jing Yang 1 , * and Robert A . Weinberg 2 , 3 , * 1 Department of Pharmacology and Pediatrics , School of Medicine , University of California , San Diego , 9500 Gilman Drive , La Jolla , CA 92093 - 0636 , USA 2 Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research , 9 Cambridge Center , Cambridge , MA 02142 , USA 3 Department of Biology , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , 77 Massachusetts Avenue , Cambridge , MA 02139 , USA * Correspondence : jingyang @ ucsd . edu ( J . Y . ) , weinberg @ wi . mit . edu ( R . A . W . ) DOI 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2008 . 05 . 009 The epithelial - mesenchymal transition is a highly conserved cellular program that allows polarized , immotile epithelial cells to convert to motile mesenchymal cells . This important process was initially recognized during several critical stages of embryonic development and has more recently been implicated in promoting car - cinoma invasion and metastasis . In this review , we summarize and compare major signaling pathways that regulate the epithelial - mesenchymal transitions during both development and tumor metastasis . Studies in both ﬁelds are critical for our molecular understanding of cell migration and morphogenesis . An Overview of Epithelial - Mesenchymal Transition The development of metazoan organ systems starts with a single layer of epithelial cells , which constitutes the primary building block for constructing organismic complexity . Epithelial cells form a sheet or layers of cells that are tightly connected laterally by specialized junction structures , including adherens junctions , desmosomes , tight junctions , and gap junctions . Among these , adherens junctions play a particularly important role in assem - bling and constructing lateral cell - cell adhesions in epithelial cell sheets ( Yap et al . , 1997 ) . Epithelial cells establish an aligned apical - basal polarity through their association with a lamina layer at their basal surface , often called the basement membrane . Un - der normal conditions , this anchoring to the basement mem - brane ensures that epithelial cells can only migrate laterally along the basal surface , thereby maintaining their positioning within the epithelium and precluding their entrance into the underlying extracellular matrix ( ECM ) . During early embryogenesis of most metazoans , mesenchy - mal cells arise from the primitive epithelium . In contrast to epithe - lial cells , mesenchymal cells exhibit a front - back end polarity and rarely establish direct contacts with neighboring mesenchymal cells ( Hay , 1995 ) . Unlike epithelial cells , mesenchymal cells can invade as individual cells through ECM constructed by epithelial sheets and by mesenchymal cells themselves . While epithelial and mesenchymal cell types have long been recognized in early embryos , the conversion of epithelial cells into mesenchymal cells was only deﬁned as a distinct cellular program in 1980s . In a series of elegant experiments , Greenburg and Hay showed that when epithelial cells from embryonic and adult anterior lens were cultured in 3D collagen gels , these cells elongated , detached from the explants , and migrated as individ - ual cells ( Greenburg and Hay , 1982 , 1986 , 1988 ) . Based on the mesenchymal morphology and the pseudopodia and ﬁlopodia structures of these migrating cells , they concluded that differen - tiated epithelial cells could be transformed into mesenchymal cells through a cellular program they named Epithelial - Mesen - chymal Transition ( EMT ) . Subsequent cell - biological and molecular studies of EMT resulted in this program being loosely deﬁned by three major changes in cellular phenotype ( Boyer and Thiery , 1993 ; Hay , 1995 ) : ( 1 ) morphological changes from a cobblestone - like mono - layer of epithelial cells with an apical - basal polarity to dispersed , spindle - shaped mesenchymal cells with migratory protrusions ; ( 2 ) changes of differentiation markers from cell - cell junction proteins and cytokeratin intermediate ﬁlaments to vimentin ﬁla - ments and ﬁbronectin ( in addition , certain integrins [ Zuk and Hay , 1994 ] and splicing variants of FGFR2 [ Savagner et al . , 1994 ] switch from epithelial to mesenchymal subtypes ) ; and ( 3 ) the functional changes associated with the conversion of sta - tionary cells to motile cells that can invade through ECM . Not all three changes are invariably observed during an EMT ; how - ever , acquisition of the ability to migrate and invade ECM as single cells is considered a functional hallmark of the EMT program . The EMT program is activated at multiple steps of embryonic development to enable the conversion of various types of epithe - lial cells into mesenchymal cells . Passage through an EMT , how - ever , does not necessarily represent an irreversible commitment to switch differentiation lineages . Thus , the reverse program , termed the Mesenchymal - Epithelial Transition ( MET ) , also oc - curs both during embryonic development and during several pathological processes ( Boyer and Thiery , 1993 ; Davies , 1996 ) . The reversibility of this process underscores the enormous plas - ticity of certain embryonic and adult cells that participate in pro - cesses of disease pathogenesis . EMT in Development During development , the EMT program has been observed to underlie a variety of tissue remodeling events , including mesoderm formation , neural crest development , heart valve 818 Developmental Cell 14 , June 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . development , secondary palate formation , and male Mu¨llerian duct regression . In this section , we discuss in more detail four examples of the best - studied EMT events that occur during embryogenesis ( Figure 1 ) . Mesoderm formation and neural crest development represent the key EMT programs that occur during early embryonic development , and the resulting mesenchymal and neural crest cells maintain oliogopotentiality , enabling them to further differentiate into various cell types . In contrast , heart valve development and secondary palate formation occur in relatively well - differentiated epithelial cells that are destined to become deﬁned mesenchymal cell types . The latter two pro - cesses , which occur in well - differentiated epithelia , raise the possibility that EMTs may also be induced under certain physio - logical or pathological conditions in adult tissues , including tumor invasion and metastasis processes that will be discussed below . Mesoderm Formation The earliest example of an EMT program participating in em - bryogenesis is the formation of mesoderm from the primitive ectoderm , a process that is initiated during gastrulation . Most of our molecular understanding of the EMT program during gas - trulation is derived from model organisms , including Drosophila and amphibian and avian embryos ( Kimelman , 2006 ) . More re - cent studies indicate that the same basic principles apply to mammalian embryos ( Viebahn , 1995 ) . The induction of mesoderm begins in a speciﬁc area of the primitive ectoderm , termed the ventral furrow in Drosophila , the blastopore lip in Xenopus , and the primitive streak in birds and mammals . The ﬁrst event in mesoderm formation is the in - vagination of the epithelial cells . This step is characterized by drastic morphological changes in a small population of epithelial cells , which include the narrowing of their apical compartments , the redistribution of organelles to the apical location , and the bulging of the basal compartments . When the epithelial cells are ready to ingress , the basement membrane is breached locally . At this point , the ingressing epithelial cells lose their tight cell - cell adhesions and remain attached to neighboring cells only by sparsely distributed focal contacts . Subsequently , these cells undergo mesenchymal differentiation and migrate along the narrow extracellular space underneath the ectoderm ( Viebahn , 1995 ) . The newly gained ability for such ectoderm - derived cells to migrate along and through ECM marks the completion of the EMT program during gastrulation . Neural Crest Formation Another dramatic example of EMT participating in embryogene - sis involves the generation of the neural crest , a deﬁning tissue of vertebrates . The neural crest is composed of a population of pre - cursor cells that are equipped with the ability to migrate over ex - traordinarily long distances in the embryo . Based on certain sim - ilarities , formation of the neural crest has been portrayed as a second gastrulation event in vertebrates ( Duband et al . , 1995 ) . The neural crest develops at the boundary between the neural plate and the epidermal ectoderm . The emergence of neural crest cells begins with the presence of a distinct population of cells with rounded and pleiomorphic shapes , which contrast with those of the polarized neural tube cells that form nearby . Like the EMT program during gastrulation , the presumptive neu - ral crest cells proceed to lose N - cadherin - mediated cell - cell adhesion while becoming excluded from the neural epithelium ( Tucker et al . , 1988 ) . Detailed immunolabeling and electron microscopic studies revealed that disruption of the basal lamina occurs immediately before or at the onset of neural crest cell migration in the cranial regions of avian and mouse embryos Figure 1 . Images of EMT Processes during Embryogenesis ( A ) Primitive streak formation . The top panel shows the posterior third of a midsagittal 1 m m plastic section from early streak stage rabbit embryo at 6 . 6 days post coitum ( d . p . c . ) with three deﬁnitive mesoderm cells ( blue arrow ) between epiblast and hypoblast and a bottle - shaped epiblast cell ( red arrow ) , which is about to ingress to become a deﬁnitive mesoderm cell ( Viebahn , 1995 ) . The lower panel shows the center of a transverse 1 m m plastic section through thecenteroftheprimitivestreakofafullprimitivestreakstagerabbitembryoat6 . 7 d . p . c . with multiple bottle - shaped epiblast cells near the primitive pit ( center of the picture ) and mesoderm cells ﬁlling the space between epiblast and hypoblast ( Viebahn et al . , 1995 ) . Image iscourtesyofChristophViehahn ( UniversityofGo¨ttingen , Go¨ttingen , Germany ) and S . Karger AG , Basel . ( B ) Neuralcrestformation . Immunoﬂuorescenceimageshowingthat neural crest cells ( light blue ) emerge from the neural epithelium ( yel - low ) . Neural crest cells are stained with SOX9 antibody ( light blue ) ; neural epithelia cells are stained with N - cadherin ( yellow ) . Phalloidin ( red ) is used to label all cells , and DAPI ( deep blue ) is used to label cell nuclei . Image is courtesy of James Briscoe ( National Institute for Medical Research , London , UK ) . ( C ) Cardiac valve formation . Light microscopy on a section of the atrium and ventricular ﬂow of an E9 . 5 mouse embryo heart . Note thatmesenchymmalcells ( Mes ) areemergingfromthecardialendo - thial cell layer ( Endo ) . Image is courtesy of Raymond B . Runyan ( University of Arizona , Tucson , Arizona , USA ) . ( D ) Secondary palate formation . A hematoxylin - and eosin - stained section of rodent palate during palatogenesis in vitro is shown . The palatal seam begins to disintegrate and epithelial cells break awayfromtheintactseamtobecomemesenchymalwithin24hr ( ar - rowhead ) . Image is courtesy of Ali Nawshad ( University of Nebraska Medical Center , Lincoln , Nebraska , USA ) . Developmental Cell 14 , June 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 819 Developmental Cell Review ( Duband and Thiery , 1987 ; Nichols , 1981 ) . These observations indicate that neural crest cells actively invade through the basal lamina , just as in the case of gastrulation . However , in the trunk region of both avian and mouse embryos , a basal lamina is not present at the neural fold before the onset of neural crest migra - tion , obviating a rate - limiting step in the release of neural crest cells ( Martins - Green and Erickson , 1987 ) . These ﬁndings sug - gest that the cranial and trunk neural crest cells might employ distinct types of subcellular machinery to initiate EMT , invade the ECM , and migrate . As presumptive neural crest cells are released from the neural epithelium , they concomitantly upregulate genes required for mesenchymal phenotype and migratory ability . One critical com - ponent of neural crest migration is ECM that is laid down along the migratory path , helping to ensure that these cells reach appropriate destinations . Studies of this process have revealed that high levels of ﬁbronectin and hyaluronan appear in the pre - sumptive neural crest area before the onset of migration ( Poel - mann et al . , 1990 ) , which raises the intriguing possibility that expression of these molecules is critical to the subsequent migratory ability of these cells . Cardiac Valve Formation The endocardial cushion is the precursor structure to the heart valve in vertebrate embryos and begins to form soon after the primitive linear heart tube begins to loop . Initially , the myocardial cells secrete a large amount of ECM , which displaces the endo - cardium away from the myocardium , thereby creating endocar - dial cushions . After cushion formation , mesenchymal cells ﬁll the cushion space ( Markwald et al . , 1977 ) . Video microscopy of isolated atrioventricular ( AV ) canals in culture has demonstrated that these mesenchymal cells derive from the endocardial cell layer by undergoing an EMT ( Bolender and Markwald , 1979 ) . Through use of an elegant AV canals explant culture system in a 3D , type I collagen gel , detailed molecular studies have shown that signals secreted from the AV myocardium are essential for induction of an EMT in the AV endocardial cells ( Mjaatvedt and Markwald , 1989 ; Rezaee et al . , 1993 ) . After receiving EMT - in - ducing stimuli , AV endocardial cells exhibit decreased expres - sion of N - CAM , lose cell - cell adhesion , and invade the newly deposited endocardial cushion , thereby establishing the pre - sumptive cardiac septa and valves ( Person et al . , 2005 ) . The ability to model this EMT event in the explant culture has greatly facilitated molecular characterization of individual signals involved in this program . Several inducing signals , transcription factors , and ECM components have been tested for their in - volvement in cardiac valve formation . Below we discuss several EMT - inducing signals that are involved in EMT that occurs during cardiac valve formation . Secondary Palate Formation Another relatively well - studied EMT event involving differenti - ated epithelial cells involves formation of the secondary oral pal - ate . Dissecting the palatal tissue and introducing it into organ cultures has made it possible to trace the entire program of pal - ate remolding by electron microscopy and immunohistochemis - try . Development of the secondary palate requires fusion of the palatal shelves at the midline . As the shelves approach one another from opposite sides of the developing oral cavity , epithe - lial cells covering the tip of each shelf intercalate and form the medial epithelial seam . Soon after fusion , these medial epithelial cells undergo an EMT and are integrated into the mesenchymal compartment of the palate , thereby completing the program of palatogenesis ( Fitchett and Hay , 1989 ) . Interestingly , blocking fusion of the palatal shelves has been shown to prevent basal epithelial cells from undergoing an EMT , indicating that signals from the epithelial midline seam are critical to the triggering of the EMT process ( Grifﬁth and Hay , 1992 ) . MET in Development During embryogenesis , the EMT program does not always repre - sent an irreversible process that permanently commits cells to one or another fate . Instead , in several cases , the converted mesenchymal cells can revert to an epithelial cell state by pass - ing through an MET . The best - studied MET event during em - bryogenesis is the formation of the nephron epithelium in the developing kidney . During this process , nephric mesenchymal cells aggregate around individual branches of the ureteral bud , begin to express laminin , polarize , and eventually develop cell - cell adhesions and differentiate into epithelial cells that form kid - ney tubules ( Davies , 1996 ) . The ability of a mesenchymal cell to revert to an epithelial identity demonstrates , once again , sub - stantial cell plasticity and additionally suggests that interconver - sion between epithelial and mesenchymal cell states may also occur under certain pathological conditions . Molecular Regulation of EMT Both developmental studies in various organisms and tissue culture studies have yielded a number of distinct signaling pathways that regulate EMT . Here we focus our discussion on the extracellular signals responsible for inducing EMTs and the key transcriptional factors that respond these signals ; such transcription factors function as master regulators of the EMT programs in vertebrates ( Table 1 ) . TGF - b Signaling Members of the transforming growth factor - b ( TGF - b ) super - family have been implicated as major induction signals of EMT during almost all of the morphogenetic events discussed above . ExtensivestudiesinvariousdevelopmentalEMTsystemsprovide convincing evidence that TGF - b signaling is a primary inducer of EMT , although the precise signaling pathways activated by indi - vidual family members may differ during various EMT events . In both Xenopus and zebraﬁsh embryos , mesoderm induction is initiated mainly by members of the Nodal subfamily of TGF - b ( Kimelman , 2006 ) . Several elegant studies in Xenopus using activin as a Nodal pathway activator or using different doses of Nodal inhibitors indicate that activation of Nodal signaling is es - sential for mesoderm induction in both the dorsal and ventral re - gions ( McDowell and Gurdon , 1999 ) . Another Nodal family mem - ber , termed Vg1 in Xenopus and chicken and GDF3 in mice , is also known to play a critical role in mesoderm induction . Overex - pression of chick Vg1 on its own is sufﬁcient to induce the forma - tion of a secondary primitive steak ( Shah et al . , 1997 ) . In mice , Gdf3 null mutants frequently exhibit defects in mesoderm forma - tion ( Chen et al . , 2006 ) . Induction of neural crest requires the activation of BMP , another TGF - b superfamily member . In Xenopus , experiments examining differential activation of the BMP signal indicate that BMPs set up a competency zone between neural plate and ectoderm from which the neural crest can be induced ( Raible , 820 Developmental Cell 14 , June 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . Developmental Cell Review 2006 ) . In chickens and mice , BMPs have also been shown to be required for the induction and / or migration of neural crest cells ( Correia et al . , 2007 ) . TGF - b signals also play critical roles in the activation of EMT during cardiac valve formation and secondary palate fusion . In a series of elegant antibody - blocking experiments using chicken AV explants , TGF - b 2 was shown to be essential for the initiation of the EMT program and the separation of endothelial cells ; in contrast , TGF - b 3 was speciﬁcally required for the migration of the separated endothelial cells into ECM ( Boyer et al . , 1999 ) . In mice , experiments using individual TGF - b 1 or TGF - b 2 knockout mice and heart explant culture also revealed the involvement of TGF - b 1 and TGF - b 2 in the EMT process occurring during car - diac morphogenesis ( Mercado - Pimentel and Runyan , 2007 ) . In - terestingly , the TGF - b 3 knockout mice present a cleft palate phenotype , and the role of this TGF - b variant in initiating EMT to enable palatal fusion has been further conﬁrmed using a TGF - b 3 - blocking antibody in isolated mouse palatal shelf explants ( Ahmed et al . , 2007 ) . One of the key questions about the role of TGF - b signaling in EMT is how various TGF - b signals are translated into the tran - scriptional signaling networks and the cellular responses re - quired for EMT and cell migration . In cultured mammary epithe - lial cells , TGF - b receptors are localized at tight junctions and directly interact with two important regulators of epithelial cell polarity and tight - junction assembly , Par6 ( Ozdamar et al . , 2005 ) and Occludin ( Barrios - Rodiles et al . , 2005 ) . Phosphoryla - tion of Par6 by TGF - b type II receptor leads to a loss of tight junctions and apical - basal polarity ( Ozdamar et al . , 2005 ) . Most developmental studies also suggest that the TGF - b pathway collaborates with Wnt , Notch , and receptor tyrosine kinase sig - nals to generate the speciﬁcities required for EMT in various mor - phogenetic steps . In cultured MDCK epithelial cells , activation of the TGF - b / Smad pathway has been shown to coordinate with Ras activation to promote a full EMT phenotype ( Grunert et al . , 2003 ) . Future studies are needed to reveal how these complex networks interact to coordinate and specify individual steps of the EMT program . The Wnt Signal The canonical Wnt pathway is implicated in the initiation and maintenance of mesoderm formation . In Xenopus and zebraﬁsh , Wnt8 is required for the formation of dorsal mesoderm ( Kelly et al . , 1995 ; Smith and Harland , 1991 ; Sokol et al . , 1991 ) . In mice , Wnt3 null mutants show defects in the formation of the primitive streak ( Liu et al . , 1999 ) . Activation of neural crest cell delamination and migration in - volves both canonical and noncanonical Wnt signaling . In Xeno - pus , gain - of - function experimental approaches demonstrate that activation of Wnt signaling induces ectopic neural crest , while depletion of b - catenin conﬁrms that the canonical Wnt pathway is required for initial neural crest induction ( Wu et al . , 2005 ) . Furthermore , activation of Wnt11 / Frizzled7 - mediated noncanonical Wnt signaling also plays an essential and speciﬁc role in neural crest migration in Xenopus ( De Calisto et al . , 2005 ) . In avian embryos , Wnt is necessary and sufﬁcient to induce neu - ral crest cells ( Garcia - Castro et al . , 2002 ) . The role of Wnt signaling in heart valve induction is also well documented . b - catenin transcription activity has been observed in the newly formed mesenchyme of cardiac cushions during EMT in both zebraﬁsh ( Gitler et al . , 2003 ; Hurlstone et al . , 2003 ) and mouse embryos ( Liebner et al . , 2004 ) . In mice , inacti - vation of b - catenin in endothelial cells inhibits EMT and cardiac cushion formation both in vivo and in tissue explants ( Liebner et al . , 2004 ) . The Notch Pathway Notch signaling has also been implicated in modulating the EMT program during embryogenesis . For example , in frog and chick , Notch signaling regulates cranial neural crest cells indirectly through its effect on expression of BMP family members ( Cornell and Eisen , 2005 ) . Another study identiﬁed a role for Notch in pro - moting EMT during cardiac valve formation and in cultured epi - thelial cells from mammary gland , kidney tubules , and epidermis ( Timmerman et al . , 2004 ) . In mice and zebraﬁsh , embryos lacking components of the Notch pathway maintain endocardial adhe - sion complexes and fail to undergo endocardial EMT . Con - versely , overexpression of activated Notch1 induces EMT in immortalized endothelial cells ( Timmerman et al . , 2004 ) . Further - more , in epithelial cells from the mammary gland , kidney tubules , and epidermis , the Notch ligand Jagged 1 and the Notch target Hey1 are induced by TGF - b at the onset of EMT in a Smad3 - de - pendent fashion ( Zavadil et al . , 2004 ) . Unlike the TGF - b and Wnt pathways , activation of the Notch signaling pathway is not con - served among all the EMT processes that occur during the course of embryogenesis . It is therefore reasonable to predict Table 1 . Examples of EMTs during Vertebrate Embryonic Development and the Corresponding Signaling Pathways Developmental Process Transition The TGF - ß Pathway The Wnt Pathway The Notch Pathway Tyrosine Kinase Receptors Transcription Factors Mesoderm formation primitive ectoderm to mesoderm Nodal canonical Wnts N . D . FGFR Snail , Slug , Goosecoid Neural crest formation neural epithelium to neural crest cells BMP canonical Wnts , noncanonical Wnt11 / Frizzled7 regulate BMP signaling FGFR , PDGFR Snail , Slug , Twist1 , SIP1 Cardiac valve formation endocardial cells to cardiac septa and valves TGF - b 1 , 2 , 3 , BMP canonical Wnts Jagged 1 / Notch1 ErbB3 Snail , Slug Secondary palate formation palatal shelf epithelial cells to palatal mesenchymal cells TGF - b 3 N . D . N . D . EGFR , PDGFR N . D . N . D . , not determined . Developmental Cell 14 , June 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 821 Developmental Cell Review that Notch signaling is not sufﬁcient and needs to be coordinated with additional signaling inputs in order to promote an EMT . Signals from Tyrosine Kinase Receptors In addition to TGF - b , several other tyrosine kinase receptors , in - cluding Met , FGF , IGF , EGF family members , and more recently PDGF , also play critical roles in regulating EMT - like morphoge - netic events that occur during development . For example , FGFR1 orchestrates the EMT and morphogenesis of mesoderm at the primitive streak by controlling E - cadherin expression in mice ( Ciruna and Rossant , 2001 ) . In mice , P38 MAP kinase downregulates E - cadherin independent of the FGF signaling at the primitive streak ( Zohn et al . , 2006 ) . Furthermore , activation of ErbB2 - ErbB3 is required for the EMT program during mouse cardiac valve formation ( Camenisch et al . , 2002 ) . In mice , abla - tion of the HGF or Met genes results in the complete absence of all muscle groups that are derived from long - range migrating progenitor cells . This defect is due to an absence of delamination by the migratory progenitors ( Dietrich et al . , 1999 ) . The similarity between muscle progenitor cell release and the EMT program suggests a role for HGF signaling in regulating an EMT - like mor - phological change occurring during this critical developmental step as well . A partial EMT has been implicated in the branching morpho - genesis that occurs during the formation of several organs , in - cluding the trachea , the kidneys , and the mammary glands . Dur - ing Drosophila tracheal development , FGF signaling is essential in guiding the migration of the tracheal cells during branch bud - ding ( Ghabrial et al . , 2003 ) , and this function of FGF is also con - served in mice . In the mouse mammary gland , overexpression of HGF causes hyperplastic branching morphogenesis , while inhi - bition of HGF / Met signaling blocks the budding of side branches ( Rosario and Birchmeier , 2003 ) . Therefore , it is likely that recep - tor tyrosine kinase pathways contribute to this EMT - like program during these branching morphogenesis events . Receptor tyrosine kinase pathways are also clearly involved in EMT in certain cell types in culture . The HGF / Met pathway pro - motes the partial EMT ( ‘‘scattering’’ ) phenotype of MDCK epithe - lial cells in monolayer culture . Extensive biochemical analyses have shown that multiple downstream signaling pathways , in - cluding Ras , MAP kinase , PI3 kinase , and Rac / Cdc42 , are acti - vated to coordinate the change in cell adhesion and motility that underlies this scattering ( Birchmeier et al . , 1997 ) . In a mouse carcinoma cell line , NBT - II , the scattering phenotype induced by FGF1 , EGF , or HGF , is due to the delocalization of E - cadherin from adherens junctions , suggesting that receptor tyrosine ki - nases can induce E - cadherin downregulation during an EMT ( Boyer et al . , 1997 ) . Recently , a PDGF / PDGF receptor autocrine loop was induced during TGF - b - induced EMT , which was es - sential for acquisition of a complete EMT phenotype ( Jechlinger et al . , 2003 ) . Transcriptional Regulation During the execution of the EMT program , many genes involved in cell adhesion , mesenchymal differentiation , cell migration , and invasion are transcriptionally altered . The best - studied transcrip - tional modulation during EMT is that involving the E - cadherin gene promoter . Indeed , functional loss of E - cadherin in an epi - thelial cell has been considered a hallmark of EMT . Detailed anal - yses of the human E - cadherin promoter have identiﬁed E - box elements that are responsible for its transcriptional repression in non - E - cadherin - expressing mesenchymal cells ( Giroldi et al . , 1997 ; Hennig et al . , 1995 ) . In 2000 , the zinc - ﬁnger transcription factor Snail was found to directly bind to the E - boxes of the E - cadherin promoter and to repress transcription of this gene ( Batlle et al . , 2000 ; Cano et al . , 2000 ) . Since this important dis - covery , several additional zinc - ﬁnger transcription factors have been found to be capable of repressing E - cadherin transcription , thereby causing the dissolution of cell - cell adhesion that occurs during EMT ; these include Slug , a close relative of Snail ( Hajra et al . , 2002 ) , and two members of the ZEB family of transcription factors , ZEB1 ( d EF1 ) ( Eger et al . , 2005 ) and ZEB2 ( SIP1 ) ( Comijn et al . , 2001 ) . More recent studies have found that ZEB1 , Snail , and Slug are capable of repressing the transcription of several polarity factors , including Crumbs3 and Lgl2 ( Aigner et al . , 2007 ; Spaderna et al . , 2008 ) , indicating their roles in suppressing critical components of epithelial cell traits . These transcription factors are involved in various EMT pro - cesses occurring during embryogenesis . During ﬂy mesoderm formation , for example , both Snail and Slug are expressed to promote the dissociation of cell adhesion , thereby allowing the migration and differentiation of epithelial cells . This particular function of Snail in gastrulation is also apparent in mice , as Snail knockout mice display a severe defect in mesoderm formation ( Carver et al . , 2001 ) . In Xenopus and chicken embryos , Snail and Slug are induced in the premigratory neural crest precursor cells and play essential roles in the subsequent delamination and migration of neural crest cells ( Nieto , 2002 ) . Similarly , SIP1 knockout mice display a delamination arrest of cranial neural crest cells , suggesting SIP1’s involvement in regulating neural crest development ( Van de Putte et al . , 2003 ) . In addition to these zinc - ﬁnger transcription factors that have a high afﬁnity for the E - box elements of the E - cadherin promoter , transcription factors belonging to other families also regulate EMT in culture and during development . E47 , a widely expressed bHLH transcription factor , has been shown to repress E - cad - herin transcription in MDCK cells directly by binding to E - boxes in the E - cadherin promoter ( Perez - Moreno et al . , 2001 ) , albeit with lower afﬁnity . In a search for genes involved in mouse mam - mary tumor metastasis , the bHLH factor Twist1 has been found to be capable of inducing EMT in human mammary epithelial cells ( Yang et al . , 2004 ) . One unique aspect of Twist1 is that it does not seem to directly repress the transcription of E - cadherin ( E . Ruiz , E . Danis , and J . Y . , unpublished data ) . Twist1 was orig - inally identiﬁed as being required for mesoderm induction in Drosophila ( Thisse et al . , 1987 ; Leptin and Grunewald , 1990 ; Leptin , 1991 ) . In vertebrates , Twist1 is predominantly expressed in neural crest cells ( Gitelman , 1997 ) . Twist1 mutation in mice causes failure in cranial neural tube closure , indicating its role in proper migration and differentiation of neural crest and head mesenchymal cells ( Chen and Behringer , 1995 ; Soo et al . , 2002 ) . Like Twist1 , two additional embryonic transcription fac - tors , FOXC2 ( Mani et al . , 2007 ) and Goosecoid ( Hartwell et al . , 2006 ) , have also been demonstrated to induce EMTs in certain epithelial cells , while they also seem to lack the ability to directly bind to the E - cadherin promoter . All of the aforementioned factors are capable of repressing E - cadherin directly or indirectly when overexpressed in cultured epithelial cells . We still do not understand , however , how these genes are involved in the mesenchymal differentiation , cell 822 Developmental Cell 14 , June 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . Developmental Cell Review motility , and invasion occurring during an EMT . The Snail and ZEB transcription factors are generally considered to be tran - scription repressors based on their domain structures . Extensive studies suggest that they play major roles in repressing the tran - scription of epithelial genes , such as E - cadherin , during embryo - genesis and in tumor cells . The bHLH transcription factors homodimerize or heterodimerize to function as both activators and repressors in a context - dependent manner . In Twist1 null mice , a promigratory cadherin , Cadherin 11 , is downregulated ( Soo et al . , 2002 ) , suggesting a more speciﬁc role of Twist in activating the migratory machinery . Gene expression proﬁling analyses have been carried out in order to understand how these various transcription factors or - chestrate this complex program . Identiﬁcation of a group of common genes controlled by several of the EMT - inducing transcription factors suggests that a gene signature of the EMT program might be shared , at least in certain cell types ( Mor - eno - Bueno et al . , 2006 ) . Precisely how these groups of genes or - chestrate the entire cellular program of cell motility and invasion is an area of active research . It is also worth noting that most of the EMT signaling pathways have been examined under overex - pression conditions in cultured epithelial cells . During develop - ment , several of these transcription factors are often activated simultaneously , such as Snail / Slug and Twist1 in neural crest cells . Additional studies are needed to recapitulate the endoge - nous activation of these transcription factors to fully understand their biological contributions to the EMT program . Since the functional loss of E - cadherin is a common feature of EMT , one additional attractive candidate transcriptional pathway regulating EMT is the b - catenin - mediated transcription program . The disappearance of E - cadherin from adherens junctions re - sults in the release of its partner , b - catenin , into the cytosol , which then has the potential to enter the nucleus where it can activate LEF / TCF - mediated transcription . Although the contri - bution of the adherens - junction - associated b - catenin pool to transcription is still a matter of debate , several studies suggest that b - catenin - mediated transcription can induce the expression of Slug ( Conacci - Sorrell et al . , 2003 ) and Twist1 ( Onder et al . , 2008 ) , thereby contributing to the EMT program . Recently , two studies found that Ajuba LIM proteins , also components of adhe - rens junctions , could travel to the nucleus to serve as functional corepressors of the Snail family to repress E - cadherin ( Ayyana - than et al . , 2007 ; Langer et al . , 2008 ) . Together , these studies highlight the dynamic communication between cell adhesion and its nuclear regulators during the EMT program . EMT in Carcinoma Progression and Metastasis The great majority of human solid tumors are carcinomas that originate from various epithelial cell types throughout the body . As mentioned earlier , in order for carcinoma cells to break away from neighboring cells to invade adjacent cell layers , these tumor cells must lose cell - cell adhesion and acquire motility . The resulting cellular motility shares many similarities with the exten - sive cell migration and tissue rearrangements that occur during the various developmental events discussed above . Indeed , this highly conserved EMT program has been implicated in giving rise to the dissemination of single carcinoma cells from primary epithelial tumors ( Thiery , 2002 ) . E - cadherin Mutations and Posttranscriptional Control Since it functions as a key gatekeeper of the epithelial state , the partial loss of E - cadherin has been associated with carcinoma progression and poor prognosis in various human and mouse tumors ( Vincent - Salomon and Thiery , 2003 ) . In both tumor cell cultures and in vivo mouse tumor models , forced expression of E - cadherin in certain invasive carcinoma cells can inhibit their ability to invade and metastasize ; conversely , blocking E - cad - herin function in noninvasive tumor cells activates their invasive - ness and metastatic powers ( Frixen et al . , 1991 ; Perl et al . , 1998 ) . In several types of human carcinomas , E - cadherin expression is lost at an early stage of tumor development , causing the result - ing tumors to exhibit an essentially permanent mesenchymal phenotype , i . e . , the phenotype of cells that have passed through an irreversible EMT . The best demonstration of this process is in familial gastric cancers , in which E - cadherin germline mutations play a causal role . Depending on the position of the nonsense or frameshift mutation involved , the E - cadherin protein can either be absent or truncated , and thus incapable of mediating cell - cell adhesion ( Guilford et al . , 1998 ) . E - cadherin - mediated adherens junction formation is also nega - tively regulated by the actions of several tyrosine kinases in tumor cells . Accumulating evidence suggests that receptor and nonre - ceptor tyrosine kinases , such as Met and Src , can phosphorylate both b - cateninandtheshortcytoplasmictailofE - cadherinthatare associated with adherens junctions . Phosphorylation of E - cad - herin promotes its binding to a Hakai E3 - ligase . Ubiquitinated b - catenin is degraded in the proteasome , while ubiquitinated E - cadherin - Hakai complexes are internalized to endosomes and thereafter recycled back to the cell surface or degraded in lyso - somes . Therefore , activationoftyrosinekinasesincarcinomacells could lead to rapid disruption of cell adhesion and a scattering phenotype ( Fujita et al . , 2002 ; Pece and Gutkind , 2002 ) . Transcriptional Regulation of EMT In the majority of human carcinoma cell populations , the loss of E - cadherin appears to be heterogeneous , with foci of E - cad - herin - positive carcinoma cells scattered among E - cadherin - negative areas . Moreover , E - cadherin is often detected in distant metastases , which may derive from cells that have previously passed through an EMT ( Bukholm et al . , 1998 , 2000 ) . This sug - gests that after their initial dissemination , some metastatic cells may revert to an epithelial state , and it indicates that other , non - genetic mechanisms controlling transcription of the E - cadherin gene or posttranslational modiﬁcation of the E - cadherin protein may be responsible for the lack of expression of this protein in some tumor cells . Indeed , many EMT - inducing transcription factors , including Snail , Slug , d EF1 , SIP1 , Twist1 , FOXC2 , and Goosecoid , have been associated with tumor invasion and metastasis . Expression ofalmostallofthesehasbeendetectedincertaininvasivehuman andmousetumorcelllines . ExpressionofTwist1hasbeenshown to be essential for a mouse breast carcinoma cell line to metasta - size from the mammary gland to the lung ( Yang et al . , 2004 ) . And overexpression of FOXC2 or Goosecoid increases the ability of weakly metastatic human carcinoma cells to disseminate ( Hart - well et al . , 2006 ; Mani et al . , 2007 ) . The involvement of several EMT - inducing transcription factors has also been reported in hu - man carcinomas . For example , when gene expression proﬁling was performed for ‘‘poor prognosis’’ signatures , overexpression Developmental Cell 14 , June 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 823 Developmental Cell Review of Twist1 was associated with distant metastasis and poor sur - vival in N - Myc - ampliﬁed neuroblastomas ( Valsesia - Wittmann etal . , 2004 ) andinmelanomas ( Hoeketal . , 2004 ) . Arecentreview has presented an excellent survey on the published reports of their expression in human cancers ( Peinado et al . , 2007 ) . Inducing Signals of EMT Signals responsible for inducing EMTs during embryogenesis have also been implicated in tumor invasion and metastasis . Once again , the best - studied pathway is that involving TGF - b signaling . In various human cancer cell lines and in mouse tumor models , activation of the TGF - b pathway at the later stages of tumor progression has been shown to promote EMT in carci - noma cells , which allows these cells to invade the ECM in culture and to spread to distant organs in mice ( Janda et al . , 2002 ; Oft et al . , 1998 ) . In various tumor cell lines , TGF - b signaling induces Snail , Slug , and SIP1 , which may then proceed to repress the expression of E - cadherin , thereby causing a loss of cell - cell adhesion ( Comijn et al . , 2001 ; Peinado et al . , 2003 ) . Glycogen synthase kinase 3 b ( GSK3 b ) can phosphorylate Snail , which promotes its nuclear export and ubiquitin - mediated degrada - tion . Hence , inactivation of GSK3 b via the Wnt pathway or recep - tor tyrosine kinases may promote Snail stability and nuclear im - port , thus activating its ability to promote EMT ( Bachelder et al . , 2005 ; Zhou et al . , 2004 ) . More recently , two studies have re - ported that hypoxia can induce EMT in carcinoma cells , doing so via activation of either Snail ( Lester et al . , 2007 ) or Twist1 ( Yang et al . , 2008 ) . Together , these data suggest that in response to various inductive signals , EMT - inducing transcription factors may serve as major signaling mediators of the EMT program to promote metastasis . In Figure 2 , we summarize the major players that have been reported to play a direct role in regulating the EMT program in carcinoma cells . The Controversy of EMT in Metastasis One major difﬁculty in demonstrating the role of EMT in metasta - sis in human cancers is identifying carcinoma cells that have passed through an EMT in primary human tumor samples . Most of the EMT markers currently used are expressed in either epithelial or mesenchymal cells , and therefore are not speciﬁc for identifying tumor cells at the EMT stage that are scattered among the many stromal cells present within a primary tumor . A few studies have shed some light on the existence of such EMT carcinoma cells in primary human cancers . The EMT - induc - ing transcription factor Twist1 is overexpressed in two human cancer types , lobular breast carcinoma and diffused - type gastric cancer . Over 90 % of these tumors do not express E - cadherin and exhibit a permanent EMT phenotype ( Rosivatz et al . , 2002 ; Yang et al . , 2004 ) . In colorectal cancers that contain APC or b - catenin mutations , b - catenin expression is predominantly ob - served in tumor cells localized at the invasion front and scattered in the adjacent stromal compartment . More interestingly , tumor cells with nuclear b - catenin accumulation appear to have under - gone an EMT , as demonstrated by the progressive loss of E - cad - herin expression and acquisition of mesenchymal markers such as ﬁbronectin ( Fodde and Brabletz , 2007 ) . Despite these various observations , the involvement of EMT in human cancer metastasis is still highly debated , due in part to clinical observations showing that the majority of human breast carcinoma metastases express E - cadherin and maintain their epithelial morphology , suggesting that they have disseminated without switching to a mesenchymal phenotype ( Tarin et al . , 2005 ; Thompson et al . , 2005 ) . Several studies in mouse tumor models have also suggested that tumor invasion and metastasis can be achieved without an obvious EMT phenotype . In a TGF - b 1 - induced mouse skin tumor model , blocking the EMT program Figure 2 . The Molecular Network of Known Signaling Pathways and Transcription Factors that Regulate the Epithelial - Mesenchymal Transition Program in Carcinoma Cells In cancer cells , the TGF - b signaling pathway induces multiple EMT - inducing transcription factors , includ - ing Slug , SIP1 , and Goosecoid , via activation of Smads . The Wnt pathway and loss of E - cadherin from adherens junctions activate b - catenin , which in turn induces several EMT - inducing transcription factors as well , such as Slug , Twist1 , and Goosecoid . Multiple tyrosine kinase receptor ( TKR ) pathways , in - cluding FGFR , EGFR , PDGFR , and HGFR , can induce the expression of Snail and Slug through the Ras - MAPK pathway . The Wnt and tyrosine kinase recep - tor pathways also modulate Snail nuclear transport and degradation through GSK3 b . The Notch pathway is induced by and required for TGF - b - induced EMT . Activated ROS , through Rac1b , is capable of pro - moting an EMT in tumor cells , though the inducing signal is unknown . Among all the EMT - inducing tran - scription factors , Snail , Slug , SIP1 , and E47 directly suppress E - cadherin transcription , while Twist1 , Goosecoid , and FOXC2 seem to function directly . FOXC2 is induced in tumor cells expressing Twist1 , Snail , and Goosecoid and mediates mesenchymal differentiation . Althoughalmostalltheaforementioned pathways are associated with cell migration and inva - sion , the speciﬁc inducers of migration and invasion during EMT are not well understood . Solid lines indi - cate direct transcriptional or posttranscriptional regu - lations . Dashed lines indicate indirect regulation . 824 Developmental Cell 14 , June 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . Developmental Cell Review with a dominant - negative TGF - b type 1 receptor did not inhibit the occurrence of distant metastases ( Han et al . , 2005 ) . Collec - tive cell invasion ( Wicki et al . , 2006 ) and ﬁbroblast - led collective invasion ( Gaggioli et al . , 2007 ) have also been responsible for carcinoma cell local invasion into the extracellular space . In - deed , cell migration during several developmental events does not require a complete EMT phenotype . For example , in the Drosophila egg chamber , border cells delaminate from the follicular epithelium and migrate posteriorly with polar cells as a compact cluster with well - deﬁned cell contacts ( Prasad and Montell , 2007 ) . However , partial EMT and collective cell mi - gration are not sufﬁcient to explain how individual tumor cells can intravasate into the blood circulation and travel to distant organs . Some of this controversy , we believe , is due to the depiction of EMT as a permanent , irreversible process occurring during the course of tumor metastasis . Indeed , a reversible EMT model has been proposed to describe the transient activation of the EMT program that carcinoma cells undergo during tumor metastasis ( Thiery , 2002 ) . In this model , carcinoma cells acti - vate the EMT program to achieve local invasion and dissemina - tion to distant organs . Once they have reached those organs , these mesenchymal cells may revert via an MET to an epithelial identity and thereby regain proliferative ability and the ability to form epithelial growths in distant organ sites . Moreover , cancer cells may , more often than not , pass through a partial EMT pro - gram rather than a complete one ; such cells may concomitantly express epithelial and mesenchymal markers . Better EMT mouse tumor models will clearly be needed to test this hypoth - esis rigorously . An alternative model suggests that carcinoma cells may gain motility through activation of an Epithelial - Amoeboid Transition . During this process , upon loss of cell adhesion , carcinoma cells switch to a spherical morphology , which allows them to squeeze through the ECM without extracellular proteolysis ( Wolf et al . , 2003 ) . Recently , this amoeboid movement has been observed in migrating mesoderm cells in the gastrula - stage zebraﬁsh em - bryo ( Weiser et al . , 2007 ) . It is likely that carcinoma cells utilize both EMT and Epithelial - Amoeboid Transition programs to achieve tumor metastasis : breaching the dense basement mem - brane requires the activation of EMT and extracellular proteoly - sis , while an Epithelial - Amoeboid Transition might enable cells to pass through thinner ECM . The above possibilities might also explain why genes involved in the EMT program have not been frequently detected as being part of the poor prognosis or distant metastasis gene expression signatures . In many gene expression proﬁling studies using human tumor samples , detecting gene expression patterns from small populations of tumor cells that are undergoing an EMT program is experimentally unlikely in a heterogeneous tumor sample . Another class of studies that addresses these questions uses mouse or human cancer cell lines to select highly metastatic variants in mice and compare gene expression signa - tures between the highly metastatic and parental cell lines . Unfortunately , almost all such studies use tumor cell lines that already have a mesenchymal phenotype and directly introduce such tumor cells into the circulation , thereby bypassing most of the steps of the invasion - metastasis cascade that may depend on an EMT program . Future Perspectives Currently , the EMT program is only loosely deﬁned by certain cell morphological changes , changes of differentiation markers from epithelial to mesenchymal patterns , and the functional changes required for cells to migrate and invade through ECM . As such , a clear molecular deﬁnition of the EMT program during both development and tumor metastasis is still elusive . Since EMT - associated changes occur in coordination with other cellular programs , such as cell survival and proliferation , it is often not clear whether a speciﬁc molecule or pathway under investigation is speciﬁc to the EMT program or is operating in parallel with another program or programs . Loss of E - cadherin ( N - cadherin in the neural crest ) may be the only consistently reported molec - ular change occurring during the various EMTs involved in both development and tumor metastasis . Since loss of E - cadherin alone in normal epithelial cells results in cell death rather than EMT , it appears that the core EMT molecular program includes more than E - cadherin repression . Indeed , several studies showed that the same factors that induce EMT , such as Snail / Slug ( Nieto , 2002 ) and many receptor tyrosine kinases , could also help cells to survive in the absence of cell adhesion . Identi - ﬁcation of the molecular signature of the EMT may be aided by the recent genomic analyses of the EMT program occurring in embryogenesis and tumor progression . Such a speciﬁc molecu - lar signature of the EMT program would create the framework for elucidation of the complete signaling network that regulates the EMT program . By undergoing an EMT , cells not only change their cellular characteristics to acquire motility and invasiveness , but also develop novel interactions with the extracellular environment . Most studies have focused on the afferent signaling pathways received by or activated within the cells undergoing an EMT . Im - portantly , such cells also release various signals to modify the microenvironment and interact with other cell types during the EMT program . For example , during mesoderm formation , primi - tive mesoderm cells deposit hyaluronan ( Sanders , 1979 ) and syndecan ( Sutherland et al . , 1991 ) to prepare the microenviron - ment for migration . Understanding the changes associated with the microenvironment surrounding cells undergoing an EMT will be critical in dissecting how tumor cells interact with various tis - sues during the metastatic journey , which begins in a primary tumor and ends at distant sites of dissemination . During embryogenesis , activation of the EMT program in vivo requires the coordination of multiple signaling inputs in a con - text - dependent manner . For example , TGF - b superfamily mem - bers are prominent inducers of EMT at many sites within the developing embryo . However , distinct members of this super - family are involved in particular EMTs , and they interact with dif - ferent signaling pathways in order to achieve these EMTs . The developmental stages of cells and their respective tissue con - texts are largely responsible for these differences , which have been demonstrated using model organisms such as Drosophila , Xenopus , and zebraﬁsh . Unfortunately , it is still extremely chal - lenging to localize these complex cellular programs in the far more complex mouse embryo . Additional new 3D or organ cul - ture systems will be required to identify the critical pathways and their interactions in the physiological context . Studying EMT under physiologic conditions is also critical for elucidating its role in tumor metastasis . In the past , the majority Developmental Cell 14 , June 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 825 Developmental Cell Review of studies on the role of EMT in cancer pathogenesis were per - formed in cultured tumor cell lines . Given the various tissue - spe - ciﬁc interactions occurring during tumor metastasis , including those that depend on the tissue microenvironment , the molecu - lar steps that create EMT must be dissected in vivo or in organo - typic 3D cultures . Furthermore , the transient nature of the EMT program in metastasis requires us to build better genetic mouse models and more sensitive reporters of the EMT program to monitor its activation in real time in vivo . Together , studies in both development and tumor metastasis will reveal the complex molecular networks that orchestrate the EMT program and hold the promise of suggesting new types of cancer therapeutics . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Weapologizetothemanyresearchersinthisﬁeldwhoseworkwewereunable to cite due to space restrictions . We would like to thank many members of R . A . W . ’s and J . Y . ’s laboratory for insightful discussions , as well as the anon - ymous reviewers whose thoughtful suggestions greatly improved the quality of this work . Our research on EMT and metastasis is supported by grants from National Institutes of Health 1DP2OD002420 ( J . Y . ) and 5P01CA080111 ( R . A . W . ) , California Breast Cancer Program ( J . Y . ) , Sidney Kimmel Foundation for Cancer Research ( J . Y . ) , Breast Cancer Research Foundation ( R . A . W . ) , and the Ludwig Centerfor Molecular Oncologyat MIT ( R . A . W . ) . R . A . W . is an Amer - ican Cancer Society Research Professor and a Daniel K . Ludwig Cancer Research Professor . REFERENCES Ahmed , S . , Liu , C . C . , andNawshad , A . ( 2007 ) . Mechanismsofpalatalepithelial seam disintegration by transforming growth factor ( TGF ) b 3 . Dev . Biol . 309 , 193 – 207 . Aigner , K . , Dampier , B . , Descovich , L . , Mikula , M . , Sultan , A . , Schreiber , M . , Mikulits , W . , Brabletz , T . , Strand , D . , Obrist , P . , et al . ( 2007 ) . The transcription factor ZEB1 ( deltaEF1 ) promotes tumour cell dedifferentia - tion by repressing master regulators of epithelial polarity . Oncogene 26 , 6979 – 6988 . Ayyanathan , K . , Peng , H . , Hou , Z . , Fredericks , W . J . , Goyal , R . K . , Langer , E . M . , Longmore , G . D . , and Rauscher , F . J . , 3rd . ( 2007 ) . The Ajuba LIM domain pro - teinisacorepressorforSNAGdomainmediatedrepressionandparticipatesinnucleocytoplasmicShuttling . Cancer Res . 67 , 9097 – 9106 . Bachelder , R . E . , Yoon , S . O . , Franci , C . , de Herreros , A . G . , and Mercurio , A . M . ( 2005 ) . Glycogen synthase kinase - 3 is an endogenous inhibitor of Snail tran - scription : implications for the epithelial - mesenchymal transition . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 29 – 33 . Barrios - Rodiles , M . , Brown , K . R . , Ozdamar , B . , Bose , R . , Liu , Z . , Donovan , R . S . , Shinjo , F . , Liu , Y . , Dembowy , J . , Taylor , I . W . , et al . ( 2005 ) . High - through - putmapping of adynamic signaling networkinmammaliancells . Science 307 , 1621 – 1625 . Batlle , E . , Sancho , E . , Franci , C . , Dominguez , D . , Monfar , M . , Baulida , J . , and Garcia De Herreros , A . ( 2000 ) . The transcription factor snail is a repressor of E - cadherin gene expression in epithelial tumour cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 , 84 – 89 . Birchmeier , W . , Brinkmann , V . , Niemann , C . , Meiners , S . , DiCesare , S . , Naun - dorf , H . , and Sachs , M . ( 1997 ) . Role of HGF / SF and c - Met in morphogenesis and metastasis of epithelial cells . Ciba Found . Symp . 212 , 230 – 240 . Bolender , D . L . , and Markwald , R . R . ( 1979 ) . Epithelial - mesenchymal transfor - mation in chick atrioventricular cushion morphogenesis . Scan . Electron Microsc . 3 , 313 – 321 . Boyer , A . S . , Ayerinskas , I . I . , Vincent , E . B . , McKinney , L . A . , Weeks , D . L . , and Runyan , R . B . ( 1999 ) . TGF b 2 and TGF b 3 have separate and sequential activi - ties during epithelial - mesenchymal cell transformation in the embryonic heart . Dev . Biol . 208 , 530 – 545 . Boyer , B . , and Thiery , J . P . ( 1993 ) . Epithelium - mesenchyme interconversion as example of epithelial plasticity . APMIS 101 , 257 – 268 . Boyer , B . , Roche , S . , Denoyelle , M . , and Thiery , J . P . ( 1997 ) . Src and Ras are involved in separate pathways in epithelial cell scattering . EMBO J . 16 , 5904 – 5913 . Bukholm , I . K . , Nesland , J . M . , Karesen , R . , Jacobsen , U . , and Borresen - Dale , A . L . ( 1998 ) . E - cadherin and a - , b - , and g - catenin protein expression in relation to metastasis in human breast carcinoma . J . Pathol . 185 , 262 – 266 . Bukholm , I . K . , Nesland , J . M . , and Borresen - Dale , A . L . ( 2000 ) . Re - expression of E - cadherin , a - catenin and b - catenin , but not of g - catenin , in metastatic tis - sue from breast cancer patients . J . Pathol . 190 , 15 – 19 . Camenisch , T . D . , Schroeder , J . A . , Bradley , J . , Klewer , S . E . , and McDonald , J . A . ( 2002 ) . Heart - valve mesenchyme formation is dependent on hyalur - onan - augmented activation of ErbB2 - ErbB3 receptors . Nat . Med . 8 , 850 – 855 . Cano , A . , Perez - Moreno , M . A . , Rodrigo , I . , Locascio , A . , Blanco , M . J . , delBar - rio , M . G . , Portillo , F . , and Nieto , M . A . ( 2000 ) . Thetranscription factorsnailcon - trols epithelial - mesenchymal transitions by repressing E - cadherin expression . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 , 76 – 83 . Carver , E . A . , Jiang , R . , Lan , Y . , Oram , K . F . , and Gridley , T . ( 2001 ) . The mouse snail gene encodes a key regulator of the epithelial - mesenchymal transition . Mol . Cell . Biol . 21 , 8184 – 8188 . Chen , C . , Ware , S . M . , Sato , A . , Houston - Hawkins , D . E . , Habas , R . , Matzuk , M . M . , Shen , M . M . , and Brown , C . W . ( 2006 ) . The Vg1 - related protein Gdf3 acts in a Nodal signaling pathway in the pre - gastrulation mouse embryo . De - velopment 133 , 319 – 329 . Chen , Z . F . , and Behringer , R . R . ( 1995 ) . twist is required in head mesenchyme for cranial neural tube morphogenesis . Genes Dev . 9 , 686 – 699 . Ciruna , B . , and Rossant , J . ( 2001 ) . FGF signaling regulates mesoderm cellfate speciﬁcation and morphogenetic movement at the primitive streak . Dev . Cell 1 , 37 – 49 . Comijn , J . , Berx , G . , Vermassen , P . , Verschueren , K . , van Grunsven , L . , Bruy - neel , E . , Mareel , M . , Huylebroeck , D . , and van Roy , F . ( 2001 ) . The two - handed E box binding zinc ﬁnger protein SIP1 downregulates E - cadherin and induces invasion . Mol . Cell 7 , 1267 – 1278 . Conacci - Sorrell , M . , Simcha , I . , Ben - Yedidia , T . , Blechman , J . , Savagner , P . , and Ben - Ze’ev , A . ( 2003 ) . Autoregulation of E - cadherin expression by cad - herin - cadherin interactions : the roles of beta - catenin signaling , Slug , and MAPK . J . Cell Biol . 163 , 847 – 857 . Cornell , R . A . , and Eisen , J . S . ( 2005 ) . Notch in the pathway : the roles of Notch signaling in neural crest development . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 16 , 663 – 672 . Correia , A . C . , Costa , M . , Moraes , F . , Bom , J . , Novoa , A . , and Mallo , M . ( 2007 ) . Bmp2 is required for migration but not for induction of neural crest cells in the mouse . Dev . Dyn . 236 , 2493 – 2501 . Davies , J . A . ( 1996 ) . Mesenchyme to epithelium transition during development of the mammalian kidney tubule . Acta Anat . ( Basel ) 156 , 187 – 201 . DeCalisto , J . , Araya , C . , Marchant , L . , Riaz , C . F . , andMayor , R . ( 2005 ) . Essen - tialroleofnon - canonicalWntsignallinginneuralcrestmigration . Development 132 , 2587 – 2597 . Dietrich , S . , Abou - Rebyeh , F . , Brohmann , H . , Bladt , F . , Sonnenberg - Rieth - macher , E . , Yamaai , T . , Lumsden , A . , Brand - Saberi , B . , and Birchmeier , C . ( 1999 ) . The role of SF / HGF and c - Met in the development of skeletal muscle . Development 126 , 1621 – 1629 . Duband , J . L . , andThiery , J . P . ( 1987 ) . Distributionoflamininandcollagensdur - ing avian neural crest development . Development 101 , 461 – 478 . Duband , J . L . , Monier , F . , Delannet , M . , and Newgreen , D . ( 1995 ) . Epithelium - mesenchyme transition during neural crest development . Acta Anat . ( Basel ) 154 , 63 – 78 . Eger , A . , Aigner , K . , Sonderegger , S . , Dampier , B . , Oehler , S . , Schreiber , M . , Berx , G . , Cano , A . , Beug , H . , and Foisner , R . ( 2005 ) . DeltaEF1 is a transcrip - tional repressor of E - cadherin and regulates epithelial plasticity in breast can - cer cells . Oncogene 24 , 2375 – 2385 . Fitchett , J . E . , andHay , E . D . ( 1989 ) . Medialedgeepitheliumtransformstomes - enchyme after embryonic palatal shelves fuse . Dev . Biol . 131 , 455 – 474 . Fodde , R . , and Brabletz , T . ( 2007 ) . Wnt / beta - catenin signaling incancer stem - ness and malignant behavior . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 19 , 150 – 158 . 826 Developmental Cell 14 , June 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . Developmental Cell Review Frixen , U . H . , Behrens , J . , Sachs , M . , Eberle , G . , Voss , B . , Warda , A . , Lochner , D . , and Birchmeier , W . ( 1991 ) . E - cadherin - mediated cell - cell adhesion pre - vents invasiveness of human carcinoma cells . J . Cell Biol . 113 , 173 – 185 . Fujita , Y . , Krause , G . , Scheffner , M . , Zechner , D . , Leddy , H . E . , Behrens , J . , Sommer , T . , and Birchmeier , W . ( 2002 ) . Hakai , a c - Cbl - like protein , ubiquiti - nates and induces endocytosis of the E - cadherin complex . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 222 – 231 . Gaggioli , C . , Hooper , S . , Hidalgo - Carcedo , C . , Grosse , R . , Marshall , J . F . , Har - rington , K . , and Sahai , E . ( 2007 ) . Fibroblast - led collective invasion of carci - noma cells with differing roles for RhoGTPases in leading and following cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 , 1392 – 1400 . Garcia - Castro , M . I . , Marcelle , C . , and Bronner - Fraser , M . ( 2002 ) . Ectodermal Wnt function as a neural crest inducer . Science 297 , 848 – 851 . Ghabrial , A . , Luschnig , S . , Metzstein , M . M . , and Krasnow , M . A . ( 2003 ) . Branching morphogenesis of the Drosophila tracheal system . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 19 , 623 – 647 . Giroldi , L . A . , Bringuier , P . P . , de Weijert , M . , Jansen , C . , vanBokhoven , A . , and Schalken , J . A . ( 1997 ) . Role of E boxes in the repression of E - cadherin expres - sion . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 241 , 453 – 458 . Gitelman , I . ( 1997 ) . Twist protein in mouse embryogenesis . Dev . Biol . 189 , 205 – 214 . Gitler , A . D . , Lu , M . M . , Jiang , Y . Q . , Epstein , J . A . , and Gruber , P . J . ( 2003 ) . Mo - lecular markers of cardiac endocardial cushion development . Dev . Dyn . 228 , 643 – 650 . Greenburg , G . , and Hay , E . D . ( 1982 ) . Epithelia suspended in collagen gels can lose polarity and express characteristics of migrating mesenchymal cells . J . Cell Biol . 95 , 333 – 339 . Greenburg , G . , and Hay , E . D . ( 1986 ) . Cytodifferentiation and tissue phenotype change during transformation of embryonic lens epithelium to mesenchyme - like cells in vitro . Dev . Biol . 115 , 363 – 379 . Greenburg , G . , and Hay , E . D . ( 1988 ) . Cytoskeleton and thyroglobulin expres - sion change during transformation of thyroid epithelium to mesenchyme - like cells . Development 102 , 605 – 622 . Grifﬁth , C . M . , and Hay , E . D . ( 1992 ) . Epithelial - mesenchymal transformation during palatal fusion : carboxyﬂuorescein traces cells at light and electron microscopic levels . Development 116 , 1087 – 1099 . Grunert , S . , Jechlinger , M . , andBeug , H . ( 2003 ) . Diversecellularandmolecular mechanisms contribute to epithelial plasticity and metastasis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 4 , 657 – 665 . Guilford , P . , Hopkins , J . , Harraway , J . , McLeod , M . , McLeod , N . , Harawira , P . , Taite , H . , Scoular , R . , Miller , A . , and Reeve , A . E . ( 1998 ) . E - cadherin germline mutations in familial gastric cancer . Nature 392 , 402 – 405 . Hajra , K . M . , Chen , D . Y . , and Fearon , E . R . ( 2002 ) . TheSLUGzinc - ﬁngerprotein represses E - cadherin in breast cancer . Cancer Res . 62 , 1613 – 1618 . Han , G . , Lu , S . L . , Li , A . G . , He , W . , Corless , C . L . , Kulesz - Martin , M . , and Wang , X . J . ( 2005 ) . Distinct mechanisms of TGF - b 1 - mediated epithelial - to - mesen - chymal transition and metastasis during skin carcinogenesis . J . Clin . Invest . 115 , 1714 – 1723 . Hartwell , K . A . , Muir , B . , Reinhardt , F . , Carpenter , A . E . , Sgroi , D . C . , and Wein - berg , R . A . ( 2006 ) . The Spemann organizer gene , Goosecoid , promotes tumor metastasis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 18969 – 18974 . Hay , E . D . ( 1995 ) . An overview of epithelio - mesenchymal transformation . Acta Anat . ( Basel ) 154 , 8 – 20 . Hennig , G . , Behrens , J . , Truss , M . , Frisch , S . , Reichmann , E . , and Birchmeier , W . ( 1995 ) . Progression of carcinoma cells is associated with alterations in chromatin structure and factor binding at the E - cadherin promoter in vivo . On - cogene 11 , 475 – 484 . Hoek , K . , Rimm , D . L . , Williams , K . R . , Zhao , H . , Ariyan , S . , Lin , A . , Kluger , H . M . , Berger , A . J . , Cheng , E . , Trombetta , E . S . , et al . ( 2004 ) . Expression proﬁling re - veals novel pathways in the transformation of melanocytes to melanomas . Cancer Res . 64 , 5270 – 5282 . Hurlstone , A . F . , Haramis , A . P . , Wienholds , E . , Begthel , H . , Korving , J . , VanEe - den , F . , Cuppen , E . , Zivkovic , D . , Plasterk , R . H . , and Clevers , H . ( 2003 ) . The Wnt / b - catenin pathway regulates cardiac valve formation . Nature 425 , 633 – 637 . Janda , E . , Lehmann , K . , Killisch , I . , Jechlinger , M . , Herzig , M . , Downward , J . , Beug , H . , and Grunert , S . ( 2002 ) . Ras and TGF [ b ] cooperatively regulate epi - thelial cell plasticity and metastasis : dissection of Ras signaling pathways . J . Cell Biol . 156 , 299 – 313 . Jechlinger , M . , Grunert , S . , Tamir , I . H . , Janda , E . , Ludemann , S . , Waerner , T . , Seither , P . , Weith , A . , Beug , H . , andKraut , N . ( 2003 ) . Expressionproﬁlingofep - ithelial plasticity in tumor progression . Oncogene 22 , 7155 – 7169 . Kelly , G . M . , Greenstein , P . , Erezyilmaz , D . F . , and Moon , R . T . ( 1995 ) . Zebraﬁsh wnt8 and wnt8b share a common activity but are involved in distinct develop - mental pathways . Development 121 , 1787 – 1799 . Kimelman , D . ( 2006 ) . Mesoderm induction : from caps to chips . Nat . Rev . Genet . 7 , 360 – 372 . Langer , E . M . , Feng , Y . , Zhaoyuan , H . , Rauscher , F . J . , 3rd , Kroll , K . L . , and Longmore , G . D . ( 2008 ) . Ajuba LIM proteins are snail / slug corepressors re - quired for neural crest development in Xenopus . Dev . Cell 14 , 424 – 436 . Leptin , M . ( 1991 ) . twist and snail as positive and negative regulators during Drosophila mesoderm development . Genes Dev . 5 , 1568 – 1576 . Leptin , M . , and Grunewald , B . ( 1990 ) . Cell shape changes during gastrulation in Drosophila . Development 110 , 73 – 84 . Lester , R . D . , Jo , M . , Montel , V . , Takimoto , S . , and Gonias , S . L . ( 2007 ) . uPAR induces epithelial - mesenchymal transition in hypoxic breast cancer cells . J . Cell Biol . 178 , 425 – 436 . Liebner , S . , Cattelino , A . , Gallini , R . , Rudini , N . , Iurlaro , M . , Piccolo , S . , andDe - jana , E . ( 2004 ) . b - catenin is required for endothelial - mesenchymal transforma - tionduringheartcushiondevelopmentinthemouse . J . CellBiol . 166 , 359 – 367 . Liu , P . , Wakamiya , M . , Shea , M . J . , Albrecht , U . , Behringer , R . R . , and Bradley , A . ( 1999 ) . Requirement for Wnt3 in vertebrate axis formation . Nat . Genet . 22 , 361 – 365 . Mani , S . A . , Yang , J . , Brooks , M . , Schwaninger , G . , Zhou , A . , Miura , N . , Kutok , J . L . , Hartwell , K . , Richardson , A . L . , and Weinberg , R . A . ( 2007 ) . Mesenchyme Forkhead 1 ( FOXC2 ) plays a key role in metastasis and is associated with aggressive basal - like breast cancers . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 10069 – 10074 . Markwald , R . R . , Fitzharris , T . P . , and Manasek , F . J . ( 1977 ) . Structural develop - ment of endocardial cushions . Am . J . Anat . 148 , 85 – 119 . Martins - Green , M . , and Erickson , C . A . ( 1987 ) . Basal lamina is not a barrier to neural crest cell emigration : documentation by TEM and by immunoﬂuores - cent and immunogold labelling . Development 101 , 517 – 533 . McDowell , N . , and Gurdon , J . B . ( 1999 ) . Activin as a morphogen in Xenopus mesoderm induction . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 10 , 311 – 317 . Mercado - Pimentel , M . E . , and Runyan , R . B . ( 2007 ) . Multiple transforming growth factor - b isoforms and receptors function during epithelial - mesenchy - mal cell transformation in the embryonic heart . Cells Tissues Organs 185 , 146 – 156 . Mjaatvedt , C . H . , and Markwald , R . R . ( 1989 ) . Induction of an epithelial - mesen - chymal transition by an in vivo adheron - like complex . Dev . Biol . 136 , 118 – 128 . Moreno - Bueno , G . , Cubillo , E . , Sarrio , D . , Peinado , H . , Rodriguez - Pinilla , S . M . , Villa , S . , Bolos , V . , Jorda , M . , Fabra , A . , Portillo , F . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Genetic pro - ﬁling of epithelial cells expressing E - cadherinrepressors reveals adistinct role for Snail , Slug , and E47 factors in epithelial - mesenchymal transition . Cancer Res . 66 , 9543 – 9556 . Nichols , D . H . ( 1981 ) . Neural crest formation in the head of the mouse embryo asobservedusing anew histological technique . J . Embryol . Exp . Morphol . 64 , 105 – 120 . Nieto , M . A . ( 2002 ) . The snail superfamily of zinc - ﬁnger transcription factors . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 3 , 155 – 166 . Oft , M . , Heider , K . H . , andBeug , H . ( 1998 ) . TGF b signalingisnecessaryforcar - cinoma cell invasiveness and metastasis . Curr . Biol . 8 , 1243 – 1252 . Developmental Cell 14 , June 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 827 Developmental Cell Review Onder , T . T . , Gupta , P . B . , Mani , S . A . , Yang , J . , Lander , E . S . , and Weinberg , R . A . ( 2008 ) . Loss of E - cadherin promotes metastasis via multiple downstream transcriptional pathways . Cancer Res . 68 , 3645 – 3654 . Ozdamar , B . , Bose , R . , Barrios - Rodiles , M . , Wang , H . R . , Zhang , Y . , and Wrana , J . L . ( 2005 ) . Regulation of the polarity protein Par6 by TGFbeta recep - tors controls epithelial cell plasticity . Science 307 , 1603 – 1609 . Pece , S . , and Gutkind , J . S . ( 2002 ) . E - cadherin and Hakai : signalling , remodel - ing or destruction ? Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , E72 – E74 . Peinado , H . , Quintanilla , M . , and Cano , A . ( 2003 ) . Transforming growth factor b - 1inducessnailtranscriptionfactorinepithelialcelllines : mechanismsforep - ithelial mesenchymal transitions . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 21113 – 21123 . Peinado , H . , Olmeda , D . , and Cano , A . ( 2007 ) . Snail , Zeb and bHLH factors in tumour progression : an alliance against the epithelial phenotype ? Nat . Rev . Cancer 7 , 415 – 428 . Perez - Moreno , M . A . , Locascio , A . , Rodrigo , I . , Dhondt , G . , Portillo , F . , Nieto , M . A . , and Cano , A . ( 2001 ) . A new role for E12 / E47 in the repression of E - cad - herin expression and epithelial - mesenchymal transitions . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 27424 – 27431 . Perl , A . K . , Wilgenbus , P . , Dahl , U . , Semb , H . , and Christofori , G . ( 1998 ) . A causalroleforE - cadherininthetransitionfromadenomatocarcinoma . Nature 392 , 190 – 193 . Person , A . D . , Klewer , S . E . , and Runyan , R . B . ( 2005 ) . Cell biology of cardiac cushion development . Int . Rev . Cytol . 243 , 287 – 335 . Poelmann , R . E . , Gittenberger - deGroot , A . C . , Mentink , M . M . , Delpech , B . , Gir - ard , N . , and Christ , B . ( 1990 ) . The extracellular matrix during neural crest for - mation and migration in rat embryos . Anat . Embryol . ( Berl . ) 182 , 29 – 39 . Prasad , M . , and Montell , D . J . ( 2007 ) . Cellular and molecular mechanisms of border cell migration analyzed using time - lapse live - cell imaging . Dev . Cell 12 , 997 – 1005 . Raible , D . W . ( 2006 ) . Development of the neural crest : achieving speciﬁcity in regulatory pathways . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 18 , 698 – 703 . Rezaee , M . , Isokawa , K . , Halligan , N . , Markwald , R . R . , and Krug , E . L . ( 1993 ) . Identiﬁcation ofan extracellular 130 - kDaproteininvolvedinearly cardiacmor - phogenesis . J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 14404 – 14411 . Rosario , M . , and Birchmeier , W . ( 2003 ) . How to make tubes : signaling by the Met receptor tyrosine kinase . Trends Cell Biol . 13 , 328 – 335 . Rosivatz , E . , Becker , I . , Specht , K . , Fricke , E . , Luber , B . , Busch , R . , Hoﬂer , H . , and Becker , K . F . ( 2002 ) . Differential expression of the epithelial - mesenchymal transitionregulatorssnail , SIP1 , andtwistingastriccancer . Am . J . Pathol . 161 , 1881 – 1891 . Sanders , E . J . ( 1979 ) . Development of the basal lamina and extracellular mate - rials in the early chick embryo . Cell Tissue Res . 198 , 527 – 537 . Savagner , P . , Valles , A . M . , Jouanneau , J . , Yamada , K . M . , and Thiery , J . P . ( 1994 ) . Alternative splicing in ﬁbroblast growth factor receptor 2 is associated with induced epithelial - mesenchymal transition in rat bladder carcinoma cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 5 , 851 – 862 . Shah , S . B . , Skromne , I . , Hume , C . R . , Kessler , D . S . , Lee , K . J . , Stern , C . D . , and Dodd , J . ( 1997 ) . MisexpressionofchickVg1inthemarginalzoneinducesprim - itive streak formation . Development 124 , 5127 – 5138 . Smith , W . C . , and Harland , R . M . ( 1991 ) . Injected Xwnt - 8RNA acts early in Xen - opus embryos to promote formation of a vegetal dorsalizing center . Cell 67 , 753 – 765 . Sokol , S . , Christian , J . L . , Moon , R . T . , and Melton , D . A . ( 1991 ) . Injected Wnt RNA induces a complete body axis in Xenopus embryos . Cell 67 , 741 – 752 . Soo , K . , O’Rourke , M . P . , Khoo , P . L . , Steiner , K . A . , Wong , N . , Behringer , R . R . , and Tam , P . P . ( 2002 ) . Twist function is required for the morphogenesis of the cephalic neural tube and the differentiation of the cranial neural crest cells in the mouse embryo . Dev . Biol . 247 , 251 – 270 . Spaderna , S . , Schmalhofer , O . , Wahlbuhl , M . , Dimmler , A . , Bauer , K . , Sultan , A . , Hlubek , F . , Jung , A . , Strand , D . , Eger , A . , et al . ( 2008 ) . The transcriptional repressor ZEB1 promotes metastasis and loss of cell polarity in cancer . Can - cer Res . 68 , 537 – 544 . Sutherland , A . E . , Sanderson , R . D . , Mayes , M . , Seibert , M . , Calarco , P . G . , Bernﬁeld , M . , and Damsky , C . H . ( 1991 ) . Expression of syndecan , a putative low afﬁnity ﬁbroblast growth factor receptor , in the early mouse embryo . De - velopment 113 , 339 – 351 . Tarin , D . , Thompson , E . W . , and Newgreen , D . F . ( 2005 ) . Thefallacyof epithelial mesenchymal transition in neoplasia . Cancer Res . 65 , 5996 – 6000 . Thiery , J . P . ( 2002 ) . Epithelial - mesenchymal transitions in tumour progression . Nat . Rev . Cancer 2 , 442 – 454 . Thisse , B . , el Messal , M . , and Perrin - Schmitt , F . ( 1987 ) . The twist gene : isola - tionofa Drosophila zygoticgenenecessaryfortheestablishmentofdorsoven - tral pattern . Nucleic Acids Res . 15 , 3439 – 3453 . Thompson , E . W . , Newgreen , D . F . , and Tarin , D . ( 2005 ) . Carcinoma invasion and metastasis : a role for epithelial - mesenchymal transition ? Cancer Res . 65 , 5991 – 5995 . Timmerman , L . A . , Grego - Bessa , J . , Raya , A . , Bertran , E . , Perez - Pomares , J . M . , Diez , J . , Aranda , S . , Palomo , S . , McCormick , F . , Izpisua - Belmonte , J . C . , et al . ( 2004 ) . Notch promotes epithelial - mesenchymal transition during cardiac development and oncogenic transformation . Genes Dev . 18 , 99 – 115 . Tucker , G . C . , Duband , J . L . , Dufour , S . , and Thiery , J . P . ( 1988 ) . Cell - adhesion and substrate - adhesion molecules : their instructive roles in neural crest cell migration . Development Suppl . 103 , 81 – 94 . Valsesia - Wittmann , S . , Magdeleine , M . , Dupasquier , S . , Garin , E . , Jallas , A . C . , Combaret , V . , Krause , A . , Leissner , P . , and Puisieux , A . ( 2004 ) . Oncogenic cooperation between H - Twist and N - Myc overrides failsafe programs in can - cer cells . Cancer Cell 6 , 625 – 630 . Van de Putte , T . , Maruhashi , M . , Francis , A . , Nelles , L . , Kondoh , H . , Huyle - broeck , D . , and Higashi , Y . ( 2003 ) . Mice lacking ZFHX1B , the gene that codes for Smad - interacting protein - 1 , reveal a role for multiple neural crest cell defects in the etiology of Hirschsprung disease - mental retardation syndrome . Am . J . Hum . Genet . 72 , 465 – 470 . Viebahn , C . ( 1995 ) . Epithelio - mesenchymal transformation duringformationof the mesoderm in the mammalian embryo . Acta Anat . ( Basel ) 154 , 79 – 97 . Viebahn , C . , Mayer , B . , andMiething , A . ( 1995 ) . Morphologyofincipientmeso - dermformationintherabbitembryo : alight - andretrospectiveelectron - micro - scopic study . Acta Anat . ( Basel ) 154 , 99 – 110 . Vincent - Salomon , A . , and Thiery , J . P . ( 2003 ) . Hostmicroenvironmentinbreast cancer development : epithelial - mesenchymal transition in breast cancer de - velopment . Breast Cancer Res . 5 , 101 – 106 . Weiser , D . C . , Pyati , U . J . , and Kimelman , D . ( 2007 ) . Gravin regulates mesoder - malcellbehaviorchanges requiredforaxiselongationduringzebraﬁshgastru - lation . Genes Dev . 21 , 1559 – 1571 . Wicki , A . , Lehembre , F . , Wick , N . , Hantusch , B . , Kerjaschki , D . , andChristofori , G . ( 2006 ) . Tumorinvasionintheabsence ofepithelial - mesenchymaltransition : podoplanin - mediated remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton . Cancer Cell 9 , 261 – 272 . Wolf , K . , Mazo , I . , Leung , H . , Engelke , K . , von Andrian , U . H . , Deryugina , E . I . , Strongin , A . Y . , Brocker , E . B . , and Friedl , P . ( 2003 ) . Compensation mechanism in tumor cell migration : mesenchymal - amoeboid transition after blocking of pericellular proteolysis . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 267 – 277 . Wu , J . , Yang , J . , andKlein , P . S . ( 2005 ) . Neuralcrestinductionbythecanonical Wnt pathway can be dissociated from anterior - posterior neural patterning in Xenopus . Dev . Biol . 279 , 220 – 232 . Yang , J . , Mani , S . A . , Donaher , J . L . , Ramaswamy , S . , Itzykson , R . A . , Come , C . , Savagner , P . , Gitelman , I . , Richardson , A . , and Weinberg , R . A . ( 2004 ) . Twist , a master regulator of morphogenesis , plays an essential role in tumor metas - tasis . Cell 117 , 927 – 939 . Yang , M . H . , Wu , M . Z . , Chiou , S . H . , Chen , P . M . , Chang , S . Y . , Liu , C . J . , Teng , S . C . , and Wu , K . J . ( 2008 ) . Direct regulation of TWIST by HIF - 1 a promotes metastasis . Nat . Cell Biol . 10 , 295 – 305 . Yap , A . S . , Brieher , W . M . , andGumbiner , B . M . ( 1997 ) . Molecularandfunctional analysis of cadherin - based adherens junctions . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 13 , 119 – 146 . 828 Developmental Cell 14 , June 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . Developmental Cell Review Zavadil , J . , Cermak , L . , Soto - Nieves , N . , andBottinger , E . P . ( 2004 ) . Integration of TGF - b / Smad and Jagged1 / Notch signalling in epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition . EMBO J . 23 , 1155 – 1165 . Zhou , B . P . , Deng , J . , Xia , W . , Xu , J . , Li , Y . M . , Gunduz , M . , and Hung , M . C . ( 2004 ) . Dual regulation of Snail by GSK - 3 b - mediated phosphorylation in con - trol of epithelial - mesenchymal transition . Nat . Cell Biol . 6 , 931 – 940 . Zohn , I . E . , Li , Y . , Skolnik , E . Y . , Anderson , K . V . , Han , J . , and Niswander , L . ( 2006 ) . p38 and a p38 - interacting protein are critical for downregulation of E - cadherin during mouse gastrulation . Cell 125 , 957 – 969 . Zuk , A . , andHay , E . D . ( 1994 ) . Expressionof b 1integrinschangesduringtrans - formation of avian lens epithelium to mesenchyme in collagen gels . Dev . Dyn . 201 , 378 – 393 . Developmental Cell 14 , June 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 829 Developmental Cell Review