Semantic , Lexical , and Geographic Cues are used in Geographic Fluency Janelle Szary ( jszary @ indiana . edu ) Michael N . Jones ( jonesmn @ indiana . edu ) Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences , 1101 E . 10th Street Bloomington , IN 47405 USA Abstract Semantic ﬂuency tasks have increasingly been used to probe the structure of human memory , adopting methodologies from the ecological foraging literature to describe memory as a tra - jectory through semantic space . Clusters of semantically re - lated items are often produced together , and the transitions be - tween these clusters of semantically related items are consis - tent with theories of optimal foraging , where the search pro - cess exhibits a balance between exploration and exploitation behaviors ( Hills , Jones , & Todd , 2012 ) . Here , we use a seman - tic ﬂuency memory task in which subjects recall geographic locations . For each pairwise transition , we measure tempo - ral , geographic , semantic , lexical , and phonetic distances . In general , the dimensions are loosely but reliably correlated with each other . Segmentation of the retrieval sequence into patches supports the notion that subjects strategically leave patches as within - patch resources diminish , but also suggests that sub - jects may shift their attention between different sources of in - formation , perhaps reﬂecting dynamically changing patch def - initions . Keywords : Memory search ; Semantic ﬂuency ; Optimal for - aging ; Spatial search Introduction In general , effective search strategies require a balance of both exploration and exploitation . The searcher , whether it be a bumblebee searching for nectar , or a child searching for hid - den Easter eggs , needs to know when to stop looking in one place and start looking in another . Too much exploration , in the later example , would be a situation in which the child runs wildly around the yard , but never stops to looks behind any leaves ( where the Easter eggs would be hidden ) ; Too much exploitation , on the other hand , might be a situation in which the child , ﬁnding one egg hidden in the rose bushes , spends the afternoon meticulously sorting through the roses for more eggs , and fails to search the rest of the yard . Although this ex - ample is exaggerated , it illustrates the importance of ﬁnding an appropriate balance between the two strategies : At either extreme , the child will do very poorly in an Easter egg hunt . A successful search process relies on appropriately modulat - ing between exploration and exploitation . The same principle applies to search in the cognitive do - main : At one end of the extreme , a lack of focus would make it hard to retrieve relevant information , and , at the other end of the extreme , perseveration on one piece of information would also be ineffective . The parallel between search in physical space and cognitive space is not coincidental . Signiﬁcant ev - idence suggests that the neural and molecular processes that evolved to govern search in physical space have been exapted to control goal - directed behaviors in other , cognitive modal - ities ( reviewed in Hills , 2006 ) . For example , the dopamin - ergic pathways of the basal ganglia control both cognitive attention and movement , and increases in dopamine have been associated with exploitation of resources and highly fo - cused behaviors , while reductions in dopamine have been as - sociated with exploratory or inattentive behaviors ( see Hills , 2006 ) . The exaptation hypothesis has led to the idea that there are general cognitive search mechanisms that control goal - directed search behaviors in both internal and external spaces ( Hills , Todd , & Goldstone , 2008 ) . As evidence for this claim , Hills et al . ( 2008 ) demonstrated that priming certain physical search strategies can inﬂuence cognitive search behavior . Further support for the exaptation hypothesis comes from the successful application of models from the animal forag - ing literature to cognitive search behavior . For example , in the foraging literature , a search process is considered optimal when it follows the marginal value theorem ( MVT ; Charnov , 1976 ) , in which a forager should continue exploiting a patch of resources while it continues to provide relative rewards , but should leave and switch to a new patch once the rate of rewards ( for the given patch ) drops below a long - term av - erage . Hills et al . ( 2012 ) used the semantic ﬂuency task , in which subjects are asked to name as many items from a given category as possible , to show that cognitive search is well described by MVT , where patches are clusters of se - mantically related items . As a subject’s relative success in a given semantic cluster decreases , the subject is more likely to switch to a new semantic cluster . Models of optimal forag - ing in semantic memory based on MVT have been successful in matching human performance , but they rely on the con - struction of appropriate semantic spaces and patches , which can be done in different ways with differing results ( see dis - cussion in Hills et al . , 2015 ; Abbott , Austerweil , & Grifﬁths , 2015 ) . Anecdotally , the similarity between physical and cognitive search is supported by the fact that we often describe our in - ternal , cognitive representations of information as networks or maps ( Steyvers & Tenenbaum , 2005 ; Tolman , 1948 ) . Fur - ther , there is growing support for the embodied cognition perspective that cognitive knowledge is grounded in physi - cal space . Montez , Thompson , and Kello ( 2015 ) asked par - ticipants to spatially organize a set of items produced dur - ing a previous semantic ﬂuency task , and found that the spa - tial distances correlated with the previously observed tempo - ral distances : Subjects spatially organized items the same way they had previously organized them during semantic retrieval . Louwerse and colleagues ( Recchia & Louwerse , 2014 ; Louwerse & Zwaan , 2009 ) have shown that from the statistics of language we can extract a great deal of informa - tion , such as the locations and sizes of cities . 1397 Using an extended semantic ﬂuency task where subjects spent twenty minutes retrieving the names of cities and towns from their home state of California , Szary , Kello , and Dale ( 2015 ) showed that the temporal structure of retrieval se - quences captured the geographic structure of cities in phys - ical space . Although the task is known as a ‘semantic ﬂu - ency’ task , previously we could only infer semantic informa - tion from the timing of the retrieval process . Here , we build upon the study presented in Szary et al . ( 2015 ) by computing semantic , lexical , and phonetic measures to compare to the existing geographic and temporal measures . The new analy - ses allow us to formulate new research questions . Consider the hypothesis that internal search is exapted from external search , and relies on a balance between exploration and ex - ploitation . Because physical space has a ﬁnite number of di - mensions , it is quite easy to measure exploration versus ex - ploitation behaviors in external search . By comparison , it is less straightforward how one should characterize exploration or exploitation behaviors in the high - dimensional cognitive space of an internal search . Here , we re - investigate semantic ﬂuency data along a number of dimensions : temporal , geo - graphic , semantic , lexical , and phonetic . In this exploratory study , we show that retrieval sequences do indeed contain structure along each of these dimensions . That is , when re - membering geographic information , people do , indeed , use the embodied physical structure of the information , but we can also measure their use of semantic , lexical , and even phonetic information . With regards to the optimal foraging perspective , these metrics may reﬂect different dimensions in which patches exist , highlighting a number of open questions for future work , as discussed in the conclusion . Methods Experimental Procedure Participants Participants were recruited from a subject pool of University of California , Merced undergraduate stu - dents who participated for course credit ( 4 male , 8 female ; mean age = 19 . 92 years , SD = 1 . 08 years ) , and reported be - ing native or proﬁcient English speakers . All but two partici - pants reported living in California for their whole lives , while the other two reported living in California for the majority of their lives ( 15 of 19 years , and 16 of 18 years , respec - tively ) . Subjects were comfortably seated by themselves at a table in small experiment room , and wore Shure microphone headsets . Speech was collected using an M - Audio MobilePre recording interface and Audacity software . Task Subjects completed two recall tasks , presented in counterbalanced order , each of which lasted for twenty min - utes . In one task subjects recalled items from the category of cities and towns in California , and in the other they re - called from the category of all animals . For the purposes of the present paper , we discuss only results from the category of cities and towns in California . Subjects were given the fol - lowing instructions : “Your goal [ is ] to think of as many items from [ the ] category as you can . When you think of an item , just say it out loud . You can be as speciﬁc or as general as you wish . For example , if the category were Food you could say ‘Fruit’ , and you could also say ‘Orange’ or ‘Mandarin Orange’ . But keep in mind that your goal is to recall as many different items as possible . If you are unsure if an item does or does not belong to the category , just say it anyhow , don’t spend time worrying about whether something counts or not , ” ( adapted from Rhodes & Turvey , 2007 ) . Audio Transcription The speech recordings were loaded into Praat audio analysis software for annotation , and were transcribed as in Szary et al . ( 2015 ) . That is , each recalled item was transcribed , and onset times of items were marked . Repeated items were removed . Incorrect items ( “Reno” , which is in Nevada , not California ) , geographic landmarks ( “Monterey Bay” bay , “Sierra Nevadas” mountains ) , and non - speciﬁc areas ( ”Bay Area” , which refers to several locations around the San Francisco Bay ) were removed . Pronunciation errors ( “Rancho Cucamongo” instead of the correct “Rancho Cucamonga” ) and common abbreviations ( “L . A . ” instead of the ofﬁcial “Los Angeles” ) were corrected . Districts , neigh - borhoods , planned communities and census - designated areas with names recognized by the U . S . Geological Survey ( e . g . “Hollywood” , “Downieville” ; United States Board on Geo - graphic Names , 2016 ) were retained . Measures For each dataset , inter - retrieval intervals ( IRIs ) are measured as the amount of time ( in milliseconds ) between consecu - tive recall events city i and city i + 1 , and represent the temporal distances we observed . For each transition ( city i to city i + 1 ) , we compute additional distances using geographic , semantic , phonetic , and lexical measures . Geographic Distance The latitudinal and longitudinal co - ordinates for most cities were provided by the world . cities dataset , in the maps package for the R programming language ( Becker , Wilks , Brownrigg , Minka , & Deckmyn , 2016 ) . Missing values were added by hand , and were retrieved from Wikimedia’s GeoHack tool ( Wikimedia Tool Labs Geo - Hack , 2016 ) . Geographic distances ( GDs ) are measured as the number of miles between consecutively recalled cities . GDs are calculated using the Haversine formula , which gives the great - circle distance between two points on an sphere ( Sinnott , 1984 ) . Semantic Distance Semantic similarity was calculated us - ing vector representations obtained by a Word2Vec model from the gensim package for Python ( ˇReh˚uˇrek & Sojka , 2010 ) , which was trained on the full English Wikipedia dataset , available from dumps . wikimedia . org / enwiki , 2016 . The cosine between the vectors representing two city names is taken as a measure of the semantic distance between those cities . Lexical Distance The standard Levenshtein distance , which measures the number of edits required to transform one 1398 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Retrieval rate per city F r e qu e n c y o f r e t r i e v a l r a t e Figure 1 : The number of cities that has each retrieval rate . string into another , is used as a measure of lexical distance . Phonological Distance Finally , as an exploratory measure of phonological difference , we converted city names into their four - digit soundex codes , which are approximate representa - tions of how words sound . We then compute the Levenshtein distance between these codes , which serves as our measure of phonological distance . Results Across all participants , a total of 323 unique city names were retrieved . On average , each participant retrieved 67 cities ( SD = 28 ) . Many of the cities ( n = 171 ) were retrieved only once , and only 4 cities were retrieved by all 12 subjects . Fig - ure 1 shows the number of cities with each retrieval rate . To visualize the structure in these highly variable retrieval rates , Figure 2 shows the locations of retrieved cities along with their retrieval frequencies . Distance Measures Across all transitions in our dataset , our distance measures tended to be subtly correlated . Replicating the ﬁndings from Szary et al . , 2015 , geographic similarity was positively cor - related with temporal proximity across all observed pairwise transitions , as measured by − IRI s , r ( 787 ) = 0 . 16 , p < 0 . 001 . In addition , we found that geographic similarity captured se - mantic similarity , r ( 787 ) = 0 . 13 , p < 0 . 001 . Figure 3 shows the positive correlations between geographic distance mea - sures and both semantic and temporal distance measures . As evident in this graph , semantic and temporal distances are also closely related , with r ( 787 ) = 0 . 17 , p < 0 . 001 . While temporal distance has slight positive correlations to both lex - Figure 2 : City locations and their retrieval rates . ical and phonological distance , r ( 787 ) = 0 . 12 , p < 0 . 001 and r ( 787 ) = 0 . 08 , p = 0 . 02 , respectively , neither lexical nor phonological distances are correlated with geographic dis - tance . Finally , although lexical and phonological distances are correlated , r ( 787 ) = 0 . 21 , p < 0 . 001 , they have dif - ferent relationships to the semantic distance measure . Se - mantic and phonological distances are positively correlated , r ( 787 ) = 0 . 18 , p < 0 . 001 , but semantic and lexical distances actually show a slight negative correlation , r ( 787 ) = − 0 . 09 , p < 0 . 01 . Observed Versus Randomized Distances To make sure that the distance measures differ from those that would be observed by chance , we shufﬂed each subject’s retrieval se - quence 100 times , and compared this to simulated data . For each metric , distances were greater for the shufﬂed data as compared to the original data , as seen in Figure 4 . Geo - graphic distances were greater in the shufﬂed data ( M = 172 . 7 miles ) than the observed data ( M = 115 . 0 miles ) , t ( 813 ) = − 12 . 76 , p < 0 . 001 . Semantic distances were also greater in the shufﬂed data ( M = 0 . 71 ) than the observed data ( M = 0 . 63 ) , t ( 798 ) = − 12 . 9 , p < − . 001 . Lexical distances were greater in the shufﬂed data ( M = 8 . 15 ) as compared to the observed data ( M = 8 . 39 ) , t ( 836 ) = − 2 . 81 , p < 0 . 01 . Fi - nally , phonetic distances were greater in the shufﬂed data ( M = 3 . 26 ) as compared to the observed data ( M = 3 . 35 ) , t ( 804 ) = − 2 . 94 , p < 0 . 01 . Patch Transitions Kernel density estimation was used to determine a segmen - tation threshold ( at the ﬁrst local minimum ) for each partici - pant’s IRI sequence ( M = 28 , SD = 10 seconds ) . This thresh - 1399 −0 . 6 −0 . 3 0 . 0 0 . 3 0 100 200 300 400 Geographic distance ( miles ) D i s t a n ce ( s ca l e d ) Semantic Temporal Figure 3 : Semantic and temporal distances as a function of geographic distance . For visibility ( but not in the analyses ) , semantic and temporal ranges are scaled and normalized , and geographic extremes are removed . A loess smoothing curve is ﬁt to remaining datapoints to show trends . Observed Simulated 100 150 Mean geographic distance Observed Simulated 0 . 55 0 . 60 0 . 65 0 . 70 Mean semantic distance Observed Simulated 3 . 2 3 . 3 3 . 4 Mean phonetic distance Observed Simulated 7 . 5 8 . 0 8 . 5 9 . 0 Mean lexical distance Figure 4 : Boxplots showing the differences in mean distances between the simulated and observed datasets . Geographic Lexical Phonetic Semantic Temporal 0 . 00 0 . 25 0 . 50 0 . 75 1 . 00 W B W B W B W B W B D i s t a n ce ( s ca l e d ) Figure 5 : Boxplot of group means comparing pairwise tran - sitions that occurred within patches ( ”W” ) to pairwise tran - sitions that occurred between patches ( ”B” ) . Distance mea - sures are scaled to share a common axis for illustration pur - poses only . old was used to segment retrieved items into patches . Our datasets had an average of 11 . 4 ( SD = 4 . 7 ) patches . While most patches were small ( median size = 2 ) , some were quite large ( maximum size = 51 ; M = 5 . 8 , SD = 9 . 2 ) . Figure 5 compares pairwise transitions that occurred within patches to the pairwise transitions that occurred at patch boundaries ( switches ) . Mean semantic and geographic dis - tances were both signiﬁcantly higher between patches ( at the transition points ) as compared to within patches . For seman - tic distances , M between = 0 . 71 and M within = 0 . 62 , t ( 211 ) = 5 . 80 , p < 0 . 001 ; For geographic distances M between = 162 . 2 miles and M within = 105 . 5 miles , t ( 181 ) = 4 . 56 , p < 0 . 001 . Lexical distance was slightly but signiﬁcantly higher be - tween patches ( M = 8 . 68 ) as compared to within patches ( M = 8 . 05 ) , t ( 194 ) = 2 . 94 , p < 0 . 005 . Finally , phonetic dis - tance was also slightly higher between patches ( M = 3 . 44 ) as compared to within patches ( M = 3 . 23 ) , t ( 235 ) = 3 . 10 , p < 0 . 005 . Figure 6 shows this same data , but instead of averaging across all within - patch distances , considers the transitions im - mediately preceding patch switches . Speciﬁcally , it shows av - erages for the switches ( index = 0 ) and the 9 transitions pre - ceding switches . While patch switches have higher average distances on each metric , Figure 6 suggests that there may be patterns leading up to patch switches , perhaps reﬂecting the depletion of resources available through a given metric . 1400 Geographic Lexical Phonetic Semantic Temporal 0 . 00 0 . 25 0 . 50 0 . 75 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 ( − ) Index with respect to patch switch D i s t a n ce ( s ca l e d ) Figure 6 : Bar heights show scaled averages for each distance metric at the 9 transitions preceding a patch switch , and the switch itself ( index = 0 ) . Shifting Strategies Although we focus primarily on summary statistics in this paper , our larger goal is to explore how different cues ( ge - ographic , semantic , lexical , phonetic ) interact dynamically during retrieval processes . Although a detailed quantitative analysis is beyond the scope of the present paper , Figure shows the evolution of all 4 distance metrics over the course of the trial for each subject , in service of our larger goal . While there are some similarities across participants ( such as geographic distance being relatively lower than other mea - sures ) , there are also striking differences in the way the mea - sures unfold over time for the different participants . This ob - servation is consistent with the idea that distances may reﬂect the cueing strategies underlying the search process , where ge - ographic cues would lead a subject to retrieve geographically proximal items , resulting in low geographic distances . Con - sider , as a simple example , the phonetic and semantic dis - tances for Subject 12 . Over the course of the task , semantic distances show a relative increase , while phonetic distances show a relative decrease . From the perspective that our dis - tance metrics ( in some loose way ) reﬂect the cueing strategies at work , we see that Subject 12 initially uses a semantic cue - ing strategy , thinking of items that are semantically related to one another ( perhaps listing afﬂuent cities with colleges : “La Jolla . . . Berkeley . . . Stanford” ) . But , as semantically re - lated resources are depleted , the subject switches to a pho - netic strategy ( perhaps “Stanford . . . Stanton . . . Winton” ) . General Discussion Overall , most of our distance metrics were positively corre - lated with each other . Temporal distances were correlated with geographic , semantic , lexical , and phonetic distances . Additionally , geographic distances were correlated with se - mantic distances , but not with lexical or phonetic distances . Semantic distances were correlated positively with phonetic distances , but negatively with lexical distances . Still , lexical and phonetic distances were positively correlated . 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Trial duration ( scaled ) D i s t a n ce ( s ca l e d ) Geographic Lexical Phonetic Semantic Figure 7 : Loess curve ﬁts to each metric ( scaled ) for each subject . To test whether there is geographic , semantic , phonetic , or lexical structure in the sequence of retrieved items beyond what would be observed by chance , we compared distances from the observed sequences to distances from sequences of the same items in shufﬂed orders , as in Szary et al . ( 2015 ) . 1401 For each of our distance measures , simulated datasets with randomized orders showed greater distances . That is , there is structure in the sequence of retrieved items beyond what would be expected for a random sampling of items , or if a given distance metric were unrelated . This suggests that sub - jects use each source of information to cue their retrieval pro - cesses . In the actual datasets , but not shufﬂed datasets , pair - wise transitions include items that are closely related ( on one or more metric ) . We also ﬁnd that each distance metric spikes at the transi - tions between patches , and tends to increase in the transitions leading up to patch transitions ( seeFigure 6 ) . While a quan - titative analysis is beyond the scope of the current paper , this ﬁnding is consistent with the notion that semantic search uti - lizes an optimal foraging policy . A hypothesis consistent with optimal foraging would predict that , as a forager retrieves the resources within a given semantic patch , the availabil - ity of additional resources becomes depleted , which may be reﬂected by increases in the the amount of time to ﬁnd addi - tional items in the transitions preceding patch switches . Here , we use an automatic clustering algorithm applied to the tem - poral sequence to deﬁne patches . While temporal distances are used to deﬁne the patch switches , it is difﬁcult to draw conclusions about how they may effect those switches . Vi - sual inspection of the other metrics , however , is consistent with the idea that patches are becoming increasingly sparse ( across multiple dimensions ) in the time leading up to the de - cision to switch . For the argument that search is a generalized cognitive pro - cess which relies on the appropriate balance between explo - ration and exploitation , the word appropriate is key . What makes the balance appropriate is known to change depend - ing on search context , such as whether you’re searching for randomly distributed or highly clustered resources , but it can also change dynamically over the course of a search process , such as when the resources in a given patch have been de - pleted . An open question , then , is how the different dimen - sions of relatedness ( geographic , semantic . . . ) interact in what we think of as ‘patches’ . In order to accurately character - ize the line between exploration and exploitation in cogni - tive space , future work must address how these information sources combine in patches . For example , how does a forager incorporate multidimensional information ? Are the patches themselves multidimensional ? Or do we move , orthogonally , through cue - strategies and information patches , respectively ? As increasing evidence suggests that search strategies are a domain - general process , across a number of cognitive con - texts ( Hills , Todd , & Goldstone , 2010 ; Rhodes & Turvey , 2007 ) , a complete understanding of how we leverage differ - ent cues to sift through the information in semantic memory becomes increasingly important . Acknowledgments Thank you to Fatemeh Torabi Asr and Rick Dale for assis - tance with data collection and analysis . References Abbott , J . T . , Austerweil , J . L . , & Grifﬁths , T . L . ( 2015 ) . Random walks on semantic networks can resemble optimal foraging . Psychological Review , 122 ( 3 ) , 558 - 569 . Becker , R . A . , Wilks , A . R . , Brownrigg , R . , Minka , T . P . , & Deckmyn , A . ( 2016 ) . maps : Draw geographical maps ( R package version 3 . 1 . 0 ed . ) . Retrieved 2016 , from https : / / CRAN . R - project . org / package = maps Charnov , E . L . ( 1976 ) . Optimal foraging , the marginal value theorem . Theoretical Population Biology , 9 ( 2 ) , 129 - 136 . dumps . wikimedia . org / enwiki . ( 2016 ) . Retrieved from https : / / dumps . wikimedia . org / enwiki / latest / Hills , T . ( 2006 ) . Animal foraging and the evolution of goal - directed cognition . Cognitive Science , 30 , 3 - 41 . Hills , T . , Jones , M . N . , & Todd , P . M . ( 2012 ) . Optimal for - aging in semantic memory . Psychological Review , 119 ( 2 ) , 431 - 440 . Hills , T . , Todd , P . M . , & Goldstone , R . L . ( 2008 ) . Search in external and internal spaces : Evidence for generalized cognitive search processes . Psychological Science , 19 ( 8 ) , 802 - 808 . Hills , T . , Todd , P . M . , Lazer , D . , Redish , A . D . , Couzin , I . D . , & Group , T . C . S . R . ( 2015 ) . Exploration versus exploita - tion in space , mind , and society . Trends in Cognitive Sci - ences , 19 ( 1 ) , 46 - 54 . Louwerse , M . M . , & Zwaan , R . A . ( 2009 ) . Language encodes geographical information . Cognitive Science , 33 , 51 - 73 . Montez , P . , Thompson , G . , & Kello , C . T . ( 2015 ) . The role of semantic clustering in optimal memory foraging . Cognitive Science , 39 ( 8 ) , 1925 - 1939 . Recchia , G . , & Louwerse , M . ( 2014 ) . Grounding the un - grounded : Estimating locations of unknown place names from linguistic associations and grounded representations . In P . Bello , M . Guarini , M . McShane , & B . Scassellati ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the 36th annual conference of the cognitive science society ( p . 1270 - 1275 ) . Austin , TX : Cog - nitive Science Society . ˇReh ˚ u ˇ rek , R . , & Sojka , P . ( 2010 , May 22 ) . Software Frame - work for Topic Modelling with Large Corpora . In Pro - ceedings of the LREC 2010 Workshop on New Challenges for NLP Frameworks ( pp . 45 – 50 ) . Valletta , Malta : ELRA . ( http : / / is . muni . cz / publication / 884893 / en ) Rhodes , T . , & Turvey , M . T . ( 2007 ) . Human memory retrieval as l´evy foraging . Physica A : Satistical Mechanics and its Applications , 385 ( 1 ) , 255 - 260 . Sinnott , R . W . ( 1984 ) . Virtues of the haversine . Sky and Telescope , 68 ( 2 ) , 159 . Steyvers , M . , & Tenenbaum , J . B . ( 2005 ) . The large - scale structure of semantic networks : Statistical analyses and a model of semantic growth . Cognitive Science , 29 , 41 - 78 . Szary , J . , Kello , C . , & Dale , R . ( 2015 ) . Memory foraging in a spatial domain . In Proceedings of the 37th annual confer - ence of the cognitive science society . Austin , TX : Cognitive Science Society . Tolman , E . C . ( 1948 ) . Cognitive maps in rats and men . Psy - chological Review , 55 , 189 - 208 . United states board on geographic names . ( 2016 ) . Retrieved from geonames . usgs . gov Wikimedia tool labs geohack . ( 2016 ) . Retrieved from https : / / www . mediawiki . org / wiki / GeoHack 1402