I n f e n t u t f c d J d JOT efmlIly 6 ) Heahh Cmc . VoL 8 . NO . 5 . pp . 491 - 497 , 1996 Pergamon cupwight o 1 5 9 6 ~ b e v 1 c r ~ L t d . M rights - Rind in Grat Brirrin PIk s1 - 13534505 / 96 515 . 00 + 0 . 00 Cultural Safety in Nursing : the New Zealand Experience ELAINE PAPPS * and wives . Cultural safety was defined at that time as I R W E T I RAMSDENT The effective nursing of a person / family from another culture by a nursc who has undertaken Nursing and Midwifery Department , Otago a proctss of reflection on own cultural identity Polytechnic , Dunedin , New Zealand and rtcognises the impact of the nurses ' culture on own nursing practice [ I ] . t Ngai Tahu / Rangitane , Nursing Educationalist , Wellington , New Zealand The Nursing Council of New Zealand is empowered by the Nurses Act 1977 to govern a concept of d ~ dety - from the nur ~ es and midwives through setting and mon - , . . , lad of N ~ ~ sodety . ln itoring standards to ensure safe and competent respom to poor of b o d , the care for the public of New Zealand . Cultural we - of N ~ ~ z e a u and safety was seen as one aspect of safe nursing and that sedce deliVery change profooodly , midwifery practice and was introduced into n - has begun a process of examination nursing and midwifery education courses as one d change in n m h g education , prompted by of the outcomes required of each applicant for Maori nurses . registration as a nurse or midwife . It attracted N * midaw o r g h d o m movd to considerable and unprecedented attention to the wport fi initiative es somm oshi & spoke content and process of nursing education , and my of nm and N ~ ~ dty . there was extraordinary public debate about this c u l ~ dety we a for nm issue . There were claims that large amounts of and middery comges 1 ~ . its htrodoc time were being devoted to cultural safety in don into n - docation has been controv - . nursing curricula at the expense of more " tradi - became him publidzed in nstiod medi % tional " aspects of nursing education and that , as andhmle & fmrction ofthe ~ - fi & of a m u k the standard of the graduates of New Zealand was qnestioned . comprehensive nursing courses was compro - pper discasses N ~ ~ a expe , + mised . Public debate was fuelled by the media of ~ u d n g dm dety into nmsfng and cultural saiety became assmiated with the docotion . apmt 0 1 % wder sci - terms " political correctness " and " social engi - LM . neering " [ 2 ] . Between 1992 and 1995 the media focus on cultural safety raised doubts in the ~ e y words : New Zealand , Maori , nursing , nursing minds of the public and politicians about the education , cultural safety . quality of nursing education and the role of the Nursing Council of New Zealand in ensuring INTRODUCIlON appropriate standards in nursing education pre - registration courses . In July 1995 a Select In 1992 the Nursing Council of New Zealand Committee of the New Zealand Parliament made cultural safety a requirement for nursing commenced an inquiry into the cultural safety and midwifery education courses which prepare component of the nursing education curriculum . individuals for registration as nurses and mid - This paper discusses what cultural safety is , why Rca ! ivui 3 April 1996 , accepted 13 August 1996 . * Corwspndtnce should bi & d to : Elaine P a m 37 B Rmd , Maod W , - , NW U . Tel : 64 3 467 2608 . Fax : 64 3 467 2608 . D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / i n t qh c / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 8 / 5 / 491 / 1843006 b y gue s t on 18 D e c e m be r 2018 492 E . Papps and I . Ramsden it is a quality issue and the controversy and Despite promises of equality embodied in the confusion surrounding its introduction into Treaty of Waitangi , there is evidence that the nursing education in New Zealand . tangata whenua have not received the same benefit from the health semce as non - Maori . A report on Maori standards of health published in BACKGROUND 1988 identified that Maori were culturally , socially and economically disadvantaged . This safety addresses in health was reflected in high unemployment levels , poor care through issues of communication and ' access to the health service [ 3 ] . Nurses may be educational achievement and significantly high the first health professional people meet , hence rates of physical and mental illness [ a . Soon the attitude a nurse portrays , if it is one of after the release of the report , the Director - criticism , blame or assumption , whether General of Health acknowledged that these expressed knowingly or unknowingly , may statistics reflected the deterioration in Maori make a person feel dememed and engender health aRer 150 years of European influence in feelings of reluctance either to seek health care New Zealand [ A . Clearly there was an urgent or to return to a particular health service [ 4 ] . need to redress the status of Maori health and The introduction of cultural safety into nur - education was an obvious place to begin . sing and midwifery education developed from a concern to develop ways of dealing with " social , THE INTRODUCTION OF economic , political , historical and often emo - CULTURAL SAFETY INTO tional reasons for the high incidence of rheu - NURSING EDUCATION matic heart disease , the rates of asthma deaths , cot deaths , mental hospital readmission rates , uptake of tobacco smoking among young women , the rapid rise in high risk behaviours and suicide , in which one section of the New Zealand population far exceeds the rest . The people in this sector are Maori " [ 3 ] . New Zealand was colonized by Great Britain during the middle of the nineteenth century . In 1840 a treaty was signed , the Treaty of Waitangi , which provided guarantees that the indigenous people ( the tangata whenua ) would have certain rights . The Treaty of Waitangi Act 1975 and its 1985 amendment requires statutory bodies and government departments to conduct their activ - ities in a manner consistent with the Treaty . In the health semce all Ministry of Health policy documents speclfy the priority of Maori health and involvement of Maori and the funding of Maori health initiatives are requested in the four Regional Health Authorities which fund the provision of health services in New Zealand . In addition , the New Zealand Government has affirmed that the Treaty of Waitangi is the founding document of New Zealand and stated its goal for Maori health as Nurses in New Zealand had begun to identify the need to address problems of Maori health through the education of nurses , and through a commitment to biculturalism in the 1980s . A workshop in 1986 which reviewed the prepara - tion and initial employment of nurses recom - mended that participation of more Maori nurses in the nursing workforce was essential [ 8 ] . In 1987 a Maori nurse advisor and educationalist was seconded to the Department of Education to assist in the development of guidelines for cumculum in nursing education . Various formal and informal hui ( meetings ) , which were widely supported by nurse educators were held throughout New Zealand to discuss these cum - culum matters [ 9 ] . Formalisation of the concept of cultural safety began in 1988 at a hui in Christchurch , which was attended by nurse educators and Maori student nurses . A hrther hui was held during 1989 for Maori nurse teachers , and from this hui a group of Maori nurses were nominated to prepare a set of cultural safety standarc $ The standards that were developed were known as " Kawa Whakaruruhau " which translates into cultural safety . In 1991 the Nursing Council of To improve Maori health status so that in the New Zealand resolved ta make cultural safety a future Maori will have the opportunity to enjoy requirement in the state examinations for nurses at least the same level of health as non - Maori and midwives and it commissioned the writing of [ % guidelines to assist in the implementation of D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / i n t qh c / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 8 / 5 / 491 / 1843006 b y gue s t on 1 8 D e c e m be r 2018 Cultural safety in nursing 493 cultural safety into the education of nurses and - not to blame the victims of historical and midwives . These guidelines and the term Kawa social processes for their current plight ; Whakanuuhau were formally adopted by the - to product a workforce of well educated , Nursing Council in February 1992 [ lo ] . self - aware registered nurses and midwives who are culturally safe to practice [ lo ] . THE RATIONALE FOR CULTURAL SAFETY IN NURSING EDUCATION DmONS On completion of a nursing education pro - gramme in New Zealand , generations of nurse graduates swore the ( now obsolete ) Florence Nightingale oath which stated that people should be nursed " regardless " of colour or d . Traditionally , nurses were educated not to recognise people ' s differences in the provision of nursing care . However , it is now believed that health professionals who operate from assump tions and stereotypical attitudes place the health of the people they care for at risk and seriously impair semce delivery . Cultural safety requires that nurses care for people " regardful " of those things which make them unique [ 3 ] . The teaching ofcultural safety is designed to challenge students to identify that there are other ways in which It is helpful at this point to look at the way in which the concept of cultural safety has been constructed . The term " culture " is used in its broadest sense within the concept of cultural safety and incorporates many elements , such as a particular way of living in the world , attitudes , behaviours , links and relationships with others [ lo ] . The nursing literature in New Zealand does not confine cultural values to the concept of ethnicity . Cultural values are defined as : " Morals , beliefs , attitudes and standards that derive from a particular cultural group . Culture is not seen as ethno specific , but must include groups from within cultures , e . g . cultures of class , socialisation , sexual orientation , age etc " r i 11 people experience life and view the world . The guidelines developed by the Nursing Council of New Zealand for the teaching of cultural safety to nursing and midwifery students makes this clear Being a member of a culture surrounds each person with a set of activities , values and experiences which are considered to be real and normal . People evaluate and define mem - bers of other cultural groups according to their own norms . When one group far outnumbers another , or has the power to impose its own nonns and values upon another , a state of serious imbalance m which threatens the identity , security and the ease of other cultural groups , thus creating a state of disease [ lo ] . Within an educational programme , students identify social and personal attitudes , and have an opportunity to examine their own beliefs , values and assumptions about other people . The focus of cultural safety teaching is to educate student nurses and student midwives : - to examine their own realities and the attitudes they bring to each new person they encounter in their practice ; - to be open minded and flexible in their attitudes toward people who are different from themselves , to whom they offer or deliver senice ; 1 ' ' 1 . The tern " safety " is common in relation to the practice of health professionals to refer to whether someone is safe and / or competent in practice . The Nursing Council of New Zealand has clearly stated expectations of safety in nursing and midwifery practice . Safety is defined as " . . . nursing or midwifery action to protect from danger and / or reduce risk to patientlclientl community from hazards to health and well - being . It includes regard for the physical , mental , scxial , spiritual and cultural components of the patient / client and the environment " [ 12 ] . Unsafe nursing or midwifery practice on the other hand is defined as " . . . any action or omission which endangers the wellbeing , demeans the person or disempowers the cultural identity of the patient / client " [ 12 ] . CULTURAL SAFETY AND QUALITY Cultural safety in nursing and midwifery education and practice provides a focus for the delivery of quality care through changes in thinking about power relationships and patients ' rights . The skill for nurses and midwives does not lie in knowing the customs of ethnoqxcific cultures . Rather , cultural safety places an obli - D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / i n t qh c / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 8 / 5 / 491 / 1843006 b y gue s t on 1 8 D e c e m be r 2018 494 E . Papps and I . Ramsden gation on the nurse or midwife to provide care within the framework of recognizing and respecting the difference of any individual . But it is not the nurse or midwife who determines the issue of safety . It is consumers or patients who decide whether they feel safe with the care that has been given [ 3 ] . Cultural safety within nursing and midwifery addresses power relationships between the service provider and the people who use the service . It empowers the users of the service to express degrees of felt risk or safety . Someone who feels unsafe will not be able to take full advantage of the primary health care service offered and may , therefore , avoid the service until dramatic and expensive secondary or tertiary intervention is required [ 3 ] . The idea of cultural safety : Assumes that each health care relationship between a professional and a consumer is unique , power - laden and culturally dyadic . From this perspective , whenever two people m e t in health care interactions , it inevitably involves the convergena of two cultures . This bicultural component not only involves unequal power and different statuses but it also often involves two cultures with differing colonial histories , ethnicities or levels of material ad - vantage [ 13 ] . CONFUSION AND CONTROVERSY to the media by an ex - student of a polytechnic ' s nursing course who had not met requirements for continuation in the course . It was asserted that the course requirements had not been met because of " failing a hui " [ 14 ] . The issue was fundamentally between the student and the polytechnic , but the media chose to incite public debate about " political correctness " in nursing education . The publication of the view - point of a tutor in a nursing department of a polytechnic in 1995 resulted in further media attention and again put the issue of cultural safety and the Nursing Council of New Zealand in a negative light . Attention focussed on the tutor ' s complaint that standards were not being met because large amounts of time were being taken up with cultural safety at the expense of some areas of nursing [ lq . With the attention given to both of these situations the credibility of nursing education in general , and graduates of nursing education courses in particular , was compromised . In the sometimes vitriolic public debate that followed , there was little recognition given to the positive aims of cultural safety . Sadly , some nurses ( either knowingly or unknowingly ) provided neither support nor illumination to the concept , but instead referred to their own days of training when everyone was treated the same . Others provided anecdotal examples of their negative experiences as students . In addition , the content From the outset , the introduction of cultural and number of hours of " nursing " in relation to safety into nursing cumcula seemed to be the number of hours of " cultural safety " in surrounded by controversy . Much of this was a nursing education courses was challenged . It was strong media reaction which represented ill the content of nursing courses which seemed to informed and biased criticism . An example of be the issue of concern for a student in a nursing course at a polytechnic in Auckland , who at a the way the lmxlia portrayed the i ~ mduction of regional of a cultural safety into nursing education highlights its distortion : tioned the need to know about the relationship between colonization and disease in nursing From November , student nurses may fail their State Final registration exams if they don ' t follow the party line on Treaty of Waitangi objectives . From this year 20 per cent of the State Final examination will be on something called " cultural safety " , a concept involving sensitivity to Maori ( but not Pacific Island , Indian , Chinese or any other minority ) cultural differences , anti - racism , and a liberal interpre - tation of the Treaty of Waitangi [ 2 ] . Further media attention about cultural safety occurred in 1993 following the release of a letter education and challenged the amount of timi dedicated to cultural safety , which , it was claimed , compromised the important aspects of nursing education [ lq . Not surprisingly , the result of this was further media attention to , and devaluing of , cultural safety . The efforts of the Nursing Council of New Zealand to provide factual information were thwarted . The press and cartoonists , combined with television and talkback radio , produced powerful negative and sometimes offensive images of nurses and nursing . D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / i n t qh c / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 8 / 5 / 491 / 1843006 b y gue s t on 1 8 D e c e m be r 2018 Cultural safety in nursing 495 It was not long after this third outbreak of media attention to cultural safety that the Education and Science Select Committee of the New Zealand Parliament became involved with cultural safety . This Committee is able to hear public submissions on issues which come under its jurisdiction , in this instance the issue of nursing education and make recommendations to Parliament . This committee announced it was to investigate the cultural safety component of nursing education in New Zealand nursing education courses . In July 1995 the Nursing Council of New Zealand was called to account to this Committee . The Council had , however , taken note of the comments about confusion and controversy in relation to the teaching of cultural safety and established an independent committee to investigate concerns that had become apparent , particularly in the interpreta - tion of the guidelines for the teaching of cultural language ( Te Reo ) or customs ( Tikanga ) , and this was made clear by the Nursing Council of New Zealand . Nonetheless this did little to dispel the confusion between the content of curricula and state final questions . There was a view that nurses were not able to be employed immediately following graduation . Rather than recognising that employment of new graduates was more to do with radical changes in the health system ( the health reforms ) , employment issues were con - fused with a notion that cultural safety was replacing the " medical " aspects of nursing education , which made new graduates inferior [ 2 ] . Overlooked in the debate about cultural safety and nursing education is the right - wing conservatism presently apparent in New Zeal - and which has altered the relationship of the State to social services . Cultural safety has in one sense , been scapegoated . safety . This committee , following its review , IS THE NEW ZEALAND CONCEFT which included visiting all the I5 polytechnics OF CULTURAL Sm which offer nursing and midwifery courses , reported its findings back to the Council in APPROPRIATE ? September 1995 . Before this happened , however , the Select Committee called for public submis - sions on the matter of cultural safety . A further appearance by the Nursing Council of New Zealand in October presented the rtcommenda - tions of the committee reviewing cultural safety teaching [ I 7 . The proposed enquiry into cultural safety by the Parliamentary Select Committee was suspended , until a report from the Nursing Council concerning the implementation of the eight recommendations of the review was received . A final decision was made about the enquiry proceeding in August 1 996 [ 1 81 . The requirement for cultural safety to be part of the nursing cumculum and included in the state final examination clearly created contro - versy and confusion . The number of hours dedicated to cultural safety in each nursing cumculum provoked a great deal of distorted discussion and some untrue , grossly inflated figures were debated in the media , through letters to the editor and during talkback radio . These exaggerated claims of time devoted to cultural safety were publicly refuted [ 19 ] . The first group of students to undertake the registra - tion examinations in which cultural safety was " tested " did so in November 1992 . The exam - ination questions do not directly assess Maori Cultural safety does not place an emphasis on sensitivity or awareness . Cultural sensitivity and cultural awareness are both concerned with having knowledge about cultural but , more specifically , ethnic diversity . It is this that seems to be the basis of misinterpretation of the concept of cultural safety . The term " culture " is taken to mean " ethnicity " , and in New Zealand culture is seen to be Maori . Cultural safety raises the issue of racism . It d m address race relations , and this causes pain both for those who may acknowledge racism and for those who deny its existence . The confusion about cultural safety , that it is concerned with students learning Maori customs and language and a concept known as " trans - cultural nursing " have become merged into the debate about what cultural safety means . An approach to ethnicity and nursing referred to as " transcultural " has been introduced through the work of Madeleine Leininger , an American nurse [ 20 ] . This , however , is a different concept from cultural safety . Transcultural nursing suggests that to work effectively with clients of other cultures it is necessary to include ethno specific knowledge . In the New Zealand context , and given the Treaty of Waitangi , transcultural nursing would be an example of continuing D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / i n t qh c / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 8 / 5 / 491 / 1843006 b y gue s t on 1 8 D e c e m be r 2018 E . Papps and I . Ramsden colonial behaviour which acceptance of the Treaty endeavours to address . Nurses and mid - wives have developed the concept of cultural safety in the New Zealand context . Since its introduction in 1992 , the concept of cultural safety has continued to be refined . Its primary focus remains on improving the health status of all people of New Zealand through the relationship between Maori and the Crown based on the Treaty of Waitangi . But it has been further developed to include an emphasis on the relationship between nurses , midwives and health service consumers who differ from them by : - age or generation - gender - sexual orientation - socioeconomic status - ethnic origin - religious or spiritual belief - disability [ 21 ] . The inclusion of these categories highlights the use of the term " culture " in its broadest sense . Nurses cannot provide quality , patient focused care if they have unconscious negative attitudes towards patients who are different from them in any of these categories . CONCLUSION There is a real paradox in the statutory recognition given to the Treaty of Waitangi , and reaction to the introduction of cultural safety into nursing and midwifery education . The Minister of Health for New Zealand , the Hon . J e ~ y Shipley , in endorsing draft guide - lines for cultural safety in nursing and midwifery education commented that the nursing and midwifery professions in New Zealand are leading the world in addressing issues of trans - femng power from providers to consumers [ 22 ] . But it is a new concept which has yet to be fully evaluated . The Nursing Council of New Zealand plans to monitor the implementation of new guidelines which relate to the teaching of cultural safety [ 23 ] . The real test of its efficacy in nursing and midwifery will be in practice , where consumers will judge . That has yet to happen . 1 . Nursing Council of New Zealand , Strmdards for registration of comprehensive muses from poly - technic courses . Glossary , Nursing Council of New Zmland , Wellington , 1992 . 2 . Du Chateau C , Culture Shock . Metro 1992 ; 132 : 96 - 106 . 3 . Ramsden I , Cultural Safety : Implunmting the Concept . Paper presented at The Social Force of Nursing and Midwifery Conference , Wellington , May 1995 . 4 . Saxon K , Students support cultural safety . Kai Tiaki : Nursing New Zealmrd 1995 ; 1 : 24 . 5 . Department of Health , R3raia te ora mo te iwi : Sm ' w for the good health of the people . Depart - ment of Health , Wellington , 1992 . 6 . Pomare E and de Boer G , Hrmora : Maori health strmdmdr . A study of the years 1970 - 1984 . Special Rtport Series 78 , Medical Research Council of New Zealand , Wellington , 1988 . 7 . Chapman K Huaora , An indictment on social equity . New Zealand Nwsmg Journal : Kai Tiaki 1988 ; 81 : 16 - 18 . 8 . National Action Group , Bicultural develop mmt in nursing : guidelines . National Action Group of the Review of the Preparation and Initial Ekployment of Nurses , ~ e k n g t o n , 1991 . 9 . Thompson S . Cultural safety and caring ethics . Nursing Practise in New Zealand ( submitted ) . Nursing Council of New Zealand . Kowa Wha - karwd & : Guidelines for masing and mimvifcry education . Nursing Council of New Zealand , Wellington , 1992 . New Zealand Nurses Organisation , C & of Ethics . New Zealand Nurses Organisation , Well - ington , 1995 . Nursing Council of New Zealand , Code of conduct for mases and midwives . Nursing Council of New Zealand , Wellington , 1995 . Kerns R and Dyck I , Cultural Safety , Bicultur - alism and nursing education in Aotearoa / New Zealand . In : Health and Social Care in the Commrotiry ( In press ) . Penn A , The Press , July 1993 . Stabb B , How I became culturally unsafe . The Evening Post , 29 May 1995 . The Dominion . Cultural safety inquiry possible . 26 June 1995 . Murchie E and Spoonley P , Report of the Nursing Council of New Zealand on cultwal safety and musing education in New Zealand . Cultural Safety Review Committee , Nursing Council of New Zealand , Wellington , 1995 . Austin , The Hon . Margaret , Cultural Safety Inquiry Susprnded Media Statement , NZ House of Representatives , 10 October , 1995 . Association of Polytechnics in New Zealand . Submission to the Education and Scienix Select Committee , Wellington , 14 July , 1995 . Leininger M , Culture care diversity and univers - D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / i n t qh c / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 8 / 5 / 491 / 1843006 b y gue s t on 1 8 D e c e m be r 2018 Cultural safety in nursing 497 ulity : a theory of nursing . New York , National 22 . Shipley . The Hon . Jenny , Minister of Health . League for Nursing Press , 1991 . Address to meeting on cultural safety in nursing 21 . Ramsden I , The Treaty of Waitangi and cultural education , Wellington , 1 May 1996 . safety . In : Drdt Guiailines for the culturalsafety 23 . Nursing Council of New Zealand . Drafr Guidr - component m musing and midrvlfery ekation . lines for the cultural safety component in nursing Nursing Council of New Zealand , Wellington , mrd & ifcry education , Nursing Council of March 1996 . New Zealand , Wellington , March , 1996 . D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / i n t qh c / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 8 / 5 / 491 / 1843006 b y gue s t on 1 8 D e c e m be r 2018