The Actin Regulators Involved in the Function and Related Diseases of Lymphocytes Jianxuan Sun 1 , 2 † , Xingyu Zhong 1 † , Xiaoyu Fu 1 † , Heather Miller 3 , Pamela Lee 4 , Bing Yu 1 * and Chaohong Liu 1 * 1 Department of Pathogen Biology , School of Basic Medicine , Tongji Medical College , Huazhong University of Science and Technology , Wuhan , China , 2 Department and Institute of Urology , Tongji Hospital , Tongji Medical College , Huazhong University of Science and Technology , Wuhan , China , 3 Cytek Biosciences , R & D Clinical Reagents , Fremont , CA , United States , 4 Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine , Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine , The University of Hong Kong , Hong Kong , Hong Kong SAR , China Actin is an important cytoskeletal protein involved in signal transduction , cell structure and motility . Actin regulators include actin - monomer - binding proteins , Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome ( WAS ) family of proteins , nucleation proteins , actin ﬁ lament polymerases and severing proteins . This group of proteins regulate the dynamic changes in actin assembly / disassembly , thus playing an important role in cell motility , intracellular transport , cell division and other basic cellular activities . Lymphocytes are important components of the human immune system , consisting of T - lymphocytes ( T cells ) , B - lymphocytes ( B cells ) and natural killer cells ( NK cells ) . Lymphocytes are indispensable for both innate and adaptive immunity and cannot function normally without various actin regulators . In this review , we ﬁ rst brie ﬂ y introduce the structure and fundamental functions of a variety of well - known and newly discovered actin regulators , then we highlight the role of actin regulators in T cell , B cell and NK cell , and ﬁ nally provide a landscape of various diseases associated with them . This review provides new directions in exploring actin regulators and promotes more precise and effective treatments for related diseases . Keywords : actin regulators , T cell , B cell , NK cell , WAS 1 INTRODUCTION Actin is a highly conserved protein that is abundantly expressed in most eukaryotic cells . Like intermediate ﬁ laments and microtubules , actin is a major component of the cytoskeleton and plays an extremely signi ﬁ cant role in the structure , motility , activation and maintenance of cells . Actin exists in the form of monomers ( globular actin or G - actin ) or ﬁ lamentous polymers ( ﬁ lamentous actin or F - actin ) . G - actin is formed by a polypeptide chain containing 375 amino acid residues , which can be structurally divided into two parts : the endostructural domain and the exostructural domain ( 1 ) . There are two clefts between these two domains , the nucleotide - binding cleft and the target - binding cleft , which binds to nucleotides and proteins , respectively , to regulate the activity of actin . F - actin is a right - handed helical structure consisting of two chains coiled around each other ( 2 ) . G - actin and F - actin can interconvert through polymerization and depolymerization , and this process often requires the assistance of several regulatory proteins Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 799309 1 Edited by : Fre ´ de ´ ric Rieux - Laucat , INSERM U1163 Institut Imagine , France Reviewed by : Narcisa Martinez Quiles , Complutense University of Madrid , Spain Shoichiro Ono , Emory University , United States * Correspondence : Bing Yu yubing @ hust . edu . cn Chaohong Liu chaohongliu80 @ 126 . com † These authors have contributed equally to this work and share ﬁ rst authorship Specialty section : This article was submitted to Primary Immunode ﬁ ciencies , a section of the journal Frontiers in Immunology Received : 21 October 2021 Accepted : 01 February 2022 Published : 16 March 2022 Citation : Sun J , Zhong X , Fu X , Miller H , Lee P , Yu B and Liu C ( 2022 ) The Actin Regulators Involved in the Function and Related Diseases of Lymphocytes . Front . Immunol . 13 : 799309 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fimmu . 2022 . 799309 REVIEW published : 16 March 2022 doi : 10 . 3389 / fimmu . 2022 . 799309 and the involvement of various small molecules . ATP - bound G - actin has greater af ﬁ nity and nucleation when interacting with nucleation proteins , such as the Arp2 / 3 complex , which form stable oligomers consisting of three to four monomers ( 3 ) that are then extended and assembled into F - actin . Simultaneously , F - actin undergoes depolymerization via the hydrolysis of ATP . The rate of actin polymerization and depolymerization depends on the available concentration of G - actin and ATP . Due to the polarity of F - actin , in order to extend a ﬁ lament in one direction , the rate of polymerization at the one end ( barbed end ) , must be relatively faster than the depolymerization at the other end ( pointed end ) . This phenomenon , known as “ treadmilling ” ( 4 ) , maintains the dynamic equilibrium between G - actin and F - actin . As an important component of micro ﬁ laments , actin plays a critical role in the maintenance of cell structure ( 5 ) . Under the action of “ treadmilling ” , ﬁ laments extend at barbed ends , forming protrusions at the leading edge of the cell ( 6 ) . This is the basis for the formation of lamellipodia , microvilli and ﬁ lopodia ( 7 ) , which are necessary for cell motility and food intake . Together with other molecules , actin is also involved in cellular endocytosis ( 8 ) . In addition , actin also interacts with myosin . Myosin has ATPase activity and hydrolyzes ATP to generate energy , leading to the sliding of actin and myosin ﬁ laments against each other , thus generating the tension required for the basic mechanism of muscle contraction ( 9 ) . Similar processes are also present in non - muscle cells , and the resulting contractile force is important for cell migration , cytoplasmic division , or other biological processes . Actin regulators are a series of proteins that control the assembly / disassembly dynamics of actin for cell motility , intracellular transport , muscle contraction , cellular structure maintenance , cytokinesis and other fundamental cell activities . Well studied actin regulators include : 1 ) Actin Capping Proteins that interact with actin and regulate the capping of the ends of actin polymers , 2 ) Actin Depolymerizing Factors that severe and depolymerize actin ﬁ laments , 3 ) Actin - Related Protein 2 / 3 Complex ( Arp2 / 3 ) that nucleates branched actin , and 4 ) Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome Protein ( WASP ) Family that interacts with and activates Arp2 / 3 ( Figure 1 ) ( 10 ) . Lymphocytes are an important constituent of leukocytes in humans , and include T lymphocytes ( T cells ) , B lymphocytes ( B cells ) and natural killer cells ( NK cells ) that play an essential role in both innate and adaptive immunity ( 11 ) . T lymphocytes are divided into T helper cells ( Th cells ) , cytotoxic T cells ( CTLs ) , regulatory T cells ( Tregs ) and other subsets according to biomarkers on the cell membrane and their functions , which are mainly involved in cell - mediated immunity . However , they are also indispensable in humoral immunity via their helper effector functions , such as cytokines release . Whereas B lymphocytes are the major players of humoral immunity and the exclusive source of antibodies ( 12 , 13 ) , NK cells are crucial to the innate immune system , which function in a cell - mediated and cytotoxic way that is essential in defending against tumors and viral infections ( 13 ) . These three types of lymphocytes help form a sophisticated immune network to recognize and eliminate non - self antigens , thus maintaining the stability of the internal environment in humans . In lymphocytes , actin is of great signi ﬁ cance for cell activation , adhesion , and migration ( 14 – 18 ) . For example , the actin cytoskeleton can mediate the formation of the supramolecular activation cluster ( SMAG ) or cap ( 15 ) , which in the case of leukocytes , is the cellular immune synapse ( IS ) ( 19 ) that exerts regulatory effects on cellular signaling ( 15 ) . In particular , actin plays an essential role in the developmental maturation of T cells . Studies have shown that Pak2 - mediated actin cytoskeleton remodeling is important for T cell maturation in the thymus ( 20 ) . In B cells , actin is involved in the regulation of B cell receptor ( BCR ) clustering , IS formation , antigen internalization and presentation ( 21 ) . Concurrently , BCR - mediated antigen transport in B cells is also actin - dependent ( 22 ) . In addition , differences in actin kinetics in various B cell subsets contribute to their speci ﬁ c regulation of activation ( 16 ) . In NK cells , actin can be induced to reorganize by upstream signaling molecules , triggering downstream biological processes , such as granule polarization , synapse formation and target cell lysis ( 23 ) , and the density of the actin cytoskeleton mediates the cytotoxic effects of NK cells ( 24 ) . Thus , the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton is essential to the function and stability of the human immune system . In this review , we will provide an overview of the structures and functions of several important actin regulators and how they play an important role in lymphocytes and regulating the human immune system ( Figure 2 ) . And we will also introduce some diseases related to the de ﬁ ciency or dysfunction of these proteins and potential targets for treatment . 2 STRUCTURE AND BASIC FUNCTION 2 . 1 Actin - Monomer - Binding Proteins 2 . 1 . 1 Pro ﬁ lin Found by Carlsson in 1976 , pro ﬁ lin is a 12 - 15 kDa protein ubiquitously expressed in eukaryotic cells of a large variety of organisms and highly expressed under hyperoxia condition ( 25 , 26 ) . In different organisms , pro ﬁ lins have a highly conserved structure : 7 b - pleated - sheets and 4 helices ( 27 ) , and have 4 isoforms containing 100 - 130 amino acids . Pro ﬁ lin I is expressed in many cell types while other isoforms have tissue speci ﬁ city : pro ﬁ lin II is brain - speci ﬁ c and the expression of mouse pro ﬁ lin III and IV is in testis , while pro ﬁ lin III can also be found in rat kidney ( 28 – 31 ) . At the cellular level , pro ﬁ lins localize in the ruf ﬂ es of peripheral lamellae and the nascent stress ﬁ bers of spreading cells , but not in peripheral belts of stationary cells in epithelioid sheets , and it is likely that pro ﬁ lin levels are higher in areas of active actin dynamics ( 32 , 33 ) . The major ligands of pro ﬁ lin are actin monomers , N - WASp / WAVE , PI ( 4 , 5 ) - P2 and poly - L - proline ( 34 ) . Phosphorylation at the residue threonine 89 of pro ﬁ lin by protein kinase A ( PKA ) enables enhanced binding to actin and poly - L - proline but has no effect on phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PIP2 ) ( 35 , 36 ) . Besides PKA , pro ﬁ lin can also be phosphorylated by Sun et al . Actin Regulators in Lymphocytes Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 799309 2 Rho - associated kinase ( ROCK ) and dephosphorylated at Ser - 137 by Protein phosphatase 1 ( PP1 ) ( 37 ) . Pro ﬁ lins play an important role in cell development , motility , membrane traf ﬁ cking and signal transduction via binding to different ligands ( 38 ) . Pro ﬁ lin ’ s main function is promoting actin polymerization ( 39 ) . By binding to and changing the af ﬁ nity of actin monomers , pro ﬁ lins slow down the elongation , thus optimizing the process of actin polymerization ( 40 ) . This mechanism of action speeds up nucleotide exchange , which acts opposite of thymosin - b 4 ( 41 ) . In addition , pro ﬁ lins can also enhance microtubule growth directly and take part in single cell wound repair ( 42 , 43 ) . Different isoforms have their speci ﬁ c functions . Pro ﬁ lin I and II play opposite roles in cell motility , migration and membrane protrusion , whereby pro ﬁ lin I principally enhances these processes while pro ﬁ lin II suppresses them ( 44 ) . As pro ﬁ lin can regulate actin polymerization , it plays a crucial role in cell migration ( 45 , 46 ) . As for its interaction with WASp - interacting protein ( WIP ) , proteins like Mena and vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ( VASP ) can directly bind pro ﬁ lin through a proline - rich Actin Based Motility ( ABM ) motif , such as APPPPP ( 47 – 49 ) . WASP - WIP ’ s function of regulating actin polymerization may be heightened by recruiting pro ﬁ lin to ABM - 2 motifs on WIP ( 45 ) . Also , in mammalian cell lines , pro ﬁ lin directly binds to actin monomers to sequester them when actin barbed ends are capped , this activity assures that the G - actin pool will not be monopolized by Arp2 / 3 and thereby formins have the chance to enter the G - actin pool and bind actin monomers , therefore pro ﬁ lins hinder actin assembly mediated by Arp2 / 3 to promote formin activity ( 50 , 51 ) . Thus , pro ﬁ lin selectively regulates actin monomers to ﬂ ow from Arp2 / 3 to formins and Ena / VASP ( 51 ) . 2 . 1 . 2 Thymosin - b 4 Thymosin beta 4 ( T b 4 ) is a 43 - amino - acid protein found to be widely expressed in thymocytes and hematopoietic cell lines , as well as in a variety of organs , such as brain , thymus , spleen , and lung ( 52 – 55 ) . As one of the most abundant proteins in the highly conserved beta - thymosin family , T b 4 is an important actin binding protein that binds to both the barbed and pointed ends of G - actin , which causes conformational changes in T b 4 to spatially block actin polymerization ( 56 , 57 ) . This binding of T b 4 to actin is in ﬂ uenced by nucleotides . It was demonstrated that the af ﬁ nity of T b 4 for ATP - actin is about 50 - fold higher than that of ADP - actin ( 58 ) . In addition to its role in the cytoplasm , T b 4 also translocates to the nucleus and binds actin monomers to regulate actin dynamics ( 59 ) . Overall , T b 4 ’ s effect on G - actin leads to an increased ratio of G - actin to F - actin in the A B FIGURE 1 | ( A ) Domain structures of actin regulators important for lymphocytes . THY , thymosin b actin - binding motif ; WH1 , WASP Homology domain - 1 ; B , Basic domain ; GBD , GTPase binding domain ; PP , poly - proline ; WH2 , WASP Homology domain - 2 ; C , Connecting sequence ; A , Acidic sequence ; SHD , SCAR - homology domain ; WAHD1 , WASH Homology domain ; TBR , Tubulin binding region ; HD , Helical domain ; DID , diaphanous autoregulatory domain ; DD , dimerization domain ; CC , coiled coil region ; FH1 , formin homology domain 1 ; FH2 , formin homology domain 2 ; DAD , diaphanous autoregulatory domain ; ADF , actin depolymerizing factor ; U , unique region ; CC , coiled - coil . ( B ) Conformation of Arp2 / 3 complex . ARP2 ; ARP3 ; and ARP complex - 1 ~ 5 ( ARPC1 ~ 5 ) are shown . Sun et al . Actin Regulators in Lymphocytes Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 799309 3 cell , thereby regulating the cytoskeleton and affecting the biological activity of cells and tissues . 2 . 2 Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome ( WAS ) Family of Proteins Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome ( WAS ) is an X - linked primary immunode ﬁ ciency disease characterized by thrombocytopenia , eczema , episodes of fever , bloody diarrhea , recurrent bacterial infections , innate and adaptive immune de ﬁ ciency , and a high rate of autoimmunity and malignancies ( 60 , 61 ) . The disease is due to mutations of the gene which encodes the WAS protein ( WASp ) ( 62 ) . WASp was the ﬁ rst identi ﬁ ed member of a family of proteins comprised of WASp / N - WASP , SCAR / WAVE , WHAMM / JMY / WHAMY , and WASH subfamilies ( 63 ) . WAS proteins are nucleation - promoting factors ( NPFs ) that activate Arp2 / 3 to nucleate branched actin ﬁ laments in response to extracellular signals . This plays an important role in many cellular processes that happen at the cell surface , such as cellular motility , endocytosis , exocytosis and intracellular signal transduction ( 64 ) . WAS family proteins are also present in the nucleus , where they regulate transcription and remodel chromatin ( 65 ) . Distinct WAS family proteins participate in different cellular processes , therefore , they differ from each other in the structure of their N - terminal portions . However , contrary to their diverse N termini , all WAS family proteins possess an identical C - terminal structure , the verprolin homology ( WH2 ) / connecting peptide / acidic domains ( VCA ) domain , which mediates interaction with the Arp2 / 3 complex and actin ( Figure 1 ) ( 64 ) . It was also reported that WAS family proteins function as polymerases , accelerating elongation of uncapped actin ﬁ laments ( 66 ) . In summary , WAS family proteins have the following functions : nucleating branched actin ﬁ laments , linking actin networks to membranes , mediating transcription and chromatin remodeling , and accelerating ﬁ lament elongation . 2 . 2 . 1 Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome Protein ( WASp ) WASp is a 502 - amino - acid protein expressed exclusively in hematopoietic cells ( 62 ) , which has several domains with different functions . The pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domain is close to the N - terminal region and is involved in the localization of WASp through interactions with other proteins or lipids , such as PIP2 . The PH domain is very important since missense mutations in this region lead to severe diseases ( 67 ) . The PH domain overlaps the Ena / VASP homology 1 ( EVH1 ) domain ( also known as WH1 domain ) , which constitutively interacts with the proline - rich region of the WIP in resting cells ( 68 ) . The EVH1 / WH1 domain is followed by a basic region ( BR ) , a GTPase - binding domain ( GBD ) , a poly - proline region ( PP ) and a VCA domain in the C - terminal ( Figure 1 ) ( 60 ) . In the inactive state , WASp is in an auto - inhibited conformation in which the GBD of WASp conceals the VCA domain . This prevents the interaction between WASp and Arp2 / 3 and inhibits actin polymerization . However , upon receptor activation mediated by extracellular stimulation , such as T cell receptor ( TCR ) and BCR signaling , WASp is recruited to the signaling site at the membrane and transformed to the active conformation ( 69 ) . This process is induced by activated GTP - bound cell division control protein 42 homolog ( Cdc42 ) , which binds to the GBD and transforms WASp to an open - activated structure , allowing it to interact with Arp2 / 3 and promote actin polymerization . Additionally , proteins with Src homology 3 ( SH3 ) domains , including Grb2 , p47nck , Fyn , and Lck , combine with Cdc42 to enhance WASp conformational FIGURE 2 | Different actin regulators play distinct roles in actin dynamics in lymphocytes . As actin - monomer - binding proteins , pro ﬁ lin and thymosin beta 4 ( T b 4 ) bind G - actin and prevent it from polymerizing , while formins act in an opposite manner , promoting actin ﬁ lament polymerization . The activation of Arp2 / 3 complex requires NPFs including WAVE , JMY , WASp / N - WASp , WASH , and WAHMM , which is needed for branching F - actin . The severing of F - actin is mediated by co ﬁ lin . In the above process , actin undergoes dynamic changes in lymphocytes , thereby regulating cellular activity and function . Sun et al . Actin Regulators in Lymphocytes Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 799309 4 changes . Furthermore , Src - family kinases , such as Lyn and the Tec family of cytoplasmic tyrosine kinases , including Btk , Tec , and Itk , phosphorylate WASp at Tyr 291 ( Y291 ) in a Cdc42 - dependent fashion , which modulates the af ﬁ nity of WASp for Cdc42 and later targets WASp for degradation via a ubiquitin - dependent proteasomal pathway ( 60 , 68 , 70 ) . After activation of WASp , actin branching is mediated by the Arp2 / 3 complex , which is initiated by several steps . First , the V / WH2 segment of VCA binds to G - actin monomers , while the CA segment binds two sites on the Arp2 / 3 complex . These WASp - recruited actin monomers will be the ﬁ rst actin subunits added onto the newly branching ﬁ lament . Second , the WASp - Arp2 / 3 complex undergoes a conformational change where two actin - related subunits in the complex , Arp2 and Arp3 , are transformed into a short pitch conformation , which imitates an actin dimer within a ﬁ lament . Finally , WASp interacts with an existing actin ﬁ lament to initiate nucleation , which ensures only branched actin ﬁ laments are generated ( 64 ) . After the ﬁ lament branching process is ﬁ nished , activated WASp is down - regulated by ubiquitination and proteasome degradation . In the resting state , WIP can inhibit WASp degradation by concealing its ubiquitination sites ( 69 ) . Following activation , WIP undergoes phosphorylation and conformational changes , which exposes WASp ’ s ubiquitination sites in the WH1 domain . After ubiquitinated by E3 ligases , c ‐ Cbl and Cbl ‐ b , WASp is targeted for protease calpain degradation ( 68 ) . 2 . 2 . 2 Neuronal Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome Protein ( N - WASP ) Another WASP family protein that plays a crucial role in cells is the Neuronal Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome Protein ( N - WASP ) . Unlike WASp , which is expressed exclusively in hematopoietic cells , the mRNA of N - WASP has been found to be widely localized in several organs including brain and colon ( 71 ) . N - WASP has 50 % homology with WASp at the protein level ( 71 , 72 ) , with the main structural difference being that N - WASP contains two verprolin homology sequences in the VCA structural domain ( VVCA ) , which allows it to bind to Arp2 / 3 more ef ﬁ ciently than WASp ( 73 ) . The structural similarity of N - WASP with WASp allows for their similar regulatory roles in cells . For example , expression of the N - WASP gene in WASp - de ﬁ cient hematopoietic stem cells can partially rescue the signaling defect in T cells ( 74 ) . However , mutations in the WASp gene predisposes someone to WAS syndrome , while N - WASP deletion is embryonic lethal ( 75 ) . This suggests that the two proteins do not function in exactly the same way , which is supported by the experimental ﬁ nding that N - WASP lacking the WASp - speci ﬁ c I30 region cannot rescue the chemotactic defects of WASP knockout Jurkat T - cells ( 76 ) . The activity of N - WASP is synergistically regulated by Cdc42 and PIP2 . In the inactivated state , the VCA domain of N - WASP binds to the GBD and is in a self - inhibited state that cannot interact with Arp2 / 3 ( 77 ) . N - WASP has binding sites for Cdc42 and PIP2 . Binding of one of these molecules induces a conformational change in N - WASP that exposes the binding site for the other , which allows for both molecules to bind and activate N - WASP ( 78 ) . N - WASP can also be activated by Src family kinases through phosphorylation ( 79 ) and proteins containing SH3 structural domains ( such as cortactin ) are also able to bind to N - WASP and activate its Arp2 / 3 binding capacity . Phosphorylation of cortactin by Erk facilitates this process , while phosphorylation by Src inhibits it ( 80 ) . N - WASP and Cdc42 play a unique role in the formation of cellular ﬁ lopodia ( 81 ) and the complex formed by N - WASP with WIP and Nck is necessary for the construction of dorsal ruf ﬂ es ( 82 ) . 2 . 2 . 3 Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome Protein ( WASp ) and SCAR Homologue ( WASH ) WASH is one of the novel members of the WASP protein family and has been found to be distributed in several human tissues including blood cells ( 83 ) . The C - terminal structural domain ( VCA domain ) in WASH proteins , similar to WASP , enables it to function as a downstream effector molecule of Rho in Drosophila and as an Arp2 / 3 activator ( 84 ) . Additionally , its unique N - terminal structural domains , including WASH homology domain 1 ( WAHD1 ) and tubulin - binding region ( TBR ) , give it the ability to interact directly with tubulin ( 85 ) . Such structural properties allow WASH to localize to multiple types of endosomes and help maintain the stability of endosome morphology and the proper recycling pathway , especially for membrane surface receptors ( 86 , 87 ) . Also , WASH plays an important role in processes such as autophagy and cell differentiation ( 88 , 89 ) . 2 . 3 Nucleation Proteins 2 . 3 . 1 Arp2 / 3 Complex The Arp2 / 3 complex is an important actin ﬁ lament nucleation factor that was ﬁ rst puri ﬁ ed from Acanthamoeba ( 90 ) . It is evolutionarily conserved in most eukaryotic cells and consists of seven subunits ( 91 ) , two of which , Arp2 and Arp3 , are actin - related proteins that are structurally similar to actin ( 92 ) . The other ﬁ ve subunits are ARPC1 through ARPC5 , of which ARPC2 and ARPC4 form the center of the complex ( 93 ) called the clamp subunit . Recent studies have con ﬁ rmed that the composition of the Arp2 / 3 complex was not constant ( 94 ) , for instance , in humans , ARPC1 contained two isoforms , ARPC1A and ARPC1B , and different Arp2 / 3 complexes could play different biological roles . The most basic function of the Arp2 / 3 complex is nucleation and branching of the actin ﬁ lament . Previous in vitro studies have shown that the Arp2 / 3 complex itself had a weak nucleation capacity ( 95 ) and required a class of proteins called nucleation - promoting factors ( NPFs ) for activation . NPFs can be divided into two types . Type I NPFs , including WAVE , WASp , N - WASP , WASH and junction - mediating and regulatory protein ( JMY ) , contain a VCA structural domain ( i . e . , the verprolin - homology domain , the co ﬁ lin - homology domain and the acidic domain ) that interacts with the Arp2 / 3 complex and binds to actin monomers . Type II NPFs , such as Cortactin , contain an acidic region that binds to Arp2 / 3 and weakly activates the Arp2 / 3 complex , as well as having effects such as stabilizing Sun et al . Actin Regulators in Lymphocytes Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 799309 5 the ﬁ lament branching structure ( 96 ) . It was con ﬁ rmed that the Arp2 / 3 complex contained two different activation sites for NPFs and functioned differently during activation ( 97 ) , thus creating a prerequisite for the synergistic activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex by cortactin and WASP family proteins ( 98 ) . During the activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex by NPFs , the complex binds to existing actin ﬁ laments ( mother ) and undergoes intra - subunit and inter - subunit changes ( 99 ) . The one conformation is induced by clamp twisting within the subunit , which transforms the original twisted conformation of Arp into a ﬂ at conformation . The other conformation is created when the Arps form a short - pitch conformation , which mimics the end of the actin ﬁ lament . As a result , the Arp2 / 3 complex initiates the formation of new ﬁ laments ( daughter ) on the mother chain and facilitates the formation of the actin branching network . Besides the activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex by proteins like NPFs , there are a variety of intracellular inhibitors that negatively regulate it . For instance , the binding of co ﬁ lin , an actin ﬁ lament severing protein ( discussed below ) , to the actin ﬁ lament reduces the af ﬁ nity of Arp2 / 3 for F - actin , thereby contributing to the detachment of Arp2 / 3 from the ﬁ lament and debranching ( 100 ) . This reduction in af ﬁ nity may be achieved through direct competition of co ﬁ lin or conformational changes of the ﬁ lament . Additionally , Glia Maturation Factor ( GMF ) , which belongs to the actin depolymerizing factor homology ( ADF - H ) family with co ﬁ lin ( 101 ) , was found to bind to Arp2 / 3 , inhibiting its nucleation and inducing debranching ( 102 , 103 ) . Ydenberg et al . subsequently proposed that GMF mediated debranching via its two binding sites by binding the ﬁ rst actin subunit on the Arp2 / 3 and the ﬁ lament branch ( 104 ) . The process involved is similar to the severing mechanism of co ﬁ lin ( 104 , 105 ) , with GMF in coordination with co ﬁ lin regulates the debranching and severing of ﬁ laments . Coronins ( discussed below ) are also known to have an inhibitory effect on the branching of Arp2 / 3 . Studies performed in different subgroups of coronins have con ﬁ rmed their function in binding to Arp2 / 3 and inhibiting its actin nucleation activity ( 106 – 108 ) , and they have synergistic effects with GMF in this regard ( 109 ) . Similarly , the acidic motif of the newly discovered protein Arpin identi ﬁ ed by Dang et al . can competitively inhibit the VCA domain of Arp2 / 3 , thereby inhibiting the activity of the complex ( 110 ) . Studies on the structure of Arp2 / 3 further con ﬁ rmed that binding to Coronin , GMF and Arpin led to a shift of Arp2 / 3 into an open / inactive conformation , thus providing an explanation for their inhibitory effect ( 109 ) . Moreover , the binding and hydrolysis of nucleotides affects the activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex ( 111 , 112 ) , and it was found that the hydrolysis of ATP played an important role in debranching ( 113 ) . Furthermore , the effect of phosphorylation regulation on the Arp2 / 3 complex activity is of important interest ( 114 – 116 ) , thus the regulation of Arp2 / 3 is a mutually coordinated and sophisticated process , which creates the prerequisite for its regulation of the actin cytoskeleton . The nucleation effect of the Arp2 / 3 complex on actin makes it an important regulator of the cytoskeleton . Thus , the Arp2 / 3 complex plays a signi ﬁ cant role in a variety of cellular activities . Experiments on Dictyostelium ( 117 ) and mice ( 118 ) suggest that defects in the Arp2 / 3 complex may be lethal . For cell migration , the Arp2 / 3 complex is localized in cell protrusions , including lamellipodia and pseudopodia ( 119 , 120 ) , which are critical for cell motility . Moreover , the Arp2 / 3 complex has been found to be essential for cell adhesion ( 121 ) and it also plays a key role in cellular endocytosis ( 122 , 123 ) , whereby disruption of Arp2 / 3 complex activators can lead to defects in endocytosis ( 124 ) . In addition , the Arp2 / 3 complex is involved in Golgi - associated membrane transport processes ( 125 , 126 ) as well as cellular phagocytosis ( 127 ) , which is of great signi ﬁ cance in the immune response . And recent studies have revealed that the WASH and Arp2 / 3 complexes were associated with centrosomes and that the actin nucleation mediated by them might function in cell mitosis ( 128 , 129 ) . 2 . 4 Actin Filament Polymerases 2 . 4 . 1 Formins Formin homology proteins ( Formins ) are a family of highly conserved proteins that are widely found in eukaryotes and are involved in the regulation of the cytoskeleton ( 130 ) . Members of the Formins family are morphologically diverse , with 15 different formin proteins present in humans ( 131 ) , but relatively few formin proteins in yeast . Nevertheless , there are regions of similarity between most of these proteins , including formin homology 1 ( FH1 ) and formin homology 2 ( FH2 ) domains , which are key regions determining the regulation of actin polymerization by formin proteins . The FH1 domain is located in the N - terminal to the FH2 domain and contains multiple repeating units of polyproline that can act as a pro ﬁ lin ligand ( 132 , 133 ) . Polyproline segments are of variable length with non - proline residues inserted in between them , which are also important in the role of the FH1 structural domain ( 132 , 134 ) . Pro ﬁ lin is an actin monomer - binding protein and its binding to the FH1 domain increases the pro ﬁ lin - actin af ﬁ nity to the FH2 - associated barbed end and helps in the rapid elongation of micro ﬁ laments ( Figure 3 ) ( 135 , 136 ) . The crystal structure of the FH2 domain is in the form of a tethered dimer ( 137 , 138 ) , which is consistent with its ability to bind actin nuclei or ﬁ lament barbed ends ( 139 ) . The FH2 domain assists in nucleation by stabilizing actin oligomers ( 140 ) and can mediate the addition of G - actin to the barbed end of a ﬁ lament while preventing the binding of capping proteins ( 141 ) . In addition to the above two structural domains , some formin protein sequences contain some or all of the GBD , Diaphanous Inhibitory Domain ( DID ) and Diaphanous Autoregulatory Domain ( DAD ) . The role of Formins in regulating the formation of unbranched actin ﬁ laments affects activities such as formation of cellular protrusions ( 7 , 142 , 143 ) and cytokinesis ( 144 ) . In addition , Formins can regulate microtubule dynamics and link them to actin dynamics to coordinate cytoskeletal activities ( 145 – 147 ) . 2 . 5 Severing Proteins 2 . 5 . 1 Co ﬁ lin Co ﬁ lin , a highly conserved protein with a molecular weight of 19 kDa , was ﬁ rst identi ﬁ ed in chick brains and can bind to actin monomers on ﬁ laments in a 1 : 1 molar ratio ( 148 , 149 ) . As Sun et al . Actin Regulators in Lymphocytes Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 799309 6 research progressed on co ﬁ lin , it was found to belong to the actin - depolymerizing factor ( ADF ) / co ﬁ lin family , which is a family of actin - binding proteins mainly containing three isoforms ( Co ﬁ lin 1 , Co ﬁ lin 2 and ADF ) . The structure of co ﬁ lin is relatively conserved consisting mainly of an ADF - H domain ( UniProtP23528 and UniProt Q9Y281 ) which was found to interact with G - actin , ﬁ lamentous actin or the Arp2 / 3 complex ( 150 ) . And the tridimensional structure has two pairs of a - helices at the periphery , with a hybrid b - sheet sandwiched in between ( 151 ) . It is currently believed that all eukaryotic cells contain at least one ADF / co ﬁ lin protein ( 152 ) . In mammals , two co ﬁ lin isoforms are known . One is the NM - type ( CFL1 ) , which is widespread in non - muscle tissues , and the other is the M - type ( CFL2 ) , which is mainly expressed in muscle cells , but can also be seen in other tissues like testis ( 153 , 154 ) . For humans , the genes encoding CFL1 and CFL2 are localized on chromosomes 11 and 14 , respectively ( 155 ) . As a member of the actin - binding protein family , the primary role of co ﬁ lin is to modulate actin dynamics . The co ﬁ lin protein contains a G / F site at the C - terminus and an F site at the N - terminal end ( 156 ) , giving it the ability to bind to actin monomers ( G - actin ) or F - actin , in which it severs and depolymerizes actin ﬁ laments . Co ﬁ lin was initially thought to bind to some of the acidic residues at the N - terminal of actin by electrostatic interaction ( 157 ) . Subsequent studies supported this by ﬁ nding that co ﬁ lin binds to F - actin along the two initial helices between neighboring subunits ( 158 ) , and that the ADF - H domain of co ﬁ lin binds between actin subdomains 1 and 3 to insert into its hydrophobic cleft ( 159 ) . In vivo studies have shown that low concentrations of co ﬁ lin prefer to function in severing F - actin , while high concentrations tend to facilitate actin nucleation ( 160 ) . A similar study also found that ﬁ laments are stabilized in the saturated co ﬁ lin state ( 160 ) . However , this rule does not always hold . For example , in the thymus , it has been found that during co ﬁ lin saturation , co ﬁ lin was still able to depolymerize ﬁ laments in the presence of actin interacting protein 1 ( Aip1 ) , another important actin regulator ( 161 ) . Many factors regulate the activity of co ﬁ lin . Phosphorylation or dephosphorylation of co ﬁ lin is a critical step in determining its activity ( 162 ) , and phosphorylation at Ser - 3 inactivates co ﬁ lin ( 163 ) . pH level also affects the polymerization or depolymerization activity of co ﬁ lin on actin ( 164 ) . In humans , depolymerization of actin mediated by co ﬁ lin increased when the pH was elevated from 6 . 5 to 8 . 0 ( 165 ) . A similar study also found that co ﬁ lin favors binding to F - actin in a neutral or weakly acidic environment , while the extent of binding is greatly reduced in a weakly basic condition ( 166 ) . Moreover , co ﬁ lin activity can also be in ﬂ uenced by phosphoinositide , where PIP2 is capable of inhibiting co ﬁ lin from binding to actin ( 167 ) and nucleotides , which co ﬁ lin has a higher af ﬁ nity for ADP - actin compared to ATP - actin ( 168 ) . It has also been proposed that the pH regulation of co ﬁ lin might be achieved through binding to phosphatidylinositol ( 169 ) . 2 . 5 . 2 Coronin Coronin is a 55 kDa protein that was ﬁ rst puri ﬁ ed from growth - phase Dictyostelium Discoideum cells by E . L . deHostos and his co - workers . They named it “ coronin ” because of its interaction with the crown - shaped projections on the dorsal cortex of the cell . Through preliminary co - sedimentation experiments , they FIGURE 3 | Formins ’ role in regulating actin dynamics . The FH2 domain offormins close to the C - terminus can bind to the barbed end of ﬁ laments , while the FH1 domain near the N - terminus can bind to pro ﬁ lin - actin , thus increasing the concentration of actin monomers around ﬁ laments and positively promoting their polymerization . Sun et al . Actin Regulators in Lymphocytes Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 799309 7 found coronin could colocalize with actin ﬁ laments ( 170 ) . Different types and subtypes of coronins have been discovered and classi ﬁ ed , however in this review we use the widely accepted classi ﬁ cation method to divide them into 3 types : type I includes coronin 1A , coronin 1B , coronin 1C and the newly - found coronin 6 . Type II includes coronin 2A and coronin 2B , and type III is coronin 7 in humans , or POD in nematode and Drosophila melanogaster ( 106 ) . Up to now , coronin research has mainly focused on coronin 1A and less on the other types . Coronins are highly conserved proteins and the basic structure of the coronin family contains a 7 - bladed b - propeller formed by 5 WD repeats on the N - terminal , a classical heptad coiled - coil domain on the C - terminal and an irregular secondary domain in the middle ( 171 , 172 ) . The N - terminal has phosphorylation sites , which mediate protein interactions and the coiled - coil domain regulates homo - oligomerization to help coronin 1A form a tripolymer structure ( 173 , 174 ) . Unlike other coronins , coronin 7 has two classical WD domains , which means two b propellers , but it has only one coiled - coil domain with an additional acidic domain , whose structure is similar to the acidic domain in the SCAR / WASP ( 172 ) . Encoded by the CORO gene , researches have shown that coronins are expressed in all eukaryotes , but as for the tissue speci ﬁ city , coronin 1A is mainly expressed in hematopoietic tissues and immune cells ( 175 ) . Coronin 1B and coronin 1C are ubiquitously expressed in different tissues and may be involved with cell migration ( 106 ) . Type II coronins can be found only in vertebrates , they have different C - terminal structure from type I . Coronin 2A is expressed in testis , ovary , uterus and brain , while coronin 2B expression is mainly in the brain ( 176 ) . Coronin 7 is found in mammals and POD in Caenorhabditis elegans , however being of similar genes , both localize and function within the Golgi complex in all kinds of cells ( 176 ) . Almost all the coronins belong to the actin ﬁ lament - crosslinking and bundling protein family and they concentrate in the actin - rich areas on the cell membrane ( 177 ) . The fundamental function of coronins is facilitating the actin depolymerization via interacting with Arp2 / 3 and actin ﬁ laments , and the binding site to actin is the KXRHXX - motif located near the N - terminal and the WD domain ( 178 ) . Coronins , co ﬁ lins and WD repeat - containing protein 1 ( WDR1 ) form an organized unit for the regulation of actin . The binding of coronin with actin enhances the binding of co ﬁ lin to actin as the ﬁ lament twist is changed . Additionally , the cooperation between coronin and slingshot - 1L increases the activity of co ﬁ lin ( 106 , 179 ) . In yeast , coronins bind Arp2 / 3 directly by a coiled - coil domain and suppress the nucleating activity of Arp2 / 3 ( 107 ) . This mechanism is properly regulated by phosphorylation of protein kinase C ( PKC ) ( 173 ) . However , recent studies demonstrated that while a high concentration of coronin restrains Arp2 / 3 , a lower concentration of coronin could promote Arp2 / 3 nucleation ( 180 ) . 2 . 5 . 3 WD Repeat - Containing Protein 1 ( WDR1 ) Aip1 , also known as WDR1 , is a conserved protein that belongs to the WD repeat domain - containing proteins , whose protein structure is mainly composed of two connected seven - bladed b - propellers ( 181 ) . WDR1 alone has little effect on actin dynamics , but it assists co ﬁ lin in severing / depolymerizing of actin ﬁ laments ( 182 , 183 ) , a process that often also involves a third protein , coronin ( discussed it above ) , which acts synergistically to promote the severing of ﬁ laments ( 184 , 185 ) . At the same time , studies in leukocytes have found that the actin - promoting effect of WDR1 is also in ﬂ uenced by caspase - 11 , the deletion of which leads to impaired motility of immune cells , including T cells ( 186 ) . 3 FUNCTIONS IN LYMPHOCYTES 3 . 1 T Lymphocytes T cells are derived from the thymus . Mature T cells settle in thymus - dependent areas of peripheral immune organs , where they mediate adaptive cellular immune responses and also play an important secondary role in thymus - dependent antigen - induced humoral immune responses . The activity of actin regulators in T cells affects the development , motility , and functional effects of T cells . 3 . 1 . 1 Development Bone marrow T cell progenitors locate to the thymus , where they develop into mature T cells via stages of differentiation , they then enter the peripheral lymphoid organs by the blood circulation . At this time , the naive mature T cells that come in contact with antigen will proliferate and differentiate into effector T cells , regulatory T cells or memory T cells that all have different functions ( 187 ) . This is a very complex process in which various actin regulators are involved . Earlier studies found that T b 4 induces phenotypic changes in the human T cell line Molt - 4 and may be involved in early cell differentiation ( 188 ) . As an important member of NPFs , WASp also has an important regulatory role on T cell development . It has been shown that high expression of WASp inhibits the growth of T - cell lymphoma , while the loss of WASp inhibits T cell activation processes including decreasing T cell proliferation induced by TCR stimulation and preventing cytokine polarization and secretion ( 189 ) . Speci ﬁ cally , CD8 + T cells from WASp - de ﬁ cient mice are hyperactive with increased cytokine production , however these cells are also insuf ﬁ cient in CD8 + memory T cells differentiation and have increased apoptosis through upregulation of the Fas pathway . This further implicates a role for WASp in the survival and differentiation of CD8 + T cells ( 190 ) . Additionally , double knockout ( DKO ) mice compared to single knockout of WASp or N - WASP mice , exhibit more pronounced abnormal thymic development and impaired T cell development , which is due to defects in cytoskeletal reorganization and migration ( 191 ) . This indicates that N - WASP exhibits a synergistic effect with WASp during T cell development . WASH is required for the ef ﬁ cient proliferation of T cells after responding to CD3 / CD28 signaling , which is related to its function in regulating the intracellular transport of T cell surface molecules , including TCR ( 192 ) . Concurrently , the lack of coronin 1A leads to decreased naïve T cells and developments of severe combined immunode ﬁ ciency Sun et al . Actin Regulators in Lymphocytes Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 799309 8 ( SCID ) ( 193 ) . This is because coronin participates in the activation of calcium - calcineurin signaling that maintains the survival of naïve T cells ( 194 ) , which was found have a similar effect on peripheral T cells ( 195 ) . Also , abrupt reduction in the number of peripheral ab T cells and impaired late development of thymocytes caused by coronin1A defects indicate its signi ﬁ cance in terminal T cell differentiation ( 196 ) . For WDR1 , it has been previously shown that defective expression of the WDR1 gene predisposes someone to autoin ﬂ ammatory disease and thrombocytopenia , which are mainly manifested by abnormal neutrophil behavior ( 197 , 198 ) . A subsequent study reported a reduced rate of follicular helper T ( Tfh ) cells in patients with defective WDR1 gene expression and also showed a decreased Ca 2 + response in TCR proximal signaling , suggesting that WDR1 may have an effect on T cell development and TCR signaling ( 199 ) . 3 . 1 . 2 Cell Migration Migration is one of the bases for accurate targeting of T lymphocytes to sites of infection ( 200 ) . In response to chemokine stimulation , T cells can polarize , extend lamellipodium at the leading edge and produce a uropod at the rear end . Integrin alpha 4 beta 1 and alpha L beta 2 induce directional with T cell motility ( 201 ) , which several actin regulators play a role in . The migratory capacity of T cells partly depends on the production and location of actin and co ﬁ lin , which can be illustrated by the experimental fact that co ﬁ lin mRNA is distributed at the leading edge of migrating cells ( 202 ) . Meanwhile , studies in Jurkat T cells revealed that co ﬁ lin is phosphorylated by the spatiotemporal regulation of LIM domain kinase ( LIMK ) and SSH1L , and this physiological process is crucial for SDF - 1 a - induced T cell migration ( 203 ) . One possible regulatory mechanism is that following G - protein - coupled receptor stimulation , LIM - Kinase1 activity is inhibited in T cells via the Ras - MEK pathway to promote the dephosphorylation of co ﬁ lin ( 204 ) . Activated co ﬁ lin may function at the leading edge of the cell to sever the F - actin , increasing the number of barbed ends to promote nucleation of actin polymerization there ( 152 , 205 ) . When the activity of MEK or co ﬁ lin is inhibited , lamellipodia extension is impaired , inhibiting the cell migration rate ( 206 ) . This mechanism may play an important role in the localization of T cells during the immune response ( 204 ) . Another study on Jurkat T cells found that cell spreading on anti - CD3 sheet - like structures was inhibited by lack of Arp2 ( 207 ) . Furthermore , preventing actin polymerization mediated by WASp / Arp2 / 3 inhibits T cell chemotaxis ( 208 ) . This is due to the Arp2 / 3 complex being an important regulator of membrane protrusion formation , including lamellipodia ( 209 ) , which is the main mode of T cell motility . Studies have found that in Arp3 - impaired CTL , the cell motility pattern changed from lamellipodia - based to blebbing - like migration , a mode of movement resulting from the detachment of the plasma membrane from the actomyosin cortex ( 210 ) , which decreases the migration speed ( 211 ) . The different motility characteristics exhibited by T cells under different antigen af ﬁ nities depends on the regulation of the Arp2 / 3 complex ( 212 ) , which allows T cells to decelerate when encountering suitable antigens and is important to T cell bioactivity . Unsurprisingly , N - WASP , the regulatory protein of the Arp2 / 3 complex , is also involved in T cell motility . An earlier study found that Cdc42 interacting protein 4 ( CIP4 ) , a protein that binds to Cdc42 and WASP / N - WASP and is involved in cytoskeletal regulation , is necessary for integrin - dependent T - cell migration , implying the participation of N - WASP in T cell motility ( 213 ) . Speci ﬁ cally , in CD8 + T cells , N - WASP is a downstream effector molecule of NKG2D , which is a transmembrane receptor expressed mainly on CD8 + T cells and NK cells . And N - WASP is involved in the inhibitory effect of NKG2D on T cell chemotaxis under the regulation of activated Cdc42 upon CD3 / NKG2D activation , and this pathway may also involve the downstream dephosphorylation of co ﬁ lin ( Figure 4 ) ( 214 ) . Formin - like - 1 ( FMNL1 ) and mDia1 are known to be the predominantly expressed formin proteins in T cells ( 215 ) . FMNL1 - mediated cytoskeletal dynamics allows T cells to undergo shape changes for adapting to the environment , helping them to complete transendothelial migration ( TEM ) and translocation to sites of in ﬂ ammation to exert immune effects ( 216 ) . RhoA - regulated mDia is expressed in activated T cells and affects the functional exertion of Rac1 through the regulation of actin equilibrium , however overexpressed mDia negatively regulates the motility of T cells ( 46 ) . Additionally , by studying T cells from p140mDia1 - encoding knockout mice , Eisenmann et al . found that this protein is necessary for proper T cell development and chemotactic movement ( 217 ) . Similarly , mDia1 de ﬁ ciency inhibits T cell proliferation and chemotaxis induced migration , thus impairing the relocation of T cells to secondary lymphoid organs ( 218 ) . Further studies revealed that mDia1 regulates microtubule dynamics and helps in T cell adhesion and translocation by inactivating glycogen synthase kinase ( GSK ) 3 b and protecting adenomatous polyposis coli from phosphorylation ( 219 ) . The regulatory effects of Coronin and WDR1 on actin allow them to also in ﬂ uence T cell motility . Coronin1A helps T cell egress from the thymus and the coronin knock - out phenotype in mice shows de ﬁ ciency in T cell migration , whereby there is abnormal accumulation of F - actin and failure of lamellipodia formation ( 106 , 220 ) . Furthermore , the enhanced effect of WDR1 on co ﬁ lin activity was shown to contribute to the chemotaxis of Jurkat cells , and also WDR1 is essential for their normal morphological maintenance and changes , which can be achieved by promoting the remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton ( 221 ) . 3 . 1 . 3 Immune Synapse T cells become activated when their T cell receptors ( TCRs ) bind speci ﬁ cally to antigen presented by major histocompatibility molecules ( MHCs ) on antigen - presenting cells ( APCs ) . This binding to antigens induces signaling by the TCRs that lead to activation of signaling pathways involved in promoting T cell functions . This activation process requires signal transduction and ampli ﬁ cation , which is supported by the stable platform Sun et al . Actin Regulators in Lymphocytes Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 799309 9 created by the IS . The IS is a membrane structure formed on the surface of T cells at the contact site with APCs . The center of the IS is a cluster of TCRs with adhesion molecules surrounding the periphery ( 222 , 223 ) . This structure is also known as a SMAC , which includes the central supramolecular activation cluster ( cSMAC ) , the peripheral SMAC ( pSMAC ) and the distal SMAC ( dSMAC ) ( 224 , 225 ) . IS formation is a dynamic process that depends on the activity of the actin cytoskeleton ( 223 , 226 ) , and therefore the contribution of actin regulators in this process is critical . Since IS formation is closely related to TCR signaling , which will be discussed below , we provide a brief overview of the actin regulators involved . During IS formation , constant actin depolymerization and repolymerization contribute to the aggregation of related molecules , including TCR , LFA - 1 , and CD45 . A number of experiments have shown that multiple actin regulators were important in IS formation . First , it was demonstrated that IS formation was halted with the inhibition of co ﬁ lin depolymerization activity ( 227 ) . Second , the Arp2 / 3 complex was found to be important in the actin polymerization that is essential for IS formation . This was determined in patients with combined immunode ﬁ ciency ( CID ) that have a homozygotic mutation in the gene ARPC1B , which results in a defect in the development of the T cell IS ( 228 – 230 ) . Additionally , ARPC3 is an essential protein involved in the TCR - related vesicular transport that enables TCR recycling between the intracellular and plasma membranes to continuously supply TCRs for activation and IS formation ( 231 , 232 ) . In this process , ARPC3 acts in concert with proteins such as IFT20 to regulate the assembly of a functional IS ( 233 ) . Furthermore , the Arp2 / 3 complex is degraded intracellularly by GRAIL via Lys - 48 and Lys - 63 ubiquitination to regulate IS formation and keep T cells in a state of anergy ( 234 ) , which is essential for immune tolerance of T cells . Along with Arp2 / 3 , WASp also takes part in actin assembly and IS stabilization . It was found that downregulation of WASp causes actin foci to disappear and the symmetry of the IS to be destroyed ( 57 ) . And WASp / N - WASp can function with Nck to regulate the interaction and movement between LAT and actin , which contributes to the formation of the IS ( 58 ) . Similarly , Formins promote the formation of TCR microclusters through polymerizing F - actin during the early stages of IS formation in T cells ( 217 , 235 ) , and the aggregation of actin by Formins at the IS distal edge is needed to form the actin arc at the IS , which affects activities such as adhesion and signal transduction of T cells ( 236 ) . A recent study also found that PKC d - dependent phosphorylation of the formin A B FIGURE 4 | N - WASP is involved in signaling pathways of T cells . ( A ) In CD4 + T cells , N - WASP is activated by CaM and enters the nucleus to coordinate the Arp2 / 3 complex to participate in the expression of cytokines . ( B ) In CD8 + T cells , N - WASP receives signals from NKG2D and participates in downstream co ﬁ lin dephosphorylation while also mediating the inhibition of cellular chemotaxis . Sun et al . Actin Regulators in Lymphocytes Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 799309 10 protein , FMNL1 b , negatively regulated F - actin polymerization at the IS and thus facilitated microtubule - organizing centers ( MTOC ) polarization ( 56 ) . Furthermore , during IS formation in T cells , centrosome polarization requires the formation of stable and detyrosinated microtubules , which is a process mediated by the FH2 domain of INF2 ( 55 ) . Thus , although the cytoskeletal components involved in IS formation is predominantly actin , other components may also be involved in this process and requires further research . 3 . 1 . 4 TCR Signaling TCR signaling is initiated after T cells recognize a speci ﬁ c MHC - peptide complex ( pMHC ) on the APC . This process consists of interaction of receptors , followed by receptor activation and intracellular signal transduction . Coreceptors on T cells ( CD4 or CD8 ) , bind to the non - peptide - like region of MHCs , inducing recruitment and phosphorylation of tyrosines in the immunoreceptor tyrosine - based activation motif ( ITAM ) of the cytoplasmic segment of CD3 molecules . The process of phosphorylation is mainly mediated by Lck , a protein tyrosine kinase , which is an essential molecule for transmission of the external activity of the TCR into an internal signal . Phosphorylated ITAMs provide a binding site for ZAP - 70 , which is activated and continues the cascade of phosphorylation of downstream molecules and initiates several signaling pathways , including the PKC pathway , small G - protein pathway , and Ca 2 + pathway , to regulate T cell activity ( 237 – 239 ) . The understanding of the TCR signaling pathway involves millions of studies , and here we focus more on the role of actin regulators in it . The role of the Arp2 / 3 complex in TCR signaling has long been of interest . Several studies have shown that the Arp2 / 3 complex maintains TCR downstream signaling ( 233 , 240 ) . A more de ﬁ nitive study suggests that deletion of APCR2 in T cells leads to reduced levels of cell surface TCRs , and that the Arp2 / 3 complex is also involved in the endosomal transport of TCRs , thus affecting the proximal TCR signaling ( 241 ) . Indeed , Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin dynamics is a critical step in multiple pathways , and more often as an effector molecule of the distal TCR signaling , linking it to alterations in the actin cytoskeleton ( Figure 5 ) . Studies have indicated that after recognition of pMHC by TCR / CD3 , stimulation is delivered to downstream tyrosine kinases like Fyn , LCK , and ZAP - 70 ( 242 ) , which then phosphorylate downstream molecules like LAT , SLP - 76 , Fyb , SLAP - 130 ( 243 ) , that ultimately activate the Arp2 / 3 complex . Multiple activators of the Arp2 / 3 complex , including NPFs , play signi ﬁ cant roles in the signaling pathway . For instance , at the IS of T cells , the GTPase - binding domain of WASp binds to Cdc42 - GTP , releasing the VAC domain and promoting the function of the WASp - Arp2 / 3 complex ( 70 , 244 ) . Also , PIP2 produced by TCR stimulation activates WASp to interact with the Arp2 / 3 complex ( 78 , 245 ) . However , the interaction between these two proteins can be inhibited by the dephosphorylation of protein tyrosine phosphatase PTP - PEST through proline , serine , threonine phosphatase interacting protein1 ( PSTPIP1 ) - mediated binding to WASp ( 246 ) . In CD4 + T lymphocytes , N - WASP interacts with CaM ( 71 ) to activate the Arp2 / 3 complex in the nucleus , which mediates the Ca 2 + induced expression of cytokines ( 247 ) . WAVE2 is another important activator of the Arp2 / 3 complex . WAVE2 receives signals from the Rac - GTPase as a complex , including Sra - 1 , Nap1 , Abi - 1 / 2 , and WAVE2 ( 248 , 249 ) , and is recruited to the membrane ( 250 ) for activating the Arp2 / 3 complex and promoting lamellipodial spreading . Inhibition of WAVE2 expression can lead to impaired IS formation in T cells ( 251 , 252 ) . The acidic region of HS1 , NTA , binds to the Arp2 / 3 complex and contributes to the stabilization of the F - actin branches ( 253 , 254 ) . Tyrosine phosphorylated HS1 was found to bind to the SH2 domain of Vav , stabilizing Vav at the IS ( 255 ) , which in turn transmits the signal to the Arp2 / 3 complex . Related to the above , Formins assist Arp2 / 3 in regulating the cytoskeleton during T cell activation ( 256 ) . The Formin mDia 1 / 3 was shown to regulate the actin kinetics required for recruitment of activated ZAP70 to the IS to promote the phosphorylation of LAT . This suggests an essential role for Formins in early TCR signaling and therefore is important for positive selection of T cells . The downstream TCR signaling involves the interaction of FMNL1 with AHNAK1 , which locates FMNL1 to the cell membrane and boosts calcium in ﬂ ux during cell activation ( 257 ) . Also worth noting is that Inverted Formin2 ( INF2 ) , one of the Formins with both actin polymerization and depolymerization activities , is regulated in T cells by Cdc42 and Rac1 , which helps MAL - mediated transport of Lck to the plasma membrane and participates in the signaling ( 258 ) . A recent study revealed the positive role of coronin in TCR signaling using coronin 1A - de ﬁ cient T cells . These cells have elevated cAMP levels that activate PKA , leading to defective CREB phosphorylation and suppression of T cell immune responses by inhibiting CaMKK , a signaling molecule downstream of the TCR ( 259 ) . However , this kind of functional disorder only causes autoimmunity suppression and has no in ﬂ uence on the response to foreign antigen ( 194 ) . Another actin regulator , co ﬁ lin , is involved in multiple T - cell signaling pathways , including TCR signaling ( Figure 6 ) . The co ﬁ lin protein sequence contains a phosphatidylinositol binding site which inhibits co ﬁ lin activity when bound to phosphatidylinositol ( e . g . PIP2 ) on the plasma membrane , however this effect is independent of co ﬁ lin phosphorylation ( 167 , 260 ) . When Phospholipase C ( PLC ) is activated by TCR signaling as well as ampli ﬁ ed signals from CD28 ( 261 , 262 ) , it triggers the decomposition of PIP2 , allowing an increase in the amount of active co ﬁ lin ( 262 ) , which may be an early event in T cell activation ( 263 ) . Furthermore , co - stimulatory signals ( e . g . CD40 and CD40L ) are also required for T cell activation in addition to the stimulation of TCRs by pMHCs . In the absence of co - stimulatory signals , T cells are in a state of anergy . This is an important mechanism by which the body maintains immunosuppression , and it may also trigger certain pathological responses . It was con ﬁ rmed that in resting human peripheral blood T lymphocytes ( PB - T ) , dephosphorylation of co ﬁ lin occurs after co - stimulatory signals are received by co - receptors ( e . g . , CD2 ) , rather than activation of TCR / CD3 receptors alone ( 264 , 265 ) . GTPase Ras is a key factor in this process , and dephosphorylation of co ﬁ lin requires the synergistic Sun et al . Actin Regulators in Lymphocytes Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 799309 11 action of both Ras - MEK and Ras - PI3K pathways ( 266 ) . Under the action of these two pathways , the protein serine / threonine phosphatases of type 1 ( PP1 ) and type 2A ( PP2A ) bind to co ﬁ lin and mediate its dephosphorylation activation ( 267 ) . It is worth noting that in studies on Jurkat T lymphocyte cell lines , Ras was unable to activate PI3K , re ﬂ ecting the inconsistency in activation of co ﬁ lin by T lymphocytes of different origins ( 265 , 268 ) . Since co ﬁ lin contains nuclear localization sequences KKRKK ( 269 ) , while actin does not , it can mediate actin nuclear ectopic processes upon dephosphorylation ( 263 ) . This is necessary for the transcriptional activity of RNA polymerase II ( 270 , 271 ) . Additionally , in co - stimulated T cells , dephosphorylated co ﬁ lin can regulate the nuclear translocation of NF - k B and promote the production of anti - in ﬂ ammatory factors , which is one of the mechanisms by which T helper 2 cells ( Th2 ) exert anti - in ﬂ ammatory effects ( 272 ) . When co ﬁ lin is oxidized and inactivated , it affects costimulatory signaling and leads to T - cell anergy . Co ﬁ lin contains four cysteine residues , Cys39 , Cys80 , Cys140 , and Cys148 , all of which are potential sites for oxidation . Oxidants such as reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) may cause the formation of disul ﬁ de bonds between Cys39 and Cys80 , resulting in the loss of co ﬁ lin ’ s depolymerization activity to F - actin although it can still bind to ﬁ laments ( 273 ) . Moreover , oxidized co ﬁ lin tends to undergo mitochondrial translocation , leading to programmed T cell death ( 274 ) . In contrast , the sensitivity of co ﬁ lin to PIP2 is decreased under reducing conditions , resulting in enhanced activity of co ﬁ lin ( 275 ) . 3 . 1 . 5 T Cell Cytotoxicity Upon activation , naïve T cells proliferate and differentiate into different functional subpopulations in response to the local microenvironment and other factors . Some of these cells have killing activity and can differentiate into CTLs , predominantly CD8 + CTLs , but also CD4 + CTLs have been reported to exist in vivo ( 276 ) . CTLs are able to recognize virally infected and tumorigenic cells and secrete perforin and granzyme to kill these target cells or mediate apoptosis through the death ligands pathway ( 277 – 279 ) . Studies have revealed that the function of the Arp2 / 3 complex is critical for the formation of CTL synaptic protrusions and granule release ( 280 ) , as well as the CTL ’ s cytolytic function ( 281 ) . The importance of Arp2 / 3 in cytotoxicity is likely due to the actin cytoskeleton maintaining the IS of CTLs . In addition , Arp2 / 3 is involved in the cycling of TCR , CD8 , and GLUT1 , which enables the TCR signaling needed for inducing the cytotoxic effects of CTLs on target cells . Also , by binding to Arp2 / 3 , WASp can promote the formation of protrusions and cause deformation of target cells , which was con ﬁ rmed to enhance perforin and granzyme - mediated killing ( 280 ) . Furthermore , Formins can also regulate TCR - mediated toxicity by affecting the centrosome polarity of T cells , which is vital for directed release of granules ( 215 ) . 3 . 2 B Lymphocytes B cells are important antibody - producing immune cells in humans , the homeostasis of B cells is signi ﬁ cant to a well - balanced immunity . Stimulated by antigens , the activation of the BCR initiates the immunological response in B cells . The BCR signaling pathway is regulated by different molecules and their interaction maintains normal B cell function . In addition to BCRs , B cells also have Toll - like receptors ( TLRs ) that are involved in innate immunity and function to link speci ﬁ c immunity with non - speci ﬁ c immunity . As a component of B cell signal transduction , TLR signaling also contributes to regulation of B cell activity . FIGURE 5 | The Arp2 / 3 complex is involved in TCR signaling . Upon receiving signals from MHC molecules , TCR / CD3 can transmit stimuli to the Arp2 / 3 complex via tyrosine kinases such as Fyn , LCK , and ZAP - 70 . In this process , WASp family proteins play an important mediating role as direct activators of the Arp2 / 3 complex . The activated Arp2 / 3 complex has the ability to promote branched ﬁ lament polymerization , which together with other T cell signaling - induced activation of actin regulators ( e . g . , co ﬁ lin and pro ﬁ lin ) modulates the actin cytoskeleton , which is important for the biological activities of T cells , especially for IS formation . Sun et al . Actin Regulators in Lymphocytes Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 799309 12 3 . 2 . 1 BCR / TLR Signaling In BCR signaling , the unbranched ﬁ lament formed by the Formin DIAPH1 assists Arp2 / 3 in the generation of actin foci , which is an important step in the antigen extraction by B cells ( 282 ) . It was also found that the C - terminus of FHOS , another formin protein widely present in the human spleen , interacts with CD21 , which is involved in the regulation of B cell signaling together with the subsequent actin kinetics ( 283 ) . Upon B cell binding to APCs , the Arp2 / 3 - mediated branched actin network promotes the aggregation of BCR - containing microclusters into a supramolecular activation cluster in the center of the IS , enhancing the BCR signaling ( 284 ) . The experimental result that the inhibition of the Arp2 / 3 complex leads to reduced BCR motility also suggests a regulatory role of this complex on B cell signaling ( 285 ) . N - WASP plays both similar and different roles compared with WASp . On the one hand , in WASp - de ﬁ cient B cells , N - WASP plays a compensatory role to help BCR clustering and B cell spreading . Also , N - WASP can play a role in BCR microcluster aggregation into central clusters and promote B cell contraction . On the other hand , N - WASP is involved in the up - and down - regulation of BCR signaling . During upregulation , N - WASP and WASp synergistically promote micro ﬁ lament formation , while N - WASP functions differently from WASP in removing F - actin during cell contraction and signal downregulation . A further study revealed that there is a mutual negative regulatory relationship between WASp and N - WASP . In the BCR signaling pathway , Btk activates WASp but inhibits N - WASP , whereas SHIP - 1 can inhibit Btk and activate N - WASP ( Figure 7 ) ( 286 ) . Ca 2 + is an important second messenger in BCR signaling , as BCR - induced Ca 2 + release can act on co ﬁ lin via the PCL g and CRAC pathways , and thus regulate B cell adhesion and lamellipodia formation ( 287 ) . The Ca 2 + mobilization decreases signi ﬁ cantly in coronin1A de ﬁ cient B cells after BCR stimulation , but the lack of coronin 1A makes no difference for B cell subset development and immune function ( 288 ) . Upon signal stimulation , co ﬁ lin is dephosphorylated by BCR via active Rap - GTP , severing actin ﬁ laments , and thereby increasing the mobility of the BCR and promoting B - cell spreading ( 289 ) . Meanwhile , the Rap - co ﬁ lin pathway promotes the polarization of MTOC toward the APC contacting site , which is an important step in the process of B cell IS formation ( 290 ) . In addition , co ﬁ lin is activated by TLR signaling stimulation , reducing the restriction of the BCR by the actin cytoskeleton and facilitating the signal transduction of the BCR ( 291 ) ( Figure 8 ) . Recent studies have revealed that WDR1 , together with LIMK , an enzyme that phosphorylates co ﬁ lin and negatively regulates it , constitute the WDR1 - LIMK - co ﬁ lin axis , an important mechanism for regulating cSMAC formation and BCR signaling in B cells . This process involves WDR1 and LIMK working together to maintain co ﬁ lin at an equivalent activity ( neither too high nor too low ) , thus achieving an optimal level of actin retrograde ﬂ ow ( 292 ) . 3 . 2 . 2 Others Many other B cell activities are modi ﬁ ed by actin regulators , such as anti - infection , cell development and antibody secretion . For cell development , the latest studies revealed that the interaction between WASp and other signaling molecules facilitates B cell development and movement . Mst1 and WASp FIGURE 6 | Co ﬁ lin involves in T cell signaling . Several signaling pathways in T cells contain co ﬁ lin , including : ( A ) PLC - PIP2 pathway belonging to the TCR signaling , ( B ) protein phosphorylation belonging to co - stimulation signaling , and ( C ) protein oxidation . Activated co ﬁ lin can mediate actin entry into the nucleus and play a regulatory role in gene transcription . PP1 / PP2A : protein serine / threonine phosphatases of type 1 and type 2A , ROS , reactive oxygen species . Sun et al . Actin Regulators in Lymphocytes Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 799309 13 are signi ﬁ cant for central and peripheral development of B cells and can adjust mutual localization and function ( 293 ) . De ﬁ ciency of DOCK2 reduces the activation of WASp and accelerates its degradation , causing dysfunction of actin accumulation and affecting the early activation process of B cells ( 294 ) . Similar to T cells , the reduction of marginal zone B cells in N - WASP conditional knockout mice indicates the promotional effect of this protein on peripheral B cell development . Further studies showed that conditional double knockout WASp and N - WASP exhibited more severe B cell developmental impairment and dysfunction than WASp KO , indicating the positive role of N - WASP in B cell development ( 72 ) . More severe abnormalities were found in B - cells of WHR1 - de ﬁ cient patients than in T - cells . On the one hand , the number of B - cell precursors is reduced , and more peripheral blood B cells are in an immature stage ; on the other hand , this defect leads to abnormal BCR / TLR signaling , generates elongated B - cell synapse , and affects B cell survival ( 199 ) . Besides intrinsic accommodation of B cell growth , environmental factors such as the extracellular matrix components may in ﬂ uence the motility of B cells ( 295 ) . The actin dynamics regulated by the Arp2 / 3 complex gives B cells this ability to exhibit adaptive mobility in different environments ( 296 ) . For the response to antigen stimulation , it has been demonstrated that in secondary lymphoid organs , co ﬁ lin mediates B cell responses to two common antigens , namely soluble and membrane - associated antigens , in the non - phosphorylated form ( 297 ) . Differences in the distribution and FIGURE 7 | Regulation of N - WASP and WASP in B cells . In B cells , N - WASP is inhibited by Btk , which in turn is negatively regulated by SHIP - 1 . The regulation of WASP depends on Btk for activation . FIGURE 8 | Co ﬁ lin in B cells . ( A ) Co ﬁ lin receives signals from the BCR . ( B ) Co ﬁ lin mediates the depolymerization of micro ﬁ laments on the membrane surface upon receiving TLR signaling , which increases BCR motility and facilitates the BCR signaling . Sun et al . Actin Regulators in Lymphocytes Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 799309 14 kinetic characteristics of co ﬁ lin under the two antigen inductions explain the different reactivity of B cells to these two antigens ( 297 ) . N - WASP in B cells is closely linked to autoimmune responses ( 298 ) . It was found that speci ﬁ c knockdown of N - WASP in B cells resulted in elevated levels of autoantibodies , and mouse B cells lacking N - WASP exhibited higher levels and longer duration of activation . This suggests that N - WASP is a key inhibitor of B cell activation , and this inhibition is essential to terminate the immune response and prevent autoimmunity ( 286 ) . Relatedly , simultaneous knockdown of WASp and N - WASP in B cells results in more severe proliferation defects in B cells and reduced levels of IgG autoantibodies compared to speci ﬁ c knockdown of the WASp gene , suggesting that N - WASP expression in B cells is required for the development of autoimmunity , which signi ﬁ es N - WASP as a new therapeutic target to control autoimmunity in WAS patients ( 299 ) . Analogously to that in T cells , the Arp2 / 3 complex is important to the formation and activity of the IS in B cells . It was demonstrated that this complex is involved in the formation of dynamic actin structures at the IS of B cells ( 282 ) . Also , upon B lymphocyte activation , the HS1 - dependent Arp2 / 3 complex is recruited at the IS through Syk - mediated tyrosine phosphorylation ( 300 ) , which results in a reduction of Arp2 / 3 complex at the centrosome , leading to its nuclear separation and polarization to the IS ( 301 ) , a process that maintains the immunomodulatory role of lymphocytes . Additional bene ﬁ ts WASp provides for lymphocytes includes protection from DNA damage . WASp acts as a novel element to link irradiation - induced DNA damage signaling with the Golgi dispersal response ( GDR ) , which has the ability of ensuring genome stability and contributes to cell survival under DNA damage . The loss of WASp triggers accumulated DNA damage and causes the failure of GDR , resulting in the dysfunction of human T and B lymphocytes ( 302 ) . 3 . 3 NK Cells As a vital member of lymphocytes , natural killer cells ( NK cell ) are not only involved in ﬁ ghting tumors and infections , but also participate in hypersensitivity and autoimmune disease . Its natural killing activity is independent of antigen stimulation and is not restricted by MHC . 3 . 3 . 1 NK Cell Cytotoxicity NK cells can kill target cells by forming IS and releasing lytic granules ( 303 ) . The activity of NK cells is regulated by cytoskeletal proteins ( 304 , 305 ) , of which the Arp2 / 3 complex promotes the aggregation of NK receptors in the lytic synapse , allowing for stable binding between NK cells and target cells . This has been demonstrated in studies showing that the lack of Arp2 / 3 causes defective cell adhesion to target cells , which inhibits lytic synapse actin assembly , thus affecting the lysis activity of NK cells ( 306 ) . Additionally , examination at the nanoscale level found that the Arp2 / 3 complex also plays an active role in lytic granule secretion ( 307 ) . T b 4 enhances the cytotoxicity of NK cells by increasing the expression of intercellular adhesion molecule - 1 ( ICAM - 1 ) and LFA - 1 , as well as cytolytic granule exocytosis ( 308 ) . Furthermore , the expression of T b 4 is upregulated by IL - 18 and in turn , T b 4 enhances IFN - g secretion mediated by IL - 18 in NK cells , which positively in ﬂ uences the immunomodulatory role of NK cells ( 309 ) . With respect to the WASp family , WASp is localized in the IS with F - actin and regulates cytotoxicity functions in NK cells ( 310 , 311 ) . This correlates with the interaction of DOCK8 , which regulates the polarization of WASp and mediates the cytotoxicity of NK cells ( 312 ) . The Y141 tyrosine of WASH can be phosphorylated by the Src family kinase Lck , thus exerting its role in promoting the movement and release of granules and assisting the cytotoxic effects of NK cells ( 313 ) . Formins also help in NK cell activity . It has been demonstrated that the effect of hDia1 on NK cell toxic effects is actin - independent , instead it mediates the formation of microtubule networks through enrichment at the lytic synapse to facilitate the transport and secretion of lytic granules ( 306 ) . In addition , the function of hDia1 in the formation of ﬁ lopodial protrusions makes it a vital factor involved in the migration and adhesion of NK cells ( 306 ) . What is more , co ﬁ lin is phosphorylated in response to LIMK stimulation and regulates the remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton in NK cells , thus affecting its cytotoxicity ( 314 ) . Finally , a recent mass spectrometry study of NK cell protein expression in severe aplastic anemia ( SAA ) patients found that the Arp2 / 3 complex is downregulated in NK cells ( 315 ) , suggesting a role in the disease - protective function of NK cells in SAA . 3 . 3 . 2 Others As for cell movement , the knockdown of N - WASP partially rescues the inhibition of NK cell migration towards CXCL12 gradient , suggesting its involvement in the positive regulation of NK cell motility ( 316 ) . Furthermore , the results of in vitro experiments suggest that co ﬁ lin in NK - 92 cells is stimulated by leptin under physiological conditions , which may promote cell migration and mediate the positive effects of leptin on NK cell morphology in a healthy environment ( 317 ) . It has been reported that WASp de ﬁ ciency affects the activation of NK cells and DCs , as DCs in WAS KO mice have weaker induction of NK cells , thus in ﬂ uencing the immune response . Up to now , it is believed that coronin has little function in NK cells , although further research is still needed ( 318 ) . 4 RELATED DISEASES 4 . 1 Cancer Since actin ﬁ laments are important to cell motility , migration , adhesion , cell growth and cell division , aberrant functions of actin regulators could lead to abnormal cellular functions and cytokinesis , thus contributing to the development and migration of tumor cells ( 319 ) . Moreover , aberrant actin regulators can also in ﬂ uence the cytotoxic functions of T cells and NK cells , resulting in tumorigenesis and progression . Sun et al . Actin Regulators in Lymphocytes Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 799309 15 T b 4 is reported to have tumor - promoting functions that enhance the motility of cancerous cells . Myocardin - related transcription factors ( MRTF ) , which are co - activators of serum response factor ( SRF ) , are linked to epithelial - mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) and tumor metastasis . Studies have found T b 4 can bind to actin competitively with MRTF , mediating the activation of the latter by TGF b and regulating the cytoskeleton and the expression of tumor - associated proteins , thus enhancing the motility of tumor cells and leading to tumor progression and metastasis ( 320 ) . Additionally , in glioma cells , T b 4 inhibition reduces the migratory capacity and aggressiveness of tumor cells and is a potential target for the treatment of glioblastoma ( 321 ) . Many recent studies have focused on the relationship between WASp and cancer . WASp is important for tumor suppression and killing and considered a new possible therapeutic target in cancer . In T cells , constitutive activation of WASp improves cytotoxic clearing of tumor cells ( 322 ) . Interestingly , studies have shown that WASp plays opposite roles in malignant and benign lymphocytes . In benign T and B cells , WASp is a tumor - suppressor protein , however it acts as a tumor activator in malignant lymphocytes , since the lack of WASp leads to an imbalance of CDC42 / MAPK and NF - k B / AP - 1 signaling pathways , which is important for the development of cancer ( 323 ) . But a recent study reported that WASp and WIP are tumor suppressors in T cell lymphoma , because high expression of WASp prevents lymphoma growth ( 189 ) . Further studies are needed to ﬁ gure out the role of WASp in malignant lymphocytes . In WASp de ﬁ cient mice , the antitumor functions of NK cells and DCs are weakened ( 324 ) . WASp de ﬁ cient patients have increased granzyme B and degranulation , along with enhanced production of IFN - g . Additionally , the expression levels of DNAM - 1 , LAG - 3 , KLRG1 increase while CD56 expression decreases , indicating a lack of NK cell phenotype . This correlates with defective F - actin accumulation and disruption of lytic synapse formation . All these changes in NK cells lead to a weaker anti - tumor response ( 322 , 325 ) . In addition , inhibiting Cdc42 , which activates NKG2D , WASp and N - WASp to regulate NK cell migration , may impact immunoreaction and evasion in tumors ( 316 ) . The Arp2 / 3 complex also shows strong relevance in cancer development . The contribution of the Arp2 / 3 complex in podosome formation ( 326 , 327 ) makes it an important factor in enhancing the mobility of cancer cells . N - WASP can promote cancer progression by activating Arp2 / 3 and affecting the tumor killing function of NK cells . For example , it has been demonstrated that N - WASP exerts actin - regulatory activity in colorectal cancer metastasis ( 328 ) , while in breast cancer cells , N - WASP enables rapid actin reconstitution , accumulating large amounts of F - actin at NK cell synapses , thus resisting NK cell attack and inducing immune escape ( 329 ) . Furthermore , a clinical study on esophageal carcinoma showed that overexpressed WASH maintained the stem cell phenotype of cancer cells by promoting IL - 8 production , thus promoting the progression of the carcinoma . Additionally , in vivo experiments found that the inhibition of WASH expression slowed the progression of tumors , which suggests WASH be a potential target to intervene in human esophageal carcinoma ( 330 ) . A study performed on an oral squamous cell carcinoma ( SCC ) cell line revealed that PI3K signaling - dependent formin , FHOD1 , was speci ﬁ cally upregulated during EMT in tumor cells , which promoted morphological changes and enhanced the invasiveness of cancer cells ( 331 ) . Similarly , an in vivo study found that mDia1 promoted the TEM capacity of leukemia cells and played an active role in the progression of leukemia , and conditional inhibition of mDia1 expression might be a latent way to treat leukemia ( 332 ) . Studies in Molt - 3 and Jurkat cells indicate that human formin - 2 ( FMN2 ) expression is inhibited by upregulated microRNA - 144 ( miR - 144 ) , affecting normal cellular activities and providing an explanation for the tumor suppression mechanism of miR - 144 ( 333 ) . Additionally , FMNL1 is expressed in a variety of malignant tissues , while an antigenic peptide ( FMNL1 - PP2 ) derived from FMNL1 was experimentally shown to induce speci ﬁ c T cells to exert killing effects on tumors , including lymphomas ( 334 ) . Co ﬁ lin is also closely associated with tumor development . The regulation of co ﬁ lin phosphorylation by Myeloid cell leukemia 1 ( MCL - 1 ) is associated with tumor cell activity in B - cell lymphoma 2 , and the inhibition of this effect of MCL - 1 has become important for tumor therapy ( 335 ) . Moreover , in malignant T lymphoma cells , it was found that blocking the dephosphorylation of co ﬁ lin led to apoptosis , which might have a promising role in arresting tumor progression ( 336 ) . Co ﬁ lin ’ s regulatory role on the cytoskeleton makes it an important molecule in regulating the migration of tumor cells ( 337 ) . It has been demonstrated that chitinase 3 - like 1 ( Chi3l1 ) dysregulation , present in many solid tumors , inhibits the accumulation of phosphorylated co ﬁ lin , hence promoting tumor cell metastasis , however , activation of RIG - like helicase can rescue this process ( 338 ) . Speci ﬁ cally , in breast cancer , various molecules , such as LMO2 , regulate the actin cytoskeleton by interacting with co ﬁ lin and altering the dynamics of cell adhesion and lamellipodial , thereby promoting the metastasis of cancer cells and increasing their invasiveness ( 339 – 341 ) . Additionally , in the tumor microenvironment , granulocytes or macrophages can mediate oxidative stress ( 342 , 343 ) , which may lead to a loss of functional activity of co ﬁ lin , and in turn affect the function of T cells . In tumor treatment , heat therapy can inhibit tumor cell migration by phosphorylating co ﬁ lin through high temperature , but it should be noted that the inhibitory effect of Hsp70 overexpression on this process can reduce the ef ﬁ cacy ( 344 ) . Analysis of the proteome of Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma ( PDAC ) tissues showed that protein level of WDR1 increased with the clinical progression of PDAC . Further studies revealed that WDR1 is associated with tumor cell growth and metastasis and is involved in the deubiquitination of b - Catenin in PDAC cells by interacting with USP7 , thereby regulating Wnt / b - Catenin signaling in PDAC cells ( 345 ) . Overall , comprehensive understanding of the role of various actin regulators in tumorigenesis and metastasis can provide new ideas for precise therapy . Moreover , the critical role of actin regulators in immune cells can modulate tumor microenvironment and affect the outcome of immunotherapy . Sun et al . Actin Regulators in Lymphocytes Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 799309 16 Therefore , further studies are required in this ﬁ eld to bring more bene ﬁ t to patients with cancer . 4 . 2 HIV Acquired immunode ﬁ ciency syndrome ( AIDS ) is a severe infectious disease caused by Human Immunode ﬁ ciency Virus ( HIV ) infection . Although researchers around the world have made great efforts , no effective drugs have been developed to cure AIDS , and there is also no effective vaccine that can be used for prevention . Several actin regulators are reported to be related to HIV infection and may provide latent therapeutic targets for AIDS . The role of pro ﬁ lin in resisting HIV infection is controversial . In ADP - Heat Shock Protein ( ADP - HSP ) immunized macaques , pro ﬁ lin can up - regulate the expression of apolipoprotein B mRNA - editing enzyme - catalytic polypeptide - like 3G ( APOBEC3G ) , and increase the level of IgG against CD4 + T cells , which provides a new direction of therapy in HIV infection ( 346 ) . However , another study has shown that through downregulating drebrin , another actin - binding protein , pro ﬁ lins accumulate and suppress the polymerization of actin in CD4 + T cells , which increases the entry of HIV ( 347 ) . HIV can cause the over - activation of co ﬁ lin ( 348 ) , leading to a weakened T cell cycle and inhibiting T cell activation ( 349 , 350 ) . In vitro studies , however , revealed that the use of anti - human a 4 b 7 integrin antibodies partially restored the motility of CD4 + T cells ( 348 ) . Co ﬁ lin and the cytoskeleton have an important role in HIV infection ( 351 ) . First , HIV can activate co ﬁ lin through CXCR4 - mediated G a i - dependent signaling pathways , promoting the depolymerization of cortical actin and facilitating its viral nuclear localization in resting T cells ( 352 ) . Also , chemokines such as CCL19 and CCL21 can produce a similar reaction to promote the nuclear migration of HIV in memory T cells , which is one of the possible mechanisms for the establishment of HIV latency ( 353 , 354 ) . Furthermore , the migration of infected T cells can be restricted by HIV through the binding of Nef to the cellular kinase Pak2 , which phosphorylates co ﬁ lin and inhibits actin dynamics ( 355 ) . In vitro and in vivo studies both showed that intracellular T b 4 expression in T cells and macrophages was reduced after HIV - 1 infection , indicating a regulatory effect of T b 4 in T cell immunity ( 356 ) . N - WASP is one of the ways in which HIV - 1 infects T cells . The Nef protein of HIV - 1 inhibits both the activation of N - WASP and its recruitment in the T cell contact region , which also interferes with the role of its upstream regulatory molecules , Rac1 and Cdc42 , in regulating actin remodeling , thus inhibiting the proper TCR signaling pathway ( 357 ) . Arp2 / 3 plays a critical role in HIV infection . Earlier studies have found that during pathogen infection the Arp2 / 3 complex of host cells can be activated by the vaccinia virus - encoded A36R protein , contributing to virus transmission ( 358 ) . Also , baculovirus activates the Arp2 / 3 complex similarly , facilitating viral proliferation ( 359 ) . The action of HIV on the Arp2 / 3 complex is an important component in the development of AIDs . Through the Rac1 - IRSP53 - WAVE2 - Arp2 / 3 signaling pathway , HIV can invade host cells ( 360 ) and promote the assembly and release of virus - like particles ( VLPs ) ( 361 ) . Lack of the Arp2 / 3 complex inhibits HIV infection of CD4 T cells , implying it could be a potent target for the treatment of AIDs ( 362 , 363 ) . Furthermore , Dia1 and Dia2 also play an important role in early HIV - 1 infection by helping to form a stable microtubule network and promoting viral uncoating ( 364 ) . In HIV - 1 infected DCs , Dia2 facilitates HIV - 1 infection of T cells by regulating actin assembly to assist ﬁ lopodia formation , while Slit2N was found to inhibit this effect ( 365 , 366 ) . Determining the relationship between HIV infection and actin regulators will be helpful in developing more effective drugs in the prevention and treatment of AIDS in the future . 4 . 3 Others Because of the vital role of the cytoskeleton in lymphocytes , actin regulators are also speci ﬁ cally related to other diseases including autoimmune diseases and infectious diseases . High expression of T b 4 was detected in patients with pulmonary tuberculosis , which is related to in ﬂ ammation and angiogenesis mediated by HIF - 1 a and VEGF and may serve as a potential biomarker for diagnosis ( 367 ) . Moreover , an analogue of T b 4 was found to have a restorative effect on T - lymphocyte de ﬁ ciency in uremic patients and used to rescue the immune function in uremic patients ( 368 ) . WAS directly in ﬂ uences the essential role of the functional activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex mediated by WASp in the human body ( 62 ) . CID , a disease caused by a homozygous mutation in the gene encoding ARPC1B , is similar to WAS ( 230 ) . And defects in ARPC4 in the epidermis may trigger Psoriasis - like skin complication epidermis ( 369 ) , while pachygyria may be caused by cortical neuronal migration disorders due to overactivity of the Arp2 / 3 complex ( 370 ) . Also , the decrease in cell migration caused by the inhibition of the Arp2 / 3 complex by factors such as prostaglandin E2 may be responsible for Hirschsprung disease ( 371 , 372 ) . Recent studies have also identi ﬁ ed the signi ﬁ cance of this complex in bone and neural tissues , suggesting that defects in Arp2 / 3 may be associated with the development of intervertebral disc defects ( 373 ) as well as Down syndrome and Alzheimer disease ( 374 ) . In innate immune cells , defective WASp interrupts the autophagy - in ﬂ ammasome axis ( 375 ) . And further studies reveal that depending on the interaction with Arp2 / 3 , WASp plays an essential role in the autophagy process , especially during the autophagosome formation and the delivery of autophagosomes to lysosomes ( 376 ) , which contributes to the development of auto - in ﬂ ammatory diseases . Additionally , the dysfunction of endogenous inhibitory proteins of Arp2 / 3 also leads to the development of several diseases . For example , the over - expression of coronin 1A causes the over activation of CD4 + T cells and CD8 + T cells in aplastic anemia and hemophagocytic syndrome ( 377 ) . Formins perform different roles in the development of several diseases . For example , the promotion of CD4 + T cell migration by FMNL1 may be one of the pathogenic mechanisms of equine recurrent uveitis ( ERU ) ( 378 ) , suggesting its role in autoimmune diseases . In addition , it is noteworthy that in the chemical - Sun et al . Actin Regulators in Lymphocytes Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 799309 17 induced asthma mouse model , the expression of co ﬁ lin in B cells differs from that in normal individuals ( 379 ) , suggesting a link between co ﬁ lin and the progression of B cell - associated diseases . Another point of interest is that mutations in the WDR1 gene have been found to cause lazy leukocyte syndrome , a disease characterized by impaired neutrophils , recurrent infections , and stomatitis ( 380 – 382 ) . In combination with other ﬁ ndings ( 198 , 383 ) , this mutation impairs the regulation of actin by WDR1 , leading to increased levels of F - actin , which induces an IL - 18 - mediated in ﬂ ammatory response downstream . Thus , WDR1 is extremely important for neutrophil function and its de ﬁ ciency can lead to auto - in ﬂ ammation and immunode ﬁ ciency ( 179 ) . 5 CONCLUSIONS Here , we discussed a selection of the most representative actin regulators whose functions in universal cells have been studied extensively , therefore we focused on their roles in lymphocytes . Many of the identi ﬁ ed actin regulators to date have important roles in the development and functional activity of lymphocytes . The majority of these roles are performed through cytoskeletal modulation by actin , leading to changes in cell structure or polarity that affect lymphocyte development and immune activity . It is also possible that actin regulators act as effector molecules involved in cellular signaling pathways , thereby regulating cellular activities such as gene expression , where actin may not be necessary . It is worth mentioning that these actin regulators do not exist independently . Actin regulators with similar / opposite functions coordinate / antagonize each other intracellularly to form a complete cytoskeletal regulatory network . Meanwhile , these actin regulators are not in complete parallel in terms of their functions , and multiple regulatory effects on lymphocytes need to be realized through interactions between upstream and downstream actin regulators . Therefore , damage or deletion of different actin regulators causes cellular developmental disorders and malfunctions to different degrees , leading to the development of various diseases . Particularly , in immune system diseases , abnormalities of these proteins often lead to immune overload or immunosuppression by affecting the normal signaling of intrinsic immune cells . Unfortunately , not all of the actin regulators are fully discussed here since little is known about the functional role of some of the recently discovered actin regulators in lymphocytes . In particular , proteins with more speci ﬁ c functions , such as WASH , may have more scope for investigation in lymphocytes . In addition , we noticed that several actin regulators are closely related to AIDS and tumors , and previous studies have suggested the potential value of targeting these proteins for treatment , so a combine study of several related actin regulators could be followed as an entry point to ﬁ nd the most likely therapeutic modality . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS JS , XZ , and XF wrote the article and drew the ﬁ gures . BY and CL organized the draft and revised the draft . HM and PL reviewed , proofread , and revised the draft . JS , XZ , and XF contribute equally to this work . All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version . FUNDING This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China ( 31970839 ) , HUST Academic Frontier Youth Team ( 2018QYTD10 ) , Independent Innovation Research Fund of Huazhong University of Science and Technology ( 2020kfyXGYJ017 ) , and National Undergraduate Training Program for Innovation and Entrepreneurship ( 202110487122 ) . REFERENCES 1 . Elzinga M , Collins JH , Kuehl WM , Adelstein RS . Complete Amino - Acid Sequence of Actin of Rabbit Skeletal Muscle . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA ( 1973 ) 70 ( 9 ) : 2687 – 91 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 70 . 9 . 2687 2 . Selby CC , Bear RS . The Structure of Actin - Rich Filaments of Muscles According to X - Ray Diffraction . J Biophys Biochem Cytol ( 1956 ) 2 ( 1 ) : 71 – 85 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 2 . 1 . 71 3 . Goley ED , Welch MD . The ARP2 / 3 Complex : An Actin Nucleator Comes of Age . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol ( 2006 ) 7 ( 10 ) : 713 – 26 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2026 4 . Wegner A , Isenberg G . 12 - Fold Difference Between the Critical Monomer Concentrations of the Two Ends of Actin Filaments in Physiological Salt Conditions . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA ( 1983 ) 80 ( 16 ) : 4922 – 5 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 80 . 16 . 4922 5 . Heuser JE , Kirschner MW . Filament Organization Revealed in Platinum Replicas of Freeze - Dried Cytoskeletons . J Cell Biol ( 1980 ) 86 ( 1 ) : 212 – 34 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 86 . 1 . 212 6 . Kovar DR , Pollard TD . Insertional Assembly of Actin Filament Barbed Ends in Association With Formins Produces Piconewton Forces . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA ( 2004 ) 101 ( 41 ) : 14725 – 30 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0405902101 7 . Yang C , Czech L , Gerboth S , Kojima S , Scita G , Svitkina T . Novel Roles of Formin Mdia2 in Lamellipodia and Filopodia Formation in Motile Cells . PLoS Biol ( 2007 ) 5 ( 11 ) : e317 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 8 . Doherty GJ , McMahon HT . Mechanisms of Endocytosis . Annu Rev Biochem ( 2009 ) 78 : 857 – 902 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . biochem . 78 . 081307 . 110540 9 . Huxley AF , Niedergerke R . Structural Changes in Muscle During Contraction ; Interference Microscopy of Living Muscle Fibres . Nature ( 1954 ) 173 ( 4412 ) : 971 – 3 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 173971a0 10 . Pollard TD . Actin and Actin - Binding Proteins . Cold Spring Harbor Perspect Biol ( 2016 ) 8 ( 8 ) : a018226 . doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a018226 11 . Al - Shura AN . 7 - Lymphocytes . In : AN Al - Shura , editor . Advanced Hematology in Integrated Cardiovascular Chinese Medicine . London : Academic Press ( 2020 ) . p . 41 – 6 . 12 . Cohn L , Hawrylowicz C , Ray A . 12 - Biology of Lymphocytes . In : NF Adkinson , BS Bochner , AW Burks , WW Busse , ST Holgate and RF Lemanske , editors . Middleton ' s Allergy ( Eighth Edition ) . London : W . B . Saunders ( 2014 ) . p . 203 – 14 . 13 . Omman RA , Kini AR . 9 - Leukocyte Development , Kinetics , and Functions . In : EM Keohane , CN Otto and JM Walenga , editors . Rodak ' s Hematology ( Sixth Edition ) . St . Louis , MO : Elsevier ( 2020 ) . p . 117 – 35 . 14 . Dupre ́ L , Houmadi R , Tang C , Rey - Barroso J . T Lymphocyte Migration : An Action Movie Starring the Actin and Associated Actors . Front Immunol ( 2015 ) 6 : 586 . doi : 10 . 3389 / ﬁ mmu . 2015 . 00586 15 . Penninger JM , Crabtree GR . The Actin Cytoskeleton and Lymphocyte Activation . Cell ( 1999 ) 96 ( 1 ) : 9 – 12 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0092 - 8674 ( 00 ) 80954 - x 16 . Tolar P . Cytoskeletal Control of B Cell Responses to Antigens . Nat Rev Immunol ( 2017 ) 17 ( 10 ) : 621 – 34 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nri . 2017 . 67 Sun et al . Actin Regulators in Lymphocytes Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 799309 18 17 . Yan SLS , Hwang IY , Kamenyeva O , Kehrl JH . In Vivo F - Actin Filament Organization During Lymphocyte Transendothelial and Interstitial Migration Revealed by Intravital Microscopy . iScience ( 2019 ) 16 : 283 – 97 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . isci . 2019 . 05 . 040 18 . Tang DD , Gerlach BD . The Roles and Regulation of the Actin Cytoskeleton , Intermediate Filaments and Microtubules in Smooth Muscle Cell Migration . Respir Res ( 2017 ) 18 ( 1 ) : 54 . doi : 10 . 1186 / s12931 - 017 - 0544 - 7 19 . Varma R , Campi G , Yokosuka T , Saito T , Dustin ML . T Cell Receptor - Proximal Signals Are Sustained in Peripheral Microclusters and Terminated in the Central Supramolecular Activation Cluster . Immunity ( 2006 ) 25 ( 1 ) : 117 – 27 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . immuni . 2006 . 04 . 010 20 . Phee H , Au - Yeung BB , Pryshchep O , O ' Hagan KL , Fairbairn SG , Radu M , et al . Pak2 Is Required for Actin Cytoskeleton Remodeling , TCR Signaling , and Normal Thymocyte Development and Maturation . eLife ( 2014 ) 3 : e02270 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 02270 21 . Fleire SJ , Goldman JP , Carrasco YR , Weber M , Bray D , Batista FD . B Cell Ligand Discrimination Through a Spreading and Contraction Response . Science ( New York NY ) ( 2006 ) 312 ( 5774 ) : 738 – 41 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1123940 22 . Brown BK , Song W . The Actin Cytoskeleton is Required for the Traf ﬁ cking of the B Cell Antigen Receptor to the Late Endosomes . Traf ﬁ c ( Copenhagen Denmark ) ( 2001 ) 2 ( 6 ) : 414 – 27 . doi : 10 . 1034 / j . 1600 - 0854 . 2001 . 002006414 . x 23 . Graham DB , Cella M , Giurisato E , Fujikawa K , Miletic AV , Kloeppel T , et al . Vav1 Controls DAP10 - Mediated Natural Cytotoxicity by Regulating Actin and Microtubule Dynamics . J Immunol ( Baltimore Md 1950 ) ( 2006 ) 177 ( 4 ) : 2349 – 55 . doi : 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 177 . 4 . 2349 24 . Gil - Krzewska A , Saeed MB , Oszmiana A , Fischer ER , Lagrue K , Gahl WA , et al . An Actin Cytoskeletal Barrier Inhibits Lytic Granule Release From Natural Killer Cells in Patients With Chediak - Higashi Syndrome . J Allergy Clin Immunol ( 2018 ) 142 ( 3 ) : 914 – 27 . e6 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jaci . 2017 . 10 . 040 25 . Vorum H , Ostergaard M , Hensechke P , Enghild JJ , Riazati M , Rice GE . Proteomic Analysis of Hyperoxia - Induced Responses in the Human Choriocarcinoma Cell Line JEG - 3 . Proteomics ( 2004 ) 4 ( 3 ) : 861 – 7 . doi : 10 . 1002 / pmic . 200300639 26 . Carlsson L , Nystrom LE , Lindberg U , Kannan KK , Cid - Dresdner H , Lovgren S . Crystallization of a non - Muscle Actin . J Mol Biol ( 1976 ) 105 ( 3 ) : 353 – 66 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0022 - 2836 ( 76 ) 90098 - x 27 . Krishnan K , Moens PDJ . Structure and Functions of Pro ﬁ lins . Biophys Rev ( 2009 ) 1 ( 2 ) : 71 – 81 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s12551 - 009 - 0010 - y 28 . Witke W , Sutherland JD , Sharpe A , Arai M , Kwiatkowski DJ . Pro ﬁ lin I Is Essential for Cell Survival and Cell Division in Early Mouse Development . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA ( 2001 ) 98 ( 7 ) : 3832 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 051515498 29 . Braun A , Aszodi A , Hellebrand H , Berna A , Fassler R , Brandau O . Genomic Organization of Pro ﬁ lin - III and Evidence for a Transcript Expressed Exclusively in Testis . Gene ( 2002 ) 283 ( 1 - 2 ) : 219 – 25 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0378 - 1119 ( 01 ) 00855 - 1 30 . Obermann H , Raabe I , Balvers M , Brunswig B , Schulze W , Kirchhoff C . Novel Testis - Expressed Pro ﬁ lin IV Associated With Acrosome Biogenesis and Spermatid Elongation . Mol Hum Reprod ( 2005 ) 11 ( 1 ) : 53 – 64 . doi : 10 . 1093 / molehr / gah132 31 . Hu E , Chen Z , Fredrickson T , Zhu Y . Molecular Cloning and Characterization of Pro ﬁ lin - 3 : A Novel Cytoskeleton - Associated Gene Expressed in Rat Kidney and Testes . Exp Nephrol ( 2001 ) 9 ( 4 ) : 265 – 74 . doi : 10 . 1159 / 000052621 32 . Wittenmayer N , Rothkegel M , Jockusch BM , Schluter K . Functional Characterization of Green Fluorescent Protein - Pro ﬁ lin Fusion Proteins . Eur J Biochem ( 2000 ) 267 ( 16 ) : 5247 – 56 . doi : 10 . 1046 / j . 1432 - 1327 . 2000 . 01600 . x 33 . Mayboroda O , Schluter K , Jockusch BM . Differential Colocalization of Pro ﬁ lin With Micro ﬁ laments in PtK2 Cells . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton ( 1997 ) 37 ( 2 ) : 166 – 77 . doi : 10 . 1002 / ( SICI ) 1097 - 0169 ( 1997 ) 37 : 2 < 166 : : AID - CM9 > 3 . 0 . CO ; 2 - 6 34 . Sohn RH , Goldschmidt - Clermont PJ . Pro ﬁ lin : At the Crossroads of Signal Transduction and the Actin Cytoskeleton . Bioessays ( 1994 ) 16 ( 7 ) : 465 – 72 . doi : 10 . 1002 / bies . 950160705 35 . Sathish K , Padma B , Munugalavadla V , Bhargavi V , Radhika KV , Wasia R , et al . Phosphorylation of Pro ﬁ lin Regulates its Interaction With Actin and Poly ( L - Proline ) . Cell Signal ( 2004 ) 16 ( 5 ) : 589 – 96 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cellsig . 2003 . 10 . 001 36 . Gau D , Veon W , Zeng X , Yates N , Shroff SG , Koes DR , et al . Threonine 89 Is an Important Residue of Pro ﬁ lin - 1 That Is Phosphorylatable by Protein Kinase A . PLoS One ( 2016 ) 11 ( 5 ) : e0156313 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0156313 37 . Shao J , Diamond MI . Protein Phosphatase 1 Dephosphorylates Pro ﬁ lin - 1 at Ser - 137 . PLoS One ( 2012 ) 7 ( 3 ) : e32802 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0032802 38 . Yarmola EG , Bubb MR . Pro ﬁ lin : Emerging Concepts and Lingering Misconceptions . Trends Biochem Sci ( 2006 ) 31 ( 4 ) : 197 – 205 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tibs . 2006 . 02 . 006 39 . Carlsson L , Nystrom LE , Sundkvist I , Markey F , Lindberg U . Actin Polymerizability Is In ﬂ uenced by Pro ﬁ lin , a Low Molecular Weight Protein in Non - Muscle Cells . J Mol Biol ( 1977 ) 115 ( 3 ) : 465 – 83 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0022 - 2836 ( 77 ) 90166 - 8 40 . Zweifel ME , Courtemanche N . Pro ﬁ lin ' s Af ﬁ nity for Formin Regulates the Availability of Filament Ends for Actin Monomer Binding . J Mol Biol ( 2020 ) 432 ( 24 ) : 166688 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2020 . 10 . 022 41 . Goldschmidt - Clermont PJ , Furman MI , Wachsstock D , Safer D , Nachmias VT , Pollard TD . The Control of Actin Nucleotide Exchange by Thymosin Beta 4 and Pro ﬁ lin . A Potential Regulatory Mechanism for Actin Polymerization in Cells . Mol Biol Cell ( 1992 ) 3 ( 9 ) : 1015 – 24 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . 3 . 9 . 1015 42 . Nakamura M , Verboon JM , Allen TE , Abreu - Blanco MT , Liu R , Dominguez ANM , et al . Autocrine Insulin Pathway Signaling Regulates Actin Dynamics in Cell Wound Repair . PLoS Genet ( 2020 ) 16 ( 12 ) : e1009186 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pgen . 1009186 43 . Henty - Ridilla JL , Juanes MA , Goode BL . Pro ﬁ lin Directly Promotes Microtubule Growth Through Residues Mutated in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis . Curr Biol ( 2017 ) 27 ( 22 ) : 3535 – 43 . e4 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2017 . 10 . 002 44 . Mouneimne G , Hansen SD , Selfors LM , Petrak L , Hickey MM , Gallegos LL , et al . Differential Remodeling of Actin Cytoskeleton Architecture by Pro ﬁ lin Isoforms Leads to Distinct Effects on Cell Migration and Invasion . Cancer Cell ( 2012 ) 22 ( 5 ) : 615 – 30 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ccr . 2012 . 09 . 027 45 . Ramesh N , Anton IM , Hartwig JH , Geha RS . WIP , a Protein Associated With Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome Protein , Induces Actin Polymerization and Redistribution in Lymphoid Cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA ( 1997 ) 94 ( 26 ) : 14671 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 94 . 26 . 14671 46 . Vicente - Manzanares M , Rey M , Pe ́ rez - Mart ı ́ nez M , Ya ́ ñez - Mo ́ M , Sancho D , Cabrero JR , et al . The RhoA Effector Mdia Is Induced During T Cell Activation and Regulates Actin Polymerization and Cell Migration in T Lymphocytes . J Immunol ( Baltimore Md 1950 ) ( 2003 ) 171 ( 2 ) : 1023 – 34 . doi : 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 171 . 2 . 1023 47 . Reinhard M , Giehl K , Abel K , Haffner C , Jarchau T , Hoppe V , et al . The Proline - Rich Focal Adhesion and Micro ﬁ lament Protein VASP Is a Ligand for Pro ﬁ lins . EMBO J ( 1995 ) 14 ( 8 ) : 1583 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1002 / j . 1460 - 2075 . 1995 . tb07146 . x 48 . Gertler FB , Niebuhr K , Reinhard M , Wehland J , Soriano P . Mena , a Relative of VASP and Drosophila Enabled , Is Implicated in the Control of Micro ﬁ lament Dynamics . Cell ( 1996 ) 87 ( 2 ) : 227 – 39 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0092 - 8674 ( 00 ) 81341 - 0 49 . Purich DL , Southwick FS . ABM - 1 and ABM - 2 Homology Sequences : Consensus Docking Sites for Actin - Based Motility De ﬁ ned by Oligoproline Regions in Listeria ActA Surface Protein and Human VASP . Biochem Biophys Res Commun ( 1997 ) 231 ( 3 ) : 686 – 91 . doi : 10 . 1006 / bbrc . 1997 . 6158 50 . Suarez C , Carroll RT , Burke TA , Christensen JR , Bestul AJ , Sees JA , et al . Pro ﬁ lin Regulates F - Actin Network Homeostasis by Favoring Formin Over Arp2 / 3 Complex . Dev Cell ( 2015 ) 32 ( 1 ) : 43 – 53 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2014 . 10 . 027 51 . Davidson AJ , Wood W . Unravelling the Actin Cytoskeleton : A New Competitive Edge ? Trends Cell Biol ( 2016 ) 26 ( 8 ) : 569 – 76 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2016 . 04 . 001 52 . Low TL , Hu SK , Goldstein AL . Complete Amino Acid Sequence of Bovine Thymosin Beta 4 : A Thymic Hormone That Induces Terminal Deoxynucleotidyl Transferase Activity in Thymocyte Populations . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA ( 1981 ) 78 ( 2 ) : 1162 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 78 . 2 . 1162 Sun et al . Actin Regulators in Lymphocytes Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 799309 19 53 . Gondo H , Kudo J , White JW , Barr C , Selvanayagam P , Saunders GF . Differential Expression of the Human Thymosin - Beta 4 Gene in Lymphocytes , Macrophages , and Granulocytes . J Immunol ( Baltimore Md 1950 ) ( 1987 ) 139 ( 11 ) : 3840 – 8 . 54 . Paulussen M , Landuyt B , Schoofs L , Luyten W , Arckens L . Thymosin Beta 4 mRNA and Peptide Expression in Phagocytic Cells of Different Mouse Tissues . Peptides ( 2009 ) 30 ( 10 ) : 1822 – 32 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . peptides . 2009 . 07 . 010 55 . Go ́ mez - Ma ́ rquez J , Dosil M , Segade F , Bustelo XR , Pichel JG , Dominguez F , et al . Thymosin - Beta 4 Gene . Preliminary Characterization and Expression in Tissues , Thymic Cells , and Lymphocytes . J Immunol ( Baltimore Md 1950 ) ( 1989 ) 143 ( 8 ) : 2740 – 4 . 56 . Safer D , Sosnick TR , Elzinga M . Thymosin Beta 4 Binds Actin in an Extended Conformation and Contacts Both the Barbed and Pointed Ends . Biochemistry ( 1997 ) 36 ( 19 ) : 5806 – 16 . doi : 10 . 1021 / bi970185v 57 . Dedova IV , Nikolaeva OP , Safer D , de la Cruz EM , dos Remedios CG . Thymosin Beta4 Induces a Conformational Change in Actin Monomers . Biophys J ( 2006 ) 90 ( 3 ) : 985 – 92 . doi : 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 105 . 063081 58 . Carlier MF , Jean C , Rieger KJ , Lenfant M , Pantaloni D . Modulation of the Interaction Between G - Actin and Thymosin Beta 4 by the ATP / ADP Ratio : Possible Implication in the Regulation of Actin Dynamics . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA ( 1993 ) 90 ( 11 ) : 5034 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 90 . 11 . 5034 59 . Huff T , Rosorius O , Otto AM , Müller CS , Ballweber E , Hannappel E , et al . Nuclear Localisation of the G - Actin Sequestering Peptide Thymosin Beta4 . J Cell Sci ( 2004 ) 117 ( Pt 22 ) : 5333 – 41 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 01404 60 . Notarangelo LD , Miao CH , Ochs HD . Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome . Curr Opin Hematol ( 2008 ) 15 ( 1 ) : 30 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1097 / MOH . 0b013e3282f30448 61 . Halle - Bikovski A , Fried S , Rozentur - Shkop E , Biber G , Shaked H , Joseph N , et al . New Structural Insights Into Formation of the Key Actin Regulating WIP - WASp Complex Determined by NMR and Molecular Imaging . ACS Chem Biol ( 2018 ) 13 ( 1 ) : 100 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1021 / acschembio . 7b00486 62 . Derry JM , Ochs HD , Francke U . Isolation of a Novel Gene Mutated in Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome . Cell ( 1994 ) 78 ( 4 ) : 635 – 44 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 94 ) 90528 - 2 63 . Cianferoni A , Massaad M , Feske S , de la Fuente MA , Gallego L , Ramesh N , et al . Defective Nuclear Translocation of Nuclear Factor of Activated T Cells and Extracellular Signal - Regulated Kinase Underlies De ﬁ cient IL - 2 Gene Expression in Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome . J Allergy Clin Immunol ( 2005 ) 116 ( 6 ) : 1364 – 71 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jaci . 2005 . 09 . 006 64 . Luan Q , Zelter A , MacCoss MJ , Davis TN , Nolen BJ . Identi ﬁ cation of Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome Protein ( WASP ) Binding Sites on the Branched Actin Filament Nucleator Arp2 / 3 Complex . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA ( 2018 ) 115 ( 7 ) : E1409 – e18 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1716622115 65 . Verboon JM , Sugumar B , Parkhurst SM . Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome Proteins in the Nucleus : aWASH With Possibilities . Nucleus ( Austin Tex ) ( 2015 ) 6 ( 5 ) : 349 – 59 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 19491034 . 2015 . 1086051 66 . Bieling P , Hansen SD , Akin O , Li TD , Hayden CC , Fletcher DA , et al . WH2 and Proline - Rich Domains of WASP - Family Proteins Collaborate to Accelerate Actin Filament Elongation . EMBO J ( 2018 ) 37 ( 1 ) : 102 – 21 . doi : 10 . 15252 / embj . 201797039 67 . Imai K , Nonoyama S , Miki H , Morio T , Fukami K , Zhu Q , et al . The Pleckstrin Homology Domain of the Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome Protein is Involved in the Organization of Actin Cytoskeleton . Clin Immunol ( Orlando Fla ) ( 1999 ) 92 ( 2 ) : 128 – 37 . doi : 10 . 1006 / clim . 1999 . 4746 68 . Fried S , Matalon O , Noy E , Barda - Saad M . WIP : More Than a WASp - Interacting Protein . J Leukocyte Biol ( 2014 ) 96 ( 5 ) : 713 – 27 . doi : 10 . 1189 / jlb . 2RU0314 - 162R 69 . Sun X , Wei Y , Lee PP , Ren B , Liu C . The Role of WASp in T Cells and B Cells . Cell Immunol ( 2019 ) 341 : 103919 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cellimm . 2019 . 04 . 007 70 . Kim AS , Kakalis LT , Abdul - Manan N , Liu GA , Rosen MK . Autoinhibition and Activation Mechanisms of the Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome Protein . Nature ( 2000 ) 404 ( 6774 ) : 151 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 35004513 71 . Miki H , Miura K , Takenawa T . N - WASP , a Novel Actin - Depolymerizing Protein , Regulates the Cortical Cytoskeletal Rearrangement in a PIP2 - Dependent Manner Downstream of Tyrosine Kinases . EMBO J ( 1996 ) 15 ( 19 ) : 5326 – 35 . doi : 10 . 1002 / j . 1460 - 2075 . 1996 . tb00917 . x 72 . Westerberg LS , Dahlberg C , Baptista M , Moran CJ , Detre C , Keszei M , et al . Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome Protein ( WASP ) and N - WASP Are Critical for Peripheral B - Cell Development and Function . Blood ( 2012 ) 119 ( 17 ) : 3966 – 74 . doi : 10 . 1182 / blood - 2010 - 09 - 308197 73 . Yamaguchi H , Miki H , Suetsugu S , Ma L , Kirschner MW , Takenawa T . Two Tandem Verprolin Homology Domains Are Necessary for a Strong Activation of Arp2 / 3 Complex - Induced Actin Polymerization and Induction of Microspike Formation by N - WASP . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA ( 2000 ) 97 ( 23 ) : 12631 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 190351397 74 . Klein C , Nguyen D , Liu CH , Mizoguchi A , Bhan AK , Miki H , et al . Gene Therapy for Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome : Rescue of T - Cell Signaling and Amelioration of Colitis Upon Transplantation of Retrovirally Transduced Hematopoietic Stem Cells in Mice . Blood ( 2003 ) 101 ( 6 ) : 2159 – 66 . doi : 10 . 1182 / blood - 2002 - 05 - 1423 75 . Snapper SB , Takeshima F , Anto ́ nI , Liu CH , Thomas SM , Nguyen D , et al . N - WASP De ﬁ ciency Reveals Distinct Pathways for Cell Surface Projections and Microbial Actin - Based Motility . Nat Cell Biol ( 2001 ) 3 ( 10 ) : 897 – 904 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1001 - 897 76 . Jain N , Thanabalu T . Molecular Difference Between WASP and N - WASP Critical for Chemotaxis of T - Cells Towards SDF - 1 a . Sci Rep ( 2015 ) 5 : 15031 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep15031 77 . Rohatgi R , Ma L , Miki H , Lopez M , Kirchhausen T , Takenawa T , et al . The Interaction Between N - WASP and the Arp2 / 3 Complex Links Cdc42 - Dependent Signals to Actin Assembly . Cell ( 1999 ) 97 ( 2 ) : 221 – 31 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0092 - 8674 ( 00 ) 80732 - 1 78 . Prehoda KE , Scott JA , Mullins RD , Lim WA . Integration of Multiple Signals Through Cooperative Regulation of the N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 Complex . Science ( 2000 ) 290 ( 5492 ) : 801 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 290 . 5492 . 801 79 . Suetsugu S , Hattori M , Miki H , Tezuka T , Yamamoto T , Mikoshiba K , et al . Sustained Activation of N - WASP Through Phosphorylation Is Essential for Neurite Extension . Dev Cell ( 2002 ) 3 ( 5 ) : 645 – 58 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s1534 - 5807 ( 02 ) 00324 - 6 80 . Martinez - Quiles N , Ho HY , Kirschner MW , Ramesh N , Geha RS . Erk / Src Phosphorylation of Cortactin Acts as a Switch On - Switch Off Mechanism That Controls its Ability to Activate N - WASP . Mol Cell Biol ( 2004 ) 24 ( 12 ) : 5269 – 80 . doi : 10 . 1128 / mcb . 24 . 12 . 5269 - 5280 . 2004 81 . Miki H , Sasaki T , Takai Y , Takenawa T . Induction of Filopodium Formation by a WASP - Related Actin - Depolymerizing Protein N - WASP . Nature ( 1998 ) 391 ( 6662 ) : 93 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 34208 82 . Banon - Rodriguez I , Saez de Guinoa J , Bernardini A , Ragazzini C , Fernandez E , Carrasco YR , et al . WIP Regulates Persistence of Cell Migration and Ruf ﬂ e Formation in Both Mesenchymal and Amoeboid Modes of Motility . PLoS One ( 2013 ) 8 ( 8 ) : e70364 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0070364 83 . Linardopoulou EV , Parghi SS , Friedman C , Osborn GE , Parkhurst SM , Trask BJ . Human Subtelomeric WASH Genes Encode a New Subclass of the WASP Family . PLoS Genet ( 2007 ) 3 ( 12 ) : e237 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pgen . 0030237 84 . Liu R , Abreu - Blanco MT , Barry KC , Linardopoulou EV , Osborn GE , Parkhurst SM . Wash Functions Downstream of Rho and Links Linear and Branched Actin Nucleation Factors . Dev ( Cambridge Engl ) ( 2009 ) 136 ( 16 ) : 2849 – 60 . doi : 10 . 1242 / dev . 035246 85 . Gomez TS , Billadeau DD . A FAM21 - Containing WASH Complex Regulates Retromer - Dependent Sorting . Dev Cell ( 2009 ) 17 ( 5 ) : 699 – 711 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2009 . 09 . 009 86 . Derivery E , Sousa C , Gautier JJ , Lombard B , Loew D , Gautreau A . The Arp2 / 3 Activator WASH Controls the Fission of Endosomes Through a Large Multiprotein Complex . Dev Cell ( 2009 ) 17 ( 5 ) : 712 – 23 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2009 . 09 . 010 87 . Zech T , Calaminus SD , Caswell P , Spence HJ , Carnell M , Insall RH , et al . The Arp2 / 3 Activator WASH Regulates a 5 b 1 - Integrin - Mediated Invasive Migration . J Cell Sci ( 2011 ) 124 ( Pt 22 ) : 3753 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 080986 88 . Xia P , Wang S , Du Y , Zhao Z , Shi L , Sun L , et al . WASH Inhibits Autophagy Through Suppression of Beclin 1 Ubiquitination . EMBO J ( 2013 ) 32 ( 20 ) : 2685 – 96 . doi : 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2013 . 189 89 . Xia P , Wang S , Huang G , Zhu P , Li M , Ye B , et al . WASH is Required for the Differentiation Commitment of Hematopoietic Stem Cells in a C - Myc - Dependent Manner . J Exp Med ( 2014 ) 211 ( 10 ) : 2119 – 34 . doi : 10 . 1084 / jem . 20140169 90 . Machesky LM , Atkinson SJ , Ampe C , Vandekerckhove J , Pollard TD . Puri ﬁ cation of a Cortical Complex Containing Two Unconventional Sun et al . Actin Regulators in Lymphocytes Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 799309 20 Actins From Acanthamoeba by Af ﬁ nity Chromatography on Pro ﬁ lin - Agarose . J Cell Biol ( 1994 ) 127 ( 1 ) : 107 – 15 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 127 . 1 . 107 91 . Pollard TD , Beltzner CC . Structure and Function of the Arp2 / 3 Complex . Curr Opin Struct Biol ( 2002 ) 12 ( 6 ) : 768 – 74 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0959 - 440x ( 02 ) 00396 - 2 92 . Robinson RC , Turbedsky K , Kaiser DA , Marchand JB , Higgs HN , Choe S , et al . Crystal Structure of Arp2 / 3 Complex . Science ( 2001 ) 294 ( 5547 ) : 1679 – 84 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1066333 93 . Gournier H , Goley ED , Niederstrasser H , Trinh T , Welch MD . Reconstitution of Human Arp2 / 3 Complex Reveals Critical Roles of Individual Subunits in Complex Structure and Activity . Mol Cell ( 2001 ) 8 ( 5 ) : 1041 – 52 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s1097 - 2765 ( 01 ) 00393 - 8 94 . Abella JV , Galloni C , Pernier J , Barry DJ , Kjær S , Carlier MF , et al . Isoform Diversity in the Arp2 / 3 Complex Determines Actin Filament Dynamics . Nat Cell Biol ( 2016 ) 18 ( 1 ) : 76 – 86 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb3286 95 . Higgs HN , Pollard TD . Regulation of Actin Polymerization by Arp2 / 3 Complex and WASp / Scar Proteins . J Biol Chem ( 1999 ) 274 ( 46 ) : 32531 – 4 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . 274 . 46 . 32531 96 . Weaver AM , Karginov AV , Kinley AW , Weed SA , Li Y , Parsons JT , et al . Cortactin Promotes and Stabilizes Arp2 / 3 - Induced Actin Filament Network Formation . Curr Biol ( 2001 ) 11 ( 5 ) : 370 – 4 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0960 - 9822 ( 01 ) 00098 - 7 97 . Padrick SB , Doolittle LK , Brautigam CA , King DS , Rosen MK . Arp2 / 3 Complex isBound and Activated by Two WASP Proteins . ProcNatl Acad Sci USA ( 2011 ) 108 ( 33 ) : E472 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1100236108 98 . Helgeson LA , Nolen BJ . Mechanism of Synergistic Activation of Arp2 / 3 Complex by Cortactin and N - WASP . Elife ( 2013 ) 2 : e00884 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 00884 99 . Shaaban M , Chowdhury S , Nolen BJ . Cryo - EM Reveals the Transition of Arp2 / 3 Complex From Inactive to Nucleation - Competent State . Nat Struct Mol Biol ( 2020 ) 27 ( 11 ) : 1009 – 16 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41594 - 020 - 0481 - x 100 . Chan C , Beltzner CC , Pollard TD . Co ﬁ lin Dissociates Arp2 / 3 Complex and Branches From Actin Filaments . Curr Biol CB ( 2009 ) 19 ( 7 ) : 537 – 45 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2009 . 02 . 060 101 . Goroncy AK , Koshiba S , Tochio N , Tomizawa T , Sato M , Inoue M , et al . NMR Solution Structures of Actin Depolymerizing Factor Homology Domains . Protein Sci Publ Protein Soc ( 2009 ) 18 ( 11 ) : 2384 – 92 . doi : 10 . 1002 / pro . 248 102 . Gandhi M , Smith BA , Bovellan M , Paavilainen V , Daugherty - Clarke K , Gelles J , et al . GMF is a Co ﬁ lin Homolog That Binds Arp2 / 3 Complex to Stimulate Filament Debranching and Inhibit Actin Nucleation . Curr Biol CB ( 2010 ) 20 ( 9 ) : 861 – 7 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2010 . 03 . 026 103 . Rodal AA , Sokolova O , Robins DB , Daugherty KM , Hippenmeyer S , Riezman H , et al . Conformational Changes in the Arp2 / 3 Complex Leading to Actin Nucleation . Nat Struct Mol Biol ( 2005 ) 12 ( 1 ) : 26 – 31 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nsmb870 104 . Ydenberg CA , Padrick SB , Sweeney MO , Gandhi M , Sokolova O , Goode BL . GMF Severs Actin - Arp2 / 3 Complex Branch Junctions by a Co ﬁ lin - Like Mechanism . Curr Biol CB ( 2013 ) 23 ( 12 ) : 1037 – 45 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2013 . 04 . 058 105 . Luan Q , Nolen BJ . Structural Basis for Regulation of Arp2 / 3 Complex by GMF . Nat Struct Mol Biol ( 2013 ) 20 ( 9 ) : 1062 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nsmb . 2628 106 . Chan KT , Creed SJ , Bear JE . Unraveling the Enigma : Progress Towards Understanding the Coronin Family of Actin Regulators . Trends Cell Biol ( 2011 ) 21 ( 8 ) : 481 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2011 . 04 . 004 107 . Humphries CL , Balcer HI , D ' Agostino JL , Winsor B , Drubin DG , Barnes G , et al . Direct Regulation of Arp2 / 3 Complex Activity and Function by the Actin Binding Protein Coronin . J Cell Biol ( 2002 ) 159 ( 6 ) : 993 – 1004 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200206113 108 . Xie C , Jiang Y , Zhu Z , Huang S , Li W , Ou G . Actin Filament Debranching Regulates Cell Polarity During Cell Migration and Asymmetric Cell Division . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA ( 2021 ) 118 ( 37 ) : e2100805118 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 2100805118 109 . Sokolova OS , Chemeris A , Guo S , Alioto SL , Gandhi M , Padrick S , et al . Structural Basis of Arp2 / 3 Complex Inhibition by GMF , Coronin , and Arpin . J Mol Biol ( 2017 ) 429 ( 2 ) : 237 – 48 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2016 . 11 . 030 110 . Dang I , Gorelik R , Sousa - Blin C , Derivery E , Gue ́ rin C , Linkner J , et al . Inhibitory Signalling to the Arp2 / 3 Complex Steers Cell Migration . Nature ( 2013 ) 503 ( 7475 ) : 281 – 4 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature12611 111 . Dayel MJ , Mullins RD . Activation of Arp2 / 3 Complex : Addition of the First Subunit of the New Filament by a WASP Protein Triggers Rapid ATP Hydrolysis on Arp2 . PLoS Biol ( 2004 ) 2 ( 4 ) : E91 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0020091 112 . Martin AC , Xu XP , Rouiller I , Kaksonen M , Sun Y , Belmont L , et al . Effects of Arp2 and Arp3 Nucleotide - Binding Pocket Mutations on Arp2 / 3 Complex Function . J Cell Biol ( 2005 ) 168 ( 2 ) : 315 – 28 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200408177 113 . Martin AC , Welch MD , Drubin DG . Arp2 / 3 ATP Hydrolysis - Catalysed Branch Dissociation Is Critical for Endocytic Force Generation . Nat Cell Biol ( 2006 ) 8 ( 8 ) : 826 – 33 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1443 114 . Michard C , Sperandio D , Baïlo N , Pizarro - Cerda ́ J , LeClaire L , Chadeau - Argaud E , et al . The Legionella Kinase LegK2 Targets the ARP2 / 3 Complex To Inhibit Actin Nucleation on Phagosomes and Allow Bacterial Evasion of the Late Endocytic Pathway . mBio ( 2015 ) 6 ( 3 ) : e00354 – 15 . doi : 10 . 1128 / mBio . 00354 - 15 115 . Vadlamudi RK , Li F , Barnes CJ , Bagheri - Yarmand R , Kumar R . P41 - Arc Subunit of Human Arp2 / 3 Complex Is a P21 - Activated Kinase - 1 - Interacting Substrate . EMBO Rep ( 2004 ) 5 ( 2 ) : 154 – 60 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . embor . 7400079 116 . LeClaire LL3rd , Baumgartner M , Iwasa JH , Mullins RD , Barber DL . Phosphorylation of the Arp2 / 3 Complex is Necessary to Nucleate Actin Filaments . J Cell Biol ( 2008 ) 182 ( 4 ) : 647 – 54 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200802145 117 . Zaki M , King J , Fütterer K , Insall RH . Replacement of the Essential Dictyostelium Arp2 Gene by its Entamoeba Homologue Using Parasexual Genetics . BMC Genet ( 2007 ) 8 : 28 . doi : 10 . 1186 / 1471 - 2156 - 8 - 28 118 . Yae K , Keng VW , Koike M , Yusa K , Kouno M , Uno Y , et al . Sleeping Beauty Transposon - Based Phenotypic Analysis of Mice : Lack of Arpc3 Results in Defective Trophoblast Outgrowth . Mol Cell Biol ( 2006 ) 26 ( 16 ) : 6185 – 96 . doi : 10 . 1128 / mcb . 00018 - 06 119 . Machesky LM , Reeves E , Wientjes F , Mattheyse FJ , Grogan A , TottyNF , et al . Mammalian Actin - Related Protein 2 / 3 Complex Localizes to Regions of Lamellipodial Protrusion and Is Composed of Evolutionarily Conserved Proteins . Biochem J ( 1997 ) 328 ( Pt 1 ) : 105 – 12 . doi : 10 . 1042 / bj3280105 120 . Weiner OD , Servant G , Welch MD , Mitchison TJ , Sedat JW , Bourne HR . Spatial Control of Actin Polymerization During Neutrophil Chemotaxis . Nat Cell Biol ( 1999 ) 1 ( 2 ) : 75 – 81 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 10042 121 . Kovacs EM , Goodwin M , Ali RG , Paterson AD , Yap AS . Cadherin - Directed Actin Assembly : E - Cadherin Physically Associates With the Arp2 / 3 Complex to Direct Actin Assembly in Nascent Adhesive Contacts . Curr Biol ( 2002 ) 12 ( 5 ) : 379 – 82 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0960 - 9822 ( 02 ) 00661 - 9 122 . Winter D , Podtelejnikov AV , Mann M , Li R . The Complex Containing Actin - Related Proteins Arp2 and Arp3 Is Required for the Motility and Integrity of Yeast Actin Patches . Curr Biol ( 1997 ) 7 ( 7 ) : 519 – 29 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0960 - 9822 ( 06 ) 00223 - 5 123 . Moreau V , Galan JM , Devilliers G , Haguenauer - Tsapis R , Winsor B . The Yeast Actin - Related Protein Arp2p Is Required for the Internalization Step of Endocytosis . Mol Biol Cell ( 1997 ) 8 ( 7 ) : 1361 – 75 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . 8 . 7 . 1361 124 . Benesch S , Polo S , Lai FP , Anderson KI , Stradal TE , Wehland J , et al . N - WASP De ﬁ ciency Impairs EGF Internalization and Actin Assembly at Clathrin - Coated Pits . J Cell Sci ( 2005 ) 118 ( Pt 14 ) : 3103 – 15 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 02444 125 . Matas OB , Mart ı ́ nez - Mena ́ rguez JA , Egea G . Association of Cdc42 / N - WASP / Arp2 / 3 Signaling Pathway With Golgi Membranes . Traf ﬁ c ( 2004 ) 5 ( 11 ) : 838 – 46 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1600 - 0854 . 2004 . 00225 . x 126 . Chen JL , Lacomis L , Erdjument - Bromage H , Tempst P , Stamnes M . Cytosol - Derived Proteins are Suf ﬁ cient for Arp2 / 3 Recruitment and ARF / coatomer - Dependent Actin Polymerization on Golgi Membranes . FEBS Lett ( 2004 ) 566 ( 1 - 3 ) : 281 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . febslet . 2004 . 04 . 061 127 . May RC , Caron E , Hall A , Machesky LM . Involvement of the Arp2 / 3 Complex in Phagocytosis Mediated by FcgammaR or CR3 . Nat Cell Biol ( 2000 ) 2 ( 4 ) : 246 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 35008673 128 . Farina F , Gaillard J , Gue ́ rin C , Coute ́ Y , Sillibourne J , Blanchoin L , et al . The Centrosome is an Actin - Organizing Centre . Nat Cell Biol ( 2016 ) 18 ( 1 ) : 65 – 75 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb3285 129 . Farina F , Ramkumar N , Brown L , Samandar Eweis D , Anstatt J , Waring T , et al . Local Actin Nucleation Tunes Centrosomal Microtubule Nucleation During Passage Through Mitosis . EMBO J ( 2019 ) 38 ( 11 ) : e99843 . doi : 10 . 15252 / embj . 201899843 Sun et al . Actin Regulators in Lymphocytes Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 799309 21 130 . Chalkia D , Nikolaidis N , Makalowski W , Klein J , Nei M . Origins and Evolution of the Formin Multigene Family That Is Involved in the Formation of Actin Filaments . Mol Biol Evol ( 2008 ) 25 ( 12 ) : 2717 – 33 . doi : 10 . 1093 / molbev / msn215 131 . Higgs HN , Peterson KJ . Phylogenetic Analysis of the Formin Homology 2 Domain . Mol Biol Cell ( 2005 ) 16 ( 1 ) : 1 – 13 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . e04 - 07 - 0565 132 . Horan BG , Zerze GH , Kim YC , Vavylonis D , Mittal J . Computational Modeling Highlights the Role of the Disordered Formin Homology 1 Domain in Pro ﬁ lin - Actin Transfer . FEBS Lett ( 2018 ) 592 ( 11 ) : 1804 – 16 . doi : 10 . 1002 / 1873 - 3468 . 13088 133 . Rivero F , Muramoto T , Meyer AK , Urushihara H , Uyeda TQ , Kitayama C . A Comparative Sequence Analysis Reveals a Common GBD / FH3 - FH1 - FH2 - DAD Architecture in Formins From Dictyostelium , Fungi and Metazoa . BMC Genomics ( 2005 ) 6 : 28 . doi : 10 . 1186 / 1471 - 2164 - 6 - 28 134 . Yonetani A , Lustig RJ , Moseley JB , Takeda T , Goode BL , Chang F . Regulation and Targeting of the Fission Yeast Formin Cdc12p in Cytokinesis . Mol Biol Cell ( 2008 ) 19 ( 5 ) : 2208 – 19 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . e07 - 07 - 0731 135 . Vavylonis D , Kovar DR , O ' Shaughnessy B , Pollard TD . Model of Formin - Associated Actin Filament Elongation . Mol Cell ( 2006 ) 21 ( 4 ) : 455 – 66 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2006 . 01 . 016 136 . Paul AS , Pollard TD . The Role of the FH1 Domain and Pro ﬁ lin in Formin - Mediated Actin - Filament Elongation and Nucleation . Curr Biol CB ( 2008 ) 18 ( 1 ) : 9 – 19 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2007 . 11 . 062 137 . Lu J , Meng W , Poy F , Maiti S , Goode BL , Eck MJ . Structure of the FH2 Domain of Daam1 : Implications for Formin Regulation of Actin Assembly . J Mol Biol ( 2007 ) 369 ( 5 ) : 1258 – 69 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2007 . 04 . 002 138 . Xu Y , Moseley JB , Sagot I , Poy F , Pellman D , Goode BL , et al . Crystal Structures of a Formin Homology - 2 Domain Reveal a Tethered Dimer Architecture . Cell ( 2004 ) 116 ( 5 ) : 711 – 23 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0092 - 8674 ( 04 ) 00210 - 7 139 . Pruyne D , Evangelista M , Yang C , Bi E , Zigmond S , Bretscher A , et al . Role of Formins in Actin Assembly : Nucleation and Barbed - End Association . Sci ( New York NY ) ( 2002 ) 297 ( 5581 ) : 612 – 5 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1072309 140 . Pring M , Evangelista M , Boone C , Yang C , Zigmond SH . Mechanism of Formin - Induced Nucleation of Actin Filaments . Biochemistry ( 2003 ) 42 ( 2 ) : 486 – 96 . doi : 10 . 1021 / bi026520j 141 . Romero S , Le Clainche C , Didry D , Egile C , Pantaloni D , Carlier MF . Formin is a Processive Motor That Requires Pro ﬁ lin to Accelerate Actin Assembly and Associated ATP Hydrolysis . Cell ( 2004 ) 119 ( 3 ) : 419 – 29 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2004 . 09 . 039 142 . Schirenbeck A , Bretschneider T , Arasada R , Schleicher M , Faix J . The Diaphanous - Related Formin Ddia2 Is Required for the Formation and Maintenance of Filopodia . Nat Cell Biol ( 2005 ) 7 ( 6 ) : 619 – 25 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1266 143 . Block J , Breitsprecher D , Kühn S , Winterhoff M , Kage F , Geffers R , et al . FMNL2 Drives Actin - Based Protrusion and Migration Downstream of Cdc42 . Curr Biol CB ( 2012 ) 22 ( 11 ) : 1005 – 12 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2012 . 03 . 064 144 . Watanabe S , Ando Y , Yasuda S , Hosoya H , Watanabe N , Ishizaki T , et al . Mdia2 Induces the Actin Scaffold for the Contractile Ring and Stabilizes its Position During Cytokinesis in NIH 3T3 Cells . Mol Biol Cell ( 2008 ) 19 ( 5 ) : 2328 – 38 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . e07 - 10 - 1086 145 . Bartolini F , Gundersen GG . Formins and Microtubules . Biochim Biophys Acta ( 2010 ) 1803 ( 2 ) : 164 – 73 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbamcr . 2009 . 07 . 006 146 . Thurston SF , Kulacz WA , Shaikh S , Lee JM , Copeland JW . The Ability to Induce Microtubule Acetylation Is a General Feature of Formin Proteins . PLoS One ( 2012 ) 7 ( 10 ) : e48041 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0048041 147 . Ishizaki T , Morishima Y , Okamoto M , Furuyashiki T , Kato T , Narumiya S . Coordination of Microtubules and the Actin Cytoskeleton by the Rho Effector Mdia1 . Nat Cell Biol ( 2001 ) 3 ( 1 ) : 8 – 14 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 35050598 148 . Nishida E , Maekawa S , Sakai H . Co ﬁ lin , a Protein in Porcine Brain That Binds to Actin Filaments and Inhibits Their Interactions With Myosin and Tropomyosin . Biochemistry ( 1984 ) 23 ( 22 ) : 5307 – 13 . doi : 10 . 1021 / bi00317a032 149 . Bamburg JR , Harris HE , Weeds AG . Partial Puri ﬁ cation and Characterization of an Actin Depolymerizing Factor From Brain . FEBS Lett ( 1980 ) 121 ( 1 ) : 178 – 82 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0014 - 5793 ( 80 ) 81292 - 0 150 . Hild G , Kalma ́ r L , Kardos R , Nyitrai M , Bugyi B . The Other Side of the Coin : Functional and Structural Versatility of ADF / Co ﬁ lins . Eur J Cell Biol ( 2014 ) 93 ( 5 - 6 ) : 238 – 51 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ejcb . 2013 . 12 . 001 151 . Lappalainen P , Kessels MM , Cope MJT , Drubin DG . The ADF Homology ( ADF - H ) Domain : A Highly Exploited Actin - Binding Module . Mol Biol Cell ( 1998 ) 9 ( 8 ) : 1951 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . 9 . 8 . 1951 152 . Moon A , Drubin DG . The ADF / co ﬁ lin Proteins : Stimulus - Responsive Modulators of Actin Dynamics . Mol Biol Cell ( 1995 ) 6 ( 11 ) : 1423 – 31 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . 6 . 11 . 1423 153 . Vartiainen MK , Mustonen T , Mattila PK , Ojala PJ , Thesleff I , Partanen J , et al . The Three Mouse Actin - Depolymerizing Factor / Co ﬁ lins Evolved to Ful ﬁ ll Cell - Type – Speci ﬁ c Requirements for Actin Dynamics . Mol Biol Cell ( 2002 ) 13 ( 1 ) : 183 – 94 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . 01 - 07 - 0331 154 . Ono S , Minami N , Abe H , Obinata T . Characterization of a Novel Co ﬁ lin Isoform That Is Predominantly Expressed in Mammalian Skeletal Muscle . J Biol Chem ( 1994 ) 269 ( 21 ) : 15280 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0021 - 9258 ( 17 ) 36603 - 6 155 . Gillett GT , Fox MF , Rowe PS , Casimir CM , Povey S . Mapping of Human non - Muscle Type Co ﬁ lin ( CFL1 ) to Chromosome 11q13 and Muscle - Type Co ﬁ lin ( CFL2 ) to Chromosome 14 . Ann Hum Genet ( 1996 ) 60 ( 3 ) : 201 – 11 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1469 - 1809 . 1996 . tb00423 . x 156 . Shishkin S , Eremina L , Pashintseva N , Kovalev L , Kovaleva M . Co ﬁ lin - 1 and Other ADF / Co ﬁ lin Superfamily Members in Human Malignant Cells . Int J Mol Sci ( 2016 ) 18 ( 1 ) : 10 . doi : 10 . 3390 / ijms18010010 157 . Muneyuki E , Nishida E , Sutoh K , Sakai H . Puri ﬁ cation of Co ﬁ lin , a 21 , 000 Molecular Weight Actin - Binding Protein , From Porcine Kidney and Identi ﬁ cation of the Co ﬁ lin - Binding Site in the Actin Sequence . J Biochem ( 1985 ) 97 ( 2 ) : 563 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1093 / oxfordjournals . jbchem . a135091 158 . McGough A , Pope B , Chiu W , Weeds A . Co ﬁ lin Changes the Twist of F - Actin : Implications for Actin Filament Dynamics and Cellular Function . J Cell Biol ( 1997 ) 138 ( 4 ) : 771 – 81 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 138 . 4 . 771 159 . Paavilainen VO , Oksanen E , Goldman A , Lappalainen P . Structure of the Actin - Depolymerizing Factor Homology Domain in Complex With Actin . J Cell Biol ( 2008 ) 182 ( 1 ) : 51 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200803100 160 . Andrianantoandro E , Pollard TD . Mechanism of Actin Filament Turnover by Severing and Nucleation at Different Concentrations of ADF / Co ﬁ lin . Mol Cell ( 2006 ) 24 ( 1 ) : 13 – 23 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2006 . 08 . 006 161 . Nadkarni AV , Brieher WM . Aip1 Destabilizes Co ﬁ lin - Saturated Actin Filaments by Severing and Accelerating Monomer Dissociation From Ends . Curr Biol ( 2014 ) 24 ( 23 ) : 2749 – 57 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2014 . 09 . 048 162 . Wong DY , Sept D . The Interaction of Co ﬁ lin With the Actin Filament . J Mol Biol ( 2011 ) 413 ( 1 ) : 97 – 105 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2011 . 08 . 039 163 . Arber S , Barbayannis FA , Hanser H , Schneider C , Stanyon CA , Bernard O , et al . Regulation of Actin Dynamics Through Phosphorylation of Co ﬁ lin by LIM - Kinase . Nature ( 1998 ) 393 ( 6687 ) : 805 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 31729 164 . Yonezawa N , Nishida E , Sakai H . pH Control of Actin Polymerization by Co ﬁ lin . J Biol Chem ( 1985 ) 260 ( 27 ) : 14410 – 2 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0021 - 9258 ( 17 ) 38580 - 0 165 . Hawkins M , Pope B , Maciver S , Weeds A . Human Actin Depolymerizing Factor Mediates a pH - Sensitive Destruction of Actin Filaments . Biochemistry ( 1993 ) 32 ( 38 ) : 9985 – 93 . doi : 10 . 1021 / bi00089a014 166 . Hayden S , Miller P , Brauweiler A , Bamburg J . Analysis of the Interactions of Actin Depolymerizing Factor With G - And F - Actin . Biochemistry ( 1993 ) 32 ( 38 ) : 9994 – 10004 . doi : 10 . 1021 / bi00089a015 167 . Yonezawa N , Nishida E , Iida K , Yahara I , Sakai H . Inhibition of the Interactions of Co ﬁ lin , Destrin , and Deoxyribonuclease I With Actin by Phosphoinositides . J Biol Chem ( 1990 ) 265 ( 15 ) : 8382 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0021 - 9258 ( 19 ) 38897 - 0 168 . Yeoh S , Pope B , Mannherz HG , Weeds A . Determining the Differences in Actin Binding by Human ADF and Co ﬁ lin . J Mol Biol ( 2002 ) 315 ( 4 ) : 911 – 25 . doi : 10 . 1006 / jmbi . 2001 . 5280 169 . Frantz C , Barreiro G , Dominguez L , Chen X , Eddy R , Condeelis J , et al . Co ﬁ lin Is a pH Sensor for Actin Free Barbed End Formation : Role of Phosphoinositide Binding . J Cell Biol ( 2008 ) 183 ( 5 ) : 865 – 79 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200804161 170 . de Hostos EL , Bradtke B , Lottspeich F , Guggenheim R , Gerisch G . Coronin , an Actin Binding Protein of Dictyostelium Discoideum Localized to Cell Surface Projections , has Sequence Similarities to G Protein Beta Subunits . EMBO J ( 1991 ) 10 ( 13 ) : 4097 – 104 . doi : 10 . 1002 / j . 1460 - 2075 . 1991 . tb04986 . x 171 . Pieters J . Coronin 1 in Innate Immunity . Subcell Biochem ( 2008 ) 48 : 116 – 23 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 0 - 387 - 09595 - 0 _ 11 Sun et al . Actin Regulators in Lymphocytes Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 799309 22 172 . Uetrecht AC , Bear JE . Coronins : The Return of the Crown . Trends Cell Biol ( 2006 ) 16 ( 8 ) : 421 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2006 . 06 . 002 173 . Cai L , Holoweckyj N , Schaller MD , Bear JE . Phosphorylation of Coronin 1B by Protein Kinase C Regulates Interaction With Arp2 / 3 and Cell Motility . J Biol Chem ( 2005 ) 280 ( 36 ) : 31913 – 23 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M504146200 174 . Gat ﬁ eld J , Albrecht I , Zanolari B , Steinmetz MO , Pieters J . Association of the Leukocyte Plasma Membrane With the Actin Cytoskeleton Through Coiled Coil - Mediated Trimeric Coronin 1 Molecules . Mol Biol Cell ( 2005 ) 16 ( 6 ) : 2786 – 98 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . e05 - 01 - 0042 175 . Nal B , Carroll P , Mohr E , Verthuy C , Da Silva MI , Gayet O , et al . Coronin - 1 Expression in T Lymphocytes : Insights Into Protein Function During T Cell Development and Activation . Int Immunol ( 2004 ) 16 ( 2 ) : 231 – 40 . doi : 10 . 1093 / intimm / dxh022 176 . Rybakin V , Stumpf M , Schulze A , Majoul IV , Noegel AA , Hasse A . Coronin 7 , the Mammalian POD - 1 Homologue , Localizes to the Golgi Apparatus . FEBS Lett ( 2004 ) 573 ( 1 - 3 ) : 161 – 7 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . febslet . 2004 . 07 . 066 177 . Rybakin V , Clemen CS . Coronin Proteins as Multifunctional Regulators of the Cytoskeleton and Membrane Traf ﬁ cking . Bioessays ( 2005 ) 27 ( 6 ) : 625 – 32 . doi : 10 . 1002 / bies . 20235 178 . Oku T , Itoh S , Okano M , Suzuki A , Suzuki K , Nakajin S , et al . Two Regions Responsible for the Actin Binding of P57 , a Mammalian Coronin Family Actin - Binding Protein . Biol Pharm Bull ( 2003 ) 26 ( 4 ) : 409 – 16 . doi : 10 . 1248 / bpb . 26 . 409 179 . Tur - Gracia S , Martinez - Quiles N . Emerging Functions of Cytoskeletal Proteins in Immune Diseases . J Cell Sci ( 2021 ) 134 ( 3 ) : jcs253534 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 253534 180 . Liu SL , Needham KM , May JR , Nolen BJ . Mechanism of a Concentration - Dependent Switch Between Activation and Inhibition of Arp2 / 3 Complex by Coronin . J Biol Chem ( 2011 ) 286 ( 19 ) : 17039 – 46 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M111 . 219964 181 . Voegtli WC , Madrona AY , Wilson DK . The Structure of Aip1p , a WD Repeat Protein That Regulates Co ﬁ lin - Mediated Actin Depolymerization . J Biol Chem ( 2003 ) 278 ( 36 ) : 34373 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M302773200 182 . Iida K , Yahara I . Cooperation of Two Actin - Binding Proteins , Co ﬁ lin and Aip1 , in Saccharomyces Cerevisiae . Genes Cells Devoted Mol Cell Mech ( 1999 ) 4 ( 1 ) : 21 – 32 . doi : 10 . 1046 / j . 1365 - 2443 . 1999 . 00235 . x 183 . Okada K , Ravi H , Smith EM , Goode BL . Aip1 and Co ﬁ lin Promote Rapid Turnover of Yeast Actin Patches and Cables : A Coordinated Mechanism for Severing and Capping Filaments . Mol Biol Cell ( 2006 ) 17 ( 7 ) : 2855 – 68 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . e06 - 02 - 0135 184 . Kueh HY , Charras GT , Mitchison TJ , Brieher WM . Actin Disassembly by Co ﬁ lin , Coronin , and Aip1 Occurs in Bursts and is Inhibited by Barbed - End Cappers . J Cell Biol ( 2008 ) 182 ( 2 ) : 341 – 53 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200801027 185 . Brieher WM , Kueh HY , Ballif BA , Mitchison TJ . Rapid Actin Monomer - Insensitive Depolymerization of Listeria Actin Comet Tails by Co ﬁ lin , Coronin , and Aip1 . J Cell Biol ( 2006 ) 175 ( 2 ) : 315 – 24 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200603149 186 . Li J , Brieher WM , Scimone ML , Kang SJ , Zhu H , Yin H , et al . Caspase - 11 Regulates Cell Migration by Promoting Aip1 - Co ﬁ lin - Mediated Actin Depolymerization . Nat Cell Biol ( 2007 ) 9 ( 3 ) : 276 – 86 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1541 187 . Kumar BV , Connors TJ , Farber DL . Human T Cell Development , Localization , and Function Throughout Life . Immunity ( 2018 ) 48 ( 2 ) : 202 – 13 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . immuni . 2018 . 01 . 007 188 . Kokkinopoulos D , Perez S , Papamichail M . Thymosin Beta 4 Induced Phenotypic Changes in Molt - 4 Leukemic Cell Line . Blut ( 1985 ) 50 ( 6 ) : 341 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1007 / bf00320927 189 . Menotti M , Ambrogio C , Cheong TC , Pighi C , Mota I , Cassel SH , et al . Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome Protein ( WASP ) is a Tumor Suppressor in T Cell Lymphoma . Nat Med ( 2019 ) 25 ( 1 ) : 130 – 40 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41591 - 018 - 0262 - 9 190 . Liu Q , Zhang L , Shu Z , Yu T , Zhou L , Song W , et al . WASp Is Essential for Effector - To - Memory Conversion and for Maintenance of CD8 ( + ) T Cell Memory . Front Immunol ( 2019 ) 10 : 2262 . doi : 10 . 3389 / ﬁ mmu . 2019 . 02262 191 . Cotta - de - Almeida V , Westerberg L , Maillard MH , Onaldi D , Wachtel H , Meelu P , et al . Wiskott Aldrich Syndrome Protein ( WASP ) and N - WASP Are Critical for T Cell Development . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA ( 2007 ) 104 ( 39 ) : 15424 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0706881104 192 . Piotrowski JT , Gomez TS , Schoon RA , Mangalam AK , Billadeau DD . WASH Knockout T Cells Demonstrate Defective Receptor Traf ﬁ cking , Proliferation , and Effector Function . Mol Cell Biol ( 2013 ) 33 ( 5 ) : 958 – 73 . doi : 10 . 1128 / mcb . 01288 - 12 193 . Jayachandran R , Pieters J . Regulation of Immune Cell Homeostasis and Function by Coronin 1 . Int Immunopharmacol ( 2015 ) 28 ( 2 ) : 825 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . intimp . 2015 . 03 . 045 194 . Foger N , Rangell L , Danilenko DM , Chan AC . Requirement for Coronin 1 in T Lymphocyte Traf ﬁ cking and Cellular Homeostasis . Science ( 2006 ) 313 ( 5788 ) : 839 – 42 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1130563 195 . Mueller P , Massner J , Jayachandran R , Combaluzier B , Albrecht I , Gat ﬁ eld J , et al . Regulation of T Cell Survival Through Coronin - 1 - Mediated Generation of Inositol - 1 , 4 , 5 - Trisphosphate and Calcium Mobilization After T Cell Receptor Triggering . Nat Immunol ( 2008 ) 9 ( 4 ) : 424 – 31 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ni1570 196 . Mugnier B , Nal B , Verthuy C , Boyer C , Lam D , Chasson L , et al . Coronin - 1A Links Cytoskeleton Dynamics to TCR Alpha Beta - Induced Cell Signaling . PLoS One ( 2008 ) 3 ( 10 ) : e3467 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0003467 197 . Standing AS , Malinova D , Hong Y , Record J , Moulding D , Blundell MP , et al . Autoin ﬂ ammatory Periodic Fever , Immunode ﬁ ciency , and Thrombocytopenia ( PFIT ) Caused by Mutation in Actin - Regulatory Gene WDR1 . J Exp Med ( 2017 ) 214 ( 1 ) : 59 – 71 . doi : 10 . 1084 / jem . 20161228 198 . Kile BT , Panopoulos AD , Stirzaker RA , Hacking DF , Tahtamouni LH , Willson TA , et al . Mutations in the Co ﬁ lin Partner Aip1 / Wdr1 Cause Autoin ﬂ ammatory Disease and Macrothrombocytopenia . Blood ( 2007 ) 110 ( 7 ) : 2371 – 80 . doi : 10 . 1182 / blood - 2006 - 10 - 055087 199 . Pfajfer L , Mair NK , Jime ́ nez - Heredia R , Genel F , Gulez N , Ardeniz Ö , et al . Mutations Affecting the Actin Regulator WD Repeat - Containing Protein 1 Lead to Aberrant Lymphoid Immunity . J Allergy Clin Immunol ( 2018 ) 142 ( 5 ) : 1589 – 604 . e11 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jaci . 2018 . 04 . 023 200 . Chimen M , Apta BH , McGettrick HM . Introduction : T Cell Traf ﬁ cking in In ﬂ ammation and Immunity . Methods Mol Biol ( Clifton NJ ) ( 2017 ) 1591 : 73 – 84 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4939 - 6931 - 9 _ 6 201 . Hauzenberger D , Klominek J , Holgersson J , Bergström SE , Sundqvist KG . Triggering of Motile Behavior in T Lymphocytes via Cross - Linking of Alpha 4 Beta 1 and Alpha L Beta 2 . J Immunol ( Baltimore Md 1950 ) ( 1997 ) 158 ( 1 ) : 76 – 84 . 202 . Maizels Y , Oberman F , Miloslavski R , Ginzach N , Berman M , Yisraeli JK . Localization of Co ﬁ lin mRNA to the Leading Edge of Migrating Cells Promotes Directed Cell Migration . J Cell Sci ( 2015 ) 128 ( 10 ) : 1922 – 33 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 163972 203 . Nishita M , Tomizawa C , Yamamoto M , Horita Y , Ohashi K , Mizuno K . Spatial and Temporal Regulation of Co ﬁ lin Activity by LIM Kinase and Slingshot is Critical for Directional Cell Migration . J Cell Biol ( 2005 ) 171 ( 2 ) : 349 – 59 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200504029 204 . Klemke M , Kramer E , Konstandin MH , Wabnitz GH , Samstag Y . An MEK - Co ﬁ lin Signalling Module Controls Migration of Human T Cells in 3D But Not 2D Environments . EMBO J ( 2010 ) 29 ( 17 ) : 2915 – 29 . doi : 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2010 . 153 205 . Chan AY , Bailly M , Zebda N , Segall JE , Condeelis JS . Role of Co ﬁ lin in Epidermal Growth Factor – Stimulated Actin Polymerization and Lamellipod Protrusion . J Cell Biol ( 2000 ) 148 ( 3 ) : 531 – 42 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 148 . 3 . 531 206 . Zebda N , Bernard O , Bailly M , Welti S , Lawrence DS , Condeelis JS . Phosphorylation of ADF / co ﬁ lin Abolishes EGF - Induced Actin Nucleation at the Leading Edge and Subsequent Lamellipod Extension . J Cell Biol ( 2000 ) 151 ( 5 ) : 1119 – 28 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 151 . 5 . 1119 207 . Nicholson - Dykstra SM , Higgs HN . Arp2 Depletion Inhibits Sheet - Like Protrusions But Not Linear Protrusions of Fibroblasts and Lymphocytes . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton ( 2008 ) 65 ( 11 ) : 904 – 22 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cm . 20312 208 . Haddad E , Zugaza JL , Louache F , Debili N , Crouin C , Schwarz K , et al . The Interaction Between Cdc42 and WASP Is Required for SDF - 1 - Induced T - Lymphocyte Chemotaxis . Blood ( 2001 ) 97 ( 1 ) : 33 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1182 / blood . v97 . 1 . 33 209 . Samstag Y , Eibert SM , Klemke M , Wabnitz GH . Actin Cytoskeletal Dynamics in T Lymphocyte Activation and Migration . J Leukoc Biol ( 2003 ) 73 ( 1 ) : 30 – 48 . doi : 10 . 1189 / jlb . 0602272 210 . Blaser H , Reichman - Fried M , Castanon I , Dumstrei K , Marlow FL , Kawakami K , et al . Migration of Zebra ﬁ sh Primordial Germ Cells : A Role for Myosin Contraction and Cytoplasmic Flow . Dev Cell ( 2006 ) 11 ( 5 ) : 613 – 27 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2006 . 09 . 023 Sun et al . Actin Regulators in Lymphocytes Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 799309 23 211 . Obeidy P , Ju LA , Oehlers SH , Zulkhernain NS , Lee Q , Galeano Niño JL , et al . Partial Loss of Actin Nucleator Actin - Related Protein 2 / 3 Activity Triggers Blebbing in Primary T Lymphocytes . Immunol Cell Biol ( 2020 ) 98 ( 2 ) : 93 – 113 . doi : 10 . 1111 / imcb . 12304 212 . Moreau HD , Lema ı ̂ tre F , Garrod KR , Garcia Z , Lennon - Dume ́ nil AM , Bousso P . Signal Strength Regulates Antigen - Mediated T - Cell Deceleration by Distinct Mechanisms to Promote Local Exploration or Arrest . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA ( 2015 ) 112 ( 39 ) : 12151 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1506654112 213 . Koduru S , Kumar L , Massaad MJ , Ramesh N , Le Bras S , Ozcan E , et al . Cdc42 Interacting Protein 4 ( CIP4 ) Is Essential for Integrin - Dependent T - Cell Traf ﬁ cking . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA ( 2010 ) 107 ( 37 ) : 16252 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1002747107 214 . Serrano - Pertierra E , Cernuda - Morollo ́ n E , Lo ́ pez - Larrea C . NKG2D - and CD28 - Mediated Costimulation Regulate CD8 + T Cell Chemotaxis Through Different Mechanisms : The Role of Cdc42 / N - WASp . J Leukoc Biol ( 2014 ) 95 ( 3 ) : 487 – 95 . doi : 10 . 1189 / jlb . 0613316 215 . Gomez TS , Kumar K , Medeiros RB , Shimizu Y , Leibson PJ , Billadeau DD . Formins Regulate the Actin - Related Protein 2 / 3 Complex - Independent Polarization of the Centrosome to the Immunological Synapse . Immunity ( 2007 ) 26 ( 2 ) : 177 – 90 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . immuni . 2007 . 01 . 008 216 . Thompson SB , Sandor AM , Lui V , Chung JW , Waldman MM , Long RA , et al . Formin - Like 1 Mediates Effector T Cell Traf ﬁ cking to In ﬂ ammatory Sites to Enable T Cell - Mediated Autoimmunity . eLife ( 2020 ) 9 : e58046 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 58046 217 . Eisenmann KM , West RA , Hildebrand D , Kitchen SM , Peng J , Sigler R , et al . T Cell Responses in Mammalian Diaphanous - Related Formin Mdia1 Knock - Out Mice . J Biol Chem ( 2007 ) 282 ( 34 ) : 25152 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M703243200 218 . Sakata D , Taniguchi H , Yasuda S , Adachi - Morishima A , Hamazaki Y , Nakayama R , et al . Impaired T Lymphocyte Traf ﬁ cking in Mice De ﬁ cient in an Actin - Nucleating Protein , Mdia1 . J Exp Med ( 2007 ) 204 ( 9 ) : 2031 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1084 / jem . 20062647 219 . Dong B , Zhang SS , Gao W , Su H , Chen J , Jin F , et al . Mammalian Diaphanous - Related Formin 1 Regulates GSK3 b - Dependent Microtubule Dynamics Required for T Cell Migratory Polarization . PLoS One ( 2013 ) 8 ( 11 ) : e80500 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0080500 220 . Fulton LM , Taylor NA , Coghill JM , West ML , Foger N , Bear JE , et al . Altered T - Cell Entry and Egress in the Absence of Coronin 1A Attenuates Murine Acute Graft Versus Host Disease . Eur J Immunol ( 2014 ) 44 ( 6 ) : 1662 – 71 . doi : 10 . 1002 / eji . 201344155 221 . Kato A , Kurita S , Hayashi A , Kaji N , Ohashi K , Mizuno K . Critical Roles of Actin - Interacting Protein 1 in Cytokinesis and Chemotactic Migration of Mammalian Cells . Biochem J ( 2008 ) 414 ( 2 ) : 261 – 70 . doi : 10 . 1042 / bj20071655 222 . Lee KH , Dinner AR , Tu C , Campi G , Raychaudhuri S , Varma R , et al . The Immunological Synapse Balances T Cell Receptor Signaling and Degradation . Sci ( New York NY ) ( 2003 ) 302 ( 5648 ) : 1218 – 22 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1086507 223 . Grakoui A , Bromley SK , Sumen C , Davis MM , Shaw AS , Allen PM , et al . The Immunological Synapse : A Molecular Machine Controlling T Cell Activation . Sci ( New York NY ) ( 1999 ) 285 ( 5425 ) : 221 – 7 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 285 . 5425 . 221 224 . Monks CR , Freiberg BA , Kupfer H , Sciaky N , Kupfer A . Three - Dimensional Segregation of Supramolecular Activation Clusters in T Cells . Nature ( 1998 ) 395 ( 6697 ) : 82 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 25764 225 . Freiberg BA , Kupfer H , Maslanik W , Delli J , Kappler J , Zaller DM , et al . Staging and Resetting T Cell Activation in SMACs . Nat Immunol ( 2002 ) 3 ( 10 ) : 911 – 7 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ni836 226 . Hammer JA , Wang JC , Saeed M , Pedrosa AT . Origin , Organization , Dynamics , and Function of Actin and Actomyosin Networks at the T Cell Immunological Synapse . Annu Rev Immunol ( 2019 ) 37 : 201 – 24 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev - immunol - 042718 - 041341 227 . Eibert SM , Lee K - H , Pipkorn R , Sester U , Wabnitz GH , Giese T , et al . Co ﬁ lin Peptide Homologs Interfere With Immunological Synapse Formation and T Cell Activation . Proc Natl Acad Sci ( 2004 ) 101 ( 7 ) : 1957 – 62 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0308282100 228 . Kuijpers TW , Tool ATJ , van der Bijl I , de Boer M , van Houdt M , de Cuyper IM , et al . Combined Immunode ﬁ ciency With Severe In ﬂ ammation and Allergy Caused by ARPC1B De ﬁ ciency . J Allergy Clin Immunol ( 2017 ) 140 ( 1 ) : 273 – 7 . e10 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jaci . 2016 . 09 . 061 229 . Somech R , Lev A , Lee YN , Simon AJ , Barel O , Schiby G , et al . Disruption of Thrombocyte and T Lymphocyte Development by a Mutation in ARPC1B . J Immunol ( 2017 ) 199 ( 12 ) : 4036 – 45 . doi : 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 1700460 230 . Brigida I , Zoccolillo M , Cicalese MP , Pfajfer L , Barzaghi F , Scala S , et al . T - Cell Defects in Patients With ARPC1B Germline Mutations Account for Combined Immunode ﬁ ciency . Blood ( 2018 ) 132 ( 22 ) : 2362 – 74 . doi : 10 . 1182 / blood - 2018 - 07 - 863431 231 . Finetti F , Baldari CT . Compartmentalization of Signaling by Vesicular Traf ﬁ cking : A Shared Building Design for the Immune Synapse and the Primary Cilium . Immunol Rev ( 2013 ) 251 ( 1 ) : 97 – 112 . doi : 10 . 1111 / imr . 12018 232 . Soares H , Lasserre R , Alcover A . Orchestrating Cytoskeleton and Intracellular Vesicle Traf ﬁ c to Build Functional Immunological Synapses . Immunol Rev ( 2013 ) 256 ( 1 ) : 118 – 32 . doi : 10 . 1111 / imr . 12110 233 . Galgano D , Onnis A , Pappalardo E , Galvagni F , Acuto O , Baldari CT . The T Cell IFT20 Interactome Reveals New Players in Immune Synapse Assembly . J Cell Sci ( 2017 ) 130 ( 6 ) : 1110 – 21 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 200006 234 . Ichikawa D , Mizuno M , Yamamura T , Miyake S . GRAIL ( Gene Related to Anergy in Lymphocytes ) Regulates Cytoskeletal Reorganization Through Ubiquitination and Degradation of Arp2 / 3 Subunit 5 and Coronin 1A . J Biol Chem ( 2011 ) 286 ( 50 ) : 43465 – 74 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M111 . 222711 235 . Thumkeo D , Katsura Y , Nishimura Y , Kanchanawong P , Tohyama K , Ishizaki T , et al . Mdia1 / 3 - Dependent Actin Polymerization Spatiotemporally Controls LAT Phosphorylation by Zap70 at the Immune Synapse . Sci Adv ( 2020 ) 6 ( 1 ) : eaay2432 . doi : 10 . 1126 / sciadv . aay2432 236 . Murugesan S , Hong J , Yi J , Li D , Beach JR , Shao L , et al . Formin - Generated Actomyosin Arcs Propel T Cell Receptor Microcluster Movement at the Immune Synapse . J Cell Biol ( 2016 ) 215 ( 3 ) : 383 – 99 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201603080 237 . Gaud G , Lesourne R , Love PE . Regulatory Mechanisms in T Cell Receptor Signalling . Nat Rev Immunol ( 2018 ) 18 ( 8 ) : 485 – 97 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41577 - 018 - 0020 - 8 238 . Courtney AH , Lo WL , Weiss A . TCR Signaling : Mechanisms of Initiation and Propagation . Trends Biochem Sci ( 2018 ) 43 ( 2 ) : 108 – 23 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tibs . 2017 . 11 . 008 239 . Smith - Garvin JE , Koretzky GA , Jordan MS . T Cell Activation . Annu Rev Immunol ( 2009 ) 27 : 591 – 619 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . immunol . 021908 . 132706 240 . Kumari S , Depoil D , Martinelli R , Judokusumo E , Carmona G , Gertler FB , et al . Actin Foci Facilitate Activation of the Phospholipase C - g in Primary T Lymphocytes via the WASP Pathway . Elife ( 2015 ) 4 : e58046 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 04953 241 . Zhang Y , Shen H , Liu H , Feng H , Liu Y , Zhu X , et al . Arp2 / 3 Complex Controls T Cell Homeostasis by Maintaining Surface TCR Levels via Regulating TCR ( + ) Endosome Traf ﬁ cking . Sci Rep ( 2017 ) 7 ( 1 ) : 8952 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 017 - 08357 - 4 242 . Wang H , Kadlecek TA , Au - Yeung BB , Goodfellow HE , Hsu LY , Freedman TS , et al . ZAP - 70 : An Essential Kinase in T - Cell Signaling . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol ( 2010 ) 2 ( 5 ) : a002279 . doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a002279 243 . Krause M , Sechi AS , Konradt M , Monner D , Gertler FB , Wehland J . Fyn - Binding Protein ( Fyb ) / SLP - 76 - Associated Protein ( SLAP ) , Ena / vasodilator - Stimulated Phosphoprotein ( VASP ) Proteins and the Arp2 / 3 Complex Link T Cell Receptor ( TCR ) Signaling to the Actin Cytoskeleton . J Cell Biol ( 2000 ) 149 ( 1 ) : 181 – 94 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 149 . 1 . 181 244 . Zeng R , Cannon JL , Abraham RT , Way M , Billadeau DD , Bubeck - Wardenberg J , et al . SLP - 76 Coordinates Nck - Dependent Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome Protein Recruitment With Vav - 1 / Cdc42 - Dependent Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome Protein Activation at the T Cell - APC Contact Site . J Immunol ( 2003 ) 171 ( 3 ) : 1360 – 8 . doi : 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 171 . 3 . 1360 245 . Rohatgi R , Ho HY , Kirschner MW . Mechanism of N - WASP Activation by CDC42 and Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - Bisphosphate . J Cell Biol ( 2000 ) 150 ( 6 ) : 1299 – 310 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 150 . 6 . 1299 246 . Badour K , Zhang J , Shi F , Leng Y , Collins M , Siminovitch KA . Fyn and PTP - PEST - Mediated Regulation of Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome Protein ( WASp ) Tyrosine Phosphorylation is Required for Coupling T Cell Antigen Receptor Engagement to WASp Effector Function and T Cell Activation . J Exp Med ( 2004 ) 199 ( 1 ) : 99 – 112 . doi : 10 . 1084 / jem . 20030976 Sun et al . Actin Regulators in Lymphocytes Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 799309 24 247 . Tsopoulidis N , Kaw S , Laketa V , Kutscheidt S , Baarlink C , Stolp B , et al . T Cell Receptor - Triggered Nuclear Actin Network Formation Drives CD4 ( + ) T Cell Effector Functions . Sci Immunol ( 2019 ) 4 ( 31 ) : eaav1987 . doi : 10 . 1126 / sciimmunol . aav1987 248 . Billadeau DD , Nolz JC , Gomez TS . Regulation of T - Cell Activation by the Cytoskeleton . Nat Rev Immunol ( 2007 ) 7 ( 2 ) : 131 – 43 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nri2021 249 . Steffen A , Rottner K , Ehinger J , Innocenti M , Scita G , Wehland J , et al . Sra - 1 and Nap1 Link Rac to Actin Assembly Driving Lamellipodia Formation . EMBO J ( 2004 ) 23 ( 4 ) : 749 – 59 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . emboj . 7600084 250 . Miki H , Yamaguchi H , Suetsugu S , Takenawa T . IRSp53 is an Essential Intermediate Between Rac and WAVE in the Regulation of Membrane Ruf ﬂ ing . Nature ( 2000 ) 408 ( 6813 ) : 732 – 5 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 35047107 251 . Nolz JC , Gomez TS , Zhu P , Li S , Medeiros RB , Shimizu Y , et al . The WAVE2 Complex Regulates Actin Cytoskeletal Reorganization and CRAC - Mediated Calcium Entry During T Cell Activation . Curr Biol ( 2006 ) 16 ( 1 ) : 24 – 34 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2005 . 11 . 036 252 . Zipfel PA , Bunnell SC , Witherow DS , Gu JJ , Chislock EM , Ring C , et al . Role for the Abi / wave Protein Complex in T Cell Receptor - Mediated Proliferation and Cytoskeletal Remodeling . Curr Biol ( 2006 ) 16 ( 1 ) : 35 – 46 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2005 . 12 . 024 253 . Uruno T , Zhang P , Liu J , Hao JJ , Zhan X . Haematopoietic Lineage Cell - Speci ﬁ c Protein 1 ( HS1 ) Promotes Actin - Related Protein ( Arp ) 2 / 3 Complex - Mediated Actin Polymerization . Biochem J ( 2003 ) 371 ( Pt 2 ) : 485 – 93 . doi : 10 . 1042 / bj20021791 254 . Uruno T , Liu J , Zhang P , Fan Y , Egile C , Li R , et al . Activation of Arp2 / 3 Complex - Mediated Actin Polymerization by Cortactin . Nat Cell Biol ( 2001 ) 3 ( 3 ) : 259 – 66 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 35060051 255 . Gomez TS , McCarney SD , Carrizosa E , Labno CM , Comiskey EO , Nolz JC , et al . HS1 Functions as an Essential Actin - Regulatory Adaptor Protein at the Immune Synapse . Immunity ( 2006 ) 24 ( 6 ) : 741 – 52 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . immuni . 2006 . 03 . 022 256 . Tabdanov E , Gondarenko S , Kumari S , Liapis A , Dustin ML , Sheetz MP , et al . Micropatterning of TCR and LFA - 1 Ligands Reveals Complementary Effects on Cytoskeleton Mechanics in T Cells . Integr Biol Quantitative Biosci Nano Macro ( 2015 ) 7 ( 10 ) : 1272 – 84 . doi : 10 . 1039 / c5ib00032g 257 . Han Y , Yu G , Sarioglu H , Caballero - Martinez A , Schlott F , Uef ﬁ ng M , et al . Proteomic Investigation of the Interactome of FMNL1 in Hematopoietic Cells Unveils a Role in Calcium - Dependent Membrane Plasticity . J Proteomics ( 2013 ) 78 : 72 – 82 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jprot . 2012 . 11 . 015 258 . Andre ́ s - Delgado L , Anto ́ n OM , Madrid R , Byrne JA , Alonso MA . Formin INF2 Regulates MAL - Mediated Transport of Lck to the Plasma Membrane of Human T Lymphocytes . Blood ( 2010 ) 116 ( 26 ) : 5919 – 29 . doi : 10 . 1182 / blood - 2010 - 08 - 300665 259 . Jayachandran R , Pieters J . Induction of Allograft Tolerance While Maintaining Immunity Against Microbial Pathogens : Does Coronin 1 Hold a Key ? Transplantation ( 2020 ) 104 ( 7 ) : 1350 – 7 . doi : 10 . 1097 / TP . 0000000000003101 260 . Gorbatyuk VY , Nosworthy NJ , Robson SA , Bains NP , Maciejewski MW , Dos Remedios CG , et al . Mapping the Phosphoinositide - Binding Site on Chick Co ﬁ lin Explains How PIP2 Regulates the Co ﬁ lin - Actin Interaction . Mol Cell ( 2006 ) 24 ( 4 ) : 511 – 22 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2006 . 10 . 007 261 . Michel F , Attal - Bonnefoy G , Mangino G , Mise - Omata S , Acuto O . CD28 as a Molecular Ampli ﬁ er Extending TCR Ligation and Signaling Capabilities . Immunity ( 2001 ) 15 ( 6 ) : 935 – 45 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1074 - 7613 ( 01 ) 00244 - 8 262 . Van Rheenen J , Song X , Van Roosmalen W , Cammer M , Chen X , DesMarais V , et al . EGF - Induced PIP2 Hydrolysis Releases and Activates Co ﬁ lin Locally in Carcinoma Cells . J Cell Biol ( 2007 ) 179 ( 6 ) : 1247 – 59 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200706206 263 . Samstag Y , Eckerskorn C , Wesselborg S , Henning S , Wallich R , Meuer SC . Costimulatory Signals for Human T - Cell Activation Induce Nuclear Translocation of Pp19 / Co ﬁ lin . Proc Natl Acad Sci ( 1994 ) 91 ( 10 ) : 4494 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 91 . 10 . 4494 264 . Samstag Y , Henning SW , Bader A , Meuer SC . Dephosphorylation of Pp19 : A Common Second Signal for Human T Cell Activation Mediated Through Different Accessory Molecules . Int Immunol ( 1992 ) 4 ( 11 ) : 1255 – 62 . doi : 10 . 1093 / intimm / 4 . 11 . 1255 265 . Samstag Y , Nebl G . Ras Initiates Phosphatidyl - Inositol - 3 - Kinase ( PI3K ) / PKB Mediated Signalling Pathways in Untransformed Human Peripheral Blood T Lymphocytes . Adv Enzyme Regul ( 2005 ) 45 : 52 – 62 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . advenzreg . 2005 . 02 . 005 266 . Nebl G , Fischer S , Penzel R , Samstag Y . Dephosphorylation of Co ﬁ lin is Regulated Through Ras and Requires the Combined Activities of the Ras - Effectors MEK and PI3K . Cell Signal ( 2004 ) 16 ( 2 ) : 235 – 43 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0898 - 6568 ( 03 ) 00133 - 5 267 . Ambach A , Saunus J , Konstandin M , Wesselborg S , Meuer SC , Samstag Y . The Serine Phosphatases PP1 and PP2A Associate With and Activate the Actin - Binding Protein Co ﬁ lin in Human T Lymphocytes . Eur J Immunol ( 2000 ) 30 ( 12 ) : 3422 – 31 . doi : 10 . 1002 / 1521 - 4141 ( 2000012 ) 30 : 12 < 3422 : : AID - IMMU3422 > 3 . 0 . CO ; 2 - J 268 . Wabnitz GH , Nebl G , Klemke M , Schröder AJ , Samstag Y . Phosphatidylinositol 3 - Kinase Functions as a Ras Effector in the Signaling Cascade That Regulates Dephosphorylation of the Actin - Remodeling Protein Co ﬁ lin After Costimulation of Untransformed Human T Lymphocytes . J Immunol ( 2006 ) 176 ( 3 ) : 1668 – 74 . doi : 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 176 . 3 . 1668 269 . Iida K , Matsumoto S , Yahara I . The KKRKK Sequence is Involved in Heat Shock - Induced Nuclear Translocation of the 18 - kDa Actin - Binding Protein , Co ﬁ lin . Cell Struct Funct ( 1992 ) 17 ( 1 ) : 39 – 46 . doi : 10 . 1247 / csf . 17 . 39 270 . Rungger D , Rungger - Brändle E , Chaponnier C , Gabbiani G . Intranuclear Injection of Anti - Actin Antibodies Into Xenopus Oocytes Blocks Chromosome Condensation . Nature ( 1979 ) 282 ( 5736 ) : 320 – 1 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 282320a0 271 . Scheer U , Hinssen H , Franke WW , Jockusch BM . Microinjection of Actin - Binding Proteins and Actin Antibodies Demonstrates Involvement of Nuclear Actin in Transcription of Lampbrush Chromosomes . Cell ( 1984 ) 39 ( 1 ) : 111 – 22 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 84 ) 90196 - X 272 . Wabnitz GH , Kirchgessner H , Jahraus B , Umansky L , Shenolikar S , Samstag Y . Protein Phosphatase 1 a and Co ﬁ lin Regulate Nuclear Translocation of NF - k b and Promote Expression of the Anti - In ﬂ ammatory Cytokine Interleukin - 10 by T Cells . Mol Cell Biol ( 2018 ) 38 ( 22 ) : e00041 - 18 . doi : 10 . 1128 / MCB . 00041 - 18 273 . Klemke M , Wabnitz GH , Funke F , Funk B , Kirchgessner H , Samstag Y . Oxidation of Co ﬁ lin Mediates T Cell Hyporesponsiveness Under Oxidative Stress Conditions . Immunity ( 2008 ) 29 ( 3 ) : 404 – 13 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . immuni . 2008 . 06 . 016 274 . Wabnitz G , Goursot C , Jahraus B , Kirchgessner H , Hellwig A , Klemke M , et al . Mitochondrial Translocation of Oxidized Co ﬁ lin Induces Caspase - Independent Necrotic - Like Programmed Cell Death of T Cells . Cell Death Dis ( 2010 ) 1 ( 7 ) : e58 – e . doi : 10 . 1038 / cddis . 2010 . 36 275 . Schulte B , John I , Simon B , Brockmann C , Oelmeier SA , Jahraus B , et al . A Reducing Milieu Renders Co ﬁ lin Insensitive to Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - Bisphosphate ( PIP2 ) Inhibition . J Biol Chem ( 2013 ) 288 ( 41 ) : 29430 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M113 . 479766 276 . Takeuchi A , Saito T . CD4 CTL , a Cytotoxic Subset of CD4 ( + ) T Cells , Their Differentiation and Function . Front Immunol ( 2017 ) 8 : 194 . doi : 10 . 3389 / ﬁ mmu . 2017 . 00194 277 . Thiery J , Lieberman J . Perforin : A Key Pore - Forming Protein for Immune Control of Viruses and Cancer . Sub - Cell Biochem ( 2014 ) 80 : 197 – 220 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 94 - 017 - 8881 - 6 _ 10 278 . Stinchcombe JC , Grif ﬁ ths GM . Secretory Mechanisms in Cell - Mediated Cytotoxicity . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol ( 2007 ) 23 : 495 – 517 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . cellbio . 23 . 090506 . 123521 279 . Mart ı ́ nez - Lostao L , Anel A , Pardo J . How Do Cytotoxic Lymphocytes Kill Cancer Cells ? Clin Cancer Res Off J Am Assoc Cancer Res ( 2015 ) 21 ( 22 ) : 5047 – 56 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 1078 - 0432 . Ccr - 15 - 0685 280 . Tamzalit F , Wang MS , Jin W , Tello - Lafoz M , Boyko V , Heddleston JM , et al . Interfacial Actin Protrusions Mechanically Enhance Killing by Cytotoxic T Cells . Sci Immunol ( 2019 ) 4 ( 33 ) : eaav5445 . doi : 10 . 1126 / sciimmunol . aav5445 281 . Randzavola LO , Strege K , Juzans M , Asano Y , Stinchcombe JC , Gawden - Bone CM , et al . Loss of ARPC1B Impairs Cytotoxic T Lymphocyte Maintenance and Cytolytic Activity . J Clin Invest ( 2019 ) 129 ( 12 ) : 5600 – 14 . doi : 10 . 1172 / jci129388 282 . Roper SI , Wasim L , Malinova D , Way M , Cox S , Tolar P . B Cells Extract Antigens at Arp2 / 3 - Generated Actin Foci Interspersed With Linear Filaments . eLife ( 2019 ) 8 : e48093 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 48093 Sun et al . Actin Regulators in Lymphocytes Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 799309 25 283 . Gill MB , Roecklein - Can ﬁ eld J , Sage DR , Zambela - Soediono M , Longtine N , Uknis M , et al . EBV Attachment Stimulates FHOS / FHOD1 Redistribution and Co - Aggregation With CD21 : Formin Interactions With the Cytoplasmic Domain of Human CD21 . J Cell Sci ( 2004 ) 117 ( Pt 13 ) : 2709 – 20 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 01113 284 . Bolger - Munro M , ChoiK , Scurll JM , Abraham L , Chappell RS , SheenD , et al . Arp2 / 3 Complex - Driven Spatial Patterning of the BCR Enhances Immune Synapse Formation , BCR Signaling and B Cell Activation . Elife ( 2019 ) 8 : e44574 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 44574 285 . Rey - Suarez I , Wheatley BA , Koo P , Bhanja A , Shu Z , Mochrie S , et al . WASP Family Proteins Regulate the Mobility of the B Cell Receptor During Signaling Activation . Nat Commun ( 2020 ) 11 ( 1 ) : 439 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 020 - 14335 - 8 286 . Liu C , Bai X , Wu J , Sharma S , Upadhyaya A , Dahlberg CI , et al . N - Wasp is Essential for the Negative Regulation of B Cell Receptor Signaling . PLoS Biol ( 2013 ) 11 ( 11 ) : e1001704 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 1001704 287 . Maus M , Medgyesi D , Kiss E , Schneider AE , Enyedi A ́ , Szila ́ gyi N , et al . B Cell Receptor - Induced Ca2 + Mobilization Mediates F - Actin Rearrangements and is Indispensable for Adhesion and Spreading of B Lymphocytes . J Leukocyte Biol ( 2013 ) 93 ( 4 ) : 537 – 47 . doi : 10 . 1189 / jlb . 0312169 288 . Combaluzier B , Mueller P , Massner J , Finke D , Pieters J . Coronin 1 is Essential for IgM - Mediated Ca2 + Mobilization in B Cells But Dispensable for the Generation of Immune Responses In Vivo . J Immunol ( 2009 ) 182 ( 4 ) : 1954 – 61 . doi : 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 0801811 289 . Freeman SA , Lei V , Dang - Lawson M , Mizuno K , Roskelley CD , Gold MR . Co ﬁ lin - Mediated F - Actin Severing is Regulated by the Rap GTPase and Controls the Cytoskeletal Dynamics That Drive Lymphocyte Spreading and BCR Microcluster Formation . J Immunol ( 2011 ) 187 ( 11 ) : 5887 – 900 . doi : 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 1102233 290 . Wang JC , Lee JY - J , Christian S , Dang - Lawson M , Pritchard C , Freeman SA , et al . The Rap1 – Co ﬁ lin - 1 Pathway Coordinates Actin Reorganization and MTOC Polarization at the B Cell Immune Synapse . J Cell Sci ( 2017 ) 130 ( 6 ) : 1094 – 109 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 191858 291 . Freeman SA , Jaumouille ́ V , Choi K , Hsu BE , Wong HS , Abraham L , et al . Toll - Like Receptor Ligands Sensitize B - Cell Receptor Signalling by Reducing Actin - Dependent Spatial Con ﬁ nement of the Receptor . Nat Commun ( 2015 ) 6 ( 1 ) : 1 – 17 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms8015 292 . Bolger - Munro M , Choi K , Cheung F , Liu YT , Dang - Lawson M , Deretic N , et al . The Wdr1 - LIMK - Co ﬁ lin Axis Controls B Cell Antigen Receptor - Induced Actin Remodeling and Signaling at the Immune Synapse . Front Cell Dev Biol ( 2021 ) 9 : 649433 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fcell . 2021 . 649433 293 . Huang L , Sun X , Yang D , Dai X , Jiang P , Bai X , et al . WASP and Mst1 Coregulate B - Cell Development and B - Cell Receptor Signaling . Blood Adv ( 2020 ) 4 ( 3 ) : 573 – 85 . doi : 10 . 1182 / bloodadvances . 2018027870 294 . Jing Y , Kang D , Liu L , Huang H , Chen A , Yang L , et al . Dedicator of Cytokinesis Protein 2 Couples With Lymphoid Enhancer - Binding Factor 1 to Regulate Expression of CD21 and B - Cell Differentiation . J Allergy Clin Immunol ( 2019 ) 144 ( 5 ) : 1377 – 90 . e4 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jaci . 2019 . 05 . 041 295 . Smaniotto S , Mendes - da - Cruz DA , Carvalho - Pinto CE , Araujo LM , Dardenne M , Savino W . Combined Role of Extracellular Matrix and Chemokines on Peripheral Lymphocyte Migration in Growth Hormone Transgenic Mice . Brain Behav Immun ( 2010 ) 24 ( 3 ) : 451 – 61 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbi . 2009 . 11 . 014 296 . Rey - Barroso J , Calovi DS , Combe M , German Y , Moreau M , Canivet A , et al . Switching Between Individual and Collective Motility in B Lymphocytes is Controlled by Cell - Matrix Adhesion and Inter - Cellular Interactions . Sci Rep ( 2018 ) 8 ( 1 ) : 5800 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 018 - 24222 - 4 297 . Liu C , Miller H , Orlowski G , Hang H , Upadhyaya A , Song W . Actin Reorganization is Required for the Formation of Polarized B Cell Receptor Signalosomes in Response to Both Soluble and Membrane - Associated Antigens . J Immunol ( 2012 ) 188 ( 7 ) : 3237 – 46 . doi : 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 1103065 298 . Dahlberg CI , Torres ML , Petersen SH , Baptista MA , Keszei M , Volpi S , et al . Deletion of WASp and N - WASp in B Cells Cripples the Germinal Center Response and Results in Production of IgM Autoantibodies . J Autoimmun ( 2015 ) 62 : 81 – 92 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jaut . 2015 . 06 . 003 299 . Volpi S , Santori E , Abernethy K , Mizui M , Dahlberg CI , Recher M , et al . N - WASP is Required for B - Cell - Mediated Autoimmunity in Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome . Blood ( 2016 ) 127 ( 2 ) : 216 – 20 . doi : 10 . 1182 / blood - 2015 - 05 - 643817 300 . Hao JJ , Carey GB , Zhan X . Syk - Mediated Tyrosine Phosphorylation is Required for the Association of Hematopoietic Lineage Cell - Speci ﬁ c Protein 1 With Lipid Rafts and B Cell Antigen Receptor Signalosome Complex . J Biol Chem ( 2004 ) 279 ( 32 ) : 33413 – 20 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M313564200 301 . Obino D , Farina F , Malbec O , Sa ́ ez PJ , Maurin M , Gaillard J , et al . Actin Nucleation at the Centrosome Controls Lymphocyte Polarity . Nat Commun ( 2016 ) 7 : 10969 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms10969 302 . Wen KK , Han SS , Vyas YM . Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome Protein Senses Irradiation - Induced DNA Damage to Coordinate the Cell - Protective Golgi Dispersal Response in Human T and B Lymphocytes . J Allergy Clin Immunol ( 2020 ) 145 ( 1 ) : 324 – 34 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jaci . 2019 . 09 . 026 303 . Iizuka Y , Cichocki F , Sieben A , Sforza F , Karim R , Coughlin K , et al . UNC - 45A Is a Nonmuscle Myosin IIA Chaperone Required for NK Cell Cytotoxicity via Control of Lytic Granule Secretion . J Immunol ( 2015 ) 195 ( 10 ) : 4760 – 70 . doi : 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 1500979 304 . Mace EM , Orange JS . Lytic Immune Synapse Function Requires Filamentous Actin Deconstruction by Coronin 1a . Proc Natl Acad Sci ( 2014 ) 111 ( 18 ) : 6708 – 13 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1314975111 305 . Orange JS , Harris KE , Andzelm MM , Valter MM , Geha RS , Strominger JL . The Mature Activating Natural Killer Cell Immunologic Synapse is Formed in Distinct Stages . Proc Natl Acad Sci ( 2003 ) 100 ( 24 ) : 14151 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1835830100 306 . Butler B , Cooper JA . Distinct Roles for the Actin Nucleators Arp2 / 3 and Hdia1 During NK - Mediated Cytotoxicity . Curr Biol CB ( 2009 ) 19 ( 22 ) : 1886 – 96 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2009 . 10 . 029 307 . Carisey AF , Mace EM , Saeed MB , Davis DM , Orange JS . Nanoscale Dynamism of Actin Enables Secretory Function in Cytolytic Cells . Curr Biol ( 2018 ) 28 ( 4 ) : 489 – 502 . e9 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2017 . 12 . 044 308 . Lee HR , Yoon SY , Kang HB , Park S , Kim KE , Cho YH , et al . Thymosin Beta 4 Enhances NK Cell Cytotoxicity Mediated by ICAM - 1 . Immunol Lett ( 2009 ) 123 ( 1 ) : 72 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . imlet . 2009 . 02 . 008 309 . Lee HR , Yoon SY , Song SB , Park Y , Kim TS , Kim S , et al . Interleukin - 18 - Mediated Interferon - Gamma Secretion Is Regulated by Thymosin Beta 4 in Human NK Cells . Immunobiology ( 2011 ) 216 ( 10 ) : 1155 – 62 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . imbio . 2011 . 04 . 002 310 . Gismondi A , Cifaldi L , Mazza C , Giliani S , Parolini S , Morrone S , et al . Impaired Natural and CD16 - Mediated NK Cell Cytotoxicity in Patients With WAS and XLT : Ability of IL - 2 to Correct NK Cell Functional Defect . Blood ( 2004 ) 104 ( 2 ) : 436 – 43 . doi : 10 . 1182 / blood - 2003 - 07 - 2621 311 . Orange JS , Ramesh N , Remold - O ' Donnell E , Sasahara Y , Koopman L , Byrne M , et al . Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome Protein is Required for NK Cell Cytotoxicity and Colocalizes With Actin to NK Cell - Activating Immunologic Synapses . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA ( 2002 ) 99 ( 17 ) : 11351 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 162376099 312 . Ham H , Guerrier S , Kim J , Schoon RA , Anderson EL , Hamann MJ , et al . Dedicator of Cytokinesis 8 Interacts With Talin and Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome Protein to Regulate NK Cell Cytotoxicity . J Immunol ( 2013 ) 190 ( 7 ) : 3661 – 9 . doi : 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 1202792 313 . Huang L , Zhu P , Xia P , Fan Z . WASH Has a Critical Role in NK Cell Cytotoxicity Through Lck - Mediated Phosphorylation . Cell Death Dis ( 2016 ) 7 ( 7 ) : e2301 . doi : 10 . 1038 / cddis . 2016 . 212 314 . Duvall MG , Fuhlbrigge ME , Reilly RB , Walker KH , K ı l ı c ̧ A , Levy BD . Human NK Cell Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Cytotoxicity Are Regulated by LIM Kinase . J Immunol ( 2020 ) 205 ( 3 ) : 801 – 10 . doi : 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 2000186 315 . Liu H , Zhang T , Chen Y , Liu C , Qi W , Shao Y , et al . Proteomics Analysis Reveals Alterations of NK Cells in Patients With Severe Aplastic Anemia . Int J Lab Hematol ( 2020 ) 42 ( 3 ) : 308 – 15 . doi : 10 . 1111 / ijlh . 13175 316 . Serrano - Pertierra E , Cernuda - Morollo ́ n E , Lo ́ pez - Larrea C . Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome Protein ( WASp ) and N - WASp Are Involved in the Regulation of NK - Cell Migration Upon NKG2D Activation . Eur J Immunol ( 2012 ) 42 ( 8 ) : 2142 – 51 . doi : 10 . 1002 / eji . 201142070 317 . Oswald J , Büttner M , Jasinski - Bergner S , Jacobs R , Rosenstock P , Kielstein H . Leptin Affects Filopodia and Co ﬁ lin in NK - 92 Cells in a Dose - and Time - Sun et al . Actin Regulators in Lymphocytes Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 799309 26 Dependent Manner . Eur J Histochem : EJH ( 2018 ) 62 ( 1 ) : 2848 . doi : 10 . 4081 / ejh . 2018 . 2848 318 . Tchang VSY , Stiess M , Siegmund K , Karrer U , Pieters J . Role for Coronin 1 in Mouse NK Cell Function . Immunobiology ( 2017 ) 222 ( 2 ) : 291 – 300 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . imbio . 2016 . 09 . 011 319 . Gibiez ̌ a P , Petrikaite ̇ V . The Regulation of Actin Dynamics During Cell Division and Malignancy . Am J Cancer Res ( 2021 ) 11 ( 9 ) : 4050 – 69 . 320 . Morita T , Hayashi K . Tumor Progression Is Mediated by Thymosin - b 4 Through a Tgf b / MRTF Signaling Axis . Mol Cancer Res MCR ( 2018 ) 16 ( 5 ) : 880 – 93 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 1541 - 7786 . Mcr - 17 - 0715 321 . Wirsching HG , Krishnan S , Florea AM , Frei K , Krayenbühl N , Hasenbach K , et al . Thymosin b 4 Gene Silencing Decreases Stemness and Invasiveness in Glioblastoma . Brain J Neurol ( 2014 ) 137 ( Pt 2 ) : 433 – 48 . doi : 10 . 1093 / brain / awt333 322 . Kritikou JS , Oliveira MM , Record J , Saeed MB , Nigam SM , He M , et al . Constitutive Activation of WASp Leads to Abnormal Cytotoxic Cells With Increased Granzyme B and Degranulation Response to Target Cells . JCI Insight ( 2021 ) 6 ( 6 ) : e140273 . doi : 10 . 1172 / jci . insight . 140273 323 . Han SS , Wen KK , Vyas YM . De ﬁ ciency of Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome Protein has Opposing Effect on the Pro - Oncogenic Pathway Activation in Nonmalignant Versus Malignant Lymphocytes . Oncogene ( 2021 ) 40 ( 2 ) : 345 – 54 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41388 - 020 - 01533 - 3 324 . Catucci M , Zanoni I , Draghici E , Bosticardo M , Castiello MC , Venturini M , et al . Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome Protein De ﬁ ciency in Natural Killer and Dendritic Cells Affects Antitumor Immunity . Eur J Immunol ( 2014 ) 44 ( 4 ) : 1039 – 45 . doi : 10 . 1002 / eji . 201343935 325 . Kritikou JS , Dahlberg CI , Baptista MA , Wagner AK , Banerjee PP , Gwalani LA , et al . IL - 2 in the Tumor Microenvironment is Necessary for Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome Protein De ﬁ cient NK Cells to Respond to Tumors in vivo . Sci Rep ( 2016 ) 6 : 30636 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep30636 326 . Linder S , Nelson D , Weiss M , Aepfelbacher M . Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome Protein Regulates Podosomes in Primary Human Macrophages . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA ( 1999 ) 96 ( 17 ) : 9648 – 53 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 96 . 17 . 9648 327 . Calle Y , Jones GE , Jagger C , Fuller K , Blundell MP , Chow J , et al . WASp De ﬁ ciency in Mice Results in Failure to Form Osteoclast Sealing Zones and Defects in Bone Resorption . Blood ( 2004 ) 103 ( 9 ) : 3552 – 61 . doi : 10 . 1182 / blood - 2003 - 04 - 1259 328 . Yan P , Liu J , Zhou R , Lin C , Wu K , Yang S , et al . LASP1 Interacts With N - WASP to Activate the Arp2 / 3 Complex and Facilitate Colorectal Cancer Metastasis by Increasing Tumour Budding and Worsening the Pattern of Invasion . Oncogene ( 2020 ) 39 ( 35 ) : 5743 – 55 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41388 - 020 - 01397 - 7 329 . Al Absi A , Wurzer H , Guerin C , Hoffmann C , Moreau F , Mao X , et al . Actin Cytoskeleton Remodeling Drives Breast Cancer Cell Escape From Natural Killer - Mediated Cytotoxicity . Cancer Res ( 2018 ) 78 ( 19 ) : 5631 – 43 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . Can - 18 - 0441 330 . Huang L , Lian J , Chen X , Qin G , Zheng Y , Zhang Y . WASH Overexpression Enhances Cancer Stem Cell Properties and Correlates With Poor Prognosis of Esophageal Carcinoma . Cancer Sci ( 2017 ) 108 ( 12 ) : 2358 – 65 . doi : 10 . 1111 / cas . 13400 331 . Gardberg M , Kaipio K , Lehtinen L , Mikkonen P , Heuser VD , Talvinen K , et al . FHOD1 , a Formin Upregulated in Epithelial - Mesenchymal Transition , Participates in Cancer Cell Migration and Invasion . PLoS One ( 2013 ) 8 ( 9 ) : e74923 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0074923 332 . Thompson SB , Wigton EJ , Krovi SH , Chung JW , Long RA , Jacobelli J . The Formin Mdia1 Regulates Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia Engraftment , Migration , and Progression In Vivo . Front Oncol ( 2018 ) 8 : 389 : . doi : 10 . 3389 / fonc . 2018 . 00389 333 . Jin J , Wang Y , Xu Y , Zhou X , Liu Y , Li X , et al . MicroRNA - 144 Regulates Cancer Cell Proliferation and Cell - Cycle Transition in Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia Through the Interaction of FMN2 . J Gene Med ( 2017 ) 19 ( 6 - 7 ) : e2898 . doi : 10 . 1002 / jgm . 2898 334 . Schuster IG , Busch DH , Eppinger E , Kremmer E , Milosevic S , Hennard C , et al . Allorestricted T Cells With Speci ﬁ city for the FMNL1 - Derived Peptide PP2 Have Potent Antitumor Activity Against Hematologic and Other Malignancies . Blood ( 2007 ) 110 ( 8 ) : 2931 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1182 / blood - 2006 - 11 - 058750 335 . Young AI , Timpson P , Gallego - Ortega D , Ormandy CJ , Oakes SR . Myeloid Cell Leukemia 1 ( MCL - 1 ) , an Unexpected Modulator of Protein Kinase Signaling During Invasion . Cell Adh Migr ( 2018 ) 12 ( 6 ) : 513 – 23 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 19336918 . 2017 . 1393591 336 . Samstag Y , Dreizler E - M , Ambach A , Sczakiel G , Meuer SC . Inhibition of Constitutive Serine Phosphatase Activity in T Lymphoma Cells Results in Phosphorylation of Pp19 / Co ﬁ lin and Induces Apoptosis . J Immunol ( 1996 ) 156 ( 11 ) : 4167 – 73 . 337 . Sidani M , Wessels D , Mouneimne G , Ghosh M , Goswami S , Sarmiento C , et al . Co ﬁ lin Determines the Migration Behavior and Turning Frequency of Metastatic Cancer Cells . J Cell Biol ( 2007 ) 179 ( 4 ) : 777 – 91 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200707009 338 . Ma B , Herzog EL , Moore M , Lee C - M , Na SH , Lee CG , et al . RIG - Like Helicase Regulation of Chitinase 3 - Like 1 Axis and Pulmonary Metastasis . Sci Rep ( 2016 ) 6 ( 1 ) : 1 – 13 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep26299 339 . Liu Y , Wang Z , Huang D , Wu C , Li H , Zhang X , et al . LMO2 Promotes Tumor Cell Invasion and Metastasis in Basal - Type Breast Cancer by Altering Actin Cytoskeleton Remodeling . Oncotarget ( 2017 ) 8 ( 6 ) : 9513 . doi : 10 . 18632 / oncotarget . 13434 340 . Tahtamouni LH , Shaw AE , Hasan MH , Yasin SR , Bamburg JR . Non - Overlapping Activities of ADF and Co ﬁ lin - 1 During the Migration of Metastatic Breast Tumor Cells . BMC Cell Biol ( 2013 ) 14 ( 1 ) : 1 – 16 . doi : 10 . 1186 / 1471 - 2121 - 14 - 45 341 . Wang L - H , Xiang J , Yan M , Zhang Y , Zhao Y , Yue C - F , et al . The Mitotic Kinase Aurora - A Induces Mammary Cell Migration and Breast Cancer Metastasis by Activating the Co ﬁ lin - F - Actin Pathway . Cancer Res ( 2010 ) 70 ( 22 ) : 9118 – 28 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 10 - 1246 342 . Otsuji M , Kimura Y , Aoe T , Okamoto Y , Saito T . Oxidative Stress by Tumor - Derived Macrophages Suppresses the Expression of CD3 z Chain of T - Cell Receptor Complex and Antigen - Speci ﬁ c T - Cell Responses . Proc Natl Acad Sci ( 1996 ) 93 ( 23 ) : 13119 – 24 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 93 . 23 . 13119 343 . Schmielau J , Finn OJ . Activated Granulocytes and Granulocyte - Derived Hydrogen Peroxide are the Underlying Mechanism of Suppression of T - Cell Function in Advanced Cancer Patients . Cancer Res ( 2001 ) 61 ( 12 ) : 4756 – 60 . 344 . Simard JP , Reynolds DN , Kraguljac AP , Smith GS , Mosser DD . Overexpression of HSP70 Inhibits Co ﬁ lin Phosphorylation and Promotes Lymphocyte Migration in Heat - Stressed Cells . J Cell Sci ( 2011 ) 124 ( 14 ) : 2367 – 74 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 081745 345 . Li H , Liu X , Jiang S , Zhou X , Yao L , Di Y , et al . WD Repeat - Containing Protein 1 Maintains b - Catenin Activity to Promote Pancreatic Cancer Aggressiveness . Br J Cancer ( 2020 ) 123 ( 6 ) : 1012 – 23 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41416 - 020 - 0929 - 0 346 . Bergmeier LA , Babaahmady K , Pido - Lopez J , Heesom KJ , Kelly CG , Lehner T . Cytoskeletal Proteins Bound to Heat - Shock Protein 70 may Elicit Resistance to Simian Immunode ﬁ ciency Virus Infection of CD4 ( + ) T Cells . Immunology ( 2010 ) 129 ( 4 ) : 506 – 15 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2567 . 2009 . 03202 . x 347 . Gordon - Alonso M , Rocha - Perugini V , Alvarez S , Ursa A , Izquierdo - Useros N , Martinez - Picado J , et al . Actin - Binding Protein Drebrin Regulates HIV - 1 - Triggered Actin Polymerization and Viral Infection . J Biol Chem ( 2013 ) 288 ( 39 ) : 28382 – 97 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M113 . 494906 348 . He S , FuY , GuoJ , Spear M , YangJ , Trinite ́ B , et al . Co ﬁ lin Hyperactivation in HIV Infection and Targeting the Co ﬁ lin Pathway Using an Anti - a 4 b 7 Integrin Antibody . Sci Adv ( 2019 ) 5 ( 1 ) : eaat7911 . doi : 10 . 1126 / sciadv . aat7911 349 . Wu Y , Yoder A , Yu D , Wang W , Liu J , Barrett T , et al . Co ﬁ lin Activation in Peripheral CD4 T Cells of HIV - 1 Infected Patients : A Pilot Study . Retrovirology ( 2008 ) 5 ( 1 ) : 1 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1186 / 1742 - 4690 - 5 - 95 350 . He S , Wu Y . Relationships Between HIV - Mediated Chemokine Coreceptor Signaling , Co ﬁ lin Hyperactivation , Viral Tropism Switch and HIV - Mediated CD4 Depletion . Curr HIV Res ( 2019 ) 17 ( 6 ) : 388 – 96 . doi : 10 . 2174 / 1570162X17666191106112018 351 . Guo J , Wang W , Yu D , Wu Y . Spinoculation Triggers Dynamic Actin and Co ﬁ lin Activity That Facilitates HIV - 1 Infection of Transformed and Resting CD4 T Cells . J Virol ( 2011 ) 85 ( 19 ) : 9824 – 33 . doi : 10 . 1128 / JVI . 05170 - 11 352 . Yoder A , Yu D , Dong L , Iyer SR , Xu X , Kelly J , et al . HIV Envelope - CXCR4 Signaling Activates Co ﬁ lin to Overcome Cortical Actin Restriction in Resting CD4 T Cells . Cell ( 2008 ) 134 ( 5 ) : 782 – 92 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2008 . 06 . 036 353 . Cameron PU , Saleh S , Sallmann G , Solomon A , Wightman F , Evans VA , et al . Establishment of HIV - 1 Latency in Resting CD4 + T Cells Depends on Sun et al . Actin Regulators in Lymphocytes Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 799309 27 Chemokine - Induced Changes in the Actin Cytoskeleton . Proc Natl Acad Sci ( 2010 ) 107 ( 39 ) : 16934 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1002894107 354 . Saleh S , Solomon A , Wightman F , Xhilaga M , Cameron PU , Lewin SR . CCR7 Ligands CCL19 and CCL21 Increase Permissiveness of Resting Memory CD4 + T Cells to HIV - 1 Infection : A Novel Model of HIV - 1 Latency . Blood J Am Soc Hematol ( 2007 ) 110 ( 13 ) : 4161 – 4 . doi : 10 . 1182 / blood - 2007 - 06 - 097907 355 . Stolp B , Reichman - Fried M , Abraham L , Pan X , Giese SI , Hannemann S , et al . HIV - 1 Nef Interferes With Host Cell Motility by Deregulation of Co ﬁ lin . Cell Host Microbe ( 2009 ) 6 ( 2 ) : 174 – 86 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . chom . 2009 . 06 . 004 356 . Shahabuddin M , McKinley G , Potash MJ , Volsky DJ . Modulation of Cellular Gene Expression of HIV Type 1 Infection as Determined by Subtractive Hybridization Cloning : Downregulation of Thymosin Beta 4 In Vitro and In Vivo . AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses ( 1994 ) 10 ( 11 ) : 1525 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1089 / aid . 1994 . 10 . 1525 357 . Haller C , Rauch S , Michel N , Hannemann S , Lehmann MJ , Keppler OT , et al . The HIV - 1 Pathogenicity Factor Nef Interferes With Maturation of Stimulatory T - Lymphocyte Contacts by Modulation of N - Wasp Activity . J Biol Chem ( 2006 ) 281 ( 28 ) : 19618 – 30 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M513802200 358 . Frischknecht F , Moreau V , Röttger S , Gon ﬂ oni S , Reckmann I , Superti - Furga G , et al . Actin - Based Motility of Vaccinia Virus Mimics Receptor Tyrosine Kinase Signalling . Nature ( 1999 ) 401 ( 6756 ) : 926 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 44860 359 . Ohkawa T , Volkman LE , Welch MD . Actin - Based Motility Drives Baculovirus Transit to the Nucleus and Cell Surface . J Cell Biol ( 2010 ) 190 ( 2 ) : 187 – 95 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201001162 360 . Harmon B , Campbell N , Ratner L . Role of Abl Kinase and the Wave2 Signaling Complex in HIV - 1 Entry at a Post - Hemifusion Step . PLoS Pathog ( 2010 ) 6 ( 6 ) : e1000956 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1000956 361 . Thomas A , Mariani - Floderer C , Lo ́ pez - Huertas MR , Gros N , Hamard - Pe ́ ron E , Favard C , et al . Involvement of the Rac1 - IRSp53 - Wave2 - Arp2 / 3 Signaling Pathway in HIV - 1 Gag Particle Release in CD4 T Cells . J Virol ( 2015 ) 89 ( 16 ) : 8162 – 81 . doi : 10 . 1128 / jvi . 00469 - 15 362 . Spear M , Guo J , Turner A , Yu D , Wang W , Meltzer B , et al . HIV - 1 Triggers WAVE2 Phosphorylation in Primary CD4 T Cells and Macrophages , Mediating Arp2 / 3 - Dependent Nuclear Migration . J Biol Chem ( 2014 ) 289 ( 10 ) : 6949 – 59 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M113 . 492132 363 . Komano J , Miyauchi K , Matsuda Z , Yamamoto N . Inhibiting the Arp2 / 3 Complex Limits Infection of Both Intracellular Mature Vaccinia Virus and Primate Lentiviruses . Mol Biol Cell ( 2004 ) 15 ( 12 ) : 5197 – 207 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . e04 - 04 - 0279 364 . Delaney MK , Malikov V , Chai Q , Zhao G , Naghavi MH . Distinct Functions of Diaphanous - Related Formins Regulate HIV - 1 Uncoating and Transport . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA ( 2017 ) 114 ( 33 ) : E6932 – e41 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1700247114 365 . Shrivastava A , Prasad A , Kuzontkoski PM , Yu J , Groopman JE . Slit2N Inhibits Transmission of HIV - 1 From Dendritic Cells to T - Cells by Modulating Novel Cytoskeletal Elements . Sci Rep ( 2015 ) 5 : 16833 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep16833 366 . Aggarwal A , Iemma TL , Shih I , Newsome TP , McAllery S , Cunningham AL , et al . Mobilization of HIV Spread by Diaphanous 2 Dependent Filopodia in Infected Dendritic Cells . PLoS Pathog ( 2012 ) 8 ( 6 ) : e1002762 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1002762 367 . Kang YJ , Jo JO , Ock MS , Yoo YB , Chun BK , Oak CH , et al . Over - Expression of Thymosin b 4 in Granulomatous Lung Tissue With Active Pulmonary Tuberculosis . Tuberculosis ( Edinburgh Scotland ) ( 2014 ) 94 ( 3 ) : 323 – 31 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tube . 2014 . 01 . 003 368 . Abiko T , Sekino H . Synthesis of a New Biological Response Modi ﬁ er Thyrnosin Beta ( 4 ) Analogue and its Restorative Effect on Depressed . Mediators In ﬂ amm ( 1992 ) 1 ( 2 ) : 113 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1155 / s09629351 9200019x 369 . van der Kammen R , Song JY , de Rink I , Janssen H , Madonna S , Scarponi C , et al . Knockout of the Arp2 / 3 Complex in Epidermis Causes a Psoriasis - Like Disease Hallmarked by Hyperactivation of Transcription Factor Nrf2 . Development ( 2017 ) 144 ( 24 ) : 4588 – 603 . doi : 10 . 1242 / dev . 156323 370 . Schaffer AE , Breuss MW , Caglayan AO , Al - Sanaa N , Al - Abdulwahed HY , Kaymakc ̧ alan H , et al . Biallelic Loss of Human CTNNA2 , Encoding a n - Catenin , Leads to ARP2 / 3 Complex Overactivity and Disordered Cortical Neuronal Migration . Nat Genet ( 2018 ) 50 ( 8 ) : 1093 – 101 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41588 - 018 - 0166 - 0 371 . Wu F , Wen Z , Zhi Z , Li Y , Zhou L , Li H , et al . MPGES - 1 Derived PGE2 Inhibits Cell Migration by Regulating ARP2 / 3 in the Pathogenesis of Hirschsprung Disease . J Pediatr Surg ( 2019 ) 54 ( 10 ) : 2032 – 7 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jpedsurg . 2019 . 01 . 001 372 . Tang W , Cai P , Huo W , Li H , Tang J , Zhu D , et al . Suppressive Action of miRNAs to ARP2 / 3 Complex Reduces Cell Migration and Proliferation via RAC Isoforms in Hirschsprung Disease . J Cell Mol Med ( 2016 ) 20 ( 7 ) : 1266 – 75 . doi : 10 . 1111 / jcmm . 12799 373 . Tessier S , Doolittle AC , Sao K , Rotty JD , Bear JE , Ulici V , et al . Arp2 / 3 Inactivation Causes Intervertebral Disc and Cartilage Degeneration With Dysregulated TonEBP - Mediated Osmoadaptation . JCI Insight ( 2020 ) 5 ( 4 ) : e131382 . doi : 10 . 1172 / jci . insight . 131382 374 . Lauterborn JC , Cox CD , Chan SW , Vanderklish PW , Lynch G , Gall CM . Synaptic Actin Stabilization Protein Loss in Down Syndrome and Alzheimer Disease . Brain Pathol ( 2020 ) 30 ( 2 ) : 319 – 31 . doi : 10 . 1111 / bpa . 12779 375 . Lee PP , Lobato - Marquez D , Pramanik N , Sirianni A , Daza - Cajigal V , Rivers E , et al . Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome Protein Regulates Autophagy and In ﬂ ammasome Activity in Innate Immune Cells . Nat Commun ( 2017 ) 8 ( 1 ) : 1576 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 017 - 01676 - 0 376 . Rivers E , Rai R , Lotscher J , Hollinshead M , Markelj G , Thaventhiran J , et al . Wiskott Aldrich Syndrome Protein Regulates non - Selective Autophagy and Mitochondrial Homeostasis in Human Myeloid Cells . Elife ( 2020 ) 9 : e55547 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 55547 377 . Chanez - Paredes S , Montoya - Garcia A , Schnoor M . Cellular and Pathophysiological Consequences of Arp2 / 3 Complex Inhibition : Role of Inhibitory Proteins and Pharmacological Compounds . Cell Mol Life Sci ( 2019 ) 76 ( 17 ) : 3349 – 61 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00018 - 019 - 03128 - y 378 . Degroote RL , Uhl PB , Amann B , Krackhardt AM , Uef ﬁ ng M , Hauck SM , et al . Formin Like 1 Expression is Increased on CD4 + T Lymphocytes in Spontaneous Autoimmune Uveitis . J Proteomics ( 2017 ) 154 : 102 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jprot . 2016 . 12 . 015 379 . Haenen S , Vanoirbeek JA , De Vooght V , Schoofs L , Nemery B , Clynen E , et al . Proteomic Alterations in B Lymphocytes of Sensitized Mice in a Model of Chemical - Induced Asthma . PLoS One ( 2015 ) 10 ( 9 ) : e0138791 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0138791 380 . Kuhns DB , Fink DL , Choi U , Sweeney C , Lau K , Priel DL , et al . Cytoskeletal Abnormalities and Neutrophil Dysfunction in WDR1 De ﬁ ciency . Blood ( 2016 ) 128 ( 17 ) : 2135 – 43 . doi : 10 . 1182 / blood - 2016 - 03 - 706028 381 . Pinkerton PH , Robinson JB , Senn JS . Lazy Leucocyte Syndrome – Disorder of the Granulocyte Membrane ? J Clin Pathol ( 1978 ) 31 ( 4 ) : 300 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1136 / jcp . 31 . 4 . 300 382 . Miller ME , Oski FA , Harris MB . Lazy - Leucocyte Syndrome . A New Disorder of Neutrophil Function . Lancet ( Lond Engl ) ( 1971 ) 1 ( 7701 ) : 665 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0140 - 6736 ( 71 ) 92679 - 1 383 . Kim ML , Chae JJ , Park YH , De Nardo D , Stirzaker RA , Ko HJ , et al . Aberrant Actin Depolymerization Triggers the Pyrin In ﬂ ammasome and Autoin ﬂ ammatory Disease That is Dependent on IL - 18 , Not IL - 1 b . J Exp Med ( 2015 ) 212 ( 6 ) : 927 – 38 . doi : 10 . 1084 / jem . 20142384 Con ﬂ ict of Interest : The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁ nancial relationships that could be construed as a potential con ﬂ ict of interest . Publisher ’ s Note : All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their af ﬁ liated organizations , or those of the publisher , the editors and the reviewers . Any product that may be evaluated in this article , or claim that may be made by its manufacturer , is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher . Copyright © 2022 Sun , Zhong , Fu , Miller , Lee , Yu and Liu . This is an open - access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License ( CC BY ) . The use , distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted , provided the original author ( s ) and the copyright owner ( s ) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited , in accordance with accepted academic practice . No use , distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms . Sun et al . Actin Regulators in Lymphocytes Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org March 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 799309 28