The Analogical Paradox : Why Analogy Is So Easy In Naturalistic Settings , Yet So Difficult In The Psychological Laboratory To appear in D . Gentner , K . J . , Holyoak , & B . Kokinov ( Eds . ) Analogy : Perspectives from Cognitive Science MIT press . Cambridge : MA . 2001 Running Head : The Analogical Paradox Kevin Dunbar Dept of Psychology , McGill University 1205 Docteur Penfield Avenue , Montreal Quebec Canada H3A 1B1 Dunbar : The Analogical Paradox Page 2 of 23 The Analogical Paradox : Why Analogy Is So Easy In Naturalistic Settings , Yet So Difficult In the Psychological Laboratory Kevin Dunbar McGill University ` A subject walks into a psychological laboratory at 2 : 00 PM . She is told a story about a problem and is given the solution to the problem . Then she is given a list of words to remember . Five minutes later ( at 2 : 18 PM ) she is given new problems to solve one of which shares superficial similarity to the first problem and the second shares structural similarity with the first problem . She does not use the first problem to solve the second when the two problems only share structural similarity , but does use the first problem when it shares superficial similarity . A scientist is investigating the way that HIV works . She obtains a very strange result . To explain what happened she spontaneously draws an analogy to a genetic mechanism found in heat - resistant bacteria . A politician is trying to convince people to vote against independence in the Canadian province of Quebec . He says that voting for independence “would be like leaving an ocean liner for a lifeboat , without paddles , on a stormy sea . ” These three examples exemplify what I term the " Analogical Paradox . " Subjects in many psychology experiments tend to focus on superficial features when using analogy , whereas people in non - experimental contexts , such as politicians and scientists , frequently use deeper more structural features . What is the cause of these different findings ? How can we account for this apparent paradox ? On the one hand , the results of the past 20 years of research on analogical reasoning have found that unless subjects are given extensive training , examples , or hints , they will be much more likely to choose superficial features than deep structural features when using analogies ( e . g . , Forbus , Gentner , & Law , 1995 ; Gick & Holyoak , 1980 , 1983 ; Novick 1988 ) . On the other hand , such results are at odds with the data that we have collected from naturalistic settings . In both science and politics , we have found that structural analogies are not a rare event . People very frequently access structural and relational features when using analogy . 1 The differences between the ways that analogy is used in naturalistic versus laboratory settings provide important insights for all models of analogical reasoning and shed new light on the nature of complex thinking . In this chapter , I will first provide a summary of our research on the use of analogy in science and politics . This research demonstrates that people outside the psychological laboratory frequently use analogies based on structural features and higher - order relations rather than mostly using superficial matches . I will then present one possible explanation for these findings : that when generating analogies people search memory for structural relations , but when they are asked to choose between different sources they will focus on superficial features . I will discuss some recent work Dunbar : The Analogical Paradox Page 3 of 23 that Isabelle Blanchette and I have conducted to test this hypothesis . I will then probe the paradox deeper . One possible reason that generation of analogies is more structural has to do with both the way the subjects encode the source and the way that they search memory to retrieve a source . I conclude that the joint interaction of encoding and retrieval provides a good fit to both naturalistic and experimental approaches to analogical reasoning and helps us untangle the mystery underlying the Analogical Paradox . The Paradox unfolds : " InVivo " Investigations of Analogy in Science & Politics Analogy in Science For the past decade we have been investigating the way that scientists think , reason , and make discoveries ( Dunbar , 1993 , 1995 , 1997 , 1999 ) . I have been investigating reasoning as it unfolds " live " at laboratory meetings . I found that the most representative , and spontaneous , cross - section of the ways scientists think and reason is the weekly laboratory meeting . Thus , we have videotaped and audiotaped leading molecular biologists and immunologists as they think and reason at their laboratory meetings . We then analyze , sentence by sentence , the types of thinking and reasoning that they use when formulating theories , analyzing data , and designing experiments . We have investigated leading laboratories in The United States , Canada , and Italy . Each laboratory we have followed from three months to a year . We supplement the meetings with interviews and other documents such as grant proposals , drafts of papers , and one - on - one meetings . Using this novel approach , we are able to capture science as it happens and see what really goes on in science . This approach I have called the InVivo cognitive approach , where we investigate science " live . " Another approach that we have used is what I term the " InVitro " Cognitive approach where we conduct experiments on scientific thinking in our own cognitive laboratory . As we will see below , the InVivo / InVitro distinction is also important for understanding analogical thinking . 2 Our " InVivo " analyses of scientists reasoning in their laboratories reveals that analogical thinking is a key component of all aspects of scientific reasoning , ranging from hypothesis generation to experimental design , data interpretation , and explanations . Analogy not only permeates all aspects of scientific thinking , but is a key component of the ways that scientists reason about unexpected findings . Here , I will provide an outline of our basic findings . We have focussed on the use of analogy in four laboratories and have found that there were anywhere from 2 to 14 analogies at every laboratory meeting . In Dunbar ( 1997 ) I provided a breakdown of the goals that scientists have when making analogies . We found that analogies serve three major goals - - formulating theories , designing experiments , and giving explanations to other scientists . We also coded the distance between the source and the target and found that very few analogies were when the source and target were from radically different domains , even when formulating theories . Instead , what we found is that most analogies were either from highly similar domains ( e . g . , HIV to HIV ) , or domains from common superordinate categories ( e . g . , one type of virus to another type of virus 3 ) . What we found is that when scientists were attempting to fix experimental problems , they tended to use " local Dunbar : The Analogical Paradox Page 4 of 23 analogies " - - analogies to very similar experiments or organisms , but when the scientists were attempting to formulate new models or concepts , they tended to make analogies to concepts in other related domains . Note that even the analogies that were to similar experiments or the same organism were dependent on higher - order relational or structural similarities rather than being based upon superficial features . Indeed if we breakdown all the analogies used in terms of whether they share literal similarity , we found that around 25 % of the analogies consisted of mappings between superficial features . For example , one scientist when looking at some data might say " yes in my experiment I got a band that looks like that , I think it might be degradation . . . I did . . . . and the band went away " One important place where analogy is frequently used is when unexpected findings occur . What we have found , in all the labs that we have studied , is that over half of the findings that scientists obtain are unexpected . Thus , one important problem that scientists must cope with is both interpreting the unexpected findings and deciding what to do next . Scientists initial reaction to an unexpected finding is that the finding is due to some sort of methodological error . Analogy is one of the first cognitive tools that they use when reasoning about these unexpected findings . Following an unexpected finding , the scientists frequently draw analogies to other experiments that have yielded similar results under similar conditions , often with the same organism - - they use local analogies . Using local analogies is the first type of analogical reasoning that scientists use when they obtain unexpected findings and is an important part of dealing with such findings . Note that by making the analogy they also find a solution to the problem . For example , the analogy between two experiments with similar bands ( discussed in the previous paragraph ) led one scientist to use the same method as the other scientist and the problem was solved . Thus , use of these local analogies can be a powerful reasoning tool that is used to solve problems . Scientists rarely mention these types of analogies in their autobiographies as they appear to be uninteresting , yet these types of analogies are one of the first mechanisms that are used in dealing with unexpected findings . The way that scientists used analogy changes when they obtain a series of unexpected findings . This usually occurred when the scientist continued to obtain unexpected findings despite having modified the method , attempted to replicate the finding , or when they obtained a whole series of unexpected findings in related conditions . It is at this point that a major shift in the reasoning occurs ; the scientists begin to offer new more general models , hypotheses , or theoretical explanations . In this situation , they drew analogies to different types of mechanisms and models in other organisms rather than making analogies to the same organism . This also involves making analogies to research conducted outside their lab . The scientists switched from using local analogies to more distant analogies , but still within the domain of biology . For example , a scientist working on a novel type of bacterium might say that " IF3 in ecoli works like this , maybe your gene is doing the same thing . " Thus , the way that analogies are used changes now . At this point there is often a complicated sequence of analogy , generalization , and deduction that occurs . This will result in both the formulation of new models and theories , as well as the design of new experiments . It is important to note that analogy works in concert with a whole host of cognitive processes , rather than working alone when Dunbar : The Analogical Paradox Page 5 of 23 discoveries are made . In some instances , we saw strings of different cognitive processes such as Generalization - Analogy - Deduction - Analogy - Generalization . The mechanisms by which these different forms of reasoning interact is one of the current research topics that we are investigating in my laboratory . One interesting feature of our results is that the scientists have little memory of the reasoning processes that have gone into a particular scientific finding . For example , when I returned to one of the labs six months after they had made a discovery the postdoc who had conducted the experiments that led to the discovery remembered little of what went on at the meeting , but could remember the final interpretation of the data . In particular , the scientists had little memory of the analogies that they made in response to the unexpected findings . While analogy was an important component of the reasoning process , the analogies were forgotten . This result indicates that to gain an understanding of the way analogy is used in science it is necessary to collect data live , and treat scientists ' retrospective reports with caution . Overall , the results of our analyses of scientists reasoning live or " InVivo " reveal a number of important features of the analogical reasoning process . First , analogy is common . Second , while the scientists do make analogies based on superficial features , they more frequently and spontaneously generate analogies based deep structural features and higher - order relations . Third , the goals that the scientists have influences the range over which an analogy is applied . Fourth , the scientists appear to be using the analogies as scaffolding . Once the analogies serve their purpose of building new explanations and models they are discarded and this is why they forget them . Before discussing the implications of these findings for theories of analogy , I will discuss our work on analogy in another naturalistic context - Politics . Analogy in Politics Having investigated the use of analogy in one context - - Science - - Isabelle Blanchette and I decided to investigate analogy use in another naturalistic context - - politics ( Blanchette & Dunbar , 1997 , 1999 ) . Politics is an interesting area to investigate the use of analogy , as analogies are frequently used and by collecting a database of analogies , we could discover the types of features and ranges over which analogies are applied . This analysis thus provides us with a new database of the ways that analogy is used in naturalistic contexts that can make it possible to build general models of analogical reasoning . Furthermore , we can compare the politicians use of analogy with that of scientists and subjects in psychology experiments . The particular political issue that we focussed on was a referendum on independence that took place in Quebec in 1996 . The electorate were presented with the choice of voting to keep the province of Quebec within the country of Canada or voting to make Quebec a new country . 4 We analyzed politicians and journalists ' use of analogy in newspaper articles during the final week of the referendum campaign . What we did was to take every newspaper story that appeared in three Montreal newspapers during the last week of the referendum campaign and search for all uses of analogy in the Dunbar : The Analogical Paradox Page 6 of 23 paper . Two of the newspapers were in French ( La Presse and Le Devoir ) and one was in English ( The Gazette ) . We found over four hundred articles referring to the referendum and then searched for every analogy that was used . This analysis resulted in the discovery of over two hundred analogies . Next we categorized the analogies in terms of the semantic categories of the source and target , the emotional connotation of the source , and how distant the source and target were from each other . That is , whether the source and target were from the same domains , superficially similar domains , or only structurally similar domains . Any statement , or set of statements where two items were said to be similar , and features of one item were mapped onto the other item were coded as an analogy . The analysis of semantic categories revealed that only 24 % of the sources were from politics . Put another way , over 75 % of the sources were not based on superficial features . Instead the analogies were based on higher order relations and structural features . We compared the analogies made by journalists and by politicians and found no differences in either the categories of sources or the distance between the source and the target . Both politicians and journalists were equally likely to use sources and targets from non - political domains . The range of source categories was fascinating ranging from agriculture , to the family , sport , magic , and religion . We also analyzed the semantic categories in terms of whether the analogies were used to support independence or to argue against independence . Again there were no differences . Thus , these analyses revealed that the politicians and journalists frequently use sources from domains other than politics . They were not basing their analogies on superficial features . In both science and politics we have found that rather than being a rare phenomenon , analogies based on higher order relations are common . 5 One feature of the politician ' s use of analogy that we found intriguing was the frequent reference to highly emotional sources . We decided to probe this phenomenon more deeply by asking subjects to categorize each source used in the referendum in terms of whether it had a positive or a negative connotation . We found that the non - political analogies received much stronger ratings of emotionality than the political analogies . Furthermore , we found that the sources used in making an analogy for one ' s own side were rated as emotionally positive , but that the sources used when attacking the other side were rated as emotionally negative . These findings suggest that one of the reasons that the politicians were using analogies from non - political domains was to map the emotional connotation of the source onto the political debate . Thus , for one ' s own side the politicians mapped well - being , happiness , and health onto their view , whereas they mapped fear , disgust , and anger onto the other side . Obviously the hope of the politicians was that by mapping a positive emotion onto a particular option will make it more likely that the general public will choose that option . 6 The scientific and political use of analogy led us to an interesting conclusion . People frequently make analogies that are based on deep structural features and have little superficial overlap between the source and the target . How could this be possible ? Over twenty years of research has shown repeatedly that subjects in psychology experiments will use superficial features when given the choice , or when given an example with only deep structural similarity , will fail to notice the similarities . It is only when subjects are given extensive encoding or various hints that they will use structural or Dunbar : The Analogical Paradox Page 7 of 23 complex relational information . One important difference between the ways that people use analogy in the naturalistic contexts that we have investigated and the ways that subjects use analogy in psychology experiments is that the psychology subjects are given the sources and targets , whereas the scientists , journalists , and politicians generate the analogies themselves . Another obvious difference between the naturalistic studies and the classic psychology experiment is that people in these naturalistic settings have a vast pool of knowledge and expertise that can influence their analogical reasoning . Thus , it may be the expertise of the subjects that allows them to make these types of analogies ( e . g . , Novick , 1988a , 1988b ) . In the next section I will look at these issues . " InVitro " Investigations of Analogical Reasoning Analogy Generation Hypothesis and Experiments Our work on scientists and politicians and their use of structural features when making analogies suggested that there may be a number of reasons why subjects in standard psychology experiments tend to rely on superficial features . One possible reason for the difference is that the scientists and politicians are generating their own analogies rather than being asked to use various source analogs that are provided by the experimenter . Isabelle Blanchette and I ( Blanchette & Dunbar , 1998 , in press ) have conducted a number of experiments to determine why laboratory and naturalistic studies have yielded different results . We have used a “production paradigm” in which subjects were asked to generate sources for a given target . The task that we used in these experiments was one of asking subjects to generate analogies to the zero - deficit problem . The zero deficit problem refers to a problem that all Canadian governments had to deal with in the 1990 ' s . Both the federal government and all the provincial governments had accumulated an enormous deficit that had to be cut . Governments reasoned that they had to cut their spending to cut the deficit . One view of this deficit problem is that the deficit must be cut no matter what the consequences . Another view is that social programs , such as health and education must not be cut and that other ways of dealing with the deficit must be found . What we did was to ask subjects to generate analogies that would justify the " cut no - matter - what - the - consequences , " or " save social programs " viewpoint . We did this by first explaining the deficit problem to subjects . Subjects were then told to pretend that they were working for a political action group that was lobbying for a particular way of dealing with the deficit . Subjects were told that psychologists had found that analogy is a very powerful way of changing opinion and that they had to generate analogies that could be used to change opinion on the deficit issue . One group of subjects was told that they were working for a group that wanted to " cut the deficit no matter what the consequences . " The other group was told that they were working for an interest group that wanted to " save the social programs . " Subjects were asked to generate as many analogies as they possibly could . What we were interested in was the type of analogy that the subjects generated . Would they pick analogs that shared superficial features only , shared structural and superficial features , or shared only structural features ? We took every analogy that subjects generated , coded the domain from which it was taken from and determined it ' s structure . Dunbar : The Analogical Paradox Page 8 of 23 The results of these experiments were that subjects generated analogies that share few superficial features with the deficit problem . Overall each subject produced around 11 analogies . Eighty percent of the analogies that the subjects produced were from domains other than politics or anything related to money . The types of analogies that they picked were from domains such as fables , domestic tasks , animals . Over 40 % of the analogies were from idiosyncratic sources . Thus , we have again found that people will use analogies with deep structural features bearing no superficial similarities to the target problem . The next question that we addressed was whether we obtained our results because subjects were " experts " on the problem or because they were generating the analogies themselves . Subjects could be " experts " on the deficit because it had been widely discussed in the media and was frequently debated in the many recent elections in Quebec . We tested this hypothesis by changing our task to a more standard " reception paradigm " where subjects are given various sources to read and then , at a later point in time , are given new stories and asked which old stories they are reminded of by the new stories . We reasoned that if using this more standard paradigm subjects still use structural features , then it was subjects ' familiarity with the deficit problem that led to them to use structural features in the previous task . If however , subjects use superficial features when the task is changed to a reception task , then it must be the task that is causing the subjects to choose superficial features . The results of this experiment were that the subjects used superficial features . Thus , when given the same materials that subjects generated in the first experiment it was possible for subjects to switch from using structural features to superficial features . The results of this series of experiments suggest that one component of the reason why people in naturalistic contexts use structural features when making analogies is that they are generating the analogies themselves . Generating analogies leads people to focus on structural features . But how ? Like a Russian doll , the generation hypothesis leads us to ask a further question . Experiments on Encoding and Retrieval The results of the analogy production experiments led us back to the issue of encoding and retrieval . Perhaps the generation of analogies is structural because of the way that subjects encode the issue . Over ten years ago Chris Schunn and I began investigating the role of encoding in analogical reasoning . I now see that what we were really doing is investigating the Analogical Paradox . We hypothesized that one of the reasons that subjects in psychology experiments tend to rely on superficial features is that they do not encode the source problem at a structural level . We reasoned that if subjects had to discover the answer to a problem , they would encode the problem at a structural level and have a much more abstract representation of the problem than simply being told the answer to the problem . We reckoned that subjects who solved the source problem would be much more likely to use that problem in an analogy than subjects who were merely told the answer to the problem . Our results demonstrated that solving the source problem does indeed facilitate performance on the target problem . Thus , the way that the source problem is encoded will influence whether the source is retrieved when working on a structurally Dunbar : The Analogical Paradox Page 9 of 23 similar problem . Surprisingly , subjects in this experiment did not make any explicit analogies to the source problem when they solved the target problem , yet solving the source problem benefited performance . We argued that because the subjects had previously learned the to - be - used concept in their psychology courses , the source problem primed the concept . When subjects were given the target problem to solve , the primed concept was available in memory to be used and subjects retrieved the concept . The process by which this happens still is not clear . However , what these results demonstrated is that the way that source information is encoded will have important effects on whether the source is retrieved when working on similar problems . Thus , we and various other researchers have concluded that the way that source information is encoded is important to analogical reasoning . Encoding alone does not resolve the Analogical Paradox . Many researchers have demonstrated that even with a rich encoding of the source , subjects will not necessarily use the source when working on a structurally related problem ( e . g . , Catarambone , 1997 ) . One way of explaining the difficulty that subjects experience in the psychological laboratory is in terms of the interaction between encoding operations and retrieval cues . Research on attention and memory from the 1970 ' s and 1980 ' s has shown that the types of operations that are performed at encoding and at retrieval will determine the types of items that are recalled ( Bransford , Morris , Franks , & Stein , 1982 ; Craik & Lockhart , 1972 ; Fiske & Schneider , 1984 ; Tulving & Thompson , 1973 ) . We hypothesized that one of the reasons that there are differences between naturalistic and laboratory investigations of analogical reasoning is due to a complex set of relations between the conditions prevailing at encoding and the conditions under which retrieval occurs . If encoding does not stress relational features of the source or highlight these features and neither do the retrieval conditions , then subjects will retrieve only superficial matches . If however , encoding stresses relational features , then subjects will be able to retrieve relational matches , particularly when the retrieval conditions stress relational features . We see encoding and retrieval conditions as lying along a continuum from superficial to relational and that , ideally , both encoding and retrieval conditions must match for successful analogical reasoning to occur . This hypothesis was tested by Tia Chung ( Chung & Dunbar , in preparation ) . She conducted an experiment using the Karla the Hawk stimuli of Rattermann & Gentner ( 1987 ) . 7 Subjects read a story and a week later were brought back to the lab and given a new set of stories that might be structurally similar bearing no superficial similarity , or be only superficially similar to the original stories . What we did is to vary both the types of encoding and retrieval conditions that subjects were asked to perform . We used three types of encoding conditions . The first was telling the subjects to read the story . This Read - Story condition is the same type of encoding condition as used in many analogy studies . The second encoding condition was what we called Sham - Analogy . Here the subjects were told that at some later point in time they would have to generate an analogy for the story that they were reading . In fact , they never had to generate an analogy at all , but anticipated that they might have to do so . We expected this encoding manipulation to highlight relational and structural features of the source . The third type of encoding condition was where the subjects were told to generate an analogy to the source story . We called this the Generate - Analogy condition . Here , the subjects really did have to generate analogies Dunbar : The Analogical Paradox Page 10 of 23 to the source stories . We expected this condition to strongly highlight the relational features of the source . Subjects returned a week later and were given various stories to read . They were asked about the relationship of these new stories to the initial stories . Half the subjects were asked which story does this remind you of - - the Remind condition . The other half of the subjects were asked which of the initial stories is this new story thematically similar to - - the Thematic condition . We expected that the Remind retrieval cue would be a superficial retrieval cue ( see also Wharton , Lange , Wickens , Holyoak 1995 ) , whereas the thematically similar cue would stress relational features . By factorially manipulating the encoding and retrieval features , we wanted to gain a clearer picture of how encoding and retrieval are related in analogical reasoning . As can be seen from Figure 1 , the results of this experiment were straightforward . Subjects in the Read - Story condition retrieved the fewest analogical matches and it did not matter whether they were given the Remind or Thematic retrieval cues . Conversely , subjects in the Generate - Analogy condition retrieved the most analogies and again it did not matter whether they received the Remind or the Thematic retrieval cue . At this point , it might be possible to conclude that the type of retrieval cue that is given is irrelevant and all that matters is the way that the source is encoded . However , the results of the Sham - Analogy condition demonstrate that the relationship between encoding and retrieval does indeed matter , albeit under specific conditions . When the encoding was Sham - Analogy and the retrieval cue was Remind , then a small number of analogies were retrieved . However , when the retrieval cue was Thematic , then there were a large number of analogies retrieved . These results reveal that there is a complex relation between encoding and retrieval conditions . When encoding strongly highlights relational features of a source , then regardless of the retrieval cue given , subjects will be able to retrieve analogically similar matches . When encoding is superficial , even when a relational retrieval cue is given , this will not help subjects retrieve the relational analogs . When there is a moderate level of relational information highlighted at encoding , then the type of retrieval cue does matter . A superficial retrieval cue will not help , whereas a relational retrieval cue will help . The results of this experiment have helped us understand some of the conditions under which relational analogies can be retrieved . In naturalistic settings , people have encoded both the source and the target problems in a relational way . A scientist attempting to understand the way that Viral DNA interacts and integrates itself into the DNA of a cell has a relational understanding of the mechanisms of a virus and searches for other types of biological mechanisms that have similar relational mechanisms . Thus , in many naturalistic settings the analogizer is in the position of the subjects in our Generate - Analogy / Thematic condition . There is a match between the relational encoding of the source and the relational goal of the analogizer . However , subjects in many analogy experiments are akin to the subjects in the Read - Story / Remind condition . There is neither a relational encoding of the source , nor a relational retrieval cue . I suspect that the subjects in our analogy generation experiments ( Blanchette & Dunbar , 1998 , in press ) are somewhat similar to the subjects in the Sham - Analogy conditions . The subjects have a relational understanding of the source problem and when asked to generate analogies they are essentially given a relational retrieval cue . Thus , they will retrieve relational analogies Dunbar : The Analogical Paradox Page 11 of 23 having few superficial features in common with the target problem . When , however , subjects are asked what these analogies remind them of , they are much less likely to retrieve structurally similar sources and retrieve superficial matches . In this condition , they are like the subjects in the Sham - Analogy / Remind condition . Conclusion : Analogy Unplugged The goal of this chapter was both to highlight the Analogical Paradox as an important issue for research on analogy and to propose a resolution of the paradox . By investigating analogy use in naturalistic contexts and comparing these results to those of analogical reasoning experiments a paradox is apparent : Analogy seems easy in naturalistic contexts , yet difficult in the psychological laboratory . By going back into the lab and conducting experiments , the paradox can be resolved . Both encoding and retrieval conditions underlie the paradox : Naturalistic environments make it possible for people to use structural features and higher order relations because information is encoded in a richer way . Furthermore , naturalistic settings influence the retrieval conditions , often stressing the search for higher - order analogs rather than analogs that share superficial features . Experiments on analogy have tended to use conditions that do not stress a rich encoding of the information , nor stress structural information at retrieval . Other researchers also have noted that analogical reasoning can be based on structural rather than superficial features ( e . g . , Fairies & Reiser , 1988 ) , these results have often been interpreted as a product of expertise : Experts have more relational and structural knowledge than novices therefore they can make analogies based on higher - order structural relations . While this view is certainly consistent with the findings that we have obtained , the point that I am making is different : Both experts and novices are capable of generating true structural analogies if the circumstances permit ( see also Faries & Reiser , 1990 ) . If the encoding and retrieval conditions highlight structural features then both novices and experts can generate analogies based on structural features . To generate an analogy , people do not need the training that is needed for true expertise ( e . g . , Ericsson , 1994 ) , but must be in a context that highlights structural relations . Subjects must have a minimal amount of understanding of the source and target , but do not need the extensive knowledge of experts to use higher - order structural relations . All human beings possess at least a minimal knowledge of myriads of issues and are able to make analogies based on structural features and higher - order relations . To be sure , both scientists and politicians in naturalistic settings can generate superficial mappings between sources and targets . Placing people in naturalistic settings does not automatically guarantee elegant analogical reasoning . However , what our research has demonstrated is that structural analogies are a frequent , rather than a rare phenomenon . Overall , subjects in psychology experiments are just like rock musicians in the Unplugged series ; they can perform well without the usual props , but at least need to be given a guitar ! Acknowledgements Dunbar : The Analogical Paradox Page 12 of 23 I would like to thank Isabelle Blanchette and Chris Schunn for the many discussions that we have had on analogical reasoning that underlie the work reported in this paper . Grants from the Spencer Foundation , Natural Sciences and Engineering Council of Canada and the Social Sciences Research Council of Canada made this research possible . I would like to thank Massimo Piatelli - Palmarini for making it possible to write this paper at the Università Vita - Salute San Raffaele in Milan . Footnotes 1 Using historical analyses , Gentner , Brem , Ferguson , Markman , Levidow , Wolff , & Forbus ( 1997 ) , and Holyoak & Thagard ( 1995 ) have also documented numerous cases where scientists , politicians , and even generals have used analogies based on structural features and higher - order relations . 2 It is important to note that the InVivo / InVitro methodology ( Dunbar 1995 , 1997 ) is different from " Situated cognition . " The assumption of the InVitro / InVivo Cognitive approach is that by going back and forth between naturalistic and laboratory investigations of cognitive processes it is possible to build a more complete and detailed account of human cognition than either approach alone would give . The InVivo / InVitro approach does not presuppose that either laboratory or naturalistic investigations of cognition are inherently superior . The underlying rationale for InVivo / InVitro is itslef based on an analogy with biology research . Many biologists conduct both InVivo and InVitro research and go back and forth between the two domains . What works in the test - tube may not work in the organism and vice versa . By doing both types of research the biologists gain a more complete and robust understanding of the phenomena that they are investigating . 3 Note that , to a molecular biologist , comparing one type of virus to another type of virus could be like comparing one type of vehicle such as skis , to another type of vehicle , such as a Stealth bomber . To a non - biologist the difference between one type of virus and another seems minimal , but to a biologist it can seem enormous . One virus will have vastly different biological properties to another virus , but share certain other biological mechanisms and genes . 4 Strictly speaking , the choice that the electorate faced was more complicated than this , but both the public and the politicians believed that the referendum was about staying in Canada or forming a new country . 5 The finding that over three quarters of the analogies used were non - political might be because the journalists who wrote the articles filtered out the analogies lacking good structural qualities or analogies that were based on superficial features . Currently , Isabelle Blanchette is checking this hypothesis . She attended a number of speeches by politicians in a recent election campaign , tape recorded them , analyzed them for use of analogy , and compared what the politicians said with what was reported in the newspapers . She found that the politicians made few , if any , analogies based on superficial similarity . Analogies that did not make it into the newspaper tended to be the ones that were vague in their mappings . Thus , it does not appear to be the case that the predominance of non - political analogies is a by - product of the filtering of analogies by the newspapers . 6 It appears that politicians and journalists are making the assumption that the general public will understand these non - superficial analogies . An interesting question is whether these types of analogies are indeed understood by the general public , and do they have an effect on behavior ? 7 I would like to thank Dedre Gentner & Mary Jo Rattermann for graciously providing us with the stories for this experiment . Dunbar : The Analogical Paradox Page 13 of 23 References Blanchette , I . , & Dunbar , K . ( 1997 ) . Constraints underlying analogy use in a real - world context : Politics . Proceedings of the Nineteenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society . Stanford , CA . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Blanchette , I . , & Dunbar , K . ( 1998 ) . Superficial and structural features in the generation of analogies . Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society . Stanford , CA . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Blanchette , I . , & Dunbar , K . ( In Press ) . How Analogies are Generated : The Roles of Structural and Superficial Similarity . Memory & Cognition . Bransford , J . D . , Franks , J . J . , Morris , C . D . , & Stein , B . S . ( 1979 ) . Some general constraints on learning and memory research . In L . S . Cermak & F . I . M . Craik ( Eds . ) , Levels of processing in human memory ( pp . 331 - 354 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Catrambone , R . ( 1997 ) . Reinvestigating the effects of surface and structural features on analogical access . Proceedings of the 19th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society . Stanford , CA . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Craik , F . I . M . , & Lockhart , R . S . ( 1972 ) . Levels of processing : A framework for memory research . Journal of Verbal Learning & Verbal Behavior , 11 , 671 - 684 . Dunbar , K . ( 1999 ) . Beyond the myth of the unexpected : Are scientists the victims of chance ? Manuscript submitted for publication . Dunbar , K . ( 1997 ) . How scientists think : On - line creativity and conceptual change in science . In T . B . Ward , S . M . Smith , & S . Vaid ( Eds . ) Conceptual structures and processes : Emergence , Discovery and Change . APA Press . Washington DC Dunbar , K . ( 1995 ) . How scientists really reason : Scientific reasoning in real - world laboratories . In R . J . Sternberg & J . E . Davidson ( Eds ) . The nature of insight . Cambridge MA : MIT Press . pp 365 - 395 . Dunbar , K . ( 1993 ) . “In Vivo cognition : Knowledge representation and change in real - world scientific laboratories . ” Paper presented at the Society for Research in Child Development . New Orleans , LA . March 26 . Dunbar , K . , & Schunn , C . D . ( 1990 ) . The temporal nature of scientific discovery : The roles of priming and analogy . Proceedings of the Twelfth Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society , 93 - 100 . Ericsson , A . K . ( 1994 ) . Expert performance : Its structure and acquisition . American Psychologist , 49 , 725 - 747 . Faries , J . M . , & Reiser , B . J . ( 1988 ) . Access and use of previous solutions in a problem - solving situation . Proceedings of the tenth annual meeting of the Cognitive Science Society . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum , 433 - 439 . Faries , J . M . , & Reiser , B . J . ( 1990 ) . Terrorists and spoiled children : Retrieval of analogies for political arguments . Proceedings of the 1990 AAAI Spring Symposium on Case - Based Reasoning . March 1990 . Stanford University , Stanford , CA . Fiske , A . D . , & Schneider , W . ( 1984 ) . Memory as a function of attention , level of processing , and automatization . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 10 , 181 - 197 . Forbus , K . , Gentner , D . , & Law , K . ( 1994 ) . MAC / FAC : A model of similarity - based retrieval . Cognitive Science , 19 , 141 - 205 . Gentner , D . , Rattermann , M . J . , Forbus , K . ( 1993 ) . The roles of similarity in transfer : Separating retrievability from inferential soundness . Cognitive Psychology , 25 , 524 - 575 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1980 ) . Analogical problem solving . Cognitive Psychology , 12 , 306 - 355 . Dunbar : The Analogical Paradox Page 14 of 23 Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schema induction and analogical transfer . Cognitive Psychology , 15 , 1 - 38 . Holyoak , K . J . , & Thagard , P . ( 1997 ) . The analogical mind . American Psychologist , 52 , 35 - 44 . Holyoak , K . J . & Thagard , P . ( 1995 ) . Mental leaps : Analogy in creative thought . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Holyoak , K . J . , & Thagard , P . ( 1989 ) . Analogical mapping by constraint satisfaction . Cognitive Science , 13 , 295 - 355 . Novick , L . R . ( 1988 ) . Analogical transfer , problem similarity , and expertise . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 14 , 510 - 520 . Rattermann , M . J . , & Gentner , D . ( 1987 ) . Analogy and similarity : Determinants of accessibility and inferential soundness . In Proceedings of the Ninth Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 22 - 34 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Tulving , E . & Thompson , D . M . ( 1973 ) . Encoding specificity and retrieval processes in episodic memory . Psychological Review , 80 , 352 - 373 . Wharton , C . M . , Holyoak , K . J . , Downing , P . E . , Lange , T . E . , Wickens , T . D . , & Melz , E . R . ( 1994 ) . Below the surface : Analogical similarity and retrieval competition in reminding . Cognitive Psychology , 26 , 64 - 101 . Dunbar : The Analogical Paradox Page 15 of 23 Figure 1 : Proportion of times higher order source is selected as a function of type of Encoding and Retrieval cue 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 Read - Story Generate - Analogy Sham - Analogy RemindTheme