Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . Davis , Fred D . MIS Quarterly ; Sep 1989 ; 13 , 3 ; ABI / INFORM Global pg . 319 Perceived Usefulness , Perceived Ease Of Use , And User Accep Perceived Usefulness , Perceived Ease of Use , and User Acceptance of Information Technology By : Fred D . Davis Computer and Information Systems Graduate School of Business Administration University of Michigan Ann Arbor , Michigan 48109 Abstract Valid measurement scales for predicting user acceptance of computers are in short supply . Most subjective measures used in practice are unvalidated , and their relationship to system usage is unknown . The present research de velops and validates new scales for two spe cific variables , perceived usefulness and per ceived ease of use , which are hypothesized to be fundamental determinants of user accep tance . Definitions for these two variables were used to develop scale items that were pretested for content validity and then tested for reliability and construct validity in two studies involving a total of 152 users and four application pro grams . The measures were refined and stream lined , resulting in two six - item scales with reli abilities of . 98 for usefulness and . 94 for ease of use . The scales exhibited high convergent , discriminant , and factorial validity . Perceived use fulness was significantly correlated with both self reported current usage ( r = . 63 , Study 1 ) and self - predicted future usage ( r = . 85 , Study 2 ) . Per ceived ease of use was also significantly corre lated with current usage ( r = . 45 , Study 1 ) and future usage ( r = . 59 , Study 2 ) . In both studies , usefulness had a significantly greater correla tion with usage behavior than did ease of use . Regression analyses suggest that perceived ease of use may actually be a causal antece - dent to perceived usefulness , as opposed to a parallel , direct determinant of system usage . Implications are drawn for future research on user acceptance . Keywords : User acceptance , end user computing , user measurement ACM Categories : H . 1 . 2 , K . 6 . 1 , K . 6 . 2 , K . 6 . 3 Introduction Information technology offers the potential for sub stantially improving white collar performance ( Curley , 1984 ; Edelman , 1981 ; Sharda , et al . , 1988 ) . But performance gains are often ob structed by users ' unwillingness to accept and use available systems ( Bowen , 1986 ; Young , 1984 ) . Because of the persistence and impor tance of this problem , explaining user accep tance has been a long - standing issue in MIS research ( Swanson , 1974 ; Lucas , 1975 ; Schultz and Slevin , 1975 ; Robey , 1979 ; Ginzberg , 1981 ; Swanson , 1987 ) . Although numerous individual , organizational , and technological variables have been investigated ( Benbasat and Dexter , 1986 ; Franz and Robey , 1986 ; Markus and Bjorn Anderson , 1987 ; Robey and Farrow , 1982 ) , re search has been constrained by the shortage of high - quality measures for key determinants of user acceptance . Past research indicates that many measures do not correlate highly with system use ( DeSanctis , 1983 ; Ginzberg , 1981 ; Schewe , 1976 ; Srinivasan , 1985 ) , and the size of the usage correlation varies greatly from one study to the next depending on the particular measures used ( Baroudi , et al . , 1986 ; Barki and Huff , 1985 ; Robey , 1979 ; Swanson , 1982 , 1987 ) . The development of improved measures for key theoretical constructs is a research priority for the information systems field . Aside from their theoretical value , better meas ures for predicting and explaining system use would have great practical value , both for ven dors who would like to assess user demand for new design ideas , and for information systems managers within user organizations who would like to evaluate these vendor offerings . Unvalidated measures are routinely used in prac tice today throughout the entire spectrum of design , selection , implementation and evaluation activities . For example : designers within vendor organizations such as IBM ( Gould , et al . , 1983 ) , Xerox ( Brawley , et al . , 1983 ) , and Digital Equip - MIS Quarterly / September 1989 319 Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . IT Usefulness and Ease of Use ment Corporation ( Good , et al . , 1986 ) measure user perceptions to guide the development of new information technologies and products ; in dustry publications often report user surveys ( e . g . , Greenberg , 1984 ; Rushinek and Rushinek , 1986 ) ; several methodologies for software se lection call for subjective user inputs ( e . g . , Goslar , 1986 ; Klein and Beck , 1987 ) ; and con temporary design principles emphasize meas uring user reactions throughout the entire design process ( Anderson and Olson 1985 ; Gould and Lewis , 1985 ; Johansen and Baker , 1984 ; Mantei and Teorey , 1988 ; Norman , 1983 ; Shneiderman , 1987 ) . Despite the widespread use of subjec tive measures in practice , little attention is paid to the quality of the measures used or how well they correlate with usage behavior . Given the low usage correlations often observed in re search studies , those who base important busi ness decisions on unvalidated measures may be getting misinformed about a system ' s accept ability to users . The purpose of this research is to pursue better measures for predicting and explaining use . The investigation focuses on two theoretical con structs , perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use , which are theorized to be funda mental determinants of system use . Definitions for these constructs are formulated and the theo retical rationale for their hypothesized influence on system use is reviewed . New , multi - item meas urement scales for perceived usefulness and per ceived ease of use are developed , pretested , and then validated in two separate empirical stud ies . Correlation and regression analyses exam ine the empirical relationship between the new measures and self - reported indicants of system use . The discussion concludes by drawing im plications for future research . Perceived Usefulness and Perceived Ease of Use What causes people to accept or reject informa tion technology ? Among the many variables that may influence system use , previous research sug gests two determinants that are especially im portant . First , people tend to use or not use an application to the extent they believe it will help them perform their job better . We refer to this first variable as perceived usefulness . Second , even if potential users believe that a given ap plication is useful , they may , at the same time , 320 MIS Ouarterlv / Seotember 1989 believe that the systems is too hard to use and that the performance benefits of usage are out weighed by the effort of using the application . That is , in addition to usefulness , usage is theo rized to be influenced by perceived ease of use . Perceived usefulness is defined here as " the degree to which a person believes that using a particular system would enhance his or her job performance . " This follows from the defini tion of the word useful : " capable of being used advantageously . " Within an organizational con text , people are generally reinforced for good performance by raises , promotions , bonuses , and other rewards ( Pfeffer , 1982 ; Schein , 1980 ; Vroom , 1964 ) . A system high in perceived use fulness , in turn , is one for which a user believes in the existence of a positive use - performance relationship . Perceived ease of use , in contrast , refers to " the degree to which a person believes that using a particular system would be free of effort . " This follows from the definition of " ease " : " freedom from difficulty or great effort . " Effort is a finite resource that a person may allocate to the vari ous activities for which he or she is responsible ( Radner and Rothschild , 1975 ) . All else being equal , we claim , an application perceived to be easier to use than another is more likely to be accepted by users . Theoretical Foundations The theoretical importance of perceived useful ness and perceived ease of use as determinants of user behavior is indicated by several diverse lines of research . The impact of perceived use fulness on system utilization was suggested by the work of Schultz and Slevin ( 1975 ) and Robey ( 1979 ) . Schultz and Slevin ( 1975 ) conducted an exploratory factor analysis of 67 questionnaire items , which yielded seven dimensions . Of these , the " performance " dimension , interpreted by the authors as the perceived " effect of the model on the manager ' s job performance , " was most highly correlated with self - predicted use of a decision model ( r = . 61 ) . Using the Schultz and Slevin questionnaire , Robey ( 1979 ) finds the per formance dimension to be most correlated with two objective measures of system usage ( r = . 79 and . 76 ) . Building on Vertinsky , et al . ' s ( 1975 ) expectancy model , Robey ( 1979 ) theorizes that : " A system that does not help people perform their jobs is not likely to be received favorably Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . in spite of careful implementation efforts " ( p . 537 ) . Although the perceived use - performance contingency , as presented in Robey ' s ( 1979 ) model , parallels our definition of perceived use fulness , the use of Schultz and Slevin ' s ( 1975 ) performance factor to operationalize perform ance expectancies is problematic for several rea sons : the instrument is empirically derived via exploratory factor analysis ; a somewhat low ratio of sample size to items is used ( 2 : 1 ) ; four of thirteen items have loadings below . 5 , and sev eral of the items clearly fall outside the defini tion of expected performance improvements ( e . g . , " My job will be more satisfying , " " Others will be more aware of what I am doing , " etc . ) . An alternative expectancy - theoretic model , de rived from Vroom ( 1964 ) , was introduced and tested by DeSanctis ( 1983 ) . The use - perform ance expectancy was not analyzed separately from performance - reward instrumentalities and reward valences . Instead , a matrix - oriented meas urement procedure was used to produce an over all index of " motivational force " that combined these three constructs . " Force " had small but significant correlations with usage of a DSS within a business simulation experiment ( corre lations ranged from . 04 to . 26 ) . The contrast be tween DeSanctis ' s correlations and the ones ob served by Robey underscore the importance of measurement in predicting and explaining use . Self - efficacy theory The importance of perceived ease of use is sup ported by Bandura ' s ( 1982 ) extensive research on self - efficacy , defined as " judgments of how well one can execute courses of action required to deal with prospective situations " ( p . 122 ) . Self efficacy is similar to perceived ease of use as defined above . Self - efficacy beliefs are theorized to function as proximal determinants of behav ior . Bandura ' s theory distinguishes self - efficacy judgments from outcome judgments , the latter being concerned with the extent to which a be havior , once successfully executed , is believed to be linked to valued outcomes . Bandura ' s " out come judgment " variable is similar to perceived usefulness . Bandura argues that self - efficacy and outcome beliefs have differing antecedents and that , " In any given instance , behavior would be best predicted by considering both self efficacy and outcome beliefs " ( p . 140 ) . Hill , et al . ( 1987 ) find that both self - efficacy and outcome beliefs exert an influence on decisions IT Usefulness and Ease of Use to learn a computer language . The self efficacy paradigm does not offer a general measure ap plicable to our purposes since efficacy beliefs are theorized to be situationally - specific , with measures tailored to the domain under study ( Bandura , 1982 ) . Self efficacy research does , however , provide one of several theoretical per pectives suggesting that perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness function as basic de terminants of user behavior . Cost - benefit paradigm The cost - benefit paradigm from behavioral deci sion theory ( Beach and Mitchell , 1978 ; Johnson and Payne , 1985 ; Payne , 1982 ) is also relevant to perceived usefulness and ease of use . This research explains people ' s choice among vari ous decision - making strategies ( such as linear compensatory , conjunctive , disjunctive and elmi nation - by - aspects ) in terms of a cognitive trade off between the effort required to employ the strat egy and the quality ( accuracy ) of the resulting decision . This approach has been effective for explaining why decision makers alter their choice strategies in response to changes in task com plexity . Although the cost - benefit approach has mainly concerned itself with unaided decision making , recent work has begun to apply the same form of analysis to the effectiveness of information display formats ( Jarvenpaa , 1989 ; Kleinmuntz and Schkade , 1988 ) . Cost - benefit research has primarily used objec tive measures of accuracy and effort in research studies , downplaying the distinction between ob jective and subjective accuracy and effort . In creased emphasis on subjective constructs is war ranted , however , since ( 1 ) a decision maker ' s choice of strategy is theorized to be based on subjective as opposed to objective accuracy and effort ( Beach and Mitchell , 1978 ) , and ( 2 ) other research suggests that subjective measures are often in disagreement with their ojbective coun terparts ( Abelson and Levi , 1985 ; Adelbratt and Montgomery , 1980 ; Wright , 1975 ) . Introducing measures of the decision maker ' s own perceived costs and benefits , independent of the decision actually made , has been suggested as a way of mitigating criticisms that the cost / benefit frame work is tautological ( Abelson and Levi , 1985 ) . The distinction made herein between perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use is similar to the distinction between subjective decision making performance and effort . MIS Quarterly / September 1989 321 Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . IT Usefulness and Ease of Use Adoption of innovations Research on the adoption of innovations also suggests a prominent role for perceived ease of use . In their meta - analysis of the relationship between the characteristics of an innovation and its adoption , Tornatzky and Klein ( 1982 ) find that compatibility , relative advantage , and complex ity have the most consistent significant relation ships across a broad range of innovation types . Complexity , defined by Rogers and Shoemaker ( 1971 ) as " the degree to which an innovation is perceived as relatively difficult to understand and use " ( p . 154 ) , parallels perceived ease of use quite closely . As Tornatzky and Klein ( 1982 ) point out , however , compatibility and relative ad vantage have both been dealt with so broadly and inconsistently in the literature as to be diffi cult to interpret . Evaluation of information reports Past research within MIS on the evaluation of information reports echoes the distinction be tween usefulness and ease of use made herein . Larcker and Lessig ( 1980 ) factor analyzed six items used to rate four information reports . Three items load on each of two distinct factors : ( 1 ) perceived importance , which Larcker and Lessig define as " the quality that causes a particular information set to acquire relevance to a deci sion maker , " and the extent to which the infor mation elements are " a necessary input for task accomplishment , " and ( 2 ) perceived usable ness , which is defined as the degree to which " the information format is unambiguous , clear or readable " ( p . 123 ) . These two dimensions are similar to perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use as defined above , repsectively , al though Larcker and Lessig refer to the two di mensions collectively as " perceived usefulness . " Reliabilities for the two dimensions fall in the range of . 64 - . 77 , short of the . 80 minimal level recommended for basic research . Correlations with actual use of information reports were not addressed in their study . Channel disposition model Swanson ( 1982 , 1987 ) introduced and tested a model of " channel disposition " for explaining the choice and use of information reports . The con cept of channel disposition is defined as having 322 MIS Quarterly / September 1989 two components : attributed information quality and attributed access quality . Potential users are hypothesized to select and use information re ports based on an implicit psychological trade off between information quality and associated costs of access . Swanson ( 1987 ) performed an exploratory factor analysis in order to measure information quality and access quality . A five factor solution was obtained , with one factor cor responding to information quality ( Factor # 3 , " value " ) , and one to access quality ( Factor # 2 , " accessibility " ) . Inspecting the items that load on these factors suggests a close correspondence to perceived usefulness and ease of use . Items such as " important , " " relevant , " " useful , " and " valuable " load strongly on the value dimension . Thus , value parallels perceived usefulness . The fact that relevance and usefulness load on the same factor agrees with information scientists , who emphasize the conceptual similarity be tween the usefulness and relevance notions ( Saracevic , 1975 ) . Several of Swanson ' s " acces sibility " items , such as " convenient , " " controlla ble , " " easy , " and " unburdensome , " correspond to perceived ease of use as defined above . Al though the study was more exploratory than con firmatory , with no attempts at construct valida tion , it does agree with the conceptual distinction between usefulness and ease of use . Self reported information channel use correlated . 20 with the value dimension and . 13 with the ac cessibility dimension . Non - MIS studies Outside the MIS domain , a marketing study by Hauser and Simmie ( 1981 ) concerning user per ceptions of alternative communication technolo gies similarly derived two underlying dimensions : ease of use and effectiveness , the latter being similar to the perceived usefulness construct de fined above . Both ease of use and effectiveness were influential in the formation of user prefer ences regarding a set of alternative communi cation technologies . The human - computer inter action ( HCI ) research community has heavily emphasized ease of use in design ( Branscomb and Thomas , 1984 ; Card , et al . , 1983 ; Gould and Lewis , 1985 ) . For the most part , however , these studies have focused on objective meas ures of ease of use , such as task completion time and error rates . In many vendor organiza tions , usability testing has become a standard phase in the product development cycle , with Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . large investments in test facilities and instrumen tation . Although objective ease of use is clearly relevant to user performance given the system is used , subjective ease of use is more relevant to the users ' decision whether or not to use the system and may not agree with the objective measures ( Carroll and Thomas , 1988 ) . Convergence of findings There is a striking convergence among the wide range of theoretical perspectives and research studies discussed above . Although Hill , et al . ( 1987 ) examined learning a computer language , Larcker and Lessig ( 1980 ) and Swanson ( 1982 , 1987 ) dealt with evaluating information reports , and Hauser and Simmie ( 1981 ) studied com munication technologies , all are supportive of the conceptual and empirical distinction between use fulness and ease of use . The accumulated body of knowledge regarding self - efficacy , contingent decision behavior and adoption of innovations provides theoretical support for perceived use fulness and ease of use as key determinants of behavior . From multiple disciplinary vantage points , per ceived usefulness and perceived ease of use are indicated as fundamental and distinct con structs that are influential in decisions to use in formation technology . Although certainly not the only variables of interest in explaining user be havior ( for other variables , see Cheney , et al . , 1986 ; Davis , et al . , 1989 ; Swanson , 1988 ) , they do appear likely to play a central role . Improved measures are needed to gain further insight into the nature of perceived usefulness and per ceived ease of use , and their roles as determi nants of computer use . Scale Development and Pretest A step - by - step process was used to develop new multi - item scales having high reliability and validity . The conceptual definitions of perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use , stated above , were used to generate 14 candidate items for each construct from past literature . Pre test interviews were then conducted to assess the semantic content of the items . Those items that best fit the definitions of the constructs were IT Usefulness and Ease of Use retained , yielding 10 items for each construct . Next , a field study ( Study 1 ) of 112 users con cerning two different interactive computer sys tems was conducted in order to assess the reli ability and construct validity of the resulting scales . The scales were further refined and streamlined to six items per construct . A lab study ( Study 2 ) involving 40 participants and two graphics systems was then conducted . Data from the two studies were then used to assess the relationship between usefulness , ease of use , and self - reported usage . Psychometricians emphasize that the validity of a measurement scale is built in from the outset . As Nunnally ( 1978 ) points out , " Rather than test the validity of measures after they have been constructed , one should ensure the validity by the plan and procedures for construction " ( p . 258 ) . Careful selection of the initial scale items helps to assure the scales will possess " content validity , " defined as " the degree to which the score or scale being used represents the con cept about which generalizations are to be made " ( Bohrnstedt , 1970 , p . 91 ) . In discussing content validity , psychometricians often appeal to the " domain sampling model , " ( Bohrnstedt , 1970 ; Nunnally , 1978 ) which assumes there is a domain of content corresponding to each vari able one is interested in measuring . Candidate items representative of the domain of content should be selected . Researchers are advised to begin by formulating conceptual definitions of what is to be measured and preparing items to fit the construct definitions ( Anastasi , 1986 ) . Following these recommendations , candidate items for perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use were generated based on their con ceptual definitions , stated above , and then pre tested in order to select those items that best fit the content domains . The Spearman - Brown Prophecy formula was used to choose the number of items to generate for each scale . This formula estimates the number of items needed to achieve a given reliability based on the number of items and reliability of comparable existing scales . Extrapolating from past studies , the formula suggests that 1 0 items would be needed for each perceptual variable to achieve reliability of at least . 80 ( Davis , 1986 ) . Adding four additional items for each construct to allow for item elimination , it was decided to generate 14 items for each construct . The initial item pools for perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use are given in Tables MIS Quarterly / September 1989 323 Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . IT Usefulness and Ease of Use 1 and 2 , respectively . In preparing candidate items , 37 published research papers dealing with user reactions to interactive systems were re - other items in order to yield a more pure indi cant of the conceptual variable . viewed in other to identify various facets of the Pretest interviews were performed to further en - constructs that should be measured ( Davis , hance content validity by assessing the corre - 1986 ) . The items are worded in reference to " the spondence between candidate items and the defi - electronic mail system , " which is one of the two nitions of the variables they are intended to test applications investigated in Study 1 , reported measure . Items that don ' t represent a construct ' s below . The items within each pool tend to have content very well can be screened out by asking a lot of overlap in their meaning , which is con - individuals to rank the degree to which each item sistent with the fact that they are intended as matches the variable ' s definition , and eliminat - measures of the same underlying construct . ing items receiving low rankings . In eliminating Though different individuals may attribute slightly items , we want to make sure not to reduce the different meaning to particular item statements , representativeness of the item pools . Our item the goal of the multi - item approach is to reduce pools may have excess coverage of some areas any extranneous effects of individual items , al - of meaning ( or substrata ; see Bohrnstedt , 1970 ) lowing idiosyncrasies to be cancelled out by within the content domain and not enough of Table 1 . Initial Scale Items for Perceived Usefulness 1 . My job would be difficult to perform without electronic mail . 2 . Using electronic mail gives me greater control over my work . 3 . Using electronic mail improves my job performance . 4 . The electronic mail system addresses my job - related needs . 5 . Using electronic mail saves me time . 6 . Electronic mail enables me to accomplish tasks more quickly . 7 . Electronic mail supports critical aspects of my job . 8 . Using electronic mail allows me to accomplish more work than would otherwise be possible . 9 . Using electronic mail reduces the time I spend on unproductive activities . 10 . Using electronic mail enhances my effectiveness on the job . 11 . Using electronic mail improves the quality of the work I do . 12 . Using electronic mail increases my productivity . 13 . Using electronic mail makes it easier to do my job . 14 . Overall , I find the electronic mail system useful in my job . Table 2 . Initial Scale Items for Perceived Ease of Use 1 . I often become confused when I use the electronic mail system . 2 . I make errors frequently when using electronic mail . 3 . Interacting with the electronic mail system is often frustrating . 4 . I need to consult the user manual often when using electronic mail . 5 . Interacting with the electronic mail system requires a lot of my mental effort . 6 . I find it easy to recover from errors encountered while using electronic mail . 7 . The electronic mail system is rigid and inflexible to interact with . 8 . I find it easy to get the electronic mail system to do what I want it to do . 9 . The electronic mail system often behaves in unexpected ways . 10 . I find itcumbersome to use the electronic mail system . 11 . My interaction with the electronic mail system is easy for me to understand . 12 . It is easy for me to remember how to perform tasks using the electronic mail system . 13 . The electronic mail system provides helpful guidance in performing tasks . 14 . Overall , I find the electronic mail system easy to use . 324 MIS Quarterly / September 1989 Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . others . By asking individuals to rate the similar ity of items to one another , we can perform a cluster analysis to determine the structure of the substrata , remove items where excess coverage is suggested , and add items where inadequate coverage is indicated . Pretest participants consisted of a sample of 15 experienced computer users from the Sloan School of Management , MIT , including five sec retaries , five graduate students and five mem bers of the professional staff . In face - to - face in terviews , participants were asked to perform two tasks , prioritization and categorization , which were done separately for usefulness and ease of use . For prioritization , they were first given a card containing the definition of the target con struct and asked to read it . Next , they were given 13 index cards each having one of the items for that construct written on it . The 14th or " over all " item for each construct was omitted since its wording was almost identical to the label on the definition card ( see Tables 1 and 2 ) . Partici pants were asked to rank the 13 cards accord ing to how well the meaning of each statement matched the given definition of ease of use or usefulness . For the categorization task , participants were asked to put the 13 cards into three to five cate gories so that the statements within a category were most similar in meaning to each other and dissimilar in meaning from those in other cate gories . This was an adaptation of the " own cate gories " procedure of Sherif and Sherif ( 1967 ) . Categorization provides a simple indicant of simi larity that requires less time and effort to obtain than other similarity measurement procedures such as paid comparisons . The similarity data was cluster analyzed by assigning to the same cluster items that seven or more subjects placed in the same category . The clusters are consid ered to be a reflection of the domain substrata for each construct and serve as a basis of as sessing coverage , or representativeness , of the item pools . The resulting rank and cluster data are summa rized in Tables 3 ( usefulness ) and 4 ( ease of use ) . For perceived usefulness , notice that items fall into three main clusters . The first cluster re lates to job effectiveness , the second to produc tivity and time savings , and the third to the im portance of the system to one ' s job . If we eliminate the lowest - ranked items ( items 1 , 4 , 5 and 9 ) , we see that the three major clusters each have at least two items . Item 2 , " control IT Usefulness and Ease of Use over work " was retained since , although it was ranked fairly low , it fell in the top 9 and may tap an important aspect of usefulness . Looking now at perceived ease of use ( Table 4 ) , we again find three main clusters . The first relates to physical effort , while the second re lates to mental effort . Selecting the six highest priority items and eliminating the seventh pro vides good coverage of these two clusters . Item 11 ( " understandable " ) was reworded to read " clear and understandable " in an effort to pick up some of the content of item 1 ( " confusing " ) , which has been eliminated . The third cluster is somewhat more difficult to interpret but appears to be tapping perceptions of how easy a system is to learn . Remembering how to perform tasks , using the manual , and relying on system guid ance are all phenomena associated with the proc ess of learning to use a new system ( Nickerson , 1981 ; Roberts and Moran , 1983 ) . Further review of the literature suggests that ease of use and ease of learning are strongly related . Roberts and Moran ( 1983 ) find a correlation of . 79 be tween objective measures of ease of use and ease of learning . Whiteside , et al . ( 1985 ) find that ease of use and ease of learning are strongly related and conclude that they are con gruent . Studies of how people learn new sys tems suggest that learning and using are not separate , disjoint activities , but instead that people are motivated to begin performing actual work directly and try to " learn by doing " as op posed to going through user manuals or online tutorials ( Carroll and Carrithers , 1984 ; Carroll , et al . , 1985 ; Carroll and McKendree , 1987 ) . In this study , therefore , ease of learning is re garded as one substratum of the ease of use construct , as opposed to a distinct construct . Since items 4 and 13 provide a rather indirect assessment of ease of learning , they were re placed with two items that more directly get at ease of learning : " Learning to operate the elec tronic mail system is easy for me , " and " I find it takes a lot of effort to become skillful at using electronic mail . " Items 6 , 9 and 2 were elimi nated because they did not cluster with other items , and they received low priority rankings , which suggests that they do not fit well within the content domain for ease of use . Together with the " overall " items for each construct , this procedure yielded a 1 0 - item scale for each con struct to be empirically tested for reliability and construct validity . MIS Quarterly / September 1989 325 Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . IT Usefulness and Ease of Use Table 3 . Pretest Results : Perceived Usefulness Old New Item # Item Rank Item # Cluster 1 Job Difficult Without 13 c 2 Control Over Work 9 2 3 Job Performance 2 6 A 4 Addresses My Needs 12 c 5 Saves Me Time 11 B 6 Work More Quickly 7 3 B 7 Critical to My Job 5 4 c 8 Accomplish More Work 6 7 B 9 Cut Unproductive Time 10 B 10 Effectiveness 1 8 A 11 Quality of Work 3 1 A 12 Increase Productivity 4 5 B 13 Makes Job Easier 8 9 c 14 Useful NA 10 NA Table 4 . Pretest Results : Perceived Ease of Use Old Item # Item 1 Confusing 2 Error Prone 3 Frustrating 4 Dependence on Manual 5 Mental Effort 6 Error Recovery 7 Rigid & Inflexible 8 Controllable 9 Unexpected Behavior 10 Cumbersome 11 Understandable 12 Ease of Remembering 13 Provides Guidance 14 Easy to Use NA Ease of Learning NA Effort to Become Skillful Study 1 A field study was conducted to assess the reli ability , convergent validity , discriminant validity , and factorial validity of the 1 0 - item scales re sulting from the pretest . A sample of 120 users within IBM Canada ' s Toronto Development Labo ratory were given a questionnaire asking them to rate the usefulness and ease of use of two systems available there : PROFS electronic mail and the XEDIT file editor . The computing envi ronment consisted of IBM mainframes accessi ble through 327X terminals . The PROFS elec tronic mail system is a simple but limited messaging facility for brief messages . ( See Panko , 1988 . ) The XEDIT editor is widely avail - 326 MIS Quarterly / September 1989 New Rank Item # Cluster 7 B 13 3 3 B 9 ( replace ) c 5 7 B 10 6 5 A 1 4 A 11 2 1 A 4 8 B 8 6 c 12 ( replace ) c NA 10 NA NA 2 NA NA 9 NA able on IBM systems and offers both full - screen and command - driven editing capabilities . The questionnaire asked participants to rate the extent to which they agree with each statement by circling a number from one to seven arranged horizontally beneath anchor point descriptions " Strongly Agree , " " Neutral , " and " Strongly Dis agree . " In order to ensure subject familiarity with the systems being rated , instructions asked the participants to skip over the section pertaining to a given system if they never use it . Responses were obtained from 112 participants , for a re sponse rate of 93 % . Of these 112 , 1 09 were users of electronic mail and 75 were users of XEDIT . Subjects had an average of six months ' experience with the two systems studied . Among Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . the sample , 10 percent were managers , 35 per cent were administrative staff , and 55 percent were professional staff ( which included a broad mix of market analysts , product development ana lysts , programmers , financial analysts and re search scientists ) . Reliability and validity The perceived usefulness scale attained Cron bach alpha reliability of . 97 for both the elec tronic mail and XEDIT systems , while perceived ease of use achieved a reliability of . 86 for elec tronic mail and . 93 for XEDIT . When observa tions were pooled for the two systems , alpha was . 97 for usefulness and . 91 for ease of use . Convergent and discriminant validity were tested using multitrait - multimethod ( MTMM ) analysis ( Campbell and Fiske , 1959 ) . The MTMM matrix contains the intercorrelations of items ( methods ) applied to the two different test systems ( traits ) , electronic mail and XEDIT . Convergent validity refers to whether the items comprising a scale behave as if they are measuring a common un derlying construct . In order to demonstrate con vergent validity , items that measure the same trait should correlate highly with one another ( Campbell and Fiske , 1959 ) . That is , the ele ments in the monotrait triangles ( the submatrix of intercorrelations between items intended to measure the same construct for the same system ) within the MTMM matrices should be large . For perceived usefulness , the 90 monotrait heteromethod correlations were all significant at the . 05 level . For ease of use , 86 out of 90 , or 95 . 6 % , of the monotrait - heteromethod corre lations were significant . Thus , our data supports the convergent validity of the two scales . Discriminant validity is concerned with the abil ity of a measurement item to differentiate be tween objects being measured . For instance , within the MTMM matrix , a perceived usefulness item applied to electronic mail should not corre late too highly with the same item applied to XEDIT . Failure to discriminate may suggest the presence of " common method variance , " which means that an item is measuring methodological artifacts unrelated to the target construct ( such as individual differences in the style of respond ing to questions ( see Campbell , et al . , 1967 ; Silk , 1971 ) ) . The test for discriminant validity is that an item should correlate more highly with other items intended to measure the same trait than with either the same item used to measure a IT Usefulness and Ease of Use different trait or with different items used to meas ure a different trait ( Campbell and Fiske , 1959 ) . For perceived usefulness , 1 , 800 such compari sons were confirmed without exception . Of the 1 , 800 comparisons for ease of use there were 58 exceptions ( 3 % ) . This represents an unusu ally high level of discriminant validity ( Campbell and Fiske , 1959 ; Silk , 1971 ) and implies that the usefulness and ease of use scales possess a high concentration of trait variance and are not strongly influenced by methodological artifacts . Table 5 gives a summary frequency table of the correlations comprising the MTMM matrices for usefulness and ease of use . From this table it is possible to see the separation in magnitude between monotrait and heterotrait correlations . The frequency table also shows that the hetero trait - heteromethod correlations do not appear to be substantially elevated above the heterotrait monomethod correlations . This is an additional diagnostic suggested by Campbell and Fiske ( 1959 ) to detect the presence of method variance . The few exceptions to the convergent and dis criminant validity that did occur , although not ex tensive enough to invalidate the ease of use scale , all involved negatively phrased ease of use items . These " reversed " items tended to cor relate more with the same item used to meas ure a different trait than they did with other items of the same trait , suggesting the presence of common method variance . This is ironic , since reversed scales are typically used in an effort to reduce common method variance . Silk ( 1971 ) similarly observed minor departures from con vergent and discriminant validity for reversed items . The five positively worded ease of use items had a reliability of . 92 compared to . 83 for the five negative items . This suggests an im provement in the ease of use scale may be pos sible with the elimination or reversal of nega tively phrased items . Nevertheless , the MTMM analysis supported the ability of the 1 0 - item scales for each construct to differentiate between systems . Factorial validity is concerned with whether the usefulness and ease of use items form distinct constructs . A principal components analysis using oblique rotation was performed on the twenty usefulness and ease of use items . Data were pooled across the two systems , for a total of 184 observations . The results show that the MIS Quarterly / September 1989 327 Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . IT Usefulness and Ease of Use Table 5 . Summary of Multitrait - Multimethod Analyses Construct Perceived Usefulness Perceived Ease of Use Same Trait ! Different Same Trait ! Different Diff . Method Trait Diff . Method Trait Correlation Elec . Same Diff . Elec . Same Diff . Size Mail X EDIT Meth . Met h . Mail X EDIT Meth . Meth . - . 20 to - . 11 - . 10 to - . 01 . 00 to . 09 3 . 10 to . 19 2 . 20 to . 29 5 . 30 to . 39 . 40 to . 49 . 50 to . 59 4 . 60 to . 69 14 4 . 70 to . 79 20 11 . 80 to . 89 7 26 . 90 to . 99 4 # Correlations 45 45 10 usefulness and ease of use items load on dis tinct factors ( Table 6 ) . The multitrait - multimethod analysis and factor analysis both support the con struct validity of the 1 0 - item scales . Scale refinement In applied testing situations , it is important to keep scales as brief as possible , particularly when multiple systems are going to be evalu ated . The usefulness and ease of use scales were refined and streamlined based on results from Study 1 and then subjected to a second round of empirical validation in Study 2 , reported below . Applying the Spearman - Brown prophecy formula to the . 97 reliability obtained for per ceived usefulness indicates that a six - item scale composed of items having comparable reliabil ity would yield a scale reliability of . 94 . The five positive ease of use items had a reliability of . 92 . Taken together , these findings from Study 1 suggest that six items would be adequate to achieve reliability levels above . 9 while main taining adequate validity levels . Based on the results of the field study , six of the 10 items for each construct were selected to form modified scales . For the ease of use scale , the five negatively worded items were eliminated due to their ap parent common method variance , leaving items 2 , 4 , 6 , 8 and 1 0 . Item 6 ( " easy to remember 328 MIS Ouarterlv ! Seotember 1989 1 6 1 5 25 2 1 32 27 2 5 40 25 9 1 11 7 14 2 2 1 9 9 3 11 3 13 3 8 2 90 45 45 10 90 how to perform tasks " ) , which the pretest indi cated was concerned with ease of learning , was replaced by a reversal of item 9 ( " easy to become skillful " ) , which was specifically de signed to more directly tap ease of learning . These items include two from cluster C , one each from clusters A and B , and the overall item . ( See Table 4 . ) In order to improve representa tive coverage of the content domain , an addi tional A item was added . Of the two remaining A items ( # 1 , Cumbersome , and # 5 , Rigid and Inflexible ) , item 5 is readily reversed to form " flex ible to interact with . " This item was added to form the sixth item , and the order of items 5 and 8 was permuted in order to prevent items from the same cluster ( items 4 and 5 ) from ap pearing next to one another . In order to select six items to be used for the usefulness scale , an item analysis was per formed . Corrected item - total correlations were computed for each item , separately for each system studied . Average Z - scores of these cor relations were used to rank the items . Items 3 , 5 , 6 , 8 , 9 and 10 were top - ranked items . Refer ring to the cluster analysis ( Table 3 ) , we see that this set is well - representative of the content domain , including two items from cluster A , two from cluster B and one from cluster C , as well as the overall item ( # 10 ) . The items were per muted to prevent items from the same cluster from appearing next to one another . The result - Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . IT Usefulness and Ease of Use Table 6 . Factor Analysis of Perceived Usefulness and Ease of Use Questions : Study 1 Scale Items Usefulness 1 Quality of Work 2 Control over Work 3 Work More Quickly 4 Critical to My Job 5 Increase Productivity 6 Job Performance 7 Accomplish More Work 8 Effectiveness 9 Makes Job Easier 10 Useful Ease of Use 1 Cubersome 2 Ease of Learning 3 Frustrating 4 Controllable 5 Rigid & Inflexible 6 Ease of Remembering 7 Mental Effort 8 Understandable 9 Effort to Be Skillful 10 Easy to Use ing six - item usefulness and ease of use scales are shown in the Appendix . Relationship to use Participants were asked to self - report their degree of current usage of electronic mail and XEDIT on six - position categorical scales with boxes labeled " Don ' t use at all , " " Use less than once each week , " " Use about once each week , " " Use several times a week , " " Use about once each day , " and " Use several times each day . " Usage was significantly correlated with both per ceived usefulness and perceived ease of use for both PROFS mail and XEDIT . PROFS mail usage correlated . 56 with perceived usefulness and . 32 with perceived ease of use . XEDIT usage correlated . 68 with usefulness and . 48 with ease of use . When data were pooled across systems , usage correlated . 63 with usefulness and . 45 with ease of use . The overall usefulness use correlation was significantly greater than the ease of use - use correlation as indicated by a test of dependent correlations ( t 181 = 3 . 69 , p < . 001 ) ( Cohen and Cohen , 1975 ) . Usefulness and ease of use were significantly correlated with each other for electronic mail ( . 56 ) , XEDIT Factor 1 Factor 1 ( Usefulness ) ( Ease of Use ) . 80 . 10 . 86 - . 03 . 79 . 17 . 87 - . 11 . 87 . 10 . 93 - . 07 . 91 - . 02 . 96 - . 03 . 80 . 16 . 74 . 23 . 00 . 73 . 08 . 60 . 02 . 65 . 13 . 74 . 09 . 54 . 17 . 62 - . 07 . 76 . 29 . 64 - . 25 . 88 . 23 . 72 ( . 69 ) , and overall ( . 64 ) . All correlations were sig nificant at the . 001 level . Regression analyses were performed to assess the joint effects of usefulness and ease of use on usage . The effect of usefulness on usage , controlling for ease of use , was significant at the . 001 level for electronic mail ( b = . 55 ) , XED IT ( b = . 69 ) , and pooled ( b = . 57 ) . In contrast , the effect of ease of use on usage , controlling for usefulness , was non - significant across the board ( b = . 01 for electronic mail ; b = . 02 for XED IT ; and b = . 07 pooled ) . In other words , the signifi cant pairwise correlation between ease of use and usage vanishes when usefulness is con trolled for . The regression coefficients obtained for each individual system within each study were not significantly different ( F 3 , 178 = 1 . 95 , n . s . ) . As the relationship between independent variables in a regression approach perfect linear dependence , multicollinearity can degrade the parameter estimates obtained . Although the cor relations between usefulness and ease of use are significant , according to tests for multi collinearity they are not large enough to com promise the accuracy of the estimated regres sion coefficients since the standard errors of the estimates are low ( . 08 for both usefulness and MIS Quarterly / September 1989 329 Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . IT Usefulness and Ease of Use ease of use ) , and the covariances between the parameter estimates are negligible ( - . 004 ) ( Johnston , 1972 ; Mansfield and Helms , 1982 ) . Based on partial correlation analyses , the vari ance in usage explained by ease of use drops by 98 % when usefulness is controlled for . The regression and partial correlation results suggest that usefulness mediates the effect of ease of use on usage , i . e . , that ease of use influences usage indirectly through its effect on usefulness ( J . A . Davis , 1985 ) . Study 2 A lab study was performed to evaluate the six item usefulness and ease of use scales result ing from scale refinement in Study 1 . Study 2 was designed to approximate applied prototype testing or system selection situations , an impor tant class of situations where measures of this kind are likely to be used in practice . In proto type testing and system selection contexts , pro spective users are typically given a brief hands on demonstration involving less than an hour of actually interacting with the candidate system . Thus , representative users are asked to rate the future usefulness and ease of use they would expect based on relatively little experience with the systems being rated . We are especially in terested in the properties of the usefulness and ease of use scales when they are worded in a prospective sense and are based on limited experience with the target systems . Favorable psychometric properties under these circum stances would be encouraging relative to their use as early warning indicants of user accep tance ( Ginzberg , 1981 ) . The lab study involved 40 voluntary participants who were evening MBA students at Boston Uni versity . They were paid $ 25 for participating in the study . They had an average of five years ' work experience and were employed full - time in several industries , including education ( 1 0 per cent ) , government ( 1 0 percent ) , financial ( 28 per cent ) , health ( 18 percent ) , and manufacturing ( 8 percent ) . They had a range of prior experience with computers in general ( 35 percent none or limited ; 48 percent moderate ; and 17 percent extensive ) and personal computers in particular ( 35 percent none or limited ; 48 percent moder ate ; and 15 percent extensive ) but were unfa miliar with the two systems used in the study . 330 MIS Quarterly / September 1989 The study involved evaluating two IBM PC based graphics systems : Chart - Master ( by De cision Resources , Inc . of Westport , CN ) and Pen draw ( by Pencept , Inc . of Waltham , MA ) . Chart Master is a menu - driven package that creates numerical business graphs , such as bar charts , line charts , and pie charts based on parameters defined by the user . Through the keyboard and menus , the user inputs the data for , and defines the desired characteristics of , the chart to be made . The user can specify a wide variety of options relating to title fonts , colors , plot orienta tion , cross - hatching pattern , chart format , and so on . The chart can then be previewed on the screen , saved , and printed . Chart - Master is a successful commercial product that typifies the category of numeric business charting programs . Pendraw is quite different from the typical busi ness charting program . It uses bit - mapped graph ics and a " direct manipulation " interface where users draw desired shapes using a digitizer tablet and an electronic " pen " as a stylus . The digitizer tablet supplants the keyboard as the input medium . By drawing on a tablet , the user manipulates the image , which is visible on the screen as it is being created . Pendraw offers capabilities typical of PC - based , bit - mapped " paint " programs ( see Panko , 1988 ) , allowing the user to perform freehand drawing and select from among geometric shapes , such as boxes , lines , and circles . A variety of line widths , color selections and title fonts are available . The digitizer is also capable of performing character recognition , converting hand - printer characters into various fonts ( Ward and Blesser , 1985 ) . Pencept had positioned the Pendraw product to complete with business charting programs . The manual introduces Pendraw by guiding the user through the process of creating a numeric bar chart . Thus , a key marketing issue was the extent to which the new product would compete favorably with established brands , such as Chart Master . Participants were given one hour of hands - on experience with Chart - Master and Pendraw , using workbooks that were designed to follow the same instructional sequence as the user manuals for the two products , while equalizing the style of writing and eliminating value state ments ( e . g . , " See how easy that was to do ? " ) . Half of the participants tried Chart - Master first and half tried Pendraw first . After using each package , a questionnaire was completed . Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . Reliability and validity Cronbach alpha was . 98 for perceived useful ness and . 94 for perceived ease of use . Con vergent validity was supported , with only two of 72 monotrait - heteromethod correlations falling below significance . Ease of use item 4 ( flexibil ity ) , applied to Chart - Master , was not significantly correlated with either items 3 ( clear and under standable ) or 5 ( easy to become skillful ) . This suggests that , contrary to conventional wisdom , flexibility is not always associated with ease of use . As Goodwin ( 1987 ) points out , flexibility can actually impair ease of use , particularly for novice users . With item 4 omitted , Cronbach alpha for ease of use would increase from . 94 to . 95 . Despite the two departures to conver gent validity related to ease of use item 4 , no exceptions to the discriminant validity criteria oc curred across a total of 720 comparisons ( 360 for each scale ) . Factorial validity was assessed by factor ana lyzing the 12 scale items using principal compo nents extraction and oblique rotation . The re sulting two - factor solution is very consistent with distinct , unidimensional usefulness and each of use scales ( Table 7 ) . Thus , as in Study 1 , Study 2 reflects favorably on the convergent , discrimi nant , and factorial validity of the usefulness and ease of use scales . Relationship to use Participants were asked to self - predict their future use of Chart - Master and Pendraw . The IT Usefulness and Ease of Use questions were worded as follows : " Assuming Pendraw would be available on my job , I predict that I will use it on a regular basis in the future , " followed by two seven - point scales , one with likely - unlikely end - point adjectives , the other , re versed in polarity , with improbable - probable end point adjectives . Such self - predictions , or " be havioral expectations , " are among the most ac curate predictors available for an individual ' s future behavior ( Sheppard , et al . , 1988 ; War shaw and Davis , 1985 ) . For Chart - Master , use fulness was significantly correlated with self predicted usage ( r = . 71 , p < . 001 ) , but ease of use was not ( r = . 25 , n . s . ) ( Table 8 ) . Chart Master had a non - significant correlation between ease of use and usefulness ( r = . 25 , n . s . ) . For Pendraw , usage was significantly correlated with both usefulness ( r = . 59 , p < . 001 ) and ease of use ( r = . 47 , p < . 001 ) . The ease of use - useful ness correlation was significiant for Pendraw ( r = . 38 , p < . 001 ) . When data were pooled across systems , usage correlated . 85 ( p < . 001 ) with use fulness and . 59 ( p < . 001 ) with ease of use ( see Table 8 ) . Ease of use correlated with usefulness . 56 ( p < . 001 ) . The overall usefulness - use corre lation was significantly greater than the ease of use - use correlation , as indicated by a test of de pendent correlations ( t 77 = 4 . 78 , p < . 001 ) ( Cohen and Cohen , 1975 ) . Regression analyses ( Table 9 ) indicate that the effect of usefulness on usage , controlling for ease of use , was significant at the . 001 level for Chart - Master ( b = . 69 ) , Pend raw ( b = . 76 ) and overall ( b = . 75 ) . In contrast , the effect of ease of use on usage , controlling for usefulness , was Table 7 . Factor Analysis of Perceived Usefulness and Ease of Use Items : Study 2 Factor 1 Factor 2 Scale Items ( Usefulness ) ( Ease of Use ) Usefulness 1 Work More Quickly . 91 . 01 2 Job Performance . 98 - . 03 3 Increase Productivity . 98 - . 03 4 Effectiveness . 94 . 04 5 Makes Job Easier . 95 - . 01 6 Useful . 88 . 11 Ease of Use 1 Easy to Learn - . 20 . 97 2 Controllable . 19 . 83 3 Clear & Understandable - . 04 . 89 4 Flexible . 13 . 63 5 Easy to Become Skillful . 07 . 91 6 Easy to Use . 09 . 91 MIS Quarterly / September 1989 331 Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . IT Usefulness and Ease of Use Table 8 . Correlations Between Perceived Usefulness , Perceived Ease of Use , and Self - Reported System Usage Correlation Usefulness Ease of Use Ease of Use & Usage & Usage & Usefulness Study 1 Electronic Mail ( n = 1 09 ) . 56 * * * . 32 * * * . 56 * * * X EDIT ( n = 75 ) . 68 * * * . 48 * * * . 69 * * * Pooled ( n = 184 ) . 63 * * * . 45 * * * . 64 * * * Study 2 Chart - Master ( n = 40 ) . 71 * * * . 25 . 25 Pend raw ( n = 40 ) . 59 * * * . 47 * * * . 38 * * Pooled ( n = 80 ) . 85 * * * . 59 * * * . 56 * * * Davis , et al . ( 1989 ) ( n = 107 ) Wave 1 . 65 * * * . 27 * * . 10 Wave 2 . 70 * * * . 12 . 23 * * * * * p < . 001 p < . 01 * p < . 05 Table 9 . Regression Analyses of the Effect of Perceived Usefulness and Perceived Ease of Use on Self - Reported Usage Study 1 Electronic Mail ( n = 1 09 ) XED IT ( n = 75 ) Pooled ( n = 184 ) Study 2 Chart - Master ( n = 40 ) Pendraw ( n = 40 ) Pooled ( n = 80 ) Davis , et al . ( 1989 ) ( n = 107 ) After 1 Hour After 14 Weeks * * * p < . 001 * * p < . 01 * p < . 05 non - significant for both Chart - Master ( b = . 08 , n . s . ) and Pendraw ( b = . 17 , n . s . ) when analyzed separately and borderline significant when ob servations were pooled ( b = . 17 , p < . 05 ) . The re gression coefficients obtained for Pendraw and Chart - Master were not significantly different ( F 3 . 74 = . 014 , n . s . ) . Multicollinearity is ruled out since the standard errors of the estimates are low ( . 07 for both usefulness and ease of use ) and the covariances between the parameter estimates are negligible ( - . 004 ) . Hence , as in Study 1 , the significant pairwise correlations between ease of use and usage drop dramatically when usefulness is controlled for , suggesting that ease of use operates 332 MIS Quarterly / September 1989 Independent Variables Usefulness Ease of Use R . 55 * * * . 01 . 31 . 69 * * * . 02 . 46 . 57 * * * . 07 . 38 . 69 * * * . 08 . 51 . 76 * * * . 17 . 71 . 75 * * * . 17 * . 74 . 62 * * * . 20 * * * . 45 . 71 * * * - . 06 . 49 through usefulness . Partial correlation analysis indicates that the variance in usage explained by ease of use drops by 91 % when usefulness is controlled for . Consistent with Study 1 , these regression and partial correlation results suggest that usefulness mediates the effect of ease of use on usage . The implications of this are ad dressed in the following discussion . Discussion The purpose of this investigation was to develop and validate new measurement scales for per ceived usefulness and perceived ease of use , two distinct variables hypothesized to be deter - Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . minants of computer usage . This effort was suc cessful in several respects . The new scales were found to have strong psychometric properties and to exhibit significant empirical relationships with self - reported measures of usage behavior . Also , several new insights were generated about the nature of perceived usefulness and ease of use , and their roles as determinants of user acceptance . The new scales were developed , refined , and streamlined in a several - step process . Explicit definitions were stated , followed by a theoretical analysis from a variety of perspectives , includ ing : expectancy theory ; self - efficacy theory ; be havioral decision theory ; diffusion of innovations ; marketing ; and human - computer interaction , re garding why usefulness and ease of use are hy pothesized as important determinants of system use . Based on the stated definitions , initial scale items were generated . To enhance content va lidity , these were pretested in a small pilot study , and several items were eliminated . The remain ing items , 10 for each of the two constructs , were tested for validity and reliability in Study 1 , a field study of 112 users and two systems ( the PROFS electronic mail system and the XEDIT file editor ) . Item analysis was performed to elimi nate more items and refine others , further stream lining and purifying the scales . The resulting six item scales were subjected to further construct validation in Study 2 , a lab study of 40 users and two systems : Chart - Master ( a menu - driven business charting program ) and Pendraw ( a bit mapped paint program with a digitizer tablet as its input device ) . The new scales exhibited excellent psychomet ric characteristics . Convergent and discriminant validity were strongly supported by multitrait multimethod analyses in both validation studies . These two data sets also provided strong sup port for factorial validity : the pattern of factor load ings confirmed that a priori structure of the two instruments , with usefulness items loading highly on one factor , ease of use items loading highly on the other factor , and small cross - factor load ings . Cronbach alpha reliability for perceived use fulness was . 97 in Study 1 and . 98 in Study 2 . Reliability for ease of use was . 91 in Study 1 and . 94 in Study 2 . These findings mutually con firm the psychometric strength of the new meas urement scales . As theorized , both perceived usefulness and ease of use were significantly correlated with self reported indicants of system use . Perceived use - IT Usefulness and Ease of Use fulness was correlated . 63 with self - reported cur rent use in Study 1 and . 85 with self - predicted use in Study 2 . Perceived ease of use was cor related . 45 with use in Study 1 and . 69 in Study 2 . The same pattern of correlations is found when correlations are calculated separately for each of the two systems in each study ( Table 8 ) . These correlations , especially the usefulness use link , compare favorably with other correla tions between subjective measures and self reported use found in the MIS literature . Swan son ' s ( 1987 ) " value " dimension correlated . 20 with use , while his " accessibility " dimension cor related . 13 with self - reported use . Correlations between " user information satisfaction " and self reported use of . 39 ( Barki and Huff , 1985 ) and . 28 ( Baroudi , et al . , 1986 ) have been reported . " Realism of expectations " has been found to be correlated . 22 with objectively measured use ( Ginzberg , 1981 ) and . 43 with self - reported use ( Barki and Huff , 1985 ) . " Motiviational force " was correlated . 25 with system use , objectively meas ured ( DeSanctis , 1983 ) . Among the usage cor relations reported in the literature , the . 79 corre lation between " performance " and use reported by Robey ( 1979 ) stands out . Recall that Robey ' s expectancy model was a key underpinning for the definition of perceived usefulness stated in this article . One of the most significant findings is the rela tive strength of the usefulness - usage relation ship compared to the ease of use - usage rela tionship . In both studies , usefulness was significantly more strongly linked to usage than was ease of use . Examining the joint direct effect of the two variables on use in regression analy ses , this difference was even more pronounced : the usefulness - usage relationship remained large , while the ease of use - usage relationship was diminished substantially ( Table 8 ) . Multi collinearity has been ruled out as an explana tion for the results using specific tests for the presence of multicollinearity . In hindsight , the prominence of perceived usefulness makes sense conceptually : users are driven to adopt an application primarily because of the functions it performs for them , and secondarily for how easy or hard it is to get the system to perform those functions . For instance , users are often willing to cope with some difficulty of use in a system that provides critically needed function ality . Although difficulty of use can discourage adoption of an otherwise useful system , no amount of ease of use can compensate for a MIS Quarterly / September 1989 333 Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . IT Usefulness and Ease of Use system that does not perform a useful function . The prominence of usefulness over ease of use has important implications for designers , particu larly in the human factors tradition , who have tended to overemphasize ease of use and over look usefulness ( e . g . , Branscomb and Thomas , 1984 ; Chin , et al . , 1988 ; Shneiderman , 1987 ) . Thus , a major conclusion of this study is that perceived usefulness is a strong correlate of user acceptance and should not be ignored by those attempting to design or implement suc cessful systems . From a causal perspective , the regression re sults suggest that ease of use may be an ante cedent to usefulness , rather than a parallel , direct determinant of usage . The significant pairwise correlation between ease of use and usage all but vanishes when usefulness is con trolled for . This , coupled with a significant ease of use - usefulness correlation is exactly the pat tern one would expect if usefulness mediated between ease of use and usage ( e . g . , J . A . Davis , 1985 ) . That is , the results are consistent with an ease of use - - > usefulness - - > usage chain of causality . These results held both for pooled observations and for each individual system ( Table 8 ) . The causal influence of ease of use on usefulness makes sense conceptu ally , too . All else being equal , the easier a system is to interact with , the less effort needed to operate it , and the more effort one can allo cate to other activities ( Radner and Rothschild , 1975 ) , contributing to overall job performance . Goodwin ( 1987 ) also argues for this flow of cau sality , concluding from her analysis that : " There is increasing evidence that the effective func tionality of a system depends on its usability " ( p . 229 ) . This intriguing interpretation is prelimi nary and should be subjected to further experi mentation . If true , however , it underscores the theoretical importance of perceived usefulness . This investigation has limitations that should be pointed out . The generality of the findings re mains to be shown by future research . The fact that similar findings were observed , with respect to both the psychometric properties of the meas ures and the pattern of empirical associations , across two different user populations , two differ ent systems , and two different research settings ( lab and field ) , provides some evidence favoring external validity . In addition , a follow - up to this study , reported by Davis , et al . ( 1989 ) found a very similar pat - 334 MIS Quarterly / September 1989 tern of results in a two - wave study ( Tables 8 and 9 ) . In that study , MBA student subjects were asked to fill out a questionnaire after a one - hour introduction to a word processing program , and again 14 weeks later . Usage intentions were measured at both time periods , and self reported usage was measured at the later time period . Intentions were significantly correlated with usage ( . 35 and . 63 for the two points in time , respectively ) . Unlike the results of Studies 1 and 2 , Davis , et al . ( 1989 ) found a significant direct effect of ease of use on usage , controlling for usefulness , after the one - hour training ses sion ( Table 9 ) , although this evolved into a non significant effect as of 14 weeks later . In gen eral , though , Davis , et al . ( 1989 ) found useful ness to be more influential than ease of use in driving usage behavior , consistent with the find ings reported above . Further research will shed more light on the gen erality of these findings . Another limitation is that the usage measures employed were self reported as opposed to objectively measured . Not enough is currently known about how accu rately self - reports reflect actual behavior . Also , since usage was reported on the same ques tionnaire used to measure usefulness and ease of use , the possibility of a halo effect should not be overlooked . Future research addressing the relationship between these constructs and ob jectively measured use is needed before claims about the behavioral predictiveness can be made conclusively . These limitations notwithstand ing , the results represent a promising step toward the establishment of improved measures for two important variables . Research implications Future research is needed to address how other variables relate to usefulness , ease of use , and acceptance . Intrinsic motivation , for example , has received inadequate attention in MIS theo ries . Whereas perceived usefulness is con cerned with performance as a consequence use , intrinsic motivation is concerned with the rein forcement and enjoyment related to the process of performing a behavior per se , irrespective of whatever external outcomes are generated by such behavior ( Deci , 1975 ) . Although intrinsic motivation has been studied in the design of com puter games ( e . g . , Malone , 1981 ) , it is just be ginning to be recognized as a potential mecha nism underlying user acceptance of end - user Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . systems ( Carroll and Thomas , 1988 ) . Currently , the role of affective attitudes is also an open issue . While some theorists argue that beliefs influence behavior only via their indirect influ ence on attitudes ( e . g . , Fishbein and Ajzen , 1975 ) , others view beliefs and attitudes as co determinants of behavioral intentions ( e . g . , Tri andis , 1977 ) , and still others view attitudes as antecedents of beliefs ( e . g . , Weiner , 1986 ) . Counter to Fishbein and Ajzen ' s ( 1975 ) position , both Davis ( 1986 ) and Davis , et al . ( 1989 ) found that attitudes do not fully mediate the effect of perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use on behavior . It should be emphasized that perceived useful ness and ease of use are people ' s subjective appraisal of performance and effort , respectively , and do not necessarily reflect objective reality . In this study , beliefs are seen as meaningful vari ables in their own right , which function as be havioral determinants , and are not regarded as surrogate measures of objective phenomena ( as is often done in MIS research , e . g . , lves , et al . , 1983 ; Srinivasan , 1985 ) . Several MIS studies have observed discrepancies between perceived and actual performance ( Cats - Baril and Huber , 1987 ; Dickson , et al . , 1986 ; Gallupe and De Sanctis , 1988 ; Mcintyre , 1982 ; Sharda , et al . , 1988 ) . Thus , even if an application would objec tively improve performance , if users don ' t per ceive it as useful , they ' re unlikely to use it ( Alavi and Henderson , 1981 ) . Conversely , people may overrate the performance gains a system has to offer and adopt systems that are dysfunc tional . Given that this study indicates that people act according to their beliefs about performance , future research is needed to understand why per formance beliefs are often in disagreement with objective reality . The possibility of dysfunctional impacts generated by information technology ( e . g . , Kottemann and Remus , 1987 ) emphasizes that user acceptance is not a universal goal and is actually undesireable in cases where systems fail to provide true performance gains . More research is needed to understand how measures such as those introduced here per form in applied design and evaluation settings . The growing literature on design principles ( An derson and Olson , 1985 ; Gould and Lewis , 1985 ; Johansen and Baker , 1984 ; Mantei and Teorey , 1988 ; Shneiderman , 1987 ) calls for the use of subjective measures at various points throughout the development and implementation process , from the earliest needs assessment IT Usefulness and Ease of Use through concept screening and prototype test ing to post - implementation assessment . The fact that the measures performed well psychometri cally both after brief introductions to the target system ( Study 2 , and Davis , et al . , 1989 ) and after substantial user experience with the system ( Study 1 , and Davis , et al . , 1989 ) is promising concerning their appropriateness at various points in the life cycle . Practitioners generally evaluate systems not only to predict acceptabil ity but also to diagnose the reasons underlying lack of acceptance and to formulate interven tions to improve user acceptance . In this sense , research on how usefulness and ease of use can be influenced by various externally control lable factors , such as the functional and inter face characteristics of the system ( Benbasat and Dexter , 1986 ; Bewley , et al . , 1983 ; Dickson , et al . , 1986 ) , development methodologies ( Alavi , 1984 ) , training and education ( Nelson and Cheney , 1987 ) , and user involvement in design ( Baroudi , et al . 1986 ; Franz and Robey , 1986 ) is important . The new measures introduced here can be used by researchers investigating these issues . Although there has been a growing pessimism in the field about the ability to identify measures that are robustly linked to user acceptance , the view taken here is much more optimistic . User reactions to computers are complex and multi faceted . But if the field continues to systemati cally investigate fundamental mechanisms driv ing user behavior , cultivating better and better measures and critically examining alternative theo retical models , sustainable progress is within reach . Acknowledgements This research was supported by grants from the MIT Sloan School of Management , IBM Canada Ltd . , and The University of Michigan Business School . The author is indebted to the anony mous associate editor and reviewers for their many helpful suggestions . References Abelson , R . P . and Levi , A . " Decision Making and Decision Theory , " in The Handbook of Social Psychology , third edition , G . Lindsay and E . Aronson ( eds . ) , Knopf , New York , NY , 1985 , pp . 231 - 309 . MIS Quarterly / September 1989 335 Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . IT Usefulness and Ease of Use Adelbratt , T . and Montgomery , H . " Attractiveness of Decision Rules , " Acta Psychologica ( 45 ) , 1980 , pp . 177 - 185 . Alavi , M . " An Analysis of the Prototyping Ap proach to Information Systems Development , " Communications of the ACM ( 27 : 6 ) , June 1984 , pp . 556 - 563 . Alavi , M . and Henderson , J . C . " An Evolutionary Strategy for Implementing a Decision Support System , " Management Science ( 27 : 11 ) , No vember 1981 , pp . 1309 - 1323 . Anastasi , A . " Evolving Concepts of Test Valida tion , " Annual Review of Psychology ( 37 ) , 1986 , pp . 1 - 15 . Anderson , N . S . and Olson , J . R . ( eds . ) Methods for Designing Software to Fit Human Needs and Capabilities : Proceedings of the Work shop on Software Human Factors , National Academy Press , Washington , D . C . , 1985 . Bandura , A . " Self - Efficacy Mechanism in Human Agency , " American Psychologist ( 37 : 2 ) , Feb ruary 1982 , pp . 122 - 147 . Barki , H . and Huff , S . " Change , Attitude to Change , and Decision Support System Suc cess , " Information and Management ( 9 : 5 ) , De cember 1985 , pp . 261 - 268 . Baroudi , J . J . , Olson , M . H . and lves , B . " An Em pirical Study of the Impact of User Involve ment on System Usage and Information Sat isfaction , " Communications of the ACM ( 29 : 3 ) , March 1986 , pp . 232 - 238 . Beach , L . A . and Mitchell , T . R . " A Contingency Model for the Selection of Decision Strate gies , " Academy of Management Review ( 3 : 3 ) , July 1978 , pp . 439 - 449 . Benbasat , I . and Dexter , A . S . " An Investigation of the Effectiveness of Color and Graphical Presentation Under Varying Time Constraints , MIS Quarterly ( 10 : 1 ) , March 1986 , pp . 59 - 84 . Bewley , W . L . , Roberts , T . L . , Schoit , D . and Ver plank , W . L . , " Human Factors Testing in the Design of Xerox ' s 8010 ' Star ' Office Worksta tion , " CHI ' 83 Human Factors in Computing Systems , Boston , December 12 - 15 , 1983 , ACM , New York , NY , pp . 72 - 77 . Bohmstedt , G . W . " Reliability and Validity Assess ment in Attitude Measurement , " in Attitude Measurement , G . F . Summers ( ed . ) , Rand McNally , Chicago , IL , 1970 , pp . 80 - 99 . Bowen , W . " The Puny Payoff from Office Com puters , " Fortune , May 26 , 1986 , pp . 20 - 24 . Branscomb , L . M . and Thomas , J . C . " Ease of Use : A System Design Challenge , " IBM Sys tems Journal ( 23 ) , 1984 , pp . 224 - 235 . Campbell , D . T . and Fiske , D . W . " Convergent and Discriminant Validation by the Multitrait - 336 MIS Quarterly / September 1989 Multitmethod Matrix , " Psychological Bulletin ( 56 : 9 ) , March 1959 , pp . 81 - 105 . Campbell , D . T . , Siegman , C . R . and Rees , M . B . " Direction - of - Wording Effects in the Relation ships Between Scales , " Psychological Bulle tin ( 68 : 5 ) , November 1967 , pp . 293 - 303 . Card , S . K . , Moran , T . P . and Newell , A . The Psy chology of Human - Computer Interaction , Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ , 1984 . Carroll , J . M . and Carrithers , C . " Training Wheels in a User Interface , " Communications of the ACM ( 27 : 8 ) , August 1984 , pp . 800 - 806 . Carroll , J . M . and McKendree , J . " Interface Design Issues for Advice - Giving Expert Sys tems , " Communications of the ACM ( 30 : 1 , January 1987 , pp . 14 - 31 . Carroll , J . M . , Mack , R . L . , Lewis , C . H . , Grishkow sky , N . L . and Robertson , S . R . " Exploring Ex ploring a Word Processor , " Human - Computer Interaction ( 1 ) , 1985 , pp . 283 - 307 . Carroll , J . M . and Thomas , J . C . " Fun , " SIGCHI Bulletin ( 19 : 3 ) , January 1988 , pp . 21 - 24 . Cats - Baril , W . L . and Huber , G . P . " Decision Sup port Systems for Ill - Structured Problems : An Empirical Study , " Decision Sciences ( 18 : 3 ) , Summer 1987 , pp . 352 - 372 . Cheney , P . H . , Mann , R . I . and Amoroso , D . L . " Or ganizational Factors Affecting the Success of End - User Computing , " Journal of Manage ment Information Systems ( 3 : 1 ) , Summer 1986 , pp . 65 - 80 . Chin , J . P . , Diehl , V . A . and Norman , K . L . " De velopment of an Instrument for Measuring User Satisfaction of the Human - Computer In terface , " CH / ' 88 Human Factors in Comput ing Systems , Washington , D . C . , May 15 - 19 , 1988 , ACM , New York , NY , pp . 213 - 218 . Cohen , J . and Cohen , P . Applied Multiple Re gression I Correlation Analysis for the Behav ioral Sciences , Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ , 1975 . Curley , K . F . " Are There any Real Benefits from Office Automation ? " Business Horizons ( 4 ) , July - August 1984 , pp . 37 - 42 . Davis , F . D . " A Technology Acceptance Model for Empirically Testing New End - User Infor mation Systems : Theory and Results , " doc toral dissertation , MIT Sloan School of Man agement , Cambridge , MA , 1986 . Davis , F . D . , Bagozzi , R . P . and Warshaw , P . R . User Acceptance of Computer Technology : A Comparison of Two Theoretical Models , " Man agement Science ( 35 : 8 ) , August 1989 , pp . 982 - 1003 . Davis , J . A . The Logic of Causal Order , Sage , Beverly Hills , CA , 1985 . Deci , E . L . Intrinsic Motivation , Plenum , New Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . York , NY , 1975 . DeSanctis , G . " Expectancy Theory as an Expla nation of Voluntary Use of a Decision Support System , " Psychological Reports ( 52 ) , 1983 , pp . 247 - 260 . Dickson , G . W . , DeSanctis , G . and McBride , D . J . " Understanding the Effectiveness of Computer Graphics for Decision Support : A Cumulative Experimental Approach , " Communications of the ACM ( 29 : 1 ) , January 1986 , pp . 40 - 47 . Edelmann , F . " Managers , Computer Systems , and Productivity , " MIS Quarterly ( 5 : 3 ) , Sep tember 1981 , pp . 1 - 19 . Fishbein , M . and Ajzen , I . " Belief , Attitude , In tention and Behavior : An Introduction to Theory and Research , " Addison - Wesley , Read ing , MA 1975 . Franz , C . R . and Robey , D . " Organizational Con text , User Involvement , and the Usefulness of Information Systems , " Decision Sciences ( 17 : 3 ) , Summer 1986 , pp . 329 - 356 . Gallupe , A . B . , DeSanctis , G . and Dickson , G . W . " Computer - Based Support for Group Problem Finding : An Empirical Investigation , " MIS Quar terly ( 12 : 2 ) , June 1988 , pp . 277 - 296 . Ginzberg , M . J . " Early Diagnosis of MIS Implemen tation Failure : Promising Results and Unan swered Questions , " Management Science ( 27 : 4 ) , April 1981 , pp . 459 - 478 . Good , M . , Spine , T . M . , Whiteside , J . and George P . " User - Derived Impact Analysis as a Tool for Usability Engineering , " CH / ' 86 Human Fac tors in Computing Systems , Boston , April 13 - 17 , 1986 , ACM , New York , New York pp . 241 - 246 . Goodwin , N . C . " Functionality and Usability , " Com munications of the ACM ( 30 : 3 ) , March 1987 , pp . 229 - 233 . Goslar , M . D . " Capability Criteria for Marketing Decision Support Systems , " Journal of Man agement Information Systems ( 3 : 1 ) , Summer 1986 , pp . 81 - 95 . Gould , J . , Conti , J . and Hovanyecz , T . " Com posing letters with a Simulated Listening Type writer , " Communications of the ACM ( 26 : 4 ) , April 1983 , pp . 295 - 308 . Gould , J . D . and Lewis C . " Designing for Usabil ity : Key Principles and What Designers Think , " Communications of the ACM ( 28 : 3 ) , March 1985 , pp . 300 - 311 . Greenberg , K . " Executives Rate Their PCs , " PC World , September 1984 , pp . 286 - 292 . Hauser , J . R . and Simmie , P . " Profit Maximizing Perceptual Positions : An Integrated Theory for the Selection of Product Features and Price , " IT Usefulness and Ease of Use Management Science ( 27 : 1 ) , January 1981 , pp . 33 - 56 . Hill , T . , Smith , N . D . , and Mann , M . F . " Role of Efficacy Expectations in Predicting the Deci sion to Use Advanced Technologies : The Case of Computers , " Journal of Applied Psy chology , ( 72 : 2 ) , May 1987 , pp . 307 - 313 . lves , B . , Olson , M . H . and Baroudi , J . J . " The meas urement of User Information Satisfaction , " Com munications of the ACM ( 26 : 1 0 ) , October 1983 , pp . 785 - 793 . Jarvenpaa , S . L . " The Effect of Task Demands and Graphical Format on Information Process ing Strategies , " Management Science ( 35 : 3 ) , March 1989 , pp . 285 - 303 . Johansen , A . & Baker E . , " User Needs Work shops : A New Approach to Anticipating User Needs for Advanced Office Systems , " Office Technology and People ( 2 ) , 1984 , pp . 103 - 119 . Johnson , E . J . and Payne , J . W . " Effort and Ac curacy in Choice , " Management Science ( 31 : 4 ) , April1985 , pp . 395 - 414 . Johnston , J . Econometric Methods , McGraw Hill , New York , NY , 1972 . Klein , G . and Beck , P . O . " A Decision Aid for Selecting Among Information Systems Alter natives , " MIS Quarterly ( 11 : 2 ) , June 1987 , pp . 177 - 186 . Kleinmuntz , D . N . and Schkade , D . A . " The Cog nitive Implications of Information Displays in Computer - Supported Decision - Making , " Uni versity of Texas at Austin , Graduate School of Business , Department of Management Work ing Paper 87 / 88 - 4 - 8 , 1988 . Kottemann , J . E . and Remus , W . E . " Evidence and Principles of Functional and Dysfunctional DSS , " OMEGA ( 15 : 2 ) , March 1987 , pp . 135 - 143 . Larcker , D . F . and Lessig , V . P . " Perceived Use fulness of Information : A Psychometric Exami nation , " Decision Sciences ( 11 : 1 ) , January 1980 , pp . 121 - 134 . Lucas , H . C . " Performance and the Use of an Information System , " Management Science ( 21 : 8 ) , April 1975 , pp . 908 - 919 . Malone , T . W . ' Toward a Theory of Intrinsically Motivating Instruction , " Cognitive Science ( 4 ) , 1981 , pp . 333 - 369 . Mansfield , E . R . and Helms , B . P . " Detecting Mul ticollinearity , " The American Statistician ( 36 : 3 ) , August 1982 , pp . 158 - 160 . Mantei , M . M . and Teorey , T . J . " Cost / Benefit Analysis for Incorporating Human Factors in the Software Lifecycle , " Communications of the ACM ( 31 : 4 ) , April 1988 , pp . 428 - 439 . MIS Quarterly / September 1989 337 Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . IT Usefulness and Ease of Use Markus , M . L . and Bjorn - Anderson , N . " Power Over Users : It ' s Exercise by System Profes sionals , " Communications of the ACM ( 30 : 6 ) , June 1987 , pp . 498 - 504 . Mcintyre , S . " An Experimental Study of the Impact of Judgement - Based Marketing Models , " Management Science ( 28 : 1 ) , Janu ary 1982 , pp . 17 - 23 . Nelson , R . R . and Cheney , P . H . " Training End Users : An Exploratory Study , " MIS Quarterly ( 11 : 4 ) , December 1987 , pp . 547 - 559 . Nickerson , R . S . " Why Interactive Computer Sys tems Are Sometimes Not Used by People Who Might Benefit from Them , " International Journal of Man - Machine Studies ( 15 ) , 1981 , pp . 469 - 483 . Norman , D . A . " Design Principles for Human Computer Interfaces , " CHI ' 83 Human Fac tors in Computing Systems , Boston , Decem ber 12 - 15 , 1983 , ACM , New York , NY , pp . 1 - 10 . Nunnally , J . Psychometric Theory , McGraw - Hill , New York , NY , 1978 . Panko , R . R . End - User Computing : Manage ment , Applications , and Technology , Wiley , New York , NY , 1988 . Payne , J . W . " Contingent Decision Behavior , " Psychological Bulletin , ( 92 : 2 ) , 1982 , pp . 382 - 402 . Pfeffer , J . Organizations and Organization Theory , Pitman , Boston , MA , 1982 . Radner , R . and Rothschild , M . " On the Alloca tion of Effort , " Journal of Economic Theory ( 1 0 ) , 1975 , pp . 358 - 376 . Roberts , T . L . and Moran , T . P . " The Evaluation of Text Editors : Methodology and Empirical Re sults , " Communications of the ACM ( 26 : 4 ) , April 1983 , pp . 265 - 283 . Robey , D . " User Attitudes and Management In formation System Use , " Academy of Manage ment Journal ( 22 : 3 ) , September 1979 , pp . 527 - 538 . Robey , D . and Farrow , D . " User Involvement in Information System Development : A Conflict Model and Empirical Test , " Management Sci ence ( 28 : 1 ) , January 1982 , pp . 73 - 85 . Rogers , E . M . and Shoemaker , F . F . Communi cation of Innovations : A Cross - Cultural Ap proach , Free Press , New York , NY , 1971 . Rushinek , A . and Rushinek , S . F . " What Makes Users Happy ? " Communications of the ACM ( 29 : 7 ) , July 1986 , pp . 594 - 598 . Saracevic , T . " Relevance : A Review of and a Framework for the Thinking on the Notion in Information Science , " Journal of the Ameri can Society for Information Science , Novem - 338 MIS Quarterly / September 1989 ber - December 1975 , pp . 321 - 343 . Schein , E . H . Organizational Psychology , third edi tion , Prentice - Hall , Englewood Cliffs , NJ , 1980 . Schewe , C . D . " The Management Information System User : An Exploratory Behavioral Analy sis , " Academy of Management Journal ( 19 : 4 ) , December 1976 , pp . 577 - 590 . Schultz , R . L . and Slevin , D . P . " Implementation and Organizational Validity : An Empirical In vestigation , " in Implementing Operations Re search I Management Science , R . L . Schultz and D . P . Slevin ( eds . ) , American Elsevier , New York , NY , 1975 , pp . 153 - 182 . Sharda , R . , Barr , S . H . , and McDonnell , J . C . " De cision Support System Effectiveness : A Review and Empirical Test , " Management Sci ence ( 34 : 2 ) , February 1988 , pp . 139 - 159 . Sheppard , B . H . , Hartwick , J . and Warshaw , P . R . " The Theory of Reasoned Action : A Meta Analysis of Past Research with Recommen dations for Modifications and Future Re search , " Journal of Consumer Research ( 15 : 3 ) , December 1988 , pp . 325 - 343 . Sherif , M . and Sherif , C . W . " The Own Catego ries Approach in Attitude Research , " in Read ings in Attitude Theory and Measurement , M . Fishbein ( ed . ) , Wiley , New York , NY , 1967 , pp . 190 - 198 . Shneiderman , B . Designing the User Interface , Addison - Wesley , Reading , MA , 1987 . Silk , A . J . " Response Set and Measurement of Self - Designated Opinion Leadership , " Public Opinion Quarterly ( 35 ) , 1971 , pp . 383 - 397 . Srinivasan , A . " Alternative Measures of System Effectiveness : Associations and Implications , " MIS Quarterly ( 9 : 3 ) , September 1985 , pp . 243 - 253 . Swanson , E . B . " Management Information Sys tems : Appreciation and Involvement , " Manage ment Science ( 21 : 2 ) , October 1974 , pp . 178 - 188 . Swanson , E . B . " Measuring User Attitudes in MIS Research : A Review , " OMEGA ( 10 : 2 ) , March 1982 , pp . 157 - 165 . Swanson , E . B . " Information Channel Disposition and Use , " Decision Sciences ( 18 : 1 ) , Winter 1987 , pp . 131 - 145 . Swanson , E . B . Information System Implemen tation : Bridging the Gap Between Design and Utilization , Irwin , Homewood , IL , 1988 . Tornatzky , L . G . and Klein , K . J . " Innovation Char acteristics and Innovation Adoption - Implemen tation : A Meta - Analysis of Findings , " IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management ( EM - 29 : 1 ) , February 1982 , pp . 28 - 45 . Triandis , H . C . Interpersonal Behavior , Brooks / Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . Cole , Monterey , CA , 1977 . Vertinsky , 1 . , Barth , R . T . and Mitchell , V . F . " A Study of OR / MS Implementation as a Social Change Process , " in Implementing Opera tions Research I Management Science , R . L . Schultz and D . P . Slevin ( eds . ) , American Elsevier , New York , NY , 1975 , pp . 253 - 272 . Vroom , V . H . Work and Motivation , Wiley , New York , NY , 1964 . Ward , J . R . and Blesser , B . " Interactive Recog nition of Handprinter Characters for Computer Input , " IEEE Computer Graphics and Appli cations , September 1985 , pp . 24 - 37 . Warshaw , P . R . and Davis , F . D . " Disentangling Behavioral Intention and Behavioral Expecta tion , " Journal of Experimental Social Psychol ogy ( 21 ) , May 1985 , pp . 213 - 228 . Weiner , B . " Attribution , Emotion , and Action , " in Handbook of Motivation and Cognition , A . M . Sorrentino and E . T . Higgins ( eds . ) , Guilford , New York , NY , 1986 , pp . 281 - 312 . Whiteside , J . , Jones , S . , Levy , P . S . and Wixon , D . " User Performance With Command , Menu , IT Usefulness and Ease of Use and Iconic Interfaces , " CHI ' 85 Proceedings , San Francisco , April 14 - 18 , 1985 , ACM , New York , NY , pp . 185 - 191 . Wright , P . " Consumer Choice Strategies : Sim plifying vs . Optimizing , " Journal of Marketing Research ( 14 : 1 ) , February 1975 , pp . 429 - 433 . Young , T . R . " The Lonely Micro , " Datamation ( 30 : 4 ) , April 1984 , pp . 100 - 114 . About the Author Fred D . Davis is assistant professor at the Uni versity of Michigan School of Business Admini stration . His doctoral research at the Sloan School of Management , MIT , dealt with predict ing and explaining user acceptance of computer technology . His current research interests in elude computer support for decision making , mo tivational determinants of computer acceptance , intentions and expectations in human behavior , and biased attributions of the performance im pacts of information technology . MIS Quarterly / September 1989 339 Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . IT Usefulness and Ease of Use Appendix Final Measurement Scales for Perceived Usefulness and Perceived Ease of Use Perceived Usefulness Using CHART - MASTER in my job would enable me to accomplish tasks more quickly . likely I I I I I I I I unlikely extremely quite slightly neither slightly quite extremely Using CHART - MASTER would improve my job performance . likely I I I I I I unlikely extremely quite slightly neither slightly quite extremely Using CHART - MASTER in my job would increase my productivity . likely I I I I I I unlikely extremely quite slightly neither slightly quite extremely Using CHART - MASTER would enhance my effectiveness on the job . likely I I I I I I unlikely extremely quite slightly neither slightly quite extremely Using CHART - MASTER would make it easier to do my job . likely I I I I I I unlikely extremely quite slightly neither slightly quite extremely I would find CHART - MASTER useful in my job . likely I I I I unlikely extremely quite slightly neither slightly quite extremely Perceived Ease of Use Learning to operate CHART - MASTER would be easy for me . likely I I I I I I unlikely extremely quite slightly neither slightly quite extremely I would find it easy to get CHART - MASTER to do what I want it to do . likely I I I I I I I unlikely extremely quite slightly neither slightly quite extremely My interaction with CHART - MASTER would be clear and understandable . likely I I I I I I I I unlikely extremely quite slightly neither slightly quite extremely I would find CHART - MASTER to be flexible to interact with . likely I I I I I I unlikely extremely quite slightly neither slightly quite extremely It would be easy for me to become skillful at using CHART - MASTER . likely I I I I I I unlikely extremely quite slightly neither slightly quite extremely I would find CHART - MASTER easy to use . likely I I I I unlikely extremely quite slightly neither slightly quite extremely 340 MIS Quarterlv ! September 1989