Distributed Collaborative Sensemaking : Tracing a Gradual Process Dorothé Smit University of Salzburg Salzburg , Austria dorothe . smit @ sbg . ac . at Ruth Neubauer New Design University Sankt Pölten , Austria ruth . neubauer @ ndu . ac . at Verena Fuchsberger University of Salzburg Salzburg , Austria verena . fuchsberg @ sbg . ac . at ABSTRACT This Pictorial discusses the outcomes of a distributed embodied ideation workshop . In this workshop , students of a Bachelor program on Management by Design explained their thesis by visualizing and externalizing the problem space using everyday objects . The use of objects to represent and understand complex design problems is well documented in the fields of Design and Human - Computer Interaction , but is often researched in collocated settings . What happens when the design tools used to externalize and represent complex design problems are everyday household objects , and the discussion happens in a distributed , asynchronous manner ? How is shared meaning negotiated and established ? In this Pictorial , we discuss six pictures that were taken of the visual representations that the students constructed , and reflect upon the distributed , asynchronous process that was employed to create , develop , and agree upon meaning . Author Keywords embodied ideation ; design processes ; representation ; shared meaning - making ; sensemaking ; dislocation CSS CONCEPTS • General and reference ~ Cross - computing tools and techniques ~ Design •Human - centered computing ~ Human computer interaction ( HCI ) ~ Interactive systems and tools INTRODUCTION Design tools and toolkits have been used extensively during the early stages of design processes to represent , externalize and understand complex design problems . Often , these tools are specifically designed for particular contexts or processes [ 24 ] and meant to be used in collocated situations [ 27 ] . What happens when the design tools used to externalize and represent complex design problems are everyday household objects , and the collaboration happens in a distributed manner ? Collaborative design tools often work best when all participants have equal access to the tools and can , e . g . , use contextual gestures [ 1 , 19 ] or directly manipulate the objects at hand [ 16 , 29 ] . These conditions are greatly reduced or rendered impossible in distributed settings , which influences processes of participatory sensemaking , embodied cognition and the construction of shared meaning [ 4 , 10 ] . In this Pictorial , we describe the process of distributed collaborative sensemaking to co - create the meaning of ( networks of ) objects , following an online workshop with students of the bachelor program Management by Design . In this workshop , the students were asked to create a physical representation of the problem statement of their Bachelor thesis by using everyday objects that they had on hand , rather than working with a predefined set of objects from a design toolkit . The researchers then took part in a multi - step , distributed process of sensemaking of the visual representations . This process is depicted in this Pictorial with the aim to unpack the gradual - - individual and collective - - steps associated with sensemaking and co - creating meaning . We contribute a reflection on the influence of ( human and non - human ) actors on the co - construction of meaning , which aims to create sensitivities about distributed , collaborative sensemaking process , the ( technological ) factors that influence them . THEORETICAL FRAMING In the next section , we briefly discuss the theoretical framing of this work , as well as a selection of related work that supports the positioning of the approaches described in this paper . Embodied Cognition & Distributed Cognition The approaches in this Pictorial are rooted in theories of embodied cognition , which states that our perception and actions are always and continuously situated in a socio - material world [ 12 ] . Our understanding of the world is shaped by our interaction with it , and other people [ 9 ] . Through interaction with tangible objects , we create understanding and make sense of situations . Using ( everyday ) tangible objects offers common metaphors that can be used to create meaning between actors [ 17 ] . Much of the research in the field of embodied cognition , and especially how the physical environment shapes our Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . TEI ' 21 , February 14 – 17 , 2021 , Salzburg , Austria © 2021 Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 8213 - 7 / 21 / 02… $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3430524 . 3446079 ( social ) interactions , assumes collocation : actors interacting in the same space , at the same time . However , in processes where cognition is distributed , collaborative processes can happen in different places , by different participants , and asynchronously [ 15 ] , thereby fundamentally changing the rules of engagement in these processes [ 14 ] . Sensemaking & The Co - Creation of Meaning We make sense of the world by acting in it , and interacting with it [ 21 : 474 – 475 ] it is a continuous , intentional and expressive process , embodied in action [ 7 ] . By participating in each other’s individual sensemaking processes , navigating break - downs and misunderstandings , and taking part in participatory sensemaking processes [ 6 ] , participants are able to co - create meaning [ 7 , 8 ] . Suchman [ 31 ] has analyzed the meaning making processes between people and technologies as interactions where always only parts of the intended meanings are available to each other , and the meanings that can be agreed upon as “shared understandings” emerge in situated action ( p . 124 ) . Intentions of meaning ( what we intend something to mean , and expect the other to understand ) cannot be scripted into an artefact , much rather they are “an emergent property of moment - by - moment interactions between actors and between actors and the environments of their action” ( p . 177 ) . Design as Sensemaking Objects do not have fixed meanings . It is through design that we attempt to assign meanings to objects , and it is through using those objects that we make sense of things [ 18 ] . Physical objects make experiences concrete and focus design discussions [ 26 ] . As designers , we are even ascribed “designerly ways of knowing” as the particular way how designers think and act with objects [ 5 ] . Nigel Cross describes design as a construction of “codes” that “translate abstract requirements into concrete objects” ( p . 226 ) . This process is described as recursive , whereby designers use codes as ordering principles that they read from and write into objects . Design is a reflective practice , where knowing is developed as a reflection - in - action [ 28 ] . The material “talks back” to the designer and creates unexpected situations which require evaluation and new responses ( p . 101 ) . Sensemaking in design is understood as emergent in the interaction between persons and objects . Using Tools for Design Over the past decades , many analogue tools and toolkits have been developed to help designers and non - designers alike in the ‘fuzzy front - end’ of design processes [ 24 , 27 ] . Especially the use of tangible artefacts in these toolkits can help dynamic forms of interaction that support problem solving in complex challenges [ 10 , 16 ] by providing physical scaffolds and traces [ 11 , 30 ] . Further , tinkering and prototyping with everyday , household objects in the early stages of design processes has also been established in quick ideation and prototyping processes [ 2 , 20 ] , including translations from theatre practices to design ( education ) practices [ 3 , 26 ] . When participants in a workshop are distributed , it might be particularly promising to use everyday objects . However , everyday objects are inherently imbued with ( social ) meaning [ 17 , 25 ] : what might come to mind when you see a cleaning product is different to what might come to mind when you see a carton of eggs . Based on this theoretical understanding , we pay particular attention to what the used everyday objects embody , how they are ( depicted to be ) related , and how humans and non - humans negotiate meaning throughout the subsequently described series of meaning making events . THE EMBODIED IDEATION WORKSHOP The photos of tangible representations that are discussed in the remainder of this Pictorial were created in an embodied ideation workshop , in which twelve students participated . The workshop took place as a video conference . Having been introduced to theories of embodied interaction and embodied sensemaking , the students set out to create a tangible representation of their thesis hypotheses on a physical , social or technical level , reminiscent of bricolage practices : using materials and tools available , and capitalizing on their relations and interpretations [ 32 ] . This process was limited to twenty minutes , and the students were not informed beforehand about the planned procedure of the workshop , so that the representations were created in a spontaneous manner , with materials that were ready - to - hand . The students then took photos of their creations . In this Pictorial , six of the twelve physical representations are discussed . Event : ( Re - ) Viewing : Researchers The students were asked to share the photographs of the visual representations of their thesis projects with the researchers . The researchers individually viewed the photographs and attempted to interpret the remaining photographs that were not discussed during the workshop , by making sense of what is visible in the photographs . In three cases , the representations were directly presented during the workshop , so no initial viewing of the photographs occurred . Event : Discussion : Students Following the ( re ) - viewing of the photographs , the students present to us their prototypes , either verbally during the workshop , or through a text description via email . Three of the prototypes are discussed verbally during the workshop . Three further photographs are discussed via email . The students offer further descriptions , clarifications , and rebuttals of their work and the researchers’ interpretation . Event : Renegotiation : Researchers In light of the further explanation of the students , the initially co - constructed meaning needed to be renegotiated , and in some cases , completely reconstructed by the researchers . After discussion and sensemaking , new meaning of the photos is agreed upon . Event : Response : Students In one case , the photo of the tangible representation submitted by one of the students , the explanation , and the further renegotiation of meaning , led to additional discussions amongst the researchers , and no satisfactory co - constructed meaning could be agreed upon . In this case , the researchers continued the exchange with the student who created the photo to jointly interpret the tangible representation and arrive at shared meaning . VISUAL REPRESENTATIONS In the next section , we present the visual representations created by the students . The textual descriptions that accompany these visual representations are written from the perspective of the viewing researcher . Figure 1 : The events that took place during the distributed , collaborative sensemaking process to co - construct the meaning of the visual representations that the students created . Icons via The Noun Project , created by Iconstock , Designify . me , and Icon Fair . Figure 2 : Luca ' s visual thesis representation - - Agile Organisations Figure 3 : Kimberly ' s visual thesis representation : Organisational Culture Figure 4 : Bernd ' s visual thesis representation : What is Design ? Figure 5 : Victoria ' s visual thesis representation : Food Waste and Food Sharing Figure 6 : Emilie ' s visual thesis representation : World Expos Figure 7 : Jana ' s visual thesis representation : Material Ecology REFLECTION The distributed sensemaking approach to gradually co - construct meaning described in this Pictorial led to an extensive process of reflection - in - action - - while co - constructing meaning - - and reflection - on - action [ 28 ] . We share these reflections on the process below . Asynchronicity The asynchronous nature of the discussion granted opportunities to focus on details and reflect on meaning . Many events described in this Pictorial took place over the course of days ( if not weeks ) : after an email was sent to a student sharing interpretations and asking for clarification , it would generally take a few days to get a response . Furthermore , it would then usually take a few more days for the researchers to meet up on Skype to discuss the response and negotiate and co - construct meaning . As a result , in - depth sensemaking often already took place as an isolated event , before attempts towards shared sensemaking and co - constructed meaning . We propose that the magnified focus on meaning of objects , metaphors , and representations , is a result of this prolonged , asynchronous process . The distributed setting of the workshop and of the ensuing conversation acted as a magnification device for viewing sensemaking . Individual & Collaborative Sensemaking How do ‘individual’ events of sensemaking , such as the initial viewing of the students’ visual representations , relate to the moments when we speak about a picture together with others ? Are ‘individual sensemaking’ and ‘collaborative sensemaking’ two inherently different types of events ? The encounters in which we establish , negotiate , abandon or reinforce our norms and understandings are not limited to encounters with other people . When during the first viewing , one of the researchers understood Jana’s “human - made world” in the nature - culture split ( see page 8 ) as a ceramics egg cup , this was a fairly free interpretation , not affected by many other ideas . When the other researcher , during their discussions , made sense of it in a different way – as a skull candle holder – this idea was affected by her memory of an old possession . This memory left not much room in interpreting it many other ways , and soon determined the shared meaning amongst the two researchers . The ‘individual’ sensemaking of the other researcher , was as an event itself mediated by the past memory of a similar item . This distant participant in shared meaning making even reached into the present , and established between the two researchers that it was in fact a skull candle holder . Sensemaking always amounts to a mediated accomplishment [ 24 ] , which we do together with the material conditions of our embodied experience , past and present , and with other people , bodily present or not . Establishing meaning successfully , so it counts as real , and so it comes to bear in the design situation with all its weight , can be understood as a process of negotiating reality . Realities and ‘individual’ meaning making processes are always multiple , and they compete in which version of reality comes to count as real [ 22 ] . ( Tools for ) Distributed Cognition Many tools for distributed work of all sorts exist , and many of them were used in the sensemaking process described in this Pictorial , such as the video conferencing tool Skype , the cloud storage service Google Drive , and E - mail services . These tools played a substantial role - - as non - human actors - - in our sensemaking processes , and influenced the co - constructed meaning of the students’ representations . An example of this is that , naturally , the students’ contributions were alphabetically ordered in Google Drive , which incidentally dictated the order in which we looked at the photographs , the order in which the student’s names appeared in our analysis document , and finally , and even the order in which the photographs ( initially ) appeared in this Pictorial . This seemingly insignificant unintentional arrangement of the photographs influences our tools for co - constructing meaning : ultimately , while participating in sensemaking , we continuously develop the tools we use to create mutual understanding . Metaphors , tacit knowledge and implicit agreements that are developed in this process help us understand , and so we might find it easier to co - construct the meaning of the third photograph we interpret , than the first , and even more so by the time we interpret the sixth photograph . The tacit influence of ( digital ) tools on our sensemaking and meaning - making practices is not to be underestimated . We develop our tools to make sense , as they shape meanings we create . The ‘events’ which we used to dissect the process , are only some of the devices participating in sensemaking . Material constraints , such as the algorithms that order files alphabetically , also participate and co - negotiate meaning . Using Everyday Objects While using everyday objects to externalize thought processes , and using ‘whatever is available’ for tinkering and bricolage is well - established in design practice [ 23 , 32 ] , we identified that in using this approach , establishing and co - constructing meaning does not have to occur in direct collaboration for shared sensemaking to proceed ( cf . [ 13 ] ) and , in fact , sensemaking practices may benefit from asynchro - nicity and distribution . Furthermore , the use of everyday objects allowed for convincing physical representations to be made ( e . g . , by using visual symbolism such as timelines ) and for the creators to rely on established metaphor ( e . g . , that two students used a cleaning product to represent ‘the government’ , faring a rigid tidying / ordering regime ) . It is important to note here that , like in bricolage practices , the students “ [ did ] not plan ahead but develop [ ed ] the project in - situ with concerns of interaction , physical form , and behavior pattern not being hierarchically ordered a priori” [ 32 : 1 ] : the students were not told to prepare for this workshop by collecting objects , and in fact created their representations on the spot , in a span of no more than 20 minutes . CONCLUSION In this Pictorial , we illustrated a collaborative , yet distributed , sensemaking process that turned out to be gradual in terms of time , level und continuity of involvement of humans and non - humans , ( technical ) mediation , and ( extra - ) ordinariness of objects and events . Sensemaking , the expression of understandings and the co - construction of shared meaning , is an ongoing , situated process . An event , such as this workshop with students , creates a dedicated space of shared sensemaking , and it is mediated by the objects and the material landscapes in which we are embedded . However , in terms of investigating the process , the material mediation became even more visible in the more slowly unfolding explicit and tacit events afterwards . The unfolding of this collaboration - partly made visible as ‘events’ and partially taken for granted as part of a research process ( such as the creation of this Pictorial ) - - shows that sensemaking in collaboration does not have a clear ‘beginning’ and an ‘end’ . As researchers , we have continued the sensemaking process – long after the workshop with the students had finished . We continued to make sense of the images , amid the workshop documentations ( such as the images ) and of emails , Google documents , submission templates , Photoshop documents , and the deadlines and time constraints around us . Our own orders which we negotiated and applied in our research process - to define events and to use them to make sense of the sensemaking , was a mediation we took part in . Doing it in a distributed way , helped us to make this mediation more visible ; to see it better . In design , attention needs to be paid to these interactions of sensemaking , as they gradually build the meaning and the orders of meaning that come to bear in the interaction . Meanings and orders are constituted in the moment of interaction . It is therefore so important to trace these interactions in collaborative design . FUTURE WORK This workshop was only a first venture into the vast research fields of embodied ideation ; representation , externalization and physicalization of ideas ; distributed sensemaking ; and the gradual co - construction of meaning . It leaves us with further venues of investigation : how can we design tools for distributed sensemaking activities ? How do ( digital ) tools mediate the space between us , and influence our sensemaking activities ? How come meaning is very much established and undisputable in one representation , while it requires several attempts at sensemaking in the next , even if similar tools , artefacts , metaphors and symbolism are used ? We have discussed some initial thoughts in our reflection , but we will continue to research these questions in the future . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The workshop was part of the Reconfiguring Artefacts project , which was funded by the New Design University . We thank the University and the students who participated in the workshop and engaged with us in email discussions after the workshop , in particular Bernd Schallagruber , Emilie Pikora , Jana Röhle , Kimberly Wächter , Luca Hierzenberger , and Victoria Bersch . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Dimitra Anastasiou , Valérie Maquil , and Eric Ras . 2014 . Gesture analysis in a case study with a tangible user interface for collaborative problem solving . J . Multimodal User Interfaces 8 , 3 ( September 2014 ) , 305 – 317 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s12193 - 014 - 0158 - z [ 2 ] Marion Buchenau and Jane Fulton Suri . 2000 . Experience prototyping . In Proceedings of the 3rd conference on Designing interactive systems : processes , practices , methods , and techniques , ACM , 424 – 433 . Retrieved January 4 , 2017 from http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 347802 [ 3 ] Jacob Buur and Preben Friis . 2015 . Object Theatre in Design Education . Des . Ecol . 6 ( 2015 ) , 8 . [ 4 ] Andy Clark . 1997 . Being there : putting brain , body , and world together again . MIT Press , Cambridge , Mass . [ 5 ] Nigel Cross . 2006 . Designerly ways of knowing . Springer , London . [ 6 ] Hanne De Jaegher . 2013 . Embodiment and sense - making in autism . Front . Integr . Neurosci . 7 , ( 2013 ) . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fnint . 2013 . 00015 [ 7 ] Hanne De Jaegher and Ezequiel Di Paolo . 2007 . Participatory sense - making . Phenomenol . Cogn . Sci . 6 , 4 ( December 2007 ) , 485 – 507 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11097 - 007 - 9076 - 9 [ 8 ] Hanne De Jaegher , Anssi Peräkylä , and Melisa Stevanovic . 2016 . The co - creation of meaningful action : bridging enaction and interactional sociology . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . B Biol . Sci . 371 , 1693 ( May 2016 ) , 20150378 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1098 / rstb . 2015 . 0378 [ 9 ] Jelle van Dijk and Caroline Hummels . 2017 . Designing for Embodied Being - in - the - World : Two Cases , Seven Principles and One Framework . In Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Tangible , Embedded , and Embodied Interaction ( TEI ’17 ) , Association for Computing Machinery , Yokohama , Japan , 47 – 56 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3024969 . 302500 7 [ 10 ] Jelle van Dijk , Remko van der Lugt , and Caroline Hummels . 2014 . Beyond distributed representation : embodied cognition design supporting socio - sensorimotor couplings . ACM Press , 181 – 188 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2540930 . 254093 4 [ 11 ] Jelle van Dijk and Gerrit Willem Vos . 2011 . Traces in creative spaces . In Proceedings of the 8th ACM conference on Creativity and cognition , ACM , 91 – 94 . [ 12 ] Paul Dourish . 2001 . Where the action is : the foundations of embodied interaction . MIT Press , Cambridge , Mass . [ 13 ] Kristie Fisher , Scott Counts , and Aniket Kittur . 2012 . Distributed sensemaking : improving sensemaking by leveraging the efforts of previous users . In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM annual conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , Austin , Texas . DOI : doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2207711 [ 14 ] Pamela Hinds and Cathleen McGrath . 2006 . Structures that work : social structure , work structure and coordination ease in geographically distributed teams . In Proceedings of the 2006 20th anniversary conference on Computer supported cooperative work - CSCW ’06 , ACM Press , Banff , Alberta , Canada , 343 . DOI : doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1180875 . 1180928 [ 15 ] James Hollan , Edwin Hutchins , and David Kirsh . Distributed Cognition : Toward a New Foundation for Human - Computer Interaction Research . 7 , 2 , 23 . [ 16 ] Philémonne Jaasma , Dorothé Smit , Jelle van Dijk , Thomas Latcham , Ambra Trotto , and Caroline Hummels . 2017 . The Blue Studio : Designing an Interactive Environment for Embodied Multi - Stakeholder Ideation Processes . ACM Press , 1 – 10 . DOI : doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3024969 . 3025002 [ 17 ] Scott R . Klemmer , Björn Hartmann , and Leila Takayama . 2006 . How bodies matter : five themes for interaction design . In Proceedings of the 6th ACM conference on Designing Interactive systems - DIS ’06 , ACM Press , University Park , PA , USA , 140 . DOI : doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1142405 . 1142429 [ 18 ] Klaus Krippendorff . 1989 . On the Essential Contexts of Artifacts or on the Proposition That “Design Is Making Sense ( Of Things ) . ” Des . Issues 5 , 2 ( 1989 ) , 9 – 39 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 1511512 [ 19 ] Curtis LeBaron and Jürgen Streeck . 2000 . Gestures , knowledge , and the world . In Language and Gesture ( 1st ed . ) , David McNeill ( ed . ) . Cambridge University Press , 118 – 138 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / CBO9780511620 850 . 008 [ 20 ] Tyson E . Lewis and James Thurman . 2019 . Tinkering and Hacking With Objects in the Art Classroom . Art Educ . 72 , 4 ( July 2019 ) , 23 – 28 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 00043125 . 2019 . 1 602497 [ 21 ] Maurice Merleau - Ponty . 2002 . Phenomenology of perception . Routledge , London ; New York . [ 22 ] Annemarie Mol . 2002 . The body multiple : Ontology in medical practice . Duke University Press , Durham , NC . [ 23 ] Stefano Parisi , Valentina Rognoli , and Marieke Sonneveld . 2017 . Material Tinkering . An inspirational approach for experiential learning and envisioning in product design education . Des . J . 20 , sup1 ( July 2017 ) , S1167 – S1184 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14606925 . 2017 . 1 353059 [ 24 ] Dorian Peters , Lian Loke , and Naseem Ahmadpour . 2020 . Toolkits , cards and games – a review of analogue tools for collaborative ideation . CoDesign 16 , 1 ( 2020 ) , 1 – 25 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710882 . 2020 . 1 715444 [ 25 ] Shawn Rowe . 2002 . The role of objects in active , distributed meaning - making . In Perspectives on Object - Centered Learning in Museums . Routledge . [ 26 ] Merja Ryöppy . 2020 . Negotiating Experiences and Design Directions through Object Theatre . In Proceedings of the 11th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Shaping Experiences , Shaping Society , ACM , Tallinn Estonia , 1 – 13 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3419249 . 342016 9 [ 27 ] Elizabeth B - N . Sanders . 2000 . Generative tools for co - designing . In Collaborative design . Springer , 3 – 12 . Retrieved January 5 , 2017 from http : / / link . springer . com / chapter / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4471 - 0779 - 8 _ 1 [ 28 ] Donald A . Schön . 1983 . The reflective practitioner : How professionals think in action . Basic books . [ 29 ] Dorothé Smit , Martin Murer , Vincent van Rheden , Thomas Grah , and Manfred Tscheligi . 2017 . The Evolution of a Scale Model as an Impromptu Design Tool . ACM Press , 233 – 245 . DOI : doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3064663 . 3064797 [ 30 ] Dorothé Smit , Doenja Oogjes , Bruna Goveia de Rocha , Ambra Trotto , Yeup Hur , and Caroline Hummels . 2016 . Ideating in Skills : Developing Tools for Embodied Co - Design . ACM Press , 78 – 85 . DOI : doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2839462 . 2839497 [ 31 ] Lucy Suchman . 1987 . Plans and Situated Actions : the Problem of Human - Machine Communication . Cambridge University Press , New York . [ 32 ] Anna Vallgårda and Ylva Fernaeus . 2015 . Interaction Design as a Bricolage Practice . In Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Tangible , Embedded , and Embodied Interaction - TEI ’14 , ACM Press , Stanford , California , USA , 173 – 180 . DOI : doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2677199 . 2680594