Top - Rated LABS Abstracts 2015 461 L A B S 2015 THE ARTISTS’ FOOTPRINT Investigating the Distinct Contributions of Artists Engaging the Public with Climate Data Rachel Jacobs This thesis investigates the distinct contributions of artists who engage the public with climate data , focusing on two studies of artist - led projects : an interactive artwork that engaged the public with climate data and the design of an online platform for capturing , authoring and “performing” climate data . The studies reveal how the projects were designed and experienced , through a mixed - methods approach requiring the author to shift perspectives to investigate her own arts practice alongside the work of other artists in this field . The findings suggest the artists adopt a distinctive voice that fosters an emotional engagement with climate data , rather than an informative or persuasive one , that goes beyond “environmental knowing” toward human - scale , embodied , localized and personalized sense making . This research reveals how the artists use key strategies of performing data , sensory experience and multiple interpretations ; engaging temporal structures and narratives ; treating the data as a new material that is embedded into the artworks and embodied in various sensory forms ; and abstracting and juxtaposing multiple , contrasting and yet related datasets , while opening up spaces between them for interpretation and dialogue . This results in a discussion of the role of technology within the artistic process— how the artists walk a line between authenticity and emotional engagement and the importance of ongoing dialogic collaborations between disciplines . This research reveals that artists have a distinctive role to play in relation to climate change and sustainability , from which those in other disciplines might ultimately learn more about how to bring an emotional treatment to other forms of data . Rachel Jacobs : < rachel . jacobs @ nottingham . ac . uk > . PhD diss . , University of Nottingham , U . K . , 2014 . Rachel Jacobs , A Conversation between Trees , interactive multimedia , 2011 . ( © Rachel Jacobs . Photo : Active Ingredient . ) OUTLINE OF A SUBVERSIVE TECHNOPOETIC For a Libertarian Pedartgogy Francesco Monico The thesis explores the relationships between knowledge and knowing in contemporary 21st - century information society , using the foundation of the Faculty of Media Design & New Media Art at the Nuova Accademia di Belle Arti in Milano as a research apparatus . This Faculty was established between 2003 and 2012 in Milano , Italy . The research was guided by the hypothesis that technics have tertiarized memory and that knowledge is always founded on an ontological pessimism and a perpetual process of the generation of meaning . Knowledge is always and inevita - bly linked to the technics with which it is passed on . Pedagogy becomes a questioning of the object of knowledge , which trans - mutes into a definition of the ways it can be visualized . Setting out from a pessimistic position in relation to knowledge and truth , this research amplifies them to infinite possible forms , causing a dual shift of philosophy toward art and of pedagogy toward hermeneutics . The methodology consisted of a textual and visual description of a territory in a cartography of meaning , seen as the relation between intuition and the way in which practices—as knowledge and arts—form remnants . Francesco Monico : < francesco . monico @ arsacademy . it > . PhD diss . , University of Plymouth , U . K . , 2013 . Francesco Monico , Remnants , paper and pencil , 2012 . ( © Francesco Monico )