1 A MULTI - DIMENSIONAL MODEL OF VENTURE GROWTH J . ROBERT BAUM University of Maryland at College Park Dingman Center for Entrepreneurship College Park , Md . 20740 Tel : ( 301 ) 403 - 4290 Fax : ( 301 ) 403 - 4292 e - mail : jrbaum @ rhsmith . umd . edu EDWIN A . LOCKE University of Maryland at College Park College of Business and Management College Park , Md . 20742 ( 301 ) 405 - 2238 KEN G . SMITH University of Maryland at College Park College of Business and Management College Park , Md . 20742 ( 301 ) 405 - 2238 2 A MULTI - DIMENSIONAL MODEL OF VENTURE GROWTH ABSTRACT We draw upon strategic management theory , organizational behavior theory , organization theory , and entrepreneurship models to form an integrated model of venture growth including 17 concepts from 5 micro / macro research domains . The model was tested with responses from 307 companies from the architectural woodworking industry . CEO’s specific competencies and motivation , and competitive strategies , were direct predictors of venture growth . CEO’s traits and general competencies , and the environment had significant indirect effects . 3 This research explores the causes of venture growth . Past entrepreneurship research has often studied individual differences ( Begley & Boyd , 1987 ) , strategic management concepts ( McDougall , Robinson , & DeNisi , 1992 ) , and organization theory concepts ( Aldrich & Wiedenmayer , 1993 ) as isolated causes of venture performance . More recent studies propose that individual , organizational , and environmental dimensions combine to provide a more comprehensive prediction of venture development and growth than any one dimension in isolation ( Chrisman , Bauerschmidt , & Hofer , 1999 ; Covin & Slevin , 1997 ; Herron & Robinson , 1993 ; Lumpkin & Dess , 1996 ; Naffziger , Hornsby , & Kuratko , 1994 ; Sandberg , 1986 ) . However , there has been limited examination of these multilevel models . Our purpose is to propose and test a comprehensive multilevel model of venture growth . As shown in Figure 2 , five research domains were included that have been theoretically identified as antecedents of venture performance : personality traits and general motives ; personal competencies ; situationally specific motivation ; competitive strategies ; and the business environment . We chose venture growth as our performance measure , rather than other indicators of performance because entrepreneurship researchers point to growth as the crucial indicator of venture success ( Covin & Slevin , 1997 ; Low & MacMillan , 1988 ) . Our goals were : ( 1 ) to test whether a multi - level model that sampled relevant concepts from individual , organizational , and environmental domains would predict firm performance successfully , ( 2 ) to test whether each domain would contribute something to the prediction , and ( 3 ) to explore alternative forms of the relationship among the domains and performance . By empirically examining multiple domains across multiple levels , we hope to produce a more complete understanding of venture growth . 4 THEORY AND HYPOTHESES Direct Effects : The Entrepreneur Traits and motives . Personality theories point to the importance of personal predispositions for venture success ( McClelland , 1965 ) , and venture capitalists report that entrepreneur characteristics are most important for venture success ( MacMillan , Siegel , & SubbaNarisimha , 1985 ) . Some traits and motives of successful entrepreneurs have been identified , but these concepts have typically produced weak ( less than 7 % of the variance ) relationships with venture performance ( Begley & Boyd , 1987 ; Low & MacMillan , 1988 ) . Furthermore , Sandberg and Hofer ( 1987 ) found that organizational and industry variables completely dominate individual - level variables as causes of venture success . There are three possible implications of these prior results : ( 1 ) traits do not matter ; ( 2 ) traits do not work in isolation from other factors ; or , ( 3 ) the wrong traits have been tested in past entrepreneurship studies . Our research design examines the second possibility . To control for the third we included additional traits in our study that have been proposed as characteristics of successful leaders : tenacity , proactivity , and passion ( Bass , 1990 ; Locke , 1997 ) . Furthermore , entrepreneurship theorists have proposed that tenacity and proactivity / initiative are important for successful establishment and operation of new ventures ( Bird , 1989 , Chandler & Jansen , 1992 ) . And , Smilor ( 1997 , p 342 ) suggested that passion is “ . . . perhaps the most observed phenomenon of the entrepreneurial process . ” . Thus , we predicted : Hypothesis 1 : Controlling for other domains , the greater the CEO’s tenacity , proactivity , and passion for work , the greater the venture growth . Individual competencies . “Competencies” refers to the underlying individual characteristics such as knowledge , skills , and / or abilities required to perform a specific job . Testing his job performance theory , Boyatzis ( 1982 ) found significant performance relationships with oral presentation skill , decision - making , conceptualization , diagnostic use of concepts , use of power , technical skill , and industry skill . Entrepreneurship studies have developed skill / ability clusters that are similar to those found in Boyatzis’ management / leadership theory 5 ( Bird , 1989 ; Chandler & Jansen , 1992 ; Herron & Robinson , 1990 ) ; however , opportunity recognition appears in these studies as an important additional skill of entrepreneurs , and the components of “people skill” and “organization skill” are combined as “managerial skill” ( Chandler & Jansen , 1992 ) . We focus on the four competencies that appear in common in entrepreneurship studies and predict that : Hypothesis 2 : Controlling for other domains , the greater the CEO’s competency with respect to organization skill , opportunity skill , industry skill , and technical skill , the greater the venture growth . Situationally specific motivation . In this domain , we chose to study vision , growth goals , and self - efficacy as motivation concepts , because : ( 1 ) all three concepts have demonstrated significant empirical relationships with business performance , and ( 2 ) entrepreneurship theorists point to the importance of vision , business goals , and self - efficacy for planning and venture performance ( Bird , 1989 ; Low & MacMillan , 1988 ) . Vision is a core element of motivation in charismatic leadership theory ( Bass , 1990 ) . Indeed , two laboratory simulations found direct and indirect performance effects for vision . Goal theory has demonstrated more scientific validity for its proposition that specific , challenging goals lead to higher performance than any other motivation theory ( Locke & Latham , 1990 ) . Entrepreneurship researchers have found that entrepreneurs’ self - efficacy [ task specific self - confidence ( Bandura , 1986 ) ] about their ability to start and grow their ventures relates with venture performance ( Chandler & Jansen , 1992 ) . We examine the direct effect of these three aspects of motivation and predict : Hypothesis 3 : Controlling for other domains , the greater the CEO’s situationally specific motivation with respect to vision , growth goals , and self - efficacy , the greater the venture growth . 6 Direct Effects : Competitive strategy Consistent with Porter ( 1980 ) , we conceive of strategy in terms of three broad business - level choices : “focus” , “low cost” , and “differentiation” . “Focus” ( narrow scope ) refers to competitive strategies that target a particular set of customers , segment of the product line , or geographic market . The “low cost” strategy involves the construction of efficient scale facilities , and aggressive pursuit of cost reduction and cost minimization in all functions of the organization , and products offered to customers who are price sensitive ( Dess & Davis , 1984 ) . “Differentiation” strategies are designed to create and market innovative / high quality products and / or services industry - wide ( Porter , 1980 ) . According to Porter , the three competitive strategies are alternative viable approaches for dealing with environmental forces . Firms that fail to select one of these strategies are “stuck in the middle” and , therefore , almost always doomed to failure ( Porter , 1980 : 42 ) . As Porter notes , the “stuck in the middle” firm lacks the investment in low cost structure to compete on price , the industry - wide differentiation to necessarily offset the need for a low cost position , and the focus to achieve differentiation or a low cost within a limited market space . Indeed , Dess and Davis ( 1984 ) found empirical support for this hypothesis . Thus , we argue that firms that select one of the three types of strategies will outperform those that deploy a combined strategy . Hypothesis 4 : Controlling for other domains , a firm’s competitive strategy will be related to performance ; more specifically , firms that emphasize either a focus , low cost , or differentiation strategy will achieve the highest growth . Direct Effects : The Environment Theories have been proposed and empirically supported which suggest that organizations are affected by their environments ( Aldrich & Wiedenmayer , 1993 ) . This study focused on three dimensions of environment : dynamism , munificence , and complexity . Dynamism ( negative stability ) refers to the level of environmental predictability ; it is manifested in the rate of market and industry change and the level of uncertainty about forces that are beyond the control of individual businesses ( Dess & Beard , 1984 ) . Because stable environments are easier to navigate , 7 we expect environmental stability to be positively related to venture growth . Munificence refers to the environment’s support for organizational growth ( Dess & Beard , 1984 ) . High munificence enables firms to cope with challenges by providing resources from outside the firm . Complexity represents the concentration or dispersion of organizations in the environment ( Aldrich and Waldenmeyer , 1993 ) . Complex environments , composed of many firms , may be more difficult for entrepreneurs to comprehend . Thus , we propose : Hypothesis 5 : Controlling for other domains , a firm’s environment will be related to venture growth ; more specifically , ventures in stable ( negative dynamism ) , munificent , and simple ( negative complexity ) environments will achieve the highest growth . Indirect Effects Effects among traits , competencies , and motivation . Entrepreneurship researchers have pointed to the likelihood that personality works in conjunction with other factors ( Naffziger , 1995 ) , or that the relation of personality with performance is mediated by other factors ( Herron & Robinson , 1993 ) . First , we propose that traits affect competencies because individuals practice what they like and practice develops skill . For example , one who is tenacious and proactive and has a passion for piano , is likely to engage in daily keyboard practice , while one who is without these traits will tend to avoid skill - building practice . Indeed , Boyatzis ( 1982 ) found that managers’ traits were manifested in their competencies . Thus , we propose : Hypothesis 6 : Controlling for other domains , the greater the CEO’s tenacity , proactivity , and passion for work , the greater the CEO’s competency in terms of organization skill , opportunity skill , industry skill , and technical skill . Second , we propose an indirect path from traits to venture growth through situationally specific motivation . Locke ( in press ) showed that the situationally specific goals and self - efficacy mediate the effects of general traits on performance , and Bird ( 1989 ) in her discussion of strategic vision and goals , suggested that vision and goals are , in part , a reflection of personality . 8 Hypothesis 7 : Controlling for other domains , the greater the CEO’s tenacity , proactivity , and passion for work , the greater his / her situationally specific motivation with respect to vision , goals , and self - efficacy . Thirdly , we propose that competencies affect situationally specific motivation . Drawing upon Maier’s ( 1965 ) theory that ability and motivation combine to produce performance , Bird ( 1989 ) proposed that personal ability affects vision and goals which , in turn , cause entrepreneurship success . The path from competencies to motivation is also consistent with social cognitive and goal theories which explain that people set their goals and form their efficacy evaluations based on self - knowledge about ability ( Bandura , 1986 ) . Personality traits ( proactivity and tenacity ) affect self - efficacy ( Bandura , 1986 ) ; thus we propose : Hypothesis 8 : Controlling for other domains , the greater the CEO’s competencies in terms of organization skill , opportunity skill , industry skill , and technical skill , the greater the CEO’s situationally specific motivation with respect to vision , goals , and self - efficacy . Effects of traits , competencies , motivation , and competitive strategy . Competitive strategies reflect the choices of managers ( Child , 1972 ) . Thus , the determinants of individual decision - making and behavior are among the determinants of strategy because people choose plans , in part , based upon ( 1 ) what they are predisposed to do , ( 2 ) what they are motivated to do , and ( 3 ) what they think they can do ( Bandura , 1986 ; Hollenbeck & Whitener , 1988 ) . Strategy researchers have empirically linked top management characteristics to innovation strategy , strategic change , and other aspects of strategy ( Grimm & Smith , 1991 ; Michel & Hambrick , 1992 ) . Furthermore , the strategy implementation literature points to the importance of personal traits in strategy formulation and communication . Since these studies support the view that individual traits are determinants of cognition and behavior , we propose that traits affect strategic choice . In particular , we believe that tenacity , proactivity , and passion for work will lead CEO’s to recognize the value of competitive strategy for enhancing venture growth . 9 Hypothesis 9 : Controlling for other domains , the greater the CEO’s tenacity , proactivity , and passion for work , the greater the likelihood that a firm will select a focus , low cost , or differentiation strategy . We also expect that competencies will affect the choice and implementation of competitive strategy . Individuals tend to adopt and commit to strategies that they believe are achievable ( Bandura , 1986 ; Covin & Slevin , 1997 ; Herron & Robinson , 1993 ) , and skills and ability may limit performance despite the existence of high goals and the “right”strategy ( Bird , 1989 ; Locke & Latham , 1990 ) . In addition , the resource - based view of the firm and the strategic choice literature ( Child , 1972 ) emphasize the link between managerial competence and strategy . Hypothesis 10 : Controlling for other domains , the greater a CEO’s competency with respect to organization skill , opportunity skill , industry skill , and technical skill , the greater the likelihood that a firm will select a focus , low cost , or differentiation strategy . We believe that an indirect causal path to venture growth exists from motivation through competitive strategy . Bandura ( 1986 ) asserted that motivation is a codeterminant ( with environment ) of task strategies , the individual level version of company strategies . Goal theory research has found that task strategy can be a mediator of the goal to performance relation ( Locke & Latham , 1990 ) , and entrepreneurship theorists propose that business vision and personal goals affect competitive strategies ( Bird , 1989 ) . Therefore , we expect a CEO’s motivation will lead to recognition of the importance of competitive strategies for venture growth . Hypothesis 11 : Controlling for other domains , the greater a CEO’s motivation with respect to vision , goals , and self - efficacy , the greater the likelihood that a firm will select a focus , low cost , or differentiation strategy . Effects of environment upon strategy . We expect the environment domain to affect competitive strategies which is consistent with the views of economists ( Scherer & Ross , 1990 ) strategic management theorists ( Bourgeois , 1980 ) , social - psychologists ( Bandura , 1986 ) , and the empirical findings of entrepreneurship researchers ( Sandberg & Hofer , 1987 ) . For example , the 10 entire structure ( environment ) - conduct ( strategy ) - performance paradigm in industrial organizational economics rests on the premise that strategy ( conduct ) will be influenced by industry structure , which will in turn , affect performance ( Mason , 1939 ; Scherer & Ross , 1990 ) . Furthermore , since strategic decision - making is a human behavior , social cognitive theory ( Bandura , 1986 ) points to the determination of behavior by environmental ( and personal ) forces . Finally , entrepreneurship research has found that new venture strategies are formed in response to environmental forces ( McDougall et al . , 1992 ; Sandberg , 1986 ) . Thus , we propose : Hypothesis 12 : Controlling for other domains , environmental stability , munificence , and simplicity will be related to firm strategy , and more specifically , to a firm’s propensity to select focus , low cost , or differentiation strategy . In summary , hypotheses 1 to 6 represent a direct effects model , which reflects a straight forward integration of concepts from multiple research domains . With hypotheses 7 to 12 , we present a more complex set of indirect effects , explaining how entrepreneurial characteristics are interrelated and how these characteristics and environmental forces impact strategic decisions . There is theory to support this more complex integration : ( 1 ) Existing personality , competency , and motivation theories underlie our hypothesized individual level indirect effects ( Bandura , 1986 ; Boyatzis , 1982 ; Hollenbeck & Whitener , 1988 ; Locke & Latham , 1990 , Maier , 1965 ) . And growing recognition of the importance of ( 2 ) individual differences ( Grimm & Smith , 1991 ; Michel & Hambrick , 1992 ) and ( 3 ) environmental conditions ( Scherer & Ross , 1990 ; Schwenk , 1988 ) as inputs of the strategic decision process support our proposed cross - level effects . Indeed , Schwenk ( 1988 ) points to the importance of rational choice and cognitive heuristics theory from cognitive psychology as well as environmental analysis and scanning systems such as the CP / IA matrix ( Hofer & Schendel , 1978 ) for understanding the outcomes of strategic decision making . The theoretical link between these indirect effects and venture growth is competitive strategy . That is , strategic choice theory itself ( Child , 1972 ) points to the efficacy of strategic decision making for organizational performance , guiding our prediction that strategies affect venture growth directly ( H4 ) . 11 Controls A single industry was studied to avoid confounding by industry type ( for example , mom & pops vs . high potential industries ) and industry - specific externalities . That is , we followed those who suggest that universal organizational patterns and processes will be most apparent in single industry studies . In addition , we controlled for organization size because size may systematically influence other concepts of interest . Indeed , hundreds of studies have shown that size is an important determinant of organization process and performance . METHODS Industry and Participants Firms that manufacture and install architectural woodwork ( doors , windows , stairs , cabinets , and trim for residential , commercial , and monumental buildings ) were studied ( part of SIC 2431 ) . Products are sold to general contractors , architects , and interior designers . Typical firms employ skilled woodworkers , production oriented high - tech machinery operators , carpentry installers , and project managers . Questionnaire In 1993 , the industry’s 849 CEOs were invited to participate ; 442 agreed . Following an extensive pilot test , the questionnaire was mailed to each CEO and an adapted version was also sent separately to the 202 employee - participants ( EP ) whose CEO had also agreed to allow their participation ( The employee data were used to test the validity of the CEO self - reports . ) . The CEO questionnaire contained measures of : ( 1 ) the 17 predictor concepts studied , and ( 2 ) 1992 performance . The EP version and the CEO version were identical except that references in the CEO version to “you” and “your company” were changed to “the CEO” and “the company” for the EP version . Performance data for 1994 were collected in 1995 with a second questionnaire to the CEOs . We received 414 CEO responses ( 49 % ) , and we used 307 in our study ( 36 % of the population ) . We disqualified CEOs who : ( 1 ) had founded their businesses or purchased going 12 concerns less than 2 years , or more than 8 years , prior to the 1993 survey , ( 2 ) had 0 or 1 employee , ( 3 ) were not active owner / managers , or ( 4 ) supplied incomplete data . The average qualified CEO respondent had 16 employees and $ 1 . 5 M sales in 1992 . Our net EP sample included 131 direct - report employees ( 43 % of the net qualified CEO sample ) who had worked with the responding CEO for two or more years and had submitted complete data . The typical EP was a manager who had been in the industry for 6 years . To test whether the 414 respondents were representative of the population , we performed a z - test of the mean number of employees and mean sales volume of the respondents vs . the population . The tests showed that the difference was not significant between the : ( 1 ) mean number of employees ( z = . 32 ; p < . 38 ) , or ( 2 ) mean sales volume ( z = 1 . 0 ; p < . 16 ) . Measures Data were collected for the 17 theory - based predictor concepts from entrepreneur / CEOs and EPs , and the entrepreneur / CEOs supplied data for the control and performance concepts . Table 1 shows the : ( 1 ) number of items , ( 2 ) format , ( 3 ) composite reliability , and ( 4 ) research source for the 17 predictor concepts . Details are available from the first author . We used three measures of venture growth using data from the 1993 and 1995 CEO questionnaires . The first measure of the dependent variable was one half the difference between 1992 and 1994 sales , divided by the base year ( 1992 ) , to equal average annual % sales growth for the period . Similar calculations produced the second and third measures : average annual % employment growth and average annual % profit growth ( CR = . 87 ) . The accuracy of the raw performance data was evaluated by checking the agreement of a random sample of 25 of the firms with Dun and Bradstreet , Inc . ( 1993 ) reports about 1992 performance . Results of the correlation and t - tests of 21 of these cases , for which Dun and Bradstreet , Inc . ( 1993 ) reports were available , show that the respondents’ reports and Dun and Bradstreet reports are highly correlated ( the smallest r = . 94 , p < . 001 ) , and none of the means differences are significant ( the largest t = . 96 , p < . 36 ) . 13 TABLE 1 Predictor Measures Domain : Concept # items Format * CR * * Research Source Traits : Tenacity 5 LRF . 85 Chandler & Jansen ( 1992 ) Proactivity 5 LRF . 81 Bird ( 1989 ) Passion 5 LRF . 85 Smilor ( 1997 ) Competencies ( General ) : Organization skill 3 LRF Boyatzis ( 1982 ) 1 DS . 74 Chandler & Jansen ( 1992 ) Opportunity skill 5 LRF . 68 Chandler & Jansen ( 1992 ) Competencies ( Specific ) : Industry skill 5 Scales . 63 Chandler & Jansen ( 1992 ) Technical skill 5 Scales . 79 Chandler & Jansen ( 1992 ) Motivation : Vision 2 EC . 77 Kirkpatrick & Locke ( 1996 ) Goals 3 Actual . 71 Locke & Latham ( 1990 ) Self - efficacy 3 Scales . 86 Bandura ( 1997 ) Competitive Strategies : Focus 4 Scales . 76 Porter ( 1980 ) Low cost 1 Scale 4 LRF . 81 Porter ( 1980 ) Differentiation - 2 Scales innovation 3 LRF . 84 Porter ( 1980 ) Differentiation - quality / 1 Scale service 4 LRF . 87 Porter ( 1980 ) Environment : Dynamism 4 LRF . 84 Dess & Beard ( 1984 ) Munificence 4 LRF . 73 Dess & Beard ( 1984 ) Complexity 2 Scales . 68 Aldrich & Wiedenmayer ( 1993 ) Notes : * LRF = Likert response format ; DS = decision scenario ; EC = Expert coding of quality and content * * CR = Composite Reliability which is conceptually similar to ALPHA Controls Organization size was indicated by the number of “full - time equivalent” employees at the end of 1992 . 14 RESULTS Measurement Model LISREL 8 and PRELIS 2 , were used to : ( 1 ) impute missing data , ( 2 ) evaluate concept validity [ reliability ( including dual - source similarity ) , convergent , and discriminant validity ] , ( 3 ) perform confirmatory factor analyses to verify the validity of the proposed configuration of concepts and domains , and ( 4 ) test the hypotheses . Univariate homogeneity testing ( PRELIS 2 HT ) and multiple sample analysis ( LISREL MSA ) confirmed the similarity of the response distributions of the 131 entrepreneur / CEO - EP pairs , as well as the distributions of the entrepreneur / CEOs with EPs ( n = 131 ) and without EPs ( n = 176 ) . We reconfigured the measurement items and concepts because the initial configuration produced a " poor " fit [ X 2 ( 4491 ) = 9722 ; p < . 00 ; GFI = . 63 ; AGFI = . 58 ; PNFI = . 57 ; RMR = . 082 ; RMSEA = . 076 ] . We removed items that were not statistically significant . The “trimmed” measurement model had 10 concepts with composite reliability ( CR ) > . 80 , 6 concepts with CR between . 70 and . 79 , and 3 with CR between . 60 and . 69 . The fit was improved significantly [ X 2 ( 2572 ) = 5961 ; p < . 00 ; GFI = . 90 ; AGFI = . 88 ; PNFI = . 55 ; RMR = 0 . 084 ; RMSEA = . 088 ] . All surviving measure coefficients were significant ( t > 2 . 0 ; p < . 05 ) ; thus , convergent validity was established . Discriminant validity was verified by determining for each latent variable that the average variance extracted by the latent variable’s measures was larger than the latent variable’s shared variance with any other latent variable . Common source bias was checked with LISREL confirmatory factor analysis by linking a common latent variable with all of the measures . The resultant coefficient , LAMBDA = . 16 ( t = . 40 , p < . 05 ) , indicated that common variance was less than 3 % . Direct Effects We used second order confirmatory factor analysis ( SOFA ) and X 2 differences to find the best domain configuration . The best was consistent with our study configuration except that a significant improvement in X 2 ( p < . 001 ) resulted when the competencies domain was split into 15 two factors : 1 ) general competencies ( Hypothesis 2a - organization skill and opportunity skill , and 2 ) specific competencies ( Hypothesis 2b - industry skill and technical skill ) . We accepted this change because it was consistent with Boyatzis’ ( 1982 : 194 ) final configuration of managerial competencies . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Insert Figure 1 about here _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Figure 1 shows the result of using the “best fit” domain configuration as a predictor of venture growth using direct paths only . Solution of the model produced an acceptable fit : X 2 ( 102 ) = 168 ; p < . 00 ; GFI = . 92 ; AGFI = . 89 ; PNFI = . 63 ; RMR = 0 . 060 ; RMSEA = . 077 . Compared with the independence model , the change in X 2 ( 36 ) = 1244 is significant ( p < . 01 ) ( This solution was better than any solution with only one predictor domain . ) . Specific competencies , motivation , and competitive strategies have significant coefficients ( p < . 05 ) with venture growth . With regard to the strategy domain , we observe that strategy is positively related with performance . More specifically , with regard to the reflections of the strategy domain , firms that select and emphasize differentiation through high quality ( r = . 31 ; p < . 001 ) and / or innovation ( r = . 25 ; p < . 001 ) achieve the fastest growth . In contrast , firms that employ low cost ( r = - . 22 ; p < . 001 ) or focus ( - . 27 ; p < . 001 ) in fact experience negative growth . Neither traits , general competencies , nor environment are significant direct predictors of venture growth ( Environment is a direct predictor only at p < . 10 ) ; thus , hypotheses 1 ( traits ) , 2a ( general competencies ) , and 5 ( environment ) are not supported . However , this direct domain level structural equation solution provides support for hypotheses 2b ( specific competencies ) , 3 ( situationally specific motivation ) , and 4 ( competitive strategies ) . Indirect Effects We tested an array of models with indirect paths among the domains that were consistent with those proposed in the theory section . The optimal path model solution , developed with the assistance of LISREL 8 modification indices and X 2 difference tests , is shown in Figure 2 . 16 _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Insert Figure 2 about here _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ The resultant indirect effects configuration produced a “good” fit : [ X 2 ( 93 ) = 148 ; p < . 00 ; GFI = . 95 ; AGFI = . 92 ; PNFI = . 69 ; RMR = 0 . 056 ; RMSEA = . 072 ] with 62 % of the variance explained . Indeed , the fit of data to the indirect and direct effects model is better than the fit of the direct domain level model alone . With the indirect effects model , we find that specific competencies , motivation , and competitive strategy have significant direct effects upon venture growth , and traits , general competencies , and environment have significant indirect effects . Traits affect specific competencies , motivation , and competitive strategy , all of which are likely predictors of venture growth , and this confirms hypotheses 6 , 7 , and 9 . Similarly , general competencies affect motivation and strategy , which confirms hypotheses 8 and 10 . General competencies also affect specific competencies ( not predicted ) . Motivation has a positive effect upon strategy which , in turn , affects venture growth , confirming hypothesis 11 . Environment affects venture growth through its impact upon strategy , which supports hypothesis 12 ( Our prediction that “Complexity” , would be a negative reflection of the environment domain did not hold ; nevertheless , the environment domain had a significant positive effect upon competitive strategy as hypothesized . ) . Taking direct and indirect effects together , the LISREL “total effects” solution confirms that all domains exhibit significant effects on venture growth . DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION The most important finding of this study is that individual , organizational , and environmental research domains predict venture growth better when the web of complex indirect relationships among them is included than when only multiple simultaneous direct effects are studied . Furthermore , all domains figure in the prediction of venture growth when these total 17 effects are considered , so that venture growth cannot be adequately explained from a single perspective . Even personal trait and specific competency domains , which do not contribute to venture growth when studied in isolation , affect venture growth through their effects upon more direct performance links . By studying multiple domains across three levels of analysis and by including both direct and indirect effects , we are able to capture a more complete understanding of the venture growth process than previous efforts . Moreover , from the indirect model , we find that the “internal” explanations of performance ( e . g . , the strategic choice , leadership , and entrepreneurship viewpoints ) are more relevant in explaining venture growth in this study than the environment or external explanations [ e . g . , the structure / performance / economics paradigm ( Mason , 1939 ; Scherer & Ross , 1990 ) , population ecology theory ( Hannon & Freeman , 1977 ) , and resource dependency theory ( Pfeffer & Salancik , 1978 ) ] . The internal explanation for venture growth that emerges from this study emphasizes the entrepreneur and his or her role in formulating strategy . The story begins with a hard - working proactive entrepreneur , with a strong set of technical , organizational and industry skills . This entrepreneur is highly motivated , which is reflected in the establishment of a clear organizational vision , high growth goals , and confidence to achieve these goals . Perhaps because of tenacity and proactivity , organizational skills and / or high motivation , this entrepreneur is capable of delineating an effective differentiation strategy that works to generate high growth . We can speculate that the entrepreneur’s industry and technical skills , and high levels of motivation , influence the venture’s growth through the establishment of growth - oriented organizational processes and structures that facilitate the implementation of this strategy . We also imagine that in these high - growth organizations , the organization’s culture becomes a reflection of the tenacious entrepreneur . We now examine the more specific results with the goal of further elaborating an “internal” explanation of venture growth . Traits . Consistent with psychological theories that explain individual performance ( Hollenbeck & Whitener , 1988 ; McClelland , 1965 ) , we find that traits are important predictors of 18 venture growth ; however , they work primarily through competencies , motivation , and strategy . Operationalized in our research , the entrepreneur’s traits serve to influence the skill sets that are developed and the level of entrepreneurial motivation , which in turn , affects strategy . This result offers an explanation for why it is that practitioners and venture capitalists continue to point to the importance of “the entrepreneur” for venture success ( MacMillan , Siegel , & SubbaNarisimha , 1985 ) while entrepreneurship trait research had not uncovered direct performance relations . Perhaps researchers ought to look again at traits and motives , but through mediation models which test more complex causal chains . Competencies . Technical and industry specific competencies should receive more research attention in entrepreneurship settings because the domain which they reflect , specific competencies , had highly significant direct effects with venture growth . We speculate that the entrepreneur’s technical and industry competencies serve an important form of expert power which facilitates the implementation of the entrepreneur’s vision and strategy . We can further hypothesize that these entrepreneurial skills may serve as sources of competitive advantage that rivals find difficult to identify and imitate . Situationally specific motivation . The results for vision and goals and performance are fully consistent with applied psychology and social psychology research ( Bandura , 1997 ; Locke & Latham , 1990 ) . For example , goal researchers have found that goal difficulty is directly related to performance , and social cognitive theory points to the strong relation between self - efficacy and performance . We hypothesize that higher levels of entrepreneurial motivation and confidence serve to shape the organization structure and processes and even work in the selection of goal - oriented employees . As a result , and as Hambrick and Mason ( 1984 ) suggest , organizations lead by highly motivated entrepreneurs may begin to reflect the character of these entrepreneurs which may serve to further enhance performance . Competitive strategies . While differentiation strategies related positively to venture growth , we were surprised to find that focus and low cost strategies related negatively . This may be a function of the industry context in that the sample firms are geographically constrained craft 19 manufacturers . Thus , at least for this sample , Porter’s theory does not hold in that low cost and focus are not effective strategic options . Perhaps more interesting is our finding that individual differences affect competitive strategies . While some strategy research has focused on top management team ( TMT ) demography ( Hambrick & Mason , 1984 ) , our findings suggest that entrepreneur / CEO traits , competencies , and motivation may offer equally important explanations of strategic decision making . Indeed , established social cognitive and goal theories point to personal characteristics as determinants of personal strategies which are likely determinants of organization strategies ( Bandura , 1997 ; Locke & Latham , 1990 ) . It would be interesting to examine the relationship between the entrepreneur’s personal motivation and strategies , and those of the organization . We speculate that in small organizations these may be the same . Environment . The direct effects of the environment domain were borderline ( p < . 10 ) . However , the significance of the indirect effects upon strategy enhance the generalizability of our model because they are entirely consistent with the structure - conduct ( strategy ) - performance paradigm in industrial organization economics ( Mason , 1939 ) . The relatively low impact of the environmental domain on venture growth , controlling for the other more micro dimensions , is surprising ; at least in our study it suggests that CEOs of small firms may have more control of their venture’s growth than some macro theories suggest ( Hannon & Freeman , 1977 ; Pfeffer and Salancik , 1978 ) , which could be an interesting avenue for future research . This study did not deal with two definitional issues that confound entrepreneurship research : ( 1 ) “who is an entrepreneur ? ” , and ( 2 ) “which firms are entrepreneurial ? ” . We simply used a sample of young small businesses that were run by active owner / managers , regardless of their mode of entry , to identify predictors of venture growth . Nor did we study other indicators of performance ( successful founding , survival , innovation , intangible assets , personal goals , etc . ) . For example , it is important to find out if the competencies that contribute to venture growth also cause successful founding . Furthermore , we modeled direct and indirect effects with linear equations rather than multiple - order equations because structural equation modeling is not 20 well suited to testing non - linear models . Additionally , while our analysis of a single industry provided control of industry effects , a few entrepreneurship researchers have found that industry effects are significant determinants of performance . Only a few concepts were used as reflections of the five research domains studied because of sampling limitations ; however , our finding that all domains figure in venture growth does not point to this as a failing . The integrated entrepreneurship performance model that was confirmed in this study offers a platform and framework to guide those who fund and manage ventures . We found that the entrepreneur’s personality matters , but indirectly , and that industry - specific skill and relevant technical skill directly affect performance as do vision , goals , and self - efficacy . Thus , there is evidence that personality testing may assist identification of those who can create and grow a high potential venture ; however , skills and motivation assessment may be even more effective because these personal dimensions are more directly related with performance . The study also confirms the soundness of financier’s interest in business plans that include a clearly defined strategy . The study suggests that entrepreneurs should recognize that multiple personal dimensions affect success . Thus , they must replace , through partnering or hiring , those personal dimensions they lack . Finally , it is apparent that entrepreneurship education programs ought to teach organization skills ( including vision and goal - setting ) , opportunity skills , and business environment analysis for formulation of strategies . In conclusion , we began by arguing for the need for a more comprehensive explanation of venture performance . Overall , we found that explaining venture growth is a complex process , influenced by a variety of interrelated micro and macro domains . Our results are important because they begin to untangle the multifaceted process by which entrepreneurs affect competitive strategy and performance . Perhaps other researchers can extend our proposed “internal” explanation of venture growth . For example , they might utilize strategic decision making ( Schwenk , 1988 ) and strategic choice theories ( Child , 1972 ) to integrate cross level effects by studying the process by which entrepreneurs formulate and implement their strategies . 21 REFERENCES Aldrich , H . E . , & Wiedenmayer , G . 1993 . From traits to rates : An ecological perspective on organizational foundings . In J . A . Katz & R . H . Brockhaus , Sr . ( Eds . ) , Advances in entrepreneurship , firm emergence , and growth , volume 1 : 145 - 195 . Greenwich , CN : JAI Press . Bandura , A . 1986 . Social foundations of thought and action : A social cognitive theory . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Bandura , A . 1997 . Self - efficacy : The exercise of control . New York : W . H . Freeman . Bass , B . M . 1990 . Handbook of Leadership . New York : Free Press . Begley , T . M . , & Boyd , D . P . 1987 . Psychological characteristics associated with performance in entrepreneurial firms and smaller businesses . Journal of Business Venturing , 2 : 79 - 93 . Bird , B . 1989 . Entrepreneurial behavior . Glenview , IL : Scott Foresman & Company . Bourgeois , L . J . 1980 . Strategy and environment : A conceptual integration . Academy of Management Review , 5 : 25 - 39 . Boyatzis , R . E . 1982 . The competent manager . New York : John Wiley and Sons . Chandler , G . N . , & Jansen , E . 1992 . The founder ' s self - assessed competence and venture performance . Journal of Business Venturing , 7 : 223 - 236 . Child , J . 1972 . Organization structure , environment , and performance : The role of strategic choice . Sociology , 6 : 1 - 22 . Chrisman , J . J . , Bauerschmidt , A . , & Hofer , C . W . 1999 . The determinants of new venture performance : An extended model . Covin , J . G . , & Slevin , D . P . 1997 . High growth transitions : Theoretical perspectives and suggested directions . In D . L . Sexton & R . W . Smilor ( Eds . ) , Entrepreneurship 2000 : 99 - 126 . Chicago : Upstart Publishing . Dess , G . G . , & Beard , D . W . 1984 . Dimensions of organizational task environments . Administrative Science Quarterly , 29 : 52 - 73 . Dess , G . G . , & Davis , P . S . 1984 . Porter’s ( 1980 ) generic strategies as determinants of strategic 22 group membership and organizational performance . Academy of Management Journal , 27 : 467 - 488 . Dun and Bradstreet ( 1993 and 1995 ) . Business credit services . 3 Sylvan Way , Parsippany , NJ . Grimm , C . M . & Smith , K . G . 1991 . Management and organizational change : A note on the railroad industry . Strategic Management Journal , 12 : 557 - 562 . Hambrick , D . C . , & Mason , P . A . 1984 . Upper echelons : The organization as a reflection of its top managers . Academy of Management Review , 9 : 193 - 206 . Hannon , M . T . , & Freeman , J . 1977 . The population ecology of organizations . American Journal of Sociology , 82 : 929 - 964 . Herron , L . A . , & Robinson , R . B . , Jr . 1990 . Entrepreneurial skills : An empirical study of the missing link connecting the entrepreneur with venture performance . Paper presented at the National Academy of Management Meeting , San Francisco , CA . Herron , L . A . , & Robinson , R . B . , Jr . 1993 . A structural model of the effects of entrepreneurial characteristics on venture performance . Journal of Business Venturing , 8 : 281 - 294 . Hofer , C . W . , & Schendel , D . 1978 . Strategy formulation : Analytical concepts . St . Paul , MI : West . Hollenbeck , J . , & Whitener , E . 1988 . Reclaiming personality traits for personnel selection . Journal of Management , 14 : 81 - 91 . Locke , E . A . in press . Self set goals and self - efficacy as mediators of incentives and personality . To appear in M . Erez , H Thiery , & U Kleinbeck ( Eds . ) , Work motivation - a multi - level approach . The individual , the group , the organization and the culture . NJ : L . Erlbaum . Locke , E . A . 1997 . Prime movers : The traits of great business leaders . In G . Cooper & S . Jackson ( Eds . ) , Creating tomorrow’s organizations : 75 - 96 . Chichester , UK : Wiley . Locke , E . A . , & Latham , G . P . 1990 . A theory of goal setting and task performance . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . Low , M . B . , & MacMillan , I . C . 1988 . Entrepreneurship : Past research and future challenges . Journal of Management , 14 : 139 - 151 . 23 Lumpkin , G . T . , & Dess , G . G . 1996 . Clarifying the entrepreneurial orientation construct and linking it to performance . Academy of Management Review , 21 : 135 - 172 . MacMillan , I . C . , Siegel , R . , & SubbaNarisimha , P . N . 1985 . Criteria used by venture capitalists to evaluate new venture proposals . Journal of Business Venturing , 1 : 119 - 128 . Maier , N . R . R . , 1965 . Psychology in industry : 3rd ed , Boston : Houghton Mifflin Co . Mason , E . ( 1939 ) . Price and production policies of large - scale enterprise . American Economic Review , 29 : 61 - 74 . McClelland , D . C . , 1965 . N - achievement and entrepreneurship : A longitudinal study . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1 : 389 - 392 . McDougall , P . P . , Robinson , R . B . , Jr . , & DeNisi , A . S . 1992 . Modeling new venture performance : An analysis of new venture strategy , industry structure , and venture origin . Journal of Business Venturing , 7 : 267 - 289 . Michel , J . G . , & Hambrick , D . C . 1992 . Diversification posture and the characteristics of the top management team . Academy of Management Journal , 35 : 9 - 37 . Naffziger , D . W . 1995 . Entrepreneurship : A person based theory approach . In J . A . Katz & R . H . Brockhaus , Sr . ( Eds . ) , Advances in entrepreneurship , firm emergence , and growth , volume 2 : 21 - 50 . Greenwich , CN : JAI Press . Naffziger , D . W . , Hornsby , J . S . , & Kuratko , D . F . 1994 . A proposed research model of entrepreneurship . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 18 : 29 - 42 . Pfeffer , J . , & Salancik , G . R . 1978 . The external control of organizations . New York : Harper and Row . Porter , M . E . 1980 . Competitive strategy . New York : Free Press . Sandberg , W . R . 1986 . New venture performance : The role of strategy and industry structure . Lexington , MA : D . C . Heath . Sandberg , W . R . & Hofer , C . W . 1987 . Improving new venture performance : The role of strategy , industry structure , and the entrepreneur . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 16 : 73 - 90 . 24 Scherer , F . M . , & Ross , D . 1990 . Industrial market structure and economic performance . Boston : Houghton - Mifflin . Schwenk , C . R . ( 1988 ) . The essence of strategic decision making . Lexington , MA : D . C . Heath & Company . Smilor , R . W . 1997 . Entrepreneurship : Reflections on a subversive activity . Journal of Business Venturing , 12 : 341 - 346 . 25 J . Robert Baum is the director of academic programs , Dingman Center for Entrepreneurship , Robert H . Smith School of Business , University of Maryland at College Park . He received his Ph . D . from the University of Maryland . His research interests include entrepreneurship , strategic decision making , and quantitative methods . Edwin A . Locke is Dean’s Professor of Leadership and Motivation at the Robert H . Smith School of Business , University of Maryland at College Park . He has published widely in professional journals and is the author or editor of several books about leadership , motivation , and management . Ken G . Smith is a professor of management and organization at the Robert H . Smith School of Business , University of Maryland at College Park . He received his Ph . D . from the University of Washington . His current research interestes include competitive dynamics , strategy , and adaptive efficiency .