Temporary increase in plasma membrane tension coordinates the activation of exocytosis and contraction during cell spreading Nils C . Gauthier a , b , Marc Antoine Fardin a , c , Pere Roca - Cusachs a , d , and Michael P . Sheetz a , b , 1 a Department of Biological Sciences , Fairchild Building , Columbia University , New York , NY 10027 ; b Mechanobiology Institute , National University of Singapore , Singapore T - Lab , Singapore 117411 ; c Laboratoire Matiere et Systemes Complexes , Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique , Unité Mixte de Recherche 7057 , Universite Paris Diderot , 10 rue Alice Domont et Leonie Duquet , 75205 Paris Cedex 13 , France ; and d Institute for Bioengineering of Catalonia and University of Barcelona , c / Baldiri Reixac 10 - 12 , 08028 Barcelona , Spain Edited by Alexander Mogilner , University of California , Davis , CA , and accepted by the Editorial Board June 30 , 2011 ( received for review April 12 , 2011 ) Cell migration and spreading involve the coordination of mem - brane trafficking , actomyosin contraction , and modifications to plasma membranetension and area . The biochemical or biophysical basis for this coordination is however unknown . In this study , we show that during cell spreading , lamellipodia protrusion flattens plasma membrane folds and blebs and , once the plasma membrane areais depleted , there is a temporaryincreasein membranetension by over twofold that is followed by activation of exocytosis and myosin contraction . Further , an artificial increase in plasma mem - brane tension stopped lamellipodia protrusion and activated an exocytotic burst . Subsequent decrease in tension restored spread - ing with activation of contraction . Conversely , blebbistatin inhibi - tion of actomyosin contraction resulted in an even greater increase in plasma membrane tension and exocytosis activation . This spatio - temporal synchronization indicates that membrane tension is the signal that coordinates membrane trafficking , actomyosin contrac - tion , and plasma membrane area change . We suggest that cells use plasma membrane tension as a global physical parameter to control cell motility . I n several animal cell types ( 1 – 4 ) , and even in plants ( 5 ) , mod - ifications in plasma membrane ( PM ) tension induced by osmo - larity change can control PM area . Regulation of PM area is linked to membrane trafficking , with endocytosis and exocytosis , respec - tively , decreasing or increasing the PM area . Moreover , mem - brane trafficking appears to be a major factor in cell migration ( 6 ) . Membrane tension also controls the dynamics of important functions ( 3 , 4 ) , such as , endocytosis , membrane edge extension , and membrane resealing ( 7 , 8 ) . Recently , modeling of cell migra - tion has confirmed that membrane tension provides the feedback control that fits best with the observed motile behavior ( 9 , 10 ) . During fibroblast spreading , there is a dramatic increase in PM area of 50 % through the activation of exocytosis of a recycling compartment ( 11 ) . Because spreading also correlates with a decrease in apparent PM tension , the cause of this exocytosis is unclear ( 11 ) . To understand this phenomenon , it is particularly useful to study isotropic fibroblast spreading , which is a rapid type of spreading with abrupt transitions from one motile phase to another ( 12 – 14 ) . The early phase of spreading ( P1 ) involves the rapid extension of lamellipodia circumferentially with only weak contractions and a very homogenous edge velocity ( 13 , 15 ) . When the spreading cells reach about half of their final spread area , there is a transition to a contractile phase of spreading ( P2 ) in which local cycles of protrusion – contraction activate the forma - tion of early adhesions ( 13 – 15 ) . Experimentally , this transition can be easily and primarily defined by decreases in edge velocity , associated with the pro - gressive appearance of a more heterogeneous edge behavior ( i . e . , protruding and contracting regions alternate along the cell circumference ) ( 13 – 15 ) . Gradual reduction in the edge velocity causes a progressive decrease in spread area growth rate until the cell reaches its final spread area . The robust nature of this transition enables us to link changes in exocytosis with changes in the motility phase . Results and Discussion During the initial phase of spreading , P1 , we observed a very low level of exocytosis using total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy ( TIR - FM ) of cells labeled with a fluorescent protein localized in the Golgi apparatus ( Fig . 1 A – E and Movie S1 ) or loaded before spreading with the membrane dye FM1 - 43 ( 11 ) ( Fig . 1 F – H and Movie S2 ) . However , at the beginning of the con - tractile phase , P2 , there was a burst in exocytosis of both labels ( Fig . 1 D , E , and H , and Movies S1 and S2 ) . The onset of the contractile phase was characterized by a clear decrease in the edge velocity ( change in color on the velocity map in Fig . 1 C and G ) , and more edge heterogeneity with local cycles of protru - sion – retraction and some ruffling ( Fig . 1 F , and brightfield record - ing in Movie S2 ) . These results indicated that increases in exocytosis through constitutive secretion ( Golgi ) or the recycling pathway ( FM1 - 43 ) were remarkably linked to the slowing of edge extension and activation of contraction at the start of P2 . These findings raised two questions : What was the source of membrane that enabled round cells to spread during P1 , and what mechan - ism activated both exocytosis and contraction simultaneously ? To determine how the PM was distributed during P1 , we labeled the PM with FM1 - 43 just before spreading and maintained the dye in the medium during spreading . Thus , when unlabeled vesicles from any internal compartment fused with the PM , they were im - mediately labeled with FM1 - 43 and the overall cell fluorescence increased ( 11 ) . Throughout P1 , cell fluorescence was constant , in - dicating that no exocytosis occurred ( Fig . 2 A – C and Movie S3 ) . However , there was a sharp increase in total fluorescence at the beginning of P2 , indicating that exocytosis was activated when cells started to contract ( Fig . 2 C and Fig . S1 ) . These results were in agreement with Golgi exocytosis and dye release studies ( Fig . 1 ) , which raised the following question : What was the source of the membrane that enabled P1 spreading without membrane addition through exocytosis ? Careful observation of early P1 revealed that cells generally ( 85 % , n ¼ 31 cells from 12 independent experi - ments ) had one or more very bright fluorescent regions ( Fig . 2 A , red dashed circle , and other cells analyzed in Figs . S1 and S2 , and Movies S3 and S4 ) . The fluorescence in the bright regions de - Author contributions : N . C . G . and M . P . S . designed research ; N . C . G . performed research ; M . A . F . contributed new reagents / analytic tools ; N . C . G . and P . R . - C . analyzed data ; and N . C . G . and M . P . S . wrote the paper . The authors declare no conflict of interest . This article is a PNAS Direct Submission . A . M . is a guest editor invited by the Editorial Board . See Commentary on page 14379 . 1 To whom correspondence should be addressed . E - mail : ms2001 @ columbia . edu . This article contains supporting information online at www . pnas . org / lookup / suppl / doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1105845108 / - / DCSupplemental . www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1105845108 PNAS ∣ August 30 , 2011 ∣ vol . 108 ∣ no . 35 ∣ 14467 – 14472 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y S EE C O MM E N T A RY creased over time until the cell reached P2 ( Fig . 2 D and Figs . S1 and S2 ) . Because there was no exocytosis , there appeared to be a preexisting PM “ buffer ” that unfolded during P1 to enable lamel - lipodial protrusion and cell flattening . When the fluorescence in the bright regions and the rest of cell was quantified over time , a loss in fluorescence of the PM buffer was equaled by the gain in fluorescence of the rest of the cell , confirming that the membrane area of the buffer provided the membrane needed for lamellipo - dial protrusion ( Fig . 2 E and Fig . S2 ) . In other cases , we observed bleb retraction before the P1 – P2 transition ( Movie S2 ) that may have provided additional membrane . To clearly identify which membrane compartment formed the buffer , we used time - lapse 3D confocal microscopy of FM1 - 43 tagged plasma membrane to determine the distribution of membrane in a spreading cell over time ( Fig . 2 F and Movie S5 ) . Strikingly , we confirmed that during P1 , blebs and membrane folds dissipated . When all available mem - brane folds appeared depleted , lamellipodia extension slowed down , in association with the appearance of membrane ruffles , C B A D E F G H Fig . 1 . Exocytosis and contraction activations are synchronized during spreading . ( A ) One example ofatypicalfibroblastcellanalyzedforitsexocyticbe - havior ( TIR - FM ) duringspreading . ( seealsoMovieS1 ) ( Scalebar : 10 μ m . ) ( B ) Exampleofsingle Golgi vesicle exocytosis analyzed by TIR - FM . ( C ) Motility map of the cell . The cell perimeter is plotted as a function of time and the color range shows the local protru - sive or retractile behavior of the edge . The map clearly shows the transition between the fast non - contractile spreading P1 ( first 2 – 3 min ) and the con - tractile spreading P2 ( dashed line ) . ( D ) Spread area andexocyticevents perminuteplottedasafunction oftime . ( E ) Sameresultsbutthenumbers ofexocytic eventsperminuteareplottedasafunctionofspreadareatooutlinethesharptransitionbetweenP1and P2 . The number of exocytic events was fewer than one per minute before phase transition but in - creased to 13 (cid:1) 3 . 2 events per minute after 10 min of spreading ( n ¼ 4 cells ) . ( F ) Brightfield images of the cell analyzed in G and H ( see also Movie S2 ) . Thearrowshowsthelossofedgecohesionwhencell enters P2 . ( Scale bar : 5 μ m . ) ( G ) Motility map of the cell . ( H ) Analysis of the fluorescence intensity of the cellsintheTIR - FMfieldduringspreading ( FM1 - 43se - cretionbyexocytosis ) plottedasafunctionofspread area . Thisexperimentwasreproducedtwotimesand the three cells presenting the same type of motility presented the same exocytic behavior . A B C D F E Fig . 2 . Plasma membrane area depletion precedes exocytosis and contraction activation . ( A ) Time se - quenceofarepresentativecellduringspreadingana - lyzed with DIC ( Upper ) and FM1 - 43 epifluorescence ( Lower ) . Thedashedboxoutlinesthemembranebuf - ferregiondepictedin D . Thedashedcircle represents the membrane buffer region analyzed in E . The images are extracted from Movie S3 . ( Scale bar : 10 μ m . ) ( B ) Motility map of the cell depicted in A . The dashed line represents the transition between P1 and P2 . ( C ) FM1 - 43 fluorescence intensity repre - senting membrane exocytosis at each time point ( 10 s ) is plotted versus the spread area to outline the sharp transition between P1 and P2 . All the cells with a clear P1 – P2 transition also had a clear and sharpexocytosisactivation ( n ¼ 31 cellsfrom12inde - pendent experiments ) . ( D ) Time sequence ( 10 s ) of the dashed box d showing the membrane buffer de - pletion during P1 . ( E ) Fluorescence intensity analysis of the different parts of the cell depicted in A show - ing that the apparent constant membrane area ob - served during P1 ( whole cell fluorescence , black ) is due to the unfolding of a membrane buffer ( buffer region , red ) that provides excess membrane area to therestofthecell ( wholecell – buffer , blue ) . Notethat the fluorescence intensity lost in the buffer region ( − 0 . 52 a : u : ) is similar to the gain in the rest of the cell ( þ 0 . 54 a : u : ) . ( F ) Time - lapse 3D reconstruction of the PM during spreading using FM1 - 43 ( see also Movie S5 ) . Arrowhead points to the membrane folds and white arrows to the blebs . Folds and blebs disap - pear before the cell enters P2 phase , where contrac - tionsigns ( ruffling ) appearattheedge ( blue arrows ) . 14468 ∣ www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1105845108 Gauthier et al . signs of the beginning of the contractile phase of spreading ( 14 , 16 ) . Thus , we found that folds and blebs are the source of PM area that enables rapid lamellipodia protrusion in P1 . When spreading cells arrived at the limit of the PM area , there was activation of exocytosis to provide extra membrane area for further spreading ( 11 ) and myosin contraction to promote early adhesion site forma - tion ( 14 , 16 ) . Interestingly , the membrane reservoir in P1 appears to be different than caveolea , which are small plasma membrane invaginations at the surface of the cells , recently described to dis - assemble under membrane mechanical stress ( 17 ) . During spread - ing , two types of buffer may participate , folds and blebs during P1 , and , maybe , caveolin disassembly during P2 . Indeed we previously observed that a glycosylphosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) - anchored protein recycling pathway caused the increase in membrane area during spreading , and caveolae have been shown to contain GPI - anchored proteins . However , it seems unlikely that the total mem - brane area increases during spreading ( about 50 % increase in area between nonspread and fully spread cells ) is primarily provided by caveolea . Indeed caveolea are very small structures , about 100 nm in diameter , and not normally present in the large numbers needed to account for the increase in area . What signaled to the cell that all PM area was depleted ? One possibility was that cells were activated by a mechanical signal , such as a transient increase in apparent PM tension due to the sudden depletion of the membrane folds . Changes in plasma membrane tension were monitored through membrane tethers that were pulled either by a glass pipette or an optically trapped bead . Both approaches led to similar results . With the pipette system , we frequently observed a narrowing of the tether at the beginning of P2 , sometimes associated with pearling ( Fig . 3 A , Fig . S3 , and Movies S6 , S7 , and S8 ) . As previously described ( 14 , 16 ) , the be - ginning of the contractile phase was clearly identified in this experi - ment by the appearance of waves , or periodic contractions , at the leading edge ( 14 , 16 ) , moving backward toward the cell center ( Fig . 3 C and Movie S6 ) . The pearling was followed by tether break - age and immediate retraction into the cell edge ( Fig . 3 B , Fig . S4 , and Movie S8 ) . It is well known that increased membrane tension will lead to the thinning and , ultimately , to the breakage of a tether ( 18 – 20 ) , but the pipette system does not allow direct force mea - surement . To directly estimate the membrane tension through the measurement of tether force , we used optical tweezers . Tether force was constant during P1 ( Fig . 3 D and E , step I and Movie S9 ) with an average value of 13 pN ( (cid:1) 3 pN SD , n ¼ 3 ) . When the edge started to slow down and the first sign of contraction appeared ( waves or ruffling ) , marking the beginning of P2 , we observed a progressive increase in tether force ( Fig . 3 E , step II ) . The tether force reached a peak 65 % higher than the initial force ( 22 pN (cid:1) 1 SD , n ¼ 3 ) . Because membrane tension is proportional to the square of the tether force ( 3 ) , there was about a 2 . 5 - fold increase in membrane tension . After the peak ( Fig . 3 E , step II ) , tether force dropped when the edge slightly retracted due to contraction ( Fig . 3 E , step III ) , and stabilized ( Fig . 3 E , step IV ) . This stabiliza - tion correlated with the edge starting to spread again , ( Fig . 3 E , step IV ) , a situation similar to step I , but at a lower level of membrane tension . Rapidly , and before releasing the trap , a new slowdown of the edge was observed ( Fig . 3 E , step V ) associated with a new in - crease in membrane tension . Both methods showed an increase in membrane tension at the P1 – P2 transition as the edge was slowing down . Further spreading depended upon the subsequent reduction in tension . Interestingly , the membrane tension seems to be modu - lated cyclically . We already reported that membrane tension is globally decreasing during spreading ( 14 , 16 ) . Combined with these observations , we propose that the decrease in membrane tension is probably occurring through repetitive cycles of stabilization - increase - decrease ( steps I - II - III ) , with each new stabilization oc - curring at lower membrane tension . The edge of the cell , at the transition , is also behaving cyclically with periodic contractions A C D E B Fig . 3 . The PM tension increases as the cell starts to contract . ( A ) A re - presentative cell visualized by DIC microscopy . The tether is the thin tube of membrane between the pipette and the edge of the cell . The dashed line represents the portion of the edge analyzed by the kymograph in C . The image is extracted from Movie S6 . ( Scale bar : 10 μ m . ) ( B ) Time sequence showing tether breakage at the transition between P1 and P2 . ( C ) Kymograph of the edge outline in A showing the periodic contrac - tion which characterizes the beginning of P2 . The total time represents 612 s . ( D ) Cell morphology in P1 ( Left ) and P2 ( Right ) during laser tweezers experiment . The dashed line represents the portion of the edge analyzed by the kymograph in E . Dark arrowhead point to the tether , dark arrow to the trap bead . White arrowhead points to the wave of material moving backward observable in DIC and also observable in E at the back of the leading edge , sign of the contraction . The white arrows point to two ruf - fles , also a clear sign of contraction activation . ( E ) Composite figure of tether force ( graph ) and kymograph of the cell edge ( blue line ) at the P1 to P2 transition . The spike in force at the beginning represents the force needed to extract the tether from the edge . After stabilization ( step I ) , the tether force increased ( step II ) , decreased ( step III ) to stabilize again at a lower value than previously ( step I compared to step IV ) , and increased again when the edge started to slow down a second time ( step V ) . At this point , the bead was released from the trap to verify that the tether was still there . Gauthier et al . PNAS ∣ August 30 , 2011 ∣ vol . 108 ∣ no . 35 ∣ 14469 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y S EE C O MM E N T A RY ( 14 , 16 ) ( Fig . 3 C and E ) . If we estimate the time required for the tension to increase ( step II , 21 s (cid:1) 3 . 6 SD , n ¼ 3 ) , this duration is remarkably compatible with the duration of one cycle of periodic contraction that was previously reported to range between 18 and 30 s ( with an average of 24 s ) , with the edge protrusion accounting for about three - fourths of the cycle duration ( comparable to step II in Fig . 3 E ) and retraction occurring during the remaining one - fourth of the time ( 14 , 16 ) ( step III in Fig . 3 E ) . Thus , it is reason - able to think that each cycle of periodic contraction is correlated with cycles of membrane tension variations during the transition between P1 and P2 . An alternative hypothesis was that the change in membrane tension was the result ( and not the cause ) of the increased con - tractility . To test this hypothesis , we added the Myosin II inhibi - tor , blebbistatin . As previously described ( 14 , 16 ) , Myosin II inhibition altered P2 by decreasing the magnitude of the periodic contractions and overall cell contractility . However , we observed that neither the activation of exocytosis nor the increase in PM tension was affected by Myosin II inhibition ( Fig . S4 ) . Inhibited cells spread as well as control cells in P1 . When the edge velocity decreased , exocytosis simultaneously increased ( Fig . S4 A and B ) . P2 was also characterized in this case by lateral propagation of protrusive waves without the clear cycle of protrusion – contrac - tion ( Fig . S4 A compared with Fig . 2 B ) . Periodic contractions were less defined ( Fig . S4 E ) , but tether breakage still occurred at the beginning of P2 ( Fig . S4 D and Movies S10 and S11 ) . Remarkably , blebbistatin inhibited the pulling of new tethers with the pipette later in P2 ( Movie S12 ) , indicating that under myosin inhibition , membrane tension was kept high well into P2 . With the optical trapped beads , we observed that tether force increased dramati - cally at the P1 – P2 transition in blebbistatin treated cells ( Movie S13 ) . Indeed , we were unable to accurately measure the tether force because , in over half of the cases , beads were pulled out of the trap at the transition ( n ¼ 12 , force of the trap was 70 pN ) . Moreover , tether force in P1 was also surprisingly high in blebbistatin treated cells ( 30 pN (cid:1) 10 SD , n ¼ 12 ) . Thus , the membrane tension at the transition increased over 10 - fold in cir - cular cells after myosin inhibition compared to control cells , and despite an already very high tension in P1 , membrane exocytosis was normally activated at the beginning of P2 . We reported previously that myosin - II - inhibited cells were spreading to a larger area ( 21 ) . A careful analysis of those results showed that myosin inhibition does not affect the beginning of spreading ( P1 ) . At the end of P1 , at around 1 ; 000 μ m 2 of spread area , myosin - II - inhibited cells started to spread significantly lar - ger and faster than control cells ( more than 30 % after 15 min of spreading ) . However , during that phase , even for myosin - inhib - ited cells , spreading speed was progressively reduced compared to P1 . We also reported previously that at a similar threshold value of 1 ; 000 μ m 2 of spread area , spreading cells started to in - crease the plasma membrane area by exocytosis ( 11 ) . In view of the current results , we propose now that , in the control case , the PM tension is alleviated in P2 by both exocytosis , increasing mem - brane area , and myosin contraction pulling actin filaments away from the edge . However , when myosin II is inhibited and actin filaments are no longer pulled away from the edge , there is an increased lamellipodia actin polymerization pressure against the plasma membrane , and , in consequence , an overspreading and an abnormal increase in membrane tension . If a rise in membrane tension was the activation event for exocytosis and contraction , then increasing tension by an alterna - tive method such as hypotonic shock might activate the P1 to P2 transition . Hypotonic shock caused a dramatic , but reversible increase in PM tension ( 1 – 4 ) . After exposure of cells to a 50 % decrease in tonicity , we observed that cells immediately stopped lamellipodia extension ( Fig . 4 A and B and Movie S14 ) . In contrast , control cells treated with an isotonic shock continued to spread ( Fig . S5 ) . In addition , hypotonically treated cells immediately activated exocytosis , strongly suggesting that the in - crease in membrane tension activated exocytosis ( Fig . 4 C ) . After isotonic media was restored , P2 began immediately and cell lamellipodia spread with clear cycles of protrusion – contraction , indicating myosin activation ( Fig . 4 A ) . Thus , an early increase in membrane tension by hypotonic shock caused a premature P1 to P2 transition , indicating that a rise in membrane tension was necessary and sufficient to induce the change in motility mode . A B C Fig . 4 . Hypotonically induced increase and subsequent decrease in mem - brane tension induces P1 – P2 transition with activation of exocytosis and contraction . ( A ) Kymograph analysis of a DIC movie for a representative cell in P1 that is exposed to hypotonic medium for30 s ( ringer 0 . 5 × , lamellipodia protrusion stops ) and subsequently restored to isotonic ringer ( spreading resumes with a contractile lamellipodia presenting cycles of protrusion – contraction ) . The cell analyzed is presented in the bottom left corner of Movie S14 with three other cells with similar behavior . ( B ) Plot of thecell area versus time showing the strong effect of the temporary increase in plasma membrane tension on the overall spread area for the cell depicted in A . When PM tension increases ( arrowhead ) the cell stops spreading ; spreading is resumed during the isotonic recovery phase ( arrow ) . ( C ) The increase in membrane tension activates the exocytosis ( lower graph , blue arrow ) . FM1 - 43 fluorescence is plotted as a function of time for a representative con - trol cell ( Upper ) and for a cell exposed to hypotonic media ( Lower ) . The PM areaadditioninducedbyhypotonicitywas 37 (cid:1) 7 % oftheoriginalPMareain 15 s ( SEM , n ¼ 6 cells ) . 14470 ∣ www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1105845108 Gauthier et al . If actin polymerization in the lamellipodia was limited by the PM area because of an increase in membrane tension , actin poly - merization activity should behave accordingly during spreading . In the initial P1 , where there was excess membrane area and low myosin contraction , no clear reward flow of actin was observable by TIR - FM in control - or blebbistation - treated cells ( Fig . 5 A and B , and Movies S15 and S16 ) , similar to previous reports with GFP - alpha - actinin ( 14 , 16 ) . When control cells started P2 , the lamellipodia actin buckled and retracted cyclically from the edge ( Fig . 5 A , arrows ) as previously described during periodic contrac - tions ( 14 , 16 ) . Myosin II was primarily responsible for the short edge retraction occurring during each cycle of periodic contrac - tion , and was also thought to be the main cause of the buckling ( 16 ) . When myosin - inhibited cells entered P2 , they spread to a larger area and had greatly decreased periodic contractions ( Fig . 5 B and Movie S16 ) as previously observed ( 14 , 16 , 21 ) , but there was clear actin buckling at the leading edge ( Fig . 5 B and Movie S16 ) . If increased membrane tension was causing a higher local density of polymerized actin in the lamellipodia , leading to buckling , then alternative methods of increasing ten - sion such as hypotonic shock should have a similar effect . As noted previously ( Fig . 4 ) , an artificial increase in membrane ten - sion inhibited lamellipodia extension but we also observed an in - crease in actin density at the cell edge ( Fig . 5 C and Movie S17 ) . When tension was restored , lamellipodia actin polymerization re - sumed ( Fig . 5 C ) . Thus , membrane tension can directly exert a feedback control on the actin polymerization , the driving force for lamellipodia extension . Membrane tension provides a physical means of coordinating the activation of the multiple cellular activities that define P2 and we suggest that a transient increase in membrane tension at the P1 to P2 transition provides the signal for the transition . It is possible to estimate if the membrane tension changes could cause the changes in extension rates . The relationship between membrane tension and the tether force has been de - scribed as T ¼ F 2 ∕ ð 8 π 2 B Þ , where F is the tether force and B and T are the effective bending stiffness and effective membrane ten - sion , respectively ( 18 , 19 , 22 ) . The adjective “ effective ” takes into account the addition of a cytoskeletal adhesion component ( 3 ) . At the P1 – P2 transition , cells reduce their overall lamellipodial protrusion rate by one - half from approximately 70 to 35 nm ∕ s ( 13 , 15 ) . Previous studies showed that the amount of pressure P applied from atomic force microscopy tips needed to reduce lamellipodial protrusions by half on a length scale of approxi - mately 1 μ m was of the order of 1 nN ∕ μ m 2 ( 23 ) . If we consider that the membrane is mainly curved along the lamellipodium height , with characteristic radius of curvature r of approximately 100 nm , we can calculate the increase in membrane tension T caused by this applied pressure using Laplace ’ s law as T ¼ Pr ¼ 10 − 4 N ∕ m . Therefore , if the transition from P1 to P2 is indeed caused by the stalling of actin polymerization due to the depletion of membrane reservoirs , it should be accompanied by an increase in membrane tension of this magnitude . Given that B is around 3 × 10 − 19 Nm ( 3 ) and that the measured tether force during P1 is 13 pN , an increase in tension of 10 − 4 N ∕ m gives a tether force increase of 37 pN , in the same order of magnitude as the observed change in experiments . These estimates , coupled with our observations , strongly suggest that actin polymerization forces can cause the increase in tension observed . In myosin - II - inhibited cells , the tension in P1 is higher than in control cells . However , cells can still spread efficiently and re - spond to the increase in membrane tension . One explanation for this phenomenon is that the polymerization of the lamellipodial actin in P1 is a process that can adjust the number of polymeriz - ing filaments to counteract the force exerted by the membrane tension . Once a threshold is reached to push the membrane for - ward , lamellipodia extension occurs at a constant pace during P1 . For any cells , myosin - inhibited or not , the critical point of entry into P1 is the activation of the actin polymerization process . Once activated , the cell is at a steady state during P1 , as long as plasma membrane area from folds is available . At the transition into P2 , the increase in membrane load against actin polymerization sim - ply destabilizes the preexisting steady state in the system and ac - tivates the transition to a new phase of behavior , P2 , as observed . C P1 P2 P1 “P2” P1 P2 P1 “P2” Control Blebbistatin A B 60 s 5 µ m 60 s 5 µ m Ringer0 . 5X Ringer1X Ringer1X Ringer0 . 5X Ringer1X Ringer1X 60 s 5 µ m Fig . 5 . Actin dynamics correlated with spreading behavior . ( A ) Characteristic kymographanalysisofGFP - actininTIR - FM ( upperpicture , seealsoMovieS16 ) . Arrows point to the periodic contractions easily identified by the actin buck - lingatthebeginningofP2 . Totaltimeis350s . Lowerpicturespresenttheactin morphologyattheleadingedgeinP1andP2 . Arrowpointsagaintothebuck - ling . ( B ) Same analysis for a characteristic blebbistatin treated cell ( see also Movie S16 ) . ( C ) Same analysis asin A and B butforacell withan hypotonically induced increase and subsequent decrease in membrane tension ( see also Movie S17 ) . Arrow points to the actin polymerization pushing forward the leading edge after isotonicity restoration . Lower pictures present the typical actin morphology at the leading edge during the experiment . Gauthier et al . PNAS ∣ August 30 , 2011 ∣ vol . 108 ∣ no . 35 ∣ 14471 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y S EE C O MM E N T A RY One surprising aspect of our results is that membrane tension in myosin - inhibited cells is higher in P1 than control cells . However , membrane exocytosis stills occurs normally at the transition into P2 , when the tension spikes . How is the tension then linked to exo - cytosis activation in that case ? Because the major component of the membrane tension is the adhesion between the membrane and the cytoskeleton , we suggest that the absence of contractile force is linked to an increase in membrane - cytoskeleton adhesion . An alternative view is that there is an alteration in membrane traffick - ing , because exocytosis during spreading involves two pathways : a recycling pathway containing GPI - anchored proteins , responsible for the increase in membrane area , and a constitutive secretion from the Golgi apparatus ( 11 ) . The GPI recycling pathway could be very sensitive to membrane tension increase and even be di - rectly exocytosed because of membrane tension variations ( 24 ) . Golgi secretion , however , could be activated through other signals . The global actin remodeling occurring at the transition and obser - vable in TIR - FM , even under myosin inhibition , could be involved ( Movies S15 and S16 ) . Indeed , actin dynamics seems to be inte - grally linked to Golgi dynamics ( 25 ) . Moreover , in myosin - inhib - ited cells , entry into P2 seems to occur at a larger spread area than in control cells . We currently understand relatively little about the proteins involved in membrane - cytoskeleton adhesion and how their activation is linked to myosin activity and membrane traffic . Conclusion In this study , we find that membrane tension correlates with the activation of exocytosis and myosin contraction . We think that our results , inthisrespect , bringthe physicalproperties ofthemem - brane to the heart of understanding coordination in cell motility . Motile functions rely on local biochemical reactions between mo - lecules such as actin filament assembly , but those functions need to be coordinated at the whole cell level in complex behaviors like cell migration . Physical forces provide a robust and simple way to coor - dinate biochemical processes to produce integrated cell functions . Materials and Methods Cell Culture Transfection and Reagents . Immortalized mouse embryonic fibro - blasts were cultured and transfected with YFP - Golgi ( Clontech ) , as previously described ( 11 ) . Tether Pulling with Micropipette . Borosilicate glass pipettes ( o . d . 1 . 0 mm ; i . d . , 0 . 58 mm ; 10 - cm length ; Sutter Instrument ) were pulled to obtain an outside diameter below 1 μ m . After acid wash ( nitric acid 20 % ) , the pipette tip was coated with concanavalin A ( 1 mg ∕ mL , in PBS ) for 24 h . Pipettes were mounted on a micromanipulator and observed with differential interference contrast ( DIC ) microscopy . The tethers were pulled by moving the stage . Tether Pulling with Optical Trap . As described previously ( 11 ) , the cells were viewed by a video - enhanced DIC microscope ( Carl Zeiss MicroImaging ) equippedwithlaseropticaltweezers . Carboxylated , 1 - μ m - diameterlatexbeads ( Polysciences ) werecoatedwithconcanavalinAbyuseofcarbodiimidelinkage . Beads were attached to the cell membrane and pulled away from the cell surface to form a membrane tether . The tether force was calculated from the displacement of the bead from the center of the laser tweezers during tetherformationandthecalibrationofthetrap . Membranetensionwasrelated to the square of the tether force as deduced from the lipid bilayer systems . Spreading Assay . Cells were detached with trypsin / EDTA . Trypsin was then in - activated with soybean trypsin inhibitor ( 1 mg ∕ mL in DMEM ) . The cells were then suspended in Ringer solution [ 150 mM NaCl , 5 mM KCl , 1 mM CaCl 2 , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 20 mM Hepes , and 2 g ∕ L glucose ( pH 7 . 4 ) ] and incubated for at least 30 min before plating on coated surfaces . Ringer 0 . 5 × contains 1 mM CaCl 2 and MgCl 2 . Cover glasses were acid - washed , treated with hex - amethyldisilazane , and coated with fibronectin ( 10 μ g ∕ mL , 2 h in PBS at 37°C , Roche Diagnostics GmbH ) . FM1 - 43 Before Spreading and FM1 - 43 During Spreading Assays . These assays were used exactly as we previously described ( 11 ) . Confocal Microscopy . Cells were analyzed using a PerkinElmer Spinning Disk coupled toan OlympusIX81 microscope using a100 × oilobjective ( N . A . 1 . 40 ) . The cells where analyzed in thesame condition as previously reported for the FM1 - 43 during spreading assay . Image Analysis and Statistics . The free - access ImageJ software was used . The motility map was drawn from a manual mask extracted from the DIC with an ImageJ plug - in developed by Marc Antoine Fardin and inspired from what was previously developed in our lab ( 13 ) . The plug - in is freely available upon request . The fluorescence level was quantified as follows : An area containing one cell was selected from the 16 bit epifluorescence or 8 bit TIR - FM ( Fig . 1 ) recording . The intensity of an identical area in the same field but without cells was subtracted from that value to obtain only the fluorescence intensity of the cell . The same protocol was followed for each time point . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . We thank all the members of the Sheetz lab for their support and help , particularly Nicolas Biais , Simon Moore , Olivier Rossier , and Adam Walpert . We also thank Pascal Hersen , Steven Wolf , and Baixue Zheng for fruitful discussions ( Mechanobiology Institute , National University of Singapore , Singapore ) . P . R . - C . was supported by a Marie Curie International Outgoing Fellowship within the Seventh European Community Framework Programme . This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grant GM064561 ( to M . P . S . ) and the Mechanobiology Institute , National University of Singapore , Singapore . 1 . ApodacaG ( 2002 ) Modulationofmembranetrafficbymechanicalstimuli . AmJPhysiol Renal Physiol 282 : F179 – 190 . 2 . Morris CE , Homann U ( 2001 ) Cell surface area regulation and membrane tension . J Membr Biol 179 : 79 – 102 . 3 . Sheetz MP ( 2001 ) Cell control by membrane - cytoskeleton adhesion . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2 : 392 – 396 . 4 . Sheetz MP , Sable JE , Dobereiner HG ( 2006 ) Continuous membrane - cytoskeleton adhesion requires continuous accommodation to lipid and cytoskeleton dynamics . Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 35 : 417 – 434 . 5 . Kell A , Glaser RW ( 1993 ) On the mechanical and dynamic properties of plant cell membranes : Their role in growth , direct gene transfer and protoplast fusion . J Theor Biol 160 : 41 – 62 . 6 . Jones MC , Caswell PT , Norman JC ( 2006 ) Endocytic recycling pathways : Emerging regulators of cell migration . Curr Opin Cell Biol 18 : 549 – 557 . 7 . Raucher D , Sheetz MP ( 2000 ) Cell spreading and lamellipodial extension rate is regu - lated by membrane tension . J Cell Biol 148 : 127 – 136 . 8 . Togo T , Krasieva TB , Steinhardt RA ( 2000 ) A decrease in membrane tension precedes successful cell - membrane repair . Mol Biol Cell 11 : 4339 – 4346 . 9 . Neves SR , et al . ( 2008 ) Cell shape and negative links in regulatory motifs together control spatial information flow in signaling networks . Cell 133 : 666 – 680 . 10 . Keren K , et al . ( 2008 ) Mechanism of shape determination in motile cells . Nature 453 : 475 – 480 . 11 . Gauthier NC , Rossier OM , Mathur A , Hone JC , Sheetz MP ( 2009 ) Plasma membrane areaincreaseswithspreadareabyexocytosisofaGPIanchoredproteincompartment . Mol Biol Cell 20 : 3261 – 3272 . 12 . Dobereiner HG , Dubin - Thaler BJ , Giannone G , Sheetz MP ( 2005 ) Force sensing and generationincellphases : Analysesofcomplexfunctions . JApplPhysiol 98 : 1542 – 1546 . 13 . Dubin - Thaler BJ , Giannone G , Dobereiner HG , Sheetz MP ( 2004 ) Nanometer analysis of cell spreading on matrix - coated surfaces reveals two distinct cell states and STEPs . Biophys J 86 : 1794 – 1806 . 14 . Giannone G , et al . ( 2004 ) Periodic lamellipodial contractions correlate with rearward actin waves . Cell 116 : 431 – 443 . 15 . Dubin - ThalerBJ , et al . ( 2008 ) Quantificationof cell edge velocities and traction forces reveals distinct motility modules during cell spreading . PLoS ONE 3 : e3735 . 16 . Giannone G , et al . ( 2007 ) Lamellipodial actin mechanically links myosin activity with adhesion - site formation . Cell 128 : 561 – 575 . 17 . SinhaB , et al . ( 2011 ) Cells respondto mechanical stress by rapiddisassemblyof caveo - lae . Cell 144 : 402 – 413 . 18 . Hochmuth FM , Shao JY , Dai J , Sheetz MP ( 1996 ) Deformation and flow of membrane into tethers extracted from neuronal growth cones . Biophys J 70 : 358 – 369 . 19 . Hochmuth RM , Evans EA ( 1982 ) Extensional flow of erythrocyte membrane from cell body to elastic tether . I . Analysis . Biophys J 39 : 71 – 81 . 20 . HochmuthRM , WilesHC , EvansEA , McCownJT ( 1982 ) Extensionalflowoferythrocyte membrane from cell body to elastic tether . II . Experiment . Biophys J 39 : 83 – 89 . 21 . Cai Y , et al . Cytoskeletal coherence requires myosin - IIA contractility . J Cell Sci 123 : 413 – 423 . 22 . Hochmuth RM ( 1982 ) Solid and liquid behavior of red cell membrane . Annu Rev Biophys Bioeng 11 : 43 – 55 . 23 . Prass M , Jacobson K , Mogilner A , Radmacher M ( 2006 ) Direct measurement of the lamellipodial protrusive force in a migrating cell . J Cell Biol 174 : 767 – 772 . 24 . StaykovaM , HolmesDP , ReadC , StoneHA ( 2011 ) Mechanicsofsurfacearearegulation in cells examined with confined lipid membranes . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108 : 9084 – 9088 . 25 . ZilbermanY , etal . ( 2011 ) InvolvementoftheRho - mDia1pathwayintheregulationof Golgi complex architecture and dynamics . Mol Biol Cell , 10 . 1091 / mbc . E11 - 01 - 0007 . 14472 ∣ www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1105845108 Gauthier et al .