( Re ) defining Land Change Science through Synthetic Research Practices Alyson L . Young , Wayne . G . Lutters Department of Information Systems UMBC , Baltimore , MD , USA alyson1 @ umbc . edu , lutters @ umbc . edu ABSTRACT This paper investigates the co - evolution of scientific practice and supporting technologies for the interdisciplinary research community of Land Change Science . Through three and a half years of iterative fieldwork and system design , we have developed a deep understanding of their synthetic research practices , specifically regarding meta - studies . Here we detail the challenges researchers face conducting meta - studies and how this collective effort advances the entire scholarly community . We illustrate how our understanding of this synthetic research practice informs the design and refinement of cyberinfrastructure to better support their work . Author Keywords Cyberinfrastructure , e - Science , Land Change Science , Research Synthesis , Sociotechnical Systems ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . 3 [ Group and Organization Interfaces ] : Computer - supported cooperative work . INTRODUCTION Computational innovation is rapidly transforming our processes of scientific inquiry . New tools allow us to ask new questions about the world around us . While this has long been the case , the past decade has seen the pace quicken and the impact deepen as entire new scientific subfields have emerged . For example , in genomics , advances in DNA amplification techniques and new sequencing technologies have made it possible for researchers to study entire communities of microorganisms , giving rise to the field of metagenomics [ 3 ] . Simultaneously , transformation in the sciences drives innovation in information and communication technology . This has resulted in a number of cyberinfrastructure projects designed to support novel practices and the communities that form around them [ 2 , 18 , 26 , 27 ] . Increasingly , researchers are confronted with intellectual and scientific challenges at such scales and complexity that single disciplinary perspectives are no longer adequate , thus demanding the expertise of multi - disciplinary teams [ 22 ] . Climate change is a classic example of this . Scientific cyberinfrastructure seeks to support interdisciplinary research by providing tools for data and resource sharing , knowledge transfer , and collaboration across geographical , institutional , and organizational boundaries [ 2 , 28 ] . Understanding this situated interplay in sociotechnical systems has long been central to the CSCW research agenda . Examining extreme cases of scientific transformation can be quite instructive . Young communities , still in the active process of institutionalization , often foreground phenomena that can be lost in more mature disciplines , such as negotiations around community identity , scientific methods , and knowledge production . We are studying an emergent scientific interdiscipline enabled by computational advances . While our story is not unlike that of bioinformatics [ 21 , 22 ] , with advances in remote sensing , modeling , and synthesis enabling new questions and new types of analyses , our community is still in a state of flux , working to define itself , and solidify the processes that give it meaning . Although it has established itself enough to have the norms and structures of a maturing transdiscipline ( i . e . , an organizing scientific body , core conferences , and journals ) , they continue to debate their identity . These tensions are brought to the fore and made visible , affording us a unique opportunity to observe their self - reflection and self - definition . Land Change Science Understanding the full complexity of Earth systems is one of the most challenging contemporary scientific problems . Historically , this has been examined in many different ways by many different disciplines , such as earth sciences ( e . g . , hydrology , geophysics , and remote sensing ) , biological sciences ( e . g . , plant science , soil science , and agricultural science ) , social sciences ( e . g . , geography , sociology , and anthropology ) , environmental sciences ( e . g . , ecology , environmental engineering , and environmental conservation ) and economics ( e . g . , public policy , econometrics , and cultural economics ) [ 23 , 34 ] . In the 1990s a group of natural and remote sensing scientists aligned with the International Geosphere Biosphere Programme ( IGBP ) came to the conclusion that in order to understand land - cover dynamics , a comprehensive understanding of land - use change was needed . This required engaging with social sciences to understand how people Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . CSCW 2015 , March 14 – 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada . Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 2922 - 4 / 15 / 03… $ 15 . 00 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2675133 . 2675183 Scientific Domains CSCW 2015 , March 14 - 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 431 make land use decisions . The IGBP subsequently approached the International Social Science Council ( ISSC ) to explore the possibility of creating a joint core research program . In 1996 , this IGBP - ISSC working group established the Land Use Cover Change ( LUCC ) project . In the United States , NASA responded by developing the LCLUC research program , taking elements from LUCC for use in its science plan [ 24 ] . These programs helped form the foundation for what would become Land Change Science ( LCS ) . The LCS community was forged by a shared worldview that the changing interactions among human systems , the terrestrial biosphere , atmosphere , and other Earth systems are best understood as mediated by human use of land [ 33 ] . Institutionally , much of the LCS community is respondent to the Global Land Project ( GLP ) . This multi - year coordination project was the result of a series of scoping meetings that began in 2001 , culminated with a Science Plan in 2005 , and the establishment of the GLP International Project Office in 2006 [ 38 ] . The GLP is commissioned by the ISSC and the International Council for Science ( ICSU ) and supported by both the IGBP and the International Human Dimensions Programme on Global Environmental Change ( IHDP ) [ 34 ] . In 2016 , the GLP will transition to Future Earth , a new 10 - year international research initiative aimed at transforming Earth systems science and human dimensions research . Traditionally , the referent disciplines generated knowledge through local case studies based on detailed field observations of land use change or regional studies that combine remote sensing observations with socio - economic and biogeophysical data . However , the influence of LUCC and the GLP drew attention to the need for more integrative assessments of the drivers and impacts of land change as part of global environmental change [ 34 ] . This led to the adoption of synthetic practices such as integrative remote sensing products ( e . g . , anthromes [ 10 ] ) and agent - based models . It is argued that only through these synthetic practices of comparative research and theory development can the LCS knowledge base become more systematic . Based on our field research we have identified these processes of research synthesis to be one of the most informative examples of the interplay of technology and scientific process for the LCS community . RESEARCH SYNTHESIS Across the entire scientific enterprise , the need for more systematic methods of data analysis and integration to answer larger , more complex questions has led to an increased interest in the use of research synthesis [ 13 , 14 ] . In most disciplines , this refers to the process of integrating research questions , methods , theories , and data across dissimilar scales of analysis , study systems , and levels of expertise in an effort to uncover consistencies and account for differences in similar - appearing studies [ 9 , 12 ] . The objective is to increase the generality and applicability of the findings [ 16 ] . While research synthesis methods have been around since the 1970’s , with Glass’s 1976 article in education believed to be the first publication to introduce meta - analysis to a wider audience , their use stayed fairly consistent until 1990 [ 32 ] . At that time the use of synthesis methods across disciplines saw an exponential increase from 0 . 02 to approximately 1 . 4 percent in 2010 [ 32 ] . Research synthesis is used extensively in a number of scientific fields , including health sciences [ 5 , 6 , 7 , 32 ] and ecological sciences [ 12 , 14 , 15 ] . Within the health sciences meta - analysis in particular has had a significant impact on the transformation of research practices [ 32 ] . For example , in epidemiology synthesis is used as a way to make timely decisions about risk assessment and public health concerns [ 7 ] , and in pharmacology it has led to the discovery of new uses for existing compounds . In the ecological sciences , synthesis methods have been adopted in an effort to consolidate current knowledge into general patterns and principles that can be used to advance the field and inform policy decisions [ 15 ] . Data Sharing and Data Reuse Research synthesis relies on data being shared in a reusable format that is both accessible and understandable . Within CSCW the challenges of data reuse are well known . Lack of contextual information on how and where data are produced [ 11 ] leads to difficulties in data interpretation [ 4 ] and concerns about data quality [ 37 ] . Understanding how variables are constructed is a highly collaborative and time - consuming effort [ 29 ] . Often engagement with original study staff is the only way to obtain the contextual information needed to assess data relevance for reuse [ 20 ] . Standardization One of the ways heterogeneity , both in terms of disciplinary differences and data formats , is being addressed is through standardization . It is argued that in order to talk about data in the aggregate , we one must first classify it [ 8 ] . Standardization through classification thus facilitates interoperability [ 20 , 28 ] and comparability [ 8 ] . Standards have been proposed , designed , and deployed to better facilitate data sharing [ 18 ] and data reuse [ 11 ] among and across many scientific disciplines . For example , in ecology , the Long - Term Ecological Research ( LTER ) Network introduced the Ecological Metadata Language ( EML ) to standardize data collection and reporting across the network [ 18 ] . Although intended to preserve datasets for the long - term , the process of ascribing standardized metadata paradoxically resulted in a loss of contextual information that was needed for data reuse [ 17 ] . The move towards standardization is one of the reasons why synthesis has been successful in highly structured , mature fields such as biology . Standardized study procedures , data reporting , and metadata practices across subdisciplines makes data reuse and integration more tractable [ 5 ] . Disciplinary databases , such as the sequencing database Scientific Domains CSCW 2015 , March 14 - 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 432 GenBank , further simplify synthesis by providing standardized data in one centralized location . The same cannot be said for LCS . Logistical and technical challenges in locating and integrating large sets of cases from its vastly differing disciplines , and variations in research questions , scales of analysis , and theoretical models make research synthesis a particular challenge for LCS . METHODS AND APPROACH The data we present here are based on an ongoing multi - year ethnographically informed field study of synthetic processes in Land Change Science . This study informs a larger NSF - funded research project , GLOBE , which seeks to design cyberinfrastructure to support LCS meta - study practices [ 36 ] . The authors have been core team members from the project inception as designers , UX evaluators , and participant observers . At the time of this writing , we have been observing this research community for 42 months . We have facilitated a community - driven survey ; we have undertaken observations at international workshops and scientific meetings ; and we have conducted lab visits and semi - structured interviews . We have also completed a systematic document review of 21 LCS meta - studies . The survey was a community driven examination of the state and trajectory of LCS research . All questions were designed by community representatives to reflect their own collective interests and concerns . It was administered to the 650 attendees of the premier conference venue for LCS – the triennial Global Land Project Open Science Meeting ( OSM ) in Berlin Germany , in 2014 . This afforded us the rare opportunity to survey the majority of the international LCS population at a point of communal self - reflection . Through the survey we were able to obtain a baseline understanding of the community , including their common practices , tools , and perspectives . This helped us to situate our field findings within the larger population . The final survey sample consisted of 205 respondents , representing a 32 % response rate . The majority of web - based survey questions were open - ended . Our attendance at the OSM also afforded us the opportunity to meet and interact with conference participants , observe sessions , and test the beta - release of the GLOBE system with prospective users via tutorial sessions and a staffed help - desk . In contrast , our participation in the workshops was strictly observational . This provided unimpeded access to unprompted community reflection and discussion on the strengths , challenges , and opportunities of research synthesis in LCS . Four international workshops have been observed to date : 1 ) Australia ( November 2011 ) , which focused on improving scientific tools to support an integrated understanding of human dimensions of global change ; 2 ) The Netherlands ( May 2012 ) , which focused on synthesis methods in LCS ; 3 ) the United States ( June 2013 ) , which focused on the content of LCS meta - studies ; and 4 ) Germany ( March 2014 ) , which focused on the use of synthesis in land change modelling . The semi - structured interviews and lab visits have allowed us to further understand the reasons why LCS researchers have adopted research synthesis methods , and the techniques and processes they use for producing their meta - studies . Twelve in - depth interviews have been completed with individuals who have either finished a meta - study or who are in the process of conducting a meta - study . Interviewees were all academics and held the following positions : Associate Professor ( 2 ) , Assistant Professor ( 5 ) , Postdoctoral Researcher ( 4 ) , and recent PhD graduate ( 1 ) . The authors transcribed all data for iterative open - coding in Nvivo , generated and reviewed analytic memos of core themes , and visualized emergent categories in a flow diagram . We actively cross - compared survey findings with the field data . FINDINGS Research Synthesis in Land Change Science In the survey , we asked respondents if they had ever conducted a research synthesis of land use change : 51 % indicated that they had ; 40 % indicated they had not ; and , 8 % were unsure . We then asked them to indicate which types of research synthesis they had conducted , with categories adopted from [ 23 ] , prompting them to select all types that applied to their experience ( see Figure 1 ) . The most highly reported form of research synthesis was the literature review ( 74 % ) , followed by cross - site comparisons ( 49 % ) and remote sensing analyses ( 49 % ) . Case - oriented meta - analyses , variable - oriented meta - analyses , and cross - site data analyses were each reported by 25 % of respondents , and cross - site meta - data analyses were reported by 22 % . Sixteen percent indicated that they had conducted a meta - analysis of effect sizes . Figure 1 : Percentage of respondents who had conducted each type of LCS research synthesis Scientific Domains CSCW 2015 , March 14 - 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 433 ( Re ) defining Land Change Science Through Research Synthesis In the survey and interviews we asked participants to reflect on what they considered to be the foremost strengths and weaknesses of research synthesis in LCS . A common theme emerged : Research synthesis was seen as a way to move the community forward , from an interdisciplinary group of researchers towards a unique transdiscipline with its own holistic approach . As we continued our analysis , we came to see that this view was prevalent throughout the many workshops , scientific meetings , and conferences we had observed . There was a general sense that synthesis is what “ makes [ LCS ] a discipline , as opposed to a set of individual fields with shared agendas ” ( survey respondent 114 ) . Integrating Disparate Knowledge At its core , research synthesis is about integrating disparate knowledge and information to elicit novel findings or insights [ 16 ] . Our participants viewed knowledge integration as a strength of synthesis in LCS as it affords the consolidation of knowledge produced in multiple individual case studies . Research synthesis enables the “ bringing together of data and lessons from multiple cases to assess the variety of drivers and outcomes of land - change ” ( SR76 ) . It also facilitates the integration of knowledge from the diverse disciplines that study LCS , thereby “ making links between research areas explicit and allowing the field to build on existing findings and experience ” ( SR113 ) . Through this integration our participants believed that new patterns and trends would emerge from the data . This new information would then facilitate a greater understanding of the underlying reasons for differences and commonalities . It would uncover common characteristics of land change processes , drivers , and their consequences , and it would elicit information on how many locations were experiencing the same phenomena . This in turn would afford a “ systematic overview of what knowledge already exists ” ( SR196 ) , guiding future research directions and supporting greater generalization of findings . Our participants also believed that through knowledge integration they would be able to uncover trends in the LCS knowledge base . This includes both trends in what types of research have been conducted and understanding what areas of the world have been over - or underrepresented in studies . An associate professor in our interview sample described how his study of swidden ( i . e . , slash and burn agriculture ) in the tropics allowed him to uncover an unequal distribution of studies . He found that while studies in Central America were numerous , there were very few studies of swidden in Africa . Similarly , a postdoctoral researcher described how she used a meta - analytic approach to understand the distribution of research on the Sahel 1 . In this process , she identified gaps in coverage that she then used to drive her future research projects . Knowledge integration therefore enables LCS researchers to point to “ the next research agenda ” ( SR118 ) . Finally , our participants expressed a belief that knowledge integration would drive standardization . Through synthesis , the LCS community would be able to establish a “ common understanding of terms , research priorities , and concepts ” that would make LCS “ appear less diffuse ” ( SR26 ) . It could thus enable a transformation from an interdiscipline with divergent methods and goals to a formalized transdiscipline with a common language , research vision , and methodology . Geographic Information Systems ( GIS ) provide a central means of standardization in LCS . As a community focused on studying specific Earth systems , rather than abstract processes such as in chemistry , spatial context is paramount . Spatiality is a fundamental component of all LCS research and is one of the ways that the community is defining what it means to be a LCS researcher : All data and findings must be reported relative to specific locations on the planet . For researchers from other disciplines interested in doing LCS research , they must therefore learn to situate their data in space and care about more than just reified processes . Generating New Knowledge Through research synthesis , LCS researchers generate new insights . Our participants identified three main ways this new knowledge advances the field . First , they described how synthesis enables theory building . This finding is consistent with a recent study of 181 LCS meta - studies that found that one - third of those studies were aimed at theory generation ( comment at US workshop ; see also [ 23 ] ) . One survey respondent described this desire to theorize as : I think trying to come up with generalizable outcomes across these various case studies is a lofty and necessary goal , because of a need for generalized theory making about how land change occurs and the many interactions across spatial and temporal aspects of those things affecting those changes ( SR61 ) . As a research community whose goal is often to inform practice , coherent theories about how land use changes are important for decision - making and to direct the future of land use policy . These theories can also be used to inform the development of tools to help guide future research directions : “ [ global theory is ] important in the area where research informs practice because we can use this theory in places where case studies [ are ] not yet done to help build models , scenarios , predictions” ( SR164 ) . Understanding 1 The Sahel represents the semidesert area of the Sahara that stretches from Mauritania to Chad . Scientific Domains CSCW 2015 , March 14 - 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 434 the global context of local knowledge allows for this knowledge to be transferred to areas of the world that have not yet been examined and for LCS researchers to make informed predictions about these places . While theory building is a prime motivator of research synthesis in LCS , an epistemic tension exists between those researchers who believe that the integration of disparate knowledge can lead to generalized theories of land use change and those who contend that due to the biases inherent in case study and interdisciplinary research , synthesis can only provide a general overview of interesting patterns and trends . Context is the crux of this tension . An interviewed associate professor identified three biases of case study research that impact the usefulness of research synthesis for theory building : 1 ) disciplinary biases , which refer to choices of concepts and indicators used in a case study ; 2 ) sampling biases , which deal with when , where , and at what scale a case study was conducted ; and , 3 ) doctoral dissertation biases , which refer to the fact that dissertations , which make up the bulk of the case study literature , seek to prove that a specific problem exists to demonstrate their novel contribution . This individual further argued that LCS researchers cannot avoid these in their research synthesis because there is an overrepresentation of case studies in the literature that fall victim to these biases . In light of these biases , some of our participants stressed the importance of not overgeneralizing the findings of research synthesis . They cautioned against “ trying to extract too globally applicable lessons , whilst most decisions driving land - change are taken locally under the influence of locally specific contexts ” ( SR76 ) . They urged researchers to pay attention to the different contexts in which land change science is conducted ( SR112 ) and they encouraged others to account for the limitations in the synthetic approaches used and to not overstate findings ( SR113 ) . Whether or not LCS researchers believe synthesis can enable generalized theories of land use change depends largely on their worldview . Those researchers who hold a more positivist perspective are more likely to agree that generalization is possible through synthesis , whereas more interpretivist and critical researchers downplay this possibility . A main challenge of LCS research therefore is the ability to “ transgress current biases imposed by differences in paradigm between researchers ” ( SR114 ) . Our participants also described how synthesizing data benefits policy . In the survey and workshops , synthesis was expressed as a way to concisely explain trends , patterns , drivers , and impacts of land use change to non - scientists . Indeed , one workshop participant argued that if nothing else “ meta - analyses should make the findings from the literature more accessible to policymakers ” ( Amsterdam workshop , presenter slides ) . While academics generally appreciate nuance , policy makers typically want simple guidance on what to do ( comment at US workshop ) . Synthesis makes access to scientific results relevant for these policy makers through the reduction of extraneous data . This finding is also consistent with the previously mentioned study , which found that one - fifth of meta - studies were focused on informing policy ( comment at US workshop ; see also [ 23 ] ) . Additionally , the respondents noted that research synthesis methods could be used to support and enhance model building . In a workshop at the GLP - OSM , they described how synthesis , and more specifically meta - studies , could be used to determine the types of behaviour that are likely to be important for the model . It could also be used to identify missing parameters that should be included in the model , as well as to parameterize the model , using the literature to ensure that variables were reporting in the correct range . Throughout the workshop , synthesis was viewed as a means to enhance models , whereas models were never discussed as a way to enhanced synthesis research . This finding is also consistent with [ 23 ] , which found that 7 % of meta - studies were focused on informing model building . Comparing the Incomparable Our participants identified a number of impediments to useful synthesis . Issues of data comparability , in terms of different methods , scales of analysis , and context , greatly impact researchers’ ability to adequately synthesize data : For a good synthesis , you need research that is comparable to a certain degree . As research characteristics are sometimes very specific or local , it is difficult to know whether cases are comparable with each other ( SR40 ) . The lack of comparable data means that LCS researchers are confronted with the reality that to do research synthesis means having to find ways to “ compare the incomparable ” , such as when trying to integrate qualitative interview results with statistical spatial analyses ( SR188 ) . Research synthesis is further complicated by the fact that case studies frequently differ on how they report and weight variables ; important factors in one study are often absent in another study . This results in a “ small universe of usable cases ” for synthesis ( US workshop , presenter slides ) . While these challenges are generally well known in CSCW , LCS differs in meaningful ways that make data integration particularly difficult for this community . One notable complication is “ dealing with [ the ] complexity of the coupled human - natural system ” ( SR120 ) . LCS research does not focus systems , human and natural , in isolation , but rather examines the interplay of the two . Mixing bio - physical data with socio - economic data is a much more complex form of cross - disciplinary knowledge integration than dealing with each system independently . Another difficulty is dealing with the many different scales at which land use changes are studied . Effectively linking land change science processes with “ material cycles and other biogeochemical dynamics in different spatial and Scientific Domains CSCW 2015 , March 14 - 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 435 temporal scales ” ( SR118 ) is a particular concern . Our participants called for the need to find ways to harmonize the data in order to resolve these mismatches in scale . Conducting Research Synthesis : Tools , Techniques , and Processes Like all scientific endeavours , research synthesis relies on the use of specific tools , techniques , and processes . In this section we describe how these are used by LCS researchers , with a focus on how they both enable and constrain synthesis activities . Searching for Data All research syntheses start with a search to identify published results from projects investigating issues relevant to the purpose of the meta - study . We found that in LCS this consists of two approaches : the use of multidisciplinary citation databases , such as Web of Knowledge , which allow for searching across many disciplines simultaneously , and social searching , tapping into one’s social network to obtain difficult to locate data . Each of these is described in turn . The survey suggests that locating cases almost always begins with a keyword search in Web of Knowledge or Google Scholar , similar to the following : keywords : ( swidden or shifting cultivation or ( slash and burn ) ) and ( change or driver * or impact ) for studies published in 2000 - 2010 ) ( Amsterdam workshop , presenter slides ) . A postdoctoral researcher in our interview sample explained how he used keyword searches to locate cases for his synthesis study on agricultural change in Europe . As these types of land changes have been studied by different disciplines , he chose Web of Knowledge in order to systematically search across publications from multiple disciplines simultaneously . In the process , he uncovered a core challenge of LCS research : determining the correct keywords or keyword combinations . His searches either yielded too many or too few results . He finally settled on a ‘good enough’ sample of 3 , 000 cases , which he narrowed down to 200 that he reviewed individually for relevancy . This resulted in a sample of 60 cases , which he further expanded to 140 cases following a cross - referencing exercise in Google Scholar . Not all synthesis studies in LCS lend themselves to the use of citation databases . In some cases , the data researchers’ rely on is not found in peer - reviewed journals or conference proceedings , but rather in the grey literature of government reports and project websites . For these types of studies , Google is most often used for basic searches to get a sense of the general landscape . Most REDD + projects 2 , for 2 REDD + stands for Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation . Its main objectives are to mitigate climate change by reducing and removing greenhouse gases through enhanced forest management in developing countries example , have not been published in academic venues and therefore citation databases are not effective search tools : Peer - reviewed journals don’t help with REDD + projects because the information I’m after is not published in peer - reviewed journals . So I have to access project ports , which is more the type of grey literature but which is more inclusive in the way they report things… only very few REDD + projects have also peer - reviewed publications out on their project . Actually it’s quite rare . That’s the thing about doing land use science… the real information you need is often not available in peer - reviewed publications but you need to get it through stakeholders or grey literature or other sources ( interview , postdoctoral researcher ) . To overcome some of the logistical challenges imposed by the limitations of citation databases , LCS researchers are turning to their social networks and original case study authors to obtain this difficult to find information . In the survey , respondents proclaimed that , “Colleagues and social networks have been more important for finding difficult to obtain datasets” ( SR71 ) and the “ best “technology” [ is to ] contact the authors behind the data ! ” ( SR149 ) This social search approach not only helps address issues in locating data across disciplinary boundaries , but also with obtaining full case details . If results are published at all , they are often incomplete as this scholar notes : I mean without their input this analysis would not be possible because it’s often data that is not published yet or is data that is even if it would be published … it’s information that is not provided in one publication ( interview , postdoctoral researcher ) . Enlisting the help of colleagues and original authors then is often the only way to obtain the provenance information required for successful synthesis . However , this may also unnecessarily complicate the search process and delay the meta - study . One of our associate professors described how his invitation to experts to submit additional papers for his meta - study meant that the dataset was constantly evolving . Each time a new paper was submitted , he had to update the Excel spreadsheet and the analysis had to be redone . He eventually stopped this process because he needed to reach a point where the dataset was complete so the final analysis could be done . Transforming Data A challenge of all interdisciplinary research is that data comes in multiple formats and these formats are usually not readily comparable . Researchers must then first transform the data to a standardized format before it can be Scientific Domains CSCW 2015 , March 14 - 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 436 synthesized : “ Each paper talks differently about the same topic . They don ' t use the same words . But in the end if you want to summarize you need to put them in an overarching category ” ( interview , assistant professor ) . In LCS , data transformation is a do - it - yourself project achieved with the help of different end user programming tools [ 25 ] . The two most commonly identified in the survey were R and Microsoft Excel . The use of these reflects differences in how the community understands and deals with the amount and types of data that need to be transformed . While all data is quantified for research synthesis in LCS , the degree to which data is separated from its context during this process differs . The use of the statistical language R was a favourite among LCS researchers working with large datasets : I like program languages , in general , because data comes in different formats and have to be organized before being used for modeling and research ( SR72 ) . While this community also uses native quantitative data , our participants expressed far fewer concerns about the need to transform this type of data . In the interviews , they consistently mentioned the processes they used to transform qualitative data to allow for quantitative comparison . A post - doctoral researcher , for instance , showed how he had transformed qualitative descriptions of significant drivers of land use change from a narrative account to a numeric representation that would allow him to run statistical analyses on the data ( see Figure 2 ) . If the case study authors had reported that a driver had a significant relation to land use change , he coded this as a “1” if present and “0” if not . In the process of transforming qualitative data , contextual information about the data is lost . In an effort to preserve some context , some LCS researchers have adopted coding practices that not only quantify qualitative data but that also provide qualifiers for why the data was transformed in a particular way . In describing his data transformation practices , another post - doctoral researcher indicated that he tries to retain contextual information by attaching qualifiers to his codes : “ If I put a 1 , I note or give a quote from the report qualifying why there is a 1 ” ( interview , postdoctoral researcher ) . The desire to balance the need for large - scale data transformation on the one hand with the preservation of context on the other hand , has led some LCS researchers to adopt programs such as Excel that afford data transparency : I was thinking of using a database manager like Access or others and developing a form to put in a structured way the data , but I found that is sometimes too restrictive and that it’s more easy if you have one [ Excel ] spreadsheet where you can easily add a column or skip through columns and compare and so on . Of course… it can get a lot of columns , but somehow this makes it more transparent . And you are better able to understand your data ( interview , postdoctoral researcher ) While this participant identifies the potential benefits of using a database manager to create forms to transform , organize , and search across his data , he also realizes the limitations it would impose , in particular the loss of data transparency . Figure 2 : Interview participant’s Excel spreadsheet providing an example of how data is transformed to enable synthesis Interpreting Data Like others who have studied data reuse in CSCW , we observed challenges with data interpretation and concerns about data quality . Participants likened data interpretation in LCS to “ comparing apples to oranges ” since land use change has been studied from so many different disciplinary perspectives ( SR65 ) . To overcome this they have adopted a number of specific techniques . The use of global datasets of variables that geographically cover the extent of the Earth ' s terrestrial surface is one way to deal this complexity . While we continue to investigate the different ways in which these datasets are used in LCS , our initial findings point to two ways they help fill gaps in understanding . This is reported in one LCS meta - study as : A common problem in the meta - analysis of qualitative and narrative case studies is the comparability of the driving factors mentioned , and the limitations on extrapolating the results due to their qualitative character . We have , therefore , used georeferenced datasets , in addition to the commonly - used qualitative meta - analysis , to describe in a comparative manner , the location conditions of the case - studies [ 1 : 2 ] . As discussed previously , data transformation is a necessary process of data synthesis . Instead of inferring what the case study authors meant by certain variables and then organizing similar variables into an overarching category , these researchers chose to use global datasets to help interpret and describe the locational conditions of the case studies used in their meta - analysis . This takes an alternative , top - down approach to research synthesis , Scientific Domains CSCW 2015 , March 14 - 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 437 focusing more on which cases can be used to represent certain parts of the world and using global datasets to provide ground support to explain the global results . In a second example , global datasets are used to help explain and identify predictors of REDD + project design : It would be kind of socioeconomic indicators for different countries or regions that the projects are in for the REDD + projects . So kind of see if there are indicators on economy , on governance , on biodiversity , that can kind of explain why certain projects are designed the way they are ( interview , postdoctoral researcher ) . In contrast to the previous example , here global datasets were not used to transform qualitative data to a comparable format , but rather to identify global and regional socioeconomic patterns or indicators that can help explain differences and similarities in REDD + project design for the regions in which the projects are based . Another way that LCS researchers deal with data complexity and interpretation is by enlisting the help of original case study authors . Across the workshops participants highlighted the importance of recruiting pertinent case study authors to participate in the meta - study process . Echoing general concerns of data reuse , our participants stressed the importance of author involvement particularly in correctly interpreting data context across disciplines . Through this participatory meta - analysis approach , meta - study researchers are better able to ensure the validity in their codes and resulting models . Our participants described two participatory meta - study styles [ 35 ] . The first approach was a partnered meta - study , which involved asking case study authors’ questions about their study site and having them code their cases based on a standardized classification scheme . In the interviews , an associate professor described how case study authors or experts helped the first author of their meta - study with any uncertainties she had with the cases . These authors provided cases that they themselves had worked on . The second approach was an interpretative meta - study , which involved asking case study authors to confirm whether their cases were interpreted correctly and coded accurately . The original authors were then able to amend codes where necessary . Despite this expressed need for greater cross - disciplinary integration , engaging case study authors from different disciplines is not an easy task . Our participants described difficulties in networking across disciplinary boundaries because they did not know anyone from the other disciplines that they wished to engage . Even in instances where they are able to identify these individuals , there is no guarantee they will be willing to help . To entice case study authors to work with them , participants reported offering co - authorship in exchange for assistance , thus providing an incentive for participation in a project for which they may otherwise not be invested . Contextualizing Scientific Inquiry through Geographic Information Systems In the survey , our participants reported the use of Geographic Information Systems to support nearly all stages of the research synthesis process . For instance , GIS is used for “ organizing spatial data ” ( SR71 ) and to find “ GIS layers ” ( SR132 ) . This use of GIS by our participants points to the previously discussed inherently spatial nature of LCS research : To do LCS means understanding the spatial situatedness of your data and findings . Another interviewed associate professor described how he used GIS tools to understand the spatial distribution of the case studies used in his meta - analysis . By placing his cases on a map , he was better able to understand where his cases were situated thus identifying underrepresented areas of the world ( see Figure 3 ) . Figure 3 : Spatial map of case studies as presented at the Amsterdam Workshop ( presenter Slides ) . BUILDING CYBERINFRASTRUCTURE TO SUPPORT RESEARCH SYNTHESIS The LCS research community is working to establish new standards and to define itself as an independent scientific field . Similar to other e - science projects , LCS is an emergent interdiscipline trying to figure out how best to work together given their referent disciplinary differences . Remember that in a related CSCW study , the LTER community adopted an Ecological Metadata Language to standardize data reporting and curation across their network . In general , this was successful , but there were several serious problems translating local practices to global standards [ 17 ] . The LCS community is wrestling with a similar problem : Coming up with its own standards to better facilitate interdisciplinary collaboration and to define LCS - style research . Our field study points to four ways they are trying to standardize their discipline : 1 ) adoption of synthetic research practices ; 2 ) preferences for particular analytic methods ; 3 ) specific processes of data transformation ; and 4 ) an emphasis on the spatial situatedness of data and findings . It is in this context that we are working to build cyberinfrastructure to better support research synthesis in Scientific Domains CSCW 2015 , March 14 - 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 438 LCS . The objective of the GLOBE project is to develop and deploy a suite of tools that will support and advance this scientific practice without necessitating systemic change . We do not want to duplicate efforts that are already working , but rather to identify and address current gaps or deficiencies in the practice that can be better supported . We also seek to amplify meta - study researchers’ abilities to manage an order of magnitude more data than they are currently able . In an ideal world , GLOBE - enabled analyses will become one of the new standards for LCS ; similar to how EML became foundational for the LTER network . We will now illustrate a few examples of how these findings have come to inform the design and refinement of GLOBE . Supporting Geographic Search The value of search lies in its ability to return results relevant for the user’s query . Our research reveals that for certain types of information traditional keyword searches may not be adequate . We observed in the interviews , for example , that disciplinary differences in language and representation made it challenging for our participants to correctly determine the appropriate keywords or keyword combinations necessary to find relevant information for synthesis . As a community grounded in geography , traditional citation databases do not effectively support geographically based search . While place name keyword searches can pull cases that reference a specific geographic location , such as “Brazil” , they cannot confirm if the case is actually located in the specified area . Representing data on a map assists both with general search but also with sense - making across the results : LCS researchers can better assess data relevance when they understand where in the world the data is located . Visualizing case searches in space is therefore quite powerful for them . Figure 4 : Geographic representation of a case study in GLOBE We designed GLOBE as a geographic search engine specifically for this purpose . We wanted to make it easier for LCS researchers to understand and interpret their data in a way that makes sense to them : Grounded on a map . While other location - based search engines exist ( e . g . , JournalMap 3 ) they are based solely on points ( i . e , latitude by longitude coordinates ) , providing very little detail about the actual study site . GLOBE goes deeper by providing full geometries that represent the actual case study area ( see Figure 4 ) . However , GLOBE does not just provide simple geographic search ; it also allows users to search for similar cases based on a wide array of global variables . This similarity search assesses the degree to which a particular case study site ( or geographic location ) is similar to other areas of the Earth’s surface based on user - defined variables and filters . Similar cases are then represented on a map and can be saved to a collection for use in a meta - study ( see Figure 5 ) . Figure 5 : GLOBE similarity analysis Linking Cases to Authors As discussed earlier , often the data needed for research synthesis is not available in peer - reviewed journals , but commonly found in the grey literature of reports and project websites . Even when data is accessible , it may not always be understandable . In the process of moving from study site to publication , important details about study procedures are often lost through the deletion of process [ 19 ] . Recall that in line with what [ 29 , 37 ] have suggested , we found that meta - study practice is not a sole author activity , but often involves enlisting the help of original study authors to both access difficult to obtain data and to learn about how the data were constructed . While author engagement has been found in other studies of data reuse , few studies have suggested ways of designing cyberinfrastructure to support this relationship . One noticeable exception is the C - IKnow Project [ 31 ] which provides a way for researchers to find the original authors for the project data they are using in their study . GLOBE makes case study author identification and participation a central focus of the system . Where we differ from the C - IKnow project is in facilitating direct contact by providing links to the author’s verified email and personal website ( see Figure 6 ) . Each case entered into GLOBE is attached to an originating author with clear provenance 3 JournalMap is a scientific literature search engine that offers location - based and variable search . Scientific Domains CSCW 2015 , March 14 - 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 439 metadata . System - generated quality metrics help identify cases with weak links that will likely be difficult to interpret and integrate . In these cases authors are invited by the system to work collaboratively with case contributors to verify , correct , or reenter case details and geographic information . Cases vetted in collaboration with case study authors earn higher quality scores . Figure 6 : Case study author contact information Linking cases to authors also allows meta - study researchers to more easily identify and build a network of individuals conducting research in a particular area of the world , on a specific topic , or variable . This information can be used to not only develop a network of potential future collaborators , but also to help identify underrepresented areas to study and potentially mobilize research resources to address this deficiency . Designing for Transparency Recall that research synthesis requires that diverse data be transformed to enable comparability . In LCS , this need for data transformation is often weighed against the need to preserve context . Understanding under what local conditions the data was produced is important to fully comprehend the data . This is particularly true of qualitative data . Data transformation risks loss of context by reducing complex narrative explanations to mere binary reporting of “absence” or “presence” for statistical analysis . In an effort to simultaneously preserve context and transform data , we found that our participants adopted tools that would support both tasks . The LCS community’s value of transparency for data transformation has changed ( and continues to change ) our design of GLOBE from an opaque system , obscuring the mechanics of data transformation , to a more transparent system that provides visualizations and metrics about data transformation . Initially all analyses in GLOBE were black boxed by design . Similarity and representativeness are nuanced mathematical concepts and required fairly intricate manipulations in the core Global Collaboration Engine [ 30 ] . Given this complexity , we had decided that it would be best to hide the algorithmic processing from the user . However , in the process of beta testing , we learned that this lack of transparency made it difficult for users to understand and trust the output . They were used to the iterative control they had in R or visual representations they had in Excel . An instructive example of this tension is in the process of binning for representativeness . A representativeness analysis assess the degree to which a given collection of study sites represents an unbiased sample of a specified global extent based on a set of global variables , answering the question : how much of the variance across the planet is explained , or represented , by my case collection ? Binning is used to understand how the universe of all cases is parsed against a collection of cases based on a set of global land variables . The resulting output informs the user to the degree and nature of the biases in their collection ( see Figure 7 ) . In testing the system with users we learned that in order to be understandable , the processes involved in binning required more transparency than we initially provided . This led us to include contextual information about each bin , including how many cases were needed to make the collection less biased . We also added interactive features that allow users to toggle between different scales ( e . g . , log and ordinal ) . The latest system update includes an interface for users to easily find cases to add to their collection to make it more representative . Figure 7 : Binning visualization in GLOBE CONCLUSIONS In this paper , we have examined research synthesis in the emergent interdiscipline of Land Change Science . Through our investigation , we have uncovered new insights into the sociotechnical interplay between scientific practice and the tools used and designed to support this practice . Our study shows how technology not only enables research synthesis by providing the tools needed to find and integrate large datasets , but also constrains the process due to mismatches Scientific Domains CSCW 2015 , March 14 - 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 440 in what current tools support and what the community actually needs . By exposing the geographic situatedness of LCS research and the strategies for involving authors , we have furthered our understanding of synthetic processes . The identification of geography as a core component of the LCS identity helps us to rethink the ways we approach the design for data search . Traditional keyword searches afforded by citation databases may not be the most practical or useful way to search for multi - disciplinary data or for data that does not lend itself well to textual descriptions . For research communities with a common characteristic that is core to their identity ( as geography is to LCS ) and which is computationally tractable , the design of interactive search visualizations that support the way the community understands their data will help improve and simplify research activities . This study also extends the data reuse literature by providing a better understanding of the strategies used for engaging original authors in the research synthesis process . Through participatory meta - analysis , case study authors are enlisted to either code their cases based on a pre - defined classification scheme or to confirm whether or not their cases have been coded properly . As incentive for their participation , they are offered co - authorship on the resulting meta - analysis . By identifying the role of research synthesis for LCS and how this community has adopted tools to support this scientific practice , we have been able to develop cyberinfrastructure that will ideally address deficiencies in current approaches and enhance researchers’ ability to do research synthesis in the future . This understanding of the role of sociotechnical systems in actual collaborative work practices has long been a central focus of CSCW . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to thank the LCS community and the Global Land Project for their support of this research . We would also like to thank our fellow GLOBE team members , in particular Erle Ellis and Jared Margulies . This research has been supported by NSF award # 115210 ‘GLOBE : Evolving New Global Workflows for Land Change Science’ . REFERENCES 1 . Asselen , S . van , Verburg , P . H . , Vermaat , J . E . , and Janse , J . H . Drivers of Wetland Conversion : a Global Meta - Analysis . PLoS ONE 8 , 11 ( 2013 ) , e81292 . 2 . Bietz , M . J . , Ferro , T . , and Lee , C . P . Sustaining the development of cyberinfrastructure : an organization adapting to change . Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , ACM ( 2012 ) , 901 – 910 . 3 . Bietz , M . J . and Lee , C . P . Collaboration in Metagenomics : Sequence Databases and the Organization of Scientific Work . In I . Wagner , H . Tellio ğ lu , E . Balka , C . Simone and L . Ciolfi , eds . , ECSCW 2009 . Springer London , 2009 , 243 – 262 . 4 . Birnholtz , J . P . and Bietz , M . J . Data at work : supporting sharing in science and engineering . Proceedings of the 2003 international ACM SIGGROUP conference on Supporting group work , ACM ( 2003 ) , 339 – 348 . 5 . Blake , C . and Pratt , W . Collaborative information synthesis I : A model of information behaviors of scientists in medicine and public health . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 57 , 13 ( 2006 ) , 1740 – 1749 . 6 . Blake , C . and Pratt , W . Collaborative information synthesis II : Recommendations for information systems to support synthesis activities . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 57 , 14 ( 2006 ) , 1888 – 1895 . 7 . Blettner , M . and Schlattmann , P . Meta - Analysis in Epidemiology . In W . Ahrens and I . Pigeot , eds . , Handbook of Epidemiology . Springer Berlin Heidelberg , 2005 , 829 – 857 . 8 . Bowker , G . C . and Star , S . L . Sorting things out : classification and its consequences . MIT Press , 1999 . 9 . Cooper , H . and Hedges , L . V . The Handbook of Research Synthesis . Russell Sage Foundation , New York , 1994 . 10 . Ellis , E . C . and Ramankutty , N . Putting people in the map : anthropogenic biomes of the world . Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 6 , 8 ( 2007 ) , 439 – 447 . 11 . Faniel , I . M . and Jacobsen , T . E . Reusing Scientific Data : How Earthquake Engineering Researchers Assess the Reusability of Colleagues’ Data . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) 19 , 3 - 4 ( 2010 ) , 355 – 375 . 12 . Hackett , E . J . and Parker , J . N . Research Groups . In W . Bainbridge , ed . , Leadership in Science and Technology : A Reference Handbook . SAGE Publications , 2011 , 165 – 174 . 13 . Hackett , E . J . and Parker , J . N . Ideas , Emotions , and Coherent Group Development . 2013 . 14 . Hackett , E . J . and Parker , J . N . Ecology reconfigured : Organizational innovation , group dynamics and scientific change . In M . Merz and P . Sormani , eds . , The Local Configuration of New Research Fields . Springer , 2014 . 15 . Hackett , E . J . and Parker , J . N . From Solomon’s house to synthesis centers . In T . Heinze and R . Muench , eds . , Institutional and Organizational Innovation in Science . Palgrave Macmillan , 2014 . 16 . Hampton , S . E . and Parker , J . N . Collaboration and Productivity in Scientific Synthesis . BioScience 61 , 11 ( 2011 ) , 900 – 910 . Scientific Domains CSCW 2015 , March 14 - 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 441 17 . Karasti , H . , Baker , K . S . , and Halkola , E . Enriching the Notion of Data Curation in E - Science : Data Managing and Information Infrastructuring in the Long Term Ecological Research ( LTER ) Network . Computer Supported Cooperative Work 15 , 4 ( 2006 ) , 321 – 358 . 18 . Karasti , H . , Baker , K . S . , and Millerand , F . Infrastructure Time : Long - term Matters in Collaborative Development . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) 19 , 3 - 4 ( 2010 ) , 377 – 415 . 19 . Latour , B . and Woolgar , S . Laboratory Life : The Construction of Scientific Facts . Princeton University Press , 1979 . 20 . Lee , J . , Zhang , J . , Zimmerman , A . , and Lucia , A . DataNet : An emerging cyberinfrastructure for sharing , reusing and preserving digital data for scientific discovery and learning . AIChE Journal 55 , 11 ( 2009 ) , 2757 – 2764 . 21 . Lenoir , T . Shaping Biomedicine as an Information Science . Proceedings of the 1998 Conference on the History and Heritage of Science Information Systems , Information Today , Inc ( 1998 ) , 27 – 45 . 22 . Lutters , W . G . and Winter , S . Virtual Organizations . In W . Bainbridge , ed . , Leadership in science and technology : A reference handbook . SAGE Publications , Thousand Oaks , Calif . , 2012 , 334 – 343 . 23 . Magliocca , N . R . , Rudel , T . K . , Verburg , P . H . , et al . Synthesis in land change science : methodological patterns , challenges , and guidelines . Regional Environmental Change , ( 2014 ) , 1 – 16 . 24 . Moran , E . F . , Skole , D . L . , and Ii , B . L . T . The Development of the International Land - Use and Land - Cover Change ( LUCC ) Research Program and Its Links to NASA’s Land - Cover and Land - Use Change ( LCLUC ) Initiative . In D . G . Gutman , A . C . Janetos , C . O . Justice , et al . , eds . , Land Change Science . Springer Netherlands , 2004 , 1 – 15 . 25 . Nardi , B . A . A Small Matter of Programming : Perspectives on End User Computing . The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 1993 . 26 . Ribes , D . and Bowker , G . C . Organizing for Multidisciplinary Collaboration : The Case of the Geosciences Network . In G . M . Olson , A . Zimmerman and N . Bos , eds . Scientific Collaboration on the Internet . The MIT Press , 2008 , 310 – 330 . 27 . Ribes , D . and Finholt , T . A . Representing Community : Knowing Users in the Face of Changing Constituencies . Proceedings of the 2008 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , ACM ( 2008 ) , 107 – 116 . 28 . Ribes , D . and Lee , C . P . Sociotechnical Studies of Cyberinfrastructure and e - Research : Current Themes and Future Trajectories . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) 19 , 3 - 4 ( 2010 ) , 231 – 244 . 29 . Rolland , B . and Lee , C . P . Beyond trust and reliability : reusing data in collaborative cancer epidemiology research . Proceedings of the 2013 conference on Computer supported cooperative work , ACM ( 2013 ) , 435 – 444 . 30 . Schmill , M . D . , Gordon , L . M . , Magliocca , N . R . , Ellis , E . C . , and Oates , T . GLOBE : Analytics for Assessing Global Representativeness . International Conference on Computing for Geospatial Research and Application ( GEOCOM ) ( 2014 ) 25 – 32 . 31 . Science of Networks in Communities Laboratory . 2011 . 32 . Sheble , L . Research synthesis : Overview of an intersection with ILS . Proceedings of the 2012 ASIS & T Annual Meeting , ( 2012 ) . 33 . Turner , B . L . , Lambin , E . F . , and Reenberg , A . The emergence of land change science for global environmental change and sustainability . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104 , 52 ( 2007 ) , 20666 – 20671 . 34 . Verburg , P . H . , Erb , K . - H . , Mertz , O . , and Espindola , G . Land System Science : between global challenges and local realities . Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 5 , 5 ( 2013 ) , 433 – 437 . 35 . Young , A . and Lutters , W . Collaborative Interpretation in Land Change Science Meta - studies . Proceedings of the Companion Publication of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing , ACM ( 2014 ) , 269 – 272 . 36 . Young , A . , Lutters , W . G . , Magliocca , N . R . , and Ellis , E . C . Designing a System for Land Change Science Meta - study . CHI ’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM ( 2013 ) , 1473 – 1478 . 37 . Zimmerman , A . Not by metadata alone : the use of diverse forms of knowledge to locate data for reuse . Int . J . Digit . Libr . 7 , 1 ( 2007 ) , 5 – 16 . 38 . The Global Land Project . Global Land Project : Background . hwww . globallandproject . org / home / background . php . Scientific Domains CSCW 2015 , March 14 - 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 442