Calibration of atomic - force microscope tips Jeffrey L . Hutter and John Bechhoefer Department of Physics , Simon Fraser University , Burnaby , British Columbia , VSA 235 , Canada ( Received 29 March 1993 ; accepted for publication 12 April 1993 ) Images and force measurements taken by an atomic - force microscope ( AFM ) depend greatly on the properties of the spring and tip used to probe the sample’s surface . In this article , we describe a simple , nondestructive procedure for measuring the force constant , resonant frequency , and quality factor of an AFM cantilever spring and the effective radius of curvature of an AFM tip . Our procedure uses the AFM itself and does not require additional equipment , 1 . INTRODUCTION check , for example , whether a tip has been blunted after crashing into a sample surface . Since its invention in 1986 , the atomic - force microscope’ ( AFM ) has become an increasingly impor - In this article , we describe a nondestructive procedure for calibrating individual cantilevers and tips for use in tant tool for studying surfaces at the atomic level . Beyond atomic - force microscopy . In Sec . II , we review the two the often spectacular and occasionally informative images common AF ? vi imaging modes . In Sec . III , we show that obtained of surfaces , the AFM has the potential to give measurements of thermal fluctuations of the cantilever can quantitative information about focal forces and interactions . 26 The accuracy of such measurements de - yield its spring constant , resonant frequency , and the qual - ity factor of the resonance . In Sec . IV , we show that mea - pends upon a knowledge of the physical properties of the surements of van der Waals forces on the tip allow an spring and tip that probe these forces . In particular , one effective tip radius to be inferred . In Sec . V , we present needs estimates of the size of the tip and the force constant representative data from the calibration of a silicon - nitride of the cantilever spring to which the tip is attached . cantilever with an integral pyramidal tip . Despite this need for calibration of individual tips and cantilevers , measurements of these properties have either been based on theoretical estimates or have been made only on supposedly representative samples . Typically , the radius of an AFM tip is taken from manufacturer’s specifications or , rarely , measured by electron microscopy . 7 - 9 In the former case one uses a nominal figure that represents an average for a batch of microfabricated tips , while , in the latter , measurements are difficult and are likely to destroy the tip . ” In either case , only the average macroscopic ra - dius of curvature will be measured . However , the tip - sample interaction is dominated by the small portion of the tip closest to the sample . Since the tip is not likely to end in a perfect sphere , particularly in the case of pyramidal tips , such an average value will not serve as a very useful calibration . II . THE ATOMIC - FORCE MICROSCOPE The AFM probes the surface of a sample by moving the sample beneath a tip attached to a weak cantilever spring while the tip is in contact , or near contact , with the surface . The sample is typically moved by piezoelectric scanners capable of accurate movement on subangstrom scales . The tip deflection can be measured with a resolution as small as 0 . 05 A . Similarly , the force constants of cantilevers are rarely measured ; loa rather , they are inferred from theoretical es - timates based on the geometry and elastic properties of the cantilevers . ” Often , the calculations themselves are sus - pect , since they are generally based on a simple , rectangular - beam geometry while the actual springs are 7” shaped . In addition , the cantilevers are often made of several materials ( e . g . , gold on silicon nitride ) , making a proper estimate of their elastic properties difficult . More important , this approach neglects the possibility of varia - tion in the force constants of individual springs due to structural defects and variations in the lever geometry and composition . For example , since the spring constant de - pends on the lever thickness t as 3 , even small variations in the thickness will result in large variations among the force constants of nominally identical springs . Also , tip and spring properties may change over time . One might wish to The AFM is operated in either of two modes . In the contact mode , the tip adheres to the sample surface with a finite force as it is dragged across the surface . The finite adhesion forces deform the tip and sample so that contact occurs over a finite area . 12y13 This area is greatly influenced by the tip sharpness and is increased by any additional spring force . In the attractiue mode , long - ranged van der Waals ( vdW ) forces deflect the tip , which is suspended 40 - 50 A above the surface . The strength of the vdW interaction depends on the tip sharpness and the amount of spring deflection is fixed by the spring constant . For both imaging modes , the tip sharpness and cantilever spring constant must be known in order to interpret images quantitatively , In addition , the AFM has been used for force - versus - distance measurements , where these parameters are again required . Estimates of both of these important probe parameters can be made by measuring the motion of a tip above a sample . We will model the experimental configuration as a spherical tip of radius R and mass m suspended a distance D above a flat sample by a spring force constant k , as shown in Fig . 1 . If the tip is far from the sample , its motion 1868 Rev . Sci . Instrum . 64 ( 7 ) , July 1993 0034 . 6748 / 93 / 64 ( 7 ~ / 1668 / 6 / $ 6 . 00 0 1993 American Institute of Physics 1868 Downloaded 02 Oct 2003 to 131 . 104 . 152 . 116 . Redistribution subject to AIP license or copyright , see http : / / ojps . aip . org / rsio / rsicr . jsp FIG . 1 . Model of an AFM tip - sample system . In this model , a spherical tip of radius R is held at a distance D from a planar sample by a spring of force constant k . The tip - sample interaction causes a tip deflection of 6 from a position a distance 2 above the sample that the tip would occupy in the absence of any interactions . is due only to thermal fluctuations . Measurements of this motion at frequencies near the resonant frequency of the spring allow one to estimate the spring constant . When the tip is closer to the sample , long - range forces will deflect it by some amount 6 . If the nature and magnitude of these forces are known , the size of the tip may be deduced . III . THERMAL FLUCTUATIONS A harmonic oscillator in equilibrium with its sur - roundings will fluctuate in response to thermal noise . The Hamiltonian of such a system is ( 1 ) where q is the displacement of the oscillator , p is its mo - mentum , m is the oscillating mass , and we is the resonant angular frequency of the system . By the equipartition the - orem , the average value of each quadratic term in the Hamiltonian is given by kBT / 2 , where kB is Boltzmann’s constant and T is the temperature . In particular , ( ; mo $ f ) = ; k , T . ( 2 ) As oi = k / m , the force constant may be obtained from a measurement of the mean - square spring displacement as k = k , T / @ ) . ( 3 ) For a spring constant of 0 . 05 N / m , typical of relatively weak AFM cantilevers , thermal fluctuations will be of the order of 3 A at room temperature . For such small deflec - tions , we can approximate an AFM cantilever as a simple harmonic oscillator with one degree of freedom . ( Other elastic modes of the cantilever have a much higher force constant and thus do not contribute much to the value of ( g ) . ) This would imply that if we measure the rms fluc - tuations of a freely moving cantilever with a sampling fre - quency much higher than its resonant frequency ( to avoid averaging out the fluctuations ) , we can estimate the spring constant . However , other noise sources are present . 1869 Rev . Sci . Instrum . , Vol . 64 , No . 7 , July 1993 In order to isolate the contribution due to thermal oscillations , we examine the data in the frequency domain . In the absence of additional noise sources and in the limit of small damping , the power spectral density of the fluc - tuations in the spring displacement has a Lorentzian line shape . 14 Other noise sources add a background to this ther - mal response . As none of the other noise sources is likely to have a resonance at the resonant frequency of the cantile - ver , it is a simple matter to subtract this background . The area below the remaining peak is then a measure of the power of the cantilever fluctuations . Since the integral of the power spectrum equals the mean square of the fluctu - ations in the time - series data , * ’ the estimate of the spring constant becomes k = kBT / P , ( 4 ) where P is the area of the power spectrum of the thermal fluctuations alone . IV . TIP DEFLECTION As the AFM tip is moved closer to the sample , the cantilever will deflect because of long - ranged tip - sample interactions . In the case of an AFM operated in air or vacuum with an electrically neutral sample , the only long - ranged force will be the van der Waals ( vdW ) attraction . The van der Waals potential between two molecules has the familiar - C / r6 form . In order to calculate the vdW force between two macroscopic bodies , one may use a con - tinuum approach and integrate the l / r6 interaction over the two volumes . 16 For our case of a sphere interacting with a flat surface , the potential has the approximate form W ( D ) = ( AR / BD ) , D ( R , ( 5 ) where Asr % ‘plpz is the so - called Hamaker constant , and p1 and p2 are the densities of the two solids . The potential energy for the AFM model described in Fig . 1 may be written as E ( S , Z ) = - 6 ( ; R + s ) + ; ka2 , where Z , the distance between the surface and an imagi - nary undeflected tip , is determined by the piezo extension and acts as a control parameter . This energy function has a singularity at 6 = - Z when the tip - sample distance is zero . Of course , contact forces always limit the approach distance to a few angstroms . The vdW force will deflect the spring to minimize the potential energy . Local minima of the energy function may be found by setting its derivative equal to zero : dE ( & Z ) dS = 6 ( ; & + kS = O . ( 7 ) Thus , the critical values of E are the solutions of a cubic equation , allowing the tip deflection to be calculated ana - lytically . Note that Eqs . ( 6 ) and ( 7 ) may be scaled so that they depend on only one parameter , 1 ~ @ % , which characterizes the length scale at which the vdW interaction is comparable to the spring potential . AFM tips 1869 Downloaded 02 Oct 2003 to 131 . 104 . 152 . 116 . Redistribution subject to AIP license or copyright , see http : / / ojps . aip . org / rsio / rsicr . jsp 8 o - i - . - - - ‘3 . : , 8 - 2o - - E : 2 do - i 5 ‘ * R b - 60 - - . = 1524 A & i . z - 80 ‘ . - I \ . gj - 1oo - u - c - 120 f I I I I I 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 Piezo extension , Z ( W > FiG . 2 . Typical force spectrum showing the deflection of a cantilever as a function of sample displacement . The axes have been scaled so that the y axis records the deflection of the tip , while the x axis indicates the position of the sample relative to the point where the sample and tip would be in contact for an undefected tip . During a force spectrum , the tip - sampie separation is decreased from a relatively large value of Z ( at a rate of 120 A / s in this case ) . The solid curve is a fit of the theoretical tip - deflection to the data . Note that this curve extends to the left of the snapping point , indicating that fluctuations have caused the tip to snap in to contact with the sample at a distance greater than that predicted by our model . For large tip - sample distances , the cantilever feels no forces and S = O . As Z is decreased , moving the tip and sample together , an attractive vdW interaction ( A > O ) causes the tip to be deflected toward the sample . Solving Eq . ( 7 ) for S , we find that when Z is decreased to Z , = 32”1 / 2 , the magnitude of the gradient of the vdW force becomes larger than that of the spring force , so that the solution corresponding to the slightly deflected tip becomes unstable . 17 At this point , cantilever deflection will have brought the tip to a distance of D * = 2ZJ3 = N $ from the sample . The tip must then “snap” into contact with the surface . For typical values of the Hamaker constant , tip radius , and spring constant ( A - lo - l9 J , R - 500 A , and k - O . 05 N / m , respectively ) , the tip will jump into contact with the surface when it is about 46 w away . This separa - tion is still large enough that atomic - scale roughness will have a negligible effect on determining the tip deflection and snapping point . Note , too , that the tip - sample distance at the snapping point is considerably less than the tip ra - dius , so that the assumption in Eq . ( 5 ) that D ( R in the region of interest is justified . Values of the parameter f can be estimated by perform - ing a “force spectrum” with the AFM . In a force spectrum , the sample is moved vertically and the resulting cantilever deflection is measured to generate a plot of 6 vs Z . An example of such a curve is shown in Fig . 2 . At long ranges , the tip is unaffected by the sample and moves with the thermal fluctuations of the cantilever . As the tip - sample distance is decreased , the vdW attraction causes the canti - lever to deflect toward the surface until the tip snaps into contact . After this , the tip and sample move together : ev - ery angstrom the piezo is extended compresses the spring by one angstrom , as well . Eventually , the sample drives the cantilever back to its undeflected position , setting the zero point for the Z axis . Experimental values of 2 can be obtained from a force Frequency ( kRz ) FIG . 3 . Power spectral density plot of fluctuations in the output of the cantilever deflection detector . The plot is the average of six spectra of 5ooO points each , binned into a 500 point curve . The resonant peak is fit to a Lorentzian . spectrum by measuring the value of Z , . In practice , ther - mal fluctuations and mechanical vibration allow the tip to overcome the energy barrier to snapping before the critical value of Z is reached . Given an approach speed and as - suming that only thermal fluctuations are relevant , one can estimate the distance at which the instability actually oc - curs . The calculation is formally equivalent to the one done by Garners for the tunneling rate of a particle over a potential barrier ( in the small - viscosity limit ) . I8 The result is that the correction is large if one measures the disconti - nuity using the tip deflection ( i . e . , measures along the y axis of Fig . 2 ) and small if one measures the piezo dis - placement ( i . e . , measures along the x axis of Fig . 2 ) . This is consistent with the plot of the full theoretical curve in Fig , 2 . To avoid the uncertainties due to variation in the snapping distance from run to run , we decided to fit to the tip deflection & fire the instability . This yielded consistent results . The value of I allows us to calculate an experimen - tal value of R , provided that we have measured the force constant and have an estimate of the Hamaker constant . i9 Details of the calculations of Hamaker constants have been included in Appendix A . V . A SAMPLE CALIBRATION The method of tip calibration detailed above has been applied to microfabricated Si , N , cantilevers with integral pyramidal tips . 20 Typical results are discussed below . Figure 3 shows the power spectrum of the fluctuations in the displacement of a typical spring . In our case , the analog - to - digital converter of the AFM electronics was un - able to measure useful time - series data owing to a combi - nation of a low signal - strength and low resolution . Instead , we used a lock - in amplifier21 to measure the deflection - detector signal - power as a function of frequency . 22 The y axis of this figure has units of A’ , which is appropriate for a power spectral density of displacement fluctuations - To calibrate the detector signal in terms of tip displacement , we needed first to measure the displacement of the piezo - electric tube scanner as a function of applied voltage . Since several schemes for calibrating the piezo have already been 1870 Rev . Sci . Instrum . , Vol . 64 , No . 7 , July 1993 AFM tipx 1870 Downloaded 02 Oct 2003 to 131 . 104 . 152 . 116 . Redistribution subject to AIP license or copyright , see http : / / ojps . aip . org / rsio / rsicr . jsp published , 23 we leave the details of our method to Appen - dix B . Essentially , a linear variable differential transformer ( LVDT ) displacement sensor was used to measure the pi - ezo scanner response . The detector could be calibrated once the piezo response was known by using the measure - ment of cantilever deflection in those portions of the force spectra where the tip and sample were in contact . Note that the deflection detector is calibrated in terms of vertical piezo displacement while the cantilever is tilted about 15” from the vertical . The scale of Fig . 3 has been corrected so that fluctuations are measured in a direction normal to the cantilever plane . In addition to the thermal fluctuations of the cantile - ver , background instrumental noise must be subtracted from the spectrum . Over the frequency range shown in Fig . 3 , the noise spectrum is flat . At low frequencies , l / f noise becomes important so that a direct measurement of x ( t ) that does not filter low frequencies would underestimate the true spring constant . The resonant peak is fit to a Lorentzian . Integrating this curve ( with the background subtracted ) , we find the force constant of the cantilever to be k = 0 . 0 167 f 0 . 0008 N / m , where most of the uncertainty is in the calibration of the deflection detector . This result does not agree with the nominal value of 0 . 064 N / m claimed by the manufacturer . The resonant frequency for the cantilever , measured to be 19 . 6 kHz , is also quite far from its nominal value of 17 kHz . The quality factor of the cantilever resonance is calculated from the fit parameters to be Q = 30 . A typical force spectrum for a mica sample is shown in Fig . 2 . Both the piezo displacement ( x axis ) and detector output ( v axis ) have been calibrated24 ( see Appendix B ) . The deflection of the cantilever and eventual snap to con - tact are evident in this plot , The experimental data is fit to a theoretical model of the tip deflection in the region before the snap . Note that the model curve given by the best fit extends below the experimental value of Z , , indicating that the snap has occurred at a distance greater than that pre - dicted by the model . For our tip , averaging values obtained from more than twenty force spectra resulted in an esti - mate of the effective tip radius of R = 15OOk 160 A ( using the value of A calculated in Appendix A ) . Most of the uncertainty in this figure is in the Hamaker constant and spring constant - the statistical uncertainty in the range of values obtained from the individual fits was only 2 % . 25 The nominal macroscopic radius of curvature for the batch of tips used was 400 A . 26 A possible explanation for this large effective radius is that a microfabricated pyramidal tip may terminate in a line rather than an point if the base of the tip is not perfectly square . The effective radius would then depend on both the rounding of the tip along this line and the length of the line . It is also possible that some irreversible deformation of the tip occurred while it was in contact with the sample . We emphasize that , far from be - ing a detail , such information about the tip is crucial in interpreting images and force measurements . VI . DISCUSSION We have described a simple calibration procedure for AFM tips whose essential steps can be implemented using the hardware available with any AFM . This calibration is particularly useful when the tip is to be used for force measurements . However , it may also aid in tip selection when maximum resolution ( minimum R ) or a particular cantilever stiffness is required . Our own work that motivated this study has focused on the measurement of Hamaker constants for the silicon nitride - mica system immersed in various liquids . We have shown that even when van der Waals forces are very weak , the snapping distance of the tip - deflection curve can yield quantitative estimates of the Hamaker constant - - once the tip radius and spring constant have been calibrated . 6 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This study was supported by NSERC operating and equipment grants . J . B . is an Alfred P . Sloan Fellow . APPENDIX A : THE HAMAKER CONSTANT The expression for the Hamaker constant in terms of the vdW force constant C given in Sec . IV ignores many - body effects and retardation effects for large distances . Many - body effects do not alter the form of the interaction potential ; they only change the value of the Hamaker con - stant . In the nonretarded limit , the Hamaker constant be - tween two media can be calculated using the Lifshitz theory . 27 According to this approach , the Hamaker con - stant depends on the dielectric responses , E ( O ) , of the two media involved and is given by28 AI * = ( ‘h ; $ ztT , 3k ; T n $ o s ; l where ( Ala ) ( Alb ) and where the prime on the first summation indicates that the n = O term is given half weight . The numerical sub - scripts on A and A refer to the tip ( 1 ) and sample ( 2 ) . The formulas are slightly more complicated when the interven - ing medium is a liquid , rather than air or vacuum . ) The Hamaker constant , then , depends on the dielectric proper - ties of the media via the dielectric functions evaluated at complex frequencies . These e ( i { ) functions are , however , real functions and can be evaluated through the Kramers - Kronig relation29 s m W E” ( O ) 2 * dw . 0 6J + c ( - 42 ) In this expression , E” ( 0 ) is the imaginary part of the di - electric response and is proportional to the absorption at frequency w . As can be seen , the e ( ic ) function is real and 1671 Rev . Sci . Instrum . , Vol . 64 , No . 7 , July 1993 AFM tips 1671 Downloaded 02 Oct 2003 to 131 . 104 . 152 . 116 . Redistribution subject to AIP license or copyright , see http : / / ojps . aip . org / rsio / rsicr . jsp TABLE I . Dielectric data for tip and sample materials . Medium c IR ( x lzb’ ) C” , Si3N4’ 2 . 558 4 . 008 2 . 182 Micah 3 . 917 1 . 884 1 . 483 ‘Values derived from data in Ref . 35 . values from Ref . 36 . % v ( x10’6s - ‘ ) 1 . 303 1 . 57 decreases monotonically in l ( from e . at g = O to a value of 1 as g - + CO f . Furthermore , it is constant in frequency ranges where the absorption E” is zero . Armed with a knowledge of the absorption spectra of the media , we can calculate the vdW interactions between the tip and the sample . However , we must remember that our numerical estimates will only be as good as the dielectric data used to compute the I function . To calculate Hamaker constants , we need an explicit representation of the functions t - ( ig ) for each of the mate - rials involved . In principle , this would require measuring the absorption spectrum for all frequencies , which is im - practical . However , Ninham and Parsegian3’ have shown that E ( Y ) for insulators can be adequately approximated by functions of the form ( A31 They assume that there are X absorptions with strengths Ci in narrow frequency bands located at frequencies Wi . For most purposes , it is sufficient to consider only a single in - frared ( IR ) and a single ultraviolet ( UV ) absorption , which account for vibrational and electron ionization ab - sorption , respectively . ’ The IR and UV absorptions can be inferred from the static dielectric constant e . and n ( w ) data for each medium . 28 Any flat , electrically neutral sample is suitable for tip calibrations if dielectric data for the material are available . Experimentally , graphite provides good results , but theo - retical estimates of E ( z $ ) are less accurate for conductors than they are for insulators . We chose instead to use a cleaved muscovite mica surface , though care must be taken in the preparation of the sample . Since the mica surface usually becomes charged when cleaved , best results are obtained when the ambient humidity is high enough to discharge the surface . On the other hand , if the humidity is too high , water condenses between tip and sample , and surface - tension forces dominate . In practice , good results were obtained when the ambient humidity was between 40 % and 70 % . Samples cleaved in air that was too dry could be discharged by setting a beaker full of water next to the mica & Since both electrostatic and capillary forces have a range of order 1 pm or more , it was easy to check whether eitber was present : in good samples , there was no measurable tip deflection until the tip was less than 200 A from the surface . Note , finally , ‘that the monolayer of water that collects on the mica surface will not measurably affect the value of A . Using the dielectric data listed in Table I , we estimate 1672 Rev . Sci . Instrum . , Vol . 64 , No . 7 , July 1993 - 300 ] , I I , . I 0 1000 2000 3000 4ooo Voltage channel FIG . 4 . Measurement of the piezo displacement as a function of the applied voltage in terms of the binary channel set by the AFM control unit . ( a ) Displacement of the piezo measured by an LVDT . ( b ) Resid - uals of a quadratic fit to the data . the Hamaker constant for a Si3N , - air - mica system to be ( l . lfO . l ) ~ lO - I9 J . APPENDIX Ek CALIBRATION OF THE AFM One of the difficulties in the cantilever calibration pro - cedure described in this article is that both the vertical motion of the piezoelectric tube scanner and the sensitivity of the deflection detector must be accurately calibrated . The piezo response and detector sensitivity are , in general , nonlinear and both responses are folded into the single measurement of tip deflection . The nonlinearity is small enough that both the piezo and detector responses can be considered to be linear in the region of interest , which is of the order of 100 A in extent - a small portion of the avail - able scanning range for the piezo and deflection range for the tip . Below , we describe a procedure to calibrate both the piezo and the detector of an AFM 1 . Piero calibration The scanner tubes are usually calibrated by the man - ufacturer , but we found that calibration parameters can change over time . In order to obtain an accurate expression for the piezo response prior to cantilever calibrations , a linear variable differential transformer ( LVDT ) displace - ment transducer” was used to measure the piezo position over its full vertical range . The piezo range was approxi - mately one pm in our case , which is a small displacement , even for relatively sensitive LVDTs . However , man adequate calibration was obtained by averaging several sets of data , each of which consisted of 4096 calibration points . 32 The piezo calibration is shown in Fig . 4 ( a ) where fif - teen separate runs were averaged . The y axis of this plot was calibrated in units of angstroms using the LVDT AFM tips 1672 Downloaded 02 Oct 2003 to 131 . 104 . 152 . 116 . Redistribution subject to AIP license or copyright , see http : / / ojps . aip . org / rsio / rsicr . jsp ( which was itself calibrated using a micrometer ) . The x axis is recorded in units corresponding to the digitized voltage output from the AFM control module to the piezo . This curve is accurately modeled as a quadratic , as the fit residuals show in Fig . 4 ( b ) . The resulting expression for the piezo displacement as a function of binary voltage channel was then used to calibrate the displacement scale in measured force spectra . 2 . Detector calibration Several methods of detecting cantilever deflection are in use . In our case , cantilever deflection is measured using the optical - lever technique . 33 In this detection system , a laser beam is reflected from the back of the cantilever onto a position - sensitive photodetector ( PSPD ) . The cantilever deflection is then measured as a difference signal between the two halves of the PSPD . This signal is not likely to be linear with the deflection ; rather , it depends on the cross - sectional intensity distribution of the reflected laser beam , which will be different each time the laser is adjusted for a new microlever . Once the vertical response of the piezo scanner has been calibrated , we can calibrate the detector using part of the force - spectrum curve . This method is applicable to any detector system and can be done at the same time as the measurements for the snapping - distance calibration . If we assume that the compliance of the weak cantilever is smaller than that of either the tip or the sample , 34 then the deflection of the tip and the displacement of the sample must be equal once the two are in contact . This allows us to use the regions of force spectra where the tip and sample ‘are in contact as calibration curves for the detector . As we only need to calibrate the detector for deflections smaller than a few nanometers , we can use a linear fit to a small portion of the force spectrum . ‘G . Binnig and C . F . Quate , Phys . Rev . Lett . 56 , 930 ( 1986 ) . ‘Y . Martin , C . C . Williams , and H . K . Wickramasinghe , J . Appl . Phys . 6X , 4723 ( 1987 ) . ‘A . L . Weisenhom , P . Maivald , H . - J . Butt , and P . K . Hansma , Phys . Rev . B 45 , 11 226 ( 1992 ) . ‘W . A . Ducker , T . J . Senden , and R . M . Pashley , Langmuir 8 , 183 1 ( 1992 ) . ‘L . Olsson , P . Tengvall , R . Wigren , and R . Erlandsson , Ultramicroscopy 42 - u . 73 ( 1992 ) . 6J . L . Hutter and J . Bechhoefer ( unpublished ) . ‘T . R . Albrecht , S . Akamine , T . E . Carver , and C . F . Quate , J . Vat . Sci . Technol . A 8 , 3386 ( 1990 ) . ‘H . Kado , K . Yokoyama , and T . Tohda , Rev . Sci . Instrum . 63 , 3330 ( 1992 ) . ‘M . Fotino , Rev . Sci . Instrum . 64 , 159 ( 1993 ) . ‘OS . Akamine and C . F . Quate , J . Vat . Sci . Technol . B 10 , 2307 ( 1992 ) . ‘ & A method for measuring the spring constant of cantilevers , different from ours , has recently been published . See J . P . Cleveland , S . Manne , D . Bocek , and P . K . Hansma , Rev . Sci . Instrum . 64 , 403 ( 1993 ) . 1873 Rev . Scl . Instrum . , Vol . 64 , No . 7 , July 1993 ” D . Sarid and V . Elings , J . Vat . Sci . Technoi . B 9 , 43 1 ( 1991 ) . ‘ * N . A . Bumham , D . D . Dominguez . R . L . Mowery , and R . J . C & on , Phys . Rev . Lett . 64 , 1931 ( 1990 ) . “J . L . Hutter and J . Bechhoefer , J . Appl . Phys . 73 , 4123 ( 1993 ) . “C . V . Heer , Statistical Mechanics Kinetic Theory , and Stochastic Pro - cesses ( Academic , New York , 1972 ) . p . 431 . 15W H Press , B . P . Flannery , S . A . Teukolsky , and W . T . Vetterling , . . Numerical Recipes in FORTRAN ( Cambridge University Press , Cam - bridge , 1989 ) , Chap . 12 . 16H . C . Hamaker , Physica 4 , 1058 ( 1937 ) . “D . Tabor and R . H . S . Winterton , Proc . R . Sot . London , Ser . A 312 , 435 ( 1969 ) . ‘ * For discussions of the Kramers problem , see H . A . Kramers , Physica 7 , 284 ( 1940 ) , and P . Hiinggi , P . Talkner , and M . Borkovec , Rev . Mod . Phys . 62 , 251 ( 1990 ) . l9 F . J . Giessibl and G . Binnig have also used measurements of tip deflec - tion to model tip shape . F . J . Giessibl and G . Biiig ( unpublished ) . 20The AFM and tips were purchased from Park Scientific Instruments ( 1171 Borregas Ave . , Sunnyvale , CA 94089 ) . The software controlling the force - spectrum routine was modified to acquire 4096 points per measurement . Note that , as delivered , the feedback circuit controlling vertical displacement of the piezoelectric tube scanner cannot be dis - abled . The result is that the voltage applied across the piezo differs from the imposed value by about one volt ( over a range of 300 V full scale ) . The extra , uncontrollable voltage may be removed by grounding the appropriate “fast feedback” line of the DB25 connector joining the SFM probe module to the main control unit . We thank V . Croquette for alerting us to this peculiarity of the Park AFM . “Model SR 850 DSP , Stanford Research Systems , 1290 - D Reamwood Avenue , Sunnyvale , California 94089 . Note that in order to measure quantitative power spectra using a lock - in amplifier , one must divide the apparent power by the equivalent - noise bandwidth of the lock - in . * * The lock - in was used more out of convenience than necessity . Further amplification of the detector signal would have permitted a direct mea - surement of the spring deflection . 23Y . Li and S . M . Linday , Rev . Sci . Instrum . 62 , 2630 ( 1991 ) . 241n practice , the detector signal drifts slightly during the measurement . We correct for this drift by a linear subtraction that straightens the baseline . Once the instrumental drift was removed , we fit the data using a nonretarded vdW potential . This is justified because almost all of the measurable deflection occurs within 200 A of the tip . * * The accuracy of our force spectrum measurements was increased - at the cost of measurement speed - by using a good voltmeter to measure directly the detector signal . 26Had our measurement of the spring constant agreed with the manufac - turer’s estimate , our value for the tip radius would have increased by a factor of 4 . “E . M . Lifshitz , Sov . Phys . JETP 2 , 73 ( 1956 ) . * * D B . Hough and L . R . White , Adv . Colloid . Interface Sci . 14 , 3 ( l . 980 ) . * ‘L . D . Landau and E . M . Lifshitz , Electrodynamics of Continuous Media ( Pergamon , New York , 1960 ) . MB . W . Nmham and V . A . Parsegian , Biophys . J . 10 , 646 ( 1970 ) . “Lucas Schaevitz , 7905 N . Route 130 , Pennsauken , NJ 08110 - 1489 . 32Note that the most recent versions of the AFM have tended to incor - porate integral systems to measure and control piezo displacement . For such AIM’s , this part of our calibration is obviously unnecessary . 33G . Meyer and N . M . Amer , Appl . Phys . L & t . 53 , 1045 ( 1988 ) . 34S . J . O’Shea and M . E . Welland , Appl . Phys . L & t . 60 , 2356 ( 1992 ) . 35 Handbook of Optical Constants of Solids , edited by E . D . Palik ( Aca - demic , Orlando , 1985 ) . 36J . Mahanty and B . W . Ninham , Dispersion Forces ( Academic , New York , 1976 ) , p . 74 . AFM tips 1673 Downloaded 02 Oct 2003 to 131 . 104 . 152 . 116 . Redistribution subject to AIP license or copyright , see http : / / ojps . aip . org / rsio / rsicr . jsp