An explicit cue improves creative analogical reasoning Adam E . Green a , ⁎ , Michael S . Cohen b , Joseph U . Kim c , Jeremy R . Gray d a Department of Psychology , Georgetown University , United States b Department of Psychology , University of California , Los Angeles , United States c Department of Psychology , Vanderbilt University , United States d Department of Psychology , Yale University , United States a r t i c l e i n f o a b s t r a c t Article history : Received 7 November 2011 Received in revised form 12 July 2012 Accepted 30 August 2012 Available online 19 September 2012 Creativity is likely to be related to intelligence , though the nature of this relationship remains largely unresolved and few studies have examined creativity in the context of measures traditionally related to intelligence . Like intelligence , creativity has often been studied as a static trait or as subject to change over long durations through training or education . By contrast , creativity as a dynamic state , particularly as a state that is subject to conscious augmentation within short time durations , has been less well - studied . Here , we tested the hypothesis that performance on a task of creative intelligence ( creative analogical reasoning ) can be improved through the deliberate effort to be creative . Specifically , we tested whether an explicit cue to “ think creatively ” would elicit better identification of creative analogies among 40 participants performing a four - term verbal analogical reasoning task . Consistent with our hypothesis , on creativity cue trials , the participants were 1 ) more likely to accurately identify highly creative analogies as valid , and 2 ) no more likely to inaccurately identify false analogies as valid . This pattern of results indicates that , consistent with a widely accepted standard for measuring creativity , the cue was successful in eliciting responses that were not only novel ( divergent ) but were also appropriate ( bounded by task constraints ) . The findings show , in a within - subjects design , that deliberately attempting to augment creative state can enhance performanceonareasoningtaskwithobjectivecriteria . Thesefindingsarediscussedwithrespect to the state vs . trait distinction in creativity and likely neural mechanisms of creative reasoning . © 2012 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . Keywords : Creativity Analogical reasoning Semantic distance 1 . Introduction While creativity can be difficult to operationalize , cogni - tive research has identified some factors that contribute to creativity in reasoning . For example , in analogical reasoning ( e . g . , Puppy is to Dog as Spark is to Fire ) , the surface - level dissimilarity , or semantic distance , between the items being compared ( e . g . , the semantic distance from [ Puppy : Dog ] to [ Spark : Fire ] ) is a key factor in determining the creativity of analogical connections ( Costello & Keane , 2000 ; Green , Fugelsang , Kraemer , & Dunbar , 2008 ; Holyoak & Thagard , 1995 ; Sternberg , 1997 ) . Furthermore , aconsensushasemerged that creative connections must have two primary charac - teristics in order to produce usable innovation : novelty , a characteristic reflected by divergence or unusualness , and task - appropriateness , a characteristic reflected by fitting pro - duction torelevantconstraints ( Mayer , 1999 ; notethat quality , or the characteristic of being compelling , is often considered a third defining characteristic of creativity ) . Although novelty aloneissometimesinformallyconsideredaroughequivalentof creativity , task - appropriateness is necessary in order to make novel , semantically distant connections usable ( Mayer , 1999 ; Sternberg , 1997 ) . Analogical reasoning requires generating novel relations ( mappings ) that draw a connection between previously unconnectedconcepts orsituations ( e . g . , generatinga mapping between [ Puppy : Dog ] and [ Spark : Fire ] ) . Analogical relations Intelligence 40 ( 2012 ) 598 – 603 ⁎ Correspondingauthorat : DepartmentofPsychology , 302CWhiteGravenor Hall , 3700 O Street , NW , Box 571001 , Washington , DC 20057 , United States . Tel . : + 1 202 687 5581 ; fax : + 1 202 687 6050 . E - mail address : aeg58 @ georgetown . edu ( A . E . Green ) . 0160 - 2896 / $ – see front matter © 2012 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . intell . 2012 . 08 . 005 Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect Intelligence are referred to as second - order relations because they are relations between relations . Successful analogical reasoning requires generation of mappings that are not just novel , but that also fit the constraints imposed by the specific terms used in the analogy . In particular , the first - order relations on the respective sides of the analogy ( e . g . , the first - order relation between Puppy and Dog , and the first - order relation between Spark and Fire ) impose constraints on appropriate mappings . Ignoring the constraints of the first - order relations ( e . g . generating a mapping based on the child to parent relation - ship of Puppy : Dog that does not fit the constraints of the Spark : Fire relation ) would not lead to a useful mapping . Thus , analogical reasoning represents a good case of novel gener - ation ( of mappings ) with prominent constraints of task - appropriateness . Evidence from science , education , and industry indicates theeffectivenessofanalogicalreasoningasameansofdirecting and constraining creative connections for innovative out - comes ( Costello & Keane , 2000 ; Dahl & Moreau , 2002 ; Holyoak & Thagard , 1995 ; Schunn , Paulus , Cagan , & Wood , 2006 ) . Reasoning by analogy has proved to be an especially useful tool in the sciences , helping scientists explain and find new solutions for unexpected issues that arise in their research ( Dunbar & Blanchette , 2001 ) . Creative analogies that bridge great semantic distances , as when Harvey likened the heart to a water pump , have repeatedly demonstrated the potential to spark innovative leaps of scientific advancement ( Dunbar & Blanchette , 2001 ; Holyoak & Thagard , 1995 ) . However , despite the considerable value of creative analogical reasoning , studies of reasoning have not examined parameters directly related to creativity ( e . g . , semantic distance ) . Likewise , studies of creative thinking have typically been constructed without the con - straints of a reasoning task , and have instead focused on the novelty / divergence component ( Carlsson , Wendt , & Risberg , 2000 ; Howard - Jones , Blakemore , Samuel , Summers , & Claxton , 2005 ) . Thus , animportanttopicforbothcreativityandreasoning research is creative integration of semantically distant con - cepts in the service of reasoning . 1 . 1 . Can creativity be cued ? Much research on the construct of creativity has been devoted to the measurement of creativity as a static trait , an intrinsic ability that some have and others do not . For instance , Guilford ' s theoretical framework ( Guilford , 1950 , 1967 ) , and the prominent Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking ( Torrance , 1966 ) are based on measurement of creativity as a stable trait quality , similar to IQ . A great deal of empirical work has also been done to characterize the effects of long - term training or educational programs on creativity over the course of development or long periods within adulthood ( Pirkko , 1975 , and see Rose & Lin , 1984 , and Scott , Leritz , & Mumford , 2004 , for reviews ) . Major research initiatives have sought to bolster creativity in the classroom environment to foster innovation through education ( e . g . , Schunn et al . , 2006 ) . While these lines of research are still active , several investigations have emerged recently which are directed at the question of creativity as a dynamic state ( e . g . , Amabile , 1996 ; Dai & Renzulli , 2008 ; O ' Hara & Sternberg , 2001 ) . A central issue within the emerging dynamic creativity lit - erature concerns the effect of explicit cues to be creative . Amabile ( 1996 ) posits that motivation to be creative may be “ the most important determinant of the difference between what a person can do and what he will do . ” However , Amabile theorizes that only extrinsic cues that produce an intrinsic motivation to think creatively will have a beneficial effect ; cues that make extrinsic motivations ( e . g . , money ) more salient may actually impair creativity because they are perceived as controlling or intimidating . Other work has demonstrated more specifically how extrinsic cues to think creatively can enhance performance . For instance , O ' Hara and Sternberg ( 2001 ) found that groups of participants who received an explicit cue to be creative wrote essays that were more creative than a control group that did not receive the creativity cue . This evidence is bolstered by several other reports of improved performance on creativity measures in between - subjects designs that varied the explicit instructions given to separate groups ( e . g . , Harrington , 1975 ; see Chen et al . , 2005 , for a more complete review ) . However , because these studies have all employed between - groups designs , they have not been able to test whether creativity is a dynamic state in the sense of being heightened and lessened within an individual across time . Further , these studies did not measure the effect of increased creativity on reasoning . A small number of studies have examined dynamic creativity using a within - subjects paradigm . One early study by Gilchrist and Taft ( 1972 ) showed some evidence for facilitation of originality when participants were instructed to “ be original . ” However , the findings of this report were highly confounded by order effects , as the creativity condi - tion always followed the same neutral condition , and thus are difficulttointerpret . Three morerecent studies haveexamined within - subjects effects of explicit instructions in creativity - related tasks ( Abdullaev & Posner , 1997 ; Howard - Jones et al . , 2005 ; Seger , Desmond , Glover , & Gabrieli , 2000 ) . However , these studies focused primarily on changes in neural activity ; only one of these actually measured the creativity of partici - pants ' responses to determine whether the instructions had an effect on behavioral performance ( Howard - Jones et al . , 2005 ) . These authors used a within - subjects paradigm that included a story - writing task , and cued subjects to either be creative or be uncreative on different trials . Stories generated under the creativity cue were in fact rated to be more creative . This study provided an initial demonstration of within - subject effects of acreativitycue ; however , itdidnotaddresseffectsonreasoning . Further , this study was limited in that only eight participants were included and , because of the lengthy nature of a story - writing task , only a relatively small number of trials were possible per individual . In addition , Howard - Jones et al . relied on subjective ratings to assess the creativity of re - sponses . This is a commonly used method of assessing creative performance , but it allows less measurement precision than an objective index . 1 . 2 . Can a cue improve reasoning ? Like creativity , reasoning ability has often been viewed as a static trait , and is generally considered a major component of trait intelligence as measured by standardized intelligence tests ( e . g . , Raven , Raven , & Court , 1998 ; Roid , 2003 ; Wechsler , 1997 ; Woodcock , McGrew , & Mather , 2001 ) . However , basedon between - subjects research , there is some empirical indication 599 A . E . Green et al . / Intelligence 40 ( 2012 ) 598 – 603 that reasoning ability may be somewhat dynamic and can be influenced by explicit cues . For instance , Gick and Holyoak ( 1980 ) found that a group of participants who received no explicit cue performed poorly on an analogical transfer task in which a target problem could be solved by drawing an analogy to a previously exposed story . However , in a group that received an explicit hint to consider the previously exposed story when generating solutions , 30 % more subjects were able to generate the optimal solution to the target problem ( Gick & Holyoak , 1980 ) . Chen et al . ( 2005 ) found that mathematical problem - solving performance benefited from explicit cues to think creatively in a between - subject design . This somewhat unexpected finding in a mathematics task not typicallyassociatedwithcreativityprovidessupportforpossible benefits of creativity cues for reasoning . 1 . 3 . The approach of the present investigation In the present investigation , we examined analogical reasoning using verbal propositional analogies of the basic form A is to B as C is to D . These analogies were classified as “ cross - domain ” ( more creative ) or “ within - domain ” ( less creative ) by a group of 84 raters . The experimental task we employed is somewhat unusual for a creativity paradigm in that it does not require overtly producing new words or images . The creativity involved in the present analogical reasoningtaskwasinmentallygeneratinganalogicalmappings between a word - pair presented on the left of a computer screen and a word - pair on the right ( Fig . 1 ) . These mappings were not explicitly available to participants , but rather participants had to come up with mapping ( s ) that validly connectedthetwoword - pairs . Althoughgenerationinthistask wascovert , rather than overt , it maynonethelessbeconsidered a form of creative generation . Creative ideas can be ( and often are ) generated without being overtly expressed . Further , we have obtained evidence in recent brain - imaging investigations of creative analogical reasoning that demonstrates strong similarity between the analogy evaluation task used in the present study and a task of overtly generating solutions to open ‐ ended analogies ( Green , Fugelsang , Kraemer , Gray , & Dunbar , 2010 , 2012 ; see Discussion ) . Investigating individuals ' ability to “ turn on ” creative reasoning processes deliberately and over short durations , hasimportantimplicationsforeducationresearchandteaching strategies . As noted above , few previous studies of creativity or reasoning have examined variation in performance within an individual across time , especially over short durations . Here , we hypothesized that analogical reasoning in our experimentaltaskwouldbeaffectedbychangesincreativestate because good performance depended on subjects mentally generating creativemappings . Importantly , these mappings had to be bothnovel ( they had to connect semantically distant word pairs to form creative analogies ) , and task - appropriate ( they had to fit the four - word sets , and four - word sets that did not support valid mappings had to be identified as such ) . We tested whether an explicit creativity cue would enhance creative analogical reasoning without undermining appropriateness . Specifically , we compared participants ' analogical mapping for creative analogy stimuli on creativity cue vs . non - cue trials . 2 . Methods 2 . 1 . Subjects 40undergraduatenativeEnglishspeakersatYaleUniversity ( 22 females and 18 males , aged 20±1 . 4 years ) took part in the investigation for course credit . Informed written consent for all participants was obtained prior to the experiment . All procedures were approved by the Yale University Human Investigation Committee . 2 . 2 . Materials and procedure Stimuli were four - word sets , comprising a word - pair on the left and a word - pair on the right , such as ‘ Kitten : Cat : : Spark : Fire ’ arranged in a rectangle as in Fig . 1 ( see Green et al . , 2010 , for a full listing of the stimuli used ) . On each trial , the participants indicated whether the four - word set consti - tuted a valid analogy ( left word - pair analogous to right word - pair ) , responding ‘ true ’ or ‘ false ’ by key press with the index or middle finger of the right hand . Four - word sets appeared in one of two colors , purple ( non - cue ) or green ( creativity - cue ) . The participants were instructed that “ When the words appear in green , think more creatively about whether the four - word set constitutes a valid analogy . ” We obtained asemanticdistancevalueforeachanalogyitemusing latent semantic analysis ( Landauer & Dumais , 1997 ; Landauer , Foltz , & Laham , 1998 ) . Inparticular , pairwisecomparisonswere made between the word pairs constituting the left and right halves of each analogy . The latent semantic analysis application ( http : / / lsa . colorado . edu ) calculates the similarity between the contextual - usage meanings of words as measured by the cosine of the included angle between vectors assigned to those words within a very high - dimensional “ semantic space , ” comprising extensive corpora of English text . A vector is added for multiword inputs such as the word pairs constituting our analogy stimuli . In addition , 84 independent raters provided a binary ratingfor all stimuliinorder toseparatetheminto two types : cross - domain analogies ( involving mapping between items taken from disparate semantic domains ) , and within - domain analogies ( involving mapping between items taken from proximal Fig . 1 . Example stimuli ( from Green et al . , 2010 ) . The figure displays examples of the 3 classes of trials presented to the participants in this study . The same word pair appeared on the left side in 1 trial of each class . 600 A . E . Green et al . / Intelligence 40 ( 2012 ) 598 – 603 semanticdomains ; examplesinFig . 1 ; seeGreenetal . , 2008for discussion of the within - domain vs . cross - domain distinction in analogy ) . All stimuli were established as within - domain or cross - domain at a level of > 90 % agreement among the group of 84 independent raters ; see Green et al . ( 2010 ) . Equal numbers of within - domain and cross - domain analogy stimuli wereused increativity - cue andnon - cue trials . All stimuliwere determined True or False at > 90 % agreementamongtheseparate group of 84 participants . False analogies were included as a manipulation check ( half within - domain , half cross - domain ) . In order to reduce stimulus - specific confounding , the same ‘ base ’ word - pair ( e . g . , [ Kitten : Cat ] ) was used on the left side in one trial of each stimulus type . All words were singular nouns . Visuo - spatial properties were consistent across stimuli ; see Green et al . ( 2010 ) for details . 3 . Results Overall accuracy was 93 . 21 % , SE = . 32 . A 2 ( Domain : Cross - domain , Within - domain ) ×2 ( Validity : True , False ) × 2 ( Cue : Creativity cue , Non - cue ) ANOVA revealed no main effect of Domain ( F b 1 ) , or Cue ( F ( 39 ) = 3 . 45 , p = . 07 , η p2 = . 08 ) on accuracy , a main effect of Validity ( F ( 39 ) = 7 . 26 , p = . 01 , η p2 = . 16 ) , a Domain×Cue interaction ( F ( 39 ) = 11 . 68 , p = . 001 , η p2 = . 23 ) , a Cue×Validity interaction ( F ( 39 ) = 5 . 46 , p = . 02 , η p2 = . 12 ) , no Validity×Domain interaction ( F b 1 ) , and a three - wayDomain×Validity×Cue interaction ( F ( 39 ) = 18 . 3 , p b . 001 , η p2 = . 32 ) . Consistent with our central hypothesis , direct com - parisons revealed that accuracy was significantly greater for cross - domain ( more creative ) analogies on creativity cue trials ( 94 . 53 % , SE = . 56 ) than cross - domain analogies on non - cue trials ( 91 . 66 % , SE = . 59 ; t ( 39 ) = 3 . 50 , SE = . 82 , p = . 001 ) . Critically , this effect was driven by greater accuracy for true cross - domainanalogies oncreativitycuetrials ( 95 . 15 % , SE = . 72 ) than true cross - domain analogies on non cue trials ( 89 . 33 % , SE = . 80 ; t ( 39 ) = 5 . 62 , SE = 1 . 04 , p b . 001 ) . Also consistent with our hypothesis , accuracy was not significantly different for false cross - domain analogies on creativity cue trials ( 93 . 9 % , SE = . 78 ) vs . false cross - domain analogies on non - cue trials ( 94 % , SE = . 74 ; t ( 39 ) = . 101 , SE = . 99 , p = . 92 ) , or for any direct contrast betweenfalse trials . Response times ( RTs ) were longer for creativity cue trials ( M = 5206 , SE = 58 ms ) than for non - cue trials ( M = 4702 , SE = 46 ms ; t ( 39 ) = 4 . 88 , SE = 1 . 31 , p b . 001 ) . RTs were also longer for cross - domain analogies ( M = 5065 , SE = 64 ms ) than for within - domain analogies ( M = 4843 , SE = 43 ms ; t ( 39 ) = 3 . 18 , SE = 1 . 05 , p = . 003 ) . As in previous studies of analogy in our laboratory and elsewhere , RTs were longer for true trials ( M = 5298 , SE = 53 ) than for false trials ( M = 4610 , SE = 46 ; t ( 39 ) = 5 . 03 , SE = 1 . 11 , p b . 001 ) . Response times were longer for true cross - domain analogies on creativity cue trials ( M = 5571 , SE = 74 ms ) than for true cross - domain analogies on non - cue trials ( M = 5388 , SE = 55 ms ; t ( 39 ) = 2 . 73 , SE = 1 . 11 , p = . 009 ) . 4 . Discussion We found that an explicit cue to think creatively led to improved performance in mapping true , cross - domain ( crea - tive ) analogies without decreasing accuracy in identifying false analogies . These findings indicate that , while deliberately trying to think more creatively , subjects were more effective in creative generation of potential valid mappings for cross - domain analogies . The data also indicate that the improved performanceon true cross - domainanalogies wasnot the result of a general criterion shift to a more lenient decision threshold ( i . e . , participants did not cease to meet the appropriateness criterion of creativity ) . This is the first demonstration to our knowledge of a creativity cue enhancing analogical reasoning . This study is also unique in showing a selective enhancement of creativity with an item - level instructional cue across a large numberoftrialsandusinganobjective , quantifiablemeasureof creative performance . The data indicate the extent to which an explicit cue can lead to successful conscious augmentation of creative state over short durations within an individual . 4 . 1 . Semantic distance and creative analogy While semantic distance does not exhaustively characterize creativity , our findings have bearing on creativity research . In the context of analogical reasoning , semantic distance is commonly identified as a determinant of creativity ( i . e . , more semantically distant analogies are more creative ; e . g . , Costello & Keane , 2000 ; Green et al . , 2010 , 2012 ; Holyoak & Thagard , 1995 ) , and LSA - derived semantic distance values were highly consistent with the classification of within - domain vs . cross - domain analogies for our set of stimuli . Creativity is difficult or likely impossible to operationalize as a unitary construct . In order to gain insights into creative cognition , it is useful to address more constrained – preferably quantifiable – constructs , such as semantic distance , that are related to creativity . Our study tested the effect of semantic distance , coupled with a cue to think creatively , on cognitive processing in a reasoning task . As such , the current research focused only on the creativity required to generate semantically distant analogical mappings , and does not by any means constitute an exhaustive study of creativity . To our knowledge , this is the first study to examine semantic distance as a factor in reasoning , other than two brain - imaging investigations of neural loci associated with processing semantic distance , which we have recently carried out ( Green et al . , 2010 , 2012 ) . Critically , these prior studies did not involve a creativity cue . 4 . 2 . Generating creative analogical mappings The paradigm employed here differs from several previ - ously employed verbal creativity paradigms in which par - ticipants gave written responses to prompts ( e . g . Amabile , 1996 ; Guilford , 1967 ; Torrance , 1966 ) , and from non - verbal creativity paradigms that examine divergent free responses ( e . g . , Haylock , 1987 ) . The participants in our task did not generate new analogies . Nonetheless , the analogy task used in this study involves a type of creativity that is important for reasoning . In particular , although the elements of the analogies were all explicitly available , the mappings that connected them were not . The participants had to generate these mappings in order to correctly judge the analogies as true or false . Thus , the creative output was not the terms of the analogy , but the connection ( mapping ) that integrates them in a useful way . Recall that the participants did not know whether any given trial was valid or invalid beforehand – and invalid trials were included as a manipulation check – so they could not simply assume that the four - word set represented a 601 A . E . Green et al . / Intelligence 40 ( 2012 ) 598 – 603 valid analogy . Instead , it was necessary to attempt to generate mapping ( s ) for each four - word set . The high level of response accuracy indicates that the participants were carrying out the task as instructed ( i . e . , attempting to generate mappings for each of the four - word stimuli ) . The hypothesis that the process of covertly generating mappings to evaluate analogies is similar to the process of overtly generating creative analogical solutions is supported by two recent brain - imaging studies in our laboratory ( Green et al . , 2010 , 2012 ) . The first of these studies ( Green et al . , 2010 ) employed a paradigm similar to the one used in the present study , requiring subjects to evaluate whether four - word sets were valid analogies . The second study ( Green et al . , 2012 ) required subjects to generate solutions to incom - plete ( open - ended ) analogies . Results indicated that the process of covertly generating mappings and overtly gener - ating solutions relied on a highly similar network of temporal and prefrontal brain regions . Most importantly , these two studies demonstrated that the same region of left frontopolar cortex was the area most responsive to increases in semantic distance for both evaluating analogies and overtly generating solutions . Frontopolar cortex has been identified by conver - gent findings in several studies of analogical reasoning as critical for analogical mapping ( Bunge , Wendelken , Badre , & Wagner , 2005 ; Cho et al . , 2009 ; Geake & Hansen , 2005 ; Green , Fugelsang , Kraemer , Shamosh , & Dunbar , 2006 ; Green et al . , 2010 , 2012 ; Hampshire , Thompson , Duncan , & Owen , 2011 ; Volle , Gilbert , Benoit , & Burgess , 2010 ; Wendelken , Nakhabenko , Donohue , Carter , & Bunge , 2008 ) . In addition , increasing semantic distance had similar effects on response time and accuracy for both evaluation and overt generation . Generating creative connections ( mappings ) between existing items and concepts is a valuable form of creativity with strong real - world applicability to reasoning ( Donnelly & McDaniel , 1993 ; Dunbar & Blanchette , 2001 ; Holyoak & Thagard , 1995 ) . While creative art sometimes involves creating anewsomethingthatdidnotpreviouslyexist , creativereasoning in the sciences ( and in the arts as well ) quite often involves finding valuable connections between things that are already well known . Highly creative insights reveal non - obvious but structurally informative analogical mappings that had previ - ously not been identified , despite all the necessary elements of information being available . The well - known Bohr model of atomic structure , sparked by seeing the analogy between the atom and the solar system , is an example of this creative analogical insight , as are many other important analogies that have been the foundation for scientific models ( e . g . , between the heart and a water pump , between gas particles and billiard balls ) . The framing of models as analogies leads to specific predictions that can be empirically tested ( e . g . , Are the forces that hold planets near the sun the same as those that hold electrons near the nucleus ? ) . Thus , even where the models are ultimately revised or proven incomplete , the creative analog - ical mappings are extremely valuable for real - world scientific advancement because they help scientists frame , test , and communicate models . Across a range of disciplines , insights that generate creative mappings between available pieces of information are extremely valuable , from identifying analogies across cultures in comparative literature and sociology , to seeing hypothesis - generating similarities between diseases in epidemiology ( typically across great semantic distance ) . The type of creativity involved in the present analogical mapping task represents a strong example of task - appropriateness . As noted above , there is near consensus among creativity researchers that task - appropriateness , and not just divergence , is an important element of the definition of creativity . Divergent ideas are truly creative only if they fit relevant environmental or task - related constraints , making them usable in some way ( see Mayer , 1999 , for a review ) . In the analogical mapping task , participants must generate mappings that apply to the four words presented on screen , and are constrained by the first - order relations between the two words on each side of the analogy . Otherwise they cannot accurately judge whether the analogies are valid . Generating mappings in this task therefore meets the def - initional requirement of task - appropriateness , necessary for useful creativity . 4 . 3 . Implications of dynamic creativity These initial findings will support further research into conscious , acute augmentation of creativity and , preliminar - ily , have some noteworthy implications for the state vs . trait distinction in creativity research . Our findings have prelim - inary bearing on strategies in education and elsewhere aimed at bolstering the highly valued skill of analogical reasoning ( e . g . , Donnelly & McDaniel , 1993 ; Gick & Holyoak , 1980 , 1983 ) . Our data indicate that an explicit cue to think creatively was able to effectively augment reasoning for semantically distant analogies . These findings indicate the hypothesis that students might show improved performance if they were cued to think creatively when attempting to assimilate a novel concept being taught through analogy . This hypothesis is especially intriguing in the context of an extensive literature that indicates analogical reasoning as a core process for learning and an important strategy for teaching ( Blanchette & Dunbar , 2002 ; Chi , Feltovich , & Glaser , 1981 ; Chiu & Lin , 2005 ; Donnelly & McDaniel , 1993 , 2000 ) . With respect to the present findings , it is important to note that the increase in accuracy for cross - domain analogies that was associated with the creativity cue was relatively small ( 91 . 66 % to 94 . 53 % ) . This is likely due , at least in part , to a ceiling effect caused by testing a cohort of highly gifted undergraduate students . Future research should evaluate the cueing procedure in other populations to determine whether it can yield greater effects . 4 . 4 . Neural mechanisms Our findings are also relevant to possible neural mecha - nisms of creativity . Demonstrating a novel paradigm for contrasting more creative vs . less creative thinking across time within an individual has the potential to facilitate further research into the neural mechanisms of creativity , especially in within - subject fMRI paradigms . Previous work ( Green et al . , 2006 , 2010 , 2012 ) has shown that semantic distance in analogies correlates parametrically with greater activation in frontopolar cortex during analogical mapping . If increasing frontopolar activity generally reflects increasing creativity in neural processing , we would predict that the creativity cue manipulation described in the present work is likely to lead to greater activation in frontopolar cortex during analogical 602 A . E . Green et al . / Intelligence 40 ( 2012 ) 598 – 603 reasoning . Building on the present study , future work will help to test this hypothesis and to further elucidate the neural bases of creativity in prefrontal regions . 5 . Conclusions These findings indicate that the ability to generate analogical mappings between semantically distant items can beimprovedbyanexplicitcuetothinkcreatively . Thisis anovel demonstration of improved performance on a reasoning task elicited by a creativity cue on an acute time scale . This finding is relevant for education in that a cue to think creatively could enhance students ' abilities to learn concepts via analogies . In addition , as a within - subjects manipulation , the paradigm reported here will allow for new avenues of investigation into the cognitive and neural mechanisms recruited when a person makes an effort to think more creatively . References Abdullaev , Y . G . , & Posner , M . I . ( 1997 ) . Time course of activating brain areas in generating verbal associations . Psychological Science , 8 , 56 – 59 . Amabile , T . M . ( 1996 ) . Creativity in context : Update to the social psychology of creativity . Boulder , CO : Westview . Blanchette , I . , & Dunbar , K . ( 2002 ) . Representational change and analogy : How analogical inferences alter target representations . Journal of Expermental Psychology : Learning Memory , and Cognition , 28 , 672 – 685 . Bunge , S . A . , Wendelken , C . , Badre , D . , & Wagner , A . D . ( 2005 ) . Analogical reasoning and prefrontal cortex : Evidence for separable retrieval and integration mechanisms . Cerebral Cortex , 15 , 239 – 249 . Carlsson , I . , Wendt , P . E . , & Risberg , J . ( 2000 ) . On the neurobiology of creativity . Differences in frontal activity between high and low creative subjects . Neuropsychologia , 38 , 873 – 885 . Chen , C . , Kasof , J . , Himsel , A . , Dmitrieva , J . , Dong , Q . , & Xue , G . ( 2005 ) . Effects of explicit instruction to “ be creative ” across domains and cultures . Journal of Creative Behavior , 39 , 89 – 110 . Chi , M . T . H . , Feltovich , P . J . , & Glaser , R . ( 1981 ) . Categorization and representation of physics problems by experts and novices . Cognitive Science , 5 , 121 – 152 . Chiu , M . - H . , & Lin , J . - W . ( 2005 ) . Promoting fourth graders ' conceptual change of their understanding of electric current via multiple analogies . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 42 , 429 – 464 . Cho , S . , Moody , T . D . , Fernandino , L . , Mumford , J . A . , Poldrack , R . A . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Common and dissociable prefrontal loci associated with compo - nent mechanisms of analogical reasoning . Cerebral Cortex , 20 , 524 – 533 . Costello , F . J . , & Keane , M . T . ( 2000 ) . Efficient creativity : Constraint - guided conceptual combination . Cognitive Science , 24 , 299 – 349 . Dahl , D . W . , & Moreau , P . ( 2002 ) . The influence and value of analogical thinking during new product ideation . Journal of Marketing Research , 39 , 47 – 60 . Dai , D . Y . , & Renzulli , J . S . ( 2008 ) . Snowflakes , living systems , and the mystery of giftedness . Gifted Child Quarterly , 52 , 114 – 130 . Donnelly , C . M . , & McDaniel , M . A . ( 1993 ) . Use of analogy in learning scientific concepts . Journal of ExperimentalPsychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 19 , 975 – 987 . Donnelly , C . M . , & McDaniel , M . A . ( 2000 ) . Analogy with knowledgeable learners : When analogy confers benefits and exacts costs . Psychonomic Bulletin and Review , 7 , 537 – 543 . Dunbar , K . , & Blanchette , I . ( 2001 ) . The in vivo / in vitro approach to cognition : The case of analogy . Trends in Cognitive Science , 5 , 334 – 339 . Geake , J . G . , & Hansen , P . C . ( 2005 ) . Neural correlates of intelligence as revealed by fMRI of fluid analogies . Neuroimage , 26 , 555 – 564 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1980 ) . Analogical problem solving . Cognitive Psychology , 12 , 306 – 355 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schema induction and analogical transfer . Cognitive Psychology , 15 , 1 – 38 . Gilchrist , M . B . , & Taft , R . ( 1972 ) . Originality on demand . Psychological Reports , 31 , 579 – 582 . Green , A . E . , Fugelsang , J . A . , Kraemer , D . J . M . , & Dunbar , K . N . ( 2008 ) . The micro - category account of analogy . Cognition , 106 , 1004 – 1016 . Green , A . E . , Fugelsang , J . A . , Kraemer , D . J . M . , Gray , J . R . , & Dunbar , K . N . ( 2010 ) . Connecting long distance : Semantic distance in analogical reasoningmodulatesfrontopolarcortexactivity . CerebralCortex , 20 , 70 – 76 . Green , A . E . , Fugelsang , J . A . , Kraemer , D . J . M . , Gray , J . R . , & Dunbar , K . N . ( 2012 ) . Neural correlates of creativity in analogical reasoning . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 38 , 264 – 272 . Green , A . E . , Fugelsang , J . A . , Kraemer , D . J . M . , Shamosh , N . A . , & Dunbar , K . N . ( 2006 ) . Frontopolar cortex mediates abstract integration in analogy . Brain Research , 1096 , 125 – 137 . Guilford , J . P . ( 1950 ) . Creativity . American Psychologist , 5 , 444 – 454 . Guilford , J . P . ( 1967 ) . Thenatureofhumanintelligence . NewYork : McGraw - Hill . Hampshire , A . , Thompson , R . , Duncan , J . , & Owen , A . M . ( 2011 ) . Lateral prefrontal cortex subregions make dissociable contributions during fluid reasoning . Cerebral Cortex , 21 , 1 – 10 . Harrington , D . M . ( 1975 ) . Effects of explicit instructions to “ be creative ” on the psychological meaning of divergent thinking test scores . Journal of Personality , 43 , 434 – 454 . Haylock , D . W . ( 1987 ) . Mathematical creativity in schoolchildren . Journal of Creative Behavior , 21 , 48 – 59 . Holyoak , K . J . , & Thagard , P . ( 1995 ) . Mental leaps . Cambridge ( MA ) : MIT Press . Howard - Jones , P . A . , Blakemore , S . J . , Samuel , E . A . , Summers , I . R . , & Claxton , G . ( 2005 ) . Semantic divergence and creative story generation : An fMRI investigation . Cognitive Brain Research , 25 , 240 – 250 . Landauer , T . K . , & Dumais , S . ( 1997 ) . AsolutiontoPlato ' s problem : Thelatent semantic analysis theory of acquisition , induction and representation of knowledge . Psychological Review , 104 , 211 – 240 . Landauer , T . K . , Foltz , P . W . , & Laham , D . ( 1998 ) . Introduction to latent semantic analysis . Discourse Processes , 25 , 259 – 284 . Mayer , R . E . ( 1999 ) . Fifty years of creativity research . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Handbook of creativity ( pp . 449 – 460 ) . Cambridge ( UK ) : Cambridge University Press . O ' Hara , L . A . , & Sternberg , R . J . ( 2001 ) . It doesn ' t hurt to ask : Effects of instructions to be creative , practical , or analytical on essay - writing performance and their interaction with students ' thinking styles . Creativity Research Journal , 13 , 197 – 210 . Pirkko , L . ( 1975 ) . Increasing creativity through art education among pre - school children . Studies in Education , Psychology , & Social Research , 29 , 44 . Raven , J . , Raven , J . C . , & Court , J . H . ( 1998 ) . Manual for Raven ' s progressive matrices and vocabulary scales , section 3 : The standard progressive matrices . San Antonio , TX : The Psychological Corporation . Roid , G . H . ( 2003 ) . Stanford – Binet intelligence scales ( Fifth edition ) . Itasca , IL : Riverside Publishing . Rose , L . H . , & Lin , H . - T . ( 1984 ) . A meta - analysis of long - term creativity training programs . The Journal of Creative Behavior , 18 , 11 – 22 . Schunn , C . D . , Paulus , P . B . , Cagan , J . , & Wood , K . ( 2006 ) . Final report from the NSF innovation and discovery workshop : The scientific basis of individual and team innovation and discovery . Washington ( DC ) : National Science Foundation . Scott , G . , Leritz , L . E . , & Mumford , M . D . ( 2004 ) . The effectiveness ofcreativity training : A quantitative review . Creativity Research Journal , 16 , 361 – 388 . Seger , C . A . , Desmond , J . E . , Glover , G . H . , & Gabrieli , J . D . E . ( 2000 ) . Functional magnetic resonance imaging evidence for right - hemisphere involve - ment inprocessing unusual semantic relationships . Neuropsychology , 14 , 361 – 369 . Sternberg , R . J . ( 1997 ) . Successful intelligence . New York : Plume . Torrance , E . P . ( 1966 ) . Torrance tests of creative thinking . Princeton , N . J . : Personnel Press . Volle , E . , Gilbert , S . J . , Benoit , R . G . , & Burgess , P . W . ( 2010 ) . Specialization of the rostral prefrontal cortex for distinct analogy processes . Cerebral Cortex , 20 , 2647 – 2659 . Wechsler , D . ( 1997 ) . WAIS - III administration and scoring manual . San Antonio , TX : The Psychological Corporation . Wendelken , C . , Nakhabenko , D . , Donohue , S . E . , Carter , C . S . , & Bunge , S . A . ( 2008 ) . “ Brainistothoughtasstomachisto ? ? ” : Investigatingtheroleof rostrolateral prefrontal cortex in relational reasoning . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 20 , 682 – 693 . Woodcock , R . W . , McGrew , K . S . , & Mather , N . ( 2001 ) . Woodcock – Johnson III tests of cognitive abilities . Itasca , IL : Riverside Publishing . 603 A . E . Green et al . / Intelligence 40 ( 2012 ) 598 – 603