COGNITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 22 , 36 - 71 ( 1990 ) Verbal Overshadowing of Visual Memories : Some Things Are better Left Unsaid JONATHAN W . SCHOOLERANDTONYAY . ENGSTLER - SCHOOLER Universio of Pittsburgh and Universiry of Washington It is widely believed that verbal processing generally improves memory perfor - mance . However , in a series of six experiments , verbalizing the appearance of previously seen visual stimuli impaired subsequent recognition performance . In Experiment 1 , subjects viewed a videotape including a salient individual . Later , some subjects described the individual’s face . Subjects who verbalized the face performed less well on a subsequent recognition test than control subjects who did not engage in memory verbalization . The results of Experiment 2 replicated those of Experiment 1 and further clarified the effect of memory verbalization by dem - onstrating that visualization does not impair face recognition . In Experiments 3 and 4 we explored the hypothesis that memory verbalization impairs memory for stimuli that are difficult to put into words . In Experiment 3 memory impairment followed the verbalization of a different visual stimulus : color . In Experiment 4 marginal memory improvement followed the verbalization of a verbal stimulus : a brief spoken statement . In Experiments 5 and 6 the source of verbally induced memory impairment was explored . The results of Experiment 5 suggested that the impairment does not reflect a temporary verbal set , but rather indicates relatively long - lasting memory interference . Finally , Experiment 6 demonstrated that lim - iting subjects’ time to make recognition decisions alleviates the impairment , sug - gesting that memory verbalization overshadows but does not eradicate the orig - inal visual memory . This collection of results is consistent with a recoding inter - ference hypothesis : verbalizing a visual memory may produce a verbally biased memory representation that can interfere with the application of the original visual ITleIIlOI’y . 0 1990 Academic Press , Inc . Experiments l - 5 were included in a doctoral dissertation submitted to the University of Washington by the first author . Experiment 6 was included in an undergraduate honors thesis submitted to the University of Washington Department of Psychology by the second author . The first author sincerely thanks the chairperson of his dissertation committee , Elizabeth Loftus , and the other members of the committee , Earl Hunt , Patricia Kuhl , Geoffrey Loftus , and John Palmer , for their guidance and support . Both authors thank Katherine Condit , Merrill McSpadden , Charles Perfetti , Kathy Pezdek , Mark Reinitz , Carmi Schooler , Lael Schooler , and three anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments and suggestions on earlier versions of this manuscript . Julianne Difuria , Celeste Duncan , Heidi Hespeldt , Suzanne Kruger , and Dorit Toker helped to conduct the experiments . John Yuille provided the videotape used in Experiments 1 , 2 , 4 , and 5 . This research was supported by a grant to Elizabeth Loftus from the National Institute of Mental Health and by grants to Jonathan Schooler from the University of Pittsburgh Offtce of Research , and the Faculty of Arts and Sciences . Reprint requests should be sent to Jonathan W . Schooler at the Learning Research and Development Center , University of Pittsburgh , 3939 O’Hara Street , Pitts - burgh , PA 15260 . 36 OOlO - 0285 / 90 $ 7 . 50 Copyright 0 1990 by Academic Press , Inc . All tights of reproduction in any form reserved . VERBAL OVERSHADOWING 31 INTRODUCTION There are some experiences , such as the appearance of a face or color , that seem to defy words . The seeming insufficiency of words for charac - terizing visual memories has been supported by a large body of research suggesting that visual memories can be associated with multiple memory codes : a visual code that resembles perceptual experience , and a verbal code that includes labels of specific details ( for a review see Paivio , 1986 ) . While researchers still debate the nature of the representation of these codes , there is now substantial agreement that some components of visual memories cannot be put into words . ’ What happens then when we try to describe these nonverbal visual memories ? Does verbal description sup - plement the original nonverbal memory or does it produce interference ? The present article explores the hypothesis that describing a visual mem - ory can result in recoding interference : the tendency to rely on a verbally biased recoding at the expense of the original visual memory . The suggestion that verbal description might impair memory for visual stimuli is seemingly contrary to a substantial body of literature indicating the beneficial consequences of verbal processing . Verbal processing is central to the two most widely studied processes for improving memory performance : verbal rehearsal and verbal elaboration . Numerous re - searchers have observed that the verbal repetition of a stimulus improves subsequent memory performance ( e . g . , Darley & Glass , 1975 ; Glenberg & Adams , 1978 ; Glenberg , Smith , & Green , 1977 ; Maki & Schuler , 1980 ; Rundus , 1971 ; Woodward , Bjork , & Jongeward , 1973 ) . Similarly , verbal elaboration , the formation of a semantic association between a stimulus and long - term knowledge , has been shown in numerous situations to fa - cilitate memory performance ( e . g . , Craik & Tulving , 1975 ; Hyde & Jen - kins , 1973 ; Tresselt & Mayzner , 1960 ; Shulman , 1970 ) . Even delayed verbal recall is typically observed to improve subsequent recognition per - formance ( e . g . , Cooper & Monk , 1976 ; Hanawalt & Tarr , 1961 ; Wenger , Thompson , & Bartling , 1980 ) . Indeed , the positive role of verbal process - ing , in the form of rehearsal or elaboration , has been a central component of many general theories of memory ( e . g . , Atkinson & Shiffrin , 1971 ; Craik & Lockhart , 1972 ; Anderson , 1983 ) . Although the majority of studies investigating the effects of verbal pro - cessing have used verbal materials , a number of studies have examined ’ Even Pylyshyn ( 1981 ) , one of the minority of researchers who have argued against the notion of a perceptual code admits that certain visual memories are “cognitively impenetrable” and therefore cannot be put into words . Anderson ( 1983 ) , a previous oppo - nent to the notion of dual codes , has since incorporated this distinction into his ACT * theory ( Anderson , 1983 ) . Potter and Kroll ( 1987 ) who argue for the existence of an amodal code also postulate a verbal and imaginal code . 38 SCHOOLER AND ENGSTLER - SCHOOLER the effects of verbalization on memory for visual stimuli . As with verbal stimuli , verbal rehearsal and verbal elaboration have been the primary paradigms for exploring the relationship between verbal processing and visual memory . In general these techniques have also revealed facilitory effects of verbal processing , although , as will be seen , an important boundary condition has emerged : the beneficial effects are typically lim - ited to situations in which the verbally generated information is useful for subsequent memory performance . Verbal Rehearsal The verbal description of previously seen visual stimuli has been ob - served to improve recognition of both faces ( Read , 1979 ) and pictures ( Bartlett , Till , & Levy , 1980 ) . However , Bartlett et al . ( 1980 ) observed that , at least in the case of pictures , visual recognition facilitation result - ing from verbal rehearsal was limited to situations in which a verbal description could discriminate the target from the distractor . Verbal Elaboration It has long been known that verbal interpretation of visual stimuli can inlluence subsequent memory performance . For example , Carmichael , Hogan , and Walter ( 1932 ) demonstrated that associating meaningful ver - bal labels with abstract shapes influenced the manner in which subjects later drew the shapes . Daniel ( 1972 ) similarly observed that labeling ab - stract shapes biases the nature of subjects’ recognition errors . With re - spect to overall accuracy , however , a variety of researchers have ob - served that labeling abstract random shapes improves subsequent recog - nition ( e . g . , Amoult , 1956 ; Daniel & Ellis , 1972 ; Ellis & Daniel , 1971 ; Rafnel & Klatzky , 1978 ) . Face recognition has also been shown to be improved by semantic interpretation . For example , making semantic judgments about a face ( e . g . , Does he look honest ? ) leads to better rec - ognition performance than making physical judgments ( e . g . , Are his lips thick ? ) ( Bower & Karlin , 1974 ; Patterson & Baddeley , 1977 ; Wells & Hryciw , 1984 ; Winograd , 1981 ) . Similarly , encoding faces with verbal labels such as personality dispositions ( McKelvie , 1976 ) or occupations ( Klatzky , Martin , & Kane , 1982 ) has been shown to facilitate perfor - mance . As with rehearsal , however , the benefits of semantic elaboration of visual stimuli appear limited to situations in which the verbal informa - tion can distinguish the target from the distracters . For example , Klatzky et al . ( 1982 ) observed that labeling faces improved recognition when the target and the distractor resembled different occupational types ( e . g . , truck driver and accountant ) but not when they both resembled the same occupational type ( see also McKelvie , 1976 ) . The above review suggests that verbally processing visual stimuli adds VERBAL OVERSHADOWING 39 or emphasizes information that may be useful for subsequent memory performance . In support of this view , many discussions of the relation - ship of dual codes assume that the contribution of each code to memory performance is independent and additive ( e . g . , Bahrick & Bahrick , 1971 ; Nelson & Brooks , 1973 ; Paivio , 1986 ) . According to this approach , infor - mation from multiple sources independently helps to increase the proba - bility that sufficient cues will be available to make an accurate identifi - cation . While many studies have observed that verbal processing can improve memory for visual stimuli , this facilitation appears to be limited to situations in which the verbally generated information is useful for subsequent memory performance . In fact , a few studies have observed that concurrent verbal processing can interfere with subjects’ ability to distinguish a target from verbally similar distracters ( e . g . , Bahrick & Boucher , 1969 ; Nelson & Brooks , 1973 ; Pezdek , Maki , Valencia - Laver , Whetstone , Stoeckert , & Dougherty , 1986 ) . For example , Nelson and Brooks ( 1973 ) observed that naming pictures in a paired associate para - digm interfered with subjects’ ability to learn the pairs . Pezdek et al . ( 1986 ) similarly observed that pairing pictures with corresponding sche - matic sentences caused subjects to falsely recognize simpler pictures that fit the earlier schematic descriptions . Bahrick and Boucher ( 1969 ) ob - served that requiring subjects to name a familiar object ( e . g . , a cup ) impaired their ability to discriminate between different objects all corre - sponding to the same name ( e . g . , different cups ) . Given the assumption that the verbal and visual codes are independent and additive , how can we explain the occasional observation that verbal processing interferes with visual memory ? To accommodate these nega - tive effects of verbal processing on visual memory , researchers have typically suggested that verbal processing reduces the amount of visual information that is encoded . Bahrick and Boucher ( 1969 ) concluded , “It would appear that the verbalizing instructions constitute , in effect , a dual task for Ss and that at higher levels of training the verbal responses occur partly at the expense of visual learning” ( p . 420 ) . Similarly , Nelson and Brooks ( 1973 ) concluded “forced involvement of the verbal system may have reduced the time available for coding the superior pictorial representation” ( p . 48 ) . Pezdek et al . ( 1986 ) suggested that the schematic sentences cause subjects to process the sentence schematically and there - fore “elaborative details less essential for communicating the central scheme of a picture are less likely to be encoded” ( p . 21 ) . Verbal interference could be an alternative to the encoding interpreta - tion of the negative influence of verbal processing on visual memories . According to an interference interpretation , verbalization does not reduce the amount of visual information that is encoded but rather interferes with subjects’ use of the visual code , thereby impairing performance when the 40 SCHOOLER AND ENGSTLER - SCHOOLER verbal code is not useful for making a correct identification . When ver - balization occurs during encoding , the interference interpretation is en - tirely confounded with an encoding interpretation . Determining whether verbal processing specifically interferes with access to the visual code requires examining the effect of verbalization subsequent to encoding . Using a paradigm in which subjects verbalize a previously seen stimu - lus not only eliminates the influence of encoding , but also provides a situation in which recoding interference may be particularly apt to occur . Visual memory interference following verbal processing may occur as a result of the interaction of two processes : ( a ) the influence of retrieval cues , and ( b ) the consequences of recollection . The Influence of Retrieval Cues What we remember depends on the retrieval cues present at the time of recollection . As Tulving ( 1984 ) observes : “traces have no strength inde - pendently of the condition in which they are actualized : any given trace can have many different ‘strengths’ depending on its retrieval conditions” ( p . 233 ) . The importance of retrieval cues is also a central assumption of dual code theory . Paivio ( 1986 ) reviews a number of studies suggesting that the relative activation of verbal and visual memory codes associated with visual memories depends on the specific retrieval cues , with verbal cues tending to activate the verbal code and visual cues tending to acti - vate the visual code . In fact , according to dual code theory it is possible that nonverbal memories may not become associated with a verbal code until verbal processing is required ( Paivio , 1986 ; p . 147 ) . From this ap - proach it follows that verbal recall of a visual memory may primarily activate ( or prompt the formation of ) a verbal code while failing to fully activate the visual code . The Consequences of Recollection Although recollection usually improves subsequent memory perfor - mance ( Darley & Murdock , 1971 ; Hanawalt & Tarr , 1961 ; Hogan & Kintsch , 1971 ; McDaniel & Masson , 1985 ; Wenger et al . , 1980 ) , incom - plete or inaccurate recollection can impair subsequent performance ( Brown & Packham , 1967 ) . The variable consequences of accurate and inaccurate memory recollection was recently demonstrated by Schooler , Foster , and Loftus ( 1988 ) where subjects were provided with recognition tests that either allowed for correct recollection or encouraged incorrect recollection . Subjects who received interpolated test questions that in - cluded the correct alternative performed more accurately on a recognition test than control subjects who received no interpolated test . In contrast , subjects who responded to interpolated test questions with exclusively incorrect alternatives performed less well than control subjects on a sub - VERBAL OVERSHADOWING 41 sequent test . Memory impairment resulting from responding to test ques - tions with no correct response was observed even when the earlier incor - rect distracters were omitted from the final test , suggesting that subjects were not simply biased toward their earlier responses but rather experi - enced memory interference resulting from their previous incorrect recol - lection . A reasonable interpretation of the varied effects of recollection is that additional retrievals result in the generation of multiple memory rep - resentations corresponding to the stimulus ( Johnson , 1983 ; Mandler & Rabinowitz , 1981 ; McDaniel & Mason , 1985 ; Morton , Hammersley , & Bekerian , 1985 ) . When recollection is accurate , the resulting veridical representation may be helpful during subsequent testing . However , when recollection is inaccurate , the resulting distorted representation may im - pair later memory performance . If we combine the influence of retrieval cues with the consequences of recollection we can predict the existence of recoding interference . Spe - cifically , if verbal recall of visual memory activates the verbal code while failing to fully activate the visual code , and if this verbally biased recol - lection can affect subsequent performance , then verbal recall may impair subjects’ ability to use nonverbalized visual details . In short , verbal recall of visual stimuli may cause subjects to generate a recoded memory , dis - proportionately emphasizing the verbal code . This verbally biased recod - ing may then interfere with the application of the original memory . Although rarely cited , a few early studies reported incidents of verbal - ization of previously seen visual stimuli impairing subsequent perfor - mance . Belbin ( 1950 ) and Kay and Skemp ( 1956 ) observed that subjects who verbally recalled a previously seen picture were subsequently less likely to correctly recognize the picture than subjects who had not re - called the picture . Admittedly , these early studies were flawed by various methodological details , e . g . , distracters were not used , making it difficult to distinguish between criterion and discrimination shifts . Nevertheless , they hint at the possibility that verbalization of visual memories may generate a nonveridical recoding of the visual stimulus that can cause a decrement in later memory performance . The present series of experiments sought to demonstrate the existence and to explore the mechanism underlying recoding interference . Experi - ment 1 examined the effects of verbalizing a type of visual memory that is particularly difficult to capture in words : memory for a face . Consistent with the current framework , verbal description of a previously seen face substantially impaired subjects’ ability to distinguish the target face from verbally similar distracters . In Experiments 24 we explored the role of recoding in mediating this impairment by manipulating the match between the modality of the original stimulus and the subsequent processing . Ex - periment 2 compared the effects of verbalizing and visualizing a previ - 42 SCHOOLER AND ENGSTLER - SCHOOLER ously seen face . Experiment 3 explored the effect of verbalizing and visualizing memory for a different visual stimulus : color . Experiment 4 investigated whether verbalization within the present paradigm would have a different effect on memory for an easily described verbal stimulus : a brief spoken statement . In Experiments 5 and 6 we explored the source of recognition impairment following memory verbalization . In Experi - ment 5 we evaluated the hypothesis that the impairment may be due to the temporary adoption of a verbal perspective for remembering faces . Fi - nally , in Experiment 6 we tested the hypothesis that the verbally recoded representation overshadows but does not eradicate the original visual memory . EXPERIMENT 1 If recoding interference does occur it seems particularly likely to be observed with memory for faces . There is a substantial disparity between the quality of subjects’ visual memories for faces and their ability to describe that memory ( Ellis , 1984 ) . While face recognition is typically quite good ( Shapiro & Penrod , 1986 ) , verbal descriptions of faces are often not precise enough to enable judges to distinguish a target face from similar distracters ( e . g . , Ellis , Shephard , & Davies , 1980 ) . If subjects are inlluenced by their nonveridical verbal descriptions , then they might have considerable difficulty distinguishing the target face from distracters that also resemble the verbal description . Relatively little research has been specifically devoted to examining the effects of verbalizing the physical appearance of a previously seen face . The few studies that have addressed this issue have not tested the hy - pothesis that verbalization of facial appearance may impair recognition performance when the targets and distracters are verbally similar . For example , Read ( 1979 ) examined the effects of verbally rehearsing previ - ously presented face photos . However , Read’s ( 1979 ) targets and distrac - tors differed exclusively with respect to a quite verbalizable feature : face orientation . Furthermore , Read ( 1979 ) alerted subjects prior to verbal rehearsal that orientation was an important feature to rehearse . Since Read’s paradigm encouraged subjects to verbally rehearse a feature ( face orientation ) that was useful for subsequent discrimination , it is not sur - prising the verbal rehearsal was helpful . Mauldin and Laughery ( 1981 ) examined the effects of various face re - call techniques on recognition performance . In this study , subjects viewed a photo of a face . They were then assigned to one of three basic conditions : photofit construction , in which subjects worked with an ex - perimenter to construct a composite image of the face using an assortment of interchangeable facial features ; facial feature description , in which they read adjectives describing each feature ( descriptors ) and then indicated VERBAL OVERSHADOWING 43 what descriptors were applicable ; or control , in which they participated in an unrelated activity . Finally , subjects were given a yes / no recognition task including 130 distracters and one target . Mauldin and Laughery ( 1981 ) observed that subjects’ recognition performance in both the pho - tofit and face descriptor conditions was better than that of control sub - jects . Mauldin and Laughery’s ( 1981 ) experiment did not address the hypoth - esis that verbal rehearsal can impair the recognition of targets matched with verbally similar targets for two reasons : ( 1 ) they provided subjects with such explicit adjectives that subjects’ descriptions were likely to be sufficiently precise to distinguish the targets from the distracters ; and ( 2 ) the distracters used in this study were apparently quite dissimilar , as reflected by the fact that in control group the false alarm rate was only 4 . 3 % . Thus , even if verbal description could impair subjects’ ability to distinguish target faces from verbally similar distracters , such an effect might not have been observed in Mauldin and Laughery’s experiment . A few studies have hinted at the potential impairing effects of verbal - ization of face memory . Bartlett ( 1932 ) provided anecdotal evidence sug - gesting that describing a face may impair memory . Subjects who repeat - edly described previously seen face drawings were reportedly surprised by the appearance of the original drawings . Bartlett suggested that this “Method of Description” might have contaminated subjects’ memories . However , Bartlett was mainly interested in the nature of subjects’ de - scriptions . Recognition accuracy was not measured , and a control group that did not describe the faces was not included . Hall ( 1977 ) examined the effects of generating a police artist sketch on recognition accuracy . Reportedly , subjects who interacted with the police artist to produce a sketch of the target face performed less well than control subjects on the final test . This study thus provides a further hint of evidence that verbalization of faces can impair memory performance . However , the effects of verbal recall were confounded in two ways : ( 1 ) the subjects interacted with a police artist who could have used leading questions or inadvertently misled subjects in a variety of different ways ( see Loftus , 1979 ; Schooler et al . , 1988 ) ; and ( 2 ) subjects’ interactions with the police artist resulted in the construction of a drawing that may have had only a minimal resemblance to the original target . Thus , the drawing , rather than the verbalization , could have been the cause of subjects’ impaired recognition . Experiment 1 examined the effects of verbalizing the appearance of a previously seen face . Subjects viewed a videotape including a salient individual . Later , subjects in the Face Verbalization condition were asked to describe the appearance of the individual’s face . Control subjects par - ticipated in an unrelated task . Finally , all subjects were given a recogni - 44 SCHOOLER AND ENGSTLER - SCHOOLER tion test including the target face and seven similar distracters . If verbal processing simply adds to the overall strength of the memory represen - tation , then verbalizing memory for the appearance of a face should not interfere with subjects’ access to visual information and may even im - prove subsequent memory performance . If , however , verbal processing of visual memories causes subjects to generate a recoded version of their original memory , then verbalizing the appearance of a face may actually interfere with subsequent memory performance . Method Subjects . The subjects were 88 undergraduates from the University of Washington who received course credit for their participation . Experimental sessions included 6 to 10 sub - jects . Procedure . Subjects in each session viewed a 30 - s videotape segment depicting a bank robbery and then participated in a 20 - min unrelated task that involved reading several passages and then answering some questions . Each session was then randomly assigned to one of two conditions : Face Verbalization or Control . Subjects in the Face Verbalization condition were given 5 min to write detailed descriptions of the robber’s face . These subjects were encouraged to describe each facial feature in as much detail as possible for the full five minutes . Control subjects participated in an unrelated activity for an equivalent duration . All subjects were then shown a slide containing photos of eight verbally similar faces , including one photo of the robber in the earlier videotape . Subjects were instructed to indicate which face was previously seen . Subjects were also given a “not present” option to indicate that none of the photos corresponded to the robber . In addition , subjects were asked to indicate their confidence on a 9 - point scale ranging from I - guessing to 9 - certain . Results Three aspects of performance were examined : recognition accuracy , description accuracy , and confidence . Recognition accuracy . Verbalizing the previously seen face substan - tially reduced recognition performance . The target face was correctly picked by 38 % of subjects in the Face Verbalization condition and 64 % of Control subjects , x2 ( 1 ) = 5 . 93 , p < . 05 . There were two possible types of errors : misidentifications , in which subjects selected a distractor photo ; and misses , in which the subjects incorrectly indicated that the target was not present . The relative ratio of misidentifications to misses was the same for the two conditions . Approximately 59 % of the errors in the Face Verbalization condition were misidentifications compared to 60 % of er - rors in the Control condition , x * ( l ) = . 002 , p > . 05 . This similar pattern of errors indicates that verbalization did not simply affect willingness to make a selection . Description accuracy . The relationship between the accuracy of de - scriptions and recognition performance was also examined . Description accuracy was assessed using a method similar to that employed by Pigott and Brigham ( 1985 ) and Wells ( 1985 ) . Six judges evaluated the target face VERBAL OVERSHADOWING 45 using a facial feature checklist that included various descriptors for 33 facial features . All feature descriptors for which three or more judges agreed were classified as accurate . These accurate descriptors were com - bined to produce a correct feature key for assessing the descriptions produced by subjects in the Face Verbalization condition . Two indepen - dent judges were trained to use the accuracy key . Training consisted of rating pilot descriptions and then comparing assessments to ensure that both judges used similar criteria . After judges reached an agreement level equal to that typically reported for face description assessment ( i . e . , Y > . 80 ) they were given the actual descriptions to rate . Three different mea - sures were used : ( 1 ) total features attempted - any attribute of the target face that was described regardless of whether it was included in the fea - ture accuracy key ; ( 2 ) critical features attempted - any attribute that had been included in the feature accuracy key , regardless of whether or not it was described correctly ; and ( 3 ) accurate critical features - all critical features that were described using terms that approximated those previ - ously agreed upon by at least three judges . The judges agreed quite well . The correlation between the judges’ rat - ings for each of the three measures were total features attempted , r = . 93 ; critical features attempted , and r = . 95 ; accurate critical features , r = . 85 . For each description , the mean score of the two judges’ ratings was determined for each of the three measures . In addition , a fourth measure , proportion accurate , was derived for each description by dividing the mean accurate critical features by the mean critical features attempted . Comparison of the quality of the descriptions generated by subjects who were correct and incorrect on the recognition test revealed no significant differences for any of the four measures . The mean number of total fea - tures mentioned was 11 . 09 for subjects who made correct identifications compared to 10 . 26 for subjects who made incorrect identifications , t ( 34 ) = . 64 , p > . 05 . The mean number of critical features attempted was 8 . 68 for correct subjects compared to 8 . 02 for incorrect subjects , r ( 34 ) = . 03 , p > . 05 . The mean number of accurate critical features was 5 . 41 for correct subjects versus 5 . 43 for incorrect subjects , t ( 34 ) = . 07 , p > . 05 . Finally , the mean proportion of accurate features was . 65 for correct subjects versus . 68 for inaccurate subjects , t ( 34 ) = . 03 , p > . 05 . Confidence . Subjects’ mean confidence scores for accurate and inac - curate responses in the Face Verbalization and Control conditions are presented in Table 1 . Subjects were significantly more confident in cor - rect responses compared to incorrect responses F ( 1 , 83 ) = 23 . 05 , p < . Ol . There was no significant difference between the mean confidence of sub - jects in the two conditions , F < 1 . There was no significant interaction between accuracy and condition , F < 1 . 46 SCHOOLER AND ENGSTLER - SCHOOLER TABLE 1 Mean Confidence in Responses in Experiment 1 Condition Response Verbalization Control Correct 7 . 53 8 . 18 Incorrect 6 . 30 5 . 93 Overall 6 . 77 1 . 39 Note . 1 = guessing , 9 = certain . Overall 7 . 85 6 . 17 Discussion In Experiment 1 , verbalizing the appearance of a previously seen face dramatically reduced recognition accuracy . This result represents an ex - ception to the common observation that verbal processing improves memory performance . Since verbalization occurred well after the face was removed from view , an encoding interpretation cannot account for the present result . Rather , it appears that verbalizing the memory of a face can be a source of interference that impairs the ability to use encoded visual information . The precise nature of the interference resulting from verbalizing a mem - ory for a face remains unclear . One possibility is that subjects simply remember their verbatim description and the memory of this description produces interference . However , there was no relationship between the face description quality and recognition performance . ( This observation is consistent with that of other researchers , e . g . , Goldstein , Johnson , & Chance , 1979 ; Pigott & Brigham , 1985 ; Wells , 1985 . ) Since the description quality did not correspond to performance it would appear that subjects are not relying exclusively on their verbatim descriptions . Instead , the interference resulting from verbalization seems more likely to reflect a nonoptimal combination of the visual and verbal codes . EXPERIMENT 2 In Experiment 1 , subjects who verbalized the appearance of a previ - ously seen face were less accurate than control subjects at recognizing the face . Experiment 2 sought to replicate this counterintuitive effect and to clarify the mechanism by which memory verbalization may interfere with face recognition . In Experiment 1 there was no correspondence between the quality of subjects’ descriptions and their performance . This finding raises the pos - sibility that verbal recoding per se may not be critical to recognition impairment . If subjects generated an impoverished image of a face while VERBAL OVERSHADOWING 47 attempting to describe it , the imaging itself might have served as a source of interference . According to this interpretation , if subjects simply imag - ined the appearance of a face , similar impairment would be observed . Alternatively , as previously argued , decrements in recognition accuracy observed in Experiment 1 may be specifically due to recoding the original memory with a verbally biased recollection . This latter interpretation predicts that verbalization per se is a critical component of the memory impairment observed in Experiment 1 . To isolate the effects of the mem - ory impairment observed in Experiment 1 , the general procedure was replicated with the addition of a third condition in which subjects visual - ized the face without describing it . Method Subjects . The subjects were 104 students at the University of Washington who partici - pated for course credit . Experimental sessions included 6 to 10 subjects . Procedure . Experimental sessions were randomly assigned to one of three conditions : Control , Face Verbalization , or Face Visualization . The procedure used in Experiment 1 was strictly replicated , with the sole difference being the addition of the Face Visualization condition . Subjects in each session viewed the bank robbery videotape segment used in Experiment 1 and then participated in a 20 - min unrelated filler task . Subjects in the Face Verbalization condition were given 5 min to write detailed descriptions of the robber’s face . Subjects in the Face Visualization condition were given 5 min to imagine the appearance of the robber’s face . The instructions for the Face Visualization condition were similar in structure to those given to the Face Verbalization subjects . Face Visualization subjects were encouraged to imagine the appearance of each facial feature in as much detail as possible . Control subjects participated in an unrelated activity for an equivalent 5 - min period . Twenty - five minutes after viewing the videotape , all subjects were given the recognition task used in Experiment 1 and asked to indicate their confidence in their selection . Results Three aspects of performance were examined : recognition accuracy , description accuracy , and confidence . Recognition accuracy . Describing the target face substantially impaired recognition performance compared to both subjects in the Control and Face Visualization conditions . The target face was correctly picked by 27 % of subjects in the Face Verbalization condition , compared to 58 % of subjects in the Face Visualization condition and 60 . 6 % of Control sub - jects , x2 ( 2 ) = 9 . 21 , p < . 05 . There was no significant difference between the relative ratio of misidentifications to misses in the three conditions , indicating that verbalization did not simply affect subjects’ willingness to make a selection . Approximately 42 % of the errors made by subjects in the Face Verbalization condition were misidentifications compared to 44 % of errors in the Face Visualization condition and 69 % of errors in the Control conditions , x2 ( 2 ) = 2 . 82 , p > . 05 . 48 SCHOOLER AND ENGSTLER - SCHOOLER Description accuracy . As in Experiment 1 , two judges rated each of the descriptions on three measures : total features attempted , critical features attempted , and accurate critical features . The correlations between the judges’ ratings for each of the three measures were total features at - tempted , r = . 88 ; critical features attempted , r = . 90 ; and accurate crit - ical features , r = . 92 . For each description , the mean score of the two judges’ ratings was determined for each of the three measures . In addi - tion , a fourth measure , proportion accurate , was derived for each descrip - tion by dividing the mean accurate critical features by the mean critical features attempted . Comparison of the quality of the descriptions gener - ated by subjects who were accurate and inaccurate on the recognition test revealed only one significant difference across the four measures . The mean number of total features mentioned was 9 . 94 for subjects who made correct identifications compared to 11 . OO for subjects who made incorrect identifications , t ( 39 ) = . 88 , p > . 05 . The mean number of critical features attempted was 6 . 44 for correct subjects compared to 8 . 17 for incorrect subjects , t ( 31 ) = 2 . 21 , p < . 05 . The mean number of accurate critical features was 4 . 78 for correct subjects versus 5 . 31 for incorrect subjects , t ( 31 ) = . 92 , p > . 05 . Finally , the mean proportion of accurate features was . 76 for correct subjects versus . 68 for inaccurate subjects , t ( 31 ) = 1 . 45 , p > . 05 . Confidence . Subjects’ mean confidence scores for correct and incorrect responses in the Face Verbalization and Control conditions are presented in Table 2 . Subjects were marginally more confident for correct responses compared to incorrect responses F ( 2 , 98 ) = 6 . 78 , p < . 07 ( one - tailed test ) . There was no significant difference between the mean confidence of sub - jects in the three conditions , F < 1 . The interaction between accuracy and condition was not statistically signiticant , F ( 2 , 98 ) = 6 . 24 , p > . 05 . How - ever , examination of Table 2 reveals that whereas subjects in the Face Visualization and Control conditions were substantially more confident when correct than when incorrect , Face Verbalization subjects were slightly less confident when correct than when incorrect . Discussion In Experiment 2 , subjects who described the appearance of a previ - TABLE 2 Mean Confidence in Responses in Experiment 2 Response Verbalization Correct 6 . 44 Incorrect 6 . 83 Overall 6 . 73 Condition Visualization 7 . 09 5 . 69 6 . 50 Control 7 . 09 6 . 69 7 . 06 Overall 7 . 06 6 . 45 VERBAL OVERSHADOWING 49 ously seen face performed less accurately than both control subjects and subjects who visualized the face . Two conclusions can be drawn from this observation : ( a ) the counterintuitive memory impairment following ver - balization that was observed in Experiment 1 is replicable , and ( b ) this impairment is not simply due to the act of visualizing the appearance of the face . This latter observation suggests that recognition interference results from the recoding process associated with verbalizing a nonverbal memory . Since subjects are not affected by visualization one might be tempted to conclude that it is the reliance on the explicit verbalization that produces the memory impairment . However , this hypothesis was further weakened by the general lack of a relationship between description quality and recognition performance . One measure ( features attempted ) did suggest a possible difference in the quality of descriptions associated with correct and incorrect responses ; however , since this difference was not observed in Experiment 1 ( nor , as will be seen , was it replicated in Experiment 4 ) , we suspect that this difference reflects a single Type 1 error resulting from multiple comparisons across many experiments . It seems that following memory verbalization people neither rely exclusively on their visual rep - resentation ( which would lead to accurate performance ) nor on their ex - plicit verbalization ( which would produce a relationship between descrip - tion quality and recognition accuracy ) . Rather , it seems most likely that impairment results from some nonoptimal combination of these two sources . One potential concern in interpreting the results of Experiment 2 is : Can we assume that subjects in the visualization condition actually gen - erated an image of the target face ? Unfortunately , an experimenter cannot be directly privy to the imagination processes of subjects . Nevertheless , a few observations add credibility to the assumption that subjects in the Face Visualization condition were engaging in some form of visual recall . First , a large body of research has demonstrated that college subjects readily generate mental images of complex stimuli . The behaviors that subjects exhibit while processing these imagined images ( i . e . , scanning rates , decision time ) closely resemble those associated with actual stimuli ( e . g . , Finke , 1985 ; Kosslyn , 1980 ; Shepard & Metzler , 1971 ) . If subjects in other studies readily generate images when asked to do so , it seems appropriate to infer that subjects in the present study were also generating images . In addition , even if only a subset of subjects generated an image , given the magnitude of the effect of verbalization , it would be expected that at least a trend toward reduced performance would be observed if visual rehearsal also impaired memory . The absence of such a trend fur - ther argues against the notion that the noneffect of visualization oc - curred because subjects failed to generate an image . Rather , the lack of an 50 SCHOOLER AND ENGSTLER - SCHOOLER effect of visualization seems more likely to suggest that there is some aspect of explicit verbalization that is a critical component in mediating recognition impairment . EXPERIMENT 3 Experiments 1 and 2 explored the notion that memory impairment can result from verbally recoding a visual memory that cannot be easily put into words . Evidence for this hypothesis was gained in two respects . First , verbalization of a nonverbal visual memory ( a face ) was shown to impair recognition . Second , visualization did not impair face recognition . A third prediction that follows from the present framework is that similar recognition impairment should result from the verbalization of memory for other visual stimuli that are difficult to describe precisely . In contrast to the predictions of the present framework , other lines of research suggest that the recognition impairment observed in Experi - ments 1 and 2 might be limited to memory for faces . There is both neu - rological and experimental evidence indicating that humans may have a specific memory system dedicated to human faces that may qualitatively differ from other types of memory . The occurrence of prosopagnosia , a brain - lesion - induced decrement that is primarily associated with the in - ability to remember familiar faces supports the notion of a dissociation between the processing of faces and other visual stimuli ( Beyn & Kn - yazeva , 1962 ) . Experimental research has further suggested qualitative differences in the nature of facial memory processing . For example , Yin ( 1969 ) compared the effects of inverting pictures of faces and other com - plex stimuli that are customarily seen only in one orientation . He found that memory for faces was disproportionately affected by inversion , sug - gesting some special process associated exclusively with faces . It is thus possible that verbally induced interference reflects a process that is lim - ited to face memories . Alternatively , if the recoding interference hypoth - esis is accurate , impairment should generalize to other situations in which the visual memory cannot be adequately captured in words . Color is another nonverbal memory set that might be particularly vul - nerable to recoding interference . Brown ( 1966 ) demonstrated that sub - jects rely on their verbal descriptions in making color recognition deci - sions . Often subjects chose the color that best tit their description even when it was not the color that they had seen before . While considerable subsequent research has substantiated the relationship between color de - scription and recognition performance ( see Lucy & Shweder , 1979 , for a review ) , little attention has been given to the possible influence of the description activity itself on memory . If color descriptions do not ade - quately characterize subjects’ visual memories , then the act of describing a color might also impair recognition . VERBAL OVERSHADOWING 51 Experiment 3 explored whether the detrimental effects of memory ver - balization would generalize to a different nonverbal stimulus set : color . Subjects viewed color swatches and then participated in one of three rehearsal activities : color description , color visualization , or participation in an unrelated filler activity . Subsequently , subjects were given a color recognition test . Besides using different stimulus materials from those used in the earlier experiments , Experiment 3 included three additional modifications on the earlier memory verbalization paradigm : ( a ) each subject responded to three stimulus sets , thus providing a more stable measure of performance in the three conditions ; ( b ) the “not present” option was eliminated to exclude any possible effects of changes in identification criterion ; and ( c ) descriptions were elicited from subjects immediately after the stimulus was removed from view . Method Subjects . The subjects were 30 University of Washington undergraduates . Subjects were run individually . Materials . The color stimuli were three 1 x l - in . color chips obtained from a hardware store as samples of house paint colors . Three different color stimuli were used : red , blue , and green . Each of the three stimulus color chips were mounted individually on 3 x 5 - in . blank note cards . Three recognition test strips were also constructed . The test strips in - cluded a duplicate of the target color chip and five distractor color chips selected on the basis of visual and verbal similarity to the original target . For example , the green chips could all have been described as army green . The target and distracters in each stimulus set were comparable in intensity and between shade differences , as defined by their manufacturer . The target and five distracters for each color stimulus set were mounted on 5 x 7 . 5 - in . blank cards . Procedure . Each subject was randomly assigned to one of three conditions : Color Ver - balization , Color Visualization , or Control . The stimulus presentation was identical for all subjects . An experimenter presented a stimulus card for 5 s . Subjects then participated in one of three activities for 30 s . Subjects in the Color Verbalization condition were asked to write in as much detail as possible a description of the color . Subjects in the Color Visual - ization condition visualized the color . Subjects in the Control condition wrote down as many names of the United States as they could recall . Subjects were then shown a test strip and asked to indicate which of the color chips corresponded to the color they had just seen . The experimenter recorded their responses . For each subject the same process was repeated with two remaining color stimuli . The order of color presentation was randomly varied both across and within conditions . Results An analysis of variance was used to compare the mean number of correct color identifications per subject ( maximum = 3 ) in the Color Verbalization , Color Visualization , and Control conditions . For the sake of clarity , each mean is presented in terms of the percentage of correct responses . Recognition of the initial color was impaired when subjects 52 SCHOOLER AND ENGSTLER - SCHOOLER described the color . The mean percentage of correctly identified colors was 33 % in the Color Verbalization condition , 64 % in the Color Visual - ization condition , and 73 % in the Control condition , F ( 2 , 27 ) = 10 . 01 , p < . Ol . Simple effect tests revealed no significant difference between the Color Visualization and Control conditions . Discussion In Experiment 3 , verbal description of a previously seen color reduced memory performance . This observation suggests that the recognition im - pairment resulting from verbalizing memory for a face generalizes to other types of visual memory . Of course it is possible that the negative effects of memory verbalization are mediated by different processes for faces and colors . However , parsimony favors a more common explana - tion : memory verbalization can prompt a verbal recoding of the original memory that can interfere with subjects’ ability to apply the original visual code . Experiment 3 also replicated the observations in Experiment 2 that visualization did not significantly affect performance . This result lends further support to the notion that detrimental memory recoding results from the mismatch between the original visual stimulus and the subse - quent verbalization . A few other observations about Experiment 3 deserve brief mention . First , in previous experiments the target individual was viewed in differ - ent contexts during presentation and test . This avoided the possibility that subjects might be able to rely on easily verbalized details such as clothing and orientation , In Experiment 3 the stimulus appeared exactly the same at encoding and test , thus further generalizing the scope of situations that may be associated with verbally induced memory impairment . Second , Experiments 1 and 2 used a delayed recall paradigm in which verbaliza - tion was initiated 20 min after the stimulus was presented . In Experiment 3 , the appearance of the color was verbalized immediately after the stim - ulus was removed from view , thus generalizing the effects to an immedi - ate recall paradigm . Third , recognition impairment following verbaliza - tion occurred in Experiment 3 without the inclusion of a not - present option . In Experiments 1 and 2 the ratio of misses to misidentifications was similar for subjects in the various conditions , so it is not surprising that exclusion of the not - present option did not eliminate an effect of verbalization . Nevertheless , this observation formally eliminates the pos - sibility that shifts in criterion for making an identification can account for recognition decrements following verbalization . EXPERIMENT 4 A reasonable explanation for the unique negative effects of verbalizing VERBAL OVERSHADOWING 53 a nonverbal memory involves the relative difficulty of precisely describ - ing such memories . While visual stimuli such as faces and colors may be visually recallable with adequate precision , verbal recall may be simply ill - suited for accurate reproduction . This analysis suggests that if identical recall instructions were used with verbal stimuli that could be reproduced accurately , a different pattern of results would be observed . As indicated earlier , previous studies examining the effects of verbal - ization on verbal stimuli have typically observed memory facilitation , thus supporting the notion that the effects of verbal processing depend on the nature of the stimulus . However , it is possible that some idiosyncracy of the present paradigm other than its choice of stimulus materials was responsible for the unique effects of verbal rehearsal . To isolate the na - ture of the stimulus materials as a critical factor , it was important to determine whether memory verbalization can differentially affect verbal and nonverbal stimuli within the same paradigm . Experiment 4 compared the effects of verbalizing a previously seen face and a statement . The general procedure of Experiment 1 was repli - cated with the addition of a third condition , Statement Verbalization , in which subjects were asked to recall in as much detail as possible the precise statement made by the robber . To test the effect of this manipu - lation , subjects were given a statement recognition test in addition to the face recognition test . To ensure a fair comparison between the effects of verbalization on the two measures , all efforts were made to keep the instructions , recognition test , and analysis of the statements analogous to those methods used in Experiments 1 and 2 . Method Subjects . The subjects were 117 students from the University of Washington who partic - ipated for course credit . Experimental sessions included 4 to 11 subjects . Procedure . Subjects viewed the videotape segment used in Experiments 1 and 2 . Subjects were then assigned to the Control , Face Verbalization , and Statement Verbalization con - ditions . Subjects in the Face Verbalization condition were given 5 min to write a description of the appearance of the target face . Subjects in the Statement Verbalization condition were given 5 min to write the precise statement that was spoken in the video . The actual statement was “Just follow the instructions . Don’t press the alarm , and you won’t get hurt . ” Subjects in the Control condition participated in an unrelated tiller activity for the S - min period . After 5 min , all subjects participated in the unrelated tiller activity for an additional 10 min and were then given the face and statement recognition tests . The order of the two tests was counterbalanced over sessions . The face recognition test was identical to that used in Ex - periments 1 and 2 . The statement recognition test was analogous in structure to the face recognition test . Eight similar statements were provided , one of which corresponded to that spoken in the video . The statements were identical in meaning and differed only with respect to surface content ( e . g . , “Just do as the note says , don’t touch the alarm button , and you won’t get hurt” ) . Subjects were asked to decide which , if any , of the statements was spoken in the video . 54 SCHOOLER AND ENGSTLER - SCHOOLER Results Recognition accuracy . As can be seen in Fig . 1 , verbalization differ - entially affected memory for the target face and statement . As in Exper - iments 1 and 2 , subjects in the Face Verbalization condition were signif - icantly less accurate at identifying the target face than Control subjects ( with respective accuracy rates of 49 and 71 % ) , x * ( l ) = 3 . 92 , p < . 05 . Recalling the target statement , however , produced a trend toward the opposite effect ; subjects in the Statement Verbalization condition were more accurate in recognizing the correct statement than were Control subjects ( with respective recognition accuracy rates of 46 and 32 % ) , al - though this difference did not reach significance , x * ( l ) = 1 . 88 , p > . 05 . A log linear analysis indicated that the effect of verbal recall on recognition accuracy was significantly different for statements and faces , x * ( l ) = 5 . 70 , p - C . 05 . The face recognition performance of subjects in the Statement Verbal - ization condition did not differ significantly from that of Control subjects x * ( l ) = . 468 , p > . 05 . Similarly , the statement recognition performance of subjects in the Face Verbalization condition did not differ significantly from that of Control subjects x * ( l ) = . 06 , p > . 05 . Face verbalization accuracy . As in Experiments 1 and 2 , two judges rated each of the face descriptions on three measures : total features at - tempted , critical features attempted , and accurate critical features . The correlation between the judges’ ratings for each of the three measures were total features attempted , r = . 94 ; critical features attempted , r = . 88 ; and accurate critical features , r = . 93 . For each description , the mean score of the two judges’ ratings was determined for each of the three 80 60 5 2 ‘0 0 40 z : ; P 20 0 0 conml n - 38 FIG . 1 . Percentages of correct face and statement identifications in Experiment 4 . VERBAL OVERSHADOWING 55 measures . In addition , a fourth measure , proportion accurate , was de - rived for each description by dividing the mean accurate critical features by the mean critical features attempted . Comparison of the quality of the descriptions generated by subjects who were accurate and inaccurate on the recognition test revealed no significant differences for any of the four measures . The mean number of total features mentioned was 10 . 31 for subjects who made correct identifications , compared to 11 . 7 for subjects who made incorrect identifications , t ( 35 ) = 1 . 59 , p > . 05 . The mean number of critical features attempted was 7 . 81 for correct subjects , compared to 8 . 36 for incorrect subjects , t ( 35 ) = . 76 , p > . 05 . The mean number of accurate critical features was 5 . 28 for correct subjects versus 5 . 11 for incorrect subjects , t ( 35 ) = . 24 , p > . 05 . Finally , the mean proportion of accurate features was . 69 for correct subjects versus . 60 for inaccurate subjects , t ( 35 ) = 1 . 40 , p > . 05 . Statement verbalization accuracy . Statement accuracy was assessed in a manner analogous to that used with faces . Three dependent measures were examined : words attempted , accurate words , and proportion accu - rate . Words attempted referred to the total number of words recalled . The accurate words measure was calculated by counting the number of words in each statement that matched those used in the original statement . The proportion accurate measure was determined for each subject by dividing the accurate words by the total words attempted . The mean scores for these measures of statement verbalization quality are presented in Table 3 . There was no difference in the total words used by subjects who made correct and incorrect statement identifications , t ( 40 ) = . 73 , p > . 05 . However , in contrast to face descriptions , the quality of the statement verbalizations associated with correct statement recognition was substan - tially greater than the statement verbalizations associated with incorrect statement recognition ( accurate words , t ( 40 ) = 3 . 80 , p < . Ol ; proportion accurate , t ( 40 ) = 2 . 41 , p < . 05 . Discussion In Experiment 4 , memory verbalization differentially affected face and TABLE 3 Mean Statement Quality Measures Associated with Correct and Incorrect Statement Identifications in Experiment 4 Total Accurate words words Proportion accurate Correct identifications 13 . 5 11 . 7 . 87 Incorrect identifications 12 . 9 9 . 1 . 72 56 SCHOOLER AND ENGSTLER - SCHOOLER statement recognition . Whereas verbalizing memory for the appearance of a previously seen face once again impaired recognition performance , statement recognition was slightly improved following verbal recall . Thus , Experiment 4 provided further evidence that the negative effects of verbalization are particularly associated with memories that cannot be readily put into words . Analysis of the relationship between the quality of subjects’ face and statement descriptions suggests an explanation for the unique negative effects of verbalizing nonverbal memories . Specifically , it appears that the effects of memory verbalization may depend on the degree to which the verbalized information is successfully used in making a recognition decision . As before , there was little relationship between the quality of face descriptions and subsequent recognition performance , suggesting that the contents of the verbalization were not useful in making correct identifications . In contrast , there was a relatively strong relationship be - tween the accuracy of the statements and subsequent recognition perfor - mance , suggesting that the contents of the statement verbalization were applicable . These findings are consistent with the hypothesis that reliance on verbalizations is useful when the memory for the verbalization is suf - ficient for making an identification . However , access to the memory for the verbally biased recoding produces interference when subjects require the original nonverbal memory . EXPERIMENT 5 The present series of experiments suggests that describing a difficult - to - verbalize visual stimulus can cause recognition impairment . However , the nature of this impairment is still somewhat unclear . In our previous discussion of this effect we have suggested that subjects are influenced by a memory recoding associated with the generation of an impoverished verbal description . Another possibility , however , is that memory ver - balization does not produce an interfering memory but rather an inappro - priate processing strategy . According to this latter interpretation , verbal - ization causes subjects to adopt a “verbal set” in which they are tempo - rarily prompted to think about the stimulus from a verbal perspective . If this hypothesis is correct , then with sufficient delay the verbal perspec - tive should dissipate and the negative effect of verbalization should di - minish . Alternatively , verbalization may produce an enduring memory representation that results in long - lasting impairment . Experiment 5 examined the plausibility of the “verbal set” hypothesis by examining recognition performance for faces and statements 2 days after subjects completed their memory verbalizations . The general pro - VERBAL OVERSHADOWING 57 cedure of Experiment 4 was replicated with the one substantive change : the duration between verbalization and recognition was increased to 2 days . Method Subjects . The subjects were 67 University of Washington undergraduates who partici - pated for course credit . Experimental sessions included 4 to 11 subjects . Procedure . Subjects viewed the videotape seen in Experiments 1 , 2 , and 4 . Immediately after viewing the videotape , subjects were assigned to either the Face Verbalization or the Statement Verbalization condition . ( Notice that recognition performance in Experiment 4 indicated that verbalization only had a significant effect on the stimulus that was verbalized . Consequently , a control condition in which subjects did not verbalize either the face or the statement was deemed unnecessary . Instead , control performance was determined by com - paring recognition of the verbalized measure in one condition to the nonverbalized measure in the other . For example , the control comparison for face identification in the Face Ver - balization condition was face identification in the Statement Verbalization condition . ) Subjects in the Face Verbalization condition were given 5 min to write a description of the appearance of the target face . Subjects in the Statement Verbalization condition were given 5 min to write the precise statement that was spoken in the video . Subjects were then asked to return in 2 days and dismissed . When subjects returned 2 days later , they were given the face and statement recognition tests . The order of the two tests was counterbalanced over sessions . Results Verbalization differentially affected memory for the target face and statement in a manner similar to that observed in Experiment 4 . Subjects in the Face Verbalization condition were significantly less accurate at identifying the target face than Statement Verbalization subjects ( the con - trol ) , with respective accuracy rates of 56 and 79 % , x * ( l ) = 3 . 98 , p < . 05 . Verbally recalling the target statement , however , produced a trend in the opposite direction . Subjects in the Statement Verbalization condition were slightly more accurate in recognizing the correct statement than were Face Verbalization subjects ( the control ) , with respective recogni - tion accuracy rates of 42 and 29 % , although this difference did not reach significance , x2 ( 1 ) = 1 . 42 , p > . 05 . Discussion In Experiment 5 , the effects of memory verbalization were shown to be at least relatively long - lasting . Recognition impairment for faces and a slight facilitation for statements were observed even though the recogni - tion test occurred 2 days after verbalization . Apparently , the effects of verbalization do not simply reflect a temporary verbal “set , ” but rather indicate relatively long - lasting memory interference . Although strict comparison of subjects’ performance in Experiments 4 and 5 may not be appropriate , it is nevertheless of some interest to note 58 SCHOOLER AND ENGSTLER - SCHOOLER the similarities of the effect of verbalization in the two experiments . Since the recognition detriment did not even begin to diminish after a 2 - day interval it appears that the effects of memory verbalization may be rela - tively resistant to the passage of time . Further , the numerical improve - ment following verbalization of statements was in the same direction in both Experiments 4 and 5 , suggesting that it may well reflect a small positive effect of verbally rehearsing statements . Such an observation would not be surprising , given the number of studies that have shown a facilitory effect of verbalization of verbal material . The observation that verbal recollection of a face can produce rela - tively long - lasting impairment also has important forensic implications . Identifying suspects is a common form of eyewitness testimony and can be the sole source of evidence in criminal trials ( Grano , 1984 ) . It is general forensic practice to ask witnesses to provide a detailed description of the appearance of a perpetrator prior to asking them to identify a suspect . In the past , describing faces has been considered harmless and has even been suspected to be helpful ( Mauldin & Laughery , 1981 ) . The current results suggest , however , that this common practice may have long - lasting detrimental effects . EXPERIMENT 6 The results of Experiment 5 suggest that memory verbalization does not simply cause subjects to temporarily adopt an inappropriate memory strategy but rather produces some type of long - lasting memory impair - ment . The question remains , however , whether the memory verbalization distorts the original visual memory or whether it produces a new repre - sentation that reduces subjects’ reliance on the original visual code . This distinction between memory alteration and coexistence is similar to a currently ongoing debate regarding the interpretation of the negative ef - fects of misleading suggestions on memory . Loftus and Loftus ( 1980 ) have argued that that postevent misinformation alters the original mem - ory . In contrast , Bekerian and Bowers ( 1983 ) , Morton et al . ( 1985 ) , and Christiaansen and Ochalek ( 1983 ) have suggested that both the original memory and the postevent information exist in memory . A study by Bartlett et al . ( 1980 ) examining the beneficial effects of verbal analysis of picture memories provides some evidence supporting the coexistence of an original visual and a verbally recoded memory . Bartlett et al . observed that verbal rehearsal of previously presented pic - tures facilitated discriminations between verbally dissimilar photos but not between verbally similar photos . They further observed that the ben - eficial effects of verbalization were largely restricted to slow recognition decisions ( “fast” and “slow” responses based on a median split ) . Bartlett et al . ( 1980 ) concluded that verbalization somehow improves the “con - VERBAL OVERSHADOWING 59 ceptual code” ( a code that includes verbal information ) but not the “pre - sentational code” ( an exclusively visual code ) . These researchers further suggested that picture recognition involves the serial access of these two codes : first the presentational code including exclusively visual informa - tion , followed by a conceptual code that also includes semantic informa - tion ( see also Rabinowitz , Mandler , & Barsalou , 1977 ) . In Experiment 6 we sought to apply the notion of serial access of visual and verbally influenced codes to demonstrate that the negative effect of verbalization is due to interference of multiple codes . If subjects possess an original visual memory and , in addition , a new verbally biased mem - ory , then providing retrieval conditions that favor the visual code should reduce memory impairment . To isolate the hypothesized original visual code , we limited the time subjects were given to make a recognition decision . Our reasoning was as follows : if verbalization subjects access an accurate visual code followed by a less precise verbally influenced code , then reducing subjects’ time to respond should reduce their access to this latter code , and consequently performance should be improved . Experi - ment 6 tested the above hypothesis by replicating the basic face verbal - ization paradigm with a new manipulation : limiting the time subjects were given to recognize the target face . Experiment 6 also addressed two possible limitations of the earlier face recognition studies . First , Experiments 1 , 2 , 4 , and 5 used the same stim - ulus face . Although the negative effects of verbalization generalized to a completely different type of visual stimuli , color , it was still possible that the recognition impairment observed in the face studies was somehow idiosyncratic to the particular face stimulusldistractors set . Second , al - though the effects of verbalization were observed in Experiment 3 with - out a “not - present” response option , the existence of this option in the face recognition studies raises the possibility that recognition impairment for faces could be due to an identification criterion shift . Experiment 6 addressed these two additional concerns by using different faces and omitting the “not - present” option . Method Subjects . One hundred twelve University of Washington undergraduates participated in this experiment for class credit . Materials . Three black and white stimulus - recognition sets were derived from a Univer - sity of Washington yearbook . Each stimulus face was selected from the candid pictures that appeared in the yearbook . Each recognition set included a different photo of the stimulus individual and five distracters depicting photos of similar looking individuals . All of the photos in the recognition test were similar in format , i . e . , professional posed photographs . Procedure . Subjects were run in groups ranging from 2 to 11 subjects . Each group was randomly assigned to either the Verbalization or the Control condition , as well as to either the Limited or the Unlimited Recognition Time condition . The basic procedure was repeated 60 SCHOOLER AND ENGSTLER - SCHOOLER three times with the three different stimulus / recognition sets . The order in which the three sets were presented was counterbalanced . Subjects were shown a stimulus slide for 5 s . After viewing the slide , all subjects engaged in an unrelated tiller activity for 5 min . Subjects in the Verbalization condition were then asked to describe the appearance of the face in as much detail as they could . Control subjects continued to participate in the unrelated activity . After 5 min , subjects were shown the recognition test slide and asked to identify which of the six faces corresponded to the individual they had seen in the earlier slide . In the Unlimited Recognition Time condition , subjects were given as much time as they wanted to make an identification . In the Limited Recognition Time condition , prior to viewing the recognition slide , subjects were instructed that they would only have 5 s to identify the previously seen face . The recognition slide was then presented for 5 s during which time subjects made their recognition decisions . This procedure was repeated with each of the three stimulus / test sets . Results Each subject could correctly identify from zero to three of the faces . Overall , Verbalization subjects performed less accurately than Control subjects , and Limited Recognition Time subjects performed more accu - rately than Unlimited Recognition Time subjects , F ( 1 , 108 ) = 15 . 3 1 , p < . Ol ; F ( 1 , 108 ) = 5 . 50 , p < . 05 , respectively . The most telling result was the significant interaction between Verbalization and Limited Recognition Time , F ( 1 , 108 ) = 11 . 22 , p < . Ol . This interaction reflects the substan - tially different effect of verbalization in the Limited and Unlimited Rec - ognition Time conditions . For subjects who were given unlimited recog - nition time , verbalization reduced accuracy substantially , with an accu - racy rate of 50 % for Verbalization subjects compared to 80 % for those in the Control condition ( p < . 05 , simple effects test ) . However , for subjects given limited recognition time , the difference between performance in the Verbalization and Control condition was negligible with an accuracy rate of 73 % in the Verbalization condition compared to 76 % in the Control condition , @ > . 05 , simple effects test ) . In fact , a simple effects test revealed that recognition performance in the Verbalization / Unlimited Recognition Time condition was significantly lower than that in the other three conditions ( p < . 05 ) . There was no significant difference between recognition accuracy in these other conditions . Discussion The results of Experiment 6 clearly demonstrate that the negative ef - fects of verbalizing nonverbal memories can be reversible . While verbally induced impairment was observed when subjects were given an unlimited amount of time to make recognition decisions , subjects who had to make very quick decisions were unaffected by their verbalizations . Indeed , the only influence of limiting recognition time was the alleviation of the neg - ative effects of verbalization . Subjects who did not verbalize the faces were virtually unaffected by having their recognition time limited to 5 s . VERBAL OVERSHADOWING 61 There are a number of rather straightforward conclusions that can be drawn from the results of Experiment 6 . First , it is clear that verbalization does not eradicate the original representation of the memory ( Loftus & Loftus , 1980 ) but rather produces some form of interference . Second , this interference takes more than 5 s to influence performance in the present paradigm . Third , all of the information that is necessary to make an ac - curate identification in the present paradigm is available within 5 s . These observations are consistent with a multiple code interpretation positing that subjects who have verbalized a nonverbal stimulus first access their original visual memory followed by a verbally biased recoding . These results are also consistent with Paivio’s ( 1985 ) proposition that visual information is accessed in parallel , whereas verbal information is ac - cessed serially . The serial access of information associated with described visual memories is also suggested by Bersted’s ( 1988 ) observation that memory set size is correlated with recognition time for described images but not for undescribed images . While consistent with a substantial body of research on dual codes , Experiment 6 offers a number of unique observations . First , in the past it has been suggested that the positive effects of verbal analysis of visual stimuli may not affect the visual code ( e . g . , Rafnel & Klatsky , 1978 ) . Experiment 6 suggests that the negative influences of verbalization also may leave the original visual code intact . Second , the performance im - provement resulting from limiting recognition time of Verbalization sub - jects is rather counterintuitive . Typically , one would expect that allowing subjects more time to make a decision should improve performance rather than weaken it . It appears that not only our intuitions about verbal pro - cessing , but also our intuitions regarding the value of decision time need to be revised . Finally , the information gained by limiting subjects’ recog - nition times in the present paradigm suggests that this technique may be a useful strategy for understanding other serial processes . Put more gen - erally , interrupting subjects at different times during a cognitive activity may provide clues about the successive processing stages of that activity . GENERAL DISCUSSION While much previous research suggests that verbal processing typically improves memory performance , the present results reliably demonstrated that verbalizing memory for the appearance of a face can actually impair subsequent recognition . In addition , a systematic examination of the pa - rameters mediating this effect has eliminated the following hypotheses : ( 1 ) The hypothesis that negative effects of verbalization result from incomplete encoding of visual details was ruled out because verbalization occurred after the visual stimuli had already been encoded . 62 SCHOOLER AND ENGSTLER - SCHOOLER ( 2 ) The hypothesis that the negative effects of verbalization are a by - product of visual recall was ruled out by the observation that visualizing a face does not affect subsequent performance . ( 3 ) The hypothesis that the negative effects of verbalization are limited to processes that are specific to faces was excluded by showing that color memory is similarly affected by verbalization . ( 4 ) The hypothesis that the negative effects of verbalization are due to subjects’ exclusive reliance on their verbatim descriptions was inconsis - tent with the lack of a relationship between description quality and rec - ognition performance . ( 5 ) The hypothesis that verbalization effects are limited to a specific face was ruled out by the observation that the effects generalize to a number of faces . ( 6 ) The hypothesis that verbalization impairment reflects some idio - syncracy of the present paradigm was ruled out by the observation that verbalization had a very different effect on memory for statements . ( 7 ) The hypothesis that verbalization causes subjects to temporarily adopt a general verbal strategy for remembering faces was eliminated by showing that the negative effects persist for at least 2 days . ( 8 ) The hypothesis that verbalization distorts the original visual mem - ory representation was eliminated by the observation that limiting recog - nition time alleviates the impairment . All of the above observations are consistent , however , with the recod - ing interference hypothesis : the verbalization of a visual memory can foster the formation of a nonveridical verbally biased representation cor - responding to the original visual stimulus . Access of this verbally biased representation can then interfere with subjects’ ability to make use of their intact visual code . This interpretation explains why verbalization impairs memory for a variety of different nonverbal stimuli ; in each case the nonverbal stimuli cannot be adequately recalled in words . It also explains why visualization did not impair visual memories and why ver - balization did not impair verbal memories ; recollection within the same modality can be veridical and consequently does not lead to an ill - matched representation . Finally , the fact that the negative effects of ver - balization are alleviated when recognition time is limited suggests that subjects have an intact visual code that is later overshadowed by access to a code that has been influenced by the verbalization . We favor the term overshadowing because it characterizes the manner in which the visual memory apparently coexists with the verbally biased recoding . Our view of recoding interference is not a traditional interfer - ence interpretation in which the interfering information impairs retrieval of the to - be - remembered information . Rather , it appears that the visuai VERBAL OVERSHADOWING 63 trace is retrieved initially , but is later ignored ( overshadowed ) following the access of the verbally biased code . While not previously applied in the memory domain , the term “overshadowing” has been used in S - R theo - ries to describe the relationship between a stronger and a weaker condi - tioned stimulus . Pavlov ( 1927 ) observed that a weak stimulus ( such as a low intensity tone ) , capable of producing a conditioned response when presented alone , was ineffective ( overshadowed ) when presented simul - taneously with a stronger stimulus ( such as a high intensity tone ) . Our usage of the term overshadowing differs from Pavlov’s ( 1927 ) in multiple respects : we are referring to the interaction of internal memory traces rather than external conditioned stimuli , and the overshadowing that we observed exerts its effect at the time of recollection rather than during learning . Nevertheless , both usages correspond to situations where mul - tiple sources of information result in the apparent domination of one source over another . The present series of experiments are generally consistent with the existence of dual codes for visual memory : one verbal , and one visual ( for a review see Paivio , 1986 ) . However , the results also suggest an important constraint on dual code theories . Most studies supporting the dual code distinction have typically suggested that information represented both verbally and visually is better recognized than information that is repre - sented only visually , while in the present study generating a verbally biased representation impaired performance . Presumably , the critical dif - ference is that whereas earlier studies used stimuli for which verbal in - formation was of some value , in the present study , the verbal information was substantially less applicable than the visual code . For example , in Paivio’s ( 1986 ) work , subjects are presented a visual stimulus ( apple ) , then verbalize this stimulus ( “apple” ) , and then are asked to recognize if they saw an apple or an orange . Since apples and oranges are verbally distinguishable , reliance on the verbal code in this case should not be harmful . By analogy , in the present study if the target differed in a readily verbalizable manner from all of the distracters ( e . g . , only the target had a moustache ) , then verbalization would not be expected to be detrimental , and might even be helpful . Two recent studies reported since the completion of the present re - search provide further evidence for the hypothesis that the applicability of the verbalization may help to mediate its effects . Wogalter ( 1988 ) reports two studies examining the effects of verbal face rehearsal . In one exper - iment , asking subjects to verbally rehearse a face using description terms provided by the experimenter impaired performance . In a second exper - iment , subjects were given a different ( presumably more applicable ) set of descriptor terms and performance was actually better than that of 64 SCHOOLER AND ENGSTLER - SCHOOLER controls . ’ Read , Hammersley , Cross - Calvert , and McFadzen ( 1989 ) also provide evidence that the effects of verbalization depend on the utility of the descriptions . In this experiment , verbalization improved subjects’ ability to distinguish a face that looked identical between viewing and testing , but impaired information of a face that changed somewhat in appearance . Read et al . ‘s ( 1989 ) results suggest that verbalization may cause subjects to rely on specific verbalizable details at the expense of a more general nonverbal code . When the face appeared the same between presentation and test , these verbalizable details were useful for discrim - inating the target from the distractor ; however , when the face appeared slightly different , reliance on the verbally biased code was no longer functional , and the reduced consideration of the original visual code took its toll3 While it seems likely that the applicability of the verbalizable informa - tion to some degree mediates the effects of verbalization , it must be noted that in the present studies there was no relationship between the quality of descriptions and face recognition accuracy . Since a relationship be - tween verbalization quality and recognition was observed for verbalizable stimuli ( Experiment 4 ) it is possible that this relationship depends on how likely the verbalizations are to be of use . Thus if even the relatively good face descriptions were of little value , then a relationship between face verbalization and performance should not be expected . The lack of rela - tionship between verbalization quality and performance may also result from retrieving both verbal and visual elements combined in an idiosyn - cratic manner . In their discussion of the effects of verbalization on visual memory , Bartlett et al . ( 1980 ) similarly suggest that whereas the initially accessed “presentational code” is exclusively nonverbal , the subse - quently accessed “conceptual code” may not be exclusively verbal . In the present paradigm , it seems almost certain that during verbalization subjects inspect their visual code to generate a verbal description . If ’ Wogalter ( 1988 ) also included a condition in which subjects verbally rehearsed the face without using experimenter - provided descriptors . In one experiment this manipulation had no effect on recognition ; in a second experiment performance was improved . The disparity between the effects of verbal rehearsal observed by Wogalter and those observed in the present series are not entirely clear . One possibility is that unlike the present study , Wogal - ter used the exact same face photo at presentation and test so verbalizable details of the photos may have been more applicable . Also , Wogalter did not try to select verbally similar distracters . 3 While superficial changes in the appearance of a visual stimulus between encoding and test may influence the effects of verbalization , appearance alteration is not a necessary precondition for verbally induced memory impairment . Experiment 3 demonstrated that verbalization can be detrimental even when the stimulus was exactly the same at presen - tation and test . VERBAL OVERSHADOWING 65 interference results from a memory associated with generating a verbal - ization , and if the act of verbalization included some visualization , then it seems quite probable that the resulting verbally biased memory may have both visual and verbal features . For example , subjects may recall a few verbalized details and a visual image that highlights those details in an idiosyncratic way . Thus , the retrieved recoded memory may neither re - semble the original visual memory nor the subsequent verbalization . It is also possible that the verbally biased code may have a reduced emphasis on holistic characteristics . Encoding techniques that encourage holistic encoding of faces ( i . e . , assessing personality trait characteristics ) produce superior recognition compared to particularistic encoding tech - niques such as characterizing individual facial features ( e . g . , Bower & Karlin , 1974 ; Wells & Hryciw , 1984 ; Winograd , 1981 ) . In comparison to feature encoding , focusing on personality traits produces superior face recognition , but poorer verbal descriptions of faces ( Wells & Hryciw , 1984 ) . It thus appears that face recognition may primarily involve con - sideration of holistic qualities , while verbal description of faces may pri - marily involve featural qualities ( Wells & Turtle , 1988 ) . This approach suggests that verbalization may give the recoded representation a featural emphasis that makes it difficult to put the face back together again for the holistic recognition task . Such an explanation might similarly account for the color results since color has also been shown to be a holistic stimulus for which featural analysis ( i . e . , discriminating between hue , saturation , and brightness ) is quite difficult ( Garner & Felfoldy , 1970 ; Shepp , 1983 ) . Thus , as in the case of faces , describing colors may cause a featural bias that is inapplicable to the final recognition test . Another general approach that may apply to the recoded representation is Reality Monitoring theory ( Johnson & Raye , 1981 ) . According to this theory , memories for imagined and perceived events are usually associ - ated with distinguishable memories . However , in some cases source con - fusions occur . Imagined events are remembered as actually having hap - pened and vice versa . Johnson ( 1983 ) further postulates that single events may be associated with both internally and externally generated memo - ries . In such situations , memories corresponding to internally generated ideas are postulated to have priority of access over externally experi - enced events ( Johnson , Raye , Foley , & Foley , 1981 ; Raye , Johnson , & Taylor , 1980 ; Schooler et al . , 1986 ; Slamecka & Graf , 1978 ) . From this perspective the present results might be characterized as resulting from a source confusion between the initially experienced stimuli and the sub - sequently self - generated memories associated with the verbalization . This approach similarly assumes that subjects generate a recoded representa - tion in the process of writing their descriptions . However , it has the additional advantage of postulating an explanation for subjects’ apparent 66 SCHOOLER AND ENGSTLER - SCHOOLER reliance on their recoded memories : internally generated memories are assumed to have priority . Future research will be needed to explore the above suggested mech - anisms . The role of visual / verbal codes might be determined by examining the effects of concurrent visual or verbal activities . If verbal overshad - owing is associated with a disproportionate emphasis on the verbal code , then concurrent verbal processing during recognition might reduce this emphasis and thereby improve performance . Evidence that verbalization produces a change from a holistic to a featural perspective might be gained by examining whether the effects of verbalization depend on the type of information that is most appropriate . If verbalizing a previously seen face produces a featural bias , then it may improve subjects’ perfor - mance on a task requiring specifically featural knowledge , such as recon - structing a face using an identi - kit ( Wells & Hryciw , 1984 ) . Finally , the role of reality monitoring confusions may be explored by varying the source of the verbalization . If impairment is specifically due to recalling a self - generated internal memory instead of a perceptual experience , then self - generating verbalizations should produce more impairment than read - ing verbalizations generated by others . Ultimately , it seems likely that multiple mechanisms may play a role in the verbal overshadowing of visual memories . It also remains to be seen what other memory stimuli are less accessible following verbalization . Memory for taste , touch , smell , sounds , affect , and frequency may also be vulnerable to verbalization . The present anal - ysis suggests a likely criterion for whether memory for a stimulus is susceptible to verbal overshadowing : it must be associated with a mem - ory that defies complete linguistic description . Thus , examination of the range of memory stimuli vulnerable to verbalization may not only help to explain the effect , but may also provide important clues for identifying different types of nonverbal memories . Another interesting question is whether concurrent verbal description within the present paradigm would also produce impairment . On the one hand , verbal face descriptions generated while a face is present are likely to be more accurate then those generated after the face is no longer in view . On the other hand , attempts to train subjects to verbally charac - terize the features of faces to improve face memory have , in some cases , actually caused trained subjects to be worse at recognizing faces than those who had not taken the course ( Malpass , 1981 ; Woodhead , Badde - ley , & Simmonds , 1979 ) . These negative effects of verbal training have generally been viewed as somewhat anomalous . They are , after all , con - trary to our typical intuitions about verbal processing . In discussions of these face verbalization training studies , the emphasis has been on the fact that no improvement was observed , rather then that verbal analysis VERBAL OVERSHADOWING 67 actually produced deficits . Accordingly , it has been suggested that per - haps these training studies simply did not train the subjects long enough ( Ellis , 1984 ) . An alternative that has received little attention is the notion that verbally characterizing a face may reliably impair recognition per - formance . In conclusion , it seems appropriate to speculate on why memory re - searchers so successfully documented the positive consequences of ver - bal processing while generally overlooking its negative consequences . While a definitive answer is impossible , one source for this oversight may lie in cognitive psychology’s preoccupation with language . The bias to - ward verbal material and verbal processing is well - reflected in the em - phasis of much memory research . Furthermore , verbal processing has been assumed to be the “deepest” and most memorable form of process - ing ( Craik & Lockhart , 1972 ) . This emphasis on verbal material and the value of verbal processing may have caused theorists to overlook observations contrary to the pre - vailing view . As mentioned earlier , a few researchers reported negative effects of verbal recall on visual memories ( Belbin , 1950 ; Kay and Skemp , 1956 ) . Nevertheless , most reviews of the effects of verbal processing of visual stimuli have overlooked these studies and emphasized the positive consequences . More recent studies that have observed memory impair - ment following verbalization ( Bahrick & Boucher , 1969 ; Nelson & Brooks , 1973 ; Pezdek et al . , 1986 ) have avoided the suggestion of memory interference and instead concluded that this effect reflected insufficient encoding . Apparently the present Zeitgeist emphasizing the value of ver - bal processing has caused memory researchers to generally overlook or simply disregard its potential to produce interference . The present results suggest that an exploration of verbal overshadow - ing is long overdue . The prevailing assumption that verbal processing helps memory or at worst has no effect is no longer tenable . At least with respect to visual memories for faces and colors it appears that “some things are better left unsaid . ” REFERENCES Anderson , J . R . ( 1983 ) . The architecture of cognition . Cambridge : Harvard Univ . Press . Amoult , M . D . ( 1956 ) . Recognition of shapes following paired associates pretraining . In K . W . Spence and J . T . Spence ( Eds . ) , The Psychology ofLearning and Motivation : Advances in Research and Theory ( Vol . 2 ) . New York : Academic Press . Atkinson , R . C . , & Shiffrin , R . M . ( 1971 ) . The control of short - term memory . Scientific American , 224 , 82 - 89 . Bahrick , H . P . , & Bahrick , P . ( 1971 ) . Independence of verbal and visual codes of the same stimuli . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 91 , 344 - 346 . Bahrick , H . P . , & Boucher , B . ( 1969 ) . Retention of visual and verbal codes of the same stimuli . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 78 , 417422 . 68 SCHOOLER AND ENGSTLER - SCHOOLER Bartlett , F . C . ( 1932 ) . Remembering : A study in experimental and social psychology . Lon - don : Cambridge Univ . Press . Bartlett , J . C . , Till , R . E . , & Levy , J . C . ( 1980 ) . Retrieval characteristics of complex pic - tures : Effects of verbal encoding . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 19 , 430 - 449 . Belbin , E . ( 1950 ) . The influence of interpolated recall upon recognition . Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 2 , 163 - 169 . Bekerian , D . A . , & Bowers , J . N . ( 1983 ) . Eyewitness testimony : Were we misled ? Journal of Experimental Psychology : Memory , Learning , and Cognition , 1 , 139 - 145 . Beyn , E . S . , & Knyazeva , G . R . ( 1962 ) . The problem of prosopagnosia . The Journal of Neurology , Neurosurgery , and Psychiatry , 25 , 154 - 158 . Bersted , C . T . ( 1988 ) . Flexibility in scanning described images . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Memory , Learning , and Cognition , 1 , 139 - 145 . Bower , G . H . , & Karlin , M . B . ( 1974 ) . Depth of processing pictures of faces and recognition memory . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 103 , 751 - 757 . Brown , J . , & Packham , D . W . ( 1967 ) . The effects of prior recall on multiple response recognition . Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 19 , 356 - 361 . Brown , R . ( 1966 ) . Social psychology . New York : Free Press . Carmichael , L . , Hogan , H . P . , & Walter , A . A . ( 1932 ) . An experimental study of the effect of language on the reproduction of visually perceived forms . Journal ofExperimental Psychology , 15 , 73 - 86 . Christiaansen , R . , & Ochalek , K . ( 1983 ) . Editing misleading information from memory : Evidence for the coexistence of original and postevent information . Memory and Cog - nition , 11 , 467 - 475 . Cooper , A . J . R . , & Monk , A . ( 1976 ) . Learning for recall and learning for recognition . In J . Brown ( Ed . ) , Recall and recognition . New York : Wiley . Craik , F . I . M . , & Lockhart , R . S . ( 1972 ) . Levels of processing : A framework for memory research . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 11 , 671 - 684 . Craik , F . I . M . , & Tulving , E . ( 1975 ) . Depth of processing and the retention of words in episodic memory . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 104 , 268 - 294 . Daniel , T . C . ( 1972 ) . Nature of the effect of verbal labels on recognition memory for form . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 96 , 152 - 157 . Daniel T . C . , & Ellis , H . C . ( 1972 ) . Stimulus codability and long - term recognition memory for visual form . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 93 , 83 - 89 . Darley , C . F . , & Glass , A . L . ( 1975 ) . Effects of rehearsal and serial list position on recall . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Learning and Memory , 104 , 453X % Darley , C . F . , & Murdock , B . B . ( 1971 ) . Effects ofprior free recall testing on final recall and recognition . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 91 ( l ) , 6673 . Ellis , H . D . ( 1984 ) . Practical aspects of face memory . In G . L . Wells & E . F . Loftus ( Eds . ) , Eyewitness testimony : Psychological perspectives ( pp . 12 - 37 ) . Cambridge : Cambridge Univ . Press . Ellis , H . C . , & Daniel , T . C . ( 1971 ) . Verbal processes in long - term stimulus - recognition memory . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 90 , 18 - 26 . Ellis , H . D . , Shepard , J . W . , & Davies , G . M . ( 1980 ) . The deterioration of verbal descrip - tions of faces over difference delay intervals . Journal of Police Science and Adminis - tration , 8 , 101 - 106 . Finke , R . A . ( 1985 ) . Theories relating mental imagery to perception . Psychological Bulletin , 98 , 236259 . Freund , R . D . ( 1971 ) . Verbal and non - verbalprocesses in picture recognition . Unpublished doctoral dissertation , Stanford University , Stanford , CA . VERBAL OVERSHADOWING 69 Garner , W . R . , & Felfoldy , G . L . ( 1970 ) . Integrality of stimulus dimensions in various types of information processing . Cognitive Psychology , 1 , 225 - 241 . Glenberg , A . , & Adams , F . ( 1978 ) . Type I rehearsal and recognition . Journal of Verbn / Learning and Verbal Behavior , 17 , 455463 . Glenberg , A . , Smith , S . M . , & Green , C . ( 1977 ) . Type I rehearsal : Maintenance and more . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 16 , 352 - 359 . Goldstein , A . G . , Johnson , K . S . , & Chance , . I . E . ( 1979 ) . Does fluency of face description imply superior face recognition ? Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society , 13 , 15 - 18 . Grano , J . D . ( 1984 ) . A legal response to the inherent dangers of eyewitness identification testimony . In G . L . Wells & E . F . Loftus ( Eds . ) , Eyewitness Testimony ( pp . 315 - 335 ) . New York : Cambridge Univ . Press . Hall , D . F . ( 1977 , December ) . Obtaining eyewitness identijkarions in criminal identifica - tions : Two experiments and some comments on the Zeirgesir in forensic psychology . Paper presented at the meeting of the American Psychology - Law Society . Hanawalt , N . G . , & Tarr , A . G . ( 1961 ) . The effect of recall upon recognition . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 62 , 361 - 367 . Hogan , R . M . , & Kintsch , W . ( 1971 ) . Differential effects of study and test trials on long - term recognition and recall . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 10 , 562 - 567 . Hyde , T . S . , & Jenkins , J . J . ( 1973 ) . Recall for words as afunction of semantic , graphic , and syntactic orienting tasks . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 12 , 471480 . Johnson , M . K . ( 1983 ) . A multiple - entry , modular memory system . In G . H . Bower ( Ed . ) , The Psychology of Learning and Motivation . New York : Academic Press . Johnson , M . K . , & Raye , C . L . ( 1981 ) . Reality monitoring . Psychological Review , 88 , 67 - 85 . Johnson , M . K . , Raye , C . L . , Foley , H . J . , & Foley , M . A . ( 1981 ) . Cognitive operations and decision bias in reality monitoring . American Journal of Psychology , 94 , 37 - 64 . Kay , H . , & Skemp , R . ( 1956 ) . Different thresholds for recognition : Further experiments on interpolated recall and recognition . Quarterly Journal ofExperimenra / Psychology , 8 , 153 - 162 . Klatzky , R . L . , Martin , G . L . , & Kane , R . A . ( 1982 ) . Semantic interpretation effects on memory for faces . Memory & Cognition , 10 , 195 - 206 . Kosslyn , S . M . ( 1980 ) . Image and mind . Cambridge : Harvard Univ . Press . Loftus , E . F . ( 1979 ) . Eyewitness testimony . Cambridge , MA : Harvard Univ . Press . Loftus , E . F . , & Loftus , G . R . ( 1980 ) . On the permanence of stored information in the human brain . American Psychologisr , 35 , 409420 . Loftus , G . R . ( 1972 ) . Eye fixations in recognition memory for pictures . Cognitive Psychol - ogy , 3 , 525 - 551 . Loftus , G . R . , & Kallman , H . J . ( 1979 ) . Encoding and use of detail information in picture recognition . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Learning and Memory , 5 , 197 - 211 . Lucy , J . A . , & Shweder , R . A . ( 1979 ) . Whorf and his critics : Linguistic and nonlinguistic influences on color memory . American Anthropologist , 8 , 581 - 613 . Maki , R . H . , & Schuler , J . ( 1980 ) . Effects of rehearsal duration and levels of processing on memory for words . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 19 , 36 - 45 . Malpass , R . ( 1981 ) . Effective size and defendant bias in eyewitness identification lineups . Law and Human Behavior , 5 , 299 - 309 . Mandler G . , & Rabinowitz , J . C . ( 1981 ) . Appearance and reality : Does a recognition test really improve subsequent recall and recognition ? Journal of Experimental Psycho / ogy : Human Learning and Memory , 7 , 79 - W . 70 SCHOOLER AND ENGSTLER - SCHOOLER Mauldin , M . A . , & Laughery , K . R . ( 1981 ) . Composite production effects on subsequent facial recognition . Journal of Applied Psychology , 66 , 351 - 357 . McDaniel , M . A . , & Masson , M . E . J . ( 1985 ) . Altering memory representations through retrieval . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 11 , 371 - 385 . McKelvie , S . . I . ( 1976 ) . The effects of verbal labelling on recognition memory for schematic faces . Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 28 , 459 - 474 . Morton , J . , Hammersley , R . H . , & Bekerian , D . A . ( 1985 ) . Headed records : A model for memory and its failures . Cognition , 20 , l - 23 . Nelson , D . L . , & Brooks , D . H . ( 1973 ) . Functional independence of pictures and their verbal memory codes . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 98 , 44 - 48 . Patterson , K . E . , & Baddeley , A . D . ( 1977 ) . When face recognition fails . Journal ofExper - imental Psychology : Human Learning and Memory , 3 , 4OW17 . Paivio , A . ( 1986 ) . Mental representations : A dual coding approach . New York : Oxford Univ . Press . Pavlov , I . P . ( 1927 ) . In G . V . Anrep ( Trans . ) , Conditioned reflexes . London : Oxford Univ . Press . Pezdek , K . , Maki , R . , Valencia - Laver , D . , Whetstone , T . , Stoeckert , J . . & Dougherty , T . ( 1986 ) . How well do we remember the visual details in pictures ? Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Psychonomic Society , 1986 , New Orleans . Pigott , M . , & Brigham , J . C . ( 1985 ) . Relationship between accuracy of prior description and facial recognition . Journal of Applied Psychology , 70 , 547 - 555 . Potter , M . C . , & Kroll , J . F . ( 1987 ) . Conceptual representation of pictures and words : Reply to Clark . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 119 , 310 - 311 . Pylyshyn , Z . W . ( 1981 ) . The imagery debate : Analog media versus tacit knowledge . In N . Block ( Ed . ) , Imagery ( pp . 151 - 206 ) . Cambridge : MIT Press . Rabinowitz , J . C . , Mandler , G . , & Barsalou , L . W . ( 1977 ) . Recognition failure : Another case of retrieval failure . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 16 , 639 - 663 . Rafnel , K . J . , & Klatzky , R . L . ( 1978 ) . Meaningful - interpretation effects on codes of non - sense pictures . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Learning and Memory , 4 , 631 - 646 . Raye , C . L . , Johnson , M . K . , & Taylor , T . H . ( 1980 ) . Is there something special about memory for internally - generated information ? Memory and Cognition , 8 , 141 - 148 . Read , J . D . ( 1979 ) . Rehearsal and recognition of human faces . American Journal of Psy - chology , 92 , 71 - 85 . Read , J . D . , Hammersley , R . , Cross - Calvert , S . , & McFadzen , E . ( 1989 ) . Rehearsal offaces and details in action events . Applied Cognitive Psychology , in press . Rundus , D . ( 1971 ) . Analysis of rehearsal processes in free - recall . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 89 , 63 - 77 . Schooler , J . W . , Foster , R . A . , & Loftus , E . F . ( 1988 ) . Some deleterious consequences of the act of recollection . Memory and Cognition , 16 , 243 - 251 . Shapiro , P . N . , & Penrod , S . ( 1986 ) . Meta - analysis of facial identification studies . Psycho - logical Bulletin , 100 , . 139 - 156 . Shepard , R . N . , & Metzler , J . ( 1971 ) . Mental rotation of three - dimensional objects . Science , 171 , 701 - 703 . Shepp , B . E . ( 1983 ) . The analyzability of multidimensional stimuli : Some constraints on perceived structure and attention . In T . J . Tighe & B . E . Shepp ( Eds . ) , Perception , cognition , and development : Interaction analyses . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Shulman , H . G . ( 1970 ) . Encoding and retention of semantic phonemic information in short - term memory . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 9 , 49 % 508 . VERBAL OVERSHADOWING 71 Slamecka , N . J . , & Graf , P . ( 1978 ) . The generation effect : Delineation of a phenomenon . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Learning & Memory , 4 , 592 - 604 . Tresselt , M . E . , & Mayzner , M . S . ( 1960 ) . A study of incidental learning Journal of Psy - chology , 50 , 339 - 347 . Tulving , E . ( 1984 ) . Precis of elements of episodic memory . The Behavorial and Brain Sci - ences , 7 , 223 - 238 . Wells , G . L . ( 1985 ) . Verbal descriptions of faces from memory : Are they diagnostic of identification accuracy ? Journal of Applied Psychology , 70 , 619 - 626 . Wells , G . L . , & Hryciw , B . ( 1984 ) . Memory for faces : Encoding and retrieval operations . Memory & Cognition , 12 , 338 - 344 . Wells , G . L . , & Turtle , J . W . ( 1988 ) . What is the best way to encode faces ? In M . M . Gruneberg , P . E . Morris , & R . N . Sykes ( Eds . ) Practical Aspecfs of Memory : Current Research and Zssues ( Vol . 1 ) . Chichester : Wiley . Wenger , S . K . , Thompson , C . P . , & Battling , C . A . ( 1980 ) . Recall facilitates subsequent recognition . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Learning and Memory , 6 , 135 - 144 . Winograd , E . ( 1981 ) . Elaboration and distinctiveness in memory for faces . Journal of Ex - perimental Psychology : Humun Learning and Memory , 7 , 181 - 19 . Wogalter , M . S . ( 1988 ) . Face memory : Effects of verbal description and visual rehearsal . Unpublished manuscript . Woodhead , M . M . , Baddeley , A . D . , & Simmonds , C . C . V . ( 1979 ) . On training people to recognize faces . Ergonomics , 22 , 333 - 343 . Woodward , A . E . , Bjork , R . A . , & Jongeward , R . H . ( 1973 ) . Recall and recognition as a function of primary rehearsal . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 12 , 608 - 617 . Yin , R . K . ( 1969 ) . Looking at upside - down faces . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 81 , 141 - 145 .