4polar - STORM polarized super - resolution imaging of actin filament organization in cells Caio Vaz Rimoli 1 , & , Cesar Augusto Valades Cruz 2 , 3 , & , Valentina Curcio 1 , Manos Mavrakis 1 , * , Sophie Brasselet 1 , * 1 Aix Marseille Univ , CNRS , Centrale Marseille , Institut Fresnel , F - 13013 Marseille , France 2 Institut Curie , PSL Research University , UMR144 CNRS , Space - Time imaging of organelles and Endomembranes Dynamics Team , F - 75005 , Paris , France 3 Inria Centre Rennes - Bretagne Atlantique , SERPICO Project Team , F - 35042 , Rennes , France & these authors contributed equally to the work * corresponding authors contact : sophie . brasselet @ fresnel . fr , manos . mavrakis @ univ - amu . fr Abstract Advances in single - molecule localization microscopy are providing unprecedented insights into the nanometer - scale organization of protein assemblies in cells and thus a powerful means for interrogating biological function . However , localization imaging alone does not contain information on protein conformation and orientation , which constitute additional key signatures of protein function . Here , we present a new microscopy method which combines for the first time Stochastic Optical Reconstruction Microscopy ( STORM ) super - resolution imaging with single molecule orientation and wobbling measurements using a four polarization - resolved image splitting scheme . This new method , called 4polar - STORM , allows us to determine both single molecule localization and orientation in 2D and to infer their 3D orientation , and is compatible with high labelling densities and thus ideally placed for the determination of the organization of dense protein assemblies in cells . We demonstrate the potential of this new method by studying the nanometer - scale organization of dense actin filament assemblies driving cell adhesion and motility , and reveal bimodal distributions of actin filament orientations in the lamellipodium , which were previously only observed in electron microscopy studies . 4polar - STORM is fully compatible with 3D localization schemes and amenable to live - cell observations , and thus promises to provide new functional readouts by enabling nanometer - scale studies of orientational dynamics in a cellular context . Introduction Protein conformation and the precise way in which proteins arrange in space to form higher - order macromolecular assemblies are key elements of biological functions in cells and tissues . Adhesion of animal cells to the extracellular matrix is driven , for example , by dramatic conformational changes in force - sensing and force - transducing proteins such as integrins and talins . The precise geometry of actin filament assemblies 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 and its remodelling in space and time are further determinant for cell mechanics driving essential biological processes , including immune responses and tissue development . Thus , understanding the function of a protein and its interaction with its partners , necessitates that we observe its organization at the nanometer scale , both in position and orientation . This need is shared by many fields in biology from immunology , neurobiology and mechanobiology , to developmental biology . Current methods reporting protein organization such as electron microscopy or X - ray diffraction are however not yet applicable to a live imaging context . Single molecule localization microscopy ( SMLM ) has brought considerable progress towards this goal , enabling imaging with a resolution down to tens of nanometers even in live cells 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 . However , while these methods report the localization of single molecules with high precision , they do not measure their orientation . If fluorophores are linked to the proteins of interest rigidly enough 10 , reporting their orientation could provide precious information on the structural organization of the attached proteins and on their conformational behaviors , which is inherently missing in localization - based optical imaging methods . While measuring fluorophore orientation precisely and accurately is a challenge that is of high interest in the field of SMLM imaging , it is however a delicate task . First , it is necessary to not only measure their 3D orientation , averaged over the imaging time , but also the extent of their orientation fluctuations , which naturally occurs when fluorophores wobble at fast time scales 10 ( Fig . 1a ) . A failure to uncouple their mean orientation from their fluctuations makes it impossible to determine accurately how the fluorophore - conjugated molecules are organized and can lead to misleading interpretations 10 . Second , orientation and spatial position are difficult to disentangle in SMLM , because of their intrinsic coupling in the process of the formation of their PSF image in a microscope 11 , 12 . The development of an optimal method to disentangle spatial position , mean orientation and orientation fluctuations is still an ongoing research 13 . One approach is to encode the orientation and wobbling information into the shape of the single molecules’ point spread function ( PSF ) , using custom - designed phase or birefringent masks 14 , 15 , 16 . This strategy comes however at the price of some constraints , which restrain its use in regular SMLM imaging . PSF engineering induces an increase of the PSF size , with the PSF shape including both orientation and wobbling information in an intricate way , limiting its use in densely - labelled structures . PSF engineering also involves practical and methodology difficulties due to complex data analysis procedures and stringent calibrations to avoid sources of bias such as optical aberrations . Along similar lines , exploiting un - engineered PSF shape changes due to image defocusing 17 , 18 or to the proximity of the molecule to the coverslip interface 19 has been proposed , however with similar limitations as encountered in PSF engineering . A less constraining approach is to use polarization projections of the image plane , and perform ratiometric intensity measurements between different polarization channels . Two - orthogonal polarization splitting has allowed fluorescence anisotropy measurements in isotropic environments 20 and used to quantify actin filament alignment in 2D 10 , however with the inconvenience of an estimation ambiguity for fluorophore orientations symmetric relative to the polarization axes . Additionally , two - orthogonal polarization splitting does not efficiently decouple orientation from wobbling . Both ambiguities have been waived by the use of a four - polarization projection scheme 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 . A strong limitation still present in currently reported four - polarization split approaches is however that due to the high numerical apertures used , the intensities measured are strongly influenced by the off - plane 3D orientation of the fluorophores , resulting in large inaccuracies in the determination of their wobbling 23 . The failure to provide accurate measurements of fluorophore wobbling has precluded its use as an additional readout for protein organization . It is indeed conceivable that fluorophore wobbling is related to local packing constraints of the labelled protein . Importantly , single molecule studies using four polarizations projections have not yet been applied to super - resolution imaging and have so far been limited to situations employing sparse labelling or / and photobleaching to obtain single fluorophores 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 . In this work , we combine for the first time Stochastic Optical Reconstruction Microscopy ( STORM ) super - resolution imaging with single molecule orientation and wobbling measurements using four - polarization image splitting in a new method called 4polar - STORM . 4polar - STORM imaging is compatible with high labelling densities and is thus ideally placed for the determination of the organization of dense protein assemblies in cells . 4polar - STORM imaging further uses a slightly reduced detection numerical aperture , allowing us to not only determine the 2D mean orientation and wobbling of fluorophores in a reliable way , but also to infer their 3D orientation and thus provide additional information on protein organization and function that is otherwise difficult to obtain . With this new approach , we reveal the nanometric - scale structural organization of actin filaments inside dense actin filament - based structures involved in the adhesion and motility of cells , notably stress fibers ( SFs ) and lamellipodia . Actin is at the center of interest in the development of super - resolution imaging methods where so far , only localization - based images have been exploited 25 , 26 , 27 , 28 , 29 , 30 . Here we use 4polar - STORM imaging to quantify the orientational behaviour of fluorophores in single actin filaments used as a reference , and in fixed cells . We show that actin filaments are highly aligned in all types of SFs in cells , in line with EM studies 31 , 32 , and further reveal that SFs contain not only 2D but also 3D oriented populations of actin filaments , whose nanometer - scale organization is consistent with the different proposed mechanisms for their assembly . Mild pharmacological inhibition of myosin II activity to relax contractile SFs , while keeping SFs macroscopically intact , led to a perturbation of the nanometric actin filament organization , as revealed by 4polar - STORM imaging , highlighting the dependence of contractile SF organization on Myosin II activity . Finally , 4polar - STORM imaging in the dense meshwork of the lamellipodium at the leading edge of motile cells revealed bimodal distributions of actin filament orientations , with non - negligible 3D oriented filament populations . Such bimodal orientation distributions have not been reported with other super - resolution light microscopy methods , to our knowledge , due to the high actin density in this area 25 , and were previously only observed in EM studies of the lamellipodium 3 , 33 , 34 , 35 , 36 . This new method is amenable to live - cell observations , and promises to complement electron microscopy studies in cells , while allowing for nanometer - scale measurements of molecular organization in large ( tens of micrometers ) fields of views . 4polar - STORM imaging applied to actin filaments Fluorophores attached to a protein act as emission dipoles . While their position is directly defined as the center of their PSF image , their orientation is not directly extractable . A fluorophore is represented by its mean orientation (  ) averaged over the imaging integration time , and its wobbling angle (  3D ) explored during this integration time ( Fig . 1a ) . 4polar - STORM measures the fluorophore’s orientation and wobbling projected in the sample plane (  ) ( Fig . 1a ) based on the projection of the fluorescence signal on four polarizations channels along the directions 0° , 45° , 90° , and 135° respectively ( 0° corresponding here to the horizontal direction of the sample ) ( Fig . 1b ) . The 4 - polarization splitting approach leads to only a minor deformation and enlargement of the image PSF , affecting minimally the signal to noise ratio ( SNR ) and PSF complexity . In contrast to a 2 - polarization projection 10 , 4 - polarization projection permits to waive coupling ambiguities and therefore to retrieve  and  independently . Supplementary Note 1 details the theoretical framework for the retrieval of the orientation parameters (  ) . We note that  is the sample - plane 2D projection of the wobbling cone angle  3D , it therefore differs from the real 3D wobbling value  3D . At large off - plane tilt angles in particular ( small  angle in Fig . 1a ) , the projection of the wobbling cone angle is biased and  is an overestimation of  3D . Theoretical calculations of the dependence of this bias on the detection numerical aperture ( NA ) and on the tilt angle of the fluorophore , show that a solution for minimizing this bias is to lower the NA to a value close to 1 . 2 ( Supplementary Note 1 ) . Even though both SNR and PSF size are expected to be slightly degraded for this lower NA , this permits to give a low - bias estimate of  3D with a reasonable compromise on the loss of signal , as long as the tilt angle of the fluorophore off - plane orientation  does not surpass 45° ( Supplementary Note 1 and Fig . S1 ) . The retrieval of the orientation parameters (  ) consists in detecting first the 2D position of single molecules in each of the polarization channels , previously corrected for imperfections in the detection paths ( Supplementary Note 2 ) and registered ( Supplementary Note 3 ) . Each molecule is associated to its pairs in all polarization channels , where polarized PSF amplitudes and sizes are deduced from a Gaussian fit in order to calculate intensities along each of the polarized channels ( Fig . 1b ) ( Supplementary Note 3 ) . We note that if molecules have a well - defined orientation and are oriented off - plane , their PSF will enlarge and deform towards a donut - shape 37 . Even though this effect is minimized when molecules wobble 38 , the PSF fit has to allow for larger ranges of sizes , since the measured PSF size for tilted molecules can be larger than for in - plane molecules . Once intensities are determined in the four polarization channels , a retrieval calculation permits to extract both  and  parameters per molecule ( Supplementary Note 1 ) . This calculation uses a relatively simple model , for computational speed reasons , which is shown to be very close to a complete model characterization accounting for the inversion of the propagation equations ( Supplementary Note 1 and Fig . S2 ) . Figure 1 . ( a ) Schematic representation of a wobbling Alexa Fluor 488 ( AF488 ) - phalloidin conjugate labelling an actin filament ( F - actin ) . The structure of the phalloidin conjugate is shown on the left , with the fluorophore moiety highlighted in red . (  represent the mean orientation of a single fluorophore in 3D , with  the projected orientation in the sample plane ( XY ) and  its off - plane tilt angle with respect to the optical axis of the microscope ( Z ) .  3D is the wobbling cone angle of the fluorophore in 3D , and  its projection in the sample plane .  is the mean orientation of the fluorophore relative to the actin filament axis . ( b ) Schematic optical setup of 4polar - STORM imaging . BS , beam splitter ; M , mirror ; D , diaphragm ; HWP , half - wave plate ; PBS , polarizing beam splitter . ( c ) Examples of 4polar - STORM images of single AF488 - phalloidin molecules labelling single actin filaments . Left panels depict single molecule localization STORM images ( blurred using a Gaussian filter with a sigma of 0 . 3 pixel size ) . Middle and right panels depict single molecule wobbling (  ) and orientation (  ) measurements overlaid with the STORM image depicted in grayscale . Each single molecule is represented as a stick whose orientation is  relative to the horizontal axis and whose color is the measured parameter (  or  ) . Scale bars , 170 nm . ( d ) Monte Carlo simulations of the expected precision on  under different signal level conditions ( signal in photons , 1000 photons = 4 . 5x10 4 camera counts ) . 5000 realizations are used for  = 90° ( in - plane molecules ) in the presence of camera detection noise using the experimental conditions and a gain of 300 ( the results do not depend on  ) ( see Supplementary Fig . S3 ) . ( e ) Corresponding Monte Carlo simulations for the estimation of  precisions reached for (  = 90° ,  = 90° ) ( the results do not strongly depend on  apart for  ° and 180° ) . ( f ) Representative experimental  histogram obtained on a straight segment of a single actin filament ( see ( c ) ) . ( g ) Corresponding  histogram in both standard and polar - plot representations , depicting the distribution of orientation angle values relative to the average within the measured region of interest ,  .    is the standard deviation of  . For both histograms , intensities are thresholded above 5x10 4 camera counts and localization precisions are thresholded below 0 . 15 pixels (  loc < 20 nm ) . Using the theoretical framework we established for the retrieval of orientation parameters , we aimed at using 4polar - STORM imaging to measure the nanometer - scale actin filament organization in complex assemblies in cells labelled with fluorophore - conjugated phalloidin molecules , which provide specific labelling of actin filaments 39 , 40 . Our measurements will allow us to extract both the degree of angular fluctuations of the fluorophores (  angle in Fig . 1a ) , and their mean orientation in the sample plane (  angle in Fig . 1a ) . To evaluate the fluorophore orientation behaviour in a flat , single actin filament with a well - defined direction , we started by reconstituting single actin filaments immobilized on a glass surface ( see Methods ) . This provides a reference for later deciphering actin filament organization in unknown , more complex assemblies . Figure 1c shows the results obtained on isolated actin filaments labelled with Alexa Fluor 488 ( AF488 ) - phalloidin . Single AF488 molecules measured by 4polar - STORM are represented as sticks whose color is the wobbling angle  and whose orientation , relative to the horizontal axis , is the angle  .  Figure 1c shows that AF488 molecules are oriented along the actin filament axis , and exhibit a non - negligible degree of orientational flexibility  . The expected precision on both  and  , depicted in Fig . 1d , e , was evaluated by Monte Carlo simulations under different signal levels , accounting for the camera noise ( Supplementary Figure S3 ) . Typical measured total intensities from single molecules are around 5 to 10x10 4 camera counts . At 5x10 4 camera counts ( e . g . 1100 photons ) , we expect an error of 12° for  in the measured range of  values ( Fig . 1d ) , and of 5° degrees for  ( Fig . 1e ) . This error decreases with the signal level and is expected to increase in the presence of background . In order to exclude degraded signal in 4polar - STORM due to background conditions , and provide high precision estimates , we systematically threshold the experimental data to a minimum intensity of 5x10 4 camera counts , and to a maximum localization precision value  loc of 0 . 15 pixels ( corresponding to 20 nm ) . Straight segments of actin filaments were selected under such conditions , and typical statistics obtained on  and  in these regions are plotted in Fig . 1f and Fig . 1g respectively . Measurements of the orientation angles  are depicted relatively to the average  over the molecules measured in the region of interest ,  Fig . 1g ) . The distribution of  is characterized by a standard deviation   which represents the range of orientations explored by single AF488 molecules with respect to the actin filament ;   also gives a measurement of the fluorophore tilt angle with respect to the filament axis ( 𝜉 angle in Fig . 1a ) . Figures 1f , g show that AF488 labels are , on average , oriented along the actin filament direction with a tilt angle of about 𝜉 = 20° with respect to the actin filament axis , and a non - negligible wobbling of  = 85 - 90° . This is consistent with the fact that the phalloidin - fluorophore conjugate exhibits a very small size ( on the order of 1 nm ) and a structure that fits in the groove formed by three neighbouring G - actin monomers 41 , while leaving some space for mobility for the fluorophore . As previous studies have suggested , this degree of mobility is expected to originate mostly from the structure of the fluorophore itself and its precise conjugation to the phalloidin moiety , AF488 being among the least wobbly fluorophores among STORM dyes 10 . Using the same labelling approach , we next investigated the organization of actin filaments in structures that are expected to be highly organized in cells , notably actin stress fibers ( SFs ) . We focused on ventral stress fibers , both ends of which associate with focal adhesions ( FAs ) on the ventral surface of the cell ; on dorsal stress fibers , with one end associating with FAs on the ventral surface and the other end extending upwards toward the dorsal cell surface ; and on meshworks ( Fig . 2a ) . A minimum intensity threshold of 5x10 4 camera counts and a maximum localization precision value  loc of 0 . 15 pixels are applied to all data in order to exclude estimates that lead to low precision and inaccuracy in the parameters’ determination . 4polar - STORM images of an actin - stained cell are shown in Fig . 2b - d , which depict respectively the single molecule localization image ( STORM ) , the  and the  images from the same cell . In well isolated thin ventral SFs , AF488 is oriented predominantly along the SF direction ( ROI 1 in Figs . 2e , f , with polar histograms of single molecule orientations shown as insets in f ) , similarly to what was observed in single actin filaments ( Fig . 1 ) . This observation confirms that these SFs are made of highly parallel filaments , which is expected from the tight crosslinking of these structures 3 . Many molecules exhibit however larger  values than the ones measured in single filaments . This is even more pronounced in ventral SF parts close to FAs ( ROI 2 in Figs . 2e , f ) or in dorsal SFs ( ROI 3 in Figs . 2e , f ) ; larger  values appear as progressively redder sticks in the  images . In these regions ,  angles also distribute over a large range of orientations , not necessarily along the SF ( see zooms in Fig . 2g , compare ROI 6 with ROI 5 ) and  angle distributions shift to high values ( see polar histogram insets in Figs . 2f and histograms in Fig . 2h , compare ROIs 2 - 3 with ROI 1 ) . This trend was observed for multiple SFs in all measured cells ( see other examples in Supplementary figure S4 ) . At last , in seemingly homogeneous meshworks , AF488 orientations  seem to follow preferential directions with much larger distributions ( ROI 4 in Figs . 2e , f , h ) . Figure 2 . 4polar - STORM imaging of actin filament organization in fixed U2OS cells . ( a ) Left : Spinning - disk fluorescence image of a U2OS cell ( green , AF488 - phalloidin - labelled F - actin ; red , p - FAK ) . White arrows indicate focal adhesions ( FAs ) and the types of stress fibers ( SFs ) of interest . Right : z - stack mage of F - actin , z is color - coded as indicated . ( b ) Large field of view single molecule ( AF488 ) localization STORM image of the same cell . ( c ) Corresponding 4polar - STORM  stick image with color - coded orientation measurements . ( d ) Corresponding 4polar - STORM  stick image with color - coded wobbling angle measurements . ( e ) STORM and ( f ) corresponding  stick images of zoomed regions of interest ( ROI ) ( see squares in ( d ) ) . ROI 1 , ventral SF ; ROI 2 , FA ; ROI 3 , dorsal SF ; ROI 4 , meshwork . Insets in ( f ) depict the polar - plot histograms of  in the rectangle region indicated ( whole region for ROI 4 ) . ( g )  stick images of zoomed ROIs 5 and 6 ( see red squares in ( d ) ) exhibiting respectively low  and high  populations . ROI 5 , ventral SF ; ROI 6 , FA . ( h ) Histograms of  values for ROIs 1 - 4 . Values of <  ( over all measured molecules ) and of the standard deviation   of  =  are shown . For all images , intensities are thresholded above 5x10 4 camera counts and localization precisions are thresholded below 0 . 15 pixels (  loc < 20 nm ) . Scale bars ( a - d ) , 7  m ; ( e ) , 800 nm ; ( g ) , 260 nm . To understand the presence of large  values and wide  distributions in SFs , we investigated possible correlations between these two parameters . We found first that in all observed SFs , large  values generally correlate with a wide distribution of  values ( Fig . 3a ) . This behaviour could physically correspond to molecules that are freely , isotropically rotating , but we exclude such an effect . First , no free phalloidin - fluorophore conjugates are expected given the high affinity of phalloidin for actin filaments . Second , higher wobbling angles were not present in single actin filaments and thin actin bundles . We exclude also a sensitivity of wobbling to actin filament packing within bundles , considering the small size of phalloidin - AF488 ; single actin filaments do not present packing - related constraints and did not exhibit high wobbling angles . Our hypothesis for the observed high  values is the presence of 3D oriented actin filaments ( off - plane  angle in Fig . 1a ) that lead to an overestimation of  . The use of a relatively low detection NA of 1 . 2 minimizes the bias induced by 3D orientations as compared to higher NA conditions , but does not entirely exclude this effect . Typically , wobbling molecules with  3D = 90° oriented off - plane by  = 45° lead to a measured  = 150° ( Supplementary Fig . S1 ) . 3D oriented filaments also naturally lead to larger deviations of  . Typically a  distribution of    20° for an in - plane filament would increase dramatically to an apparent    90° when this filament is tilted off - plane by 45° ( Supplementary Fig . S5 ) . To test the hypothesis of possible 3D oriented filaments , we investigated the correlation of  and  with the single molecule detection parameters , in particular their intensity , which is expected to decrease when fluorophores are tilted off plane due to their lower photo - excitation , and the PSF radius , which is expected to increase when molecules are either tilted or out of focus . Large  values and wider distributions of  values are indeed found to correlate with large PSF radii and with the lowest levels of intensities ( Fig . 3b , c ) . Thresholding intensities and  loc values as above , as well as keeping PSF radii below 1 . 15 pixels ( ~ 150 nm ) leads to a net reduction of the populations of high  values ( Fig . 3d ; compare with Fig . 2f ) ( see also Supplementary Fig . S4 ) . Larger populations of large PSF radii can also be found in SFs that are visibly enriched in high  values ( Supplementary Fig . S6 ) . These populations are attributed to molecules tilted off plane ( also possibly positioned at slightly different heights ) , and therefore to populations of filaments that are tilted with respect to the sample plane . Such tilted filaments are found , as expected , more frequently at the FA sites and in dorsal SFs , both of which are expected to contain off - plane filament populations , in contrast to ventral SFs , which lie in the plane of the substrate ( Fig . 2a ) . Estimation of the off - plane angle can be done qualitatively from the theoretical  vs  bias dependence ( Supplementary Fig . S1 ) . In the case of actin filaments labelled with AF488 - phalloidin , we expect  ~ 90° for molecules lying in - plane ( Fig 1 ) . This value would increase to about  ~ 110° for  = 70° and  ~ 150° at  = 45° ( Supplementary Fig . S1 ) . The population with  > 120° (  < 60° ) observed in Fig . 3a is thus attributed to filaments tilted by more than 30° from the sample plane . Thus , selecting only delta values with  < 110° (  > 70° , i . e . within 20° from the sample plane ) allows to measure actin filament organization in SFs without a strong bias on    Supplementary Fig . S5  Using this criterion , the parameter   can therefore be used as a minimally - biased quantitative estimate of in - plane actin filament organization in selected regions .   is seen to decrease in SFs for  < 110° ( Fig . 3e - f , ROIs 1 and 2 , compare with Fig . 2f , h ) , reaching the   values in single actin filaments ( Fig . 1 g ) , thus showing now highly aligned actin filaments in ventral SFs and FAs . Regions in dorsal SFs and meshworks depict now more clearly populations of actin filaments crossing each other , as expected ( Fig . 3e - f , ROIs 3 and 4 , compare with Fig . 2f ) ( see also Supplementary Fig . S7 ) . Importantly , the estimated   is found to be of similar values independently of the radius size thresholding ( data not shown ) , as long as in - plane filaments are selected (  < 110° ) . Figure 3 . Influence of the detection parameters on 4polar - STORM imaging . ( a ) Scatter polar representation of (  ) values obtained in single AF488 molecules ( all detected intensities ) present in ROI 1 ( rectangle in ( d ) ) . Each marker is a molecule present in the ROI , plotted using cylindrical coordinates  as a radius and  as an angle respective to the horizontal axis . ( b ) Same  values as in ( a ) , using intensity counts as a vertical coordinate , and the PSF radius r as a color code for the markers . Each marker is a single molecule . ( c ) Same representation using , for the horizontal axis ,  values centered with respect to their average orientation <  ( d ) Same 4polar - STORM images as in Fig . 2e , f , depicting  sticks only for molecules for which r < 1 . 15 pixels ( 149 nm ) . The corresponding average <  > over all measured molecules ( present in the rectangle for ROIs 1 - 3 or the whole region for ROI 4 ) are shown . ( e ) Same ROIs as in ( d ) showing  stick images only for molecules with  < 110° . ( f ) Corresponding polar - plot histograms of  for regions indicated in ( e ) . The corresponding   values are shown . Scale bar ( d - e ) , 800 nm . Our analysis emphasizes two novel possibilities that the 4polar - STORM method offers for the investigation of actin filament organization . First , the wobbling of single fluorophores can be used for the quantification of their off - plane tilt orientations , exploiting the degree of bias even at a slightly reduced detection NA . Second , the lowest wobbling values obtained in a population of fluorophores can be used to select in - plane populations of actin filaments and study their organization in a quantitative manner . Not quantifying these sources of bias can lead to errors of interpretation in the measured organizations , especially at the high detection NAs generally used 22 , 23 , 24 . In what follows , we exploit these considerations to quantitatively compare actin filament organization in different structures of the cell . Actin filament organization imaging by 4polar - STORM in - plane selection We first analysed actin filament organization in different types of SFs in cultured U2OS cells on unpatterned or micropatterned coverslips ( see Methods ) , quantifying   for molecules with  < 110° . In what follows , the PSF radius of single molecules is not thresholded , results being very similar in both conditions . Regions defining ventral , peripheral , dorsal SFs as well as transverse arcs and FAs are measured by 4polar - STORM . We combine phalloidin stainings with immunostainings for a FA protein , the phosphorylated form of focal adhesion kinase , p - FAK , in order to define the different types of SFs based on their association with FAs 42 , 43 ( Fig . 2a ) . A z - stack of the cell further allows us to visualize off - plane tilted structures ( Fig . 2a ) . While ventral , peripheral and arc SFs are lying in the sample plane , dorsal SFs are the most tilted ones .   values were measured in rectangular ROIs of typically ( 0 . 5 - 1  m ) x 100 nm in size .   exhibits very large distributions , due to variations in actin filament organization among SFs within a given cell and across cells ( Fig . 4a ) . Among the measured SFs , ventral SFs exhibit the highest filament alignment ( lowest   value ) , with the average   close to that measured in single filaments ( <   > ~ 25° ) .   values for transverse arc SFs are slightly higher , suggesting the presence of less well - aligned actin filaments or / and filaments crossing each other . Such organization is fully consistent with the proposed mechanisms of transverse arc assembly , involving both the progressive fusion and alignment of actin filament fragments and myosin filament stacks , and connections of forming arcs with dorsal SFs 44 , 45 , 46 .   values for peripheral SFs are , surprisingly , even larger , suggesting that peripheral SFs contain a larger population of actin filaments in various directions . This observation correlated with the fact that the measured peripheral SFs were often thicker than the measured ventral ones , which suggests that thicker SFs contain more various actin filaments directions . This hypothesis is in line with observations of actin bundles fusing with or splitting from peripheral fibers and with recent work showing that peripheral SFs and the cortical meshwork form a continuous contractile network 47 . FAs , regardless their association with ventral or dorsal SFs , depict a much wider distribution of   values , containing both highly aligned actin filaments and actin filaments in mixed orientations . We hypothesize that this organization reflects the dynamical nature of FAs , whose precise assembly and maturation depend on the local mechanical environment 48 , 49 . At last , dorsal SFs exhibit the highest   values with <   > ~ 35° . We attribute these high values to the very nature of dorsal SF assembly involving extensive interconnections along their length with transverse arc SFs 42 , 43 . Depicting all <  values measured in all ROIs confirms that peripheral SFs , FAs and dorsal SFs contain the largest population of filaments tilted off plane , with the lowest proportion of single molecules with  < 110° ( Fig . 4a ) . These results show that while peripheral SFs are known to be under a larger mechanical strain than central ventral SFs 50 , their higher mechanical tension is not necessarily accompanied with a higher alignment of actin filaments in - plane . To probe the sensitivity of actin filament organization in SFs to contractility , we treated U2OS cells with blebbistatin , a drug that inhibits myosin II activity and therefore acto - myosin bundle contractility . To minimize dispersions due to SF heterogeneities , we performed this experiment on cells adhering to H - shaped micropatterned substrates of a well - defined size , concentrating on peripheral SFs ( see Methods ) . Blebbistatin treatment leads eventually to the dissociation of the contractile peripheral SFs 51 ( also seen in our data ) . Blebbistatin concentration and incubation time were thus kept low enough to induce a loss in contractility , evidenced by the concave shape of relaxed SFs , while preserving the apparent macroscopic integrity of the SFs ( Fig . 4b ) . The single molecule localization image alone ( STORM , Fig . 4b ) cannot inform us on the underlying actin filament organization in the relaxed SFs . 4polar - STORM measurements , however , show a slight decrease of actin filament alignment , with a statistically significant increase of <   > from 26° to 32° ( Fig . 4c ) , and also an enrichment of 3D oriented filaments as seen from the increase of <  > ( Fig . 4d ) . Contractility loss induced by myosin II inactivation is therefore correlated to a decrease of actin filament organization which is also visible from the 4polar - STORM  images ( Fig . 4b ) . Representative distributions of single - molecule orientations  in control and blebbistatin - treated SFs are shown in Fig . 4b and quantified in Fig . 4e , for both in - plane (  ) and off - plane (  >  ) filament populations . The spreading of the distributions induced by blebbistatin confirms a decrease in actin filament alignment and a concomitant increase in 3D oriented filament populations as schematically represented in Fig . 4f . 4polar - STORM measurements thus reveal that actin filament organization in SFs is sensitive to acto - myosin contractility , with myosin II inhibition inducing a loss in actin filament alignment at the nanometer - scale . Figure 4 . 4polar - STORM imaging of actin filament organization in different types of stress fibers . ( a ) Left :   ( standard deviation of  =  - <  > ) values measured in ROIs on different types of SFs , using only molecules with  < 110° . The numbers of measured ROIs are as follows : n = 42 ( ventral ) , 32 ( peripheral ) , 30 ( arc ) , 51 ( FA ) , 28 ( dorsal ) from a total of 8 cells . Typically , a few thousands of molecules per ROI are measured . Right : same analysis , plotting <  > ( average of  measured for each ROI , all  values selected ) . For each SF type , the percentage of the  population with  < 110° is indicated . Statistical significance of scatter plots : ns ( p > 0 . 05 ) ; * * ( p < 0 . 01 ) ; * * * ( p < 0 . 001 ) ; * * * * ( p < 0 . 0001 ) ( T - test ) . All comparisons are made with respect to the ventral SF population . ( b ) top : STORM images of control and blebbistatin - treated U2OS cells on micropatterns . Scale bars , 6 . 5  m ; bottom : 4polar - STORM  stick images of zoomed regions ( rectangles in the STORM images ) . Scale bars , 500 nm . ( c ) Effect of blebbistatin on peripheral SFs ( see Methods for blebbistatin treatment ) .   values reported for all ROIs , using only molecules with  < 110° . 4 cells were analysed per condition , using in total 87 ROIs in control cells and 43 ROIs in treated cells . ( d ) <  values reported for all ROIs ( all  selected ) . ( e ) Polar - plot histograms of  in the zooms shown in ( b ) , for  < 110° ( left ) and  > 120° ( right ) . The corresponding   values are shown . ( f ) Schematic representations of the SFs observed in control and blebbistatin - treated conditions , showing highly - aligned actin filaments in 2D ( top ) and disorganized filaments in 3D ( bottom ) . At last , we investigated actin filament organization in dense networks at the leading edge of B16 melanoma cells ( Fig . 5a ) . We concentrate in particular on the lamellipodium , which spans a few micrometers at the cell border 36 . Again , the single molecule localization images alone ( STORM in Fig . 5a , d ) do not provide any information on how single AF488 - phalloidin molecules orient with respect to one another and thus on the nanometer - scale organization of the labelled actin filaments ; the very high filament density in these networks makes it even more challenging to decipher the precise arrangement of filaments . Remarkably , the contour of the cells imaged by 4polar - STORM shows different (  ) distributions than in the rest of the cell ( Fig . 5b , c ) . Within the first hundreds of nanometers from the cell contour , single molecules exhibit wide distributions of orientations (  and high wobbling  values , signatures of more disorganized , off - plane actin filament populations . Selecting only in - plane filaments (  < 110° ) shows that actin filaments in these dense networks are not oriented isotropically , but that there are visible preferred orientations which cannot be detected in the single molecule localization images alone 25 ( Fig . 5d and quantification in Fig . 5e ) . Single molecule orientation distributions at the cell border ( ROIs 1 , 2 , 4 - 8 in Fig . 5b ) reveal in general the presence of two main populations with different contributions ( Fig . 5e ) . Generally , one of the two orientation populations appears to predominate ( ROIs 1 , 6 - 8 ) . However , in some regions ( ROIs 5 ) , the two populations tend to contribute equally into a bimodal distribution , which becomes more isotropic when off - plane molecules are considered (  > 120° ) . This behaviour has been observed in all cells measured ( see another example in Supplementary Fig . S8 ) . We note that these distributions are very different from those found in SFs , which exhibit much narrower distributions with a preferred orientation , even when considering off - plane molecules ( ROI 10 ) . At last , narrow distributions are found in microspikes ( ROIs 3 , 9 ) , which is a signature of parallel actin bundles within the lamellipodium , despite their close proximity to bimodal distributions ( see ROIs 2 and 4 which surround ROI 3 ) . Remarkably , the angle between the two peaks of the observed bimodal distributions is close to 70° , with some variations along the cell contour , and points towards the normal to the membrane contour ( Fig . 5e ) . This is reminiscent of observations made by EM where actin filaments display a bimodal angular distribution , with filament orientations peaking at 35° and - 35° with respect to the direction of membrane protrusion 34 , 35 , 36 . This so - called dendritic organization was attributed to the angle imposed by the Arp2 / 3 complex involved in actin filament branching in those regions 36 , 52 . Bimodal orientation distributions in 4polar - STORM images were present in ROIs from hundreds of nanometers to micrometers sizes , and were variable depending on the region of the cell contour , emphasizing the importance of large field of view observations . Figure 5 . 4polar - STORM imaging of actin filament organization in lamellipodia . ( a ) Single molecule localization STORM image of a B16 cell labelled with AF488 - phalloidin . ( b ) Corresponding 4polar - STORM  stick image with color - coded orientation measurements . ( c ) 4polar - STORM  stick image with color - coded wobbling angle measurements . ( d ) Examples of  stick images showing molecules with  < 110° and corresponding STORM images in selected ROIs ( squares in ( b ) ) . ROIs 1 - 9 , regions in the lamellipodium ; ROI 3 , 9 , microspikes ; ROI 10 , SF . ( e ) Polar - plot histograms of  for the regions shown in ( b ) . The condition  < 110° is used , except for red - circled histograms for which  > 120° molecules are selected . Scale bars ( a - c ) , 4  m ; ( d ) , 260 nm . The variations in the precise distribution of actin filament orientations at the cell edge , and the non - negligible presence of 3D orientations , are consistent with recent findings in the literature based on EM and modelling 4 . A range of angular distributions of actin filament orientations has been evidenced , which appears to be more complex and heterogeneous than a pure bimodal distribution with peaks positioned at the 70° branching angle 53 . This angular spread depends on the cell mechanical load 54 , and the precise geometry of filament assemblies , not necessarily pointing towards the membrane normal , depends on the modulation of the protrusion rate 55 , 56 . Additionally , actin filament organization within the lamellipodium sheet is known to extend in 3D , with possibly different organizations at the cell surface and in the upper layer as evidenced recently in studies using 3D super - resolution localization microscopy 25 or cryo - tomography EM 57 . The 4polar - STORM results , which do not differentiate between specific actin layers , suggest the co - existence of both preferred angular distributions of actin filament orientations and populations of 3D oriented filaments . Discussion We developed a new super - resolution fluorescence microscopy method , called 4polar - STORM , which allows simultaneous measurements of single molecule localization and orientation in 2D , as well as an indirect evaluation of their 3D orientation . The 4polar - STORM analysis permits to evaluate quantitatively both the orientation and wobbling angles of single molecules , thus enabling the accurate determination of their organization . A detailed theoretical analysis of the dependence of the orientation and wobbling parameters on different sources of bias , either originating from SNR conditions or physical features , such as 3D molecular orientations or a high detection NA , is used to define appropriate detection conditions and analysis procedures for the minimally biased determination of molecular organization at the nanometer scale . It is important to note that the majority of polarized single molecule experiments have been performed under high NA conditions so far . This prevents the physical interpretation of wobbling values and thus an unbiased determination of the underlying molecular organization 23 , 24 . Other alternatives such as PSF engineering necessitate more complex signal processing to achieve quantitative measurements , and can be challenged in high density - labelled samples 14 , 19 . To highlight the potential of 4polar - STORM to measure molecular organization in complex protein assemblies , we measured the nanometer - scale organization of actin filament - based structures involved in the adhesion and motility of mammalian cells . We focused on different types of stress fibers made of actin filament bundles and on the actin filament meshwork of the lamellipodium . We exploited the sensitivity of orientation and wobbling parameters to molecules lying off - plane to evidence the non - negligible contribution of 3D orientations in the measured populations of actin filaments , both in SF bundles and in the flat lamellipodium . Selecting the lowest wobbling values from measured single molecules permits to select only in - plane filament populations and determine their organization in a quantitative manner . This analysis permitted to evidence the very high actin filament alignment in all types of SFs , in line with EM studies 31 , 32 , but to also reveal differences in their nanometer - scale organization , consistently with their different modes of assembly and function in the cell . Thin 2D ventral and transverse arc SFs are made of highly aligned actin filaments , while thick peripheral SFs , off - plane oriented dorsal SFs , and FAs containing filament populations of mixed orientations , were seen to contain a non - negligible population of filaments with 3D off - plane orientations . Low doses of blebbistatin that inhibited myosin II activity in contractile peripheral SFs , while preserving their macroscopic integrity , resulted in a perturbation of the nanometer - scale organization of actin filaments , emphasizing the key role of myosin II in the organization of actin filaments in contractile SFs . Importantly , in - plane measurements of actin filament organization permitted us to investigate the organization of dense assemblies that is not accessible by single molecule localization imaging alone , in particular in the lamellipodium at the leading edge of motile cells . 4polar - STORM imaging revealed that the actin filaments in the lamellipodial meshwork are not oriented randomly but that they organize in preferred angular distributions , including bimodal distributions previously observed by electron microscopy . It is important to note that these characteristic features of the dendritic organization of the lamellipodium have not been observed with other super - resolution light microscopy methods . These results show altogether the added value of combining localization and orientation measurements , and highlight the potential of 4polar - STORM to investigate the nanometer - scale organization of actin filaments in complex arrangements which are hardly accessible in standard optical super - resolution microscopy . In particular , the complex geometries of actin filaments close to the cell membrane and their link with local contractile and protrusive activity are poorly understood . Additionally , little is known on the organization of actin filaments in cell adhesion - mediating structures which play a large role in cell mechanics , in particular focal adhesions . Assessing the nanometric organization of actin filaments , and the contribution of 2D vs 3D oriented populations of filaments , at various stages of FA formation and maturation promises to permit us to understand how such complex molecular machineries assemble in order to sense , respond and adapt to mechanical stimuli . We note that while AF488 - phalloidin is used in the present study , our method is fully compatible with a wide variety of labels as long as the orientational flexibility of the fluorophore is not very high . In particular , actin labelling by Atto633 - phalloidin 10 or silicon rhodamine - jasplakinolide ( SiR - actin ) 24 , 58 , have been reported to exhibit low wobbling . Genetically encoded probes for actin filament orientation studies are also currently being developed 59 , using strategies which could be extended to other proteins of interest . Such approaches which are amenable to live - cell measurements promise to open new directions for orientational dynamics studies , combining for instance single molecule orientation measurements with single particle tracking PALM 60 . Wobbling measurements in the case of fluorescent proteins , whose size is typically comparable to the size of the labelled protein of interest , might also reveal packing - related constraints and could thus provide additional protein organization readouts . Although the present work focuses on the implementation of 4polar - STORM for deciphering the organization of actin filaments , the framework we built regarding theoretical considerations for the retrieval of orientation parameters and the definition of appropriate acquisition and analysis procedures , can be easily adapted for the study of any molecule . The methodology of 4polar - STORM is also compatible with two - color localization and orientation measurements and thus can provide insights into the functional interplay between the nanometric organizations of interacting partners ; the link between conformational changes in activated integrins and actin filament remodeling is such an example . At last , 4polar - STORM is compatible with 3D localization schemes , including astigmatism 61 or multiplane 62 , 63 strategies , and can therefore be adapted for exploring the full 3D organization of a large variety of biological structures 64 . Materials and Methods 4polar - STORM optical setup . Measurements are carried - out on a custom epi / TIRF - fluorescence microscope , whose detection path is adapted to retrieve four polarization states of the single molecule fluorescence images . The excitation light source is a continuous laser emitting at 488 nm ( Sapphire 488LP - 200 , Coherent ) , whose beam is expanded by a telescope and circularly polarized by a quarter waveplate ( AQWP10M - 580 , Thorlabs ) . A set of mirrors reflect the beam towards the microscope , followed by a large focal length lens ( f = 400 mm ) to focus the beam in the back focal plane of the objective , to provide an illumination field of view with a diameter of about 100 μm . After the reflection on a dichroic mirror ( DI02 - R488 , Semrock Rochester NY ) , the excitation light is focused onto the sample by an oil immersion objective lens ( Plan Apo 100× , NA = 1 . 45 , Nikon ) . The emitted fluorescence is collected back by the same objective lens , passes through the dichroic mirror and a band pass emission filter ( FF01 - 525 / 40 , Semrock Rochester NY ) . At the microscope exit a non - polarizing beam splitter separates the beam in two paths , each of them being built up with a 1x relay imaging telescope that uses two ( f 150 mm ) lenses . In the first path , a Wollaston prism ( separation angle 5° , CVI Laser Optics ) is placed at the back focal intermediate image plane , aligned for 0° - 90° polarization split . In the second path , a similar Wollaston prism is placed just after an achromatic half wave plate ( AHWP05M - 600 , Thorlabs ) , to provide 45° - 135° polarized images . The two beams are recombined by a mirror reflection of the first path , and refocused on the EMCCD camera detection plane ( iXon Ultra 888 , Andor , 13  m pixel size ) , such as to fill the CCD chip with four polarized images . The size of the images is set by a diaphragm placed in the first image plane at the exit of the microscope ( typical image field of view , 40  m x 40  m ) . In addition , two diaphragms are placed in intermediate planes conjugated to the back focal plane of the objective in order to reduce the detection numerical aperture to NA det = 1 . 2 . The imaging lens provides a total magnification of ×100 , corresponding to a pixel size of 130 nm on the EMCCD . The stability of the focus throughout the measurement is ensured by a commercial system ( Perfect Focus System , Nikon ) . For initial positionning , the sample is mounted on a XYZ piezo stage ( Physik Instrumente ) . The acquisition parameters are controlled by a commercial imaging software ( AndorSolis , Andor ) . For STORM imaging , a first fluorescence image is recorded with low intensity ( ~ 500 W / cm 2 , below STORM blinking conditions ) , ensuring the identification of relevant parts of the sample . The intensity is then raised to 5 - 8 kW / cm 2 , which is a typical level to provide a good compromise between signal level and blinking rate . The images are acquired at a rate of 100 ms / image , camera gain 300 , with a total of about 30 , 000 images depending on the molecular density . Cell culture . 4polar - STORM measurements were made in U2OS osteosarcoma cells ( Fig . 1 - 4 ) and B16 - F1 mouse melanoma cells ( Fig . 5 ) . Naive U2OS cells ( gift from Flavio Maina , IBDM , France ) were used for assessing the effect of blebbistatin . U2OS CA - MLCK cells ( gift from Sanjay Kumar , UC Berkeley , USA ) cultured in 0 ng / mL doxycycline were used for all other experiments . U2OS cells were maintained in McCoy ' s 5A medium ( ThermoFisher Scientific , 26600 - 080 ) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( Biowest , S181H ) , 100 U / mL penicillin and 100  g / mL streptomycin ( Sigma , P4333 ) in a humidified incubator at 37°C and 5 % CO2 . B16 - F1 cells ( gift from Klemens Rottner , Technische Universität Braunschweig , Germany ) were cultured in DMEM ( ThermoFisher Scientific , 41966 - 029 ) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( PAA Laboratories , A15 - 102 ) , 100 U / mL penicillin and 100  g / mL streptomycin ( Sigma , P4333 ) in a humidified incubator at 37°C and 5 % CO2 . Cell preparation for 4polar - STORM . U2OS cells . 24 mm - diameter high - precision ( 170 μm ± 5 μm ) glass coverslips ( Marienfeld , 0117640 ) were cleaned with base piranha ( Milli - Q water , 30 % ammonium hydroxide , 35 % hydrogen peroxide at a 5 : 1 : 1 volume ratio ) for 15 min , rinsed with Milli - Q water for 2 x 5 min in a bath sonicator , sonicated in 70 % ethanol for 5 min , and air - dried before coating with fibronectin ( SIGMA F1141 ) for 2 h at room temperature ( RT ) and at a final fibronectin concentration of 20  g / mL in PBS . For experiments with micropatterned substrates , medium - size ( 1100  m 2 ) H - shaped patterns from CYTOO ( 10 - 900 - 00 - 18 ) were similarly coated with 20  g / mL fibronectin . U2OS cells were seeded onto fibronectin - coated coverslips and allowed to spread for 5 h on micropatterned substrates or overnight on nonpatterned ones . Cells were fixed for 15 min with 4 % formaldehyde ( Electron Microscopy Sciences 15714 ) in cytoskeleton buffer ( 10 mM MES pH 6 . 1 , 150 mM NaCl , 5 mM EGTA , 5 mM MgCl 2 , 5 mM glucose ) , washed for 2 x 5 min in PBS , then permeabilized and blocked in phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) containing 0 . 1 % saponin and 10 % bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) for 1 h at RT . Cells were incubated successively with primary rabbit anti - phospho - FAK antibodies at 1 : 200 ( ThermoFisher Scientific 44 - 624G ) and secondary donkey anti - rabbit Alexa Fluor 647 - conjugated IgG secondary antibodies at 1 : 1000 ( ThermoFisher Scientific A - 31573 ) each for 1 h at RT and with three 10 - min washes in - between antibody incubations . After five 6 - min washes , cells were incubated with 0 . 5  M Alexa Fluor 488 ( AF488 ) - phalloidin ( ThermoFisher Scientific A12379 ) in 0 . 1 % saponin / 10 % BSA / PBS overnight at 4°C in a humidified chamber . For 4polar - STORM measurements , coverslips with stained cells were mounted in an Attofluor cell chamber ( ThermoFisher Scientific A7816 ) with freshly prepared STORM imaging buffer ( see composition below ) and the chamber covered with a glass coverslip to minimize contact with oxygen . To visualize focal adhesions in order to define the types of stress fibres measured , AF488 - phalloidin and phospho - FAK - co - stained cells were imaged before each STORM acquisition on an optical setup employing a confocal spinning disk unit ( CSU - X1 - M1 from Yokogawa ) connected to the side - port of an inverted microscope ( Eclipse Ti - U from Nikon Instruments ) , using a Nikon Plan Apo ×100 / 1 . 45 NA oil immersion objective lens , 488 - and 641 - nm laser lines ( Coherent ) and an iXon Ultra 888 EMCCD camera ( 1024×1024 pixels , 13×13  m pixel size , Andor , Oxford Instruments ) . z - stacks were acquired with a  z interval of 0 . 5  m . B16 - F1 cells . 24 mm - diameter high - precision ( 170 μm ± 5 μm ) glass coverslips ( Marienfeld , 0117640 ) were sonicated in 70 % ethanol for 5 min and air - dried before coating with mouse laminin ( SIGMA L2020 ) for 1 h at RT and at a final laminin concentration of 25  g / mL in coating buffer ( 50 mM Tris - HCl pH 8 , 150 mM NaCl ) . B16 - F1 cells were seeded onto laminin - coated coverslips and allowed to spread overnight . To stimulate lamellipodia formation , cells were treated with aluminum fluoride for 15 min by adding AlCl 3 and NaF to final concentrations of 50 μM and 30 mM , respectively , in pre - warmed , full growth medium . Cells were fixed for 20 min with a mixture of prewarmed ( 37°C ) 0 . 25 % glutaraldehyde ( Electron Microscopy Sciences 16220 ) and 4 % formaldehyde ( Electron Microscopy Sciences 15714 ) in cytoskeleton buffer , and treated with fresh sodium borohydride ( 1 mg / mL ) in PBS for 2 x 5 min to reduce background fluorescence . Cells were washed in PBS for 3 x 5 min before an overnight incubation with 0 . 5  M AF488 - phalloidin in 0 . 1 % saponin / 10 % BSA / PBS at 4°C in a humidified chamber . For 4polar - STORM measurements , coverslips were mounted as for U2OS cells . Blebbistatin treatment . Blebbistatin from Sigma ( B0560 ) was prepared at 10 mM in DMSO . U2OS cells were seeded onto fibronectin - coated medium - size H - shaped patterns from CYTOO and allowed to spread for 5 h , as detailed above . Cells were incubated for 15 min with 50  M blebbistatin ( i . e . in medium also containing 0 . 5 % DMSO due to the blebbistatin stock dilution ) , or with medium containing 0 . 5 % DMSO ( control cells ) . Cells were fixed with 4 % formaldehyde in cytoskeleton buffer for 15 min , and washed in PBS for 2 x 5 min before an overnight incubation with 0 . 5  M AF488 - phalloidin in 0 . 1 % saponin / 10 % BSA / PBS at 4°C in a humidified chamber . Cells were mounted for 4polar - STORM measurements as detailed above . Reconstitution of single actin filaments for 4polar - STORM . Lyophilized rabbit skeletal muscle G - actin ( Cytoskeleton , Inc . AKL99 ) was resuspended to 5 mg / mL ( 119  M ) in G - buffer ( 5 mM Tris - HCl pH 8 , 0 . 2 mM Na 2 ATP , 0 . 1 mM CaCl 2 , 1 mM DTT ) , aliquots snap - frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C . Frozen aliquots were thawed and centrifuged for 30 min at 120 , 000 g in a benchtop Beckman air - driven ultracentrifuge ( Beckman Coulter Airfuge , 340401 ) to clear the solution from aggregates . Clarified G - actin was kept at 4°C and used within 3 - 4 weeks . For reconstitution experiments , G - actin was polymerized at 5  M final concentration in actin polymerization buffer ( 5 mM Tris - HCl pH 8 , 50 mM KCl , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 2 mM Na 2 ATP , 1 mM DTT ) in the presence of 5  M AF488 - phalloidin for at least 2 h at RT . Flow cells for measurements on reconstituted actin filaments were prepared as follows . Microscope glass slides and coverslips were cleaned for 15 min in base - piranha solution , rinsed twice , 5 min each , with Milli - Q water in a bath sonicator , and stored in ethanol up to one month . To assemble flow cells , slides and coverslips were dried with synthetic air , and ~ 10  L channels were assembled by sandwiching ~ 2 - mm - wide and ~ 2 . 5 - cm - long strips of Parafilm between a cleaned glass slide and coverslip and melting on a hot plate at 120°C . The chambers were incubated for 45 min with 1 M KOH , rinsed with actin polymerization buffer , incubated for another 15 min with 1 mg / mL poly - L - lysine ( PLL ; Sigma P8920 ) , and rinsed with actin polymerization buffer . Reconstituted AF488 - phalloidin - labelled actin filaments were diluted to 0 . 1 - 0 . 2  M , loaded into the PLL - coated flow channels and left for 15 min to immobilize actin filaments . Actin polymerization buffer was then exchanged with STORM imaging buffer ( see composition below ) , and flow channels sealed with VALAP ( 1 : 1 : 1 vasoline : lanoline : paraffin ) . The typical experimental conditions were TIRF illumination , laser power 150 mW , camera gain 300 and 200 - ms integration time . A stack of 5000 images was used for 4polar - STORM imaging . The materials and chemicals for glass cleaning were as follows . Glass slides ( 26x76 mm ) from Thermo Scientific ( AA00000102E01FST20 ) . Glass coverslips ( 24x60 mm ) from Thermo Scientific ( BB02400600A113FST0 ) . Ammonium hydroxide solution from SIGMA ( 221228 ) . Hydrogen peroxide solution from SIGMA ( 95299 ) . STORM imaging buffer preparation . The final composition of the buffer for 4polar - STORM measurements was 100 mM Tris - HCl pH 8 , 10 % w / v glucose , 5 U / mL pyranose oxidase ( POD ) , 400 U / mL catalase , 50 mM  - mercaptoethylamine (  - MEA ) , 1 mM ascorbic acid , 1 mM methyl viologen , and 2 mM cyclooctatetraene ( COT ) . D - ( + ) - glucose was from Fisher Chemical ( G / 0500 / 60 ) . POD was from Sigma ( P4234 - 250UN ) , bovine liver catalase from Calbiochem / Merck Millipore ( 219001 - 5MU ) ,  - MEA from Sigma ( 30070 ) , L - ascorbic acid from Sigma ( A7506 ) , methyl viologen from Sigma ( 856177 ) , and COT from Sigma ( 138924 ) . Glucose was stored as a 40 % w / v solution at 4°C . POD was dissolved in GOD buffer ( 24 mM PIPES pH 6 . 8 , 4 mM MgCl 2 , 2 mM EGTA ) to yield 400 U / mL , and an equal volume of glycerol was added to yield a final 200 U / mL in 1 : 1 glycerol : GOD buffer ; aliquots were stored at - 20°C . Catalase was dissolved in GOD buffer to yield 10 mg / mL , and an equal volume of glycerol was added to yield a final 5 mg / mL ( 230 U /  L ) of catalase in 1 : 1 glycerol : GOD buffer ; aliquots were stored at - 20°C .  - MEA was stored as ~ 77 mg powder aliquots at - 20°C ; right before use , an aliquot was dissolved with the appropriate amount of 360 mM HCl to yield a 1 M  - MEA solution . Ascorbic acid was always prepared right before use at 100 mM in water . Methyl viologen was stored as a 500 mM solution in water at 4°C . COT was prepared at 200 mM in DMSO and aliquots stored at - 20°C . After mixing all components to yield the final buffer composition , the buffer was clarified by centrifugation for 2 min at 16 , 100 g , and the supernatant kept on ice for 15 min before use . Freshly prepared STORM buffer was typically used within a day . Supplementary Information Supplementary Note 1 . Model and retrieval of orientation parameters Supplementary Note 2 . Calibration factors in 4polar - STORM Supplementary Note 3 . Data processing algorithm of the 4polar - STORM method Supplementary Figure S1 . Retrieval bias on  Supplementary Figure S2 . Cone model used for orientation parameter retrieval Supplementary Figure S3 . Camera noise estimation . Supplementary Figure S4 . 4polar - STORM d images of F - actin in cells Supplementary Figure S5 . Retrieval bias on   Supplementary Figure S6 . Statistics on detection parameters in 4polar - STORM imaging of F - actin in stress fibers in cells Supplementary Figure S7 . 4polar - STORM imaging of of F - actin in cells , selecting in - plane actin filament populations Supplementary Figure S8 . 4polar - STORM imaging of actin filament organization in lamellipodia . Acknowledgements This research has received funding from the « Investissements d ' Avenir » French Government program managed by the French National Research Agency ANR ( ANR - 16 - CONV - 0001 ) , from Excellence Initiative of Aix - Marseille University A * MIDEX ( ANR - 11 - IDEX - 0001 ) , European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Sklodowska - Curie grant agreement No 713750 , and the SEPTIMORF and 3DPolariSR ANR grants ( ANR - 17 - CE13 - 0014 ; ANR - 20 - CE42 - 0003 ) . This work was also supported by INRIA in the frame of NAVISCOPE - IPL ( INRIA Project Lab ) . The authors are grateful to Arita Silapetere ( Humboldt Universitat zu Berlin , Germany ) for the assistance in the initiation of the project and Louwrens Van Dellen ( Purplecode Aix en Provence , France ) for help in the experimental acquisition programming . The authors further acknowledge useful discussions of the results with Klemens Rottner ( Technische Universität Braunschweig , Germany ) . Author Contributions S . B and M . M conceived and initiated the project . C . V . R built the optical system , performed experiments on cells and analysed the data with S . B . V . C performed experiments on single actin filaments and analysed the data . C . A . V . C wrote the data processing algorithm . C . V . R and S . B wrote part of the data analysis algorithms . All authors wrote the paper and contributed to the scientific discussion . Author information The authors declare that they have no competing financial interests . Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to the corresponding author . Data availability The datasets generated and analysed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request . Code availability The code used to process and analyse the data during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request . References 1 . Winkelman , J . D . et al . Fascin - and α - Actinin - Bundled Networks Contain Intrinsic Structural Features that Drive Protein Sorting . Curr . Biol . 26 , 2697 – 2706 ( 2016 ) . 2 . Ennomani , H . et al . Architecture and Connectivity Govern Actin Network Contractility . Curr . Biol . 26 , 616 – 626 ( 2016 ) . 3 . Svitkina , T . The actin cytoskeleton and actin - based motility . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 10 , ( 2018 ) . 4 . Holz , D . & Vavylonis , D . Building a dendritic actin filament network branch by branch : models of filament orientation pattern and force generation in lamellipodia . Biophysical Reviews vol . 10 1577 – 1585 ( 2018 ) . 5 . Dmitrieff , S . & Nédélec , F . Amplification of actin polymerization forces . Journal of Cell Biology vol . 212 763 – 766 ( 2016 ) . 6 . Hess , S . T . , Girirajan , T . P . K . & Mason , M . D . Ultra - high resolution imaging by fluorescence photoactivation localization microscopy . Biophys . J . 91 , 4258 – 4272 ( 2006 ) . 7 . Betzig , E . et al . Imaging Intracellular Fluorescent Proteins at Nanometer Resolution . Science ( 80 - . ) . 313 , 1642 – 1645 ( 2006 ) . 8 . Rust , M . J . , Bates , M . & Zhuang , X . Sub - diffraction - limit imaging by stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy ( STORM ) . Nat . Methods ( 2006 ) doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth929 . 9 . Sharonov , A . & Hochstrasser , R . M . Wide - field subdiffraction imaging by accumulated binding of diffusing probes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 103 , 18911 – 18916 ( 2006 ) . 10 . Valades Cruz , C . A . et al . Quantitative nanoscale imaging of orientational order in biological filaments by polarized superresolution microscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 113 , ( 2016 ) . 11 . Enderlein , J . , Toprak , E . & Selvin , P . R . Polarization effect on position accuracy of fluorophore localization . Opt . Express 14 , 8111 ( 2006 ) . 12 . Backlund , M . P . , Lew , M . D . , Backer , A . S . , Sahl , S . J . & Moerner , W . E . The role of molecular dipole orientation in single - molecule fluorescence microscopy and implications for super - resolution imaging . ChemPhysChem 15 , 587 – 599 ( 2014 ) . 13 . Zhang , O . & Lew , M . D . Single - molecule orientation localization microscopy II : a performance comparison . arXiv ( 2020 ) . 14 . Zhang , O . , Lu , J . , Ding , T . & Lew , M . D . Imaging the three - dimensional orientation and rotational mobility of fluorescent emitters using the Tri - spot point spread function . Appl . Phys . Lett . 113 , 031103 ( 2018 ) . 15 . Curcio , V . , Alemán - Castañeda , L . A . , Brown , T . G . , Brasselet , S . & Alonso , M . A . Birefringent Fourier filtering for single molecule coordinate and height super - resolution imaging with dithering and orientation . Nat . Commun . 11 , ( 2020 ) . 16 . Lu , J . , Mazidi , H . , Ding , T . , Zhang , O . & Lew , M . D . Single‐Molecule 3D Orientation Imaging Reveals Nanoscale Compositional Heterogeneity in Lipid Membranes . Angew . Chemie Int . Ed . 59 , 17572 – 17579 ( 2020 ) . 17 . Toprak , E . et al . Defocused orientation and position imaging ( DOPI ) of myosin V . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 103 , 6495 – 9 ( 2006 ) . 18 . Nevskyi , O . , Tsukanov , R . , Gregor , I . , Karedla , N . & Enderlein , J . Fluorescence polarization filtering for accurate single molecule localization . APL Photonics 5 , 061302 ( 2020 ) . 19 . Ding , T . , Wu , T . , Mazidi , H . , Zhang , O . & Lew , M . D . Single - molecule orientation localization microscopy for resolving structural heterogeneities between amyloid fibrils . Optica 7 , 602 ( 2020 ) . 20 . Gould , T . J . et al . Nanoscale imaging of molecular positions and anisotropies . Nat . Methods 5 , 1027 – 1030 ( 2008 ) . 21 . Forkey , J . N . , Quinlan , M . E . , Alexander Shaw , M . , Corrie , J . E . T . & Goldman , Y . E . Three - dimensional structural dynamics of myosin V by single - molecule fluorescence polarization . Nature 422 , 399 – 404 ( 2003 ) . 22 . Ohmachi , M . et al . Fluorescence microscopy for simultaneous observation of 3D orientation and movement and its application to quantum rod - tagged myosin V . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . ( 2012 ) doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1118472109 . 23 . Mehta , S . B . et al . Dissection of molecular assembly dynamics by tracking orientation and position of single molecules in live cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 113 , E6352 – E6361 ( 2016 ) . 24 . Nordenfelt , P . et al . Direction of actin flow dictates integrin LFA - 1 orientation during leukocyte migration . Nat . Commun . 8 , 2047 ( 2017 ) . 25 . Xu , K . , Babcock , H . P . & Zhuang , X . Dual - objective STORM reveals three - dimensional filament organization in the actin cytoskeleton . Nat . Methods 9 , 185 – 188 ( 2012 ) . 26 . Xu , K . , Zhong , G . & Zhuang , X . Actin , spectrin , and associated proteins form a periodic cytoskeletal structure in axons . Science ( 80 - . ) . 339 , 452 – 456 ( 2013 ) . 27 . Van Den Dries , K . et al . Dual - color superresolution microscopy reveals nanoscale organization of mechanosensory podosomes . Mol . Biol . Cell 24 , 2112 – 2123 ( 2013 ) . 28 . Whelan , D . R . & Bell , T . D . M . Image artifacts in single molecule localization microscopy : Why optimization of sample preparation protocols matters . Sci . Rep . 5 , 1 – 10 ( 2015 ) . 29 . Bachmann , M . , Fiederling , F . & Bastmeyer , M . Practical limitations of superresolution imaging due to conventional sample preparation revealed by a direct comparison of CLSM , SIM and dSTORM . J . Microsc . 262 , 306 – 315 ( 2016 ) . 30 . Leyton - Puig , D . et al . PFA fixation enables artifact - free super - resolution imaging of the actin cytoskeleton and associated proteins . Biol . Open 5 , 1001 – 1009 ( 2016 ) . 31 . Heuser , J . E . & Kirschner , M . W . Filament organization revealed in platinum replicas of freeze - dried cytoskeletons . J . Cell Biol . 86 , 212 – 234 ( 1980 ) . 32 . Svitkina , T . M . , Verkhovsky , A . B . & Borisy , G . G . Improved procedures for electron microscopic visualization of the cytoskeleton of cultured cells . J . Struct . Biol . 115 , 290 – 303 ( 1995 ) . 33 . Urban , E . , Jacob , S . , Nemethova , M . , Resch , G . P . & Small , J . V . Electron tomography reveals unbranched networks of actin filaments in lamellipodia . Nat . Cell Biol . 12 , 429 – 435 ( 2010 ) . 34 . Svitkina , T . M . , Verkhovsky , A . B . , McQuade , K . M . & Borisy , G . G . Analysis of the actin - myosin II system in fish epidermal keratocytes : Mechanism of cell body translocation . J . Cell Biol . 139 , 397 – 415 ( 1997 ) . 35 . Schaub , S . , Meister , J . J . & Verkhovsky , A . B . Analysis of actin filament network organization in lamellipodia by comparing experimental and simulated images . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 1491 – 1500 ( 2007 ) . 36 . Vinzenz , M . et al . Actin branching in the initiation and maintenance of lamellipodia . J . Cell Sci . 125 , 2775 – 2785 ( 2012 ) . 37 . Enderlein , J . et al . Polarization effect on position accuracy of fluorophore localization . J . D . Jackson Class . Electrodyn . Phys . Lett 14 , 337 – 350 ( 2006 ) . 38 . Lew , M . D . , Backlund , M . P . & Moerner , W . E . Rotational Mobility of Single Molecules Affects Localization Accuracy in Super - Resolution Fluorescence Microscopy . Nano Lett . 13 , 3967 – 3972 ( 2013 ) . 39 . Wulf , E . , Deboben , A . , Bautz , F . A . , Faulstich , H . & Wieland , T . Fluorescent phallotoxin , a tool for the visualization of cellular actin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 76 , 4498 – 4502 ( 1979 ) . 40 . Barak , L . S . , Rogers Yocum , R . , Nothnagel , E . A . & Webb , W . W . Fluorescence staining of the actin cytoskeleton in living cells with 7 - nitrobenz - 2 - oxa - 1 , 3 - diazole - phallacidin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 77 , 980 – 984 ( 1980 ) . 41 . Oda , T . , Namba , K . & Maéda , Y . Position and orientation of phalloidin in F - actin determined by x - ray fiber diffraction analysis . Biophys . J . 88 , 2727 – 2736 ( 2005 ) . 42 . Tojkander , S . , Gateva , G . & Lappalainen , P . Actin stress fibers – assembly , dynamics and biological roles . J . Cell Sci . 125 , 1855 – 1864 . 43 . Vallenius , T . Actin stress fibre subtypes in mesenchymal - migrating cells . Open Biol . 3 , 130001 ( 2013 ) . 44 . Tojkander , S . , Gateva , G . , Husain , A . , Krishnan , R . & Lappalainen , P . Generation of contractile actomyosin bundles depends on mechanosensitive actin filament assembly and disassembly . Elife ( 2015 ) doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 06126 . 001 . 45 . Hu , S . et al . Long - range self - organization of cytoskeletal myosin II filament stacks . Nat . Cell Biol . 19 , 133 – 141 ( 2017 ) . 46 . Fenix , A . M . et al . Expansion and concatenation of nonmuscle myosin IIA filaments drive cellular contractile system formation during interphase and mitosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 27 , 1465 – 1478 ( 2016 ) . 47 . Vignaud , T . et al . Stress fibres are embedded in a contractile cortical network . Nat . Mater . ( 2020 ) doi : 10 . 1038 / s41563 - 020 - 00825 - z . 48 . Revach , O . Y . , Grosheva , I . & Geiger , B . Biomechanical regulation of focal adhesion and invadopodia formation . Journal of cell science vol . 133 ( 2020 ) . 49 . Kanchanawong , P . et al . Nanoscale architecture of integrin - based cell adhesions . Nature 468 , 580 – 584 ( 2010 ) . 50 . Tanner , K . , Boudreau , A . , Bissell , M . J . & Kumar , S . Dissecting regional variations in stress fiber mechanics in living cells with laser nanosurgery . Biophys . J . ( 2010 ) doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2010 . 08 . 071 . 51 . Hotulainen , P . & Lappalainen , P . Stress fibers are generated by two distinct actin assembly mechanisms in motile cells . J . Cell Biol . 173 , 383 – 394 ( 2006 ) . 52 . Svitkina , T . M . & Borisy , G . G . Arp2 / 3 complex and actin depolymerizing factor / cofilin in dendritic organization and treadmilling of actin filament array in lamellipodia . J . Cell Biol . 145 , 1009 – 1026 ( 1999 ) . 53 . Verkhovsky , A . B . et al . Orientational Order of the Lamellipodial Actin Network as Demonstrated in Living Motile Cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 4667 – 4675 ( 2003 ) . 54 . Mueller , J . et al . Load Adaptation of Lamellipodial Actin Networks . Cell 171 , 188 - 200 . e16 ( 2017 ) . 55 . Koestler , S . A . , Auinger , S . , Vinzenz , M . , Rottner , K . & Small , J . V . Differentially oriented populations of actin filaments generated in lamellipodia collaborate in pushing and pausing at the cell front . Nat . Cell Biol . 10 , 306 – 313 ( 2008 ) . 56 . Weichsel , J . , Urban , E . , Small , J . V . & Schwarz , U . S . Reconstructing the orientation distribution of actin filaments in the lamellipodium of migrating keratocytes from electron microscopy tomography data . Cytom . Part A ( 2012 ) doi : 10 . 1002 / cyto . a . 22050 . 57 . Weichsel , J . , Urban , E . , Small , J . V . & Schwarz , U . S . Reconstructing the orientation distribution of actin filaments in the lamellipodium of migrating keratocytes from electron microscopy tomography data . Cytom . Part A 81A , 496 – 507 ( 2012 ) . 58 . Spira , F . et al . Cytokinesis in vertebrate cells initiates by contraction of an equatorial actomyosin network composed of randomly oriented filaments . ( 2017 ) doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 30867 . 001 . 59 . Nakai , N . et al . Genetically encoded orientation probes for F - actin for fluorescence polarization microscopy . Microscopy 68 , 359 – 368 ( 2019 ) . 60 . Manley , S . , Gillette , J . M . & Lippincott - Schwartz , J . Single - Particle Tracking Photoactivated Localization Microscopy for Mapping Single - Molecule Dynamics . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0076 - 6879 ( 10 ) 75005 - 9 . 61 . Huang , B . , Wang , W . , Bates , M . & Zhuang , X . Three - dimensional super - resolution imaging by stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy . Science 319 , 810 – 3 ( 2008 ) . 62 . Juette , M . F . et al . Three - dimensional sub - 100 nm resolution fluorescence microscopy of thick samples . Nat . Methods 5 , 527 – 529 ( 2008 ) . 63 . Abrahamsson , S . et al . MultiFocus Polarization Microscope ( MF - PolScope ) for 3D polarization imaging of up to 25 focal planes simultaneously . doi : 10 . 1364 / OE . 23 . 007734 . 64 . Chakraborty , S . , Jasnin , M . & Baumeister , W . Three‐dimensional organization of the cytoskeleton : A cryo‐electron tomography perspective . Protein Sci . 29 , 1302 – 1320 ( 2020 ) .