Engaging The Disengaged : How Do We Design Technology for Digitally Excluded Older Adults ? Graeme W . Coleman , Lorna Gibson , Vicki L . Hanson School of Computing University of Dundee Dundee DD1 4HN , UK { gcoleman , lgibson , vlh } @ computing . dundee . ac . uk Ania Bobrowicz Engineering & Digital Arts The University of Kent Canterbury CT2 7NZ , UK a . bobrowicz @ kent . ac . uk Alison McKay Mechanical Engineering University of Leeds Leeds LS2 9JT , UK a . mckay @ leeds . ac . uk ABSTRACT Amongst older adults , recent evidence suggests the most commonly stated reason for non - adoption of digital technologies is a lack of interest , rather than affordability or difficulty . This directly impacts upon the design community , both in terms of technologies we design for such groups to adopt , and the design methods we use for exploiting the untapped creativity and innovation amongst people who are not particularly interested in the outcome . This paper explores issues of technology non - acceptance amongst older adults , and reports on work designed to incorporate the values of older adults within the design process . We present the results of a series of interviews conducted with disengaged older adults , presenting the key themes found within a subset with these interviews . ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . 2 . [ User Interfaces ] : Theory and Methods ; User - Centered Design ; Evaluation / methodology Keywords Older adults , design , inclusion , technology acceptance , digital economy . INTRODUCTION In recent years , the concept of a digital economy , a term adopted by industry and government as a means of providing improved and lower - cost services and products , has arisen . However , for a significant number of people , access to the digital economy is not possible . Providing broadband coverage to people not currently connected is aimed at addressing the digital divide ( for example , [ 1 , 5 ] ) , but broadband availability is only one aspect of what is needed to get everyone connected . Geography , affordability , and usability , including interface issues that arise from age - related disability and lack of experience have also been suggested [ 8 ] . Recent evidence highlights the importance of this latter factor for older users [ 12 , 19 ] . Studies published within the past year show a lower degree of technology adoption by older adults than by those under the age of 65 [ 10 , 16 ] . A number of specific factors are associated with getting online and may help understand why there is a lack of technology acceptance [ 3 , 6 , 7 , 9 , 16 ] . Age is one factor , with younger adults more interested than older adults in adopting new technologies . Even for those who use technology , the level of access is not equal to that of younger users . For example , access to the Internet is often through older equipment ( offering less access to the latest applications ) , involving a limited number of activities when compared with younger users . Older adults tend to restrict their activities to email and basic Web searches , whereas tweeting , blogging , and creating online videos are activities typically associated with the young . Recent surveys have indicated the single largest reason for exclusion is a stated disinterest in , and a perceived lack of usefulness of , digital technologies [ 9 , 16 , 18 ] . For example , a recent UK - based survey asked digitally excluded older adults what it would take for them to go online [ 16 ] . Issues of affordability ( low cost computers and monthly fees ) , help ( training and phone support ) , and easy - to - use devices ( such as a touch screens with simple Internet interfaces ) were proposed . However , respondents overwhelmingly indicated that none of these factors would be sufficient enough for them to go online . They were simply not interested . It is therefore no secret that many ( but not all ) older adults find themselves excluded , intentionally or otherwise , from using the latest technology . It is clear that this population of non - users will not become adopters until we change their perceptions about the usefulness of technology or until technology itself changes to better address their interests and needs . DESIGNING FOR THE DISINTERESTED The issues described within the previous section directly impact upon the design community , posing significant challenges that go beyond traditional notions of improving usability , as well as identifying and adopting appropriate design methods . For example , conventional usability wisdom considers that interfaces for older adults need to be Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . DIS 2010 , August 16 - 20 , 2010 , Aarhus Denmark Copyright © 2010 ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 0103 - 9 , 2010 / 08 - $ 10 . 00 . 175 simple and easily legible ( with large text and buttons ) , as described in design recommendations for older users [ 14 ] . Multiple special purpose interfaces for older adults have been developed that address these needs [ 8 ] and , in extreme cases , special purpose computers have been developed . While intuitively appealing and particularly useful for getting novices started , many older adults are not interested in such technology , stating that even these purpose - built interfaces and devices would not entice them to use computers [ 16 ] . In terms of design methods , Inclusive Design and Participatory Design both encourage the active involvement of users . In both approaches , however , the design process originates with , and is shaped by , the designer who retains ownership of the process , using familiar design tools and techniques and controlling the outcomes . We therefore believe that exclusion arises in large part from the fact that the push for new technology comes from developers , not from the end - users who may ultimately not be interested in the discussions or the outcomes . We argue that there is a need to involve such people at the very early stages of a design process , before appropriate design methods involving users are even considered . Of course , a cynic may ask why everyone actually needs to be digitally engaged . Many disengaged older adults believe that their life has been fine so far without using these technologies , so there is no need to change [ 19 ] . The fact is , however , that the world is changing to one in which those unable to participate in a digital economy are disadvantaged in terms of consumer power , access to basic services , and access to readily available knowledge and entertainment . Without product and service alternatives to digital offerings , those digitally excluded will become increasingly socially excluded . A cynic may also argue that this is a temporary problem , and will disappear when the next generation of older adults appears . We argue that , without attention by designers to the needs of older adults , this is a situation that will not change . Age - related impairments will not subside , and the rapidly changing nature of technology will require future generations of adults to learn technologies much different from those currently in use [ 8 ] . The overall goal of the SEEDS 1 project is to gain a better understanding of the needs of older people excluded from participation in the digital economy , and to develop an approach that can be used to bring those users into the very early stages of a design activity before solutions have been explored or proposed . The SEEDS project adopts a “user - push” methodology . Here , the goal is to empower older adults to participate in developing their own solutions to overcoming the “pain points” that will serve to motivate their inclusion in the digital economy . By listening to the voices of those who are digitally disengaged , we are developing a novel methodology that will enable them to 1 http : / / www . seedsfordesign . com / take ownership of the design process , and to shape and lead development rather than to have design and technological solutions imposed on them by designers . Thus , we begin by working to understand the potential end - users and how technology would fit into their lives [ 17 ] . The SEEDS project is represented by an interdisciplinary team , combining complementary expertise ranging from sustainable product design and computer aided design systems to support early design activity , to applied linguistics , cognitive psychology , and accessibility . INITIAL STUDY – IDENTIFYING THE “PAIN POINTS” This paper presents the results of the first step in the SEEDS project . We conducted a series of informal individual interviews with disengaged older adults at universities and at participants’ homes across the UK . The goal of these interviews was to understand current technology use by the informants as well as current needs in their life , while keeping in mind possible technology solutions , by identifying activities that informants would like to do but which they could not do at the time of the interview . We report here on a subset of the interviews conducted by one of the universities involved in the project , involving ten volunteers ( seven female , three male ) , all over the age of 65 ( range 68 – 84 ) . During the interviews , which lasted approximately forty minutes to an hour , all but one person discussed their previous employment , typically within factory or service industries . Informants were informed of the general goals of the interview and agreed to have their session recorded for the purpose of aiding researcher recall . Discussions were freewheeling , although did include specific triggers about their experience of various technologies , such as mobile phones , digital television , ATMS , digital photography , and computers . The interviews were then written up and analyzed using Thematic Analysis , a method for identifying , analyzing and reporting specific themes within data [ 2 ] . Not all our informants were completely dismissive of all technologies . Indeed , as the following discussions show , some informants notified us of the role that technology plays , and could play , within their everyday lives , occasionally offering potential application ideas . Hence , our themes cover both positive and negative associations and experiences towards technology . Acceptance of directly beneficial technology We found that participants generally accepted technology if it provided them with a direct , tangible , benefit . Examples suggested included a system that would notify an informant’s family if he were ever taken to hospital ( thus preventing him from phoning them all the time to keep their minds at ease ) , having medical records on a personal CD which could then be provided to medical staff where medical records were not available and being able to use a mobile phone in emergency situations . In the latter case , a participant related an incident in which she had been 176 involved in a car crash , and was able to use her mobile to contact her family to let them know where she was , and that she had not been injured . These examples highlight potential technologies that could enhance disengaged older adults with the outside world , and where the technological alternative is an improvement over traditional means . On the other hand , digital photo frames were seen as being too opulent – one informant stated they were “nice to look , but not overly impressive” . Acceptance of “invisible computers” A prevalent theme was how much “invisible computers” [ 15 ] , based or built upon traditional technology well known to this user group , were accepted as opposed to “visible” desktops or laptops . Digital televisions and set - top boxes , for example , were generally well received , and informants generally felt able to use them without difficulty , often expressing high satisfaction with them . We argue , therefore , that such technologies are acceptable to this group because they are not perceived as being computers , but merely contemporary versions of recognizable products . Hence , the less new technology “looks” like a computer , and more like an artifact that already plays a role in the older adult’s lives , the more likely it is to be accepted and potentially used by older adults . The Proxy Effect Many participants enjoyed the benefits of what the Internet had to offer by using what we define as “proxies” . In most cases , these proxies tended to be family members who offered to look up information on the Web and to help with e - mailing . In short , these older adults had access to some of the advantages of the Internet while avoiding the need to learn new skills . Technology acted as a “mediator” within the family ; for example , one informant felt that having a computer was a useful way of “indulging the grandchildren” and “spending time with family” , even though he was not particularly keen on learning more about computers per se . Proxies also included peers within their age group who had taken to using computers , and who tended to offer more encouragement and belief . For example , one of our informants suggested that she was able to set up and use her mobile phone through a friend who “spoke her language” , while another noted that it was hearing from a friend who had been able to find information on line dancing classes that she started to take an interest in going to computer classes . On the other hand , while family members often persuaded informants to use “invisible” technologies described earlier , they were often less encouraging when it came to buying computers . In one particular case , the son of an informant had put her off from buying a laptop by telling her they could be expensive and difficult to learn while , in another case , one of the informants was afraid of “losing face” amongst his peers if he struggled to use the technology . Technology Fear Perhaps the most common negative theme running through the interviews was the concept of technology fear . In such cases , informants used phrases such as “expensive” , “daunting” , “danger” , “security” and “encountering dubious characters” , some of which have been reported in detail elsewhere ( e . g . [ 13 ] ) . Informants often admitted that some of these concerns had developed through peers , family , personal preferences and , in some cases , personal experience . For example , one informant no longer uses an ATM as , when she tried to use one to change her credit card’s PIN , her card was swallowed , while another has stopped using her credit card in shops as she does not trust the chip - and - pin services . Technology Redundancy In some cases , informants had purchased , or had been given as gifts , technology that they simply did not use . The mobile phone was the most common example of this . Often , mobiles were purchased to keep their children happy , or were received from their children as gifts . However , one informant left his in his car’s glove compartment , and only intended to use it when he broke down , while another used it as a paperweight for letters on a table . Additionally , many of the participants had hobbies that are not associated ( in our informants’ minds ) with new technologies , such as going to the theatre , golf , reading and cooking . Indeed , anything involving a computer was perceived as being an “extra” hobby , involving time and inclination to learn . It is arguable that “using the computer” is , for this group , perceived as a hobby in itself . DISCUSSION AND NEXT STEPS It is interesting to note that services currently exist to deal with the issues that many of the older users brought up . Consider the desire to communicate with family . Landlines and mobile phones are clearly designed for communication , although our informants indicated cost ( for international communications ) and lack of interest in using mobile phones as barriers to use . There may be other factors , however , that go into the technology adoption equation here that were not specifically mentioned by the informants . For example , many older adults do not want to bother family members or interrupt at what they consider to be crucial times [ 4 , 11 ] . Thus , phones , which by their very nature are instruments of interruption , do not address the communication desires of many older adults . A variety on online communication methods , such as email , instant messaging , Facebook , and Skype , could also be used . Most of our informants had heard of these – some had even tried email or Skype – yet they were not interested in using them , despite being active , able - bodied individuals who felt capable of learning new skills and who were not particularly technology - adverse . In order for a technology to be accepted by this group , we argue that its usefulness ( the benefit ) must be worth more than the hurdles that must be overcome for its use ( the cost ) . For disengaged older adults , there is a clear indication that the costs outweigh the benefits . In other words , the benefit of the new technology must be made clear and must fit in with what they would like to do in 177 their daily lives . To accomplish this , it is important , at the very early stages of the design process , to understand the values of those not currently engaged . The next stage of the project is to develop a virtual repository of social stories to engage designers , helping them to understand issues important to this segment of the population that often lacks a voice in the development process . Using these stories as a basis , we then intend to examine how traditional user centered design approaches can be adapted to consider disengaged ( whether intentionally or not ) older adults . CONCLUSION Older adults who are currently digitally disengaged will find it increasingly difficult to access public information , leaving them potentially more socially excluded . This poses a number of challenges , and opportunities , to the design community . We argue that this group is less likely to use , or may struggle to use , some current forward - thinking technologies , even if they already fulfill their wants and needs . On the other hand , we argue that they are more likely to accept the technology if it is based upon technologies that this user group is already used to . This is shown by the relative success of digital TV , digital cameras and , to a lesser extent , mobile phones amongst this user group . Hence , the design community could play a role in encouraging engagement by examining traditional technologies and considering how these could be built upon to access the digital economy . We also argue that more focus needs to be given to bring the voices of disengaged users into the very early stages of design activity , before solutions have been explored or proposed through traditional user centered design approaches . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors would like to thank the participants who took part in the study . We also acknowledge support from RCUK grants EP / H006834 / 1 and EP / G066019 / 1 . REFERENCES 1 . 1Mb Broadband Access Becomes Legal Right . http : / / yle . fi / uutiset / news / 2009 / 10 / 1mb _ broadband _ acce ss _ becomes _ legal _ right _ 1080940 . html ? origin = rss 2 . Braun , V . and Clarke , V . 2006 . Using thematic analysis in psychology . Qualitative Research in Psychology , 3 , 77 - 101 . 3 . Czaja , S . J . , Charness , N . , Fisk , A . D . , Hertzog , C . , Nair , S . N . , Rogers , W . 2006 . Factors predicting the use of technology : Findings from the Center for Research and Education on Aging and Technology Enhancement ( CREATE ) . Psychology of Aging 21 ( 2 ) , 333 – 352 . 4 . Dickinson , A . and Hill , R . L . 2007 . Keeping in touch : Talking to older people about computers and communication . Educational Gerontology , 33 , 613 - 630 . 5 . Digital Britain . 2009 . Available at http : / / interactive . bis . gov . uk / digitalbritain / 6 . Green , M . 2005 . Unpacking “I don’t want It” - - Why novices and non - users don’t use the Internet . First Monday [ Online ] , Volume 11 Number 9 ( 4 September 2006 ) . 7 . Hargittai , E . 2002 . Second - level digital divide : Differences in people’s online skill . First Monday [ Online ] , Volume 7 Number 4 ( 1 April 2002 ) . 8 . Hanson , V . L . 2009 . Age and web access : The next generation . In Proceedings of W4A ' 09 . ACM , New York , NY , 7 - 15 . DOI = http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 1535654 . 1535658 9 . Horrigan , J . 2009 . Home broadband adoption 2009 . http : / / www . pewinternet . org / Reports / 2009 / 10 - Home - Broadband - Adoption - 2009 . aspx 10 . Jones , S . and Fox , S . 2009 . Generations online in 2009 . http : / / www . pewinternet . org / PPF / r / 275 / report _ display . as p 11 . Lindley , S . E . , Harper , R . , and Sellen , A . 2009 . Desiring to be in touch in a changing communications landscape : attitudes of older adults . In Proceedings of CHI ' 09 . ACM , New York , NY , 1693 - 1702 . DOI = http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 1518701 . 1518962 12 . Melenhorst , A . , Rogers , W . A . , and Bouwhuis , D . G . 2006 . Older adults ' motivated choice for technological innovation : Evidence for benefit - driven selectivity . Psychology and Aging . Vol 21 ( 1 ) , 190 - 195 . 13 . Morris , A . , Goodman , J . and Brading , H . 2007 . Internet use and non - use : views of older adults . Universal Access in the Information Society 6 , 1 , 43 - 57 . 14 . Needs of older users . http : / / www . w3 . org / WAI / WAI - AGE / needs . html 15 . Norman , D . A . The Invisible Computer . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 1998 . 16 . Ofcom . 2009 . Accessing the internet at home : A quantitative and qualitative study among people without the internet at home . http : / / www . ofcom . org . uk / research / telecoms / reports / bbr esearch / bbathome . pdf 17 . Sellen , A . , Rogers , Y . , Harper , R . , and Rodden , T . 2009 . Reflecting human values in the digital age . Commun . ACM 52 , 3 ( Mar . 2009 ) , 58 - 66 . DOI = http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 1467247 . 1467265 18 . Selwyn , N . , Gorard , S . , Furlong , J . and Madden , L . 2003 . Older adults’ use of information and communications technology in everyday life . Ageing and Society , 23 , 561 - 582 . doi : 10 . 1017 / S0144686X03001302 19 . Zajicek , M . 2007 . Web 2 . 0 : Hype or happiness ? . In Proceedings W4A ' 07 , ACM , New York , NY , 35 - 39 . DOI = http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 1243441 . 1243453 178