TECHNOLOGY AFFORDANCES William W . Gaver Rank Xerox Cambridge EuroPARC 61 Regent Street Cambridge CB2 1AB , U . K . gaver . europarc @ rx . xerox . com ABSTRACT Ecological approaches to psychology suggest succinct accounts of easily - used artifacts . Affordances are properties of the world that are compatible with and relevant for people ' s interactions . When affordances are perceptible , they offer a direct link between perception and action ; hidden and false affordances lead to mistakes . Complex actions can be understood in terms of groups of affordances that are sequential in time or nested in space , and in terms of the abilities of different media to reveal them . I illustrate this discussion with several examples of interface techniques , and suggest that the concept of affordances can provide a useful tool for user - centered analyses of technologies . KEYWORDS : ecological perspectives ; human interface design ; input / output design ; multi - media INTRODUCTION There is a real tension between tasks and technologies in interface design . Designs based primarily on the features of a new technology are often technically aesthetic but functionally awkward . But equally , designs based primarily on users ' current articulated needs and tasks can overlook potential innovations suggested by new technologies . We must understand the needs and abilities of prospective users . But equally , we must understand the capabilities and limitations of technologies in order to know the possibilities they offer for design . In this paper , I explore the notion of affordances as a way of focussing on the strengths and weaknesses of technologies with respect to the possibilities they offer the people that might use them . The term " affordance " comes from the perceptual psychologist J . J . Gibson [ 9 , 10 ] , who developed an " ecological " alternative to cognitive approaches . The cognitive approach suggests that people have direct access only to sensations , which are integrated with memories to build up symbolic representations of the environment and its potential for goal - oriented action . This account has recently come under attack , particularly for its decontextualized approach to design [ e . g . , 4 , 17 , 19 ] . In focussing on perception , action , memory and problem - solving " in the head , " its descriptions of action in the world , tool - use , In : Proceedings of CHI ' 91 , ( New Orleans , Lousiana , April 28 - May 2 , 1991 ) , ACM , New York , pp . 79 - 84 . perceptually - guided learning , etc . , often seem baroque and overly complicated . In contrast , the ecological approach stresses relevant human - scaled objects , attributes and events and the patterns of energy that provide effective perceptual information about them . It eschews detailed accounts of information processing as being unnecessary products of the abnormal situations found in laboratories . In focussing on everyday perception and action , the ecological perspective may offer a more succinct approach to the design of artifacts that suggest relevant and desirable actions in an immediate way . Cognitive approaches , from this perspective , are best reserved for artifacts which are complex , difficult to use , and error - prone . The notion of affordances is in many ways the epitome of the ecological approach , encapsulating ideas about ecological physics , perceptual information , and the links between perception and action . In this account , affordances are the fundamental objects of perception . People perceive the environment directly in terms of its potentials for action , without significant intermediate stages involving memory or inferences . For instance , we perceive stairways in terms of their " climbability , " a measurable property of the relationship between people and stairs . The work required to climb a flight of stairs can be described by a U - shaped function relating work to riser height and leg length . Warren [ 18 ] showed that people ' s visually - guided judgements of the climbability of different staircases reflect this function with great accuracy : people perceive the affordance of stairclimbing . An affordance of an object , such as one for climbing , refers to attributes of both the object and the actor . This makes the concept a powerful one for thinking about technologies because it focuses on the interaction between technologies and the people who will use them . However , the concept raises issues from many different domains : perception and action , metaphor and learning , and techniques for input and output . A simple example from everyday life can illustrate the sorts of issues that must be addressed before the notion of affordances can be made precise and useful . Gaver : Technology Affordances 2 WHAT ARE AFFORDANCES ? The concept of affordances is not a new one for design . Most notably , Norman [ 15 ] applied the concept to everyday artifacts . For instance , thin vertical doorhandles afford pulling , while flat horizontal plates afford pushing ( Figure 1 ) . Figure 1 . Different door handles suggest affordances for different actions . The interaction of a handle with the human motor system determines its affordances . When grasping a vertical bar , the hand and arm are in a configuration from which it is easy to pull ; when contacting a flat plate pushing is easier . We can perceive the affordances of doorhandles because the attributes relevant for grasping are available for perception . Finally , the course from perception to action seems a direct one , implying an ease of learning desirable for artifacts . However , perceptual information may suggest affordances that do not actually exist ; while those that do may not be perceivable . For instance , vertical doorhandles suggest pulling , but doors may be locked . In general , when the apparent affordances of an artifact matches its intended use , the artifact is easy to operate . When apparent affordances suggest different actions than those for which the object is designed , errors are common and signs are necessary . This example illustrates several important aspects of affordances . Below I develop the idea of affordances as properties of the environment relevant for action systems , consider how they might be perceived , and note the effects of culture on their perception . In the end I offer a definition that seems broad enough to be interesting for design , yet narrow enough to be useful . Complementarity of Action Affordances imply the complementarity of the acting organism and the acted - upon environment . Most fundamentally , affordances are properties of the world that make possible some action to an organism equipped to act in certain ways . Whether a handle with particular dimensions will afford grasping depends on the grasper ' s height , hand size , etc . Similarly , a cat - door affords passage to a cat but not to me , while a doorway may afford passage to me but not somebody taller . Affordances , then , are properties of the world defined with respect to people ' s interaction with it . Tools afford different actions . For instance , mechanics use a myriad of different tweezers , pliers and clamps to take advantage of the variations in their affordances for grasping . In interfaces , a similar diversity of input devices ( e . g . , keyboards , mice , touch tablets ) and onscreen cursors ( e . g . , arrows , brushes , hands ) offer various affordances for interaction [ 1 ] . Perception and Inter - referentiality Affordances per se are independent of perception . They exist whether the perceiver cares about them or not , whether they perceived or not , and even whether there is perceptual information for them or not . For example , a glass of water affords drinking whether or not I am thirsty , a ball affords throwing whether or not anybody sees it , and a pit affords falling even if it is concealed by brush . Affordances exist whether or not they are perceived , but it is because they are inherently about important properties that they need to be perceived [ 9 , p . 143 ] . no yes yes no P erce p t u a l I n f o r m a t i o n Affordance PerceptibleAffordance Hidden Affordance False Affordance Correct Rejection Figure 2 . Separating affordances from the information available about them allows the distinction among correct rejections and perceived , hidden and false affordances . Distinguishing affordances from perceptual information about them is useful in understanding ease of use . Common examples of affordances refer to perceptible affordances , in which there is perceptual information available for an existing affordance ( Figure 2 ) . If there is no information available for an existing affordance , it is hidden and must be inferred from other evidence . If information suggests a nonexistent affordance , a false affordance exists upon which people may mistakenly try to act . Finally , people will usually not think of a given action when there is no affordance for it nor any perceptual information suggesting it . Making affordances perceptible is one approach to designing easily - used systems . Perceptible affordances are inter - referential : the attributes of the object relevant for action are available for perception [ cf . 6 ] . What is perceived is what is acted upon . This situation contrasts with one in which perceived attributes must be related to those relevant for action by a mediating representation . Perceiving that a doorhandle affords pulling does not require a mediating concept because the attributes relevant to pulling are available for perception . Knowing that a key should be turned inside a lock does require mediation because the relevant attributes are not available . Gaver : Technology Affordances 3 From this point of view , interfaces may offer perceptible affordances because they can offer information about objects which may be acted upon . We can understand displays in terms of the subset of normally available perceptual information various media make available for various actions [ cf . 9 , 10 ] . For instance , the onscreen buttons shown in Figure 3 appear to be raised from the background , to have depth . This is not arbitrary , but the result of refined methods for conveying certain sorts of information . In semiotic terms , the marks are nomically ( causally ) related to their referents , rather than symbolically or metaphorically . In a sense , nomic mappings do not need to be interpreted , because they do not rely on convention or analogy . Their meaning is directly available to the perceiver [ 16 , 8 ] . Nomically mapped graphical objects can provide information about affordances when the information conveyed graphically corresponds to attributes of the system that are relevant for action . Culture , Experience and Learning The actual perception of affordances will of course be determined in part by the observer ' s culture , social setting , experience and intentions . Like Gibson I do not consider these factors integral to the notion , but instead consider culture , experience , and so forth as highlighting certain affordances . Distinguishing affordances and the available information about them from their actual perception allows us to consider affordances as properties that can be designed and analyzed in their own terms . Learning can be seen as a process of discriminating patterns in the world , as opposed to one of supplementing sensory information with past experience . From this perspective , my culture and experiences may determine the choice of examples I use here , but not the existence of the examples themselves . Affordances Are… The concept of affordances points to a rather special configuration of properties . It implies that the physical attributes of the thing to be acted upon are compatible with those of the actor , that information about those attributes is available in a form compatible with a perceptual system , and ( implicitly ) that these attributes and the action they make possible are relevant to a culture and a perceiver . Artifacts may be analyzed to see how close they are to this configuration of properties , and thus what affordances they convey . For instance , MacLean et al . [ 13 ] discuss a user - tailorable system of onscreen buttons and their experiences introducing them to non - technical users ( Figure 3 ) . Users intuitively understood that these buttons could be " pressed " using the mouse , but their tailorable attributes were not spontaneously manipulated . MacLean et al . Figure 3 . Onscreen buttons seem to protrude from the screen ; they afford pushing , but not moving or editing . interpret this as implying the need for a " tailoring culture " to support users [ see also 5 ] . But consider what needed to be supported . Buttons appear to afford pressing but not moving because they appear to protrude from the underlying surface . They do not appear to afford tailoring because they don ' t suggest decomposition . They appear and act as unitary objects – one of their advantages as an interface metaphor – with the drawback that they do not afford much except pressing . Just as the affordances of door handles imply the complementarity of handles and the motor system , so do the affordances of onscreen buttons imply the complementarity of buttons and mouse - driven cursors . Various graphical techniques allow us to perceive the pressability of an onscreen button , and the course from perception to action seems as direct as it does for doorhandles . And again , perceptual information may be misleading about the affordances of buttons ; in this case the ability to move or edit buttons is not supported perceptually . AFFORDANCES FOR COMPLEX ACTIONS The account above emphasizes perceptual information for affordances that can be obtained via relatively passive perception . But there often seems to be too little information available for the perception of more complex affordances . How do we know to turn a pivoting door handle ? Do scrollbars afford scrolling ? The notion of affordances may be extended to explicitly include exploration . For instance , the pivoting door handle shown in Figure 4 may appear to afford grasping , but passive observation will probably not indicate the affordance of turning it or using it to open the door . However , once grasped ( B ) , a random or exploratory press downwards will convey tactile information revealing the affordance of turning the handle . When the handle is fully turned ( C ) , the new configuration is one from which pulling is natural . The results of a pull will indicate whether the door affords opening or not . Figure 4 . Sequential affordances : one affordance leads to another . Visual information indicates grasping ( A & B ) ; tactile information indicates turning ( B & C ) . What is true for door handles again seems true for interfaces . For instance , the Macintosh scrollbox ( Figure 5A ) may appear to afford grabbing , but visual information probably does not indicate an affordance of dragging it or using it to scroll a window . However , just as grasping a door handle is likely to lead to tactile Gaver : Technology Affordances 4 information indicating turning , so is grabbing the Macintosh scrollbox likely to move it , leading to visual information about its affordance of dragging . In addition , the vertical grey shaft which encloses the scroll box perceptibly affords one sort of dragging – up and down – but not others , such as side to side . These are examples of sequential affordances , a concept I introduce to refer to situations in which acting on a perceptible affordance leads to information indicating new affordances . The Macintosh scrollbox offers a sequence of affordances – dragging is a natural progression from grabbing . In contrast , Smalltalk 80 scrollbars do not ; the scrollbar cannot be grabbed . Instead , scrolling requires moving the cursor over the scrollbar to change the cursor into an arrow pointing up , down , or sideways , and pressing one of the mouse ' s buttons ( Figure 5B ) . The Smalltalk scrollbar lacks inter - referentiality : There is nothing to coordinate perception and action with the device , no way to take advantage of obvious affordances to explore others . A . Macintosh B . Smalltalk Figure 5 . Two kinds of scrollbar . Which affords scrolling ? Sequential affordances explain how affordances can be revealed over time ; nested affordances describe affordances that are grouped in space . For instance , a handle alone only appears to afford pulling . A door alone may suggest an affordance for manipulation due to its partial separation from the wall , but not what sort of manipulation will be effective . Only by seeing the affordance of pulling the handle as nested within an affordance of pulling the door can opening the door be a perceptible affordance . Similarly , an onscreen window may appear to afford uncovering if the occlusion of its contents is apparent , and a scrollbox may afford dragging . A perceptible affordance of scrolling the window relies on seeing the affordance of dragging the scrollbox to uncover the window . In each case , the nested affordance offers itself both as an end in itself , and as a means towards realizing another affordance . In general , the affordances of complex objects are often grouped by the continuity of information about activities they reveal . Affordances are not passively perceived , but explored . This point of view leads to a reconception of metaphor which emphasizes its role as a design tool for importing consistent affordances from one domain to another . From this perspective , users need not know metaphors explicitly . Exploration of afforded actions leads to discovery of the system , rather than knowledge of the system metaphor leading to expectations of its affordances . Learning is seen as a matter of attention rather than inference . The role of a good interface is to guide attention via well - designed groups of sequential and nested affordances . MODES , MEDIA , AND AFFORDANCES Gibson [ 9 ] focuses almost exclusively on affordances which may be seen . But affordances may be perceived using other senses as well . As the pivoting handle example suggests , tactile information is a rich source of information for affordances . We can often feel what can be done with something – that it is hot enough to fry an egg , sharp enough to slice a tomato , and so on . Similarly , input devices may make use of tactile affordances . For instance , pressing onscreen buttons is reinforced by pressing mouse buttons , and force - feedback joysticks allow users to feel simulations . We might imagine redesigning three button mice with two of the buttons on the sides ; this would offer the affordances of squeezing and pushing . We can also hear some affordances . Typical examples of affordances depend on attributes of the environment such as the size and orientation of surfaces ; such attributes are those about which vision provides information . Sound , on the other hand , conveys information about affordances related to the size , material and internal structure of objects , the location , nature and forces of interactions , and the status of occluded processes [ 8 , 12 ] . For example , when door handles are turned the sound of the latch may reveal the affordance of moving the door . The sound conveys information for an affordance which can not be seen . Sounds can similarly reveal affordances of interfaces . For instance , selecting an object in a direct manipulation system might make a sound indicating its size and type , and thus reveal affordances which depend on these attributes ( e . g . , whether the object can be copied or the results of activating the object ) [ 8 ] . As with the pivoting door handle , visual information leads to a sequential affordance ; consequent auditory information suggests new possibilities . Sounds may also convey information for affordances in ways which supplement graphics . For example , sounds which indicate ongoing processes can reveal affordances for using other interdependent tools , sounds indicating the activities of others can suggest affordances for collaboration , and so on [ 7 ] . Just as different modalities can reveal information about affordances , so might we characterize various media in terms of the affordances they make available . For instance , researchers at EuroPARC have been exploring remote communication via computer - controllable audio and video links [ 2 ] . Video may support many aspects of face - to - face communication , but it does not seem well - suited for supporting the use of gestures as a communicative tool [ 11 ] . An account relating the characteristics of video as a medium for conveying information , the attributes required for effective gesture , Gaver : Technology Affordances 5 and the information necessary to perceive these attributes might allow us to redesign the system to emphasize this desirable affordance . In general , understanding the affordances offered by media other than graphics can aid in designing transparent systems . When visual affordances can not be designed in systems , the tendency is to turn to symbolic means of conveying information . A more fruitful approach may be to explore other modes as means of communicating affordances for actions . CONCLUSIONS The notion of affordances is appealing in its direct approach towards the factors of perception and action that make interfaces easy to learn and use . As a means for analyzing technologies , affordances should be useful in exploring the psychological claims inherent in artifacts [ 3 ] and the rationale of designs [ 14 ] . More generally , considering affordances explicitly in design may help suggest ways to improve the usability of new artifacts . In providing an integrated account of a complex configuration of attributes , the concept provides a simple but powerful means of addressing a broad range of interface issues . This paper lays out a framework for developing ways to apply the notion to design . At the level of detail explored here , the concept provides a valuable way to think about transparent interfaces . It encourages us to consider devices , technologies and media in terms of the actions they make possible and obvious . It can guide us in designing artifacts which emphasize desired affordances and de - emphasize undesired ones . Perhaps most important , it allows us to focus not on technologies or users alone , but on the fundamental interactions between the two . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS I thank Rachel Bellamy for initial discussions about these ideas . Many other people have provided valuable insights as the ideas have developed . In particular , I thank Bob Anderson , Victoria Bellotti , Jonathan Grudin , Christian Heath , Allan MacLean , Tom Moran , Don Norman , Gary Olson , Judy Olson , and Anne Schlottmann . REFERENCES 1 . Buxton , W . ( 1990 ) . The pragmatics of haptic input . Tutorial notes , CHI ' 90 , Seattle Washington . 2 . Buxton , B . , & Moran , T . P . ( 1990 ) . EuroPARC ' s integrated interactive intermedia facility ( IIIF ) : Early experiences . Proceedings of the IFIP WG8 . 4 Conference on Multi - user Interfaces and Applications ( Heraklion , Crete , September 1990 ) . 3 . Carroll , J . M , & Kellogg , W . A . ( 1989 ) . Artifact as theory - nexus : Hermeneutics meets theory - based design . Proceedings of the CHI ' 89 Conference on Computer and Human Interaction . 1989 April ; Austin , Texas . ACM , New York , pp . 7 - 14 . 4 . Carroll , J . M . ( 1990 ) . Infinite detail and emulation in an ontologically minimized HCI . Proceedings of the CHI ' 90 Conference on Computer and Human Interaction . 1990 April , Seattle , Washington . ACM , New York , pp . 321 - 327 . 5 . Carter , K . , & Henderson , A . ( 1990 ) . Tailoring culture . Preceedings of 13th IRIS Conference , Turku , Finland . 6 . Draper , S . W . ( 1986 ) . Display managers as the basis for user - machine communication . In D . A . Norman & S . W . Draper ( Eds . ) , User centered system design New perspectives on human - computer interface . Erlbaum , Hillsdale , N . J . 7 . Gaver , W . W . , & Smith , R . B . ( 1990 ) . Auditory icons in large - scale collaborative environments . Human - Computer Interaction – Interact ' 90 . D . Diaper et al . ( eds . ) . North - Holland , Elsevier . 8 . Gaver , W . W . ( 1989 ) . The SonicFinder : An interface that uses auditory icons . Human - Computer Interaction . 4 ( 1 ) . 9 . Gibson , J . J . ( 1979 ) . The ecological approach to visual perception . Houghton Mifflin , New York . 10 . Gibson , J . J . ( 1982 ) . Reasons for realism : Selected essays of James J . Gibson . ( edited by E . Reed & R . Jones ) . Erlbaum , Hillsdale , New Jersey . 11 . Heath , C . ( 1990 ) . Communication through video technology : The transformation of actual space within working environments . In Pellegrino , P . ( ed . ) , Proceedings of the Colloquium of the International Association of Semiotics of Space : " Architecture and Urban Culture " . University of Geneva . 12 . Jenkins , James J . ( 1985 ) . Acoustic information for objects , places , and events . In Warren , W . H . , & Shaw , R . E . , ( eds . ) , Persistence and change Proceedings of the first international conference on event perception . Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ . 13 . MacLean , A . , Carter , K , Lövstrand , L . , & Moran , T . P . ( 1990 ) . User - tailorable systems : Pressing the issue with buttons . Proceedings of the CHI ' 90 Conference on Computer and Human Interaction . 1990 April ; Seattle , Washington . ACM , New York , pp . 175 - 182 . 14 . MacLean , A . , Young , R . , & Moran , T . P . ( 1989 ) . Design rationale : The argument behind the artifact . Proceedings of the CHI ' 89 Conference on Computer and Human Interaction . 1989 April ; Austin , Texas . ACM , New York , 247 - 252 . 15 . Norman , D . A . ( 1988 ) . The psychology of everyday things . Basic Books , New York . Gaver : Technology Affordances 6 16 . Peirce , C . S . ( 1932 ) . In C . Jartshorne & P . Weiss ( eds . ) , Collected papers of Charles Sanders Peirce . Harvard University Press , Cambridge MA . 17 . Suchman , L . A . ( 1987 ) . Plans and situated actions : The problem of human machine communication . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , U . K . 18 . Warren , W . H . ( 1982 ) . Perceiving affordances : The visual guidance of stair climbing . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Perception and Performance . 19 . Winograd , T . , & Flores , F . ( 1987 ) . Understanding computers and cognition : A new foundation for design . Ablex , Norwood , N . J .