CHI 98 018 - 23 APRIL 1998 ACM ISBN l - 581 13 - 028 - 7 TUTORlALS Contextual Design : Using Customer Work Models to Drive Systems Design Karen Holtzblatt InContext Enterprises , Inc . 249 Ayer Rd . , Suite 301 Harvard , MA 01451 telephone : ( 508 ) 772 - 0001 email : karen @ acm . org ABSTRACT Field data gathering techniques such as Contextual Inquiry enable a design team to gather the detailed data they need . These techniques produce enormous amounts of information on how the customers of a system work . This creates a new problem - how to represent all this detail in a coherent , comprehensible form , which can be a suitable basis for design . An affinity diagram effectively shows the scope of the customer problem , but is less effective at capturing and coherently representing the details of how people work . Design teams need a way to organize this detail so they can use it in their own development process . In this tutorial we present our latest methods for representing detailed information about work practice and using these representations to drive system design . These methods have been adopted over the last few years by major product development and information systems organizations . We show how to represent the work of individual users in models , how to generalize these to describe a whole market or department , and how to use these to drive innovative design . We present the process by which we build and use the models and practice key steps . We show how these methods fit into the overall design process , and summarize Contextual Design , which gathers field data and uses it to drive design through a well - defined series of steps . The tutorial is appropriate for those who have used field techniques , especially Contextual Inquiry , and would like to put more structure on the process of using field data . We use shopping as our example of work practice throughout this tutorial , since shopping is simple and understood by everyone . We encourage participants to go grocery shopping shortly before the tutorial , and bring any shopping list they may have used , their store receipt , and a drawing of the store layout and their movement through it . KEYWORDS analysis methods , design techniques , customer - centered Hugh Beyer InContext Enterprises , Inc . 249 Ayer Rd . , Suite 301 Harvard , MA 01451 telephone : ( 508 ) 772 - 0001 email : beyer @ acm . org design , ethnography , usability engineering , methodology , team design , domain analysis , work modeling , software engineering , task analysis , user models , user studies work analysis CONTENT Representing Customer Work Systems and products are built to help people work better . They cannot be built well without understanding how people work . Techniques such as Contextual Inquiry gather the necessary data , but producing a good system requires that the data and its use be incorporated into a coherent design process . Such a design process would lead a team from data about specific users to a design addressing the needs of an entire market or department , providing ways to represent the design and iterate it with users . So good system design starts with a deep understanding of how people work . But understanding work is hard : there is no discipline of understanding how people work , the concepts , distinctions , and issues of work practice are not general knowledge , and we have no language for describing work practice . Without a language , it is hard to communicate work practice to others . To remedy this deficiency , we have developed work models , drawings that incorporate important distinctions about work . These models show the roles people play in the organization and how they communicate ; the social and emotional context in which work happens ; the sequence of actions which accomplish work ; the details of the physical site and work place in which work happens ; and the artifacts which support work and capture work results . In this section of the tutorial , we introduce the problem of representing customer work for design . We discuss the need for a language in which to talk about key work distinctions . We introduce the work models we have developed and show how they offer multiple perspectives on work practice . Modeling customer work is a natural extension of Contextual Inquiry . We show how to capture work models in an interpretation session simultaneously with capturing affinity notes , using a video of a working team to illustrate the process . We have found that the work models shorten interpretation sessions significantly , because they structure and simplify the discussion . 149 TUTORIALS ACM ISBN l - 581 13 - 028 - 7 CHI 98 l l 8 - 23 APRIL 1998 We describe each type of work model in turn and give participants practice building key models in pairs from a simplified transcript . Characterizing a Market or Department Products and systems are built for sale to a market or use by a department ; they are not built for individual users . But we gather data from individual users - how do we represent what these users tell us about all users ? Without a well - defined way to generalize from specific users , we appear to be designing from anecdotal evidence . Work model consolidation is such a well - defined process , resulting in a small set ( 5 - 7 ) of work models which characterize the work structure and basic work strategies across all customers . These models can be shown to account or fail to account for the work practice of any individual user . In this section , we describe and demonstrate the consolidation process for the key types of work model . We show how the consolidated models reveal issues to which a design must respond . Participants work in pairs to read and practice the thinking process of deriving implications from consolidated models . Inventing a System Response Ultimately , system design is the invention of the system’s response to a user problem . Without adequate customer data this invention is ungrounded - it is not driven from deep knowledge of how people organize their work , and cannot be developed in its details to support customers’ work well . Without a coherent understanding of work , design tends to degenerate into lists of features that do not consider the system as a whole , or that depend on the designers keeping the whole system in their heads . Work models capture precisely the detail necessary to ensure invention is grounded in customer work , provides a coherent solution to a whole work problem , and is developed to support actual work practice . Though we do not cover brainstorm and design processes in detail , we do conclude the tutorial with a grounded brainstorm experience in which we bring together the issues and design ideas identified by participants over the course of the day into a coherent system response . CONCLUSION A clearly defined , customer - centered design process guiding a team from initial data gathering to system design is possible today . In this tutorial we lead participants through the key transition in that process : making customer work practice real , generalizing to a market or department , and seeing the implications for the system design . We show how the material in this tutorial links to field research techniques such as Contextual Inquiry and to the later design process which formalizes and elaborates the initial design . REFERENCES H . Beyer , “Calling Down the Lightning , ” in IEEE Software . September 1994 , Vol . 11 No 5 , p . 106 150 B . Curtis , M . I . Kelhrer , and J . Over , “Process Modeling , ” Communications of the ACM , September 92 , V 35 , No . 9 . P . Ehn , Work - Oriented Design of Computer Arttfacts . Gummessons , Falkoping , Sweden 1988 , international distribution by Almqvist & Wiksell International , also Coronet Books , Philadelphia , PA . K . Holtzblatt and S . Jones , “Contextual Inquiry : A Participatory Technique for System Design , ” Participatory Design : Principles and Practice . Aki Namioka and Doug Schuler ( Eds . ) , Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Earlbaum Pub . 1993 . K . Holtzblatt and H . Beyer , “Making Customer - Centered Design Work for Teams , ” Communications of the ACM , October , 1993 . K . Holtzblatt and H . Beyer , “Representing work for the Purpose of Design , ” in Representations of Work , HICSS Monograph ( Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ) , January 1994 . Lucy Suchman , Editor . K . Holtzblatt and H . Beyer , “ Contextual Design : Principles and Practice , ” Field Methods for Software and Systems Design . D . Wixon and J . Ramey ( Eds . ) , John Wiley & Sons , Inc . , NY , NY , ( forthcoming ) . K . Holtzblatt , “If We’re a Team , Why Don’t We Act Like One ? ‘ , in interactions , July 1994 , Vol . 1 No . 3 , p . 17 M . Km % “ Making Representations Work , ” in Representations of Work , HICSS Monograph ( Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ) , January 1994 . Lucy Suchman , Editor . P . Sachs , “Transforming Work : The Role of Learning in Organizational Change , ” in Representations of Work , HICSS Monograph ( Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ) , January 1994 . Lucy Suchman , Editor . L . Suchman , ed . Communications of the ACM issue on ‘Representations of Work’ , September 1995 .