Current Biology , Vol . 12 , 854 – 858 , May 14 , 2002 ,  2002 Elsevier Science Ltd . All rights reserved . PII S0960 - 9822 ( 02 ) 00838 - 2 Transitions Regulating the Timing of Cytokinesis in Embryonic Cells ratus aligned along the long axis of the cell . Cells manip - ulated in this fashion allowed for accurate measurement ofthetimeintervalbetweentheinitiationofchromosome Charles B . Shuster 1 , 2 , 4 and David R . Burgess 1 , 2 , 3 1 Department of Biology Boston College Chestnut Hill , Massachusetts 02467 separation and cytokinesis onset . Whereas normal spherical controls began dividing 7 – 7 . 5 min following 2 The Marine Biological Laboratory Woods Hole , Massachusetts 02543 anaphase onset ( Figure 1A ) , a 2 - fold reduction in the distance between the spindle poles and the cell cortex ( from (cid:1) 55 (cid:1) m to 25 (cid:1) m ) resulted in precocious furrows forming no less than 3 . 5 min after the initiation of chro - Summary mosome separation ( n (cid:2) 6 ) , with identical results ob - tained for E . parma and L . pictus . In the cell shown in Anaphase , mitotic exit , and cytokinesis proceed in rapid succession , and while mitotic exit is a require - Figure 1B , the spindle poles were between 10 and 15 (cid:1) m from the cell surface , with the asters kept in constant ment for cytokinesis in yeast [ 1 , 2 ] , it may not be a direct requirement for furrow initiation in animal cells contact with the cell surface . The earliest contractile behavior indicating cytokinesis onset was detected 3 . 5 [ 3 , 4 ] . In this report , we physically manipulated the proximity of the mitotic apparatus ( MA ) to the cell cor - min following the initiation of chromosome segregation ( Figure1Bf ; alsoseeMovie1intheSupplementaryMate - tex in combination with microinjection of effectors of the spindle checkpoint and CDK1 activity to determine rial available with this article online ) , but well before the normal manifestations of mitotic exit ( expansion of the how theinitiation of cytokinesisis coupled tothe onset of anaphase and mitotic exit . Whereas precocious spindle poles , astral microtubule elongation , karyomere formation ) . Sister chromatids had separated less than contactbetweentheMAandthecellsurfaceadvancedtheonsetofcytokinesisintoearlyanaphaseA , furrow - 8 (cid:1) m from each other at the time of furrow initiation , whereas chromatid separation in controls typically oc - ing could not be advanced prior to the metaphase - anaphase transition . Additionally , while cells arrested curred 20 (cid:1) m before furrowing activity could be de - tected ( data not shown ) . Measurements of poleward in anaphase could be induced to initiate cleavage fur - rows , cells arrested in metaphase could not . Finally , chromosome movement reveal that chromosomes mi - grate toward the poles at approximately 1 . 2 (cid:1) m / min in activation of the mitotic checkpoint in one spindle of a binucleate cell failed to arrest cytokinesis induced both cylindrical and spherical cells ( data not shown ) , suggestingthatanaphasechromosomemovementsand by the control spindle but did inhibit the formation of furrows between the arrested MA and the control , mitotic exit were unaffected by the extreme physical constraints placed upon these cells . However , despite nonarrested MA . Our experiments suggest that the competence of the mitotic apparatus to initiate cytoki - the 4 - fold reduction in the distance between the spindle poles and the surface , no furrowing could be detected nesis is not dependent on cyclin degradation but does require anaphase - promoting complex ( APC ) activity in these or any other geometrically altered cell prior to 3 . 5 min past the anaphase onset . This lag phase be - and , thus , inactivation of the mitotic checkpoint . tween anaphase onset and cytokinesis in manipulated cells closelymatched earlier measurements forthe mini - Results and Discussion mal period of time between astral fiber contact with the cortex and furrow initiation [ 6 ] . Thus , even under Precocious Induction of Cytokinesis Previous studies have demonstrated that altering the conditions that favor precocious furrow initiation , fur - rowing cannot be initiated until an inhibitor of cytokine - geometric relationship between the mitotic apparatus and the cell cortex advanced the timing of cytokinesis sis is inactivated , either concomitantly or immediately preceding the metaphase - anaphase transition . relative to unmanipulated controls [ 3 , 5 ] . Presumably , this reduction in the distance between the spindle poles and cell cortex decreases the distance required for the Differential Cytokinetic Capacity of Cell asters to grow and contact the cortex . However , neither Cycle - Arrested Cells study accurately measured these changes in the timing To more precisely identify the cell cycle transition re - of cytokinesis relative to the onset of sister chromatid quired for the induction of cytokinesis in these embry - separation . In an effort to define precisely the earliest onic cells , we injected blastomeres with proteins that window during mitosis in which cytokinesis may be initi - arrested the cell cycle in either metaphase or anaphase , ated , blastomeres of the sand dollar Echinarachnius and we assessed their ability to form cleavage furrows parma and the sea urchin Lytechinus pictus were drawn following micromanipulation . One cell of a two - cell em - into incrementally smaller capillary pipettes prior to nu - bryo was injected either with injection buffer alone ( Con - clearenvelopebreakdown ( NEB ) , suchthatthespherical trol ) , nondegradable cyclin B ( (cid:3) 90 cyclin B ) , the N - ter - cellswerereshapedintoacylinderwiththemitoticappa - minal domain of cyclin B ( 1 – 102 cyclin B ) , or the spindle checkpoint protein , Mad2 ( Mad2 ) ( Figure 2A ) . Following 3 Correspondence : david . burgess @ bc . edu cytokinesis of the uninjected blastomere ( lower blasto - 4 Presentaddress : DepartmentofBiology , NewMexicoStateUniver - sity , Las Cruces , New Mexico 88003 . mere for each panel ) , injected blastomeres were scored Brief Communication 855 Figure 1 . Reducing the Distance between the Spindle Poles and Figure 2 . Cells Arrested in M Phase Differ in Their Ability to Induce theCellCortexAlterstheTimingofCytokinesisinCylindricalBlasto - Cleavage Furrows meres ( A ) One blastomere of a two - cell Lytechinus pictus embryo was ( A ) Fertilized Echinarachnius parma and Lytechinus pictus eggs injected with ( a ) injection buffer alone ( containing fluorescein - dex - were stripped of their fertilization membranes and hyaline layers , tran as an injection marker ) or with buffer containing ( b ) purified cultured through the first division , and one blastomere of a two - recombinant (cid:3) 90 cyclin B , the ( c ) N - terminal 102 amino acids of cell embryo was drawn into a capillary pipette just before nuclear cyclin B , or ( d ) human Mad2 protein . ( b ) Note that while injection of envelopebreakdown . Thetimingbetweenanaphaseonset ( detected (cid:3) 90 cyclin B arrested the injected blastomere in anaphase , ( c and by Hoescht staining ) and the furrow initiation was recorded and d ) injection of 1 – 102 cyclin B or Mad2 resulted in metaphase arrest . plotted against the distance between the spindle poles and the The scale bar represents 50 (cid:1) m . nearest cell surface . Data points for E . parma are shown in blue , ( B ) Blastomeresoftwo - cell Lytechinuspictus embryoswereinjected and data points for L . pictus are shown in red . either with ( a and b ) control buffer , ( c and d ) (cid:3) 90 cyclin B , ( e and f ) ( B ) One blastomere of a two - cell Lytechinus pictus embryo was 1 – 102 cyclin B , or ( g and h ) Mad2 . Needles were applied to the drawn into a narrow , thin - walled capillary ( i . d . 22 (cid:1) m ) following the injected blastomereafter thecontrol blastomerehad begun orcom - first cell division and was then followed by time - lapse microscopy . pleted cleavage , such that the spindle poles were placed in close In these extremely thin cells , the chromosomes were easily dis - proximitytothecellsurface . Cellswerefollowedbytime - lapsevideo cernable , and the lag period between anaphase onset ( b ) and the microscopy , and 20 min after the application of the needles , the first evidence of furrow ingression ( arrow in [ F ] ) was 3 . 5 min . The cells were scored for furrow formation and chromatin condensation average distance between the spindle poles and the surface was ( shown in blue ) . An oblique furrow formed in the cell arrested with 11 (cid:1) m . Times denote minutes past nuclear envelope breakdown . (cid:3) 90cyclinB ( d ) , whereasnofurrowingwasdetectedincellsarrested The chromosomes in ( b (cid:4) ) and ( f (cid:4) ) have been pseudocolored blue in metaphase with 1 – 102 cyclin or Mad2 . The scale bar represents to highlight the positions of the sister chromatids . The scale bar 50 (cid:1) m . represents 10 (cid:1) m . For a QuickTime movie , see Movie 1 in the Sup - plementary Material . of mRNA ( (cid:1) 1mg / ml ) , as reported previously [ 3 , 7 ] . In contrast , cells injected with either the 1 – 102 cyclin B for sister chromatid segregation and cleavage . Control injections resulted in normal cytokinesis ( 59 / 60 cells ) ( 37 / 44 cells ) or Mad2 protein ( 21 / 25 cells ) failed to pro - gress into anaphase or mitotic exit and arrested with that was synchronous with the uninjected blastomere ( Figure 2Aa ) . (cid:3) 90 cyclin B - injected cells underwent nor - small metaphase - like asters and chromosomes aligned at the spindle midzone ( Figures 2Ac and 2Ad ) . The N mal anaphase A chromosome segregation ( 22 / 24 cells ) butarrestedwith condensedchromatinandmetaphase - terminus of cyclin B inhibits mitotic progression by act - ingasacompetitiveinhibitorofcyclinandsecurindestruc - like asters ( Figure 2Ab ) . Injection of either recombinant protein or in vitro - transcribed mRNA resulted in ana - tion [ 8 ] , whereas Mad2 directly inhibits the targeting of substrates to the anaphase - promoting complex [ 9 ] . phase arrest , with spindle pole splitting and cell death observed with cells injected with higher concentrations Both 1 – 102 cyclin B - and Mad2 - injected cells were sta - Current Biology 856 ble for up to 4 hr , beyond which cells injected with the ulated in this fashion ( termed “donut” cells ) , both nuclei undergo NEB and mitosis synchronously . And , following 1 – 102 cyclin B underwent anaphase and mitotic exit and divided normally ( data not shown ) . While spindle anaphase onset , furrows form not only over the spindle midzone at the normal plane of the metaphase plate , pole splitting was observed in both 1 – 102 cyclin B - and Mad2 - injected cells , neither exhibited the aberrant but also at the midpoint between unrelated asters ( see Movie 2 in the Supplementary Material ) . These “second - morphology and cell death observed in (cid:3) 90 cyclin B - arrested cells . ary” furrows normally initiated later than the primary furrows and failed to initiate or retracted if the distance To assess whether cells injected with (cid:3) 90 cyclin B , 1 – 102 cyclin B , or Mad2 were capable of initiating fur - between the aster centers was greater than 110 (cid:1) m ( data not shown ) . rows , arrested blastomeres were manipulated with nee - dles to place the mitotic apparatus directly adjacent to To create donut cells with asynchronous spindles , one spindle pole was gently pulled off the nucleus with the cell surface to compensate for the lack of astral microtubule elongation that normally occurs when cells a microneedle prior to NEB ( Figure 3B ) , and the needle was kept in the cell to block the aster from returning exit mitosis to initiate cytokinesis [ 3 ] . Cells were then scored for cleavage 20 min after the application of nee - to the nucleus . Spindles manipulated in this manner resulted in one monopolar spindle ( denoted by an aster - dles ( Figure 2Bb ) . Control - injected embryos manipu - lated with needles underwent normal anaphase , mitotic isk ) , a free aster , and a control , bipolar mitotic apparatus ( Figures 3E – 3L ) . The control , bipolar spindle underwent exit ( as evidenced by chromatin decondensation , Fig - ures 2Baand 2Bb ) , and cytokinesis ( 5 / 5 cells ) . Manipula - normal anaphase and mitotic exit ( as evidenced by elon - gated astral microtubules and decondensed chromatin ; tion of cells arrested in anaphase with (cid:3) 90 cyclin B mRNA or recombinant protein also initiated cytokinetic Figures 3F – 3H and 3J – 3L ) and induced cytokinesis . The monopolar spindle remained arrested in mitosis with furrows , but without normal chromatin decondensation and nuclear envelope reformation ( 7 / 13 cells ) , with condensed chromatin and metaphase - like asters ( Fig - ures 3F – 3H and 3J – 3L ) . In six cells manipulated in this higher concentrations of (cid:3) 90 cyclin B resulting in furrow regression . In the cell shown in Figures 2Bc and 2Bd , manner , monopolar spindles remained arrested for up to45minpastNEBbeforefinallyexitingmitosis . Incases the furrow formed obliquely to the plane of the needle and coverslip , leaving one daughter cell out of the plane in which the cut aster migrated back to the monopolar spindle to reform a bipolar spindle ( n (cid:2) 6 ) , the injured of focus . In contrast , no furrowing activity could be de - tected in manipulated cells arrested in metaphase with spindle was able to proceed through anaphase and in - duce cytokinesis with a 5 - to 20 - min delay ( data not either 1 – 102 cyclin B ( n (cid:2) 8 ) or Mad2 ( n (cid:2) 9 ) ( Figures 2Be – h ) . Four cells arrested with 1 – 102 cyclin B and sub - shown ) . The spindle checkpoint activated in these monopolar sequently manipulated with needles formed cleavage furrows , and in each case , the cells had exited M phase , spindles did not appear to be freely diffusible and thus was unable to arrest the control bipolar spindles con - as evidenced by chromatin decondensation and nuclear envelope reformation . These results indicated that the tained within a common cytoplasm ( Figure 3 ; [ 12 ] ) . How - ever , inall cells examined ( n (cid:2) 12 ) , nosecondary furrows initiation of cytokinesis was dependent upon proteolytic events associated with anaphase onset , but not MPF formed between normal telophase asters and check - point - arrested monasters , regardless of the pole - to - inactivation . poledistance . InthecellillustratedinFigure3 , themono - polar spindle was within 75 (cid:1) m of the nearest telophase Spindle Checkpoint Activation in Cells Containing aster , butnofurrowingcouldbedetectedbetweenthese Two Spindles spindle poles . The free aster originally cut from the nu - Direct manipulation of the cell cycle established that , cleus was greater than 100 (cid:1) m from the nearest telo - while cells arrested in anaphase were capable of initiat - phase aster , and while some cortical contractility was ing cleavage furrows , cells arrested in metaphase could detected near the free aster , no sustained furrowing not ( Figure 2 ) . To confirm and extend these results , we activity was detected in this region of the cell . explored the relationship between the mitotic check - In contrast to yeast , it is unlikely that mitotic exit is point and cytokinesis by examining furrow formation in the direct timer for cytokinesis in animal cells . This is binucleate cells with asynchronous spindles . Rappaport based on our own results ( [ 3 ] ; Figure 2 ) demonstrating demonstrated that , in cells containing two spindles , that manipulated sea urchin blastomeres arrested with cleavage furrows may be induced between two asters nondegradable cyclin B are capable of initiating cleav - regardless of whether there is an intervening central age furrows as well as recent findings in Drosophila , spindle or chromosomes [ 10 , 11 ] . We reasoned that , if where expression of nondegradable cyclin B3 results in the spindle checkpoint acted locally as previously re - cytokinesis in the absence of mitotic exit [ 4 ] . And while ported [ 12 ] , then checkpoint activation in one spindle the metaphase furrows of the syncytial Drosophila em - should not inhibit cytokinesis induced by the other spin - bryodonotingresstocompletionbeforethe14 th division dle . To ask if furrows could form between control and [ 14 ] , these furrows contain all the normal components checkpoint - activatedspindles , wegeneratedbinucleate of cytokinesis and assemble in the presence of elevated cells by suppressing the first cleavage with 50 mM ure - MPF activity [ 15 , 16 ] . It should be noted , however , that thane , which inhibits astral microtubule growth and thus late events in cytokinesis , such as new membrane addi - cytokinesis [ 13 ] . After the removal of urethane , the tion , do require CDK1 inactivation [ 10 ] . In yeast , there daughter nuclei were then separated by gently pushing is a well - established requirement for mitotic exit before the contractile ring may function . In both fission and a glass ball through the center of the cell . In cells manip - Brief Communication 857 Figure 3 . CleavageFurrowFormationinDonut - Shaped Cells with Asynchronous Spindles ( A – H ) Binucleate L . pictus eggsweremanipu - lated with a glass ball to separate the nuclei ( [ A ] , the lower nucleus is out of the plane of focus ) . ( D ) Just priorto NEB , one centrosome wascutfromtheuppernucleus ( centrosomes marked with dots ) , leaving a single centro - some associated with the nucleus during nu - clearenvelopebreakdown . Whereasthecon - trol spindle underwent normal anaphase , cytokinesis , and mitotic exit , the monopolar spindle ( marked with an asterisk ) remained arrestedinmetaphase , withcondensedchro - matin and short metaphase - like asters . No secondary furrow formed between the telo - phasecontrol asterandthe monopolarmeta - phase aster . ( G ) A broad , shallow furrow was observed between the free aster and the other , telophase aster from the control spin - dle , which retracted . ( I – J ) Chromatin staining of ( E ) – ( H ) . The scale bar represents 50 (cid:1) m . See Movie 2 in the Supplementary Material for an exam - ple of secondary furrow formation in a con - trol , manipulated sea urchin egg . budding yeast , the cleavage plane is determined prior and induced cytokinesis normally , furrows that normally form between asters from unrelated spindles [ 10 , 11 ] to mitotic exit , and proper timing of cytokinesis is likely achieved either by regulating constriction [ 17 ] or the failed to initiate between normal and checkpoint - arrested spindles ( Figure 3 ) . Interestingly , inhibition of recruitment of ring components to the bud neck [ 18 , 19 ] . In animal cells , the cleavage site is not predeter - metaphase and anaphase by preventing the degrada - tion of endogenous substrates of the anaphase - promot - mined , nor is the contractile apparatus preassembled prior to anaphase onset . And while there appears to be ingcomplex ( APC ) with theDbox - containing , N - terminal domain of cyclin B also inhibited furrow formation [ 8 ] . flexibility in regards to how long furrow - inducing activity may extend following mitotic exit [ 20 , 21 ] , we find that Together , these results indicate that , while the proximal signals regulating cytokinesis may not require mitotic furrowing cannot be induced prior to the metaphase - anaphase transition ( Figure 1 ) . Thus , the apparent block exit , they are dependent upon spindle checkpoint inacti - vation and may also be dependent on the proteolysis to cytokinesis in animal cells appears to be more closely linked to events associated with anaphase onset than of some other regulatory factor . to mitotic exit . By the time the cell reaches the metaphase - anaphase Supplementary Material Supplementary Material including detailed descriptions of the Experi - transition , several critical cell cycle transitions have al - mental Procedures used in this report as well as movies accompa - ready occurred . Principle among these is the inactiva - nying Figures 1 and 3 is available at http : / / images . cellpress . com / tion of the mitotic spindle checkpoint [ 22 ] . Upon attach - supmat / supmatin . htm . ment of the last unbound kinetochore to the mitotic spindle , the spindle checkpoint is inactivated , initiating Acknowledgments the degradation of securins , cyclins , and kinesin - like proteins [ 23 , 24 ] . Using two different experimental ap - The authors would like to thank Drs . Michael Glotzer and Marc Kirschner for their generosity in sharing reagents , Ray Rappaport proaches , we find that the mitotic checkpoint regulates for his comments and suggestions , and the Mount Desert Island the timing of cytokinesis independently of mitotic exit . Biological Laboratory , where these studies were initiated . This work First , we used a defined effector of the mitotic check - was supported by a National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) National point , Mad2 , to generate blastomeres arrested in meta - Research Service Award to C . B . S and NIH grant GM58231 to D . R . B . phase . And while cells arrested with stabilized cyclin B were able to initiate cytokinesis when the asters were Received : January 28 , 2002 placed in close proximity with the cell cortex , similarly Revised : March 18 , 2002 manipulated Mad2 - arrested cells failed to stimulate fur - Accepted : March 26 , 2002 Published : May 14 , 2002 row formation ( Figure 2 ) . Using a different approach in tissue culture cells , Canman et al . [ 25 ] demonstrated that inactivation of Mad2 in nocodazole - treated cells References induced cortical contractions , suggesting that Mad2 1 . Sigrist , S . , Jacobs , H . , Stratmann , R . , and Lehner , C . F . ( 1995 ) . controlled the initiation of cortical contractility . As a sec - Exit from mitosis is regulated by Drosophila fizzy and the se - ond approach , we generated a binucleate cell in which quential destruction of cyclins A , B and B3 . EMBO J . 14 , 4827 – one checkpoint - activated monopolar spindle and a nor - 4838 . mal , bipolar MA share a common cytoplasm . And while 2 . Surana , U . , Amon , A . , Dowzer , C . , McGrew , J . , Byers , B . , and Nasmyth , K . ( 1993 ) . Destruction of the CDC28 / CLB mitotic ki - the bipolar control spindle progressed through mitosis Current Biology 858 nase is not required for the metaphase to anaphase transition 27 . Glotzer , M . , Murray , A . W . , and Kirschner , M . W . ( 1991 ) . Cyclin is degraded by the ubiquitin pathway . Nature 349 , 132 – 138 . in budding yeast . EMBO J . 12 , 1969 – 1978 . 3 . Shuster , C . B . , andBurgess , D . R . ( 1999 ) . Parametersthatspecify 28 . Fang , G . , Yu , H . , and Kirschner , M . W . ( 1998 ) . The checkpoint protein MAD2 and the mitotic regulator CDC20 form a ternary the timing of cytokinesis . J . Cell Biol . 146 , 981 – 992 . 4 . Parry , D . H . , and O’Farrell , P . H . ( 2001 ) . The schedule of destruc - complex with the anaphase - promoting complex to control ana - phase initiation . Genes Dev . 12 , 1871 – 1883 . tion of three mitotic cyclins can dictate the timing of events during exit from mitosis . Curr . Biol . 11 , 671 – 683 . 5 . Rappaport , R . , andRappaport , B . N . ( 1993 ) . Durationofdivision - related events in cleaving sand dollar eggs . Dev . Biol . 158 , 265 – 273 . 6 . Rappaport , R . , and Ebstein , R . P . ( 1965 ) . Duration of stimulus and latent periods preceding furrow formation in sand dollar eggs . J . Exp . Zool . 158 , 373 – 382 . 7 . Hinchcliffe , E . H . , Cassels , G . O . , Rieder , C . L . , and Sluder , G . ( 1998 ) . The coordination of centrosome reproduction with nu - clear events of the cell cycle in the sea urchin zygote . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 1417 – 1426 . 8 . Holloway , S . L . , Glotzer , M . , King , R . W . , andMurray , A . W . ( 1993 ) . Anaphase is initiated by proteolysis rather than by the inactiva - tion of maturation - promoting factor . Cell 73 , 1393 – 1402 . 9 . Li , Y . , Gorbea , C . , Mahaffey , D . , Rechsteiner , M . , and Benezra , R . ( 1997 ) . MAD2 associates with the cyclosome / anaphase - pro - moting complex and inhibits its activity . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 12431 – 12436 . 10 . Shuster , C . B . , and Burgess , D . R . ( 2002 ) . Targeted new mem - brane addition in the cleavage furrow is a late , separate event in cytokinesis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 3633 – 3638 . 11 . Rappaport , R . ( 1961 ) . Experiments concerning the cleavage stimulus in sand dollar eggs . J . Exp . Zool . 148 , 81 – 89 . 12 . Rieder , C . L . Khodjakov , A . , Paliulis , L . V . , Fortier , T . M . , Cole , R . W . , and Sluder , G . ( 1997 ) . Mitosis in vertebrate somatic cells with two spindles : implications for the metaphase / anaphase transition checkpoint and cleavage . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 5107 – 5112 . 13 . Rappaport , R . ( 1971 ) . Reversal of chemical cleavage inhibition in echinoderm eggs . J . Exp . Zool . 176 , 249 – 255 . 14 . Miller , K . G . , and Kiehart , D . P . ( 1995 ) . Fly division . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 1 – 5 . 15 . Field , C . M . , and Alberts , B . M . ( 1995 ) . Anillin , a contractile ring protein that cycles from the nucleus to the cell cortex . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 165 – 178 . 16 . Foe , V . E . , Field , C . M . , and Odell , G . M . ( 2000 ) . Microtubules and mitotic cycle phase modulate spatiotemporal distributions of F - actin and myosin II in Drosophila syncytial blastoderm em - bryos . Development 127 , 1767 – 1787 . 17 . Sparks , C . A . , Morphew , M . , and McCollum , D . ( 1999 ) . Sid2p , a spindlepolebodykinasethatregulatestheonsetofcytokinesis . J . Cell Biol . 146 , 777 – 790 . 18 . Bi , E . , Maddox , P . , Lew , D . J . , Salmon , E . D . , McMillan , J . N . , Yeh , E . , and Pringle , J . R . ( 1998 ) . Involvement of an actomyosin contractileringin Saccharomycescerevisiae cytokinesis . J . Cell Biol . 142 , 1301 – 1312 . 19 . Lippincott , J . , and Li , R . ( 1998 ) . Sequential assembly of myosin II , an IQGAP - like protein , and filamentous actin to a ring struc - ture involved in budding yeast cytokinesis . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 355 – 366 . 20 . Martineau , S . N . , Andreassen , P . R . , and Margolis , R . L . ( 1995 ) . Delay of HeLa cell cleavage into interphase using dihydrocyto - chalasin B : retention of a postmitotic spindle and telophase disccorrelateswithsynchronouscleavagerecovery . J . CellBiol . 131 , 191 – 205 . 21 . Rappaport , R . , andRappaport , B . N . ( 1993 ) . Durationofdivision - related events in cleaving sand dollar eggs . Dev . Biol . 158 , 265 – 273 . 22 . Pines , J . , andRieder , C . L . ( 2001 ) . Re - stagingmitosis : acontem - porary view of mitotic progression . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , E3 – 6 . 23 . Greaves , S . ( 2000 ) . Xkid - ding around . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 , E183 . 24 . Morgan , D . O . ( 1999 ) . Regulation of the APC and the exit from mitosis . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , E47 – E53 . 25 . Canman , J . C . , Hoffman , D . B . , and Salmon , E . D . ( 2000 ) . The role of pre - and post - anaphase microtubules in the cytokinesis phase of the cell cycle . Curr . Biol . 10 , 611 – 614 . 26 . Kiehart , D . P . ( 1982 ) . Microinjectionofechinodermeggs : appara - tus and procedures . Methods Cell Biol . 25 , 13 – 31 .