Effects of Color and Threshold on User Perception of Heat Maps ChloeEghtebas 1 , 2 , BrendanRitter 1 , AlapParkin 1 , LarsLischke 2 1 Cornell Tech , New York , US { nce9 , bjr224 , akp76 } @ cornell . edu 2 University of Stuttgart , Germany , lars . lischke @ vis . uni - stuttgart . de Abstract Heat maps are a commonplace tool to communicate geolocated information . There are a lot of features in a heat map’s visualization that are able to be perceived differently . Parameters such as color and threshold can inﬂuence how the data is understood . In the speciﬁc context of visualizing restaurant density , we conducted a mixed methods study to measure how these two parameters can affect a user’s perception of data quality . We present preliminary results of interviews , and an online survey . Author Keywords Geo - located data ; data exploration ; sensemaking . ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords H . 5 . 2 [ User Interfaces ] : Graphical user interfaces ( GUI ) . Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the Owner / Author . Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . DIS’17 Companion , June 10 - 14 , 2017 , Edinburgh , United Kingdom ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4991 - 8 / 17 / 06 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3064857 . 3079160 Figure 1 : Left to Right : Heat maps showing same data thresholded at different levels of data points : large , default , small . Introduction Heat maps are a representation of aggregated data that use color to represent information . Historically , they have been called by many names and originated from cluster maps [ 12 ] . Heat maps have evolved from representing spatial data and are used in many applications and disciplines , such as policy making , meteorology , website experience , biology , elections , and real estate [ 10 ] . In this study we look at how two visualization factors : Color and Threshold affect perception of heat map data . Previous work has looked into how heat maps are perceived in video game contexts [ 1 ] . As discussed by Ballatore and Bertolotto [ 2 ] , a map’s representation of the environment should reﬂect the individual’s understanding of the environment . A personalized or custom map based on the viewer can thus better achieve the desired communication . To accomplish this , the visualizations should be adjustable to a user’s needs and the overlaying information has to be adapted [ 6 ] . Research has also shown how the nature of data requires different color representations for accurate user perception [ 8 , 11 ] . Additionally , research has shown that low spatial density graphs ( maps with less information presented ) are better paired with high variation of color ( i . e . a heat map using more than one color ) and vice versa [ 9 ] . Figure 2 : Heat maps with the same data but varying color . The last map is an example of high variation of color as opposed to the ﬁrst two maps . Figure 3 : Heat maps with a satellite background . Prior work has been done on understanding the importance of thresholds , as identifying as the absolute cutoff value of the color spectrum [ 3 ] . For instance , in gaze tracking data , where the threshold is high , critical information about precision might be missed . Consequently , low threshold might lead to information loss about overall gaze [ 3 ] . Also , incomplete information shown in heat maps can lead to incorrect decision making due to the lack of proper thresholds ( see Figure 1 for example of varying threshold ) . We deﬁne Threshold by the standard deviation of the Gaussian used for the data interpolation algorithm . However , prior work does not show effects of varying these two parameters such as Color and Threshold in the change of the user’s perception . To situate our research in a real world scenario , we focus on the ask of route planning for dining , in the context of visualizing restaurant density . Such common tasks are performed by users of relevant applications such as Yelp and Foursquare . Our research aims to ﬁnd out how varying color and threshold of restaurant density heat map visualizations , when available , might be perceived by users . Heat map Prototype For the purpose of this work , heat maps were generated through a web application that allowed quick construction and iteration via Google’s heat map API 1 . The maps 1 https : / / developers . google . com / maps / documentation / javascript / heatmaplayer generated were all anonymized by removing region labels and were centered around semi - urban areas of Milwaukee , USA ( a large but mostly unidentiﬁable city for most participants we had access to in New York ) . The data is generated by placing several centers of a Gaussian distribution with 3 different standard deviations onto the map to vary density . The individual data points are then randomly drawn onto the map from these Gaussian distributions . Once the data is on the map , our tool allowed for quick changing of Color , Threshold , and Background of the heat map . The color decreased in seven equal steps from the center of a data point to the boundary of the data point . The color gradients used went from red to white , blue to white , and red to blue ( see Figure 2 ) . The heat map interpolation is based on the superposition of Gaussian kernels centered at each data point . Our threshold was deﬁned by choosing three different standard deviations for these Gaussians , large , default , and small ( see Figure 1 ) . The different map backgrounds were of satellite and street view ( see Figure 3 ) . Method To ﬁnd out how color and threshold affect the perceived data on a heat map , we ran a mix method study with a qualitative and quantitative part . The qualitative study guided the design of the larger quantitative study as it gave a better understanding of effects of Color , Thereshold and Background of heat maps . The qualitative study was a semi - structured interview conducted on thirteen individuals through snowball sampling of graduate students at Cornell Tech . We began by presenting a single picture of a heat map . We asked the participant to think aloud the effect of 3 parameters ( Color , Threshold , and Background ) when drawing a route between a given start and ﬁnish position to acquaint the users better with the maps , and think aloud the importance of Color and Threshold while they interacted with the map . Next , we showed the participants other heat maps , each representing one of the three values for Color ( red , blue , red and blue ) ; Threshold ( large , default , and small ) , and Background ( satellite and street ) . Participants assumed that they can toggle between the backgrounds as is commonly available across geo - location applications . Participants also reported that the satellite map backgrounds were visually cluttered . Figure 4 : Possible routes to take through sub - urban area of Milwaukee showing restaurant density data . Based on the preliminary feedback , we decided to only test for Color and Threshold , while ﬁxing the Background at street level . Next , based on the routes generated by our participants , we derived three routes : The ﬁrst route was the longest , the second was the shortest , and the third one went through the highest number of data points on the heat map ( see Figure 4 ) . These routes were then used in a survey to measure effects of varying the independent variables ( Color and Threshold ) on dependent variables ( user preference , measured on a 5 - point Likert scale ) , as described next . The online survey was a 10 - 15 minute survey created on Google forms which was released to our social media networks for the duration of 2 weeks . The online survey consisted of three sections . The ﬁrst section of the survey showed a heatmap in Figure 4 asking the participant to choose the route they like best and why ? With the route they chose , participants were presented the set of below statements which they answered on a likert scale from 1 - 5 with 5 being they strongly agree . At the end of the statements they were asked to describe any additional actions they would perform given the route they chose . 1 . I would try to obtain additional information about this route before traveling through it . 2 . I would use this map to help notify my friends about this route . 3 . I would stop to look at several restaurants menus . 4 . I would go towards the crowded areas in this route . 5 . I would want to walk along this route with friends . 6 . I would eat at more than one restaurant along this route . The second section of the online survey showed a group of maps that had either the color or threshold parameter changing such as in Figure 1 and 2 respectively . The participant were then asked to compare across the variables and choose maps that contained the most and least data ; and maps with the best and worst representation . The third and ﬁnal section of the online survey asked a set of demographic questions . We put this section at the end to minimize bias in our survey . Since our social media networks are diverse , we wanted to get a general poll on the participants gender , age , education , where they currently live , and where they have lived . Additionally we asked how often they ate out at restaurants to see how their prior experience would inﬂuence their current interpretations based on our context of restaurant density . Results and Discussion The demographics of the online survey show that the 43 participants have a mean age of 29 . 4 ( SD = 11 . 7 ) with 67 . 4 % male and 32 . 6 % female . Their occupation is graduate students ( 53 . 5 % ) , from the US ( 32 . 6 % ) or Germany ( 46 . 5 % ) . Lastly , they eat at restaurants one to four times a week ( 44 . 2 % ) . The Route question yielded responses where ( 58 . 1 % ) said they eat at restaurants once to several times a week also tended to choose the path with more restaurants ( 83 . 1 % ) . As shown in Figure 5 , most participants wanted to obtain additional information before traveling through the path ( 53 . 5 % ) ; wanted to stop and look at several restaurants menus along the path ( 69 . 7 % ) ; routed through the crowded areas ( 65 . 1 % ) and wanted to walk along this route with friends ( 72 . 1 % ) , suggesting this to be a social activity . Color comparison results showed respondents liked high contrast color ( two colors ) over gradients of the same color ( See bottom map in Figure 2 ) . 74 . 4 % of respondents picked the map with multi - colored high contrast map as their preferred representation . In addition , 32 . 6 % of participants thought that the high contrast color showed more data than the other two color gradients . Threshold comparison results showed that 63 % of respondents chose the threshold option that was neither the Small or Large ( Top map in Figure 1 ) . Also , 41 . 9 % of the participants thought that smallest threshold had less data than the other two . Our preliminary results show that information visualized through heat maps are perceived differently when Color and Threshold are varied . Bi - colored maps with default threshold value were the most preferred . Map Designers can use these results when designing the default view of heat maps . However , these results are based on a small sample of users , performing a simple routing task for a speciﬁc dining context . In the future , larger studies are needed to understand the impact of more complex tasks , across other contexts . Further , as reported by participants , route - planning is a social sensemaking activity similar to existing collaborative sensemaking work by Goyal et al . [ 7 ] where collaborators worked on geospatial crime solving tasks . Goyal et al . [ 5 ] in their later work further show the importance of making such social sense - making activity translucent to improve task Figure 5 : Table of the route survey question results . Each row corresponds to the questions in the ﬁrst part of the online survey and every column is a point on the likert scale . performance . Future work is needed to build upon this sensemaking research on visualizing geolocation data , especially in mobile contexts [ 4 ] . Conclusion In this work , we described a preliminary study about how two parameters , Color and Threshold , can inﬂuence the perception of data and data quality using a mixed methods study for route calculations across varying restaurant density visualizations on a map . We found that Bi - colored maps with default threshold value were the most preferred . Future research is suggested to better understand the other potential variables studied in this work and to have a generalization across various other user contexts . Acknowledgements We would like to thank Albrecht Schmidt , Louise Barkhuus , Marco Hirsch and Paul Lukowicz for their guidance , inspiration , and support . This work was funded in part by the NSF under grant IIA - 1358096 and by the European Commission’s H2020 Program under the funding scheme " FETPROACT - 1 - 2014 : Global Systems Science ( GSS ) " , grant agreement # 641191 CIMPLEX : Bringing Citizens , Models and Data together in Participatory , Interactive Social Exploratories EU FETPROACT - 1 - 2014 # 641191 . REFERENCES 1 . N . Hoobler ; G . Humphreys ; M . Agrawala . 2005 . Visualizing competitive behaviors in multi - user virtual environments . In Visualization , 2004 . IEEE . 2 . Andrea Ballatore and Michela Bertolotto . 2015 . Personalizing Maps . Commun . ACM 58 , 12 ( Nov . 2015 ) , 68 – 74 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2756546 3 . Agnieszka Aga Bojko . 2009 . Informative or misleading ? Heatmaps deconstructed . In International Conference on Human - Computer Interaction . Springer , 30 – 39 . 4 . Nitesh Goyal . COMET : Collaboration in Mobile Environments by Twisting . In Supplementary Proceedings of the 11th European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work . 29 . 5 . Nitesh Goyal and Susan R Fussell . 2016 . Effects of Sensemaking Translucence on Distributed Collaborative Analysis . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’16 ) . ACM , 288 – 302 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2818048 . 2820071 6 . Nitesh Goyal , Gilly Leshed , and Susan R . Fussell . 2013a . Effects of Visualization and Note - taking on Sensemaking and Analysis . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2721 – 2724 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2481376 7 . Nitesh Goyal , Gilly Leshed , and Susan R . Fussell . 2013b . Leveraging Partner’s Insights for Distributed Collaborative Sensemaking . In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work Companion ( CSCW ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 15 – 18 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2441955 . 2441960 8 . Kenneth Moreland . 2009 . Diverging color maps for scientiﬁc visualization . In International Symposium on Visual Computing . Springer , 92 – 103 . 9 . Bernice E Rogowitz , Lloyd A Treinish , Steve Bryson , and others . 1996 . How not to lie with visualization . Computers in Physics 10 , 3 ( 1996 ) , 268 – 273 . 10 . Johannes Trame and Carsten Keßler . 2011 . Exploring the lineage of volunteered geographic information with heat maps . Proceedings of GeoViz : Linking Geovisualization with Spatial Analysis and Modeling , Hamburg , Germany ( 2011 ) , 10 – 12 . 11 . Colin Ware . 1988 . Color sequences for univariate maps : theory , experiments and principles . IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 8 , 5 ( Sept 1988 ) , 41 – 49 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1109 / 38 . 7760 12 . Leland Wilkinson and Michael Friendly . 2012 . The history of the cluster heat map . The American Statistician ( 2012 ) .