Walking and Talking : Place - based Data Collection and Mapping for Participatory Design with Communities Sebastian Prost Vasilis Ntouros Gavin Wood Northumbria University Newcastle University Northumbria University Newcastle upon Tyne , UK Newcastle upon Tyne , UK Newcastle upon Tyne , UK sebastian . prost @ northumbria . ac . uk nick . taylor @ newcastle . ac . uk gavinwood2 @ sigchi . org Henry Collingham Nick Taylor Clara Crivellaro Northumbria University Newcastle University Newcastle University Newcastle upon Tyne , UK Newcastle upon Tyne , UK Newcastle upon Tyne , UK henry . w . r . collingham @ northumbria . ac . uk nick . taylor @ newcastle . ac . uk clara . crivellaro @ newcastle . ac . uk Jon Rogers John Vines Northumbria University University of Edinburgh Newcastle upon Tyne , UK Edinburgh , UK jon . rogers @ northumbria . ac . uk john . vines @ ed . ac . uk ABSTRACT This paper explores the value of a participant - led walking method , during which matters of place in urban or rural contexts are ex - plored . While walking , a diverse dataset is collected , including audio recordings , photographs , GPS tracks , as well as three words that participants are prompted for at each stop along the walk via a bespoke web application . We used this approach in an urban community in the UK and a rural community in Greece as part of ongoing place - based initiatives . Our fndings show how partic - ipants connected personal and emotional stories with structural issues , countered ofcial , ‘authorised’ discourses about both places , and how maps and videos created after the walks acted as boundary objects . We refect on the claims of walking as a method that fosters equitable researcher - participant relationships , outline future de - sign directions for participatory walking and mapping technologies , and consider the value of walking methods and map - making for participatory design . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → HCI design and evaluation methods . KEYWORDS walking interviews , walk - along , mobile app , counter mapping , par - ticipatory design Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the frst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specifc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pittsburgh , PA , USA © 2023 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9893 - 0 / 23 / 07 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3563657 . 3596054 ACM Reference Format : Sebastian Prost , Vasilis Ntouros , Gavin Wood , Henry Collingham , Nick Taylor , Clara Crivellaro , Jon Rogers , and John Vines . 2023 . Walking and Talking : Place - based Data Collection and Mapping for Participatory Design with Communities . In Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ’23 ) , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pittsburgh , PA , USA . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 16 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3563657 . 3596054 1 INTRODUCTION HCI researchers are increasingly engaging in place - based agendas . Interactive systems are built to collect , analyse , or advocate with place - based data , spanning diverse issues such as environmental quality [ 61 ] , road safety [ 6 , 50 ] , urban development [ 20 , 37 ] , gentri - fcation [ 16 , 51 ] , or police violence [ 57 ] . Data frequently concerns issues raised by local activists and communities of place [ 52 , 70 , 75 ] . Frequently , place - based design projects get funded based upon a discourse that a place is broken , that it needs investment , or that there are social issues that need addressing . This , however , ignores positive resources and assets available in a place while re - inscribing negative outside perceptions [ 31 ] . Place - based data has been used to feed into such narratives but also to resist them , such as by highlighting a place and a community’s rich history [ 20 ] or local re - sourcefulness to solve problems [ 25 , 33 ] , or by explicitly countering ofcial data accounts [ 51 , 71 ] . With this paper , we build on this body of work by exploring the following research question : What is the value of a digitally sup - ported walking method for place - based participatory design ? Like others [ 38 ] , we conceive of walking as a rich method to feed into par - ticipatory design processes . ‘Walking and Talking’ , or ‘walk - alongs’ , are typically semi - structured or unstructured conversations ( inter - views ) between a researcher and one or several participants while walking through an environment relevant to the participant ( s ) , for example their local neighbourhood [ 28 , 43 ] . Compared to seden - tary interviews , they have the potential to generate rich data about participants’ thoughts about the environment [ 66 ] , decentre the expertise of the researcher and give authority to participants [ 59 ] , 2437 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Prost et al . help to build rapport between researcher and participant [ 66 ] , and foster attention to structural and political problems [ 11 ] . In our work , we used ‘Walking and Talking’ alongside a col - lection of readily available tools ( to record audio , photo , and GPS data ) and a bespoke mobile application ( app ) – WalkYourWords – which participants used on their walks to support elicitation of their experiences and to capture place - based data grounded in these experiences . WalkYourWords was inspired by the location service what3words [ 78 ] . What3words uses a 3x3 metres grid laid over a global map , and each square on the grid is then uniquely identifed by a combination of three randomly generated words . We turned this mechanism upside - down ; in WalkYourWords participants can assign three words ( or short phrases ) to tag their current location , efectively building a user - generated grid with meaningful identi - fers for the places they care about . Following the walks , we created personalised paper maps and videos for our participants that we used to engage them and others in further local action . We walked and talked using WalkYourWords in two distinct contexts where we are engaged in long - term place - based initia - tives with their communities . The frst context is a semi - urban social housing estate in England , UK . It is characterised by a pre - dominantly working - class population with a complex history of stigmatisation and neglect , and , as a consequence , community clo - sure to outside intervention . The second context is a group of small remote villages in Greece . The region has sufered from economic downturn and a shrinking and aging population . Recently , major infrastructural investments have stirred up resistance among locals who denounce those infrastructures as top - down , poorly , and non - transparently designed that are extractive to the local environment . Utilising our pre - existing connections in both areas , we con - ducted six walks in the UK and fve walks in Greece . In the UK , the walks built on prior research relations in the neighbourhood and were the frst step in an ongoing participatory design process to co - create community - led responses to entrenched social issues . In Greece , our engagement built on prior place - based actions to foster participation in local everyday politics and culture . The aim of our ten - day research visit was to contribute to ongoing public debates through the data gathered in the walks . Mindful of the fact that we were working with marginalised communities in both places , we devised ‘Walking and Talking’ as a sensitive ethnographic device to build equitable relationships with participants , putting them into a position of authority and expertise . In this paper , we report on the fndings from our engagements across these two sites , highlighting how walking , talking and Walk - YourWords supported participants to connect personal experiences with wider structural issues , supported the creation of data that countered dominant discourses about their place , and how maps and videos acted as critical boundary objects across diferent social contexts . In refecting on and discussing the method and fndings , we contribute a deepened understanding of the role of digitally sup - ported walking methods in participatory and place - based projects with communities . Specifcally , we ofer new insights on how walk - ing methods support more equitable researcher - participant relation - ships , the value of mobile technologies to collect and disseminate diverse data about a place , and how walking can inform design - based inquiries of place . 2 WALKING AND MAPPING IN HCI We situate our work within socially and civically engaged HCI research and community - based participatory design . Participatory design has strong political roots [ 8 , 39 ] , being based on the double principle that involving future users of a system in its design does not only result in better design , but is also people’s democratic right . Questions of who participates and whose voice counts have long been at the heart of debates in participatory design [ 26 , 74 ] . More recently , the wider HCI community has begun to engage with ‘communities’ through ‘community informatics’ [ 12 ] , ‘design for civic engagement’ [ 42 ] , ‘civic tech’ [ 9 ] , or ‘digital civics’ [ 76 ] . These contributions have explored what role digital technologies can play in strengthening citizens’ participation in local or national politics and culture , supporting non - proft organisations in delivering their work , and helping to build grassroots and activist movements . However , in recent years , both in participatory design and in civically engaged HCI , calls have been mounting that the ethos and methods of design itself can be inappropriate and even harmful when working with marginalised communities without responding to the historic injustices they have experienced [ 17 ] . For example , Harrington et al . [ 36 ] point out that as researchers we need to be refexive over potentially traumatic histories of marginalised communities in relation to a research institution , our limits to fully understand lived experiences in a community , how certain brainstorming and ‘blue - sky’ thinking methods can be alienating for resource - constrained participants , and the potential harm caused by data collection and dissemination . Recent eforts to centre equity in the design process have argued that designers and researchers need to invest in building relation - ships and trust to evidence their commitment to a community rather than a research or design outcome [ 36 , 45 ] , they need to integrate community knowledge in the design and share control over the design process [ 15 ] , and focus on available assets and capacities rather than defcits [ 31 , 80 ] . In this paper , we want to position walking as a method for participatory design and civically engaged HCI research that contributes to such equity in the design process . In this section , we frst present the unique qualities others have found in walking that underline this claim . Afterwards , we discuss map - making as a political tool for countering ofcial , ‘sanctioned’ discourses about a place . 2 . 1 Walking as a Method for Design Research Walking has long been part of research practice ( e . g . , in ethnogra - phy ) , but recently received attention as a method in its own right [ 11 , 28 , 43 , 46 ] . Evans and Jones [ 28 ] diferentiate between mobile methods ( e . g . , walking interview or a walk - along ) and sedentary methods in motion ( e . g . , sitting in a car while interviewing , also called a ‘ride - along’ [ 11 ] ) . The go - along , which can be either a walk - along or a ride - along [ 43 ] , is broadly defned as “interviewing a participant while receiving a tour of their neighbourhood or other local context” [ 11 , p . 264 ] . It typically combines aspects of feld observations and sedentary interviews . Field observations help to familiarise a researcher with an environment , its people , and their social interactions . However , the insights drawn are limited to the researcher’s own interpretive framework . Interviews are useful methods to hear about people’s biographies and perceptions of self 2438 Walking and Talking : Place - based Data Collection and Mapping for Participatory Design with Communities DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA and others . However , as they are typically conducted in a closed room , they are not situational , and it can be difcult for intervie - wees to talk about issues they are not immediately aware of [ 11 ] . The walk - along is a hybrid of the two methods . A participant’s level of control over conversation and route is critical . As with any qualitative interview method , questions can be open - ended or semi - structured . Similarly , the route can be set by the participant ( natural walk - along ) or the researcher ( contrived walk - along ) [ 28 ] . Hybrid forms exist , where the researcher may ofer a predefned set of places to visit , and participants choose a subset and / or the route between them ( e . g . , [ 19 , 66 ] ) . It is generally recommended to allow deviations ( going of route ) to keep the method fexible and responsive [ 38 ] . Moreover , routes might not be determined at all , called ‘bimbles’ [ 5 ] or dérives [ 24 ] , based on the concept developed by Situationist Guy Debord . In HCI , researchers have used walking methods alongside de - signed prompts or digital augmentation to help structure or orient walks around specifc issues . For example , Crivellaro et al . [ 19 ] used prompt cards with open - ended statements participants had to asso - ciate with places along their walk . The cards were NFC - tagged to access further archival material related to places along the walk and elicit refections on their meaning and history . Stals et al . [ 66 , 67 ] prompted participants to indicate how they feel in relation to var - ious places along a walk using Plutchik’s emotional wheel [ 58 ] , which depicts eight basic human emotions across diferent levels of intensity . Clarke et al . [ 13 , 14 ] conducted performative group walks during which participants wore animal masks that acted as prompts to take their animal’s perspective on the urban environment , other species , data , and communication technologies . 2 . 1 . 1 Strengths of Walking as a Method . Social science , HCI , and participatory design literature has identifed several benefts of walk - alongs compared to sedentary interviews . First , they gener - ate rich data about participants’ thoughts about the environment [ 49 ] . Physical features give cues , trigger memories , and prompt conversations while walking [ 28 , 66 , 72 ] . Periods of silence are not perceived as awkward , and movement and physical activity stimulate refection and thinking [ 66 ] . As a consequence , walking interviews tend to last longer than sedentary ones [ 28 ] ( which can also be a drawback , see below ) . Walking methods can also decentre the expertise of the re - searcher . If walks are led by participants , they become leaders and experts in their own experience [ 59 ] . In contrast to most sedentary interviews , while walking , researcher and participant are positioned side - by - side , with little or no direct eye contact , which may help reduce power imbalances [ 11 ] . Walking builds a co - presence and shared understanding through movement . This is created through the shared rhythmic movement of walking and the same feld of view as researcher and participant walk next to one another [ 46 ] . This also helps to build rapport between researcher and participant . Thus , the act of walking helps to relax and open up about emotional or sensitive topics [ 66 ] . However , contrived walks ( where the participant cannot choose the route ) might lessen the empowerment felt by the participants [ 11 ] . When walking , it has been observed that participants more read - ily confront power and display a critical awareness of structural and political problems [ 11 ] . One reason for this might be that the focus on the environment rather than the individual biography also brings structural issues to the foreground . Drawing on De Certeau [ 23 ] , Crivellaro et al . [ 19 ] utilised this aspect in the group walks discussed above as a means of resistance . Participants used counterfactual maps and the NFC audio prompts to contest exist - ing narratives about places . In the context of the smart city , van Zeeland et al . [ 72 ] and Powell [ 59 ] conducted group walks during which participants explored means and efects of surveillance and new data infrastructure . 2 . 1 . 2 Drawbacks of Walking as a Method . Challenges of walk - alongs concern both the conduct of data collection outdoors as well as the complexity of data analysis . Walking can be impacted by the weather and the physical abilities of participants [ 11 , 66 ] . The method is therefore less suitable for particularly hot , cold , or wet climates . There is a risk of excluding participants who cannot walk longer distances . Therefore , depending on the context and participants , alternatives , such as ride - alongs in a car need to be considered . Time and weekday , as well as safety are other critical factors to consider [ 11 ] . A number of technical challenges to data collection have been pointed out as well . Unlike in a sedentary interview , equipment needs to be carried at all times [ 11 , 28 ] . In the absence of a writing surface , note taking is generally not possible [ 66 ] . Environments can also be noisy , limiting the quality of audio recordings [ 11 , 28 ] . As noted above , walk - alongs have been shown to last longer than sedentary interviews [ 66 ] . Therefore , it can be complex to analyse the data . A missed opportunity [ 28 , 49 ] is the fact that researchers frequently do not map data spatially . Usually , location information ( using verbal cues , notes , annotated maps , or GPS recording ) is insufciently documented , which can limit data analysis . Refer - ences made during the walk ( e . g . , “this building over there” ) , can become too vague later on , if no spatial data had been recorded . Geographers have used GPS devices which they time - synced with audio recordings to generate spatial transcripts to overcome this limitation [ 28 , 49 ] . Finally , recording precise GPS data requires re - fexivity of researchers over the ethical use of this data , as it could be abused or constitute a violation of privacy [ 49 ] . In summary , walking can be an equitable method that centres the participant’s experience of place . As one way of preserving the spatial quality of data collected during walks , in the next section we unpack map - making as a complementary method and how maps as political datasets can inform design processes . 2 . 2 Counter Data and Counter Mapping for Advocacy and Civic Action Over the last decade or more , there has been a growing body of work that has examined the role of digital data as it relates to civic matters , local communities , and place - based concerns [ 70 ] . The broader framing of this literature is to challenge popularised dis - courses of smart cities and big data that tend to place citizens in passive roles and generate datasets that are about places but not en - gaged with the experiences and concerns of people in those places . Researchers have used design as a means to playfully highlight that certain places can be ‘othered’ and misrepresented by the provision of large scale , decontextualised datasets – such as how neighbour - hoods and places are represented in open policing and crime data 2439 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Prost et al . portals [ 30 ] . Others have made attempts to reconceptualise what data means within communities . For example , Taylor et al . [ 70 ] coined the term data - in - place as part of their research working with communities engaged in local planning disputes with their local governmental authority . Conceptualising data as in - place requires careful consideration of the “tight - knit and always emerging rela - tions between people , places and data” ( p . 2871 ) , and that data is part of the social geography of communities , neighbourhoods , and streets . Researchers within social and critical geography and HCI have also studied and developed new approaches and practices to chal - lenge concerns around the relationships between people , place , and data . Dalton and Thatcher [ 22 ] coined the term counter data actions , which Currie et al . [ 21 ] further elaborated on as a means to develop “acts of resistance to politically dominant datasets” . For example , Meng and DiSalvo [ 51 ] documented the ways a grassroots housing group in Atlanta , USA , assembled “counter data” to challenge what community members experience as incorrect data about their place generated by ofcial sources . Such counter data was used by the group in a variety of ways , including to challenge city ofcials and organisations about the portrayal of the community in ofcial data and records . Outside of being specifcally framed as counter data , there are also many other examples of where tools have been developed for and with specifc communities to support the cre - ation of citizen - generated datasets to infuence local policy making , participatory budgeting and community development initiatives ( e . g . , [ 37 , 47 , 56 ] ) . Data related to places and communities is oftentimes represented in the form of maps . Like those who have challenged the notion that data represents ‘truths’ about the world , many scholars [ 27 , 35 , 41 ] have argued that maps are not descriptive objects but hold semiotic prescriptive power [ 40 , 65 ] . Maps are boundary objects as intro - duced by Star [ 68 ] . Boundary objects are objects that are plastic , so that they are interpreted diferently by diferent communities , but are also robust enough to maintain a shared identity across them . Creating a map as a boundary object is the result of subjective decisions about what to include , what to leave out , and what to communicate [ 18 , 41 , 69 , 81 ] . These decisions increase the commu - nicative value of maps across social groups , but are also acts of standardisation and exclusion [ 69 ] . In this regard , maps have been described as political objects which are not mirrors of nature but producers of nature ; they do not simply reveal but create ‘knowl - edge’ and ontologies [ 41 ] . Within HCI , similar concerns have been discussed when maps and data are combined together . For example , Le Dantec et al . [ 44 ] explored how a map possesses authority in a cycle network planning context , irrespective of the fact that the data it represents is incomplete and partial . Johnson et al . [ 37 ] dis - cussed how maps overlayed with crime data can label entire areas permanently as ‘unsafe’ despite data being insufcient granular and outdated . Corbett and Loukissas [ 16 ] discussed how maps of online place - making platforms contribute to everyday processes of gentrifcation . On the other hand , maps – as political and value - laden boundary objects – can be used ( like data ) to counter top - down narratives about territories , their histories , or their use . Counter - mapping examples include Psychogeographic maps [ 24 , 73 ] decolonial maps ( e . g . , The Decolonial Atlas [ 3 ] , Palestine Open Maps [ 7 ] ) , maps produced by indigenous communities facing forced migration and land exploitation ( e . g . , MappingBack [ 2 ] ) , bioregional community maps [ 77 ] , neighbourhood maps against gentrifcation ( e . g . , [ 1 ] ) , and maps produced by groups investigating human rights violations ( e . g . , Forensic Architecture [ 29 ] ) . In summary thus , data and maps are political tools that possess authority to tell a story about a place , be it top - down , “a view from nowhere” [ 34 ] or to advocate ground - up views and counter ofcial narratives , bound up in the situatedness of place [ 70 ] . Explicitly connecting walking and map - making , in Kanstrup et al . [ 38 ] , par - ticipants collectively made a map combining all signifcant places they walked to . Clarke et al . [ 13 ] generated a map with pictures and drawings from their group walk . Stals et al . [ 67 ] used the data collected during their walks with Plutchik’s emotional wheel to generate an emotional map of the city . In this paper , we propose a method and an app to support designers and communities to collectively gather and analyse place - based data through walking and to produce maps representing this data . We tested the method using readily available technologies and our bespoke app Walk - YourWords . Before we explain the details of the method and app , we will introduce the UK and Greek research contexts . 3 RESEARCH CONTEXTS This research was located in Meadow Well , UK , and Katsanochoria , Greece . The Meadow Well engagement took place between January and April 2022 and was part of an ongoing participatory design inquiry to co - create place - based actions addressing the systemic injustices the estate’s community is experiencing . We visited Kat - sanochoria for ten days in May 2022 , where the second author has been part of ongoing design - led eforts to strengthen local relation - ships and civic engagement ( e . g . , through a community maker space and design projects ) . In both contexts , we were motivated to use the Walking and Talking method to contribute to these continuing eforts . Meadow Well is a semi - urban social housing estate near New - castle upon Tyne in North East England , UK . It is predominantly residential with a streetscape dominated by approx . 4000 typical mid - 20 th century English terraced houses ( see Figure 1 ) . In the centre of Meadow Well , there are a handful of small shops and three non - proft community centres , about a fve minutes’ walk from one another . A fourth non - proft , focused on youth work , is located at the estate’s northeast end . Just to the south of the estate is a park that connects the estate to a large river . Meadow Well is one of the poorest neighbourhoods in the UK . Over the course of the 20 th century , the estate’s residents have been neglected by local authorities and shamed by the media . In a mix of defance and self - help , delinquent behaviour became increasingly the norm in Meadow Well . Tensions escalated in the late 20 th century , when two young men died in a police chase . Residents took their anger to the streets , looted shops , and burned cars . Since the so - called ‘Meadow Well riots’ , the estate has seen signifcant investment in ‘community development’ . The number of non - proft organisations active on the small estate pays testimony to this . Nevertheless , on England’s index of multiple deprivation ( IMD , which spans the di - mensions of income , employment , education , health , crime , barriers to housing and services , and quality of the living environment ) , 2440 Walking and Talking : Place - based Data Collection and Mapping for Participatory Design with Communities DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Meadow Well ranks among the upper 10 percentile of the most deprived neighbourhoods , with pockets falling within the upper 1 percentile [ 55 ] . What these statistics do not tell is that Meadow Well residents have a strong sense of community and resourcefulness , partly due to the relative closure to outsiders and a continuous distrust in state and other institutions . People know each other on the street and problems are rather dealt with internally than by calling authorities . Figure 1 : Meadow Well Katsanochoria is a constellation of eight villages located in the region of Epirus , Greece ( Figure 2 ) . Formerly its own political re - gion , Katsanochoria today is part of the much larger municipality of North Tzoumerka . Epirus is considered to be one of least devel - oped regions in Greece and until recently , because of limited road infrastructure and its mountainous terrain , a very isolated area . Since the 1980s , following a general trend [ 4 ] , the population of all villages that belong in the municipality has been shrinking , with the majority of people migrating abroad or to bigger towns and cities . As a result , formerly cultivated land became idle , and houses were abandoned . Today , the area is slowly becoming a tourist desti - nation and road infrastructure is being built or upgraded to make the region more accessible . The population of the fve villages we visited and walked around with locals varies from 9 to 65 residents . The great majority of them are pensioners . The few non - pensioners either sustain small focks of livestock or commute to a nearby city ( 20 - 30 km ; 12 - 18 miles ) . Overall , the population of all fve villages is ageing and there are very few school - age children living in the area . The villages oftentimes experience power and water cuts and have poor access to the Internet . Out of the fve villages we visited , only two have a ‘kafeneio’ ( a pub / cafeteria ) that operates throughout the year . Kafeneios , alongside the local church , are important social places for the community . Due to the shrinking population and public budget cuts , church services do not take place on a weekly basis but only once every two or three weeks . 4 THE WALKING AND TALKING METHOD The Walking and Talking method used in this research consists of three phases : pre - walk , during - walk , and post - walk , as depicted in Figure 3 . As part of the pre - walk , we acquired ethical approval , Figure 2 : One of the villages making up Katsanochoria recruited participants , and briefed them about our plans . During the walk we used the WalkYourWords app and other tools to collect au - dio , photos , three - words , and GPS data . Post - walk , we designed pa - per maps ( for Meadow Well ) and videos ( for Katsanochoria ) which we shared with our participants in a workshop ( UK ) and on social media ( Greece ) , respectively , to inform further design and local actions ( which are beyond the scope of this paper ) . Figure 3 : The Walking and Talking process 4 . 1 Relationship Building and Recruitment Building relationships and trust with community members , or “the work before the work” [ 45 , p . 1357 ] is essential for meaningful participatory design . In Meadow Well , the frst author had existing relationships with non - proft organisations on the estate building on over fve years of prior research collaborations . His earlier pres - ence and commitment to the location enabled the support of the organisations . To build rapport with local residents , he signed up as a volunteer in two community centres , helping out in a low - cost grocery service , a community garden , and a games group for sev - eral months . In these places , he met residents regularly and over time invited them to take him on a walk around their neighbour - hood . Participants had to either live or have lived on the Meadow Well estate and be able to walk for approximately 30 minutes . In total we recruited six participants , three male , two female , and one genderqueer . Ages ranged from 19 to 65 . Due to funding restrictions , our time in Katsanochoria was lim - ited to ten days . We therefore did not have the time to build rapport with locals in the same way as in Meadow Well . However , the sec - ond author has family roots in the region and had been living in 2441 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Prost et al . one of the villages intermittently over the last three years . He and a local friend acted as mediators between the frst author and the participants and as translators ( from English to Greek and vice versa ) during the walks . In order to recruit participants for the project , they shared a call on Facebook groups run by locals and personally invited people they already had connections with , re - sulting in an initial interest by 10 - 12 people . However , during our stay , the majority dropped out , so we employed a ‘door - to - door’ method involving visiting the villages’ kafeneios and directly ask - ing locals to participate . Out of the fve participants we walked with , all identifed as men . Ages ranged from 45 to 69 with the majority of them aged over 60 . While we clearly stated that all genders are invited to participate , two women who initially agreed to participate cancelled their walk ( we will refect on this aspect later ) . Before we present the process of the actual walk , we introduce the technical architecture and design of the WalkYourWords app . 4 . 2 The WalkYourWords App WalkYourWords is a web app that allows participants to place sets of three words at visited locations during their walk ( see Figure 4 ) . The motivation for WalkYourWords was to allow participants to express and assign their own sentiments about a place , potentially coun - tering ofcial labels and narratives . In designing the app , we were inspired by the commercial service what3words [ 78 ] . What3words is a location - based technology that allows people to identify and fnd a location using just three words . What3words divides the world into 57 trillion 3 - meter squares [ 79 ] where each square is assigned a unique three - word address ; for example , the three words “pretty . needed . chill” can be used on to locate the company’s busi - ness premises in Oxford , UK . The service has had success and adop - tion across many countries , for instance being used by emergency services . However , this has not been without criticism . For this work , what3words provided the design provocation that in today’s world places are ‘pinpointed on a map’ by systems , whether this is through what3words , latitude and longitude , or coordinates . These identifers , while highly accurate , have little meaning to most peo - ple and are simply ‘given’ to places . By creating WalkYourWords , we intended to fip this association by allowing people to describe a place through a few chosen words . WalkYourWords was written using a development stack with HTML , CSS , Node . js runtime environment , and the Express . js frame - work . On loading WalkYourWords for the frst time , participants are assigned an anonymous username that they keep for the duration of using the app . They are then given three text boxes to enter three words which are uploaded and stored on its secure website along with the latitude and longitude of the location . After the walk , the organiser can use an admin page on the web app to display the walker’s route and meta data . The admin can see words entered for each location as well as generate each route as a GPS trace using the OpenGIS schema format [ 54 ] from the Open Geospatial Consortium KML standard [ 53 ] . The GPS trace is then displayable on mapping websites . For our work , there is no intention to fnd a location on a map ; instead , we envision the use of this technology to be part of an assemblage of other rich location - based data to inform ethnographic Figure 4 : WalkYourWords prototype app research and participatory design . Infuenced by what3words , the app does ask for three separate words , e . g . , “maybe , another , day” , however , it does not enforce any validation on this entry which allows users to enter more than one word in each text feld if they desire so . Fields can also remain empty if a user wants to enter fewer than three words . The three - word combination also does not have to be unique . Intended as a technology to re - label ‘sanctioned’ or ofcial descriptions of places , we understand WalkYourWords as a counter - mapping tool . Users can assign their own labels to places that have meaning to them , be that positive or negative associations . We now present the structure of the walks in which we used WalkYourWords . 4 . 3 Structure of ‘Walking and Talking’ Prior to the actual walk , we met with each participant to discuss the process and get informed consent . In Meadow Well , we gave participants a card with a map of the estate and several prompts to think about places they might want to bring us to . Participants could use the map to mark places and draw a route between them . However , none of the participants used this opportunity and in - stead just had a route in their head when we met for the walk . In Katsanochoria , we did not include a map on the prompt card because of the experiences in Meadow Well and because of the locale being a much larger rural area . At the start of each walk , we ( re - ) introduced the devices we would use to collect data : a handheld audio recorder ( or a voice recording application on a phone in some instances ) , a phone to take pictures , an of - the - shelf app to track our GPS coordinates , and the WalkYourWords app . The participant then led the researcher ( s ) from place to place . At each stop , they explained why they chose this location , took one or several pictures of the place , and used the WalkYourWords app to enter three words they associate with it . Between places , the conversation was largely unstructured . We had , however , also prepared a small number of open questions we asked along the way , including about how they came to live in the neighbourhood / region , what they think the best and worst part of Meadow Well / Katsanochoria is , and what they would like to change . We adjusted and added questions from one walk to the 2442 Walking and Talking : Place - based Data Collection and Mapping for Participatory Design with Communities DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA next to incorporate topics brought up by previous participants . In Meadow Well , all interviews were conducted as walk - alongs . In Katsanochoria , two interviews consisted of walk - alongs with sections conducted as ride - alongs in a car to reach the places our participants wanted to show us . In Meadow Well , walks lasted on average 1 hour ( between 43 and 80 min ) . Average distance walked was 2 . 69 km ( between 1 . 05 and 3 . 55 km ) or 1 . 85 miles ( between 0 . 66 and 2 . 21 miles ) . In Kat - sanochoria , walks lasted signifcantly longer ; average duration was 2 : 19 h ( between 2 : 07 and 3 : 06 h ) . Average distance covered was 5 . 37 km ( between 3 . 11 and 10 . 54 km ) or 3 . 33 miles ( between 1 . 93 and 6 . 61 miles ) , refecting the sections driven in a car . In Meadow Well , we made a total of 33 stops visiting 22 diferent places , 8 of which were named by at least two participants . The average number of stops was 5 . 5 ( between 4 and 7 ) . In Katsanochoria , we stopped at 26 places . Refecting the diferent geography and the fact that all participants came from diferent villages , no routes or places overlapped . The number of stops per route was similar to those in Meadow Well , averaging at 5 . 2 ( between 3 and 8 ) . 4 . 4 Map Making We organised post - walk activities to refect back the data to our par - ticipants for collective sense - making and to feed into the ongoing place - based eforts in each place . In Meadow Well , we transcribed all audio recordings and generated personal maps displaying the route , the three words for each stop , the pictures taken , and a slightly shortened transcript . We used the MapOSMatic web ser - vice to generate the map images overlayed with route data using OpenStreetMap as a base layer . We also printed foldable copies of the maps for each participant to keep ( Figure 5 ) . We organised a workshop with all walkers , in which they had the chance to meet and view each other’s maps . We also generated a map with all six routes laid on top of each other ( Figure 6 ) . In the workshop , we discussed shared issues which we will present in the Findings . Figure 5 : Personalised paper maps made for Meadow Well participants In Katsanochoria , we created short videos out of the material that we could share online , primarily on the Facebook groups related to the villages we visited . The videos we created vary in duration Figure 6 : A participant’s individual route ( left ) and all Meadow Well routes overlayed ( right ) ( 17 - 27 min ) . Like the paper maps in Meadow Well , they include a map with the walked route and photographs . The videos zoom in at each stop and the three words / phrases the participants shared with us are presented ( Figure 7 ) . All videos were sent to the participants asking for their consent on the content we included before they were made public on YouTube and Facebook . To make the videos , we used iMovie ( video editing ) , Audacity ( audio editing ) , and qGIS ( to generate map the with overlayed route data ) . Compared to the Meadow Well maps , we switched from MapOSMatic to the more powerful qGIS , as OpenSteetMap data of the Katsanochoria region was not detailed enough , resulting in mostly empty maps . To make the routes more relatable to the viewer , we decided to switch to satellite images on top of which we placed route data and the three words . We shared the videos on YouTube and local Facebook groups and personal profles , accompanied by a small text that summarises the key points we talked about with each participant . 4 . 5 Data Collection and Analysis In this paper , we draw on the audio recordings , photographs , GPS tracks , and participants’ three words gathered during the walks , as well as our research diaries and refective conversations during the engagements . Furthermore , we included the audio recording of the post - walk workshop in Meadow Well and the Facebook comments made about the walks in Katsanochoria in our data . We used this corpus of data in a thematic analysis [ 10 ] using the qualitative data analysis software nVivo . In a frst step , we read transcripts of au - dio recordings and reviewed maps and pictures . We then coded all text material – including the sets of three words – in an inductive manner . Open coding allowed us to remain sensitive to the unique themes of each context , which we later cross - compared . Further - more , as we were interested in the diversity that diferent data collection tools can bring , we coded the three - words data separate from the recorded conversations . Initial open coding resulted in 90 codes . After several passes through the data , we frst clustered these codes into 28 second - level codes . We then grouped them into 2443 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Prost et al . 8 themes for the three - words data and 6 themes for the audio tran - scripts . Finally , we discussed the themes for consistency within the research team . The next section presents our fndings resulting from this process , focusing on the three most central themes of the audio transcripts , which are cross - referenced with the three - word themes in the text . To protect our participants’ privacy , their names are replaced with IDs , ‘MW’ denoting a participant from Meadow Well , and ‘KA’ a participant from Katsanochoria . 5 FINDINGS In this section , we highlight three qualities of the data produced by the Walking and Talking method , complemented by the Walk - YourWords app and the follow - up activities ( creation of paper maps and videos ) . The data shows how participants connected personal experiences with structural issues , countered ofcial ‘authorised’ discourses , and used maps and videos as boundary objects for fur - ther debate . 5 . 1 From the Personal to the Structural The walks in Meadow Well and Katsanochoria showed how per - sonal , often emotional memories are entangled with larger - scale structural issues . Walking through place , our participants recalled events that happened there , which they did not necessarily plan to talk about . For example , MW1 brought us to the site of his childhood Figure 7 : Stills of YouTube video showing map with GPS track and the participant’s three words for two locations ( top ) and a photo he took ( bottom ) home . Standing in front of new houses , he shared his memories of the Meadow Well riots : All these are new houses . After the riots , some col - lapsed , quite a few got burned . Because the kids , we don’t have them wooden telegraph poles now , they just cut them down , blocked the road , and set them alight the minute the emergency services come in . That’s how bad it was . Because there’s nothing around here for the kids . ( MW1 ) After our conversation , MW1 tagged this location using Walk - YourWords with “fun , bad time , great place to live” – illustrating his ambivalent feelings about his home and the riots . As the quote shows , MW1 quickly connected his personal memories of the riots with the structural issue that the area lacks opportunities for young people . It is common knowledge on the estate , and all our partici - pants reiterated this view , that “there is nothing for the kids” . The estate has three community centres ( targeted at families and adults needing support ) and a detached youth work charity , but there is no indoor space were young people feel welcome . However , MW1 did not simply blame young people for causing havoc – there is a long history of tolerance of so - called ‘anti - social behaviour’ due to the shared rejection of police and local authorities – but instead blames the local council for not doing enough to prevent young people ending up on the street . In Katsanochoria , we drove between two of KA2’s planned places when we passed a half - fnished football pitch ( soccer feld ) . KA2 suddenly asked us to stop . The sight of the football pitch ( see Fig - ure 8 ) , cued him to raise a structural issue imbued with personal memories . The 5 - a - side pitch had been in the current stagnant state for months without any further progress . It is located on top of an older 11 - a - side pitch . The decision to build it was made by the North Tzoumerka municipality , of which authorities are located outside of the Katsanochoria villages . The downsized pitch , for KA2 , is refective of the population decline in the region . KA2 told us that when he was younger , they used to have a football team that played in the local league every week and fans would come to watch . For KA2 , the smaller pitch , but also its design and placement , are symbols for a municipality that takes decisions in a top - down and non - transparent way and one that does not believe that the villages can attract new residents : Look what they did here , that’s stupid to say the least . They destroyed the football pitch and who knows if the 5 - a - side will be used ? Now there are no kids at all , but in the future , with new migration waves or another way of life , there might be 100 kids . Are they going to make the 11 - a - side from scratch here then ? They destroyed something to build something new . We should make new things without destroying existing infrastructures , this is what I believe . ( KA2 ) The three words KA2 used to describe the scene are “misery , misery , misery” . Like MW1 above , KA2 connected his personal memories and emotions with a structural issue . Interestingly , the comparison between the WalkYourWords and the conversation data showed , that when talking , participants’ feelings came across in the tone of their voice ; the app made them more explicit . In Meadow Well , participants tended to use emotion words , such as “happy” , 2444 Walking and Talking : Place - based Data Collection and Mapping for Participatory Design with Communities DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA “joy” , or “sad” , while participants from Katsanochoria also used poetic or associative expressions , such as “source of life” or “alpha and omega” . Overall , the data shows that participants trusted us and – cued by the environment – shared their feelings about painful and contentious topics . Figure 8 : Half - fnished football pitch ; picture taken by KA2 5 . 2 Counter Data A second theme we found in the data collected during the walks is that it frequently counters ofcial , ‘authorised’ discourses about each location . This frst concerns what is being included or left out on ofcial maps of both places . In Katsanochoria , KA3 took us to a small church on a mountain that his mother and himself have been building as a memorial for his father after he passed away ( Figure 9 ) . According to KA3 , the municipality does not recognise the building as a church : It is considered illegal to be in the church , to use the church . [ . . . ] The central authorities don’t recognise it as such , thus a priest is not allowed to run a service . [ . . . ] You see , there is no cross on the roof [ . . . ] but it’s a legacy for my family , my dad . [ . . . ] God might have accepted it as a church , but it seems that his representatives on Earth did not . ( KA3 ) As a non - consecrated church , the building is not visible on an ofcial map of the area . By using the WalkYourWords and tagging it as “in memory of , [ frst name ] , [ last name ] ” , KA3 put his church on a map , countering the ofcial data . In a slightly diferent vein , what is a part of Meadow Well was also contested by our participants . The park ( Figure 10 ) exemplifes this , as it is ofcially outside , south of the estate . When we handed out the prompt sheet and map of Meadow Well to our participants , we therefore did not include the park on it . Accidentally , we at - tempted to restrict our participants to the authorised boundaries of the estate . Nevertheless , fve out of the six walkers brought us to the park , making a total of 12 stops there . In the park , MW3 argues : I still class this all as Meadow Well . I mean , North Shields is further away . You could call this the Royal Quays , I guess . All part of this . Because further along there’s is Percy Main , further longer there’s North Shields and this bit is Meadow Well to me . I don’t know . Maybe it’s not classed as that , I don’t know . ( MW3 ) Luckily , our participants ignored the map on the prompt sheet and showed us their Meadow Well , which included the park as an important community asset . Examples of three words include : “calm , ducks , belonging” ( MW2 ) , “pretty , tranquil , peaceful” ( MW3 ) , “exciting , ecstatic , warm” ( MW4 ) , “childhood , memories , family” ( MW5 ) , and “peaceful , green , fun” ( MW6 ) . Besides the question what is included and excluded of each site , walks also contradicted the authorised narrative of the places need - ing ‘development’ . While the high number of community centres and other charities in Meadow Well refects the ofcial narrative , most of our walkers stress the strong sense of community and in - ternal resources . To this day , the riots defne the negative image of the estate . However , MW1 and MW4 brought up counter data to the ofcial narrative of the riots , pointing out the fact that the riots were escalated by hooligans from another part of the city : “Because at the same time the riots happened , I think it was the east end of Newcastle , they came down , trying to riot with us , looting the shops , and then we were obviously trying to defend our little estate . ” ( MW4 ) . The participant then went on to point out how supportive the community is , while rejecting stereotypical media stories : Literally , it’s always been [ a ] really close [ community ] . And then , if anything , the riots brought everybody closer because we all had to defend ourselves . We were getting bad press , we were getting like , “Oh it’s a proper radgy estate . If you go on there , you’ll get raped , you get murdered” . No , it’s just people like me that lived on the estate . So yeah , we all had to defend our innocence , I think . ( MW4 ) To this day , the media portraits Meadow Well as a dangerous and delinquent place , which reinforces the community’s closure and distrust towards institutions . While ofcial statistics , like Eng - land’s index of multiple deprivation , tell a story of deprivation , the counter data our participants collected on the walks tell a story of Figure 9 : The ‘illegal’ church , picture taken by KA3 2445 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Prost et al . Figure 10 : Meadow Well’s unofcial park , picture taken by MW2 a community that is sticks together . The ofcial narrative by the North Tzoumerka municipality is equally that the region needs de - velopment , in this case through large infrastructure projects , such as the new highway currently being built . However , our partici - pants countered this narrative and understood it as an attempt of top - down centralisation and a “strangling , of , nature” ( three words of KA3 ) . Figure 11 shows the construction work and the damage it causes to the mountain’s terrain . KA2 expressed the view that most locals hold about the project : I disagree with this project . It should not have been built here . It will not help the area “develop more” , as they say , and since it doesn’t traverse any of the villages it will possibly isolate them more [ . . . ] . And it is catastrophic to the environment which however might heal itself at some point [ . . . ] . We were not asked . ( KA2 ) Figure 11 : The road works cutting across the green mountain ; picture taken by KA1 Rather than mapping the road as a positive development in the region that eases access and promotes tourism ( ideas locals are as such not opposed to ) , they map it as a project of further isolation , environmental destruction , and centralisation . Walking and talking thus enabled our participants to resist dominant narratives and power relations . In the next section we will look at how the maps and videos further contributed to these eforts . 5 . 3 Maps and Videos as Boundary Objects A key aspect of the Walking and Talking method is not just the walk itself , but also what happens afterwards . Here , we found that the paper maps and YouTube videos acted as boundary objects [ 68 ] . In their capacity to bridge communication across diferent social groups , boundary objects can be used as a design device to facilitate dialogue , acknowledge and discuss these diferences , and build relationships [ 32 ] . In Meadow Well , we designed the paper maps as personalised gifts to our participants , a souvenir and refection back of the walk we did together . However , we also used this personalised map to bring all six walkers together and structure a dialogue . For the workshop , we hung all maps side - by - side on a wall and invited participants to browse and read others’ maps at the start of the session ( Figure 12 ) . Most participants did not know each other , or only via a common friend . Very quickly though , they started talking about each other’s maps , compared which places they went to , and particularly those they had in common , such as the park . Some of the pictures , in particular of the community centres and views of the park , were almost identical . Moreover , each contributed their particular story about shared events or buildings . Since the riots were such a key event in everyone’s life , participants pieced together their memories of the events . For example , they discussed the involvement of other hooligan groups in the riots : MW5 : They were other kids coming in and [ . . . ] pulling things down and harassing people . MW1 : That’s how the riots started . MW5 : No , the riots didn’t start like that . MW1 : They did , people from the other areas . MW4 : No , there was a police chase . MW5 : The riots started because the two young lad [ s ] got killed on the Coast Road . MW1 : They shouldn’t have pinched the car though . MW5 : [ . . . ] That’s what the riots were for , yeah , for that reason . MW1 : Yeah , but people came from the West End as well though . MW5 : Yeah , people were coming in on busses to see where the riots have been . [ . . . ] They parked where the Collingwood pub was . [ . . . ] There were buses , queues to get in ! MW1 : Getting a drink before they come for a tour . [ laughs ] MW5 : I bet you they did . It was through such contestations and re - constructions of shared memories connected to Meadow Well that the group began to form social ties and a collective identity . During the main discussion , we had a large print of all routes overlaid ( see Figure 6 ) spread out on the table around which participants sat . We used this map to guide the conversation about places visited , particularly those that were visited by several people . While the discussion was largely 2446 Walking and Talking : Place - based Data Collection and Mapping for Participatory Design with Communities DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA unstructured , the map acted again as a boundary object , connecting the diferent realities and walking experiences . It also reinscribed the role of the participants as experts in their own experience . They knew all places better than the researchers and it gave them an opportunity to share their knowledge . The discussions once again surfaced community assets rather than defcits , both tangible ( e . g . , the park ) and less tangible ( historical knowledge , informal support and policing networks ) . Issues , as opportunities for community action utilising existing assets , still emerged in the discussion : 1 ) there are no ofers for teenagers , which is a long - standing issue even pre - dating the riots ; 2 ) litter , broken glass , and vandalism are connected to young people , but also caused by adults and the council who are neglecting the area ; 3 ) more than 30 years after the riots , there is still stigma attached to Meadow Well . We then took those ideas forward in a participatory design project ( which is beyond the scope of this paper ) . Figure 12 : Meadow Well maps side by side in workshop In Katsanochoria , the videos also fulflled the role of bound - ary objects . However , as there was no opportunity to engage in a longer - term participatory design process following the walks , the process was messier and more incomplete than in Meadow Well . As described in Section 4 . 4 , we hosted the videos on YouTube and shared them on Facebook , both on personal Facebook profles and in groups that some villages run . The number of views each video received varied from 60 to 230 , which is considerable in the context of the small population . However , no comments were made on the group pages . On the second author’s profle , all comments came from persons not related to the area . Someone commented , “It felt that I was in the walk with you . Great project” , while on another video someone wrote , “Your walk - and - talk made me want to visit the area again” . In their capacity to standardise communication , the boundary objects ( the videos ) reduced the rich lived experiences of going on a walk into a an object that can be shared with others yet is robust enough to communicate the essence of the experi - ence . The second author also received comments ( online and in person ) about the videos from people living in the area . One of the participants told him that people discussed the videos in the local kafeneio and another person coming from the same village as KA1 reached out to the author on Facebook . In his video , KA1 proposed the development of an elderly home as a way to attract new residents and keep existing ones . The commentator praised KA1’s idea and indicated an old boarding school building as a space that could host the proposed care home . 6 DISCUSSION The insights about the data generated from our walks – the con - nection of structural and personal issues , data countering ofcial narratives , and boundary objects for ongoing debate and design – allow us to ofer three refections about the possibilities and limi - tations of our Walking and Talking method and WalkYourWords app supporting place - based participatory design and civic engage - ment . We will revisit the claim that the method supports equitable relationships between researcher and participant , lay out design directions for location - based technologies supporting participatory data collection through walking and talking , and consider how the method and WalkYourWords app can feed into design processes . 6 . 1 Revisiting the Claim to Equitable Researcher - Participant Relationships When working with marginalised communities , power imbalances between lay ‘informants’ and expert ‘researchers / designers’ can further reinscribe inequalities and alienate participants . This as - sertion has been recognised by various felds of design , including participatory design [ 36 ] , design for social innovation [ 48 ] , and design justice [ 17 ] . How then can walking - and - talking methods contribute to more equitable researcher - participant relationships in design ? Walking methods have widely been credited for decentring and challenging the researcher’s expertise . As we argued in Section 2 . 1 . 1 , the act of walking side - by - side is less confrontational than in a sedentary interview ; if the route is set by the participant , they are put in a position of authority and leadership ; and if questions re - main ( semi - ) open and the conversation can fow freely , participants can act as knowledge experts [ 11 , 46 , 59 ] . Our experiences with the method can confrm these claims . Walking next to our participants , they opened up about sensitive and emotional topics , as the per - sonal memories about the Meadow Well riots , their childhood , or youth illustrate . Another important aspect for equity in the research process was that participants decided which places they wanted to bring us to and which path we took between them . We did not only walk next to our participants , sometimes we walked behind them , as they were leading the route . This framed the participant as the local expert and the researcher as the visitor . The map we provided participants in Meadow Well with was optional and turned out to be unnecessary . Participants knew their estate like the back of their hand . In fact , as the discussion in Section 5 . 2 about the park showed , participants resisted the authorised expert discourse over what the boundaries of the estate are . Like route setting , questions also re - mained very open . ‘Talking’ while walking resembled less of an interview and more of a conversation among peers . Conversations were free to go of topic and we encouraged participants also to ask us questions during the walk . In all conversations , there were periods of silence , which sometimes lasted minutes . In a sedentary interview , even a few seconds of silence can be experienced as awkward or as a signal that the interview is over [ 66 ] . In contrast , 2447 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Prost et al . while we asked participants to come up with a route that would take about 30 minutes to walk , all walk - alongs took signifcantly longer , often an hour or more . However , we need to refect to what extent these qualities are inherent to the act of walking , or whether the rapport we built with our participants before the walk , and how we framed our questions during the walk , contributed to them feeling at ease and share personal stories and articulate their dismay with structural issues . For example , when we frst invited participants in Katsanochoria to go on a walk with us , many suggested places to go to that aligned with the ofcial , authorised discourse of the municipality ( touristic highlights , a river gorge , or ancient Greek ruins ) . We had to clarify that we are more interested in places that are signifcant to them personally , irrespective of how ‘pretty’ they are . Thus , while we do feel that walking helped to decentre the researcher as a person of authority and expertise , it equally depends on how the walking method is confgured . If the route is set by the researcher and if questions are less open , one may be walking side - by - side , but that does not make the relationship more equitable . A concern of walking as a method is that it may exclude partic - ipants who are unable or do not feel comfortable walking . While during recruitment we set expectations ( to be able to walk for 30 minutes ) , in Greece we had two participants who needed a car for part of their route as they could not walk to the places they wanted to show us . To address this inclusivity issue , future work should ofer alternatives to walking from the start . The comparison between the UK and Greek contexts also shows how important relationship and trust building are to live up to claims of equity and inclusion . In Katsanochoria , all our participants were older men . Despite the fact that we made clear to everyone that we do not expect anything specifc other than being taken on a walk to talk about their village , from the start women and younger people were more hesitant to participate . The most common reason shared with us was their perceived inability to provide rich and historically correct information about the area . One of the women that we initially approached suggested that we should go for a walk with her husband or with some other men living in the area . The woman thus referred us to men as an authoritative source of local knowledge and history . Old white men , taking up more public space , represent another layer of authorised discourse , even if below that of the municipality and the state . Four of our fve participants were involved in local politics in some way and thus may be considered the ‘usual suspects’ . We were perhaps underprepared for the more patriarchal structures in the villages . A limitation of our work in Greece was that we did not have as much time as in the UK to build relationships and trust with the more invisible community members . Furthermore , both authors who travelled to Greece are male . While a female friend of the sec - ond author supported us with recruitment on site , we may have had more success if we had spent more more time building trust with female participants . Or , had we not gone to kafeneios , which are male - dominated places , but to the church or knocked on people’s doors , we may have met more female participants . Our experience reminded us that a place or a community are not homogeneous en - tities . They are comprised of heterogeneous groups with their own power dynamics and inequalities that we as researchers need to become sensitive to before we engage ‘the’ community to take part in our research . For equity and inclusivity in research and design , doing “the work before the work” [ 45 , p . 1357 ] , being present in a place and building rapport , are as – if not more – important than the actual work . In conclusion , while the method does aford more equitable research relationships , it still depends on the willingness of the researcher to create an environment where participants can take space and authority . There are large societal forces at play that require refexivity of the researcher to overcome . 6 . 2 Future Walking Data Collection Technologies As we have shown , the Walking and Talking method has revealed rich data , spanning personal and structural issues , countering of - cial narratives of a place , and acting as boundary objects to facilitate further discourse and action beyond the walk itself . The richness of the data has been supported by diverse data sources and how they interact . The conversation data is accompanied by succinct ‘tags’ from the WalkYourWords app and the photographs visually repre - sent the discussed topic . The GPS tracks ground the other data in a particular location . This interaction was not without tension during the walks . Most , if not all our walkers were focused on walking and talking . The conversation usually fowed well with very few moments of silence . During a stop at a location , when everything was said , participants wanted to move on . It was usually then when we had to remind them to “do the three words” and take a picture . Collecting this data pulled them out of the fow and asked of them to pause and refect . While one or two words came quickly , partici - pants frequently struggled to fnd a third one . Similarly , participants had to use the camera to capture the ‘essence’ of our conversation visually . Sometimes this was a simple snapshot from where we were standing , other times it required to walk around to fnd a good perspective or get closer or further away from an object . We do not interpret this interruption of fow as a problem , but as an indication that participants actively thought about how they would capture what we had just talked about in a succinct format ( three words and a photograph ) , contributing to more diverse data . We advocate therefore for the design of new tools in this area and have open sourced ours 1 to provide a starting point . Based on our fndings , we see the potential for integrated and confgurable apps for the research community . Apps supporting walking - and - talking methods could be used by a participant together with a researcher . Moreover , if developed as an integrated app rather than a collection of tools and apps , they would become more accessible to be used by a community to conduct self - guided walks to collect data to support a local cause . For data collection , at the bare minimum , an app could allow users to : record audio , take photographs , enter three words for the current location , and track the walk . There is potential for further data diversifcation by collecting diferent types of data that can be spatially mapped . While in this work we have focused on data corresponding to visible features in the landscape , we see an opportunity to connect other data - in - place eforts to pull in ‘invisible’ data about a place to act as prompts and provide opportunities to contest it [ 70 ] . This could include , for example : 1 see https : / / github . com / GavWood / WalkYourWords . git 2448 Walking and Talking : Place - based Data Collection and Mapping for Participatory Design with Communities DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA • Prompts for emotions felt about a place ( cp . [ 66 , 67 ] ) • Prompts for levels of comfort , safety , or health • Collection of noise , air quality , or trafc data from hand - held sensors ( cp . [ 56 , 61 ] ) or use of pre - existing datasets ( cp . [ 37 , 60 ] ) • Responses to geo - coded content created either by researchers ( as in [ 19 ] ) or by other participants who left content ‘behind’ for others to fnd . As a frst step , the three words of other users could become visible while walking . Opportunities for further content are manifold , including gamifed approaches ( e . g . , mobile learning [ 63 , 64 ] ) or popular location - based games , such as Geocaching or Pokémon Go • Inclusion of pre - existing datasets from GIS sources ( e . g . , stationary air quality , noise , and trafc monitors , socio - demographic data ) Comprehensive tools should allow users to confgure their walks , for example , by adding diferent prompts and data sets depending on their specifc needs and interests . 6 . 3 Walking and Mapping in Participatory Design In the introduction , we stated that our aim was to explore how walk - ing as a method and tools like the WalkYourWords app can feed into ongoing place - based participatory design and civic advocacy . We have shown the strength of the method to connect personal experiences and emotions with structural issues , produce counter data to challenge ofcial narratives about a place , and produce arte - facts that can bridge the context of the walk with follow - up action . Taken together , we see real value for the method and the app to support design processes working in contested spaces and with marginalised communities , where it can help shift power relations and public discourses . As discussed in Section 5 . 3 , the maps and videos are boundary objects that can either be used by professional designers and citizens to understand history , challenges , and op - portunities of a place when developing novel services , tools , or infrastructures . To strengthen our approach , both map and video generation could be semi - automated using the spatially linked data . Repre - sentation could generate printable PDF maps or publish them as an interactive map online for further analysis , exhibition , and dis - cussion of fndings . In our case , we used the geo - locations of the ‘three words’ as proxies to map the conversation data . This was done for simplicity of representation . A direct representation of , for example , 30 - second transcript snippets on a map may be useful for data analysis by a researcher ( see [ 28 ] for an example ) , but the result is not always aesthetically pleasing or accessible to read . However , this required a manual curation of the transcript by us during analysis . To automate this process , the process outlined by Martini [ 49 ] could be leveraged : GPS point clusters are indicative of stops during the walk . Transcripts could then be pre - grouped around these automatically detected stops . Of course , other loca - tion markers ( such as the ‘three words’ , location of photographs taken during the walk , or other prompts ) could equally be used to automatically pre - group transcripts . Manual fne - tuning should be allowed to decide which transcript should be associated with which location on the map . Furthermore , for videos and interactive representations of the walks , there is the need or opportunity to preserve the original audio and map it , similar to the transcript , spatially . This could be combined with collaborative audio analysis tools , such as Gabber [ 62 ] , which would allow participants to not only code ( tag ) audio directly , but link what was said with where it was said . By preserving the spatiality of the data , content from diferent users can be connected and contrasted , building on the map with overlaid routes we used for the discussion in Meadow Well . These artefacts then act as boundary objects insofar as they bridge the research phase ( walking and talking ) and a follow - up design process where they can be reviewed , critiqued , and used as prompts . This being said , we want to point out a few caveats . While we see this method as part of participatory design , we as researchers and designers played a signifcant role in the process . The semi - automated process as outlined above could help to reduce the work - load by having processing tools built in , but a one - click production seems very unlikely . In particular , the data curation process cannot be automated . Understanding the maps and videos as boundary objects reminds us that they are always an act of standardisation [ 69 ] . This aids communication across social groups and institutions , but there are decisions made – by a human or an algorithm – about what is included and what gets left out [ 18 , 41 ] . We saw this in the maps of Katsanochoria , which were mostly empty . Most of the rich landscape has been left out , which led us to use satellite images instead . In turn , when generating the WalkYourWords maps , we as researchers decided which ( conversation ) data would be included or not on the map or video , as it needed shortening . In this pro - cess there is an inherent risk that existing narratives , biases , and power dynamics get reproduced rather than resisted . Maps gener - ated through future systems like WalkYourWords therefore need to enable users to decide which transcript sections , location markers , images , and other data are included on the map . Furthermore , in the scenario of the app being used by communities directly ( rather than in a curated design process ) it remains unclear how the outcomes ( maps , videos ) can be communicated efectively to decision makers . Finally , the Walking and Talking method bears value for asset - based design [ 31 , 80 ] . In Meadow Well , walkers identifed the park , their historical knowledge , and tight - knit community support and policing networks as assets . This is not to say that issues were not important or did not surface alongside the assets . The maps acted as design prompts to co - design place - based actions that address the issues identifed by the walkers ( space for young people , litter and neglect , image and stigma ) . In Katsanochoria , assets included their historical , economic , and ecological knowledge as well as a strong political consciousness and drive to take action without state support ( e . g . , building a church on a mountain ) . Issues discussed alongside these assets included population decline , short - sighted top - down planning , and the destruction of local ecosystems . How - ever , further engagement using the videos as prompts in a design process will depend on further funding to continue engaging with the local communities and develop the ideas for changes raised by our participants . In the meantime , the videos contributed to ongo - ing public debates in the Facebook groups about burning political issues ( in particular re - invigoration of the region and resistance to the top - down infrastructure projects ) . It is up to local actors to 2449 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Prost et al . turn the debate into action , for example , the idea of a care home to enable elderly residents to stay in the villages . 7 CONCLUSION In this paper , we presented an adaptation and application of a ‘Walk - ing and Talking’ method in combination with a set of data collection tools in two diferent cultural contexts . Both contexts , a semi - urban social housing estate in the UK and a rural group of villages in Greece , are frequently portrayed as in need of ‘development’ and outside intervention to improve living conditions . Working with marginalised communities living in both contexts , our aim was to evaluate to what extent the method and the WalkYourWords app can support the articulation of place - based issues and feed into pro - cesses of participatory design and civic engagement . Our fndings showed that by walking in - place , participants shared personal expe - riences and memories that were entangled with the place and wider structural issues , such as stigma and top - down intervention . Using the WalkYourWords app , they also produced data that counters of - cial narratives about each place . They challenged what is ofcially considered a part of Meadow Well and Katsanochoria and produced narratives about community strength , environmental care , and self - determination rather than deprivation and development . Finally , the maps and videos we created out of the data acted as boundary objects to bridge public discourses in diferent social spheres . In Meadow Well , this was to facilitate an ongoing participatory design process to co - create place - based actions that respond to the issues identifed by the group of walkers . In Katsanochoria , this was to share the alternative narratives of our participants in online fora to contribute to ongoing debates about the future of the villages . Refecting on our fndings , we found that walking with our par - ticipants did indeed establish an equitable relationship between us that supported the articulation of personal and public issues . While the relationship and the trust we had built before we went on a walk , how we framed the research to participants , and what kind of questions we asked also contributed to this relationship , we do believe that walking side - by - side , putting them in charge of setting the route , and following a mostly unstructured conversation style played a signifcant part that may not have been achieved in a seden - tary interview . Moreover , it was important to walk through their local environment and to use diferent data collection tools ( audio , photographs , WalkYourWords app , GPS tracks ) to be able to pro - duce rich and engaging design artefacts refecting back our insights – the paper maps and videos . We therefore see potential to further develop data collection tools for walking , both for researchers and designers as well as for communities to use themselves without academic facilitation . There is potential to semi - automate some of the post - walk data processing and output generation , making potentially valuable tools for place - based design processes and civic advocacy . As researchers and designers , we are excited to continue developing the app and share it with the HCI communities for use and further input . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to thank all our participants in the UK and Greece for taking us out on a walk in their neighbourhood . Their trust , dedication , and hospitality have been invaluable to this research . Special thanks go to Theodora Zoumpa , who hosted us in Kat - sanochria and supported us with planning , recruitment , translation , and refections in Greece . We further thank Kahina Meziant for her refective comments during and after the walks . Finally , we thank our anonymous reviewers for their helpful and constructive feedback . This research activity was co - funded by UKRI EPSRC as part of the Centre for Digital Citizens ( EP / T022582 / 1 ) , the EPSRC Centre for Doctoral Training in Digital Civics ( EP / L016176 / 1 ) , and the the European Commission i - Portunus Houses pilot programme . REFERENCES [ 1 ] [ n . d . ] . London housing and gentrifcation campaigns . https : / / www . google . com / maps / d / u / 0 / viewer ? mid = 1leJhKFWQmwLwx4CJehVrvC - A0jo { & } ll = 51 . 46229458361186 { % } 2C - 0 . 18316901098636595 { & } z = 11 [ 2 ] [ n . d . ] . Mappingback . http : / / mappingback . org / [ 3 ] [ n . d . ] . The Decolonial Atlas . https : / / decolonialatlas . wordpress . com / [ 4 ] Peter S . Allen . 1986 . Positive aspects of Greek urbanization : the case of Athens by 1980 . Ekistics 53 , 318 / 319 ( 1986 ) , 187 – 194 . [ 5 ] Jon Anderson . 2004 . Talking whilst walking : a geographical archaeology of knowledge . Area 36 , 3 ( sep 2004 ) , 254 – 261 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / J . 0004 - 0894 . 2004 . 00222 . X [ 6 ] Mariam Asad and Christopher A . Le Dantec . 2017 . Tap the “Make This Public” Button : A Design : Based Inquiry into Issue Advocacy and Digital Civics . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , 6304 – 6316 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3026034 [ 7 ] Ahmad Barclay , Majd Al - shihabi , Hanan Yazigi , Morad Taleeb , and Bassam Barham . 2018 . Palestine Open Maps . https : / / palopenmaps . org / [ 8 ] Susanne Bødker and Morten Kyng . 2018 . Participatory Design that matters - Facing the big issues . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction 25 , 1 ( feb 2018 ) , 1 – 31 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3152421 [ 9 ] Kirsten Boehner and Carl DiSalvo . 2016 . Data , design and civics : An exploratory study of civic tech . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM Press , New York , NY , 2970 – 2981 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858326 [ 10 ] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke . 2006 . Using thematic analysis in psychology . Qualitative Research in Psychology 3 , 2 ( jan 2006 ) , 77 – 101 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1191 / 1478088706qp063oa [ 11 ] Richard M . Carpiano . 2009 . Come take a walk with me : The “Go - Along” interview as a novel method for studying the implications of place for health and well - being . Health & Place 15 , 1 ( mar 2009 ) , 263 – 272 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . healthplace . 2008 . 05 . 003 [ 12 ] John M . Carroll and Mary Beth Rosson . 2013 . Wild at Home . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction 20 , 3 ( jul 2013 ) , 1 – 28 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2491500 . 2491504 [ 13 ] Rachel Clarke , Sara Heitlinger , Marcus Foth , Carl DiSalvo , Ann Light , and Laura Forlano . 2018 . More - than - human urban futures : Speculative participatory design to avoid ecocidal smart cities . In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Situated Actions , Workshops and Tutorial - Volume 2 , Vol . 2 . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 4 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3210604 . 3210641 [ 14 ] Rachel E . Clarke . 2020 . Ministry of Multispecies Communications . In Companion Publication of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 441 – 444 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3393914 . 3395845 [ 15 ] Ned Cooper , Tifanie Horne , Gillian R . Hayes , Courtney Heldreth , Michal Lahav , Jess Holbrook , and Lauren Wilcox . 2022 . A Systematic Review and Thematic Analysis of Community - Collaborative Approaches to Computing Research . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 18 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517716 [ 16 ] Eric Corbett and Yanni Loukissas . 2019 . Engaging gentrifcation as a social justice issue in HCI . In Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings . ACM , New York , 1 – 16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300510 [ 17 ] Sasha Costanza - Chock . 2020 . Design justice : community - led practices to build the worlds we need . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . 360 pages . [ 18 ] Jeremy W . Crampton . 2009 . Cartography : performative , participatory , political . Progress in Human Geography 33 , 6 ( dec 2009 ) , 840 – 848 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0309132508105000 [ 19 ] Clara Crivellaro , Rob Comber , Martyn Dade - Robertson , Simon J . Bowen , Peter C . Wright , and Patrick Olivier . 2015 . Contesting the City : Enacting the Political Through Digitally Supported Urban Walks . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2853 – 2862 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702176 [ 20 ] Clara Crivellaro , Alex Taylor , Vasillis Vlachokyriakos , Rob Comber , Bettina Nis - sen , and Peter Wright . 2016 . Re - Making Places : HCI , ’Community Building’ and Change . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , 2958 – 2969 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858332 2450 Walking and Talking : Place - based Data Collection and Mapping for Participatory Design with Communities DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA [ 21 ] Morgan Currie , Britt S . Paris , Irene Pasquetto , and Jennifer Pierre . 2016 . The conundrum of police ofcer - involved homicides : Counter - data in Los Angeles County . Big Data & Society 3 , 2 ( dec 2016 ) , 205395171666356 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 2053951716663566 [ 22 ] Craig Dalton and Jim Thatcher . 2014 . What Does A Critical Data Studies Look Like , And Why Do We Care ? https : / / www . societyandspace . org / articles / what - does - a - critical - data - studies - look - like - and - why - do - we - care [ 23 ] Michel de Certeau , Luce Giard , and Pierre Mayol . 1998 . The practice of everyday life : Volume 2 : Living & cooking . University of Minnesota Press , Minneapolis , MN . 292 pages . [ 24 ] Guy Debord . 1956 . Theory of the Dérive . Les Lèvre Nues 9 ( 1956 ) . https : / / www . cddc . vt . edu / sionline / si / theory . html [ 25 ] Jessa Dickinson , Mark Díaz , Christopher A . Le Dantec , and Sheena Erete . 2019 . “The cavalry ain’t coming in to save us” : Supporting capacities and relationships through civic tech . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( 2019 ) , 21 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359225 [ 26 ] Carl DiSalvo , Andrew Clement , and Volkmar Pipek . 2013 . Communities : Partici - patory Design for , with and by communities . In Routledge International Handbook of Participatory Design , Jesper Simonsen and Toni Robertson ( Eds . ) . Routledge , London , England , 182 – 209 . [ 27 ] Matthew H . Edney . 1996 . Theory and the history of cartography . Imago Mundi 48 , 1 ( jan 1996 ) , 185 – 191 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 03085699608592841 [ 28 ] James Evans and Phil Jones . 2011 . The walking interview : Methodology , mobility and place . Applied Geography 31 , 2 ( 2011 ) , 849 – 858 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . apgeog . 2010 . 09 . 005 [ 29 ] Forensic Architecture . [ n . d . ] . Agency . https : / / forensic - architecture . org / about / agency [ 30 ] Andrew Garbett , Jamie K Wardman , Ben Kirman , Conor Linehan , and Shaun Lawson . 2015 . Anti - Social Media : Communicating Risk through Open Data , Crime Maps and Locative Media . In Proceedings of HCI Korea . Hanbit Media , Seoul , 145 – 152 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5555 / 2729485 . 2729508 [ 31 ] Aakash Gautam and Deborah Tatar . 2022 . Empowering Participation Within Structures of Dependency . In Participatory Design Conference 2022 : Volume 1 , Vol . 1 . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 75 – 86 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3536169 . 3537781 [ 32 ] Tom Giraud , Ines Di Loreto , and Matthieu Tixier . 2020 . The Making of Acces - sibility to Rural Place for Blind People : The Relational Design of an Interactive Map . In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1419 – 1431 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3357236 . 3395527 [ 33 ] Derek L . Hansen , Jes A . Koepfer , Paul T . Jaeger , John C . Bertot , and Tracy Viselli . 2014 . Civic action brokering platforms . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work & social computing - CSCW ’14 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , 1308 – 1322 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2531602 . 2531714 [ 34 ] Donna Haraway . 1988 . Situated Knowledges : The Science Question in Feminism and the Privilege of Partial Perspective . Feminist Studies 14 , 3 ( 1988 ) , 575 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 3178066 [ 35 ] John Brian Harley . 1989 . Deconstructing the Map . Cartographica : The Interna - tional Journal for Geographic Information and Geovisualization 26 , 2 ( jun 1989 ) , 1 – 20 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3138 / E635 - 7827 - 1757 - 9T53 [ 36 ] Christina N . Harrington , Sheena Erete , and Anne Marie Piper . 2019 . Deconstruct - ing community - based collaborative design : Towards more equitable participatory design engagements . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( nov 2019 ) , 1 – 25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359318 [ 37 ] Ian G . Johnson , Aare Puussaar , Jennifer Manuel , and Peter Wright . 2018 . Neigh - bourhood Data : Exploring the Role of Open Data in Locally Devolved Policymak - ing Processes . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 2 , CSCW ( nov 2018 ) , 1 – 20 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3274352 [ 38 ] Anne Marie Kanstrup , Pernille Bertelsen , and Jacob Østergaard Madsen . 2014 . Design with the feet : Walking methods and participatory design . ACM Interna - tional Conference Proceeding Series 1 ( sep 2014 ) , 51 – 60 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2661435 . 2661441 [ 39 ] Finn Kensing and Joan Greenbaum . 2012 . Heritage : Having a say . In Routledge International Handbook of Participatory Design . Routledge , London , 21 – 36 . https : / / www . taylorfrancis . com / books / 9781136266263 [ 40 ] Alexander Kent . 2016 . Political Cartography : From Bertin to Brexit . The Carto - graphic Journal 53 , 3 ( jul 2016 ) , 199 – 201 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 00087041 . 2016 . 1219059 [ 41 ] Rob Kitchin , Chris Perkins , and Martin Dodge . 2009 . Rethinking maps : New fron - tiers in cartographic theory . In Rethinking Maps : New Frontiers in Cartographic Theory , Martin Dodge , Rob Kitchin , and Chris Perkins ( Eds . ) . Taylor & Francis , Milton Park , Chapter 1 , 1 – 25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4324 / 9780203876848 [ 42 ] Matthias Korn and Amy Voida . 2015 . Creating friction : Infrastructuring civic engagement in everyday life . Aarhus Series on Human Centered Computing 1 , 1 ( 2015 ) , 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7146 / aahcc . v1i1 . 21198 [ 43 ] Margarethe Kusenbach . 2003 . Street Phenomenology : The go - along as ethno - graphic research tool . Ethnography 4 , 3 ( sep 2003 ) , 455 – 485 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 146613810343007 [ 44 ] Christopher A . Le Dantec , Mariam Asad , Aditi Misra , and Kari E Watkins . 2015 . Planning with Crowdsourced Data : Rhetoric and Representation in Transporta - tion Planning . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing - CSCW ’15 . ACM , New York , 1717 – 1727 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2675133 . 2675212 [ 45 ] Christopher A . Le Dantec and Sarah Fox . 2015 . Strangers at the Gate : Gaining Access , Building Rapport , and Co - Constructing Community - Based Research . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing - CSCW ’15 . ACM Press , New York , 1348 – 1358 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2675133 . 2675147 [ 46 ] Jo Lee and Tim Ingold . 2006 . Fieldwork on foot : Perceiving , routing , socializing . In Locating the Field : Space , Place and Context in Anthropology , Simon Coleman and Peter Collins ( Eds . ) . Berg , Oxford , 67 – 85 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4324 / 9781003085904 - 4 [ 47 ] Jennifer Manuel and Clara Crivellaro . 2020 . Place - Based Policymaking and HCI : Opportunities and Challenges for Technology Design . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376158 [ 48 ] Ezio Manzini . 2015 . Design , when everybody designs : An introduction to design for social innovation . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . 241 pages . [ 49 ] Natalia Martini . 2020 . Using GPS and GIS to Enrich the Walk - along Method . Field Methods 32 , 2 ( may 2020 ) , 180 – 192 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1525822X20905257 [ 50 ] Thomas Maskell , Clara Crivellaro , Robert Anderson , Tom Nappey , Vera Araújo - Soares , and Kyle Montague . 2018 . Spokespeople : Exploring routes to action through citizen - generated data . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , Vol . 2018 - April . ACM , New York , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173979 [ 51 ] Amanda Meng and Carl DiSalvo . 2018 . Grassroots resource mobilization through counter - data action . Big Data & Society 5 , 2 ( jul 2018 ) , 205395171879686 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 2053951718796862 [ 52 ] Amanda Meng , Carl Disalvo , and Ellen Zegura . 2019 . Collaborative data work towards a caring democracy . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Inter - action 3 , CSCW ( nov 2019 ) , 1 – 23 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359144 [ 53 ] Open Geospatial Consortium . [ n . d . ] . KML . https : / / www . ogc . org / standards / kml [ 54 ] Open Geospatial Consortium . 2008 . Open Schema Standard for KLM / 2 . 2 . 0 . http : / / schemas . opengis . net / kml / 2 . 2 . 0 / ogckml22 . xsd [ 55 ] OpenDataCommunities . 2015 . Indices of Deprivation 2015 Explorer . http : / / dclgapps . communities . gov . uk / imd / idmap . html [ 56 ] Sean Peacock , Robert Anderson , and Clara Crivellaro . 2018 . Streets for People : Engaging children in placemaking through a socio - technical process . In Proceed - ings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173901 [ 57 ] Jennifer Pierre , Roderic Crooks , Morgan Currie , Britt Paris , and Irene Pasquetto . 2021 . Getting Ourselves Together : Data - centered participatory design research & epistemic burden . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445103 [ 58 ] Robert Plutchik . 2003 . Emotions and life : Perspectives from psychology , biology , and evolution . American Psychological Association , Washington , DC . [ 59 ] Alison Powell . 2017 . Data Walks and the Production of Radical Bottom - up Data Knowledge Alison . In International Communications Association Conference . Peter Lang , New York , 23 . [ 60 ] Aare Puussaar , Ian G . Johnson , Kyle Montague , Philip James , and Peter Wright . 2018 . Making open data work for civic advocacy . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 2 , CSCW ( 2018 ) , 20 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3274412 [ 61 ] Aare Puussaar , Kyle Montague , Sean Peacock , Thomas Nappey , Robert Anderson , Jennine Jonczyk , Peter Wright , and Philip James . 2022 . SenseMyStreet : Sensor Commissioning Toolkit for Communities . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 6 , CSCW2 ( nov 2022 ) , 1 – 26 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3555215 [ 62 ] Jay Rainey , Kyle Montague , Pamela Briggs , Robert Anderson , Thomas Nappey , and Patrick Olivier . 2019 . Gabber : Supporting Voice in Participatory Qualitative Practices Voice in Participatory Qualitative Practices . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300607 [ 63 ] Dan Richardson , Clara Crivellaro , Ahmed Kharrufa , Kyle Montague , and Patrick Olivier . 2017 . Exploring public places as infrastructures for civic m - learning . In C & T ’17 : Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Communities and Technologies . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , New York , USA , 222 – 231 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3083671 . 3083678 [ 64 ] Dan Richardson , Pradthana Jarusriboonchai , Kyle Montague , and Ahmed Khar - rufa . 2018 . ParkLearn : Creating , sharing and engaging with place - based activities for seamless mobile learning . In MobileHCI 2018 - Beyond Mobile : The Next 20 Years - 20th International Conference on Human - Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services , Conference Proceedings . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3229434 . 3229462 [ 65 ] Hansgeorg Schlichtmann . 1985 . Characteristic Traits of the Semiotic System ’Map Symbolism’ . The Cartographic Journal 22 , 1 ( jun 1985 ) , 23 – 30 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1179 / caj . 1985 . 22 . 1 . 23 2451 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA [ 66 ] Shenando Stals , Michael Smyth , and Wijnand Ijsselsteijn . 2014 . Walking & Talking : Probing the Urban Lived Experience . In Proceedings of the 8th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Fun , Fast , Foundational . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 737 – 746 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2639189 . 2641215 [ 67 ] Shenando Stals , Michael Smyth , and Oli Mival . 2017 . Exploring People’s Emo - tional Bond with Places in the City . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference Companion Publication on Designing Interactive Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 207 – 212 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3064857 . 3079147 [ 68 ] Susan Leigh Star . 1988 . The Structure of Ill - Structured Solutions : Boundary Objects and Heterogeneous Distributed Problem Solving . In Distributed Artifcial Intelligence , Les Gasser and Michael N Huhns ( Eds . ) . Morgan Kaufmann , San Francisco , 37 – 54 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / B978 - 1 - 55860 - 092 - 8 . 50006 - X [ 69 ] Susan Leigh Star . 2010 . This is not a boundary object : Refections on the origin of a concept . Science Technology and Human Values 35 , 5 ( 2010 ) , 601 – 617 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0162243910377624 [ 70 ] Alex S Taylor , Siân Lindley , Tim Regan , David Sweeney , Vasillis Vlachokyriakos , Lillie Grainger , and Jessica Lingel . 2015 . Data - in - Place : Thinking through the Relations Between Data and Community . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , 2863 – 2872 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702558 [ 71 ] Katie Headrick Taylor and Rogers Hall . 2013 . Counter - Mapping the Neighbor - hood on Bicycles : Mobilizing Youth to Reimagine the City . Technology , Knowledge and Learning 18 , 1 - 2 ( jul 2013 ) , 65 – 93 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10758 - 013 - 9201 - 5 [ 72 ] Ine Van Zeeland , Jonas Breuer , and Jo Pierson . 2021 . Walkshops for Citizen Involvement : Walk the Talk with Smart City Citizens . In 2021 IEEE International Smart Cities Conference ( ISC2 ) . IEEE , New York , 1 – 4 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ISC253183 . 2021 . 9562922 [ 73 ] Raoul Vaneigem . 1979 . The revolution of everyday life ( 2 ed . ) . Rising Free Collective , London . 280 pages . Prost et al . [ 74 ] John Vines , Anja Thieme , Rob Comber , Mark Blythe , Peter C . Wright , and Patrick Olivier . 2013 . HCI in the press . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’13 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , 1873 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2466247 [ 75 ] Vasilis Vlachokyriakos , Rob Comber , Karim Ladha , Nick Taylor , Paul Dunphy , Patrick McCorry , and Patrick Olivier . 2014 . PosterVote : expanding the action repertoire for local political activism . In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on Designing interactive systems . ACM , New York , 795 – 804 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2598510 . 2598523 [ 76 ] Vasillis Vlachokyriakos , Clara Crivellaro , Christopher A . Le Dantec , Eric Gordon , Pete Wright , and Patrick Olivier . 2016 . Digital Civics : Citizen Empowerment With and Through Technology . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI EA ’16 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , 1096 – 1099 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2851581 . 2886436 [ 77 ] Watershed Commons . [ n . d . ] . Bioregional Mapping . https : / / deptofbioregion . org / bioregional - mapping / [ 78 ] What3words . [ n . d . ] . what3words / / / The simplest way to talk about location . https : / / what3words . com / pretty . needed . chill [ 79 ] What3words . 2021 . How does what3words handle similar combinations of words ? https : / / what3words . medium . com / how - does - what3words - handle - similar - combinations - of - words - d480c94483c7 [ 80 ] Marisol Wong - Villacres , Carl Disalvo , Neha Kumar , and Betsy Disalvo . 2020 . Culture in Action : Unpacking Capacities to Inform Assets - Based Design . In Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings . 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376329 [ 81 ] Denis Wood and John Fels . 1986 . Designs On Signs / Myth And Meaning In Maps . Cartographica : The International Journal for Geographic Information and Geovisualization 23 , 3 ( sep 1986 ) , 54 – 103 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3138 / R831 - 50R3 - 7247 - 2124 2452