1 “That’s not just me” : Encouraging Minority Participation Using Deceptive Group Decision Visualization Syavash Nobarany , Mona Haraty , Bernhard Riecke , Alissa Antle , Brian Fisher School of Interactive Arts and Technology Simon Fraser University Surrey , BC V3T 0A3 , Canada { sna35 , mha48 , ber1 , aantle , bfisher } @ sfu . ca ABSTRACT Group decision making often leads to putting pressure on minority group members , who might have useful information but find it hard to share them under group pressure . Traditional solutions such as devil’s advocacy , while being effective , are not always practical due to imposing specific processes . This study investigates the effects of increasing saliency of minority’s opinion in visual representation of group decision state , on group decision making process . Our findings suggest that providing manipulated situational awareness through visualizations can hardly affect a small - group face - to - face decision making process and more studies are required to explore opportunities of using manipulated situation awareness . Author Keywords Group decision making , conformity , social impact , visualization , visual illusion , group processes , minority . ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . 3 Group and Organization Interfaces : Computer - supported cooperative work , Synchronous interaction . INTRODUCTION Group support systems ( GSS ) are systems that combine communication , computer and decision technologies together to support the formulation and solution of problems during group meetings [ 46 ] , and have widely been studies during last three decades . Researchers from social science , social psychology , management information systems and computer science have been engaged in investigating their possible benefits in different stages of group life cycle [ 39 , 40 ] , from forming to performing and adjourning , and in different aspects of group processes . The major application of group support systems have been removing the barriers of distributed group communication and collaboration , considering media richness theory [ 38 ] , through providing reach communication channels [ 43 ] . These studies have been followed by research on understanding various effects of using computer mediated communication systems on different aspects of group processes such as participation , patterns of influence [ 15 ] , and information sharing [ 7 ] . Group decision making , perhaps as the most important group process , has attracted special attention in research community . Group decision support systems ( GDSS ) are expected to address group decision making problems such as information loss or distortion and inadequate exploration of alternative solutions , by enabling rich communication among members , allowing anonymity , and providing information analysis facilities [ 23 ] . Dominant majority of previous GSS studies tried to understand various effects of using technology and particularly computer - mediated communication in the decision making process [ 15 , 23 , 4 , 8 , 45 , 28 ] . However , only a few studies has aimed at actively solving inherent problems of group decision making ; most of the studies has investigated various consequences of using computer mediated communication channels in distributed decision making process but only recently research efforts try to discover ways to improve group decision making challenges that exist even in face to face settings . Traditional group decision support systems that support face - to - face discussions could facilitate information management [ 3 , 18 ] or participants’ interaction [ 35 ] during the meetings , but recently studies try to influence the decision making process by providing situational awareness using shared displays [ 14 ] . Current study investigates a novel approach to alleviate the group pressure on minority opinion holders using contrast visual illusion in shared displays to make minority’s opinion more salient to ultimately affect group behavior during a group decision making session . 2 Decision making in groups , especially when members are cohesive , often leads to putting pressure on minority , who might have useful information , but they find it hard to share under pressure . Poor information sharing is one of the main factors that may lead to poor decisions . This problem leads to overlooking alternative hypotheses and poor discussion and evaluation of majority’s initial hypothesis due to the group pressure , and is mainly addressed in social psychology literature [ 24 , 22 , 20 , 2 ] . Previous work focused mainly on two possible solutions to deal with these problems , the first one is devil’s advocacy in which a subgroup or an individual who ( usually based on initial opinions ) keeps the role of devil’s advocate and critic of the current decision ( plan / hypothesis ) and tries to discover its deficiencies and probable conditions or situations that cannot be understood or mitigated by that decision . Second solution is to develop a counter - plan or counter - decision after identifying and discussing on the prevailing decision . The counter - plan is generated based on assumptions or interpretations of available information , opposite or different from the assumptions of prevailing plan . Subgroups will be responsible to conduct a debate and decision makers sub - group will hear all arguments and will decide based on the debate . Both of these solutions have shown to be effective [ 42 ] , but the major problem with these solutions and their variants is that they try to impose a special process for decision making to the group and assigning roles to decision makers and analysts is challenging and sometimes impossible in real world situations . Our proposed solution is different from previous solutions in a sense that it will not change the decision making process substantially , rather just supports it by visualizing what is happening and thus helps estimating how probable it is to select each of the hypotheses . The only change imposed to the process is that each decision maker should keep his opinion updated in the system ; thus the system can provide optimistic and encouraging situational awareness to minority in decision making process , which we expected to result in more minority participation and better information sharing and ultimately making better decisions . This work can inform design of group decision support systems , both in face - to - face and distributed settings , by manipulating possibly harmful perceptions of participants , such as illusion of unanimity in majority , and lead to better decision making environments for analytical , organizational and political purposes . In the following section , more background information about group decision making , social impact , and related works is provided . Group Decision Making We tend to make important decisions collectively , mainly because we think having more participants in a discussion leads to having different viewpoints and more experience , therefore better decisions can be made [ 32 ] . Besides , some decisions need to be made by various stakeholders and group decision making is inevitable . This has led to a considerable attention in management information systems literature , which is mainly concerned about effects of group decision support systems on organizations [ 17 ] . However , many thinkers believe that group decision making may lead to horribly wrong decisions that individuals rarely make ; Nietzsche said “Madness is the exception in individuals but the rule in groups . ” and Carl Jung said “Ten smart people in a group add up to one dummy . ” Social psychologists have addressed this problem by identifying why some groups cannot take advantage of shared knowledge and experience in their group decision making process . One of the earliest relevant works in this area is Le Bon’s theories in crowd psychology in which he talks about hypnotic influence of group on its members [ 27 ] . However , the most salient theory in this regard is Groupthink which occurs when group pressures lead to a poor efficiency [ 22 ] . Based on this theory , group cohesiveness and tendency to minimize conflict to reach consensus , lead to avoiding critical analysis and evaluation of ideas which ultimately result in loss of creativity and independent thinking . Janis has mentioned several flawed group decisions that impacted the world such as Bay of Pigs Invasion , Pearl Harbour , The escalation of Vietnam War , etc as examples of groupthink . Other theories like group polarization ( risky shift or cautious shift ) as [ 24 ] and social loafing ( loss of accountability and self - awareness ) [ 20 ] have been developed to provide a better understanding of group decision failures . Social Impact and Minority / Majority influence An important common issue in all of the theories , mentioned in previous section , is that group discussions need a minority or advocates of alternative choice to make sure that alternatives are not being overlooked . When the minority cannot tolerate group pressure , phenomena like self - censorship , self - appointed mind - guards and conformity [ 2 ] of minority result in poor performance of minority opinion holders in the decision making process . Based on Festinger’s [ 16 ] social comparison theory , people evaluate their own opinions through comparison with others who are similar to themselves . Also based on Self - categorization theory , similarity between source and target of the influence is the basis for the influence of majority on minority or vice versa [ 9 , 41 ] . Social impact theory , developed by Bibb Latané [ 25 , 26 ] is the most salient theory that was used to study the effects of group on individuals in various decision making tasks . This theory indicates that social influence will be proportional to a function of the strength , immediacy , and number of people who are the sources of influence , and inversely proportional to the strength and number of people being influenced . As applied to this study , this theory holds that we would expect the saliency of minority’s opinion in 3 visualization , affects conformity , minority participation , and information sharing . We expect that by increasing the saliency of minority opinion , their perceived strength and number increases which can lead to decreasing the effect of majority on them and increasing the reverse effect . Also , findings of Nemeth [ 30 ] , indicates that minority opinions can stimulate divergent thinking and increase the breadth of exploration in solutions space which increases the likelihood of finding optimal solutions . Increasing the saliency of minority opinion , based on the social impact theory , can lead to decreasing the effect of majority on minority ; therefore under less group pressure , they will be more willing to share their information which based on this theory may improve the quality of decisions . A thorough review of minority influence is available in [ 44 ] . As mentioned above , conformity is one of the main constructs that we want to affect using our proposed visualization . Conformity is the process by which an individual ' s attitudes , beliefs , and behaviours are influenced by other people . This influence can lead to pre - mature agreement between minority and majority . Sometimes minority agreement is derived because of the need for consensus and not from a change in their personal opinion due to the discussion ; in this case , it is most likely to be just at a public level [ 29 ] and if we change the group’s opinion perception , we might be able to prevent that kind of agreement . Related works Altering the group decision - making process , can help in avoiding the communication and behavioral flaws that may lead to wrong decisions [ 21 ] ; some of the previous works in this area have found that allowing minority viewpoints to be freely expressed [ 5 ] , continually scanning the available options to find new alternatives [ 19 ] , increasing vigilance in considering choice alternatives [ 21 ] , Increasing the sharing of information between individuals [ 34 ] , assigning devil’s advocate [ 42 ] , Limiting the effects of group polarization ( Group’s tendency toward the direction of extremity , risk or caution ) [ 6 ] and many other strategies may help ; Our study investigates if providing manipulated situation awareness through salient visual representation of minority opinion and increasing the perceived uncertainty can help this process by helping to avoid illusion of unanimity and reducing the actual and perceived group pressure . Factors that might encourage minority to express their opinion are getting support for their position [ 26 , 37 ] and having a positive and accepting social atmosphere in the group [ 19 ] which is one of the goals of current study through preventing the illusion of unanimity . Another category of group decision support systems is discussion and decision making visualization systems . Some of these systems such as [ 1 ] try to support reviewing the decision making process for future improvements , but they do not impact the ongoing decision making process . Although real - time support for meetings has been studied for a long time [ 35 ] , using visualizations and shared awareness displays has only recently attracted the attention of researchers . Real - time decision making visualization systems try to impact ongoing decision process and help the group take advantage of all available information and viewpoints . Noticeable recent research in this area is conducted by DiMicco et al . [ 14 , 10 , 12 , 13 , 11 ] , which is later confirmed and extended in [ 36 , 31 , 33 ] . DiMicco has studied the effects of visualizing the participation and turn taking information in a shared display , on group decision making process and they found that those at highest level of participation spoke less in subsequent discussions and those with least participation levels spoke more . They also examined how group information sharing is influenced by information displays and found that showing participation and turn - taking information to poor information sharers could improve them to the level of best groups that had no display , but the group who had performed well at first , performed as poorest groups . This indicates the downside of feedbacks which was adjusting behaviour with the norm . In an earlier attempt [ 11 ] they tried to increase saliency of minority opinions by extracting discussion keywords and emphasizing the less - vocal member’s contributions so that minority’s viewpoints become more salient . However , because of the speech recognition problems and the fact that textual content on a peripheral display are less effective than visualizations , they shifted their focus to visualizing participation dynamics . Our approach for improving quality of decision making is analogous to the last mentioned study , but rather than visualizing discussions , we try to make minority’s opinions salient in the level of vote to avoid dealing with error - prone artificial intelligence algorithms for extracting text out of voice and categorization problems . OPINION VISUALIZATION PROTOTYPE To understand the effects of increasing saliency of minority opinion , we have designed a prototype of a decision visualization system for supporting face to face decision making sessions . This prototype focuses only on the evaluation of the available solutions or choices ; however increasing saliency can be valuable even in earlier phases for finding solutions and understanding problem space . The prototype visualizes the current state of group decision , in which the relative desirability of the choices is determined . Visual representation of decision Considering the need for majority and minority in the experiments , the visual representations are optimized for two - choice problems by coupling the desirability of the two choices in one bar , where black represents one choice and white represents the other one and the proportion of the bar that is covered with each of them determines the current 4 state of group . The realistic representation of decision state is shown in fig . 1 . To increase the saliency of minority a contrast - based visual illusion is used . 30 % of the bar is gradient filled to obfuscate the intersection of the two choices and the background color is determined so that the saliency of the less desirable choice is increased . For example if the black color represents the minority’s choice , the background turns white . An example of using this strategy is shown in fig . 2 . The prototype is implemented as a web - application , to facilitate future extensions . The shared display first connects to the web - server and registers itself on the server . Clients need to determine the session - ID in addition to their identification information , because the prototype supports concurrent decision making sessions . BEHAVIORAL STUDY Our prototype and visualizations are designed to increase uncertainty among group members to prevent pre - mature consensus and encourage more discussion and information sharing while decreasing group pressure on minority . To understand whether our predictions are correct and the visualizations can create the desired change in members’ behaviour we ran a mixed - methods behavioural study combining qualitative and quantitative observations . Our predictions about the influence of the opinion visualization prototype are hypothesized as follows . Hypothesis We expected that representing minority more salient in visual representation of decision state has the following effects : H1 : Decreasing conformity We expect the increase in minority saliency to decrease to possibility of conformity because , if the visualization shows the majority choice uncertain , minority may feel more confidence to disagree and also majority feels less confidence in insisting on their judgement and they will be more open to new information and points of view . We measure this variable by counting the number of decision tasks that the informed minority conforms to majority that has less information . H2 : Increasing the information sharing If the visualization can increase the feeling of uncertainty , we expect members to feel uncertain about their individual and group decisions and increase their participation in discussion to clarify the situation and make sure about the solution . We measure information sharing as a categorical variable because the numbers of unshared information pieces are not equal in different tasks . And if the critical information for making right decision was shared it is considered high and otherwise low . H3 : Improving the quality of decision Finally we want to understand the overall influence of this visualization on the quality of decision . And we expect that the previous effects on members’ behaviour lead to better decisions which will be measured as a two - state categorical variable : correct or wrong . The tasks are designed so that one of the choices is logically better than the other one . Study Design A repeated - measures experiment , with visualization type as the within - subject factor , was designed to facilitate detecting the expected effects of visualizations on participants’ behaviour . The main reason for using within - subject design was to minimize the effect of interpersonal differences which are extremely confounding in social psychology studies . A total of 11 subjects , 5 females and 6 males , from the School of Interactive Arts and Technology ( SIAT ) graduate students voluntarily participated in the experiment . They were randomly assigned to 2 four - person and one 3 - person groups . SIAT is an interdisciplinary school and the participants were of varying background including arts , sciences and engineering . Procedures To make sure about the suitability of the decision room and display position , experimenters conducted a preliminary experiment with 4 participants . Before the main experiment session , all the participants were asked to answer to a questionnaire to gather basic demographic information like age , nationality , course of study and gender . Eight short decision tasks were designed for the decision making sessions , because each of the group members was Figure 2 . Gradient fill and the contrast of background and foreground colors can increase the visual saliency of minority Figure 1 . Realistic opinion representation 5 in minority position in two tasks , one for control condition ( realistic visualization ) and one for experimental condition ( non - realistic visualization using contrast visual illusion ) . Before each short session subjects had been given an information sheet including task description and a set of evidences about the decision task and they had two minutes to memorize the information pieces ( less than 100 words ) . They were told to discuss the task with the group to make a decision in less than 7 minutes . In each tasks one of them , the minority , held some critical information for making the correct decision . However we did not inform them about their different information to create a more natural situation where members might have different information but no one knows . After the experiment the participants answered to a questionnaire about their experience with the system and decision tasks . This questionnaire is used for the qualitative analysis of participants’ behaviour . The decision tasks are designed so that to be similar in nature but different in content and context to reduce the inevitable practice effect . Also tasks in experimental condition and control condition were counter - balanced . In each of the decision sessions a two - choice comparison task was assigned to the group , to discuss about . Decision tasks were , car buying decision , travel destination selection , student admission , land buying decision , digital camera buying decision , stock buying decision , store buying decision and wireless service plan selection . Participants were asked to keep their decisions updated on the system to have a better understanding of their current state . All the changes in opinions were recorded for further analysis . Results The quantitative data , collected from the experiments indicate no significant effects of increasing saliency of minority using contrast - based visual illusion , on the quality of decisions , information sharing and conformity . We conducted three experiment sessions with two four - person groups and one three - person group . Each four person group made group decisions on 8 decision tasks and the three person group made 6 decisions . In 2 of the 22 tasks ( 8 + 8 + 6 ) from the three group experiments , the minority could not find the right answer individually and in 3 other tasks one of the majority group members decided correctly without having enough information . ( Wrong decision based on his information ) . Two of the mistakes were related to same participant . Therefore , four of the participants’ information discarded from analysis , because we needed the results of using both realistic and illusory visualization to perform a within - subject analysis ) . And all of the reported data contain 7 participants’ performance and behaviour in 14 decision tasks . We used McNemar’s chi - square ( within - subject chi - square ) test to identify the effects of increasing minority saliency using illusory visualization . Based on first hypothesis we expected participants to conform less , because of perceiving some extra support for their position . Figure 3 shows the results . Three of the participants performed better with the illusory visualization , however the McNemar’s test indicated no significant effect ( McNemar ' s chi - squared = 1 . 3333 , df = 1 , p - value = 0 . 2482 ) . Based on the second hypothesis , we expected minority to share their information more effectively because of the possible decrease in group pressure . The related results are shown in figure 4 . Two of the participants could share enough information for making right group decisions but again no significant effect is identified ( McNemar ' s chi - squared = 0 . 5 , df = 1 , p - value = 0 . 4795 ) . In the last hypothesis we expected minority to be more effective in changing the wrong group decision and it happened for two of the participants . Figure 5 depicts these results . Again McNemar test indicated no significant effect on decision quality . ( McNemar ' s chi - squared = 0 . 5 , df = 1 , p - value = 0 . 4795 . Figure 3 . Effects of visualization type on conformity : Three of the participants that were conformed using realistic visualization , could be consistent with their opinion using illusory visualization 6 DISCUSSION The study showed clear trends in the hypothesized direction , but that none of these trends reached statistical significance , which makes it reasonable to run more statistically powerful studies with more participants to identify the expected effects . The first of the limitations of this study was group - size which was limited to three or four . Our observations of group behavior showed that , in such small groups , when the primary communication channel is rich , the secondary information such as the awareness display become less effective . During the experiments sometimes participants explicitly asked each other about each other’s opinions which let them to have a clear image of group opinion in their mind , so that the display became almost useless . An observation that supports this justification was that participants that were not friends or did not know each other well , tend to look more at the display in their first tasks , but after a few tasks that their communication became more comfortable , they preferred to explicitly ask each other . However , we cannot be sure about the effect of these processes , because the tasks were not similar and the differences between tasks might have caused the differences in behavior . Participating in 8 decision making tasks was another factor that affected participants’ behaviour . They did better in terms of structured discussions and sharing information ( practice effect ) and in some tasks they knew that there should be some critical information that one of them is not sharing , so they asked each other “what do you remember from your information sheet ? ” . Another limitation of this study was the coherence of groups in which in all groups , the participants new each other and sometimes they were close friends . The differences in relationships were an extraneous variable that might have affected their communication . Level of expertise in each of the tasks was another unmanaged extraneous variable that sometimes affected participants’ behaviour . For example , in one of the tasks about comparing two cameras , two of the participants believed that they are expert in that field and it was hard for them to change their opinion , and they tried to somehow justify their decision , even after finding out about the information that they did not have . A set of extraneous variables were related to tasks and the nature of information that were supposed to be shared . Some information was easier to share than some others , for example people could easily share information about price of camera , but it was hard to remember that the size of camera . Although we exaggerated the differences in size , to make it obvious for them , but probably due to the short time of reading information sheet , they could not memorize it . Although we tried to design tasks that were similar to each other , but still the familiarity with topics affected participants’ confidence for talking in favour or against choices . This was observed in the decision making about buying stock , in which many students felt unaware of Figure 5 . Effects of visualization type on the quality of decisions : Two of the participants that could not change group decision in control condition ( realistic visualization ) , could change it in experiment condition . Figure 4 . Effects of visualization type on information sharing : Two of the participants that could not effectively share information in control condition ( realistic visualization ) , could do it in experiment condition ( illusory visualization ) 7 criteria for decision making , so they thought that they cannot express their opinions . A major challenge of the experiment design was designing similar tasks . We could not design eight tasks with same number of unshared and shared information pieces . But having smaller number of tasks may let researchers to use the number of shared evidences as a fine - grained measure of information sharing which can help in identifying effects on information sharing . Another limitation of this study was that the visualizations that were used , could only represent 2 - choice decisions ; A visualization that can be used for multiple choice decisions , is using a pie - chart with gradient slices , to generate the similar effects . However the more complex visualization techniques can be used or developed to design similar interfaces for general applications . These qualitative observations and quantitative data showed that despite the non - significant quantitative results , there are still possibilities for running strictly controlled studies with larger groups and more participants by paying special attention to designing tasks and taking into account our findings in task definition , to identify the possible effects of manipulating situation awareness in face - to - face settings , particularly affecting majority - minority effects . CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS Although quantitative results could not show any significant effect of display type on group processes and members’ behaviour , the observations suggest that the study limitations particularly small group size , was one of the major factors that let them explicitly ask each other’s opinion which could have reduced the effect of display type . Our findings suggest that manipulating situation awareness based on what is right for them to know , rather than the actual situation requires some information need in the group . When understanding the exact opinion of all members is easily possible , the awareness display is unable to change their beliefs about group situation . This study proposed a new way of affecting individuals and group behavior by manipulating their perceived situation . In a broader sense , this study calls for further controlled studies and designing standard carefully designed task - sets to identify the desired effects . Also more studies are required for finding solutions in various research areas that are dealing with social - impact or other patterns of influence in different contexts . For example new ways of using motivation theories in several contexts such as management and education are yet to be explored and they may provide new opportunities for understanding effects of manipulated situation awareness . This study introduced another possible application of perceptual illusions and we expect to see more research on their applications , especially for the situations that realistic visualizations may decrease human performance . This research in combination with previous works on awareness displays can inform design of group decision support systems about their possible ways of helping groups and improving the decision making process to correct the possible flawed behavior of participants . Design of situation awareness systems can benefit from the idea of manipulating situation awareness for improving human performance . Depending on situation , optimistic or pessimistic estimations of current or near future situation may motivate users improve how they take advantage of their resources . Manipulating situation awareness can be useful in the design of e - learning systems that provide feedback about the performance of the learners to motivate them . However , much more research effort is required to determine concrete ways of applying these ideas and more studies are required to better understand the effects of manipulated situation awareness ( optimistic , pessimistic , etc ) on human performance in decision making and various other contexts . If the future research can identify significant effects of such systems , we can expect to see actual GDSS and other systems applying them . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors wish to thank all participants in our study that helped us running experiments . REFERENCES 1 . Alallah , F . , Nezhadasl , M . , Irani , P . , and Dean Jin . Visualizing the Decision - Making Process in a Face - to - Face Meeting . Information Visualization , 2007 . IV ' 07 . 11th International Conference , ( 2007 ) , 168 - 176 . 2 . Asch , S . E . Opinions and Social Pressure . Scientific American 193 , 5 ( 1955 ) , 31 - - 35 . 3 . Barkhi , R . , Jacob , V . S . , and Pirkul , H . The influence of communication mode and incentive structure on GDSS process and outcomes . Decision Support Systems 37 , 2 ( 2004 ) , 287 - 305 . 4 . Bordia , P . Face - to - Face Versus Computer - Mediated Communication : A Synthesis of the Experimental Literature . Journal of Business Communication 34 , 1 ( 1997 ) , 99 - 118 . 5 . Bray , R . M . , Johnson , D . , and Chilstrom , J . T . Social influence by group members with minority opinions : A comparison of Hollander and Moscovici . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 43 , 1 ( 1982 ) , 78 - 88 . 6 . Brown , R . Group Polarization . Social Psychology ( 2d Edition ) , New York : Free Press , ( 1986 ) . 7 . Convertino , G . , Billman , D . , Pirolli , P . , Massar , J . , and Shrager , J . The CACHE Study : Group Effects in Computer - supported Collaborative Analysis . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) 17 , 4 ( 2008 ) , 353 - 393 . 8 8 . Credé , M . and Sniezek , J . A . Group judgment processes and outcomes in video - conferencing versus face - to - face groups . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 59 , 6 ( 2003 ) , 875 - 897 . 9 . David , B . and Turner , J . C . Majority and minority influence : A single process self - categorization analysis . Group consensus and minority influence : Implications for innovation , ( 2001 ) , 91 - 121 . 10 . DiMicco , J . M . Designing interfaces that influence group processes . CHI ' 04 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems , ACM ( 2004 ) , 1041 - 1042 . 11 . DiMicco , J . M . and Bender , W . Second messenger : increasing the visibility of minority viewpoints with a face - to - face collaboration tool . Proceedings of the 9th international conference on Intelligent user interfaces , ACM ( 2004 ) , 232 - 234 . 12 . DiMicco , J . M . , Hollenbach , K . J . , and Bender , W . Using visualizations to review a group ' s interaction dynamics . CHI ' 06 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems , ACM ( 2006 ) , 706 - 711 . 13 . DiMicco , J . M . , Hollenbach , K . J . , Pandolfo , A . , and Bender , W . The impact of increased awareness while face - to - face . Hum . - Comput . Interact . 22 , 1 ( 2007 ) , 47 - 96 . 14 . DiMicco , J . M . , Pandolfo , A . , and Bender , W . Influencing group participation with a shared display . Proceedings of the 2004 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work , ACM ( 2004 ) , 614 - 623 . 15 . Dubrovsky , V . J . , Kiesler , S . , and Sethna , B . N . The Equalization Phenomenon : Status Effects in Computer - Mediated and Face - to - Face Decision - Making Groups . Human - Computer Interaction 6 , 2 ( 1991 ) , 119 . 16 . Festinger , L . A Theory of Social Comparison Processes . Human Relations 7 , 2 ( 1954 ) , 117 - 140 . 17 . Greitemeyer , T . , Schulz - Hardt , S . , Brodbeck , F . C . , and Frey , D . Information sampling and group decision making : The effects of an advocacy decision procedure and task experience . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Applied 12 , 1 ( 2006 ) , 31 - 42 . 18 . Grisé , M . and Gallupe , R . B . Information Overload : Addressing the Productivity Paradox in Face - to - Face Electronic Meetings . Journal of Management Information Systems 16 , 3 ( 1999 ) , 157 - 185 . 19 . Hackman , J . R . The design of work teams . Handbook of organizational behavior 315 , ( 1987 ) , 342 . 20 . Jackson , J . and Harkins , S . Equity in effort : an explanation of the social loafing effect . Journal of personality and social psychology 49 , 5 ( 1985 ) , 1199 - 1206 . 21 . Janis , I . L . Groupthink : psychological studies of policy decisions and fiascoes . Houghton Mifflin Boston , 1982 . 22 . Janis , I . L . Victims of Groupthink : A Psychological Study of Foreign - policy Decisions and Fiascoes . Houghton Mifflin Company , 1972 . 23 . Kraemer , K . L . and King , J . L . Computer - based systems for cooperative work and group decision making . ACM Comput . Surv . 20 , 2 ( 1988 ) , 115 - 146 . 24 . Lamm , H . and Myers , D . G . Group - induced polarization of attitudes and behavior . Advances in Experimental Social Psychology 11 , ( 1978 ) , 145 - 195 . 25 . Latané , B . The psychology of social impact . American Psychologist 36 , 4 ( 1981 ) , 343 - 356 . 26 . Latané , B . and Wolf , S . The social impact of majorities and minorities . Psychological Review 88 , 5 ( 1981 ) , 438 - 453 . 27 . Le Bon , G . The Crowd : A Study of the Popular Mind ( originally 1895 ) . Cherokee Publishing Company , Atlanta , GA 1982 , 1982 . 28 . McLeod , P . L . , Baron , R . S . , Marti , M . W . , and Yoon , K . The eyes have it : Minority influence in face - to - face and computer - mediated group discussion . Journal of Applied Psychology 82 , 5 ( 1997 ) , 706 - 718 . 29 . Moscovici , S . Toward a theory of conversion behavior . Advances in experimental social psychology 13 , ( 1980 ) , 209 - 239 . 30 . Nemeth , C . Differential contributions of majority and minority influence . Psychological review 93 , 1 ( 1986 ) , 23 - 32 . 31 . Nijholt , A . , Rienks , R . , Zwiers , J . , and Reidsma , D . Online and off - line visualization of meeting information and meeting support . Vis . Comput . 22 , 12 ( 2006 ) , 965 - 976 . 32 . Raven , B . H . Groupthink , Bay of Pigs , and Watergate Reconsidered . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 73 , 2 - 3 ( 1998 ) , 352 - 361 . 33 . Rienks , R . , Zhang , D . , Gatica - Perez , D . , and Post , W . Detection and application of influence rankings in small group meetings . Proceedings of the 8th international conference on Multimodal interfaces , ACM ( 2006 ) , 257 - 264 . 34 . Stasser , G . and Titus , W . Effects of information load and percentage of shared information on the dissemination of unshared information during group discussion . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 53 , 1 ( 1987 ) , 81 - 93 . 35 . Stefik , M . , Foster , G . , Bobrow , D . G . , Kahn , K . , Lanning , S . , and Suchman , L . Beyond the chalkboard : computer support for collaboration and problem 9 solving in meetings . Commun . ACM 30 , 1 ( 1987 ) , 32 - 47 . 36 . Sturm , J . , Herwijnen , O . H . , Eyck , A . , and Terken , J . Influencing social dynamics in meetings through a peripheral display . Proceedings of the 9th international conference on Multimodal interfaces , ACM ( 2007 ) , 263 - 270 . 37 . Tanford , S . and Penrod , S . Social Influence Model : A formal integration of research on majority and minority influence processes . Psychological Bulletin 95 , 2 ( 1984 ) , 189 - 225 . 38 . Trevino , L . K . , Lengel , R . H . , and Daft , R . L . Media Symbolism , Media Richness , and Media Choice in Organizations : A Symbolic Interactionist Perspective . Communication Research 14 , 5 ( 1987 ) , 553 - 574 . 39 . Tuckman , B . W . Developmental sequence in small groups . Psychological bulletin 63 , 6 ( 1965 ) , 384 - 399 . 40 . Tuckman , B . W . and Jensen , M . A . C . Stages of small - group development revisited . Group & Organization Management 2 , 4 ( 1977 ) , 419 . 41 . Turner , J . C . Social Influence . Wadsworth Pub Co , 1991 . 42 . Valacich , J . S . and Charles , S . Devil′s Advocacy and Dialectical Inquiry Effects on Face - to - Face and Computer - Mediated Group Decision Making . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 63 , 2 ( 1995 ) , 158 - 173 . 43 . Wolff , R . , Roberts , D . J . , Steed , A . , and Otto , O . A review of telecollaboration technologies with respect to closely coupled collaboration . International Journal of Computer Applications in Technology 29 , 1 ( 2007 ) , 11 - 26 . 44 . Wood , W . , Lundgren , S . , Ouellette , J . A . , Busceme , S . , and Blackstone , T . Minority influence : A meta - analytic review of social influence processes . Psychological Bulletin 115 , 3 ( 1994 ) , 323 - 345 . 45 . Zack , L . W . Using electronic group decision - making technology for usability walkthroughs : an initial qualitative cost / benefit analysis . Conference companion on Human factors in computing systems , ACM ( 1994 ) , 273 - 274 . 46 . Zigurs , I . and Buckland , B . K . A Theory of Task / Technology Fit and Group Support Systems Effectiveness . MIS Quarterly 22 , 3 ( 1998 ) , 313 - 334 .