Vol . : ( 0123456789 ) 1 3 Universal Access in the Information Society ( 2021 ) 20 : 299 – 319 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10209 - 020 - 00720 - z REVIEW PAPER End‑user adaptable technologies for rehabilitation : a systematic literature review Jessica M . Palomares‑Pecho 1 · Greis Francy M . Silva‑Calpa 2 · Alberto B . Raposo 1 , 2 Published online : 6 June 2020 © Springer - Verlag GmbH Germany , part of Springer Nature 2020 Abstract Studies on end - user adaptable applications for rehabilitation aim to offer exercises to patients based on their therapeutic goals and individual advances . The process of adapting the applications is usually done by therapists , who have the clini - cal knowledge necessary for the effective design of the exercises ; thus , their participation is essential in this process . In this sense , it is crucial that studies on adaptable applications consider their relevance for various users : patients who use an application ( potential end users ) and therapists who perform the process of adapting the application ( end users ) . This study aims , through a systematic review , to identify how the use of adaptable applications has contributed , in the context of rehabilitation , not only to the treatment of patients but also to therapists in their work , in addition to identifying how they have addressed the process of adaptation and extension of the applications . A total of 28 studies from four electronic databases were considered and analyzed . The results indicate promising benefits for patients and some benefits that support the therapist’s work . However , there are some difficulties faced by therapists in the use and adoption of the applications . Further studies on the impact of adaptable applications in view of the end users ( therapists adapting the applications ) are needed . A longer - term follow - up is required to evaluate the treatment outcomes in the patients and improve the required aspects according to therapeutic contexts . Keywords End - user adaptable technology · End - user development · Rehabilitation · Systematic review 1 Introduction Rehabilitation consists of a set of therapeutic interventions that seek to attenuate disabilities caused by some injury , dis - order , or disease [ 1 ] . The process of interventions involves , among others , the definition and implementation of adequate activities and exercises [ 2 ] when therapists and rehabilitation professionals take care of restoring the loss of functionality as well as preventing or delaying its deterioration [ 3 ] . Computational applications using various types of devices have been developed to contribute to the process of rehabilitation . Several applications have used the adapt - able technologies approach to offer patient - specific exercises designed to meet individual therapeutic goals . Adaptable technologies allow therapists to tailor applications and create activities with personalized characteristics ( content , images , sounds , videos , colors , and so on ) based on the preferences and level of difficulty required for a particular patient ( poten - tial end user ) . Siegert et al . [ 4 ] emphasized that the application of end - user development ( EUD ) practices in rehabilitation support the empowerment of therapists to provide custom content to their patients , thus increasing their motivation and , conse - quently , the effectiveness of a rehabilitation plan . Similarly , reviewing literature on the use of technologies to support rehabilitation for stroke [ 5 ] , autism spectrum disorder [ 6 ] , and dementia [ 7 ] highlights their significant benefits . Among them , the ability to watch exercise demonstrations over and over , adaptation of the rehabilitation plan considering the patient’s performance , and immediate visual feedback for * Jessica M . Palomares - Pecho jpecho @ inf . puc - rio . br Greis Francy M . Silva - Calpa greis @ tecgraf . puc - rio . br Alberto B . Raposo abraposo @ tecgraf . puc - rio . br 1 Department of Informatics , Pontifical Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro – PUC - Rio , Gávea , Rio de Janeiro 22451 - 900 , Brazil 2 Tecgraf Institute , Pontifical Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro – PUC - Rio , Gávea , Rio de Janeiro 22451 - 900 , Brazil 300 Universal Access in the Information Society ( 2021 ) 20 : 299 – 319 1 3 the patient and therapist generate motivation in the patient and attention in the activity [ 6 ] . However , we identified two aspects that have been little explored : ( a ) the role of these technologies in the physical and / or cognitive rehabilitation of other types of injuries or disorders and ( b ) the use of these technologies by therapists and how they treat the process of software adaptability . In this study , we present a systematic review of the lit - erature on end - user adaptable technologies supporting the rehabilitation of various injuries , disorders , and diseases . The objective of this study is to identify how these technolo - gies have contributed to ( 1 ) the treatment of patients in their various impairments and ( 2 ) the process of adaptation of these applications by therapists . With this review , we aim to understand how the use of the end - user approaches , which allow customization and adaptation , may support thera - pists in the personalization of exercises programs for their patients . Therefore , this review provides a detailed overview of the use of adaptable therapeutic applications in rehabilita - tion programs , which involve not only patients but also their family members , therapists , and caregivers . We searched for studies in four electronic databases and applied strict inclusion criteria to investigate any evidence - based adaptable application used in the context of reha - bilitation . It was decided to include only studies published in the past 8 years ( 2010 – 2018 ) because the use of tablets and Kinect devices in the context of rehabilitation has been spreading recently . Previous studies suggested that these devices have been readily accepted in rehabilitation primar - ily because of their portability , low cost , and natural user interaction [ 8 , 9 ] . Moreover , these characteristics allow a therapist to use and customize adaptable applications in clin - ics or at patients’ homes [ 10 ] . Studies examining the use of adaptable applications for support in the rehabilitation of persons with any disorder or injury were included . Studies that did not present user evaluations with therapists and / or patients were excluded . Conference abstracts , case studies , and papers published in languages other than English were also excluded . We addressed four research questions : ( a ) what types of impairments ( injuries , disorders , or diseases ) are supported by adaptable technologies , ( b ) how adaptable technologies have supported the rehabilitation of patients ( c ) what are the main contributions of adaptable technologies to the therapists and ( d ) what are the difficulties faced by therapists in their adoption and adaptation . We found that there are several studies on adaptable technologies to support physical , cognitive , and behavioral rehabilitation , particularly for people suffering from strokes or neurodevelopmental disorders . Most studies report that patients were motivated during therapy sessions and quickly achieved physical and learning improvements compared with traditional rehabilitation models . Some studies evalu - ated the use of adaptable technologies with the therapists , indicating the advantages of quick access to performance reports and better understanding of patient preferences . However , the studies reported that therapists had some dif - ficulties in using the applications , particularly because of the limited time they got to familiarize themselves , use the applications , and customize their activities . The studies demonstrate that adaptable technologies have the potential to be efficient , may significantly improve the treatment plans of people with different types of disabilities , and can contribute to the future research in the field of com - puting as well as in various healthcare areas . The difficul - ties regarding the use of these technologies suggest the need for new studies on adaptable technologies for rehabilitation , focusing on their use and adoption by therapists . It is crucial for therapists to be actively involved in the development pro - cess of adaptable technologies because they are better aware of the individual characteristics and needs of patients , which is an essential aspect in improving the effectiveness of adapt - able technologies for rehabilitation purposes . This article is organized as follows . We present the back - ground of adaptable technologies in Sect . 2 . This is followed by a discussion on the process of planning and conducting a systematic literature review in Sect . 3 . The results and analyses of the results for each of the research questions are presented in Sect . 4 . Finally , the conclusions of the study are presented in Sect . 5 . 2 Adaptable technologies The possibility of creating and adapting systems for the end user can be seen from two approaches : adaptability and adaptivity . Adaptability consists of allowing the end user to explicitly change specific characteristics of a system to make it adequate or adapt it as per need . Adaptivity is the automatic adaptation of the interface based on interactions by the user . It is done by the system itself [ 11 ] . Note that the existing adaptable technologies mix both adaptability and adaptivity . We refer to these technologies as semiautomatic technologies , which have adaptive characteristics but are not fully automatic . They automate repetitive manual tasks done by the therapist ; for example , changes in the level of difficulty and maintaining the performance of the patient at an acceptable level , thereby limiting frustration or a feeling of abandonment . Our focus in this review is adaptability , including semi - automatic technologies in which the therapist can modify the application to achieve patient - specific goals through an individualized therapeutic process . We do not include adaptivity ( fully automatic ) applications because they can prevent therapists from participating and making decisions in the therapeutic process , which are necessary to ensure good performance outcomes for each patient . 301 Universal Access in the Information Society ( 2021 ) 20 : 299 – 319 1 3 To guide the development of end - user adaptable tech - nologies , human – computer interaction proposes the meta - design framework as an approach , which consists of devel - oping an open system that users can help evolve , becoming co - designers of that technology [ 12 ] and enabling them to perform end - user development ( EUD ) or end - user program - ming ( EUP ) activities . EUD is defined as a set of methods , techniques , and tools that allow users of software systems to act as ( nonprofessional ) developers , who can create , modify , and / or extend a software artifact [ 13 ] . Systems based on the EUD approach empower people - not software development specialists , but people who are able to understand problems in a particular domain - to make changes or add extensions to software designed for them . In contrast , EUP - based systems target novice programmers and users to learn the code [ 14 ] using a variety of techniques to support them in program - ming tasks , such as programming by example , visual pro - gramming , and domain - specific programming . EUP focuses mainly on the implementation and maintenance phases of the software life cycle , which means creating code to adapt the system to new needs or preferences of users . The dif - ference between EUP and EUD is that EUD methods , tech - niques , and tools cover the entire software development life - cycle , including software modification and extension , not just the implementation phase [ 15 ] . In the context of rehabilitation , there are several partici - pants involved—on the one hand , health specialists , family , and school members—and on the other , patients or people with specific needs . The therapist , teacher , and caregiver fulfill the roles of adapting or extending the system to the patient according to their needs , performance , and thera - peutic goals . The therapist is the professional who has the skills to guide patients toward established goals in the pro - cess of restoration of their health and quality of life [ 16 ] . The teacher is the professional who is responsible for the educational needs of a person with certain physical or cog - nitive needs . Therefore , teachers need specific material to help improve the learning process and quality of life of such persons . As the caregiver is responsible for performing tasks that patients cannot accomplish themselves [ 17 ] , they are fully aware of the patients’ needs and preferences . Therefore , the role of these persons is fundamental in the therapeutic process , although supporting technologies exist . From this point onward , we will use the term “therapist ( s ) ” to refer to the different participants who play the role of end user , and “patient ( s ) ” to refer to potential end users . Further , we consider that the pertinence for the partici - pants mentioned above is fundamental in the design and evaluation phases , as it depends on their possible adoption and use . A critical issue to consider is related to the trans - fer of adaptable applications from the laboratory to clini - cal practice , as the level of acceptance from users is essen - tial for its subsequent adoption . This is supported by the Technology Acceptance Model ( TAM ) , proposed by [ 18 ] , which includes two main factors—perceived utility and ease of use . Davis [ 18 ] defines perceived utility as “the degree to which a person believes that using a particular system would enhance his or her job performance” and perceived ease of use as “the degree to which a person believes that using a particular system would be free from effort . ” There - fore , these aspects should essentially be considered when evaluating the use of technologies in the therapeutic context , involving patients and therapists . 3 Systematic literature review Our review follows the three stages of a systematic literature review : planning , conducting , and documenting [ 19 ] . In the planning stage , we defined the main aspects involved in the review . In the conducting stage , we selected studies accord - ing to the strategy described in the planning stage . Finally , in the third stage , we analyzed the selected studies based on the research questions raised . This last stage is presented in Sect . 5 . 3 . 1 Revision planning In this stage , we defined the research questions ( RQ ) , the strategy used for the review , the electronic databases used to search for the studies , and the inclusion and exclusion criteria . 3 . 1 . 1 Research questions To achieve the objective of this study , the following research questions were defined : • RQ1 Which rehabilitation processes are supported by adaptable applications or technologies ? • RQ2 How do adaptable technologies support the rehabili - tation of patients according to the type of injury , disorder , or disease ? How has this benefited the patients ? • RQ3 What are the main contributions of adaptable tech - nologies to the therapist that accompanies patient reha - bilitation ? • RQ4 What are the difficulties that therapists face in adopting and using adaptable technologies ? 3 . 1 . 2 Inclusion and exclusion criteria To answer the research questions , the inclusion and exclu - sion criteria were defined as follows . Inclusion criteria : • Articles in journals or conference proceedings ; 302 Universal Access in the Information Society ( 2021 ) 20 : 299 – 319 1 3 • Studies available with full access ; • Studies published in the last 8 years ( period from January 2010 to November 2018 ) ; • Studies involving adaptable technologies to support human rehabilitation processes ; • Studies in which adaptable technologies have been evalu - ated with patients and / or therapists . Exclusion criteria : • Studies on adaptable technologies , but those that do not present evaluation with respect to the users ; • Duplicate studies found in more than one database ; • Studies involving automatic technologies , such as robotic technologies ; • Written studies in English ; • Ph . D . and Masters theses were also excluded , as relevant publications resulting from the research covered by them were included in the review ; • Abstracts , editorials , tutorials , panels , posters , prefaces , and opinion texts . 3 . 1 . 3 Data source and search strategy We considered four electronic database sources— ACM Digital Library , IEEE Xplore , Springer Link , and Science Direct —as they store significant journals and proceedings from major conferences on Computer Science , specifically on Human – Computer Interaction and information systems . Moreover , the databases of Springer Link and Science Direct store several significant journals from different scholarly fields such as health , physiotherapy , psychology , and edu - cation , which allowed us to increase the reliability of the search results and ensure that articles from various scholarly fields were included . While accessing SpringerLink , we pay special attention to reviewing the studies published in the proceedings of the International Symposium on End - User Development ( IS - EUD 2010 to IS - EUD 2018 ) . Based on the research questions , we constructed the search string using the different terms related to adaptable technologies and their use in the context of rehabilitation , as shown below , which is the String used in IEEE Xplore . ( ( Adaptable OR “End User Programming” OR “end user development” OR EUD OR personalization OR customiza - tion OR “user centered” ) AND ( therap * OR impairment OR treatment ) AND ( application OR service OR app OR oper - ating system OR “therapeutic software” OR “customizable software” ) AND ( empiric * OR eval * OR test * OR assessment OR case study OR framework OR validation OR metric OR prototype OR survey OR user experience ) ) It is worth noting that in the construction of the String , we consider terms related to the EUD , such as “customizable , ” “adaptable , ” and “personalization . ” This is because some authors do not explicitly mention the use of the EUD , but their studies involve the development or use of environments in which the therapist adapts the content or exercises of the software to the end users ( patients ) . 3 . 2 Conducting the review We searched through the electronic databases mentioned above and retrieved 1542 studies using our search strings . As depicted in Fig . 1 , in the first step , 59 articles were excluded ( because they were not available in full ) . In the second step , of the 1483 remaining articles , 1425 articles were excluded based on the exclusion criteria and the 58 remaining were selected based on their titles and abstracts . In the third step , we read these studies in full and selected 28 relevant articles based on the research questions raised . The studies selected from the databases are detailed in Table 1 . 4 Results The 28 selected studies ( see “Appendix A” ) were character - ized by presenting customizable tools and their evaluation with the therapists and / or patients . In “Appendix B , ” we present a brief description of each application proposed in the studies , identifying each one with an ID in the order S1 , S2 , S3 , . . . , S28 , and grouping them according to the type of disease treated , as follows : neurodevelopmental disorder ( S1 to S12 ) , dyslexia ( S13 ) , cerebral palsy ( S14 , S15 ) , apha - sia ( S16 , S17 ) , speech apraxia ( S18 ) , Alzheimer’s disease ( S19 ) , amnesia ( S20 ) , mental health disease ( S21 ) , stroke ( S22 to S26 ) , hand disabilities ( 27 ) , and multiple sclerosis ( 28 ) . It is worth noting that neurodevelopmental disorder Fig . 1 Literature review process 303 Universal Access in the Information Society ( 2021 ) 20 : 299 – 319 1 3 ( NDD ) is a general term that encompasses a broad group of disorders characterized by impairments in the brain func - tion and mental development such as intellectual disability , hyperactivity disorder , and autism spectrum disorder ( ASD ) among others [ 20 ] . From this point forward , the term application is used to refer to the adaptable tool or software and the term sensor to refer to the hardware devices ( Kinect , balance board , tan - gible objects , and so on ) that support and / or maintain the development and use of the application . Overall , the applications of the analyzed studies present two main modules . One module is intended for the patient interacting with the application , and another one is intended for the therapist , responsible for adapting the application . It is essential to mention that the applications were intended for patients of different age groups . Of the 28 arti - cles , 16 were aimed at children , 10 at adults , and 2 at adoles - cents . Most studies aimed at applications to support cogni - tive rehabilitation for children . On the other hand , studies that included applications for adult patients aimed to assist in the physical rehabilitation of upper / lower limbs or gait training . It should be noted that one study ( S23 ) included applications to specifically evaluate therapists , aiming to encourage them to create personalized exercises for patients . For this , the authors used already existing tools that consist of learning programming concepts . We found that in the context of the reviewed studies user tests involving patients , therapists , or both were conducted . As Table 2 indicates , most studies ( 16 ) report the evalua - tion of the patients only ( some articles indicated that , dur - ing the evaluation , the therapist just followed the patient ) . The remaining articles included the therapists , eight of them evaluated the tool with both patients and therapists , and four articles reported the evaluation of the tool with the thera - pists only . It should be noted that these 12 studies includ - ing therapists were those intended for the rehabilitation of apraxia ( S18 ) , mental health disease ( S21 ) , dyslexia ( S13 ) , hand disabilities ( S27 ) , stroke ( S22 – S25 ) , and NDD ( S1 , S7 , S10 , and S12 ) . It should also be noted that there are three studies that have not explicitly evaluated applications with therapists but mention some of the professionals’ feedback ( S16 , S17 , and S20 ) . The evaluation period of each application was variable in each study ( between 3 min and 6 months ) . Further , the test sessions lasted between 3 and 45 min for each patient , as reported by some studies . The results of the review , based on the research questions , are presented in Table 2 . 4 . 1 RQ1 : Which rehabilitation processes are supported by adaptable applications or technologies ? The 28 articles selected in the period 2010 – 2018 presented the design and evaluation of software to support rehabilita - tion or treatment processes in 11 different types of diseases or injuries ( see Fig . 2 ) . As depicted in Fig . 2 , most studies ( 16 articles ) were pub - lished in the period 2014 – 2018 , though studies to support the rehabilitation process for people with amnesia , mental health problems , and Alzheimer’s disease were published before that . In 2010 , three studies were published—one focused on amnesia ( S20 ) , one on mental health disease ( S21 ) , and one on NDD ( S11 ) . Amnesia is a disease charac - terized by loss of memory resulting from neuronal damage in specific brain structures responsible for memory process - ing [ 21 ] . Mental health issues consist of experiencing severe and distressing psychological symptoms , particularly when normal functioning is gravely impaired [ 22 ] . Similarly , there was a study to support the treatment of people with mild to moderate Alzheimer’s disease ( S19 ) , an irreversible progres - sive disorder that causes gradual memory loss and mental confusion [ 23 ] caused by the loss of cells , only in 2011 . Recently , we identified a study ( S27 ) from 2017 that pre - sents an adaptable therapeutic application to support the rehabilitation of the hands of people who have had a stroke or suffered from cerebral palsy or hemiplegia , a condition characterized by the paralysis of the left or right half of the body . We categorized this study as hand disabilities . Simi - larly , from the year 2016 , we selected a study ( S13 ) that proposes a web platform to help children with dyslexia , a learning disorder characterized by the difficulty of acquir - ing efficient reading skills , mainly owing to the disability of recognizing symbols and phonemes and the differentiation between them [ 24 ] . Table 1 Studies retrieved and selected from each database Electronic database Retrieved studies Selected based on titles and abstracts Selected after full reading IEEE Xplore 75 11 4 ACM Digital Library 1018 28 17 Science Direct 84 6 2 SpringerLink 365 13 5 Total 1542 58 28 304 Universal Access in the Information Society ( 2021 ) 20 : 299 – 319 1 3 It is noteworthy that most studies from the period con - sidered ( 2010 – 2018 ) were intended for the rehabilitation of NDD ( 12 studies ) and stroke ( 5 studies ) . Of the twelve ( 12 ) articles focused on NDD , seven ( 7 ) were aimed at children with ASD , three ( 3 ) at children with intellectual disabilities , one at children with language disorders , and one at children with NDD . Stroke is a disease caused by problems with the blood supply to the brain , which causes chronic disabilities such as difficulty in walking , speaking , and understanding and the total or partial paralysis of the face or an upper and / or lower limb [ 25 ] . Two studies ( S16 , S17 ) present applications to support the rehabilitation of speech pathology in people with apha - sia , which is a disease characterized by a reduced capacity to understand and generate speech and language [ 26 ] . The authors of S18 presented an application for a remote admin - istration aiming to support the rehabilitation of apraxia in childhood , a neurological motor speech disorder that affects Table 2 Participants and length of time for evaluations in the studies analyzed Type of rehabilita - tion Study ID Numbers of users talking part in studies Evaluated users Length of time evaluation NS : not specified Potential ends - users End - users adapting application Patients only Patients and therapists only Therapists only Neurodevelopmen - tal disorder S1 8 therapists X NS S2 19 children 8 caregivers X 4 months S3 6 children X 1 month and 1 week S4 2 children X 1 session per partici - pants ( 45 min ) S5 10 patients ASD X 45 min each session S6 5 children 4 therapists X 1 month ( 8 sessions ) S7 7 therapists X 2 sessions S8 6 children X 1 sessions per patient S9 9 children X 15 weeks S10 3 children 3 teachers X 2 sessions per par - ticipants S11 11 children X 1 sessions per par - ticipants S12 5 autism students 3 teachers X NS Dyslexia S13 7 children 2 dyslexia’s spe - cialists X 3 months Cerebral palsy S14 10 children X 4 sessions per par - ticipant S15 2 children X 25 sessions Aphasia S16 1 adult 1 therapist X 3 months S17 4 adults with their caregivers X 2 sessions per par - ticipants ( 1 week ) Aphasia of speech S18 4 children 4 therapists X 1 session per child Alzheimer S19 3 adults X 1 session per partici - pants ( 45 min ) Amnesia S20 4 adults with their family members X 6 months Mental health S21 10 therapists X 4 months Stroke S22 45 adults 24 therapists X 6 months S23 10 therapists X 1 session ( 3 h ) S24 18 therapists X NS S25 5 adults 10 therapists X 5 weeks S26 20 adults X NS Hand disabilities S27 5 adults 3 therapists X 3 sessions per patient Multiple sclerosis S28 8 adults X 1 sessions per par - ticipant 305 Universal Access in the Information Society ( 2021 ) 20 : 299 – 319 1 3 children’s ability to produce syllables and words correctly [ 27 ] . Studies S14 and S15 present applications focused on the natural interaction of the user to support the neuromus - cular rehabilitation of children with cerebral palsy , which is caused by the atypical development of the brain or by brain lesions that control movement , balance , and posture . Study S28 focused on the rehabilitation of the upper limbs of people with multiple sclerosis ( MS ) , a disease that affects the central nervous system and causes disorders in the com - munication between the brain and the body . We also identified that adaptable technologies support different rehabilitation activities , such as learning training ( S1 , S2 , S5 , S6 , S7 , S8 , S12 , S13 ) , fine and gross motor skills training ( S1 , S3 , S5 , S28 ) , speech skill training ( S4 , S16 , S18 ) , communication skill training ( S1 , S8 , S9 , S10 , S17 , S21 ) , social training ( S5 ) , balance training ( S14 , S23 , S25 ) , upper limb training ( S15 , S22 , S24 , S26 ) , cognitive training ( S1 , S2 , S5 , S19 , S20 , S24 ) , gait training ( S23 ) , and hand training ( S27 ) . It is worth mentioning that the speech and communication skill training categories involve differ - ent objectives . Speech skill training consists of encourag - ing speaking skills by training the articulation of ideas or the creation of stories . Communication training consists of engaging patients in a meaningful interaction with other individuals to help them communicate effectively . From the studies analyzed , adaptable technologies for individuals with NDD include activities to support learn - ing skills , communication training , social training , cognitive training , and fine / gross motor training . Adaptable technolo - gies for individuals with aphasia and mental health disease include activities for communication training . Speech train - ing is supported by technologies for individuals with apha - sia , NDD , and apraxia . Technologies to support individuals with amnesia and Alzheimer’s disease include cognitive training activities , and those to support physical therapy of individuals with cerebral palsy and stroke include activities for balance training , upper limb training , and hand training . As presented in Table 2 , studies that propose adaptable applications to support amnesia , dyslexia , apraxia of speech , hand disabilities , mental health disease , multiple sclerosis , and Alzheimer’s disease only present a single publication in the revised period . Overall , the authors report that the use of these applications indicated effective results in all cases in relation to improving the patients’ attention span , improved learning and communication , better motor skills , and so on ( see Table 5 ) . However , further research is required to dem - onstrate the viability of these applications , particularly for diseases that affect a large population such as mental health disease , dyslexia , Alzheimer’s disease , and multiple sclero - sis ( MS ) . In 2017 , mental health problems affected 10 . 7 % of the world population ( 792 million ) [ 28 ] and dyslexia affected approximately 700 million people worldwide [ 29 ] . In 2019 , the World Health Organization ( WHO ) reported that Alz - heimer’s disease is the most common form of dementia and may have contributed to 60 – 70 % of the 50 million dementia cases in the world at present [ 30 ] , and there are approxi - mately 10 million new cases every year . Similarly , in 2019 , the National Multiple Sclerosis Society [ 31 ] reported that more than 2 . 3 million people have been diagnosed with MS . We suggest the future development of adaptable appli - cations to support other diseases that affect a considerable number of the population , such as Parkinson’s disease , mus - cular dystrophy , and diabetes mellitus . Parkinson’s disease is a progressive nervous system disorder that affects move - ment . The Parkinson Foundation reports that in 2019 , more than 10 million people worldwide were living with this dis - ease [ 32 ] . Muscular dystrophy is a group of diseases that cause progressive weakness and loss of muscle mass [ 33 ] . The prevalence of all muscular dystrophies is between 19 . 8 and 25 . 1 per 100 , 000 person years [ 34 ] . Similarly , diabetes mellitus is associated with various health problems , includ - ing decline in skeletal muscle mass [ 35 ] . In 2016 , the World Health Organization reported that approximately 1 . 6 million people worldwide died owing to diabetes , and it is estimated that 425 million people are living with diabetes all over the world [ 36 ] . We believe that people suffering from various types of diseases or disorders can benefit significantly from adaptable applications . The following subsection describes how adaptable tech - nologies support rehabilitation processes and what advan - tages they bring to patients . 4 . 2 RQ2 : How do adaptable technologies support the rehabilitation of patients according to the type of injury , disorder , or disease ? How has this benefited the patients ? We have identified that the applications proposed or used in the studies have different characteristics to support the rehabilitation processes . These characteristics are classi - fied based on the type of application and adaptation . We referred to the module present to the patient to interact with Fig . 2 Number of articles selected per year of publication and type of illness / injury 306 Universal Access in the Information Society ( 2021 ) 20 : 299 – 319 1 3 the application as the type of application , categorized into serious game , playful game , gamification , informative inter - face , communication interface , presentation , and schedul - ing interface ( Table 3 ) . We referred to the possibilities of customization of the applications as the type of adaptation , which were categorized as content adaptation , layout and content adaptation , semiautomatic adaptation , adaptation of the tool , and programming adaptation ( Table 4 ) . 4 . 2 . 1 Classification by type of application Regarding the type of application , we found that most stud - ies present applications such as serious games ( 9 ) and play - ful activities ( 5 ) to their patients . Regarding informative and communication applications , a total of seven studies present this type of application to patients—three and four , respectively . Regarding gamification , scheduling applica - tions , and presentation , only one study presents each of these modules to the patients . It is noteworthy that four studies ( S3 , S7 , S16 , and S23 ) do not present a software interface to the patients . This is because they proposed the use of custom tangible objects such as a toy ( S3 ) and a pen ( S16 ) so that the patient can interact . Study S23 focused attention on knowing how to present a development - like interface to therapists . Study S7 proposed an alternative design of cus - tom technologies for autistic children and focused analysis on the design of the interface with the therapists . The last four studies mentioned were categorized as “not applicable” for the reasons explained . The remaining studies were cat - egorized regardless of the type of application by injuries or disorders in Fig . 3 . We categorize those applications that include strategies based on the principles of interactive game design to deliver educational contents as a serious game . This is found in studies for the treatment of NDD ( S1 , S4 , S6 , and S12 ) , Table 3 Classification by type of application Type of application Description Serious game Application consisting of an interactive game with educational purpose . Studies are S1 , S4 , S6 , S12 , S14 , S24 , S26 , S27 , S28 Playful game Application involving playful activities . Studies are S2 , S5 , S8 , S11 , S21 Gamification Application that uses more gaming techniques in a context that is not typically related to them . Study S13 Informative interface Application with emphasis on providing feedback on performance to patients . Studies are : S15 , S22 , S25 Communication application Messaging applications that enable chat and applications with text - to - speech features . Studies are S9 , S10 , S17 , S18 Presentation application Application that only showed personalized content to patient , avoiding any distractor . Study S19 Scheduling application Application focused on managing appointments and bookings , similar to meeting scheduling tools . Study S20 Table 4 Classification by type of adaptation Type of adaptation Description Content adaptation Customization of audiovisual elements of the application . Studies that use this type of adaptation are S1 , S4 , S5 , S6 , S7 , S8 , S10 , S11 , S13 , S16 , S17 , S19 , S20 , and S21 Layout and content adaptation Customization of Graphic Interface layout and content . S9 is a study that uses this type of adaptation Semiautomatic adaptation Exercises customization initial or periodical according to information and goal for each patient . Studies that use this type of adaptation are S12 , S18 , S26 , and S27 Tool adaptation Hardware customization through GUI interface according to specific needs of patients . Studies that use this type of adaptation are S3 , S14 , S15 , S22 , S24 , S25 , and S28 Programming adaptation Customization using graphical user interfaces similar to the programming languages using drag and drop visual objects . Studies that use this type of adaptation are S2 and S23 Fig . 3 Classification by type of application for each injury / disease 307 Universal Access in the Information Society ( 2021 ) 20 : 299 – 319 1 3 cerebral palsy ( S14 ) , stroke ( S24 , S26 ) , hand disabilities ( S27 ) , and multiple sclerosis ( S28 ) . Studies S1 , S12 , S14 , S26 , and S27 report that there are significant therapeutic gains , as the elements of the game are engaging , motivating , and fun for patients . The authors of S6 indicate that the increment of sustained attention from session 1 to 2 is an average between 7 and 14 % . In study S12 , the authors suggest that 40 % of the patients could pay attention to the prototype for more than 10 min . According to the authors of S4 , the use of serious games helped patients to maintain remained attentive contributing to more efficient learning . The authors indicate that the data collected through the log system have not been analyzed yet but would help to understand more detailed therapeutic gains . Similarly , in the S28 study , patients with MS con - sidered the system to be very beneficial and valued it as an alternative to conventional training approaches . In study S27 , the authors reported that the patient’s range of motion was evolving after each session . The task was completed correctly by 20 % of the evaluated users , obtain - ing a percentage of achievement and correctness of 100 % . Results between 50 and 60 % were achieved by 60 % of the users . Among the limitations , the authors mentioned that it is necessary to add multiple games in the future and train the users in the use of the sensor leap motion before play - ing smoothly . The authors of S24 suggested positive results in the user test . However , they indicated that the user test was not thoroughly analyzed ; thus , they did not report more details about the results obtained . Studies that include playful games consist of platforms created for users to perform activities involving visual and / or physical stimulation . Unlike serious games , playful games are generally used for recreational purposes . We have identi - fied that this strategy is used in the treatment of NDD ( S2 , S5 , S8 , and S11 ) and mental health diseases ( S21 ) , all of which report its usefulness in the motivation and commit - ment of patients . According to the authors who used this type of applica - tion , the use of therapeutic activities that imply a game - like structure helps in learning ( S5 ) , motivation ( S11 ) , and engagement ( S5 , S11 ) . In study S2 , the authors mention that the scores in the cognitive area triple the initial value after six sessions . In the relational area , the children improved by 28 – 64 % in communication , between 25 and 80 % in emo - tional behavior , and 20 – 33 % in the motor area . The authors concluded that the results are encouraging , and the caregiv - ers observed that learning improvements were achieved sig - nificantly faster when compared to traditional interventions . The authors in S5 suggested that the adaptable applica - tion has a learning potential to improve the attention ( from 43 . 4 to 72 . 38 % , in two sessions ) and duplicate the percent visual - motor integration skill compared to the initial ses - sions . The authors of S8 did not report quantitative results of gain for patients because some problems of interface and interaction occurred along the user test . It should be noted that although they are classified as seri - ous games and playful games , these studies do not report any significant difference between using one or another applica - tion . They all mention the benefits observed , regardless of the type of game proposed . Concerning gamification categorized by the type of appli - cation , this is described in the use of design techniques and game mechanics to enrich contexts that are not typically related to games . This strategy aims to instruct , make the application more attractive , and influence the behavior of users . We have identified that such an application is used only in the S13 study to support the treatment of dyslexia . The authors concluded that gamification platforms combined with teachers’ practices shape the pedagogical and motiva - tional benefits experienced by students , facilitating encour - agement and learning for children with dyslexia . With applications different from those of games and gamification , three studies for cerebral palsy ( S15 ) and stroke ( S22 and S25 ) proposed informative interfaces with an emphasis on visual feedback for motivating the patient . Through this application , the authors aimed to present feed - back , while the patient performs the exercises . The patient is congratulated with personalized feedback ( audio or on - screen messages ) or corrected after the error . According to the authors of S25 , 80 % of the patients indicated better body movement because of the visual feedback displayed by the platform . In addition , the authors suggested that therapists considered that the platform provides pleasant , positive , and motivating visual feedback for patients . The authors of S15 indicated that the patients’ performance increased substan - tially , achieving an average of 10 correct movements , when the application displayed feedback pictures after completing the movements . The type of application categorized as communication appears in four studies for NDD ( S9 , S10 ) , aphasia ( S17 ) , and apraxia of speech ( S18 ) . The use of this type of applica - tion aims to encourage the social and verbal communication of the patients . The authors of S9 report that the number of sessions of the children’s group that used the custom plat - form was an average of 10 more compared with the group without customization . Further , the children with custom content were able to perform completely focused sessions in 12 % of the cases compared with the group without cus - tomization ( 0 % of sessions ) . The authors of S10 suggest that the children evaluated used more than one image to communicate with others . In addition , the authors report that the children used more pictures acquired with the camera of a smartphone than cartoon images , reinforcing the idea that real images may work better with these users . According to the authors of S17 , customization was criti - cal to the adoption of the application ( TalkingTiles ) by the 308 Universal Access in the Information Society ( 2021 ) 20 : 299 – 319 1 3 users because the personalization of the interface was too complicated for individuals with aphasia . However , they found that the patients’ ability to navigate improved after the keywords displayed on the tiles were edited . The authors of S18 suggested that characteristics such as animations , rewards , audios , and visual aids on the tablet helped the user engage and speed up the learning process of patients . Study S19 includes a presentation application that con - sists of presenting customized content with a very simple interface and a limited number of options for the users to interact . This type of application was used in S19 with the purpose of reminiscence . The authors suggest that the sys - tem was effective in prompting conversations and in evok - ing personal memories ; it was also helpful in facilitating patient – caregiver interaction . In addition , the authors rec - ommend that the use of animations or competing stimuli should be avoided in future applications at any instant of time , using subtle graphics through calming color schemes and a touch screen for all required interactions to support the most natural interaction style . Only one study , S20 , presented a scheduling application that consists of a collaborative shared calendar system . For evaluating the collaboration , the authors counted the number of shared events in the participant families during the inter - vention as compared to the baseline . They suggested that the mean of the shared events with an adaptable scheduling application is 13 . 58 compared to the mean baseline value of 4 . 42 . 4 . 2 . 2 Classification by type of adaptation Regarding the classification of studies by type of adapta - tion , we identified that the adaptation was applied in various ways , from the customization of videos , audios , and charac - ters preferred by patients to the customization of the layout or tools used in the applications for the various diseases ( Fig . 4 ) . We classified them considering the type of infor - mation that the therapist registers in the end - user module of adaptable application . Adaptation of content consists of customizing the content of the application , which includes the adaptation of videos , animations , audios , images ( favorite characters of users ) , and system feedback . This is applied in the treatment of NDD ( S1 , S4 , S5 , S6 , S7 , S8 , S10 , and S11 ) , dyslexia ( S13 ) , apha - sia ( S16 , S17 ) , Alzheimer’s disease ( S19 ) , amnesia ( S20 ) , and mental health diseases ( S21 ) . Adaptation of layout and content consists of customizing the layout of the interface , such as the image and background color , colors and formats of the menus , icons , and sounds . It was used in only one study for the treatment of NDD ( S9 ) , whose focus was on the development of communicative competence in autistic children . Semiautomatic adaptation consists of the mixture of cus - tomization , by the therapist , and adaptation based on the rules of the system . Repetitive manual tasks such as diffi - culty level updates based on patient performance or speech analysis are automated . At the beginning of the therapy , the therapist registers the patient and the diagnosis to define the training exercises . The therapist follows the treatment and can change the goals and strategies at any time . This is used in applications for NDD ( S12 ) , apraxia of speech ( S18 ) , and stroke ( S26 , S27 ) . Adaptation of the tool allows the therapist to establish , through a graphic interface , the variables of the sensors that are usually used to capture movements or to interact with the patients ( tangible objects ) . This is used in applications for the physical rehabilitation of people with NDD ( S3 ) , cerebral palsy ( S14 , S15 ) , stroke ( S22 , S24 , S25 ) , and MS ( S28 ) . Programming adaptation consists of the use of a graphi - cal user interface ( GUI ) very similar to the programming languages for beginners that use drag and drop visual objects to adapt or create custom applications for patients . This is used in applications for NDD ( S2 ) and Stroke ( S23 ) . As observed in Fig . 4 , adaptation of content is the type of customization mostly used in studies , particularly in those supporting the rehabilitation of NDD . The studies report that the present custom content facilitates the development of skills and motivation of the patients to perform the therapy . Regarding patients’ motivation , studies S4 , S6 , and S8 report that the possibility of customizing contents according to the needs ( S4 , S6 ) and interests ( S8 ) of each child encour - ages their attention and involvement in therapy . According Fig . 4 Types of adaptation according to the disease 309 Universal Access in the Information Society ( 2021 ) 20 : 299 – 319 1 3 to the authors of S6 , S11 , and S15 , the children were more attentive and motivated when their favorite characters appeared in the game , thus being more disposed to partici - pating in the therapy and better performance . Similarly , the authors of S19 indicated that patients with Alzheimer’s dis - ease demonstrated a clear preference for personalized mate - rial ( photos of their home environment ) , which contributed to the improvement of their memories . The authors of S10 emphasized that customizing using images more familiar to the children than those made avail - able by default in the application contributed to the accom - plishment of the therapies without interruptions . According to the authors of S16 , the therapist highlighted the advan - tages of portability and customization of contents through the digital pen , compared to the use of traditional tools ( pen and paper ) in phonoaudiological therapies . They emphasized that the digital pen enabled the creation of activities appro - priate to the specific needs of each patient . The authors of S5 emphasized that the inclusion of aspects of customiza - tion , the evolution of task levels , and use of rewards , among others , were more effective compared to commercial games that do not have such characteristics . The authors of S13 suggested that customization was the key to the success of the application . The authors of S9 opted for the adaptation of the lay - out and content , suggesting that this type of customization contributed to maintaining their focus of attention for more extended periods , compared to platforms without customiza - tion , which can benefit the accomplishment of the activities and hence lead to improvement of their communication . Regarding the category of semiautomatic adaptation , the authors of S12 suggested that the automatic level adaptation allowed 80 % of the users to complete all levels of the proto - type without any problem or error . In S28 , the authors con - cluded that the use of an automated speech analysis engine supports the feasibility of the use of a customized system as a complement to traditional face - to - face speech therapy . The authors of S26 indicated that the results obtained did not indicate a significant effect of the factor “rehabilitation” ( before vs after ) on the variables analyzed ( joint pain , pas - sive joint range of motion and motor function , wrists and hands , and coordination / speed ) for the patients . In addition , they suggested that a more extensive pilot study is neces - sary to assess the efficacy of the system . In S27 , the authors suggested that the adaptive factor of the system helped to maintain the patients’ interest in the game . Regarding the adaptation of the tool , it has been used in studies where the patient interacts with the application using sensors such as Kinect ( S14 , S15 , S24 ) , leap motion ( S24 ) , or tangible objects constructed by the researchers for the training of hand ( S3 , S22 , S28 ) or foot ( S25 ) movements . Patient movements are captured by sensors and compared through rules with the prescriptions made by therapists , providing feedback during or after patient interaction with the application ( S14 , S15 ) . According to the authors of S15 , the gesture recognition capabilities of the system reduced the intervention of therapy staff and enabled the enhancement of the motivation of participants for physical rehabilitation . For the authors of S25 and S28 , the real - time feedback of the movements presented in the application was attractive and engaging for the patients . In S3 , the children gained a diverse range of fine motor skills , which resulted in varied usage of toy functions . The authors of S2 and S23 opted for programming adap - tation . Only S2 has been evaluated with patients , and the authors reported that the use of custom content combined with controlled stimuli in an intelligent environment has aided in the development of cognitive , communication - related , relational , emotional , and motor skills of NDD children ( see Table 2 ) . It has been observed that regardless of the type of adapta - tion ( content , layout , semiautomatic , tool , programming ) or type of application ( serious game , playful game , gamifica - tion , informative interface , for communication or presenta - tion , and scheduling application ) offered , the applications contribute favorably to the therapeutic process . As Table 5 presents , the main contributions include : increased attention ; engagement in therapy ; learning , communication , social interaction , and motor movement improvements ; patients’ independence to perform the exercises ; and the possibility of doing the exercises at home . It is worth mentioning that of the five types of adapta - tions mentioned above , the contents and tool adaptations are used in most of the applications , mainly in those to sup - port the treatment of conditions that compromise cognitive , behavioral , and language aspects ( Table 5 ) . Various authors suggest that the presentation of colors , videos , sounds , and images preferred by the patient contributes to enhancing the patient’s attention and , consequently , to obtain more effective therapeutic gains in relation to improvement in cognitive , language and behavioral aspects as compared to traditional therapies . In addition , as summarized in Table 5 , applications that used this type of adaptation contributed primarily to patient engagement in therapy and improved learning and communication skills . Semiautomatic and tool adaptations are mainly included in applications designed to support exercise or physical activity training ( Table 5 ) . The applications that used tool adaptation present motivating results in the improvement of motor movements , mainly owing to the interaction of the patients through different sensors such as Kinect or LED floor . This also helps therapists quickly become aware of patient improvements , thus providing personalized feedback . Applications with semiautomatic adaptations demonstrate positive results , primarily because they offer independence 310 Universal Access in the Information Society ( 2021 ) 20 : 299 – 319 1 3 T a b l e 5 M a i n b e n e fi t s o f a pp li ca ti on s acc o r d i ng t o t y p e o f a pp li ca ti on a nd a d a p t a ti on T yp e o f r e h a b ilit a - ti on S t udy I D T yp e o f a pp li ca ti on T yp e o f a d a p t a ti on M a i n b e n e fi t s f o r p a ti e n t s S e r i - ou s g a m e P l a y f u l g a m e G a m i - fi ca - ti on I n f o r m a - ti v e i n t e rf ace C o m - m un i - ca ti on a pp li - ca ti on P r e s - e n t a - ti on a pp li - ca ti on S c h e d - u li ng a pp li ca - ti on C on - t e n t a d a p - ti on L a you t a nd c on - t e n t a d a p - ti on S e m i - a u t o - m a ti c a d a p - ti on T oo l s a d a p - ti on P r o - g r a m - m i ng a d a p - ti on I n c r ea s e d a tt e n ti on I m p r ov e d l ea r n i ng I m p r ov e d c o mm un i - ca ti on E ng a g e - m e n t a nd s e ss i on s B e tt e r m o t o r s k ill s I nd e - p e nd - e n c y P o s - s i b ilit y o f r e h a - b ilit a - ti on fr o m ho m e I m p r ov e d s o c i a l s k ill s B e tt e r r e s u lt s c o m - p a r e d t o t r a d i - ti on a l t h e r a - p i e s N o t a pp li ca - b l e N e u r od e - v e l op - m e n t a l d i s o r d e r S 1 X X X X S 2 X X X X X X S 3 X X X X X S 4 X X X X X S 5 X X X X X S 6 X X X X X X S 7 X X X S 8 X X S 9 X X X X S 10 X X X X X X S 11 X X X X S 12 X X X X X D y s l e x i a S 13 X X X X C e r e b r a l p a l s y S 14 X X X X S 15 X X X X X X A ph a s i a S 16 X X X S 17 X X X A ph a s i a o f s p eec h S 18 X X X X A l z h e i m e r S 19 X X X A m n e s i a S 20 X X X M e n t a l h ea lt h S 21 X X X S t r ok e S 22 X X X S 23 X X S 24 X X X S 25 X X X X S 26 X X X X H a nd d i s - a b iliti e s S 27 X X X M u lti p l e s c l e r o - s i s S 28 X X X 311 Universal Access in the Information Society ( 2021 ) 20 : 299 – 319 1 3 and enable home - based rehabilitation to complement the therapeutic sessions . Overall , the main benefits that adaptable technologies offer NDD patients are improving motor skills , learning and communication , and increased attention . Most authors suggested better results compared to traditional therapies , mainly owing to the possibility of rehabilitation from home . Studies using adaptable technologies for patients with aphasia suggest that rehabilitation from home contributes to better independence of the patients . Studies on individu - als for cerebral palsy , stroke , and multiple sclerosis report improvement in motor skills and patient independence . The main benefit reported in patients with apraxia of speech is improvement in learning of speech . Finally , a study using an adaptable technology for Alzheimer’s disease reported improvement in the communication of the patients . 4 . 3 RQ3 : What are the main contributions that adaptable technologies bring to the therapist that accompanies patient rehabilitation ? We identified that only 10 studies ( S1 , S12 , S16 , S18 , S20 , S21 , S22 , S26 , S27 , and S28 ) explicitly mention contribu - tions that the applications offered to therapists in their work . We categorized these contributions as follows : ( a ) the data captured in the applications support the therapists to custom - ize the exercises and strategies in the decision making , based on the performance and preferences of the patients ; ( b ) the semiautomatic adaptability of the exercises that support the work of the therapist , and ( c ) the reuse of targeted exercises to reduce work and effort in preparing exercises afresh . The use of various technological tools enabled the cap - ture of patient’s data performance , allowing identification of their preferences and performance during their interac - tion with the application . In the Pixtalk application ( S10 ) , which helps the patient communicate with people through the use of images , the captured data helped the therapist to determine the number and size of sentences created by the patients , as well as to identify the images that were used the most to communicate . The authors of S16 and S18 suggested that data tracking can help the therapist understand what the patient is doing without the need for supervision and provide the ability to document the patient’s progress over time . Nevertheless , in S16 , data tracking helped the authors to know the characteristics and use patterns of the applica - tion ( therapist and patient ) , helping them to identify new needs to be implemented that were not considered during the development of the prototype . The authors of S26 concluded that the proposed application reports and recommendations , based on patient performance and algorithms that were made available in the cloud to the clinic , would assist the therapist in personalizing exercises , decision - making , and strategies with their patients . The authors of S20 indicated that using the application helped reduce stress , effort , and saved the caregivers’ time in scheduling and coordinating activities for the patient . The concept of supporting the work of the therapist was explored mainly based on studies that propose a semiauto - matic adaptation ( see Table 5 ) . In study S27 , the therapists found the adaptation of the application based on the level of patient performance useful . The authors of S12 pointed out that automatic adaptation of the application helps reduce the workload of the teachers , as they do not need to repeat the same lesson several times and redo the same questions for students with autism . In addition , this type of adaptation allows children to enjoy a fun learning environment ( S12 ) . In study S18 , the authors suggested that an automated speech analysis engine enables the therapist to remotely monitor progress and adapt the therapy regimen as needed . Moreo - ver , based on the results from the pilot study , they concluded that the application proposed could be used as a complement to traditional face - to - face speech therapy . Concerning the reduction of work and effort in the prepa - ration of exercises , we identified that three studies ( S1 , S21 , and S22 ) presented applications that allow the reuse of exer - cises . However , they allow modification and / or adaptation of the exercises to several patients with similar needs and goals . Although the authors intended to contribute to the reduction of the time spent by the therapist in the elabora - tion of each exercise , this improvement was not reported by the therapists . The authors of S1 reported that the therapists did not quickly understand the benefits of reusing digital content and physical objects , which led to an overload of ( physical ) materials in the application after creating several exercises , but after they understood the concept , it was used intensively . In S22 , ready - made exercises were available for therapists to use , with some modification , for patients with similar needs . Unfortunately , this proposal did not work well because therapists preferred to create new exercises instead of modifying previous ones , arguing that understanding the details of exercises created by another professional would require a longer time than creating new ones . S21 did not report whether the template offered help with the amount of time required to adapt the exercises . Still , the therapists found the system flexible , which allowed them to imple - ment a wide range of therapeutic conversations and ques - tionnaires for their patients using the template offered in the application . Although the several studies reviewed suggest the pos - sibility of using remotely adaptable applications ( suggest - ing tele - rehabilitation ) , more than 90 % reported supervised patient testing , similar to local therapy . Tele - rehabilitation consists in the delivery of rehabilitation services over tel - ecommunication networks and the Internet [ 37 ] . Previous works have reported noticeable results for patients with the 312 Universal Access in the Information Society ( 2021 ) 20 : 299 – 319 1 3 use of tele - rehabilitation systems [ 38 , 39 ] , comparable with those obtained at hospitals or with a face - to - face therapist [ 40 ] . Among the main advantages for patients , the studies suggested that the tele - rehabilitation systems are cost - effec - tive ( when just used for monitoring during the rehabilitation process ) , avoid tiring travel , and help with resource limi - tations including time spent in hospitals or geographically distant locations [ 41 ] . Advanced present - day technologies such as wireless sensors , microcomputers , and communica - tion systems provide support for developing robust , flexible , and modular architecture tele - rehabilitation systems [ 41 ] . Furthermore , in recent years , several studies focusing on tele - rehabilitation have included machine learning algo - rithms to evaluate the exercises performed by the patients in real time , thus providing targeted feedback [ 42 , 43 ] . How - ever , several factors reported in the literature limit the adop - tion of tele - rehabilitation in real environments . The promi - nent ones are ( a ) impossibility of customizing a therapy to meet a patient’s specific needs and ( b ) excessive complex - ity of use for non - technical persons such as therapists or patients [ 44 – 46 ] . In this regard , based on the various benefits presented in this section and Sect . 4 . 2 , we believe that adapt - able technologies can be presented as a solution to assist in the adoption of tele - rehabilitation systems . In conclusion , 36 % of the studies evaluated explicitly mention that adaptable applications along with the sensors / devices used have contributed to the therapeutic process both to know patients’ preferences and to monitor their per - formance and to reduce their work and effort in preparing the exercises . These contributions are promising for future studies aimed at supporting therapists in different rehabili - tation processes , but further studies are required . It is rec - ommended that in future studies , adaptable applications be designed and evaluated along with all the persons involved ( patients , therapists , parents , teachers , caregivers ) , giving special attention to the end user to design suitable applica - tions for the potential end user . We believe that this contrib - utes to the applications , offering a positive and satisfactory experience as well as guaranteeing their durability over time . 4 . 4 RQ4 : What are the difficulties faced by therapists in the adoption and use of adaptable technologies ? Regardless of whether the study was directly evaluated with therapists or not , we have identified that some stud - ies report information from therapists , either through direct evaluations , semi - structured interviews , informal feedback , or direct observations of authors . We have identified that only six of the reviewed studies ( S1 , S8 , S9 , S15 , S18 , and S22 ) report these difficulties , which are related to both the adaptability of the application and the usability aspects . We classified the difficulties as ( a ) limited time to customize exercises for patients and ( b ) difficulty in using and learning the application . One of the major difficulties faced by therapists in adopt - ing adaptable technologies is the limited time in which they must perform end - user activities to adapt or extend the appli - cation to the patient . For example , in S22 , therapists indicate that creating and modifying exercises requires a consider - able amount of time , which is beyond the time available for patient care . In addition , the authors suggested that other fac - tors impact the adoption of adaptable applications , such as cultural aspects , theoretical and organizational approaches , time , and personal motivation . The limited time is an aspect that significantly impacts the adaptation of the applications , as the lack of time may prevent therapists from appropriately adapting the tool . For example , in studies S8 and S9 , the authors reported that , owing to the short time , teachers do not customize the con - tent of the application according to the children’s prefer - ences , thus using the standard characteristics available ( predefined images ) . Therapists have demonstrated a lack of motivation to search for symbols that might be useful to children . In S9 , it was seen that these aspects had an impact on the result , as the messages exchanged and the sharing of preferences of the patients were similar to those of the use of the system without customization . In the S15 study , the authors identified that the configura - tion of the input parameters of the sensors for a particular exercise is a time - consuming task , although they have pro - vided a suitable graphical interface for the therapists . The authors suggested , as future work , to provide a predefined collection of settings with the application for the therapists’ convenience during the time available . Regarding the difficulty in using and learning the applica - tion , in S1 , the authors indicated that the general aspects of the application were easy to learn . However , the most signif - icant learning difficulty faced by therapists was the concept of “reusing physical and digital content , ” that is , connecting the same physical object to multiple digital contents in dif - ferent learning activities . However , once they understood the benefits and advantages of reusing materials , they used it intensively , finding it simple to operate . To address these difficulties , some studies suggest rec - ommendations for designing adaptable applications in the future work . Study S23 suggests that for EUP - based envi - ronments , it is necessary to use simple blocks without much programming detail , particularly because of the limited time therapists have . The authors of S23 pointed out that insuf - ficient time is still a challenge when designing platforms for therapeutic use . Similarly , study S7 suggests , as a require - ment , that adaptable applications offer standard activities that the therapist can adapt quickly , thus contributing to the limited time they have . Also in study S8 , the authors pointed out that the use of design probes has proved to be efficient in 313 Universal Access in the Information Society ( 2021 ) 20 : 299 – 319 1 3 the communication and presentation of new concepts , such as adaptable technologies for therapists , and suggested that these gains will be reflected in the usability of the applica - tion and its adoption by the end users . Based on the findings in this review , we believe that the benefits of adaptable applications , such as support for auto - matic adaptability , the possibility of generating personalized exercises and patient performance reports can help with the therapists’ limited time . However , various aspects must be considered to aid in the adaptability process . We believe that future studies should include further evaluations of how therapists treat the process of adapting applications , as this is directly related to the quality of therapy and the contribution they make to the therapeutic process for both patients and therapists . Further , we consider that it is essen - tial for the design of the interface aimed at the therapist to consider details such as concepts and technologies with which the therapist is familiar . These details can help to save the therapists’ time in learning and understanding how the application works , which may help in the adoption of the application . 5 Conclusion This review was aimed at identifying how end - user adapt - able applications studied in the literature contribute to the therapeutic process for patients ( potential end users ) and therapists ( end users ) . Further , this review identified the dif - ficulties faced by therapists in the process of adaptation and extension of the applications . The main conclusions for the four research questions proposed are as follows . We identified that 28 studies include applications to sup - port the rehabilitation of 11 types of injuries or disorders . Most studies ( 17 out of 28 ) present applications for the treat - ment of NDD and stroke , mainly in the year 2018 . For other conditions , one or two studies at most were identified . We highlight that there is still a lack of research on adaptable applications aimed at conditions other than stroke or NDD , particularly for injuries or disorders that affect a large part of the population . The second aspect reviewed consisted of identifying how adaptable applications support rehabilitation and how they have contributed to patients . We determined that most stud - ies that include applications focused on physical training propose , in addition to the adaptability of the application , applications of the type playful game and serious game , mainly to motivate and engage the patient during therapeu - tic sessions . We classified the adaptable applications by type of application for patients and by the type of adaptation that the therapist performs . The studies analyzed suggested that the type of application combined with adaptability is more effective in achieving therapeutic goals quickly because the exercises are tailored to the needs and progress of the patient . However , most studies focusing on cognitive or behavioral rehabilitation have chosen to adapt content ( see Fig . 4 ) . In all of them , we identified that the main benefits of using adaptable technologies for patients were ( a ) improvement in communication , learning , attention , and social skills ; ( b ) improvement in motor movement ; ( c ) engagement during sessions ; and ( d ) contribution to the independence of the patients in the accomplishment of the tasks . However , we believe that there still are gaps in this field of research that can offer good opportunities for future studies . For exam - ple , a tool or application that supports the measurement of the benefits that adaptable technologies bring to patients or therapists during and after the experiments has not been identified . The third aspect reviewed consisted of identifying the contributions that adaptable applications can bring to the therapist in the therapeutic context . We identified three main contributions : ( a ) support for strategies in decision making , based on the performance and preference of patients , ( b ) support for repetitive tasks such as change of level or to find custom images , and ( c ) help in preparing exercises . We believe that these contributions have significant benefits for therapists because they help them save time , improve effi - ciency in their daily work , and promote their adoption in real environments . However , these contributions were iden - tified in 10 out of the 28 articles analyzed , as most studies focused on the evaluation of the application with the patient . Thus , we can suggest that the future research should evaluate the adaptable applications along with the two main users to understand how to help both the evolution of the patient and support the work of therapists . Finally , this review aimed to identify the difficulties faced by therapists in the use and adoption of adaptable technolo - gies . We identified that only 21 % of the studies reported some aspect of difficulty faced by therapists , which may be mainly because few studies considered therapists while evaluating the applications . In these studies , the main prob - lem is the limited time available with therapists to learn how to operate the application and customize the contents and devices according to the patients’ needs . Some studies help with this challenge , such as the use of standard exer - cises , automation of some repetitive manual tasks through algorithms , reuse of ready exercises , and reports of patient performance throughout their treatment . An additional fac - tor , apart from the lack of time , is that in some cases , the therapist’s poor / little knowledge about the technology or even their lack of interest in adapting the application to the patients’ preferences impacted the results of the research . In addition to the four aspects addressed through the research questions , this systematic review helped to better understand the use of end - user adaptable technologies in the therapeutic context as well as to obtain more specific 314 Universal Access in the Information Society ( 2021 ) 20 : 299 – 319 1 3 information about their main contributions and possible limitations . Among the methodological limitations is the need for studies with larger samples , more extended time of evaluation of the application with patients and therapists , and assessment of the adoption of the practices of the use of adaptable technologies by therapists . We believe that these aspects would help to compare the future research and adapt - able application results . Consequently , generalizations can be drawn from such studies . It is not easy to predict the future of adaptable technol - ogies in the context of rehabilitation owing to the socio - technical environment that is involved where issues such as learning , motivation , limit time , collaboration , and organiza - tion are concerned and are the determinants of adoption and success . In this study , we delineate a few research directions in this regard , namely ( a ) natural user interface adaptation techniques , ( b ) automatization of repetitive manual tasks , and ( c ) social - technical context . We consider that , at the design stage of adaptable tech - nologies , one should observe more closely the character - istics of how therapists traditionally present or customize exercises for their patients . Currently , several devices allow a more natural interaction with interfaces such as Kinect , leap motion , and multitouch tables . In this sense , new techniques that enable a more natural customization of adaptable tech - nologies can be developed to avoid adoption barriers such as time spent in learning the tool or delaying the customization . As mentioned in Sects . 4 . 2 and 4 . 3 , the automatization of the repetitive manual tasks can help save the therapists’ customization time ; for the future research , we suggest that more attention be paid to this aspect . Moreover , support activities such as automatic reports and information analy - sis could help the work of the therapist ; consequently , we offered more efficient support . In addition , it is essential to consider that adaptable technology will not be used only by users who spend a substantial amount of their working time in front of a computer . In most cases , non - technical users are likely to find it difficult to learn how to customize new technologies . Therefore , we believe that in the design phase , not only the end users and potential end users but also the context in which the end users operate should be considered . A possible future research direction could be to investigate new techniques of adoption of adaptable technologies within the social - technical context . Furthermore , we suggest the need for research studies that use technologies to make the tele - rehabilitation system architecture highly flexible and less expensive by appropri - ately combining software and hardware . For instance , in the physical rehabilitation context , several studies commonly use cameras as Kinect for human skeleton tracking . How - ever , this represents additional costs for most people and sometimes leads to their restricted use in hospital environ - ments . We believe that the use of open frameworks such as OpenPose [ 47 ] , which allows one to track virtual skeleton joints directly from the RGB data captured from a web - cam , can contribute to the use of tele - rehabilitation systems anywhere and by a large population . In addition , we con - sider the training of the professionals involved in this new form of intervention essential to provide a more effective rehabilitation . Compliance with ethical standards Conflict of interest On behalf of all authors , the corresponding author states that there is no conflict of interest . Appendix A : List of reviewed articles See Table 6 . 315 Universal Access in the Information Society ( 2021 ) 20 : 299 – 319 1 3 Table 6 List of review articles Id Article S1 Franca Garzotto , Rober Gonella , “An open - ended tangible environment for disabled children’s learning , ” Proceedings of the 10th Interna - tional Conference on Interaction Design and Children , pp . 52 – 61 , June 20 – 23 , 2011 , Ann Arbor , Michigan S2 Franca Garzotto and Mirko Gelsomini . 2018 , “Magic Room : A Smart Space for Children with Neurodevelopmental Disorder , ” IEEE Per - vasive Computing 17 , 1 ( 2018 ) , 38 – 48 S3 Victoria Tam , Mirko Gelsomini , Franca Garzotto , “Polipo : a Tangible Toy for Children with Neurodevelopmental Disorders , ” Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Tangible , Embedded , and Embodied Interaction , March 20 – 23 , 2017 , Yokohama , Japan S4 Cagatay , M . , Ege , P . , Tokdemir , G . , Cagiltay , N . E . ( 2012 , April ) . A serious game for speech disorder children therapy . In 2012 7th Interna - tional Symposium on Health Informatics and Bioinformatics ( pp . 18 – 23 ) . IEEE S5 Bartoli , L . , Garzotto , F . , Gelsomini , M . , Oliveto , L . , Valoriani , M . ( 2014 , June ) . Designing and evaluating touchless playful interaction for ASD children . In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on Interaction design and children ( pp . 17 – 26 ) . ACM S6 Garzotto , F . , Gelsomini , M . , Clasadonte , F . , Montesano , D . , Occhiuto , D . ( 2016 , June ) . Wearable immersive storytelling for disabled chil - dren . In Proceedings of the International Working Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces ( pp . 196 – 203 ) . ACM S7 Braz , P . , David , V . F . , Raposo , A . , Barbosa , S . D . J . , de Souza , C . S . ( 2014 , June ) . An alternative design perspective for technology sup - porting youngsters with autism . In International Conference on Augmented Cognition ( pp . 279 – 287 ) . Springer , Cham S8 Porcino , T . , Trevisan , D . , Clua , E . , Rodrigues , M . , Barbosa , D . ( 2015 , September ) . A participatory approach for game design to support the learning and communication of Autistic children . In International Conference on Entertainment Computing ( pp . 17 – 31 ) . Springer , Cham S9 da Silva , M . L . , Gonçalves , D . , Silva , H . ( 2014 ) . User - tuned content customization for children with autism spectrum disorders . Procedia Computer Science , 27 , 441 – 448 S10 De Leo , G . , Gonzales , C . H . , Battagiri , P . , Leroy , G . ( 2011 ) . A smart - phone application and a companion website for the improvement of the communication skills of children with autism : clinical rationale , technical development and preliminary results . Journal of medical systems , 35 ( 4 ) , 703 – 711 S11 R . R . Morris , C . R . Kirschbaum , R . W . Picard , “Broadening accessibility through special interests : a new approach for software customiza - tion , ” in : Proceedings of the 12th international ACM SIGACCESS conference on Computers and accessibility , ASSETS 10 , ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2010 , pp . 171 – 178 S12 Iradah , I . S . , Rabiah , A . K . ( 2011 , November ) . EduTism : An assistive educational system for the treatment of autism children with intel - ligent approach . In International Visual Informatics Conference ( pp . 193 – 204 ) . Springer , Berlin , Heidelberg S13 Gooch , D . , Vasalou , A . , Benton , L . , Khaled , R . ( 2016 , May ) . Using gamification to motivate students with dyslexia . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on human factors in computing systems ( pp . 969 – 980 ) . ACM S14 Bonnechére , B . , Omelina , L . , Jansen , B . , Rooze , M . , Van Sint Jan , S . ( 2014 , May ) . Balance training using specially developed serious games for cerebral palsy children , a feasibility study . In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Pervasive Computing Tech - nologies for Healthcare ( pp . 302 – 304 ) . ICST ( Institute for Computer Sciences , Social - Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering ) S15 Chang , Y . J . , Han , W . Y . , Tsai , Y . C . ( 2013 ) . A Kinect - based upper limb rehabilitation system to assist people with cerebral palsy . Research in developmental disabilities , 34 ( 11 ) , 3654 – 3659 S16 Piper , A . M . , Weibel , N . , Hollan , J . D . ( 2011 ) . Write - n - speak : authoring multimodal digital - paper materials for speech - language therapy . ACM Transactions on Accessible Computing ( TACCESS ) , 4 ( 1 ) , 2 S17 Huijbregts , T . , Wallace , J . R . ( 2015 , November ) . Talkingtiles : Supporting personalization and customization in an aac app for individuals with aphasia . In Proceedings of the 2015 International Conference on Interactive Tabletops Surfaces ( pp . 63 – 72 ) . ACM S18 Parnandi , A . , Karappa , V . , Son , Y . , Shahin , M . , McKechnie , J . , Ballard , K . , Gutierrez - Osuna , R . ( 2013 , October ) . Architecture of an auto - mated therapy tool for childhood apraxia of speech . In Proceedings of the 15th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Comput - ers and Accessibility ( p . 5 ) . ACM S19 Sarne - Fleischmann , V . , Tractinsky , N . , Dwolatzky , T . , Rief , I . ( 2011 , May ) . Personalized reminiscence therapy for patients with Alzhei - mer’s disease using a computerized system . In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments ( p . 48 ) . ACM S20 Wu , M . , Baecker , R . M . , Richards , B . ( 2010 , October ) . Field evaluation of a collaborative memory aid for persons with amnesia and their family members . In Proceedings of the 12th international ACM SIGACCESS conference on Computers and accessibility ( pp . 51 – 58 ) . ACM S21 Coyle , D . , Doherty , G . , Sharry , J . ( 2010 , April ) . PlayWrite : End - User adaptable games to support adolescent mental health . In CHI’10 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( pp . 3889 – 3894 ) . ACM S22 Tetteroo , D . , Vreugdenhil , P . , Grisel , I . , Michielsen , M . , Kuppens , E . , Vanmulken , D . , Markopoulos , P . ( 2015 , April ) . Lessons learnt from deploying an End - User development platform for physical rehabilitation . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( pp . 4133 – 4142 ) . ACM S23 Kelleher , C . , Tam , S . , May , M . , Profitt , R . , Engsberg , J . ( 2011 , July ) . Towards a therapist - centered programming environment for creating rehabilitation games . In 2011 16th International Conference on Computer Games ( CGAMES ) ( pp . 240 – 247 ) . IEEE S24 Madeira , R . N . , Antunes , A . , Postolache , O . , Correia , N . ( 2017 , December ) . Serious . . . ly ! Just Kidding in Personalised Therapy Through Natural Interactions with Games . In International Conference on Advances in Computer Entertainment ( pp . 726 – 745 ) . Springer , Cham 316 Universal Access in the Information Society ( 2021 ) 20 : 299 – 319 1 3 Appendix B : Description of each application proposed in the studies analyzed See Table 7 . Table 6 ( continued ) Id Article S25 Victor Donker , Panos Markopoulos , Bert Bongers , “ REHAP balance tiles : a modular system supporting balance rehabilitation” , Proceed - ings of the 9th International Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare , pp . 201 – 208 , May 20 – 23 , 2015 , Istanbul , Turkey S26 Caggianese , G . , Cuomo , S . , Esposito , M . , Franceschini , M . , Gallo , L . , Infarinato , F . , Romano , P . ( 2018 ) . Serious games and in - cloud data analytics for the virtualization and personalization of rehabilitation treatments . IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics , 15 ( 1 ) , 517 – 526 S27 Afyouni , I . , Rehman , F . U . , Qamar , A . M . , Ghani , S . , Hussain , S . O . , Sadiq , B . , Basalamah , S . ( 2017 ) . A therapy - driven gamification framework for hand rehabilitation . User Modeling and User - Adapted Interaction , 27 ( 2 ) , 215 – 265 S28 Marijke Vandermaesen , Tom De Weyer , Peter Feys , Kris Luyten , Karin Coninx , “Integrating Serious Games and Tangible Objects for Functional Handgrip Training : A User Study of Handly in Persons with Multiple Sclerosis , ” Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems , June 04 – 08 , 2016 , Brisbane , QLD , Australia Table 7 Studies on adaptable applications , organized according to type of injury or disorder Id Description of the adaptable application proposed in each study Neurodevelopmental disorder ( NDD ) S1 Tangible Learning Framework : This study describes and evaluates an open - ended web application framework that enables the therapist to develop tangible learning activities through the combination of physical objects ( PECs , a cards , and familiar objects ) and multimedia resources ( video scenes , animation , and music ) S2 Magic Room : In this study , a smart space provides controllable stimuli through visual projections , aromas , soap bubbles , lights , toys , or other physical objects to provide sensory and language stimulus to children with NDD . Therapists define the behavior of the smart space as a visual interface that allows the association of stimuli to interactions or time - based events S3 Polipo : In this study , a customizable toy offers tangible interaction and multisensory stimuli to promote the development of the fine motor skills of children with NDD . Therapists can customize the luminous , sonic stimuli and adjust the basic structure of the toy to offer new tactile stimuli S4 3D serious game environment : This study consists of a game that combines entertainment and education for speech and language therapy . The thera - pist can define the objects to be included in the game environment and their places and functions to stimulate patients based on their needs S5 Touchless Playful Interaction : This study describes an application that allows children’s interaction through the movements of their body , aiming at improving the attention and motor / visual abilities of children with autism . This includes three games : bubble game , space game , and shape game S6 Wilcard : This study describes an application that presents children’s book stories in a virtual reality immersive environment , enriched with interactive resources to support reading by children with NDD . The therapist defines parameters such as the theme or story , chooses predefined avatars to repre - sent the characters , positions objects in the scene , inserts custom images , and may adapt time intervals to advance the story S7 Design Probes in Technology Design : This is an exploratory study that presents to therapists the proposal of an adaptable application based on mock - ups to help children with autism . The therapist can change the contents ( images , audio , video , and so on ) of the lessons S8 Mobile games for learning and communication : This study consists of a mobile game aimed at assisting in the learning and communication of children with autism . The contents of the activities such as images , audio , and feedback are customized S9 myTroc @ s . net : This study described a platform for training the communication skills of children with autism through the use of personalized content based on their preferences . To enable this , multimedia content ( photos , music , videos , and so on ) and a message board using text and symbols are used , facilitating the communication process . The caregiver can customize the background color of the interface , emoticons , icons , sounds , and so on S10 PixTalk : This study describes a web smartphone application that helps children with autism create messages to allow them to communicate with others and consequently improve their social skills . In this application , it is possible to manage three different user roles - super users , coordinators , and teachers , each one with access to different interfaces S11 Image - processing algorithm : This study presents an algorithm that facilitates the search of images for personalizing computer - based interventions . The caregiver registers the patient’s preferences ( for example , his / her favorite characters ) and the algorithm searches the Internet and strips the background of the image so they can be integrated into any Flash program b S12 Edutism : This study describes an educational system to encourage children with autism to recognize people from their family environment . In this application , the teacher registers new students and reviews their progress . The application monitors student progress and performance based on an algorithm that adapts the difficulty level of the game and presents the children’s performance reports to the teacher Dyslexia S13 ClassDojo : This is an exploratory study employing ClassDojo , c a gamification platform aiming to aid the learning process of children with dyslexia . In the application , the teacher creates classes , manages the scores of the students , and rewards them with feedback according to their performance Cerebral palsy S14 Configurable architecture for revalidation games : This study describes configurable architecture for games , focusing on muscular rehabilitation - the therapist can adjust the configuration of the game and use various technologies ( Kinect , accelerometers , and balance boards ) so that the patient , regardless of the disability , interacts with the application 317 Universal Access in the Information Society ( 2021 ) 20 : 299 – 319 1 3 a Picture Exchange Communication System ( PECs ) is an alternative and augmentative communication system widely adopted to support commu - nication using pictures of people with impairments in language [ 48 ] b Adobe Flash is a software platform commonly used to create interactive animations that work embedded in a web browser and also through desktops , mobile phones , smartphones , tablets , and televisions [ 49 ] c ClassDojo is a classroom communication application used to share reports between parents and teachers . The gamification style system teaches development skills through real - time feedback [ 50 ] d TalkingTiles is an augmented and alternative communication app that enables users to construct sentences by tapping on tiles associated with words or phrases [ 51 ] e Looking Glass is a programming environment in which users construct programs by dragging and dropping graphical tiles [ 52 ] Table 7 ( continued ) Id Description of the adaptable application proposed in each study S15 A Kinect - based upper limb rehabilitation : This study describes a Kinect - based system that detects several joints and angles of different motions performed by the patient , aiming to improve the proficiency and motor quality of people with cerebral palsy . In this system , the physiotherapist can develop a series of tailored positions based on each participant’s level of motor impairment Aphasia S16 Write - N - Speak : This study describes a platform based on a kit that includes a digital pen , a device that captures brush or handwriting strokes ( created using pen and paper ) and converts them into digital data , allowing data to be used in a variety of applications . The therapist can create interactive spreadsheets , voice - programmed photos , and household item stickers ( to aid in recognizing and naming objects ) based on the patient’s needs S17 TalkingTiles : This is a field study using a commercial app for iPad ( TalkingTiles d ) aimed at determining the effectiveness of its communication sup - port for individuals with aphasia . Users ( family / patients ) can edit aspects of the application interface such as language , genre , and text output speed for speech , image and text size , colors , number of rows , and block columns displayed on pages Apraxia of speech S18 Automated speech therapy system : This study describes a remote monitoring system to aid in the rehabilitation of children with speech apraxia . The therapist , through the web interface , manages patients , creates exercises , and monitors patient progress Alzheimer S19 Personalized reminiscence program : This study describes a web application for reminiscence interventions through photos of patients’ relatives . Car - egivers can add , upload , and manage personal content ( photo albums ) to be seen by their relatives with dementia Amnesia S20 Family - Link : This study describes a calendar - type application to assist patients with amnesia and their families in scheduling day - to - day activities . Caregivers create activities , share with family members involved , and track the activities and commitments of their patients , giving them a sense of security Mental health S21 PlayWrite : This study illustrates a system consisting of a game template where the mental health professional can create or edit interactive dialogues , incorporate psychological questionnaires , and choose the looks and order of appearance of the characters in the game Stroke S22 TagTrainer : This study presents a tangible and interactive training platform for hand and arm rehabilitation therapy . The therapist can create , extend , or modify exercises ; provide visual and audio feedback ; attach tagged RFID objects ; and monitor patient performance S23 Guidelines for the design of tools for therapists : This is an exploratory study using Looking Glass , e an application designed to create animated stories in interactive 3D , in a drag and drop graphic blocks environment . The authors carried out two case studies . In the first one , they evaluated the relation between the performance of the players ( patients ) and the movements of objects within a game world . Based on the results , they added support for therapy movements to Looking Glass and tested it with therapists . Thereafter , they presented guidelines and challenges for the design of therapeutic applications in the future research S24 Just Physio Kidding : This is an exploratory study that presents a virtual environment application that allows natural interaction to help the cognitive stimulation and psychotherapy of children . It includes three serious games that the therapist can configure according to the patient’s profile and supervise the patient’s performance and progress in therapy S25 REHAP Balance Tiles : This is a study that uses interactive tiles to support people’s balance rehabilitation after a stroke . The therapist can change the physical position of the tiles according to the needs of the patient and define the purpose and number of steps S26 Serious Games for rehabilitation treatments : This study presents a remote rehabilitation system based on serious games to support the neuromotor and neurocognitive recovery of people after a stroke . In the application , the therapist records patient data and rehabilitation goals , which are used by the application to suggest new rules - based exercises and patient performance Hand disabilities S27 E - health framework : This study presents a framework to develop serious adaptable games for people with hand disabilities . The adaptable environment generates and recommends navigation routes based on the profile and capabilities of the patient registered by the therapist Multiple sclerosis S28 Handly : This study describes an integrated system that combines a serious game and tangible objects for training the upper limbs . The therapist sets up parameters that impact the training effort , depending on the patient’s abilities and therapy progress . In addition , the maximum training time is set to avoid the occurrence of muscle fatigue 318 Universal Access in the Information Society ( 2021 ) 20 : 299 – 319 1 3 References 1 . World Health Organization ( 2018 ) WHO | World report on dis - ability . https : / / www . who . int / disab iliti es / world _ repor t / 2011 / en / . Accessed 07 Oct 2018 2 . Steiner , W . A . , Ryser , L . , Huber , E . , Uebelhart , D . , Aeschlimann , A . , Stucki , G . : Use of the ICF model as a clinical problem - solving tool in physical therapy and rehabilitation medicine . Phys . Ther . 82 ( 11 ) , 1098 – 107 ( 2002 ) 3 . World Health Organization ( 2019 ) WHO | Rehabilitation in health systems . https : / / www . who . int / disab iliti es / rehab ilita tion _ healt h _ syste ms / en / . Accessed 07 Jan 2019 4 . Siegert , R . J . , McPherson , K . M . , Taylor , W . J . : Toward a cognitive - affective model of goal - setting in rehabilitation : is self - regulation theory a key step ? Disabil . Rehabil . 26 ( 20 ) , 1175 – 1183 ( 2004 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09638 28041 00017 24834 5 . Aminov , A . , Rogers , J . M . , Middleton , S . , Caeyenberghs , K . , Wilson , P . H . : What do randomized controlled trials say about virtual rehabilitation in stroke ? A systematic literature review and meta - analysis of upper - limb and cognitive outcomes . J . Neu - roEng . Rehabil . 15 ( 1 ) , 29 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / s1298 4 - 018 - 0370 - 2 6 . Pennisi , P . , Tonacci , A . , Tartarisco , G . , Billeci , L . , Ruta , L . , Gangemi , S . , Pioggia , G . : Autism and social robotics : a sys - tematic review . Autism Res . 9 ( 2 ) , 165 – 183 ( 2016 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / aur . 1527 7 . García - Casal , J . A . , Loizeau , A . , Csipke , E . , Franco - Martín , M . , Perea - Bartolomé , M . V . , Orrell , M . : Computer - based cognitive interventions for people living with dementia : a systematic lit - erature review and meta - analysis . Aging Ment . Health 21 ( 5 ) , 454 – 467 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 13607 863 . 2015 . 11326 77 8 . Donker , T . , Petrie , K . , Proudfoot , J . , Clarke , J . , Birch , M . R . , Chris - tensen , H . : Smartphones for smarter delivery of mental health programs : a systematic review . J . Med . Internet Res . 15 ( 11 ) , e247 ( 2013 ) 9 . Da Gama , A . , Fallavollita , P . , Teichrieb , V . , Navab , N . : Motor rehabilitation using kinect : a systematic review . Games Health J . 4 ( 2 ) , 123 – 135 ( 2015 ) 10 . Joddrell , P . , Astell , A . J . : Studies involving people with dementia and touchscreen technology : a literature review . JMIR Rehabil . Assist . Technol . 3 ( 2 ) , e10 ( 2016 ) 11 . Harman , M . , Jia , Y . , Langdon , W . B . , Petke , J . , Moghadam , I . H . , Yoo , S . , Wu , F . ( 2014 ) Genetic improvement for adaptive software engineering ( keynote ) . In : Proceedings of the 9th International Symposium on Software Engineering for Adaptive and Self - Managing Systems , ACM , pp . 1 – 4 12 . Fischer , G . , Fogli , D . , Piccinno , A . : Revisiting and broadening the meta - design framework for end - user development . In : Paterno , F . , Wulf , V . ( eds . ) New Perspectives in End - User Development , pp . 61 – 97 . Springer , Cham ( 2017 ) 13 . Lieberman , H . , Paternò , F . , Klann , M . , Wulf , V . : End - user development : an emerging paradigm . In : Lieberman , H . , Paternò , F . , Klann , M . , Wulf , V . ( eds . ) End User Devel - opment , pp . 1 – 8 . Springer , Dordrecht ( 2006 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 1 - 4020 - 5386 - X _ 1 14 . Fischer , G . : End - User Development and Meta - design : Founda - tions for Cultures of Participation , pp . 3 – 14 . Springer , Berlin ( 2009 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 00427 - 8 _ 1 15 . Archana , S . , Singh , S . , Abbas , S . : Proposed quality paradigm for end user development . Int . J . Comput . Sci . Eng . 4 ( 4 ) , 4 ( 2016 ) 16 . Ferreira , A . : Novo dicionário Aurélio da língua portuguesa . Nova Fronteira , Rio de Janeiro ( 1986 ) 17 . Karsch , U . M . : Idosos dependentes : famílias e cuidadores . Cad - ernos de Saúde Pública 19 ( 3 ) , 861 – 866 ( 2003 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1590 / S0102 - 311X2 00300 03000 19 18 . Davis , F . D . : A technology acceptance model for empirically test - ing new end - user information systems : theory and results . Doc - toral Dissertation ( 1986 ) 19 . Kitchenham , B . A . : Guidelines for Performing Systematic Litera - ture Reviews in Software Engineering , version 2 . 3 . EBSE Techni - cal Report . Keele University and University of Durham ( 2007 ) 20 . Thapar , A . , Cooper , M . , Rutter , M . : Neurodevelopmental dis - orders . Lancet Psychiatry 4 ( 4 ) , 339 – 346 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S2215 - 0366 ( 16 ) 30376 - 5 21 . American Psychiatric Association : Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders . American Psychiatric Association , Philadelphia ( 2013 ) 22 . Coyle , D . , Doherty , G . , Matthews , M . , Sharry , J . : Computers in talk - based mental health interventions . Interact . Comput . 19 ( 4 ) , 545 – 562 ( 2007 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / J . INTCO M . 2007 . 02 . 001 23 . Alzheimer Association : What is Alzheimer’s ( 2018 ) . https : / / www . alz . org / alzhe imers - demen tia / what - is - alzhe imers . Accessed 11 Nov 2018 24 . Démonet , J . F . , Taylor , M . J . , Chaix , Y . : Developmental dys - lexia . The Lancet 363 ( 9419 ) , 1451 – 1460 ( 2004 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0140 - 6736 ( 04 ) 16106 - 0 25 . American Heart Association : What is stroke ? —National Stroke Association ( 2018 ) . https : / / www . strok e . org / under stand - strok e / what - is - strok e / . Accessed 13 Dec 2018 26 . Lingraphica : What is Aphasia ? —Learn about the different types of Aphasia ( 2018 ) . https : / / www . aphas ia . com / what - is - aphas ia / . Accessed 12 Nov 2018 27 . American Speech - Language - Hearing Association : Childhood Apraxia of Speech ( 2018 ) . https : / / www . asha . org / publi c / speec h / disor ders / child hood - aprax ia - of - speec h / . Accessed 01 Dec 2018 28 . Our World in Data : Mental Health ( 2018 ) . https : / / ourwo rldin data . org / menta l - healt h . Accessed 26 Nov 2019 29 . Dyslexia and Literacy International : Dyslexia International : bet - ter training , better teaching ( 2016 ) . https : / / www . dysle xia - and - liter acy . inter natio nal / wp - conte nt / uploa ds / 2016 / 04 / DI - Duke - Repor t - final - 4 - 29 - 14 . pdf . Accessed 26 Nov 2019 30 . World Health Organization : Dementia ( 2019 ) . https : / / www . who . int / disab iliti es / world _ repor t / 2011 / en / . Accessed 26 Nov 2019 31 . National Multiple Sclerosis Society : Multiple Sclerosis FAQs ( 2019 ) . https : / / www . natio nalms socie ty . org / What - is - MS / MS - FAQ - s # quest ion - How - many - peopl e - have - MS . Accessed 26 Nov 2019 32 . Parkinson’s Foundation : Parkinson Statistics ( 2019 ) . https : / / www . parki nson . org / Under stand ing - Parki nsons / Stati stics . Accessed 26 Nov 2019 33 . National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke : Muscular dystrophy information page ( 2019 ) . https : / / www . ninds . nih . gov / Disor ders / All - Disor ders / Muscu lar - Dystr ophy - Infor matio n - Page . Accessed 30 Nov 2019 34 . Theadom , A . , Rodrigues , M . , Roxburgh , R . , Balalla , S . , Higgins , C . , Bhattacharjee , R . , Jones , K . , Krishnamurthi , R . , Feigin , V . : Prevalence of muscular dystrophies : a systematic literature review . Neuroepidemiology 43 ( 3 – 4 ) , 259 – 268 ( 2014 ) 35 . Science Daily : How diabetes causes muscle loss ( 2019 ) . https : / / www . scien cedai ly . com / relea ses / 2019 / 02 / 19022 21013 09 . htm . Accessed 26 Nov 2019 36 . World Health Organization : Global report on diabetes ( 2016 ) . https : / / apps . who . int / iris / bitst ream / handl e / 10665 / 20487 1 / 97892 41565 257 _ eng . pdf ? seque nce = 1 . Accessed 26 Nov ( 2019 ) 37 . Frederix , I . , Vanhees , L . , Dendale , P . , Goetschalckx , K . : A review of telerehabilitation for cardiac patients . J . Telemed . Telecare 21 ( 1 ) , 45 – 53 ( 2015 ) 38 . Constantinescu , G . , Theodoros , D . , Russell , T . , Ward , E . , Wilson , S . , Wootton , R . : Treating disordered speech and voice in Parkin - son’s disease online : a randomized controlled non - inferiority trial . Int . J . Lang . Commun . Disord . 46 ( 1 ) , 1 – 16 ( 2011 ) 319 Universal Access in the Information Society ( 2021 ) 20 : 299 – 319 1 3 39 . Khan , F . , Amatya , B . , Kesselring , J . , Galea , M . : Telerehabilita - tion for persons with multiple sclerosis . A cochrane review . Eur . J . Phys . Rehabil . Med . 51 , 311 – 325 ( 2015 ) 40 . Cramer , S . C . , Dodakian , L . , Le , V . , See , J . , Augsburger , R . , McKenzie , A . , Zhou , R . J . , Chiu , N . L . , Heckhausen , J . , Cassidy , J . M . , et al . : Efficacy of home - based telerehabilitation vs in - clinic therapy for adults after stroke : a randomized clinical trial . JAMA Neurol . 76 ( 9 ) , 1079 – 1087 ( 2019 ) 41 . Peretti , A . , Amenta , F . , Tayebati , S . K . , Nittari , G . , Mahdi , S . S . : Telerehabilitation : review of the state - of - the - art and areas of application . JMIR Rehabil . Assist . Technol . 4 ( 2 ) , e7 ( 2017 ) 42 . Rybarczyk , Y . , Luis Pérez Medina , J . , Leconte , L . , Jimenes , K . , González , M . , Esparza , D . : Implementation and assessment of an intelligent motor tele - rehabilitation platform . Electronics 8 ( 1 ) , 58 ( 2019 ) 43 . Pérez - Medina , J . L . , Jimenes - Vargas , K . B . , Leconte , L . , Villarreal , S . , Rybarczyk , Y . , Vanderdonckt , J . : ePHoRt : towards a refer - ence architecture for tele - rehabilitation systems . IEEE Access 7 , 97159 – 97176 ( 2019 ) 44 . Tyagi , S . , Lim , D . S . , Ho , W . H . , Koh , Y . Q . , Cai , V . , Koh , G . C . , Legido - Quigley , H . : Acceptance of tele - rehabilitation by stroke patients : perceived barriers and facilitators . Arch . Phys . Med . Rehabil . 99 ( 12 ) , 2472 – 2477 ( 2018 ) 45 . Brouns , B . , Meesters , J . , Wentink , M . , de Kloet , A . , Arwert , H . , Vlieland , T . V . , Boyce , L . , van Bodegom - Vos , L . : Why the uptake of erehabilitation programs in stroke care is so difficult - a focus group study in the netherlands . Implement . Sci . 13 ( 1 ) , 133 ( 2018 ) 46 . Pramuka , M . , van Roosmalen , L . : Telerehabilitation technologies : accessibility and usability . Int . J . Telerehabil . 1 ( 1 ) , 85 ( 2009 ) 47 . Cao , Z . , Hidalgo , G . , Simon , T . , Wei , S . E . , Sheikh , Y . : Openpose : realtime multi - person 2d pose estimation using part affinity fields ( 2018 ) . arXiv preprint arXiv : 18120 8008 48 . Charlop - Christy , M . , Carpenter , M . , Le , L . , LeBlanc , L . , Kellet , K . : Using the picture exchange communication system ( PECS ) with children with autism : assessment of PECS acquisition , speech , social - communicative behavior , and problem behav - ior . Appl . Behav . Anal . 35 ( 27 ) , 213 – 231 ( 2013 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1901 / jaba . 2002 . 35 - 213 49 . Nielsen , J . : Flash 99 % Bad ( 2000 ) . Accessed 10 Aug 2018 50 . Chaykowski , K . : How ClassDojo built one of the most popular classroom apps by listening to teachers ( 2017 ) . https : / / www . forbe s . com / sites / kathl eench aykow ski / 2017 / 05 / 22 / how - class dojo - built - one - of - the - most - popul ar - class room - apps - by - liste ning - to - teach ers / # 3e272 51b1e 5e . Accessed 9 Nov 2018 51 . Huijbregts , T . , Wallace , J . : TalkingTiles : Supporting personali - zation and customization in an AAC App for individuals with Aphasia . In : Proceedings of the 2015 International Conference on Interactive Tabletops and Surfaces—ITS ’15 , no . 15 – 18 , p . 10 ( 2015 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 28177 21 . 28177 23 52 . Kelleher , C . , Tam , S . , May , M . , Profitt , R . , Engsberg , J . : Towards a therapist - centered programming environment for creating rehabilitation games . In : 16th International Conference on Com - puter Games ( CGAMES ) , no . 27 – 30 , p . 8 ( 2011 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / CGAME S . 2011 . 60003 46 Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations .