Joint Ventures and the Option to Expand and Acquire Bruce Kogut Management Science , Vol . 37 , No . 1 . ( Jan . , 1991 ) , pp . 19 - 33 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0025 - 1909 % 28199101 % 2937 % 3A1 % 3C19 % 3AJVATOT % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - 5 Management Science is currently published by INFORMS . Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR ' s Terms and Conditions of Use , available at http : / / www . jstor . org / about / terms . html . JSTOR ' s Terms and Conditions of Use provides , in part , that unless you have obtained prior permission , you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles , and you may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal , non - commercial use . Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work . Publisher contact information may be obtained at http : / / www . jstor . org / journals / informs . html . Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed page of such transmission . The JSTOR Archive is a trusted digital repository providing for long - term preservation and access to leading academic journals and scholarly literature from around the world . The Archive is supported by libraries , scholarly societies , publishers , and foundations . It is an initiative of JSTOR , a not - for - profit organization with a mission to help the scholarly community take advantage of advances in technology . For more information regarding JSTOR , please contact support @ jstor . org . http : / / www . jstor . org Sat Dec 29 15 : 25 : 36 2007 MANAGEMENT SCIENCE Vol . 37 , No . I . January 1991 Pr ~ ~ iird 111 L ' S A JOINT VENTURES AND THE OPTION TO EXPAND AND ACQUIRE * BRUCE KOGUT The Wharton School , Unzverslty of Pennsylvan ~ a , Ph ~ ladelphra , Penns ~ ~ lvanra 19 104 This article develops the perspective that joint ventures are created as real options to expand in response to future technological and market developments . The exercise of the option is ac - companied by an acquisition of the venture . It is hypothesized that the timing of the acquisition should be triggered by a product market signal indicating an increase in the venture ' s valuation . Based on a sample of 92 manufacturing joint ventures , this hypothesis is tested by estimating the effect of product market signals on the hazard of acquisition . The results indicate that unexpected growth in the product market increases the likelihood of acquisition ; unexpected shortfalls in product shipments have no effect on the likelihood of dissolution . This asymmetry in the results strongly supports the interpretation of joint ventures as options to expand . ( JOINT VENTURES ; TERMINATION BY ACQUISITION ; REAL OPTIONS ; OPTION TO EXPAND ; LEARNING ) A fundamental problem facing the firm is the decision to invest and expand into new product markets characterized by uncertain demand . The problem is exacerbated when the new business is not related to current activities . In this sense , a firm ' s initial investments in new markets can be considered as buying the right to expand in the future . In current parlance , the right to expand is an example of a " real option , " real because it is an investment in operating as opposed to financial capital , and an option because it need never be exerci ~ ed . ~ For many investments , such as the purchase of new capital equipment to reduce costs in aging plants , the option value is insignificant . In industries where the current investment provides a window on future opportunities , the option to expand can represent a substantial proportion of the value of a project , if not of the firm . 2 An analysis of joint ventures provides an interesting insight into investment decisions as real options . The task ofbuilding a market position and competitive capabilities requires lumpy and nontrivial investments . As a result , it is often beyond the resources of a single firm to buy the right to expand in all potential market opportunities . A partner , especially one which brings the requisite skills , may be sought to share the costs of placing the bet that the opportunity will be realized . This perspective is related to the use of joint ventures to share risk . Pure risk - sharing arises in cases , such as bidding on oil lots , where firms have committed capital downstream ( such as in refineries ) but are dependent upon availability supplies of a finite resource . Multiple joint ventures among firms in the oil industry are analogous to collective in - ~ urance . ~ In many industries , however , joint ventures not only share risks , but also decrease the total investment . Because the parties bring different capabilities , the venture no longer requires the full development costs . Due to its benefits of sharing risk and of reducing overall investment costs , joint ventures serve as an attractive mechanism to invest in an option to expand in risky markets . * Accepted by Richard M . Burton ; received January 17 , 1989 . This paper has been with the author 3 ; months for 2 revisions . See Myers ( 1984 ) for an interesting qualitative discussion of real options and Mason and Merton ( 1985 ) for an extensive analytical treatment . See Kester ( 1984 ) for an interesting tabulation of the option value of many large firms . For a study ofjoint ventures in the oil industry , see Mead ( 1967 ) . Note , however , that the decision whether to pump the oil can be viewed analytically as an option to wait . See McDonald and Siegel ( 1986 ) . 19 0025 - 190919 11370 1 / 00 19 $ 0 1 . 25 Copyr ~ ght C 1991 . The Inst ~ tute of Management Sc ~ ences I 20 BRUCE KOGUT However , in the event the investment is judged to be favorable , the parties to the joint venture face a difficult decision . To exercise the option to expand requires further com - mitment of capital , thus requiring renegotiation among the partners . One possible outcome is that the party placing a higher value on this new capital commitment buys out the other . Thus , the timing when it is desirable to exercise the option to expand is likely to be linked to the time when the venture will be acquired . The exploration of the link in the timing of the acquisition of joint ventures and of the exercise of the option to expand is the focus of the following empirical investigation . The first two sections apply an option perspective to joint ventures . A distinction is made between acquisitions motivated by industry conditions and those stemming from the desire to expand in response to favorable growth opportunities . The third section develops the central hypothesis that the timing of the acquisition is related to a signal that the valuation of the venture has increased . This signal is proxied by two measures derived from the growth of shipments in the venture ' s industry . The effects of these industry signals on the likelihood of a venture terminating by an acquisition are tested by specifying and estimating a hazard model , while controlling for industry and other effects . The same model is then tested on the likelihood of dissolution . If the option interpre - tation is correct , a signal that the venture ' s value has increased should lead to an acqui - sition ; a signal that it has decreased , however , should not lead to dissolution , as long as further investment is not required and operating costs are modest . Strong support is found for the option argument . These results run counter to prevailing presumptions in organizational theories that firms engage in cooperative ventures as buffers against uncertainty and that managerial discretion is severely limited by environmental volatility . In the view of Pfeffer and Nowak ( 1976 ) , joint ventures are instruments to manage the dependency of the partner firms on the uncertai ~ ty of resources . Recent work in organizational mortality , as influenced by the seminal articles by Hannan and Freeman ( 1977 ) and McKelvey and Aldrich ( 1983 ) , has advanced the proposition that managers are severely curtailed in their abilities to affect the prospects of survival of their firms . To the contrary , an option perspective posits that joint ventures are designed as mech - anisms to exploit , as well as buffer , uncertainty . Because firms have limited influence over the sources of uncertainty in the environment , it pays to invest in the option to respond to uncertain events . Joint ventures are investments providing firms with the discretion to expand in favorable environments , but avoid some of the losses from down - side risk . In this regard , real option theory provides a way to ground the trial and learning aspect to joint vzntures . Real Options The assignment of the right to buy and sell equity in the joint venture is a common feature of many agreements . For example , in a recent announcement of a joint venture in the area of power generation equipment , Asea Brown Boverie received the option to buy the venture at some time in the future . Westinghouse , as the partner , has the right to sell its ownership interest . In the vernacular of financial markets , the terms of the venture provides a call option to Asea Brown Boverie and a put option to Westinghouse . In drawing up a joint venture agreement , it is common practice to give first rights of refusal to the contracting parties to buy the equity of the partner who decides to withdraw . Sometimes , one party is given the priority to acquire in the case of termination . The legal clause serves to regulate the assignation of the rights to the underlying option . Such a clause may establish not only who has the first right to acquire , but also may set pricing rules . JOINT VENTURES AND THE OPTION TO ACQUIRE FIGURE Expected change in a , I . The legal clause outlining acquisition rights should not be confused with the real option itself . Legal clauses serve simply as a way proactively to outline ownership rights in response to unspecified contingencies involving the failure of the cooperation . The termination of the venture by acquisition is not , therefore , necessarily equivalent to the creation and exercise of an option similar to those found in financial markets . However , an economic option is often inherent in the decision to joint venture and the decision to exercise this option , as explained below , is likely to promote the divestment of the venture by one of the parties . Joint ventures are real options , not in terms of the legal assignation of contingent rights , but , like many investments , in terms ofthe economic opportunities to expand and grow in the future . The value of any investment can be broken into the cash flows stemming from assets as currently in place and those stemming from their redeployment or future expansion ( Myers 1977 ) . Because these latter cash flows are only realized if the business is expanded , they represent , as Myers first recognized , the value of growth opportunities . The intuition behind this argument can be explained by following the notation of Pindyck ( 1988 ) . Given an investment of K , the value of the venture can be decomposed in terms of both assets in place and the embedded options : where V is the value of the venture as estimated by the jth firm , F , ( K , X ) is the value of the assets in their current use , 0 , ( K , 8 ) is the valuation of the future growth oppor - tunities , and T is the current value of an uncertain state variable . The difference between F , ( K , X ) and 0 , ( K , X ) is that the latter is not equivalent to the discounted cash flows of expected earnings , because the firm maintains the flexibility to choose among invest - ment alternatives - including not to invest - in the future . As both the value of the assets in place and the option can be potentially affected by current assets and opportunities of the partner firms , the valuations of the venture will differ among the parties . For example , the venture might source components from one partner and not the other , hence affecting the valuation of assets in place . 4 Differences in option valuation can arise if the potential spill - over effects of the venture ' s technology complement the product portfolio of one partner more than the other . See Contractor ( 1985 ) for an analysis of joint ventures with resulting side payments 22 BRUCE KOGUT Changes in the value of these assets depend on the stochastic process determining the current value of the embedded option , where the state variables are prices , either of production or the inputs . In Figure 1 , we illustrate the implications of this process by assuming that changes in a state variable ( indicated as T ) are normally distributed over time and depict a cross - section of the path . The expected value ( ? r , + , , ) is the current value plus the expected increase ; the variance is a * . If realization of P , , , , is greater than some critical value P * , the derived value of the venture is greater than its acquisition price and the option to acquire is exercised . If T , , , , is less than P * , no further investment is made . Nor is it necessary to divest the assets ( if operating costs are low ) , for there is the possibility that future changes will be more favorable . It is for this reason that the downside risk is not consequential . Below , we consider the conditions which generate the option value , as well as examine motives for acquisitions which are not driven by the underlying option value . We link the value ofthe option , and , thereby , the venture , to the market demand for new products and technologies . Then , the central issue of the timing of exercise is addressed . Joint Ventures as Real Options In the following , we consider two options and examine qualitatively why joint ventures can be viewed as analogues . The first option is waiting to invest , whereby it pays to wait before committing resources . In the second option of expanding production , investment commitment is necessary in order to have the right to expand in the future . These two options , therefore , exemplify two polar types of real option ~ trategies . ~ It is often the case that an investment decision involves a comparison of both options . Committing engineers or product planners to a risky project incurs the possibility that the market does not develop ; it also draws resources from other projects . Clearly , there is a value in waiting before the technology or market is proven . But if there is a benefit in investing today in order to gain experience with the technology or to establish a brand image with customers , then investing generates the valuable option to expand in the future . A joint venture serves as a way to bridge these options through pooling resources of two or more firms . Because the value of the option to expand is greatest in new markets and technologies , any given firm is unlikely to possess the full repertoire of skills . A joint venture not only shares the investment burden , but sometimes reduces it , as the parties may bring different skills , thereby lowering the total investment cost . In this sense , a joint venture resolves partly the tradeoff between buying flexibility now and waiting to invest and focus later ( Wernerfelt and Karnani 1987 ) . ~ When the market for the technology or new product is proven , the option to acquire , as discussed later , is likely to be exercised . Through the joint venture , the buying party has acquired the skills of the partner firm and no longer needs to invest in the development ofthe requisite capability to expand into the targeted market . The divesting firm is willing to sell because , one , it realizes capital gains , and two , it may also not have the downstream assets to bring the technology to market ( Teece 1987 ; Shan 1988 ) . In this sense , the divestiture of joint ventures are the buyers ' side to the argument and findings of Chris - tensen and Montgomery ( 198 1 ) that acquisitions are a way to buy into attractive in - dustries . Variations on the waiting to invest option are given in McDonald and Siege1 ( 1986 ) , Majd and Pindyck ( 1987 ) , and Pindyck ( 1988 ) . Kulatilaka ( 1988 ) provides a general formulation , allowing for switching between active and wait modes . This explanation is incomplete without a consideration why a joint venture is favored over alternatives . For a discussion , see Kogut ( 1988 ) . 23 JOINT VENTURES AND THE OPTION TO ACQUIRE For one of the partners to make the acquisition , the net value of purchasing the joint venture must be at least equal to the value of purchasing comparable assets on the market . This condition is likely to be satisfied due to the gain in experience in running the venture . If it does not hold , there was no advantage and , hence , no value to the option by investing early . But even if this condition does not hold ex post , a joint venture , as Balakrishnan and Koza ( 1988 ) point out , affords the possibility to learn the true value of the assets . As information is revealed , the acquisition is completed or withdrawn . From this per - spective , regardless of other motives such as managerial experience , there is a bias to buy out the venture relative to other acquisition prospects simply due to better valuation information . Timing of Exercise As apparent from the above analysis , an acquisition or divestment is often a foreseen conclusion to the venture . The investing firms may be indifferent to whether a partner or a third firm purchases the venture . The reward is the capital gains return on the development efforts . From this perspective , the timing of the acquisition is of critical significance . Simply stated , the acquisition is justified only when the perceived value to the buyer is greater than the exercise price . For a financial option , the terminal value is given by the stock price and the exercise price as set by the initial contract : where W is the value of the option , S is the price of the stock at time t , and E is the exercise price . ( In this case , S , is the state variable which we denoted earlier as T . ) As the cost of purchasing the option is sunk , these two parameters determine , ex post , the value of the option when e ~ ercised . ~ The joint venture analogue to equation ( 2 ) is That is , the value of the option to acquire ( W ) is equal to the value to the jth firm of purchasing the remaining shares in the venture minus P , where a > 0 and < 1 and is the current share owned by firm j and P is the price of purchasing the remaining shares . ( P is either negotiated between the parties or set according to a contractual clause . ) ' For financial options , it is well established that an option should be usually held to full maturity ( Hull 1989 , pp . 105 - 129 ) . Exceptions to this rule depend upon dividend policy on the underlying stock , where it may pay to exercise the option before payment to shareholders . Obviously , in the case of joint ventures , the acquisition is only carried outif ( 1 - a ) ? > P . But the exercise of the option to acquire the joint venture is likely to be immediate for two reasons . First , the value of the real option is onlj ~ recognized by making the investment and realizing the incremental cash flows . If the investment in new capacity is not made in a period , the cash flows are lost . Second , the necessity to increase the capitalization of the venture invariably requires a renegotiation of the agreement , often leading to its te ~ mination . ~ The option to expand the investment is likely to coincide with exercising the option to acquire the joint venture . ' Ex ante , the value of the option is determined by not only by the known parameters , but also the stochastic process determining the value of the venture . As the acquisition price is likely to be state dependent , it is important to note that McDonald and Siegel ( 1986 ) provide a solution for an option where the value of the underlying asset and exercise price are both stochastic . The comments of one of the referees helped clarify the necessity of both conditions . See also Doz and Schuen ( 1988 ) for a discussion of negotiating problems stemming from different evaluations of the venture ' s growth potential . 24 BRUCE KOCiUT Consider a pure research venture between two parties . Both parties provide initial funding and a pre - established contribution to costs . As long as the initial investment is sunk and additional capital commitments are not required , increased variance in the value of the technology raises the upside gain . ( Of course , variable costs must be paid , but these " carrying " costs apply as well to some kinds of financial options . ) Since the option need not be exercised , the downside is inconsequential . At any given time , whether it pays for one party to buy the venture is dependent upon the buy - out price and the valuation of the business as a wholly - owned operation . But once it is profitable to exercise the option , there are sound reasons not to wait . The option value of the venture is realized by investing in expansion . The requirement to contribute further capital leads to a difficult renegotiation . By now , the partners have information to know that the original equity share may not reflect the division of benefits . This deviation can be expected to be compounded when the option to expand becomes economically viable , as the partners are likely to differ in their appraisal of these oppor - tunities . Thus , the allocation of new capital burdens often forces a revaluation of the distribution of benefits . Buying out the partner is a common outcome . The timing of the exercise of the option to terminate the venture by acquisition is , thus , influenced by two considerations : the initial base rate forecast underlying the val - uation of the business and the value of the venture to each party ( or third parties ) as realized over time . For the acquisition to take place , the acquisition price P must be greater than the valuation placed on the assets by one of the partners . These considerations lead to the following hypothesis : The ventzrre will be acqzlired when its valziation e , uceeds the base rate forecast . Selective Cues and Market Valuation Unlike the case for a contingent security , there are no written contracts and financial markets that indicate changes in the value of a real option . Testing this hypothesis is , clearly , difficult given the impossibility to collect data on changes over time of both partners ' evaluations of the option to expand . Nor is it likely that managers possess clear base - rates and valuation signals by which to guide a decision to exercise the option to expand . Consequently , the specification of the above hypothesis raises important questions about what information and environment cues managers use to time the exercise of the option . Despite theoretical interest and laboratory experiments , most of the research on en - vironmental cues informing managerial decisions has been oriented to identifying biases in the interpretation of information rather than in the selection of the information itself . Of some guidance is the finding of Bowman ( 1 963 ) that adherence to a consistent rule derived from previous decisions performs better than the decisions actually made , sug - gesting that the efficiency of decisionmaking is impaired due to biases in the selection cues . ' ' More recent research has especially pointed to biases derived from base - rate errors and the salience , or availability , of information . Several studies have shown that individ - uals wrongly calculate probabilities by weighting recent information too heavily or failing to incorporate information on the marginal probabilities . ' ' Base - rates are , thus , frequently ignored , especially when the causal relationships are not explicit . Whereas experimental research has validated a number of heuristics used in selecting information , there is little guidance for establishing the base rates that might be used for irregular decisions , such as the acquisition of a joint venture . We would expect , as Camerer lo See also Kunreuther ( 1969 ) and the analysis of similar " bootstrapping " models in psychology by Camerer ( 1981 ) . I ' See Tversky and Kahneman ( 1982 ) and the discussion in Hogarth ( 1982 , pp . 38 - 42 ) . 25 JOINT VENTURES AND THE OPTION T O ACQUIRE ( 198 1 ) notes , that individuals rely upon only a few cues of those available . We experiment with two time - varying specifications of the market cues relevant to the acquisition decision : a short - term annual growth rate and an annual residual error from a long - term trend in shipments . The short - term annual growth rate is calculated as where the growth rate is set equal to changes in the value of product shipments ( P S ) for the jth industry over an annual interval [ t - 1 , t ] . The residual error is derived from the error from an estimated regression of the time trend in shipment growth : where the residual error is the forecasting error from a linear time trend for the jth industry with intercept a and slope coefficient b . ( The appropriateness of the linear specification is discussed below . ) It is essential to recognize that the above variables vary with time . Both specifications are derived from a constant dollar series of industry product shipments . The annual growth measure looks at year to year changes , always using the previous year as a bench - mark . The residual error indicates that decision makers establish a long - term base - rate for each industry ' s historical growth and look at year to year departures from this trend . Unlike the growth measure , it assumes that managers act to acquire or divest when a market cue signals a rise in valuation relative to a long - term trend . These two variables are , by our argument , proxies for changes in the unobserved state variable ( given as T earlier ) that determines the value ofthe joint venture . As our interest does not lie , however , in the pricing of the option but in the likelihood ( or hazard ) of acquisition , differences in the scales of the proxies are unimportant to the estimations , as described below . Positive movements in the value of industry shipments signal improved investment opportunities and an increase in the value of the real option embedded in the venture . Because the exercise ofthe option requires a decision to expand the investment and , hence , a renegotiation of the capital commitment of the parties to the venture , the likelihood of an acquisition should increase with positive movements of the proxy variables . Acquisition and Value of Assets in Place Joint ventures can , of course , be acquired for reasons other than as the outcome to negotiations stemming from exercising the option to expand . In large part , the differences in the reasons to acquire are derived from differences in the original motivations to joint venture in the first place . The motivations to joint venture may sometimes have less to do with building an option to expand into new markets than with the benefits of sharing ownership of assets in their current use . Some ventures provide a mechanism to share scale economies and to coordinate the management of potentially excess capacity in mature and concentrated industries ( Harrigan 1986 ) . The option proportion ofthe total value of these kinds of ventures is likely to be low , that is , the present value of the assets in their current use dominates the option to expand or redeploy . There is , though , an interesting aspect to some ventures in concentrated industries which the terminology of the option literature illuminates , for many of these ventures are also partial divestments . A number of recent joint ventures fall in this category : Firestone ' s sale of 50 % of the equity of its tire business to Bridgestone , Honeywell ' s partnership with NEC and Bull in computers , and the above cited Asea Brown Boverie and Westinghouse agreement . In all of these ventures , the call option was given to the non - American firm . 26 BRUCE KOGUT The question of why do the parties not agree to an immediate acquisition underscores the critical roles of learning and pre - emption . Through the joint venture , the divesting pasty is contracted to pass on complex know - how on the running ofthe business , as well as to slow an erosion in customer confidence . Since this know - how may be essentially organizational - such as , the procedures by which an American firm are effectively man - aged , a joint venture serves as a vehicle of managerial and technological learning ( Kogut 1988 ; Lyles 1988 ) . In this case , a joint venture is a phased divestiture with a future exercise date . The importance of this motivation is especially important in industries where there are few competitors . Tying up a potential acquisition target prevents other parties from making the acquisition , a threat which is particularly troubling in concentrated industries where there are few acquisition targets . Through the acquisition , full ownership is attained without adding further capacity to the industry by entering with a new plant . Data Collection In the above analysis , we related the likelihood of termination of a joint venture by acquisition to increases in the valuation of the embedded option and to industry conditions leading to divestment of existing assets . To test the effect of these two factors on the likelihood of acquisition , data were collected from both questionnaire and archival sources . Information on joint ventures was first acquired from the publication Mergers and Ac - qzlisitlons for the years 1975 and 1983 . 12 The sample included only ventures located in the United States in order to eliminate variance in political environments across countries . Moreover , all ventures had at least one American partner given the difficulty of gathering information on non - American firms . Of the 475 firms contacted in two mailings , 55 . 5 % responded . However , due to a number of factors , such as misclassifying a contract as a joint venture or announcing a venture which never occurred , only 140 responses were useable . Of these , 92 are in manufacturing ; it is this subsample which is used in this paper . Sources for the industry data are given below . The questionnaire was designed to elicit factual information regarding the starting and , in the case of termination , ending dates for the venture , as well as its primary purpose . On the basis of this information , the percentage of ventures dissolved or acquired by one of the partners or a third party is 43 % . A follow - up questionnaire was sent one - year later to those ventures reported still alive , which resulted in raising this percentage to 55 % . A second follow - up was made the following year , with the percentage of termi - nations rising to 70 % . The questionnaire data makes it possible to construct life histories for the 92 manu - facturing ventures . Of these 92 , 27 terminated by dissolution , 37 by acquisition , and 28 are censored , that is , they are still in effect . In this study , we treat the ventures that terminated by dissolution as also censured . Such a treatment is reasonable as long as the individual hazards are independent . Given the low density of ventures in a particular industry , the assumption of independence is justified . From the questionnaire data , we create three dummy variables ( RBD , P ~ odzrcflonand Marketing ) indicating whether the venture included any of these activities . These variables are used to control for differences in the contractual terms of the sampled joint ventures due to variations in their functional activities . Clearly , the expectations regarding the duration of the ventures may differ depending on whether they involve investments in production and capital equipment or in joint marketing or product development . The other data are taken from secondary sources . Drawing on Bureau of Census data , In the sampling process , some of the joint ventures were reported as starting up later and , in a few cases , earlier than the initial time span . JOINT VENTURES AND THE OPTION TO ACQUIRE 2 7 TABLE 1 Descriptive Statistics and Coi . i . elrition Matrix Mean Standard Deviation Lowest Highest A = Acquisition B = Concentration C = R & D D = Production E = MarketingIDistribution 0 . 4 40 . 1 1 0 . 5 1 0 . 57 0 . 53 0 . 49 20 . 76 0 . 50 0 . 50 0 . 50 Spearman Correlation Matrix we use the four - firm concentration ratio at the four - digit SIC level ( Concentration ) as a proxy for industry maturity that promotes the use ofjoint ventures as vehicles of planned divestment . Since concentration ratios are published for every fifth year , we employ the ratio nearest the midpoint of the venture ' s life . ( As the ratios are highly correlated across years , there is little difference in results using this procedure or other alternatives . ) As discussed earlier , two different proxies are specified for the central hypothesis that the likelihood of an acquisition is related to the occurrence of a signal of an increase in the value of the venture . The two measures discussed earlier ( Annual Growth and Annzral Residzial Error ) are estimated from unpublished Department of Commerce data on annual shipments ( i . e . , goods sold ) at the four - digit level in constant 1982 dollars for the years 1965 to 1986 . Both of these variables are drawn from industry data . The annual growth data is derived directly from the shipment series . To normalize the data , each industry time series was divided by the first year of the series ; thus each series begins with 1965 set to 100 . By first differencing the normalized series and dividing by the lagged year , growth in shipments were calculated for each year . This measure was then entered into the analysis as a time - varying covariate with a one - year lag . I3 The time - varying specification means that for a venture alive in 1978 , the value of the growth variable is set equal to the annual growth of the venture ' s industry for 1977 . Ifthe venture survives to the next year , the growth covariate is updated to the realized growth rate in 1978 . The residual error is calculated in several steps . First , we again used the normalized series of shipments for each four - digit SIC industry . Second , a time trend was derived by a linear regression . The residual is calculated as the forecasting error for each year , using the estimated linear time trend as the base - rate predictor and the actual normalized shipment as the realized value . The residual error was also entered into the analysis as a time - varying covariate with a one - year lag . The use of a linear fit for estimating the time trend is justified on a few grounds . With the exception of a few industries , the F - test indicated that the linear specification resulted in rather good fits . Thus , the simple linear model provides a good estimate of the ' ' The lag is motivated by pragmatic and design concerns . Since the shipment data ends in 1986 , a lag would have been necessary for the ventures surviving to 1987 . Also , as the ventures can terminate at any time during a given year and as the termination date usually follows by several months the decision , it is more conservative to take the lag value . 2 8 BRUCE KOCUT long - term trend . Moreover , several studies have found that linear rules are commonly adopted by individuals to establish expectations ( Hogarth 1982 ) . In some industries , a linear estimate is a poor one and unlikely to be widely maintained . Indeed , as we find below , the exclusion of outliers on the residual measure leads to much better results . Descriptive statistics are provided for the variables in Table 1 . The correlation of the variable Acqzrisition with the covariates is misleading , for the later regressions use time to acquisition as the basis of ordering the likelihoods . It , nevertheless , provides some insight into the underlying relationships . Evident from the table is the low degree of collinearity among these variables . We do not report the time - varying variables , since it would require reporting a covariate for each year of the sample . Statistical Specification To incorporate the effects of the unobserved stochastic process and the time - varying covariates , we use a partial likelihood specification to estimate the influence of these factors on termination by acquisition among a sample of joint ventures . Partial likelihood estimates the influence of explanatory variables ( or covariates ) on the hazard of termi - nation without specifying a parametric form for the precise time to failure . Instead , it rank orders ventures in terms of the temporal sequence of terminations . For each event time , it specifies a likelihood that the observed terminated venture should have terminated , conditional on the covariates of the ventures at risk : For simplicity , the coefficients and covariates are given as vectors B and X , respectively , with I indexing the venture which failed at time t , , j indexing the ventures at risk at time ti , ho ( tl ) is the baseline hazard , and L is the likelihood for the lth event . The time - varying covariates ( Annzral Growth and Residual Error ) are indexed by the time of the event ( t , ) . It should be noted that the partial likelihood is general in its specification . The para - metric assumptions are the linearity imposed on the coefficients and the log - additivity of the baseline hazard and covariate terms . The distribution of the baseline hazard is nonparametric and entirely general . By leaving the baseline hazard unspecified , no bias is incurred by misspecifying the stochastic process by which unobserved variables influence the observed hazard rate . While efficiency is lost by ignoring the exact termination times , the estimates are consistent ; the efficiency loss has been shown to be modest ( Efron 1977 ; Kalbfleisch and Prentice 1980 ) . This generality is achieved by restricting the baseline hazard to be the same for all the ventures . By this assumption , ho ( tl ) cancels out . As shown first by Cox ( 1972 ) , this likelihood is equivalent to allowing only the conditional probabilities to contribute to the statistical inferences . No information on the precise timing of , or the elapsed time to termination is required ; hence it provides a partial , rather than full maximum , likelihood estimate . Consequently , we do not need to know the functional form of the baseline hazard and , implicitly , the underlying process generating changes in the valuation of the venture or the boundary condition giving the point of exercise of the option . The partial likelihood is calculated as the product of the individual likelihoods . Esti - mation proceeds by maximizing jointly the likelihoods that the lth venture should ter - minate conditionally on the characteristics of the other ventures at risk at the time of termination . We use the Newton - Raphson algorithm by which to estimate numerically the coefficients and standard errors . There is no constant or error term . A positive coef - ficient indicates that increases in the covariate tend to increase the likelihood of termi - nation ; a negative coefficient indicates the reverse . 14 l4 See Allison ( 1984 ) and Kalbfleisch and Prentice ( 1980 ) for the treatment of tied data 29 JOINT VENTURES AND THE OPTION TO ACQUIRE Statistical Results The statistical results are given in Table 2 . As can be seen from the Student T scores . the principal hypotheses are confirmed under a two - tail significance test . Concentration is significant at , 002 . In concentrated industries , joint ventures appear to be used as an intermediary step towards a complete acquisition . A complementary but more speculative interpretation is that joint ventures are also often part of the restructuring of mature industries , either due to new , and perhaps foreign , competition or to efforts to stabilize the degree of rivalry . By acquiring the assets , a shifting of ownership occurs without an increase in industry capacity . Ventures with R & D activities or marketing and distribution activities are more likely to be acquired at . I significance under a two - tail test and at . 05 under a one - tail . The production variable is positive , though insignificant . The most interesting comparison is between the growth and residual error variables . The growth variable has a positive effect on acquisitions and is significant at . 05 . The residual error coefficient , on the other hand , is indistinguishable from a null effect . Given the sample size , it is important to look at the effect of possible outliers . Large residuals might be generated by a poor fit of the linear trend line . The trend lines for ten industries ( in which there are twelve ventures ) have significance levels worse than . 05 . Ofthese twelve ventures , six terminated by acquisition . Their elimination from the sample changed the results only mildly . A more direct way to identify outliers is to plot the residual errors and growth rates for each industry . The electronic computing machinery industry ( SIC 3573 ) stands out dramatically from the rest . For 1986 , for example , the residual error for computers was 30 times greater than the next highest industry . The remarkable trait of the industry is that since these growth rates have been sustained for two decades and more , negative residual errors are generated even when the growth rate is still substantially above the mean and median for the whole sample . As three of the four ventures in this industry terminated in an acquisition , the estimates are strongly affected . TABLE 2 Partrul Likelil ~ ood Estimclte q / Co ~ arlcltes ' Effects or1 Log Lrkelil ~ ood ~ fAcqltisirion Without Computer Without Computer Without Computer Full Sample Industry Industry Industry Variable Name ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) Concentration 0 . 26 ( 3 . 16 " ) R & D 0 . 58 ( 1 . 67 ' ) Production 0 . 16 ( 0 . 44 ) Marketing / Distribution 0 . 61 ( 1 . 75 ' ) Annual Growth 0 . 03 ( 2 . 25b ) Residual Error 0 . 000 1 ( 0 . 45 ) Significance under two - tail T - test : ( T - statistics in parentheses ) " P < . 01 . P < . 05 . ' P < . lo . 30 BRUCE KOGUT Reestimating the regression equation without these four ventures gives strikingly dif - ferent results . Significance levels for the other variables stay largely the same . The most striking change is in the positions of the residual error and growth variable . Both are now positively signed , but the residual error variable is significant at . 01 . The coefficient on the growth variable is indistinguishable from the null hypothesis . These results are much kinder to the proposition that managers are sensitive to a long - term intra - industry base rate which serves as a standard by which to evaluate annual changes . The decline in significance of the growth variable is partially the result of the collinearity with the measure of the residual error . Unusually high ( low ) growth is likely to result in larger ( smaller ) residual errors . The correlations for Annzral Grolt ~ th and Residual Error ranged as high as . 85 for one year , though often were much lower . Since collinearity tends to raise the standard errors , the loss in significance for Annzral Growth should be interpreted with some caution . To address this confounding , Anntlal Growth and Residtlal Error were entered separately into the regression analysis . The results are given in equations ( 3 ) and ( 4 ) of Table 2 . Whereas Annzlal Growth is only significant at . l , Residzlal Error is significant at , 001 . It is reasonable to conclude that the decision by managers whether to acquire or divest the joint venture is more significantly sensitive to annual departures from a long - term trend than to short - term indices of industry growth . 15 Discussion of Market Signals The above findings indicate that increases in excess of the long - term trend in shipment growth are significantly related to the timing of the acquisitions of ventures . Such a relationship suggests that managerial decisions are cued by market signals that the venture ' s value has increased . Because of the level of aggregation of our sample , the cue may be indirectly related , that is , there are intervening variables ( e . g . , revenues to the venture ) between the variables we chose and the direct cues bearing on managerial choice . In turn , it could be argued that the take - off in growth signals industry consolidation , thus forcing exits . Conceptually , this objection is weak , for a shake - out should occur when the market does poorer than its historical record . The relationship between Residzral Error and the likelihood of acquisition suggests the opposite , namely , acquisitions tend to occur when the market does better than its historical record . To test whether consolidation leads to divestment , we calculate a new variable Change in Concentration which indicates the percentage change in the four - firm concentration at the 4 - digit SIC level during the life of the venture . 16 The results given in equations ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) of Table 3 show no support that consolidation leads to an increase in acquisition . Another interpretation of the findings is that managers are myopic and fail to consider that short - term deviations may be outliers . Frequently , this error is referred to as ignoring regression to the mean or the law of small numbers ( Hogarth 1982 ; Tversky and Kahne - man 197 1 ) . Incidences of annual growth rates and residual errors , in other words , may reflect extreme values of a random process . That managers do not simply react to any short - term change can also be addressed empirically . If short - term myopia leads to a divest and acquire decision , then it should lead to a dissolve decision when the market turns down . We can test this proposition by estimating the same model for the likelihood of termination by dissolution . This test is especially important if the argument that joint ventures frequently serve as real options is correct . The nature of an option should be kept in mind . Once the IS Though the coefficient to Aiznllai Grort ~ I ~ is larger , they are not comparable due to the differences in their measurement . l6 As concentration is only published for every fourth year , we took the starting year closest to the year of birth of the venture and the closing year closest to the year of termination or censorship . JOINT VENTURES AND THE OPTION TO ACQUIRE 3 1 TABLE 3 Paitral L ~ kelrhood Estir ? ~ aies of Covariates ' Eflects 011 Log Likeiil ~ ood qf ' Tei . r ? ~ ini ~ rion Acquisition Dissolution Without Computer Without Computer Full Sample Industry Full Sample Industry Variable Name ( 1 ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) 0 . 03 Concentration ( 3 . 14 " ) 0 . 59 R & D ( 1 . 66 ' ) 0 . 16 Production ( 0 . 45 ) 0 . 62 Marketing / Distribution ( 1 . 75 ' ) 0 . 03 Annual Growth ( 2 . 23b ) 0 . 000 1 Residual Error ( 0 . 39 ) 0 . 143 Change in Concentration ( 0 . 14 ) Significance under two - tail T - test : ( T - statistics in parentheses ) . " P < . 01 . P < . 05 . b P < . lo . capital is committed , the downside risk is low , especially if there is a market for the acquisition ofthe assets and operating costs are not high . The selling ofthe venture means that one firm puts a higher value on the assets ; it does not mean the venture is unprofitable . Though it should not be expected that the same covariates should be theoretically related to dissolution , we include them in order to make the results comparable . " These results are given in columns 3 and 4 of able 3 . As can be seen , there is no significant relationship between dissolution and the growth and residual error measures . The insignificance of the Annzial Growtl ? and Residzlal Error variables lends further support to the options argument . For if joint ventures are designed as options , then as long as the investment is sunk and the operating costs are moderate , downward movements should not lead to dissolution . Rather , it pays to wait and see if the process generates more favorable outcomes . The asymmetry in the acquisition and dissolution results sup - ports strongly the interpretation that joint ventures are designed as options . Conclusion This article has investigated the proposition that joint ventures are designed as options that are exercised through a divestment and acquisition decision . The statistical inves - tigation analyzes what factors increase the likelihood of an acquisition . These factors have been shown to be unexpected increases in the value of the venture and the degree of concentration in the industry . There is a wider implication of this study for theories of organizational behavior . At least since Knight ' s ( 1921 ) observations , it has been widely claimed that risk reduction can be achieved through organizational mechanisms , or what Cyert and March ( 1963 ) " For an analysis of the dissolution of joint ventures , see Kogut ( 1989 ) 3 2 BRUCE KOGUT labelled " uncertainty reduction . " But firms , if not other organizations , may also profit from uncertainty . 18 Such profit taking might be achieved through a more flexible pro - duction process or organizational design , as described by Piore and Sabel ( 1984 ) . It might also be achieved by investments in joint ventures which serve as platforms for possible future development . After decades of research on the mechanisms of reducing risk , a look focusing at the way which organizations benefit from uncertainty appears promising . 19 . 20 l8 In some cases , they may even seek higher risk ( Myers 1977 ; Bowman 1980 ) . l9 One of the more interesting directions of population ecology is the comparison between strategies which differ by their ability to survive under varying conditions of risk . See , for example , Brittain and Freeman ( 1980 ) . 20 The author would like to acknowledge the research assistance and suggestions of Kristiaan Helsen and the comments of Ned Bowman , Colin Camerer , Weijian Shan , Gordon Walker , and the anonymous referees . The research has been funded under a grant from AT & T under the auspices of the Reginald H . Jones Center . References ALLISON , P . D . , Event History ! , Ana / . vsis : Regression Jbr Longit ~ ldinai Eveni Data , Sage Publications . Beverly Hills . 1984 . BALAKRISHNAN , S . AND M . KOZA , " Information Asymmetry , Market Failure and Joint Ventures , " mimeo , UCLA , 1988 . BOWMAN , E . H . , " Consistency and Optimality in Managerial Decision Making , " Management Sci . , 9 ( 1963 ) , 310 - 321 . , " A Risk / Return Paradox for Strategic Management , " Sloan Managemenf Rev . , 2 1 ( 1980 ) , 17 - 3 1 . BRITTAIN , J . W . AND J . H . FREEMAN , " Organizational Proliferation and Density - Dependent Selection : Orga - nizational Evolution in the Semiconductor Industry , " in J . R . Kimberly and R . M . Miles ( Eds . ) , The Organizational L @ Cycle , Jossey Bass , San Francisco , CA , 1980 . CAMERER , C . , " General Conditions for the Success of Bootstrapping Models , " Organizational Behavior and Human Pe ( forrnance , 27 ( 198 1 ) , 4 1 1 - 422 . CHRISTENSEN , " Corporate Economic Performance : Diversification Strategy H . K . AND C . A . MONTGOMERY , Versus Market Structure , " Strategic Managemenf J . , 2 ( 1981 ) , 327 - 343 . CONTRACTOR , F . , " A Generalized Theorem for Joint Ventures and Licensing Negotiations , " J . Internutioizul Btlsiness Silldies . 16 ( 1985 ) , 23 - 50 . Cox , D . R . , " Regression Models and Life Data , " J . Royal Siaiisiical Societj , , ( B ) 34 ( 1972 ) , 187 - 202 . CYERT , R . M . AND J . G . MARCH , A Bel ~ uviorzll Tl7eor . v ofihe Firm , Prentice - Hall , Englewood Cliffs , NJ , 1963 . Doz , Y . AND A . SHUEN , " From Intent to Outcome : A Process Framework for Partnerships , " INSEAD , working papers , 1988 . EFRON , B . , " The Efficiency of Cox ' s Likelihood for Censored Data , " J . Amer . Staiisiical Assoc . , 72 ( 1977 ) , 557 - 564 . HANNAN , M . AND J . FREEMAN , " The Population Ecology of Organizations , " Amer . J . Sociologv , 82 ( 1977 ) , 929 - 964 . HARRIGAN , Lexington Books , Lexington , MA , 1986 . K . , Managing , for Joint Vent ~ ire SIICC ~ SS , HOGARTH , R . M . , Judgment and Choice , Wiley , New York , 1982 . HULL , J . , Opiions , Fuiures , and Oiher Derivative Securiiies , Englewood Cliffs , Prentice - Hall , NJ , 1989 . KALBFLEISCH , The Staiisiical Analvsis yfFailure Time Dufa , Wiley , New York , J . D . AND R . L . PRENTICE , 1980 . KESTER , W . , " Today ' s Options for Tomorrow ' s Growth , " Harvard Business Rev . , ( March - April 1984 ) . KNIGHT , F . H . , Risk , Uncertainill , and Pryfit , University of Chicago , Chicago , IL , 197 1 ; originally published , Houghton - Mifflin , Boston , MA , 192 1 . KOGUT , B . , " Joint Ventures : Theoretical and Empirical Perspectives , " Sirategic kfanagerneni J . , 9 ( 1988 ) , 319 - 332 . , " The Stability of Joint Ventures : Reciprocity and Competitive Rivalry , " J . Indusirial Ecot ~ ornics , 38 ( 1989 ) . KULATILAKA , N . , " The Value of Real Options , " unpublished manuscript , Boston University , 1988 . KUNREUTHER , H . , " Extensions of Bowman ' s Theory on Managerial Decision Making , " Mr ~ nagement Sci . , 15 ( 1969 ) , 415 - 439 . LYLES , M . A , , " Learning among Joint Venture Firms , " Managernenf Internal . Rev . , 28 ( 1988 ) , 85 - 97 . MCDONALD , AND D . SIEGEL , " The Value of Waiting to Invest , " Qliart . J . Economics , I01 ( 1986 ) , 707 - 728 . MCKELVEY , B . AND H . ALDRICH , " Populations , Natural Selection and Applied Organizational Science , " AN ' - ministration Sci . Qziur ? . , 20 ( 1983 ) , 509 - 525 . 33 JOINT VENTURES AND THE OPTION TO ACQUIRE MAJD , S . AND R . PINDYCK , " Time to Build , Option Value , and Investment Decisions , " J . finiincciti Ecoizornro ~ , 18 ( 1987 ) , 7 - 27 . MASON , S . AND R . MERTON , " The Role of Contingent Claims Analysis in Corporate Finance . " in Recer ~ i Advances in Corporate Finance ( E . Altman and M . Subrahmanyam , Eds , ) . Irwin , New York , 1985 . MITCHELL , G . R . AND W . F . HAMILTON , " Managing R & D as a Strategic Option , " Research - Technolog ) ' , 31 ( 1988 ) , 15 - 22 . MEAD , W . , " Competitive Significance of Joint Ventures , " Ai ~ titrtrst Bzlll . , 12 ( 1967 ) . MYERS , S . C . , " Determinants of Corporate Borrowing , " J . Financial Econoinics , 5 ( 1977 ) , 147 - 176 . , " Finance Theory and Financial Strategy , " Inteijaces , 14 ( 1984 ) , 126 - 137 . NELSON , R . R . AND S . G . WINTER , An Evol ~ ltior ~ ury Tlleory of Ecor ~ ornic Change , Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA , 1982 . PFEFFER , J . AND P . NOWAK , " Joint Ventures and Interorganizational Interdependence , " . 4rh ? 1inistroti1 ~ ' Sci . Qtiait . , 21 ( 1976 ) , 3 15 - 339 . PINDYCK , R . , " Irreversible Commitment , Capacity Choice , and the Value of the Firm , " . 4mwicaiz Econornic Rev . , 78 ( 1988 ) , 967 - 985 . PIORE , M . AND C . SABEL , The Second lildzlstrial Div ~ de . Basic Books , New York , 1984 . SHAN , W . , " An Analysis of Organizational Strategies by Enterpreneurial High - Technology Firms . " working paper , Sol C . Snider Enterpreneurial Center , Wharton School , 1988 . TEECE , D . , " Profiting from Technological Innovation : Implications for Integration , Collaboration , Licensing . and Public Policy , " in The Corn . r ~ etitive Cilullenge . Strategies , for Indtlstriai Innovation and Reneivcil , Ballinger , Cambridge , MA , 1987 . TVERSKY , " Belief in the Law of Small Numbers , " Psychological Btlll . , 2 ( 197 1 ) , A . AND D . KAHNEMAN , 105 - l lo . AND - - - , " Evidential Impact of Base Rates , " in J ~ rdgernent under Cincertainty : H ~ zwistics ailcl Biases ( D . Kahneman , P . Slovic , and A . Tversky , Eds . ) . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK , 1982 . WERNERFELT , " Competitive Strategy under Uncertainty , " Strategic ~ Wanagernent J . , 8 B . AND A . KARNANI , ( 1987 ) , 187 - 194 . You have printed the following article : Joint Ventures and the Option to Expand and Acquire Bruce Kogut Management Science , Vol . 37 , No . 1 . ( Jan . , 1991 ) , pp . 19 - 33 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0025 - 1909 % 28199101 % 2937 % 3A1 % 3C19 % 3AJVATOT % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - 5 This article references the following linked citations . If you are trying to access articles from an off - campus location , you may be required to first logon via your library web site to access JSTOR . Please visit your library ' s website or contact a librarian to learn about options for remote access to JSTOR . [ Footnotes ] 6 Joint Ventures : Theoretical and Empirical Perspectives Bruce Kogut Strategic Management Journal , Vol . 9 , No . 4 . ( Jul . - Aug . , 1988 ) , pp . 319 - 332 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0143 - 2095 % 28198807 % 2F08 % 299 % 3A4 % 3C319 % 3AJVTAEP % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - 8 17 The Stability of Joint Ventures : Reciprocity and Competitive Rivalry Bruce Kogut The Journal of Industrial Economics , Vol . 38 , No . 2 . ( Dec . , 1989 ) , pp . 183 - 198 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0022 - 1821 % 28198912 % 2938 % 3A2 % 3C183 % 3ATSOJVR % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - O References Corporate Economic Performance : Diversification Strategy Versus Market Structure H . Kurt Christensen ; Cynthia A . Montgomery Strategic Management Journal , Vol . 2 , No . 4 . ( Oct . - Dec . , 1981 ) , pp . 327 - 343 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0143 - 2095 % 28198110 % 2F12 % 292 % 3A4 % 3C327 % 3ACEPDSV % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - 5 http : / / www . jstor . org LINKED CITATIONS - Page 1 of 2 - NOTE : The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list . The Population Ecology of Organizations Michael T . Hannan ; John Freeman The American Journal of Sociology , Vol . 82 , No . 5 . ( Mar . , 1977 ) , pp . 929 - 964 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0002 - 9602 % 28197703 % 2982 % 3A5 % 3C929 % 3ATPEOO % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - J Joint Ventures : Theoretical and Empirical Perspectives Bruce Kogut Strategic Management Journal , Vol . 9 , No . 4 . ( Jul . - Aug . , 1988 ) , pp . 319 - 332 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0143 - 2095 % 28198807 % 2F08 % 299 % 3A4 % 3C319 % 3AJVTAEP % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - 8 The Stability of Joint Ventures : Reciprocity and Competitive Rivalry Bruce Kogut The Journal of Industrial Economics , Vol . 38 , No . 2 . ( Dec . , 1989 ) , pp . 183 - 198 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0022 - 1821 % 28198912 % 2938 % 3A2 % 3C183 % 3ATSOJVR % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - O Competitive Strategy Under Uncertainty Birger Wernerfelt ; Aneel Karnani Strategic Management Journal , Vol . 8 , No . 2 . ( Mar . - Apr . , 1987 ) , pp . 187 - 194 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0143 - 2095 % 28198703 % 2F04 % 298 % 3A2 % 3C187 % 3ACSUU % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - K http : / / www . jstor . org LINKED CITATIONS - Page 2 of 2 - NOTE : The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list .