Prototyping for Social Wellbeing with Early Social Media Users Belonging , Experimentation , and Self - Care Linda Charmaraman Youth , Media & Wellbeing Research Lab , Wellesley Centers for Women lcharmar @ wellesley . edu ABSTRACT Many 10 - 14 year olds are at the early stages of using social media , habits they develop on popular platforms can have lasting efects on their socio - emotional wellbeing . We led a remote innovation workshop with 23 middle schoolers on digital wellbeing , identity ex - ploration , and computational concepts related to social computing . This workshop was a unique opportunity to refect on emergent habits , discuss them with peers , and imagine oneself as an ICT in - novator . Resulting themes related to participants’ social wellbeing online included a ) sense of belonging to communities of interest , friends , and family , b ) self - care and social support strategies involv - ing managing risks , control , and empathy , and c ) experimentation while building self - confdence and bravely exploring audience reac - tions . Participants iteratively designed and tested a sandbox social network website , resulting in Social Sketch . Refecting on our study , we describe the process for conceptualizing Social Sketch , and chal - lenges in social media innovation with teenagers . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - Centered Computing ; • Collaborative and Social Computing ; KEYWORDS adolescence , teenagers , ICT , social media , wellness , wellbeing , pro - totyping , cooperative inquiry ACM Reference Format : Linda Charmaraman and Catherine Grevet Delcourt . 2021 . Prototyping for Social Wellbeing with Early Social Media Users : Belonging , Experimentation , and Self - Care . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’21 ) , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 15 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445332 1 INTRODUCTION Many young adolescents ( 10 - 14 years old ) are at the beginning stages of using social media [ 38 ] . The early habits they develop on these platforms can have lasting efects on their socio - emotional wellbeing . On the positive side , social technologies allow the creation , maintenance , and strengthening of social relationships Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the frst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specifc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan © 2021 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 8096 - 6 / 21 / 05 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445332 Catherine Grevet Delcourt Wellesley College , Computer Science Department cdelcour @ wellesley . edu through rich interactions [ 26 , 33 ] . However , they can also have negative consequences such as addiction [ 14 ] , fear of missing out ( FoMO ) [ 41 ] , or navigating the intricacies of anonymity and self - presentation [ 14 ] . Early adolescence is a particularly vulnerable age due to heightened awareness of peer status , approval , and rejection . Due to their susceptibility to peer pressure , negative efects of social networking behaviors ( e . g . , friending strangers ) may increase as adolescents seek autonomy [ 14 ] . Furthermore , the omnipresence of connectivity plays a role in physical wellbeing such as afect - ing sleep patterns [ 15 ] . In the circumstances of the 2020 pandemic and physical distancing , Information Communication Technologies ( ICTs ) have become even more essential parts of teenagers’ daily lives and understanding the implications of these technologies on their wellbeing is pressing . These young teenagers ( 10 - 14 years old ) are overlooked as typical users of social media due to the legal protections for accessing them . Most social media sites are not designed for early adolescents since access is typically forbidden to children under 13 [ 45 ] . This restriction , specifed through the Terms of Service of most social media platforms , is a compliance with the U . S . Federal Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act ( COPPA ) [ 18 , 21 ] . In Europe , GDPR - K goes even further of specifying an age limit of 16 [ 17 ] . This legal landscape is at odds with the actual usage of these services . Indeed , early adolescents , aged 10 - 14 years , are highly active on social media . In Europe , 38 % of 9 - 12 year olds have a social media profle [ 38 ] . This discrepancy between the regulations and what we see in practice is due to the fact that meeting the age requirement is a mere formality of account creation and many youth simply bypass it [ 21 , 45 ] . Despite the fact that preteens are highly active users of social media , the platforms are not designed for this particularly vulnerable age group . Our work contributes to best practices and understandings of ICT usage for this group . At an age when social processes are key to their development , social wellbeing is essential for the development of teenagers as they transition from their family unit to rely more on peer networks . When discussing the mental health and wellbeing of teenagers , we are often focused on individual wellbeing , such as personal habits like sleeping [ 15 ] or mental health and stress [ 8 ] . Beyond individual wellbeing , social wellbeing occurs as part of a social interaction or takes place in a social context , and can be either experienced personally or on behalf of someone else [ 35 ] . Building a strong sense of belonging , learning empathy [ 54 ] and their role as part of a larger community are also key components of social wellbeing . Informal educational opportunities to refect and engage on topics of social wellbeing , in the context of ICTs , are limited for today’s youth . CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Linda Charmaraman and Catherine Delcourt Our work was a summer workshop with 23 middle school stu - dents about their social media usage . This workshop took place remotely , over 4 days . We discussed topics relating to social wellbe - ing , identity , and computational concepts related to social media . Through this workshop , we engaged students in many online activ - ities , and together designed a social media website to support social wellbeing that we iterated on during the 4 days . Our contributions are : 1 ) An account of online social wellbeing experienced by a group of middle school students during the 2020 COVID - 19 pan - demic . 2 ) A description of activities for workshops with early social media users to explore social wellbeing . 3 ) An account of a social media prototype , called Social Sketch , resulting from an iterative design process focused on sup - porting social wellbeing . 2 BACKGROUND This study was informed by prior work in adolescent develop - ment , in particular , early experiences with social media , and User - Centered Design practices with youth . 2 . 1 Why Intervene in Early Adolescence ? The years between 10 and 15 are marked as one of increased vulner - ability due to school transitions , limited capacity to self - regulate , and susceptibility to peer pressure [ 40 ] . The infuence of peers is one of the central concerns including peer approval , ftting in , and establishing a social identity [ 34 ] . In transitioning from childhood , early adolescents begin to spend less time with their parents and more time with their peers through various extracurricular and media activities [ 48 ] . During this developmental period , early ado - lescents begin to psychologically distance themselves and share less with their parents , seeking a balance between staying connected to their parents and independence from them , which can lead to more personal decision making and control over their own lives [ 24 ] . There can be temporary increases in parent - child confict , particularly over issues of autonomy and control [ 49 ] . During the same developmental period , social relationships are crucial such that adolescents with the highest levels of collective social support from their parents , teachers , classmates , and close friends report highest levels of self - regard , and those with the lowest levels of perceived social support report the lowest levels of self - esteem [ 30 ] . Early adolescents who have positive peer relationships report higher levels of emotional wellbeing , increased prosocial values , more positive self - worth [ 47 ] , and lower levels of emotional distress [ 56 ] . All of these psychological processes occurring and changing during early adolescence have a large social component to them since they all play out in a social context : learning how to detach from the nuclear family , fnding one’s place in a group of friends , understanding one’s role in society . As such , exploring how these formative years are supported , or challenged , by a prime sphere of social performance , social media , is critical . 2 . 2 Social Media Usage In Early Adolescents Adolescents today are now almost constantly online [ 5 ] . Their frequent usage of ICTs , such as using mobile phones or social media sites , has both positive and negative consequences to adolescent mental wellbeing . Social connection and isolation . With healthy limits , social media can improve social connectivity , sense of belonging , and a feeling of validation regardless of time or physical location [ 20 ] . Prior research demonstrates that more frequent online communication is associated with higher quality friendships . One of the reasons why online communication increases social connectivity involves the promotion of self - disclosure and sense of belonging to communities [ 51 ] . But social media use can bring about detrimental efects on mental health , such as through cyberostracism or alienation due to exclusion , rejection , or being ignored online [ 58 ] , which is especially painful during the early teen years . Another hallmark of early adolescence is the search for accurate self - evaluations - usually through peer social comparison processes [ 50 ] - that can have major infuence on adolescent health and behaviors [ 13 ] . For instance , viewing other’s often overly positive and fattering experiences on social media [ 1 , 39 ] can intensify feelings of isolation and fear of missing out ( ‘FoMO’ ) [ 7 ] . In fact , passive surveillance of others’ online posts can lead to social anxiety , envy , and lower self - esteem [ 37 , 53 ] . Sense of control and agency . In this transitional stage , early teenagers may still be monitored by their parents . Some parents opt to use software programs and apps to restrict time spent online , though other forms of parent mediation encourage adolescents to think critically on their own usage may be more efective [ 42 ] . As early social media users advance in age , parental restrictions be - come less feasible with adolescents spending more time away from their parents . While parental controls and household rules may limit teenagers’ usage of social media , they do have control over other aspects such as their time on digital media , watching videos , connected on social media , and playing games . Another facet of an early user’s sense of agency is the ability to choose who they follow , thus have some control over the content they are exposed to [ 27 ] . There exist apps available to support healthy technology use such as helping a user monitor their time spent on a phone by either setting limits or completely blocking the ability to use another app [ 8 ] . Others help build healthy habits by giving advice on activities to do ofine or in mini - games to combat feelings of stress or anxiety [ 46 ] . In the design of our workshop , we were motivated by the success of more communicative strategies ( e . g . , active mediation ) for ado - lescents to have some agency in evaluating their own social media usage and how it afects their social and emotional wellbeing . Due to the issues faced by teenagers on social media , there is a need to design social media to better support the socio - psychological processes occurring at that age . 2 . 3 Approaches to Designing Pro - Social Social Media Social media platforms , as prominent contemporary ICTs , play a large role in widespread psychological challenges such as authen - ticity , loneliness , envy , and distractions [ 6 ] . These challenges can be pinpointed to core building blocks of these platforms : profle pages require conscious self - presentation in ways that may threaten authenticity ; network efects and large audiences may increase Prototyping for Social Wellbeing with Early Social Media Users CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan feelings of loneliness ; social comparison through activity streams can incite envy ; and always - on conversations feed the attention economy [ 6 ] . Exploring and understanding how the design of these systems facilitates , or hinders , these psychological efects and social processes is essential for ICT innovation . For example , a design principle such as anonymity may support more self - expression than face - to - face interactions [ 25 ] but may also increase risk [ 14 ] . Brainstorming and testing new ways of interacting anonymously that supports authenticity while minimizing risk could lead to more prosocial online environments in currently popular social media sites ( e . g . , TikTok ) and those to come in the future . 2 . 4 Cooperative Inquiry For Social Media With Teens Exploring new technological design ideas with children and young teenagers is best done with hands - on activities and directly in - volving youth through the process [ 55 ] . Druin coined Cooperative Inquiry , a design philosophy involving children as equal design partners [ 32 , 55 ] . In cooperative inquiry , children are design part - ners and deeply involved in the design process , in fact they mold the design process and the adult facilitators are there to support them with their own expertise . Common activities with children in design partners and coopera - tive inquiry contexts are typically low - fdelity low - tech , using famil - iar materials [ 55 ] . However , it is challenging to involve teenagers as design partners for new social systems . This is due to the barrier to frst learn the necessary technical layers , social processes , and assessments of future implications . Here , our focus , is on the design of social media systems to support positive social interactions . We will explore prototypes of social network sites as tinkering artifacts [ 11 ] . Tinkering is a form of frst - hand informal learning experience that contributes to identity formation and is more typically engaged by males than females [ 36 ] . Tinkering with online social systems is particularly challenging due to the hurdles of the infrastructure [ 29 ] , and obtaining a critical mass of users [ 2 ] . Some prior work utilizing paper prototyping and computational tinkering with so - cial media design with teenagers has focused on social systems prototyping in a healthcare context [ 52 ] . As teenagers use social media , they are adept at reconfguring its infrastructures by adapting the existing design parameters of the platform [ 57 ] . For example , teenagers reconfgure Instagram accounts to Finstas , Fake - Instagram accounts , to alter the standard norms present and expected on Instagram [ 57 ] . Generally , they also create their own networked publics , situated within the larger societal public , but providing them space to discover their evolving and emerging identities [ 9 ] , which leads to questions for what it means to be a designer in the context of a sociotechnical system . 2 . 5 Research Questions Our line of inquiry explores practices to innovate in social media de - sign with middle school students , and poses the following research questions : RQ1 : How do middle school students currently expe - rience and engage with social wellbeing in ICTs ? RQ2 : What types of workshop activities might raise awareness of online social wellbeing ? RQ3 : How can we elicit new design ideas by middle school students for social media reconstruction ? 3 METHODOLOGY The work presented in this paper is part of a larger NIH - funded study on online wellbeing for early social media users . We con - ducted a pilot workshop in summer 2019 on the broad topic of online wellbeing , and adapted our summer 2020 workshop to be more specifcally about identity and social wellbeing . This paper presents our fndings from the summer 2020 workshop on social wellbeing and our cooperative inquiry process to design a support - ive social website . 3 . 1 Recruitment , IRB , and Handling Risks Our summer 2019 pilot [ 12 ] was key to determining the feasibility of our summer 2020 virtual workshop . Through a longstanding partnership with a local large suburban middle school in the East Coast , and the help of their principal , we recruited students , in the summer 2019 , for our in - person 4 - day workshop on social media and wellbeing . Participants frst completed a screener . Eighteen applications were received and 13 were accepted into the workshop , including those that indicated a full commitment to attend all 4 days . We obtained parental consent for the students to participate in the workshop and media releases to include their pictures and de - identifed audio recordings for future reports and publications . Our population was composed primarily of 7 th graders ( 7 ) and 8 th graders ( 5 ) with only 1 in the 6 th grade . A few students were familiar with each other before the workshop . Our workshop students ( 6 females , 7 males ) were diverse in ethnicity with backgrounds such as Brazilian , Dominican , Puerto Rican , Indian , Irish / Italian , Middle Eastern , Australian , Russian . We gained several insights due to this pilot : a ) more sensitive facilitation is needed when discussing wellbeing topics with teens who are unfamiliar with each other , b ) there are technological , scafolding , and COPPA - related challenges when dealing with existing platforms for prototyping , and c ) the level of complexity of the computational concepts may not be suited for all levels entering the workshop . Since the COVID - 19 pandemic resulted in the need to provide remote instruction , our summer 2020 recruitment process was han - dled diferently . We continued our partnership with a local middle school and then opened up spaces for students from outside the school since in - person instruction and geographic restriction were no longer a concern . We recruited through principal announce - ments at a few local schools , Facebook announcements through our institution’s faculty & staf email lists , and by word of mouth . Our target enrollment was a maximum of 30 students . Due to the over - whelming response of 49 applicants from Massachusetts , California , Virginia , and Washington , DC , we used the following selection cri - teria for the fnal invitations : We frst prioritized applicants from the past summer who could not participate as well as students from our partnering school . Then we prioritized potentially vul - nerable groups afected by the social distancing imposed , such as racial / ethnic minorities and girls . We thus invited 27 to continue the parental consent and media release process , resulting in 26 taking the pre - workshop survey , and 23 who eventually participated in the workshop . CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Linda Charmaraman and Catherine Delcourt Table 1 : Summary of the 23 participant demographics . Age and grade level were asked as multi - choice questions ; gender was a multi - choice question ( male , female , non - binary ) ; race / ethnicity was asked both as a multi - choice and open - ended question , state and school were asked as open ended questions . ID Age Grade Gender State Race / Ethnicity P1 13 8th Male MA Black P2 12 7th Male MA Asian P3 13 8th Female MA Black P4 13 8th Female MA White / Hispanic P5 13 8th Male MA White P6 14 9th Male MA Black P7 12 7th Female MA Asian P8 13 8th Female MA Middle Eastern P9 12 7th Male MA Black / White P10 13 8th Female MA Asian P11 12 7th Female CA Asian P12 13 8th Male MA Asian P13 13 8th Female MA White P14 12 7th Male MA Asian / White P15 12 7th Male MA Asian P16 12 7th Female MA White P17 12 7th Female MA White P18 13 8th Male MA White P19 14 8th Female MA White P20 12 7th Male DC White P21 12 7th Female MA Hispanic P22 12 7th Female MA Asian / White P23 13 8th Female MA Multiracial All participants frst agreed to a Code of Conduct before begin - ning the workshop to promote mutual respect . Given the remote structure of this workshop , we extensively used online tools to com - municate and conduct the collaborative design . We chose a software suite that is familiar to students and that allow those younger than 13 to access them : Zoom , Seesaw , and Google Apps . These tools also gave us multiple options to appeal to diferent learning styles , such as those who would prefer to illustrate or map their experiences rather than describe them verbally . Other similar remote design workshops have focused on teenagers older 13 years old , using remote technologies such as Slack [ 8 ] . There are few examples of remote workshops with teenagers younger 13 . Finally , our custom software was built using Firebase which supports encryption and safely manages passwords . 3 . 2 Participants Students came from 6 diferent middle schools across 3 states in 2 diferent time zones . They were 11 7 th graders , 11 8 th graders , and 1 9 th grader , ranging in age from 10 to 13 . The vast majority did not know each other beforehand . Our workshop students ( 13 females , 10 males ) were also ethnically diverse , such as 3 Black ( e . g . , Jamaican ) , 1 Hispanic , 7 Asian ( e . g . Vietnamese , Chinese , South Asian ) , 5 Multiracial , 1 Middle Eastern , and 7 White . Table 1 sum - marizes participant demographics . In the results section , we will use a participant ID / gender / source notation to indicate the au - thor of a quote ; the source distinguishes from three data sources for quotes throughout the Data Collection and Analysis section : written comments submitted through Seesaw as part of an assign - ment or reported in a feedback survey , and spoken quotes obtained through our group discussions over Zoom to provide context for the diferent formulations of these quotes . 3 . 3 Workshop Structure 3 . 3 . 1 Roles . In summer of 2019 , the workshop was co - led by a faculty member in Computer Science and research scientist special - izing in adolescent development , and assisted by a project coordi - nator , and 3 college undergraduates . When our team transitioned to a remote , fully virtual workshop format in summer 2020 , we increased our capacity for the workshop to host 23 students , and this time was assisted by two high school students and a recently graduated college senior . The role of the research team was to structure the schedule , monitor the in - person technologies ( e . g . , prototyping tools ) , remote technologies ( Zoom waiting rooms , See - saw , etc . ) , and facilitate team building through peer discussions via small and whole group discussions . We viewed the participants in our workshop as design partners [ 22 ] . Through this lens , every - one , our research team and participants , came to our workshop with diferent expertise , but all capable of equal contribution to the project . As social systems are complex systems , we planned to introduce new technical concepts to participants to scafold their understanding , just as we expected to learn about new social media practices from our participants . Prototyping for Social Wellbeing with Early Social Media Users CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan 3 . 3 . 2 Development of Units . When preparing this workshop , we asked in our pre - workshop survey what topics were most important to them when designing apps for healthy social media use . The top answers were , in order of most popular response : 1 ) making the world a better place , 2 ) how to cope during social distancing , 3 ) how to provide social support to others , and 4 ) how to spend less time on screens . Since educational contexts universally shifted to remote learning during the COVID - 19 pandemic by increasing time on social technologies , we adapted the focus of our summer ’20 workshop to on how to recognize and engage in online behaviors to promote social wellbeing and identity exploration . Our workshop goals were : 1 ) Supporting early teenagers in understanding and exploring wellbeing in a social context 2 ) Deconstructing and reconstructing social media sites to sup - port positive online social spaces 3 . 3 . 3 Social Wellbeing Units . We included several types of activ - ities designed to elicit discussion and refection about a ) how to cope with social distancing using social media , b ) positives and negatives of social media afordances , particularly on social inter - actions , c ) enhancing personal awareness of social and emotional wellbeing online and ofine , d ) understanding the purposes of social media use in diferent social contexts , during diferent life stages , for various audiences , and e ) refecting on their use of YouTube and how they might identify with others emotionally . Guest speakers who targeted social wellbeing as their primary topic included the director of Open Circle , a social / emotional learning curriculum . 3 . 3 . 4 Technology units . The technical units in the pilot summer 2019 in - person workshop , were broad computational concepts such as the Internet , data representation and browsers , privacy and secu - rity , and computational thinking through developing basic HTML pages . As we adapted our general workshop theme to be more focused on social wellbeing and identity , we also refocused our technical units on developing a sense of agency in innovation . As such , our focus was on teaching processes , roles , and tools used in the development of social media apps ; and involving students directly in similar industry activities . We structured the sequence of activities following best - practices for cooperative inquiry with chil - dren [ 13 ] . First , we introduced the technology units by talking about innovation . Innovation was core to agency and motivating the dif - ferent roles involved in creating a social media product ( designers , product managers , engineers ) . As part of the technical activities , we started with designing personas in small groups . Personas are common HCI discovery artifacts and are useful to develop empa - thy with end users [ 44 ] . While low - tech prototyping techniques have been well studied with this age group [ 13 ] , working with low - tech prototyping tools is challenging in a remote context since any submission requires a rather high - tech fow . For example , paper prototyping is commonly done with kids but difcult to do in a remote setting . Instead , we created Seesaw activities encouraging participants to use many of the drawing functionalities that are similar to other interactive prototyping tools . Finally , to engage students in critique and instill some perspective in ethical design we performed a risk assessment of positive and negative ways our design could be used . 3 . 3 . 5 Social Network Sandbox . A running activity through the 4 days of the workshop was to prototype a social network website with the middle school participants . The themes served as inspi - ration and discussion points to feed the ideas to be implemented in this prototype website . We call this a social network sandbox following the childhood metaphor of a box of sand with toys pro - vided in a protected , bounded , and enjoyable environment [ 4 ] . In engineering , the term ‘sandbox’ is employed in many contexts . In computer architecture and security , sandboxes are environments that protect individual applications from sharing resources with other applications [ 4 ] . In HCI , sandboxes can refer to protecting individual interactions in multi - user systems to lock the interac - tions [ 4 ] , or to Wizard - Of - Oz evaluation methods where a sandbox system mimics the functionality of a ‘real’ system [ 3 ] . Here , we call our website a Social Network Sandbox because it represented a bounded and safe space for participants in our workshop to try new ideas . The Social Network Sandbox contained the following core components of social network sites [ 10 ] : account authentication , editable user profle pages , a list of users of the page for graph tra - versal , and an activity feed of user - generated content . This website was built in HTML5 , CSS3 , JavaScript , and the backend was using Google Firebase . Firebase allowed us to use a secure authentica - tion mechanism , and the backend GUI was a helpful educational tool during the workshop to demonstrate database and account management features to the students . 3 . 4 Data Collection and Analysis 3 . 4 . 1 Audio Recordings , Survey Measures , Activity Submissions And Artifacts Created . We conducted a pre - and post - study survey to an - alyze the impact of the workshop . We captured the audio transcript of the Zoom calls . We collected submissions created by students using Seesaw . There were 13 Seesaw activities total ( 8 of which were focused on social wellbeing or identity ) and they ranged from text submissions , to freeform drawings , to photo uploads . Based on our pilot workshop from summer 2019 , we found that there were diferences in what students would say vs submit individually . This suggested the role of peer infuence in a collaborative group context compared to a personal activity . That is , by leading group discussions and also allowing for a more personal design activity , we were able to elicit design ideas that we would have missed had we done all of these activities in groups . In summer 2020 , we bal - anced individual submissions , small group breakouts , and large group discussions , as well as daily surveys , to capture input from diferent perspectives . 3 . 4 . 2 Data Analysis Process . After the workshop , our team con - ducted a thematic analysis of our qualitative data sources , including audio transcripts , Seesaw activities , and prototype outputs . A pre - liminary set of codes were derived through an inductive process from one of the authors . The other author then conducted deduc - tive coding using codes generated in the frst analysis phase , and the two researchers discussed the emerging themes and resolved diferences . Finally , after further refnement of the themes , the f - nal themes were resolved in consensus [ 16 ] . Through this process , we triangulated our fndings by turning to our feld notes , work - shop discussions , and design artifacts to identify illustrations of the emerging themes arising from the coding process . In the fnal stage CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Table 2 : Social media sites and messaging apps used by par - ticipants in our summer 2020 workshop . Name of # who have % who have site or app ever used . . . ever used . . . YouTube 20 95 % ooVoo 18 86 % TikTok 13 62 % WhatsApp 10 48 % Instagram 9 43 % Reddit 8 38 % Pinterest 8 38 % Discord 7 33 % Snapchat 6 29 % Twitch 6 29 % House Party 5 24 % Twitter 2 10 % Facebook 1 5 % Vsco 1 5 % of selective coding , we categorized the emergent themes around a set of core categories which we present as our fndings [ 19 ] . 4 SOCIAL WELLNESS ONLINE FOR EARLY SOCIAL MEDIA USERS There have been many studies looking at technological wellness for teenagers . Here , our focus is on wellness in online social contexts . Last summer , our workshop centered on time use and wellness , whereas this workshop was focused on content production and consumption . Students in our workshop used many diferent social media platforms . The social media usage patterns of students in our workshop matched the typical patterns of other studies for that age group . The social media sites and apps listed here are those used by early social media users ( 10 - 14 years old ) who may have started using YouTube at a young age for watching videos , as students mentioned to us , and may not have started using Facebook . 4 . 1 Afordances Enabling Experimentation A high - level theme that emerged from our workshop data was the notion of experimentation on social media . 4 . 2 Experimenting with a New Social Media App : the Case of TikTok Several students mentioned a common recent experience of discov - ering a new social media app : TikTok . At the time of our workshop , TikTok was a popular video creation and sharing application that was the most downloaded app in 2020 during the social distancing period of the pandemic . Students commented on the fact that they had only recently started using it in the last few months : “I got it literally two months ago . ” P8 , F , group discussion . They reported that they installed the app and tried it because they heard about it through word - of - mouth or we sent videos to watch from friends . Linda Charmaraman and Catherine Delcourt Their initial experience using TikTok was as a consumer of con - tent , fnding videos that would appeal to them . Furthermore , on refecting why TikTok became so popular with their age group , who are already avid YouTube watchers , one of our participants commented on the fact that the speed of TikTok contributed to consuming content at a faster pace , and thus perhaps being more appealing than YouTube . While 13 participants in our workshop ( 62 % ) reported ever using TikTok , two participants explained how they ended up disengaging as users of TikTok . Reasons why they did not keep using it regularly were annoyance , lack of new content , lack of funny and interesting content : “I got only just before quarantine because obviously , I heard about it . I did it for like two days . Pretty much nothing was interesting to me or funny so I deleted it . And then I got the link again two months ago for a day . Someone showed me a video . So I checked out the guys thing and yeah that video is funny but like half of his jokes are the same exact on the funny thing . ” P5 , M , group discussion . 4 . 2 . 1 Vulnerability . Few students reported on specifc instances of content they created . They had more to say about their experi - ence as a content consumers , even recognizing that they are lurkers , viewing content without creating it . We discussed the act of creating content as experimentation . One workshop facilitator noted that students put themselves out there in diferent ways , for instance , by trying to market their paintings or sharing them for entertain - ment . As described in an instance of increased self - esteem due to positive comments on a TikTok video , the feedback received from experimentation through production can have a lasting efect on the type of social media users a middle school student will become . Indeed , students were attuned to the comments they receive on the content they create . They really appreciated positive comments , this boosted their confdence , made them feel counted , and encour - aged them to continue posting this type of content , such as videos of dance performances . They also mentioned feeling particularly vulnerable to mean comments , especially when they felt attacked in their skills : “ If you’re playing a game . [ criticism of ] how good are you are” P9 , M , group discussion . 4 . 2 . 2 Social Influence . It appeared from our participants that their strongest trigger for social media experimentation was through in - fuence from their social environment , such as when friends shared a TikTok with them : “Maybe like if you see your friends , doing something you may be like want to do the same thing , too , be - cause you don’t want to be diferent . I guess from them . Or maybe just like if you see a friend . Doing it means like it makes you want to do it . ” P7 , F , group discussion . In addition to infuence from their friends , and their desire to ‘ft in’ to their immediate social circle , students in our workshop also discussed the pressure to experiment that they perceive while watching social media content , particularly when it comes from online infuencers and the hype around products or challenges that can be enticing to also try . Prototyping for Social Wellbeing with Early Social Media Users CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan 4 . 3 Afordances enabling a sense of belonging In middle school , the importance of friend circles and ‘fnding one’s community’ becomes more important . Students in our workshop mentioned diferent communities that they feel a part of and shared how they relate to those social environments through ICTs . 4 . 3 . 1 Communities of Interest . Participants described opportuni - ties to explore diferent facets of their identity such as through YouTube videos “because it shows you how to connect with others through music and help others connect with you . ” P18 , M , Seesaw . After a small group break out session , a workshop facilitator re - counted a student sharing about how she really loves anime and she doesn’t have a community of friends who also love anime in school so she uses social media to connect with people in a larger community who share the same interest as her . There are risks associated with connecting with strangers online . For instance , an app like Snapchat that tends to be more strongly associated with close friends , the connection mechanism can lend itself to being more open to connecting with strangers than the way that users conceptualize it : “I’m on Snapchat . It’s like someone can add you and then like , you don’t have to add them back for them to Like , have your Contact so it can be kind of Scary because random people can stalk you . ” P16 , F , group discussion . Trusting people online was a topic of conversation in a small group and there was a sense of being able to trust a group of like - minded others more so than the broader Internet . 4 . 3 . 2 Friend circles . Students used many diferent types of appli - cations with their friends , and most with their best friends . We saw that Snapchat was strongly associated with more intimate close friend communication . Specifc features of Snapchat contributed to feeling more connected to friends such as maintaining streaks as a constant reminder to communicate : “It kind of reminds me to talk to my friends . . . I don’t want to like lose my streak close to 200 and something and you end up snap trying them every day . And I also found that like I used to do it as much . But I found that actually helpful during quarantine to make sure that I’m talking to my friends . ” P21 , F , group discussion . Similarly , the app TikTok was used to stay in contact with friends since those connections were already encoded into the app rather than needing to know additional personal information ( phone num - bers ) to connect with friends while away : “I didn’t have all my friends , phone numbers , but I knew a lot of their TikToks so it was like a way in which I can communicate to them ” P8 , F , group discussion . The ability to fnd a user by username or simply knowing their name can facilitate connections through those applications . These applications become the gatekeepers to these relationships and central places where the relationships unfold . Students also recounted the importance of validation about their content , especially coming from friends . They were especially hurt by mean comments and by the lack of comments or reactions , at all , on their content . For example , a workshop facilitator described a small group conversation about reactions on Instagram , such as getting comments and “likes” that make you feel counted . Con - versely , mean comments or even simply the lack of comments can be hurtful . 4 . 3 . 3 Family Bonds . Since our workshop occurred during the pan - demic , the sense of family and family bonds might have been stronger due to the time spent together in close proximity . We found that ‘how connected I feel to my family’ increased for girls in our workshop : “they are doing a family TikTok and most people wouldn’t really do videos with their own family and it takes courage to do a TikTok with your family if they mess up . They are connecting with each other by having fun and dancing with each other . ” P3 , F , Seesaw . At this age , parents played a large role in the control and safety of social media usage : “My parents aren’t allowing me yet [ on Snapchat ] . They’re kind of protective when it comes to social media because they want me to be safe . So they said , I can get it in high school , but not now . I use messages on my phone , usually WhatsApp with my family” P7 , F , group discussion . The context of the pandemic also increased a feeling of belonging within the nuclear family as reported by our participants during our discussion . 4 . 3 . 4 Self - care and Social Support Strategies . What is often missing from the discussion of teenager’s usage of social media are the strategies they already know to employ to manage their feelings and enhance their self - esteem . We learned from our participants ways in which they engage in these strategies , and notice positive ways in which others engage in them and learn from those observations . 4 . 3 . 5 Seeking Positive Content . We learned that our participants actively seek out videos to boost happiness . Watching videos was often associated with a desire to fnd humor : “people are connecting through goofng of in a video game” P5 , M , Seesaw ; “This video from YouTube [ . . . ] is encouraging and for me I really like puns so this makes me feel happy . Also when I feel sad I like to see funny drawing . ” P11 , F , Seesaw ; “This photo ( A pic of my dog ) from Instagram is an example of courage because I look at my profle picture and it brings me happiness” P14 , M , Seesaw . Knowing places that they can reliably fnd content that boosts their emotional state is a method of resiliency and self - care that these students demonstrate . 4 . 3 . 6 Managing Exposure , Preventing Risk . Students mentioned ways in which they actively managed the audiences that view their content . For example , in more private and personal spaces by explicitly setting up accounts , or spaces within an account such as private vs public Stories on Snapchat , to manage self - disclosure with diferent audiences : “I don’t have a Finsta or anything and I don’t have like a second TikTok or anything , but on Snapchat I have like my private story which is I post silly pictures of myself and I do a lot more stuf on that than I do on my normal stories cuz that’s like only my closest friends . ” P21 , F , group discussion . In contrast to the example of Snapchat where private stories can be set with explicit permissions on who can or cannot view the content , students also described experiences with implicit privacy management . For example , privacy on YouTube is managed through the size of the audience : CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Linda Charmaraman and Catherine Delcourt “If your only subscribers are your friends , which is most likely who they are . It’s really unless you have other people subscribed and unless your friends are really showing up for you . You’re probably not going to fnd anyone new except your friends saying , Hey , I saw your video . ” P5 , M , group discussion . However , this implicit privacy through audience expectations can also result in many questions about who actually viewed the content , such as acquaintances , since videos on YouTube can be viewed by people who are not subscribed . This student comments how the knowledge of having a larger audience but not receiving the expected amount of feedback on posted content can also be hurtful : “I think it can go both ways . Because you can still want to have validation , even if you’re just showing your friends and people that you know , because people who you are sort of friends with but not really like , you see around school , they can still follow you or subscribe to you and then if they don’t say anything , or if they don’t like it , it can make you feel bad about yourself . ” P16 , F , group discussion . Through these diferent accounts of managing their exposure , participants in our workshop described diferent strategies they em - ploy to manage their privacy through understanding and adapting the audiences that can access their content . 4 . 3 . 7 Disengaging and Sense of Control of Their Time . Developing a sense of control and agency is a key psychosocial process of ado - lescence . Faced with constant connectivity today , students have developed strategies to control their social media usage habits and gain control over their time . The COVID - 19 pandemic has changed the daily rhythms around social media . As described by a work - shop participant , she balances her time online with other ofine activities : “I feel like I’m doing more [ social media during quar - antine ] . I don’t post a lot but I feel like I scroll through a lot more . And because there’s things I can do other social media so I try and get outside whatever I can . But like a couple days . It’s been like really hot outside , so I use TikTok , YouTube , and I have Instagram , but I don’t post on it . ” P8 , F , group discussion . A strategy discussed during their experimentation with TikTok was deleting the app . In situations where students did not fnd what they came for , such as funny or interesting content , they completely disengaged from the app by deleting it of their phone . Perhaps less drastic , they also employed strategies of disconnecting or disengaging from the current app they are using to protect their mental health and wellbeing . 4 . 3 . 8 Empathy for Others . Students in our workshop mentioned many ways in which they observed behaviors of others . For ex - ample , they noticed instances of courage on the part of content creators when they were vulnerable about mean comments they received . Empathizing with others was a way to engage in social support . A workshop facilitator noted that a student talked about thinking what would they like someone else to do for them so they try to be cognizant of that . That group also talked about gaming and how they try to hype each other up even if they might be dying in the game , trying to be positive about it . “This video on YouTube is an example of Connect because there was a YouTube that didn’t get much likes and subscribers , and I connect because I made a YouTube channel and didn’t get much either so that’s how I connect to them . ” P1 , M , Seesaw . Students also described a newfound sense of empathy resulting from the discussions in our workshop after a guest speaker from Open Circle : “ [ discussing the 4Cs ] helped me realize how I would want to be treated online is how I should treat others online as well” P16 , F , group discussion ; “I’m going to try really hard to make others feel good on social media , whether that be liking or commenting something nice” P21 , F , post - survey ; “I learned about how important it is to be careful about what you say or it might put someone down” P8 , F , post - survey . From our prior work with middle school students and other accounts of empathy , we know that they are already quite aware of the impact that their online actions can have on others , but it appears that the workshop has reinforced these ideas . From experimenting with new social media platforms to fnding a sense of belonging with inner and outer circles to managing self - care strategies to improve wellbeing , we documented how the workshop individual and group - based activities provided a forum to refect and raise awareness of how social wellbeing ties into adolescents’ use ( and non - use ) of social media in diferent social contexts . In the next section , we demonstrated how we tinkered with adolescents’ notions of their agency in reconfguring how social media works to support social wellbeing . 5 ITERATIVE DESIGN OF SOCIAL SKETCH We conducted an iterative design process over the 4 days of the workshop , to design a supportive social website for middle school students using the social network sandbox . On the frst day , partici - pants created personas of middle school students , then participants chose a design direction for the following day . On the second day , participants discovered the Social Network Sandbox for the frst time with their suggested anonymity and photo uploading features . They then worked individually on an activity to redesign posts in the activity feed , and fnally they decided on design directions for the next day . On the third day , they reviewed the changes to the website , named it Social Sketch , and redesigned profle pages . Finally , on day 4 we completed a fnal test of Social Sketch and conducted a risk assessment . This timeline is summarized in Figure 1 The Social Network Sandbox evolved to become Social Sketch . Initially , participants envisioned a social network to anonymously post photos and drawings . As seen in Figure 2 , the frst iteration users could post a photo without a signature ( anonymously ) , and browse the activity feed . The second iteration adding cosmetic styling , highly requested by the students , tags that could be added with the posts , and post captions . The fnal prototype tweaked the styling , updated the tags with additional options and better styling . We also updated tags to be used as custom flters so that selecting a tag brought a user to a page containing only posts belonging to that tag . Instead of adding likes ( an explicit action ) we added view counts . Prototyping for Social Wellbeing with Early Social Media Users CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Figure 1 : Timeline of iterative design activities . Figure 2 : Three iterations of Social Sketch with illustrations for the user - generated content component and how they changed over the course of the workshop . 5 . 1 Photos and Sketches After testing the frst prototype , students provided written feedback . Students mentioned how they would use this to experiment with their own drawings : “ I would post drawings that I’ve drawn over the past few years . We could test another drawing out ” P3 , F , group discussion . This relates back to the desire for experimentation that is evident in the choice of the name “Social Sketch . ” 5 . 2 Anonymous Feed We were particularly intrigued by the interest in anonymity , since research has found that anonymous platforms are particularly risky for teenagers [ 14 ] and the fact that anonymity had not been a topic discussed in the wellbeing / identity portions of the workshop . How - ever , we also started to see further refections around the fexible use of anonymity and lack of engagement : “ I think that something you could do is make it so if you would like to post without anyone knowing it was you then but also make it so people could know it was you” P11 , F , group discussion . Anonymity is a way to manage self - expression by choosing a username , or by toggling anonymity as needed . We also discussed the need for signatures on posts . With - out them , an activity feed could be completely anonymous . With signatures , the platform semi - anonymous where the author could select what name represents them . Together , anonymity and photos can contribute to self - expression and identity exploration . While photos - based plat - forms are amongst the most prominent social media apps used by teenagers , our participants were not familiar with anonymous apps . This underscores the high relevancy of photo as a form of communication for this age and a need to further explore safe anonymous spaces . 5 . 3 Supportive Feedback Design features such as view counts and promoted content to make everyone feel counted . Many found the website fun and simple : “ I thought it was really fun and easy to use and I actually liked how there was no liking or commenting and you just browsed through pictures ” P21 , F , group discussion . Others also confrmed this desire to limit engagement metrics for wellbeing : “ it doesn’t show how many likes or comments it has so some people don’t feel less popular then others ” , “ you could post things without having to worry about people judging you ” P1 , M , group discussion . We had also discussed the impact of likes and engagements through the workshop , despite the issues and interests in no engagement metrics , there was still some discussion about adding them . So instead of adding likes ( an explicit action ) we added view counts . 5 . 4 Tags and Filtering Students suggested adding tags on posts and fltering mechanisms to see posts of most interest . These mechanisms contribute to behaviors they described using in existing platforms to manage self - care , and to feel a sense of belonging with individuals and CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Linda Charmaraman and Catherine Delcourt Figure 3 : Example Social Sketch post from a workshop participant . This illustrates how a post appears , after iteration III , with signatures ( currently Anonymous but users could change their username ) , a caption ( Art ) , tags ( My Sketches , Nature ) , and view counts ( 138 ) . groups with similar interests . Students also commented on per - 5 . 5 Profle Pages sonalization algorithms , which went beyond our rapid prototyping Participants also had ideas for improving the profle page with timeframe , but was able to be discussed and explored with the additional information including a profle picture ( ex : could use a notion of tags . These curation mechanisms can facilitate self - care photo of your dog ) , a bio , links to profles on other social media and help limiting information overload and distractions . On the sites , and interests or “what their account is about” . Profles are topic of tags , they found them helpful especially as a way to reduce places to be your authentic self , and we saw these early social media risk because they point to the things that the user is interested in . users already engaging in the understanding of personal branding . Prototyping for Social Wellbeing with Early Social Media Users CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Table 3 : How students rated their enjoyment of the summer 2020 workshop activities . 6 ELICITING DESIGN IDEAS FOR SOCIAL MEDIA DESIGNS Previously , we described experiences of students around social wellbeing in existing systems and how they imbued those under - standings into the design of Social Sketch . Here we explore in more details the activities and aspects of the workshop that may have especially supported the exploration of new design ideas for social media for middle school students . 6 . 1 Overall Workshop Outcomes Out of the 23 participants , 15 took both the pre - and the post - surveys . Girls reported increases in the importance of sharing about their abilities , achievements , and future career plans online and feel - ing of belonging in online communities . Girls reported an increase in their belief that they are good at computing and that learning about technology will give them many career choices . Overall , par - ticipants were less likely to think that computing jobs were boring . Girls’ self - esteem and sense of agency increased from pre - study to post - study . The most enjoyable activities involved guest speakers in ICT professions , testing iterations of the social media site , and identity exercises exploring career possibilities ( see Table 3 ) . 6 . 2 Roles in the Cooperative Design Process Through our domain expertise , we guided discussions , created ac - tivities , and coded the diferent iterations of Social Sketch . It’s important to note that in a design partnership with children , adults can support the design process by providing these expertise [ 22 ] . We adapted the schedule and oferings each day based on what we heard from participants , fully engaging them as active participants in this process . We found that the students in our workshop did not always take on the full innovator’s role that we set for them , due to lack of experience or functional fxedness [ 23 ] . For example , they tended to adapt the Seesaw prototypes to them as users rather than creators of the infrastructure , reverting to reconfguration behaviors rather than innovation [ 57 ] . It was difcult to distinguish them from their role as users , and customizing UI elements based on the content vs . the layout . This observation may be due to their stage as early social media users who are still navigating familiar and foreign features of an ever shifting digital landscape . We were limited in how much computation we could teach them to make them fully co - developers in the prototyping of So - cial Sketch . We suggest that for prototyping social systems with teenagers , to employ this method to design the activities that they will take part in . For example , we found students especially en - gaged during small groups and large group discussions and willing to share novel ideas verbally rather than using design tools to sketch their ideas . CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Linda Charmaraman and Catherine Delcourt 6 . 3 Honing in on Student Skills Our dedication to supporting participants as design partners was also in helping train them to gain the necessary knowledge to be contributors [ 22 ] . It is difcult to fully include students in the design process of social systems due to the interdisciplinary and complexities involved . For example , understanding databases is a central technical component to building a multi - user system and is a challenging concept to teach in middle school . In fact , to explore the prior knowledge of students and give them some insight into data storage , we proposed an educational activity watching a video about bits and data , and then administered an assessment to understand what they learned from this video . Most students didn’t know binary and reported gaining new knowledge from this activity . There could be further exploration of the pieces needed to teach middle school students to have them fully engaged as design partners in social systems . 6 . 4 Remote Format There exist educational tools to teach middle school students , parents , and teachers about healthy social media usage such as Common Sense Media in the US ( commonsensemedia . org ) and the Healthy Social Media App in Europe ( https : / / www . healthysocialmedia . eu / app / . . These tools have proven value and are defnitely needed as part of a comprehensive educational cur - riculum in school and community contexts that are conducive to prioritizing this content . However , some of the positive aspects that emerged from our workshop were only possible because of the workshop structure : such as spending multiple days working on online and ofine projects together with a group of peers . The excitement and social proximity of this in - person setting might inspire a diferent set of ideas than one developed in a shorter time , and may empower students diferently than a classroom curricu - lum . We saw that some students started to participate more when other students had spoken , and they frequently bounced of of each other’s ideas . In the fnal surveys , students asked for more small group breakouts : “I liked the breakout rooms and talking about the design of website” P16 , F , post - survey . However , in our daily debriefs we mentioned the challenges we found in some small groups of facilitating the conversation . Also , due to technical challenges in breakout rooms in Zoom we did fewer small group breakouts over time . 7 DISCUSSION Our workshop fndings indicated to us that early users of social media participants are able and eager to engage with notions about wellbeing on social media . These discussions and participatory design activities were well supported by the workshop’s remote format , and these activities were able to elicit innovative design ideas for social media . 7 . 1 How do Middle School Students Currently Engage With Social Wellbeing in ICTs ? The top - level themes that emerged from our workshop about wellbeing were afordances enabling experimentation , afordances enabling a sense of belonging , and self - care and social support strategies . These themes aligned well with prior work with older teenagers and we describe here these insights may extend to how younger teenagers exhibit early behaviors with ICTs . For Afordances enabling experimentation we found a tension between self - disclosure now and needs of the future self . Stu - dents were aware of their future digital footprint and implications for college or jobs based on what they post online today , noting instances of self - censorship to manage these scenarios . However , self - disclosure is an important part of identity exploration that online social platforms can help teenagers at this particular time of their life [ 51 ] . At these early stages of social media usage , sup - porting better ways to explore safely without repercussions on the future self could be innovative ways of exploring social systems . For Afordances enabling a sense of belonging we found a ten - sion between anonymity and being recognized . We saw the topic of anonymity being prominent in the initial design of Social Sketch . This could suggest that our workshop participants are eager for anonymous spaces to experiment with their current identities and / or artistic talents as middle school students . Anonymous en - vironments can support many important socialization functions for older adolescence [ 25 ] . Discussions with participants about anonymity also tackled the tension between needing to give up their personal space to become more public . Understanding how the balance between self - exploration through anonymity and peer val - idation through public recognition shifts throughout adolescence ( from pre - teen to young adult years ) could be an area for further research . For self - care and social support strategies we found a tension between curation and control . Curation was discussed in rela - tion to the design of Social Sketch as a way to enable self - care strategies such as fnding interesting content and disengaging from uninteresting or unpleasant content . It is interesting to note that this wasn’t discussed in the current way that they use social me - dia , rather curation and fltering of content as self - care strategies were ideas discussed during the design and prototyping process of Social Sketch . The desire for curation , and discussion of diferent fltering mechanisms , can be a way to exert control on the content they consume . Learning a sense of control on one’s environment is important for teenagers who are navigating between their family and their own independence [ 28 ] . 7 . 2 Remote Activities Supporting Online Social Wellbeing In the context of the 2020 pandemic and social distancing at the time of the workshop , despite the widespread increase in screen time , our participants were eager to connect with others in a virtual environment . We adapted our workshop as much of the focus in our 2019 pilot centered around reducing screen time , whereas in the 2020 workshop , the focus was on how to re - engage with social technologies and repurpose it to explore our identities and positive wellbeing . We also found that the remote format enabled us to engage in activities that could not be practically possible when physically together . Conducting this workshop remotely meant that we had to recon - sider standard activities used in cooperative inquiry projects . We were encouraged by the positive outcomes of the Asynchronous Remote Communities ( ARC ) method used with teenagers [ 8 ] and Prototyping for Social Wellbeing with Early Social Media Users CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan the insights about facilitating refections and community build - ing . Here , in the context of a workshop with tweens and younger teens we had diferent consideration including a need for synchro - nous sessions for community building , selecting tools that allow our study participants , younger than 13 , to create accounts , and facilitating engaging activities for middle school students . We found that discussing wellbeing with guest speakers and in our daily group discussions encouraged refection on many experi - ences , as described in our results , about the ways in which students engage with wellbeing in online social platforms . Students reported being inspired by guest speakers who spoke of inventing their own paths despite odds against them . Our group discussions inspired the prototyping activities through building a shared sense of team - work and empathy with others’ experiences . We complemented the group discussions on wellbeing with individual refection activities , through reviewing these submissions . Low fdelity prototyping which is an essential activity to work with design partners was especially feasible in this remote format for prototyping a social system since a low - fdelity prototype of social interactions requires a multi - user system . Having each par - ticipant already on their device was particularly seamless to get everyone on - boarded onto our test prototype and debug issues on the fy . Since our screen was already shared , simply revealing aspects of the back - end turned into a teachable moment . Due to the fact that the website was updated daily with new features , there were some ideas that we were not able to include . However , other related features served as initial ways to test these ideas . These included comments , which is a complicated feature for the UI and the backend , which was tested by proxy through the view counts as another form of user engagement . Another idea was a personal - ization algorithm , which would have also been a signifcant heavy lift on the backend , and was discussed by proxy through the tag flters . These ideas could be explored further in future workshops of a similar nature . 7 . 3 From Reconfguration to Reconstruction Through the workshop , we discussed the features , afordances , and norms of social media that contributed to wellbeing and those that might cause harm . This critique and exploration of online social spaces was a way to “deconstruct” the components of social media sites . Additionally , through providing some computational under - standing of the product development lifecycle and some computing background ( such as the bits video and explaining databases ) , stu - dents started engaging with the core components of social media such as describing anonymity or asking question about “what is a timestamp ? ” Through the prototyping activity , we then engaged students in using their “deconstruction” mindset to “reconstructing” notions of social media into a cohesive whole , resulting in Social Sketch . As opposed to other tinkering projects with hands on artifacts or simple code structures , social systems require a complex technical stack simply to enable multi - user processes . In a way “opening the box” to allow for hands - on exploration is challenging in the social systems space . We found that daily iterations on a bare - bones social network sandbox was efective in engaging students through this innovation and reconstruction process . As we have found in this reconstruction process , students reconstructed with awareness for wellbeing and social processes that could be harmful to others . Reconstruction , in our workshop , was a direct reworking of the underlying code and infrastructure of a social website . In contrast , reconfguration is the social process of adapting existing social platforms to new uses through developing new norms of usage [ 9 , 57 ] . Existing social media platforms only provide room for reconfguration since their underlying infrastructure cannot be modifed by end users . By using our Social Network Sandbox as an experimental design environment , we encouraged students to be empowered to innovate . We found that our sandbox website was efective at eliciting ideas starting from scratch . We saw instances of students building on each other’s ideas . We found that it was important to involve students as design partners through our process of creating Social Sketch . Students gained experience as creators of social systems that went beyond styling suggestions and towards design ideas that pertain to social interactions . They were also fully involved as users and testers of the system , which helped elicit future ideas . Through Social Sketch , we explored the emergent ideas that were inspired by our discussions about online wellbeing to empower teenagers in the decision - making process of the parameters for novel social media infrastructures . 7 . 4 Limitations The fndings from this study must be contextualized in our current reality . This workshop occurred in July 2020 , during a time of global physical social distancing due to the COVID - 19 pandemic . These circumstances afected our research team and student participants in ways that may have deeply shaped the workshop and subsequent analysis . This time period has been marked by more time spent online , which matches the experiences reported by our participants . Increased time online may have contributed to diferent usage patterns of social media that during the pre - pandemic period , such as increased time using social media to stay connected with friends , etc . We had planned this workshop , based on a workshop in summer 2019 , prior to the pandemic and adapted our structure to a remote format to accommodate the situation . This study should also be contextualized by the population of our workshop participants and our recruitment strategies , which are standard for this type of research . Our purposive sampling strategy was frst advertised to a diverse school community where we had an existing partnership and , secondly , we used word - of - mouth to reach hard - to - fnd youth . Our fnal participant selection criteria was based on the need for heterogeneity [ 43 ] to include those underrepresented in the current design of technology , who , at the time of our study , were also those most at - risk in the remote learning context caused by the pandemic in the Spring ( e . g . , race , socioeconomic status , gender ) . This recruitment process resulted in a workshop population primarily of local students , with some students located further away geographically . To increase diversity , we chose to conduct the workshop during a timeframe that was better for students of color ( morning EST ) , which ended up being more difcult for people on the West Coast to join . This population is certainly not generalizable to all middle school students , but the learnings we obtained about structuring the workshop could be CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Linda Charmaraman and Catherine Delcourt applied with other middle school populations and we specifcally targeted those whose voices are underrepresented in the current design of technology . Our paper describes in detail our iterative workshop design process so that future researchers can employ our activities and analysis methods which may be applicable to early social media users for a focus on transferability [ 31 ] . 8 CONCLUSION Our work highlights a need to tackle early social media usage through a multi - faceted approach . Providing adolescents agency to collaboratively envision how they would defne and support healthy social media use can provide novel design directions for more age - appropriate platforms . Discussions surrounding this design process can also shed light on the COVID - 19 pandemic , which forced us to alter our workshop plan in changing it to a remote format . We found that this format was particularly well suited for cooperative inquiry with early teenagers for exploring new social media design ideas . Through remote rapid prototyping , we can help to create bridges between an emerging understanding of the technology and its social and health implications , as well as bridges between teens’ usage of social media and their network of peers , parents , and educators . We believe that encouraging their ownership of the design outcomes , and their involvement in this process is a way to recognize the agency of early teenagers in a social wellbeing system . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We are grateful to the I Am Strong Foundation for supporting our summer workshop series , who awarded us a fund aimed at reducing isolation and stigma related to adolescent mental health struggles . We thank our study participants and our anonymous reviewers for their helpful feedback . We thank Alyssa Gramajo for her review of this paper and for her coordination of the workshop and to Amanda M . Richer , MA , who assisted with survey analysis . We would also like to thank recent Wellesley College alum Julia Cromwell and our high school interns , Jessica Hung and Mercedes Noelia Hainzl Fernández , for the planning and implementation of the summer workshop . We owe much gratitude to our partnering schools and to the guest speakers who were key in the success of the workshop . The larger study from which this workshop stemmed was supported by the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development of NIH under award number 1R15HD094281 - 01 . The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the ofcial views of the National Institutes of Health . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Dominic Abrams , Mario Weick , Dominique Thomas , Hazel Colbe and Keith M . Franklin . 2011 . On - line ostracism afects children diferently from adolescents and adults . In British Journal of Developmental Psychology , 29 , 1 , 110 - 123 . [ 2 ] Mark S . Ackerman . 2000 . The intellectual challenge of CSCW : the gap between social requirements and technical feasibility . In Human - Computer Interaction , 15 , 2 , 179 – 203 . [ 3 ] Eytan Adar , Desney S . Tan and Jaime Teevan . 2013 . Benevolent deception in human computer interaction . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Hu - man Factors in Computing Systems , 1863 – 1872 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2466246 [ 4 ] Andrea Albarelli and Augusto Celentano . 2014 . Sandboxed interaction for casual users in shared spaces . In Proceedings of the International Working Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces , 97 - 104 . [ 5 ] Monica Anderson and Jingjing Jiang . 2018 . Teens , social media & technology 2018 . In Pew Research Center , 31 , 2018 . [ 6 ] Joseph B Bayer , Penny Triêu and Nicole B Ellison . 2020 . Social media elements , . ecologies , and efects . In Annual review of psychology , 71 . [ 7 ] Ine Beyens , Eline Frison and Steven Eggermont . 2016 . “I don’t want to miss a thing” : Adolescents’ fear of missing out and its relationship to adolescents’ social needs , Facebook use , and Facebook related stress . In Computers in Human Behavior , 64 , 1 - 8 . [ 8 ] Arpita Bhattacharya , Calvin Liang , Emily Y . Zeng , Kanishk Shukla , Miguel E . R . Wong , Sean A . Munson and Julie A . Kientz . 2019 . Engaging Teenagers in Asynchronous Online Groups to Design for Stress Management . In Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on Interaction Design and Children , 26 – 37 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311927 . 3323140 [ 9 ] Danah Boyd . 2014 . It’s complicated : The social lives of networked teens . Yale University Press . [ 10 ] Danah M Boyd and Nicole B Ellison . 2007 . Social network sites : Defnition , history , and scholarship . In Journal of computer - mediated Communication , 13 , 1 , 210 - 230 . [ 11 ] Marion Buchenau and Jane Fulton Suri . 2000 . Experience prototyping . In Proceed - ings of the Proceedings of the 3rd conference on Designing interactive systems : processes , practices , methods , and techniques , 424 – 433 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 347642 . 347802 [ 12 ] Charmaraman L , Grevet Delcourt C , Serrano Najera C , Vargas E , Gramajo A , Richer A and Adachi - Mejia A . ( in press ) . Disconnecting and reconnecting : A summer workshop photovoice project to support healthy social media use in early adolescence . In Afterschool Matters . [ 13 ] Linda Charmaraman , David Bickham and Olaide Sode . ( 2020 ) . Mental health and illness related behavior . In Megan A . Moreno and Annie Hoopes ( ed . ) , Technology and Adolescent Health Beahvior : In School and Beyond . ( pp . 283 - 304 ) . Elsevier [ 14 ] Linda Charmaraman , Tracy Gladstone and Amanda Richer . 2018 . Positive and Negative Associations Between Adolescent Mental Health and Technology . In M . A . Moreno & A . Radovic ( ed . ) , Technology and adolescent mental health ( pp . 61 - 71 ) . Springer . [ 15 ] Linda Charmaraman , Amanda M Richer , Elana Pearl Ben - Joseph and Elizabeth B Klerman . ( in press ) . Quantity , content , and context matter : associations among so - cial technology use and sleep habits in early adolescents . In Journal of Adolescent Health . [ 16 ] Kathy Charmaz . 2000 . Grounded theory : Objectivist and constructivist methods . In Handbook of qualitative research , 2 , 509 - 535 . [ 17 ] European Commission , May 25 , 2018 , General Data Protection Regulation , Article 8 , [ 18 ] Federal Trade Commission , 2002 , Protecting Children’s Privacy Under COPPA : A survey on compliance . , https : / / www . ftc . gov / sites / default / fles / documents / rules / children % E2 % 80 % 99s - online - privacy - protection - rule - coppa / coppasurvey . pdf [ 19 ] Juliet Corbin and Anselm Strauss . 2014 . Basics of qualitative research : Techniques and procedures for developing grounded theory . Sage publications . [ 20 ] Katie Davis . 2012 . Friendship 2 . 0 : Adolescents’ experiences of belonging and self - disclosure online . In Journal of adolescence , 35 , 6 , 1527 - 1536 . [ 21 ] Ratan Dey , Yuan Ding and Keith W Ross . 2013 . Profling high - school students with facebook : how online privacy laws can actually increase minors’ risk . In Proceedings of the Conference on Internet Measurement , 405 - 416 . [ 22 ] Allison Druin . 2002 . The role of children in the design of new technology . In Behaviour & Information Technology , 21 , 1 , 1 - 25 . [ 23 ] Allison Druin , Ben Bederson , Angela Boltman , Adrian Miura , Debby Knotts - Callahan and Mark Platt . 1998 . Children as our technology design partners . In A . Druin ( ed . ) , The design of children’s technology ( pp . 51 - 72 ) . Morgan Kaufmann , San Francisco , CA . [ 24 ] Jacquelynne S Eccles , Christy Miller Buchanan , Constance Flanagan , Andrew Fuligni , Carol Midgley and Doris Yee . 1991 . Control versus autonomy during early adolescence . In Journal of Social Issues , 47 , 4 , 53 - 68 . [ 25 ] Nicole B Ellison , Lindsay Blackwell , Clif Lampe and Penny Trieu . 2016 . “The Question Exists , but You Don’t Exist With It” : Strategic Anonymity in the Social Lives of Adolescents . In Social Media + Society , 2 , 4 . [ 26 ] Nicole B Ellison , Charles Steinfeld and Clif Lampe . 2007 . The benefts of Face - book “friends : ” Social capital and college students’ use of online social network sites . In Journal of computer - mediated communication , 12 , 4 , 1143 - 1168 . [ 27 ] Jasmine Fardouly , Natasha R Magson , Carly J Johnco , Ella L Oar and Ronald M Rapee . 2018 . Parental control of the time preadolescents spend on social media : Links with preadolescents’ social media appearance comparisons and mental health . In Journal of youth and adolescence , 47 , 7 , 1456 - 1468 . [ 28 ] Arup Kumar Ghosh , Karla Badillo - Urquiola , Mary Beth Rosson , Heng Xu , John M Carroll and Pamela J Wisniewski . 2018 . A matter of control or safety ? Examining parental use of technical monitoring apps on teens’ mobile devices . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 - 14 . [ 29 ] Catherine Grevet and Eric Gilbert . 2015 . Piggyback prototyping : Using existing , large - scale social computing systems to prototype new ones . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 4047 - 4056 . [ 30 ] Susan Harter . 1993 . Causes and consequences of low self - esteem in children and adolescents . In ( ed . ) , Self - esteem ( pp . 87 - 116 ) . Springer . Prototyping for Social Wellbeing with Early Social Media Users [ 31 ] Gillian R . Hayes . 2011 . The relationship of action research to human - computer interaction . In ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . , 18 , 3 , Article 15 . [ 32 ] Ole Sejer Iversen and Rachel Charlotte Smith . 2012 . Scandinavian participatory design : dialogic curation with teenagers . In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children , 106 - 115 . [ 33 ] Carrie James , Katie Davis , Linda Charmaraman , Sara Konrath , Petr Slovak , Emily Weinstein and Lana Yarosh . 2017 . Digital life and youth well - being , social con - nectedness , empathy , and narcissism . In Pediatrics , 140 , Supplement 2 , S71 - S75 . [ 34 ] Jaana Juvonen and Bernard Weiner . 1993 . An attributional analysis of students’ interactions : The social consequences of perceived responsibility . In Educational Psychology Review , 5 , 4 , 325 - 345 . [ 35 ] Corey Lee M Keyes . 1998 . Social well - being . In Social psychology quarterly , 121 - 140 . [ 36 ] Samantha Krieger , Meghan Allen and Catherine Rawn . 2015 . Are Females Disin - clined to Tinker in Computer Science ? In Proceedings of the 46th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education , 102 – 107 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2676723 . 2677296 [ 37 ] Liu Yi Lin , Jaime E Sidani , Ariel Shensa , Ana Radovic , Elizabeth Miller , Jason B Colditz , Beth L Hofman , Leila M Giles and Brian A Primack . 2016 . Association between social media use and depression among US young adults . In Depression and anxiety , 33 , 4 , 323 - 331 . [ 38 ] Sonia Livingstone , Kjartan Ólafsson and Elisabeth Staksrud . 2011 . Social net - working , age and privacy . In London UK : EU Kids Online . [ 39 ] Soraya Mehdizadeh . 2010 . Self - presentation 2 . 0 : Narcissism and self - esteem on Facebook . In Cyberpsychology , behavior , and social networking , 13 , 4 , 357 - 364 . [ 40 ] Gwenn Schurgin O’Keefe and Kathleen Clarke - Pearson . 2011 . The impact of social media on children , adolescents , and families . In Pediatrics , 127 , 4 , 800 - 804 . [ 41 ] Ursula Oberst , Elisa Wegmann , Benjamin Stodt , Matthias Brand and Andrés Chamarro . 2017 . Negative consequences from heavy social networking in adoles - cents : The mediating role of fear of missing out . In Journal of adolescence , 55 , 51 - 60 . [ 42 ] Laura M Padilla - Walker , Sarah M Coyne , Ashley M Fraser , W Justin Dyer and Jeremy B Yorgason . 2012 . Parents and adolescents growing up in the digital age : Latent growth curve analysis of proactive media monitoring . In Journal of adolescence , 35 , 5 , 1153 - 1165 . [ 43 ] Michael Quinn Patton . 1990 . Qualitative evaluation and research methods . SAGE Publications , inc . [ 44 ] John Pruitt and Jonathan Grudin . 2003 . Personas : practice and theory . In Pro - ceedings of the Conference on Designing for User Experiences , 1 - 15 . [ 45 ] Matt Richtel and Miguel Helft . 2011 . Facebook users who are under age raise concerns , Retrieved September , 2020 from http : / / www . nytimes . com / 2011 / 03 / 12 / technology / internet / 12underage . html ? pagewanted = all & _ r = 1 & CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan [ 46 ] Alberto Monge Rofarello and Luigi De Russis . 2019 . The Race Towards Digital Wellbeing : Issues and Opportunities . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300616 [ 47 ] Kenneth H . Rubin , William M . Bukowski and Jefrey G . Parker . 2006 . Peer In - teractions , Relationships , and Groups . In ( ed . ) , Handbook of child psychology : Social , emotional , and personality development , Vol . 3 , 6th ed . ( pp . 571 - 645 ) . John Wiley & Sons , Inc . , Hoboken , NJ , US . [ 48 ] L Steinberg and JS Silk . 2002 . Parenting adolescents . In M . H . Bornstein ( ed . ) , Handbook of parenting ( Vol . 1 ) ( pp . 103 – 134 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . [ 49 ] Laurence Steinberg . 1990 . Autonomy , confict , and harmony in the family rela - tionship . In S . Feldman and G . Elliot ( ed . ) , At the threashold : The developing adolescent ( pp . 255 - 276 ) . Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA . [ 50 ] Jerry Suls , Rene Martin and Ladd Wheeler . 2002 . Social comparison : Why , with whom , and with what efect ? In Current directions in psychological science , 11 , 5 , 159 - 163 . [ 51 ] Patti M Valkenburg and Jochen Peter . 2007 . Online communication and adolescent well - being : Testing the stimulation versus the displacement hypothesis . In Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication , 12 , 4 , 1169 - 1182 . [ 52 ] Maja van der Velden , Margaret Machniak Sommervold , Alma Culén and Britt Nakstad . 2016 . Designing interactive technologies with teenagers in a hospital setting . In ( ed . ) , Perspectives on HCI Research with Teenagers ( pp . 103 - 131 ) . Springer . [ 53 ] Philippe Verduyn , David Seungjae Lee , Jiyoung Park , Holly Shablack , Ariana Orvell , Joseph Bayer , Oscar Ybarra , John Jonides and Ethan Kross . 2015 . Passive Facebook usage undermines afective well - being : Experimental and longitudinal evidence . In Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 144 , 2 , 480 . [ 54 ] Helen GM Vossen and Patti M Valkenburg . 2016 . Do social media foster or curtail adolescents’ empathy ? A longitudinal study . In Computers in Human Behavior , 63 , 118 - 124 . [ 55 ] Greg Walsh , Elizabeth Foss , Jason Yip and Allison Druin . 2013 . FACIT PD : a framework for analysis and creation of intergenerational techniques for partici - patory design . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2893 - 2902 . [ 56 ] Kathryn R . Wentzel and Kathryn Caldwell . 1997 . Friendships , Peer Acceptance , and Group Membership : Relations to Academic Achievement in Middle School . In Child Development , 68 , 6 , 1198 - 1209 . [ 57 ] Sijia Xiao , Danaë Metaxa , Joon Sung Park , Karrie Karahalios and Niloufar Salehi . 2020 . Random , Messy , Funny , Raw : Finstas as Intimate Reconfgurations of Social Media . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376424 [ 58 ] Sarita Yardi and Amy Bruckman . 2011 . Social and technical challenges in parent - ing teens’ social media use . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 3237 - 3246 .