Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 1 | P a g e The Emotional Unconscious John F . Kihlstrom University of California , Berkeley Shelagh Mulvaney University of Arizona Betsy A . Tobias University of Arizona Irene P . Tobis University of Wisconsin Note : An edited version of this article appeared in E . Eich , J . F . Kihlstrom , G . H . Bower , J . P . Forgas , & P . M . Niedenthal ( 2000 ) Counterpoints : Cognition and Emotion ( pp . 30 - 86 ) , New York : Oxford University . The webpage is last modified by author ( s ) 07 / 10 / 2007 10 : 36 : 19 AM . This document is created and corrected from typos 22 / 09 / 2011 10 : 18 : 12 PM . One of the earliest marks of the cognitive revolution in psychology was a re - vival of interest in consciousness , as opposed to behavior . To a large degree , the cognitive psychology which emerged immediately after World War II to replace functional behaviorism was marked by an interest in the span of ap - prehension , primary memory , attention , and imagery . Now , as we approach the 21st century , cognitive psychology has begun to deal seriously with un - conscious mental life , and the notion of the psychological unconscious : the idea that conscious experience , thought , and action is influenced by per - cepts , memories , and other mental states which are inaccessible to pheno - menal awareness and somehow independent of voluntary control . The Cognitive Unconscious and Beyond In the modern history of cognitive psychology , one can discern four early stages in our conceptualization of the psychological unconscious ( Kihlstrom , 1995b , 1998a ) . ( 1 ) The first of these might be called the wastebasket view : Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 2 | P a g e that the unconscious is comprised of events that are unattended and unre - hearsed , and memories that have been lost through decay or displacement . ( 2 ) There is also the file cabinet view : that the unconscious is comprised of memories that are passively stored , and must be actively retrieved into short - term or working memory in order to play any role in cognitive processing . Note that neither view allows unconscious percepts , thoughts , and memories to be dynamically active . Thus , they do not really satisfy the definition of the psychological unconscious . ( 3 ) A more active role for the unconscious appears in the notion of preattentive processing , which holds that stimulus events are subject to unconscious processes of feature detec - tion , pattern recognition , and the like before conscious attention is directed to them . ( 4 ) An even more active role is suggested by the idea of automatic - ity - - the notion that some cognitive and motoric skills , once executed deli - berately , may become automatized through extensive practice - - after which we have no direct introspective access to these procedures or their opera - tions . These ideas allow unconscious processes to play a role in cognition , but they imply that the psychological unconscious is limited to mental processes , and that the contents on which these processes operate are con - scious . Implicit Memory The idea that mental contents might be unconscious , and not just the processes that operate on them , is commonly associated with psychoanalytic theory . But , as Ellenberger ( 1970 ) has shown , ideas about unconscious per - cepts and memories have a history that extends far back beyond Brewer and Freud ' s ( 1893 - 1895 / 1955 ) studies of hysteria . And in contemporary psy - chology it has been revived in the distinction between explicit and implicit memory ( Schacter , 1987 ) . Explicit memory refers to the conscious recollec - tion of some past event , as in recall and recognition . By contrast , implicit memory refers to any effect of a past event on a person ' s ongoing expe - rience , thought , and action , regardless of whether that event can be con - sciously remembered . Perhaps the most dramatic demonstration of the difference between explicit and implicit memory comes from studies of patients who have suffered bila - teral damage to the medial temporal lobes ( including the hippocampus ) or diencephalon ( including the mammillary bodies ) . These patients show a gross anterograde amnesia , as evidenced by their general inability to recall Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 3 | P a g e or recognize words that have been presented to them for study . But when asked to perform other tasks , they frequently give evidence of the preserva - tion of some sort of memory . The first investigators to document this under controlled conditions were Warrington and Weiskrantz ( 1968 ) , who found relatively normal retention when the patients were tested with fragments or stems of list items . Thus , after studying a word like ELASTIC , amnesics will be unable to recall or recognize it ; but when presented with the stem ELA - - , and encouraged to fill in the blanks , they are more likely to produce ELASTIC than ELATED . This phenomenon has now come to be known as a priming ef - fect , and it has been demonstrated many times . When amnesic patients , who cannot remember words from a study list , are later given an opportuni - ty to use those same words in another sort of task , they show an advantage for previously studied items as opposed to unstudied neutral items - - an ad - vantage similar in magnitude to that displayed by neurologically intact con - trols . Dissociations between explicit and implicit memory can be observed in other forms of amnesia as well , including posthypnotic amnesia ( Dorfman & Kihlstrom , 1994 ; Kihlstrom , 1980 ) , surgical anesthesia ( for reviews , see Cork , Couture , & Kihlstrom , 1997 ; Kihlstrom , 1993b ; Kihlstrom & Schacter , 1990 ; Merikle & Daneman , 1996 ) , and the amnesias associated with electro - convulsive therapy ( Dorfman , Kihlstrom , Cork , & Misiaszek , 1995 ; Squire , Shimamura , & Graf , 1985 ) and multiple personality disorder ( for reviews , see Kihlstrom & Schacter , 1995 ; Kihlstrom , Tataryn , & Hoyt , 1993 ) , so the effect is quite commonly observed . Implicit memory is also spared in normal aging , which has deleterious effects on explicit memory ( e . g . , Light & Singh , 1987 ; Light , Singh , & Capps , 1986 ; for a review , see Schacter , Kihlstrom , Kaszniak , & Valdiserri , 1993 ) . Dissociations between explicit and implicit memory can be observed even in normal subjects run under normal laboratory conditions ( for a review , see Roediger & McDermott , 1990 ) . Thus , subjects can show savings in relearning items which they can neither recall nor recognize from a previous study trial ( Nelson , 1978 ) . Priming effects are unaffected by variables , such as depth of processing during encoding , that profoundly affect conscious recollection ( e . g . , Jacoby & Dallas , 1981 ) . The study of implicit memory in normal sub - jects , especially as represented by repetition priming , is now a major enter - prise within cognitive psychology ( for reviews of this literature , see ; Graf & Masson , 1993 ; Lewandowsky , Dunn & Kirsner , 1989 ; Roediger & McDermott , Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 4 | P a g e 1990 ) . At the same time , the explicit - implicit distinction has also been ex - tended to other domains of cognition ( Kihlstrom , 1987 , 1990 , 1998a ) . Implicit Learning Perhaps the most familiar of these extensions ( and one that actually pre - dates the explicit - implicit distinction in memory ) is the phenomenon of im - plicit learning , or the acquisition of new patterns of behavior in the absence of awareness of the patterns themselves ( for reviews , see Adams , 1957 ; Berry & Dienes , 1993 ; Dienes & Berry , 1997 ; Kihlstrom , 1996a ; Neal & Hesketh , 1997 ; Reber , 1993 ; Seger , 1994 ) . Implicit learning has been dem - onstrated by Reber ' s ( 1967 ) work on artificial grammars , in which subjects who have been exposed to letter strings generated according to a complex rule system can classify new instances appropriately , even though they can - not articulate the rules that define the category ; Lewicki ( 1986 ) has reported conceptually similar experiments involving social categorization and judg - ment . Similarly , experiments on the control of complex systems show that subjects can learn to manipulate inputs in order to make control outputs , without being able to articulate the relations between them ( e . g . , Berry & Broadbent , 1984 ) . Finally , it appears that subjects can acquire the ability to predict forthcoming events without being able to specify the underlying se - quential structure they have obviously learned ( e . g . , ( Lewicki , Czyzewska , & Hoffman , 1987 ; Nissen & Bullemer , 1987 ) . Razran ( 1961 ) reported that sub - jects could acquire interoceptive conditioned responses without being aware of either the conditioned or unconditioned stimuli ( see also Papka , Ivry , & Woodruff - Pak , 1996 ) . In all these cases , and others , subjects have appar - ently learned without being aware of what they have learned . In stark contrast to implicit memory , claims for implicit learning have been highly controversial ( Adams , 1957 ; Dulany , 1997 ; Shanks & St . John , 1994 ) . Reber ( 1967 , 1993 ) , has defined implicit learning as abstract , automatic , and unconscious , and all three assertions have been seriously questioned by critics . Although questions concerning automaticity and representation are both interesting , in the present context only awareness is relevant , and here it must be admitted that the available evidence is not completely satisfying . For example , while most subjects in artificial grammar learning cannot arti - culate the entire Markov process by which the grammatical strings have been generated ( Reber , 1967 ) , it is also true that above - chance classifica - tion performance could result from consciously accessible knowledge of legal Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 5 | P a g e letters , letter positions , or bigrams . Perhaps the best evidence on the posi - tive side is that the subjects experience themselves as behaving randomly . In artificial grammar learning the relationship between accuracy and confi - dence is very weak ( Dienes , Altman , Kwan , and Goode , 1995 ) , while in se - quence learning subjects rate their accurate predictions as guesses ( Willing - ham , Greeley , & Bardone , 1993 ) . Implicit Perception A somewhat more recent extension of the explicit - implicit distinction is to perception . By analogy to implicit memory , we can define implicit perception in terms of the effects of a current event ( or an event in the very recent past ) on performance , in the absence of conscious perception of that event ( Kihlstrom , 1996a ; Kihlstrom , Barnhardt , & Tataryn , 1992a ) . Implicit per - ception includes what has been known as subliminal perception , precons - cious processing , or detectionless processing , as illustrated by priming ef - fects involving weak , brief , or masked stimulus presentations ( e . g . , Green - wald Klinger , & Liu , 1989 ; Marcel , 1983 ; Merikle & Reingold , 1990 ; Pierce & Jastrow , 1885 ) . It also covers priming effects observed in experiments in - volving parafoveal vision ( e . g . , Bargh & Petromonaco , 1982 ; Underwood , 1976 ) and dichotic listening ( Eich , 1984 ) . In each of these cases , the prim - ing is produced by stimuli which can be construed as somehow degraded be - low some level required for conscious perception . During the recent history of psychology , claims for subliminal perception have been very controversial ( e . g . , Bruner & Klein , 1960 ; Dixon , 1971 , 1981 ; Eriksen , 1960 ; Holender , 1986 ; Shanks & St . John , 1994 ) , but the effect has now been demonstrated under conditions that should satisfy all but the most incorrigible critics ( Greenwald , Klinger , & Liu , 1989 ; Greenwald , Klinger , & Schuh , 1995 ; Greenwald , Draine , & Abrams , 1996 ) . It should be noted , however , that tru - ly subliminal processing seems to be analytically limited to very perceptual and very simple semantic analyses ( Greenwald , 1992 ; Kihlstrom , 1993a , 1996a ) . However , subliminal perception does not exhaust the category of implicit perception effects . This is because priming and similar effects can be ob - served under conditions that are not easily classified as subliminal . A neuro - logical case in point is blindsight ( Weiskrantz , 1986 ) : patient D . B . , can make accurate judgments about the visual properties of objects which he cannot see ; another is neglect resulting from temporoparietal damage ( Bisiach , Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 6 | P a g e 1993 ; Rafal , 1998 ) : In at least some cases , the patient ' s behavior and judgments can be influenced by stimuli presented in the neglected portion of the visual field ( Marshall & Halligan , 1988 ) . Similar effects are observed in the functional anesthesias , such as " hysterical " blindness , associated with conversion disorder ( e . g . , Brady and Lind , 1961 ; Bryant & McConkey , 1989b ) , and in some phenomena of hypnosis , such as suggested blindness ( Bryant & McConkey , 1989a ) and deafness ( Spanos , Jones , & Malfara , 1982 ) . in these cases , the stimuli in question are clearly supraliminal : and despite the fact that they are not consciously perceived , they clearly influ - ence the subject ' s experience , thought , and action . For this reason , Kihlstrom et al . ( 1992a ) preferred the term " implicit " to " subliminal " percep - tion , to underscore the central role of the subject ' s phenomenal awareness , as opposed to stimulus properties : the subjects are perceiving while una - ware of what they are perceiving . Implicit perception is typically revealed by the same sorts of tasks employed in studies of implicit memory , with the dif - ference that in implicit memory , the events in question were consciously perceived at the time they occurred . On these grounds , then , preserved priming following general anesthesia ( Cork et al . , 1997 ) might well be classi - fied as a case of implicit perception rather than implicit memory . Implicit Thought After memory , learning , and perception , the catalog of cognition comes na - turally to thought . Although James ( 1890 ) characterized unconscious thought as a contradiction in terms , evidence for implicit thought is mount - ing ( Dorfman , Shames , & Kihlstrom , 1994 ; Kihlstrom , Shames , & Dorfman , 1996 ) . Again by analogy to implicit memory , implicit thought may be said to occur where a thought - - for example , the correct solution to a problem - - influences experience , thought , or action , in the absence of awareness of the thought itself . Implicit thoughts may consist of ideas , beliefs , or images - - any cognitive content , in fact , which is neither a percept ( a representation of a current event ) or a memory ( a representation of a past event ) ; and they appear to be closely associated with the experiences of intuition , incubation , and insight which are hallmarks of creative problem solving . The notion of implicit thought is exemplified by the research of Bowers and his associates , who showed how the correct solution to a difficult problem can influence choice behavior , even though the subject is not consciously aware of the solution itself ( Bowers , 1984 ; Bowers , Farvolden , & Mermigis , Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 7 | P a g e 1995 ; Bowers , Regehr , Balthazard , & Parker , 1990 ) . Their research involved an adaptation of the Remote Associates Test ( Mednick , 1962 ) , in which sub - jects are presented with two word triplets , one coherent and one incoherent . For the coherent triplet , the items are all associatively related to a single word ( e . g . , playing , credit , report - - card ) , while for the incoherent triplet , there is no such relation ( e . g . , still , pages , music ) . The subject ' s task is to in - spect both triplets , and give the solution to the coherent triplet ( the target ) ; if they cannot do so , they are to indicate which triplet is coherent . Bowers et al . ( 1990 , Experiment 1 ) found that subjects could discriminate between co - herent and incoherent triplets at better than chance levels , even when they could not name the target . They further suggested that the subjects ' choices reflected information processing outside of phenomenal awareness - - some - thing like the buildup of activation spreading from semantic memory nodes representing the elements of the coherent triplet to a node representing the target . In support of this idea , Shames ( 1994 ) found that unsolved but co - herent triplets primed lexical decisions concerning their respective targets . Other experiments also show that , in the absence of awareness of the cor - rect answer , subjects ' intuitions about problems , choices , and judgments are not merely random guesses . For example , Bowers et al . ( 1990 , Experiment 2 ) also showed that subjects could discriminate between picture fragments that could , when properly assembled , represent familiar objects and those that could not - - even though they were unable to tell what the objects were . Durso and his colleagues were able to trace changes in cognitive structure as subjects approached the solution to a problem , even though they had not reached the solution itself ( Durso , Rea , and Dayton , 1994 ) . And Bechara and colleagues found that subjects ' skin - conductance res - ponses , and choice behaviors , differentiated between advantageous and dis - advantageous decks of cards in a gambling game , even though they could not describe the difference between " good " and " bad " decks ( Bechara , Da - masio , Damasio , & Anderson , 1994 ; Bechara , Damasio , Tranel , & Damasio , 1997 ; Bechara , Tranel , Damasio , & Damasio , 1996 ) . These sorts of results converge on the proposition that thoughts , in the form of ideas , images , bi - ases , and the like , can guide behavior even when we are unaware of them . Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 8 | P a g e The Trilogy of Mind These four categories of phenomena - - memory , learning , perception , and thought - - make up the cognitive unconscious ( Kihlstrom , 1987 , 1998a ; Ro - zin , 1976 ) . But cognition is not all there is to mental life . At least since the 19th century , many psychologists and philosophers of mind and have classi - fied mental life into three broad faculties , including emotion and motivation as well as cognition ( for a review , see Hilgard , 1980 ) . This idea began with Christian Wolfe ( 1679 - 1754 ) who brought the term psychology into common use , and who classified the mind into the facultas cognoscitova ( knowledge ) and the facultas appetiva ( desire ) . Moses Mendelsohn ( 1729 - 1786 ) added affect ( emotion ) to the list . The tripartite classification of mental faculties was consolidated by the philosopher Immanuel Kant ( 1724 - 1804 ) , who wrote in his Critique of Judgment ( 1790 ) that " there are three absolutely ir - reducible faculties of the mind , namely , knowledge , feeling , and desire " ( Watson , 1888 , p . 311 ) . By this statement , Kant meant that emotion and motivation each have an existence that is in some sense independent of cognition , and of each other . This position which contrasts with the idea , still popular in psychology , that emotional and motivational states are cognitive constructions - - i . e . , that they are beliefs about what one feels ( Schacter & Singer , 1962 ) or wants ( Lepper , Greene , & Nisbett , 1973 ) . Kant ' s idea of three independent mental faculties is reflected in what Hilgard ( 1980 ) has called " the trilogy of mind " : cognition , the mental representation of reality through perception , attention , learning , memory , and thought ; emotion , the subjective experience of arousal , pleasure , and displeasure , and their ex - pression in behavior ; and motivation , the activation of behavior and its di - rection toward a goal . All three of these mental states enter into the deter - mination of behavior . We usually think of the cognitive , emotional , and motivational processes that underlie action in terms of conscious mental states . We are aware of what we think , feel , and desire ; and we act accordingly . But we have already con - cluded that cognitive states , such as percepts , memories , and thoughts can affect behavior outside of awareness . If it makes sense to say that cognitive states of perception , memory , and thought can be unconscious , or implicit , it makes sense to ask whether emotional states can be unconscious , or impli - cit , as well . Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 9 | P a g e The Freudian Model What might implicit emotion look like ? One possibility is that it resembles Sigmund Freud ' s vision of unconscious mental life ( for a detailed analysis of Freud ' s theory of psychoanalysis , see Macmillan , 1996 ) . Freud ( 1916 - 1917 / 1963 , 1933 / 1964 ) argued that people are affected by emotional or motivational states of which they are not consciously aware . Later on , when they reflect on their behavior ( or perhaps after they have undergone psy - choanalysis ) , they realize what their true feelings and motives are . But when that happens , the insight has the character of an inference , rather than an introspection , and they were never consciously aware of their feelings or de - sires at the time they acted on them . So , the classic Freudian defense me - chanisms ( A . Freud , 1936 / 1966 ; S . Freud , 1926 / 1959 ) all are designed to render the person unaware of his or her true emotions . In reaction forma - tion , we profess love but really feel hate ; in displacement , we declare hatred of one person , when we really hate another person entirely ; in intellectuali - zation and rationalization , our behavior is stripped of all of its emotional connections entirely . Freud argued that our true emotions were manifest in our behavior , even if they were not represented in consciousness . Suppes and Warren ( 1975 ) have proposed a mathematical model of the kinds of transformations involved in the Freudian defense mechanisms . They begin with a propositional representation of unconscious affect - - of an ac - tor , an action , and an object ( x ) of the action - - as in the prototypical Freu - dian emotional self - disclosure : I ( actor ) love ( action ) my mother ( object x ) . They then go on to show that some 44 different defense mechanisms , in - cluding all those included in the standard list , can be produced by just eight transformations applied to the actor , the action , or the object , alone or in combination - - e . g . , the transformation of self to other , of an action into its opposite , or from object x to object y . Thus , displacement retains the original actor and action , but changes the ob - ject from x to y : I love my father . In reaction formation , the actor and object remain constant , but the action is changed into its opposite : I hate my mother . In projection , the action and the object remain constant , but the ac - tor is changed : Saddam Hussein loves my mother . Applying all three trans - Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 10 | P a g e formations , we obtain Saddam Hussein hates my father - - a glib and vulgar Freudianism , to be sure , but one which nicely illustrates the essential process by which the defense mechanisms are held to operate so as to rend - er the actual emotional and motivational determinants of our behavior inac - cessible to phenomenal awareness . Of course , one does not have to embrace the whole conceptual panoply of classical ( or even neofreudian ) psychoanalysis - - the division of the mind in - to id , ego , and superego , the theory of infantile sexuality , the stages of psy - chosexual development , repression , and whatnot . And one certainly doesn ' t have to trace all of one ' s emotional life to primitive sexual and aggressive instincts . The kinds of emotions whose conscious representations are at is - sue can be represented by the everyday concepts of folk psychology , as re - flected in the affect circumplex ( Russell , 1980 ; Watson & Tellegen , 1985 ) , Murray ' s ( 1938 ) list of needs , and similar ideas . In the present context , what is important in Suppes and Warren ' s ( 1975 ) model is that it suggests two basic ways in which the emotional unconscious can be expressed - - ( 1 ) when the original emotion is represented consciously but we are unconscious of the source of that emotion , as in displacement and projection ; and ( 2 ) where the emotion itself is denied conscious representation , as in reaction formation , intellectualization , and denial . Emotion as an Expression of Implicit Cognition One element of the emotional unconscious is that a person may be con - sciously aware of his or her emotional state , yet unaware of its source in current or past experience . This is the sort of thing the Roman poet and epi - grammatist Martial had in mind , when he wrote ( Epigrammata , Book 1 , No . 32 , freely translated by the 17th - century English satirical poet Thomas Brown ; see Hayward , 1927 ) : Non amo te , Sabidi , nec possum dicere quare : hoc tantum possum dicere , non amo te . I do not love you Dr . Fell , but why I cannot tell ; But this I know full well , I do not love you , Dr . Fell It is also what Brewer and Freud ( 1893 - 1895 / 1955 ) had in mind in their Studies on Hysteria : Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 11 | P a g e Hysterics suffer mainly from reminiscences . [ But In ] the great majority of cases it is not possible to establish the point of origin by a simple interroga - tion of the patient , however thoroughly it may be carried out . . . principally because he is genuinely unable to recollect it and often has no suspicion of the causal connection between the precipitating event and the pathological phenomenon . For Breuer and Freud ' s unconscious ( or repressed ) memories , we can substi - tute implicit ones ( for a fuller discussion , see Kihlstrom , 1997b ) . Viewed in this way , a conscious emotional state may serve as an index of implicit per - ception or memory . Even though the emotional states themselves are con - sciously experienced , these phenomena of implicit perception and memory deserve to be counted in the emotional unconscious . Emotion as an Expression of Implicit Memory In a classic demonstration of what we have now come to call spared implicit memory in organic amnesia , Claparede ( 1911 / 1951 ) pricked an unsuspect - ing Korsakoff ' s syndrome patient with a pin hidden in his hand - - an event that caused her quite a bit of distress . Claparede subsequently left the room , and returned after the patient had regained her composure . Upon question - ing , she failed to recognize Claparede , and had no recollection of the unfor - tunate incident that had just transpired between them . Nevertheless , she re - fused to shake his hand . When asked why , she replied , " Sometimes people hide pins in their hands " . The story illustrates the phenomenon of source amnesia familiar in studies of memory ( see Kihlstrom , 1995a ) . But assuming that the prospect of shaking hands made the patient nervous as well , it sug - gests a dissociation between conscious awareness of an emotional state , which she probably experienced , and conscious recollection of the origins of that state in experience , which she evidently did not . In a case of hysterical somnambulism reported by Janet ( 1893 , 1904 ; see Nemiah , 1979 ) , Madame D . suffered a breakdown after some men jokingly deposited her drunken husband on her doorstep and announced that he was dead . Afterward , the woman had no conscious recollection of the event . But whenever she passed by her front door , she froze with terror . Moreover , she complained of dreams in which her husband was brought home dead . Here again , we have an emotional state - - terror , and distress about the dreams - Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 12 | P a g e - and emotional behavior - - freezing , as well as the nightmares ; but no awareness of why they occur . A third example comes from a case of phobia for running water reported by Bagby ( 1928 ) . The patient had no memory of the circumstances under which this intense emotional reaction had been acquired . However , the mystery was solved when the patient was visited by an aunt who said , as an aside , " I have never told " . It turned out that the patient , as a child , had gone on a picnic with the aunt ; and , as children are wont to do , she had disobeyed in - structions , strayed into a nearby creek , and become trapped under a water - fall . The child was rescued by the aunt , who promised to keep her transgres - sion a secret . Apparently , memory for the incident was lost - - perhaps due to a process like repression or dissociation , perhaps merely to childhood am - nesia or ordinary forgetting - - but the phobia remained solidly entrenched . In this case , the symptom appears to be an implicit memory for an incident lost to explicit memory . The evidence for emotion as implicit memory is not limited to anecdote ( To - bias , Kihlstrom , & Schacter , 1990 ) . There are several formal studies that al - so demonstrate that emotional responses can persist in the absence of cor - responding awareness of the past circumstances in which they were ac - quired . A study by Johnson , Kim , and Risse ( 1985 ) made use of the " mere exposure " effect on preferences ( Zajonc , 1968 ) : repeated exposure to an object tends to increase judgments of likability , even if there is no substan - tive information presented that would support such attitudinal change . John - son et al . exposed Korsakoff syndrome patients ( who are amnesic as a result of damage to diencephalic structures ) and controls to unfamiliar Korean me - lodies . Some melodies were played only once during the study phase , while others were played five or ten times . Later , the subjects were played these melodies , and other Korean melodies that were entirely new , and asked to indicate which they preferred . As expected from the mere exposure effect , both Korsakoff patients and controls preferred old over new melodies , al - though there was no effect of the number of exposures given to the old tunes . However , the patients showed greatly impaired levels of recognition , compared to the controls . Thus , exposure affected the amnesic patients ' pre - ference judgments , and index of emotional response to the melodies , even though the patients showed impaired memory for the exposure trials . Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 13 | P a g e A second study by Johnson et al . ( 1985 ) provided subjects with more subs - tantive contact with the stimulus materials . The same amnesic and control patients who served in the melodies study were presented with pictures of two male faces , accompanied by fictional biographical information presented that depicted one individual positively ( the " good guy " ) and the other nega - tively ( the " bad guy " ) . When asked whom they preferred , control subjects always chose the face that had been paired with the positive information ; and they were always able to state that their judgment was made on the ba - sis of the accompanying descriptive information . The amnesic patients also showed a strong ( though not unanimous ) preference for the " good guy " ; however , they were able to recall only a negligible amount of the biographi - cal material presented at the time of study . Again , some aspect of emotional response - - liking of persons instead of melodies - - was altered by informa - tion presented during the study phase , in the absence of conscious recollec - tion of this information . Unfortunately , another group of investigators failed to obtain the mere expo - sure effect in a mixed group of amnesic patients who were repeatedly ex - posed to photographs of faces ( Redington , Volpe , & Gazzaniga , 1984 ) , sug - gesting that the exposure effect on preferences is not always dissociable from explicit memory . However , Johnson and Multhaup ( 1992 ) essentially confirmed the findings of Johnson et al . ( 1985 ) with a new sample of amnes - ic patients . In the melodies experiment , amnesic patients preferred old me - lodies new ones but controls did not ; controls remembered the melodies well , but amnesics did not . In the impression formation experiment , both amnesics and controls preferred the " good guy " to the " bad " one , even though the amnesics recalled very little of the biographical information pre - sented at the time of study . The dissociation between acquired emotional preferences and explicit memo - ry was confirmed by an experimental case study with patient Boswell , who had been was rendered densely amnesic following a case of herpes encepha - litis ( Damasio , Tranel & Damasio , 1989 ) . Despite a profound inability to rec - ognize people , it had been noted that Boswell would go to a particularly ge - nerous staff member if he wanted something . In the experiment , Boswell had an extended series of positive , negative and neutral encounters , respec - tively , with three different confederates . Upon subsequent questioning , Bos - well was unable to recall anything about any of the people and never indi - cated that they were familiar in any way . Nonetheless , when asked on a Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 14 | P a g e forced - choice test whom he liked best , and would approach for rewards and favors , he strongly preferred the " good " confederate over the " bad " one , with the neutral confederate falling in between . In addition to the disorders of memory produced by lesions to specific brain structures , there are also functional disorders of memory observed in the dissociative syndromes of psychogenic amnesia , psychogenic fugue , and multiple personality disorder . One of the interesting features of the function - al amnesias is that patients often display implicit memory for events lost to conscious recollection : sometimes this implicit memory takes the form of an emotional response . For example , in a case reported by Kaszniak and his colleagues , a victim of attempted homosexual rape was amnesic for the inci - dent , but experienced severe distress when shown a TAT card picturing a person attacking another from behind ( Kaszniak , Nussbaum , Berren , & San - tiago , 1988 ) . Similarly , Christianson and Nilsson ( 1989 ) observed that a woman who had suffered severe amnesia following assault and rape became extremely upset when returned to the scene of the crime , even though she had no explicit memory for the event . Finally , in Prince ' s ( 1910 ) case of Miss Beauchamp , a multiple personality , one alter ego , " B IV " , experienced strong emotional reactions to people and places that had emotional meaning to personality " B I " and vice versa ; however , neither personality had explicit memory for the emotionally arousing objects of the other and each would be puzzled by their inexplicably intense reactions to such stimuli . Similar dissoc - iations of affect from awareness have been reported in " split brain " patients ( Gazzaniga , 1985 ; LeDoux , Wilson , & Gazzaniga ; Sperry , Gazzaniga , & Bo - gen , 1969 ) . Amnesia for the source of a consciously experienced emotion is also a famili - ar phenomenon in hypnosis . While hypnotic suggestions are typically in - tended to alter some aspect of cognitive functioning , they can also have emotional and motivational effects . When these suggestions are accompa - nied by further suggestions for amnesia , the subject can experience a pro - found change in mood state , without knowing why this occurs . For example , Luria ( 1932 ) suggested to hypnotized subjects that they had committed a terrible crime , and then covered this paramnesia with a further suggestion for posthypnotic amnesia . On a later word - association test , the subjects showed evidence of anxiety in response to cues related to the suggested crime , even though they were amnesic for the suggestion . Luria ' s findings were essentially replicated by Huston , Shakow , and Erickson ( 1934 ) . Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 15 | P a g e In a related line of hypnosis research , Levitt ( 1967 ; Levitt & Chapman , 1979 ) administered direct suggestions for anxiety to hypnotic subjects , fol - lowed by a suggestion for posthypnotic amnesia . Even though the subjects could not consciously remember the suggestion , they displayed elevated le - vels of anxiety on various test measures . Similar findings were obtained by Blum ( 1979 ) and his colleagues . In their studies , subjects receive sugges - tions to relive a conflictual , ego - threatening experience from early childhood , and then a suggestion for posthypnotic amnesia covering the experience . The result , according to Blum , was to leave the subject in a state of anxiety which is free - floating , not tied to any hypnotic or childhood experience . Most recently , Bower and his colleagues ( Bower , 1981 ; Bower , Gilligan , & Monteiro , 1981 ; Bower , Monteiro , & Gilligan , 1978 ) used a variant on Luria ' s technique to study mood - dependent memory . In these experiments , hypno - tized subjects were given hypnotic suggestions to relive a particularly happy or sad experience from their past , and further given posthypnotic sugges - tions to experience those happy and sad emotional states , stripped of cogni - tive content about the instigating event , in response to particular cues . The suggestion was further covered by one for posthypnotic amnesia . Thus , dur - ing the experiment proper the subjects felt happy or sad without being aware that this was something that had been suggested to them previously , or which was more distantly related to some previous experience in their lives . The studies just described converge on the conclusion that emotional re - sponse can serve as an index of implicit memory . That is , subjects can dis - play emotional responses that are attributable to some event in their past history , in the absence of conscious recollection of that event . However , it must be admitted that the evidence in this regard is rather sparse , especially when compared to the vast body of literature on the perceptual and cogni - tive expressions of implicit memory ( e . g . , Roediger & McDermott , 1990 ; Shacter , 1987 ) . More systematic studies are needed , employing both am - nesic patients and normal subjects , specifically testing the hypothesis that emotional response , as an expression of implicit memory , can be dissociated from conscious recollection . Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 16 | P a g e Emotion as an Expression of Implicit Perception There is considerably better evidence for emotion as an index of implicit per - ception - - that is to say , where emotional responses are attributable to some event in the current environment , in the absence of conscious perception of that event . Here again , we begin with anecdote , and proceed to some formal studies . Levinson ( 1965 ) reported on a woman who came out of surgery inexplicably weepy , depressed , and disconsolate . The reasons for this remained obscure until Levinson , on a hunch , hypnotized the patient and regressed her to the time of the surgery - - at which time she blurted out , " the surgeon says it might be malignant ! " . Further investigation revealed that the doctors had discovered a possible malignancy during the surgery and had discussed it while she was anesthetized ( subsequent investigation proved it to be be - nign ) . Now adequate anesthesia , by definition , abolishes conscious aware - ness and thus explicit memory for surgical events . But , as discussed earlier , there is some evidence for the preservation of priming effects . Apparently , implicit perception during anesthesia can appear not just in the form of repe - tition priming effects , but also in terms of full - blown emotional states . More recently , Traub - Werner ( 1989 ) reported on an unusual case of simul - taneous panic attacks in two agoraphobic patients . The first patient ' s symp - toms had been well controlled by clonazepam and amitryptyline ; but one day , while she was washing her face , she unexpectedly experienced anxiety , fear of falling , palpitations , and depersonalization . She hid under the bed for some minutes , until she felt better . Later that day , she received a phone call from a friend , also agoraphobic , who reported her worst panic attack in years - - at precisely the same time of day . Further investigation revealed that an earthquake , registering magnitude 6 on the Richter scale , had oc - curred not far away at exactly the time of the two patients ' panic episodes . The interpretation is that an associated earth tremor , too weak to be con - sciously felt but perhaps picked up by the vestibular system , may have evoked anxiety in the first patient . More mundane perhaps , but certainly more tightly controlled , evidence of emotion as an index of implicit perception has emerged in a line of research on " subliminal mere exposure effects " . Recall Zajonc ' s ( 1968 ) discovery that mere exposure is sufficient to increase judgments of likability , an arguably Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 17 | P a g e affective response ; and the evidence from Johnson et al . ( 1985 ) and Dama - sio et al . ( 1989 ) that the exposure does not have to be consciously remem - bered in order to have an emotional effect ( see also Moreland & Zajonc , 1977 , 1979 ; but see Birnbaum & Mellers , 1979a , 1979b ) . Interestingly , it appears that the exposure does not have to be consciously perceived , either . For example , Wilson ( 1979 ) found that subjects preferred tones that had been presented in the unattended channel during a dichotic listening proce - dure to tones that had not been previously presented . Similarly , Kunst - Wilson & Zajonc ( 1980 ) presented a set of irregular polygons on a tachistos - cope , with exposures so brief that the stimuli were not consciously per - ceived : nevertheless , rated preference was affected by prior exposure histo - ry ( for an alternative interpretation , see Mandler , Nakamura , & Van Zandt , 1987 ) . This " subliminal " mere exposure effect has been replicated and extended by a number of investigators ( e . g . , Bonnano & Stillings , 1986 ; Murphy & Za - jonc , 1993 ; Seamon , Brody , & Kauff , 1983a , 1983b ; for reviews , see Bornstein , 1989 , 1992 ) . In perhaps the most dramatic extension of the Kunst - Wilson and Zajonc ( 1980 ) study , Bornstein and his colleagues found that subliminal exposures can affect not only subjects ' preferences for people ' s faces , but also their interpersonal behavior towards those very same people when they actually meet them later ( Bornstein , Leone , & Gal - ley , 1987 ) . Subjects who were subliminally exposed to a picture of a confe - derate during the study phase were more likely to express agreement with that confederate on a judgment task . However , testing of a separate group of subjects indicated that recognition of the " old " confederate was at chance levels , indicating that the faces had not been consciously perceived during the study phase . In fact , a meta - analysis by Bornstein ( 1989 ) found that the magnitude of the mere exposure effect was significantly greater with subli - minal than with supraliminal stimuli . Apparently , affective judgments are in - fluenced by perceptual fluency , which in turn is enhanced by the priming ef - fects of the subject ' s initial exposure to the material . When subjects con - sciously remember the prior exposure , they appear to correct their prefe - rence ratings accordingly ; but when the initial exposure is subliminal , so that subjects do not consciously perceive ( much less consciously remember ) it , subjects are unable to engage in discounting , resulting in a stronger effect on preference judgments ( Bornstein , 1992 ; Bornstein & D ' Agostino , 1992 , 1994 ; see also Klinger & Greenwald , 1994 ) . Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 18 | P a g e Other investigators have found similar sorts of effects , where subliminal or unattended stimuli have effects on judgments and behavior that would be clearly labeled as " emotional " . For example , Murphy and Zajonc ( 1993 ) found , like Bornstein ( 1989 ) , that subliminal exposure to emotional faces produced increased liking and preference for Chinese ideographs . In their view , the familiarity produced by subliminal exposure created diffuse positive feelings analogous to ( though different in valence from ) the clinical concept of free - floating anxiety . Of course , considerable early evidence for emotion as implicit perception was provided by investigations of perceptual defense , subception , and other as - pects of the " New Look " ( Bruner & Klein , 1960 ; see also Erdelyi , 1974 ; Greenwald , 1992 ; Kihlstrom et al . , 1992a , 1992b ) . More recently , Bargh and Pietromonaco ( 1982 ) found that subjects who had been exposed to hostile words followed by a masking stimulus attributed significantly more negative qualities to a pictured person than subjects who had not received this masked exposure ( see also Bargh , Bond , Lombardi , & Tota , 1986 ) . Similarly , Devine ( 1989 ) found that unmasked parafoveal presentation of words re - lated to negative stereotypes of African - Americans led to more negative evaluations of a target person whose race was unspecified . Niedenthal ( 1990 , 1992 ; Niedenthal , Setterlund , & Jones , 1994 ) and her col - leagues have produced yet another emotional adaptation of the basic subli - minal priming paradigm . In the study phase of each experiment , briefly pre - sented primes consisting of faces expressing emotions of joy or disgust were rendered subliminal by means of a metacontrasting presentation of clearly supraliminal cartoon figures . In the test phase , the subjects were asked to discriminate between old , previously presented cartoons and new distrac - tors . These were also preceded by a face prime , which again was rendered subliminal by metacontrast . On half the test trials , the affect associated with the prime was the same as it had been on the study trials ; for the remaind - er , the prime was drawn from the opposite emotional category . Congruence between the primes generally facilitated recognition of the targets , especially when the prime was negative . A second study , in which emotionally charged faces or scenes primed emotionally neutral women ' s faces , obtained essen - tially the same effect . Moreover , the affective valence of the prime influ - enced the subjects ' interpretations of the target ' s emotional state . Based on research indicating that the perception of emotionally expressive faces in - duces a similar emotional state in the perceiver ( Niedenthal & Showers , Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 19 | P a g e 1991 ) , Niedenthal has proposed that a subliminal emotional prime elicits a corresponding emotional state in the perceiver ; this state then serves as a cue for both perceptual identification and recognition memory . It is also , therefore , an expression of implicit perception . Additional evidence that subliminal emotional primes actually elicit conscious feeling states comes from research on subliminal fear conditioning by Oh - man and his colleagues ( for reviews , see Ohman , 1998 ) . In one line of re - search ( Ohman , Dimberg , & Esteves , 1989 ) , subjects were conditioned to associate an electric shock with presentation of an angry face ( an unrein - forced happy face served as a control stimulus ) . In subsequent unreinforced test trials , the angry face was masked by a neutral face . Despite the fact that subjects could not consciously perceive the angry face , they gave condi - tioned electrodermal responses when it was presented , compared to masked presentation of the happy face . A subsequent pilot study showed that acqui - sition of a conditioned fear response is possible , even when the conditioned stimulus is masked and therefore not consciously perceptible . In another line of research , Ohman & Soares ( 1993 , 1994 ) substituted nonmasked pictures of snakes , spiders , flowers , and mushrooms as conditioned stimuli . On un - reinforced test trials , masked pictures of snakes and spiders elicited condi - tioned electrodermal fear responses , but masked pictures of flowers and mushrooms did not . The fact that only the snake and spider pictures sur - vived masking was interpreted within the framework of Seligman ' s ( 1971 ) preparedness theory of phobias which argues that , by virtue of our evolutio - nary history , some stimuli ( such as snakes and spiders ) automatically give rise to rapid and long - lasting conditioned fear responses . In this case , the assumption of automaticity of the association is supported by the fact that the fear response persists even when the fear stimulus is subliminal , and thus unattended . To date , the most systematic exploration of preconscious emotional processing has been conducted by Greenwald and his colleagues ( Green - wald , Draine , & Abrams , 1996 ; Greenwald , Klinger & Liu , 1989 ; Greenwald , Klinger , & Schuh , 1995 ) explored another emotional response : evaluative judgments of words . These studies are especially notable for the amount of care taken to address methodological criticisms of earlier studies purporting to demonstrate subliminal perception ( e . g . , Eriksen , 1960 ; Holender , 1986 ) . In all the experiments of the series , subjects are asked to judge an aspect of the connotative meaning of a word : whether it is affectively positive or Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 20 | P a g e negative . In their earliest experiments , presentation of the target word was preceded by a prime word which was either affectively positive or negative . The prime was so effectively masked that subjects were unable to determine whether it appeared on the left or the right side of a fixation point . Never - theless , evaluative judgments of the target were facilitated by the presenta - tion of primes drawn from the same affective category . More recently , Greenwald et al . ( 1996 ) added a further refinement , in which subjects were constrained to make their judgments of the target within a very brief period of time following its presentation - - further insuring that the influence of the prime on the target judgment was not the product of conscious reflection . On the basis of early studies showing a dissociation between preference judgments and conscious recollection ( Moreland & Zajonc , 1977 ) and con - scious perception ( Kunst - Wilson and Zajonc , 1980 ) , Zajonc ( 1980 , 1984a , 1984b ) argued that emotional processing is independent of , and temporally prior to , cognitive processing ( see also Lazarus , 1982 , 1984 ) . However , later studies documenting similar dissociations between explicit and implicit ex - pressions of memory ( e . g . , Schacter , 1987 ) and perception ( e . g . , Kihlstrom et al . , 1992a ) put a different light on the early results . One might just as well conclude , with respect to memory , that dissociations between recall and priming show that memory itself is independent of , and temporally prior to , cognitive processing . It is now clear that , in the early studies and those that followed , some aspect of emotional response is serving as an implicit ex - pression of perception and / or memory . But unconscious cognition is still cognition . Furthermore , if there were an emotional system separate from cognition , it would still need the cognitive capacity to analyze stimuli , link them to prior knowledge , and generate emotional feelings and expressions ( Leventhal , 1980 , 1984 ) . The fact that such cognitive processes can go on outside of awareness , so that changes in evaluative judgment and other as - pects of emotional response can be dissociated from explicit perception and memory , yields one aspect of the emotional unconscious . People can be aware of their emotional states , but unaware of the percepts and memories which evoke these states . " Feeling Memories " : A Cautionary Note Clinical folklore about post - traumatic stress disorder has revived the notion , originated by Brewer and Freud ( 1893 - 1895 / 1955 ) that unconscious memo - ries of trauma express themselves implicitly as intrusive feelings ( see , e . g . , Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 21 | P a g e Bass & Davis , 1988 ; Blume , 1990 ; Frederickson , 1993 ; Herman , 1992 ; Terr , 1994 ; van der Kolk , McFarlane , & Weisaeth , 1996 ; for a detailed analysis of the parallels between Freud ' s theories and later clinical practices , see Bow - ers & Farvolden , 1996 ; Crews , 1995 ; Kihlstrom , 1996b , 1997b , 1998c ) . For example Frederickson ( 1992 ) has distinguished between a conscious recall memory and an unconscious feeling memory : Feeling memory is the memory of an emotional response to a particular sit - uation . If the situation we are being triggered to remember is a repressed memory , we will have the feelings pertaining to the event without any con - scious recall of the event itself . Feeling memory is often experienced as a flood of inexplicable emotion , particularly around abuse issues . . . . A felt sense that something abusive has happened is a common form of a feeling memory . Some survivors will say , " Yes , I think I was sexually abused , but it ' s just a gut feeling . " These clients are experiencing a feeling memory about being abused , even though at that moment they can recall nothing about their abuse ( p . 92 ) . In some respects , the notion of a " feeling memory " finds support in the lite - rature reviewed in this section , which indicates that emotional responses can , indeed , serve as expressions of implicit memory . However , there is an important difference : the experimental literature we have reviewed provides independent corroboration of the emotion - eliciting event . Implicit memory may be inferred only when such evidence is available , and such information is rarely available in clinical practice . Nevertheless , clinical practitioners may infer a history of prior trauma and abuse from the patient ' s current emotion - al symptoms , and then engage in therapeutic practices intended to recover the traumatic memories and restore them to conscious accessibility . Of course , in the absence of objective corroboration of the patient ' s history , such inferences are tautological , and should be avoided - - not least because the techniques used to recover ostensibly lost memories are highly sugges - tive , and may lead patients to reconstruct distorted or false memories of trauma and abuse ( Kihlstrom , 1996b , 1998c ; Lindsay & Read , 1994 , 1995 ; Shobe & Kihlstrom , 1998 ) . Implicit Emotion But can people be unaware of their emotional states themselves ? The propo - sition seems to contain an internal contradiction , because emotions must be Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 22 | P a g e felt , and feeling is by any ordinary definition a conscious experience ( Clore , 1994 ) . But environmental stimuli must be felt , too ; yet cognitive psychology and cognitive neuroscience is gradually coming to terms with the possibility that percepts can be unconscious ( Kihlstrom et al . , 1992a ; Greenwald et al . , 1996 ) , just as it earlier came to terms with the possibility that memories can be unconscious ( Roediger & McDermott , 1990 ; Schacter , 1987 ) . If there is a cognitive unconscious , in which percepts , memories , and thoughts influence experience , thought , and action outside of phenomenal awareness , then why can ' t there be an emotional unconscious as well ? The answer depends on how we define emotion . If we define emotion as a conscious feeling state , a positive answer is foreclosed , by definition . But if we define emotion diffe - rently , the question is at least open to empirical evidence . Desynchrony In his classic research on experimental neurosis in dogs , Gantt ( 1937 , 1953 ) observed that separate components of a conditioned fear response could be acquired and extinguished at different rates , and persist for different lengths of time , resulting in an organismic state of schizokinesis reflecting the " dis - harmony or cleavage in behavioral , somatic , and psychophysiological re - sponse systems " ( Mineka , 1979 , p . 987 ) . The clear implication of Gantt ' s work is that a multifaceted emotional response , and that these facets can be separated , or dissociated , from each other . Gantt ' s ( 1937 , 1953 ) observations have been confirmed in more recent re - search on fear conditioning . For example , Mineka ( 1979 ) distinguished four quite different response systems which have been used in the study of fear conditioning in nonhuman animals : conditioned emotional responses , in - creased rate of conditioned avoidance response , passive avoidance , and conditioned heart rate . Further , she showed that these indices of fear could be dissociated from learned avoidance behavior . Animals can behave as if they are afraid , even if they do not appear to manifest fear according to some standard laboratory measures ( see also Mineka , 1985 , 1992 ) . One in - terpretation of such findings is that , contrary to Mowrer ' s ( 1947 ) two - process theory , avoidance learning is not motivated by fear . Another is that the subjective experience of fear is only one component of a broader emo - tional response to fear stimuli . Similar observations have been made in the case of human fears and phobias . For example , in a study of systematic de - sensitization of snake phobia , Lang and Lazovik ( 1963 ) found that some Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 23 | P a g e subjects would show substantial changes in avoidance behavior , while still expressing fear of the snake ; other subjects would deny fear of the snake , but show elevated cardiovascular activity and persisting avoidance behavior . Based on observations such as these , Lang ( 1968 , 1971 , 1978 , 1988 ; Lang , Rice , & Sternbach , 1972 ) proposed a multiple - system theory of emotion . Ac - cording to this theory , every emotional response consists of several compo - nents : verbal - cognitive , corresponding to subjective feeling state ( e . g . , of fear ) ; overt motor , or behavioral , response ( e . g . , escape or avoidance ) ; and a covert physiological response mediated by the autonomic and skeletal nervous systems ( e . g . , skin conductance or heart rate ) . Lang further pro - posed that these three systems are partially independent , although they also interact with each other in important ways . When all three systems act to - gether , the person experiences intense emotional arousal . Under circums - tances of attenuated emotion , however , the correlations among these sys - tems tend to break apart , at the same time as their individual levels of activ - ity are reduced . Moreover , Lang proposed that the different components of emotion can have different developmental histories . For example , autonomic responses to emotional stimuli may appear early in development , with the behavioral and cognitive responses emerging only later . Or , alternatively , the cognitive component of an emotional state can be acquired first , as for example through the social learning of fear , with the behavioral and physiological components coming on line later , if at all . Lang further proposed that effec - tive psychotherapy for anxiety states and other emotional disorders should be directed at all three components : it cannot be assumed for example , that flooding directed at reduce compulsive behavior will necessarily reduce sub - jective anxiety and physiological arousal as well . Rachman and Hodgson ( 1974 ; Hodgson & Rachman , 1974 ; Rachman , 1978 , 1981 , 1990 ) picked up Lang ' s theme and explored the implications of desyn - chrony among emotional systems , and especially between overt behavior and covert physiology , for the treatment of anxiety disorders . They proposed that different forms of treatment would have different effects on the various components of fear and anxiety : for example , flooding might reduce avoid - ance behavior but leave autonomic arousal largely intact ; on the other hand , spontaneous remission would affect autonomic arousal first , but behavioral avoidance would persist for a longer period of time . Like Lang ( 1968 ) , Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 24 | P a g e Rachman and Hodgson proposed that fear and anxiety should be assessed in terms of all three components , and that treatment should be directed toward that component which was most " abnormal " ( see also Norton , DiNardo , Bar - low , 1983 ) . One way or another , however , the remaining components would eventually catch up . So long as one component persisted unchanged , in their view , the likelihood of relapse remained high . The general idea of desynchrony is that an emotional response can be ma - nifest at one level , but not at another ( Hugdahl , 1981 ; Turpin , 1991 ) . Given that they were writing from a tradition of behavior therapy which emphasiz - es objective measurement , it is perhaps natural , and certainly understanda - ble , that both Lang ( 1968 ) and Rachman ( 1978 ) placed most emphasis on desynchrony between the behavioral and physiological components of emo - tion . In the present context , however , we are most interested in cases that represent the emotional analog of the explicit - implicit distinction in memory : where the subjective component of an emotion ( conscious feeling state ) is absent , while the behavioral and physiological components persist outside of phenomenal awareness . The snake phobic denies fear , but somehow never quite manages to go near the reptile house at the zoo ; the agoraphobic claims to be cured , and even ventures outside the house , but blood pressure and heart rate still go way up . If such observations reflected merely denial , or a flight into health , they would not be too interesting . But suppose that the patients ' reports accurately reflect the subjective state of affairs - - that they really do not experience the emotions that used to bother them . If the behavioral and autonomic signs of emotion persist unabated , why can ' t we say that they are displaying unconscious emotion - - or at least an uncons - cious emotional response ? Apparently , dissociations between subjective feelings and covert psychophy - siological response are found quite commonly in the anxiety disorders ( e . g . , Barlow , Mavissakalian , & Schofield , 1980 ; Craske , Sanderson , & Barlow , 1987 ; Vermilyea , Boice , & Barlow , 1984 ; for reviews , see Barlow , 1988 ; Rachman , 1990 ) . Indeed , such findings were a primary motive for Lang ' s proposal of the multiple - systems theory of emotion in the first place ( Lang & Lazovik , 1963 ) . Cardiology clinics frequently encounter patients who com - plain of behavioral and physiological symptoms associated with panic disord - er but who report no subjective fear or distress , aside from concern about the presenting complaints themselves ( Kushner & Beitman , 1990 ; Beitman , Mukerji , Russell , & Grafing , 1993 ) . Similar patients have been seen in neu - Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 25 | P a g e rology clinics ( Russell , Kushner , Beitman , & Bartels , 1991 ) . A survey of stu - dents with a history of panic attacks found that those who reported " fear - less " panic attacks were less likely to engage in avoidance behavior , or to use alcohol or drugs as coping strategies . Some evidence for desynchrony between subjective experience and covert psychophysiology is also provided in the literature on child - parent attach - ment . Dozier and Kobak ( 1992 ) administered an attachment interview in which subjects were asked to express their feelings about a number of dif - ferent imagined scenarios involving separation from their parents . Subjects scoring high on a dimension of deactivation / hyperactivation , who strategical - ly divert attention from thoughts , memories , and feelings related to attach - ment , showed greater skin conductance responses to scenarios involving pa - rental separation , rejection , threats of separation , and changes in relation - ship with the parents . Unfortunately , dissociations between subjective feelings and overt behavioral response appear to be much less common ( e . g . , Lang , Lazovik , & Reynolds , 1965 ) . Moreover , evaluations of treatment outcome typically indicate that cognitive subjective fear persists even as behavioral and psychophysiological indices of fear diminish - - precisely the opposite of the pattern of desynchro - ny implied by the concept of implicit emotion ( e . g . , Lang & Lazovik , 1963 ; Gerew , Romney , & LeBoef , 1989 ; Thomas & Rapp , 1977 ) . The emotional deficits ( e . g . , " blunted " or " inappropriate " affect ) commonly associated with schizophrenia also have a flavor of desynchrony ( Dworkin , 1992 ) . Thus , anhedonia refers to a deficit in the conscious experience of emotion , which may leave behavioral or physiological expressions of emotion unimpaired . Similarly , flat affect refers to a deficit in the behavioral expres - sion or display of emotion , which may not extend to subjective experience or covert physiology . In fact , Kring and Neale ( 1993 , 1996 ) found that schi - zophrenic patients expressed significantly less emotion than normal controls in response to emotional film clips ; however , self - reports of emotional expe - rience did not differ between the groups , and the schizophrenics actually showed greater skin conductance reactivity . Again , this is desynchrony , but it is not the desynchrony implied by the concept of implicit emotion . Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 26 | P a g e Individual Differences in Emotional Experience and Expres - sion A lack of awareness of emotion may be implicated in several different di - mensions of individual differences , the most obvious of which is repression . Although conceived by Freud as a general psychological process available to everyone , a tendency to use repression as a defense may be reconstrued as an individual difference variable , as it was by Rosenzweig in his work on the Zeigarnik effect in memory , and his exploration of the personality correlates of hypnotizability ( Rosenzweig , 1938 ; Rosenzweig & Mason , 1934 ; Rosenz - weig & Sarason , 1942 ; Sarason & Rosenzweig , 1942 ) . Unfortunately , early attempts to measure individual differences in repressive tendency by means of questionnaires , as exemplified by Byrne ' s ( 1961 , 1964 ) Repression - Sensitization Scale ( RSS ; Bell & Byrne , 1978 ) , foundered on the shoals of discriminant validity : somewhat paradoxically , perhaps , repression as meas - ured by the RSS proved to be highly correlated with anxiety and distress . However , other measurement approaches may prove more useful to under - standing the differences between explicit and implicit emotion . Repressive Coping Style . More recently , Weinberger and his associates have attempted to construct a measurement of repressive coping style which is free of such confounds ( Weinberger , 1990 ; Weinberger , Schwartz , & Da - vidson , 1979 ) . In Weinberger ' s original procedure ( Weinberger et al . , 1979 ) , subjects who show extremely low levels of trait anxiety , as shown on Tay - lor ' s Manifest Anxiety Scale ( MAS ; Taylor , 1953 ) , but extremely high levels of defensiveness , as shown by the Marlowe - Crowne Social Desirability Scale ( SDS ; Crowne & Marlowe , 1960 ) , are labeled as " repressors " . Although re - pressors do report low levels of anxiety , Weinberger et al . ( 1979 ) found that they showed elevated levels of physiological response - - EMG , heart rate , and galvanic skin resistance - - to sexual and aggressive phrase stems . In fact , their levels of physiological reactivity were comparable to those shown by high - anxious , nondefensive subjects . The general thrust of these results was later confirmed by Asendorf & Scherer ( 1983 ) . Given results such as these , we might want to speculate that repressors have a talent for desyn - chrony : they may not display high levels of stress to others , or even expe - rience it themselves ; but at the same time , their physiology is churning away anxiously . This situation may be construed as a dissociation between Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 27 | P a g e explicit ( subjective ) and implicit ( behavioral or physiological ) components of emotion . Unfortunately , however , there has been no followup of this early evidence of implicit emotion . Instead , research has focused on the development of new methods for assessing repression , and on repression as a risk factor for medical complaints . Thus , Weinberger ( 1990 , 1997 ; Weinberger & Schwartz , 1990 ) reformulated the concept of repressive tendency , and introduced a new instrument , the Weinberger Adjustment Inventory ( WAI ) , for measuring individual differences in repressive coping style . The WAI follows the same logic as the earlier procedure , but whereas the original formulation involved a fourfold typology ( produced by splitting the two dimensions of anxiety and social desirability ) , the new measure yields six categories . Subjects who are low in distress ( anxiety , depression , low self - esteem , and low well - being ) and at least moderately high in restraint ( impulse control , suppression of aggression , consideration of others , and responsibility ) are candidates for identification as repressors . However , a measure of defensiveness ( denial of distress , repressive defensiveness ) is added to the mix in order to distin - guish between genuine repressors and the merely self - assured . As a means of identifying repressors , the WAI is more conservative than the older proce - dure employing the MAS and SDS ( Mulvaney , Kihlstrom , Figueredo , & Schwartz , 1992 ) . Still , to date no research has attempted to replicate the observations of Weinberger et al . ( 1979 ) with the new measure , nor - - ex - cept for the replication of Asendorf and Scherer ( 1983 ) , has any published research examined repressive style with respect to implicit emotion . Alexithymia and Anhedonia . Another potentially relevant personality con - struct is alexithymia ( Nemiah , Freyberger , & Sifneos , 1981 ; Nemiah & Sif - neos , 1970 ; see also Apfel & Sifneos , 1979 ; Taylor , 1984 ; Taylor & Bagby , 1988 ; Taylor , Bagby , & Parker , 1997 ; Taylor & Taylor , 1997 ) , in which people have difficulty describing their emotional states , or even in discrimi - nating one state from another . Alexithymia , or restricted emotionality , seems at least superficially similar to the repressive coping style ( Weinberg - er , 1990 ) . Again , it may be that alexithymic individuals have " no words for feelings " - - a fairly direct translation from the Greek roots - - because they are not aware of their feelings in the first place ( Lane , Ahern , Schwartz , & Kaszniak , 1997 ) . Alexithymia is a prominent feature among neurological pa - tients with hemispheric commissurotomy ( e . g . , Hoppe & Bogen , 1977 ; Ten - Houten , Hoppe , Bogen , & Walter , 1985 , 1986 ; TenHouten , Walter , Hoppe , & Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 28 | P a g e Bogen , 1988 ) , suggesting that the division in awareness affecting such pa - tients includes an inability to communicate , via the language centers of the left hemisphere , emotion arising from centers in the right hemisphere . In other words , the left hemisphere might not be aware of , and thus unable to communicate , emotions of which the right hemisphere is perfectly aware - - awareness which might be revealed if the right hemisphere possessed the same language skills as the left . In any event , the alexithymic patient ' s ina - bility to discriminate between such feelings as anger and sadness suggests a rather marked deficit in explicit emotion . The question , then , is whether we can find evidence for implicit emotion in these people , in terms of behavioral or physiological indices . Clinical lore , as well as an increasing body of empiri - cal data , indicates that alexithymics are at risk for psychophysiological and somatoform disorders . Perhaps alexithymics , like repressors , have a talent for desynchrony , with emotion expressed physiologically even if it is not ex - perienced subjectively . Alexithymia should be distinguished from anhedonia , an inability to expe - rience positive emotions ( Chapman , Chapman , & Raulin , 1976 ) . However , the alexithymic inability to communicate emotions to others is correlated with social anhedonia , or a preference for solitary as opposed to social ac - tivities ( Prince & Berenbaum , 1993 ) . In the present context . however , we may offer the hypothesis that physical anhedonia affects explicit ( subjective ) components of positive emotion , leaving implicit ( behavioral and physiologi - cal ) components of positive emotion intact . Levels of Emotional Awareness . Lane and his colleagues ( Lane , Quinlan , Schwartz , Walker , & Zeitlin , 1990 ; Lane & Schwartz , 1987 , 1992 ) have drawn on the developmental theories of Piaget and Werner ( for a review , see Flavell , 1963 ) to propose five levels of emotional awareness determined by the manner in which the individual ' s emotional states are organized . Ac - cording to their theory , emotional experience is progressively differentiated and integrated as the individual develops cognitively . At the lowest level , roughly corresponding to the earliest sensorimotor stage of Piagetian theory , the person is aware only of bodily sensations ; at the next level , correspond - ing to later sensorimotor stages , the person is also aware of action tenden - cies . In neither case , however , is there awareness of emotion as such . Awareness of emotion occurs at a level corresponding to the preoperational stage , where it is confined to awareness of single , pervasive emotions . At a level corresponding to the stage of concrete operations , the person is aware Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 29 | P a g e of emotion blends and simultaneous opposites . And at a level corresponding to formal operations , the person can be aware of subtle nuances of emotion , as well as a difference between one ' s own emotional reactions and those of others . It should be understood , however , that shifts in emotional awareness from one level to the next are not coterminous with the progress of cognitive de - velopment , which is why it makes sense to distinguish among levels of emo - tional awareness in adults . Some adults , while firmly ensconced in formal operations with respect to their cognitive abilities , may have only primitive , sensory - motor , emotional reactions - - in other words , no emotional aware - ness at all . Interestingly , some of Lane ' s levels of emotional awareness cor - respond nicely to the three components of emotional response postulated by multiple - systems theory : physiological ( bodily sensations ) , behavioral ( ac - tion tendencies ) , and subjective ( single emotions , blends , and nuances ) . Thus , one way of conceptualizing a desynchrony between explicit and impli - cit emotion is in terms of an impairment at higher levels of emotional awareness which leaves lower levels intact . Hypnotic Analgesia A further example of desynchrony between the subjective experience of emotion and the behavioral and physiological expressions of it is provided by hypnotic analgesia ( Hilgard & Hilgard , 1975 ) . Following appropriate sugges - tions , many highly hypnotizable subjects report feeling no pain when ex - posed to normally painful stimulation . Although analgesia may be construed as a special case of sensory anesthesia , in fact pain has two components : sensory pain , providing information about the location and severity of irrita - tion or injury , and suffering , a psychological reaction of unpleasantness which depends on the meaning of the sensory pain ( Hilgard , 1969 ; Melzack & Torgerson , 1971 ) . Suffering is an explicitly emotional component that is not always present in the other skin senses , such as touch and temperature . Sensory pain and suffering are dissociable in terms of subjects ' pain ratings ( Gracely & Nabiloff , 1996 ; Melzack , 1975 ; Melzack & Torgerson , 1971 ) , and they also appear to be mediated by different brain systems : sensory pain by the somatosensory cortex , suffering by the anterior cingulate cortex ( Rain - ville , Duncan , Price , Carrier , & Bushnell , 1997 ) . Ordinarily , hypnotic sugges - tions for analgesia diminish awareness of both sensory pain and suffering ( Hilgard , 1969 ; Knox , Morgan , & Hilgard , 1974 ) ; however , it is also possible Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 30 | P a g e to alter suffering while leaving sensory pain unaffected ( Rainville et al . , 1997 ) . Clinical studies conducted since the mid - 19th century indicate that hypnotic analgesia can be highly effective in relieving the pain of major surgery . However , the more common clinical use of analgesia is in the treatment of postoperative pain , episodic pain associated with specific medical and sur - gical procedures , burns , obstetrics , dentistry , and chronic pain associated with illness ( E . Hilgard & J . Hilgard , 1975 ; J . Hilgard & LeBaron , 1984 ) . These clinical results are confirmed by more tightly controlled laboratory studies . For example , Stern and his colleagues found that hypnosis was more effective than acupuncture , placebo acupuncture , morphine , aspirin , diazepam , and placebo in counteracting both cold - pressor and ischemic pain ( Stern , Brown , Ulett , & Sletten , 1977 ) . Other laboratory studies indicated that hypnotizable subjects respond differently to analgesia suggestions than do insusceptible subjects who are instructed to simulate hypnosis ( Hilgard , Macdonald , Morgan , & Johnson , 1978 ) . Hypnotic analgesia is not mediated by placebo effects ( McGlashan , Evans , & Orne , 1969 ) , or by the tranquilizing effects of relaxation ( Greene & Reyher , 1972 ) . Hypnotic analgesia is not re - versed by naloxone , an opiate antagonist , so it is not mediated by the re - lease of endogenous opiates ( Goldstein & Hilgard , 1975 ; Spiegel & Albert , 1983 ) . Most important , hypnotic analgesia does not appear to be mediated by the subject ' s engagement in stress inoculation procedures , such as self - distraction and reinterpretation , which alter the subject ' s response to , but not his / her awareness of , the pain stimulus . Miller and Bowers ( 1986 ) found that subjects administered hypnotic suggestions for analgesia did not report engaging in such strategies . Moreover , response to hypnotic analgesia sug - gestions was mediated by hypnotizability , while response to stress - inoculation instructions was not . A second paper by Miller and Bowers ( 1993 ) showed that stress inoculation strategies interfered with performance on a difficult vocabulary test , while hypnotic analgesia did not . Finally , Har - gadon , Bowers , and Woody ( 1995 ) showed that the use of counterpain im - agery , a common stress inoculation strategy , had no effect on hypnotic analgesia . Taken together , these studies show that while stress inoculation can reduce pain ( Meichenbaum , 1977 ; Spanos , 1986 ; Chaves , 1989 ) , it does not mediate pain reduction in hypnotic analgesia . Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 31 | P a g e Hilgard ( 1973 , 1977 ) has proposed that hypnotic analgesia is mediated by an amnesia - like dissociative barrier which partially or fully blocks the sub - ject ' s conscious perception and awareness of pain . Some evidence for this dissociative process comes from studies using the " hidden observer " tech - nique , in which it is suggested to the analgesic subject that there is a " hid - den part " of the person which may have registered , and can report , the true level of pain stimulation . In response to some subjects will report levels of pain which are comparable to those experienced in the absence of analgesia suggestions ( Hilgard , Morgan , & Macdonald , 1975 ; Hilgard , Hilgard , Macdo - nald , Morgan , & Johnson , 1978 ) . The hidden observer is a metaphor for the continuing cognitive representation of pain outside of conscious awareness , and the means by which it may be accessed . Although hidden observer in - structions may be interpreted as altering contextual demands to report pain ( Spanos , 1986 ) or expectations about pain ( Kirsch & Lynn , 1998 ) , hypnotic subjects are much less responsive to manipulations of the testing context than are subjects instructed to simulate hypnosis ( Kihlstrom , 1998b ; Lau - rence , Perry , & Kihlstrom , 1983 ) . Therefore it seems that the demand cha - racteristics ( Orne , 1962 , 1979 ) of the experimental situation are not suffi - cient to produce the hidden observer in analgesic subjects . While hypnotic analgesia alters the person ' s subjective awareness of pain and distress , it has little impact on physiological responses to pain stimula - tion ( Barber & Hann , 1962 ; Hilgard , Morgan , Lange , Lenox , Macdonald , Mar - shall , & Sachs , 1974 ; Sears , 1932 ; Shor , 1962 ; Stern et al . , 1977 ; Sutcliffe , 1961 ) . Interpretation of this finding is ambiguous , because psychophysiolog - ical parameters to not show the same lawful covariation with intensity of stimulation shown by self - reports of pain ( Hilgard , 1969 ) . The preservation of physiological responses to the pain stimulus does not impeach the sub - jects ' self - reports of analgesia , however , because the same dissociation is found with other analgesic agents , including aspirin , diazepam , and mor - phine ( Stern et al . , 1977 ) . However , the basic finding of a dissociation be - tween self - reports of analgesia and persisting physiological responses to the pain stimulus is consistent with the notion of desynchrony between the sub - jective and physiological components of pain as an emotional state . Obvious - ly , however , further research is needed to evaluate the hypothesis of desyn - chrony as applied to hypnotic analgesia ( or , for that matter , any other anal - gesic ) . Such research should compare self - reports with psychophysiological indices , but also with overt behavioral indices of pain , such as facial expres - sion . Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 32 | P a g e Implicit Attitudes Yet another line of evidence bearing on the concept of implicit emotion comes from recent social - psychological work on attitudes , stereotypes , and prejudice . In social psychology , attitudes have a central affective compo - nent : they are dispositions to favor or oppose certain objects , such as indi - viduals , groups of people , or social policies , and the dimensions of favorable - unfavorable , support - oppose , pro - anti naturally map onto affective dimen - sions of pleasure - pain or approach - avoidance . As Thurstone put it , " attitude is the affect for or against a psychological object " ( 1931 , p . 261 ) . Like emo - tions , attitudes are generally thought of as conscious mental dispositions : people are assumed to be aware that they are opposed to nuclear power plants , or favor a women ' s right to choose . Similarly , people are generally believed to be aware of the stereotyped beliefs that they hold about social outgroups , and of the prejudiced behavior that they display towards mem - bers of such groups . And for that reason , attitudes and stereotypes are gen - erally measured by asking subjects to reflect and report on their beliefs or behavior . However , Greenwald and Banaji ( 1995 ) proposed an extension of the explicit - implicit distinction into the domain of attitudes . Briefly , they suggest that people possess positive and negative implicit attitudes about themselves and other people , which affect ongoing social behavior outside of conscious awareness . Following the general form of the explicit - implicit distinction applied to memory , perception , learning , and thought in the cognitive domain , we may define an explicit attitude as the conscious awareness of one ' s favorable or unfavorable opinion concerning some object or issue . By contrast , an implicit attitude refers to any effect of such an opinion on a person ' s ongoing expe - rience , thought , and action , regardless of whether that opinion can be con - sciously reported . From a methodological point of view , explicit attitudes would be assessed by tasks requiring conscious reflection on one ' s opinions ; implicit attitudes would be assessed by tasks which do not require such ref - lection . A particularly provocative demonstration of implicit attitudes affecting beha - vior is provided by Greenwald and Schuh ( 1994 ) in an analysis of reference citation practices among social scientists ( Study 1 ) and prejudice research - ers ( Study 2 ) . In these studies , the authors ' names , and the names of the authors cited in their papers , were classified into three ethnic categories : Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 33 | P a g e Jewish , non - Jewish , or other . Authors were approximately 40 % more likely to cite colleagues from their own ethnic category , a significant difference that could not be attributed to either differential assortment by ethnicity to research topic , or the tendency for authors to cite their personal acquain - tances . Although it seems likely that few of the authors in question would consciously admit to ethnic prejudice ( social scientists in general , and preju - dice researchers in particular , tending to be a rather liberal bunch ) , their be - havior suggests the operation of negative attitudes toward members of a re - ligious outgroup . A more tightly controlled demonstration of implicit attitudes is provided by a study of the " false fame effect " by Banaji and Greenwald ( 1995 ) . In the typi - cal false fame procedure ( Jacoby , Kelley , Brown , & Jasechko , 1989 ) , sub - jects are asked to study a list consisting of the names of famous and non - famous people . Later , they are presented with another list of names , includ - ing the names studied earlier and an equal number of new names , and asked to identify the names of famous people . The general finding of their research is that subjects are more likely to identify new rather than old non - famous names as famous . In their adaptation , Banaji and Greenwald in - cluded both male and female names in their lists , and found that subjects were more likely to identify male names as famous . This result suggests that the average subject is more likely to associate achievement with males than with females - - a common gender stereotype . Similarly , Blair and Banaji ( 1996 ) conducted a series of experiments in which subjects were asked to classify first names as male or female . Prior to the presentation of each target , the subjects were primed with a word representing a gender - stereotypical or gender - neutral activity , object , or profession ) . In general , Blair and Banaji ( 1996 ) found a gender - specific priming effect : judgments were faster when the gender connotations of the prime were congruent with the gender category of the name . This means that gender stereotypes influenced their subjects ' classification behavior . In the area of racial stereotypes , Gaertner and McLaughlin ( 1983 ) employed a conventional lexical - decision task with positive and negative words related to stereotypes of Blacks and whites , and the words " black " or " white " serv - ing as the primes . There was a priming effect when positive targets were primed by " white " rather than " black " , but no priming was found for the negative targets , and this was so regardless of the subjects ' scores on a self - Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 34 | P a g e report measure of racial prejudice . thus , the effect of attitudes on lexical de - cision was independent of conscious prejudice . Similarly , Dovidio Evans , and Tyler ( 1986 ) employed a task in which sub - jects were presented with positive and negative trait labels , and asked whether the characteristic could ever be true of black or white individuals . While the judgments themselves did not differ according to race ( even the most rabid racist will admit that there are some lazy whites and smart blacks ) , subjects were faster to endorse positive traits for whites , and to en - dorse negative traits for blacks . Thus , even though conscious attitudes did not discriminate between racial groups , response latencies did . These studies , and others like them ( e . g . , Devine , 1989 ) , seem to reveal the implicit influence of sexist or racist attitudes on behavior . However , at present , interpretation of these results is somewhat unclear . In the first place , the logic of the research is that stereotype - specific priming indicates that subjects actually hold the stereotype in question - - that , for example , the subjects in Blair and Banaji ' s ( 1996 ) experiment really ( if unconsciously ) believe that males are athletic and arrogant while females are caring and dependent ) . However , it is also possible that these priming effects reflect the subjects ' abstract knowledge of stereotypical beliefs held by members of so - ciety at large , though they themselves personally reject them - - both con - sciously and unconsciously . Thus , a subject may know that people in general believe that ballet is for females and the gym is for males , without him - or herself sharing that belief . Even so , this knowledge may affect his or her performance on various experimental tasks , leading to the incorrect attribu - tion of the stereotypical beliefs to the subject . Moreover , most studies of implicit attitudes lack a comparative assessment of explicit attitudes . Although we might like to think that the average Gentile social psychologist is not antisemitic ( Greenwald & Schuh , 1994 ) , this may not be so . Implicit measures of attitudes may be useful additions to the me - thodological armamentarium of the social psychologist , but in the present context their interest value rests on demonstrations of dissociations between explicit and implicit expressions of emotion . Accordingly , it is important for research to show that implicit measures reveal different attitudes than those revealed explicitly . Just as the amnesic patient shows priming while failing to remember , and the repressive subject shows autonomic arousal while deny - Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 35 | P a g e ing distress , we want to see subjects displaying attitudes or prejudices which they deny having , and acting on stereotypes which they deny holding . Recently , Wittenbrink , Judd , and Park ( 1997 ) performed a formal compari - son of explicit and implicit racial attitudes . Their subjects , all of whom were white , completed a variety of traditional questionnaire measures of self - reported racial attitudes . They also performed a lexical - decision task in which trait terms drawn from racial stereotypes of whites and blacks were primed with the words black , white , or table . Analysis of response latencies found , as would be anticipated from the studies described above , a race - specific priming effect : white speeded lexical judgments of positive traits , while black speeded judgments of negative traits . However , the magnitude of race - specific priming was correlated with scores on the questionnaire measures of racial prejudice . In this study , then , implicit attitudes about race were not dissociated from explicit ones . Such a finding does not under - mine the use of implicit measures in research on attitudes and prejudice ( Dovidio & Fazio , 1992 ) , but a clear demonstration of a dissociation is critical if we are to accept implicit attitudes as evidence of an emotional unconscious whose contents are different from those which are accessible to phenomenal awareness . Neuroscientific Perspectives Desynchrony , repression , alexithymia , hypnotic analgesia , and implicit atti - tudes all seem to represent instances in which the person is subjectively un - aware of an emotional state that nevertheless influences behavioral and physiological outcomes . In view of these phenomena , we propose a formal distinction between two expressions of emotion , explicit and implicit . Paral - leling the usage of these descriptors in the domain of the cognitive uncons - cious , explicit emotion refers to the person ' s conscious awareness of an emotion , feeling , or mood state ; implicit emotion , by contrast , refers to changes in experience , thought , or action that are attributable to one ' s emo - tional state , independent of his or her conscious awareness of that state . In terms of measurement , explicit emotion tasks require the subject to reflect on , and report , his or her conscious feeling states ; implicit emotion tasks do not . Some of the most convincing evidence for emotion as implicit memory is provided by studies of neurological patients who acquire new emotional res - Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 36 | P a g e ponses but who , by virtue of their brain damage , have no conscious recollec - tion of the experiences by which this learning took place . Similarly , strong support for the concept of implicit emotion would be provided by evidence of brain - damaged patients who do not subjectively experience emotional feel - ing states , but who nevertheless display overt behavioral and covert physio - logical responses that would be regarded as emotional . Dissociations among emotion systems would seem a natural topic for study by neuropsycholo - gists , to whom the concept of multiple systems is quite familiar in the do - mains of memory ( e . g . , Schacter & Tulving , 1994 ) and vision ( Ungerleider & Haxby , 1994 ) . Unfortunately , neuropsychological evidence of multiple emotional systems , some supporting conscious feeling states and others supporting unconscious behavioral displays and physiological responses , is hard to come by ( for re - views , see Heilman , Bowers , & Valenstein , 1993 ; Kolb & Wilshaw , 1996 ) . Perhaps this is because the attention of most clinical and experimental neu - ropsychology has been focused on cognitive , rather than emotional and mo - tivational , functions . The terms cognitive neuropsychology and cognitive neuroscience will be quite familiar to the readers of this chapter , while the terms affective neuropsychology and emotion neuroscience are rarely heard . The idea of dissociable emotion systems is related to the concept of the emotional brain , as it has evolved from Cannon ( 1929 ) and Bard ( 1929 ) through Papez ( 1937 ) and MacLean ( 1949 ) to LeDoux ( 1996 ) . Cannon and Bard found that decorticate animals would still show fear responses , so long as the thalamus and hypothalamus remained intact . These observations led them to propose that the diencephalon , which contains these structures , was the seat of the emotions . According to their view , the diencephalon mediated skeletal and autonomic emotional responses ; in contrast , the conscious ex - perience of emotion was mediated by the cortex , which was activated by fi - bers ascending from the hypothalamus . In such a system , a disconnection ( Geschwind , 1965 ) between the diencephalon and the cortex would impair the subjective experience of emotion , while leaving the behavioral and phy - siological components intact . Later research and theory broadened the emotional brain to include the en - tire limbic system ( MacLean , 1949 , 1952 ; Papez , 1937 ) - - a move which , ac - cording to one commentary , " had the appeal of combining behavioral phe - nomena having no known neurological substrates with anatomical structures Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 37 | P a g e having no known function " ( Kolb & Wilshaw , 1996 , p . 418 ) . For Papez , the afferent messages arriving at the thalamus were transmitted in two separate streams to the sensory cortex ( the stream of thought ) and to the hypotha - lamus ( the stream of feeling ) . The hypothalamus , in turn , generated skeletal and autonomic responses to the stimulus , and also transmitted sensory in - formation to the cingulate cortex , which also received inputs from the sen - sory cortex . When inputs from the hypothalamus were integrated with inputs from the sensory cortex , an emotional feeling state was generated . In such a system , three different disconnections could create a desynchrony between the explicit subjective and implicit emotion : ( 1 ) between the thalamus and the sensory cortex ; ( 2 ) between the hypothalamus and the cingulate cortex ; and ( 3 ) between the sensory cortex and the cingulate cortex . In any of these cases , the behavioral and physiological responses to an emotional stimulus would run off unimpaired , in the absence of any corresponding subjective feeling state . MacLean ( 1949 , 1952 , 1970 , 1990 ) broadened the limbic system even fur - ther , including the amygdala and other structures connecting directly to the hypothalamus , and proposed that a paleomammalian brain mediates the vis - ceral and emotional life of the ( mammalian ) organism , while the neomam - malian brain mediates consciousness , language , and other complex cognitive functions . Thus , along the lines outlined by Papez ( 1937 ) , a disconnection between the paleomammalian and neomammalian brains could impair expli - cit emotion , while sparing implicit emotion . Most recently , LeDoux ( 1995 , 1996 ) has proposed a variant on the Pa - pez / MacLean theory which has the virtue of being more specific in terms of both anatomy and psychology . Briefly , LeDoux argues that a particular structure in the limbic system , the amygdala , mediates a particular emotion , fear ( for a similar analysis , see Damasio , 1994 ) . Based on his studies of fear conditioning in rats and other nonhuman animals , but supported by studies of human patients who have suffered damage to the amygdala and sur - rounding brain tissue ( e . g . , Adolphs , Damasio , Tranel , & Damasio , 1996 ; LaBar , LeDoux , Spencer , & Phelps , 1995 ) , LeDoux has proposed that fear stimuli are processed by the amygdala , which in turn generates appropriate behavioral , autonomic , and endocrine responses . Cortical arousal , feedback of somatic and visceral information , and information about the fear stimulus are then integrated in working memory to generate the subjective expe - rience of being afraid . As with the simpler systems described by Papez and Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 38 | P a g e MacLean , a disconnection between the amygdala and the cortex can produce a dissociation between explicit and implicit emotion : the person will respond in a fearful manner without feeling fear or anxiety . LeDoux ' s system is espe - cially appealing because it also offers a mechanism by which fear can serve as an implicit expression of memory : if the eliciting stimulus is not represented in working memory , the person will experience fear without be - ing aware of the fear stimulus . It should be understood that LeDoux ' s ( 1995 , 1996 ) analysis of the amygda - la applies only to the fear of emotion . Whereas Papez and MacLean implied that all emotions were mediated by a single system ( Papez ' s circuit or the limbic system ) , LeDoux postulates a number of different systems , each me - diating conscious experience , motor behavior , and somatic changes , corres - ponding to different emotional domains . It is not clear how many such sys - tems there are , but if Ekman and Friesen ( 1975 ) are right that some pat - terns of emotional expression have deep evolutionary roots , a reasonable hypothesis is that there may be at least seven separate systems , corres - ponding to the " basic emotions " of surprise , happiness , sadness , fear , anger , and disgust . Thus , the range of possible dissociations is not just between explicit and implicit expressions of emotion in general . It is may also be possible , at least in principle , to observe in a single patient , desynchrony be - tween explicit and implicit fear , but synchrony between explicit and implicit anger . This is , of course , a nightmare for any prospective researcher of the emotional unconscious . The State and the Stimulus The nightmare is exacerbated by a consideration of the logic of inferring un - conscious emotions . Consider the analogy to implicit memory . We know that priming is evidence of implicit memory because we can trace the facilitation in lexical decision , perceptual identification , and the like , to a specific objec - tively observable event - - the nature of the prime presented to the subject . Furthermore , we can specify objectively the relationship between the prime and the target : same versus different word , same word / same appearance versus same word / different appearance , and so on . Put another way , we can identify an implicit expression of memory because we know what happened to the subject in the past - - what the subject should be remembering . Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 39 | P a g e But by the same logic , in order to identify an implicit expression of emotion , we have to know what emotional state the subject should be experiencing , or which emotional state is being represented , and expressed , outside of conscious awareness . Applying the logic of explicit and implicit memory to the problem of emotion , then , compelling evidence of a dissociation between explicit and implicit emotion makes a number of methodological demands . First , we need to possess an adequate stimulus for emotion - - that is , a set of stimuli which , under ordinary circumstances , reliably elicits particular emotions in subjects . Unfortunately , the search for such reliable elicitors has not been particularly fruitful . Apparently , just as the experience of pain de - pends on the subjective meaning of the pain stimulus , the person ' s emotion - al response to a situation depends greatly on his or her cognitive appraisal of that situation ( e . g . , Ellsworth , 1991 ; Lazarus , 1991 ; Lazarus & Smith , 1988 ; Ortony , Clore , Collins , 1988 ; Smith & Ellsworth , 1985 ) . Still , some fairly universal elicitors of emotion have been proposed , and these hold promise for desynchrony research . Ekman and Friesen ( 1975 ) found , among other relations , that actual or threatened harm elicits fear , while loss of an object to which one was attached induces sadness . Similarly , Scherer , Wallbott , and their colleagues have found , among other relations , that basic pleasures elicited joy , while separation elicited sadness ( Scherer , Wallbott , & Summerfield , 1986 ; Scherer & Wallbott , 1994 ) . To be sure , the relations in question are moderated to some degree by context - specific ap - praisals and cultural considerations , but there is enough cross - situational consistency that we can have some hope of measuring subjects ' subjective , behavioral , and physiological responses to stimuli that , all things being equal , should elicit certain emotions . If we observe diminished subjective awareness coupled with persisting behavioral and physiological responses , we would have evidence of a dissociation between explicit and implicit emo - tion . Of course , documenting such a dissociation also requires that we have relia - ble measures of the subjective , behavioral , and physiological responses to the emotion stimulus ; and these are nontrivial problems . Subjective feeling states can be assessed by the usual sorts of self - report measures , but care must be taken to distinguish between the subjects ' failure to consciously feel a particular emotion , and their willingness to report what they feel to an ex - perimenter . Implicit emotion is about awareness , not denial . The behavioral Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 40 | P a g e component of emotion might be indexed by gross patterns of ap - proach / withdrawal , flight / fight , or activation / inhibition ( Gray , 1987 ) , and the physiological component by generalized levels of autonomic arousal ( Schac - ter & Singer , 1962 ) , but again ideally we would like to have implicit meas - ures that are more specifically isomorphic to the lexicon of conscious emo - tions . On the overt behavioral side , one possibility are facial expressions of the sort documented by Ekman and Friesen ( 1975 ) , as well as cognate post - ural and gestural expression . On the level of covert physiology , Levenson ( 1988 , 1992 ) and his colleagues have been able to document specific pat - terns of autonomic response accompanying particular indices of emotion ( Ekman , Levenson , & Friesen , 1983 ; Levenson , Carstensen , Friesen , & Ek - man , 1991 ; Levenson , Ekman , & Friesen , 1990 ; Levenson , Ekman , Heider , & Friesen , 1988 ) . Similarly , Davidson ( 1993 ) has suggested that particular patterns of cortical activation may also differentiate certain basic emotions . Figure 1 . Emotional state defined by the convergence of eliciting stimulus , subjective experience , expressive behavior , and physiological response . The ideal structure of an experimental demonstration of implicit emotion is now clear . To begin with , we assume that a particular emotional state is a Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 41 | P a g e hypothetical construct defined by the logic of converging operations ( Garner , Hake , & Eriksen , 1956 ; see also Campbell & Fiske , 1956 ; Kihlstrom , 1984 ; Stoyva & Kamiya , 1968 ) . These operations include specification of an elicit - ing stimulus and the measurement of subjecive experience , overt behavior , and physiological response ( Figure 1 ) . When all operations agree , we can be fairly confident that the person is in an emotional state such as fear or happiness . Agreement among the operations is sufficient to establish the presence of an emotional state . However , none of these operations is necessary for this purpose , and under some circums - tances some combination of two or three operations would sufficient . For ex - ample , a subject might report feeling no fear in response to a real or im - agined threat . At the same time , he or she should show continue to manifest facial , postural , and gestural expressions of fear , as well as autonomic and cortical signs of fear . Under these circumstances , the diagnosis of implicit fear might well be irresistible . As we grow more confident with respect to classification of emotional stimuli , and multivariate measurement of emo - tional responses , we will be in a better position both to evaluate the mul - tiple - systems theory of emotion and to search for evidence of desynchronies between emotional systems - - especially the particular pattern ( s ) of desyn - chrony characteristic of a dissociation between explicit and implicit emotion . Cognition , Emotion , Consciousness , and the Self So now we have an overview of what the emotional unconscious might look like . The research is not definitive , not by a long shot , but there do seem to be a number of well - documented instances in which current or past events influence our emotional states outside of phenomenal awareness , and another set of plausible instances where emotional responses themselves af - fect experience , thought , and action outside phenomenal awareness . Accept - ing such conclusions , even for the sake of argument , leads to the further question of what makes the difference between those cognitions and emo - tions that are conscious and those that are not . One possibility , raised by Schacter ( 1990 ) , is that there is some sort of cog - nitive module , which he calls the Conscious Awareness System ( CAS ) , cor - responding to a brain module or a system of modules , that has connections to other modular systems involved in perception , memory , language , emo - tion , and other mental functions . Damage to CAS , or more likely to the con - Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 42 | P a g e nections between it and other systems , will produce a loss of conscious awareness ; but it will not produce a complete loss of function . Thus , for ex - ample , if the connection between CAS and the visual system is broken , the person will not be aware of seeing ; but may still respond to visual events - - the sort of thing that occurs in the neuropsychological syndrome of blind - sight . If the connection between CAS and the episodic memory system is broken , the person will be unaware of past events ; but may still be influ - enced by the past , in the form of implicit memory , as has been observed in the organic amnesic syndromes . By extension , a disconnection between CAS and an emotion system would prevent the person from being aware of his or her emotional states , at the same time as behavioral and physiological com - ponents of emotional response run off outside of conscious awareness . The system proposed by LeDoux ( 1996 ) , while rather more complicated , has some of the same flavor . At the psychological level of analysis , staying very close to phenomenal ex - perience , the kinds of dissociations discussed here may be mediated by as - sociations between various mental representations of experience , and the mental representation of the self as the agent or patient of some action , or as the stimulus or experiencer of some state ( Kihlstrom , 1993c , 1997a ) . This proposal , in turn , is stimulated by James ' s ( 1890 / 1980 ) comment that : The universal conscious fact is not ' feelings and thoughts exist ' , but ' I think ' and ' I feel ' ( p . 221 , italics original ) . According to James , consciousness comes when we take possession of our behaviors , thoughts , feelings and desires - - in other words , when we ac - knowledge them as our own , or inject ourselves into them . Janet ( 1907 ) articulated similar ideas about the role of the self in conscious - ness , employing an early metaphor for spreading activation : There are then in the [ statement ] " I feel " , two things in presence of each other : a small , new , psychological fact , a little flame lighting up - - ' feel " - - and an enormous mass of thoughts already constituted into a system - - " I " ( pp . 304 - 305 ) . So too , consider the great French neurologist Claparede ( 1911 ; see Kihlstrom , 1995a ) , discussing a classic early case of what we now call impli - cit memory : Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 43 | P a g e If one examines the behavior of such a patient , one finds that everything happens as though the various events of life , however well associated with each other in the mind , were incapable of integration with the me itself ( p . 71 ) . Figure 2 . Mental representation of self linked to co - activated mental repre - sentations of an event , its episodic context , and emotional state ( A ) . When the link between self and event is disrupted ( B ) , emotional state is an ex - pression of implicit perception or memory . When the link between self and emotion is disrupted ( C ) , expressive behavior and physiological activity serve as implicit expressions of emotion . This connection to the self is just what appears to be lacking in the pheno - mena of implicit cognition and emotion . When we perceive an event , assume that we activate fragments of pre - existing knowledge ; when we attend to the event , its mental representation becomes part of our working memory , Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 44 | P a g e along with information about our emotional reaction to the event . These ac - tivated knowledge structures then have the opportunity to contact other ac - tivated knowledge structures . Among these are the person ' s current processing goals , the current spatiotemporal context , and the self . This self - structure , resident in working memory , routinely comes into contact with other activated pieces of knowledge - - about the environment in which the person exists , current and past events , and other information activated by perceptual processing , memory retrieval , and other acts of thought . This connection , which defines the self as the agent or experiencer of some ongo - ing event , or the stimulus or experiencer of some state , is the key to con - sciousness . The cognitive situation is schematically depicted in Figure 2 . Consider what happens when an event is perceived or remembered which generates an emotional response . Under ordinary circumstances , the event , its surrounding context , and the emotional response all make contact with the self in working memory , and all are represented in consciousness ( Figure 2a ) . The person knows what he or she feels , and knows why . Now consider what happens if the subjective component of the emotional re - sponse connects to the self , but the representation of the instigating event does not ( Figure 2b ) . Under these circumstances , the person will be aware of the situational background , his or her emotional state will be experienced consciously , and the behavioral and physiological consequences of that state will run off unimpaired . But the person will not know why he feels what he feels , because he is not aware of the instigating event perceived in the present , or retrieved from the past . This is the usual form of a state of dis - sociation , reflecting an impairment of explicit perception or memory , with the emotional response reflecting spared implicit memory . Under other circumstances , the representation of the instigating event will connect to the self , but the representation of the emotional state may not - - although the behavioral and physiological components of the emotion will run off activity , but the emotion itself will not be experienced consciously ( Figure 2c ) . The result will be a state of desynchrony , reflecting an impair - ment of explicit emotion , while implicit emotion , in the form of expressive behavior and physiological changes , will be spared . Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 45 | P a g e Can Emotions Be Nonconscious ? The emotional unconscious , then , has two different aspects . On the one hand , we may be unaware of the percepts , memories , and thoughts which give rise to our emotional feelings . In this case , emotion serves as an impli - cit expression of perception , memory , learning , or thought . On the other hand , we may be aware of what we are perceiving , remembering , and think - ing , but unaware of the emotions instigated by these cognitions . In this case , behavioral and physiological changes serve as implicit expressions of emotion . But can emotions really be unconscious ? A recent symposium answered this question in the negative ( Clore , 1994 ; Davidson & Ekman , 1994 ; LeDoux , 1994 ; Zajonc , 1994 ) . There was general agreement that the cognitive and brain processes underlying emotions could operate outside of conscious awareness and conscious control . In this way , we might not be conscious of the source of our emotions ; and , in the absence of source awareness , we might not be aware of precisely which emotion we are experiencing . But as Clore put it , the essence of emotion is feeling , and " emotions that are felt cannot be unconscious by definition " ( 1994 , p . 285 ) . And if , as Clore and Schwarz ( Clore , 1992 ; Clore , Schwarz , & Conway , 1994 ; Schwarz & Clore , 1983 , 1988 ) propose , the function of emotion is to provide information con - cerning the appraisal and evaluation of the ( past , current , or anticipated fu - ture ) situation , it would certainly be dysfunctional if emotions were uncons - cious . On the other hand , if it is true , as James ( 1884 ; 1890 / 1980 ) famously ar - gued , that ( 1 ) emotion is the perception of bodily ( muscular and visceral ) activity ; and ( 2 ) perception can be unconscious , as seems to be the case from the litera - ture documenting dissociations between explicit and implicit perception ( Kihlstrom et al . , 1992a ) ; then Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 46 | P a g e ( 3 ) emotions can be unconscious , at least in principle , and can express themselves outside awareness via overt behavioral and covert physiological responses . While the experimental and clinical evidence for a dissociation between ex - plicit and implicit emotion is not yet convincing , and the methodological re - quirements for such a demonstration have not yet been met , the hypothesis of unconscious emotional states cannot be rejected out of hand . If we are willing to speak of implicit percepts , memories , and thoughts that are disso - ciated from their explicit counterparts , then we must be willing to speak of implicit emotions in the same terms as well . It does not matter whether un - conscious emotions would be dysfunctional . What matters is whether they can happen , how they can happen , and how we would know . Notes A preliminary version of this chapter was presented at the annual meeting of the Association for Applied Psychophysiology and Biofeedback , Dallas , March 1991 , at the invitation of Ian Wickramasekera ; a shorter version was presented at the annual EMPathy Symposium at the annual meeting of the American Psychological Association , San Francisco , August 1998 , at the invitation of Charles Spielberger . The point of view represented here is based on re - search supported by Grants MH - 35856 and MH - 44737 from the National Institute of Mental Health . We thank David Barlow , Jennifer Beer , Amy Manning Ciaschini , Jack Glaser , Michael Kim , Regina Miranda , Susan Mirch - Kretschmann , Kevin LaBar , Robert Levenson , Susan Mi - neka , Jason Mitchell , Pradeep Mutalik , Linda O ' Hara , Lillian Park , Elizabeth Phelps , John Pe - rez , Katharine Shobe , Stephanie Tolley , and Heidi Wenk for their comments during the preparation of this paper . I . The self , as Janet ( 1907 ) noted , is a very rich mental structure . In the social intelligence theory of personality ( Cantor & Kihlstrom , 1987 , 1989 ; Kihlstrom & Cantor , 1989 ) , the self is an organized knowledge structure that stores what one knows about oneself . This would include semantic knowledge about one ' s physical and personality attributes , social status , and the like . It is also tightly linked to episodic knowledge forming one ' s autobiographical history ; autobiographical memories must represent the self , by definition ( Kihlstrom & Can - tor , 1984 ; Kihlstrom et al . , 1988 ; Kihlstrom & Klein , 1994 , 1997 ; Kihlstrom , Marchese , & Klein , 1997 ) . References Adams , J . K . ( 1957 ) . Laboratory studies of behavior without awareness . Psychological Bulletin , 54 , 383 - 405 . Adolphs , R . , Damasio , H . , Tranel , D . , & Damasio , A . ( 1996 ) . Cortical systems for the recognition of emotion in facial expressions . Journal of Neuroscience , 16 , 7678 - 7687 . Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 47 | P a g e Apfel , R . J . , & Sifneos , P . E . ( 1979 ) . Alexithymia : Concept and measurement . Psychotherapy & Psycho - somatics , 32 , 180 - 190 . Asendorf , J . B . , & Scherer , K . R . ( 1983 ) . The discrepant repressor : Differentiation between low anxiety , high anxiety , and repression of anxiety by autonomic - fl - verbal patterns of behavior . Journal of Perso - nality & Social Psychology , 45 , 1334 - 1346 . Bagby , E . ( 1928 ) . The psychology of personality . New York : Holt , 1928 . Banaji , M . R . , & Greenwald , A . G . ( 1995 ) . Implicit gender stereotyping in judgments of fame . Journal of Personality & Social Psychology , 68 , 181 - 198 . Barber , T . X . , & Hahn , K . W . ( 1962 ) . Physiological and subjective responses to pain - producing stimula - tion under hypnotically suggested and waking - imagined " analgesia " . Journal of Abnormal & Social Psy - chology , 65 , 411 - 415 . Bard , P . ( 1929 ) . The central representation of the sympathetic system : As indicated by certain physio - logical observations . Archives of Neurology & Psychiatry , 22 , 230 - 246 . Bargh , J . A . , Bond , R . N . , Lombardi , W . J . , & Tota , M . E . ( 1986 ) . The additive nature of chronic and tem - porary sources of construct accessibility . Journal of Personality & Social Psychology , 50 , 869 - 878 . Bargh , J . A . , & Pietromonaco , P . ( 1982 ) . Automatic information processing and social perception : The influence of trait information presented outside of conscious awareness on impression formation . Jour - nal of Personality & Social Psychology , 43 , 437 - 449 . Barlow , D . H . ( 1988 ) . Anxiety and its disorders : The nature and treatment of anxiety and panic . New York : Guilford . Barlow , D . H . , Mavissakalian , M . , & Schofield , L . D . ( 1980 ) . Patterns of desynchrony in agoraphobia : A preliminary report . Behaviour Research & Therapy , 18 , 441 - 448 . Bass , E . , & Davis , L . ( 1988 ) . The courage to heal : A guide for women survivors of child sexual abuse . New York : Harper & Row . Bechara , A . , Damasio , A . R . , Damasio , H . , & Anderson , S . W . ( 1994 ) . Insensitivity to future conse - quences following damage to human prefrontal cortex . Cognition , 50 , 7 - 15 . Bechara , A . , Damasio , H . , Tranel , D . , & Damasio , A . R . ( 1997 ) . Deciding advantageously before know - ing the advantageous strategy . Science , 275 , 1293 - 1295 . Bechara , A . , Tranel , D . , Damasio , H . , & Damasio , A . ( 1996 ) . Failure to respond autonomically to antic - ipated fture outcomes following damage to prefrontal cortex . Cerebral Cortex , 6 , 215 - 225 . Beitman , B . D . , Mukerji , V . , Russell , J . L . , & Grafing , M . ( 1993 ) . Panic disorder in cardiology patients : A review of the Missouri Panic / Cardiology Project . Journal of Psychiatric Research , 27 , 35 - 46 . Bell , P . A . , & Byrne , D . ( 1978 ) . Repression - sensitization . In H . London & J . E . Exner ( Eds . ) , Dimensions of personality ( pp . 449 - 485 ) . New York : Wiley . Berenbaum , H . , & Oltmanns , T . F . ( 1992 ) . Emotional experience and expression in schizophrenia and depression . Journal of Abnormal Psychology , 101 , 37 - 44 . Berry , D . C . , & Broadbent , D . E . ( 1984 ) . On the relationship between task performance and associated verbalizable knowledge . Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 39A , 585 - 609 . Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 48 | P a g e Berry , D . C . , & Dienes , Z . ( 1993 ) . Implicit learning : Theoretical and empirical issues . Hove , U . K . : Erl - baum . Birnbaum , M . H . , & Mellers , B . A . ( 1979 ) . One - mediator model of exposure effects is still viable . Journal of Personality & Social Psychology , 37 , 1090 - 1096 . ( a ) Birnbaum , M . H . , & Mellers , B . A . ( 1979 ) . Stimulus recognition may mediate exposure effects . Journal of Personality & Social Psychology , 37 , 391 - 394 . ( b ) Bisiach , E . ( 1993 ) . Mental representation in unilateral neglect and related disorders . Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 46A , 435 - 462 . Blair , I . V . , & Banaji , M . R . ( 1996 ) . Automatic and controlled processes in stereotype priming . Journal of Personality & Social Psychology , 70 , 1142 - 11163 . Blum , G . S . ( 1979 ) . Hypnotic programming techniques in psychological experiments . In E . Fromm & R . E . Shor ( Eds . ) , Hypnosis : Developments in research and new perspectives ( pp . 457 - 481 ) . New York : Aldine . Blume , E . S . ( 1990 ) . Secret survivors : Uncovering incest and its aftereffects on women . New York : Wi - ley . Bonnano , G . A . , & Stillings , N . A . ( 1986 ) . Preference , familiarity , and recognition after repeated brief exposure to random geometric shapes . American Journal of Psychology , 99 , 403 - 415 . Bornstein , R . F . ( 1989 ) . Exposure and affect : Overview and meta - analysis of research , 1968 - 1987 . Psychological Bulletin , 106 , 265 - 289 . Bornstein , R . F . ( 1992 ) . Subliminal mere exposure effects . In R . F . Bornstein & T . S . Pittman ( Eds . ) , Per - ception without awareness : Cognitive , clinical , and social perspectives ( pp . 191 - 210 ) . New York : Guil - ford . Bornstein , R . F . , & D ' Agostino , P . R . ( 1992 ) . Stimulus recognition and the mere exposure effect . Journal of Personality & Social Psychology , 63 , 545 - 552 . Bornstein , R . F . , & P . R . D ' Agostino , P . R . ( 1994 ) . The attribution and discounting of perceptual fluency : Preliminary tests of a perceptual fluency / attributional model of the mere exposure effect . Social Cogni - tion , 12 , 103 - 128 . Bornstein , R . F . , Leone , D . R . , & Galley , D . J . ( 1987 ) . The generalizability of subliminal mere exposure effects : Influence of stimuli perceived witout awareness on social behavior . Journal of Personality & Social Psychology , 53 , 1070 - 1079 . Bower , G . H . ( 1981 ) . Mood and memory . American Psychologist , 36 , 129 - 148 . Bower , G . H . , Gilligan , S . G . , & Monteiro , K . P . ( 1981 ) . Selectivity of learning caused by affective state . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 110 , 451 - 473 . Bower , G . H . , Monteiro , K . P . , & Gilligan , S . G . ( 1978 ) . Emotional mood as a context for learning and recall . Journal of Verbal Learning & Verbal Behavior , 17 , 573 - 585 . Bowers , K . S . ( 1984 ) . On being unconsciously influenced and informed . In K . S . Bowers & D . Meichen - baum ( Eds . ) , The unconscious reconsidered ( pp . 227 - 272 ) . New York : Wiley - Interscience . Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 49 | P a g e Bowers , K . S . , & Farvolden , P . ( 1996 ) . Revisiting a century - old Freudian slip - - From suggestion dis - avowed to the truth repressed . Psychological Bulletin , 119 , 355 - 380 . Bowers , K . S . , Farvolden , P . , & Mermigis , L . ( 1995 ) . Intuitive antecedents of insight . In S . M . Smith , T . M . Ward , & R . A . Finke ( Eds . ) , The creative cognition approach ( pp . 27 - 52 ) . Cambridge , Ma . : MIT Press . Bowers , K . S . , Regehr , G . , Balthazard , C . G . , & parker , K . ( 1990 ) . Intuition in the context of discovery . Cognitive Psychology , 22 , 72 - 110 . Brady , J . P . , & Lind , D . L . ( 1961 ) Experimental analysis of hysterical blindness - Operant conditioning techniques . Archives of General Psychiatry . 4 , 331 - 339 . Breuer , J . , & Freud , S . ( 1955 ) . Studies on hysteria . In J . Strachey ( Ed . ) , The standard edition of the complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud ( Vol . 2 ) . London : Hogarth . Original published 1893 - 1895 . Bruner , J . S . , & Klein , G . S . ( 1960 ) . The function of perceiving : New Look retrospect . In S . Wapner & B . Kaplan ( Eds . ) , Perspectives in psychological theory : Essays in honor of Heinz Werner ( pp . 61 - 77 ) . New York : International Universities Press . Bryant , R . A . , & McConkey , K . M . ( 1989 ) . Hypnotic blindness , awareness , and attribution . Journal of Abnormal Psychology , 98 , 443 - 447 . ( a ) Bryant , R . A . , & McConkey , K . M . ( 1989 ) . Visual conversion disorder : A case analysis of the influence of visual information . Journal of Abnormal Psychology , 98 , 326 - 329 . ( b ) Byrne , D . ( 1961 ) . The Repression - Sensitization Scale : Rationale , reliability and validity . Journal of Personality , 29 , 334 - 349 . Byrne , D . ( 1964 ) . Repression - sensitization as a dimension of personality . In B . A . Maher ( Ed . ) , Progress in experimental personality research ( vol . 1 , pp . 87 - 128 ) . New York : Academic . Campbell , D . T . , & Fiske , D . W . ( 1959 ) . Convergent and discriminant validation by the multitrait - multimethod matrix . Psychological Bulletin , 56 , 82 - 105 . Cannon , W . B . ( 1929 ) . Bodily changes in pain , hunger , fear , and rage . New York : Appleton . Cantor , N . , & Kihlstrom , J . F . ( 1987 ) . Personality and social intelligence . Englewood Cliffs , N . J . : Pren - tice - Hall . Cantor , N . , & Kihlstrom , J . F . ( 1989 ) . Social intelligence and cognitive assessments of personality . In R . S . Wyer & T . K . Srull ( Eds . ) , Advances in Social Cognition . Vol . 2 ( pp . 1 - 59 ) . Hillsdale , N . J . : Erlbaum . Chapman , L . J . , Chapman , J . P . , & Raulin , M . L . ( 1976 ) . Scales for physical and social anhedonia . Jour - nal of Abnormal Psychology , 85 , 374 - 382 . Chaves , J . F . ( 1989 ) . Hypnotic control of clinical pain . In N . P . Spanos & J . F . Chaves ( Eds . ) , Hypnosis : The cognitive - behavioral perspective ( pp . 242 - 272 ) . Buffalo , N . Y . : Prometheus . Christianson , S . - A . , & Nilsson , L . - G . . ( 1989 ) . Hysterical amnesia : A case of aversively motivated isola - tion of memory . In T . Archer & L . - G . Nilsson ( Eds . ) , Aversion , avoidance , and anxiety : Perspectives on aversively motivated behavior ( pp . 289 - 310 ) . Hillsdale , N . J . : Erlbaum . Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 50 | P a g e Claparede , E . ( 1951 ) . Recognition and me - ness . In D . Rapaport ( Ed . ) , Organization and pathology of thought : Selected sources ( pp . 58 - 75 ) . New York : Columbia University Press . Originally published , 1911 . Clore , G . L . ( 1992 ) . Cognitive phenomenology : Feelings in the construction of judgment . In L . Martin & A . Tesser ( Eds . ) , The construction of social judgment ( pp . 133 - 164 ) . Hillsdale , N . J . : Erlbaum . Clore , G . L . ( 1994 ) . Why emotions are never unconscious . In P . Ekman & R . J . Davidson ( Eds . ) , The nature of emotion : Fundamental questions ( pp . 285 - 290 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Clore , G . L . , Schwarz , N . , & Conway , M . ( 1994 ) . Emotion and information processing . In R . S . Wyer & T . K . Srull ( Eds . ) , Handbook of social cognition , 2nd Ed . ( pp . 323 - 417 ) . Hillsdale , N . J . : Erlbaum . Cork , R . L . , Couture , L . J . , & Kihlstrom , J . F . ( 1997 ) . Memory and recall . In T . L . Yaksh , C . Lynch , W . M . Zapol , M . Maze , J . F . Biebuyck , & L . J . Saidman , ( Eds . ) , Anesthesia : Biologic foundations ( pp . 451 - 467 ) . New York : Lippincott - Raven . Craske , M . G . , Sanderson , M . C . , & Barlow , D . H . ( 1987 ) . How do desynchronous response systems re - late to the treatment of agoraphobia ? Behaviour Research & Therapy , 25 , 117 - 122 . Crews , F . ( 1995 ) . The memory wars : Freud ' s legacy in dispute . New York : New York Review Imprints . Crowne , C . P . , & Marlowe , D . A . ( 1960 ) . A new scale of social desirability independent of psychopathol - ogy . Journal of Consulting Psychology , 24 , 349 - 354 . Damasio , A . R . ( 1994 ) . Descartes ' error : Emotion , reason , and the human brain . New York : Gros - set / Putnam . Damasio , A . R . , Tranel , D . , & Damasio , H . ( 1989 ) . Amnesia caused by herpes simplex encaphalitis , infarctions in basal forebrain , Alzheimer ' s disease and anoxia / ischemia . In F . Boller & J . Grafman ( Eds . ) , Handbook of neuropsychology ( vol . 3 , pp . 149 - 166 ) . Amsterdam : Elsevier . Davidson , R . J . ( 1993 ) . Parsing affective space : Perspectives from neuropsychology and psychophysi - ology . Neuropsychology , 7 , 464 - 475 . Davidson , R . J . , & Ekman , P . ( Eds . ) . ( 1994 ) . The nature of emotion : Fundamental questions . New York : Oxford University Press . Devine , P . G . ( 1989 ) . Stereotypes and prejudice : Their automatic and controlled components . Journal of Personality & Social Psychology , 56 , 5 - 18 . Dienes , Z . , Altmann , G . , Kwan , L . , & Goode , A . ( 1995 ) . Unconscious knowledge of artificial grammars is applied strategically . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 17 , 875 - 887 . Dienes , Z . , & Berry , D . ( 1997 ) . Implicit learning : Below the subjective threshold . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 4 , 3 - 23 . Dixon , N . F . ( 1971 ) . Subliminal perception : The nature of a controversy . London : McGraw - Hill . Dixon , N . F . ( 1981 ) . Preconscious processing . New York : Wiley . Dorfman , J . , & Kihlstrom , J . F . ( 1994 , November ) . Semantic priming in posthypnotic amnesia . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Psychonomic Society , St . Louis . Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 51 | P a g e Dorfman , J . , Kihlstrom , J . F . , Cork , R . C . , & Misiaszek , J . ( 1995 ) . Priming and recognition in ECT - induced amnesia . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 2 , 244 - 248 . Dorfman , J . , Shames , V . A . , & Kihlstrom , J . F . ( 1996 ) . Intuition , incubation , and insight : Implicit cogni - tion in problem - solving . In G . Underwood ( Ed . ) , Implicit cognition ( pp . 257 - 296 ) . Oxford : Oxford Uni - versity Press . Dovidio , J . F . , Evans , N . , & Tyler , R . ( 1986 ) . racial stereotypes : The contents of their cognitive repre - sentations . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 22 , 22 - 37 . Dovidio , J . F . , & Fazio , R . H . ( 1992 ) . New technologies for the direct and indirect assessment of atti - tudes . In J . M . Tanur ( Ed . ) , Questions about questions ( pp . 204 - 236 ) . New York : Russell Sage Founda - tion . Dozier , M . , & Kobak , R . R . ( 1992 ) . Psychophysiology in attachment interviews : Converging evidence for deactivating strategies . Child Development , 63 , 1473 - 1480 . Dulany , D . E . ( 1997 ) . Consciousness in the explicit ( deliberative ) and implicit ( evocative ) senses . In J . D . Cohen & J . W . Schooler ( Ed . ) , Scientific approaches to consciousness ( pp . 179 - 212 ) . Mahwah , N . J . : Erlbaum . Durso , F . T . , Rea , C . B . , & Dayton , T . ( 1994 ) . Graph - theoretic confirmation of restructuring during in - sight . Psychological Science , 5 , 94 - 98 . Dworkin , R . H . ( 1982 ) . Affective deficits and social deficits in schizophrenia : What ' s what ? Schizophre - nia Bulletin , 18 , 59 - 64 . Eich , J . E . ( 1984 ) . Memory for unattended events : Remembering with and without awareness . Memory & Cognition , 12 , 105 - 111 . Ekman , P . , & Friesen , W . V . ( 1975 ) . Unmasking the face . Englewood Cliffs , N . J . : Prentice - Hall . Ekman , P . , Levenson , R . W . , & Friesen , W . V . ( 1983 ) . Autonomic nervous system activity distinguishes between emotions . Science , 221 , 1208 - 1210 . Ellenberger , H . F . ( 1970 ) . The discovery of the unconscious . New York : Basic Books . Ellsworth , P . C . ( 1991 ) . Some implications of cognitive appraisal theories of emotion . In K . T . Strong - man ( Ed . ) , International review of studies on emotion ( pp . 143 - 161 ) . New York : Wiley . Erdelyi , M . H . ( 1974 ) . A new look at the New Look : Perceptual defense and vigilance . Psychological Review , 81 , 1 - 25 . Eriksen , C . W . ( 1960 ) . Discrimination and learning without awareness : A methodological survey and evaluation . Psychological Review , 67 , 279 - 300 . Flavell , J . H . ( 1963 ) . The developmental psychology of Jean Piaget . Princeton : Van Nostrand Reinhold . Frederickson , R . ( 1993 ) . Repressed memories : A journey to recovery from sexual abuse . New York : Simon & Schuster . Freud , A . ( 1966 ) . The ego and the mechanisms of defense . Rev . ed . In A . Freud ( Ed . ) , The writings of Anna Freud ( Vol . 2 ) . New York : International Universities Press . Original published 1936 . Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 52 | P a g e Freud , S . ( 1963 ) . Introductory lectures on Psycho - Analysis . In J . Strachey ( Ed . ) , The standard edition of the complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud ( Vols . 15 - 16 ) . London : Hogarth . Original pub - lished 1916 - 1917 . Freud , S . ( 1959 ) . Inhibitions , symptoms , and anxiety . In J . Strachey ( Ed . ) , The standard edition of the complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud ( Vol . 20 , pp . 87 - 178 ) . London : Hogarth . Original pub - lished 1926 . Freud , S . ( 1964 ) . New introductory lectures on psychoanalysis . In J . Strachey ( Ed . ) , The standard edi - tion of the complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud ( Vol . 22 , pp . 1 - 184 ) . London : Hogarth . Original published 1933 . Gaertner , S . L . , & McLaughlin , J . P . ( 1983 ) . racial stereotypes : Associations and ascriptions of positive and negative characteristics . Social Psychology Quarterly , 46 , 23 - 30 . Gantt , W . H . . ( 1937 ) . Contributions to the physiology of the conditioned reflex . Archives of Neurology & Psychiatry , 37 , 848 - 858 . Gantt , W . H . ( 1953 ) . Principles of nervous breakdown : Schizokinesis and autokinesis . Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences , 56 , 141 - 163 . Garner , W . R . , Hake , H . W . , & Eriksen , C . W . ( 1956 ) . Operationism and the concept of perception . Psy - chological Review , 63 , 149 - 159 . Gazzaniga , M . S . ( 1985 ) . The social brain : Discovering the networks of the mind . New York : Basic Books . Gerew , A . B . , Romney , D . M . , & LeBoef , A . ( 1989 ) . Synchrony and desynchrony in high and low arousal subjects undergoing therapeutic exposure . Journal of Behavior Therapy & Experimental Psychiatry , 20 41 - 48 . Geschwind , N . ( 1965 ) . Disconnexion syndromes in animals and man . Brain , 88 , 237 - 294 . Goldstein , A . , & Hilgard , E . R . ( 1975 ) . Lack of influence of the morphine antagonist naloxone on hyp - notic analgesia . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 72 , 2041 - 2043 . Gracely , R . H . & Nabiloff , B . D . ( 1996 ) . Measurement of pain sensation . In L . Kruger ( Ed . ) , Pain and touch . ( pp . 243 - 313 ) . San Diego : Academic . Graf , P . , & Masson , M . E . J . ( 1993 ) . Implicit memory : New directions in cognition , development , and neuropsychology . Hillsdale , N . J . : Erlbaum . Gray , J . A . ( 1987 ) . The psychology of fear and stress , 2nd ed . Cambridge , U . K . : Cambridge University Press . Greene , R . J . , & Reyher , J . ( 1972 ) . Pain tolerance in hypnotic analgesic and imagination states . Journal of Abnormal Psychology , 79 , 29 - 38 . Greenwald , A . G . ( 1992 ) . New Look 3 : Unconscious cognition reclaimed . American Psychologist , 47 , 766 - 779 . Greenwald , A . G . , & Banaji , M . R . ( 1995 ) . Implicit social cognition : Attitudes , self - esteem , and stereo - types . Psychological Review , 102 , 4 - 27 . Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 53 | P a g e Greenwald , A . G . , Draine , S . C . , & Abrams , R . L . ( 1996 ) . Three cognitive markers of unconscious se - mantic activation . Science , 273 , 1699 - 1702 . Greenwald , A . G . , Klinger , M . R . , & Liu , T . J . ( 1989 ) . Unconscious processing of dichoptically masked words . Memory & Cognition , 17 , 35 - 47 . Greenwald , A . G . , Klinger , M . R . , & Schuh , E . S . ( 1995 ) . Activation by marginally perceptible ( " sublimin - al " ) stimuli : Dissociation of unconscious from conscious cognition . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 124 , 22 - 42 . Greenwald , A . G . , & Schuh , E . S . ( 1994 ) . An ethnic bias in scientific citations . European Journal of So - cial Psychology , 24 , 623 - 639 . Hargadon , R . , Bowers , K . S . , & Woody , E . Z . ( 1995 ) . Does counterpain imagery mediate hypnotic anal - gesia ? Journal of Abnormal Psychology , 104 , 508 - 516 . Hayward , A . L . ( 1927 ) . Amusements , serious and comical , and other works by Tom Brown . New York : Dodd , Mead . Heilman , K . M . , Bowers , D . , & Valenstein , E . ( 1993 ) . Emotional disorders associated with neurological diseases . In K . M . Heilman & E . Valenstein ( Eds . ) , Clinical neuropsychology , 3rd ed . ( pp . 461 - 498 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Herman , J . L . ( 1992 ) . Trauma and recovery . New York : Basic Books . Hilgard , E . R . ( 1969 ) . Pain as a puzzle for psychology and physiology . American Psychologist , 24 , 103 - 113 . Hilgard , E . R . ( 1973 ) . A neodissociation interpretation of pain reduction in hypnosis . Psychological Re - view , 80 , 396 - 411 . Hilgard , E . R . ( 1977 ) . Divided consciousness : Multiple controls in human thought and action . New York : Wiley - Interscience . Hilgard , E . R . ( 1980 ) . The trilogy of mind : Cognition , affection , and conation . Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences , 16 , 107 - 117 . Hilgard , E . R . , & Hilgard , J . R . ( 1975 ) . Hypnosis in the relief of pain . Los Altos , Ca . : Kaufmann . Hilgard , E . R . , Hilgard , J . R . , Macdonald , H . , Morgan , A . H . , & Johnson , L . S . ( 1978 ) . Covert pain in hyp - notic analgesia : Its reality as tested by the real - simulator design . Journal of Abnormal Psychology , 87 , 655 - 663 . Hilgard , E . R . , Macdonald , H . , Morgan , A . H . , & Johnson , L . S . ( 1978 ) . The reality of hypnotic analgesia : A comparison of highly hypnotizables with simulators . Journal of Abnormal Psychology , 87 , 239 - 246 . Hilgard , E . R . , Morgan , A . H . , Lange , A . F . , Lenox , J . R . , Macdonald , H . , Marshall , G . D . , & Sachs , L . B . ( 1974 ) . Heart rate changes in pain and hypnosis . Psychophysiology , 11 , 692 - 702 . Hilgard , E . R . , Morgan , A . H . , & Macdonald , H . ( 1975 ) . Pain and dissociation in the cold - pressor test : A study of hypnotic analgesia with " hidden reports " through automatic key - pressing and automatic talk - ing . Journal of Abnormal Psychology , 84 , 280 - 289 . Hilgard , J . R . , & LeBaron , S . L . ( 1984 ) . Hypnosis in the treatment of pain and anxiety in children with cancer : A clinical and quantitative investigation . Los Altos , Ca . : Kaufmann . Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 54 | P a g e Hodgson , R . , & Rachman , S . ( 1974 ) . II . Desynchrony in measures of fear . Behaviour Research & Therapy , 12 , 319 - 326 . Holender , D . ( 1986 ) . Semantic activation without conscious identification in dichotic listening , parafo - veal vision , and visual masking : A survey and appraisal . Behavior & Brain Sciences , 9 , 1 - 23 . Hoppe , K . D . , & Bogen , J . E . ( 1977 ) . Alexithymia in twelve commissurotomized patients . Psychotherapy & Psychosomatics , 28 , 148 - 155 . Hugdahl , K . ( 1981 ) . The three - system model of fear and emotion - - A critical examination . Behaviour Research & Therapy , 19 , 75 - 85 . Huston , P . E . , Shakow , D . & Erickson , M . H . ( 1932 ) . A study of hypnotically induced complexes by means of the Luria technique . Journal of General Psychology , 11 , 65 - 97 . Jacoby , L . L . , & Dallas , M . ( 1981 ) . On the relationship between autobiographical memory and percep - tual learning . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 110 , 306 - 340 . Jacoby , L . L . , Kelley , C . M . , Brown , J . , & Jasechko , J . ( 1989 ) . Becoming famous overnight : Limits on the ability to avoid unconscious influences of the past . Journal of Personality & Social Psychology , 56 , 326 - 338 . James , W . ( 1884 ) . What is an emotion ? Mind , 9 , 18 - 205 . James , W . ( 1890 ) . Principles of psychology . New York : Henry Holt . Janet , P . ( 1893 ) . [ Continuous amnesia . ] Revue Generale des Sciences , 4 , 167 - 179 . Janet , P . ( 1904 ) . [ Neuroses and fixed ideas . ] Paris : Alcan . Janet , P . ( 1907 ) . The major symptoms of hysteria . New York : Macmillan . Johnson , M . K . , Kim , J . K . , & Risse , G . ( 1985 ) . Do alcoholic Korsakoff ' s syndrome patients acquire affec - tive reactions ? Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 11 , 27 - 36 . Johnson , M . K . , & Multhaup , K . S . ( 1992 ) . Emotion and MEM . In S . - A . Christianson ( Ed . ) , Handbook of emotion and memory : Research and theory ( pp . 33 - 66 ) . Hillsdale , N . J . : Erlbaum . Kaszniak , A . W . , Nussbaum , P . D . , Berren , M . R . , & Santiago , J . ( 1988 ) . Amnesia as a consequence of male rape : A case report . Journal of Abnormal Psychology , 97 , 100 - 104 . Kihlstrom , J . F . ( 1980 ) . Posthypnotic amnesia for recently learned material : Interactions with " episod - ic " and " semantic " memory . Cognitive Psychology , 12 , 227 - 251 . Kihlstrom , J . F . ( 1984 ) . Conscious , subconscious , unconscious : A cognitive perspective . In K . S . Bowers & D . Meichenbaum ( Eds . ) , The unconscious reconsidered . New York : John Wiley & Sons . Kihlstrom , J . F . ( 1985 ) . Posthypnotic amnesia and the dissociation of memory . In G . H . Bower ( Ed . ) , The psychology of learning and motivation . Vol . 19 ( pp . 131 - 178 ) . New York : Academic Press . Kihlstrom , J . F . ( 1987 ) . The cognitive unconscious . Science , 237 , 1445 - 1452 . Kihlstrom , J . F . ( 1990 ) . The psychological unconscious . In L . Pervin ( Ed . ) , Handbook of personality : Theory and research ( pp . 445 - 464 ) . New York : Guilford . Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 55 | P a g e Kihlstrom , J . F . ( 1993 ) . The continuum of consciousness . Consciousness & Cognition , 2 , 334 - 354 . ( a ) Kihlstrom , J . F . ( 1993 ) . Implicit memory function during anesthesia . In P . S . Sebel , B . Bonke , & E . Wi - nograd ( Eds ) , Memory and Awareness in Anesthesia ( pp . 10 - 30 ) . New York : Prentice - Hall . ( b ) Kihlstrom , J . F . ( 1993 ) . The psychological unconscious and the self . In T . Nagel ( Ed . ) , Experimental and theoretical studies of consciousness [ Proceedings of Ciba Foundation Symposium # 174 ] , ( pp . 147 - 167 ) . London : Wiley . ( c ) Kihlstrom , J . F . ( 1995 ) . Memory and consciousness : An appreciation of Claparde and recognition et moit . Consciousness & Cognition , 4 , 379 - 386 . ( a ) Kihlstrom , J . F . ( 1995 ) . The rediscovery of the unconscious . In H . Morowitz & J . Singer & ( Eds . ) , The mind , the brain , and complex adaptive systems ( pp . 123 - 143 ) . Santa Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences of Complexity , Vol . 22 . Reading , Ma . : Addison - Wesley . ( b ) Kihlstrom , J . F . ( 1996 ) . Perception without awareness of what is perceived , learning without awareness of what is learned . In M . Velmans ( Ed . ) , The science of consciousness : Psychological , neuropsycholog - ical , and clinical reviews ( pp . 23 - 46 ) . London : Routledge . ( a ) Kihlstrom , J . F . ( 1996 ) . The trauma - memory argument and recovered memory therapy . In K . Pezdek & W . P . Banks ( Eds . ) , The recovered memory / false memory debate ( pp . 297 - 311 ) . San Diego , Ca . : Aca - demic . ( b ) Kihlstrom , J . F . ( 1997 ) . Consciousness and me - ness . In J . Cohen & J . Schooler ( Eds . ) , Scientific ap - proaches to the question of consciousness ( pp . 451 - 468 ) . Mahwah , N . J . : Erlbaum . ( a ) Kihlstrom , J . F . ( 1997 ) . Suffering from reminiscences : Exhumed memory , implicit memory , and the return of the repressed . In M . A . Conway ( Ed . ) , False and recovered memories ( pp . 100 - 117 ) . Oxford : Oxford University Press . ( b ) Kihlstrom , J . F . ( 1998 / 1999 ) . Conscious and unconscious cognition . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , The con - cept of cognition ( pp . 173 - 203 ) . Cambridge , Ma . : MIT Press . ( a ) Kihlstrom , J . F . ( 1998 ) . Dissociations and dissociation theory in hypnosis : A comment on Kirsch & Lynn ( 1998 ) . Psychological Bulletin , 123 , 186 - 191 . ( b ) Kihlstrom , J . F . ( 1998 ) . Exhumed memory . In S . J . Lynn & N . P . Spanos ( Eds . ) , Truth in memory ( pp . 3 - 31 ) . New York : Guilford . ( c ) Kihlstrom , J . F . , Barnhardt , T . M . , & Tataryn , D . J . ( 1992 ) . Implicit perception . In R . F . Bornstein & T . S . Pittman ( Eds . ) , Perception without awareness : Cognitive , clinical , and social perspectives ( pp . 17 - 54 ) . New York : Guilford . ( a ) Kihlstrom , J . F . , Barnhardt , T . M . , & Tataryn , D . J . ( 1992 ) . The psychological unconscious : Found , lost , and regained . American Psychologist , 47 , 788 - 791 . ( b ) Kihlstrom , J . F . , & Cantor , N . ( 1984 ) . Mental representations of the self . In L . Berkowitz ( Ed . ) , Ad - vances in experimental social psychology . Vol . 17 . New York : Academic Press . Kihlstrom , J . F . , & Cantor , N . ( 1989 ) . Social intelligence and personality : There ' s room for growth . In R . S . Wyer & T . K . Srull ( Eds . ) , Advances in Social Cognition . Vol . 2 ( pp . 197 - 214 ) . Hillsdale , N . J . : Erl - baum . Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 56 | P a g e Kihlstrom , J . F . , & Cantor , N . ( 1998 / 2000 ) . Social intelligence . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Handbook of intelligence ( pp . 359 - 379 ) . Cambridge , U . K . : Cambridge University Press . Kihlstrom , J . F . , Cantor , N , Albright , J . S . , Chew , B . R . , Klein , S . B . , & Niedenthal , P . M . ( 1988 ) . Informa - tion processing and the study of the self . In L . Berkowitz ( Ed . ) , Advances in experimental social psy - chology . Vol 21 ( pp . 145 - 177 ) . San Diego : Academic Press . Kihlstrom , J . F . , & Hoyt , I . P . ( 1988 ) . Hypnosis and the psychology of delusions . In T . F . Oltmanns & B . A . Maher ( Eds . ) , Delusional beliefs : Interdisciplinary perspectives ( pp . 66 - 109 ) . New York : Wiley . Kihlstrom , J . F . , & Hoyt , I . P . ( 1990 ) . Repression , dissociation , and hypnosis . In J . L . Singer ( Ed . ) , Re - pression and dissociation : Implications for personality theory , psychopathology , and health ( pp . 181 - 208 ) . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Kihlstrom , J . F . , & Klein , S . B . ( 1994 ) . The self as a knowledge structure . In R . S . Wyer & T . K . Srull ( Eds . ) , Handbook of social cognition , 2nd Ed . ( Vol . 1 , pp . 153 - 208 ) . Hillsdale , N . J . : Erlbaum . Kihlstrom , J . F . , & Klein , S . B . ( 1997 ) . Self - knowledge and self - awareness . In J . G . Snodgrass & R . L . Thompson ( Eds . ) , The self across psychology : Self - recognition , self - awareness , and the self - concept . Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences , 818 , 5 - 17 . Kihlstrom , J . F . , Marchese , L . A . , & Klein , S . B . ( 1997 ) . Situating the self in interpersonal space . In U . Neisser & D . A . Jopling ( Eds . ) , The conceptual self in context : Culture , experience , self - understanding ( pp . 154 - 175 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Kihlstrom , J . F . , & Schacter , D . L . ( 1990 ) . Anaesthesia , amnesia , and the cognitive unconscious . In B . Bonke , W . Fitch , & K . Millar ( Eds . ) , Awareness and memory during anaesthesia ( pp . 22 - 44 ) . Amster - dam : Swets & Zeitlinger . Kihlstrom , J . F . , & Schacter , D . L . ( 1995 ) . Functional disorders of autobiographical memory . In A . Bad - deley , B . A . Wilson , & F . Watts ( Eds . ) , Handbook of memory disorders ( pp . 337 - 364 ) . London : Wiley . Kihlstrom , J . F . , Shames , V . A . , & Dorfman , J . ( 1996 ) . Intimations of memory and thought . In L . Reder ( Ed . ) , Implicit Memory and Metacognition ( pp . 1 - 23 ) . Mahwah , N . J . : Erlbaum . Kihlstrom , J . F . , Tataryn , D . J . , & Hoyt , I . P . ( 1993 ) . Dissociative disorders . In P . J . Sutker & H . E . Adams ( Eds . ) , Comprehensive handbook of psychopathology , 2nd Ed ( pp . 203 - 234 ) . New York : Plenum . Kirsch , I . , & Lynn , S . J . ( 1998 ) . Dissociation theories of hypnosis . Psychological Bulletin , 123 , 100 - 115 . Klinger , M . R . , & Greenwald , A . G . ( 1994 ) . Preferences need no inferences ? The cognitive basis f ncons - cious mere exposure effects . In P . M . Niedenthal & S . Kitayama ( Eds . ) , The heart ' s eye : Emotional in - fluences in perception and attention ( pp . 67 - 85 ) . San Diego : Academic . Knox , V . J . , Morgan , A . H . , & Hilgard , E . R . ( 1974 ) . Pain and suffering in ischemia : The paradox of hyp - notically suggested anesthesia as contradicted by reports from the " hidden observer " . Archives of General Psychiatry , 30 , 840 - 847 . Kolb , B . , & Wilshaw , I . Q . ( 1996 ) . Fundamentals of uman neuropsychology . 4th ed . New York : Free - man . Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 57 | P a g e Kring , A . M . , & Neale , J . M . ( 1996 ) . Do schizophrenic patients show a disjunctive relationship among expressive , experiential , and psychophysiological components of emotion ? Journal of Abnormal Psy - chology , 105 , 249 - 257 . Kring , A . M . , Kerr , S . , Smith , D . A . , & Neale , J . M . ( 1993 ) . Flat affect in schizophrenia does not reflect diminished subjective experience of emotion . Journal of Abnormal Psychology , 102 , 507 - 517 . Kunst - Wilson , W . R . , & Zajonc , R . B . ( 1980 ) . Affective discrimination of stmuli that cannot be recog - nized . Science , 207 , 557 - 558 . Kushner , M . G . , & Beitman , B . D . ( 1990 ) . Panic attacks without fear : An overview . Behaviour Research & Therapy , 28 , 469 - 479 . Labar , K . S . , LeDoux , J . E . , Spencer , D . D . , & Phelps , E . A . ( 1995 ) . Impaired fear conditioning following unilateral temporal lobectomy in humans . Journal of Neuroscience , 15 , 6846 - 6855 . Lane , R . D . , Ahern , G . L . , Schwartz , G . E . , & Kaszniak , A . W . ( 1997 ) . Is alexithymia the emotional equiv - alent of blindsight ? Biological Psychiatry , 42 , 834 - 844 . Lane , R . D . , Quinlan , D . M . , Schwartz , G . E . , Walker , P . A . , & Zeitlin , S . B . ( 1990 ) . The Levels of Emotion - al Awareness Scale : A cognitive - developmental measure of emotion . Journal of Personality Assess - ment , 55 , 124 - 134 . Lane , R . D . , & Schwartz , G . E . ( 1987 ) . Levels of emotional awareness : A cognitive - developmental theory and its application to psychopathology . American Journal of Psychiatry , 144 , 133 - 143 . Lane , R . D . , & Schwartz , G . E . ( 1992 ) . Levels of emotional awareness : Implications for psychotherapeu - tic integration . Journal of Psychotherapy Integration , 2 , 1 - 18 . Lang , P . J . ( 1968 ) . Fear reduction and fear behavior : Problems in treating a construct . In J . M . Schlein ( Ed . ) , Research in psychotherapy ( vol . 3 , pp . 90 - 103 ) . Washington , D . C . : American Psychological As - sociation . Lang , P . J . ( 1971 ) . The application of psychophysiological methods to the study of psychotherapy and behavior modification . In A . E . Bergin & S . L . Garfield ( Eds . ) , Handbook of psychotherapy and behavior change ( pp . 75 - 125 ) . New York : Wiley . Lang , P . J . ( 1978 ) . Anxiety : Towards a psychophysiological definition . In H . S . Akiskal & W . H . Webb ( Eds . ) , Psychiatric diagnosis : Exploration of biological predictors ( pp . 365 - 389 ) . New York : Spectrum . Lang , P . J . ( 1988 ) . What are the data of emotion ? In V . Hamilton , G . H . Bower , & N . H . Frijda ( Eds . ) , Cognitive perspectives on emotion and motivation ( pp . 173 - 181 ) . NATO ASI Series D : Behavioural and Social Sciences . Dordrecht , The Netherlands : Kluwer . Lang , P . J . , & Lazovik , A . D . ( 1963 ) . Experimental desensitization of a phobia . Journal of Abnormal & Social Psychology , 66 , 519 - 525 . Lang , P . J . , Lazovik , & Reynolds . ( 1965 ) . Desensitization , suggestibility , and pseudotherapy . Journal of Abnormal Psychology , 70 , 395 - 402 . Lang , P . J . , Rice , D . G . , & Sternbach , R . A . ( 1972 ) . The psychophysiology of emotion . In N . S . Greenfield & R . A . Sternbach ( Eds . ) , Handbook of psychophysiology ( pp . 623 - 644 ) . New York : Holt , Rinehart , & Winston . Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 58 | P a g e Laurence , J . - R . , Perry , C . , & Kihlstrom , J . F . ( 1983 ) . " Hidden observer " phenomena in hypnosis : An experimental creation ? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 44 , 163 - 169 . Lazarus , R . S . ( 1982 ) . Thoughts on the relations between emotion and cognition . American Psycholo - gist , 37 , 1019 - 1024 . Lazarus , R . S . ( 1984 ) . On the primacy of cognition . American Psychologist , 39 , 124 - 129 . Lazarus , R . S . ( 1991 ) . Emotion and adaptation . New York : Oxford University Press . Lazarus , R . S . , Smith , C . A . ( 1988 ) . Knowledge and appraisal in the cognition - emotion relationship . Cognition & Emotion , 2 , 281 - 300 . LeDoux , J . ( 1994 ) . Emotional processing , but not emotions , can occur unconsciously . In P . Ekman & R . J . Davidson ( Eds . ) , The nature of emotion : Fundamental questions ( pp . 291 - 292 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . LeDoux , J . ( 1995 ) . Emotion : Clues from the brain . Annual Review of Psychology , 46 , 209 - 235 . LeDoux , J . ( 1996 ) . The emotional brain : The mysterious underpinnings of emotional life . New York : Simon & Schuster . LeDoux , J . E . , Wilson , D . H . , & Gazzaniga , M . S . ( 1977 ) . Manipulao - spatial aspects of cerebral lateraliza - tion : Cues to the origin of lateralization . Neuropsychologia , 15 , 743 - 750 . Lepper , M . R . , Greene , D . , & Nisbett , R . E . ( 1973 ) . Undermining children ' s intrinsic interest with extrin - sic reward : A test of the " overjustification " hypothesis . Journal of Personality & Social Psychology , 28 , 129 - 137 . Levenson , R . W . ( 1988 ) . Emotion and the autonomic nervous system : A prospectus for research on autonomic specificity . In H . Wagner ( Ed . ) , Social psychophysiology and emotion : Theory and clinical applications ( pp . 17 - 42 ) . London : Wiley . Levenson , R . W . ( 1992 ) . Autonomic nervous system differences among emotions . Psychological Science , 3 , 23 - 27 . Levenson , R . W . , Carstensen , L . L . , Friesen , W . V . , & Ekman , P . ( 1991 ) . Emotion , physiology , and ex - pression in old age . Psychology & Aging , 6 , 28 - 35 . Levenson , R . W . , Ekman , P . , & Friesen , W . V . ( 1990 ) . Voluntary facial action generates emotion - specific autonomic nervous system activity . Psychophysiology , 27 , 363 - 384 . Levenson , R . W . , Ekman , P . , Heider , K . , & Friesen , W . V . ( 1988 ) . Emotion and autonomic nervous sys - tem activity in the Minangkabau of West Sumatra . Journal of Personality & Social Psychology , 62 , 972 - 988 . Leventhal , H . ( 1980 ) . Toward a comprehensive theory of emotion . In L . Berkowitz ( Ed . ) , Advances in experimental social psychology ( Vol . 13 , pp . 139 - 207 ) . New York : Academic . Leventhal , H . ( 1984 ) . A perceptual - motor theory of emotion . In K . R . Scherer & P . Ekman ( Eds . ) , Ap - proaches to emotion ( pp . 271 - 291 ) . Hillsdale , N . J . : Erlbaum . Levinson , B . ( 1965 ) . States of awareness during general anaesthesia . British Journal of Anaesthesia , 37 , 544 - 546 . Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 59 | P a g e Levitt , E . E . ( 1967 ) . The psychology of anxiety . Indianapolis : Bobbs - Merrill . Levitt , E . E . , & Chapman , R . H . ( 1979 ) . Hypnosis as a research method . In E . Fromm & R . E . Shor ( Eds . ) , Hypnosis : Developments in research and new perspectives ( pp . 85 - 114 ) . New York : Aldine . Lewandowsky , S . , Dunn , J . C . , & Kirsner , K . ( Eds . ) . ( 1989 ) . Implicit memory : Theoretical issues . Hillsdale , N . J . : Erlbaum . Lewicki , P . ( 1986 ) . Nonconscious social information processing . New York : Academic Press . Lewicki , P . , Czyzewska , M . , & Hoffman , H . ( 1987 ) . Unconscious acquisition of complex procedural knowledge . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 13 , 52 - 530 . Light , L . L . , & Singh , A . ( 1987 ) . Implicit and explicit memory in young and older adults . Journal of Ex - perimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 13 , 531 - 541 . Light , L . L . , Singh , A . , & Capps , J . L . ( 1986 ) . Dissociation of memory and awareness in young and older adults . Journal of Clinical & Experimental Neuropsychology , 8 , 62 - 74 . Lindsay , D . S . , & Read , J . D . ( 1994 ) . Psychotherapy and memories of childhood sexual abuse : A cogni - tive perspective . Applied Cognitive Psychology , 8 , 281 - 338 . Lindsay , D . S . , & Read , J . D . ( 1995 ) . " Memory work " and recovered memories of childhood sexual abuse : Scientific evidence and public , professional , and personal issues . Psychology , Public Policy , & the Law , 1 , 846 - 908 . Luria , A . R . ( 1932 ) . The nature of human conflicts . New York : Liveright . MacLean , P . D . ( 1949 ) . Psychosomatic disease and the " visceral brain " : Recent developments bearing on the Papez theory of emotion . Psychosomatic Medicine , 11 , 338 - 353 . MacLean , P . D . ( 1952 ) . Some psychiatric implications of physiological studies on frontotemporal portion of limbic system ( visceral brain ) . Electroencephalography & Clinical Neurophysiology , 4 , 407 - 418 . MacLean , P . D . ( 1970 ) . The triune brain , emotion and scientific bias . In F . O . Schmitt ( Ed . ) , The neuros - ciences : Second study program ( pp . 336 - 349 ) . New York : Rockefeller University Press . MacLean , P . D . ( 1990 ) . The triune brain in evolution : Role in paleocerebral functions . New York : Ple - num . Macmillan , M . ( 1996 ) . Freud reevaluated : The completed arc . Rev . ed . Cambridge , Ma . : MIT Press . Mandler , G . , Nakamura , Y . , & Van Zandt , B . J . S . ( 1987 ) . Nonspecific effects of exposure on stimuli that cannot be recognized . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 13 , 646 - 648 . Marcel , A . ( 1983 ) . Conscious and unconscious perception : Experiments on visual masking and word recognition . Cognitive Psychology , 15 , 197 - 237 . Marshall , J . C . , & Halligan , P . W . ( 1988 ) . Blindsight and insight in visuo - spatial neglect . Nature , 336 , 766 - 767 . McGlashan , T . H . , Evans , F . J . , & Orne , M . T . ( 1969 ) . The nature of ypnotic analgesia and the placebo response to experimental pain . Psychosomatic Medicine , 31 , 227 - 246 . Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 60 | P a g e Mednick , S . ( 1962 ) . The associative basis of the creative process . Psychological Review , 69 , 220 - 232 . Meichenbaum , D . ( 1977 ) . Cognitive behavior modification : An integrative approach . New York : Ple - num . Melzack , R . ( 1975 ) . The McGill Pain Questionnaire : Major properties and scoring methods . Pain , 1 , 277 - 299 . Melzack , R . , & Torgerson , W . S . ( 1971 ) . On the language of pain . Anesthesiology , 34 , 50 - 59 . Merikle , P . M . , & Reingold , E . M . ( 1990 ) . Recognition and lexical decision without detection : Uncons - cious perception ? Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Perception & Performance , 16 , 574 - 583 . Merikle , P . M . , & Daneman , M . ( 1996 ) . Memory for unconsciously perceived events : Evidence from anesthetized patients . Consciousness & Cognition , 5 , 525 - 541 . Miller , M . E . , & Bowers , K . S . ( 1986 ) . Hypnotic analgesia and stress inoculation in the reduction of pain . Journal of Abnormal Psychology , 95 , 6 - 14 . Miller , M . E . , & Bowers , K . S . ( 1993 ) . Hypnotic analgesia : Dissociated experience or dissociated control ? Journal of Abnormal Psychology , 102 , 29 - 38 . Mineka , S . ( 1979 ) . The role of fear in theories of avoidance learning , flooding , and extinction . Psycho - logical Bulletin , 86 , 985 - 1010 . Mineka , S . ( 1985 ) . Animal models of anxiety - based disorders : Their usefulness and limitations . In A . H . Tuma & J . Maser ( Eds . ) , Anxiety and the anxiety disorders ( a ) Mineka , S . ( 1985 ) . The frightful complexity of the origins of fears . In F . R . Brush & J . B . Overmeier ( Eds . ) , Affect , conditioning , and cognition : Essays on the determinants of behavior ( pp . 55 - 73 ) . Hillsdale , N . J . : Erlbaum . ( b ) Mineka , S . ( 1992 ) . Evolutionary memories , emotional processing , and the emotional disorders . In D . Medin ( Ed . ) , The psychology of learning and motivation ( Vol . 28 , pp . 161 - 206 ) . San Diego : Academic . Moreland , R . W . , & Zajonc , R . B . ( 1977 ) . Is stimulus recognition a necessary condition for the occur - rence of exposure effects ? Journal of Personality & Social Psychology , 35 , 191 - 199 . Moreland , R . W . , & Zajonc , R . B . ( 1979 ) . Exposure effects may not depend on stmulus recognition . Journal of Personality & Social Psychology , 37 , 1085 - 1089 . Mowrer , O . H . ( 1947 ) . On the dual nature of learning - - A renterpretation of " conditioning " and " prob - lem - solving " . Harvard Educational Review , 17 , 102 - 148 . Mulvaney , S . , Kihlstrom , J . F . , Figueredo , A . J . , & Schwartz , G . E . ( 1992 ) . A continuous measure of re - pressive style . EGAD Quarterly , 1 , 40 - 49 . Murphy , S . T . , & Zajonc , R . B . ( 1993 ) . Affect , cognition , and awareness : Affective priming with subop - timal and optimal stimulus . Journal of Personality & Social Psychology , 64 , 723 - 739 . Murray , H . A . ( 1938 ) . Explorations in personality . New York : Oxford University Press . Neale , A . , & Hesketh , B . ( 1997 ) . Episodic knowledge and implicit learning . Psychonomic Bulletin and Review , 4 , 24 - 37 . Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 61 | P a g e Nelson , T . O . ( 1978 ) . Detecting small amounts of information in memory : Savings for nonrecognized items . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Learning & Memory , 4 , 453 - 468 . Nemiah , J . C . ( 1979 ) . Dissociative amnesia : A clinical and theoretical reconsideration . In J . F . Kihlstrom & F . J . Evans ( Eds . ) , Functional disorders of memory ( pp . 303 - 323 ) . Hillsdale , N . J . : Erlbaum . Nemiah , J . C . , Freyberger , H . , & Sifneos , P . E . ( 1981 ) . Alexithymia : A view of the psychosomatic process . In O . Hill ( Ed . ) , Modern trends in psychosomatic medicine ( Vol . 3 , pp . 430 - 439 ) . London : But - terworths . Nemiah , J . C . , & Sifneos , P . E . ( 1970 ) . Affect and fantasy in patients with psychosomatic disorders . In O . Hill ( Ed . ) , Modern trends in psychosomatic medicine ( Vol . 2 , pp . 26 - 34 ) . London : Butterworths . Niedenthal , P . M . ( 1990 ) . Implicit perception and affective information . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 26 , 505 - 527 . Niedenthal , P . M . ( 1992 ) . Affect and social perception . In R . F . Bornstein & T . S . Pittman ( Eds . ) , Percep - tion without awareness : Cognitive , clinical , and social perspectives ( pp . 211 - 235 ) . New York : Guilford . Niedenthal , P . M . , Setterlund , M . B . , & Jones , D . E . ( 1994 ) . Emotional organization of perceptual memo - ry . In P . M . Niedenthal & S . Kitayama ( Eds . ) , The heart ' s eye : Emotional influences in perception and attention ( pp . 87 - 113 ) . San Diego : Academic Press . Niedenthal , P . M . , & Showers , C . J . ( 1991 ) . The perception and processing of affective information and its influence on social judgment . In J . Forgas ( Ed . ) , Affect and social judgment ( pp . 125 - 143 ) . Oxford : Pergamon . Nissen , M . J . , & Bullemer , P . ( 1987 ) . Attentional requirements of learning : Evidence from performance measures . Cognitive Psychology , 19 , 1 - 32 . Norton , G . R . , DiNardo , P . A . , & Barlow , D . H . ( 1983 ) . Predicting phobics ' response to therapy : A consid - eration of subjective , physiological , and behavioural measures . Canadian Psychology , 24 , 50 - 58 . Ohman , A . ( 1999 ) . Distinguishing unconscious from conscious emotional processes : Methodological considerations and theoretical implications . In T . Dalgleish & M . Power ( Eds ) , Handbook of cognition and emotion ( pp . 321 - 352 ) . Chichester , U . K . : Wiley . Ohman , A . , Dimberg , U . , & Esteves , F . ( 1989 ) . Preattentive activation of aversive emotions . In T . Ar - cher & L . G . Nilsson ( Eds . ) , Aversion , avoidance , and anxiety ( pp . 169 - 193 ) . Hillsdale , N . J . : Erlbaum . Ohman , A . , & Soares , J . ( 1993 ) . On the automaticity of phobic fear : Conditioned skin conductance responses to masked phobic stimuli . Journal of Abnormal Psychology , 102 , 121 - 132 . Ohman , A . , & Soares , J . J . F . ( 1994 ) . Unconscious anxiety : Phobic responses to masked stimuli . Journal of Abnormal Psychology , 403 , 231 - 240 . Ohman , A . , & Soares , J . J . F . ( 1998 ) . Emotional conditioning to masked stimuli : Expectancies for aver - sive outcomes following non - recognized fear - relevant stimuli . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 127 , 69 - 82 . Orne , M . T . ( 1962 ) . On the social psychology of the psychological experiment : With particular refer - ence to demand characteristics and teir implications . American Psychologist , 17 , 776 - 783 . Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 62 | P a g e Orne , M . T . ( 1979 ) . On the simulating subject as a quasi - control group in hypnosis research : What , why , and how . In E . Fromm & R . E . Shor ( Eds . ) , Hypnosis : Developments in research and new pers - pectives ( pp . 399 - 444 ) . New York : Aldine . Ortony , A . , Clore , G . L . , & Collins , A . ( 1988 ) . The cognitive structure of emotions . New York : Cam - bridge University Press . Papez , J . W . ( 1937 ) . A proposed mechanism of emotion . Archives of Neurology & Psychiatry , 79 , 217 - 224 . Papka , M . , Ivry , R . B . , & Woodruff - Pak , D . S . ( 1996 ) . Eyeblink classical conditioning and awareness re - visited . Psychological Science , 8 , 404 - 408 . Pierce , C . S . , & Jastrow , J . ( 1885 ) . On small differences in sensation . Memoirs of the National Academy of Sciences , 3 , 75 - 83 . Prince , J . D . , & Berenbaum , H . ( 1993 ) . Alexithymia and hedonic capacity . Journal of Research in Per - sonality , 27 , 15 - 22 . Prince , M . ( 1910 ) . The dissociation of a personality . New York : Longmans , Green . Rachman , S . ( 1978 ) . Human fears : A three - system analysis . Scandinavian Journal of Behavior Thera - py , 7 , 237 - 235 . Rachman , S . ( 1981 ) . The primacy of affect : Some theoretical implications . Behaviour Research & Therapy , 19 , 279 - 290 . Rachman , S . ( 1990 ) . Fear and courage . 2nd ed . New York : Freeman . Rachman , S . , & Hodgson , R . ( 1974 ) . I . Synchrony and desynchrony in measures of fear . Behaviour Research & Therapy , 12 , 311 - 318 . Rafal , R . ( 1998 ) . Neglect . In R . Parasuraman ( Ed . ) , The attentive brain ( pp . 489 - 526 ) . Cambridge , Ma . : MIT Press . Rainville , P . , Duncan , G . H . , Price , D . D . , Carrier , B . , & Bushnell , M . C . ( 1997 ) . Pain affect encoded in human anterior cingulate but not somatosensory cortex . Science , 277 , 968 - 971 . Razran , G . ( 1961 ) . The observable unconscious and the inferable conscious in current Soviet psycho - physiology : Interoceptive conditioning , semantic conditioning , and the orienting reflex . Psychological Review , 68 , 81 - 147 . Reber , A . S . ( 1967 ) . Implicit learning of artificial grammars . Journal of Verbal Learning & Verbal Beha - vior , 6 , 855 - 863 . Reber , A . R . ( 1993 ) . Implicit learning and tacit knowledge : An essay on the cognitive unconscious . New York : Oxford University Press . Redington , Volpe , & Gazzaniga . ( 1984 ) . Roediger , H . L . , & McDermott , K . B . ( 1990 ) . Implicit memory in normal human subjects . In F . Boller & J . Graffman ( Eds . ) , Handbook of neuropsychology ( vol . 8 , pp . 63 - 131 ) . Amsterdam : Elsevier . Rosenzweig , S . ( 1938 ) . The experimental study of repression . In H . A . Murray ( Ed . ) , Explorations in personality ( pp . 472 - 490 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 63 | P a g e Rosenzweig , S . , & Mason , G . ( 1934 ) . An experimental study of memory in relation to the theory of repression . British Journal of Psychology , 24 , 247 - 265 . Rosenzweig , S . , & Sarason , S . ( 1942 ) . An experimental study of the triadic hypothesis : Reaction to frustration , ego - defense , and hypnotizability : I . Correlational approach . Character & Personality , 11 , 1 - 19 . Rozin , P . ( 1976 ) . The evolution of intelligence and access to the cognitive unconscious . In E . Stellar & J . M . Sprague ( Eds . ) , Progress in psychobiology and pysiological psychology ( vol . 6 , pp . 3 - 48 ) . New York : Academic . Russell , J . A . ( 1980 ) . A circumplex model of affect . Journal of Personality & Social Psychology , 39 , 1161 - 1178 . Russell , J . L . , Kushner , M . G . , Beitman , B . D . , & Bartels , K . M . ( 1991 ) . Nonfearful panic disorder in neu - rology patients validated by lactate challenge . American Journal of Psychiatry , 148 , 361 - 364 . Sarason , S . , & Rosenzweig , S . ( 1942 ) . An experimental study of the triadic hypothesis : Reaction to frustration , ego defense , and hypnotizability : II . Thematic apperception approach . Character & Perso - nality , 11 , 150 - 165 . Schacter , D . L . ( 1987 ) . Implicit memory : History and current status . Journal of Experimental Psycholo - gy : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 13 , 501 - 518 . Schacter , D . L . ( 1990 ) . Toward a cognitive neuropsychology of awareness : Implicit knowledge and anosognosia . Journal of Clinical & Experimental Neuropsychology , 12 , 155 - 178 . Schacter , D . L . , Kihlstrom , J . F . , Kaszniak , A . W . , & Valdiserri , M . ( 1993 ) . Preserved and impaired mem - ory functions in elderly adults . In J . Cerella , J . Rybash , W . Hoyer , & M . Commons ( Eds . ) , Adult infor - mation processing : Limits on loss ( pp . 327 - 350 ) . New York : Academic . Schacter , D . L . , & Tulving , E . ( 1994 ) . Memory systems 1994 . Cambridge , Ma . : MIT Press . Schachter , S . , & Singer , J . E . ( 1962 ) . Cognitive , social , and physiological determinants of emotional state . Psychological Review , 69 , 379 - 399 . Scherer , K . R . , & Walbott , H . G . ( 1994 ) . Evidence for universality and cultural variation of differential emotion response patterning . Journal of Personality & Social Psychology , 66 , 310 - 328 . Scherer , K . R . , Walbott , H . G . , & Summerfield , A . B . ( Eds . ) . ( 1986 ) . Experiencing emotion : A crosscul - tural study . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Schwarz , N . , & Clore , G . L . ( 1983 ) . Mood , misttribution , and judgments of well - being : Informative and directive functions of affective states . Journal of Personality & Social Psychology , 45 , 513 - 523 . Schwarz , N . , & Clore , G . L . ( 1988 ) . How do I feel about it ? The informative function of mood . In K . Fiedler & J . Forgas ( Eds . ) , Affect , cognition , and social behavior ( pp . 44 - 62 ) . Toronto : Hogrefe . Seamon , J . J . , Brody , N . , & Kauff , D . M . ( 1983 ) . Affective discrimination of stimuli that are not recog - nized : Effects of shadowing , masking , and cerebral laterality . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 9 , 544 - 555 . ( a ) Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 64 | P a g e Seamon , J . J . , Brody , N . , & Kauff , D . M . ( 1983 ) . Affective discrimination of stimuli that are not recog - nized : II . Effect of delay between study and test . Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society , 21 , 187 - 189 . ( b ) Sears , R . R . ( 1932 ) . Experimental study of hypnotic anesthesia . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 15 , 1 - 22 . Seger , C . A . ( 1994 ) . Implicit learning . Psychological Bulletin , 115 , 163 - 196 . Seligman , M . E . P . ( 1971 ) . Phobias and preparedness . Behavior Therapy , 2 , 307 - 320 . Shames , V . A . ( 1994 ) . Is there such a thing as implicit problem solving ? Unpublished doctoral disserta - tion , University of Arizona . Shanks , D . R . , & St . John , M . F . ( 1994 ) . Characteristics of dissociable human learning systems . Beha - vioral & Brain Sciences , 17 , 367 - 448 . Shobe , K . K . , & Kihlstrom , J . F . ( 1998 , in press ) . Interrogative suggestibility and " memory work " . In M . I . Eisen , G . S . Goodman , & J . Quas ( Eds . ) , Memory and suggestibility in the forensic interview ( pp . xxx - xxx ) . Mahwah , N . J . : Erlbaum . Shor , R . E . ( 1962 ) . Physiological effects of painful stimulation during ypnotic analgesia under condi - tions designed to minimize anxiety . International Journal of Clinical & Experimental Hypnosis , 10 , 183 - 202 . Smith , C . A . , & Ellsworth , P . C . ( 1985 ) . Patterns of cognitive appraisal in emotion . Journal of Personality & Social Psychology , 48 , 813 - 838 . Spanos , N . P . ( 1986 ) . Hypnotic behavior : A social - psychological interpretation of amnesia , analgesia , and " trance logic " . Behavioral & Brain Sciences , 9 , 449 - 502 . Spanos , N . P . , Jones , B . , & Malfara , A . ( 1982 ) . Hypnotic deafness : Now you hear it - - Now you still hear it . Journal of Abnormal Psychology , 91 , 75 - 77 . Sperry , R . W . , Gazzaniga , M . S . , & Bogen , J . E . ( 1969 ) . Inter - hemispheric relationships : The neocortical commissures ; Syndromes of hemisphere disconnection . In P . J . Vinken & G . W . Bruyn ( Eds . ) , Handbook of clinical neurology ( vol . 4 , pp . 273 - 290 ) . Amsterdam : North - Holland . Spiegel , D . , & Albert , L . H . ( 1983 ) . Naloxone fails to reverse hypnotic alleviation of chronic pain . Psy - chopharmacology , 81 , 140 - 143 . Squire , L . R . , Shimamura , A . P . , & Graf , P . ( 1985 ) . Independence of recognition memory and priming effects : A neuropsychological analysis . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , & Cog - nition , 11 , 37 - 44 . Stern , J . A . , Brown , M . , Ulett , G . A . , & Sletten , I . ( 1977 ) . A comparison of hypnosis , acupuncture , mor - phine , valium , aspirin , and placebo in the management of experimentally induced pain . In W . E . Ed - monston ( Ed . ) , Conceptual and investigative approaches to hypnosis and hypnotic phenomena . Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences , 296 , 175 - 193 . Stoyva , J . , & Kamiya , J . ( 1968 ) . Electrophysiological studies of dreaming as the prototype of a new strategy in the study of consciousness . Psychological Review , 75 , 192 - 205 . Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 65 | P a g e Suppes , P . , & Warren , H . ( 1975 ) . On the generation and classification of defence mechanisms . Inter - national Journal of Psycho - analysis , 56 , 405 - 414 . Sutcliffe , J . P . ( 1961 ) . Credulous " and " skeptical " views of hypnotic phenomena : Experiments in esthe - sia , hallucination , and delusion . Journal of Abnormal & Social Psychology , 62 , 189 - 200 . Taylor , G . J . ( 1984 ) . Alexithymia : Concept , measurement , and implications for treatment . American Journal of Psychiatry , 141 , 725 - 732 . Taylor , G . J . , & Bagby , R . M . ( 1988 ) . Measurement of alexithymia : Recommendations for clinical prac - tice and future research . Psychiatric Clinics of North America , 11 , 351 - 366 . Taylor , G . J . , Bagby , R . M . , & Parker , J . D . A . ( 1997 ) . Disorders of affect regulation : Alexithymia in medi - cal and psychiatric illness . Cambridge , U . K . : Cambridge University Press . Taylor , G . J . , & Taylor , H . L . ( 1997 ) . Alexithymia . In M . McCallum , & W . E . Piper ( Eds . ) , Psychological mindedness : A contemporary understanding ( pp . 77 - 104 ) . Mahwah , N . J . : Erlbaum . Taylor , J . A . ( 1953 ) . A personality scale of manifest anxiety . Journal of Abnormal & Social Psychology , 48 , 285 - 290 . TenHouten , W . D . , Hoppe , K . D . , Bogen , J . E . , & Walter , D . O . ( 1985 ) . Alexithymia and the split brain : I . Lexical - level content analysis . Psychotherapy & Psychosomatics , 43 , 202 - 208 . TenHouten , W . D . , Hoppe , K . D . , Bogen , J . E . , & Walter , D . O . ( 1986 ) . Alexithymia : An experimental study of cerebral commissurotomy patients and normal control subjects . American Journal of Psychia - try , 143 , 312 - 316 . TenHouten , W . D . , Walter , D . O . , Hoppe , K . D . , & Bogen , J . E . ( 1988 ) . Alexithymia and the split brain : VI . Electroencephalographic correlates of anexithymia . Psychiatric Clinics of North America , 11 , 317 - 329 . Terr , L . ( 1994 ) . Unchained memories : True stories of traumatic memories , lost and found . New York : Basic Books . Thomas , M . R . , & Rapp , M . S . ( 1977 ) . Physiological , behavioral and cognitive changes resulting from flooding in a monosymptomatic phobia . Behaviour Research & Therapy , 15 , 304 - 306 . Thurstone , L . L . ( 1931 ) . The measurement of attitudes . Journal of Abnormal & Social Psychology , 4 , 25 - 29 . Tobias , B . A . , Kihlstrom , J . F . , & Schacter , D . L . ( 1990 ) . Emotion and implicit memory . In S . - A . Chris - tianson ( Ed . ) , Handbook of emotion and memory ( in press ) . Hillsdale , N . J . : Erlbaum . Traub - Werner , D . ( 1989 ) . Anxiety in a patient during an unconsciously experienced earth tremor . American Journal of Psychiatry , 146 , 679 - 680 . Turpin , G . ( 1991 ) . The psychophysiological assessment of anxiety disorders Three - systems measure - ment and beyond . Psychological Assessment , 3 , 365 - 375 . Underwood , G . ( 1976 ) . Semantic interference from unattended printed words . British Journal of Psy - chology , 67 , 327 - 338 . Ungerleider , L . G . , & Haxby , J . ( 1994 ) . What and where in the uman brain . Current Opinion in Neurobi - ology , 4 , 157 - 165 . Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 66 | P a g e van der Kolk , McFarlane , & Weisaeth . ( 1996 ) . Vermilyea , J . A . , Boice , R . , & Barlow , D . H . ( 1984 ) . Rachman and Hodgson ( 1974 ) a decade later : ow do desynchronous response systems relate to the treatment of agoraphobia ? Behaviour Research & Therapy , 22 , 615 - 621 . Warrington , E . K . , & Weiskrantz , L . ( 1968 ) . New method of testing long - term retention with special reference to amnesic patients . Nature , 217 , 972 - 974 . Watson , D . , & Tellegen , A . ( 1985 ) . Toward a consensual structure of mood . Psychological Bulletin , 98 , 219 - 235 . Watson , J . ( 1888 ) . The philosophy of Kant : As contained in extracts from his own writings . New York : Macmillan . Weinberger , D . A . ( 1990 ) . The construct validity of the repressive coping style . In J . L . Singer ( Ed . ) , Repression and dissociation : Implications for personality theory , psychopathology , and health ( pp . 337 - 386 ) . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Weinberger , D . A . ( 1997 ) . Distress and self - restraint as measures of adjustment across the life span : Confirmatory factor analyses in clinical and nonclinical samples . Psychological Assessment , 9 , 132 - 135 . Weinberger , D . A . , & Schwartz , G . E . ( 1990 ) . Distress and restraint as superordinate dimensions of self - reported adjustment : A typological perspective . Journal of Personality , 58 , 381 - 417 . Weinberger , D . A . , Schwartz , G . E . , & Davidson , R . J . ( 1979 ) . Low - anxious , high - anxious , and repressive coping styles : Psychometric patterns and behavioral and physiological responses to stress . Journal of Abnormal Psychology , 88 , 369 - 380 . Weiskrantz , L . ( 1986 ) . Blindsight : A case study and implications . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Willingham , D . B . , Greeley , T . , & Bardone , A . M . ( 1993 ) . Dissociation in a serial response time task us - ing a recognition measure : Comment on Perruchet and Amorin ( 1992 ) . Journal of Experimental Psy - chology : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 19 , 1047 - 1060 . Wilson , K . G . , Sandler , L . S . , & Asmundson , G . J . ( 1993 ) . Fearful and non - fearful panic attacks in a stu - dent population . Behaviour Research & Therapy , 31 , 407 - 411 . Wilson , W . R . ( 1979 ) . Feeling more than we can know : Exposure effects without learning . Journal of Personality & Social Psychology , 37 , 811 - 821 . Wittenbrink , B . , Judd , C . M . , & Park , B . ( 1997 ) . Evidence for racial prejudice at the implicit level and its relationship with questionnaire measures . Journal of Personality & Social Psychology , 72 , 262 - 274 . Zajonc , R . B . ( 1968 ) . The attutidinal effects of mere exposure . Journal of Personality & Social Psychol - ogy , Monograph Supplement 9 ( 2 , Pt . 2 ) . Zajonc , R . B . ( 1980 ) . Feeling and thinking : Preferences need no inferences . American Psychologist , 35 , 151 - 175 . Zajonc , R . B . ( 1984 ) . On primacy of affect . In K . R . Scherer & P . Ekman ( Eds . ) , Approaches to emotion ( pp . 259 - 270 ) . Hillsdale , N . J . : Erlbaum . ( a ) Zajonc , R . B . ( 1984 ) . On the primacy of affect . American Psychologist , 39 , 117 - 123 . ( b ) Retrieved on 21 September 2011 from http : / / ist - socrates . berkeley . edu / ~ kihlstrm / Eich2000 . htm 67 | P a g e Zajonc , R . B . ( 1994 ) . Evidence for nonconscious emotions . In P . Ekman & R . J . Davidson ( Eds . ) , The nature of emotion : Fundamental questions ( pp . 293 - 297 ) . New York : Oxford University Press .