110 | FEBRUARY 2004 | VOLUME 5 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S Proteins of the secretory pathway can be attached to membrane structures by various mechanisms . There are several classes of transmembrane protein and , as their name implies , these polypeptides span the lipid bilayer . But proteins can also be targeted to the mem - brane by post - translational modification with lipids . Most of these modifications take place in the cyto - plasm and involve the addition of ISOPRENOIDS or fatty acids to the protein , but palmitate and cholesterol can also be attached to proteins in the lumen of the endo - plasmic reticulum ( ER ) 1 . These modifications help to target the proteins to the membrane and , in some cases , to particular membrane microdomains 2 . Another class of lipid modification can occur on the lumenal side of the ER membrane — the attach - ment of a glycosylphosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) anchor . GPI - anchored proteins are found mainly on the plasma membrane , but they can also be internal - ized by endocytosis ( see below ) . On average , ~ 0 . 5 % of cellular proteins in eukaryotes are GPI - anchored 3 . A GPI anchor is attached to certain proteins ( FIG . 1a ) by the action of a GPI transamidase . This enzyme cleaves the peptide bond at the GPI - anchor attachment site — the ω - site , which is near the carboxy - terminal end of the protein — and creates an amide linkage between the ethanolamine of the GPI and the newly generated carboxyl group at the end of the cleaved precursor protein . The attachment site is the first of three contiguous amino acids that have short side chains . It must be followed by a short spacer sequence , which is usually unstructured , and then by a carboxy - terminal , hydrophobic signal sequence ( FIG . 1b ) . GPI anchors are diverse structures , but have a com - mon core structure ( FIG . 1c ) that is conserved among all species that have so far been investigated 4 , 5 . There is vari - ability in the side chains and lipid moieties of GPI anchors , but the physiological significance of this variabil - ity is an outstanding issue . The modifications of the lipid moieties ( some of which are shown in FIG . 1c ) could be essential for the physical properties of GPI - anchored pro - teins in the membrane ( see below ) . For example , in a par - ticular stage of the life cycle of the protozoan parasite Trypanosoma brucei , the palmitic - acid residues of the GPI anchors are replaced with myristic - acid residues before the anchor is attached to proteins 6 . This modification might be specific for protozoa , and has been exploited to identify inhibitors of this reaction 7 . In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae , the diacylglycerol moieties of the GPI anchors are extensively replaced with ceramides after attachment of the GPI anchor to the protein 8 , 9 . Other organisms also use ceramide modification of GPI anchors 10 , but additional modifications , such as the replacement of an acyl linkage with an alkyl linkage 11 , also occur . Unfortunately , we still know very little concerning the structures of side chains and lipid moieties on the large number of GPI - anchored proteins . For example , the GPI anchor on prion glycoproteins is modified with sialic acid , and this could allow the protein to be more mobile in the plane of the lipid bilayer 12 . Important issues remain unsolved , such as how the side chain and lipid moieties are chosen , where they are added and / or remodelled , and what roles these structures have in the physical properties of the GPI - anchored protein in the membrane . It is prob - able that these modifications have important implications in the trafficking of GPI - anchored proteins . SORTING GPI - ANCHORED PROTEINS Satyajit Mayor * and Howard Riezman § The study of glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored - protein sorting has led to some surprising new findings and concepts . Evidence is accumulating that , during their delivery to the surface , different types of plasma membrane protein might be sorted from each other early in this pathway , in the endoplasmic reticulum . Furthermore , membrane - lipid composition and microdomains might have a role in the process of protein sorting in both the secretory and endocytic pathways . * National Centre for Biological Sciences , UAS - GKVK Campus , Bangalore 560065 , India . § Department of Biochemistry , University of Geneva , Sciences II , 30 quai Ernest Ansermet , CH - 1211 Geneva , Switzerland . e - mails : mayor @ ncbs . res . in ; Howard . Riezman @ biochem . unige . ch doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm1309 ISOPRENOIDS Compounds that are derived from isoprene ( 2 - methylbuta - 1 , 3 - diene ) linked together in head - to - tail or tail - to - tail conformations and that comprise farnesyl and geranylgeranyl molecules that are used in the covalent modification ofproteins on cysteine residues . © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 5 | FEBRUARY 2004 | 111 R E V I E W S development , and mutants of GPI synthesis have an embryonic - lethal phenotype 15 , perhaps because several cell - adhesion proteins — which are essential during var - ious stages of development — are GPI - anchored . Somatic mutation of the PIGA gene is a key event lead - ing to paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria , an acquired haematopoietic stem - cell disorder 16 . PIGA is located on the X chromosome and encodes a subunit of the GPI - N - acetylglucosamine transferase , which catalyses the first step in GPI - anchor synthesis . When GPI - anchored proteins also have very diverse func - tions . In fungi , synthesis of GPI anchors is essential for viability , probably because their cell wall mannoproteins require a GPI anchor so that they can be covalently incorporated into the cell wall 13 , 14 . In other lower eukaryotes , such as protozoa , GPI - anchored proteins have an important role in cell viability and defence against the host immune system 4 , and are among the most abundant cell - surface proteins in these organisms . In animal cells , GPI - anchored proteins are important in Figure 1 | GPI - anchored - protein precursor and anchor structure . The disposition of GPI - anchored proteins with respect to the membrane , and the conserved core structure of the GPI anchor are shown . a | GPI - anchored proteins are embedded in the extracellular or lumenal leaflet of membranes through their glycolipid moieties and are not directly accessible from the cytosolic face of the membrane . b | GPI - anchored proteins are synthesized as precursors with a cleavable , hydrophobic amino - terminal signal sequence that targets the protein to the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) and a cleavable , carboxy - terminal signal sequence that directs GPI anchoring . The GPI - anchoring signal consists of a hydrophobic region separated from the GPI - attachment site ( ω - site ) by a hydrophilic spacer region . Amino - acid residues with small side chains are highly preferred for the two amino acids that follow the ω - site . c | The GPI core structure is shown . The conserved core consists of ethanolamine phosphate in an amide linkage to the carboxyl terminus of the protein , three mannose residues ( orange ) , glucosamine ( blue ) and phosphatidylinositol ( purple ) . It can be modified and is subject to various remodelling reactions of the lipid moiety . Variations can occur by addition of extra sugars or ethanolamine phosphates to the mannose residues ; acylation of the inositol ring ; changes in the fatty acids ( length , saturation , hydroxylation ) , or their types of linkage to the glycerol backbone ( acyl to alkyl ) ; or remodelling of the entire diacylglycerol to ceramide . Lumen of the ER cell surface a GPI - anchored protein in the membrane Asp C O NH CH 2 CH 2 O P O O – O O P O O O – H 2 C HC C CH 2 C ( CH 2 ) 12 O ( CH 2 ) 12 O CH 3 CH 3 O O Sugar modifications Attachment of sugars or phosphoethanolamine Lipid modifications • Acylation of inositol ring • Fatty - acid exchange or modification ( changes in saturation , hydroxylation , linkage ) • Lipid - backbone exchange ( DAG → ceramide ) Mannose Glucosamine Inositol Signal peptidase GPI protein transamidase Mature protein Hydrophobic region Spacer region + + ω ω ω 1 2 b Structure of the GPI - anchored - protein precursor c GPI core structure © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup 112 | FEBRUARY 2004 | VOLUME 5 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S surface ( BOX 1 ) are the subjects of this review . We will also discuss the nature of the interaction of GPI - anchored proteins with the membrane and their associ - ation with specialized lipid microdomains that are often called lipid rafts ( BOX 2 ) . Sorting GPI - anchored proteins : a dilemma Lumenal and membrane proteins of organelles involved in secretory / endocytic pathways are first synthesized and localized to the ER , from where they are sorted to their final destinations . In fact , many proteins of this pathway then continue to cycle between various stations of the secretory / endocytic pathway . There are probably several mechanisms by which these proteins are local - ized , but one of the crucial determinants of this process is the presence of peptide or carbohydrate signals that are contained in , or attached to , the protein itself . In transmembrane proteins , these signals can be found on either side of the prospective transmembrane domain or within this domain itself . Cytosolic - domain - localized signals in transmembrane proteins have been shown to interact with the machinery that is involved in vesicle budding and that is also used in protein sorting and trafficking . In particular , COAT PROTEINS , which are also believed to have an active role in vesicle formation , have been shown to recognize cytosolic sorting signals at var - ious stages of the pathway . Proteins with signals in the lumenal domain — for example , soluble proteins — cannot interact directly with coat proteinsand several cases have been documented in which specific recep - tors link these proteins to the vesicle - trafficking machinery 19 , 20 . Less is known about how signals in transmembrane domains affect protein sorting . GPI - anchored proteins , similar to soluble lumenal proteins , cannot interact directly with cytosolic compo - nents that recognize sorting signals , but nevertheless they are membrane proteins . Therefore they must either interact with proteins that do span the lipid bilayer , or be sorted into vesicles using an alternative mechanism that depends on their particular behaviour in the mem - brane . By either mechanism , GPI - anchored proteins probably contain signals that target them directly from the Golgi compartment to the plasma membrane . These signals could be contained within the GPI anchor itself ( for example , in the hydrophobic and / or glycan portion ) , in the protein moiety , or in N - or O - linked carbohydrates on the GPI - anchored proteins . GPI - anchored proteins and lipid rafts An extremely interesting feature of the GPI - anchoring of proteins is that this mode of membrane attachment confers specific association with detergent - insoluble / detergent - resistant membranes ( DRM ) 21 , which implies an association with a lipid - dependent structural unit that has functional significance 22 . Along with an examination of the sorting and signalling prop - erties of the GPI - anchored proteins , this biochemical characteristic has led to the proposal that GPI - anchored proteins are present in specialized membrane domains that have become known as lipid rafts 23 ( BOX 2 ) . In fact , the history of the role of lipid rafts in cell biology stems GPI - anchored proteins are not anchored , they remain intracellular ( see below ) , and the absence of the GPI - anchored proteins on the cell surface of blood cells leaves these cells unprotected from lysis by the COMPLEMENT system 17 . As alluded to above , prion glyco - proteins also contain a GPI anchor , although this does not seem to be their only mode of attachment to the membrane 12 , 18 . The particular mode of membrane attachment of GPI - anchored proteins , their dual composition of pro - tein and lipid , and their overall localization to the plasma membrane indicates that these proteins might be transported through the cell in ways that are different to those of other secretory proteins . The mechanisms by which GPI - anchored proteins are sorted and trans - ported through the secretory , and numerous endocytic , pathways that are available to molecules at the cell COMPLEMENT Nine interacting serum proteins ( C1 – C9 ) — which are mostly enzymes — that are activated in a coordinated way and participate in bacterial lysis and macrophage chemotaxis . COAT PROTEINS Molecules that form a proteinaceous coating around vesicles that are used in membrane trafficking . They are believed to be important for vesicle formation and recruitment ofcargo into the forming vesicles . Box 1 | An overview of endocytic and recycling pathways Most cell surface molecules seem to be internalized by dynamin - dependent pathways ( see figure ) . These involve clathrin - coated pits , caveolae or RhoA - dependent mechanisms ( see REFS 64 , 83 for recent reviews ) . In the case of the clathrin - coated - pit - mediated pathway , several molecules , such as the transferrin and low - density - lipoprotein receptors — including a small fraction of glycosylphosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) - anchored proteins — are transported from sorting endosomes to the recycling endosomal compartment and / or late endosomes . Receptors and other membrane components in the recycling endosomal compartment are returned to the plasma membrane ; molecules in late endosomes are subsequently degraded in the lysosomes . Available data indicate that the clathrin - independent , but RhoA - dependent , pathway , followed by detergent - resistant membrane ( DRM ) - associated interleukin 2 ( IL2 ) receptors ( see REF . 104 and references therein ) deliver their contents to sorting endosomes . Here , the IL2 - receptor subunits are sorted from each other to different destinations — IL2 α moves towards the sorting endosome , whereas IL2 β moves towards the late endosome . The final destination of the caveolae - mediated pathway is more controversial . Recent studies indicate delivery to a distinct endosomal destination , the caveosome ( REF . 83 ) . To plasma membrane Plasma membrane Nucleus Caveolae Dynamin Caveosome RhoA Clathrincoated pit Sorting endosomes Late endosome Recycling endosome Transferrin receptor Interleukin - 2 - receptor β LDL receptor Low - density lipoprotein ( LDL ) © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 5 | FEBRUARY 2004 | 113 R E V I E W S GPI - anchored protein . Experiments that are designed to study the signals for GPI - anchor attachment , and experi - ments using mutants of GPI synthesis or anchor attach - ment , have shown that there is a tight correlation between GPI - anchor attachment and GPI - anchored - protein transport from the ER to the Golgi . Mutations in the anchor - attachment site or in the hydrophobic GPI - anchoring signal block anchor attachment and GPI - anchored - protein transport to the Golgi compart - ment 33 – 35 . This has led to the hypothesis that the GPI anchor could be a signal for entry into vesicles that are formed using the coatomer COPII . Various studies have been undertaken to address this issue . Experiments in yeast have shown that when cells are deprived of inositol , GPI - anchor synthesis is halted and Gas1 , a GPI - anchored protein , is no longer segre - gated into COPII - coated vesicles 36 . This indicates that anchor attachment is probably required for ER exit and would be consistent with a function for the GPI anchor as an exit signal . However , an alternative explanation is still possible . As the addition of the GPI anchor onto the protein is tightly coupled to the cleavage of the hydrophobic GPI - signal sequence in vivo , the lack of GPI - anchor synthesis results in a non - cleaved protein precursor . This precursor still contains the hydrophobic region , but it is less hydrophobic than a typical trans - membrane domain , and could lead to the precursor being recognized and retained by the quality - control system of the ER . The quality - control system recognizes proteins that are incompletely folded or non - assembled in the ER and retains them there until they can be prop - erly folded or , if this is not possible , they are degraded 37 . The presence of an exposed hydrophobic region in the non - cleaved precursor would probably be indicative of from an effort to understand the particular relationship of sorting and signalling properties of GPI - anchored proteins and their connection with microdomains that are enriched in cholesterol and sphingolipids 24 . However , at this point in time , there is no clear or com - mon definition of lipid rafts , or of how DRM - associa - tion relates to these functional entities 25 . The structure of DRMs is , apparently , not the same as any pre - existing structure , although there might be compositional simi - larities in the protein and lipid components of DRMs and some membrane microdomains ( BOX 2 ) . Here , we use a definition of lipid rafts to imply a specific lipid - dependent structural organization that has functional significance . Insight into the size and structure of this type of organization for GPI - anchored proteins is , at present , the subject of considerable debate and investigation 26 . Data from various biophysical measurements — including FLUORESCENCE RESONANCE ENERGY TRANSFER ( FRET ) 27 – 29 , single - particle - diffusion studies 30 and chemical - crosslinking studies in living cell mem - branes 31 — seem to indicate that the steady - state size of these structures is very small 32 . Such studies esti - mate the size of these structures to be sufficient to contain only a few GPI - anchored proteins , and there - fore these ‘lipid rafts’ are unlikely to be the entities that carry out sorting and signalling functions . So , if lipid rafts exist as functional structures in mem - branes , they would have to be reorganized into larger - scale units to have roles in sorting or signalling . GPI anchors as putative ER exit signals The GPI anchor is attached to the ER membrane rapidly after completion of translation of the prospective FLUORESCENCE RESONANCE ENERGY TRANSFER ( FRET ) . The non - radiative transfer ofenergy from a donor fluorophore to an acceptor fluorophore that is typically < 80 Å away . FRET will only occur between fluorophores in which the emission spectrum ofthe donor has a significant overlap with the excitation ofthe acceptor . Box 2 | Lipid rafts , detergent - resistant membranes and liquid - ordered phases In membranes of living cells , a working definition of lipid rafts could be “…a membrane microdomain , with a particular lipid composition , the formation of which is , at least in part , dependent upon lipid – lipid interactions” . No complete and clear demonstration of such structures has been presented so far , although there are good reasons to think that they exist 105 . In artificial membranes , differences in lipid composition give rise to the physical - property - dependent coexistence of equilibrium phases , which are rigorously defined as liquid - ordered and liquid - disordered entities 105 , 106 . ( The physical properties in question include surface pressure , osmotic gradient , pH , ionic composition , and so on . ) So similar segregation principles might operate in cell membranes . In living cells , however , membranes are made up of extremely diverse components that are not at equilibrium . Much of the current understanding of the composition and function of lipid rafts in cell membranes stems from their association with detergent - resistant membrane ( DRM ) fractions as defined by extraction with cold , non - ionic detergents 107 . This definition has generated a whole body of literature that is mainly consistent with the existence of lipid raftsin living cells . At the same time , DRMs have been correlated with liquid - ordered phases in artificial membrane systems , consistent with the proposition that lipid rafts represent ordered lipid phases in membranes 108 . However , the mechanism of detergent solubilization has been only recently investigated 109 , 110 . The data indicate that detergents such as Triton X - 100 induce ordered domains in homogenous fluid systems , and if lipid rafts are formed by the spontaneous separation of cholesterol and sphingolipids from a complex milieu of phospholipids , they are probably very sensitive to perturbations , especially those that involve incorporation of detergent molecules into the bilayer . So in a complex membrane environment such as a cell membrane , DRM association at best functions to define a biochemical characteristic — namely , the potential to associate with a liquid - ordered domain . It cannot provide information as to the pre - existing organization of components necessary for understanding cellular function , or whether such liquid - ordered domains exist at all in living cells at steady state . So lipid - dependent organization , congruent with cellular functions , will be understood only by the simultaneous study of the structure and organization of putative lipid - raft components in living cell membranes . An emerging definition of lipid rafts in membranes is that they are reorganized from small and diverse structures into larger - scale units to have roles in sorting or signalling 26 , 32 , 106 , 108 . © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup 114 | FEBRUARY 2004 | VOLUME 5 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S for exit from the ER , at least in yeast , because GPI - anchored proteins have been shown to exit the ER in vesicles that are distinct from those that contain many other secretory and plasma membrane pro - teins 40 . ER - derived vesicles containing GPI - anchored proteins can be separated from other ER - derived vesi - cles by immuno - isolation techniques and by flotation in sucrose - density gradients . The sorting of GPI - anchored proteins from other cargo on exit from the ER has been reconstituted in vitro and several known cytosolic and membrane components that are required for cargo sorting have been identified . Tethering factors in cargo sorting . Fusion of vesicles with the target membrane is thought to occur in two steps . The first step entails the specific recognition between the vesicle and the target compartment , and has been referred to as the tethering step . The second step is the fusion step , in which the lipid bilayers fuse and the vesicle contents are delivered to the target compartment . At present , several components are known to be involved in the tethering of ER - derived vesicles to the Golgi structure in yeast 41 – 44 ; some of these components might be recruited to ER mem - branes 45 and others form large complexes on the Golgi membrane 44 . These factors have been shown to regulate the tethering of ER - derived vesicles to the Golgi and thereby increase the efficiency of the fusion process . Some of these factors have recently been shown to have an additional function — in sorting cargo proteins before , or during , exit from the ER , but prior to ER - derived - vesicle fusion with the Golgi . In particular , Uso1 , the yeast homologue of p115 ( a protein that has been shown to be required for trans - port - vesicle tethering to the Golgi apparatus and intercisternal transport 46 , 47 ) is probably directly involved in cargo - protein sorting . The use of a uso1 mutant resulted in a defect in this process in vitro and the addition of purified Uso1 under these conditions restored cargo - protein sorting . When cargo - protein sorting is defective , the GPI - anchored proteins are found in the same vesicles as plasma membrane per - meases and PRO - ALPHA FACTOR , and on sucrose gradients , these vesicles behave similarly to vesicles carrying plasma membrane permeases . At present , it is not known whether there is a simple mixing of the con - tents of the two vesicles on vesicle formation in the mutant , or whether the GPI - anchored - protein budding pathway is specifically inhibited and the GPI - anchored proteins are diverted to the other pathway . Other factors that are implicated in vesicle tethering , including the small GTPase Ypt1 and the COG COMPLEX , are also required for efficient cargo - protein sorting . Although tethering proteins are implicated in cargo - protein sorting , tethering per se is not required , because a TRAPP ( transport protein particle ; required for tethering ER - derived vesicles to the Golgi compartment 48 ) mutant is not defective in cargo - protein sorting . Furthermore , ER - derived vesicles could still be biochemically detected in tether - ing mutants under in vivo conditions 49 . an unfolded or non - assembled protein , which would result in the protein being retained in the ER . Experiments in T . brucei also point to a possible role for the GPI anchor in GPI - anchored - protein transport . Mutant protein precursors that cannot receive a GPI anchor show defects in transport to the Golgi compart - ment . In particular , one mutation — a truncation just after the GPI - anchor - attachment site , which removes the hydrophobic GPI - signal sequence — renders the protein defective for transport 38 . Although it has been suggested that this mutant protein could be retained in the ER through a remaining interaction with the GPI transamidase , this seems unlikely because the transamidase probably requires the hydrophobic sig - nal sequence to recognize the protein precursor . An alternative explanation comes from studies showing that the presence of a GPI anchor can have profound effects on protein conformation . Removal of the GPI anchor can result in large enough conformational changes in the protein such that it is no longer recog - nized by antibodies 39 . So an alternative explanation for the results described above would be that GPI - anchor attachment is necessary for efficient transport to the Golgi , but the reason for the defect would be the lack of a particular protein conformation . Further experi - ments — in particular , transferring a GPI anchor onto a naive protein that has no other information for traffick - ing in the secretory pathway — will be necessary to clearly define a positive role for GPI anchors in ER - to - Golgi trafficking . ER - to - Golgi transport : lessons from yeast Whether or not GPI anchors function as ER exit signals , GPI - anchored proteins must contain some information NSF ( N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive fusion protein ) . NSF was originally isolated because ofits requirement for vesicle fusion in vitro . It is associated with SNAPs ( soluble NSF accessory proteins ) . PRO - ALPHAFACTOR A yeast pheromone precursor that is produced by haploid mating - type - a cells . COG COMPLEX A protein complex that is conserved from yeast to mammalian cells and is found on the Golgi compartment . Its precise function is not yet known , but it seems to be important for various steps of membrane trafficking to , and through , the Golgi . Figure 2 | A model of GPI - anchored - protein sorting . A model for the sorting of a GPI - anchored proteins after exit from the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) in yeast is shown . The two distinct mutant phenotypes — one that affects the budding efficiency of GPI - anchored or other proteins , and the other that affects their sorting without affecting budding efficiency — led to the hypothesis that , first , there is a separation of cargo proteins into microdomains of the ER without significant cargo - protein concentration . This step requires v - SNARE proteins , several cytosolic factors including Ypt1 and Uso1 , and other tethering factors . Concentration of the cargo then occurs , probably in conjunction with the vesicle budding process , and it requires various membrane proteins , including Emp24 and Erv29 , and the COPII coat proteins . v - SNARE , vesicle - membrane soluble NSF - attachment - protein - receptor , where NSF is N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive fusion protein . ER Separation of cargo Concentration of cargo v - SNARE , Rab GTPase and other tethering factors ER exit site Emp24 complex , Erv29 , COPII coat proteins GPI - anchored protein Transmembrane protein © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 5 | FEBRUARY 2004 | 115 R E V I E W S polarized epithelia 56 , 57 . However , several studies have questioned the view that the GPI anchor functions as the sole apical - targeting signal in Madin – Darby canine kidney ( MDCK ) cells ; in this cell - type , N - GLYCANS are sufficient to target any protein ( transmembrane or GPI - anchored ) from the Golgi to the apical domain 58 . This , however , does not rule out the apical - targeting function of the GPI - anchor . Instead , it indicates that other targeting signals , which have not been fully characterized at present , might be used ; possibly in a complex hierarchical manner or , in certain cases , in a cell - specific manner , during the apical transport of pro - teins 59 , 60 . The cellular components that recognize the GPI signals and carry out the targeting process remain unknown . However , one particular protein , VIP17 / MAL , which has been found , biochemically , to interact with GPI - anchored proteins and can be isolated in DRMs , is required for apical - protein sorting 61 – 63 . Sorting at the plasma membrane Once they have reached the plasma membrane , GPI - anchored proteins are then , like all cell surface proteins , subject to internalization , downregulation and degrada - tion . At the cell surface , there seems to be a surfeit of endocytic pathways that are available for internalization of transmembrane , or otherwise cytosol - exposed , pro - teins ( BOX 1 ) . Besides CLATHRIN - dependent endocytic mechanisms , there are clathrin - independent pathways , which include caveolar pathways of uptake 64 . Most of these require at least one of the numerous DYNAMIN iso - forms for the purpose of PINCHING - OFF at the cell surface 65 . In the absence of active exclusion from specific path - ways , GPI - anchored proteins are probably internalized by all the means that are available , albeit at low efficien - cies 66 . In their native form , GPI - anchored proteins are found in various endosomes 67 – 71 , which implies the potential existence of several internalization pathways . There is also evidence for new mechanisms of GPI - anchored - protein internalization ( see below ) . Three pathways for GPI - anchored - protein internaliza - tion . Several factors can influence the exact nature of the pathway that GPI - anchored proteins follow 66 . However , these pathways can conceptually be divided into three groups . The first group involves the uptake of crosslinked ( usually by artificial means ) GPI - anchored proteins . The second group relies on the association of GPI - anchored proteins with other plasma membrane proteins that drive the GPI - anchored proteins into a particular internalization pathway . The third group , which could be considered a GPI - specific pathway , con - cerns GPI - anchored proteins that are probably in only small clusters on the cell surface . An important proposal of the 1990s was that GPI - anchored proteins are internalized through caveolin - coated structures called CAVEOLAE , in a process known as potocytosis 72 . This mechanism was seriously challenged when it was shown that GPI - anchored proteins are not constitutively enriched in caveolae 73 – 75 . However , GPI - anchored proteins can be induced into a caveolar local - ization by crosslinking ; this often occurs artefactually Tethering factors and recognition of ER components . The tethering factors must recognize ER membrane components to permit the sorting of GPI - anchored proteins . One possible candidate membrane component is the Emp24 complex . EMP24 mutants are defective for packaging of some cargoes into vesicles , including the GPI - anchored protein Gas1 , but do not affect the effi - ciency of vesicle formation 50 . Another ER - enriched membrane protein , encoded by YOS9 , interacts directly with GPI - anchored proteins and is required for their efficient transport to the Golgi 51 . Interestingly , YOS9 interacts genetically with SEC34 , which encodes a subunit of the COG complex that is required for GPI - anchored - protein sorting after ER exit . Another muta - tion , in ERV29 , similarly affects concentration of some cargoes , including pro - alpha factor , which is packaged into different vesicles from Gas1 ( REF . 52 ) . However , these membrane components are putative receptors that might have a role in cargo packaging , which must be distinct from cargo - protein sorting and tethering . The tethering mutants do not affect the process of cargo concentration into vesicles ; they affect only the cargo - sorting step that determines which vesicle will be used . Therefore , there seem to be two distinct steps required for cargo sorting and packaging into vesicles ; one that determines the vesicle population that will be used , and a second step that concentrates the cargo into the bud - ding vesicles . One hypothesis to explain this would be that there is a physical separation of the cargo molecules before they are concentrated into vesicles and that the tethering / sorting factors would have a role in this process . This would predict that distinct ER membrane domains are involved in the formation of the two vesicle populations . Cargo proteins would then be concen - trated during their incorporation into ER - derived vesicles ( FIG . 2 ) . There is now ample evidence for the con - centration of cargo into COPII - coated vesicles and the role of the coat proteins in this process 53 , 54 . The tethering / sorting proteins are cytosolic proteins that must interact with the ER membrane to carry out their function in cargo - protein sorting . A possible site of interaction with the membrane could be with v - SNARE proteins . Mutants of the v - SNAREs BOS1 , BET1 and SEC22 all show cargo - protein - sorting defects that are similar to those seen with the tethering mutants 55 . They do not affect budding efficiency , only the sorting step . The implication of v - SNARE proteins in the process of cargo - protein sorting is not surprising . The v - SNARE proteins are essential factors for the selective fusion of vesicles with the target organelle and it is necessary to provide some mechanism to ensure that the correct cargo molecules are targeted to the proper site . Little is known about the mechanism of cargo - protein sorting , but experiments using antibody inhibition of cargo - protein sorting in vitro have led to the conclusion that the v - SNARE proteins function as individuals , not as a cis - SNARE complex . From the Golgi to the cell surface The GPI anchor has been implicated in providing pro - teins with the potential to target the APICAL DOMAIN of SNARE PROTEINS Soluble NSF ( N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive fusion protein ) accessory protein ( SNAP ) receptors on the membrane . SNARE proteins have been implicated as determinants ofthe specific fusion ofvesicles with target membranes . They have been classified into two complementary classes that are referred to as vesicle - membrane SNAREs ( v - SNAREs ) and target - membrane SNAREs ( t - SNAREs ) . APICAL DOMAIN A domain in the plasma membrane ofepithelial cells that is exposed to the external environment . N - GLYCANS Carbohydrate molecules that are linked to asparagine moieties in proteins . They have several possible structures and are built on a common core structure that is composed of N - acetylglucosamine and mannoses . CLATHRIN The first vesicle coat protein to be identified . It is involved in membrane traffic to , and through , the endocytic pathway . DYNAMIN A high - molecular - weight GTPase that is thought to be involved in the ‘pinching off’of vesicles from membranes . PINCHING OFF The process whereby vesicles are detached from membranes . CAVEOLAE Small plasma - membrane invaginations that occur in many cell types , in particular in endothelial cells . Caveolae are usually coated with a protein of the caveolin family . © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup 116 | FEBRUARY 2004 | VOLUME 5 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S In the absence of lateral associations of the type described above , or crosslinking and internalization through the caveolar / raft - dependent pathway 83 , GPI - anchored proteins seem to be selectively internalized through a dynamin - independent pathway 70 , 84 . In vari - ous mammalian cell types 70 , 85 , 86 and in Drosophila melanogaster HAEMOCYTES 84 , GPI - anchored proteins con - tinue to be internalized even when dynamin activity is inhibited ( FIG . 3 ) . GPI - anchored proteins are then deliv - ered to RAB 5 - negative early endosomes , which are devoid of markers of the clathrin - or the caveolin - medi - ated pathway . This has led to the proposal that GPI - anchored proteins are endocytosed through a dynamin - independent pinocytic pathway known as the GEEC ( GPI - anchored - protein - enriched early endosomal compartments ) pathway 70 ( FIG . 4 ) . In Chinese hamster ovary ( CHO ) cells , inhibition of CDC42 resulted in a reduction in fluid - phase uptake , concomitant with a redirection of GPI - anchored proteins into the clathrin - mediated pathway that is utilized by the transferrin receptor , a commonly used marker of this pathway . Inhibition of other Rho - family GTPases ( RhoA and Rac ) had no significant effects on the GEEC pathway 70 . The GPI anchor , therefore , functions as a sorting signal for selectively targeting GPI - anchored proteins into this new internalization route ; the transmembrane isoforms of proteins or fluorescently labelled lipids that have been added exogenously are not included efficiently into this route . So the defining features of this pathway seem to be the requirement for the small - molecule GTPase Cdc42 , the lack of sensitivity to inhibition of dynamin activity and , so far , the presence of a GPI - anchor . This pathway is distinct from that which is followed by flu - orescently tagged glycosphingolipids that have been introduced exogenously , as these are internalized pref - erentially through a dynamin - dependent ‘caveolar’ pathway 87 . More intriguing is the observation that in T . brucei , fluid - phase and GPI - anchored proteins are endocytosed by a pathway that is distinct from that used by transmembrane proteins in the same cell 88 , which indicates that there might be an evolutionarily pre - served mechanism for the formation of a separate endocytic pathway for GPI - anchored proteins . Sorting in the endocytic pathway The main fraction of GPI - anchored proteins in many cell types is delivered to GEECs , from which these pro - teins eventually reach recycling endosomes 70 . At the same time , a small fraction of GPI - anchored proteins is internalized into Rab5 - positive sorting endosomes that contain markers such as transferrin receptors 70 . This indicates a potential merger of GPI - anchored proteins with molecules that are internalized through clathrin - mediated endocytosis at one or both of two stages : either by delivery through GEECs or by internalization in the same clathrin - mediated pathway . In baby ham - ster kidney ( BHK ) cells , GPI - anchored proteins are delivered to late endosomes by fluid - phase - containing early endosomes that lack transferrin receptors ( co - internalized clathrin - pathway markers ) , which again indicates that they are internalized into GEECs 71 . during immunolocalization studies that use standard fixation conditions 75 . In this review , we will not deal with the endocytic fate of specifically crosslinked GPI - anchored proteins ; this process depends on dynamin , the cytoskeleton and cytosolic signalling molecules , which associate with such crosslinked patches , and seems to vary according to the cell type 73 , 76 . It also seems that specific lateral associations of GPI - anchored proteins with other plasma membrane com - ponents modulate the precise pathway of internaliza - tion for GPI - anchored proteins . In the case of GPI - anchored prion proteins in neuronal cells , their amino - terminal domain specifies clathrin - pit localiza - tion , and this might be augmented by association of the prion protein with metal ions 77 , 78 . Other instances of such protein - specific modulation are : binding of a com - plex of the urokinase - type plasminogen activator ( uPA ) and its GPI - anchored uPA receptor ( uPAR ) to the α 2 macroglobulin receptor / low - density - lipoprotein - recep - tor - related protein 79 , 80 ( LRP ) ; and GPI - anchored CD14 , which interacts with bacterial LIPOPOLYSACCHARIDE ( LPS ) bound to the plasma - LPS - binding protein ( LBP ) 81 , 82 . LIPOPOLYSACCHARIDE ( LPS ) . A bacterial surface glycolipid that is often a primary antigen and effector during bacterial infections . HAEMOCYTES Blood cells , particularly of insects and crustacea . They are similar in many respects to leukocytes , as they are phagocytic and are not involved in oxygen transport . RABS Small Ras - like GTPase molecules that are implicated in regulating membrane - trafficking dynamics by recruiting effector molecules . GEEC ( GPI - anchored - protein - enriched early endosomal compartments ) . It accounts for a main fraction ofthe fluid phase ofthe endocytic content , and is formed independently of dynamin function . CDC42 A small Rho - family GTPase that is implicated in localized actin dynamics in cells . Figure 3 | GPI - anchored proteins are internalized into pinosomes by a dynamin - independent mechanism . a , b | GPI - anchored - protein - enriched early endosomal compartments ( GEECs : arrowheads , green ) are reasonably distinct from sorting endosomes ( arrows ) , which contain internalized low - density lipoprotein ( red ) and transferrin ( blue ) . Part b shows a magnified view of the region corresponding to the box outlined in a . c , d | Haemocytes from Drosophila melanogaster carrying a temperature - sensitive mutation in the dynamin gene fail to internalize anionic ligands that are bound to scavenger - receptor - like proteins ( blue in part c ) at the restrictive temperature ( 31°C ) . Instead , they continue to internalize fluid - phase markers ( red ) and antibodies to GPI - anchored proteins that are expressed in these cells ( green in part d ) . Scale bar , 10 µ m . ( Figure adapted from REFS 70 , 84 courtesy V . Sriram , National Centre for Biological Sciences , India . ) Parts a and b are reproduced with permission from REF . 70 © 2002 Elsevier . Parts c and d are reproduced with permission from REF . 84 © 2003 Company of Biologists Ltd . a b c d © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 5 | FEBRUARY 2004 | 117 R E V I E W S observation that GPI - anchored proteins have different destinations in different cell types presents an interest - ing example of the cell - type - dependent trafficking plas - ticity of GEECs ( FIG . 4 ) . GPI - anchored proteins in most cell types are effi - ciently recycled to the cell surface from the recycling endosomes . By contrast , the fate of GPI - anchored pro - teins that are delivered to late endosomes has not yet been fully characterized . Although cell - surface GPI - anchored proteins are internalized at a similar rate to membrane components that lack any specific internal - ization signals , the recycling rates of GPI - anchored pro - teins from the recycling endosomes are at least threefold to fourfold slower than other recycling membrane com - ponents including transferrin receptors and fluores - cently labelled lipids from the recycling endosomes 68 , 69 , 90 . This slower recycling rate manifests as an accumulation of GPI - anchored proteins compared with other recycling markers in the recycling endo - somes , which indicates that GPI - anchored proteins might be sorted from endocytosed membrane cargo in the recycling endosomes 68 . The GPI - anchor is once again necessary for the successful retention of GPI - anchored proteins in the recycling endosomes 69 . Lipid - dependent sorting and trafficking GPI - anchored - protein trafficking from the ER to the Golgi compartment in yeast requires ongoing ceramide synthesis 91 , 92 . The Gas1 protein from the secretory pathway , even in its ‘ER localized’ form , can be isolated in DRMs 93 , which indicates that GPI - anchored proteins might already be found in mem - brane microdomains in the ER . In the absence of ceramide synthesis , GPI - anchored proteins are no longer found in DRMs ; however , they are also found not to be embedded firmly in the lipid bilayer 92 and can be mainly extracted from the membrane by buffer or carbonate treatment . Therefore , either ceramide and / or sphingolipids , such as inositolphosphorylce - ramide , are required for the stable association of GPI - anchored proteins with the membrane in yeast ER . It is not known why the GPI - anchored proteins are not firmly embedded in the ER membrane in the absence of ceramide synthesis . Perhaps the diacylglycerol - containing GPI anchors need to be remodelled into ceramide - containing anchors , or perhaps , in the absence of ceramide , the structure of the membrane ( possibly lipid - raft domains ) is not compatible with the stable association of the GPI - anchored proteins in the membrane . Other experiments indicate that association of the GPI - anchored proteins with deter - gent - resistant structures might not be the crucial fac - tor at this step in trafficking . In mutants of ergosterol biosynthesis in yeast , GPI - anchored proteins are transported efficiently from the ER to the Golgi appa - ratus , even though they are no longer found in detergent - resistant domains 94 . However , some GPI - anchored proteins are then targeted to the vacuole 95 . This could be either a direct targeting from the Golgi compartment through an increased rate of endo - cytosis or a decreased rate of recycling from A similar pathway through GEECs to the late endosome seems to be present in haemocytes from D . melanogaster 84 . The relationship between GEECs and conventional early endosomes is likely to be a dynamic one and their con - tents probably intermix . However , at least in CHO cells , there is no apparent lumenal connectivity between GEECs and the transferrin - receptor - positive early endo - somal system 68 . Although it has also been proposed that lipid - raft components including GPI - anchored proteins are endocytosed to the Golgi and recycled to the plasma membrane by a common Rab5 - independent pathway 89 , recent evidence that was obtained by directly following the trafficking of several different GPI - anchored pro - teins 70 and raft components ( reviewed in REF . 70 ) prob - ably rules out such a proposal . Nevertheless , the Figure 4 | Endocytosis of GPI - anchored proteins from the cell surface . GPI - anchored proteins and the fluid phase ( yellow ) are internalized by endocytic vesicles — which are formed by a dynamin - independent , Cdc42 - regulated mechanism , and are distinct from caveolin - and clathrin - coated vesicles ( see BOX 1 ) — into tubular , vesicular endosomes known as GEECs ( GPI - anchored - protein - enriched early endosomal compartments ) . GPI - anchored proteins are subsequently trafficked to the cell surface through perinuclear , recycling - endosomal compartments ( in Chinese hamster ovary ( CHO ) and MA104 cells ) , but not to the Golgi . The alternative trafficking destinations of GEECs to late endosomes in baby hamster kidney ( BHK ) and Drosophila melanogaster haemocytes reflects the plasticity of endocytic destinations that is available for this pathway . To plasma membrane Plasma membrane Recyclingendosome Cdc42 CHO / MA104 cells GEEC BHK cells / haemocytes Late endosome Nucleus © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup 118 | FEBRUARY 2004 | VOLUME 5 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S surrounding membrane . Concentration and budding are then probably coupled , which results in a budding vesi - cle with a high concentration of GPI - anchored proteins ( FIG . 2 ) . In the case of GPI - anchored - protein exit from the ER , COPII components are required for vesicle formation , raising the question of whether a coat pro - tein is required for GPI - anchored - protein sorting into the distinct pinocytic pathway at the cell surface . The involvement of SNARE proteins in increasing the effi - ciency of sorting by the GPI - anchored - protein - spe - cific pathway in yeast is extremely intriguing . Could a similar mechanism be involved in this sorting pathway at the cell surface ? At the cell surface , dynamin is unlikely to be involved in the internalization of GPI - anchored proteins , so in neither of the two pathways has the mediator of the scission mechanism been iden - tified . However , at the cell surface , the inhibition of this pathway by expression of dominant - negative Cdc42 or TOXIN B points to the involvement of an actin - mediated mechanism in the scission process , which provides a working hypothesis in this regard for endo - cytic internalization . Future directions To understand the sorting properties of the GPI anchor , it is going to be of paramount importance to under - stand the level of lipid - dependent organization that is imposed on the protein , and how this structure is recruited / utilized in lipid - based sorting mechanisms . This will provide a basis to understand a role for ‘func - tional lipid organization’or ‘lipid rafts’ . The conserved core of the GPI - anchor is probably important for speci - fying such an organization . Addition of acyl / alkyl chains , ceramide remodelling or carbohydrate modifi - cations might have important roles in modulating this type of lipid - based sorting principle . So it is of great importance to obtain more structures of the GPI moi - ety on proteins that are expressed in functional contexts . This will greatly aid the rationalization of their role in sorting and specifying a functional organization . These structures might also help to define potential targeting - signal roles for the GPI moiety . A mechanism for SNARE - based sorting has emerged for the exit of GPI - anchored proteins from the ER . The fact that the SNARE composition of vesicles seems to be crucial for directing them to the proper target organelle 100 makes it logical that SNARE proteins should be involved in cargo - protein selection . The mechanisms used to do this are not clear at pre - sent , but SNAREs could be involved in the establish - ment of microdomains in the membrane that separate cargoes with different destinations . As Rab proteins and tethering factors have been shown to influence SNARE function 101 , 102 and also to be membrane - domain organizers 103 , it is possible that this is a com - mon function for the components that have so far been described in GPI - anchored - protein sorting after exit from the ER . A challenge for the future will be to develop new methods to test this hypothesis and to visualize the potential microdomains that are involved in cargo - protein sorting . endosomes . Defects in both ergosterol biosynthesis and sphingolipid biosynthesis seem to affect post - Golgi trafficking of GPI - anchored proteins 95 and might also lead to a loss in polarized expression of GPI - anchored proteins , and other proteins , during the formation of mating projections in yeast 96 . The trafficking step that is affected is still unclear . As occurs in yeast , most of the GPI - anchored pro - teins of mammalian cells are found at the cell surface . In human monocytes , cholesterol depletion leads to a reduction in the surface localization of the GPI - anchored protein CD14 ( REF . 97 ) , an effect that is similar to the one observed for gD1 - Daf ( decay accelerating fac - tor ) in cholesterol - depleted MDCK cells 98 . In neurons , the GPI - anchored protein Thy1 , which is normally tar - geted to the axonal membrane , is missorted after sphingolipid depletion , although delivery of a den - dritic - membrane marker under these conditions is not affected 99 . In the endocytic pathway of mammalian cells , cho - lesterol and sphingolipid depletion have a profound effect on the retention of GPI - anchored proteins in recycling endosomes ; when cholesterol or sphin - golipid is depleted from CHO cells , GPI - anchored proteins recycle at a faster rate , comparable to that of the other recycling components 68 , 69 . These studies also indicate that the role of sphingolipids in regulating endocytic retention of GPI - anchored proteins proba - bly involves a contribution to membrane structure rather than a function as second messengers in a sig - nalling pathway . The dependence of intracellular sort - ing of GPI - anchored proteins on sphingolipid and cholesterol levels implies a mechanism that is distinct from those that rely primarily on protein – protein interactions , and indicates a role for lipid - based inter - actions . In sorting to the late endosome in BHK cells , an alternative model has been proposed that involves the stabilization of the association of GPI - anchored proteins with sphingolipid / cholesterol - enriched microdomains in early endosomes . The micro - domains would subsequently be targeted to the late endosome . Consistent with this mechanism , oligo - merization of GPI - anchored proteins with a hep - tameric toxin results in enhanced association of GPI - anchored proteins with microdomains , causing endosomal redirection from recycling endosomes to late endosomes in CHO cells 71 . A common sorting mechanism ? A broad comparison of the endocytic pathway and the ER – Golgi route of GPI - anchored proteins shows some interesting similarities . First of all , these proteins exit their respective membrane boundaries in distinct vesicles . The selective incorporation of GPI - anchored proteins into these vesicles is another similarity . It is probable that the comparison might end here in terms of molecular detail , but general principles of selective incorporation of GPI - anchored proteins into budding vesicles will have to fulfil similar requirements . We propose that GPI - anchored proteins are present in domains where they are only minimally more concentrated than in the TOXIN B A Clostridium difficile toxin that irreversibly inactivates all Rho - family GTPases by glucosylation . © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 5 | FEBRUARY 2004 | 119 R E V I E W S In addition to bacterial toxins , several intracellu - lar pathogens , including protozoan parasites , viruses and bacteria , bind GPI - anchored receptors on host cell membranes . So key components of the pathways used by the GPI - anchored proteins might be used for the detrimental activities of these pathogens , with significant pathological consequences . As mentioned in this review , these associations are also likely to alter significantly the organization of GPI - anchored protein at the cell surface , and lead to recruitment of new combinations of endocytic and signalling machinery . Studies of the trafficking pathway of GEECs in different cell types show a tremendous plasticity of GEEC targeting . Clearly , the role of SNAREs and rele - vant regulatory networks needs to be considered in the context of this parallel dynamin - independent endocytic pathway . New , and more specific , markers of the path - way would also be of great use in further elucidating the role of this pathway . Already , the existence of such an endocytic mechanism in D . melanogaster is an indica - tion that the molecular characterization and functional significance of these pathways could be explored at the level of the whole animal . 1 . Mann , R . K . & Beachy , P . A . Cholesterol modification of proteins . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1529 , 188 – 202 ( 2000 ) . 2 . Prior , I . A . et al . GTP - dependent segregation of H - ras from lipid rafts is required for biological activity . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 368 – 375 ( 2001 ) . 3 . Eisenhaber , B . , Bork , P . & Eisenhaber , F . Post - translational GPI lipid anchor modification of proteins in kingdoms of life : analysis of protein sequence data from complete genomes . Protein Eng . 14 , 17 – 25 ( 2001 ) . 4 . Ferguson , M . A . The structure , biosynthesis and functions of glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchors , and the contributions of trypanosome research . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 2799 – 2809 ( 1999 ) . 5 . Ikezawa , H . Glycosylphosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) - anchored proteins . Biol . Pharm . Bull . 25 , 409 – 417 ( 2002 ) . 6 . Masterson , W . J . , Raper , J . , Doering , T . L . , Hart , G . W . & Englund , P . T . Fatty acid remodeling : a novel reaction sequence in the biosynthesis of trypanosome glycosyl phosphatidylinositol membrane anchors . Cell 62 , 73 – 80 ( 1990 ) . 7 . Doering , T . L . et al . Toxicity of myristic acid analogs toward African trypanosomes . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 91 , 9735 – 9739 ( 1994 ) . 8 . Conzelmann , A . , Puoti , A . , Lester , R . L . & Desponds , C . Two different types of lipid moieties are present in glycophosphoinositol - anchored membrane proteins of Saccharomyces cerevisiae . EMBO J . 11 , 457 – 466 ( 1992 ) . 9 . Fankhauser , C . et al . Structures of glycosylphosphatidylinositol membrane anchors from Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 26365 – 26374 ( 1993 ) . 10 . Haynes , P . A . , Gooley , A . A . , Ferguson , M . A . , Redmond , J . W . & Williams , K . L . Post - translational modifications of the Dictyostelium discoideum glycoprotein PsA . Glycosylphosphatidylinositol membrane anchor and composition of O - linked oligosaccharides . Eur . J . Biochem . 216 , 729 – 737 ( 1993 ) . 11 . Ferguson , M . A . et al . Glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol molecules of the parasite and the host . Parasitology 108 , S45 – S54 ( 1994 ) . 12 . Rudd , P . M . , Wormald , M . R . , Wing , D . R . , Prusiner , S . B . & Dwek , R . A . Prion glycoprotein : structure , dynamics , and roles for the sugars . Biochemistry 40 , 3759 – 3766 ( 2001 ) . 13 . Leidich , S . D . , Drapp , D . A . & Orlean , P . A conditionally lethal yeast mutant blocked at the first step in glycosyl phosphatidylinositol anchor synthesis . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 10193 – 10196 ( 1994 ) . 14 . Brul , S . et al . The incorporation of mannoproteins in the cell wall of S . cerevisiae and filamentous Ascomycetes . Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 72 , 229 – 237 ( 1997 ) . 15 . Kawagoe , K . et al . Glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchor - deficient mice : implications for clonal dominance of mutant cells in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria . Blood 87 , 3600 – 3606 ( 1996 ) . 16 . Takeda , J . et al . Deficiency of the GPI anchor caused by a somatic mutation of the PIG - A gene in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria . Cell 73 , 703 – 711 ( 1993 ) . 17 . Inoue , N . , Murakami , Y . & Kinoshita , T . Molecular genetics of paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria . Int . J . Hematol . 77 , 107 – 112 ( 2003 ) . 18 . Baron , G . S . & Caughey , B . Effect of glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor - dependent and - independent prion protein association with model raft membranes on conversion to the protease - resistant isoform . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 14883 – 14892 ( 2003 ) . 19 . Kirchhausen , T . , Bonifacino , J . S . & Riezman , H . Linking cargo to vesicle formation : receptor tail interactions with coat proteins . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 9 , 488 – 495 ( 1997 ) . 20 . Mellman , I . Membranes and sorting . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 8 , 497 – 498 ( 1996 ) . 21 . Brown , D . GPI - anchored proteins and detergent - resistant membrane domains . Braz . J . Med . Biol . Res . 27 , 309 – 315 ( 1994 ) . 22 . Brown , D . A . & Rose , J . K . Sorting of GPI - anchored proteins to glycolipid - enriched membrane subdomains during transport to the apical cell surface . Cell 68 , 533 – 544 ( 1992 ) . The first study to correlate the ability of GPI - anchored proteins to associate with microdomains ( more specifically , DRMs ) with the apical sorting property of GPI anchoring . 23 . Simons , K . & Ikonen , E . Functional rafts in cell membranes . Nature 387 , 569 – 572 ( 1997 ) . 24 . Chatterjee , S . & Mayor , S . The GPI - anchor and protein sorting . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 58 , 1969 – 1987 ( 2001 ) . 25 . Sharma , P . , Sabharanjak , S . & Mayor , S . Endocytosis of lipid rafts : an identity crisis . Semin . Cell . Dev . Biol . 13 , 205 – 214 ( 2002 ) . 26 . Zurzolo , C . , van Meer , G . & Mayor , S . The order of rafts . EMBO Rep . 4 , 1117 – 1121 ( 2003 ) . 27 . Kenworthy , A . K . & Edidin , M . Distribution of a glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored protein at the apical surface of MDCK cells examined at a resolution of 100 Å using imaging fluorescence resonance energy transfer . J . Cell Biol . 142 , 69 – 84 ( 1998 ) . 28 . Kenworthy , A . K . , Petranova , N . & Edidin , M . High - resolution FRET microscopy of cholera toxin B - subunit and GPI - anchored proteins in cell plasma membranes . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 1645 – 1655 ( 2000 ) . 29 . Varma , R . & Mayor , S . GPI - anchored proteins are organized in submicron domains at the cell surface . Nature 394 , 798 – 801 ( 1998 ) . 30 . Jacobson , K . & Dietrich , C . Looking at lipid rafts ? Trends Cell Biol . 9 , 87 – 91 ( 1999 ) . 31 . Friedrichson , T . & Kurzchalia , T . V . Microdomains of GPI - anchored proteins in living cells revealed by crosslinking . Nature 394 , 802 – 805 ( 1998 ) . 32 . Edidin , M . Lipids on the frontier : a century of cell - membrane bilayers . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 4 , 414 – 418 ( 2003 ) . 33 . Nuoffer , C . , Horvath , A . & Riezman , H . Analysis of the sequence requirements for glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchoring of Saccharomyces cerevisiae Gas1 protein . J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 10558 – 10563 ( 1993 ) . 34 . Moran , P . , Raab , H . , Kohr , W . J . & Caras , I . W . Glycophospholipid membrane anchor attachment . Molecular analysis of the cleavage / attachment site . J . Biol . Chem . 266 , 1250 – 1257 ( 1991 ) . 35 . Udenfriend , S . , Micanovic , R . & Kodukula , K . Structural requirements of a nascent protein for processing to a PI - G anchored form : studies in intact cells and cell - free systems . Cell Biol . Int . Rep . 15 , 739 – 759 ( 1991 ) . 36 . Doering , T . L . & Schekman , R . GPI anchor attachment is required for Gas1p transport from the endoplasmic reticulum in COP II vesicles . EMBO J . 15 , 182 – 191 ( 1996 ) . 37 . Ellgaard , L . & Helenius , A . Quality control in the endoplasmic reticulum . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 4 , 181 – 191 ( 2003 ) . 38 . McDowell , M . A . , Ransom , D . M . & Bangs , J . D . Glycosylphosphatidylinositol - dependent secretory transport in Trypanosoma brucei . Biochem . J . 335 , 681 – 689 ( 1998 ) . Provides evidence that GPI anchors could be a signal for efficient transport of proteins from the ER to the Golgi compartment . 39 . Butikofer , P . , Malherbe , T . , Boschung , M . & Roditi , I . GPI - anchored proteins : now you see ’em , now you don’t . FASEBJ . 15 , 545 – 548 ( 2001 ) . Contains the surprising finding that , at least in some cases , the protein structure of GPI - anchored proteins is highly dependent on the presence of the GPI anchor . 40 . Muniz , M . , Morsomme , P . & Riezman , H . Protein sorting upon exit from the endoplasmic reticulum . Cell 104 , 313 – 320 ( 2001 ) . Provides the first evidence that cargo proteins , including GPI - anchored proteins , can exit the ER in at least two vesicle populations . 41 . Cao , X . , Ballew , N . & Barlowe , C . Initial docking of ER - derived vesicles requires Uso1p and Ypt1p but is independent of SNARE proteins . EMBOJ . 17 , 2156 – 2165 ( 1998 ) . 42 . VanRheenen , S . M . et al . Sec34p , a protein required for vesicle tethering to the yeast Golgi apparatus , is in a complex with Sec35p . J . Cell Biol . 147 , 729 – 742 ( 1999 ) . 43 . Whyte , J . R . & Munro , S . The Sec34 / 35 Golgi transport complex is related to the exocyst , defining a family of complexes involved in multiple steps of membrane traffic . Dev . Cell 1 , 527 – 537 ( 2001 ) . 44 . Barrowman , J . , Sacher , M . & Ferro - Novick , S . TRAPP stably associates with the Golgi and is required for vesicle docking . EMBOJ . 19 , 862 – 869 ( 2000 ) . 45 . Allan , B . B . , Moyer , B . D . & Balch , W . E . Rab1 recruitment of p115 into a cis - SNARE complex : programming budding COPII vesicles for fusion . Science 289 , 444 – 448 ( 2000 ) . 46 . Waters , M . G . , Clary , D . O . & Rothman , J . E . A novel 115 - kD peripheral membrane protein is required for intercisternal transport in the Golgi stack . J . Cell Biol . 118 , 1015 – 1026 ( 1992 ) . 47 . Sapperstein , S . K . , Walter , D . M . , Grosvenor , A . R . , Heuser , J . E . & Waters , M . G . p115 is a general vesicular transport factor related to the yeast endoplasmic reticulum to Golgi transport factor Uso1p . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 92 , 522 – 526 ( 1995 ) . 48 . Sacher , M . et al . TRAPP , a highly conserved novel complex on the cis - Golgi that mediates vesicle docking and fusion . EMBOJ . 17 , 2494 – 2503 ( 1998 ) . 49 . Morsomme , P . & Riezman , H . The Rab GTPase Ypt1p and tethering factors couple protein sorting at the ER to vesicle targeting to the Golgi apparatus . Dev . Cell 2 , 307 – 317 ( 2002 ) . Provides evidence that factors involved in tethering of ER - derived vesicles to the Golgi compartment have an additional function in cargo - protein sorting on exit from the ER . 50 . Muniz , M . , Nuoffer , C . , Hauri , H . P . & Riezman , H . The Emp24 complex recruits a specific cargo molecule into endoplasmic reticulum - derived vesicles . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 925 – 930 ( 2000 ) . 51 . Friedmann , E . , Salzberg , Y . , Weinberger , A . , Shaltiel , S . & Gerst , J . E . YOS9 , the putative yeast homolog of a gene amplified in osteosarcomas , is involved in the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) - Golgi transport of GPI - anchored proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 35274 – 35281 ( 2002 ) . 52 . Belden , W . J . & Barlowe , C . Role of Erv29p in collecting soluble secretory proteins into ER - derived transport vesicles . Science 294 , 1528 – 1531 ( 2001 ) . Identifies conclusively a transmembrane protein that acts to concentrate a lumenal cargo protein into vesicles formed on the ER membrane . 53 . Miller , E . , Antonny , B . , Hamamoto , S . & Schekman , R . Cargo selection into COPII vesicles is driven by the Sec24p subunit . EMBOJ . 21 , 6105 – 6113 ( 2002 ) . 54 . Malkus , P . , Jiang , F . & Schekman , R . Concentrative sorting of secretory cargo proteins into COPII - coated vesicles . J . Cell Biol . 159 , 915 – 921 ( 2002 ) . 55 . Morsomme , P . , Prescianotto - Baschong , C . & Riezman , H . The ER v - SNAREs are required for GPI - anchored protein © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup 120 | FEBRUARY 2004 | VOLUME 5 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S sorting from other secretory proteins upon exit from the ER . J . Cell Biol . 162 , 403 – 412 ( 2003 ) . 56 . Lisanti , M . P . , Caras , I . W . , Davitz , M . A . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . A glycophospholipid membrane anchor acts as an apical targeting signal in polarized epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 109 , 2145 – 2156 ( 1989 ) . 57 . Brown , D . A . , Crise , B . & Rose , J . K . Mechanism of membrane anchoring affects polarized expression of two proteins in MDCK cells . Science 245 , 1499 – 1501 ( 1989 ) . 58 . Benting , J . H . , Rietveld , A . G . & Simons , K . N - Glycans mediate the apical sorting of a GPI - anchored , raft - associated protein in Madin – Darby canine kidney cells . J . Cell Biol . 146 , 313 – 320 ( 1999 ) . 59 . Lipardi , C . , Nitsch , L . & Zurzolo , C . Detergent - insoluble GPI - anchored proteins are apically sorted in fischer rat thyroid cells , but interference with cholesterol or sphingolipids differentially affects detergent insolubility and apical sorting . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 531 – 542 ( 2000 ) . 60 . Rodriguez - Boulan , E . & Gonzalez , A . Glycans in post - Golgi apical targeting : sorting signals or structural props ? Trends Cell Biol . 9 , 291 – 294 ( 1999 ) . 61 . Cheong , K . H . , Zacchetti , D . , Schneeberger , E . E . & Simons , K . VIP17 / MAL , a lipid raft - associated protein , is involved in apical transport in MDCK cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 6241 – 6248 ( 1999 ) . 62 . Martin - Belmonte , F . , Puertollano , R . , Millan , J . & Alonso , M . A . The MAL proteolipid is necessary for the overall apical delivery of membrane proteins in the polarized epithelial Madin – Darby canine kidney and fischer rat thyroid cell lines . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 2033 – 2045 ( 2000 ) . 63 . Millan , J . & Alonso , M . A . MAL , a novel integral membrane protein of human T lymphocytes , associates with glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored proteins and Src - like tyrosine kinases . Eur . J . Immunol . 28 , 3675 – 3684 ( 1998 ) . 64 . Conner , S . D . & Schmid , S . L . Regulated portals of entry into the cell . Nature 422 , 37 – 44 ( 2003 ) . 65 . McNiven , M . A . , Cao , H . , Pitts , K . R . & Yoon , Y . The dynamin family of mechanoenzymes : pinching in new places . Trends Biochem . Sci . 25 , 115 – 120 ( 2000 ) . 66 . Maxfield , F . R . & Mayor , S . Cell surface dynamics of GPI - anchored proteins . Adv . Exp . Med . Biol . 419 , 355 – 364 ( 1997 ) . 67 . Rijnboutt , S . et al . Endocytosis of GPI - linked membrane folate receptor - α . J . Cell Biol . 132 , 35 – 47 ( 1996 ) . 68 . Mayor , S . , Sabharanjak , S . & Maxfield , F . R . Cholesterol - dependent retention of GPI - anchored proteins in endosomes . EMBOJ . 17 , 4626 – 4638 ( 1998 ) . 69 . Chatterjee , S . , Smith , E . R . , Hanada , K . , Stevens , V . L . & Mayor , S . GPI anchoring leads to sphingolipid - dependent retention of endocytosed proteins in the recycling endosomal compartment . EMBO J . 20 , 1583 – 1592 ( 2001 ) . Together , references 68 and 69 show that sorting of GPI - anchored proteins in endosomes of mammalian cells is dependent on cholesterol and sphingolipid concentrations in cells , consistent with the role of cholesterol - and sphingolipid - enriched microdomains in trafficking . 70 . Sabharanjak , S . , Sharma , P . , Parton , R . & Mayor , S . GPI - anchored proteins are delivered to the endosomal recycling compartment via a distinct cdc42 - regulated , clathrin - independent pinocytic pathway . Dev . Cell 2 , 411 – 423 ( 2002 ) . Identifies a distinct dynamin - independent endocytic pathway that is responsible for the internalization of GPI - anchored proteins , and also shows that this route accounts for a significant fraction of fluid - phase uptake . 71 . Fivaz , M . et al . Differential sorting and fate of endocytosed GPI - anchored proteins . EMBO J . 21 , 3989 – 4000 ( 2002 ) . Provides evidence for the plasticity of GEEC targeting and indicates that the time of association of GPI - anchored proteins with microdomains might also be important for their final destination inside the endosomal system . 72 . Anderson , R . G . The caveolae membrane system . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 67 , 199 – 225 ( 1998 ) . 73 . Parton , R . G . , Joggerst , B . & Simons , K . Regulated internalization of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 1199 – 1215 ( 1994 ) . 74 . Fujimoto , T . GPI - anchored proteins , glycosphingolipids , and sphingomyelin are sequestered to caveolae only after crosslinking . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 44 , 929 – 941 ( 1996 ) . 75 . Mayor , S . , Rothberg , K . G . & Maxfield , F . R . Sequestration of GPI - anchored proteins in caveolae triggered by cross - linking . Science 264 , 1948 – 1951 ( 1994 ) . 76 . Deckert , M . , Ticchioni , M . & Bernard , A . Endocytosis of GPI - anchored proteins in human lymphocytes : role of glycolipid - based domains , actin cytoskeleton , and protein kinases . J . Cell Biol . 133 , 791 – 799 ( 1996 ) . 77 . Pauly , P . C . & Harris , D . A . Copper stimulates endocytosis of the prion protein . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 33107 – 33110 ( 1998 ) . 78 . Sunyach , C . et al . The mechanism of internalization of glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored prion protein EMBOJ . 22 , 3591 – 3601 ( 2003 ) . 79 . Conese , M . et al . α 2 Macroglobulin receptor / Ldl receptor - related protein ( Lrp ) - dependent internalization of the urokinase receptor . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 1609 – 1622 ( 1995 ) . 80 . Nykjaer , A . et al . Purified α 2 - macroglobulin receptor / LDL receptor - related protein binds urokinase•plasminogen activator inhibitor type - 1 complex . Evidence that the α 2 - macroglobulin receptor mediates cellular degradation of urokinase receptor - bound complexes . J . Biol . Chem . 267 , 14543 – 14546 ( 1992 ) . 81 . Poussin , C . , Foti , M . , Carpentier , J . L . & Pugin , J . CD14 - dependent endotoxin internalization via a macropinocytic pathway . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 20285 – 20291 ( 1998 ) . 82 . Triantafilou , K . , Triantafilou , M . & Dedrick , R . L . A CD14 - independent LPS receptor cluster . Nature Immunol . 2 , 338 – 345 ( 2001 ) . 83 . Nabi , I . R . & Le , P . U . Caveolae / raft - dependent endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 161 , 673 – 677 ( 2003 ) . 84 . Guha , A . , Sriram , V . , Krishnan , K . S . & Mayor , S . shibire mutations reveal distinct dynamin - independent and dependent endocytic pathways in primary cultures of Drosophila hemocytes . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 3373 – 3386 ( 2003 ) . 85 . Skretting , G . , Torgersen , M . L . , van Deurs , B . & Sandvig , K . Endocytic mechanisms responsible for uptake of GPI - linked diphtheria toxin receptor . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 3899 – 3909 ( 1999 ) . 86 . Ricci , V . et al . High cell sensitivity to Helicobacter pylori VacA toxin depends on a GPI - anchored protein and is not blocked by inhibition of the clathrin - mediated pathway of endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 3897 – 3909 ( 2000 ) . 87 . Puri , V . et al . Clathrin - dependent and - independent internalization of plasma membrane sphingolipids initiates two Golgi targeting pathways . J . Cell Biol . 154 , 535 – 547 ( 2001 ) . 88 . Pal , A . , Hall , B . S . , Nesbeth , D . N . , Field , H . I . & Field , M . C . Differential endocytic functions of Trypanosoma brucei Rab5 isoforms reveal a glycosylphosphatidylinositol - specific endosomal pathway . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 9529 – 9539 ( 2002 ) . 89 . Nichols , B . J . et al . Rapid cycling of lipid raft markers between the cell surface and Golgi complex . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 529 – 541 ( 2001 ) . 90 . Kamen , B . A . , Wang , M . T . , Streckfuss , A . J . , Peryea , X . & Anderson , R . G . Delivery of folates to the cytoplasm of MA104 cells is mediated by a surface membrane receptor that recycles . J . Biol . Chem . 263 , 13602 – 13609 ( 1988 ) . 91 . Horvath , A . , Sutterlin , C . , Manning - Krieg , U . , Movva , N . R . & Riezman , H . Ceramide synthesis enhances transport of GPI - anchored proteins to the Golgi apparatus in yeast . EMBOJ . 13 , 3687 – 3695 ( 1994 ) . 92 . Watanabe , R . , Funato , K . , Venkataraman , K . , Futerman , A . H . & Riezman , H . Sphingolipids are required for the stable membrane association of glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored proteins in yeast . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 49538 – 49544 ( 2002 ) . 93 . Bagnat , M . , Keranen , S . , Shevchenko , A . & Simons , K . Lipid rafts function in biosynthetic delivery of proteins to the cell surface in yeast . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 3254 – 3259 ( 2000 ) . 94 . Heese - Peck , A . et al . Multiple functions of sterols in yeast endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 2664 – 2680 ( 2002 ) . 95 . Sievi , E . , Suntio , T . & Makarow , M . Proteolytic function of GPI - anchored plasma membrane protease Yps1p in the yeast vacuole and Golgi . Traffic 2 , 896 – 907 ( 2001 ) . 96 . Bagnat , M . & Simons , K . Lipid rafts in protein sorting and cell polarity in budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Biol . Chem . 383 , 1475 – 1480 ( 2002 ) . 97 . Esfahani , M . et al . Cholesterol regulates the cell surface expression of glycophospholipid - anchored CD14 antigen on human monocytes . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1149 , 217 – 223 ( 1993 ) . 98 . Hannan , L . A . & Edidin , M . Traffic , polarity , and detergent solubility of a glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored protein after LDL - deprivation of MDCK cells . J . Cell Biol . 133 , 1265 – 1276 ( 1996 ) . 99 . Ledesma , M . D . , Simons , K . & Dotti , C . G . Neuronal polarity : essential role of protein - lipid complexes in axonal sorting . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 3966 – 3971 ( 1998 ) . 100 . McNew , J . A . et al . Compartmental specificity of cellular membrane fusion encoded in SNARE proteins . Nature 407 , 153 – 159 ( 2000 ) . 101 . Lian , J . P . , Stone , S . , Jiang , Y . , Lyons , P . & Ferro - Novick , S . Ypt1p implicated in v - SNARE activation . Nature 372 , 698 – 701 ( 1994 ) . 102 . Sapperstein , S . K . , Lupashin , V . V . , Schmitt , H . D . & Waters , M . G . Assembly of the ER to Golgi SNARE complex requires Uso1p . J . Cell Biol . 132 , 755 – 767 ( 1996 ) . 103 . Pfeffer , S . Membrane domains in the secretory and endocytic pathways . Cell 112 , 507 – 517 ( 2003 ) . 104 . Lamaze , C . et al . Interleukin 2 receptors and detergent - resistant membrane domains define a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway . Mol . Cell 7 , 661 – 671 ( 2001 ) . 105 . Edidin , M . The state of lipid rafts : from model membranes to cells . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 32 , 257 – 283 ( 2003 ) . 106 . McConnell , H . M . & Vrljic , M . Liquid - liquid immiscibility in membranes . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 32 , 469 – 492 ( 2003 ) . 107 . Brown , D . A . & London , E . Functions of lipid rafts in biological membranes . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 14 , 111 – 136 ( 1998 ) . 108 . Anderson , R . G . & Jacobson , K . A role for lipid shells in targeting proteins to caveolae , rafts , and other lipid domains . Science 296 , 1821 – 1825 ( 2002 ) . 109 . Heerklotz , H . Triton promotes domain formation in lipid raft mixtures . Biophys . J . 83 , 2693 – 2701 ( 2002 ) . 110 . Heerklotz , H . , Szadkowska , H . , Anderson , T . & Seelig , J . The sensitivity of lipid domains to small perturbations demonstrated by the effect of Triton . J . Mol . Biol . 329 , 793 – 799 ( 2003 ) . Acknowledgements Research in S . Mayor’s laboratory was supported by a Senior Research Fellowship from The Wellcome Trust , the Department of Biotechnology ( India ) , and intra - mural funds from the National Centre for Biological Sciences , India . S . M . is grateful to V . Sriram , S . Sabharanjak , S . Chatterjee and P . Sharma and other members of the laboratoryfor their invaluable contributions to this review . Research in H . Riezman’s laboratory was supported by grants from the Swiss National Science Foundation , Human Frontiers Science Program Organization , and the Office Fédéral de l’Education et de la Science . H . R . is grateful to members of his laboratory for critical reading of the review . Competing interests statement The authors declare that they have no competing financial interests . Online links DATABASES The following terms in this article are linked online to : LocusLink : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / LocusLink / PIGA OMIM : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / Omim / searchomim . html Paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria Saccharomyces genome database : http : / / www . yeastgenome . org / bet1 | bos1 | Emp24 | ERV29 | Gas1 | sec22 | SEC34 | Uso1 | YOS9 | Ypt1 Swiss - Prot : http : / / us . expasy . org / sprot / CD14 | LBP | p115 | uPA | uPAR Access to this interactive links box is free online . © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup