Design Journals : Personal Artifacts in Collaborative Design Abstract Traditionally , designers use physical paper notebooks to construct a personal design artifact , often referred to as a design journal . However , collaborative design projects require the construction of shared understanding among the group , which often relies on the creation of shared information artifacts such as whiteboards , prototypes , or formal design documentation . In this paper , we present a literature review of both the traditional role of design journals and proposed personal information systems . We also propose future investigation of the transition from personal information artifacts to shared understanding . Keywords Design journal , design information systems , collaborative design , shared understanding Introduction Design journals are a ubiquitous part of design practice ; traditionally , designers use physical paper notebooks to keep track of information and ideas relevant to a given project ( see Figure 1 ) . Collaborative design teams often establish shared understanding through the creation of shared information artifacts such as whiteboards , prototypes , or formal design documentation . Personal design Copyright is held by the author / owner ( s ) . CHI 2010 , April 4 – 9 , 2009 , Atlanta , GA , USA ACM 978 - 1 - 60558 - 246 - 7 / 09 / 04 . Lora Oehlberg Department of Mechanical Engineering University of California , Berkeley 281 Hearst Memorial Mining Building # 1764 Berkeley , CA 94720 - 1764 USA lora @ berkeley . edu Alice M . Agogino Department of Mechanical Engineering University of California at Berkeley 415 Sutardja Dai Hall Berkeley , CA 94720 - 1764 USA agogino @ berkeley . edu 2 journals are also social artifacts , as they are often present during group meetings or ideation sessions where they are used to document design activity and reference past thought processes . In this paper , we present a literature review of both the traditional role of design journals , as well as proposed new journaling systems . We also propose future investigation of the transition from personal information artifacts to shared understanding . Figure 1 : Example pages from a traditional design journal Traditional Design Journals The design journal is a ubiquitous part of design practice . The core concept of a design journal goes by many different names ; besides “design journal” [ 2 ] , there is also “design notebook” [ 18 ] , “engineer’s logbook” [ 13 ] , “engineering notebook” [ 2 ] and “idea log” [ 14 ] . Designers have several motivations for keeping a design journal . Documentation for Intellectual Property Patent applications require documentation of the origins of the concept . Most engineering textbooks that mention design journals as an aspect of design communication emphasize its importance in the patent application process [ 2 ] [ 18 ] . Centralized Personal Information Storage Designers use journals to collect information relevant to a project . These journals serve as central references to pertinent information [ 13 ] . As such , they act as part of the extended memory of their owner [ 21 ] . Mobile access to design information In industry , designers wander from their desks to gather and pass along informal information to their fellow designers and coworkers [ 1 ] . Traditional paper - based journals allow designers to take their notes with them into the field . New Tools for Design Journals Researchers have explored new ways to digitally augment traditional paper design journals . This research can be clustered into three main motivations : archiving and information management , sharing and collaboration , and engaging multi - media . Archiving and Information Management One appeal of electronic design journals is their ability to serve as digital archives . Early examples of digital design journals including the Electronic Design Notebook [ 10 ] and the Electronic Cocktail Napkin [ 4 ] provided platforms for collecting and managing notes and sketches . Subsequent extensions , including the 3 Digital Design Sketchbook [ 5 ] , allowed designers to remotely access a centralized archive of sketches , annotate archived drawings , and contribute additional content to the archive . Human - computer interaction researchers have since included both tangible , paper - based notes and digital artifacts into a single , unified archive using digital pens [ 20 ] . Sharing and Collaboration Many research projects bring digital media to design journals in order to facilitate information sharing or distributed collaboration . For example , the Personal Electronic Notebook with Sharing , or PENS [ 6 ] was developed to facilitate sharing design knowledge over the internet with remote collaborators . Researchers have also created tangible user interface tools for informal design tasks [ 9 ] and for synchronous collaborative note - taking [ 8 ] . iDeas [ 12 ] [ 11 ] approached the development of design tools from a ‘design ecology’ perspective . Based on Butterfly Net [ 19 ] , a digital copy of the physical iDeas notebooks is made available to immediate collaborators , allowing designers to share personal design journal content with each other . Engaging with Multimedia While conducting user - research , designers will often record conversations or interviews with users to reference later on during group meetings . Both the Audio Notebook [ 17 ] and Dynomite [ 19 ] were developed to enable users to both capture audio data and navigate through it by interacting with their written notes from the interview . These research projects extend the abilities of paper to not only capture written or graphic information , but also multimedia information that otherwise was exclusively available to digital media . Research Questions We propose applying a private / personal / public framework [ 16 ] [ 3 ] from PDA use to designers’ interactions with design journals or other personal information artifacts . This proposed research addresses designers’ interactions with individual information tools during collaborative design projects . In particular , we intend to investigate how information from individual tools is communicated in the shared design space . Primary research questions include : • What are designers’ attitudes towards personal design information artifacts ? • How do designers interact with personal design information artifacts during collaborative meetings ? • How can future personal information artifacts better support collaborative design tasks ? Addressing these research questions will shed light on how the social implications of the design process impact the usage of individual design tools . This will also inform the design of future personal design artifacts that recognize the designer’s needs for both private and shared information . References [ 1 ] Bellotti , V . , Bly , S . “Walking Away from the Desktop Computer : Distributed Collaboration and Mobility in a Product Design Team . ” Proc . of CSCW 1996 . [ 2 ] Bystrom , M . & Eisenstein , B ( 2005 ) . Practical Engineering Design . BocaRaton : Taylor & Francis Group LLC . 4 [ 3 ] Greenberg , S . , Boyle , M . , Laberge , J . , “PDAs and Shared Public Displays : Making Personal Information Public , and Public Information Personal . ” Personal Technologies , 3 , 1 , ( 1999 ) . [ 4 ] Gross , M . , Do , E . “Demonstrating the electronic cocktail napkin : a paper - like interface for early design . ” Proc . Of CHI 1996 . [ 5 ] Gross , M . , Do , E . , McCall , R . , Citrin , W . , Hamill , P . , Warmack , A . , Kuczun , K . “Collaboration and Coordination in Architectural Design : approaches to computer mediated work . ” Automation in Construction , 7 ( 1998 ) , 465 - 473 . [ 6 ] Hong , J . , Toye , G . , Leifer , L . ( 1995 ) “Personal Electronic Notebook with Sharing” , Proc . of Workshop on Enabling Technologies : Infrastructure for Collaborative Enterprises ( WETICE ' 95 ) , p . 88 , April 20 - 22 , 1995 . [ 7 ] Hyman , Barry . Fundamentals of Engineering Design . Prentice Hall , Upper Saddle River , NJ : 2003 . [ 8 ] Kam , M . , Wang , J . , Iles , Al . , Tse , E . , Chiu , J . , Glaser , D . , Tarshish , O . , Canny , J . Livenotes : a system for cooperative and augmented note - taking in lectures . Proc . of CHI 2005 . P . 531 - 540 . [ 9 ] Klemmer , S . , Newman , M . , Farrell , R . , Bilezikjian , M . , Landay , J . . “The Designers’ Outpost : A Tangible Interface for Collaborative Web Site Design . ” Proc . Of UIST 2001 . [ 10 ] Lakin , F . , Wambaugh , J . , Leifer , L . , Cannon , D . , Sivard , C . “The Electronic Design Notebook : Performing Medium and Processing Medium . ” The Visual Computer , 1989 . 5 : p . 214 - 226 . [ 11 ] Lee , B . “From Cognitive Artifacts to Social Artifacts : The iDeas Design Ecology . ” In Conference Supplement to UIST 2006 : ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology 2006 . ( Doctoral Symposium ) [ 12 ] Maldonado , H . , Lee , B . , Klemmer , S . , Pea , R . “Patterns of Collaboration in Design Courses : Team dynamics affect technology appropriation , artifact creation , and course performance . ” Proc . of CSCL 2007 . [ 13 ] McAlpine , H . , B . J . Hicks , G . Huet , and S . J . Culley . “An investigation into the use and content of the engineer’s logbook . ” Design Studies 27 ( 2006 ) 481 - 504 . [ 14 ] Stanford University . Mechanical Engineering 214 “Needfinding” , Winter 2004 Syllabus . [ 15 ] Sharmin , M , Bailey , B . , Coats , C . , Hamilton , K . “Understanding Knowledge Management Practices for Early Design Activity and Its Implications for Reuse . ” Proc . of CHI 2009 . [ 16 ] Shen , C . , Everitt , K . , Ryall , K . “Ubitable : Impromptu Face - to - Face Collaboration on Horizontal Interactive Surfaces . ” Proc . Of Ubicomp 2003 . [ 17 ] Stifelman , L . , Arons , B . , Schmandt , C . “The Audio Notebook : Paper and Pen interaction with Structured Speech . ” Proc . Of CHI 2001 , p . 182 - 1889 . [ 18 ] Ullman , D . G . The Mechanical Design Process . McGraw - Hill , New York : 1992 . [ 19 ] Wilcox , L . , Schilit , B . , Sawhney , N . “Dynomite : a dynamically organized ink and audio notebook . ” Proc . Of CHI 1997 . p . 186 - 193 . [ 20 ] Yeh , R . B . , C . Liao , S . R . Klemmer , F . Guimbretière , B . , Lee , B . Kakaradov , J . Stamberger , and A . Paepcke “ButterflyNet : A Mobile Capture and Access System for Field Biology Research . ” Proc . of CHI 2006 . pp 571 - 580 . [ 21 ] Yeo , R . “Notebooks as Memory Aids : Precepts and practices in early modern England . ” Memory Studies , 1 , 1 , ( 2008 ) , 115 - 136 .