ANRV339 - CP04 - 03 ARI 6 November 2007 22 : 4 R E V I E W S I N A D V A N C E Ecological Momentary Assessment Saul Shiffman , 1 Arthur A . Stone , 2 and Michael R . Hufford 3 1 Department of Psychology , University of Pittsburgh , Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania 15260 ; email : Shiffman @ pitt . edu 2 Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences Department , State University of New York , Stony Brook , Stony Brook , New York 11794 - 8790 ; email : Arthur . stone @ sunysb . edu 3 Cypress Bioscience , Inc . , San Diego , California 92121 ; email : mhufford @ cypressbio . com Annu . Rev . Clin . Psychol . 2008 . 4 : 3 . 1 – 3 . 32 The Annual Review of Clinical Psychology is online at http : / / clinpsy . annualreviews . org This article’s doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . clinpsy . 3 . 022806 . 091415 Copyright c (cid:2) 2008 by Annual Reviews . All rights reserved 1548 - 5943 / 08 / 0427 - 0001 $ 20 . 00 Key Words diary , experience sampling , real - time data capture Abstract Assessment in clinical psychology typically relies on global retro - spective self - reports collected at research or clinic visits , which are limited by recall bias and are not well suited to address how behav - ior changes over time and across contexts . Ecological momentary assessment ( EMA ) involves repeated sampling of subjects’ current behaviors and experiences in real time , in subjects’ natural envi - ronments . EMA aims to minimize recall bias , maximize ecological validity , and allow study of microprocesses that inﬂuence behavior in real - world contexts . EMA studies assess particular events in subjects’ lives or assess subjects at periodic intervals , often by random time sampling , using technologies ranging from written diaries and tele - phones to electronic diaries and physiological sensors . We discuss the rationale for EMA , EMA designs , methodological and practical issues , and comparisons of EMA and recall data . EMA holds unique promise to advance the science and practice of clinical psychology by shedding light on the dynamics of behavior in real - world settings . 3 . 1 First published online as a Review in Advance on November 28 , 2007 A nnu . R e v . C li n . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 4 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f M i ss ou r i - C o l u m b i a on 02 / 18 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV339 - CP04 - 03 ARI 6 November 2007 22 : 4 Contents INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 . 2 WHAT IS ECOLOGICAL MOMENTARY ASSESSMENT ? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 . 3 Momentary , Real - Time Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 . 4 Real - World Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 . 4 Repeated Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 . 4 ECOLOGICAL MOMENTARY ASSESSMENT SCOPE AND HISTORY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 . 5 Historical Roots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 . 6 AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORY AND LIMITATIONS OF RECALL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 . 7 THE USES OF ECOLOGICAL MOMENTARY ASSESSMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 . 8 Individual Differences . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 . 8 Natural History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 . 8 Contextual Associations . . . . . . . . . . . 3 . 9 Temporal Sequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 . 9 DATA COMPARING RETROSPECTIVE AND REAL - TIME REPORTS . . . . . . . . . 3 . 10 Comparison of Aggregated Recall - Based Data and EMA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 . 10 Correlations Between Disaggregated EMA and Recall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 . 11 Construct Validity of Real - Time Versus Recall Assessments . . . . . 3 . 12 ECOLOGICAL MOMENTARY ASSESSMENT DESIGNS AND APPROACHES . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 . 13 Event - Based Monitoring . . . . . . . . . . 3 . 14 Time - Based Designs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 . 14 Combination Designs . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 . 15 Use of Recall in EMA . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 . 16 Sampling Versus Coverage Strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 . 16 Daily Diaries : A Special Case of EMA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 . 17 USE OF ECOLOGICAL MOMENTARY ASSESSMENT IN TREATMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 . 17 For Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 . 17 For Intervention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 . 18 MEASUREMENT CONSIDERATIONS FOR ECOLOGICAL MOMENTARY ASSESSMENT SELF - REPORTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 . 19 METHODOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS IN ECOLOGICAL MOMENTARY ASSESSMENT STUDIES . . . . . . . 3 . 20 Reactivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 . 20 Compliance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 . 20 SPECIAL POPULATIONS . . . . . . . . . 3 . 22 Analysis of EMA Data . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 . 22 PRACTICAL ISSUES IN ECOLOGICAL MOMENTARY ASSESSMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 . 23 EMA Hardware and Software . . . . . 3 . 23 Other Practical Considerations . . . . 3 . 24 CONCLUSION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 . 24 INTRODUCTION Clinical psychologists , along with behavioral , social , and health scientists and practitioners of every stripe , are interested in people’s ev - eryday real - world behavior . This interest is perhaps especially marked for clinical psy - chologists because psychopathology and its functional impairments are expressed in real - world settings : No one is diagnosed or treated because of how they behave in a laboratory or consulting room . Yet , behavior is seldom studied , assessed , or observed as it unfolds in the real world . Instead , both clinicians and re - searchers rely on global , summary , or retro - spective self - reports of behavior : We ask pa - tients how often they experience anxiety , on 3 . 2 Shiffman · Stone · Hufford A nnu . R e v . C li n . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 4 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f M i ss ou r i - C o l u m b i a on 02 / 18 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV339 - CP04 - 03 ARI 6 November 2007 22 : 4 average , howmanypanicattackstheyhaddur - ing the past week or month , how intense their pain generally is during the day , or how de - pressed their mood has been . Moreover , the emphasis on global assessments can keep us from seeing and studying dynamic changes in behavior over time and across situations , from appreciating how behavior varies , and is governed , by context , and from understand - ing cascades of behavior , or interactions with others or with our environments that play out as a sequence of events over time . Thus , our frequent reliance on global , retrospective re - ports seriously limits our ability to accurately characterize , understand , and change behav - ior in real - world settings and misses the dy - namics of life as it is lived , day - to - day , hour by hour . In this review , we discuss an alternative to static retrospective reports—Ecological Momentary Assessment ( EMA , Stone & Shiffman 1994 ) , which allows subjects and pa - tients to report repeatedly on their experi - ences in real - time , in real - world settings , over time and across contexts . WHAT IS ECOLOGICAL MOMENTARY ASSESSMENT ? EMA is not a single research method ; it en - compasses a range of methods and method - ological traditions , which we discuss below . However , to provide a quick sense of how EMA can be used to inform our understand - ing of clinical psychology , and as a reference for its paradigmatic characteristics , we de - scribe a prototypical EMA study . Our exam - ple is a study of cigarette smoking cessation and relapse ( see Shiffman 2005 ) . Smoking is a good target for EMA , as it involves a behav - ior with clearly discernible small - scale events . Tracking experience over time allows the re - search to track the process of quitting and re - lapsing over time . In this study , smokers who had recently quit were asked to monitor their cigarette craving , nicotine withdrawal symp - toms , mood , and activities over several weeks , using palm - top computers as electronic di - aries . Since episodes of smoking ( “lapses” ) EcologicalMomentaryAssessment ( EMA ) : methods using repeated collection of real - time data on subjects’ behavior and experience in their natural environments were of key interest , subjects were asked to record any episodes of smoking as they hap - pened , and were then prompted to complete brief assessments of their craving , mood , and activities during the episode . On top of this , aboutﬁvetimeseachday , atrandomtimes , the electronic diaries also prompted , or “beeped , ” subjects and administered a similar assess - ment . These assessments captured not only the events associated with lapses , but the ﬂow of mood , behavior , and events in the hours and days before and after lapses . These EMA data , captured using the electronic diaries , allowed the investiga - tors to answer a variety of questions ( see Shiffman 2005 ) , including : How much crav - ing do smokers experience when they quit smoking ? ( Surprisingly little , except in dis - crete episodes ; Shiffman et al . 1997a . ) Does craving intensity vary with individual charac - teristics , such as nicotine dependence ? ( Yes ; Shiffman et al . 2004 . ) Are day - to - day changes in craving intensity associated with variations in subsequent risk of smoking ? ( Yes , especially craving experienced ﬁrst thing in the morn - ing ; Shiffman et al . 1997a . ) Does experienc - ing emotional distress predispose smokers to lapse ? ( Yes , but only acute distress , over a pe - riod of hours ; Shiffman & Waters 2004 . ) Do situational factors affect lapse risk ? ( Yes , espe - cially emotional distress , others smoking , and alcohol consumption ; Shiffman et al . 1996b . ) Do lapses diminish self - efﬁcacy ? ( Yes , nega - tively ; Shiffman et al . 1997b . ) These are just some of the kinds of ques - tions and answers that can be examined using EMA . They illustrate the potential for EMA data to address questions about individual dif - ferences , about particular episodes or situa - tions , about the unfolding of processes over time , and about the interactions among these factors . In this way , they illustrate both the richness and the complexity of EMA data . This study illustrates several key fea - tures common to EMA approaches ( Stone & Shiffman 1994 , Stone et al . 2007a ) : (cid:2) Data are collected in real - world envi - ronments , as subjects go about their www . annualreviews . org • Ecological Momentary Assessment 3 . 3 A nnu . R e v . C li n . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 4 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f M i ss ou r i - C o l u m b i a on 02 / 18 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV339 - CP04 - 03 ARI 6 November 2007 22 : 4 Autobiographicalmemory : memory processes involved in recalling one’s own experience lives . This is the “ecological” aspect of EMA and allows generalization to the subjects’ real lives , i . e . , ecological validity . (cid:2) Assessments focus on subjects’ current state ; forexample , self - reportsaskabout current feelings ( or very recent ones ) , rather than asking for recall or summary over long periods . This is the “momen - tary” aspect of EMA and aims to avoid the error and bias associated with retro - spection . (cid:2) Moments are strategically selected for assessment , whether based on particu - lar features of interest ( e . g . , occasions whensubjectssmoked ) , byrandomsam - pling ( to characterize subjects’ experi - encesthroughrepresentativesampling ) , or by other sampling schemes . (cid:2) Subjects complete multiple assessments over time , providing a picture of how their experiences and behavior varies over time and across situations . This study is only illustrative . The par - ticular design , assessment schedule , assess - ment content , and even technology will vary across studies , depending on the behavior re - searchers are studying , their aims , and their theoretical frameworks . But what EMA stud - ies have in common is the collection of as - sessments of subjects’ current or recent states , sampled repeatedly over time , in their natural environments . With this illustration as back - ground , we now move to highlighting the key aspects of EMA methods . Momentary , Real - Time Assessment EMA methods developed in part in response to the limitations of retrospective recall . Al - though we all feel conﬁdent in our own mem - ories , research on autobiographical memory teaches us that memory can be quite un - reliable ( Bradburn et al . 1987 , Tourangeau 2000 ) . Our recollections are not just inac - curate : They are often systematically biased . That is , the errors made in recalling informa - tion are not just random noise ; rather , they change the data in systematic ways . For ex - ample , people are more likely to retrieve neg - atively valenced information when they are in a negative mood , thus introducing substantial bias ( Clark & Teasdale 1982 ) . Because the dy - namics of recall are so important to justifying and structuring EMA methods , these issues are reviewed in more detail below . Real - World Data If one is interested in how subjects feel at work , there is no point asking them how they feel in the research clinic—or at home , for that matter . EMA recognizes that many be - haviors and experiences can be affected by context . Therefore , in order for assessed ex - perience or behavior to be representative , it has to be sampled in the contexts in which it naturally occurs . Stated more simply , EMA emphasizes ecologically valid observations . Because EMA data are collected in sub - jects’ natural environments—in real life— they should be generalizable to real - world , real - life experience . Repeated Assessment EMA studies involve many repeated mea - sures , covering various extents of time with varying intensity of assessment . Some imple - mentadensescheduleofassessment , assessing subjects as often as every 30 minutes ( Shapiro et al . 2002 ) over a period of days . At the other extreme , subjects may be assessed less fre - quently ( e . g . , daily ) over periods as long as a year ( Jamison et al . 2001 ) . Some EMA stud - ies are primarily focused on using these many measures to characterize the subject’s “typi - cal” state , aggregating over the repeated as - sessments to better characterize the subject’s average state across situations . More often , EMA studies use the temporal resolution af - forded by multiple measures to focus on the within - subject changes in behavior and expe - rience over time and across contexts , address - ing how symptoms vary over time or how sit - uational antecedents inﬂuence behavior . 3 . 4 Shiffman · Stone · Hufford A nnu . R e v . C li n . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 4 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f M i ss ou r i - C o l u m b i a on 02 / 18 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV339 - CP04 - 03 ARI 6 November 2007 22 : 4 In summary , EMA aims to assess the ebb andﬂowofexperienceandbehaviorovertime , capturing life as it is lived , moment to mo - ment , hour to hour , day to day , as a way of faithfully characterizing individuals and of capturing the dynamics of experience and be - havior over time and across settings . ECOLOGICAL MOMENTARY ASSESSMENT SCOPE AND HISTORY EMA is sometimes mistakenly associated nar - rowly with particular designs , such as the use of randomly scheduled prompts to col - lect assessments , or with certain technolo - gies , such as the use of palm - top comput - ers . However , EMA is not a single method , much less a particular technology , but rather a collection of methods that share the charac - teristics described above . EMA includes tra - ditional diaries , whether they use paper and pencil ( Green et al . 2006 ) , palm - top com - puters ( Shiffman et al . 1996b ) , or telephones ( Perrine et al . 1995 ) . It encompasses inter - personal interaction diaries ( Reis & Wheeler 1991 ) , ambulatory physiological monitoring ( Kop et al . 2001 ) , and collection of medi - cation compliance data by instrumented pill bottles ( Byerly et al . 2005 ) . The technologies differ , the targets of assessment differ , the schedules of data collection differ , but all of thesemethodsfocusoncollectingdatarepeat - edly , in close to real time , and in subjects’ nat - ural environments . EMA aims to bring these diverse methods under a common framework in order to deﬁne higher - order methodologi - cal principles , identify commonalities across methods , and thus provide a framework in which researchers and clinicians can select the appropriate methods for their particular re - search studies or interventions . Althoughtheterm“EMA”wasonlycoined in 1994 ( Stone & Shiffman 1994 ) , EMA re - search , as deﬁned here , has been an active area for decades . A search using the terms “diary , ” “experience sampling , ” and “ecological mo - mentary assessment” yielded over 3000 cita - tions in the past 25 years on PsychLit , and 196 , 000 “hits” on Google TM Scholar . This in - dicates a substantial volume of research activ - ity using EMA methods . The emergence of EMA as an important research method is also indicated by a num - ber of books and reviews that have appeared on the topic , including books on EMA meth - ods and ﬁndings by Stone et al . ( 2007b ) , Hektner et al . ( 2007 ) , and Fahrenberg & Myrtek ( 2001 ) ; applications to mental health by DeVries ( 1992 ) ; and discussions of data analysis by Walls & Schafer ( 2006 ) . Other reviews include Wheeler & Reis ( 1991 ) on sampling schemes for EMA methods , Scol - lon et al . ( 2003 ) on the promise and chal - lenges of EMA methods , Bolger et al . ( 2003 ) on various uses of diary methods , and Pi - asecki et al . ( 2007 ) on applications of EMA methods to clinical treatment . A recent spe - cial issue of the Journal of Personality ( Tennen et al . 2005 ) described several research pro - grams applying EMA methods to issues rel - evant to personality , clinical , and health psy - chology , and several review papers discussed theirapplicationtoparticulardomains : Thiele et al . ( 2002 ) reviewed the application of EMA methods to clinical psychology , Moskowitz & Young ( 2006 ) discussed applications to psy - chopharmacology , and Beal & Weiss ( 2003 ) to industrial psychology . The reader is referred to these sources for more detail than can be included here . Finally , EMA methods are being used to study a very wide range of behaviors , expe - riences , and conditions . In a review of pub - lished diary studies , Thiele and colleagues ( 2002 ) found large groups of studies on pain , mood , anxiety and anxiety disorders , eating , sleep , gastrointestinal disorders , and alcohol consumption . But even this is an incom - plete list : EMA studies include studies of de - pression , social support , initiate relationships , diet , work activity and satisfaction , sexual behavior , psychotherapy , drug use , allergies , psychological stress , adverse effects of medi - cations , self - esteem , and asthma , to name just a few . Clinical disorders studied with EMA www . annualreviews . org • Ecological Momentary Assessment 3 . 5 A nnu . R e v . C li n . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 4 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f M i ss ou r i - C o l u m b i a on 02 / 18 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV339 - CP04 - 03 ARI 6 November 2007 22 : 4 including addictive disorders , eating disor - ders , anxiety disorders , depression , bipolar disorder , schizophrenia , sexual dysfunction , and ADHD—in other words , the full range of psychopathology . Beyond clinical syndromes and symptoms , EMA is also widely used to study basic adaptation processes relevant to adjustment , such as coping , self - esteem , and social support , as well as behaviors central to health psychology and behavioral medicine , such as coping with illness and treatment , medication compliance , exercise , relaxation , and safe sexual practices , among other behav - iors . In sum , EMA methods are used in most domains of concern to clinical psychology . Historical Roots EMA draws together several historical tradi - tions , including diaries , self - monitoring , ex - perience sampling , ambulatory monitoring , and others . The oldest is the use of written diaries for research ( Verbrugge 1980 ) , which was systematically deployed in clinical re - search in the 1940s . Self - monitoring of par - ticular behaviors or experiences ( Korotitsch & Nelson - Gray 1999 ) has a long history in research and particularly in behavioral treat - ment . Thisincludessimplecountsofclinically relevant events , but also collection of data about their antecedents and contexts , which provideddatafor“naturalisticfunctionalanal - ysis” ( Schlundt et al . 1985 ) . Related methods included self - monitoring of particular targets ; a prominent example is the Rochester Inter - action Record ( Reis & Wheeler 1991 ) , which subjects used to record every social interac - tion . Self - monitoring approaches often aimed to capture all relevant events , and as a result didnotfocusonsamplingissuesorcollectdata outside of target events . Other historical streams that fed into the development of EMA focused on broad de - scriptions of subjects’ behavior . One came from the focus of the Kansas School of Eco - logical Research ( Barker 1978 ) on continuous observationofbehaviorthroughthedayinthe natural environment . Another derived from the ethnographic method of describing indi - viduals’ allocation of time , often to describe differences among societies ( Szalai 1966 ) . A variant of this within schools of manage - ment and business examined the behavior of workers in the workplace to understand how they used their time and what activities they engaged in . More central to the development of mod - ern EMA methods was the development by Czikszentmihalyi and colleagues ( DeVries 1992 , Hektner et al . 2007 ) of the Experience Sampling Method , demonstrating the inno - vation of randomly sampling experience , ini - tially using pagers to “beep” people at ran - dom times to prompt them to complete diary cards reporting their activity , mood , and or thoughts . The development of electronic di - aries , based upon the emerging technology of handheld computers , opened up new oppor - tunities for more complex and sophisticated EMA protocols that incorporated , combined , and expanded upon the various approaches to collecting EMA self - report data . Enabled by technological developments , ambulatory monitoring of cardiovascular function , which became possible with the de - velopment of wearable cardiac monitors , has been used for several decades as a means of understanding the link between experience and cardiovascular health ( Turner et al . 1994 ) . Ambulatory monitoring did not rely on self - report ( although it was often accompanied by written diaries ) and also enabled continuous or near - continuous recording . Recent devel - opments have expanded physiological moni - toring to other parameters , such as galvanic skin response , temperature , motion , and oth - ers ( Wilhelm et al . 2003 ) . Often little atten - tion was paid to sampling , in part because the monitors could collect data almost continu - ously ( e . g . , actigraph or heart - rate recording ) or at very high and stable frequencies . Some physiological monitoring devices ( e . g . , mon - itoring of blood - glucose , pulmonary func - tion ) require subjects to actively make pe - riodic assessments , and thus raise many of the sampling issues that arise with self - report . 3 . 6 Shiffman · Stone · Hufford A nnu . R e v . C li n . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 4 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f M i ss ou r i - C o l u m b i a on 02 / 18 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV339 - CP04 - 03 ARI 6 November 2007 22 : 4 Technological developments have also en - abled automated EMA assessment of behav - iors ( e . g . , pill taking ; Cramer et al . 1989 ) and even of the physical environment ( e . g . , air sampling ; Saito et al . 2005 ) . These diverse traditions developed in dif - ferent disciplinary contexts , often with dis - tinct assessment targets . For example , the ExperienceSamplingMethodfocusedonsub - jective states ( Hektner et al . 2007 refer to it as systematic phenomenology ) , whereas self - monitoring focused on behaviors , and ambu - latory monitoring focused on physiological parameters . Moreover , because of their par - ticular disciplinary histories and content foci , these methods have been discussed in differ - ent literatures , and investigators in one tradi - tion often seem unaware of the others . Yet , these methods share many goals , concerns , and approaches . The object of EMA , which attempts to encompass all of them , is to unify these diverse approaches under a common methodological framework . AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORY AND LIMITATIONS OF RECALL A major motivation for EMA is to avoid the pitfalls and limitations of reliance on autobio - graphical memory . In this section , we expand on the issues and concerns regarding autobi - ographical memory , both to explain the ratio - naleforEMAandtoprovideanessentialfoun - dation to considerations of the uses of EMA and speciﬁc EMA designs . Research on autobiographical memory ( Bradburn et al . 1987 ) indicates that recall is not just subject to random error but also is fraught with systematic bias , which can dis - tort recall even after relatively short inter - vals . Modern cognitive science considers that much of what we “recall” is actually recon - struction , pieced together from fragmentary inputs through the use of various heuristic strategies . Many experiences are not retained in memory , so often the information we are asked to provide simply is not available for direct retrieval . Experiences are particularly likely to be encoded and retrieved if they are emotionally salient or are unique ; routine ex - perienceislesslikelytobeencodedandharder to retrieve . Moreover , the process of retrieval itself is subject to bias because the accessi - bility of particular content in memory varies with the subject’s mental state at the time of retrieval . Importantly , research inquiries usually ask subjects not to just retrieve but also to aggre - gate and summarize their experiences ( e . g . , “How intense was the pain , on average , to - day ? ” ) . Whentryingtoanswersuchquestions , subjectsdonotrecall , enumerate , andthenag - gregate their experience over time ( Bradburn et al . 1987 ) . Rather , they use a variety of heuristics to estimate the answer . The use of cognitive heuristics and the processes of re - trieval account for much of the bias in recall data . A key example of a biasing cognitive heuristic is the “availability heuristic . ” In its original form , as described by Tversky & Kahneman ( 1973 ) , this refers to how peo - ple make judgments about the frequency of events . When deciding how often an event ( say , a ﬁght with a spouse ) occurs , a person tries to retrieve an example . If an example is easy to think of ( i . e . , it is easily “available” in memory ) , the event is considered to be fre - quent . One can see how this heuristic would work much of the time—rare events should be harder to “ﬁnd” in memory . But one can also see how biased it can be : if a ﬁght was partic - ularly memorable because it was intense , if it is easily recalled because it was recent , or be - cause one was recently reminded of it ( say , by a previous question in the assessment ) , then the frequency of ﬁghts will be overestimated . Importantly , the process of memory re - trieval is itself subject to bias by the person’s context and mental state at the time of re - call . It has been shown , for example , that sub - jects in a negative mood more easily recall negativeinformationthanpositive ( Kihlstrom et al . 2000 ) . Similarly , subjects who are in pain ﬁnd it easy to remember past pain , but harder to recall pain - free states ; accordingly , it’s been www . annualreviews . org • Ecological Momentary Assessment 3 . 7 A nnu . R e v . C li n . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 4 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f M i ss ou r i - C o l u m b i a on 02 / 18 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV339 - CP04 - 03 ARI 6 November 2007 22 : 4 Recall bias : systematic errors in data values ( as distinct from random error ) introduced by processes of autobiographicalmemory shown that subjects who are in pain at the time ofrecallwilloverestimatetheirpastpain ( Eich et al . 1985 ) . This has profound implications for research because it suggests that the sub - ject’s state and situation at time of reporting will inﬂuence what is reported . A dramatic demonstration of the biases in recall—and an indication of how quickly these biases can set in—was reported by Redelmeier et al . ( 2003 ) . Summary ratings of pain by sub - jects who had undergone a colonoscopy 20 to 30 minutes earlier were found to be unduly inﬂuenced by the peak level of pain ( presum - ably because it was most salient ) and the pain intensity at the end of the procedure ( most recent ) . In other words , recall did not accu - rately represent the average pain over the in - terval , because it was based on a few of the most memorable moments , essentially ignor - ing most of the experience . This shows the potential for bias even over short intervals . Besides being distorted by the operation of heuristic recall strategies , memory is also in - ﬂuenced by what we know and believe rather than actually recall . People unconsciously re - organize their “memories” to make them ﬁt a coherent script or theory of events or to reconcile events with what transpired subse - quently ( Ross 1989 ) . These biases are particu - larly pernicious because they tend to produce recalled patterns that are coherent and that may conform to theoretical predictions , even if they are false . It is important to understand that these bi - asing processes operate involuntarily and un - consciously . They do not represent distortion by uncooperative or defensive subjects—this is simply the way memory operates . Research inquiries often maximize the potential for bias by asking about routine events , asking sub - jects to summarize their experience , and so - liciting recall in unusual settings ( i . e . , research laboratories ) and contexts ( e . g . , after being asked other questions ) that can bias recall . Thus , heuristics that serve well enough to ad - dress the demands placed on autobiographical memory in everyday life can break down when called upon to produce accurate research data . THE USES OF ECOLOGICAL MOMENTARY ASSESSMENT EMA data are collected for a variety of pur - poses ( Bolger et al . 2003 ) . We categorize these into four classes : ( a ) characterizing individ - ual differences , ( b ) describing natural history , ( c ) assessing contextual associations , and ( d ) documenting temporal sequences . We illus - trate each with an example . Individual Differences When used to characterize individual differ - ences , EMA data are aggregated to obtain a measure of the subject that is collapsed across time ( i . e . , across multiple EMA measures ) ; for example , the average intensity of pain experi - enced by a pain patient . As an extension of this , aggregated EMA data might be used to quantify subjects’ characteristics at two dif - ferent time points ; e . g . , pain before and after treatmentadministration . Asestimatesofsub - ject characteristics , aggregated EMA data are expected to provide assessments of individuals thataremorereliable ( becauseofaggregation ) and more valid ( because of avoidance of recall bias , representative sampling , and ecological validity ) . Of course , if the variable is very sta - ble over time , if recall bias were not present , and if contextual factors did not inﬂuence the variable , then there would be no advantage in using EMA . Natural History To describe natural history , EMA measures are analyzed for trends over time . In this case , the within - subject variation over time itself is the focus , and time is the independent vari - able , the X - axis in a graphical representation of the data . For example , McCarthy et al . ( 2006 ) documented the trajectories of various withdrawal symptoms that smokers experi - enced after quitting . The EMA data demon - strated that some symptoms peaked immedi - ately when smokers quit and then decreased over time , while others increased and per - sisted , andstillothersincreasedonlygradually 3 . 8 Shiffman · Stone · Hufford A nnu . R e v . C li n . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 4 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f M i ss ou r i - C o l u m b i a on 02 / 18 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV339 - CP04 - 03 ARI 6 November 2007 22 : 4 over time . These patterns contradicted widely held notions about the course of the with - drawal syndrome and were associated with differences in treatment outcome . Basic de - scriptive information about the natural his - tory of symptoms over time can often be an important foundation for understanding clin - ical disorders and outcomes . Contextual Associations Studies that examine contextual associations look at the association or interaction between two ( or more ) phenomena that co - occur in time . Analyses of contextual associations are often cross - sectional , even when data are col - lected longitudinally , in that they examine the co - occurrence of events or experiences , not their sequence . In these analyses , time is not explicitly represented—it is more of a stage against which the events of interest play out . For example , Myin - Germeys et al . ( 2001 ) examined emotions accompanying stressful events as a way to test a diathesis - stress model of schizophrenia . They postulated that vul - nerability to schizophrenia would be reﬂected in excess emotional responses accompanying stress . Schizophrenics , their ﬁrst - degree rel - atives ( who are genetically vulnerable ) , and normal controls were assessed 10 times daily about stressful events and mood . An exam - ination of individual differences in average mood showed that the schizophrenics re - ported more negative affect and more stress - ful events , whereas vulnerable individuals and normal controls did not differ . But a look at stressor - mood associations revealed that the ﬁrst - degree relatives reacted more strongly than did controls . Thus , examination of the association between stressors and mood at particular moments was key to understanding what vulnerabilities might be conferred by a genetic predisposition to schizophrenia . Understanding the momentary cross - sectional associations between different as - pects of experience has also been important for foundational studies of the structure of behavior and experience ; for example , data on the covariation of momentary emotions have been central in the debate about whether positive and negative emotions are polar op - posites or are independent dimensions and can be experienced simultaneously . Feldman - Barrett & Russell ( 1998 ) used EMA data to address the argument that although one could be both happy and distressed over some in - terval of time , in a particular moment , one could be either happy or distressed but not both . Although most designs examine associa - tions between different variables within the same person , an interesting variation consid - ershowonepersoninarelationshipaffectsthe other ( Bolger & Laurenceau 2005 ) . For exam - ple , Larson & Richards ( 1994 ) asked members of families to track their experience in parallel and examined how the mood of each affected theother . Theyfound , forexample , thatahus - band’s mood when he comes home from work signiﬁcantly inﬂuences his wife’s mood , but not vice versa . Temporal Sequences Finally , thelongitudinalnatureofEMAdatais used to explicitly examine temporal sequences of events or experiences , to document an - tecedents or consequences of events or be - haviors , or to study cascades of events . In theseanalyses , unlikethoseabove , theorderof events or assessments is explicitly considered and is a key focus . The previously cited study ofquittingsmoking ( Shiffmanetal . 1997b ) as - sessed smokers’ affect and self - efﬁcacy before and after lapses to smoking , and their effects on subsequent progression toward relapse , to test Marlatt’s theory ( Curry et al . 1987 ) that the psychological response to lapses is what drives progression toward relapse . Compar - ing assessments obtained before the lapse and afterward conﬁrmed the theory’s hypothesis that lapses would result in increased negative affect and decreased self - efﬁcacy ( Shiffman et al . 1997b ) . Continued EMA monitoring , however , contradicted the theory’s prediction that increases in negative affect and decreases www . annualreviews . org • Ecological Momentary Assessment 3 . 9 A nnu . R e v . C li n . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 4 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f M i ss ou r i - C o l u m b i a on 02 / 18 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV339 - CP04 - 03 ARI 6 November 2007 22 : 4 in self - efﬁcacy would predict the risk of subsequent progression to another lapse or relapse ( Shiffman et al . 1996a ) . Importantly , retrospective analyses had appeared to show a relationship between initial responses to a lapse and progression to relapse ( Curry et al . 1987 ) , but later comparisons with EMA data ( Shiffman et al . 1997c ) showed that retrospec - tive reports of lapse episodes were inaccurate and biased : Subjects recalled their mood as worse than it actually had been , and those who had returned to smoking at the time of re - call exaggerated how demoralizing the initial lapse had been . Thus , prospectiveassessments of the ﬂow of behavior and experience , and of the antecedents and consequences of events , can enable a more valid and more detailed un - derstanding of behavior . These examples illustrate the use of EMA data to evaluate hypotheses regarding the dynamic interactions among processes over time . Data provided by EMA studies may be likened to a movie , in which dynamic rela - tionships emerge over time , whereas global or recall measures are analogous to a still pho - tograph , a single static snapshot of time . By providing temporal resolution , EMA meth - ods allow investigators to examine sequences of events and experiences and enable them to describe and analyze cascades of events and interactions between events that shape behav - ior over periods of minutes , hours , or days . Insight into microprocesses—the interplay or cascade of cognitive , affective , and behavioral variables over short intervals of time—is par - ticularly important because many theories of psychopathology and treatment focus on how these processes unfold over time . Evaluation ofmicroprocessesalsofacilitatesdevelopment of interventions because an understanding of how affect , cognition , and behavior interact and unfold over time helps identify leverage points for timely , and at least potentially more efﬁcacious , clinical interventions . The ability to shed light on dynamic processes and situa - tional inﬂuences is potentially the most criti - cal contribution of EMA methods to clinical psychology . DATA COMPARING RETROSPECTIVE AND REAL - TIME REPORTS Research suggests that recall measures , and especiallysummarymeasures , areoftenbiased due to the use of mental heuristics to recall information . This implies that there will be discrepanciesbetweenEMA - basedandrecall - based assessments of the same period . Rel - atively few studies have examined such dis - crepancies . In discussing this literature , we distinguishcomparisonwithaggregatedEMA measures from comparisons of disaggregated time - speciﬁc estimates . Comparison of Aggregated Recall - Based Data and EMA A number of studies have evaluated the rela - tionship between EMA - and recall - based as - sessments , comparing EMA assessments av - eraged over some interval with recall - based measures for the same interval . In some in - stances , the two methods yield similar esti - mates ( Shrier et al . 2005 ) , and in some other cases , recall methods produce lower estimates of intensity or frequency than do EMA meth - ods ( Carneyetal . 1998 , Littetal . 2000 ) . How - ever , in many domains , recall - based assess - ments tend to yield higher estimated levels than diary ratings of the same target events : That is , symptoms tend to be described as more frequent , more intense , and longer last - ing , sometimes dramatically so ( Broderick et al . 2006 , Houtveen & Oei 2007 , Shiffman 2007 , Shiffman et al . 2006 ; see review in Van den Brink et al . 2001 ) . Behavior frequency is also often overestimated in recall ( Homma et al . 2002 , Shiffman & Paty 2003 ) . This phenomenon may be the result of the un - due inﬂuence of more salient experiences in recall : Intense pain is more salient than no pain , headaches are more salient than non - headaches , and so on , leading recall data to overestimate clinical symptoms . An example of this is the ﬁnding that subjects who had themostintenseheadachesalsooverestimated 3 . 10 Shiffman · Stone · Hufford A nnu . R e v . C li n . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 4 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f M i ss ou r i - C o l u m b i a on 02 / 18 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV339 - CP04 - 03 ARI 6 November 2007 22 : 4 headache frequency ( Van den Brink et al . 2001 ) . Studies have also examined the correlation between aggregated EMA and recall - based data , which assesses whether the ranking of individuals is similar across the two sources , and can be high even when there are differ - ences in the two means . Like the ﬁndings on mean differences , the ﬁndings from cor - relational studies are also variable . Studies of drug use report good correspondence for fre - quency or quantity used ( Carney et al . 1998 , Shiffman & Paty 2003 ) , but very poor cor - respondence when characterizing situational patternsofdruguse , whichinvolvemorecom - plex judgments ( Shiffman 1993 , Todd et al . 2005 ) . In one study of pain among chronic pain patients ( J . Broderick , J . Schwartz , and A . A . Stone , unpublished observations ) , corre - lations in the 0 . 70s were seen between EMA and recall - based measures of pain intensity , whereas Van den Brink ( 2001 ) reported cor - relations around 0 . 20 for headache frequency , intensity , and duration . Thus , ﬁndings on correspondence be - tween aggregate EMA data and recall - based estimates are inconsistent and variable . One likely reason is that the magnitude and direc - tion of recall bias can differ across subjects and settings . Individual differences can affect re - call accuracy . Feldman - Barrett ( 1997 ) found that recalled distress was exaggerated among more neurotic subjects and positive affect was exaggerated among extraverted subjects , and Van den Brink ( 2001 ) describes other individ - ual differences that moderate recall bias . Be - liefs can also moderate recall bias . McFarland et al . ( 1989 ) found that women who believed that their menstrual cycle inﬂuenced their mood reported exaggerated negative mood in retrospect , but only for menstrual days . In contrast , women who did not believe men - struation inﬂuenced mood did not show any bias , either for menstrual or nonmenstrual days . Variationinthepatternoftargetsymptoms themselves can moderate bias . Stone et al . ( 2005 ) showed that subjects whose pain was relatively constant over time were able to es - timate their pain more accurately since , in ef - fect , they could easily know their typical pain level or estimate accurately from any given time point . In contrast , subjects whose pain was variable demonstrated considerable bias . Furthermore , Broderick et al . ( 2006 ) and oth - ers have found that recalled pain was particu - larlyexaggeratedwhensubjectswereinpainat the time of recall and understated when they were not . Thus , thevalidityofrecalldatalikelyvaries with characteristics of both the samples and the setting . It is likely that the validity of re - call is also inﬂuenced by the duration of the recall interval and the variability , salience , and uniqueness of what is being assessed : Some kinds of end points may be well estimated , whereas others are not . Better understand - ing of these relationships could help estab - lish when EMA is likely to add the most value compared with aggregated recall measures . Correlations Between Disaggregated EMA and Recall The studies reviewed above assess the cor - relation between EMA - and recall - based es - timates of experience when EMA data are aggregated over time to broadly character - ize person - level effects , and compared with similar data based on global recall . How - ever , EMA data are most often used not just to characterize between - person differences , but also to characterize within - person vari - ations in experience over time , so that the question is whether recall measures are able to accurately reﬂect time - speciﬁc data . The available evidence suggests that they cannot . Even when global recall data correlate well with aggregated EMA data , as in the stud - ies cited above ( J . Broderick , J . Schwartz , and A . A . Stone , unpublishedobservations ; Carney et al . 1998 ; Shiffman & Paty 2003 ) , they do not adequately capture time - varying data , with correlations for recall of speciﬁc days hovering in the range of 0 . 20 – 0 . 40 . Moreover , analyses show that the cross - day correlation www . annualreviews . org • Ecological Momentary Assessment 3 . 11 A nnu . R e v . C li n . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 4 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f M i ss ou r i - C o l u m b i a on 02 / 18 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV339 - CP04 - 03 ARI 6 November 2007 22 : 4 also varies widely between subjects , with some subjects actually showing negative cor - relations between their recalled reports and real - time reports of the same target events ( Carney et al . 1998 , Searles et al . 2000 ) . In other words , even when recall appears adequate to characterize aggregate experi - ence , it is not typically adequate to charac - terize day - to - day changes in cognitions and behaviors of interest , which are typically the focus of EMA research . This highlights one of the unique contributions of EMA to the study of processes that unfold over time . Construct Validity of Real - Time Versus Recall Assessments InadditiontocomparisonsofEMA - basedand aggregated recall - based assessments to each other , comparisonscanbemadebasedontheir construct validity—in other words , their re - lationships with other theoretically relevant constructs . Several studies illustrate cases in which EMA data show incremental validity over and above retrospective or global as - sessments of similar constructs . Kamarck and colleagues ( 2007 ) directly contrasted the ef - fect of job strain on cardiovascular outcomes when strain was measured by EMA versus global measures . Subjects ﬁlled out a stan - dard global job strain questionnaire and used an electronic diary to collect EMA data on experienced strain every 45 minutes for six days ( data from the EMA was averaged to create a single EMA summary variable ) . The study’s outcome measure was a prospectively assessed biological outcome : the progression of blockage in the carotid artery ( which corre - lates with blockage of coronary arteries ) over the subsequent three years . EMA - based mea - sures of job strain predicted progression of arterial occlusion ; however , traditional global questionnaire measures of job strain did not . Moreover , heart rate assessed by EMA in the natural environment also independently predicted progression of carotid blockage , whereas heart rate measured in the lab did not . This illustrates the potential of EMA data to shed light on relationships that are missed when relying on global retrospective self - reports . In a study of smoking , Shiffman and col - leagues ( 2007 ) similarly compared global and EMA - based measures , in this case , measures of “negative - affect smoking”—the tendency to smoke when distressed . The EMA - based measure estimated negative - affect smoking by comparing negative affect on smoking and nonsmoking occasions ; the global assess - ment used standardized and validated ques - tionnaires . Shiffman et al . tested the predic - tion that smokers engaged in negative - affect smoking would be more vulnerable to relapse after they quit smoking . This was found to be true for EMA - assessed negative - affect smok - ing , but not for assessments based on standard recall - based questionnaires . The literature also suggests that EMA measures may sometimes mirror the ﬁndings of recall measures , but may capture the target constructs with less noise and greater sensitiv - ity . In a study of the efﬁcacy of analgesics in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis , Nived and colleagues ( 1994 ) reported that diary data differentiated active treatment from control after only four weeks of treatment , whereas it took 24 weeks for the differences to become apparent in recall measures collected at clinic visits . In a related vein , analyses have shown that real - time diary - based methods resulted in decreased error variance when capturing events ( McKenzie et al . 2004 ) and scaled rat - ings ( Pearson 2004 ) , making such data more sensitive to treatment effects . In contrast to these studies favoring EMA data , J . Broderick , J . Schwartz , and A . A . Stone ( unpublished observations ) recently found that EMA and recall - based measures of pain were equally correlated with medication - taking and social impairment . Importantly , other studies have illustrated cases in which recall measures were actually better predic - tors of subsequent behavior than were EMA data . These cases are illuminating . In a study of bias in recall of pain , Kahneman and col - leagues ( Redelmeier et al . 2003 ) showed that 3 . 12 Shiffman · Stone · Hufford A nnu . R e v . C li n . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 4 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f M i ss ou r i - C o l u m b i a on 02 / 18 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV339 - CP04 - 03 ARI 6 November 2007 22 : 4 participants who were randomized to un - dergoalongercolonoscopy , withmoreoverall pain , but who experienced less intense pain near the end of the procedure actually re - calledloweroverallpain . Afollow - uprevealed that subjects who had undergone the longer procedure—which was experienced as more painful in real time—were more likely to re - turn for a repeat colonoscopy . In other words , their future behavior was related to the ret - rospective summary of pain , not the momen - tary experience . Similarly , Oishi & Sullivan ( 2006 ) found that break - up of dating cou - ples was better predicted from their retro - spective summaries of relationship dissatis - faction than from their daily ratings . These ﬁndings make sense , because people shape theirsubsequentbehavior—whethertoreturn for a colonoscopy , whether to proceed with a relationship—by reference to their stored summary memory of the experience , not the actual experience at the time . Theseexamplesillustrateakeypoint : Even if they do not match momentary experience , retrospective impressions or global beliefs can exercise greater control over subsequent be - havior , since they represent the information that people use to make subsequent decisions . In this sense , the momentary and retrospec - tive reports represent different perspectives on the same event . If one is interested in what was experienced in the moment ( e . g . , to un - derstand the physiological effects of the pain or to evaluate the effects of an analgesic ) or wishes to understand what are the proximal determinants of a speciﬁc event , then the mo - mentary data are likely to provide a more valid picture . But if one is interested in the person’s impressions of an event or in the prediction of future behavior , then the retrospective im - pressions may well be better predictors than EMA . This suggests that researchers evalu - ating the validity and utility of EMA and re - call data must consider whether they are con - cerned with understanding the experience as lived or with understanding subjects’ impres - sions of those experiences . As we have argued with regard to assessments of psychological Event - based sampling : a method of data collection whereby a recording is made each time a predeﬁned event occurs Time - based sampling : a method of data collection whereby a recording is solicited based on a time schedule , often based on random time intervals coping ( Stone et al . 1998 ) , confusion about what is being assessed can misdirect theory and research . The discrepancy between momentary ex - perience and global summary recall also sug - gests that it would be worthwhile for research to help us understand how momentary ex - periences are integrated in the development of global judgments . More research is also needed on the circumstances in which global or retrospective judgments are valid and cir - cumstances in which EMA data are neces - sary . In the interim , EMA is likely to provide unique insights about processes that charac - terize dynamics of behavior , cognition , and affect over time . ECOLOGICAL MOMENTARY ASSESSMENT DESIGNS AND APPROACHES In this section , we describe and categorize EMA designs , by which we mean the scheme thatdictatesthescheduling , arrangement , and temporal coverage of EMA assessments . In global assessments such as personality ques - tionnaires , the researcher assumes that the assessment captures the subject’s entire expe - rience in one fell swoop , rendering it unim - portant when the assessment is made . In EMA assessment , one assesses moments or periods of time , raising the issue of how to ensure that the moments or periods assessed are repre - sentative of the subject’s experience . In many cases , the assessments can be conceptualized as a sample of the person’s experience or be - havior . Thus , designing an EMA protocol can essentially amount to designing a sampling scheme for moments in an individual’s life . The most important inﬂuence on the design must be the aims of the study . EMA sampling and assessment schemes can be roughly divided into event - based sampling and time - based sampling schemes ( Shiffman 2007 , Wheeler & Reis 1991 ) . Event - based schemes do not aim to charac - terize subjects’ entire experience , but rather to focus on particular discrete events or www . annualreviews . org • Ecological Momentary Assessment 3 . 13 A nnu . R e v . C li n . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 4 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f M i ss ou r i - C o l u m b i a on 02 / 18 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV339 - CP04 - 03 ARI 6 November 2007 22 : 4 episodes in subjects’ lives—e . g . , headaches ( Niere & Jerak 2004 ) or drinking episodes ( Todd et al . 2005 ) —and organize the data col - lection around these events . Time - based sam - pling typically aims to characterize experience more broadly and inclusively—e . g . , observing how mood varies over time—without a prede - ﬁned focus on discrete events . Event - Based Monitoring In many disorders , the clinical and research interestisinparticulareventsorepisodes , e . g . , instances of drinking , violence , or panic at - tacks . These cases lend themselves to event - based monitoring , in which assessments are triggered by the occurrence of a predeﬁned event of interest to the investigator . For ex - ample , subjects might be asked to complete an assessment when they have a panic at - tack ( Taylor et al . 1990 ) , engage in a so - cial interaction lasting more than 10 minutes ( Reis & Wheeler 1991 ) , or take a medica - tion ( Jonasson et al . 1999 ) . Typically , the sub - jectsthemselvesdeterminewhentheeventhas occurred and initiate an assessment ( though some events can be automatically detected by devices ; see Kop et al . 2001 ) . Such pro - tocols require clear deﬁnitions of the event , which can be surprisingly thorny to delin - eate : If subjects are to make a record every time they eat , does chewing gum count as eating ? Sometimes , target events are deﬁned as episodic ﬂare - ups of otherwise continu - ous experiences , for example , a pain episode in which pain is experienced more intensely ( McCarberg 2007 ) , or an episode of intense cigarette craving ( Shiffman et al . 1997a ) . Deﬁning the algorithm for declaring an event is particularly difﬁcult—and important—in these cases . If one only needs a record of events , for ex - ample , to ascertain their frequency and time distribution , subjects need only note that an event has occurred , e . g . , press a button on a recording device . More often , investiga - tors wish to collect data about the event : its duration , intensity , antecedent mood , etc . ( Schlundt et al . 1985 , Shiffman et al . 1996b ) . If the events are too frequent , it may not be realistic to assess each event , in which case a subset of them can be sampled at random ( Shiffman et al . 2002 ) . An important limitation in the use of event - based monitoring is that there is often no way to independently assess or verify com - pliance ; i . e . , there is no way to know whether events occurred that were not entered or ( less likely ) entries made for events that did not oc - cur . In a few studies , diary entries have been compared to records made by separate elec - tronic devices ( e . g . , instrumented medication dispensers ) ; thesehavesuggestedthatmedica - tion compliance is exaggerated in self - report ( see Hufford 2007 ) . Event entries can some - times also be roughly conﬁrmed by biochemi - cal measures ; e . g . , Shiffman & Paty ( 2003 ) re - ported that subjects’ electronic diary records of cigarettes were consistent with biochemical measures of smoking . In any case , event re - ports are subject to error resulting from poor compliance or falsiﬁcation . Time - Based Designs Some clinical phenomena—e . g . , mood , pain—vary continuously and are not easily conceptualized in an episodic framework . In some instances ( e . g . , actigraphy , heart rate , skin conductance ) , the phenomenon can be monitored continuously . In the more typical case , where this is not possible , EMA protocols rely on time - based sampling . There are many varieties of time - based sampling schemes , which vary in schedule , frequency , and timing ( see Delespaul 1995 for more detail ) . The frequency of time - based assessments will determine the resolution the study will have . The resolution needed depends on the goal of the study , what is known about the be - havior studied , and the theoretical framework of the study . A variety of time - based assessment sched - ulesareusedinEMA . Someadministerassess - mentatﬁxedintervals . Thishasbeencommon 3 . 14 Shiffman · Stone · Hufford A nnu . R e v . C li n . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 4 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f M i ss ou r i - C o l u m b i a on 02 / 18 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV339 - CP04 - 03 ARI 6 November 2007 22 : 4 in ambulatory monitoring of blood pressure ( e . g . , every 30 to 45 minutes in Kamarck et al . 1998 ) . Assessment at equal intervals allows the time block to serve as the unit of analy - sis and supports analyses that require evenly spaced assessments , such as simple autocorre - lation analysis and time series analysis . ( Daily diaries are a special case discussed below . ) Some studies have used somewhat irregu - lar intervals , typically deﬁned by social pa - rameters : For example , Hensley et al . ( 2003 ) had subjects complete an asthma diary in the morning and evening of each day . Because the timeblocksarevaguelydeﬁned , theygivesub - jects considerable discretion in the timing of assessments , and this has the potential to in - troduce bias . For example , subjects might re - member to complete their mood assessments when they are reminded by extreme affect , thus biasing the sample of mood . An alternative to ﬁxed intervals is a vari - able schedule , which usually administers as - sessments at random times in order to achieve a representative sampling of subjects’ state . A variation is stratiﬁed random sampling , from within strata deﬁned by blocks of time within a day . For example , Afﬂeck and colleagues ( 1998 ) assessed subjects once in each pre - deﬁned time window in the morning , after - noon , or evening , with assessments scheduled at random within each interval . This guaran - tees that the sample of assessments will evenly sample time across the day and ensures ( sub - ject to missed assessments ) that each time blockincludesanassessment , whichallowsthe time block to serve as the unit of analysis . Setting the frequency of assessments in - cludesconsiderationsofsubjectburdenaswell as of how rapidly the target phenomenon is expected to vary . Although assessing subjects 3 to 5 times per day is common , some studies have succeeded with as many as 20 or more assessments per day ( Goldstein et al . 1992 ; Kamarck et al . 1998 , 2002 , 2005 , 2007 ) . As - sessment frequency may be varied to collect more assessments at certain times of day if those are of particular interest ( Shiffman et al . 2000 ) . Assessments should ideally be sched - PDA : personal digital assistant ( a handheld computer ) uled throughout the waking day . Some stud - ies have limited assessment to a narrow range of hours ( e . g . , 10 am to 10 pm in Kimhy et al . 2006 ) , which misses early - morning and late - night hours that may encompass important— and substantially different—experiences and behaviors . When using time - based assessment sched - ules , especially with variable intervals , EMA studies require some method of signaling sub - jects when an assessment is scheduled . This is typically accomplished through the use of a device—a beeper , phone , wristwatch , or per - sonal digital assistant ( PDA ) —programmed to signal the subjects at the appropriate times ( see Shiffman 2007 for a scussion of devices ) . Thus , although events can be captured at thesubject’sinitiative , continuousphenomena typically have to be sampled using a suitable time - based sampling scheme . Combination Designs Different sampling approaches can be fruit - fully combined to test particular hypotheses . When the researcher is interested in the cir - cumstances that are associated with a target event , it can be particularly helpful to com - bine time - and event - based assessments in or - der to provide a context for interpreting the event data . Data on the situational context of clinically meaningful events , such as panic attacks ( Margraf et al . 1987 ) or binge - eating episodes ( Engel et al . 2007 ) are hard to inter - pret without comparison to base - rates ( Paty et al . 1992 ) . For example , Greeno et al . ( 2000 ) found depressed affect among bingers at the time of a binge . However , this is difﬁcult to interpret : Does it mean that negative moods help trigger binges , or just that binge eaters are generally unhappy , even when not binge - ing ? By comparing affect reported during a binge with affect reported on random occa - sions outside of binges , Greeno et al . ( 2000 ) were able to establish that binges were specif - ically associated with more distress . This de - sign is modeled after the case - control design , with the events as “cases” and the nonevent www . annualreviews . org • Ecological Momentary Assessment 3 . 15 A nnu . R e v . C li n . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 4 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f M i ss ou r i - C o l u m b i a on 02 / 18 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV339 - CP04 - 03 ARI 6 November 2007 22 : 4 data collected by time - based methods consti - tuting the “controls , ” and is often referred to as a case - crossover design ( Maclure & Mittle - man 2000 ) . In EMA designs combining event - and time - based assessments , time - based assess - ments can also document the antecedents or sequelae of events . For example , Shiffman & Waters ( 2004 ) used time - based data to show that ex - smokers were experiencing escalating levels of affective distress in the hours preced - ing a smoking lapse ( the event ) and to show that self - efﬁcacy decreased following a lapse , but not after occasions when smokers success - fully resisted a temptation to smoke ( Shiffman et al . 1997b ) . Time - based assessments can be usedtofollowuponthesequelaeofarecorded event . For example , to test how quickly mi - graine medications delivered pain relief and how long the relief lasted , Sheftell and col - leagues ( 2005 ) had subjects record the onset of migraines and then scheduled a series of assessments as follow - ups . Combining different schedules of time - based assessments can also be useful . For ex - ample , Muraven et al . ( 2005 ) assessed social drinking in subjects throughout the day but also scheduled an assessment each morning to ask about hangovers from the previous night’s drinking . This illustrates how decisions about design and scheduling of assessments need to be driven by the research questions and by knowledge about the natural history of the target behavior . Use of Recall in EMA Although some EMA studies truly focus on the moment , many assessments involve some degree of retrospection . For example , Afﬂeck and colleagues ( 1998 ) asked ﬁbromyalgia sub - jects to report on their pain and fatigue over the past 30 minutes . Event - based diaries of - ten involve some retrospection if the entry is made after the event : For example , studies with the Rochester Interaction Diary ( Reis & Wheeler 1991 ) ask subjects about social in - teractions they had just concluded . Thus , the focus on momentary experience is not abso - lute ; it might more liberally be thought of as a focus on recent experience . Of course , some events and experiences are likely to be recalled more accurately , particularly if they are un - common and / or highly salient ( e . g . , a major marital spat ) or recent . However , since the lit - erature shows that recall can be biased over even a short interval , the researcher needs to carefully consider the use of recall meth - ods and the potential for bias even over short intervals . Sampling Versus Coverage Strategies When subjects are assessed intermittently and the focus is on their momentary state , the as - sessments do not provide complete coverage of their daily experience . That is , even though we may have assessed their mood 12 times in a day , andfoundthemhappyeachtime , itispos - sible that they experienced moments of mis - ery in between the assessments . A sampling strategy recognizes that only some moments are assessed , but relies on the idea that , over multiple days and multiple assessments , both momentsofhappinessandmomentsofmisery will be sampled , and the mix will be represen - tative of the subjects’ average mood . In lieu of a sampling strategy , investiga - tors sometimes adopt a coverage strategy , which aims to cover every moment of the day . For some kinds of objective data , continu - ous measurement ( e . g . , actigraphy ) is possi - ble , enabling true coverage ( e . g . , Tulen et al . 2001 ) . For self - report measures , continuous assessment is not possible , so investigators try to obtain coverage by having subjects re - call and summarize the period between as - sessments . This is sometimes implemented by asking subjects several times a day to recall and summarize their experience since the last assessment , providing piecemeal coverage of the entire day . For example , Van den Brink et al . ( 2001 ) assessed pediatric headache pa - tients four times each day , and at each as - sessment , asked them to recall and character - ize headaches experienced since the previous 3 . 16 Shiffman · Stone · Hufford A nnu . R e v . C li n . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 4 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f M i ss ou r i - C o l u m b i a on 02 / 18 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV339 - CP04 - 03 ARI 6 November 2007 22 : 4 assessment . Besides being vulnerable to biases introduced by recall , this strategy requires subjects to accurately maintain a timeline of experience and focus on experience since the last assessment . Research suggests that peo - ple are particularly poor at keeping track of time and identifying when events took place ( Sudman & Bradburn 1973 ) , suggesting that this approach needs to be treated with cau - tion . Coverage strategies may be useful when the investigator needs an absolute estimate or count of events ; otherwise , sampling strate - gies can yield representative estimates . Daily Diaries : A Special Case of EMA Daily ( i . e . , once - a - day ) diaries are particularly popular with researchers and clinicians be - cause of their ease of administration and rela - tively low subject burden . Within the frame - work that we have been discussing , daily diaries are ﬁxed - interval assessments with an assessment frequency of once per day , em - ploying a retrospective coverage strategy . Even though daily diaries rely on recall of the entire day and therefore are not momentary , we consider them as falling into the family of EMA designs because they are administered repeatedly and provide a dynamic look at the variables investigated , although with less res - olution than that of within - day assessments . Daily diaries bring some of the beneﬁts of EMA in terms of illuminating process over time , buttheyalsocarrywiththemsomeofthe limitations of retrospective assessments , ask - ing participants to summarize the entire day’s experience . This may introduce some bias be - cause moods can vary substantially from one moment to the next , and true recall is likely to stretch the capabilities of autobiographi - cal memory . Moreover , research on autobi - ographical memory suggests that biases due to heuristic recall strategies operate even over short time frames . The typical scheduling of diary completion at the end of the day may itself become a source of bias , since this tends tobeahighlyunrepresentativemoment , when subjects may be particularly fatigued , for ex - ample , whichcouldbiastheirrecalloftheday’s experience . Accuraterecallmaybemorelikely when subjects are asked to recall less frequent , more notable and salient events , such as the occurrence of a migraine headache . Compar - isons of daily diary data to real - time data will enable researchers to determine whether the former is a reasonable proxy for the latter . Re - search is needed to shed light on when ac - curate recall is and is not likely . Thus , daily diaries require a cautious approach . Besides concern about retrospective bias , daily assessment also provides limited tempo - ral resolution in which to observe behavior ; that is , within - day processes may be critically important for some phenomena . This was il - lustrated in a study by Shiffman & Waters ( 2004 ) on the antecedents of smoking lapses . Daily diary data showed no increase in nega - tive affect in the days leading up to a lapse and no association between daily negative affect and lapse risk . However , examination of hour - by - hour affect data revealed a steep increase in negative affect in the hours immediately preceding lapse episodes . Thus , day - level data may miss important sources of dynamic varia - tion that drive behavior . However , when used carefully , especially for highly memorable and slow - moving targets , daily diaries can never - theless be a tremendous asset for studying cer - tain questions and are often an improvement over relying on global retrospective recall . USE OF ECOLOGICAL MOMENTARY ASSESSMENT IN TREATMENT For Assessment Although we have been addressing the use of EMAforresearchdata , italsoseemsnaturalto use EMA assessment for ongoing assessment during treatment . The treatment context in - cludes many features that lend themselves to EMA methods : The client is likely motivated to devote energy to assessment , and there are usually clear target behaviors or experiences on which to focus , dictated by the client’s www . annualreviews . org • Ecological Momentary Assessment 3 . 17 A nnu . R e v . C li n . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 4 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f M i ss ou r i - C o l u m b i a on 02 / 18 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV339 - CP04 - 03 ARI 6 November 2007 22 : 4 presenting problem , the nature of the pathol - ogy , and / or the clinical formulation of the case . EMA methods lend themselves to idio - graphic n = 1 analysis ; even formal statistical testing can be done by using a single client’s data to guide therapy and assess progress ( e . g . , Delespaul 1995 ) . Properly structured EMA data lend themselves to the sort of micro - analysis of process that is often the subject of therapeutic discussion , and that is seen as re - vealing opportunities for intervention ( “Let’s ﬁgure out what led up to your anxiety attack so we can understand it and think about how to prevent it” ) . Because change is expected during treatment , ongoing assessment can be informative . EMA could also prove useful in shedding light on processes and mediators of psychotherapy - induced change . EMA assessments are only beginning to seeapplicationinclinicalsettings . Nortonand colleagues ( 2003 ) conducted a small outcome study of CBT for binge eating , in which pa - tients were randomized to use EMA - based assessment or not . There were no signiﬁ - cant differences in the primary outcome , but there were strong trends favoring the patients withEMAassessment , suggestingthatalarger study would have demonstrated reliable dif - ferences . Protocols to make optimal use of EMA assessment in treatment have yet to be developed . Widespread use of EMA in treat - ment will also have to overcome both real and perceived barriers of the technical and ﬁnan - cial burden of these methods . We expect that EMA methods will see increasing use in clini - cal settings over the next decade ( see Piasecki et al . 2007 for a review of EMA applied to clinical assessment ) . For Intervention Although using EMA for clinical assessment would be a minor extension of its use in research , applying EMA methods directly to intervention—that is , implementing real - time in - the - moment interventions as sub - jects go about their daily lives—may open up more radical developments . Bridging the gap between patients’ here - and - now experi - ences and behaviors in the real world and the removed , conﬁned , and limited contact with the clinician in the consulting room has al - ways been a major challenge for psychological treatment . Only a few papers have described momentary interventions , and fewer still have evaluated them . Newman et al . ( 2003 ) reviewed a variety of palm - top - assisted treatments for psychologi - cal disorders . Newman et al . ( 1997 ) reported that a brief palm - top - assisted momentary in - tervention for panic disorder was equivalent in efﬁcacy to a longer therapist - administered treatment . The control group in this study also engaged in EMA assessment and may have beneﬁted from that , which highlights the importance of identifying the incre - mental beneﬁts of EMA intervention versus EMA assessment . Momentary interventions have also been described for eating disorders ( Norton et al . 2003 ) and addictive disorders ( Rileyetal . 2002 ) . Carteretal . ( 2007 ) describe a particularly sophisticated and interactive EMA - based treatment program for smoking ( still under evaluation ) and present a concep - tual foundation of EMA - based treatments . At this stage , then , EMA - based momen - tary intervention remains a promising , but only partly proven , idea . However , its poten - tial seems enormous . The idea of momentary treatment , delivering intervention immedi - ately on - the - spot and as needed in real - world settings—a “therapist in your pocket”—holds promise for addressing behavior at crucial moments in the patient’s life . EMA - based treatment can provide behavioral guidance or other interventions ( e . g . , relaxation stimuli ) throughout a patient’s day as well as just at the moment they are needed . By learning from an individual’s history , algorithms could , for example , tailor coping suggestions based on what has worked before for this patient in this situation . Furthermore , by observing the pa - tient over time , predictive algorithms could anticipate and respond to challenges before they gain strength , for example , noting rising stress levels and intervening ( or contacting a 3 . 18 Shiffman · Stone · Hufford A nnu . R e v . C li n . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 4 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f M i ss ou r i - C o l u m b i a on 02 / 18 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV339 - CP04 - 03 ARI 6 November 2007 22 : 4 counselor ) before they result in maladaptive behavior . In - the - moment interventions have only begun to be explored , but they have the potential to revolutionize clinical treatment . MEASUREMENTCONSIDERATIONS FOR ECOLOGICAL MOMENTARY ASSESSMENT SELF - REPORTS When self - report assessments are used in EMA , somespecialconsiderationsareneeded . Many questionnaires were not designed for assessing momentary states ; the instructions may have a longer recall time frame or no time frame at all . Whether adapting an ex - isting instrument for EMA or creating a new one , it is important to consider whether the item makes sense in the new time frame—i . e . , momentary , hourly , etc . —both from the in - vestigator’s conceptual perspective and from the subject’s perspective . For the latter , cog - nitive testing of proposed assessments ( Willis 2005 ) , as well as pilot testing of assessments in the ﬁeld , is usually prudent . An unusual aspect of EMA studies is that subjects will typically encounter each assess - ment many , many times . This requires that assessments be well tuned : Something that is just a small annoyance when seen once can become a real irritant when encountered ﬁve times a day for weeks . Construction of EMA assessments may also be inﬂuenced by the device or medium used . For example , PDAs have limited screen display space , requiring that items and re - sponse options be reasonably succinct . When interactive voice response systems are used , the length , complexity , and number of op - tions needs to be severely limited , keeping in mind that subjects must listen to and remem - ber all the response options and their corre - sponding keypad numbers . Simply moving a questionnaire from paper to a screen - based electronic device should not be problematic : A meta - analysis showed that paper - based and screen - based questionnaires were equivalent ( Gwaltney et al . 2007 ) . Use of programmable electronic devices to administer assessments provides oppor - tunities to change the order in which as - sessment items are administered . This can be used to present items in random order to counterbalance any effects of item se - quencing ( for free access to such software , see http : / / www . experiencesampling . org / ) . This programmability could be used to im - plement computer - adaptive testing ( Chang & Reeve 2005 ) , which provides efﬁcient assess - ment of a construct with a minimum num - ber of items , by dynamically changing which items are administered to particular subjects based on their responses to prior items . Although most EMA studies collect struc - tured quantitative data ( using structured scales to quantify responses ) , EMA meth - ods can also be used to gather qualitative data . Diariescanallowwrite - inresponses , and O’Connell et al . ( 2002 ) have supplemented PDAs for quantitative assessment with tape recorders for collecting qualitative narratives for later coding . Automatically activated tape recorders have also been used to collect qual - itative data ( i . e . , conversations ) without the need for subject intervention ( Mehl et al . 2001 ) . Assessments of physiological parame - ters usually bring with them a set of techni - cal concerns speciﬁc to the system being mea - sured and the method used . Besides keeping in mind the special mea - surement issues that apply to EMA , it is equally important to recognize that many of the measurement issues that apply to global psychometric assessment also apply to EMA . That is , it is important that assessments be re - liable and valid ; in EMA , reliability can some - times be achieved through aggregation across multiple assessments rather than across mul - tiple items within a single assessment . The meaning of EMA assessments has to be care - fully considered ; Schwarz ( 2007 ) has spec - ulated that focusing self - report on immedi - ate experience might shift the individual’s focus to very small events at the cost of the “big picture . ” It is also important to keep in mind that self - report data collected via www . annualreviews . org • Ecological Momentary Assessment 3 . 19 A nnu . R e v . C li n . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 4 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f M i ss ou r i - C o l u m b i a on 02 / 18 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV339 - CP04 - 03 ARI 6 November 2007 22 : 4 EMA methods are still self - report data and are subject to many of the limitations inher - ent to self - report . Like any self - report data , EMA data can be adversely inﬂuenced by the effects of subjects’ psychopathology ( Kessler et al . 2000 ) and by deception or self - deception . METHODOLOGICALCONSIDERATIONSINECOLOGICALMOMENTARYASSESSMENTSTUDIES Reactivity Reactivity is deﬁned as the potential for be - havior or experience to be affected by the act of assessing it . Behavioral studies of self - monitoring , in which patients were asked to monitor the behavior they were trying to change , often demonstrated reduction in the problem behavior due to monitoring alone— so much so that self - monitoring came to be considered a part of behavior - change treat - ment , notjustassessment . However , reactivity is not universally observed . In particular , stud - ies showed that reactivity emerged when sub - jects were trying to change the target behavior and when the behavior was recorded prior to being executed ( e . g . , recording a meal before eating it ) —in other words , under conditions that provide both the motivation and the op - portunity to exert control over the behavior ( Korotitsch & Nelson - Gray 1999 ) . This sug - gests that EMA researchers need to be con - cernedaboutreactivityundersuchconditions , although there has not yet been a direct test of this idea . When such conditions are not present , several studies of EMA ﬁnd little or no evidence of reactive effects ( Cruise et al . 1996 ; Hufford & Shields 2002 ; Hufford et al . 2002a , b ; Hufford & Shiffman 2002 ; Litt et al . 1998 ; Stone et al . 1998 ) . In the most controlled study of reactivity to EMA , Stone and colleagues ( 2003a ) assigned subjects with pain syndromes to complete either no EMA monitoring or sampling of their pain using electronic diaries 3 , 6 , or 12 times daily . No evidence was found that the pain ratings were systematically reactive to the EMA monitoring . Besides traditional reactivity , one might also be concerned that the burden of moni - toring , including being interrupted by “beep - ing” throughout the day , might cause distress that would bias the data . Again , the evidence suggests this is not typical . The Stone et al . ( 2003a ) studyfoundnotrendovertimeinpain ratings and no systematic effect on pain rat - ings of increased prompting , despite a delib - erately aggressive prompting and assessment schedule . Given the earlier literature suggesting that reactivity can occur , the literature does not completely resolve when reactive effects might or might not be observed . EMA re - searchers should be alert to the potential for reactivity while recognizing that little evi - dence has been found to support the concern that EMA engenders signiﬁcant reactivity . Compliance While EMA methods promise to capture data closer in time to events and symptoms of interest , they also place on subjects the burden of making timely recordings as they go about their daily lives . Missing assessments have the potential to bias the obtained sample of behavior and experience , especially if the missing data are nonrandom . As a result , EMA studies place a premium on obtaining high levels of subject compliance with the assessment protocol . The methods used to collect diary data can affect the investigator’s ability to obtain and documentcompliance . Studiesusingpaperdi - aries often report that about 90 % of diary cards are returned ( Hufford & Shields 2002 ) . However , timely compliance is often inferred from the date and time subjects have recorded onthediarycard . Thisopensthedoorforsub - jects to hoard and backﬁll diaries ( that is to complete entries , perhaps en masse , after the fact ) while seeming compliant . 3 . 20 Shiffman · Stone · Hufford A nnu . R e v . C li n . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 4 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f M i ss ou r i - C o l u m b i a on 02 / 18 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV339 - CP04 - 03 ARI 6 November 2007 22 : 4 Concern about hoarding and backﬁlling is heightened by the ﬁndings from studies in which subjects completed written diaries while also using electronically instrumented devices ( e . g . , inhalers , blood glucose moni - tors ) that independently tracked the actual time and date of events , such as medica - tion taking or glucose monitoring . Across eight studies ( Hufford 2007 ) , objective data from the devices indicated that compliance had actually been much lower than was in - dicated by the written diaries : Many of the written entries had been falsiﬁed . Moreover , the written entries were systematically biased , for example , showing better glycemic con - trol than had actually been achieved ( Mazze et al . 1984 ) . The written diary records un - derstated problems of glucose control and ac - centuated the concern about backﬁlling and faked compliance . These concerns were fur - ther accentuated by reports from paper di - ary studies in which high proportions of sub - jects later admitted to backﬁlling entries , even when they had been electronically prompted at the appropriate times and had recorded those times on their diary cards ( Litt et al . 1998 , Moghaddam & Ferguson 2007 ) . To assess true compliance with written di - aries , Stone et al . ( 2002 ) used an instrumented paper diary ( IPD ) , which was covertly instru - mented with photosensors that recorded the opening of the diary booklet—a prerequisite to completing diary cards . Chronic pain sub - jects were assigned to use either the IPD or a PDA - based electronic diary to record their pain at three scheduled times daily for three weeks . Subjects were trained on the diary , and steps were taken to encourage motivation and compliance . The IPD allowed compar - ison of reported compliance—based on the time and date handwritten on returned diary cards—and actual compliance—based on the electronic records . Reported compliance was 90 % , as in many other paper diary studies . However , actual compliance was estimated at 11 % . In other words , almost 90 % of the sub - mitteddiarycardshadbeenfalsiﬁed . Evidence indicated that the diaries had been hoarded for days and backﬁlled . More disturbing still , many subjects also showed evidence of ﬁll - ing their paper diary cards in advance of the stated time ( Stone et al . 2003b ) , which ob - viously renders the data invalid . Broderick et al . ( 2003 ) subsequently showed that adding an audible reminder to complete the diary boosted compliance only modestly . The other 40 pain sufferers in the study by Stone et al . ( Stone et al . 2002 , 2003a , b ; Stone & Shiffman 2002 ) had been given an electronic diary , which prompted for assess - ments and did not allow entries outside the designated time windows . These subjects ac - tually did complete 94 % of their assigned as - sessments on time . These compliance ﬁndings by Stone and colleagues have stirred debate among diary researchers ( Green et al . 2006 , Tennen et al . 2006 ) , with critics noting , for example , that various procedures ( e . g . , having subjects re - turn diaries daily by mail , so that postmarks provide some degree of time - stamping ) might improve timely compliance with written di - aries . In any case , the Stone et al . study ( Stone et al . 2002 , 2003a , b ; Stone & Shiffman 1994 , 2002 ) , along with the prior literature docu - menting falsiﬁed paper diary entries ( Hufford 2007 ) , raises critical questions about timely compliance . Paper - and - pencil diaries are vul - nerable to being falsiﬁed , and both forward - and backﬁlling are possible and potentially frequent , making veriﬁcation of timely com - pliance both essential and challenging . Thus , the burden of proof falls to the EMA inves - tigator to establish , by whatever means , the timeliness of recording . The most common way to ensure and doc - ument timely compliance is the use of elec - tronicdiaries , whichtageachrecordwithtime of entry and thus allow for detailed analy - sis of compliance , particularly with interval - or signal - contingent recordings . Many elec - tronic diary studies document compliance rates around 90 % ( Hufford & Shields 2002 ) . However , good compliance is not universal even with electronic diaries ; rates as low as 50 % have been reported ( e . g . , Jamison et al . www . annualreviews . org • Ecological Momentary Assessment 3 . 21 A nnu . R e v . C li n . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 4 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f M i ss ou r i - C o l u m b i a on 02 / 18 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV339 - CP04 - 03 ARI 6 November 2007 22 : 4 2001 ) , suggesting that the mere use of elec - tronic diary technology is not , by itself , a panacea . A variety of suggestions of ways to enhance compliance with electronic diary studies has been presented elsewhere ( Huf - ford & Shiffman 2003 ) . As noted above , com - pliance with event - oriented protocols is difﬁ - cult to verify . SPECIAL POPULATIONS Because of the burdens they place on subjects , EMA methods often raise concerns about ap - plication to special populations . These con - cerns are often magniﬁed when EMA stud - ies employ electronic devices , such as PDAs or cell phones , for data collection . A com - mon concern is that elderly subjects will be unable or unwilling to operate high - tech devices . However , data on subject prefer - ence for electronic versus more traditional paper diaries do not support this assump - tion . In a meta - analysis of patient prefer - ence , older subjects are actually less likely to prefer paper diaries ( in Shiffman et al . 2007 ) . Similarly , although there have been concerns about the use of such technology in low - education , low - socioeconomic - status subjects , Finkelstein et al . ( 2000 ) demon - strated good success with just such a sample . Different concerns are sometimes raised about the use of diaries with children . Sev - eral studies have demonstrated that children are able to use electronic diaries , and good compliance and results have been seen with children as young as 7 ( see Van den Brink et al . 2001 ) . Of course , the use of EMA meth - ods does not obviate , and may increase , some more general issues about assessment of chil - dren , such as comprehension of the question - naires used . Concerns also arise about whether some clinical populations might be unable to per - forminEMAstudiespreciselybecauseoftheir psychopathology . In this regard , it is notable that several studies have been successfully carried out among schizophrenics ( Delespaul 1995 , Freedman et al . 2006 , Myin - Germeys et al . 2001 ) , and good compliance using cell phones for EMA reporting has been reported in a sample of homeless crack addicts . These examples suggest that , with appropriate sen - sitivity , EMA methods and related technol - ogy may be useful in a wide array of patient populations and that investigators should not make decisions about feasibility without test - ing their assumptions . A subtler concern that is not addressed by the performance of special populations in EMA studies is that subjects who volun - teer for and complete demanding EMA stud - ies may not be representative . There have been no reports of particular recruitment dif - ﬁculties or notable deviations in EMA study samples , but this has not been systematically evaluated . It seems likely that personal and environmental factors may discourage some subjects’ participation in EMA studies . Oc - cupational demands may preclude availabil - ity for momentary assessment ( consider sur - geonsandassemblylineworkers , althoughsee Goldstein et al . 1992 ) . Also , some work en - vironments may be so noisy as to preclude hearing prompts or using a phone . Motor im - pairments , impaired vision or hearing , and il - literacy may preclude participation in EMA ( and in many non - EMA ) studies . Finally , sub - jects who are unfamiliar with or fearful of technology may be put off by EMA studies using high - tech devices . The limits of EMA and their impact on studies should be contin - ually evaluated . Analysis of EMA Data EMA data usually consist of a large number of observationsfromeachsubject , withthenum - ber and timing of observations often vary - ing between subjects . EMA data do not lend themselves to the basic approaches most clin - ical psychologists learned in graduate - school statistics classes , which require independent observations . Nor do they ﬁt easily into tradi - tional repeated - measures designs , which typi - cally require the same number of observations foreachpersonandnomissingdata . However , 3 . 22 Shiffman · Stone · Hufford A nnu . R e v . C li n . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 4 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f M i ss ou r i - C o l u m b i a on 02 / 18 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV339 - CP04 - 03 ARI 6 November 2007 22 : 4 a variety of methods—essentially extensions of the regression framework most psycholo - gists are familiar with—can handle such data . Known variously as random effects models , multilevel or hierarchical analysis , and gen - eralized estimating equations , these methods implement regression models while account - ing for the interrelationships of observations within subjects . Extensions of these methods go beyond linear regression to cover logistic regression and survival models , among oth - ers . Detailed exposition about these methods is beyond the scope of this review ; the reader is referred to Schwartz & Stone ( 1998 , 2007 ) for detailed and practical guidance on appli - cations of these models to EMA data . The bottom line is that EMA researchers can use easily available software to apply the concep - tual models they are familiar with from more traditional between - subjects analyses to EMA data . Besides these relatively familiar statisti - cal models , a variety of novel approaches can fruitfully be applied to EMA data ( Walls & Schafer 2006 ) . PRACTICAL ISSUES IN ECOLOGICAL MOMENTARY ASSESSMENT The implementation of EMA places unique demands on both researchers and subjects . A detailed discussion of the practical aspects of implementing EMA is beyond the scope of this review . The interested reader is referred to Hufford ( 2007 ) . Here we touch only brieﬂy on considerations of hardware and software , and management of subjects and data . EMA Hardware and Software An investigator planning an EMA study faces many practical issues and decisions . One key decision is what type of mechanism to use to capture data . Although EMA is most closely associated with the use of palm - top comput - ers ( Hufford & Shields 2002 ) , the method is hardware agnostic and encompasses a range of high - and low - tech devices , ranging from paper and pencil to futuristic wireless sen - sors ( Intille 2007 ) . The key factor to con - sider in selecting a hardware platform is the support provided for key functions , including the ability to prompt subjects to complete as - sessments , manage prompting schedules ( in - cluding randomization and contingencies ) , present assessment content to subjects , man - age assessment logic such as branching , ac - cept and store subjects’ self - report data , time - stamp entries to avoid faked compliance , and / or directly collect physical or physio - logical data ( see Shiffman 2007 ) . Investiga - tors should also consider the suitability of a particular device or medium to their subject population : For example , a small screen or a telephone system may be less suitable for an elderly population with visual or hearing im - pairments , respectively . The cost of devices and of software devel - opment is often an additional consideration . Investigators should avoid being overly inﬂu - enced by initial start - up costs and also should consider downstream costs , such as the cost of cell phone service or of data entry from pa - per diaries . Unfortunately , high ﬁxed costs of technological solutions can make it very hard to initiate small studies or pilot studies . EMA approaches using electronic devices require software for basic system functional - ity and for the speciﬁcs of the study proto - col . The success of such studies depends on correct and robust performance of software , which can often be complex . Both freeware and commercial versions of EMA software are now readily available . Le et al . ( 2006 ) have re - viewed a number of freely available programs , andanumberofcommercialvendorsalsopro - vide programming and support services for EMA studies . These base systems have to be conﬁgured or customized to the needs of a particular study . Researchers should carefully considercapabilitiesandlimitationsofvarious software systems . For example , some systems canonlyaccommodatesignalingduringspeci - ﬁedperiodsoftheday , whichcanbiasthesam - ple by , for example , omitting early - morning and late - night events , which may be highly www . annualreviews . org • Ecological Momentary Assessment 3 . 23 A nnu . R e v . C li n . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 4 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f M i ss ou r i - C o l u m b i a on 02 / 18 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV339 - CP04 - 03 ARI 6 November 2007 22 : 4 salient . Some programs may support event - or signal - driven assessments , but not the combi - nation of the two . In light of the availability of software from multiple sources , investiga - torsarewelladvisedtouseexistingsoftwareor services . Other Practical Considerations Investigators should also consider procedures and resources related to managing study subjects . Training of subjects on the protocol , the assessment , and any device used is an es - sential aspect of EMA studies . Data manage - ment is an additional consideration in EMA studies . EMA studies can produce volumi - nous datasets with hundreds of thousands of observations , possibly of diverse kinds ( e . g . , momentary , daily , events ) . Additional compli - cations include the fact that the records are ordered in time and the temporal relation - ships need to be maintained , and there may be nondata records that do not represent subject assessments ( e . g . , records of missed assess - mentprompts ) thatalsohavetobemaintained within the database . Data management facili - ties for maintaining these databases and pro - ducing analytical datasets are an essential re - sourceforEMAstudiesandshouldbeplanned into the study . CONCLUSION EMA studies help us appreciate the impor - tance of change and context in everyday be - haviorandexperience . Thedynamicinﬂuence of context is demonstrated not only for con - structs that we might expect to be variable , such as affect , craving , and pain , but also for many constructs that are typically conceptu - alized as stable trait - like characteristics , such as extraversion ( Fleeson 2001 ) , self - esteem ( Kernis 2005 ) , coping style ( Schwartz et al . 1999 ) , andself - efﬁcacy ( Gwaltneyetal . 2005 ) . EMA’s microscopic focus and temporal res - olution is beginning to help us see the un - derlying dynamics behind even trait - like con - structs . EMA studies suggest that behavior and experience is much more dynamic , and much more inﬂuenced by its immediate con - text , than we usually envision . Even individual differences can sometimes be best understood through analysis of within - person variation . For example , differences in how persons react to situational stimuli , such as stressors , are re - lated to personality ( Feldman - Barrett 1997 ) , psychopathology ( Myin - Germeysetal . 2001 ) , and clinical outcomes ( Kamarck et al . 2007 ) , and within - person variation in response may sometimes be as important as the mean level ( Gwaltney et al . 2005 , Kernis 2005 ) . Despite their limitations , EMA methods promise to enhance our understanding of the dynamic interactions between individuals and their environments . Clinical psychology—and psychology in general—is prone to overestimate the role of stable traits in determining behavior and to underestimate the inﬂuence of the local set - ting on behavior ( Mischel 2004 ) . Our behav - ior in daily life is inﬂuenced not just by our predispositions , but also by where we are and whom we are with , by how we are feeling and what situation we are in , by what has recently happened and what we have done or felt in the minutes and hours preceding the present moment . One context can elicit dysfunctional behavior while another elicits a healthier re - sponse ; one can fuel psychopathology or set us on a course toward improvement . Under - standing life as it is lived , up close , will help us better understand both health and pathol - ogy and help us see where there are oppor - tunities to intervene on the side of health . This requires methods that examine behav - ior at the appropriate level of granularity : “Research methods that examine this land - scape from 10 , 000 feet cannot shed light on how this landscape is shaped at ground level” ( Shiffman 2005 , p . 1743 ) . EMA methods pro - vide an important tool to help clinical psy - chology explore the dynamic nature of behav - ior , thought , and feeling as they unfold over time . 3 . 24 Shiffman · Stone · Hufford A nnu . R e v . C li n . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 4 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f M i ss ou r i - C o l u m b i a on 02 / 18 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV339 - CP04 - 03 ARI 6 November 2007 22 : 4 SUMMARY POINTS 1 . Autobiographicalmemoryprocessescanintroducebiasintoretrospectiveself - reports , which form the bulk of clinical assessments . 2 . EMA is a collection of methods for obtaining repeated real - time assessments of sub - jects’ behavior and experience in their natural environments , to minimize recall bias , maximize ecological validity , and document variation over time . 3 . EMA encompasses a variety of diary approaches and technologies used to collect data on a schedule ( e . g . , daily diaries or assessments scheduled at random ) or in response to clinical events ( e . g . , symptom episodes or behaviors ) . 4 . The collection of frequent assessments makes EMA studies well suited to study microprocesses—i . e . , how behavior and experience vary over time and across changing contexts . 5 . Although sometimes retrospective self - reports correspond well with those based on aggregatedEMAdata , recallofbehaviorandexperienceovertimedoesnotcorrespond well to real - time EMA assessments . 6 . The application of EMA methods for assessment and intervention in treatment is promising but is in its infancy . 7 . EMA methods have great potential to advance the science and practice of clinical psychology by providing more valid and more detailed data about real - world behavior and experience . FUTURE ISSUES 1 . Further prospective longitudinal analyses of EMA data are necessary to shed light on theoretically relevant microprocesses in studies of psychopathology and treatment . 2 . Further improvements in technological tools for EMA studies would enhance ease of use , reduce cost , and expand capabilities . 3 . An improved understanding is needed of the relationship between recall and real - time EMA data , the circumstances under which recall may be accurate , and the processes by which persons develop retrospective accounts of their experience . 4 . Models are needed for application of EMA methods to clinical assessment and intervention . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors are grateful to Julie Mickens for invaluable help in preparing this manuscript . DISCLOSURES The authors are not aware of any biases that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review . www . annualreviews . org • Ecological Momentary Assessment 3 . 25 A nnu . R e v . C li n . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 4 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f M i ss ou r i - C o l u m b i a on 02 / 18 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV339 - CP04 - 03 ARI 6 November 2007 22 : 4 LITERATURE CITED Afﬂeck G , Tennen H , Urrows S , Higgens P , Abeles M , et al . 1998 . Fibromyalgia and women’s pursuit of personal goals : a daily process analysis . Health Psychol . 17 : 40 – 47 Barker R . 1978 . Habitats , Environments and Human Behavior : Studies in the Ecological Psychology andEcobehavioralScienceoftheMidwestPsychologicalFieldStation : 1947 – 1972 . SanFrancisco , CA : Jossey - Bass Beal DJ , Weiss HM . 2003 . Methods of Ecological Momentary Assessment in organizational research . Organ . Res . Methods 6 : 440 – 64 Bolger N , Davis A , Rafaeli E . 2003 . Diary methods : capturing life as it is lived . Annu . Rev . Psychol . 54 : 579 – 616 Bolger N , Laurenceau J - P . 2005 . Using diary methods to study marital and family processes . J . Family Psychol . 19 : 86 – 97 Summarizes biases related to autobiographicalmemory , and how they can bias research data . Bradburn N , Rips L , Shevell S . 1987 . Answering autobiographical questions : the impact of memory and inference on surveys . Science 236 : 157 – 61 Broderick JE , Schwartz JE , Shiffman S , Hufford MR , Stone AA . 2003 . Signaling does not adequately improve diary compliance . Ann . Behav . Med . 26 : 193 – 248 Broderick JE , Schwartz JE , Stone AA . 2006 . Context ( pain and affect ) inﬂuences recall pain ratings . Presented at Annu . Meet . Am . Pain Soc . , San Antonio , TX Byerly M , Fisher R , Whatley K , Holland R , Varghese F , et al . 2005 . A comparison of electronic monitoring vs clinician rating of antipsychotic adherence in outpatients with schizophre - nia . Psychiatry Res . 133 : 129 – 33 Carney MA , Tennen H , Afﬂeck G , del Boca FK , Kranzler HR . 1998 . Levels and patterns of alcohol consumption using timeline follow - back , daily diaries and real - time “electronic interviews . ” J . Stud . Alcohol 59 : 447 – 54 Carter BL , Day SX , Cinciripini PM , Wetter DW . 2007 . Momentary health interventions : Where are we and where are we going ? See Stone et al . 2007b , pp . 289 – 307 Chang C , Reeve BB . 2005 . Item response theory and its applications to patient - reported out - comes measurement . Eval . Health Prof . 28 : 264 – 82 Clark DM , Teasdale JD . 1982 . Diurnal variation in clinical depression and accessibility of memories of positive and negative experiences . J . Abnorm . Psychol . 91 : 87 – 95 Cramer JA , Mattson RH , Prevey ML , Scheyer RD , Ouellette VL . 1989 . How often is medi - cation taken as prescribed : a novel assessment technique . J . Am . Med . Assoc . 261 : 3273 – 77 Cruise CE , Broderick JE , Porter L , Kaell A . 1996 . Reactive effects of diary self - assessment in chronic pain patients . Pain 67 : 253 – 58 Curry S , Marlatt GA , Gordon JR . 1987 . Abstinence violation effect : validation of an attribu - tional construct with smoking cessation . J . Consult . Clin . Psychol . 55 : 145 – 49 Delespaul P . 1995 . Assessing Schizophrenia in Daily Life : The Experience Sampling Method . Maas - tricht , The Netherlands : Maastricht Univ . Press DeVries M , ed . 1992 . The Experience of Psychopathology : Investigating Mental Disorders in Their Natural Settings . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge Univ . Press . 429 pp . Eich E , Reeves J , Jaeger B , Graff - Radford S . 1985 . Memory for pain : relation between past and present pain intensity . Pain 223 : 375 – 79 Engel SG , Boseck J , Crosby RD , Wonderlich SA , Mitchell JE , et al . 2007 . The relationship of momentary anger and impulsivity to bulimic behavior . Behav . Res . Ther . 45 : 437 – 47 Fahrenberg J , Myrtek M . 2001 . Progress in Ambulatory Assessment : Computer - Assisted Psychological and Psychophysiological Methods in Monitoring and Field Studies . Seattle , WA : Hogrefe & Huber 3 . 26 Shiffman · Stone · Hufford A nnu . R e v . C li n . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 4 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f M i ss ou r i - C o l u m b i a on 02 / 18 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV339 - CP04 - 03 ARI 6 November 2007 22 : 4 Feldman - Barrett L . 1997 . The relationships among momentary emotion experiences , per - sonality descriptions , and retrospective ratings of emotion . Personal . Soc . Psychol . Bull . 23 : 1100 – 10 Feldman - Barrett L , Russell JA . 1998 . Independence and bipolarity in the structure of current affect . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 74 : 967 – 84 Finkelstein J , Cabrera MR , Hripcsak G . 2000 . Internet - based home asthma telemonitoring . Chest 117 : 148 – 55 Fleeson W . 2001 . Toward a structure - and process - integrated view of personality : traits as density distributions of states . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 80 : 1011 – 27 Freedman M , Lester K , McNamara C , Milby J , Schumacher J . 2006 . Cell phones for Ecological Momentary Assessment with cocaine - addicted homeless patients in treatment . J . Subst . Abuse Treat . 30 : 105 – 11 Goldstein I , Jamner L , Shapiro D . 1992 . Ambulatory blood pressure and heart rate in healthy male paramedics during a workday and a nonworkday . Health Psychol . 11 : 48 – 54 Green AS , Rafaeli E , Bolger N , Shrout PE , Reis HT . 2006 . Paper or plastic ? Data equivalence in paper and electronic diaries . Psychol . Methods 11 : 87 – 105 Greeno CG , Wing R , Shiffman S . 2000 . Binge antecedents in obese women with and without Binge Eating Disorder . J . Consult . Clin . Psychol . 68 : 95 – 102 Gwaltney CJ , Shields AS , Shiffman S . 2007 . Equivalence of electronic and paper - and - pencil administrationofpatientreportedoutcomemeasures : ameta - analyticreview . ValueHealth . In press Gwaltney CJ , Shiffman S , Sayette MA . 2005 . Situational correlates of abstinence self - efﬁcacy . J . Abnorm . Psychol . 114 : 649 – 60 Describes the development of the ExperienceSamplingMethodandreviewsﬁndingsfromstudiesapplyingittoavarietyofdomains . Hektner JM , Schmidt JA , Csikszentmihalyi M . 2007 . Experience Sampling Method : Mea - suring the Quality of Everyday Life . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage Hensley MJ , Chalmers A , Clover K , Gibson PG , Toneguzzi R , Lewis PR . 2003 . Symptoms of asthma : comparison of a parent - completed retrospective questionnaire with a prospective daily symptom diary . Pediatr . Pulmonol . 36 : 509 – 13 Homma Y , Ando T , Yoshida M , Kageyama S , Takei M , et al . 2002 . Voiding and incontinence frequencies : variability of diary data and required diary length . Neurourol . Urodyn . 21 : 204 – 9 Houtveen JH , Oei NYL . 2007 . Recall bias in reporting medically unexplained symptoms comes from semantic memory . J . Psychosom . Res . 62 : 277 – 82 Hufford MR . 2007 . Special methodological challenges and opportunities in Ecological Mo - mentary Assessment . See Stone et al . 2007b , pp . 54 – 75 Hufford MR , Shields AL . 2002 . Electronic diaries : an examination of applications and what works in the ﬁeld . Appl . Clin . Trials 11 : 46 – 56 Hufford MR , Shields AL , Shiffman S , Paty J , Balabanis M . 2002a . Reactivity to Ecological Mo - mentary Assessment : an example using undergraduate problem drinkers . Psychol . Addict . Behav . 16 : 205 – 11 Hufford MR , Shiffman SS . 2002 . Methodological issues affecting the value of patient - reported outcomes data . Exp . Rev . Pharmacoecon . Health Outcomes 2 : 119 – 28 Hufford MR , Shiffman S . 2003 . Patient - reported outcomes : assessment methods . Dis . Manag . Health Outcomes 11 : 77 – 86 Hufford MR , Stone AA , Shiffman S , Schwartz JE , Broderick JE . 2002b . Paper vs . electronic diaries : compliance and subject evaluations . Appl . Clin . Trials 11 ( 8 ) : 38 – 43 Intille S . 2007 . Technological innovations enabling automatic , context - sensitive Ecological Momentary Assessment . See Stone et al . 2007b , pp . 308 – 37 www . annualreviews . org • Ecological Momentary Assessment 3 . 27 A nnu . R e v . C li n . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 4 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f M i ss ou r i - C o l u m b i a on 02 / 18 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV339 - CP04 - 03 ARI 6 November 2007 22 : 4 Jamison RN , Raymond SA , Levine JG , Slawsby EA , Nedeljkovic SS , Katz NP . 2001 . Electronic diaries for monitoring chronic pain : one - year validation study . Pain 91 : 277 – 85 Jonasson G , Carlsen K , Sodal A , Jonasson C , Mowinckel P . 1999 . Patient compliance in a clinical trial with inhaled budesonide in children with mild asthma . Eur . Respir . J . 14 : 150 – 54 Kamarck TW , Janicki DL , Shiffman S , Polk DE , Muldoon MF , et al . 2002 . Psychosocial de - mands and ambulatory blood pressure : a ﬁeld assessment approach . Physiol . Behav . 77 : 699 – 704 Kamarck TW , Muldoon M , Shiffman S , Sutton - Tyrrell K . 2007 . Experiences of demand and control during daily life are predictors of carotid atherosclerotic progression among healthy men . Health Psychol . 26 : 324 – 32 Kamarck TW , Schwartz J , Shiffman S , Muldoon M , Sutton - Tyrrell K , Janicki D . 2005 . Psy - chosocial stress and cardiovascular risk : What is the role of daily experience ? J . Pers . 73 : 1749 – 74 Kamarck TW , Shiffman S , Smithline L , Goodie JL , Paty J , et al . 1998 . Effects of task strain , social conﬂict , and emotional activation on ambulatory cardiovascular activity : daily life consequences of recurring stress in a multiethnic adult sample . Health Psychol . 17 : 17 – 29 Kernis MH . 2005 . Measuring self - esteem in context : the importance of stability of self - esteem in psychological functioning . J . Personal . 73 : 1 – 37 Kessler R , Wittchen H - U , Abelson J , Zhao S . 2000 . Methodological issues in assessing psy - chiatric disorders with self - reports . See Stone et al . 2000 , pp . 229 – 55 Kihlstrom J , Eich E , Sandbrand D , Tobias B . 2000 . Emotion and memory : implications for self - report . See Stone et al . 2000 , pp . 81 – 100 Kimhy D , Delespaul P , Corcoran C , Ahn H , Yale S , Malaspina D . 2006 . Computerized expe - rience sampling method ( ESMc ) : assessing feasibility and validity among individuals with schizophrenia . J . Psychiatr . Res . 40 : 221 – 30 Kop W , Verdino R , Gottdiener J , O’Leary S , Bairey Merz C , Krantz D . 2001 . Changes in heart rate and heart rate variability before ambulatory ischemic events . J . Am . Coll . Cardiol . 38 : 742 – 49 Korotitsch WJ , Nelson - Gray RO . 1999 . An overview of self - monitoring research in assessment and treatment . Psychol . Assess . 2 : 415 – 25 Larson R , Richards MH . 1994 . Divergent Realities : The Emotional Lives of Mothers , Fathers and Adolescents . New York : Basic Books Le B , Hat NC , Beal DJ . 2006 . Pocket - sized psychology studies : exploring daily diary software for PalmPilots . Behav . Res . Methods 38 : 325 – 32 Litt MD , Cooney NL , Morse P . 1998 . Ecological Momentary Assessment ( EMA ) with treated alcoholics : methodological problems and potential solutions . Health Psychol . 17 : 48 – 52 Litt MD , Cooney NL , Morse P . 2000 . Reactivity to alcohol - related stimuli in the laboratory and in the ﬁeld : predictors of craving in treated alcoholics . Addiction 95 : 889 – 900 Maclure M , Mittleman MA . 2000 . Should we use a case - crossover design ? Annu . Rev . Public Health 21 : 193 – 221 Margraf J , Taylor CB , Ehlers A , Roth WT . 1987 . Panic attacks in the natural environment . J . Nerv . Ment . Dis . 175 : 558 – 65 Mazze RS , Shamoon H , Pasmantier R , Lucido D , Murphy J , et al . 1984 . Reliability of blood glucose monitoring by subjects with diabetes mellitus . Am . J . Med . 77 : 211 – 17 McCarberg BH . 2007 . The treatment of breakthrough pain . Pain Med . 8 : S8 – 13 McCarthy DE , Piasecki TM , Fiore MC , Baker TB . 2006 . Life before and after quitting smok - ing : an electronic diary study . J . Abnorm . Psychol . 115 : 454 – 66 3 . 28 Shiffman · Stone · Hufford A nnu . R e v . C li n . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 4 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f M i ss ou r i - C o l u m b i a on 02 / 18 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV339 - CP04 - 03 ARI 6 November 2007 22 : 4 McFarland C , Ross M , DeCourville N . 1989 . Women’s theories of menstruation and biases in recall of menstrual symptoms . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 57 : 522 – 31 McKenzie S , Paty J , Grogan D , Rosano M , Curry L , et al . 2004 . Trial power : how eDiary data can enhance the power and reduce the sample size in clinical trials . Appl . Clin . Trials 13 : 54 – 68 Mehl MR , Pennebaker JW , Crow DM , Dabbs J , Price JH . 2001 . The Electronically Activated Recorder ( EAR ) : adeviceforsamplingnaturalisticdailyactivitiesandconversations . Behav . Res . Methods Instrum . Comput . 33 : 517 – 23 Mischel W . 2004 . Toward an integrative science of the person . Annu . Rev . Psychol . 55 : 1 – 22 Moghaddam NG , Ferguson E . 2007 . Smoking , mood regulation , and personality : an event - sampling exploration of potential models and moderation . J . Personal . 75 : 451 – 78 Moskowitz D , Young SN . 2006 . Ecological Momentary Assessment : what it is and why it is a method of the future in clinical psychopharmacology . J . Psychiatry Neurosci . 31 : 13 – 20 Muraven M , Collins RL , Morshimer ET , Shiffman S , Paty JA . 2005 . The morning after : limit violationsandtheself - regulationofalcoholconsumption . Psychol . Addict . Behav . 19 : 253 – 62 Myin - Germeys I , van Os J , Schwartz JE , Stone AA , Delespaul PA . 2001 . Emotional reactivity to daily life stress in psychosis . Arch . Gen . Psychiatry 58 : 1137 – 44 Newman MG , Erickson T , Przeworski A , Dzus E . 2003 . Self - help and minimal - contact ther - apies for anxiety disorders : Is human contact necessary for therapeutic efﬁcacy ? J . Clin . Psychol . 59 : 251 – 74 Newman MG , Kenardy J , Herman S , Taylor CB . 1997 . Comparison of cognitive behavioral treatment of panic disorder with computer - assisted brief cognitive behavior treatment . J . Consult . Clin . Psychol . 65 : 178 – 83 Niere K , Jerak A . 2004 . Measurement of headache frequency , intensity and duration : compar - ison of patient report by questionnaire and headache diary . Physiother . Res . Int . 9 : 149 – 56 Nived O , Sturfelt G , Eckern¨as S - ˚A , Singer P . 1994 . A comparison of 6 months’ compliance of patients with rheumatoid arthritis treated with tenoxicam and naproxen : use of patient computer data to assess response to treatment . J . Rheumatol . 21 : 1537 – 41 Norton M , Wonderlich SA , Myers T , Mitchell JE , Crosby RD . 2003 . The use of palmtop computers in the treatment of bulimia nervosa . Eur . Eat . Disord . 11 : 231 – 42 O’ConnellKA , GerkovichMM , BottM , CookMR , ShiffmanS . 2002 . Theeffectofanticipatory strategies on the ﬁrst day of smoking cessation . Psychol . Addict . Behav . 16 : 150 – 56 Oishi S , Sullivan HW . 2006 . The predictive value of daily vs . retrospective well - being judg - ments in relationship stability . J . Exp . Soc . Psychol . 42 : 460 – 70 Paty JA , Kassel JD , Shiffman S . 1992 . Assessing stimulus control of smoking : the importance of base rates . In The Experience of Psychopathology , ed . M DeVries , pp . 347 – 52 . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge Univ . Press Pearson J . 2004 . Better , faster and cheaper diary trials ? Evaluating the potential scientiﬁc beneﬁts of e - diary technology in a chronic primary insomnia trial . Presented at Annu . Meet . DIA , Arlington , VA Perrine MW , Mundt JC , Searles JS , Lester LS . 1995 . Validation of daily self - reported alcohol consumption using Interactive Voice Response ( IVR ) technology . J . Stud . Alcohol 56 : 487 – 90 Piasecki TM , Hufford MR , Solhan M , Trull TJ . 2007 . Assessing clients in their natural en - vironments with electronic diaries : rationale , beneﬁts , limitations , and barriers . Psychol . Assess . 19 : 25 – 43 Redelmeier DA , Katz J , Kahneman D . 2003 . Memories of colonoscopy : a randomized trial . Pain 104 : 187 – 94 www . annualreviews . org • Ecological Momentary Assessment 3 . 29 A nnu . R e v . C li n . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 4 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f M i ss ou r i - C o l u m b i a on 02 / 18 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV339 - CP04 - 03 ARI 6 November 2007 22 : 4 Reis HT , Wheeler L . 1991 . Studying social interaction with the Rochester Interaction Record . In Advances in Experimental Social Psychology , ed . MP Zanna , pp . 270 – 318 . San Diego , CA : Academic Riley WT , Jerome A , Behar A , Weil J . 2002 . Computer and manual self - help behavioral strate - gies for smoking reduction : initial feasibility and one - year follow - up . Nicotine Tobacco Res . 4 : S183 – 88 Ross M . 1989 . Relation of implicit theories to the construction of personal histories . Psychol . Rev . 96 : 341 – 57 Saito M , Kumano H , Yoshiuchi K , Kokubo K , Yamamoto Y , et al . 2005 . Symptom proﬁle of multiple chemical sensitivity in actual life . Psychosom . Med . 67 : 318 – 25 Schlundt DG , Johnson WG , Jarrell MP . 1985 . A naturalistic functional analysis of eating behavior in bulimia and obesity . Adv . Behav . Res . Ther . 7 : 149 – 62 Schwartz JE , Neale J , Marco C , Shiffman S , Stone AA . 1999 . Does trait coping exist ? A momentaryassessmentapproachtotheevaluationoftraits . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 77 : 360 – 69 Schwartz JE , Stone AA . 1998 . Data analysis for EMA studies . Health Psychol . 17 : 6 – 16 Schwartz JE , Stone AA . 2007 . Analysis of real - time momentary data : a practical guide . See Stone et al . 2007b , pp . 76 – 113 Schwarz N . 2007 . Retrospective and concurrent self - reports : the rationale for real - time data capture . See Stone et al . 2007b , pp . 11 – 26 Scollon CN , Kim - Prieto C , Diener E . 2003 . Experience sampling : promises and pitfalls , strengths and weaknesses . J . Happiness Stud . 4 : 5 – 34 Searles JS , Helzer JE , Walter DE . 2000 . Comparison of drinking patterns measured by daily reports and timeline follow back . Psychol . Addict . Behav . 14 : 277 – 86 Shapiro D , Jamner LD , Davydov DM , James P . 2002 . Situations and moods associated with smoking in everyday life . Psychol . Addict . Behav . 16 : 342 – 45 Sheftell FD , Dahl¨of CG , Brandes JL , Agosti R , Jones MW , Barrett PS . 2005 . Two replicate randomized , double - blind , placebo - controlled trials of the time to onset of pain relief in the acute treatment of migraine with a fast - disintegrating / rapid - release formulation of sumatriptan tablets . Clin . Ther . 27 : 407 – 17 Shiffman S . 1993 . Assessing smoking patterns and motives . J . Consult . Clin . Psychol . 61 : 732 – 42 Shiffman S . 2005 . Dynamic inﬂuences on smoking relapse process . J . Personal . 73 : 1715 – 48 Shiffman S . 2007 . Designing protocols for Ecological Momentary Assessment . See Stone et al . 2007b , pp . 27 – 53 Shiffman S , Balabanis MH , Gwaltney CJ , Paty JA , Gnys M , et al . 2007 . Prediction of lapse from associations between smoking and situational antecedents assessed by Ecological Momentary Assessment . Drug Alcohol Depend . 91 : 159 – 68 Shiffman S , Elash CA , Paton S , Gwaltney CJ , Paty JA , et al . 2000 . Comparative efﬁcacy of 24 - hour and 16 - hour transdermal nicotine patch for relief of craving and withdrawal . Addiction 95 : 1185 – 95 Shiffman S , Engberg J , Paty JA , Perz W , Gnys M , et al . 1997a . A day at a time : predicting smoking lapse from daily urge . J . Abnorm . Psychol . 106 : 104 – 16 Shiffman S , Ferguson SG , Gwaltney CJ , Balabanis MH , Shadel WG . 2006 . Reduction of abstinence - induced withdrawal and craving using nicotine replacement therapy . Psychopharmacology 184 : 637 – 44 Shiffman S , Gwaltney CJ , Balabanis M , Liu KS , Paty JA , et al . 2002 . Immediate antecedents of cigarette smoking : an analysis from Ecological Momentary Assessment . J . Abnorm . Psychol . 111 : 531 – 45 3 . 30 Shiffman · Stone · Hufford A nnu . R e v . C li n . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 4 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f M i ss ou r i - C o l u m b i a on 02 / 18 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV339 - CP04 - 03 ARI 6 November 2007 22 : 4 Shiffman S , Gwaltney CJ , Shields AL . 2007 . Validation of ePRO measures and using ePRO to enhance validity . Presented at Annu . Meet . New Clin . Drug Eval . Unit , 47th , Boca Raton , FL Shiffman S , Hickcox M , Paty JA , Gnys M , Kassel JD , Richards T . 1996a . Progression from a smoking lapse to relapse : prediction from abstinence violation effects and nicotine de - pendence . J . Consult . Clin . Psychol . 64 : 993 Shiffman S , Hickcox M , Paty JA , Gnys M , Kassel JD , Richards T . 1997b . The abstinence violation effect following smoking lapses and temptations . Cogn . Ther . Res . 21 : 497 – 523 Shiffman S , Hufford M , Hickcox M , Paty JA , Gnys M , Kassel JD . 1997c . Remember that ? A comparison of real - time vs . retrospective recall of smoking lapses . J . Consult . Clin . Psychol . 65 : 292 – 300 Shiffman S , Paty JA . 2003 . Using an electronic diary to capture frequent events . Presented at From Quality of Life to Patient Outcomes Assess . : Res . Agenda for a Paradigm Shift , Drug Inf . Assoc . , Baltimore , MD Shiffman S , Paty JA , Gnys M , Kassel JD , Hickcox M . 1996b . First lapses to smoking : within - subjects analyses of real - time reports . J . Consult . Clin . Psychol . 64 : 366 – 79 Shiffman S , Waters AJ . 2004 . Negative affect and smoking lapses : a prospective analysis . J . Consult . Clin . Psychol . 72 : 192 – 201 Shiffman S , Waters AJ , Hickcox M . 2004 . The Nicotine Dependence Syndrome Scale : a multi - dimensional measure of nicotine dependence . Nicotine Tob . Res . 6 : 327 – 48 Shrier LA , Shih M - C , Beardslee WR . 2005 . Affect and sexual behavior in adolescents : a review of the literature and comparison of momentary sampling with diary and retrospective self - report methods of measurement . Pediatrics 115 : 573 – 81 Stone AA , Bachrach CA , Jobe JB , Kurtzman HS , Cain VS , eds . 2000 . The Science of Self - Report : Implications for Research and Practice . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum Stone AA , Broderick JE , Schwartz JE , Shiffman S , Litcher - Kelly L , Calvanese P . 2003a . In - tensive momentary reporting of pain with an electronic diary : reactivity , compliance , and patient satisfaction . Pain 104 : 343 – 51 Stone AA , Schwartz JE , Broderick JE , Shiffman S . 2005 . Variability of momentary pain predicts recall of weekly pain : a consequence of the peak ( or salience ) memory heuristic . Personal . Soc . Psychol . Bull . 31 : 1340 – 46 Stone AA , Schwartz JE , Neale JM , Shiffman S , Marco CA , et al . 1998 . A comparison of coping assessed by Ecological Momentary Assessment and retrospective recall . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 74 : 1670 – 80 Initially stated EMA principles , describing the rationale for and characteristics of EMA . Stone AA , Shiffman S . 1994 . Ecological Momentary Assessment in behavioral medicine . Ann . Behav . Med . 16 : 199 – 202 Stone AA , Shiffman S . 2002 . Capturing momentary , self - report data : a proposal for reporting guidelines . Ann . Behav . Med . 24 : 236 – 43 Stone AA , Shiffman S , Atienza A , Nebeling L . 2007a . Introduction to Ecological Momentary Assessment ( EMA ) . See Stone et al . 2007b , pp . xi – xiv Lays out rationale and foundation of EMA methods , including design , practicalities , and data analysis , with examples of EMA studies . Stone AA , Shiffman S , Atienza A , Nebeling L , eds . 2007b . The Science of Real - Time Data Capture : Self - Reports in Health Research . New York : Oxford Univ . Press Reports a study evaluating actual compliance with written diaries compared with electronic diaries . Stone AA , Shiffman S , Schwartz JE , Broderick JE , Hufford MR . 2002 . Patient noncom - pliance with paper diaries . Br . Med . J . 324 : 1193 – 94 Stone AA , Shiffman S , Schwartz JE , Broderick JE , Hufford MR . 2003b . Patient compliance with paper and electronic diaries . Controlled Clin . Trials 24 : 182 – 99 Sudman S , Bradburn NM . 1973 . Effects of time and memory factors on response in surveys . J . Am . Stat . Assoc . 68 : 805 – 15 www . annualreviews . org • Ecological Momentary Assessment 3 . 31 A nnu . R e v . C li n . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 4 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f M i ss ou r i - C o l u m b i a on 02 / 18 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV339 - CP04 - 03 ARI 6 November 2007 22 : 4 Szalai A . 1966 . The multinational comparative time budget research project : a venture in international research cooperation . Am . Behav . Sci . 10 : 30 Taylor BC , Fried L , Kenardy J . 1990 . The use of a real - time diary for data acquisition and processing . Behav . Res . Ther . 28 : 92 – 97 Tennen H , Afﬂeck G , Armeli S . 2005 . Personality and daily experience revisited . J . Personal . 73 : 1 – 19 Tennen H , Afﬂeck G , Coyne JC , Larsen RJ , DeLongis A . 2006 . Paper and plastic in daily diary research : comment on Green , Rafaeli , Bolger , Shrout , and Reis . Psychol . Methods 11 : 112 – 18 Thiele C , Laireiter A - R , Baumann U . 2002 . Diaries in clinical psychology and psychotherapy : a selective review . Clin . Psychol . Psychother . 9 : 1 – 37 Todd M , Armeli S , Tennen H , Carney MA , Ball SA , et al . 2005 . Drinking to cope : a comparison of questionnaire and electronic diary reports . J . Stud . Alcohol 66 : 121 – 29 Tourangeau R . 2000 . Remembering what happened : memory errors and survey reports . See Stone et al . 2000 , pp . 29 – 48 Tulen J , Volkers A , Stronks D , Cavelaars M , Groeneveld W . 2001 . Accelerometry in clinical psychophysiology . In Ambulatory Assessment , ed . J Fahrenberg , M Myrtek , pp . 207 – 31 . Seattle , WA : Hogrefe & Huber Turner JR , Ward MM , Gellman MD , Johnston DW . 1994 . The relationship between labora - tory and ambulatory cardiovascular activity : current evidence and future directions . Ann . Behav . Med . 16 : 12 – 23 Tversky A , Kahneman D . 1973 . Availability : a heuristic for judging frequency and probability . Cogn . Psychol . 5 : 207 – 32 Van Den Brink M , Bandell - Hoekstra E , Abu - Sadd H . 2001 . The occurrence of recall bias in pediatric headache : a comparison of questionnaire and diary data . Headache 41 : 11 – 20 Verbrugge LM . 1980 . Health diaries . Med . Care 18 : 73 – 95 Describes a variety of methods for statistical analysis of EMA data . Walls TA , Schafer JL , eds . 2006 . Models for Intensive Longitudinal Data . New York : Oxford Univ . Press . Wheeler L , Reis H . 1991 . Self - recording of everyday life events : origins , types , and uses . J . Personal . 59 : 339 – 54 Wilhelm FH , Roth WT , Sackner MA . 2003 . The LifeShirt : an advanced system for ambulatory measurement of respiratory and cardiac function . Behav . Modif . 27 : 671 – 91 Willis G . 2005 . Cognitive Interviewing . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . http : / / www . experiencesampling . org / 3 . 32 Shiffman · Stone · Hufford A nnu . R e v . C li n . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 4 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f M i ss ou r i - C o l u m b i a on 02 / 18 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y .