An Exploratory Study of Personal Calendar Use Manas Tungare , Manuel A . P´erez - Qui˜nones , Alyssa Sams Center for Human - Computer Interaction Department of Computer Science Virginia Tech Blacksburg , VA , USA { manas @ tungare . name , perez @ cs . vt . edu } Abstract In this paper , we report on ﬁndings from an ethnographic study of how peo - ple use their calendars for personal information management ( PIM ) . Our partici - pants were faculty , staff and students who were not required to use or contribute to any speciﬁc calendaring solution , but chose to do so anyway . The study was conducted in three parts : ﬁrst , an initial survey provided broad insights into how calendars were used ; second , this was followed up with personal interviews of a few participants which were transcribed and content - analyzed ; and third , exam - ples of calendar artifacts were collected to inform our analysis . Findings from our study include the use of multiple reminder alarms , the reliance on paper calendars even among regular users of electronic calendars , and wide use of calendars for reporting and life - archival purposes . We conclude the paper with a discussion of what these imply for designers of interactive calendar systems and future work in PIM research . 1 Introduction Personal Information Management ( PIM ) is receiving attention as an area of re - search within the CHI community [ Barreau et al . , 2008 , Bergman et al . , 2004 , Teevan et al . , 2006 ] . PIM research mostly is concerned with studying how people ﬁnd , keep , organize , and re - ﬁnd ( or reuse ) information in and around their personal information space . Calendar management , one of the typical PIM tasks , is done today using a variety of systems and methods , including several popular paper - based methods : At - A - Glance , one of the largest suppliers of paper planners , sold more than 100 million calendars in 2000 1 . For computer - based systems , calendar management is often integrated into email clients ( e . g . Microsoft Outlook ) ; it is one of the most common applica - tions in all personal digital assistants ( PDAs , e . g . Blackberries and iPhones ) , and there are several online calendar systems ( e . g . Yahoo ! Calendar , Google Calendar , Apple Mobile Me ) . Date - and time - based information is ubiquitous , and is often 1 http : / / www . allbusiness . com / consumer - products / ofﬁce - supplies - equipment / 6579063 - 1 . html 1 a r X i v : 0809 . 3447v1 [ c s . H C ] 19 S e p 2008 available through many means such as postings on ofﬁce doors , displays with dated announcements , through email conversations , written on wall calendars , etc . The result is that calendar information tends to be pervasive . In this paper , we set out to explore how people use calendars in the presence of varied technological options . We are interested in understanding how calen - dar information is managed given the availability of these platforms . After a brief review of related work , we proceed to discuss our ﬁndings from the survey , inter - views , and artifacts . From these , we suggest several opportunities for designers of future electronic calendar systems , and conclude the paper with a discussion of future research in personal information management . 2 Related Work There is a long history of calendar studies in human - computer interaction litera - ture . Early research on calendar use predates electronic calendars . In 1982 , Kel - ley and Chapanis [ Kelley and Chapanis , 1982 ] interviewed 23 professionals to dis - cover how people in the business world kept track of their schedules . They found that for the individuals interviewed , calendars were indispensable and showed a lot of diversity in their use . The use of multiple calendars was prevalent , and a wide variation was seen in the time spans viewed , as well as in other aspects such as archiving , editing and portable access . Many of the problems identiﬁed in pa - per calendars could be solved in electronic calendars , and they concluded with a list of features for emerging electronic calendars to implement . Soon afterwards , Kincaid and Pierre [ Kincaid et al . , 1985 ] examined the use of paper and electronic calendars in two groups , and concluded that electronic calendars failed to pro - vide several key features such as ﬂexibility , power , and convenience , that paper calendars did . They recommended many useful features to be incorporated into electronic calendar systems as well . Nearly 10 years after Kelley and Chapanis’ original study , Payne [ Payne , 1993 ] conducted interviews with 30 knowledge workers about both calendars and to - do lists , followed by a task analysis of his observations . He concluded that the central task supported by calendars was prospective remembering . Prospective remembering is the use of memory for remembering to do things in the future , as different from retrospective memory functions such as recalling past events . Payne reported that other uses of calendars were not as well - supported by sys - tems at the time : features such as automatic scheduling were found to be detrimen - tal , since it allowed users to schedule appointments without simultaneously being able to browse the other appointments in the calendar opportunistically . Electronic calendars of the time did not support the rich layout and typography of paper cal - endars , nor did they allow the scheduling of events that did not have a speciﬁc time associated with them . He concludes with a discussion how calendars could be designed to support the prospective remembering task better . Groupware in the ofﬁce or corporate context has been studied widely : Grudin [ Grudin , 1996 ] reported that many ofﬁce administrators who used online calendar systems printed the calendars of their managers almost daily . Grudin and Palen [ Grudin and Palen , 1995 , Palen , 1998 , Palen and Grudin , 2003 ] explored the fac - tors that contributed to adoption of groupware calendars , and the role of peer pres - sure and network effects in expanding the use of a shared calendar system for meeting scheduling . Palen [ Palen , 1999 ] explored the inter - play and co - evolution 2 of individual demands , social aspects and deployment issues in groupware calen - dar systems . Calendars are often also used at home , but this area has not received much attention in the literature ; a notable exception is [ Crabtree et al . , 2003 ] . In this paper , we focus on the personal use of calendars ( at work or at home ) but do not explore the collaborative aspects of calendar systems in detail . Several interesting design concepts have been suggested to make electronic calendar systems less error - prone and smarter . These cover a wide range , from systems that retrieve tasks from email messages [ Horvitz , 1999 ] , to systems that learn from users’ behavior to recommend intelligent defaults [ Mueller , 2000 ] , to calendar systems that predict attendance at events [ Tullio et al . , 2002 ] . Beard et al . [ Beard et al . , 1990 ] assessed the effectiveness of a priority - based calendar proto - type and concluded that integration with other personal information systems ( such as email ) would make the system more useful for users . Visualizing calendar in - formation on desktop computers and mobile devices has been explored in several studies [ Mackinlay et al . , 1994 , Bederson et al . , 2004 ] . In the ﬁeld of Personal Information Management , the management of various information collections such as ﬁles [ Barreau and Nardi , 1995 ] , folders [ Jones et al . , 2005 ] , email [ Whittaker and Sidner , 1996 ] bookmarks [ Abrams et al . , 1998 ] and cross - collection issues [ Boardman and Sasse , 2004 , Kaye et al . , 2006 ] have been studied widely . Calendars are an important part of users’ personal information , and this domain can beneﬁt from a re - examination in the wake of electronic and ubiquitous calendar systems . Jones [ Jones , 2004 ] framed the problems in PIM in terms of the canonical tasks of keeping , organizing , and re - ﬁnding . Keeping any kind of information involves a tradeoff between the likelihood it will be recalled in the future , and the costs of capturing and retaining it . Organizing involves ﬁling it away such that it can be retrieved easily in the future , and while keeping the cost of organizing less than the cost of ﬁnding . Re - ﬁnding is a different problem from ﬁnding , since there are aspects to encountered information that make it personal . With the increased use of mobile devices , more and more calendaring tasks are performed off the desktop computer . Perry et al . [ Perry et al . , 2001 ] report on issues faced by mobile workers , their need for access to people and information located remotely , and the planful opportunism they engage in when utilizing their dead time for tasks . 3 Study Description The ethnographic approach we took in this study follows techniques commonly re - ported in the Personal Information Management literature , notably [ Kelley and Chapanis , 1982 , Payne , 1993 , Jones et al . , 2005 , Marshall and Bly , 2005 ] . We did not attempt to test any a priori hypotheses , but were interested in examining how calendar prac - tices have evolved in the years following previous calendar studies by Kelley and Chapanis [ Kelley and Chapanis , 1982 ] and Payne [ Payne , 1993 ] . Our study has three components to it : a survey ( N = 98 ) , in - person interviews ( N = 16 ) , and an examination of calendar artifacts such as screenshots and paper calendars . A large - scale online survey was distributed among members of a uni - versity . A total of 98 responses were received ( 54 % male and 45 % female ) , includ - ing faculty ( 56 % ) , administrative staff ( 20 % ) , and students ( 19 % ) ( ﬁgure 1 ) . While previous studies have examined organizational calendars [ Dourish et al . , 1993 ] and 3 groupware calendar systems [ Grudin , 1996 , Palen and Grudin , 2003 ] , our focus was on the personal use of calendars . StudentsFacultyStaffOther 1955204 Other4 % Staff20 % Faculty56 % Students19 % Figure 1 : Roles of survey participants In part two , we conducted in - depth personal interviews with 16 participants , recruited from among the survey participants . The recruitment criterion for inter - view candidates was the same as in [ Kelley and Chapanis , 1982 ] : that participants should be regular users of some form of calendar system , either electronic or paper or a combination of both . Participants included graduate students , faculty mem - bers , administrative assistants , a department head , the director of a small business , etc . , among others . Interviews ranged from 20 to 30 minutes each , and were conducted in situ at their workplaces so we could observe their calendaring practices directly ( e . g . calendar programs or wall calendars or paper scraps . ) Interviews were semi - structured and open - ended : a prepared set of questions was asked in each inter - view . The questions we asked were closely modeled on those asked in similar stud - ies [ Kelley and Chapanis , 1982 , Payne , 1993 ] . The complete set of questions is available as an appendix in a technical report [ Tungare and P´erez - Qui˜nones , 2008 ] . As an extension to past studies , we were able to explore the use of features of modern calendar systems such as alarms , reminders , and mobile use , which were absent in paper calendars . Interviewees were encouraged to talk freely and to ex - pand upon any of the themes they wished to discuss in more detail . Additional topics were addressed as appropriate depending on the interviewee’s calendar use . Examining the calendar systems in use at their desks or on their walls prompted speciﬁc questions from the interviewers about these practices . All interviews were transcribed in full . We performed content analysis [ Krippendorff , 2004 ] of the transcripts to extract common patterns of use . The main purpose of content analysis in this study was to summarize the ﬁndings into groups of common ob - servations , as in [ Marshall and Bly , 2005 ] . Individual responses were tagged into several categories by two of the authors and any differences reconciled by dis - cussion . Nearly 410 tags resulted from this activity ; these were then collapsed into 383 tags ( grouping together tags that were near - duplicates ) and 11 top - level groups during the clustering procedure . From each interview participant , we collected copies of artifacts that were used for calendaring purposes : 2 weeks’ worth of calendar information and any other idiosyncratic observations that were spotted by the interviewers . These included screenshots of their calendar programs , paper calendars , printouts of electronic calendars ( that were already printed for their own use ) , sticky notes stuck on paper calendars , etc . Some of these reﬂected a degree of wear and tear that occurred naturally over time ; others provided evidence of manipulations such as color high - lights , annotations in the margins , or comments made in other ways . Artifacts were 4 not coded on any particular dimension , but pictures of these artifacts are used to supplant our textual descriptions wherever appropriate . ( See ﬁgures 4 , 5 and 8 . ) 4 Analysis 4 . 1 General Use of Calendars 4 . 1 . 1 Capturing and Adding Events Capturing events refers to the act of knowing about an event and entering it into a calendaring system ( also referred to as the ‘keeping’ phase in the PIM literature . ) Most survey participants reported adding new events as soon as they were ( made ) aware of them ( 93 % ) while the rest added them before the end of the day . Even when at their desks , those users who owned PDAs reported using them to create new events in their calendar : this was deemed faster than trying to start the calendar program on a computer and then adding an event . When away from their desks , they used proxy artifacts such as printed calendar copies or paper scraps . Information about new events reached the primary calendar user via one of sev - eral means : email , phone , and in - person were commonly reported ( ﬁgure 2 ) . The fact that email was the most common way reported in our study is an expected evo - lution from older ﬁndings [ Kelley and Chapanis , 1982 ] that phones were the most common stimuli for calendar events . Interviewees mentioned several other meth - ods through which they received events : ﬂyers , posters , campus notices , meeting minutes , public calendars ( such as academic schedules or sports events ) , news - papers , internet forums , ( postal ) mail , fax , radio , or scheduled directly by other people who had access to the calendar ( e . g . , shared calendars ) . The wide variety of sources here is a potential indication of the problem of information overload [ Schick et al . , 1990 ] faced by knowledge workers . New events arrive Frequently Sometimes Rarely Email Phone In - person 79 17 1 17 50 30 34 54 9 Email Phone In - person 0 20 40 60 80 100 9 30 1 54 50 17 34 17 79 Number of survey participants out of 98 Frequently Sometimes Rarely Figure 2 : How new events arrive in users’ PIM systems 4 . 1 . 2 Personal Calendar View Preference We refer to the most common time interval shown in a calendar program or on a paper calendar as the preferred personal calendar view : the week view was pre - ferred by most of our survey participants at 44 % , followed by the day view at 35 % , 5 and the month view at 21 % ( ﬁgure 3 ) . These are very close to the numbers reported by Kelley et al . [ Kelley and Chapanis , 1982 ] ( 45 % , 33 % , 22 % respectively ) . That many interviewees preferred a week view suggests the use of the calen - dar for opportunistic rehearsal , because they browsed the entire week’s appoint - ments each time they viewed the calendar . This preference supports the analysis of [ Payne , 1993 ] in that the printed versions of calendar do provide a valuable aid in opportunistic reading of the the week’s activities . Users who kept multiple cal - endars within the same calendaring system indicated that they turned the visibility of each calendar on or off on demand , based on the speciﬁcs of what they needed to know during a particular lookup task . On smaller devices such as PDAs , the default view was the daily view . Daily35 % Weekly44 % Monthly21 % Preferred calendar view Daily25 % Weekly33 % Monthly43 % Preferred printed view Monthly Weekly Daily Figure 3 : Preferred calendar views There seem to be two motivators for browsing calendars : looking for activi - ties to attend in the near future , and looking for activities further out that require preparation . A daily view directly supports the ﬁrst , while a week view partially supports the second one . Intermediates such as Google Calendar’s 4 - day view af - ford browsing for future events without losing local context for the current day . The downside of such a view , however , is that days no longer appear in a ﬁxed column position , but in different locations based on the day . Thus , the preferred calendar view depends on the type of activity the user is doing . 4 . 1 . 3 Frequency of Consulting the Calendar When asked about the frequency at which users consulted their calendars , we re - ceived a wide range of responses in the survey : keeping the calendar program always open ( 66 % ) and several times a day ( 21 % ) were the most common . In the interviews , several other speciﬁc times were reported : just before bed - time or after waking up ; only when prompted by an alarm ; when scheduling a new event ; once weekly ; or on weekends only . Two interviewees reported consulting their calendar only to check for conﬂicts before scheduling new events , and for conﬁrmation of events already scheduled . 4 . 1 . 4 Proxy Calendar Artifacts We use the term ‘proxy calendar artifacts’ ( or ‘proxies’ in short ) to refer to ephemeral scraps or notes ( characterized as micronotes in [ Lin et al . , 2004 ] ) or printed calen - dars or electronic means such as email to self that are used for calendaring when 6 primary calendar systems are unavailable or inaccessible ( e . g . when users were away from their desks or ofﬁces ) . Despite the prevalent use of electronic calendars , many were not portable and were tied to speciﬁc desktop computers . This prompted the users to use other means to view or add events to their calendar ; about 27 % reported that they used proxy artifacts such as scraps or notes to be entered into the primary calendar at a later time . A wide variety of proxy calendar artifacts was reported in our in - terviews : paper scraps were by far the most common medium ; other techniques in - cluded carrying laptops solely for the purpose of calendaring , PDAs , voice recorders , and printouts of electronic calendars . Information captured via these proxies was transferred to the primary calendar after a delay : most often , users entered the events as soon as they could access their primary calendar ( 63 % of survey partici - pants ) , a few others reported entering them within the same day ( 25 % ) , while the maximum delay reported was up to one week . 4 . 1 . 5 Information Stored in an Event Record Calendar systems allow users to add several items of information to an event record . Typical information included the date of the event ( 97 % ) , time ( 96 % ) , location ( 93 % ) and purpose ( 69 % ) as indicated in the survey . In interviews , it was clear that common ﬁelds such as notes , other attendees and status were used only to a limited extent . Location was entered mostly for non - recurring events . However , many other pieces of information were frequently recorded , even though calendar programs do not have a speciﬁc ﬁeld for these data . For example , information critical for participation at an event was entered inline for easy access : e . g . phone numbers for conference calls , cooking menus and shopping lists , meeting agenda , original email for reference , links to relevant web sites , and ﬁlenames of relevant ﬁles . One participant mentioned adding meeting participants’ email addresses in case she needed to inform them of a cancellation or rescheduling . For activities such as trips or ﬂights , further details such as booking codes and ﬂight details were included as a way of reducing information fragmentation between the calendar system and the email system . 4 . 1 . 6 Types of Events The events most commonly recorded on calendars by survey participants were timed events such as appointments or meetings ( 98 % ) , special events requiring advance planning , such as tests ( 93 % ) , long duration events such as the week of ﬁnal exams at the end of each semester ( 66 % ) , and all - day events such as birthdays ( 81 % ) . Several interviewees also mentioned recording to - do items in a calendar , such as phone calls to be made , or tasks which would remain on the calendar until completed , or which were scheduled in on their deadline . Speciﬁcally , we found several instances of the following types of events scheduled : • Work - related events . Many interviewees used calendar scheduling for work - related events such as meetings , deadlines , classes , public events such as talks and conferences , and work holidays . Users in work environments in - cluded vacation details for co - workers and subordinates . Time was routinely blocked off to prepare for other events : e . g . class preparation or ground work to be done before a meeting . 7 Interviewees who had administrative assistants reported that their assistant maintained or co - maintained their calendar ( 7 out of 16 interviewees ) . The dynamics of shared access were vastly different across all these situations . One interviewee mentioned that he would never let an assistant be their pri - mary scheduler ; the assistant was able to access only a paper copy and any new events would be reviewed and added by the primary calendar user . Two other users mentioned that they provided paper calendars to subordinates to keep track of their schedule and to be able to answer questions about it to third parties . One participant reported calling in to their secretary when they needed to consult their schedule while away from their desk ( similar to pre - vious reports in [ Perry et al . , 2001 ] ) , while another reported sending email to themselves as a way to quickly capture a newly - scheduled meeting . • Family / personal events . Half of the survey respondents indicated that they coordinate calendars with their spouses , roommates , or family . Even though family activities such as picking up kids from school , or attending church services , were easily remembered without the aid of a calendar , interviewees reported that they chose to record them anyway to provide “a visual idea of the entire day” ( ﬁgure 4 ) . Public holidays , family birthdays , and guest visits were added to prevent accidental scheduling of conﬂicting events . Figure 4 : Family events such as attending church are added to calendars , not for re - membering , but to be able to get a visual idea of the entire day . Many participants reported having separate calendars for business use and for home / personal use , as was also seen in a majority of respondents in [ Kelley and Chapanis , 1982 ] . Although events overlapped between them ( e . g . work trips on family calendars and family medical appointments on work calendars ) , the calendars themselves were located at the respective places and maintained separately . Family calendars were most likely to be kept in the kitchen , on the refrigerator . Two contrasts between work calendars and home calendars were promi - nent : work calendars were more often electronic while home calendars more likely to be paper calendars , e . g . as a wall calendar , or on the refrigerator . Work calendars were updated by the primary users or their secretaries or their colleagues , while family calendars were overwhelmingly managed by women . No male participant reported being the only calendar manager at 8 home ; women reported either being the only person to edit it , or sharing responsibilities with their husbands . Family - related events and reminders were constrained to the home calendar , as in [ Nippert - Eng , 1996 ] , but they were sometimes added to work calendars if such events would impact work time . For example , medical appointments ( of self or family members ) that occurred during work hours were added to work calendars so that their co - workers were aware of their absence . • Public events . Public events were added even when the user had no inten - tion of attending that event . They were added to recommend to other people , or for personal planning purposes , or to start conversations related to the public activity . An administrator ( from ANONYMIZED , a small university town with a very popular college football team ) said that although he had no interest in football , he added home games to his calendar to ensure that visit - ing dignitaries were not invited during a time when all hotels in town would be booked to capacity . On the other hand , two interviewees considered such public events as contributing to clutter in their personal calendar , and chose not to add them . 4 . 2 Continued Use of Paper Calendars In his 1993 study [ Payne , 1993 ] , Payne reports that the most stable characteristic he observed was the continued reliance of all but two participants on some kind of paper calendar . Our ﬁndings are similar : despite most of our users using electronic calendars , every one of them reported using paper calendars even if not regularly ; 12 out of 16 interview participants reported using them regularly . 4 . 2 . 1 Reasons for the Continued Use of Paper Calendars We group the several reasons and examples elicited from our participants into the following four categories : • Paper trail . Cancelled events were scratched off the calendar , leaving a paper trail . Being able to make a distinction between cancelled and never - scheduled events was cited as an important concern for continuing with pa - per calendars . • Opportunistic rehearsal . We found support for the idea of opportunistic rehearsal [ Payne , 1993 ] . Users cited that wall calendars needed no more than a glance to read , and provided for quick reference . This also corroborates Dourish’s argument [ Dourish et al . , 1993 ] that the presence of informational context in paper artifacts such as calendars is an important motivator for people to continue to use them , even though electronic systems support the information retrieval task better . • Annotation . Paper calendars are more amenable to free - form annotation , as reported earlier [ Kelley and Chapanis , 1982 ] , and as the following quotes from our study illustrate : “That’s what I call the grafﬁti aspect of it , it’s probably freer by virtue of being handwritten . ” “There is a lot of that [ code and symbols ] . Stars and dashes and circles and headlines , marked and completed . ” 9 Figure 5 shows a printed calendar with a sticky note pasted on it . The event is about a community potluck dinner . The sticky note complements the sched - uled appointment with information about the dish the participant plans to bring to the event . Figure 6 shows a picture of a pumpkin hand - drawn on a printed calendar to mark Halloween on October 31 . Figure 5 : Sticky notes are pasted on paper calendars to remind oneself of the prepara - tion required for an event . Figure 6 : A hand - drawn pumpkin marks Halloween on October 31 . • Prepopulated events . Participants reported that having holidays or other event details already printed in commercially - available paper calendars was an important reason for using them . Calendars distributed by the university contained details not only of academic deadlines , but also of athletic events and games ; [ Kelley and Chapanis , 1982 ] point to branding issues as well . Paper calendars were used alongside electronic calendars in either a supple - mentary or complementary role , as follows : 10 4 . 2 . 2 Printouts of Electronic Calendars Printouts of electronic calendars played a supplementary role : they were used as proxies of the master calendar when the master calendar was unavailable . 35 % of survey participants reported printing their calendar . Among those printed , all views were commonly printed : monthly ( 43 % ) , weekly ( 33 % ) and daily ( 25 % ) ( ﬁgure 3 ) . Among those who printed , many printed it monthly , weekly or daily ( ﬁgure 7 ) . Monthly Weekly Daily Never Preferred calendar view Preferred printed view Print their calendarMake changes to printed calendar Update a public printed calendar 21 43 34 17 13 10 10 8 5 26 0 2 11 23 6 2 13 69 0 % 25 % 50 % 75 % 100 % Print their calendar Make changes to printed calendar Update a public printed calendar 77 % 64 % 53 % 14 % 31 % 10 % 2 % 6 % 16 % 7 % 20 % How often do users . . . Monthly Weekly Daily Never Figure 7 : How often users perform activities related to paper calendars . Based on our interviews , we found that electronic calendars were printed for three main reasons : • Portability . Users carried a printed copy of the master calendar to venues where collaboration was anticipated , such as a meetings or trips . Even those who carried laptops and PDAs said that they relied on printed calendars for quick reference . • Quick capture . Events were often entered into paper calendars ﬁrst because of their easy accessibility , and were later transferred back to the digital cal - endar . 4 . 1 . 1 One - third of all interviewees reported making changes to paper copies of their calendars . Not all these changes were propagated back to the master calendar , however . • Sharing a read - only view with associates . Taping a printed calendar to the outside of ofﬁce doors was common practice , as reported by interviewees . In one instance , a user provided printed calendars to his subordinates so they could schedule him for meetings . These events were then screened by him before being added to the master calendar . 4 . 2 . 3 Wall Calendars Wall calendars typically played a complementary role , and there was little overlap between the events on a wall calendar and those in an electronic calendar . 70 % of survey participants had a wall calendar in their home or ofﬁce , however only 25 % of users actually recorded events on it . Family events such as birthdays , vacations , and days off were most commonly recorded by interviewees . At home , wall calendars were located in the kitchen , on the fridge . 11 4 . 2 . 4 Index Cards An extreme case of ad hoc paper calendar usage reported by one of our intervie - wees involved index cards , one for each day , that the participant carried in his shirt pocket when he forgot his PDA . Another interviewee reported exclusively using index cards for calendar management at their previous job because of their porta - bility and trustworthiness . “ [ . . . ] I get a 3 × 5 index card so that I can stick it in my pocket without me losing it . Because if it is put on a little piece of paper , I am sure I will lose it . But a 3 × 5 index card , it ﬁts in my pocket , but is big enough so I would not lose it . ” “I used to just take index cards and keep a little stack [ . . . ] clipped together and keep it in my back pocket . I got my schedule , I have my daily schedule and each index card was a day so I would write in the daily events [ . . . ] . I could easily carry over events from previous days because I just move that card . Everybody joked about it but it was a really useful system . ” ( edited to remove conversational pauses and ﬁllers . ) “One for the paper , again , I know if they are going to blow up or not . This [ referring to index cards ] I am still waiting for it to explode on me some day . ” We report this not as a trend , but to illustrate the wide variety in the use of paper calendars . 4 . 3 Reminders and Alarms Reminders and alarms are one of the major distinguishing features of modern elec - tronic calendar systems . A majority of survey participants ( 63 % ) reported using these features . One user reported switching from paper to an online calendar be - cause “a paper calendar cannot have an alarm feature” . We use the term reminder to refer to any notiﬁcation of a calendar event , and alarm to refer to the speciﬁc case of an interruption generated by the calendar system . Based on our interviews , we classiﬁed reminders into three categories taking into consideration the reasons , time , number , modalities and intervals of alarms . Before presenting the details of such a classiﬁcation , however , we examine the individual factors in more detail . 4 . 3 . 1 Reasons for Using Alarms Although reminding oneself of upcoming events is the most obvious use case for alarms , there were several other situations where users mentioned using reminders in addition to consulting their calendars regularly . Even when users were cognizant of upcoming events , they preferred to set alarms to interrupt them and grab their attention at the appointed hour . Alarms served as preparation reminders for events that were not necessarily in the immediate future . When subordinates added events to a primary user’s calendar , alarms were deemed an important way of notifying that user of such events . Early morning meeting reminders doubled up as wake - up alarms : one interviewee reported keep - ing their PDA by their bedside for this purpose . Another interviewee who needed 12 to move his car out of a university parking lot where towing started at 8 : 00 am sharp had set a recurring alarm ( ﬁgure 8 ) . In one case , alarms were closely moni - tored by a user’s secretary : if an event were missed by the user by a few minutes , the secretary would check on her boss and remind him to attend the meeting that was now overdue . Figure 8 : One user showed us an example where he set an alarm for moving his car before a towing deadline set in at 8 : 00am . 4 . 3 . 2 Number and Modalities of Reminders While most survey participants only set a single reminder per event ( 52 % ) , many others reported using multiple alarms . We conclude from our interviews that dif - ferent semantic meanings were assigned to each such reminder : an alarm one day before an event was for preparation purposes , while an alarm 15 minutes before an event was a solicited interruption . Multimodal alarms were not used by many : the two most popular modalities used individually were audio ( 40 % ) and on - screen dialogs ( 41 % ) . 4 . 3 . 3 Alarm Intervals Reminders were set for varying intervals of time before the actual events took place , ranging from 5 minutes to several years . The two factors that affected this timing were ( 1 ) location of the event , and ( 2 ) whether or not ( and how much ) preparation was required . Users often set multiple alarms to be able to satisfy each of these requirements , because a single alarm could not satisfy them all . Based on these ﬁndings , we classify alarms into 3 categories : • Interruption Reminders . Alarms set 5 - 15 minutes before an event were extremely short - term interruptions intended to get users up from their desks . Even if they knew in their mind that a particular event was coming up , it was likely that they were involved in their current activity deeply enough to overlook the event at the precise time it occurred . 15 minutes was the most common interval , as reported by 8 out of 16 interview participants . We found that the exact interval for interruption reminders was a function of the location of the event . Events that occurred in the same building as the user’s current location had alarms set for between 5 and 15 minutes . Events in a different building had alarms for between 15 minutes and 30 minutes , based on the time it would take to reach there . Two interviewees reported that they set alarms for TV shows and other activities at home for up to 1 hour prior , because that is how long their commute took . 13 • Preparation Reminders . Users set multiple alarms when preparation was required for an event : the ﬁrst ( or earlier ) alarm was to alert them to begin the preparation , while a later alarm was the interruption reminder for that event . Payne [ Payne , 1993 ] mentions the prevalence of this tendency as well : the reason for the ﬁrst alarm ( out of several ) is to aid prospective remember - ing where the intention to look up an event is not in response to a speciﬁc temporal condition , but instead such conditions are checked after the inten - tion is recalled . If certain items were needed to be taken to such meetings , preparation reminders were set for the previous night or early morning on the day of the event . Based on the interviews , preparation reminders were more commonly used for non - recurring events than for recurring events . • Long - term Reminders . Events several months or years into the future were assigned reminders so that the user would not have to remember to consult the calendar at that time , but instead would have them show up automatically at ( or around ) the proper time . This is an illustration of using the calendar for prospective remembering tasks . Examples include a department head who put details of faculty coming up for tenure in up to 5 years , and a professor setting reminders for a conference submission deadline several months later . 4 . 4 Calendars as a Memory Aid Calendars serve a value purpose as external memory for events [ Payne , 1993 ] . In addition , in our data we found that the role that calendars play with respect to memory goes beyond this simple use . In particular , the following uses of calen - dars illustrate the different ways in which calendars serve as memory aids beyond simple lookups : First , users reported recording events in the calendar after the fact , not for the purpose of reminding , but to support reporting needs . Second , a few reported using previous years’ calendars as a way to record memorable events to be remembered in future years . For those that used paper calendars , these events were often copied at the end of the year to newer calendars . The function of mem - ory aid goes beyond remembering personal events ( appointments and deadlines ) ; it serves as a life journal , capturing events year after year . Kelley and Chapanis [ Kelley and Chapanis , 1982 ] reported that 9 out of 11 respondents in their study kept calendars from two to 15 years . 4 . 4 . 1 Reporting Purposes In our study , 10 out of 16 interviewees reported that they used their calendar to generate annual reports every year . Since it contained an accurate log of all their activities that year , it was the closest to a complete record of all accomplishments for that year . Among these , 5 users reported that they archived their calendars year after year to serve as a reference for years later . This tendency has also been re - ported in past studies [ Kelley and Chapanis , 1982 , Payne , 1993 ] ; Kelley referred to it as an ‘audit trail’ , and highlighted the role of calendars in reporting and plan - ning . One person mentioned that they discovered their father’s journal a few years after his death , and now they cultivate their calendar as a memento to be shared with their kids in the future . 14 “I think I occasionally even think about my kids . Because I do , I save them , I don’t throw them away [ . . . ] I think that it’s common with a little more sense of mortality or something . It’s trying to moving things outwards . ” 5 Opportunities for Design In this section , we highlight how some of our ﬁndings can be address through new electronic calendar designs . 5 . 1 Paper Calendars and Printing We do not believe that paper calendars will disappear from use ; they serve several useful functions that are hard to replace by technology . Electronic calendars in general are more feature - rich than paper calendars . Portable devices have good support for capturing information while mobile . Yet , we found that paper calendars and proxies continue to be prevalent in the use of calendar management . They provide support for easy capture of calendar information , are effective at sharing , and support the display of the calendar in public view with ease . Therefore , given the many uses of paper calendars , we consider how electronic calendar systems can provide better support for these proxies . Richer printing ca - pabilities might provide easy support for transferring online calendar information to the paper domain . Printing a wall calendar is a novelty relegated to specialized design software . However our ﬁndings show that wall calendars play a signiﬁcant role in supporting calendar management , particularly at home . With affordable printing technology available , it is possible to print a wall calendar or table calen - dar at home , incorporating not only details of events from a user’s personal elec - tronic calendar , but also visual elements such as color coding , digital photos ( for birthdays , etc . ) and event icons . In a way , printed calendars are used in similar ways as discussed in [ Lin et al . , 2004 ] . 5 . 2 Digital Paper Trails Some of the features of paper calendars can be recreated in online systems . For example , current electronic calendar systems remove all traces of an event upon cancellation , without providing an option to retain this historical record . This was one of the shortcomings which led interview participants to rely on paper instead . Instead of deleting events , they could be faded out of view , and made visible upon request . Most calendar software support the notion of different calendars inside of the same program . A possibility is that all deleted events could simply be moved to a separate calendar , where events can be hidden easily . Yet , the events would remain in the calendar as a record of cancelled activity . 5 . 3 Tentative Event Scheduling Several participants indicated that they ‘penciled in’ appointments in their pa - per calendars as tentative appointments to be conﬁrmed later ( also identiﬁed as a problem in [ Kelley and Chapanis , 1982 ] ) . These tentative appointments served as a way of blocking particular date / time combinations while a meeting was being 15 scheduled with others . Often , there were several of these tentative times for a par - ticular meeting . Once the meeting was conﬁrmed , only one of them was kept and the rest discarded . This type of activity is not well - supported in personal calendars . For corporate calendars , there is adequate support for scheduling group meetings , but it is often missing in personal calendars . 5 . 4 Intelligent Alarms Calendar alarms and reminders have evolved from past systems and now allow notiﬁcation in several ways : audible alarms , short text messages , popup reminders , and email are just a few . However , the fundamental concept of an alarm still tailors only to interruption reminders . • Preparation reminders . To support preparation reminders , many electronic calendars allow the creation of multiple alarms per event , with different modalities for each ( e . g . , email , SMS , sounds , dialog box ) . However , when these reminders are used for preparation , as we found in the study , users of - ten wanted to have more context : they expected to have an optional text note to indicate what preparation was required . E . g . , alarms that would remind a user before leaving home to remember to carry material for an upcoming meeting , or a reminder the previous night to review documents . • Location - related alarms . The location of events was found to be an impor - tant inﬂuencer of alarm time . If calendars supported the notion of location ( besides simply providing a ﬁeld to type it in ) , alarms could be automatically set based on how long it would take the user to reach the event . • Alarms on multiple devices . When an alarm is set on multiple devices , each will go off at the exact same time without any knowledge of all the others . There is need to establish communication among the devices to present a single alarm to the user on the mutually - determined dominant device at the time . 5 . 5 Supporting a Rich Variety of Event Types Users reported that not all events were equal : public events were merely for aware - ness , recurring events indicated that time was blocked out , and holidays were added to prevent accidental scheduling . From the users’ point of view , each has different connotations , different visibility ( public events should ideally fade out of sight when not required ) , and different types , number and intervals of alarms . • Event templates . A calendar system that supports event types can provide ways and means for users to create event templates and categories with dif - ferent default settings along each of the dimensions outlined above . By hav - ing event templates , quick capture is supported as well . When much of the extra information about an event is pre - ﬁlled , data entry can be minimized to just the title of the event . Certain types of events have special metadata ﬁelds associated with them , e . g . conference call events contain the dial code , ﬂight events contain airline and arrival / departure info . This could be easily achieved by event templates . • Showing / hiding public events . While a few users said they added public events for informational purposes , others did not want public events ( that 16 they would not necessarily attend ) to clutter their calendar . If calendars sup - ported making certain event types visible or invisible on demand , the needs of both user groups could be met . Again , by providing an option to keep all events in the same calendar , such a system would contribute to reducing information fragmentation . 5 . 6 Reporting and Archival Support Report generation is a signiﬁcant use of electronic calendars . Calendar software should have a way to generate reports and export information so that particular groups of events can be summarized in terms of when the meetings / events oc - curred , how many hours were devoted to them , and capture any notes entered in the calendar . One participant reported that he uses the search functionality in his calendar to obtain a listing of events related to a theme . This is used to get an idea of the number of hours devoted to particular activities and help to prepare an annual activity report . 6 Discussion & Future Work The paradox of encoding and remembering , as described in [ Payne , 1993 ] , was clearly evident in our data . Participants seem to over - rely on calendar artifacts to remember appointments , as seen in the setting of multiple alarms , printing of calendars for meetings , carrying a PDA everywhere , and calling their secretary to conﬁrm events . The unfortunate side effect of sharing the management of a calen - dar with other people is that the primary user no longer goes through the personal encoding episode of entering the information . Some participants relied on admin - istrative assistants to enter events in their calendars . At home , many participants relied on their spouses to maintain the calendar . Some participants even suggested the need to have an alarm for when events were added to their calendars . All of this points to a diminished opportunity for encoding the information that is entered into one’s calendar . This makes it very difﬁcult for participants to remember what is in their calendar , given that at times the scheduled events have never been seen before they occur . On the other hand , the opportunity for rehearsal is greater today , if users take advantage of existing information dissemination and syndication techniques . For example , keeping a calendar on a desktop computer and publishing to an online calendar service such Google Calendar or Apple Mobile Me makes the calendar available in many other locations . Users can view their calendar on the web from any web browser , from mobile phones , or in the background on a desktop com - puter as part of widgets ( tiny applications ) such as Apple’s Dashboard or Google Gadgets , or access it over a regular phone call [ P ´ erez - Qui ˜ nones and Rode , 2004 ] . So , the possibility of opportunistic rehearsal is afforded by current systems . We did not observe this in our data , as many of our users did not use these services . However , the paradox of encoding , rehearsal , and recall seems to be in need of future work so we can understand the impact of electronic calendar systems on human memory . 17 7 Appendix 7 . 1 Survey Questions 7 . 1 . 1 Demographics • Gender • Occupation ( Undergraduate Student , Graduate Student , Faculty , Staff , In - dustry ) • What is your age group ? 7 . 1 . 2 Calendar Use Basics • Which devices do you own or use frequently ? • What computing - enabled calendars do you use ? • Do you use your computer to keep your calendar ? If so , which program do you use for your main calendar management task on your desktop / laptop computer ? • If you own and / or use a PDA , which calendar program do you use on the PDA ? • Do you use an online calendar ? • What events do you record on your calendar ? • How often do you visit your calendar ? • How far ahead do you regularly look when you view your calendar ? • What would you consider your preferred view ? • If your calendar software includes a To - Do function , do you use it ? • Does your calendar software have a way to classify calendar events by cate - gories ? If so , how do you use this feature ? • Who changes and updates your calendar ? • How often do you add new events ? • Do you keep ‘proxies’ ( for example , post - its ) or other notes that need to be entered in the calendar at a later time ? • How long does it take for the proxy to make it into your main calendar ? 7 . 1 . 3 New Events • How frequently do you get events by phone ( someone calls you ) that go into your calendar ? • How frequently do you get events by e - mail ( someone sends you email ) that go into your calendar ? • How frequently do you get events in person ( someone tells you of a meeting ) that go into your calendar ? • By what other methods do new events arrive ? 18 7 . 1 . 4 More Calendar Use • What kinds of calendar failure ( e . g . missed an event due to not entering it in calendar , scheduled conﬂicting events ) have you experienced ? • What do you store in the calendar entry ( check all that apply ) ? • What other information do you record in your calendar ? • Do you use the alarms options of your calendar software ? • If you do use them , how much advance warning do you set your alarms for ? • If you do not use them , why not ? • If you are setting an alarm for an event , how many alarm notiﬁcation do you set ? • What medium of notiﬁcation do you use for your alarms ? • Please explain the role of an alarm ? 7 . 1 . 5 Use of PDAs • Do you synchronize your PDA calendar with a desktop calendar ? • If so , how often ? • Which do you consider the ‘master’ or main calendar ? • Do you make changes only on the desktop , thus keeping your PDA as a mobile / view - only aid ? • When you are at your desk , which device do you use to look up events ? • When you are at your desk , which device do you use to enter new events or change existing ones ? 7 . 1 . 6 Use of Paper Calendar Products • Do you print your calendar ? • Which view do you print most frequently ? • How often do you print any of your views ? • Do you make changes ( or write notes ) in the printed copy ? • How often do you copy changes back to your computer ? 7 . 1 . 7 Use of a Wall Calendar • Do you have a wall calendar in your home or ofﬁce ? • If so , do you mark events there ? • If so , what types of events do you put on your wall - calendar ? • Do you copy these events to your ‘main’ computerized calendar ? 7 . 1 . 8 Public Display of Calendar Information • Do you keep a publicly available calendar ( like posted ofﬁce hours on your door , or in the department web page ) ? • If so , how often do you update it ? • If you keep an online calendar , what privacy settings do you use ? 19 7 . 1 . 9 Sharing of Calendar • Do you share your calendar with others ? • If so , with whom ? • Do you coordinate calendar events with your spouse , roommate , family ? 7 . 1 . 10 Phone Access to Calendar • Do you use a service that provides access to your calendar over the phone ? • Would you like to use such a service ? 7 . 2 Interview Questions • How important is your calendar to your work / daily activities ? • If you use multiple calendar systems , how often do you sync them ? On a regular basis i . e . : every morning when you arrive at work , or as events occur ? • If you use multiple calendar systems , do you go back and forth between them during the day ? Which do you use when and why ? • Do you use a to - do list ? • What events are on the to - do list versus scheduled as an event on the cal - endar ? I . e . : presentation for a meeting are a to - do or is the meeting just scheduled on the calendar with a note in the entry that a presentation is due at that time ? • Do you keep “proxies” ( sticky notes ) or other notes that need to be entered in the calendar at a later time ? • What situations arise that make it necessary to use these proxies ? • Do you record public events on your calendar ? ( e . g . beginning of the Olympic games , holidays , election days , football dates , etc . ) ? • What is your reasoning behind recording these public events ? • If you use alarms , what is the role of the warning ? ( i . e . : warning for a timed event or an appointment ( such as History , 1 - 2pm Friday ) , warning to prepare or plan for an event , appointment , or deadline ( such as History Test Friday ) , period events ( Olympic games in session , football weekend ) ) ? • Have you experienced any calendar failures ? What kinds of calendar failures have you experienced ? Please elaborate . • Do you print your calendar ? If so , do you change the printed copy ? • What are your reasons for making changes in the printed copy ? • Do you copy these changes back into your electronic calendar at any point ? • How long do you use this printed copy before printing out an updated one ? • Do you keep more than one calendar ? ( A wall calendar or other paper , com - puter , etc . ) • What criteria separates what goes on one or the other ? 20 • Is there any overlap ? Is one just a pared - down version of the other one or do they contain completely separate events ? • Do you coordinate calendar events with your spouse , roommate , family ? • If so , how do you go about doing that ? • Please explain any additional ways in which you use your calendar system . • What are you habits as far as when you look at your calendar , how often , how far ahead do you look , how in - depth you examine events when you look , etc . • Do you use a method of organization on a paper calendar that you cannot apply to an electronic calendar ? ( i . e . : speciﬁc types of events go into a speciﬁc area of the date box , highlighted events , etc ) • Is there anything else about your personal information management we have not covered ? 8 Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank all our survey participants and interviewees for their participation . We would also like to acknowledge Kyunghui Oh for assistance with preliminary analysis of the data collected , and Leysia Palen and Pardha Pyla for their comments on earlier drafts of this paper . References [ Abrams et al . , 1998 ] Abrams , D . , Baecker , R . , and Chignell , M . ( 1998 ) . Infor - mation archiving with bookmarks : personal web space construction and organi - zation . In CHI ’98 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , pages 41 – 48 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press / Addison - Wesley Publishing Co . [ Barreau et al . , 2008 ] Barreau , D . , Capra , R . , Dumais , S . , Jones , W . , and P´erez - Qui˜nones , M . A . ( 2008 ) . Introduction to keeping , reﬁnding and sharing per - sonal information . ACM Transactions on Information Systems , Special Issue on Personal Information Management , 4 ( 18 ) . [ Barreau and Nardi , 1995 ] Barreau , D . and Nardi , B . A . ( 1995 ) . Finding and re - minding : ﬁle organization from the desktop . SIGCHI Bull . , 27 ( 3 ) : 39 – 43 . [ Beard et al . , 1990 ] Beard , D . , Palaniappan , M . , Humm , A . , Banks , D . , Nair , A . , and Shan , Y . - P . ( 1990 ) . A visual calendar for scheduling group meetings . In CSCW ’90 : Proceedings of the 1990 ACM conference on Computer - supported cooperative work , pages 279 – 290 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . [ Bederson et al . , 2004 ] Bederson , B . B . , Clamage , A . , Czerwinski , M . P . , and Robertson , G . G . ( 2004 ) . DateLens : A ﬁsheye calendar interface for PDAs . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . , 11 ( 1 ) : 90 – 119 . [ Bergman et al . , 2004 ] Bergman , O . , Boardman , R . , Gwizdka , J . , and Jones , W . ( 2004 ) . Personal information management . In CHI ’04 : CHI ’04 extended ab - stracts on Human factors in computing systems , pages 1598 – 1599 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . 21 [ Boardman and Sasse , 2004 ] Boardman , R . and Sasse , M . A . ( 2004 ) . “Stuff goes into the computer and doesn’t come out” : a cross - tool study of personal infor - mation management . In CHI ’04 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , pages 583 – 590 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ Crabtree et al . , 2003 ] Crabtree , A . , Hemmings , T . , Rodden , T . , and Mariani , J . ( 2003 ) . Informing the development of calendar systems for domestic use . In ECSCW’03 : Proceedings of the eighth conference on European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , pages 119 – 138 , Norwell , MA , USA . Kluwer Academic Publishers . [ Dourish et al . , 1993 ] Dourish , P . , Bellotti , V . , Mackay , W . , and Ma , C . - Y . ( 1993 ) . Information and context : lessons from the study of two shared information sys - tems . In COCS ’93 : Proceedings of the conference on Organizational comput - ing systems , pages 42 – 51 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . [ Grudin , 1996 ] Grudin , J . ( 1996 ) . A case study of calendar use in an organization . SIGOIS Bull . , 17 ( 3 ) : 49 – 51 . [ Grudin and Palen , 1995 ] Grudin , J . and Palen , L . ( 1995 ) . Why groupware suc - ceeds : discretion or mandate ? In ECSCW’95 : Proceedings of the fourth con - ference on European Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pages 263 – 278 , Norwell , MA , USA . Kluwer Academic Publishers . [ Horvitz , 1999 ] Horvitz , E . ( 1999 ) . Principles of mixed - initiative user interfaces . In CHI ’99 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in com - puting systems , pages 159 – 166 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . [ Jones et al . , 2005 ] Jones , W . , Phuwanartnurak , A . J . , Gill , R . , and Bruce , H . ( 2005 ) . Don’t take my folders away ! : Organizing personal information to get things done . In CHI ’05 : CHI ’05 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 1505 – 1508 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ Jones , 2004 ] Jones , W . P . ( 2004 ) . Finders , keepers ? the present and future perfect in support of personal information management . First Monday , 9 ( 3 ) . [ Kaye et al . , 2006 ] Kaye , J . J . , Vertesi , J . , Avery , S . , Dafoe , A . , David , S . , Onaga , L . , Rosero , I . , and Pinch , T . ( 2006 ) . To have and to hold : exploring the personal archive . In CHI ’06 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in computing systems , pages 275 – 284 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ Kelley and Chapanis , 1982 ] Kelley , J . and Chapanis , A . ( 1982 ) . How profes - sional persons keep their calendars : Implications for computerization . The British Psychological Society . [ Kincaid et al . , 1985 ] Kincaid , C . M . , Dupont , P . B . , and Kaye , A . R . ( 1985 ) . Electronic calendars in the ofﬁce : an assessment of user needs and current tech - nology . ACM Trans . Inf . Syst . , 3 ( 1 ) : 89 – 102 . [ Krippendorff , 2004 ] Krippendorff , K . ( 2004 ) . Content analysis : An introduction to its methodology . Sage Publications , Inc . [ Lin et al . , 2004 ] Lin , M . , Lutters , W . G . , and Kim , T . S . ( 2004 ) . Understanding the micronote lifecycle : Improving mobile support for informal note taking . Conference on human factors in computing systems , 6 ( 1 ) : 687 – 694 . 22 [ Mackinlay et al . , 1994 ] Mackinlay , J . D . , Robertson , G . G . , and DeLine , R . ( 1994 ) . Developing calendar visualizers for the information visualizer . In UIST ’94 : Proceedings of the 7th annual ACM symposium on User interface software and technology , pages 109 – 118 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . [ Marshall and Bly , 2005 ] Marshall , C . C . and Bly , S . ( 2005 ) . Saving and using encountered information : implications for electronic periodicals . In CHI ’05 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , pages 111 – 120 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ Mueller , 2000 ] Mueller , E . T . ( 2000 ) . A calendar with common sense . In IUI ’00 : Proceedings of the 5th international conference on Intelligent user interfaces , pages 198 – 201 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . [ Nippert - Eng , 1996 ] Nippert - Eng , C . ( 1996 ) . Calendars and keys : The classiﬁca - tion of ‘home’ and ‘work’ . Sociological Forum , 11 ( 3 ) : 563 – 582 . [ Palen , 1999 ] Palen , L . ( 1999 ) . Social , individual and technological issues for groupware calendar systems . In CHI ’99 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI confer - ence on Human factors in computing systems , pages 17 – 24 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . [ Palen and Grudin , 2003 ] Palen , L . and Grudin , J . ( 2003 ) . Discretionary adoption of group support software : lessons from calendar applications . pages 159 – 179 . [ Palen , 1998 ] Palen , L . A . ( 1998 ) . Calendars on the new frontier : challenges of groupware technology . PhD thesis , Irvine , CA , USA . [ Payne , 1993 ] Payne , S . J . ( 1993 ) . Understanding calendar use . Human - Computer Interaction , 8 ( 2 ) : 83 – 100 . [ P´erez - Qui˜nones and Rode , 2004 ] P´erez - Qui˜nones , M . A . and Rode , J . ( 2004 ) . You’ve got mail ! calendar , weather and more : Customizable phone access to personal information . Technical Report TR - 04 - 21 , Virginia Tech . [ Perry et al . , 2001 ] Perry , M . , O’Hara , K . , Sellen , A . , Brown , B . , and Harper , R . ( 2001 ) . Dealing with mobility : understanding access anytime , anywhere . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . , 8 ( 4 ) : 323 – 347 . [ Schick et al . , 1990 ] Schick , A . G . , Gordon , L . A . , and Haka , S . ( 1990 ) . Informa - tion overload : A temporal approach . Accounting , Organizations and Society , 15 ( 3 ) : 199 – 220 . [ Teevan et al . , 2006 ] Teevan , J . , Jones , W . , and Bederson , B . B . ( 2006 ) . Personal information management . Commun . ACM , 49 ( 1 ) : 40 – 43 . [ Tullio et al . , 2002 ] Tullio , J . , Goecks , J . , Mynatt , E . D . , and Nguyen , D . H . ( 2002 ) . Augmenting shared personal calendars . In UIST ’02 : Proceedings of the 15th annual ACM symposium on User interface software and technology , pages 11 – 20 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ Tungare and P ´ erez - Qui ˜ nones , 2008 ] Tungare , M . and P ´ erez - Qui ˜ nones , M . ( 2008 ) . An exploratory study of personal calendar use . Technical report , Com - puting Research Repository . [ Whittaker and Sidner , 1996 ] Whittaker , S . and Sidner , C . ( 1996 ) . Email over - load : exploring personal information management of email . In CHI ’96 : Pro - ceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , pages 276 – 283 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . 23