Most and Least : Differences in Integer Comparisons Based on Temperature Comparison Language Laura Bofferding 1 & Sherri Farmer 1 Received : 1 June 2017 / Accepted : 5 January 2018 / Published online : 30 January 2018 # Ministry of Science and Technology , Taiwan 2018 Abstract The language involved in de - contextualized integer comparisons poses challenges , as students may interpret B most ^ based on absolute values rather than on order . Using the context of temperature , we explored how students ’ integer value comparisons differed based on question phrasing ( which temperature is hottest , most hot , least hot , coldest , most cold , least cold ) and on numbers presented ( positive , negative , mixed ) . Participants included 88 second graders and 70 fourth graders from a rural school district in the Midwestern USA , and each student solved 36 integer comparisons . For comparisons with positive number choices , students had more difficulty with B coldest ^ than B hottest ^ ; however , the results were reversed for com - parisons with only negative number choices . When working with mixed comparisons , students often chose the least of the cold as opposed to the least cold , suggesting that they saw hot and cold as categorical opposites rather than opposites on a continuum , with zero as a boundary . Keywords Integers . Language . Number comparisons . Temperature Quantitative comparisons form an important foundation for early mathematics learning ( Dougherty , 2010 ) . Initially , children make comparisons by analyzing aspects of objects directly ( Clements & Sarama , 2014 ) . For example , students might hold two objects to determine which is colder or heavier , place two sticks side - by - side to choose the longer one or visually compare two sets of objects to determine if they are equal ( Sophian , 1987 ) . These explorations naturally provoke a desire for children to quantify the differences they see ( i . e . how much colder , heavier , longer , more ) , which in turn leads Int J of Sci and Math Educ ( 2019 ) 17 : 545 – 563 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10763 - 018 - 9880 - 4 * Laura Bofferding LBofferd @ purdue . edu Sherri Farmer shefarme @ gmail . com 1 Purdue University , 100 N University Street Beering Hall # 4132 , West Lafayette , IN 47907 , USA to counting , addition , and subtraction ( Dougherty , 2010 ; National Research Council , 2009 ) . As children make comparisons , understanding the type of quantity being compared is essential . Generic language makes this process more difficult . For example , asking students to identify the B biggest ^ rock could lead to multiple answers depending on if the child interprets tallest or widest to mean biggest ( Dougherty , 2010 ) . Even when the attribute being compared is clear , researchers have found that preschoolers more accurately make compar - isons involving unmarked adjectives ( positive adjectives ) than their opposites , marked adjectives ( negative adjectives ) . For instance , they are better able to judge high ( er ) than low ( er ) ( Smith , Rattermann & Sera , 1988 ) , taller than shorter ( Ryalls , 2000 ) , and more than less ( Donaldson & Balfour , 1968 ) . Students ’ understanding of these words has far reaching implications . Higher , lower , more , and less are all key words that students associate with adding and subtracting ( Adetula , 1990 ; Fuson , Carroll & Landis , 1996 ; Verschaffel , 1994 ) . In this vein , eventually , students do not only compare objects ( or sets of objects ) but also compare numerals . In the USA , comparing numerals to determine which is B more ^ or B less ^ is part of the Common Core State Standards for Mathematics ( CCSSM ) starting in kindergarten ( National Governors Association Center for Best Practices & Council of Chief State School Officers , 2010 ) . Once students have mastered the number sequence and the meanings of the terms more and less in relation to that sequence and sets of objects , numerical comparisons are relatively straightforward for whole numbers . However , they become trickier with the introduction of negative integers , as once again the language used can cause difficulties . At this point , many students consider numbers that are more to have greater absolute value as opposed to being further to the right on a standard number line ( Ball , 1993 ; Bofferding , 2014 ; Whitacre et al . , 2017 ) . Therefore , they may think that − 4 > 2 . In fact , students describe numbers increasing in magnitude within the negatives as being B more negative ^ ( Whitacre et al . , 2017 ) , B more in the red ^ ( Stephan & Akyuz , 2012 , p . 453 ) , or B higher negative numbers ^ ( Stephan & Akyuz , 2012 , p . 453 ) . Comparison questions with integers could capitalize on this language . Rather than posing , B Which is more : - 4 or 2 ? ^ a more specific question would be , B Which is more positive ( or more negative ) , - 4 or 2 ? ^ Such a question could be difficult in two respects . First , combining more or less with B positive ^ or B negative ^ ( e . g . more negative ) could be linguistically difficult to interpret ; comparisons with less ( e . g . less tall ) are particu - larly difficult for students ( ages six to nine ) ( Gobbo & Agnoli , 1985 ) . Second , such questions require students to see positive and negative as opposites on a continuum as opposed to just two separate categories ( Cheshire , 1998 ) . Therefore , when determining which of two positive numbers is more negative , 4 or 6 , students would need to see 4 as more in the negative direction than 6 on a positive - negative continuum . Otherwise , students might mistakenly conclude that neither is more negative because neither of them are negative numbers . Contextual problems could alleviate the positive - negative challenge while still providing information about the point of comparison . Yet , comparisons with altitude or elevation could be equally challenging for students ( i . e . Which is further above ground ? ) , as distances above and below zero or ground level form two categories . Further , asking students to determine which integer is higher , − 4 or − 6 , could be difficult because students talk about higher negative numbers ( Stephan & Akyuz , 2012 ) ; therefore , students may select B − 6 ^ because it is higher in the negatives . With temperatures , another context advocated in the CCSSM 546 L . Bofferding , S . Farmer ( National Governors Association Center for Best Practices & Council of Chief State School Officers , 2010 ) and the context explored here , comparison questions can indicate whether the answer should be toward the positive end of the scale ( hottest ) or toward the negative end of the scale ( coldest ) . At the same time , people regularly refer to temperatures as hot in one season and cold in another season ( e . g . 40 °F in the USA may be considered hot in winter but cold in summer ) , using them relationally as opposed to categorically , making them more likely to support thinking along a continuum . Our research investigates the role that language , specifically question phrasing , within a temperature context plays in students ’ negative integer comparisons . Comparisons Children ’ s understanding of comparisons has been explored from both a language perspective and numerical perspective . Comparison Language Over the last several decades , researchers have sought to explain why unmarked ( positive ) adjectives appear to be easier for children to interpret than marked ( negative ) ones in the English language . Using nonsense words , Klatzky , Clark and Macken ( 1973 ) found that the unmarked adjective bias persisted , suggesting that it was not due to frequency of exposure . Preschoolers ( ages 3 to 5 years ) learned the unmarked term maf ( for big ) faster than the marked term bup ( for small ) and had fewer errors with the unmarked terms . Further , some researchers found that 3 - to 5 - year - olds initially use terms such as less to mean more ( Donaldson & Balfour , 1968 ) and B after ^ to mean B before ^ ( Clark , 1971 ) . These results suggest a more conceptual issue underlying children ’ s interpretations , and some have suggested that the categorical sense of the adjectives interferes with young children ’ s ( ages 3 to 5 years ) understanding of the comparative meaning ( e . g . Griffiths , Shantz & Sigel , 1967 ; Ryalls , 2000 ) . For example , Smith et al . ( 1988 ) found that 3 - to 5 - year - olds had a harder time determining which of two butterflies was lower when the butterflies were positioned at points they considered high ; the children did not use the terms lower and higher as opposites . In an investigation of directed magnitude knowledge , Bofferding ( 2014 ) found related results . When asked to move a cat positioned on the middle of a staircase less high , less low , more high , or more low , some 6 - and 7 - year - olds indicated that B less high ^ was the region above the middle point and B less low ^ was the region just below the middle point . Therefore , they moved the cat to a location rather than more or less in a particular direction . In other words , the use of categories often constrains how students interpret the language comparatively . These language studies largely occurred before 2000 and were focused on the age at which children correctly handle unmarked versus marked terms with no specific attempts to directly ask children about their interpretations of the terms . However , researchers have also started exploring children ’ s categorical and relative comparisons more fully . In one study , Barner and Snedeker ( 2008 ) had 4 - year - olds categorize cylinders of different heights , which they called pimwits , as either tall or short . Children identified the tallest one as tall but did not always identify the shortest one as short , once again suggesting that they master the positive Most and Least : Differences in Integer Comparisons Based on . . . 547 terms first . They also found that children could identify which of two short pimwits was taller and which of two tall pimwits was shorter , contradicting the results found by Ryalls ( 2000 ) and Smith et al . ( 1988 ) . Interestingly , when they added extra tall pimwits to the set , children ’ s cutoffs for determining tall pimwits went up , and when they added extra short pimwits , their cutoffs went down ( Barner & Snedeker , 2008 ) . There was a non - significant trend for determining short with the distractors . This suggests that children did make relative judgments but were still learning the meaning of short — some indicated that these ones were small , not short . Numerical Comparisons Studies on number comparisons have focused on exploring students ’ responses to questions about which of two numbers is more . When comparisons involved the numbers 1 – 9 , Siegler and Robinson ( 1982 ) found that children do better on the comparisons with age : 3 - year - olds correctly made 12 % of the comparisons , 4 - year - olds made 62 % , and 5 - year - olds made 80 % , after correcting for the effect of chance . Students were also quite capable of categorizing numbers as large , medium , and small ( Siegler & Robinson , 1982 ) . Similar to findings from the English language studies , for positive number comparisons , when two numbers belonged to different categories ( e . g . large = 10 and small = 1 ) as defined by the students , 3 - and 4 - year - olds did better on the comparisons than when both numbers were part of the same category ( e . g . two numbers they considered large , such as 9 vs . 10 ) ( Murray & Mayer , 1988 ) . Students ’ language background can also influence their performance on number comparisons . Compared to Australian fourth to sixth graders for whom English was typically their first language , non - native English speakers in Papua New Guinea had a higher percentage of errors in identifying which whole number is more than the native English speakers ( Lean , Clements & Del Campo , 1990 ) . However , their percentages of incorrect were similar for identifying the number that was more compared to the number that was less . Spatial cues can also interfere with children ’ s number comparisons when spatial language such as B high ^ is used . For example , when the number 3 is arranged above the number 7 , 4 - and 5 - year - olds often picked 3 when asked to identify the high number ( Shire & Durkin , 1989 ) . The term B higher ^ can also prime students to think about the larger number in contexts when it is not desired . For example , when asked to determine the position of a team who is ranked 7 and moves 4 places higher in the ranking , older students ( 10 - and 11 - year - olds ) added 7 + 4 ( Bell , 1984 ; Shire & Durkin , 1989 ) ; however , students who had a visual with some of the rankings filled - in performed better ( Shire & Durkin , 1989 ) . With the introduction of negative numbers , students must make comparisons across two categories ( positive and negative ) , where numerical magnitudes get larger in both directions from 0 . Peled , Mukhoadhyay and Resnick ( 1989 ) found that almost none of the first graders in their study identified − 4 as larger than − 6 ; however , almost all the fifth graders they interviewed could . Likewise , Whitacre et al . ( 2017 ) found that roughly 90 % of second graders and fourth graders who were familiar with negative numbers in their sample could identify 3 as larger than − 7 , about 80 % chose 0 as larger than − 9 , and just over 50 % knew that − 5 was larger than − 6 . For second and fourth graders who were not familiar with negative numbers , these percentages decreased dramatically ( 37 % for − 7 versus 3 , 22 % for 548 L . Bofferding , S . Farmer − 9 versus 0 , and 7 % for − 5 vs . − 6 ) . It should be noted that with both of these studies , the focus was on identifying the larger number . Although there are a sizeable number of studies exploring adults ’ reaction times to choosing the greater integer in integer comparisons , similar studies have only recently been tried with younger students . In one , when comparing two negatives ( numbers in the same category ) , experienced sixth graders were faster when the two numbers were farther apart than when they were closer . However , there were no differences when they compared a positive and negative number ( numbers in different categories ) , suggesting that they used a rule that positives are more than negatives regardless of how far apart the numbers are ( Varma & Schwartz , 2011 ) . The words children use when talking about numbers include larger , smaller , higher , lower , bigger , more , and less . Bofferding and Hoffman ( 2015 ) found that children are not necessarily consistent in how they respond to integer comparisons when different words are used . First graders ’ responses to higher and more were significantly correlated , and their responses to B closer to 10 ^ and B further from 10 ^ were significantly correlated . However , students generally did better on questions with the latter order - based phrasing than the former . For example , when answering , B Which is closer to 10 ? ^ given the researcher ’ s card labeled − 5 or his card labeled − 6 , one boy said that his was one farther away . Yet , when asked , B Which is more ? ^ he consistently picked the number with a greater absolute value . Aside from word - use , the context of comparison questions can play a role in how students interpret the questions . In terms of relating numbers to temperatures , students refer to categories of hot and cold . For example , when several 8 - year - olds considered the temper - ature of Poland , which was 0 °C , one student claimed that 0 °C was freezing ( Pratt & Simpson , 2004 ) . Although categorization can help students make some comparisons , as children move on to add and subtract integers , it is necessary for them to see positive and negative numbers on a continuum . We merge ideas from the two comparison camps ( language and number ) to explore the extent to which Midwestern students in second and fourth grades interpret positive and negative temperatures on a continuum . In particular , we explore how the use of two temperature categories ( hot vs . cold ) in conjunction with different question phrasings ( focused on comparison and superlative terms , such as B most ^ ) relates to students ’ integer comparisons in second grade , when they are less likely to have formal exposure to negative numbers and in fourth grade , and when they are more likely to have had exposure based on standards advocated by the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics in grades 3 – 5 ( NCTM , 2000 ) . Exploring comparisons at two grade levels allowed us to investigate interactions with the question phrasing and students ’ likely exposure to negatives . Although the CCSSM and many international standards do not call for introducing negatives until the sixth ( or seventh ) grade , several studies found that many fourth graders have already heard about negatives and can reason about them ( Murray , 1985 ; Peled et al . , 1989 ; Whitacre et al . , 2017 ) . Framework Theory Approach to Conceptual Change Mental Models of Whole Numbers and Comparison Language To frame our thinking about children ’ s transition from a categorical - to continuum - based focus on number and opposites , we employ the framework theory approach to conceptual Most and Least : Differences in Integer Comparisons Based on . . . 549 change . Based on this viewpoint , children develop an initial theory for a concept based on their everyday experiences ( Vosnaidou & Brewer , 1992 ) . With numbers , children build on their understanding of whole numbers based on experiences counting objects ( Vosniadou , Vamvakoussi & Skopeliti , 2008 ) . As explained above , they initially categorize whole numbers based on large and small numbers ( Siegler & Robinson , 1982 ) ; having additional experiences with these numbers and participating in activities focused on order and value help them see the numbers on a continuum where larger numbers have greater values ( Case , 1996 ) . Further , when first using language that involves direction , children ages 3 to 5 years interpret the terms as categories or locations , as with children who have difficulty choosing the B low ^ object when two objects are positioned high ( Smith et al . , 1988 ) . In fact , when given feedback on the comparisons , students who practiced categorizing objects as B maller ^ ( taller ) or B borger ^ ( shorter ) had more difficulty learning to compare the same objects , whereas those who did not categorize the objects first were successfully able to compare objects along the entire continuum ( Ryalls , 2000 ) . The language results suggest that students ’ conceptions may vary depending on context . In fact , Vamvakoussi and Vosnaidou ( 2012 ) found that secondary students were better able to reason about there being infinitely more points on a line than infinitely more numbers in an interval . Therefore , it is beneficial to investigate students ’ mental models across contexts , in order to identify interventions to help students develop consistent , global mental models . Mental Models for Integers and Comparison Language Based on the framework theory approach to conceptual change , Bofferding ( 2014 ) found evidence that first graders exhibited three main types of mental models for integer order and values with two transition levels when asked to identify which integer is greater or more . These mental models reflect the varying extent to which students build on their whole number understanding and differentiate negative numbers from positive numbers , shifting from a categorical to continuum - based understanding of integers . Students who exhibit an initial mental model interpret the values of negative numbers as equivalent to positive numbers ; although they may correctly order them , they still interpret , for example , − 5 as equivalent to 5 ( Bofferding , 2014 ) . Students exhibiting a transition I mental model interpret the negative sign as meaningful but consider it a subtraction sign and an indication that the number has been taken away or is worth zero ( Bofferding , 2014 ; Schwartz , Kohn & Resnick , 1993 – 1994 ) . Therefore , they may correctly identify 5 > − 5 , although their inter - pretation of the situation is that 5 > 0 . When comparing numbers such as − 5 and − 3 , they may consider the values of the numbers before they are taken away ( − 5 > − 3 because 5 > 3 ) or say that they are equal because both are worth zero ( Bofferding , 2014 ) . Students at these levels interpret negatives within the category of whole numbers . Students exhibiting a synthetic mental model for integers show evidence that they know negatives are below zero and that positive numbers are considered greater than negative numbers . However , when asked to determine which negative number is greater , they will choose the negative number with a larger magnitude ( Bofferding , 2014 ; Widjaja , Stacey & Steinle , 2011 ) . Therefore , they categorize numbers as positive and negative but do not use them on a continuum but more as separate rays put together ( Widjaja et al . , 2011 ) . If they correctly determine which negative is larger in certain contexts but not in others , then they are considered to have a transition II mental model . Finally , students who exhibit 550 L . Bofferding , S . Farmer conventional understanding of negative order and values are considered to have a formal mental model ( Bofferding , 2014 ) , where numbers exist on a continuum from negative to positive ( and positive > negative ) . In regard to language , Bofferding ( 2014 ) found that first graders interpreting directed magnitude language in order to move a cat on a staircase exhibited behaviors ranging from a focus on categories to a continuum . Students who focused on categories interpreted the middle stair on a staircase as equivalent to 0 and indicated that less low was below the middle and more low was at the bottom of a staircase . Students who interpreted the directed magnitudes on a continuum indicated that less low was higher on the staircase compared to the cat ’ s current position while more low was lower on the staircase compared to the cat ’ s position . This ability to interpret numbers in relation to each other is essential for integer operations . At the same time , students ’ susceptibility to revert to categorical thinking depending on the language involved in integer com - parisons could influence their interpretations of integer values . Temperature Comparisons and the Integer Continuum With temperature , students need to interpret hot as the opposite of cold along a continuum . As part of the nature of the continuum , students need to move beyond categorical under - standing of the values and consider their relative values ; when given two hot temperatures ( or two large , positive numbers ) , one of the numbers is colder ( or more negative ) than the other . However , Peled et al . ( 1989 ) found that when students add and subtract integers , some have difficulty crossing the zero point without using special rules . This divided number line model B stresses movements toward and away from zero ^ ( p . 108 ) and is related to the synthetic mental model for integer order and values with its strong focus on maintaining the categories of positive and negative . The relativity conceptual model , where students consider negative numbers in relation to a point of reference , is rarely used by fifth graders when describing integer problems ( Wessman - Enzinger & Mooney , 2014 ) but can play an essential role in integer operations . Students need to consider getting more negative not as a point but as a movement toward the negative end of a continuum ( adding a negative ) , regardless of the starting point ( Bofferding , 2014 ) . Similarly , a student who can correctly interpret more cold as a temperature closer to the cold end of the continuum could use this knowledge to reason about adding negative numbers as getting more cold ( and subtracting negative numbers as getting less cold ) . Given the likely roles that language and number categories play on students ’ interpretations of integer comparisons , we explore the following research questions within the context of temperature : ( 1 ) How do second and fourth graders ’ integer comparisons differ based on the language of the comparisons ? ( 2 ) How do second and fourth graders ’ integer comparisons differ based on the numbers involved ? ( 3 ) What do students ’ comparisons indicate about their mental models for integer values , depending on the language of the comparisons ? Methods The larger study from which these data draws involved a pretest , random assignment to one of two conditions , intervention , instruction , and posttest design . However , the focus here is on the comparisons that students did on the pretest . Most and Least : Differences in Integer Comparisons Based on . . . 551 Participants and Setting The study took place in a Midwestern state in the USA at two public schools in a rural district with 88 second graders ( 7 - to 8 - year - olds ) and 70 fourth graders ( 9 - to 10 - year - olds ) . These students were recruited across all second and fourth grade classrooms in the two schools . In the district , 75 . 2 % of students received free or reduced - price lunches , and 32 . 2 % were English - language learners . Temperatures ( °F ) in this area often fall into the negatives during the winter , affecting students ’ recess and sometimes whether the school is open ; therefore , it seemed reasonable that students would be aware of temperatures . Data Collection All data collection occurred in English . Students took the pretest during one whole - class session per classroom . Due to the scope of the larger project from which these data come , the researchers individually interviewed 20 % of second graders within a few days of testing in order to gain further insight into their thinking . The researchers chose students to interview across the classrooms , focusing on students who provided different answers so that they could hear reasoning for the variety of responses , and their interviews were recorded and transcribed . The fourth graders were asked to write about their thinking on the tests ; the researchers circulated during the pretest and prompted them to write more if needed . Although the methods of collecting students ’ reasoning differed , they resulted in similar types of responses . Materials The pretests consisted of five sections : ( a ) two working memory tasks ; ( b ) a number path , to assess knowledge of integer order ; ( c ) temperature comparisons , to assess integer value knowledge and interpretation of language for comparisons ; ( d ) feeling comparisons , to assess comparison language in a different context ; and ( e ) addition and subtraction problems with integers . As mentioned previously , the focus in this paper is on the temperature comparisons . However , because students ’ interpretations of integer order and values are typically related ( Bofferding , 2014 ) , we also analyzed the results of number path item to help clarify students ’ mental models for integers . Items for these two tasks were created for this study . Number Path The number path problem required students to fill in missing positive and negative numbers on a number path ( see Fig . 1 ) . Specifically , the researchers asked students to fill in the missing numbers that go before four and come after six as when they are counting down or up . Temperature Comparisons Students compared a set of integers to determine the hottest or coldest temperature ; each question was worded in one of three ways : Which temperature is ( 1 ) term + est ( i . e . hottest , coldest ) , ( 2 ) most + term ( i . e . most hot , most cold ) , and ( 3 ) least + term ( i . e . least hot , least cold ) . Further , for each set of corre - sponding terms ( e . g . hottest , most hot , and least cold ) , the comparisons included the same numbers but in a different order so that the problems did not look the same . The 552 L . Bofferding , S . Farmer comparisons included sets with three positive integers ( one item ) , three negative integers ( two items ) , or a mixture ( three items ) and the option B none . ^ There were six questions per wording category , resulting in 36 comparisons ( see Table 1 ) . Analysis To address the first and second research questions , we determined the percentage of students at each grade level who provided the same answer for a particular question . For example , for Which is hottest ? : 2 , 3 , 8 , none , we determined the percentage of second and fourth graders who answered 2 , 3 , 8 , none , or skipped the question . Using these percentages , we looked for trends in responses ( both correct and incorrect ) across language types and number compar - ison types and supplemented the analysis with interview responses from the students to clarify their interpretation of the questions and numbers ( similar to methods used by Widjaja et al . , 2011 ) . Further , because the size of the two grade - level groups was drastically different with some unequal variances , we used a non - parametric version of the independent t test , the Mann - Whitney U test , to compare performance between the grade level groups on the categories of comparisons . Based on the multiple comparisons ( 24 total ) described in the results , we used a Bonferroni correction , resulting in a target p value of 0 . 002 . To address the third research question , we used methods similar to those in Bofferding ( 2014 ) . First , we simultaneously coded students ’ responses to the number path task based on the types of numbers students included : only positive numbers , only whole numbers , or both positive and negative numbers . In the latter case , we also coded for students ’ use of zero ( correct zero , left out zero , included extra zeroes , made zero negative , or included both a positive and negative zero ) . Finally , we coded for whether students reversed the order of the negatives . Responses with − 3 , − 2 , − 1 , 0 , 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 filled in were designated as formal responses ( even if students forgot to fill in 7 , 8 , and 9 after the six ) . Next , we coded students ’ responses to each set of comparisons based on the pattern of their responses : compared using absolute value , treated all negatives as equivalent to zero , made comparisons with negatives based on magnitude ( e . g . chose smallest negatives for coldest ) , were inconsistent when comparing negatives , made all comparisons correctly , or had no pattern . We used these codes together with their number path code to determine their order and value mental model ( see Bofferding , 2014 ) for each language term ( see Table 2 for an example ) ; we discussed any disagreements until we arrived at consensus . Results Focus on Language Table 3 presents the results of the comparisons for the six comparison phrasings at each grade level . Overall , students performed above chance level . Collapsing across integer Most and Least : Differences in Integer Comparisons Based on . . . 553 4 5 6 Fig . 1 Number path question that students had to complete comparison types , fourth graders had similar performance on comparisons for hottest , most hot , coldest , and most cold , averaging 69 % correct across these items . Although fourth graders did better on these items than comparisons with least cold and least hot , the second graders had similar performance across all comparison types , averaging 35 % correct across all items . Overall , based on the Mann - Whitney U test , there was no significant difference in performance between grade levels for least cold , and it was nearly non - significant for least hot ( p = 0 . 0018 ) . Therefore , although fourth graders did better on all comparisons than second graders , the difference was smaller for the terms that were more difficult to interpret ( or less familiar ) . At both grade levels , some students struggled with all terms , whereas others could articulate the differences . Those who knew the difference were able to talk about the meaning of the terms , discussing hot versus cold or the relation of temperature with negatives . For example , one second grader , I10 explained regarding most cold , B If it ’ s a bigger number and it has a negative , that means it ’ s colder . ^ Similarly , regarding coldest , fourth grader , L02 said , B Cold is usually the lowest number , and the biggest negative is the lowest temperature . ^ Focus on Numbers Comparisons with All Positive Integers When comparing only positive integers , students at both grade levels had an easier time determining the temperatures with unmarked , positive ( hot ) terms than the marked , negative ( cold ) terms . They did better comparing hottest versus coldest , most hot versus most cold , and least hot versus least cold ( see Table 4 ) . In fact , the differences between grade levels for the positive B hot ^ comparisons were negligible and non - significant . The differences between grade levels Table 1 Integer comparison questions Which temperature is … Comparisons ( all positive , all negative , mixture ) … hottest ? … most hot ? … least cold ? 2 , 3 , 8 , none − 6 , − 2 , − 3 , none − 5 , − 4 , − 7 , none 0 , − 6 , − 1 , none − 4 , − 2 , 3 , none 5 , − 10 , − 8 , none … coldest ? … most cold ? … least hot ? 2 , 6 , 4 , none − 8 , − 1 , − 2 , none − 4 , − 6 , − 1 , none − 6 , − 9 , 10 , none − 4 , 4 , − 3 , none − 1 , 0 , 6 , none Table 2 Example of coding for integer order and value mental models Number path and code Hottest code Hottestmentalmodel Most cold code Most cold mental model StudentA − 1 , − 2 , − 3 , 0 , 1 , 2 , 3 … ( Negative reversed , 0 , positive ) Chose largest absolute values Initial : absolute value Chose smallest negatives Synthetic : magnitude StudentB − 3 , − 2 , − 1 , 0 , 1 , 2 , 3 … ( Formal ) Chose positive , otherwise B none ^ Transition I All correct Formal 554 L . Bofferding , S . Farmer for the B cold ^ comparisons were virtually the same across phrasings , with fourth graders performing a little higher . Most Cold and Coldest The only comparisons on which fourth graders did signifi - cantly better than second graders were those for most cold . This is largely due to 28 % of the second graders choosing the largest ( most ) number instead of the smallest ( cold ) number . Similarly , on the coldest positive comparison , 18 % of second graders chose the largest ( hot ) number . Least Cold However , 23 % of second graders correctly chose the largest number for the comparison with least cold . Second - grader E01 explained B Least cold means it ’ s not that cold . It ’ s more hot than cold . ^ Another 17 % of second graders interpreted the middle choice , 4 ( as opposed to 6 or 2 ) , as least cold . Therefore , they chose the number that was not as cold as the coldest and also not the hottest . Likewise , for least cold , 37 % of fourth graders picked the smallest number , suggesting that they focused on either the term B least ^ or B cold , ^ not their combined meaning . In fact , when writing how to determine which is least cold , fourth - grader M06 suggested , B The less the number gets , the colder it is . ^ Another 13 % of fourth graders chose the middle number ; L01 said , B Whatever number [ is ] in [ the ] middle is least cold . ^ Least Hot For least hot , 18 % of second graders followed B03 ’ s lead and selected B the middle number . ^ Much like for least cold , these students were not willing to pick the hottest or coldest values . The fourth - grader L01 articulated the rationale for choosing the middle value more clearly , B Because the greater number : most hot , smallest number Table 3 Average performance ( percent correct ) on comparisons by phrasing for both grades H ot t e st ( % ) Most hot ( % ) Least cold ( % ) Col de s t ( % ) Most cold ( % ) Least hot ( % ) 4th Grade 70 65 52 70 71 52 2nd Grade 34 32 38 37 37 32 Difference ( 4th - 2nd ) 36 * 33 * 14 33 * 34 * 20 * * Significant difference based on Mann - Whitney U tests with p ≤ 0 . 002 Table 4 Average performance ( percent correct ) on comparisons with only positive integers for both grades Grade H ot t e st ( % ) Coldest ( % ) Most hot ( % ) Most cold ( % ) Least hot ( % ) Least cold ( % ) 4th Grade 94 84 87 79 70 44 2nd Grade 86 64 80 52 61 23 Difference ( 4th - 2nd ) 8 20 7 27 * 9 21 * Significant difference based on Mann - Whitney U tests with p ≤ 0 . 002 Most and Least : Differences in Integer Comparisons Based on . . . 555 is coldest . ^ Although the patterns between grade levels were fairly consistent for the positive comparisons , the second graders did better with least hot ( 61 % ) than most cold ( 52 % ) ; whereas , fourth graders did better on most cold ( 79 % ) than least hot ( 70 % ) . Comparisons with All Negative Integers Compared to their performance on com - parisons with all positive integers , students in both grades had a more difficult time making comparisons with only negative integers ( see Table 5 ) . However , with the focus on B negatives , ^ students overall had higher performance on comparisons with coldest , most cold , and least cold as opposed to the hot variants ( in contrast to the results for positive numbers ) . Least Cold For instance , although making comparisons with least cold were the hardest when students had to choose among three positive numbers , these were the easiest comparisons for second graders when choosing among three negative numbers . Second graders , such as B05 who thought in terms of absolute value , could get these correct by thinking , B It meant the smallest ^ ; likewise , those such as second - grader E05 who thought in terms of integer values and temperature got them correct by thinking , B It ’ s like warmish . ^ Second graders did better than chance on the negative comparisons for coldest , most cold , and least cold but performed near or below chance on the negative comparisons for hottest , most hot , and least hot . Fourth graders were relatively consistent and higher performing , except on least hot and least cold , on which their performance was not significantly different than the second graders . Incorrect Answers Overwhelmingly , when students did not get the correct answer on the negative comparisons for which they were supposed to choose the hottest temper - ature ( hottest , most hot , least cold ) , they chose the one with largest absolute value ( coldest temperature ) . In fact , more second graders chose the coldest temperature than hottest for hottest and most hot . Otherwise , for hottest and most hot , students at both grade levels choose none 11 % to 18 % of the time , arguing like second - grader J04 , B Because all are negatives , and that would be cold . ^ Likewise , when making compar - isons for coldest , students were likely to pick the number with the smallest absolute value ( which was actually hottest ) . At each grade level , 14 % of students picked the middle value for least cold . Fourth - grader N01 explained , B Because they are not too low but not too high , ^ and fourth - grader L06 stated , B It is least hot because it is medium , ^ suggesting that the students were not just guessing . Table 5 Average performance ( percent correct ) on comparisons with only negative integers for both grades Grade Hottest ( % ) Coldest ( % ) Most hot ( % ) Most cold ( % ) Least hot ( % ) Least cold ( % ) 4th Grade 51 67 46 69 49 55 2nd Grade 15 40 13 41 30 47 Difference ( 4th - 2nd ) 36 * 27 * 33 * 28 * 19 8 * Significant difference based on Mann - Whitney U tests with p ≤ 0 . 002 556 L . Bofferding , S . Farmer Comparisons with Positive and Negative Integers Students ’ performance on the mixed integer comparisons was the most variable between grades ( see Table 6 ) . Fourth graders did best on hottest , coldest , most hot , and most cold but had some of their lowest scores across all comparisons for least hot and least cold . Least Cold One fourth grader , student N09 , answered based on absolute value and misinterpreted least cold as B the least number . ^ However , others knew the difference between positive and negatives . Fourth - grader R07 focused on the cold in least cold and answered with the coldest temperatures while explaining , B I know because if the number is negative then it ’ s cold , and if it ’ s not , it ’ s hot . ^ Student S10 , a fourth - grader who answered similarly , clarified what type of number to look for with least cold , stating , B For positive , smaller ; for negative , bigger . ^ Fourth - grader R01 expressed some confusion with the terms least and most , writing that least cold B would be similar to most could [ cold ] , it would be the highest negative number . ^ As with some of the previous comparisons , fourth graders chose B the middle number ^ or the one that was B not to [ o ] negative ^ 16 % of the time on average . Second graders , on the other hand , performed at chance level for almost all mixed comparisons ; they did slightly better on comparisons for least cold with no significant difference in scores compared to fourth graders . Incorrect Answers Second - grade students were more likely to choose their B most hot ^ and B hottest ^ answers based upon absolute value ( from 40 % to 51 % of responses ) than were fourth graders ( 16 % to 17 % for the same questions ) . Incorrect answers for least cold were split between choosing the number that was coldest ( most negative ) or the negative number that was closest to zero ( least of the negatives ) , not least negative overall . For instance , one student who answered this way suggested that B whatever is in the middle is least cold , ^ while fourth - grader U03 explained that for least cold , it is B the lowest negative number , ^ suggesting a focus on magnitude as well as the category of cold . There was also a contingent of students who selected none for most hot on the comparison involving 0 , − 1 , and − 6 ( 15 % for second grade , 11 % for fourth ) , sug - gesting that they saw zero as aligned with negatives in that B none of them are hot . ^ Mental Models Regarding their understanding of integer order , 49 of the second graders ( 56 % ) and 63 of the fourth graders ( 90 % ) included negative numbers on their number path . Their Table 6 Average percent correct on comparisons with positive and negative integers for both grades Grade Hottest ( % ) Coldest ( % ) Most hot ( % ) Most cold ( % ) Least hot ( % ) Least cold ( % ) 4th Grade 75 66 70 70 47 53 2nd Grade 29 26 29 28 24 38 Difference ( 4th - 2nd ) 46 * 40 * 41 * 42 * 23 * 15 * Significant difference based on Mann - Whitney U tests with p ≤ 0 . 002 Most and Least : Differences in Integer Comparisons Based on . . . 557 mental model results based on analysis of their number paths along with their compar - isons for the different terms or contexts are shown in Table 7 . Because second graders had fewer people include negatives on their number paths , they also had larger percentages of students demonstrating initial : whole number mental models . Interestingly , second and fourth graders had similar percentages of students demonstrate initial : absolute value mental models for several of the language terms . Therefore , although they could label the negative numbers on the number path , they interpreted integers by their absolute values . Fourth graders had higher percentages of students demonstrating formal and transition II mental models . Among second graders , a few more students had higher mental models ( formal and transition II ) when asked to compare numbers based on coldest and most cold compared to the other language terms . This trend also held for fourth graders . Discussion and Implications Similar to other number comparison studies ( e . g . Siegler & Robinson , 1982 ) , the older students in this study did better on the comparisons than the younger ones . Overall , the second graders in this study performed above chance on over half of the comparisons . The fourth graders performed above chance on all of the comparisons . These results contrast with Whitacre et al . ’ s ( 2017 ) where , when lumping second and fourth graders with and without negatives together , students performed above chance when choosing the B largest ^ for 7 versus 3 and − 7 versus 3 , at about chance for − 9 and 0 , and performed less than chance for − 5 versus − 100 and − 5 versus − 6 . Further , when we break apart our results by language categories and problem types , the results from the current study provide key insights and reveal several interesting patterns . Table 7 Second and fourth graders mental models based on language terms for comparisons Mental model Grade Hottest ( % ) Most hot ( % ) Least cold ( % ) Coldest ( % ) Most cold ( % ) Least hot ( % ) Initial : whole number 2nd 43 43 42 42 35 38 4th 3 4 7 1 4 6 Initial : absolute value 2nd 30 31 48 24 32 34 4th 20 26 53 21 17 33 Transition I 2nd 13 10 2 2 3 7 4th 17 13 7 3 1 9 Synthetic : magnitude 2nd 2 6 1 11 8 6 4th 7 9 4 10 11 7 Transition II 2nd 3 5 2 9 10 11 4th 19 16 13 23 26 20 Formal 2nd 9 6 5 11 11 5 4th 34 33 16 41 40 26 558 L . Bofferding , S . Farmer Unmarked ( Positive ) Versus Marked ( Negative ) Comparison Terms Simple Unmarked Versus Marked Comparisons The study consisted of comparisons with marked and unmarked terms . The simple unmarked term was hottest , and the simple marked term was coldest . When focusing on positive number comparisons and mixed integer comparisons , those with the marked adjective , in this case coldest , were more difficult for both second and fourth graders than comparisons with hottest as in previous studies ( e . g . Smith et al . , 1988 ; Ryalls , 2000 ) . However , when the students were asked to focus on a set of three negative numbers , the pattern reversed . Students were much better at answering for coldest than for hottest . This provides additional evidence that students have an easier time making comparisons when categories align ( e . g . Smith et al . , 1988 ) ; they found it easier to determine the coldest temperature when given three cold ( negative ) temperature choices . This is important because the strength of the same - category - benefit was strong enough for students to overcome the difficulty of dealing with a marked adjective . An alternative possibility is that the degree to which an adjective is marked changes depending on the context ; in the case of comparisons with negatives , coldest could be unmarked . Compound - Mixed Unmarked Versus Marked Comparisons Aside from simple marked and unmarked terms , the comparisons also included novel compound terms . Most cold involves both unmarked ( most ) and marked ( cold ) terms , and least hot involves both marked ( least ) and unmarked ( hot ) terms . Typically , students did better on comparisons with most cold than least hot , suggesting that compound terms are easier if the first part of the term is unmarked ( i . e . B most ^ ) . However , second graders , whose performance on hottest was much higher than on coldest , did better with least hot on positive comparisons ( i . e . thinking about relative hotness ) . This caveat suggests that an initial unmarked term is only more helpful if students ’ performance in the simple categories ( e . g . hottest versus coldest ) is fairly close , as with the fourth graders . Compound - Simple Unmarked Versus Marked Comparisons The third type of comparison students worked with involved compound terms with either two unmarked terms ( i . e . most hot ) or two marked terms ( i . e . least cold ) . As with the results for hottest and coldest , students at both grades did better with most hot for positive number only comparisons and least cold for negative number only comparisons , providing additional evidence that the strength of an adjective ’ s markedness depends on the context . On mixed comparisons , there was less consistency between grade levels , primarily because second graders were more likely to get comparisons with least cold correct by looking for the number with the smallest absolute value . This latter result highlights the importance of number choice when crafting comparison problems . For comparisons with least cold , an alternative comparison to B 5 , − 10 , − 8 , none ^ could have been 8 , − 10 , − 5 , none , so that students who look for the number with least absolute value would pick − 5 rather than inadvertently answering correctly with absolute value reasoning . However , this modified comparison is not perfect either , as students who looked for the middle absolute values would inadvertently get this comparison correct . Another implication of these results is that to help students make comparisons with marked terms ( e . g . less or cold ) , they should have the opportunity to do so with items or numbers associated with that term or category , in this case , negatives . Most and Least : Differences in Integer Comparisons Based on . . . 559 Categorical Terms Versus Along a Continuum Unlike some early number comparison studies , the categories relevant in this study related less to students ’ designations of which numbers were high , medium , and low ( as in Murray & Mayer , 1988 ) and more in terms of positive and negative or hot and cold . Both second and fourth graders had the most difficulty making comparisons with terms that did not align with the category of numbers ( i . e . comparing three negatives to determine the hottest , most hot , or least hot ) . Much like Smith et al . ( 1988 ) found with the butterflies positioned high or low , it was hard for students to think about the numbers as being in the category of hot in order to move beyond the term and make the comparison with negatives ; earlier and more experiences with negatives could help this . They had less difficulty determining cold temperatures when given all positive answers , possibly because they had had more exposure to these situations . In terms of conceptual change , this suggests that having students explore comparisons using different terms within a category might be more productive to do before exploring comparisons across categories if the goal is to help them see the numbers on a continuum . Therefore , it might be better to help students compare negative tempera - tures in terms of hottest and coldest before having them compare positive versus negative temperatures . The mixed comparisons are often easier ( e . g . Peled et al . , 1989 ; Whitacre et al . , 2017 ) , but focusing on them initially may reinforce categorical thinking . The fourth graders had an easier time making mixed comparisons than comparisons within all negatives , similar to reaction time studies with sixth graders ( Varma & Schwartz , 2011 ) . This was one case when seeing the numbers in terms of the categories positive and negative would be an advantage . Second graders had a harder time with these , likely due to their reduced familiarity with negative numbers and their focus on absolute values . Although some students , like E01 and L02 described above , were able to think about the numbers on a continuum where least cold is equivalent to hottest , many students exhibited reasoning reflective of utilizing a divided number line ( Peled et al . , 1989 ) , where positive and negative were mostly interpreted as separate categories . Students who chose the middle values or least of the cold ( as opposed to the least cold ) or the least of the hot ( as opposed to the least hot ) had difficulty overcoming categorical thinking , a key finding of this study . These students would likely benefit from additional experiences helping them interpret numbers along a continuum . For exam - ple , they could start by comparing three negative temperatures on a vertical number path . After noticing that the least cold is the highest temperature , they could compare two negatives and a positive and then three positive numbers , referring back to their observation that the highest number is least cold . By helping students move beyond categorical reasoning , teachers can help them develop their thinking related to relativity ( least cold in relation to what ? ) , an important conceptual model for integers ( Wessman - Enzinger & Mooney , 2014 ) . The results in this study are also novel because providing three number choices and an option for none helped illuminate students ’ categorical thinking ( e . g . saying none of the temperatures was hot ) . Beyond numerical comparisons , the results provide some insights as to why students might treat the number line as divided when adding and subtracting integers ( Peled et al . , 1989 ) . Students might have difficulty when crossing 560 L . Bofferding , S . Farmer zero because they feel inclined to stay within one category of numbers ( positive or negative ) . This is an area for further investigation . Temperature Contexts for Comparisons The use of the temperature contexts had mixed success . Its utility was lessened by a small subset of people who interpreted hottest and coldest as equivalent . Although it is unclear whether this was due to a language or conceptual issue , these results highlight the impor - tance of students being familiar with a context before incorporating it with the use of numbers . However , the context did allow us to differentiate between students who interpreted the comparisons categorically versus on a continuum . As our population includ - ed some English Language Learners , the overall percentages correct presented here might be lower than for other populations , as found by Lean et al . ( 1990 ) . However , their groups had similar error patterns for questions involving more and questions involving less ; therefore , it is likely that the differences we found among question phrasings are generalizable . Mental Models Students ’ mental model classifications stayed fairly consistent across the comparison terms , suggesting that some students had a more global mental model for integer values . However , one fourth of the students , nearly two thirds of them fourth graders , had inconsistent mental model classifications due to their understanding of the different comparison terms used in relation to the integers . This could be particularly important if students were asked to solve addition and subtraction word problems within word problem contexts . Even in contexts involving borrowing and lending , students may take the perspective of either the buyer or lender , leading them to only interpret the values as positive in some cases ( Whitacre , Bishop , Philipp , Lamb & Schappelle , 2015 ) ; alternatively , they misinterpret the language involved in the context ( Swanson , 2010 ) . The results presented here provide new evidence that one ’ s perspective on a context ( i . e . temperature ) can influence how the numbers themselves are interpreted ( e . g . negatives cannot be hot ) or how the question is interpreted ( e . g . finding the least or least of the cold instead of the least cold ) . Based on these results , researchers need to be careful about the claims they make regarding students ’ understanding of numerical comparisons when they only ask the question in one way ( e . g . which is larger ? ) , as one term may underestimate or overestimate what students know . Further , interventions around integer values should help students connect different comparison terms to help them develop a more global mental model . Acknowledgements This research was supported by NSF CAREER award DRL - 1350281 . The authors would like to thank the schools , teachers , and students involved in the research for their participation and support . The authors give thanks especially to Mahtob Aqazade for her review of the paper . References Adetula , L . O . ( 1990 ) . Language factor : Does it affect children ’ s performance on word problems ? Educational Studies in Mathematics , 21 ( 4 ) , 351 – 365 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / BF00304263 Ball , D . L . ( 1993 ) . With an eye on the mathematical horizon : Dilemmas of teaching elementary school mathematics . The Elementary School Journal , 93 ( 4 ) , 373 – 397 . Most and Least : Differences in Integer Comparisons Based on . . . 561 Barner , D . , & Snedeker , J . ( 2008 ) . Compositionality and statistics in adjective acquisition : 4 - year - olds interpret tall and short based on the size distributions of novel noun referents . Child Development , 79 ( 3 ) , 594 – 608 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 8624 . 2008 . 01145 . x Bell , A . ( 1984 ) . Short and long term learning — Experiments in diagnostic teaching design . In B . Southwell ( Ed . ) , Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference for the Psychology of Mathematics Education ( pp . 55 – 62 ) . Sydney , Australia : International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education . Bofferding , L . ( 2014 ) . Negative integer understanding : Characterizing first graders ’ mental models . Journal for Research in Mathematics Education , 45 ( 2 ) , 194 – 245 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5951 / jresematheduc . 45 . 2 . 0194 . Bofferding , L . & Hoffman , A . ( 2015 ) . Comparing negative integers : Issues of language . In K . Beswick , T . Muir , & J . Wells ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the 39th Conference of the International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education ( Vol . 1 , p . 150 ) . Hobart , Australia : PME . Case , R . ( 1996 ) . Introduction : Reconceptualizing the nature of children ’ s conceptual structures and their development in middle childhood . Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development , 61 ( 1 – 2 ) , 1 – 26 . Cheshire , J . ( 1998 ) . Double negatives are illogical . In L . Bauer & P . Trudgill ( Eds . ) , Language myths ( pp . 113 – 122 ) . New York , NY : Penguin Putnam , Inc . . Clark , E . V . ( 1971 ) . On the acquisition of the meaning of before and after . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 10 ( 3 ) , 266 – 275 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0022 - 5371 ( 71 ) 80054 - 3 Clements , D . H . , & Sarama , J . ( 2014 ) . Learning and teaching early math : The learning trajectories approach ( 2nd ed . ) . New York , NY : Routledge . Donaldson , M . , & Balfour , G . ( 1968 ) . Less is more : A study of language comprehension in children . British Journal of Psychology , 59 ( 4 ) , 461 – 471 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 2044 - 8295 . 1968 . tb01163 . x Dougherty , B . J . ( 2010 ) . Developing essential understanding of number and numeration for teaching mathematics in prekindergarten – grade 2 . Reston , VA : National Council of Teachers of Mathematics . Fuson , K . C . , Carroll , W . M . , & Landis , J . ( 1996 ) . Level in conceptualizing and solving addition and subtraction compare problems . Cognition and Instruction , 14 ( 3 ) , 345 – 371 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s1532690xci1403 _ 3 Gobbo , C . , & Agnoli , F . ( 1985 ) . Comprehension of two types of negative comparisons in children . Journal of Psycholinguistic Research , 14 ( 3 ) , 301 – 316 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / BF01068088 Griffiths , J . A . , Shantz , C . A . , & Sigel , I . E . ( 1967 ) . A methodological problem in conservation studies : The use of relational terms . Child Development , 38 ( 3 ) , 841 – 848 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 1127261 Klatzky , R . L . , Clark , E . V . , & Macken , M . ( 1973 ) . Asymmetries in the acquisition of polar adjectives : Linguistic or conceptual ? Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 16 ( 1 ) , 32 – 46 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0022 - 0965 ( 73 ) 90060 - X Lean , G . A . , Clements , M . A . , & Del Campo , G . ( 1990 ) . Linguistic and pedagogical factors affecting children ’ s understanding of word problems : A comparative study . Educational Studies in Mathematics , 21 ( 2 ) , 165 – 191 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / BF00304900 Murray , J . C . ( 1985 ) . Children ’ s informal conceptions of integer arithmetic . In L . Streefland ( Ed . ) , Proceedings of the Ninth Annual Conference of the International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education ( Vol . 1 , pp . 147 – 153 ) . Noordwijkerhout , The Netherlands : International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education . Murray , P . L . , & Mayer , R . E . ( 1988 ) . Preschool children ’ s judgments of number magnitude . Journal of Educational Psychology , 80 ( 2 ) , 206 – 209 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 0663 . 80 . 2 . 206 National Council of Teachers of Mathematics ( 2000 ) . Principles and standards for school mathematics . Retrieved from http : / / www . nctm . org / flipbooks / standards / pssm / index . html . National Governors Association Center for Best Practices & Council of Chief State School Officers ( 2010 ) . Common core state standards for mathematics . Retrieved from http : / / www . corestandards . org / Math / Content / K / introduction National Research Council ( 2009 ) . Mathematics learning in early childhood : Paths toward excellence and equity . Committee on Early Childhood Mathematics . In C . T . Cross , T . A . Woods & H . Schweingruber ( Eds . ) , Center for Education , Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education . Washington , DC : The National Academies Press . Peled , I . , Mukhoadhyay , S . , & Resnick , L . ( 1989 ) . Formal and informal sources of mental models for negative numbers . In G . Vergnaud , J . Rogalski , & M . Artique ( Eds . ) , The international group for the psychology of mathematics education ( Vol . 3 , pp . 106 – 110 ) . Paris : International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education . Pratt , D . , & Simpson , A . ( 2004 ) . McDonald ’ s vs Father Christmas . Australian Primary Mathematics Classroom , 9 ( 3 ) , 4 – 9 . 562 L . Bofferding , S . Farmer Ryalls , B . O . ( 2000 ) . Dimensional adjectives : Factors affecting children ’ s ability to compare objects using novel words . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 76 ( 1 ) , 26 – 49 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1006 / jecp . 1999 . 2537 Schwartz , B . B . , Kohn , A . S . , & Resnick , L . B . ( 1993 - 1994 ) . Positives about negatives : A case study of an intermediate model for signed numbers . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 3 ( 1 ) , 37 – 92 . Shire , B . , & Durkin , K . ( 1989 ) . Junior school children ’ s responses to conflict between the spatial and numerical meanings of ‘ up ’ and ‘ down ’ . Educational Psychology , 9 ( 2 ) , 141 – 147 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 0144341890090206 Siegler , R . S . , & Robinson , M . ( 1982 ) . The development of numerical understandings . In H . W . Reese & L . P . Lisitt ( Eds . ) , Advances in child development and behavior ( Vol . 16 , pp . 242 – 312 ) . New York , NY : Academic Press . Smith , L . B . , Rattermann , M . J . , & Sera , M . ( 1988 ) . B Higher ^ and B lower ^ : Comparative and categorical interpretations by children . Cognitive Development , 3 ( 4 ) , 341 – 357 . Sophian , C . ( 1987 ) . Early developments in children ’ s use of counting to solve quantitative problems . Cognition and Instruction , 4 ( 2 ) , 61 – 90 . Stephan , M . , & Akyuz , D . ( 2012 ) . A proposed instructional theory for integer addition and subtraction . Journal for Research in Mathematics Education , 43 ( 4 ) , 428 – 464 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5951 / jresematheduc . 43 . 4 . 0428 Swanson , P . E . ( 2010 ) . The intersection of language and mathematics . Mathematics Teaching in the Middle School , 15 ( 9 ) , 516 – 523 . Vamvakoussi , X . , & Vosnaidou , S . ( 2012 ) . Bridging the gap between the dense and the discrete : The number line and the B rubber line ^ bridging analogy . Mathematical Thinking and Learning , 14 ( 4 ) , 265 – 284 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10986065 . 2012 . 717378 Varma , S . , & Schwartz , D . L . ( 2011 ) . The mental representation of integers : An abstract - to - concrete shift in the understanding of mathematical concepts . Cognition , 121 , 363 – 385 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2011 . 08 . 005 Verschaffel , L . ( 1994 ) . Using retelling data to study elementary school children ’ s representations and solutions of compare problems . Journal for Research in Mathematics Education , 25 ( 2 ) , 141 – 165 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 749506 Vosnaidou , S . , & Brewer , W . F . ( 1992 ) . Mental models of the earth : A study of conceptual change in childhood . Cognitive Psychology , 24 ( 4 ) , 535 – 585 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0010 - 0285 ( 92 ) 90018 - W Vosniadou , S . , Vamvakoussi , X . , & Skopeliti , I . ( 2008 ) . The framework theory approach to the problem of conceptual change . In S . Vosniadou ( Ed . ) , International handbook of research on conceptual change ( pp . 3 – 34 ) . New York , NY : Routledge . Wessman - Enzinger , N . M . , & Mooney , E . S . ( 2014 ) . Making sense of integers through storytelling . Mathematics Teaching in the Middle School , 20 ( 4 ) , 202 – 205 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5951 / mathteacmiddscho . 20 . 4 . 0202 Whitacre , I . , Azuz , B . , Lamb , L . L . C . , Bishop , J . , Schappelle , B . P . , & Philipp , R . A . ( 2017 ) . Integer comparisons across the grades : Students ’ justifications and ways of reasoning . The Journal of Mathematical Behavior , 45 , 47 – 62 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jmathb . 2016 . 11 . 001 Whitacre , I . , Bishop , J . P . , Philipp , R . A . , Lamb , L . L . , & Schappelle , B . P . ( 2015 ) . Dollars & sense : Students ’ integer perspectives . Mathematics Teaching in the Middle School , 20 ( 2 ) , 84 – 89 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5951 / mathteacmiddscho . 20 . 2 . 0084 Widjaja , W . , Stacey , K . , & Steinle , V . ( 2011 ) . Locating negative decimals on the number line : Insights into the thinking of pre - service primary teachers . The Journal of Mathematical Behavior , 30 , 80 – 91 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jmathb . 2010 . 11 . 004 Most and Least : Differences in Integer Comparisons Based on . . . 563