Linfield College DigitalCommons @ Linfield Faculty Publications Faculty Scholarship & Creative Works 1 - 1 - 2008 Distinct Phospho - Forms of Cortactin Differentially Regulate Actin Polymerization and Focal Adhesions Anne E . Kruchten Linfield College Eugene W . Krueger Mayo Clinic Yu Wang University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Mark A . McNiven Mayo Clinic Follow this and additional works at : https : / / digitalcommons . linfield . edu / biolfac _ pubs Part of the Cellular and Molecular Physiology Commons , and the Molecular Biology Commons This Published Version is brought to you for free via open access , courtesy of DigitalCommons @ Linfield . For more information , please contact digitalcommons @ linfield . edu . DigitalCommons @ Linfield Citation Kruchten , Anne E . ; Krueger , Eugene W . ; Wang , Yu ; and McNiven , Mark A . , " Distinct Phospho - Forms of Cortactin Differentially Regulate Actin Polymerization and Focal Adhesions " ( 2008 ) . Faculty Publications . Published Version . Submission 6 . https : / / digitalcommons . linfield . edu / biolfac _ pubs / 6 Distinct phospho - forms of cortactin differentially regulate actin polymerization and focal adhesions Anne E . Kruchten , * Eugene W . Krueger , * Yu Wang , and Mark A . McNiven Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and the Miles and Shirley Fiterman Center for Digestive Diseases , Mayo Clinic , Rochester , Minnesota Submitted 1 May 2008 ; accepted in ﬁnal form 28 August 2008 Kruchten AE , Krueger EW , Wang Y , McNiven MA . Distinct phospho - forms of cortactin differentially regulate actin polymerization and focal adhesions . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 295 : C1113 – C1122 , 2008 . First published September 3 , 2008 ; doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00238 . 2008 . — Cortactin is an actin - binding protein that is overexpressed in many cancers and is a substrate for both tyrosine and serine / threonine kinases . Tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin has been observed to increase cell motility and invasion in vivo , although it has been reported to have both positive and negative effects on actin polymerization in vitro . In contrast , serine phosphorylation of cortactin has been shown to stimulate actin assembly in vitro . Currently , the effects of cortactin serine phosphoryla - tion on cell migration are unclear , and furthermore , how the distinct phospho - forms of cortactin may differentially contribute to cell migration has not been directly compared . Therefore , we tested the effects of different tyrosine and serine phospho - mutants of cortactin on lamellipo - dial protrusion , actin assembly within cells , and focal adhesion dynamics . Interestingly , while expression of either tyrosine or serine phospho - mimetic cortactin mutants resulted in increased lamellipodial protrusion and cell migration , these effects appeared to be via distinct processes . Cortactin mutants mimicking serine phosphorylation appeared to pre - dominantly affect actin polymerization , whereas mutation of cortactin tyrosine residues resulted in alterations in focal adhesion turnover . Thus these ﬁndings provide novel insights into how distinct phospho - forms of cortactin may differentially contribute to actin and focal adhesion dy - namics to control cell migration . cell migration ; phosphorylation CORTACTIN IS AN ACTIN - BINDING protein that is a major substrate of v - Src in transformed cells and a regulator of actin dynamics in response to various signaling pathways ( 6 , 16 ) . It is known to participate in a wide variety of actin - based cellular processes by supporting the regulated assembly of dynamic , branched actin networks that act to push and deform cellular membranes such as during lamellipodial protrusion or propulsion of vesi - cles via actin comet tails ( 22 , 31 , 35 ) . As a dynamic scaffolding protein , cortactin contains multiple interactive domains that bind to proteins involved in actin polymerization ( see Fig . 1 ) . These include an NH 2 - terminal acidic domain that binds to and activates the actin - related protein ( Arp ) 2 / 3 complex ( 31 ) and a COOH - terminal Src - homology 3 ( SH3 ) domain that binds to , among other proteins , the actin - regulatory protein neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( N - WASP ) ( 18 , 19 ) . In addition , cortactin contains a series of F - actin - binding domains and a central domain rich in proline , serine , and threonine residues . How complexes of cortactin and actin - regulatory proteins are temporally assembled and localized to mediate actin polymeriza - tion and support a complex process such as lamellipodial exten - sion is not yet clear . However , the effects of cortactin on actin assembly are thought to be regulated through phosphorylation of cortactin by both tyrosine and serine / threonine kinases ( 6 , 16 , 35 ) . Src - mediated phosphorylation of tyrosine residues near the SH3 domain of cortactin has been implicated in altering actin organi - zation , allowing for the disassembly of large cytoplasmic bundles and subsequent formation of a ﬁner lamellipodial meshwork that may facilitate cell migration ( 11 ) . Early studies indicated that cortactin is also phosphorylated on serine / threonine residues ( 30 , 36 ) ; indeed , cortactin has been demonstrated to be a substrate for extracellular signal - regulated kinase ( ERK ) at two serine residues present in the central domain of cortactin immediately upstream of the Src - phosphorylated tyrosine residues ( 3 , 18 ) ( see Fig . 1 ) . Furthermore , phosphorylation of cortactin by ERK at these serine residues has been suggested to alter its structural conformation , resulting in an increased association with N - WASP and a marked increase in actin polymerization . In contrast , Src - mediated ty - rosine phosphorylation abolished the stimulatory effects of cor - tactin on N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 - induced actin polymerization ( 18 ) . However , a recent study by Tehrani et al . ( 28 ) revealed that when the adaptor protein Nck1 was present along with N - WASP and Arp2 / 3 , tyrosine - phosphorylated cortactin had a positive effect on the generation of actin ﬁlament barbed ends in vitro . A current gap in our understanding of cortactin function is an apparent disconnect between some of the observations made using in vitro assays , such as the negative effects of Src - mediated phosphorylation of cortactin on actin assembly , and those made in living cells . For example , endothelial cells overexpressing cortactin were observed to be exceptionally motile , while migration of cells into a wound was inhibited in cells expressing a cortactin mutant unable to be phosphorylated on key tyrosine residues ( 11 ) . Similarly , overexpression of cortactin in breast cancer cells resulted in increased bone metastasis when these cells were injected into a nude mouse model , whereas injection of cells expressing a tyrosine phos - pho - inhibitory cortactin mutant resulted in fewer bone metas - tases as compared with the control group ( 14 ) . Thus , the functions of cortactin appear to be regulated in a complex manner through phosphorylation at multiple sites . Indeed , a recent mass spectrometry analysis of cortactin puriﬁed from human embryonic kidney HEK - 293 cells identiﬁed 17 new sites of cortactin phosphorylation for a total of 22 sites ( 4 tyrosine , 14 serine , and 4 threonine ) when combined with the previously identiﬁed phosphorylation sites ( 17 ) . However , the functional implications of this differential phosphorylation on * A . E . Kruchten and E . W . Krueger contributed equally to this work . Address for reprint requests and other correspondence : M . A . McNiven , Dept . of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , Mayo Clinic , 200 First St . SW , Guggenheim 1637 , Rochester , MN 55905 ( e - mail : mcniven . mark @ mayo . edu ) . The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges . The article must therefore be hereby marked “ advertisement ” in accordance with 18 U . S . C . Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 295 : C1113 – C1122 , 2008 . First published September 3 , 2008 ; doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00238 . 2008 . 0363 - 6143 / 08 $ 8 . 00 Copyright © 2008 the American Physiological Society http : / / www . ajpcell . org C1113 on F eb r ua r y 6 , 2012 a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m actin dynamics with relation to migration of living cells need to be tested and compared . Here , using the expression of phospho - mimetic and phos - pho - inhibitory cortactin tyrosine and serine mutants in cultured tumor cells and ﬁbroblasts , we provide a detailed analysis of the mechanisms by which serine and tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin may differentially contribute to cell migration . Interestingly , while phosphorylation at either site promotes cell migration , tyrosine phosphorylation appears to increase focal adhesion dynamics and lead to stress ﬁber disassembly . In contrast , serine phosphorylation of cortactin promotes the as - sembly of extensive branched actin networks . Thus these ﬁndings provide novel insights into how distinct types of phosphorylation may differentially regulate the effects of cor - tactin on speciﬁc processes to mediate cell migration and metastasis . MATERIALS AND METHODS Cells . Human pancreatic tumor cells ( HPAF - II , BxPC - 3 , and PANC - 1 ) , rat ﬁbroblasts ( FR ) , and normal rat liver cells ( Clone 9 ) were acquired from American Type Culture Collection ( Rockville , MD ) . Mouse em - bryonic ﬁbroblasts ( MEFs ) were a gift from Andra´s Kapus ( University of Toronto , Toronto , Canada ) . HPAF - II cells were maintained in EMEM ( Mediatech , Herndon , VA ) supplemented with 0 . 1 mM nonessential amino acids and 1 mM sodium pyruvate ; BxPC - 3 cells were maintained in RPMI 1640 ( Mediatech ) supplemented with glutamine , 10 mM HEPES , 4 . 5 mM glucose , and 1 . 5 mM sodium bicarbonate ; PANC - 1 , FR , and MEF cells were maintained in DMEM ( Mediatech ) ; and Clone 9 cells were maintained in Ham’s F12K medium ( Mediatech ) . Media for all cell lines contained 10 % FBS , and 100 U / ml penicillin and 100 (cid:1) g / ml streptomycin ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) . All cells were grown at 37°C in 5 % CO 2 . Cells were cultured on normal or gridded acid - washed glass coverslips . Constructs , transfection , and other reagents . Cells were transfected with the indicated constructs using either the Lipofectamine Plus Trans - fection Reagent ( Invitrogen ) or Genejammer Transfection Reagent ( Stratagene , La Jolla , CA ) according to the manufacturer’s instruc - tions . The cDNA sequence corresponding to rat cortactin isoform B ( GenBank accession no . NM _ 021868 ) was used for generating wild - type and phospho - mutant cortactin constructs . Generation of wild - type red ﬂuorescent protein ( RFP ) - tagged cortactin has been previ - ously described ( 4 ) . RFP - cortactin tyrosine and serine mutants were generated on the basis of known tyrosine ( 11 ) and serine ( 3 , 18 ) phosphorylation sites using the Stratagene QuikChange Site - Directed Mutagenesis kit ( Stratagene ) . The Myc - tagged type 1 phosphatidyl - inositol - 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase - (cid:2) ( PIP5K1 (cid:2) ) construct was a gift from Laura M . Machesky ( University of Birmingham , Birmingham , UK ) , and the green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) - paxillin construct was a gift from Christopher E . Turner ( State University of New York , Syracuse , NY ) . Monoclonal anti - paxillin antibody was from BD Biosciences ( San Jose , CA ) , monoclonal anti - vinculin antibody was from Sigma ( St . Louis , MO ) , and FITC - conjugated phalloidin and Alexa - conjugated secondary antibodies were from Invitrogen . EGF was from Invitrogen , and nocodazole was from Sigma . Microscopy . Cells were processed for ﬂuorescence microscopy as previously described ( 10 ) , except that cells were ﬁxed with 4 % formal - dehyde and permeabilized with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 for 2 to 5 min , depending on the cell type . ProLong ( Invitrogen ) antifade reagent was used as mounting medium . Live imaging experiments were performed using previously described conditions ( 21 ) . Microscopy was performed on a Zeiss Axiovert 200 epiﬂuorescent microscope ( Zeiss , Thornwood , NJ ) . Digital images were acquired and analyzed using a cooled - CCD Orca II camera ( Hamamatsu Photonics , Hamamatsu City , Japan ) and the software program IPLab ( Scanalytics , Fairfax , VA ) . All images were processed using Adobe Photoshop software ( Adobe Systems , Mountain View , CA ) . To analyze comets using electron microscopy , cells containing PIP5K1 (cid:2) - induced comets positive for RFP - tagged cortactin were ﬁrst identiﬁed using ﬂuorescence microscopy . These cells were then pro - cessed for electron microscopy analysis using standard procedures and observed with a JEOL 1200 transmission electron microscope ( JEOL USA , Peabody , MA ) . Lamellipodial protrusion . Transfected cells were plated on glass coverslips and serum starved ( 0 . 2 % FBS ) for 16 h . Subsequently , cells were either mock stimulated with carrier or stimulated with EGF ( 30 ng / ml ) for 20 min , processed for ﬂuorescence microscopy analysis , and stained with FITC - conjugated phalloidin . The percentage of transfected cells extending a lamellipodium was determined for each condition . Wound healing . Transfected PANC - 1 cells were grown to conﬂu - ency on gridded glass coverslips , serum starved ( 0 . 2 % FBS ) for 16 h , and then wounded with a pipette tip . After thorough washing , low serum medium was replaced with full serum medium , and the migra - tion of cells into the wound was followed over a 14 - h time period . At time 0 , multiple images of each slip were taken , focusing on the coverslip grid . At regular time intervals afterward , images were taken in the exact same locations using the grid as a reference to track the migration of cells in the wound . Image integration was performed using IPLab software , and individual ﬂuorescent cells were tracked . All ﬂuorescent cells within a 100 - (cid:1) m distance from the wound front at time 0 were tracked . Approximately 20 cells were analyzed for each condition . The total distance each cell traveled was measured , and since under some conditions the cells traveled in aberrant pathways , the net distance into the wound perpendicular to the wound front was also measured . Comet formation . FR cells were plated on glass coverslips and were cotransfected with RFP - cortactin and Myc - PIP5K1 (cid:2) constructs . Twenty - four hours after transfection , cells were processed for ﬂuo - rescence microscopy analysis , staining with FITC - conjugated phal - loidin , or correlative electron microscopy analysis . Additionally , transfected cells were plated in imaging dishes , and comets were imaged in living cells via the RFP - cortactin in their tails . Focal adhesion dynamics . Focal adhesion size and morphology were assessed in ﬁxed FR cells that had been allowed to spread for 6 h on coverslips coated with 1 (cid:1) g / ml ﬁbronectin ( Calbiochem , San Diego , CA ) by staining with a monoclonal anti - paxillin antibody or on the basis of GFP - paxillin signal . To monitor focal adhesion turnover in living cells , MEFs and PANC - 1 cells were cotransfected with GFP - paxillin and RFP - cortac - tin constructs . Twenty - four hours after transfection , cells were trypsinized and resuspended in serum - containing medium . Subse - quently , cells were replated on coverslips coated with 1 (cid:1) g / ml ﬁbronectin and allowed to spread for 30 min before being imaged using either time - lapse confocal microscopy or total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence ( TIRF ) microscopy . Focal adhesion reassembly following microtubule - mediated focal adhesion disassembly was assayed in MEFs and PANC - 1 cells as follows . First , cells were treated with 10 (cid:1) g / ml nocodazole fo r 3 h at 37°C to induce microtubule disassembly . The drug was then washed out , and microtubules were allowed to repolymerize over various time intervals . Subsequently , cells were ﬁxed and processed for immuno - ﬂuorescence , staining with a monoclonal antibody against vinculin . Cells were imaged using ﬂuorescence microscopy , and the presence or absence of focal adhesions was quantitated . RESULTS Cortactin phosphorylation promotes lamellipodial protru - sion and cell migration . We have previously observed that cortactin is present at both plasma membrane clathrin - coated pits and the Golgi in cultured rat hepatocytes ( Clone 9 ) ( 4 , 5 ) C1114 CORTACTIN PHOSPHO - FORMS AND MIGRATION AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 295 • NOVEMBER 2008 • www . ajpcell . org on F eb r ua r y 6 , 2012 a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m ( Fig . 1 A ) , an epithelial cell type normally exhibiting a discoidal cell shape . Interestingly , expression of a RFP - tagged version of cortactin mutated to mimic Src - mediated phosphorylation ( rat cortactin isoform b Y384 / 429 / 445E ; CortYE ) in these cells resulted in graphic changes in cell morphology . Even in the absence of growth factor stimulation , Clone 9 cells expressing CortYE appeared elongated and highly polarized , and extended elaborate lamellipodia ( Fig . 1 B ) . These initial observations made in nonmotile , normal epithelial cells provided a strong incentive to test the effects of the different phospho - forms of cortactin on growth factor - mediated induction of lamellipodial extension and migration in inherently motile cell types , partic - ularly cancer cells . Toward this end , we compared the effects of tyrosine versus serine cortactin phospho - mutants on cell migration , the assembly of actin structures in the conﬁnes of living cells , and focal adhesion dynamics using cultured ﬁbro - blasts ( MEFs and RF cells ) and three human pancreatic ductal carcinoma cell lines , BxPC - 3 ( 27 ) , PANC - 1 ( 15 ) , and HPAF - II ( 12 , 24 ) . ( For a graded comparison of these lines , see Ref . 26 . ) In addition to generating the RFP - tagged cortactin mutant mimicking Src - mediated phosphorylation ( CortYE ) indicated above , cortactin phospho - mutants designed to inhibit ( Y384 / 429 / 445F ; CortYF ) Src - mediated phosphorylation , or inhibit ( S368 / 381A ; CortSA ) or mimic ( S368 / 381D ; CortSD ) ERK - mediated phosphorylation were constructed on the basis of previously identiﬁed sites of tyrosine ( 11 ) and serine ( 3 , 18 ) phosphorylation . These mutants , RFP - tagged wild - type cortac - tin ( CortWT ) or vector alone , were then expressed in BxPC - 3 ( Fig . 1 , C – G ) or HPAF - II cells ( supplemental material Fig . S1 ; the online version of this article contains supplemental data ) , and the effects on the percentage of cells that formed lamelli - podia in the absence and presence of EGF were quantitated . As expected , EGF treatment resulted in an approximately 3 . 5 - fold stimulation of lamellipodial protrusion in vector - and CortWT - expressing cells ( Fig . 1 H and supplemental Fig . S1 F ) . Inter - estingly , cells expressing the cortactin phospho - mimetic mu - tants CortSD and CortYE exhibited an approximately 2 . 5 - to 3 - fold increase in the percentage of cells that extended lamel - lipodia in the absence of EGF , as compared with control and CortWT - expressing cells ( Fig . 1 H and supplementary Fig . S1 F ; gray bars ) . Furthermore , this EGF - dependent extension of lamellipodia was reduced in cells expressing the cortactin Fig . 1 . Expression of phospho - mimetic forms of cortactin in - duces a dramatic motile phenotype in nonmigratory epithelial cells and in pancreatic tumor cells . A cartoon of the cortactin protein is shown with speciﬁc protein domains and sites of serine ( S ) and tyrosine ( Y ) phosphorylation relevant to the studies indicated . SH3 , COOH - terminal Src - homology 3 do - main ; Arp , actin - related protein . A and B : ﬂuorescence images of cultured hepatocytes ( Clone 9 cells ) expressing red ﬂuores - cent protein ( RFP ) - tagged wild - type cortactin ( CortWT ; A ) or an RFP - tagged cortactin mutant mimicking tyrosine phosphor - ylation ( Y384 / 429 / 445E , CortYE ; B ) . Clone 9 cells expressing CortWT are discoidal in shape and exhibit a modest amount of peripheral membrane rufﬂing ( A ) . In contrast , expression of CortYE in these cells induces marked changes in cell morphol - ogy , as they become elongated and extend elaborate lamellipo - dia ( B ) . C – G : ﬂuorescence images of BxPC - 3 pancreatic tumor cells that were transfected with either vector alone , as a control , or RFP - tagged cortactin constructs ( red ) , serum starved over - night , and when indicated , treated with EGF ( 30 ng / ml ) for 20 min . Subsequently , cells were processed for analysis by ﬂuo - rescence microscopy and were stained with FITC - conjugated phalloidin ( green ) to label actin ﬁlaments . Cells expressing CortWT extended lamellipodial protrusions under serum - starved conditions ( C , arrow ) at a frequency similar to that of cells expressing vector alone ( data not shown ) , and this was increased upon EGF treatment ( D , arrow ) . Lamellipodial pro - trusion ( arrows ) was increased by EGF treatment in untrans - fected cells , but a cell expressing a cortactin mutant inhibiting tyrosine phosphorylation ( CortYF ; E , arrowhead ) shows virtu - ally no lamellipod . Conversely , cells expressing cortactin mu - tants mimicking either serine phosphorylation ( CortSD ; F ) or tyrosine phosphorylation ( CortYE ; G ) frequently extended la - mellipodia ( arrows ) even in the absence of EGF . H : graph representing the percentage of cells expressing vector alone ( V ) , CortWT , or cortactin phospho - mutants that extended lamelli - podia in the absence ( gray bar ) and presence ( black bar ) of EGF . SA , cortactin mutant inhibiting serine phosphorylation . Values represent the average (cid:3) SE for n (cid:4) 3 with (cid:5) 100 cells counted for each condition . Bar , 10 (cid:1) m ( A – G ) . C1115 CORTACTIN PHOSPHO - FORMS AND MIGRATION AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 295 • NOVEMBER 2008 • www . ajpcell . org on F eb r ua r y 6 , 2012 a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m phospho - inhibitory mutant CortYF . The baseline lamellipodial formation seen in cells expressing the phospho - inhibitory CortSA mutant may be attributed to the prolonged activation of ERK caused by overexpression of cortactin as demonstrated by Timpson et al . ( 29 ) . We next tested whether the increase in lamellipodial protru - sion exhibited by the cortactin tyrosine and serine phospho - mimetic mutants ( CortSD and CortYE ) may translate into increased cell motility . We observed PANC - 1 cells to be more motile than HPAF - II or BxPC - 3 cells ( A . E . Kruchten , E . W . Krueger , and M . A . McNiven , unpublished observations ) ; thus , wound - healing assays were performed using PANC - 1 cells . Expression of CortWT enhanced the migratory phenotype of cells ( Fig . 2 , A and D ) , in agreement with previous reports that overexpression of cortactin in ﬁbroblasts and endothelial cells enhances cell migration ( 11 , 23 ) . Similarly , cells expressing CortSD or CortYE also exhibited an enhancement in cell migration , although not above that of CortWT - expressing cells ( Fig . 2 , C and D , and data not shown ) . In contrast , cells expressing CortSA or CortYF migrated only approximately half as far as cells ex - pressing CortWT or their respective phospho - mimetic mutant ( Fig . 2 , B and D , and data not shown ) . Thus , both tyrosine and serine phosphorylation of cortactin appear to be important not only for lamellipodial protrusion , but also for the stimulatory effects of cortactin on cell migration . Serine phosphorylation of cortactin promotes actin assem - bly in living cells . Similar to the branched actin network formed at the leading edge of migrating cells , actin comets used to propel some intracellular vesicles and pathogens also exhibit a branched actin network ( 2 , 9 ) . Therefore , because it is challenging to obtain quantitative measurements of actin as - sembly at lamellipodia in living cells , we analyzed vesicle - associated actin comet tails that are generated in cultured cells ( here , FR cells ) upon overexpression of the lipid kinase type 1 phosphatidylinositol - 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase - (cid:2) ( PIP5K1 (cid:2) ; 20 , 25 ) . These comets are easily visualized and act to push vesicles forward using an actin network also containing cortactin ( 20 ) . Thus we could readily quantify the number and dimensions of actin comet tails formed behind vesicles in ﬁxed or living cells coexpressing Myc - tagged PIP5K1 (cid:2) and either wild - type or phospho - mutants of RFP - tagged cortactin based on the ﬂuo - rescent cortactin incorporated into the tail and / or FITC - conju - gated phalloidin , used to label actin . Most notably , in compar - ison to the number of comets formed in cells expressing CortWT ( Fig . 3 A ) or CortSA ( data not shown ) , CortSD - expressing cells ( Fig . 3 C ) showed a substantial increase in comet number ( (cid:6) 2 - fold ; Fig . 3 J ) , suggesting an increase in actin polymerization . In contrast , expression of cortactin tyro - sine mutants , either phospho - inhibitory ( CortYF ; Fig . 3 B ) or phospho - mimetic ( CortYE ; data not shown ) , only slightly in - creased the number of comets per cell in comparison to CortWT - expressing cells ( Fig . 3 J ) . Just as comet number can be used as an indicator of sites of actin polymerization , the lengths and widths of individual actin comet tails may also be representative of increased actin branching and polymerization . The lengths of comet tails was similar in cells expressing CortWT , CortYE , and CortSD , possibly indicating that actin polymerization and branching following nucleation is affected in a similar way by cortactin tyrosine and serine phosphorylation . Indeed , comet tail length was decreased in cells expressing either CortYF or CortSA , as compared with CortWT - or cortactin phospho - mimetic - ex - pressing cells ( Fig . 3 K ) . In contrast , comet tail width was decreased in cells expressing CortYF or CortYE ( Fig . 3 L ) , but it was increased in cells expressing CortSD ( Fig . 3 , D (cid:7) and L ) . Interestingly , many of the comets generated in the CortSD - expressing cells were so exceptionally thick as to appear bifurcated and composed of two parallel , bright actin bundles ( Fig . 3 D (cid:7) ) , a phenotype not observed in cells expressing CortWT ( Fig . 3 D ) . To conﬁrm the differences in actin comet tail dimensions observed in cells expressing the different cortactin phospho - mutants at a higher resolution , comets were viewed using electron microscopy ( Fig . 3 , E – I ) . In support of the ﬂuores - cence imaging , the shorter , thinner comets formed in the CortSA - expressing cells exhibited an actin network that appeared to surround only a small portion of the vesicle ( (cid:6) 30 – 40 % ; Fig . 3 , F and G ) , whereas in cells expressing CortSD , a larger portion of the vesicle was surrounded by actin ﬁlaments ( (cid:6) 50 – 70 % ; Fig . 3 , H and I ) . In addition , the comet base was wider in cells expressing CortSD , as compared with cells expressing CortSA . Fig . 2 . Tyrosine and serine phosphorylation of cortactin stimulates cell migration . Wound - healing assays were performed using PANC - 1 pancreatic cancer cells transfected with RFP - tagged cortactin constructs ( red ) , and the movement of individual cells ( colored lines ) was tracked over a 14 - h time period . A – C : representative images and tracking of PANC - 1 cells expressing CortWT ( A ) , CortYF ( B ) , or CortYE ( C ) . Note the distance migrated by cells expressing CortWT is markedly further than that of cells expressing CortYF . D : graph representing the distance traveled by cells expressing CortWT or cortactin phospho - mutants . Values represent the average (cid:3) SD of (cid:6) 20 cells tracked for each condition over 18 frames . Statistically signiﬁcant differences in distance traveled were observed between CortWT and CortYF ; CortWT and CortSA ; and CortSA and CortSD ( * P (cid:8) 0 . 05 , by Student’s t - test ) , as well as when CortYF is compared with either CortYE or CortSD ( * * P (cid:8) 0 . 01 ) . Bar , 100 (cid:1) m ( A – C ) . C1116 CORTACTIN PHOSPHO - FORMS AND MIGRATION AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 295 • NOVEMBER 2008 • www . ajpcell . org on F eb r ua r y 6 , 2012 a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin alters focal adhe - sion morphology and dynamics . Observation of actin comet tails indicated that serine phosphorylation of cortactin pref - erentially promotes actin assembly in cells ; however , both tyrosine and serine phospho - mimetic cortactin mutants pro - mote lamellipodial protrusion and cell migration ( Figs . 1 and 2 and supplemental Fig . S1 ) . This paradox suggests that Src - mediated tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin may be contributing to these dynamic processes in a way distinct from actin assembly . Some insights into this possibility come from a recent study showing that knockdown of cortactin protein levels reduces the rate of focal adhesion assembly ( 1 ) and our observation that some cells expressing cortactin appear to exhibit prominent focal contact - like structures ( Fig . 6 ) . Thus , because Src - mediated phosphory - lation is known to play a role in regulating focal adhesion dynamics ( 8 , 34 ) , we tested whether tyrosine phosphoryla - tion of cortactin may contribute to lamellipodial protrusion not by actin assembly at the leading edge , but by regulating focal adhesion turnover . First , focal adhesion size was analyzed in two different cell types : FR cells , chosen because of the large adhesions made by Fig . 3 . Serine phosphorylation of cortactin increases the number , length , and caliber of PIP5K1 (cid:2) - induced comets . Rat ﬁbroblasts ( FR cells ) coexpressing Myc - PIP5K1 (cid:2) , to induce comet formation , and RFP - tagged wild - type or phospho - mutant cortactin were analyzed using ﬂuorescence microscopy and electron microscopy , quantitating the number of comets per cell and comet tail length and width . Comet tails were observed and measured by using the cortactin RFP signal as a marker . A – C : cells expressing CortWT ( A ) or CortYF ( B ) had fewer and shorter comets than cells expressing CortSD ( C ) . D and D (cid:7) : some of the comets in the CortSD - expressing cells appeared to be substantially wider at the base ( D (cid:7) ) , compared with comets in CortWT - expressing cells ( D ) . E – I : electron micrographs of PIP5K1 (cid:2) - induced comets in cells expressing RFP - tagged CortWT ( E , low magniﬁcation ) , CortSA ( F and G , high magniﬁcation ) , or CortSD ( H and I , high magniﬁcation ) . The actin tails in CortSA - expressing cells ( F and G ) were narrower and did not extend as far around the lipid droplet as in CortSD - expressing cells ( H and I ) . J – L : graphs representing the number of ﬂuorescent comets per living cell ( J ) , comet tail length ( K ) , and comet tail width ( L ) in cells expressing CortWT or the various cortactin phospho - mutants . While the length of comet tails was increased both in CortYE - and CortSD - expressing cells , comet tail thickness appeared to be increased more so in cells expressing CortSD . Values represent the average (cid:3) SE of (cid:6) 50 comets from at least 10 cells analyzed for comet number and length for each condition ( J and K ) , and of 55 – 115 comets from 6 to 8 cells analyzed for comet width for each condition ( L ) . Statistically signiﬁcant differences in comet number ( J ) were observed between CortWT and CortSD ; and CortSA and CortSD ( P (cid:8) 0 . 05 ) . Differences in comet lengths ( K ) were not statistically signiﬁcant . Statistically signiﬁcant differences in comet widths ( L ) were observed between CortSD and CortYF ; and CortSD and CortYE ( P (cid:8) 0 . 05 ) . Bars , 1 (cid:1) m ( E ) and 0 . 5 (cid:1) m ( F – I ) . C1117 CORTACTIN PHOSPHO - FORMS AND MIGRATION AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 295 • NOVEMBER 2008 • www . ajpcell . org on F eb r ua r y 6 , 2012 a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m these cells ( Fig . 4 A , A (cid:7) ) , and PANC - 1 cells , which exhibit smaller , more ephemeral adhesions ( Fig . 4 F , F (cid:7) ) . To mark focal adhesions , cells were transfected to express RFP - tagged CortWT or the cortactin phospho - mutants in combination with GFP - tagged paxillin , a widely used marker for monitoring focal adhesion dynamics ( 32 , 34 ) , or alternatively , cells were stained with an anti - paxillin antibody . As shown in Fig . 4 , FR cells expressing CortYE exhibited small , sparsely populated focal adhesions ( Fig . 4 B , B (cid:7) ) , compared with cells expressing CortWT ( Fig . 4 A , A (cid:7) ) , whereas CortYF - expressing cells exhib - ited much larger , more densely packed focal adhesions that appeared to ﬁll the cell border ( Fig . 4 C , C (cid:7) ) . Quantitation of focal adhesion size in FR cells expressing wild - type cortactin or the various cortactin phospho - mutants revealed a slight reduction in size in cells expressing CortYE , CortSA , or CortSD , as compared with CortWT - expressing cells , whereas expression of CortYF resulted in an increase in focal adhesion size ( Fig . 4 D ) . Indeed , a 2 . 5 - fold difference in focal adhesion size was determined in cells expressing CortYF versus CortYE . While more difﬁcult to quantitate , similar effects on focal adhesion size were observed in PANC - 1 tumor cells expressing CortYE ( Fig . 4 G , G (cid:7) ) and CortYF ( Fig . 4 H , H (cid:7) ) compared with cells expressing CortWT ( Fig . 4 F , F (cid:7) ) . Changes in focal adhesion size could be a reﬂection of changes in the dynamics of these structures . Therefore , focal adhesion turnover was monitored in the context of CortWT , CortYE , or CortYF expression by following the changes in ﬂuorescence intensity of GFP - paxillin over time in a localized region on initiation of focal adhesion formation . For these studies , MEFs expressing GFP - paxillin and RFP - tagged wild - type or phospho - mutant cortactin were plated on coverslips coated with 1 (cid:1) g / ml ﬁbronectin and allowed to spread for 30 min before imaging of focal adhesions at the very base of cells using TIRF microscopy . As shown by the line graph of repre - sentative curves from individual MEFs , cells expressing CortWT contained focal adhesions that assembled in (cid:6) 10 – 15 Fig . 4 . Tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin modulates focal adhesion size and stability . Focal adhesion size and dynamics were monitored in either FR cells , mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts ( MEFs ) , or PANC - 1 cells expressing RFP - tagged wild - type or phospho - mutant cortactin . Green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) - paxillin or staining with an anti - paxillin antibody was used as a marker for focal adhesions . A , A (cid:7) : a representative image of focal adhesions in an FR cell expressing CortWT . B – C (cid:7) : focal adhesions in FR cells expressing CortYE ( B , B (cid:7) ) were much smaller than those in CortWT - expressing cells and composed of more discrete GFP - paxillin puncta , whereas the focal adhesions in cells expressing CortYF ( C , C (cid:7) ) were markedly larger and more densely packed . D : graph representing analysis of focal adhesion size in FR cells . A 2 . 5 - fold difference exists between cells expressing CortYF versus those expressing CortYE . Values represent the average (cid:3) SE of (cid:6) 10 FR cells analyzed for each condition . E : line graph of representative curves from individual MEFs expressing CortWT , CortYE , or CortYF , indicating changes in GFP - paxillin ﬂuorescence intensity , and thereby focal adhesion assembly and disassembly , over time . F – H (cid:7) : similar to FR cells , staining of PANC - 1 cells expressing the cortactin tyrosine phospho - mutants ( CortYE , G , G (cid:7) ; and CortYF , H , H (cid:7) ) with an antibody against paxillin also revealed differences in focal adhesion size , as compared with cells expressing CortWT ( F , F (cid:7) ) . I : graph showing the amount of time required for focal adhesion ( FA ) assembly or disassembly in PANC - 1 cells expressing CortWT , CortYE , or CortYF . Values represent the average (cid:3) SE of approximately 6 – 8 PANC - 1 cells analyzed for each condition . J : line graph , similar to that shown in E ; however , data from multiple PANC - 1 cells were compiled to generate a single representative curve for each condition ( expression of CortWT , CortYE , or CortYF ) . Bar , 10 (cid:1) m ( A – C and F – H ) ; insets are higher magniﬁcations of the respective boxed regions of paxillin at focal adhesions . C1118 CORTACTIN PHOSPHO - FORMS AND MIGRATION AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 295 • NOVEMBER 2008 • www . ajpcell . org on F eb r ua r y 6 , 2012 a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m min and subsequently almost completely disassembled over the following (cid:6) 5 min ( Fig . 4 E ) . Interestingly , CortYE - expressing cells assembled and disassembled their small focal adhesions much faster , as they both appeared and disassembled over an (cid:6) 15 - min time period . In strong contrast , the large focal adhe - sions present in CortYF - expressing cells assembled at a rate similar to that of CortWT - expressing cells , but persisted at (cid:6) 70 % of the peak GFP - paxillin ﬂuorescence intensity beyond 30 min ( Fig . 4 E ) . PANC - 1 cells demonstrated focal adhesion dynamics similar to those of MEFs , with cells expressing CortYF taking (cid:6) 1 . 5 – 2 times as long as CortWT - expressing cells to assemble or disassemble focal adhesions ( Fig . 4 I ) . Compilation of this focal adhesion assembly - disassembly data from multiple PANC - 1 cells into a single representative curve for each condition ( CortWT , CortYE or CortYF expression ) provides another way of depicting that focal adhesion dynam - ics are slowed in PANC - 1 cells expressing CortYF ( Fig . 4 J ) . As a second method to assess a role for cortactin phosphor - ylation in regulating focal adhesion size and turnover , we used a microtubule - mediated focal adhesion disassembly assay sim - ilar to that established by Ezratty et al . ( 7 ) . Here , MEFs and PANC - 1 cells expressing wild - type or phospho - mutant cortac - tin were treated with nocodazole to disassemble microtubules and induce formation of focal adhesions . Subsequently , fol - lowing washout of the drug , cells were allowed to recover for 2 h and were then stained for the focal adhesion marker vinculin . During the ﬁrst 60 min of the recovery period , (cid:5) 90 % of the focal adhesions are disassembled , possibly by an endo - cytic mechanism ( 7 ) , while focal adhesion reassembly occurs during the second 60 min . It is predicted that ephemeral , dynamic focal adhesions will not form as quickly during the allotted recovery period , while stable adhesions will reassem - ble more readily . Consistent with this premise , both MEFs and PANC - 1 cells expressing CortYE showed a marked decrease in focal adhesion recovery ( Fig . 5 , A , A (cid:7) and C , C (cid:7) , respectively , asterisks ) compared with the CortWT - or CortYF - expressing cells ( Fig . 5 , B , B (cid:7) and D , D (cid:7) , asterisks ; and data not shown ) . In contrast , focal adhesions in CortYF - expressing cells ( Fig . 5 , B , B (cid:7) and D , D (cid:7) , asterisks ) recovered more readily and were noticeably larger than those in adjacent control cells as well as those in the CortYE - expressing cells . Semiquantitative count - ing of the number of focal adhesions in these cell populations ( Fig . 5 E ) suggested modest differences in focal adhesion reas - sembly between cells expressing wild - type cortactin and either of the cortactin tyrosine phospho - mutants , whereas a more noticeable difference existed between cells expressing CortYE versus CortYF . Cortactin has been implicated in focal adhesion formation ( 1 ) , and our observations suggest that the different phospho - forms of cortactin exert marked effects on focal adhesion size and turnover in both normal and pancreatic tumor cells ( Figs . 4 and 5 ) . However , a direct localization of cortactin to these Fig . 5 . Expression of cortactin tyrosine phospho - mutants leads to distinct effects on the ability of cells to reassemble focal adhesions . A – D (cid:7) : MEFs ( A – B (cid:7) ) and PANC - 1 cells ( C – D (cid:7) ) expressing wild - type or tyrosine phospho - mutant cortactin ( asterisks ) were treated with nocodazole for 3 h todisassem - ble microtubules and enhance formation of focal adhesions . Subsequently , following drug washout , cells were allowed to recover for 2 h and were then ﬁxed and stained for vinculin ( right ) . Additionally , cells were ﬁxed and stained in the absence of any recovery period ( left ) . In untransfected cells , microtubule regrowth induces focal adhesion disassembly in the ﬁrst 60 min , followed by focal adhesion reassembly over the next 60 min . In MEFs and PANC - 1 cells expressing CortYE ( asterisks ) , focal adhesions were prominent before micro - tubule regrowth ( A and C , arrows ) and disassembled in the initial 60 - min recovery period ( data not shown ) . Following 120 min of recovery , although focal adhesions had reassembled in surrounding untransfected cells ( A (cid:7) and C (cid:7) , arrows ) , focal adhesions did not readily reassemble in CortYE - expressing cells ( A (cid:7) and C (cid:7) , asterisks ) . MEFs and PANC - 1 cells expressing CortYF ( asterisks ) also displayed large focal adhesions before drug washout ( B and D , arrows ) , which disassembled upon microtubule regrowth ( data not shown ) . In contrast to cells expressing CortYE , however , CortYF - expressing cells appeared to fully reassemble large focal adhesions over the 120 - min recovery period ( B (cid:7) and D (cid:7) , arrows ) . E : graph representing the percentage of MEFs ( gray bars ) and PANC - 1 cells ( black bars ) expressing either wild - type or tyrosine phospho - mutant cortactin that contained focal adhesions 2 h after washout of nocoda - zole . Values represent the average (cid:3) SD for n (cid:4) 3 with (cid:5) 60 cells analyzed for each condition . Bars , 8 (cid:1) m ( A – D (cid:7) ) . C1119 CORTACTIN PHOSPHO - FORMS AND MIGRATION AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 295 • NOVEMBER 2008 • www . ajpcell . org on F eb r ua r y 6 , 2012 a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m structures in cells is lacking , suggesting that cortactin could be affecting focal adhesions indirectly . As shown in Fig . 6 , we detected a marked localization of CortWT to the tips of actin stress ﬁbers in FR cells , which may represent sites of insertion into focal adhesions ( Fig . 6 A , A (cid:7) , arrows ) . Indeed , subsequent staining of cells with an antibody against paxillin conﬁrmed that the CortWT - positive structures were focal adhesions ( Fig . 6 B , B (cid:7) , arrows ) . As discussed below , the action of tyrosine - phosphorylated cortactin on focal adhesion stability and turn - over could have profound effects on actin stress ﬁber dynamics and thereby markedly retard or accelerate cell migration . DISCUSSION The effects of tyrosine and serine / threonine phosphorylation of cortactin on actin polymerization have been observed using in vitro assays ( 18 , 28 ) , and these modiﬁcations are predicted to play an important role in the regulation of actin dynamics in living cells . Here , using expression of phospho - mutant forms of cortactin in cells , we provide a detailed , quantitative exam - ination of the physiological effects of phospho - cortactin on actin - mediated processes in different pancreatic tumor cell types and ﬁbroblasts . Incorporation of a variety of assays in our current study has allowed us to make signiﬁcant observations regarding the mechanisms by which distinct forms of cortactin phosphorylation may regulate cell migration . Namely , al - though both tyrosine and serine phosphorylation of cortactin support lamellipodial extension and cell migration ( Figs . 1 and 2 and supplemental Fig . S1 ) , serine - phosphorylated cortactin may do so by promoting the assembly of dendritic actin networks ( Fig . 3 ) , while tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin appears to regulate focal adhesion dynamics ( Figs . 4 and 5 ; see cartoon , Fig . 6 C ) . Serine phosphorylation of cortactin promotes actin assem - bly in cells . Serine phosphorylation of cortactin has been reported to stimulate N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin poly - merization in vitro , and this stimulatory effect was prevented by subsequent tyrosine phosphorylation ( 18 ) . More recently , another in vitro study using puriﬁed components demonstrated that tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin does amplify the generation of actin barbed ends ; however , this effect requires the adaptor protein Nck1 as an additional component of the actin assembly mixture . In addition , it is further enhanced by including WASP - interacting protein ( WIP ) ( 28 ) . These latter components were not included in the earlier study . Our primary goal was to provide a useful extension of these in vitro observations to the context of living cells , something that has been lacking to date . To this end , we analyzed the effects of different cortactin phospho - mutants on the number , length , and girth of PIP5K1 (cid:2) - induced actin comet tails as an in vivo indicator of the assembly of actin networks . Indeed , our ob - servations of a marked increase in comet numbers and dimen - sions in cells expressing CortSD are in strong support of the observations made in vitro . However , an increase in comet length was also observed in cells expressing CortWT and CortYE , indicating a complex interplay of cortactin phosphor - ylation in the regulation of actin dynamics within cells . Inter - estingly , unusually wide , bifurcated comets were observed at the light microscopy level in CortSD - expressing cells ( Fig . 3 D (cid:7) ) , and using electron microscopy , a wide base of actin nucleation that appeared to wrap around more than half of the vesicle membrane could be detected at the membrane interface . Such robust actin branching would be particularly useful at the leading edge of a migrating tumor cell to extend a lamellipo - dium forward . Cortactin as a key regulator of focal adhesion dynamics ? Cortactin has been implicated in the regulation of focal adhe - sion dynamics in migrating cells ( 1 ) . Because expression of CortYE did not appear to alter actin assembly appreciably in vivo ( Fig . 3 ) and Src - mediated phosphorylation is known to play a key role in regulating focal adhesion dynamics ( 8 , 34 ) , we tested whether tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin may preferentially affect focal adhesion size and / or dynamics ( Figs . 4 and 5 ) . Here , we observed a marked increase in the size of focal adhesions in cells expressing either CortWT or CortYF , consistent with observations of others that cortactin promotes focal adhesion stability ( 1 ) . Moreover , the marked increase in Fig . 6 . Cortactin localizes to focal adhesions situated at the end of large actin stress ﬁbers . A – B (cid:7) : ﬂuorescence images of ﬁbroblasts expressing RFP - tagged CortWT ( A and B ) and stained for actin ( rhodamine - phalloidin , A (cid:7) ) or paxillin ( B (cid:7) ) . In addition to a prominent localization to lamellipodia and the Golgi , numerous cortactin - positive adhesion - like plaques ( A , arrows ) can be seen oriented lengthwise throughout the cytoplasm , which coalign with the tips of large actin ﬁbers ( A (cid:7) , arrows ) . The signiﬁcant overlap with paxillin staining ( B (cid:7) , arrows ) indicates that this cortactin localization represents focal adhesions . G , Golgi ; N , nucleus . C : cartoon depicting how distinct types of cortactin phosphorylation , ERK - mediated serine phosphorylation , and Src - mediated tyrosine phosphorylation could inﬂuence cell migration . Phosphorylation of cortactin on serine residues by ERK may promote the formation of dendritic branched actin networks that support lamellipodial extension . In contrast , Src - mediated tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin appears to predominantly affect focal adhesion dynamics , resulting in increased focal adhesion turnover and a subsequent decrease in adhesion and stress ﬁber size . C1120 CORTACTIN PHOSPHO - FORMS AND MIGRATION AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 295 • NOVEMBER 2008 • www . ajpcell . org on F eb r ua r y 6 , 2012 a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m the size of focal adhesions in cells expressing CortYF ( Fig . 4 ) suggests a role for cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation in focal adhesion disassembly . Indeed , observation of GFP - paxillin in living cells ( Fig . 4 ) using TIRF microscopy revealed a sub - stantial difference in focal adhesion turnover in cells express - ing CortYE ( turnover in 5 – 15 min ) versus CortWT ( turnover in 15 – 25 min ) or CortYF ( stable (cid:5) 25 min ) . Results from an assay using a distinct approach to measure focal adhesion dynamics— the ability of focal adhesions to reassemble following micro - tubule - mediated disassembly—provided further support to these ﬁndings ( Fig . 5 ) . All of these observations are consistent with an important role for cortactin phosphorylation in regulating focal adhesion dynamics , and in turn , lamellipodial protrusion . Furthermore , our ﬁndings are consistent with the premise that active Src ( favoring tyrosine - phosphorylated cortactin and corresponding to CortYE ) leads to smaller focal adhesions ( 8 ) . Conversely , cells lacking Src family kinases or expressing a kinase - dead Src ( corresponding to CortYF ) have enlarged peripheral focal adhesions with impaired disassembly ( 8 , 13 , 33 ) . Thus , Src - mediated phosphorylation of cortactin may be important in regulating focal adhesion size and dynamics , and thereby modulate cell migration . As illustrated in Fig . 6 C , we propose that differential cor - tactin phosphorylation plays an important role in the regulation of two distinct processes , actin and focal adhesion dynamics , both of which can contribute to cell migration . How these processes are affected by differences in the phosphorylation status of cortactin is unclear , although alterations in protein - protein interactions are likely to be involved . For example , serine phosphorylation of cortactin by ERK appears to allow for an increased association with N - WASP and facilitate branched actin assembly ( 18 ) , whereas tyrosine phosphoryla - tion of cortactin increases its association not only with Nck1 ( 28 ) , but also with dynamin ( 37 ) , an interaction which might contribute to focal adhesion disassembly ( 7 ) . Based on the ﬁndings described here , in combination with those from other groups ( 1 , 18 , 28 ) , we predict that phospho - regulation of cortactin contributes to cell motility in two major ways . First , serine phosphorylation by ERK promotes the formation of branched actin networks , which supports lamellipodial forma - tion and extension . Second , tyrosine phosphorylation by Src may also promote some actin assembly in vivo , although most conspicuously triggers turnover of focal adhesions and a re - duction in the capping or anchoring of actin stress ﬁbers at these structures . In the future it will be important to determine how the speciﬁc phospho - forms of cortactin are regulated by different cellular stimulations , the interplay among the various types of cortactin phosphorylation , and the distinct effects of the vari - ous cortactin phospho - forms on the variety of cellular pro - cesses involving cortactin . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors thank Dr . Heather M . Thompson for help in preparing the manuscript . GRANTS This work was supported by National Institutes of Health / National Cancer Institute Grant CA - 104125 ( to M . A . McNiven ) . REFERENCES 1 . Bryce NS , Clark ES , Leysath JL , Currie JD , Webb DJ , Weaver AM . Cortactin promotes cell motility by enhancing lamellipodial persistence . Curr Biol 15 : 1276 – 1285 , 2005 . 2 . Cameron LA , Svitkina TM , Vignjevic D , Theriot JA , Borisy GG . Dendritic organization of actin comet tails . Curr Biol 11 : 130 – 135 , 2001 . 3 . Campbell DH , Sutherland RL , Daly RJ . Signaling pathways and struc - tural domains required for phosphorylation of EMS1 / cortactin . Cancer Res 59 : 5376 – 5385 , 1999 . 4 . Cao H , Orth JD , Chen J , Weller SG , Heuser JE , McNiven MA . Cortactin is a component of clathrin - coated pits and participates in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Mol Cell Biol 23 : 2162 – 2170 , 2003 . 5 . Cao H , Weller S , Orth JD , Chen J , Huang B , Chen JL , Stamnes M , McNiven MA . Actin and Arf1 - dependent recruitment of a cortactin - dynamin complex to the Golgi regulates post - Golgi transport . Nat Cell Biol 7 : 483 – 492 , 2005 . 6 . Daly RJ . Cortactin signalling and dynamic actin networks . Biochem J 382 : 13 – 25 , 2004 . 7 . Ezratty EJ , Partridge MA , Gundersen GG . Microtubule - induced focal adhesion disassembly is mediated by dynamin and focal adhesion kinase . Nat Cell Biol 7 : 581 – 590 , 2005 . 8 . Frame MC , Fincham VJ , Carragher NO , Wyke JA . v - Src’s hold over actin and cell adhesions . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 3 : 233 – 245 , 2002 . 9 . Frischknecht F , Way M . Surﬁng pathogens and the lessons learned for actin polymerization . Trends Cell Biol 11 : 30 – 38 , 2001 . 10 . Henley JR , McNiven MA . Association of a dynamin - like protein with the Golgi apparatus in mammalian cells . J Cell Biol 133 : 761 – 775 , 1996 . 11 . Huang C , Liu J , Haudenschild CC , Zhan X . The role of tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin in the locomotion of endothelial cells . J Biol Chem 273 : 25770 – 25776 , 1998 . 12 . Kim YW , Kern HF , Mullins TD , Koriwchak MJ , Metzgar RS . Char - acterization of clones of a human pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell line representing different stages of differentiation . Pancreas 4 : 353 – 362 , 1989 . 13 . Klinghoffer RA , Sachsenmaier C , Cooper JA , Soriano P . Src family kinases are required for integrin but not PDGFR signal transduction . EMBO J 18 : 2459 – 2471 , 1999 . 14 . Li Y , Tondravi M , Liu J , Smith E , Haudenschild CC , Kaczmarek M , Zhan X . Cortactin potentiates bone metastasis of breast cancer cells . Cancer Res 61 : 6906 – 6911 , 2001 . 15 . Lieber M , Mazzetta J , Nelson - Rees W , Kaplan M , Todaro G . Estab - lishment of a continuous tumor - cell line ( panc - 1 ) from a human carcinoma of the exocrine pancreas . Int J Cancer 15 : 741 – 747 , 1975 . 16 . Lua BL , Low BC . Cortactin phosphorylation as a switch for actin cytoskeletal network and cell dynamics control . FEBS Lett 579 : 577 – 585 , 2005 . 17 . Martin KH , Jeffery ED , Grigera PR , Shabanowitz J , Hunt DF , Parsons JT . Cortactin phosphorylation sites mapped by mass spectrom - etry . J Cell Sci 119 : 2851 – 2853 , 2006 . 18 . Martinez - Quiles N , Ho HY , Kirschner MW , Ramesh N , Geha RS . Erk / Src phosphorylation of cortactin acts as a switch on - switch off mechanism that controls its ability to activate N - WASP . Mol Cell Biol 24 : 5269 – 5280 , 2004 . 19 . Mizutani K , Miki H , He H , Maruta H , Takenawa T . Essential role of neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein in podosome formation and degradation of extracellular matrix in src - transformed ﬁbroblasts . Cancer Res 62 : 669 – 674 , 2002 . 20 . Orth JD , Krueger EW , Cao H , McNiven MA . The large GTPase dynamin regulates actin comet formation and movement in living cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99 : 167 – 172 , 2002 . 21 . Orth JD , Krueger EW , Weller SG , McNiven MA . A novel endocytic mechanism of epidermal growth factor receptor sequestration and inter - nalization . Cancer Res 66 : 3603 – 3610 , 2006 . 22 . Orth JD , McNiven MA . Dynamin at the actin - membrane interface . Curr Opin Cell Biol 15 : 31 – 39 , 2003 . 23 . Patel AS , Schechter GL , Wasilenko WJ , Somers KD . Overexpression of EMS1 / cortactin in NIH3T3 ﬁbroblasts causes increased cell motility and invasion in vitro . Oncogene 16 : 3227 – 3232 , 1998 . 24 . Rajasekaran SA , Gopal J , Espineda C , Ryazantsev S , Schneeberger EE , Rajasekaran AK . HPAF - II , a cell culture model to study pancreatic epithelial cell structure and function . Pancreas 29 : e77 – e83 , 2004 . 25 . Rozelle AL , Machesky LM , Yamamoto M , Driessens MH , Insall RH , Roth MG , Luby - Phelps K , Marriott G , Hall A , Yin HL . Phosphatidyl - C1121 CORTACTIN PHOSPHO - FORMS AND MIGRATION AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 295 • NOVEMBER 2008 • www . ajpcell . org on F eb r ua r y 6 , 2012 a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m inositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate induces actin - based movement of raft - enriched vesicles through WASP - Arp2 / 3 . Curr Biol 10 : 311 – 320 , 2000 . 26 . Sipos B , Moser S , Kalthoff H , Torok V , Lohr M , Kloppel G . A comprehensive characterization of pancreatic ductal carcinoma cell lines : towards the establishment of an in vitro research platform . Virchows Arch 442 : 444 – 452 , 2003 . 27 . Tan MH , Nowak NJ , Loor R , Ochi H , Sandberg AA , Lopez C , Pickren JW , Berjian R , Douglass HO Jr , Chu TM . Characterization of a new primary human pancreatic tumor line . Cancer Invest 4 : 15 – 23 , 1986 . 28 . Tehrani S , Tomasevic N , Weed S , Sakowicz R , Cooper JA . Src phosphorylation of cortactin enhances actin assembly . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104 : 11933 – 11938 , 2007 . 29 . Timpson P , Wilson AS , Lehrbach GM , Sutherland RL , Musgrove EA , Daly RJ . Aberrant expression of cortactin in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cells is associated with enhanced cell proliferation and resis - tance to the epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitor geﬁtinib . Cancer Res 67 : 9304 – 9314 , 2007 . 30 . Van Damme H , Brok H , Schuuring - Scholtes E , Schuuring E . The redis - tribution of cortactin into cell - matrix contact sites in human carcinoma cells with 11q13 ampliﬁcation is associated with both overexpression and post - translational modiﬁcation . J Biol Chem 272 : 7374 – 7380 , 1997 . 31 . Weaver AM , Young ME , Lee WL , Cooper JA . Integration of signals to the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr Opin Cell Biol 15 : 23 – 30 , 2003 . 32 . Webb DJ , Brown CM , Horwitz AF . Illuminating adhesion complexes in migrating cells : moving toward a bright future . Curr Opin Cell Biol 15 : 614 – 620 , 2003 . 33 . Webb DJ , Donais K , Whitmore LA , Thomas SM , Turner CE , Parsons JT , Horwitz AF . FAK - Src signalling through paxillin , ERK and MLCK regulates adhesion disassembly . Nat Cell Biol 6 : 154 – 161 , 2004 . 34 . Webb DJ , Parsons JT , Horwitz AF . Adhesion assembly , disassembly and turnover in migrating cells – over and over and over again . Nat Cell Biol 4 : E97 – 100 , 2002 . 35 . Weed SA , Parsons JT . Cortactin : coupling membrane dynamics to cortical actin assembly . Oncogene 20 : 6418 – 6434 , 2001 . 36 . Wu H , Reynolds AB , Kanner SB , Vines RR , Parsons JT . Identiﬁcation and characterization of a novel cytoskeleton - associated pp60 src substrate . Mol Cell Biol 11 : 5113 – 5124 , 1991 . 37 . Zhu J , Yu D , Zeng XC , Zhou K , Zhan X . Receptor - mediated endocyto - sis involves tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin . J Biol Chem 282 : 16086 – 16094 , 2007 . C1122 CORTACTIN PHOSPHO - FORMS AND MIGRATION AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 295 • NOVEMBER 2008 • www . ajpcell . org on F eb r ua r y 6 , 2012 a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m