INTRODUCTION The actin cytoskeleton is essential to eukaryotic cell movement . Fibroblastic cells attached to a substrate extend lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia in the direction of cell locomotion . Actin ﬁlaments are assembled into networks in lamellipodia and into radial bundles in ﬁlopodia ( reviewed by Small et al . , 1996 ) . Polymerization of actin molecules near the cell membrane is thought to generate the force to move the membrane forward ( Abraham et al . , 1999 ; Bailly et al . , 1999 ; reviewed by Borisy and Svitkina , 2000 ) . Cdc42 and Rac , Rho - family small G - proteins , regulate the actin polymerization in ﬁlopodia and lamellipodia , respectively ( Kozma et al . , 1995 ; Nobes and Hall , 1995 ; Ridley et al . , 1992 ; reviewed by Hall , 1998 ) . WASP , N - WASP and WAVE , of the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) family in mammalian organs , have been shown to be the downstream effectors of Cdc42 and Rac signal cascades ( Aspenström et al . , 1996 ; Kolluri et al . , 1996 ; Miki et al . , 1998a ; Miki et al . , 1998b ; Symons et al . , 1996 ) . These proteins have common binding sites for actin , proﬁlin and Arp2 / 3 complex ( Egile et al . , 1999 ; Machesky and Insall , 1998 ; Machesky et al . , 1999 ; Miki et al . , 1996 ; Miki et al . , 1998b ; Rohatgi et al . , 1999 ; Suetsugu et al . , 1998 ) , but have unique amino acid sequences around their N - terminus . The C - terminal acidic domain of WASP family proteins stimulates the actin ﬁlament nucleation activity of Arp2 / 3 complex ( Machesky and Insall , 1998 ; Rohatgi et al . , 1999 ) . WASP and N - WASP have a GBD / CRIB region for binding Cdc42 , but WAVE does not ( Miki et al . , 1996 ; Miki et al . , 1998b ) . The expression of WASP is restricted to hematopoietic cells ( Derry et al . , 1994 ) , whereas N - WASP and WAVE are expressed ubiquitously in mammalian organs ( Miki et al . , 1996 ; Miki et al . , 1998b ) . Recent studies have elucidated how Cdc42 induces ﬁlopodia to form in mammalian cells . The binding of active Cdc42 to the GBD / CRIB region of N - WASP disrupts the inhibitory interaction between N - and C - terminal moieties of the N - WASP molecule to reveal the binding sites to several proteins ( Kim et al . , 2000 ) . On the formation of ﬁlopodium , N - WASP is assumed to activate Arp2 / 3 complex and recruit actin monomers of proﬁlin - actin complex to the fast growing ends of actin ﬁlaments ( reviewed by Mullins , 2000 ; Rohatgi et al . , 1999 ) . An actin ﬁlament nucleation cascade mediated by N - WASP is used not only by eukaryotic organisms ranging 1555 WASP - and Ena / VASP - family proteins have been reported to regulate the cortical actin cytoskeleton as downstream effectors of the Rho - family small G - proteins Rac and Cdc42 , but their functions are little understood . We observed the localization of the WASP family proteins , N - WASP and WAVE , and the Ena / VASP family protein , Mena , in protruding lamellipodia . Rat ﬁbroblast cell line 3Y1 protruded lamellipodia on poly - L - lysine - coated substrate without any trophic factor . N - WASP and Cdc42 were concentrated along the actin ﬁlament bundles of microspikes but not at the tips . By immunoﬂuorescence and immunoelectron microscopy , both WAVE and Mena were observed to localize at the lamellipodium edge . Interestingly , Mena tended to concentrate at the microspike tips but WAVE did not . At the edge of the lamellipodium , the correlation between the ﬂuorescence from Mena and actin ﬁlaments stained with the speciﬁc antibody and rhodamine - phalloidin , respectively , was much higher than that between WAVE and actin ﬁlament . The Ena / VASP homology 2 ( EVH2 ) domain of avian Ena , an avian homolog of Mena , was localized to the lamellipodium edge and concentrated at the tip of microspikes . The SCAR homology domain ( SHD ) of human WAVE was distributed along the lamellipodium edge . These results indicate that N - WASP , WAVE and Mena have different roles in the regulation of the cortical actin cytoskeleton in the protruding lamellipodium . WAVE and Mena should be recruited to the lamellipodium edge through SHD and the EVH2 domain , respectively , to regulate the actin polymerization near the cell membrane . N - WASP should regulate the formation of the actin ﬁlament bundle in addition to activating Arp2 / 3 complex in lamellipodium under the control of Cdc42 . Key words : Actin cytoskeleton , WASP family , Ena / VASP family , Lamellipodia SUMMARY N - WASP , WAVE and Mena play different roles in the organization of actin cytoskeleton in lamellipodia Hiroyuki Nakagawa 1 , * , Hiroaki Miki 2 , Masayo Ito 3 , Kazuyo Ohashi 3 , Tadaomi Takenawa 2 and Shigeaki Miyamoto 1 1 Dept of Biochemical Engineering and Science , Faculty of Computer Science and Systems Engineering , Kyushu Institute of Technology , Iizuka , Fukuoka 820 - 8502 , Japan 2 Dept of Biochemistry , Institute of Medical Science , University of Tokyo , 4 - 6 - 1 Shirokanedai , Minato - ku , Tokyo 108 - 8639 , Japan 3 Dept of Biology , Faculty of Science , Chiba University , 1 - 33 Yayoicho , Inage - ku , Chiba 263 - 8522 , Japan * Author for correspondence ( e - mail : hiro @ bse . kyutech . ac . jp ) Accepted 24 January 2001 Journal of Cell Science 114 , 1555 - 1565 ©The Company of Biologists Ltd RESEARCH ARTICLE 1556 from yeast to humans , but also by the bacterial pathogen Shigella ﬂexneri to produce an actin comet tail in the cytoplasm of infected cells ( Egile et al . , 1999 ) . WAVE , a mammalian homolog of Dictyostelium discoideum Scar ( Bear et al . , 1998 ) , has the same set of binding sites as other WASP family proteins , except for the small G - protein binding region ( Miki et al . , 1998b ) . The C - terminal acidic region of WAVE stimulated the actin ﬁlament nucleation activity of Arp2 / 3 complex in vitro but exogenous expression of this region disturbed Arp2 / 3 complex localization in cultured cells ( Machesky and Insall , 1998 ; Machesky et al . , 1999 ) . Overexpression of WAVE induced ectopic actin polymerization and clustering ( Miki et al . , 1998b ) . The truncated form of WAVE inhibited Rac - mediated actin polymerization and membrane ruffling but not Cdc42 - mediated ﬁlopodium extension ( Miki et al . , 1998b ) . In addition , WAVE was colocalized with actin ﬁlaments to the lamellipodium ( Miki et al . , 1998b ) . These results suggest that WAVE regulates actin ﬁlament rearrangement downstream of Rac in the lamellipodium . The N - terminal SCAR homology domain ( SHD ) has been predicted to participate in the localization of WAVE ( Miki et al . , 1998b , Bear et al . , 1998 ) , but its function is still unclear . Mammalian Ena / VASP family proteins , Evl , Mena and VASP ( vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ) , have been implicated in the temporal and spatial control of actin ﬁlament dynamics ( Gertler et al . , 1996 ; Reinhard et al . , 1992 ; Rottner et al . , 1999 ) . These proteins bind to actin , proﬁlin and the proline - rich motif of ActA on the bacterial pathogen Listeria monocytogenes , and to the focal adhesion proteins vinculin and zyxin ( Bachmann et al . , 1999 ; Brindle et al . , 1996 ; Chakraborty et al . , 1995 ; Gertler et al . , 1996 ; Reinhard et al . , 1992 ; Reinhard et al . , 1995a ; Reinhard et al . , 1995b ; Reinhard et al . , 1996 ) . Ena / VASP family proteins play essential roles in the formation of the actin comet tail of L . monocytogenes in platelet and brain extracts ( Laurent et al . , 1999 ) . A complex between ActA and Ena / VASP family protein regulates actin polymerization at the surface of the bacterium . The complex is considered to play the same role as N - WASP in S . ﬂexneri ( Laurent et al . , 1999 ) . Ena / VASP family proteins are expressed in various mammalian organs ( Gertler et al . , 1996 ; Lanier et al . , 1999 ; Ohta et al . , 1997 ; Reinhard et al . , 1992 ) . Mena and VASP are localized at focal adhesions and in cell surface protrusions that contain actin ﬁlaments ( Gertler et al . , 1996 ; Reinhard et al . , 1992 ) . Recently , Mena and VASP have been demonstrated to localize at the tips of protruding lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia ( Rottner et al . , 1999 ) . In addition , Mena has been observed to localize in ﬁlopodia of the neural growth cone and shown to play an important role in mouse neural development ( Lanier et al . , 1999 ) . In Ena / VASP family proteins , three conserved regions are recognized , the Ena / VASP homology ( EVH ) 1 and 2 domains , and a central proline - rich region . All of these regions have been reported to participate in the subcellular localization of the protein . The EVH1 domain of Mena migrates to the focal adhesions and leading edges ( Bear et al . , 2000 ; Gertler et al . , 1996 ) . The EVH2 domain of VASP binds to actin ﬁlaments and mediates tetramerization of VASP molecules ( Bachmann et al . , 1999 ) . In the neural tissue , the proline - rich region of Mena is linked to b - amyloid precursor protein through FE65 ( Ermekova et al . , 1997 ) . Previous results suggest that N - WASP , WAVE and Mena should be localized to the same area , such as the lamellipodium and ﬁlopodium , to regulate the dynamics of the actin cytoskeleton . Mena has been reported to localize at the tips , but the localization of WASP family proteins at that site has not been well documented . To elucidate the regulatory mechanism behind the actin dynamics , we compared their localization with various antibodies under a light and electron microscope . Then , to clarify the roles of WAVE and Mena in lamellipodia , we measured the correlation coefficient between actin ﬁlaments and these proteins . Finally , the domains of these proteins were expressed exogenously in mammalian cultured cells to determine which domains were required for the localization . MATERIALS AND METHODS Antibodies and other materials Affinity puriﬁed polyclonal antibodies against N - WASP and WAVE were characterized as described previously ( Miki et al . , 1996 ; Miki et al . , 1998b ) . Monoclonal antibodies against Mena ( clone no . 21 ) and Rac1 ( clone no . 102 ) were purchased from Transduction Laboratories Inc ( KY , USA ) . Rabbit antiserum against green ﬂuorescence protein was purchased from Molecular Probes ( OR , USA ) . Monoclonal antibodies against vinculin ( clone no . VIN - 11 - 5 ) and talin ( clone no . 8d4 ) and FITC - conjugated anti - mouse IgA goat IgG were obtained from Sigma - Aldrich Japan K . K . ( Tokyo , Japan ) . Rhodamine - or FITC - conjugated goat IgG fractions against mouse and rabbit IgG were obtained from Organon teknika Corp . ( NC , USA ) . Gold particle - conjugated secondary antibodies against mouse IgA and rabbit IgG were provided by British BioCell International ( Cardiff , UK ) . Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium ( DMEM ) and fetal bovine serum were purchased from Dainippon Pharmaceutical Co . Ltd ( Osaka , Japan ) . Antibiotics , 0 . 01 % poly - L - lysine solution and rhodamine - phalloidin were obtained from Sigma - Aldrich Japan K . K . A mammalian expression vector pEGFP - N1 was obtained from CLONETECH Laboratories Inc ( CA , USA ) . GENETICIN was purchased from Life Technologies ( MD , USA ) . TransIt - LT1 was provided by PanVera Corp . ( WI , USA ) . Cell culture A rat embryonic ﬁbroblast cell line 3Y1 was cultured as previously described ( Nakagawa and Miyamoto , 1998 ) . To induce lamellipodium , cells were cultured on poly - L - lysine - coated substrates . A glass coverslip and carbon - coated formvar ﬁlm on a copper EM grid were incubated in a 0 . 01 % poly - L - lysine solution for 30 minutes at 37 o C and washed with PBS ( 137 mM NaCl , 2 . 7 mM Na 2 HPO 4 , 8 . 1 mM KCl and 1 . 5 mM KH 2 PO 4 ) just before use . Cells were cultured on a glass coverslip from 1 to 15 hours for immunoﬂuorescence microscopy , and on formvar ﬁlm for 30 minutes for electron microscopy . Expression vectors and transfection The cDNAs encoding the Ena / VASP homology 1 ( EVH1 ) domain ( residues 1 - 113 ) , EVH2 domain ( residues 376 - 550 ) and proline - rich ( PR ) region ( residues 294 - 358 ) of avian Ena ( avEna ) were ampliﬁed by PCR with avEna cDNA ( accession no . AB017437 ) . The cDNAs encoding the WAVE N - terminal ( WNT ) region ( residues 1 - 225 ) and the SCAR homology domain ( SHD ) region ( residues 1 - 171 ) were ampliﬁed by PCR with human WAVE1 cDNA ( Miki et al . , 1998 ) . All 5 ¢ primers contained a Sac I restriction endonuclease site and all 3 ¢ primers a Bam HI endonuclease site . In the 5 ¢ primers for the EVH2 domain and the proline - rich region , the ATG sequence for the ﬁrst methionin was inserted between the Sac I site and complementary sequences . Ampliﬁed products were subcloned into Sac I - Bam HI - JOURNAL OF CELL SCIENCE 114 ( 8 ) 1557 Localization of WASP and Ena / VASP families digested pEGFP - N1 . In all constructs , the sequence of enhanced green ﬂuorescence protein ( EGFP ) was fused to the 3 ¢ terminus of the insert sequence . For transfection experiments , 3Y1 cells were grown to 70 % conﬂuence in 35 mm dishes and transfected with 3 m g of each EGFP fused protein construct using TransIt - LT1 . Transfected cells were selected and maintained with 1 mg / ml Geneticine . SDS - PAGE and immunoblotting SDS - PAGE and immunoblotting were carried out as previously described ( Nakagawa et al . , 2000 ) . Whole - mount electron microscopy Whole - mount cells were prepared according to a method previously described ( Small and Sechi , 1998 ) and observed under a JEOL JEM - 1200EX ( JEOL , Tokyo , Japan ) . Immunoﬂuorescence and immunoelectron microscopy The immunoﬂuorescence microscopy was performed as previously described ( Nakagawa et al . , 2000 ) . Cells on glass coverslips were ﬁxed with 3 % formaldehyde in PBS , permeablized with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 in PBS and reacted with primary and secondary antibodies . Rhodamine - phalloidin was diluted in the secondary antibody solution . All immunoﬂuorescence observations were carried out under the confocal laser scanning microscope , Zeiss LSM510 ( Carl Zeiss Jena , GmbH . , Jena , Germany ) . Immunoelectron microscopy on whole - mount cells was performed according to a previously described method ( Rottner et al . , 1999 ) . We could not use glutaraldehyde as a ﬁxative , however , because it heavily reduced the antigenicity of each protein , even at 0 . 1 % in solution . Cells were cultured on formvar ﬁlm according to a previously described method ( Small and Sechi , 1998 ) , incubated in cytoskeleton buffer ( CB ; 10 mM MES , 150 mM NaCl , 5 mM EGTA , 5 mM MgCl 2 and 5 mM glucose , pH 6 . 1 ) containing 10 m g / ml phalloidin , 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 and 3 % formaldehyde for one minute , ﬁxed with CB containing 10 m g / ml phalloidin and 3 % formaldehyde for 30 minutes , washed with 5 m g / ml phalloidin in PBS , blocked at nonspeciﬁc binding sites with 10 m g / ml phalloidin , 1 mg / ml BSA and 100 mM glycine in PBS ( blocking solution ) , reacted with primary antibody diluted in blocking solution , washed with 5 m g / ml phalloidin in PBS , reacted with 10 nm gold particle conjugated secondary antibody diluted in blocking solution , washed with 5 m g / ml phalloidin in PBS , and ﬁxed with 2 . 5 % glutardehyde and 5 m g / ml phalloidin in PBS . The ﬁxed cells were washed with distilled water and negatively stained with 1 % uranyl acetate in water . Using this protocol , we obtained a well - contrasted whole - mount specimen with uranyl acetate solution but not sodium phosphotangstic acid solution . Electron microscopic observation was carried out using a JEOL JEM - 1200EX ( JEOL , Tokyo , Japan ) . Measurement of ﬂuorescence intensity We measured the ﬂuorescence intensity ( recorded as counts per pixel ) at the tip of lamellipodia double - stained with rhodamine - phalloidin and primary antibody against WAVE or Mena followed by FITC conjugated secondary antibody . Measurements were taken from eight cells per immunostaining set . The number of data points was at least 587 per cell . The net ﬂuorescence intensity of each pixel was obtained by subtracting the background ﬂuorescence intensity from the raw data . A correlation coefficient of the ﬂuorescence intensity between rhodamine and FITC was calculated for each cell . RESULTS Protrusion of lamellipodia from 3Y1 cells We developed a simple method to induce lamellipodia in 3Y1 rat ﬁbroblastic cells . Fifteen hours after plating on a plain glass surface , cells were well spread ( Fig . 1a ) and had developed many actin stress ﬁbers of ﬁbroblastic form ( Fig . 1b ) . On the poly - L - lysine - coated glass , cells immediately attached to the surface and extended lamellipodia . Interestingly , almost all cells extended large lamellipodia during the 15 hour incubation ( Fig . 1c ) . In these cells , actin ﬁlaments were distributed Fig . 1 . Lamellipodia formation was induced in 3Y1 cells on poly - L - lysine . Cells adhered to a plain glass surface as a typical ﬁbroblastic form within 15 hours of plating ( a ) . Cells on the poly - L - lysine - coated glass surface extended large lamellipodia around their bodies ( c ) . Cells in a and c observed in phase contrast are shown in b and d stained with rhodamine - phalloidin . Many stress ﬁbers developed in cells on the plain glass ( b ) . Most of the actin ﬁlaments were concentrated in lamellipodia and did not form stress ﬁbers ( d ) . Lamellipodia protruded from the cell body one hour after plating on poly - L - lysine ( e ) , and the number of actin ﬁlament bundles increased during an incubation period of 15 hours ( f ) . Both lamellipodia were stained with rhodamine - phalloidin . Under an electron microscope , an actin ﬁlament meshwork was observed over the lamellipodia ( g ) . A high magniﬁcation view of the boxed area in g is shown in h . Actin ﬁlament bundles ( arrows in h ) extended from the microspike tip ( h , arrow head ) into the actin ﬁlament meshwork . Bar , 10 m m ( d , f , g ) ; Bar , 2 m m ( h ) . 1558 throughout the lamellipodium and many bundles of them , usually called microspikes , were observed but stress ﬁbers were not ( Fig . 1d ) . Within one hour of plating on the poly - L - lysine - coated surface , cells extended lamellipodia ( Fig . 1e ) . Many thick microspikes developed in the lamellipodium during the 15 hour incubation ( Fig . 1f ) . By electron microscopy , microspike bundles of actin ﬁlaments were observed that also extended as ﬁlopodia beyond the lamellipodium edge ( Fig . 1h ) . When 3Y1 cells were cultured on poly - L - lysine for 15 hours , microspikes did not protrude as ﬁlopodia and lamellipodia were gradually retracted to cell bodies ( data not shown ) . Swiss 3T3 ﬁbroblasts have been reported to protrude large lamellipodia on a poly - L - lysine - coated glass surface ( Machesky and Hall , 1997 ; reviewed by Small et al . , 1999b ) . Such a method requires starving the cultured cells of serum and then activating Rac with PDGF , whereas our method does not require this step ( see the methods section ) . In the well - spread cells on the plain glass surface , vinculin was localized at focal adhesions but not along the stress ﬁbers ( Fig . 2a ) . By contrast , in the cells on the poly - L - lysine - coated glass , vinculin was distributed along microspikes in the lamellipodia ( Fig . 2c ) . Talin , another focal adhesion protein , showed a similar localization to vinculin ( data not shown ) . These linear contacts with the substrate in the lamellipodium have been referred to as microspike - associated contacts ( reviewed in Small et al . , 1999a ) . Vinculin has also been reported to concentrate in the protruding lamellipodia of Swiss 3T3 cells on poly - L - lysine ( Machesky and Hall , 1997 ) . These results indicated that the lamellipodia of 3Y1 cells on poly - L - lysine were typical , even 15 hours after plating . Localization of N - WASP , WAVE and Mena in the protruding lamellipodia Using antibodies against N - WASP , WAVE and Mena , we identiﬁed their localization in lamellipodia . To clarify the speciﬁcity , we immunoblotted the SDS - whole extracts of 3Y1 cells with these antibodies . Antibodies against N - WASP and Mena reacted with a single band of each antigen , respectively ( Fig . 3b , d ) . As previously reported , anti - WAVE antibody recognized less - and hyperphosphorylated forms of antigen ( Miki et al . , 1999 ) ( Fig . 3c ) . N - WASP was distributed throughout the lamellipodia and clearly concentrated in the actin bundles of microspikes ( Fig . 4a - d ) . At high magniﬁcation , thin actin ﬁlament bundles were observed in addition to the microspikes ( Fig . 4d ) . N - WASP was also colocalized to these bundles ( Fig . 4c ) . Cdc42 showed a similar localization to N - WASP in lamellipodia ( Fig . 4e , f ) . JOURNAL OF CELL SCIENCE 114 ( 8 ) Fig . 2 . Localization of cell - substrate adhesions . Cells were double - stained with anti - vinculin antibody ( a , c ) and rhodamine - phalloidin ( b , d ) . Vinculin was localized to focal adhesions at both ends of stress ﬁbers in the cells on plain glass ( a ) . By contrast , in the cells on poly - L - lysine , vinculin was concentrated to the actin ﬁlament bundles of microspikes ( c ) at microspike - associated contacts . Bar , 10 m m ( b , d ) . Fig . 3 . Immunoblotting analysis with anti - N - WASP , WAVE and Mena antibodies . Antibody against N - WASP reacted with a single band of 3Y1 cell SDS - whole extract ( b ) . Anti - WAVE antibody was recognized as a doublet at around 78 kDa , as previously shown ( Miki et al . , 1999 ) ( c ) . Anti - Mena antibody reacted with a single band at 80 kDa ( d ) . Lane a shows a Commassie - stained polyvinylidene diﬂuoride ( PVDF ) membrane to which the peptides separated in SDS - PAGE gel were transferred . On the left , the mobilities of relative molecular mass markers are listed ( kDa ) . Fig . 4 . N - WASP and Cdc42 were localized to actin bundles in lamellipodia . Cells on poly - L - lysine were double - stained with rhodamine - phalloidin ( b , d , f ) and antibody against N - WASP ( a , c ) or Cdc42 ( e ) . N - WASP was concentrated not only in the actin bundles of microspikes ( c , d , large arrows ) , but also in thin bundles in lamellipodia ( c , d , small arrows ) . Cdc42 showed a similar localization pattern to N - WASP . Bar , 5 m m ( b , d , f ) . 1559 Localization of WASP and Ena / VASP families These results suggest that N - WASP regulates actin ﬁlament bundling downstream of Cdc42 in lamellipodia . Both WAVE and Mena were localized along the edges of lamellipodia one hour after plating ( Fig . 5a - d ) . Monoclonal antibody against Rac1 stained lamellipodia diffusely ( Fig . 5e ) . Interestingly , in the cells plated for 15 hours , Mena seemed to concentrate at the tips of microspikes ( Fig . 6a ) , whereas WAVE was localized along the edge of lamellipodia , as seen in the cells plated for one hour ( Fig . 6e ) . In the polarized cells , antibodies against these proteins stained the lamellipodium edge but not the non - lamellipodium marginal regions ( Fig . 6c , d , g , h , large arrows ) . Double - staining with antibodies against Mena and WAVE showed a clear difference in the localization of these proteins . Many ﬂuorescence spots stained with anti - Mena antibody were Fig . 5 . Localization of Mena , WAVE and Rac in lamellipodia . Cells cultured on poly - L - lysine for one hour were double - stained with rhodamine - phalloidin ( b , d , f ) and antibody against Mena ( a ) , WAVE ( c ) or Rac1 ( e ) . Mena and WAVE showed a similar localization along the edge of lamellipodia . Rac , however , distributed diffusely over lamellipodia . Bar , 10 m m ( f ) . Fig . 6 . Localization of Mena and WAVE in lamellipodia . Cells were plated on poly - L - lysine for 15 hours and double - stained with rhodamine - phalloidin ( b , d , f , h ) and antibody against Mena ( a , c ) or WAVE ( e , g ) . Both Mena and WAVE were distributed at the edges of lamellipodia ( a , c , e , g ) . After 15 hours of plating , Mena tended to concentrate at the tip of microspikes ( a , b , small arrows ) , but not WAVE . In polarized cells ( c , d , g , h ) , both proteins were localized at the edge of lamellipodia but not non - lamellipodium cell membrane ( large arrows ) . Double - staining with antibodies against Mena ( i ) and WAVE ( j ) showed a speckled distribution of Mena at the lamellipodium edge , where WAVE was localized continuously . Bar , 10 m m ( h ) ; Bar , 5 m m ( j ) . 1560 localized along the lamellipodium edge ( Fig . 6i ) , whereas anti - WAVE antibody stained the same edge with a continuous ﬂuorescence band ( Fig . 6j ) . To elucidate the relation between actin ﬁlaments and WAVE or Mena , we measured the ﬂuorescence intensity at the edge of the lamellipodia double - stained with rhodamine - phalloidin for actin ﬁlaments and antibody against WAVE or Mena , and calculated the correlation coefficient between the intensity of ﬂuorescence from actin ﬁlaments and that from each antigen . The ﬂuorescence intensities of the proteins stained with each antibody correlated with that of the actin ﬁlaments ( Fig . 7 ) . The correlation coefficient between Mena and actin ﬁlament was signiﬁcantly higher , by about twofold , than that between actin ﬁlament and WAVE . This result suggests that these proteins play a different role in actin cytoskeleton dynamics at the edge of the lamellipodium . Under an electron microscope , Mena has been observed to localize at the edge of the lamellipodium ( Rottner et al . , 1999 ) . The localization of WASP family proteins , however , has not been observed at the electron microscopic level . To clarify the localization of N - WASP and WAVE in the lamellipodium , we observed whole mount cytoskeletons of 3Y1 cells by immunoelectron microscopy ( Fig . 8 ) . Cells adhered immediately to the poly - L - lysine - coated formvar ﬁlm after plating , and lamellipodia protruded within 30 minutes ( see Fig . 1g ) . In contrast to the cells on the poly - L - lysine - coated glass surface , cells maintained lamellipodia only for a few hours on the poly - L - lysine - coated formvar ﬁlm . By the immunogold method with anti - N - WASP antibody , gold particles conjugated with a secondary antibody were found to be localized mainly to the actin ﬁlament bundles , although some gold particles were scattered in the actin ﬁlament meshwork ( Fig . 8b , c ) . We conﬁrmed that N - WASP was not concentrated at the tip of microspikes as observed by immunoﬂuorescence microscopy ( Fig . 4 ) . We observed that WAVE was localized along the edge of the lamellipodium , and did not recognize a difference in the density of gold particles between the tips of microspikes and the edge of the lamellipodium ( Fig . 8d ) . Previous reports showed Mena localized at the edge of the lamellipodium ( Rottner et al . , 1999 ) ( Fig . 8e ) , whereas gold particles were clearly concentrated at the tip of microspikes ( Fig . 8e , inset ) . Localizations of EVH2 and SHD to the edge of the lamellipodium To determine which domains of Mena and WAVE were required for the localization of these proteins to the edge of the lamellipodium , we expressed the three conserved domains of Ena / VASP family proteins and two N - terminal fragments of WAVE tagged with EGFP ( Fig . 9 ) . Because the ﬂuorescence from these EGFP - tagged proteins was too weak to detect in living cells ( data not shown ) , we observed the localizations of these proteins by immunoﬂuorescence microscopy using anti - GFP antiserum . In the cells on a plane glass surface , EVH1 - and EVH2 - GFP were localized to the focal adhesions in the same manner as endogenous Mena ( Fig . 10a , d , g ) . EVH1 - GFP was distributed diffusely over the lamellipodium but EVH2 - GFP was localized to the edge ( Fig . 10e , h ) . EVH2 - GFP was also concentrated at the tip of microspikes with thick actin bundles , similar to endogenous Mena ( Fig . 10m ) . Essentially the same results were obtained with different antibodies ( anti - Mena and anti - GFP ) . This indicates that the higher correlation between Mena and actin ﬁlament was not an artifact caused by the character of antibody . PR - GFP distributed mainly to nuclei and did not show any clear localization in the cytoplasm ( Fig . 10j ) . In the cells on poly - L - lysine , PR - GFP seemed to be excluded from the lamellipodium ( Fig . 10k ) . Interestingly , both WNT - GFP and SHD - GFP were concentrated at the cell membrane ( Fig . 11d , g ) , whereas the endogenous WAVE was scattered over the cytoplasm of the cells on the plane glass surface ( Fig . 11a ) . These N - terminal fragments were localized to the edge of the lamellipodium in the same manner as endogenous WAVE ( Fig . 11b , e , h ) . The EVH2 domain and SHD were localized to a similar region of the lamellipodium , but no signiﬁcant homology was found between their amino acid sequences using GENETYX - Mac software ( data not shown ) . DISCUSSION The recent progress in the study of the motility machinery of parasitic bacteria , L . monocytogenes and S . ﬂexneri , in the invaded cytoplasm has provided insight into eukaryotic cell movement . The bacterial cell body is propelled directly by the actin polymerization within the invaded cell cytoplasm ( Tilney and Portnoy , 1989 ) . The endogenous proteins of the invaded cell , such as N - WASP of the WASP family and several JOURNAL OF CELL SCIENCE 114 ( 8 ) Fig . 7 . Correlation coefficient between actin ﬁlaments and WAVE or Mena at the lamellipodium edge . To clarify the correlation of actin ﬁlaments with WAVE or Mena at the lamellipodium edge , using cells double - stained with rhodamine - phalloidin and antibody against WAVE or Mena , we measured the ﬂuorescence intensities of rhodamine to actin ﬁlament and of FITC conjugated with secondary antibodies to each antigen . The values of the correlation coefficient between actin ﬁlament and WAVE or actin ﬁlament and Mena were 0 . 21 – 0 . 08 and 0 . 42 – 0 . 08 ( mean – s . e . m . ) , respectively ( a ) . Scattered plots are shown ( b , c ) for the cell that shows the closest value to each mean correlation coefficient , these values are 0 . 22 and 0 . 45 , respectively . The antigen of primary antibody used for immunostaining is indicated in the upper - left corner of the graph . Rhodamine and FITC show ﬂuorescence for rhodamine - phalloidin and secondary antibody , respectively . All ﬂuorescence intensities are normalized to the mean value . 1561 Localization of WASP and Ena / VASP families Ena / VASP family proteins , play an essential role in these bacterial movements . The protrusion of lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia is thought to be driven by the same machinery responsible for these bacterial movements ( reviewed in Borisy and Svitkina , 2000 ) . Indeed , several proteins of these families , such as N - WASP , WAVE , Mena and VASP , have been reported to regulate the protrusion of ﬁlopodia and / or lamellipodia ( Lanier et al . , 1999 ; Miki et al . , 1998a ; Miki et al . , 1998b ; Fig . 8 . Localization of N - WASP , WAVE and Mena in whole - mount lamellipodia . Cells on poly - L - lysine - coated formvar ﬁlm were stained with various primary antibodies followed by 10 nm gold conjugated secondary antibody . At 30 minutes after plating , lamellipodia protruded from the cell body . In the control lamellipodium stained only with the secondary antibody mixture , a few gold particles were observed ( a , arrows ) . Some gold particles were scattered in the lamellipodium stained with anti - N - WASP antibody ( b , arrows ) , but most particles were localized to the actin ﬁlament bundles of microspikes ( c , the enhanced image of the bracketed region in b ; arrows indicate the gold particles on the actin ﬁlament bundle ) . In the lamellipodia stained with the antibodies against WAVE ( d ) or against Mena ( e ) , gold particles were localized along the edges . The density of gold particles in the anti - WAVE - stained cells was indistinguishable between the tips of microspikes ( d , inset , large arrow ) and the edge of lamellipodia ( d , inset , small arrows ) . In the anti - Mena stained cells , however , the gold particles were more concentrated at the tips of microspikes ( e , inset , which shows an enhanced image of the microspike indicated by the large arrow ) than the edge of lamellipodia ( e , small arrows ) . Bars , 0 . 2 m m . Fig . 9 . A schematic representation of EGFP - tagged constructs of avian Ena ( A ) and WAVE1 ( B ) . EVH , SHD , PR , B , V and A indicate Ena / VASP homology , SCAR homology domain , proline - rich , basic region , VPH domain , and acidic domain , respectively . WNT includes SHD and B of WAVE1 . The identities of the amino acid sequence of EVH 1 and 2 domains , and the PR region of avian Ena against mouse Mena are shown in A . 1562 Rottner et al . , 1999 ) . However , it is still not clear how they function in these cellular processes . In this article , we present evidence that these proteins perform different functions in cell movement . On a poly - L - lysine - coated substrate , serum - starved Swiss 3T3 cells protruded lamellipodia around the cell body following stimulation with PDGF ( Machesky and Hall , 1997 ) . Here , we described how large lamellipodia were induced from 3Y1 cells on poly - L - lysine , even when the cells were cultured in a serum - containing medium without any additional trophic factors . Our observation that both vinculin and talin were localized to the actin ﬁlament bundles of microspikes suggested that 3Y1 cells attached to the poly - L - lysine - coated substrate via the ventral side of the microspike . The activation of Rac was required for lamellipodia to protrude from Swiss 3T3 cells ( Machesky and Hall , 1997 ) , whereas Rac scattered over the lamellipodia of 3Y1 cells and did not concentrate at the edge . This result suggests two possibilities : ﬁrst , that most of the Rac molecules remain inactive even in the protruding lamellipodium ; and second , that the lamellipodia on poly - L - lysine are still in a premature stage . It is difficult to clarify these possibilities with the results of our present work . How the Rac cascade is activated by poly - L - lysine is still obscure . Our method to induce lamellipodia formation from 3Y1 cells is useful for uncovering this cascade . This is because the stability of the lamellipodia of 3Y1 cells favors cell biological manipulation , such as the microinjection of various proteins , cDNAs and drugs that induce rearrangement of the cytoskeleton . Overexpression of N - WASP has been reported to enhance the Cdc42 - induced formation of ﬁlopodia in COS - 7 cells ( Miki et al . , 1996 ; Miki et al . , 1998a ) . On the surface of S . ﬂexneri , N - WASP binds the bacterial protein IcsA to promote the elongation of actin ﬁlaments ( Egile et al . , 1999 ) . Consequently , N - WASP has been expected to localize at the tip of microspikes in lamellipodia ( reviewed by Borisy and Svitkina , 2000 ) . We previously showed that N - WASP was concentrated in the membrane ruffles but did not proceed further , because the JOURNAL OF CELL SCIENCE 114 ( 8 ) Fig . 10 . Localization of the EGFP - tagged EVH1 and 2 domains , and PR region . Cells were plated on a plane glass surface for one day ( a , d , g , j ) or poly - L - lysine for 3 hours ( b , c , e , f , h , i , k - n ) . Intact cells were stained with antibody against Mena ( a ) . Intact lamellipodia were double - stained with antibody against Mena ( b ) and rhodamine - phalloidin ( c ) . The cells expressing the EGFP - tagged constructs were stained with antiserum against GFP ( d , g , j ) . The lamellipodia expressing the EGFP - tagged constructs were double - stained with antiserum against GFP ( e , h , k , m ) and rhodamine - phalloidin ( f , i , l , n ) . EVH1 - ( d ) and EVH2 - GFP ( g ) were localized to the focal adhesions in the same manner as endogenous Mena ( a ) . EVH2 - GFP was localized at the edge of the lamellipodium ( h ) , but EVH1 - GFP was distributed diffusely over the lamellipodium and did not concentrate at the edge ( e ) . PR - GFP distributed mainly to nuclei , did not show any clear localization in the cytoplasm ( j ) and seemed to be excluded from lamellipodia ( k ) . EVH2 - GFP was concentrated at the tip of thick microspike bundles , similarly to endogenous Mena ( m , n , arrows ) . Bar , 10 m m ( j , l ) ; Bar , 5 m m ( n ) . Fig . 11 . Localization of the EGFP - tagged WNT and SHD . Cells were plated on a plane glass surface for one day ( a , d , g ) or poly - L - lysine for 3 hours ( the rest of the photographs ) . Intact cells were stained with antibody against WAVE ( a ) . Intact lamellipodia were double - stained with antibody against WAVE ( b ) and rhodamine - phalloidin ( c ) . The cells expressing the EGFP - tagged constructs were stained with antiserum against GFP ( d , g ) . The lamellipodia expressing the EGFP tagged constructs were double - stained with antiserum against GFP ( e , h ) and rhodamine - phalloidin ( f , i ) . In the cells on a plain glass surface , endogenous WAVE was distributed diffusely in cytoplasm ( a ) but WNT - GFP ( d ) and SHD - GFP ( g ) migrated to cell membrane . Both WNT - GFP ( e ) and SHD - GFP ( h ) were localized at the edges of lamellipodia , similar to endogenous WAVE ( b ) . Bar , 10 m m ( g , h ) . 1563 Localization of WASP and Ena / VASP families membrane ruffle is a highly complicated structure containing lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia ( Miki et al . , 1996 ) . By the method described in this article , however , we observed that N - WASP was localized along the actin bundles of microspikes but was not concentrated at the microspike tip . Cdc42 was localized along microspikes in the same manner as N - WASP . This remarkable result suggests that N - WASP regulates the bundling of actin ﬁlaments , in addition to the activation of Arp2 / 3 complex , downstream of Cdc42 in the lamellipodium . N - WASP should bundle up actin ﬁlaments into microspikes through the F - actin binding site at its N - terminus ( Egile et al . , 1999 ) and elongate them so that they protrude as ﬁlopodia as previously reported ( Miki et al . , 1998a ; Rohatgi et al . , 1999 ) . We previously reported that WAVE was localized to lamellipodia induced to form by Rac activation ( Miki et al . , 1998b ) . Mena has been reported to localize in ﬁlopodia at the neural growth cone and at the edge of lamellipodia in addition to the focal adhesions of B16 melanoma cells ( Lanier et al . , 1999 ; Rottner et al . , 1999 ) . To clarify the function of these proteins in lamellipodium protrusion , we immunostained the protruding lamellipodia of 3Y1 cells with antibodies against these proteins . Both proteins showed a similar localization along the edge of the lamellipodium one hour after the plating . Interestingly , at 15 hours , Mena concentrated at the microspike tips but WAVE did not . These results suggested that the localization of each of these proteins was regulated by different molecular mechanisms . To conﬁrm this , we expressed the EGFP - tagged constructs . Only the EGFP - tagged EVH2 domain among the three conserved regions of Ena / VASP family proteins was localized along the lamellipodium edge and concentrated at the microspike tip similarly to endogenous Mena . This result suggests that , in the lamellipodium , the localization of Ena / VASP family proteins is regulated through the EVH2 domain . By contrast , it has been reported that the EVH1 domain migrated to the leading edge ( Bear et al . , 2000 ) . Judging from the ﬁgures presented in their article , the lamellipodia were less developed and it was difficult to observe ﬁne structures . The EVH1 domain might have been localized to focal complexes aligned near the lamellipodium edge , similar to EGFP - tagged VASP ( Rottner et al . , 1999 ) . Under our experimental conditions , no focal adhesion or complex developed in the lamellipodium ( Fig . 2 ) . Because the EVH2 domain of VASP composes a homotetramer ( Bachmann et al . , 1999 ) , we cannot rule out the possibility that EVH2 - GFP is localized at these edges through the binding with the EVH2 domain of endogenous Mena . The ﬁnding that neither EVH1 - GFP nor PR - GFP is localized to the lamellipodium edge strongly indicates the important role of the EVH2 domain in the regulation of the subcellular localization of Ena / VASP family proteins . Interestingly , in the cells on the plane glass surface , the EGFP - tagged SHD of WAVE migrated to the cell membrane , in contrast to the endogenous WAVE , which showed a diffuse distribution . SHD - GFP was also localized to the edge of the lamellipodium . These results show that SHD has cell membrane localization activity and this activity of a whole WAVE molecule is suppressed in the non - lamellipodium region . When the Rac cascade is activated , SHD might be released from inhibition and the WAVE molecule might migrate to the edge of the lamellipodium through it . Because SHD contains the putative leucine zipper motif ( Miki et al . , 1998b ) , WAVE might bind to some unidentiﬁed membrane protein ( s ) with this motif . The low homology of the EVH2 domain and SHD amino acid sequences suggests that the localization of Mena and WAVE is regulated by different mechanisms . This possibility is conﬁrmed by the result that only Mena is localized at focal adhesions . What are the functions of Mena and WAVE in the protruding lamellipodium ? The key here is the higher correlation between actin ﬁlaments and Mena , than between actin ﬁlaments and WAVE . The fast growing ends of actin ﬁlaments face the edge of the lamellipodium ( Small et al . , 1978 ) , so we propose the hypothesis that Mena would modulate actin ﬁlament polymerization directly and WAVE functions indirectly . This hypothesis is strongly supported by the observation that the density of Mena at the tips of lamellipodia closely correlates with the rate of protrusion ( Rottner et al . , 1999 ) . How do these proteins regulate actin ﬁlament polymerization ? We present a tentative model of actin ﬁlament polymerization at the edge of the lamellipodium ( Fig . 12 ) . In the protruding lamellipodium , the GTP - bound form of Rac activates WAVE to migrate to the edge through SHD . Subsequently , WAVE stimulates Arp2 / 3 complex to promote actin ﬁlament nucleation ( Machesky et al . , 1999 ) . Mena should be recruited around the fast growing ends of actin ﬁlaments through the EVH2 domain and supply monomeric actin molecules to elongate actin ﬁlaments branched by Arp2 / 3 complex ( Mullins et al . , 1998 ) . Activated WAVE - bound cell membrane would protrude as lamellipodia . Mena would modulate the speed of lamellipodium protrusion downstream of various receptors as previously reported ( Bashaw et al . , 2000 ; Bear et al . , 2000 ) . When Cdc42 is activated in lamellipodium , N - WASP should bundle up actin ﬁlaments into microspikes , and then it should elongate them to produce protruding ﬁlopodia . Rac Fig . 12 . Schematic model of actin polymerization in the lamellipodium . The GTP - bound form of Rac stimulates WAVE to localize at the lamellipodium edge through SHD ; subsequently , WAVE induces Arp2 / 3 complex to promote actin ﬁlament nucleation near the plasma membrane . Mena and / or VASP are recruited to the cell membrane via their EVH2 domain and supply actin molecules from proﬁlin - actin complexes to the fast - growing ends of actin ﬁlaments branched by Arp2 / 3 complex . When Cdc42 is activated in the lamellipodium , N - WASP induces the bundling of actin ﬁlaments to form microspikes . 1564 activity might be regulated by Cdc42 in the protruding lamellipodia as reported ( Nobes and Hall , 1995 ) . Recently , the movement of endocytic vesicles was shown to be associated with an actin comet tail similar to that of parasitic bacteria , and N - WASP was recruited to the surface of each moving vesicle ( Rozelle et al . , 2000 ; Taunton et al . , 2000 ) . These observations indicate that an actin comet tail is a necessary physiological structure for cytoplasmic vesicle movement not an aberrant one . Ena / VASP family proteins might regulate the formation of the actin comet tail in other vesicle species . An analysis of actin dynamics in the comet tail should provide important information on the functions of these proteins . This information , however , could not be applied directly to the lamellipodium protrusion , because the role of protein is greatly dependent on its subcellular localization . For instance , as described in this article , the localization of N - WASP along the actin ﬁlament bundles of microspikes is unexpected given S . ﬂexneri ’s comet tail . N - WASP should play a different role in the lamellipodium from that in the actin comet tail . This study is the ﬁrst attempt to compare the localization of WASP and Ena / VASP family proteins in the lamellipodium , and our results shed light on the roles of these proteins in cell membrane protrusion . We thank Makoto Tsuneoka ( Institute of Life Science , Kurume University , Kurume , Japan ) for generously donating the 3Y1 cell line . This work was partly supported by the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science . REFERENCES Abraham , V . C . , Krishnamurthi , V . , Taylor , D . L . and Lanni , F . ( 1999 ) . The actin - based nanomachine at the leading edge of migrating cells . Biophys . J . 77 , 1721 - 1732 . Aspenström , P . , Lindberg , U . and Hall , A . ( 1996 ) . Two GTPases , Cdc42 and Rac , bind directly to a protein implicated in the immunodeﬁciency disorder Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome . Curr . Biol . 6 , 70 - 75 . Bachmann , C . , Fischer , L . , Walter , U . and Reinhard , M . ( 1999 ) . The EVH2 domain of the vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein mediates tetramerization , F - actin binding , and actin bundle formation . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 23549 - 23557 . Bailly , M . , Macaluso , F . , Cammer , M . , Chan , A . , Segall , J . E . and Condeelis , J . S . ( 1999 ) . Relationship between Arp2 / 3 complex and the barbed ends of actin ﬁlaments at the leading edge of carcinoma cells after epidermal growth factor stimulation . J . Cell Biol . 145 , 331 - 345 . Bashaw , G . J . , Kidd , T . , Murray , D . , Pawson , T . and Goodman , C . S . ( 2000 ) . Replsive axon guidance : Abelson and Enabled play opposing roles downstream of the Rounabout receptor . Cell 101 , 703 - 715 . Bear , J . E . , Rawls , J . F . and Saxe C . L . , III ( 1998 ) . SCAR , a WASP - related protein , isolated as a suppressor of receptor defects in late Dictyostelium development . J . Cell Biol . 142 , 1325 - 1335 . Bear , J . E . , Loureiro , J . J . , Libova , I . , Fässler , R . , Wehland , J . and Gertler , F . B . ( 2000 ) . Negative regulation of ﬁbroblast motility by Ena / VASP proteins . Cell 101 , 717 - 728 . Borisy , G . G . and Svitkina , T . M . ( 2000 ) . Actin machinery : pushing the envelope . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 , 104 - 112 . Brindle , N . P . J . , Holt , M . R . , Davies , J . E . , Price , C . J . and Critchley D . R . ( 1996 ) . The focal - adhesion vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ( VASP ) binds to the proline - rich domain in vinculin . Biochem . J . 318 , 753 - 757 . Chakraborty , T . , Ebel F . , Domann , E . , Niebuhr , K . , Gerstel , B . , Pistor , S . , Temm - Grove , C . J . , Jockusch , B . M . , Reinhard , M . , Walter , U . et al . ( 1995 ) . A focal adhesion factor directly linking intracellularly motile Listeria monocytogenes and Listeria ivanovii to the actin - based cytoskeleton of mammalian cells . EMBO J . 14 , 1314 - 1321 . Derry , J . M . , Ochs , H . D . and Francke , U . 1994 . Isolation of a novel gene mutated in Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome . Cell 78 , 635 - 644 . Egile , C . , Loisel , T . P . , Laurent , V . , Li , R . , Pantaloni , D . , Sansonetti , P . J . and Carlier , M - F . ( 1999 ) . Activation of the CDC42 effector N - WASP by the Shigella ﬂexneri IcsA protein promotes actin nucleation by Arp2 / 3 complex and bacterial actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 146 , 1319 - 1332 . Ermekova , K . S . , Zambrano , N . , Linn , H . , Minopoli , G . , Gertler , F . , Russo , T . and Sudol , M . ( 1997 ) . The WW domain of neural protein FE65 interacts with proline - rich motif in Mena , the mammalian homolog of Drosophila Enabled . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 32869 - 32877 . Gertler , F . B . , Niebuhr , K . , Reinhard , M . , Wehland , J . and Soriano , P . ( 1996 ) . Mena , a relative of VASP and Drosophila Enabled , is implicated in the control of microﬁlament dynamics . Cell 87 , 227 - 239 . Hall , A . ( 1998 ) . Rho GTPases and the actin cytoskeleton . Science 279 , 509 - 514 . Kim , A . S . , Kakalis , L . T . , Abdul - Manan N . , Liu , G . A . and Rosen , M . K . ( 2000 ) . Autoinhibition and activation mechanisms of the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein . Nature 404 , 151 - 158 . Kolluri , R . , Tolias , K . F . , Carpenter , C . L . , Rosen , F . S . and Kirchhausen , T . ( 1996 ) . Direct interaction of the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein with the GTPase Cdc42 . Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 5615 - 5618 . Kozma , R . , Ahmed , S . , Best , A . and Lim , L . ( 1995 ) . The Ras - related protein Cdc42Hs and bradykinin promote formation of peripheral actin microspikes and ﬁlopodia in Swiss 3T3 ﬁbroblasts . Mol . Cell . Biol . 15 , 1942 - 1952 . Lanier , L . M . , Gates , M . A . , Witke , W . , Menzies , A . S . , Wehman , A . M . , Macklis , J . D . , Kwiatkowski , D . , Soriano , P . and Gertler , F . B . ( 1999 ) . Mena is required for neurulation and commissure formation . Neuron 22 , 313 - 325 . Laurent , V . , Loisel , T . P . , Harbeck , B . , Wehman , A . , Gröbe , L . , Jockusch , B . M . , Wehland , J . , Gertler , F . B . and Carlier , M - F . ( 1999 ) . Role of proteins of the Ena / VASP family in actin - based motility of Listeria monocytogenes . J . Cell Biol . 144 , 1245 - 1258 . Machesky , L . M . and Hall , A . ( 1997 ) . Role of actin polymerization and adhesion to extracellular matrix in Rac - and Rho - induced cytoskeletal reorganization . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 913 - 926 . Machesky , L . M . and Insall , R . H . ( 1998 ) . Scar1 and the related Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein , WASP , regulate the actin cytoskeleton through the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 8 , 1347 - 1356 . Machesky , L . M . , Mullins , R . D . , Higgs , H . N . , Kaiser , D . A . , Blanchoin , L . , May , R . C . , Hall , M . E . and Pollard , T . D . ( 1999 ) . Scar1 , a WASP - related protein , activates nucleation of actin ﬁlaments by Arp2 / 3 complex . Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 3739 - 3744 . Miki , H . , Miura , K . and Takenawa , T . ( 1996 ) . N - WASP , a novel actin - depolymerizing protein , regulates the cortical cytoskeletal rearrangement in a PIP2 - dependent manner downstream of tyrosine kinases . EMBO J . 15 , 5326 - 5335 . Miki , H . , Sasaki , T . , Takai , Y . and Takenawa , T . ( 1998a ) . Induction of ﬁlopodium formation by a WASP - related actin - depolymerizing protein N - WASP . Nature 391 , 93 - 96 . Miki , H . , Suetsugu , S . and Takenawa , T . ( 1998b ) . WAVE , a novel WASP - family protein involved in actin reorganization induced by Rac . EMBO J . 17 , 6932 - 6941 . Miki , H . , Fukuda , M . , Nishida , E . and Takenawa , T . ( 1999 ) . Phosphorylation of WAVE downstream of mitogen - activated protein kinase signaling . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 27605 - 27609 . Mullins , R . D . ( 2000 ) . How WASP - family proteins and the Arp2 / 3 complex convert intracellular signals into cytoskeletal structures . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 , 91 - 96 . Mullins , R . D . , Heuser , J . A . and Pollard , T . D . ( 1998 ) . The interaction of Arp2 / 3 complex with actin : nucleation , high affinity pointed end capping , and formation of branching network of ﬁlaments . Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 6181 - 6186 . Nakagawa , H . and Miyamoto , S . ( 1998 ) . Actin - ﬁlaments localize on the sorting endosomes of 3Y1 ﬁbroblastic cells . Cell Struct . Funct . 23 , 283 - 290 . Nakagawa , H , Yoshida , M . and Miyamoto , S . ( 2000 ) . Nitric oxide underlies the differentiation of PC12 cells induced by depolarization with high KCl . J . Biochem . 127 , 113 - 119 . Nobes C . D . and Hall , A . ( 1995 ) . Rho , rac , and cdc42 GTPases regulate the assembly of multimolecular focal complexes associated with actin stress ﬁbers , lamellipodia , and ﬁlopodia . Cell 81 , 53 - 62 . Ohta , S . , Mineta , T . , Kimoto , M . and Tabuchi , K . ( 1997 ) . Differential display cloning of a novel rat cDNA ( RNB6 ) that shows high expression in the neonatal brain revealed a member of Ena / VASP family . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 237 , 307 - 312 . Reinhard , M . , Halbrugge , M . , Scheer , U . , Wiegand , C . , Jockusch , B . M . and Walter , U . ( 1992 ) . The 46 / 50 kDa phosphoprotein VASP puriﬁed from JOURNAL OF CELL SCIENCE 114 ( 8 ) 1565 Localization of WASP and Ena / VASP families human platelets is a novel protein associated with actin ﬁlaments and focal contacts . EMBO J . 11 , 2063 - 2070 . Reinhard , M . , Giehl , K . , Abel , K . , Haffner , C . , Jarchau , T . , Hoppe , V . , Jockusch , B . M . and Walter , U . ( 1995a ) . The proline - rich focal adhesion and microﬁlament protein VASP is a ligand for proﬁlins . EMBO J . 14 , 1583 - 1589 . Reinhard , M . , Jouvenal , K . , Tripier , D . and Walter , U . ( 1995b ) . Identiﬁcation , puriﬁcation , and characterization of a zyxin - related protein that binds the focal adhesion and microﬁlament protein VASP ( vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ) . Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . USA 92 , 7956 - 7960 . Reinhard , M . , Rudiger , M . , Jockusch , B . M . and Walter , U . ( 1996 ) . VASP interaction with vinculin : a recurring theme of interactions with proline - rich motifs . FEBS Lett . 399 , 103 - 107 . Ridley , A . J . , Paterson , H . F . , Johnston , C . L . , Diekmann , D . and Hall , A . ( 1992 ) . The small GTP - binding protein rac regulates growth factor - induced membrane ruffling . Cell 70 , 401 - 410 . Rohatgi , R . , Ma , L . , Miki , H . , Lopez , M . , Kirchhausen , T . , Takenawa , T . and Kirschner , M . W . ( 1999 ) . The interaction between N - WASP and the Arp2 / 3 complex links Cdc42 - dependent signals to actin assembly . Cell 97 , 221 - 231 . Rottner , K . , Behrendt , B . , Small , J . V . and Wehland , J . ( 1999 ) . VASP dynamics during lamelliodia protrusion . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 321 - 322 . Rozelle , A . L . , Machesky , L . M . , Yamamoto , M . , Driessens , M . H . E . , Insall , R . H . , Roth , M . G . , Luby - Phelps , K . , Marriott , G . , Hall , A . and Yin , H . L . ( 2000 ) . Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate induces actin - based movement of raft - enriched vesicles through WASP - Arp2 / 3 . Curr . Biol . 10 , 311 - 320 . Small , J . V . , Isenberg , G . and Celis , J . E . ( 1978 ) . Polarity of actin at the leading edge of cultured cells . Nature 272 , 638 - 639 . Small , J . V . , Anderson , K . and Rottner , K . ( 1996 ) . Actin and the coordination of protrusion , attachment and retraction in cell crawling . Biosci . Rep . 16 , 351 - 368 . Small , J . V . and Sechi , A . ( 1998 ) . Whole - mount electron microscopy of the cytoskeleton : negative staining methods . In Cell Biology : A Laboratory Handbook . ( 2nd edn , Vol . 3 ) , ( ed . J . E . Celis ) . pp . 285 - 281 , Academic Press , USA . Small , J . V . , Kaverina , I . , Krylyshkina , O . and Rottner , K . ( 1999a ) . Cytoskeleton cross - talk during cell motility . FEBS Lett . 452 , 96 - 99 . Small , J . V . , Rottner , K . and Kaverina , I . ( 1999b ) . Functional design in the actin cytoskeleton . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 11 , 54 - 60 . Suetsugu , S . , Miki , H . and Takenawa , T . ( 1998 ) . The essential role of proﬁlin in the assembly of actin for microspike formation . EMBO J . 17 , 6516 - 6526 . Symons , M . , Derry , J . M . , Karlak , B . , Jiang , S . , Lemahieu , V . , McCormick , F . , Francke , U . and Abo , A . ( 1996 ) . Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein , a novel effector for the GTPase CDC42Hs , is implicated in actin polymerization . Cell 84 , 723 - 34 . Taunton , J . , Rowning , B . A . , Coughlin , M . L . , Wu , M . , Moon , R . T . , Mitchison , T . J . and Larabell , C . A . ( 2000 ) . Actin - dependent propulsion of endosomes and lysosomes by recruitment of N - WASP . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 519 - 530 . Tilney , L . G . and Portnoy , D . A . ( 1989 ) . Actin ﬁlaments and the growth , movement , and spread of the intracellular bacterial parasite , Listeria monocytogenes . J . Cell Biol . 109 , 1597 - 1608 .