Characteristics of Patent Litigation : A Window on Competition Jean O . Lanjouw and Mark Schankerman 1 Revised March 2000 1 The authors are from Yale University and NBER , and the London School of Economics and CEPR , respectively . We thank the editor , Rob Porter , and two anonymous referees for helpful suggestions . Dietmar Harhoff , Robert Merges , Suzanne Scotchmer and Brian Wright provided constructive comments on an earlier draft . We thank Derwent and Micro - Patent for access to their data and Orli Arav for assistance in obtaining them , Sam Kortum for the data on total patenting activity , and Jonathan Putnam for extracting the matched data set and the citations information . Information for the latter was made available by Mogee Research and Analysis of Reston , Virginia , and was accessed through their PCAD database . We gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Nuffield Foundation and the Suntory - Toyota International Center for Economic and Related Research at the London School of Economics . Abstract The cost of engaging in litigation over intellectual property assets diminishes their value as an incentive to invest in research . The frequency of court cases reflects firms’ strategies for appropriating innovation rents . We examine the characteristics of litigated patents and their owners by combining , for the first time , information about patent case filings from the U . S . district courts with detailed data from the U . S . Patent and Trademark Office . By comparing filed cases to a control group , we show that there is substantial variation across patents in their exposure to litigation risk . Litigation rates differ sharply across technology areas , and are higher when ( i ) innovations are more valuable , ( ii ) they form the basis for a sequence of technologically - related innovations held by the patentee , ( iii ) there is domestic ownership , and ( iv ) they are owned by individuals , except when competing R & D activity in the same technology field makes reputation building important . We use this empirical evidence to examine hypotheses about the determinants of patent suits . Keywords : patents , litigation , R & D Jean O . Lanjouw Mark Schankerman Department of Economics Department of Economics Yale University and NBER London School of Economics / CEPR P . O . Box 208264 Houghton Street New Haven , CT 06520 - 8264 London WC2A 2AE , England Tel : 203 . 432 . 3568 Tel : 44171 . 955 . 7518 Fax : 203 . 432 . 6323 Fax : 44171 . 831 . 1840 Email : lanjouw @ econ . yale . edu Email : schankem @ ebrd . com 1 Intellectual property litigation reflects competition and conflict . Firms competing in research and production often infringe , or directly challenge , each other ' s patent rights . Firms face the decision to file a legal suit , and following that , either to resolve their differences in pre - trial settlement negotiations or to take the expensive route of going to trial . An empirical analysis of how these choices are related to the characteristics of intellectual property assets and their owners , and to industry structure , offers a potentially useful window through which to view strategic interaction among firms . We take an initial step here , by providing a broad - based statistical characterization of patent cases filed in the United States . The results are encouraging - we find that the frequency of legal disputes is strongly correlated with a variety of characteristics of innovations and their owners in a way which is consistent with existing hypotheses in the industrial organization , and law and economics , literature . Two examples illustrate this point . The first is our finding that patentees are more likely to go to court to protect patents that form the base of a cumulative chain , or technological trajectory . This suggests that the ability of firms to appropriate rents from their subsequent , “improvement” inventions , either through direct manufacturing or licensing , hinges on their control over the initial invention . This finding is consistent with the theoretical literature that emphasizes the link between patent rights and bargaining in contractual arrangements between first and second - generation innovators ( Scotchmer , 1991 ; Green and Scotchmer , 1995 ) . The second example concerns our finding that reputation building plays a role in the decision to litigate . Specifically , corporate ( but not individual ) patentees are much more likely to prosecute the infringement of a patented innovation when subsequent citations to that patent come from firms active in closely related technology fields . But when such technological “overlap” is smaller , and thus there is less benefit to building a reputation for aggressively protecting property , we find that firms are no more likely to litigate than individual patentees . Of course , in order for reputation building to be effective , it must be the case that litigation itself conveys information to competitors about the willingness to defend the patent . We 2 find some supporting evidence : a patent is significantly more likely to be cited by other inventors shortly after it is litigated as compared to other patents of the same age involved in litigation longer ago ( we call this the “publicity effect” ) . These findings together suggest that the burden of enforcing property rights is more severe for certain types of patentees . If pre - trial settlements are facilitated by cross - licensing and other types of patent portfolio exchange , or if the benefits of litigating one patent spill over to the protection of others through reputation effects , then enforcement considerations alone would make the same patent worth more in the hands of a large firm than a small one . 2 We find evidence that both of these factors are at work : Lower litigation rates for corporate relative to individual patentees suggests advantages in settlement ( since their costs of litigation are almost certainly lower ) , and higher litigation rates for corporate patentees when later inventors who cite them are working in similar technological areas suggests reputation effects . Since it is common that intellectual property is the key asset of start - up firms , high enforcement costs may especially weaken their incentives for R & D and entry . 3 These findings provide new , and in some cases the first , empirical support for these , and other , hypotheses related to R & D and industrial organization . Further progress in understanding how firms interact while trying to appropriate the value of their intellectual property will require that the litigation and patent data used in this paper be complemented by data on the outcomes of patent suits and firm - specific information such as size , cash flow , R & D , stock market valuation and licensing patterns . There is a second reason to be interested in patterns of patent litigation . Innovation is at the heart of productivity growth , and granting inventors property rights through the patent system is the most widespread policy to encourage innovation . Yet , outside of the field of pharmaceuticals , research oriented 2 There is evidence that small biotechnology firms design their R & D strategies to avoid conflict with larger firms and that smaller firms rely more heavily on trade secrets than on patents for protection ( Lerner , 1995a ) . 3 Models of Schumpeterian growth , which require the appropriation of innovative rents , assume costless enforcement of these property rights ( Aghion and Howitt , 1998 ) . 3 firms consistently report that they rely heavily on other mechanisms to appropriate the returns to innovation ( Levin , Klevorick , Nelson and Winter , 1987 ; Cohen , Nelson and Walsh , 1999 ) . Evidence from econometric studies using patent renewal and application data shows that that the implied , average ‘subsidy rate’ to R & D provided by patent rights are only on the order of 15 to 30 percent ( for a review , Lanjouw , Pakes and Putnam , 1998 ) . It is important to understand why the main policy instrument to encourage R & D investment is not more effective than these studies suggest . Given the huge sums involved in some well - publicized cases , the cost of enforcing patent rights is certainly one candidate explanation . It is clear from our data that litigation can be a very real part of extracting returns from patented innovations . But the importance of litigation is missed if one focuses only on average litigation rates . This should not be surprising , since it is well documented in the literature on innovation that there is substantial heterogeneity in the value of patents . What is interesting is that the heterogeneity is clearly reflected in the variation across patents in their exposure to litigation risk . Although the average litigation rate is only about one percent , patents with more claims and more citations by subsequent patentees are substantially more likely to be involved in litigation in each of the four technology fields we study . For the most “valuable” drugs and health patents , the estimated probability of litigation during the lifetime of the patent is more than 25 percent , and more than 10 percent in the other technology fields . As a percentage of utilized patents , these litigation rates would be even higher . Very little is known about the costs of enforcing patent ( and other intellectual property ) rights . To make an economic assessment , three types of information are needed : the probability of litigation , the pattern of outcomes ( settlement rates and win rates in trials ) , and the costs of settling and going to trial . As a first step , in this paper we calculate the probabilities that patents with different characteristics will be involved in litigation . In order to assess the overall burden of enforcement costs , and thus to estimate the net incentives being generated by the U . S . patent system , this information needs to be supplemented by analysis of how these characteristics influence the pattern of outcomes , and the costs of settling or going to trial . 4 The results in the paper point to some possible remedial actions . The rate of litigation in all of our broad technology areas is far lower than that estimated by Lerner ( 1995a ) for the emerging field of biotechnology , consistent with other evidence that uncertainty and inexperience impede settlement bargaining . Thus , institutional changes in the patent office or courts to improve parties’ information – such as greater clarity about what is patentable , or arbitration requirements – could lower the costs of enforcement for all patentees . 4 More directly , our findings that observable characteristics of patents and owners are systematically related to the probability of legal suits can facilitate the development of a private litigation insurance market . This would be of particular use to smaller inventors . Although a number of insurance companies have offered patent litigation policies ( Business Insurance , 1995 ) , this protection remains limited and expensive , in part because pricing is based on pooled risks due to lack of information . The market for intellectual property insurance can be made more efficient if insurance companies ( and patentees ) were better able to identify the risk associated with different “profiles” of patents and set prices accordingly . The data set we construct for this paper is unique in two respects . First , we have linked information on patent suits ( case filings ) from the U . S . court system to the detailed information about inventions and their owners found in patent documents . This provides a very rich data set covering about three - quarters of all patent suits filed in the U . S . during the period 1975 - 1991 . Matching court data to patent information enables us to construct a control group of patents . Rarely does one have information both about litigants and about the population from which potential litigants are drawn . Court data alone contain information on lawsuits , but no information on the potential population of disputes . It is only by using both the litigated and control groups that we can identify how the characteristics of patents and their owners differ between those that are involved in court actions and those that are not . The paper is organized as follows . Section 1 summarizes hypotheses about the determinants of 4 On mediation requirements , see Farber and White ( 1991 ) . 5 litigation derived from existing theoretical literature , which are used as an organizing framework for the subsequent empirical discussion . Section 2 describes the construction of the new data set . In Section 3 we describe characteristics of the data and discuss which hypotheses in the literature are consistent with the evidence . In this section , we aggregate the information on patent infringement suits where the patentee is the plaintiff , and patent invalidity suits where the patentee is the defendant . There are no important qualitative differences in the results for each taken separately . Section 4 presents an econometric analysis of the determinants of infringement and invalidity suits , treated separately , as well as estimates of litigation probabilities for patents with different characteristics . Brief concluding remarks summarize directions for future research . 1 . Determinants of Litigation Activity Existing theoretical models identify the following four key determinants of litigation . ( For an excellent survey , see Cooter and Rubinfeld , 1989 . ) A . The probability of litigation increases in the likelihood of a potentially litigious situation , or ' event ' , occurring and being detected by the plaintiff . In our context , an event is any action which could be considered an infringement of patent rights . B . The probability of litigation is increasing in the asymmetry information or the divergence in parties ' expectations regarding the outcome of a trial . In our context this is more likely in emerging technology areas ( e . g . , biotechnology ) ; where patent protection is new ( e . g . , computer software ) ; or where legal procedure itself is changing . 5 C . The probability of litigation rises in the size of the stakes . In our context , this includes the value of the patent right and any indirect benefits to filing a case ( e . g . , to strengthen reputation and bargaining power in subsequent interactions ) . 5 In strategic models of litigation , the likelihood of litigation depends on the information available to parties and the sequence of offers ( Bebchuk , 1984 ; Png , 1983 ) . For discussion of the evolution of legal rules for 6 D . The probability of litigation declines in the cost of trial relative to the cost of settlement . In our context differences are likely to arise between domestic and foreign patentees , and corporate versus individual patentees . 6 Often the first defense against being sued for the infringement of a patent is to counter sue with a claim that the patent is invalid . Challenging validity may also be done preemptively . The four generic factors above would influence the probability of both patent infringement and challenge suits . However , there is an important difference between these two types of litigation : successful challenges of validity generate positive externalities while infringement suits do not . If a firm suing for invalidity is active in related R & D , it may be well - placed to benefit if the disputed patent is declared invalid or is restricted in scope . But other R & D - performing firms may also innovate in any technology space opened up , and all firms would be able to use the original innovation freely . By contrast , the gains from a successful patent infringement suit accrue primarily , if not exclusively , to the patentee . Besides making infringements suits more frequent than challenges , this argument implies that the four factors listed above should increase the probability of infringement suits ( at the margin ) more than patent challenges ( for evidence , see Section 4 ) . Before proceeding to the empirical analysis , one clarifying remark is in order . Here we analyze the incidence and characteristics of case filings . The vast majority of patent cases do not reach the final stage of a trial judgement . Thus , from the point of view of assessing the overall costs of enforcing patent rights we expect that understanding why patent disputes get into the first rounds of court proceedings may be at least as important as understanding why they go to trial . Often the factors listed above are used to explain whether disputes fail to settle in the negotiations after case filing . However , expectations about the outcome software patenting , and the uncertainty it created , see Samuelson , Davis , Kapon and Reichman ( 1994 ) . 6 Legal costs are probably higher for foreign firms . Even if they engage domestic legal representation , they incur higher costs in communications and in translating business documents into a form which will be understood by a U . S . court . Legal expenses are also likely to be higher for smaller firms and individuals because of higher financing costs and their greater reliance on external legal counsel ( Lanjouw and Lerner , 7 of the post - filing stage will affect the earlier decision to file a suit and therefore this decision too would be influenced by the same factors . ( For strategic models of litigation , see Shavell , 1982 ; P’ng , 1983 ; Hughes and Snyder , 1989 . ) 2 . Description of the Data The data source used to identify litigated patents is the Patent History CD - ROM produced by Derwent . This database is constructed from information collected by the U . S . Patent and Trademark Office ( PTO ) . The data include 5 , 452 patent cases during the period 1975 - 1991 , involving 3 , 887 U . S . patents . Although the U . S . Federal courts are required to report to the PTO whenever a case is filed which involves a U . S . patent , they often fail to do so . This means that the PTO data is a subset of all patent cases . We calculated the number of missing cases by linking the information from the PTO to comprehensive data on court activity available from the Inter - university Consortium for Political and Social Research ( Federal Judicial Center , 1991 ) . Only 22 percent of patent disputes recorded by the Federal courts ( code 830 ) were reported to the PTO during the years 1977 - 79 . This had increased to 85 percent of all cases by the years 1985 - 87 , with the most substantial improvement in reporting occurring between 1983 and 1984 . The incomplete reporting by the courts to the PTO seems to be mainly a clerical issue ( reporting rates differ by districts ) . We checked for selection bias by comparing characteristics of federal cases reported to the PTO to those of unreported cases , and found no discernible differences between the two groups in a range of variables in the federal database . 7 To create a control group , we generated a ‘matched’ set of patents from the population of all U . S . patents ( both litigated and unlitigated ) . For each litigated patent , a patent was chosen at random from the set of all U . S . patents with the same application month and a common 4 - digit International Patent Classification 1996 ) . 7 The variables included the method of disposition of the case , the type of judgement , the percentage of large ( greater than ten million dollars ) monetary judgements received , and the party favoured in cases 8 ( IPC ) sub - class assignment , described below . By constructing the population sample in this way , the comparisons we present between litigated patents and matched patents control both for technology and cohort effects . We obtained information on a range of characteristics for each litigated and matched patent , which we now briefly describe . Number of Claims : A patent is comprised of a set of claims which delineate the boundaries of the property rights provided by the patent . The principal claims define the essential novel features of the invention in their broadest form and the subordinate claims are more restricted and may describe detailed features of the innovation claimed . The patentee has an incentive to claim as much as possible in the application , but the patent examiner may require that the claims be narrowed before granting . IPC Assignments : Each patent is assigned by the patent examiner to 9 - digit categories of the IPC system . Our data contain assignments at the more aggregated , widely used , 4 - digit sub - class level ( 614 sub - classes ) . The IPC is a technology - based classification system and patents may be assigned to more than one sub - class . In the empirical analysis , we use the set of all 4 - digit IPC sub - classes to which each patent was assigned . Citations : An inventor must cite all related prior U . S . patents in the patent application . A patent examiner who is an expert in the field is responsible for insuring that all appropriate patents have been cited . Like claims , the citations in the patent document help to define the property rights of the patentee . For each patent in the litigated and matched data , we obtained the number of prior patents cited in the application ( backward citations ) and their IPC sub - class assignments . We obtained the same information on all subsequent patents which had cited a given patent in their own applications , as of 1994 ( forward citations ) . For recent patents there is substantial truncation in the number of forward citations , since citation lags can be long ( Jaffe and Trajtenberg , 1996 ) , and we adjust for this fact in the analysis . For older patents there is considerable missing information on the IPC sub - class assignments of backward citations , as comprehensive were a final judgement was rendered . 9 IPC data are only available from about 1970 , but the number of backward citations is complete for all patents . Ownership : Nationality and type of ownership ( corporate or individual ) are constructed as follows . We classify the inventor as domestic , Japanese or other foreign , based on the inventor ' s address . The nationality of the assignee is defined in the same way . About 66 percent of litigated and 73 percent of matched patents have an assignee . The nationality of patent ownership is that of the assignee , if there is one , and otherwise it is the nationality of the inventor . Nearly all assignees are firms ( inventors are individuals ) , so we identify a patent as corporate - owned if there is an assignee . Case Type : We have no direct information on whether a filed case is an infringement suit or a patent challenge . However , we were able to identify the patent owner as either the plaintiff or the defendant for about two - thirds of the suits in the data set . Among these , the patent owner was the plaintiff 84 percent of the time , which we interpret as infringement suits . The other cases , where the patent owner was the defendant , are almost surely suits for patent invalidation brought by competitors . These variables relate to the key determinants of suits as follows : 8 ( i ) the number of potential disputes – is measured by the number of claims in the patent , the diversity of technology classes into which the patent falls , and the technological similarity of future patents that cite the original one ; ( ii ) the size of the stakes - is measured by the number of future citations the patent receives , and the extent of self - citation ( as an indicator of the firm’s cumulative investment in that technology ) ; and ( iii ) the cost of prosecuting a suit and asymmetric information – are inferred from whether the patent ownership is individual or corporate , and domestic or foreign . 3 . The Frequency and Characteristics of Suits 3 . 1 Prevalence of Litigation 8 There are some studies using proxy variables for these variables in other areas of litigation . For example , see Siegelman and Waldfogel ( 1996 ) and Fournier and Zuehlke ( 1989 ) on civil suits , and Hughes and Snyder ( 1989 ) and Farber and White ( 1991 ) on medical malpractice . 10 Panel A of Table 1 provides estimates of the number of cases which have been or will be filed per thousand patents applied for during the period 1980 - 1984 , broken down by technology field and ownership . For example , the aggregate figure of 10 . 7 means that for every thousand granted patents applied for during the years 1980 - 84 , they will eventually become the subject of 10 . 7 filed cases . 9 It is an estimate because of the need to adjust both for the under - reporting of cases ( discussed in Section 2 ) and for truncation . 10 We need to make two calculations when constructing patent litigation rates by ownership ( Panel B in Table 1 ) . As in the aggregate data , we must adjust for truncation . 11 Second , to compute total patents in the denominator , we must impute the country of ownership from information on the country of first application ( priority country ) . Inventions are often patented in multiple locations but , with few exceptions , the priority country is the country of the inventor . 12 Most exceptions involve cases where a foreign patentee chooses the U . S . as the priority country . Thus the share of total patents with domestic owners is slightly over - estimated and , as a result , the filing rate is understated for domestic patentees and overstated for foreign owners . Despite this bias , domestic - owned patents are far more frequently involved in litigation . The aggregate litigation rate is nearly five times as large for domestic patentees , and this finding holds ( with some variation ) in all five technology areas . However , although domestic - owned patents are more likely to 9 Because some patents are litigated more than once , the number of cases per thousand patents is larger than the number of individual patents which are litigated . The latter statistics , adjusted for truncation in first filings , are 6 . 3 ( total ) , 9 . 1 ( domestic ) , and 2 . 0 ( foreign ) . That is , for every thousand patents , 6 . 3 will be litigated and they will generate 10 . 7 cases . 10 Based on the comprehensive ICPSR data , the number of cases reported to the patent office by 1991 is assumed to be three - quarters of the true number of cases involving these patents by that date . Because the litigation data end in 1991 , there is truncation at seven to eleven years after application . To estimate the size of the truncation effect we examine the first few cohorts in the data ( 1975 - 77 ) , where truncation should be minimal , and find that 45 percent of all case filings occur within seven years of the application date of the patent , and 75 percent within eleven years . We use the midpoint of this range , and the estimated 25 percent under - reporting , and gross up the litigation rates accordingly . 11 The case filings involving foreign - owned patents ( including Japanese ) tend to occur later than for domestic - owned patents . Using the procedure in note 10 , we get a truncation adjustment of 48 percent for foreign - owned patents and 41 percent for domestic - owned patents . 12 Putnam ( 1996 ) calculates that 98 % of U . S . inventors have their residence as priority country . Figures for 11 be litigated , they are not more likely to be litigated more than once . Among litigated patents the mean number of cases per patent is 1 . 39 ( 0 . 02 ) for domestic owners , 1 . 30 ( 0 . 10 ) for Japanese owners and 1 . 53 ( 0 . 10 ) for non - Japanese foreign owners . ( Throughout the paper , figures in parentheses are standard errors . ) These means are not statistically different from each other at the 0 . 01 level . Thus , the nationality of the patent owner influences the probability of litigation , but not the number of times that a given patent is litigated . This finding is consistent with there being a fixed cost to litigating a given patent , which is higher for foreign firms , but it is not consistent with the idea that foreign firms are at a disadvantage in detecting infringements in the U . S . market since , if that were true , we would also expect the number of cases per litigated patent to be lower for foreign firms . 13 There are also pronounced differences in litigation rates across technology fields , holding ownership constant . The most notable are the very low litigation rate for chemical patents and the high rate for drugs and health . There is a cased filed for every fifty drug patents . This may reflect the fact that patents are relied upon more frequently to protect pharmaceutical innovations , as confirmed by survey evidence ( Levin , et . al . , 1987 ; Cohen , et . al . , 1999 ) . In addition , some of differences in litigation rates may be associated with variation in the value of patent protection . ( See Lanjouw , 1998 , and Schankerman , 1998 , for evidence of differences in the value of patent rights across technology areas . ) The litigation rates in Table 1 are much lower than those presented by Lerner ( 1995b ) for patents in the relatively young field of biotechnology . Based on a sample of 530 biotechnology firms , he estimates that there are about sixty cases per thousand U . S . corporate biotechnology patents . In other words , in biotechnology the rate of litigation is at least four times as large as it is for patents as a whole , and more than other leading OECD countries include : France , 84 % ; Germany , 88 % ; the U . K . , 83 % ; and Japan , 87 % . 13 An alternative to the fixed cost interpretation is that there are two types of foreign patent owners , those with low costs of detecting infringement and litigation ( for example , owners with a domestic presence by virtue of a local subsidiary ) and those with high costs . If most foreign patent owners are of the first type , the probability of litigation will be low . But the low - cost type will be highly represented among the foreign patent owners who do get involved in litigation , so the frequency of cases , conditional on a first filing , may be high . 12 twice as high as for drugs and health . This field difference supports the view that a lack of experience with disputes and having little legal precedent established in an area to guide disputants in assessing their cases can impede settlement . Finally , litigation rates differ across patents owned by individuals and those with corporate owners ( not shown in the table ) . Litigation rates for patents owned by domestic and non - Japanese foreign individuals are 16 percent higher than those owned by corporations in those countries . The difference is even more striking for Japanese inventors , where individuals are more than three times as likely as corporations to file suits involving their U . S . patents . 14 This suggests that , if corporate owners have lower litigation costs , they must have even greater advantages in reaching settlement agreements . The econometric evidence in Section 4 shows that the effect of ownership is less pronounced , but still significant , when one controls for other patent characteristics . Panel B in Table 1 provides information on the type of litigation occurring in each technology group and ownership category . We defined infringement ( challenge ) suits as those where the patent owner is the plaintiff ( defendant ) . 15 In each technology group , infringements account for the bulk of litigation ; about 84 percent if unclassified cases are excluded , and 90 percent if they are treated as infringement suits . This is consistent with plaintiffs being better able to appropriate the gains from successful infringement suits , as compared to patent challenges . 3 . 2 Patent Citations 14 This understates the difference between individual and corporate behavior because there may be a third party ( parent company , exclusive licensee or joint venture partner ) representing an individual patent owner in a suit . ) We find third party litigants for 53 percent of patents owned by individuals ( 26 percent of corporate - owned patents ) . Even in the 47 percent of cases where an individual owner is identified as one of the litigants , firms act as co - litigants in roughly half the cases . Thus , individuals appear to actual litigate alone in only about 25 percent of cases which involve individual ownership . 15 The unclassified category refers to cases where the patent owner is neither the plaintiff nor defendant . Under U . S . patent law , an exclusive licensee can sue for infringement on behalf of the patentee , but the defendant in a challenge suit must be the patent owner . Thus we conclude that the unclassified category is 13 Future citations received by a patent ( forward citations ) are one indication that an innovation has contributed to the development of subsequent inventions . For this reason , citations have been used a measure of the value of an invention ( Trajtenberg , 1990a and 1990b ) and to trace and measure the effects of R & D spillovers ( Jaffe , Henderson and Trajtenberg , 1993 ; Caballero and Jaffe , 1993 ) . We use citations to investigate whether the value of patents is systematically related to litigation . The link between citations and litigation in these data is striking . Litigated patents are much more frequently cited than a randomly chosen patent . The mean number of citations among the litigated patents is 11 . 9 ( 0 . 2 ) , but only 5 . 8 ( 0 . 1 ) for matched patents . This is partly because domestic - owned patents tend to be more heavily cited and also form the bulk of the litigated sample . In the matched sample , domestic - owned patents are cited 6 . 3 ( 0 . 16 ) times on average , compared to 4 . 8 ( 0 . 19 ) citations for non - Japanese foreign - owned patents and 5 . 8 ( 0 . 32 ) for Japanese - owned patents . However , litigated patents are more heavily cited even when we control for ownership ( Table 2 ) . We can easily reject a null hypothesis that litigated and matched patents have the same distribution of the number of citations , both for domestic - owned patents and foreign - owned patents . 16 Considering Japanese - owned patents separately does not appreciably effect the results . Clearly , litigation is much more likely to be a feature of maintaining property rights for more valuable ( heavily cited ) inventions . In Section 3 . 1 we argued that the lower litigation rate observed for foreign - owned patents was consistent with higher litigation costs per patent for foreign patentees , but not with higher detection costs for foreign owners . The mean citation figures in Table 2 cast doubt on another explanation for the lower litigation rate : that foreign - owned patents are simply less valuable . In fact , studies of the private value of patent rights in different countries have found that foreign - owned patents are typically more valuable than those owned by domestic patentees ( Pakes and Simpson , 1989 ; Lanjouw , 1992 ; Putnam , 1996 . primarily infringement suits brought by an exclusive licensee or the parent company of the patent owner . 16 Using citation categories of 0 , 1 - 5 , 6 - 15 , 16 - 50 , and > 50 , test statistics are χ 2 / 6 = 190 . 8 , p - value < 0 . 01 , and χ 2 / 6 = 492 . 9 , p - value < 0 . 01 , respectively . 14 Schankerman , 1998 , provides mixed evidence ) . 17 Since foreign - owned patents are less heavily cited in the population , we can infer that they receive fewer U . S . citations per unit of value . But among litigated patents , those with a foreign owner are just as heavily cited as those with a U . S . owner . ( We cannot reject a chi - square test of the equality of the distributions . ) This implies that litigated patents owned by foreigners are more valuable than their domestic counterparts , which is consistent with the hypothesis that foreign patentees face higher legal costs and thus litigate only their more valuable patents . As with our finding in Section 3 . 1 , this evidence does not support the hypothesis that foreigners have more difficulty detecting infringements , since there is no reason to expect the latter to have a selective ( value - related ) effect . We have interpreted the empirical association between citations and case filings as reflecting the role of the ‘size of the stakes’ . This is the typical use of citations as an indicator . However , it is equally clear that someone is making those citations , and thus the fact that a patent has many forward citations may also be an indicator that it is subject to a greater level of competition . When the citations come from others innovating in the same area , there are likely to be many disputes over competing claims . We examine this hypothesis by noting that , when inventors are operating in the same area , their patents will tend to fall in technology classes more closely related to the patents they cite and those patents that cite them . To measure the technological “similarity” between a patent and one of its citing patents , we calculate the percentage of 4 - digit IPC assignments of the citing patent which overlap with those of the patent itself . Our similarity index is the mean degree of similarity taken over a group of citations . 18 Similarity between a patent and its backward citations is measured analogously . Similarity measures the technological closeness of a patent to 17 This reflects self - selection in the patent application process - given the substantial cost of applying for and maintaining patent protection , foreign patentees are less likely to take out patent protection in other countries for low - valued inventions . There may also be differences across nationalities in the underlying value of their inventions , but studies of patent systems in different countries tend to find foreign - owned patents are higher valued , suggesting that it is more to do with selection . From the point of view of the argument in the text , the reason for the value difference does not matter . 18 The same approach is taken in Trajtenberg , Henderson and Jaffe ( 1997 ) , but they base the technological similarity of a patent and one of its citations on a comparison of the patents’ primary IPC classifications alone , rather than on their full sets of IPC classes as here . 15 its children and its parents . We treat self - citations separately since , when a firm cites its own past patents , they are more likely to be technologically similar because they arise from the same research program . For backward citations , we cannot reject the hypothesis that the similarity index is the same for litigated and matched patents ( Table 3 ) . However , for forward citations , the similarity index for litigated patents is significantly higher than for matched patents . Both conclusions hold for self - cites and citations by others , and for domestic and foreign patentees . This evidence supports the idea that crowdedness in a research area contributes to litigation . It increases the number of actual disputes , which could have a direct effect on the level of litigation , and also the number of potential disputes , and therefore , the importance of building a reputation for being willing to go to court . Patentees are more likely to bring suits when they have subsequent inventions in the same technology area . There is significantly greater technological similarity between patents and their future self - citations among litigated patents than among the matched patents - 0 . 67 versus 0 . 58 for domestic owners , 0 . 72 versus 0 . 63 for foreign owners . One interesting explanation for this finding is that greater similarity of future self - citations is an indication of cumulative or sequential invention . In such cases , the ability to appropriate returns from later inventions may depend on having effective proprietary control over the earlier invention . This can arise because stronger control of earlier inventions changes the bargaining position for subsequent licensing agreements ( Scotchmer , 1991 and 1996 ; Green and Scotchmer , 1995 ; Merges and Nelson , 1990 ) . This gives a firm trying to control a technology as it develops a strong incentive to prosecute infringers of the early patents . Not only does this increase the stakes of the dispute , but perhaps equally important in explaining suits , it is also likely to cause an asymmetry in the stakes . Protecting the early patent in a cumulative chain generates benefits for the other patents in the chain which can only be enjoyed by the patent owner . We have reasoned that citations ( as a measure of value ) lead to patent suits . But when deciding which previous inventions to cite , the patent applicant ( or patent examiner who screens the application ) is 16 faced with a large body of patents to search . When a patent is disputed , it may receive more attention and , as a result , more citations than it would have otherwise . Thus one might be concerned that the publicity generated by a patent suit leads to more citations , reversing the direction of causality . We tested for the presence of a ‘publicity effect’ as follows . Using only the group of litigated patents , we compute the mean number of citations received at various lags after the application date . The first column in Table 4 presents the mean number of citations at various lags , but including only those not yet involved in a first case filing by the time of the citation . For example , the value 0 . 96 at lag six indicates that , for patents which will eventually be litigated but which have not been involved in litigation by six years after application , the mean number of citations in that year is 0 . 96 . The second column gives the mean number of citations T years after application for patents that were involved in a first case filing T - 1 years after application . The following columns give the same figure when the first case filing date is progressively further from the year of citation . The final row of the table provides the mean of the preceding rows and gives clear evidence that there is a “publicity effect” associated with a patent dispute going to court . The mean number of citations for given lags is significantly higher in the two years following a case filing . The effect of the case filing wears off over time and by the fourth year after filing no longer increases citations . This shows that other parties are aware of patent litigation . This means that litigation may signal to others the willingness of a patent owner to defend his property rights , which underpins reputation building . However , while there is a publicity effect , it is much too small to explain the higher number of citations that we observe for litigated patents . The last row in Table 4 implies that the publicity effect raises the number of citations received by a litigated patent by an average of just 0 . 50 , a half a citation . 19 The actual difference in the mean number of citations between litigated and matched patents is 6 . 1 , so the publicity effect can account for less than 10 percent of the observed difference in litigation rates . 19 The publicity effect is somewhat greater for more highly cited patents . Among all patents , the publicity effect accounts for four percent of mean citations . Among more highly cited patents , the percentage of mean citation attributable to the publicity effect of litigation is larger but is never more than ten percent . 17 3 . 3 Patent Claims The number of claims is another , underutilized , indicator of the ‘bits of information’ contained in a patent , and therefore its value . Supporting evidence for the relationship between claims and value is found in the fact that claims are positively correlated with forward and backward citation in all technology areas in these data ( Lanjouw and Schankerman , 1999 ) , and also with R & D expenditures at the economy - wide level ( Tong and Frame , 1994 ) . Technologies fall into two distinct groups : drugs and health , chemical , and electronic inventions have more claims per patent , while patents protecting mechanical and other types of inventions have fewer claims . We easily reject that the distribution of claims across technology is the same ( χ 2 / 20 = 4 . 56 , p - value < 0 . 01 , based on the claims categories 1 - 5 , 6 - 10 , 11 - 15 , 16 - 20 , 21 - 50 and > 50 ) . The mean number of claims per patent also differs significantly across ownership types : the mean for domestic owners is 13 . 2 ( 0 . 2 ) , it is 10 . 7 ( 0 . 2 ) for non - Japanese foreign owners , and 9 . 0 ( 0 . 3 ) for Japanese owners . This conclusion holds for each technology field . The mean number of claims per patent has increased over time . It was stable prior to 1983 , averaging 12 . 2 ( 0 . 15 ) over the period 1975 - 1982 , then began to drift upward to average 13 . 5 ( 0 . 24 ) for the 1983 - 1991 cohorts . In 1982 , the U . S . PTO raised application and issuance fees and introduced the requirement that patentees pay renewal fees to keep their patents in force . This increase in the cost of protection should have led inventors to apply for patent protection only on more valuable inventions . The observed increase in the number of claims per patent could arise from the combination of this self - selection process and a positive relationship between claims and the private value of protection . In addition to being an indicator of patent value , the number of claims may be associated with the technology or product “space” being protected by the patent . A patentee making more claims runs a larger risk of conflict with competitors . For both reasons , we expect litigation to be more likely for such patents , and it is . Litigated patents have far more claims than matched patents , both when they are domestic - owned 18 and foreign - owned . The differences are large and statistically significant ( Table 2 ) , and are also evident in the median and mode . Not only is the mean number of claims larger for litigated patents , but the number of forward citations per claim is also higher , controlling for ownership ( Table 2 ) . Thus litigated patents have both more claims , and more valuable claims . Moreover , we cannot reject the hypothesis that , among litigated patents , domestic and foreign - owned patents have the same number of citations per claim . As in our earlier analysis of citations per patent , this highlights the self - selection at work among foreign - owned , litigated patents . In Table 2 we also examine the number of prior patents cited per claim in the patent documents of litigated and matched patents ( backward citations ) . Controlling for ownership , we find that a litigated patent is likely to cite fewer prior patents per claim than a randomly selected patent . A small number of backwards citations may indicate that the invention is in a relatively new technology area . In this situation there is little information available to either the patentee or his competitors about how the courts will view the claims made in the patent , increasing the likelihood of divergent expectations and , as a result , litigation . 20 3 . 4 Technology Classifications Lerner ( 1994 ) argues that patents with uses in many areas - “broad” patents - are faced with more potential infringers and are thus more likely to be litigated . He proposes a measure of breadth : a simple count of the number of 4 - digit IPC sub - classes to which a patent is assigned by the patent examiner . Using a sample of biotechnology patents he finds a large , statistically significant positive relationship between the 20 An alternative hypothesis is that a small number of backward citations simply reflects a failure by the patentee to cite relevant patents , which leads to litigation . Under this “failure to cite” hypothesis , we expect to observe patent invalidity suits , not infringement suits by the patentee . Under the “new area” hypothesis in the text , the number of backward citations per claim should not be significantly different for infringements and challenges , but under the “failure to cite” hypothesis , backward citations per claim should be larger for infringement suits . There was no significant difference in any of the three ownership categories , thus supporting the “new area” hypothesis . This finding is not surprising since , under U . S . patent law , “gross negligence” in citing prior art is sufficient grounds for invalidating a patent ( Merges , 1997 , Chapter 7 ) . 19 probability that a patent is litigated and its breadth . We constructed his measure of breadth on our more comprehensive data and tested the hypothesis that the distribution of the number of IPC sub - classes to which litigated and matched patents are assigned is the same ( see Table 5 ) . We also found some significant differences in breadth , but they go the “wrong” way . It is the narrower patents which tend to be litigated more often . We interpret this finding as indicating that it is more difficult for a patentee to detect infringement when his patented invention is used in diverse technology areas . 21 Whatever the reason , it is clear that biotechnology is not representative in terms of the link between patent suits and breadth . 4 . Econometric Analysis Table 6 presents probit regressions relating the probability of infringement and challenge suits , separately , to the following regressors : the number of claims , forward citations per claim , backward citations per claim , the number of 4 - digit IPC’s to measure patent breadth , similarity indices for backward and forward citations to measure crowdedness , the percentage of backward and forward citation which is self - citation to capture cumulative technology , and a set of ownership dummy variables to allow for nationality and individual / corporate differences . In each regression , the sample includes the litigated patents of the indicated type plus all of the matched patents . Technology group dummies are included as controls since the 50 : 50 breakdown of litigated and matched patents by IPC group does not hold for these separate samples . The table presents the parameter estimates and the implied marginal effect of each variable on the probability of litigation for a randomly drawn patent in the sample . 22 Since the pooled sample has a high 21 We also developed a more refined measure of patent breadth , defined as one minus the maximum percentage of patent ' s 4 - digit IPC sub - class assignments that fall into one of twenty - two 2 - digit technology groups . This measure recognizes that 4 - digit sub - classes may be closely related ( a patent with three assignments all within chemicals is less broad by this measure than a patent with two assignments where one is in chemicals and the other in electronics ) . The point estimates again confirm that broader patents are less likely to be litigated , but the difference was not statistically significant in any technology group . 22 Where there are quadratic terms , the reported marginal effect includes the full effect of a change in the covariate . For the similarity of forward citation , the marginal effect indicated for the interaction is the full effect of a change in similarity for corporate owners . The marginal effect for ownership type k is the 20 rate of litigation by construction , to obtain the marginal effects for a randomly drawn patent in the population , one must multiply the reported marginal effects by a conversion factor . These differ by technology group and type of suit and are given at the bottom of Table 6 . The methodology for the conversion is described in Appendix 2 . The significance of variables and the relative size of their effects is preserved through this conversion , although magnitudes will depend on the specific population of interest . Thus we discuss general results with reference to the sample and then end with an example of marginal effects on the probability of litigation in a population . Turning first to infringement suits , the results strongly confirm that the probability of litigation rises with the number of claims and forward citations per claim , and the effects are substantial . A 10 percent rise in the number of claims ( 1 . 0 claim at the mean ) implies a 1 . 4 percentage point increase in the sample litigation probability . Since the mean litigation probability for infringements in the sample is 37 percent , this corresponds to a 3 . 8 percent increase . But the number of claims is very skew : a similar calculation shows that a one standard deviation increase in the number of claims increases the probability of litigation about 32 percent . One additional forward citation per claim raises the probability of an infringement suit by 8 . 1 percentage points , or 22 percent . A one standard deviation increase in forward citations per claim raises the probability of litigation by 35 percent . These findings confirm the importance of the value of a patent in determining infringement suits . On the point estimates , the likelihood of an infringement suit declines with the number of backward citations per claim . This is consistent with the hypothesis , proposed in Section 3 . 3 , that a small number of backward citations is an indication of patenting in a relatively new area and that the associated uncertainties lead to more frequent patent disputes . However , the effect is not significant . difference between the probability of litigation given k and a weighted average of the probabilities of litigation given ownership type j , where the weights are the probability that a patent is type j given that it is not type k . Because characteristics of patents in infringement and challenge suits differ , we evaluate the marginal effects at the overall sample means for each covariate ( see Appendix 1 for details ) . Thus the marginal effects correspond to a randomly drawn patent and can be compared between the infringement and 21 There is no evidence that Lerner ' s index of patent breadth ( NO4IPC ) increases the probability of infringement litigation . On the contrary , the point estimate again indicates that “broader” patents are less likely to be litigated . But the effect is marginally significant and small : a one standard deviation increase in breadth lowers the litigation probability by only 3 percent . The similarity of forward citations by others ( SIMFWD ) significantly raises the probability of infringement litigation , and the effect is substantial . Moreover , the effect of the similarity index is almost twice as large for corporate owners as for individual owners . A one standard deviation increase in the similarity index raises the sample probability of an infringement suit by about 10 percent for individual owners and 17 percent for corporate owners . Given the number of citations , greater similarity indicates a more “crowded” technology area . This causes litigation because it increases both the likelihood of disputes and the importance of reputation in dealing with disputes . Our finding that similarity increases the probability of litigation more sharply for corporate owners indicates that reputation concerns may be an important factor in patent litigation . In Section 3 . 2 we suggested that forward self - citations for a patent ( given its total forward citations ) may be an indicator that the patent owner is engaged in subsequent inventions that build on this earlier patent and that , as a result , he would have a greater incentive to protect his property rights in this area . This hypothesis is supported by the positive and significant coefficient on the variable FWDSELF , the percentage of citations which is self - citation . The point estimate implies that a one standard deviation increase in this variable raises the probability of an infringement suit by 4 . 0 points , or 11 percent . At the same time , we find that greater backward self - citation ( BWDSELF ) significantly reduces the likelihood of litigation : a one standard deviation rise in this variable lowers the litigation probability by 4 . 4 points , or 12 percent . Greater backward self - citation in a patent indicates that an invention builds more extensively on one ' s own past research and is thus more likely to be a “derivative” invention . This evidence supports the idea that there is challenge regressions . 22 complementarity among technologically - related inventions in a firm ' s R & D portfolio , and that this raises the willingness to protect the property rights of inventions at the base of the chain . In the simple comparisons in Section 3 . 1 , we found that individual patentees litigated as often as corporate patentees . Since corporations are likely to have lower litigation costs , this finding suggested that corporations are better positioned to settle . The econometric results show that another factor may also be at work – reputation effects . When reputation is not at issue because no future citing patents come from the same technology area ( SIMFWD = 0 ) , we again cannot reject the hypothesis that the litigation probability is the same for corporate and individual owners of a given nationality ( χ 2 / 3 = 7 . 34 , p - value = 0 . 06 ) . However , when reputation is potentially relevant ( which we evaluate by calculating the effect of corporate ownership at SIMFWD equal to its mean value ) we find that , among domestic patentees , corporate owners are much more likely to become engaged in a patent suit than individual owners ( χ 2 / 1 = 4 . 34 , p - value = 0 . 04 ) . In short , there is evidence that corporations have both lower settlement costs and strategic incentives to litigate , and that the latter effect dominates for domestic corporate patentees in the United States . As in Section 3 , we can easily reject that there are no nationality differences when we control for other factors ( χ 2 / 4 = 375 , p - value < 0 . 01 ) . Foreign individuals and corporations are much less likely to engage in infringement suits than their domestic counterparts . For example , comparing the marginal effects of DINDOWN with FINDOWN and JINDOWN , we see that foreign individual owners are about 80 percent ( 30 percentage points ) less likely to become engaged in litigation than their domestic counterparts . A similar pattern is observed for corporate owners . The empirical results for patent challenges are very similar to those for infringement suits , so we do not discuss them extensively . It is interesting , however , that the marginal effects of the variables in the patent challenge regression are nearly proportional to those in the infringement regression . We cannot reject the null hypothesis that the marginal effects are proportional to each other ( χ 2 / 12 = 13 . 77 , p - value = 0 . 33 ) . Under this null , we obtain a point estimate of 0 . 14 for the factor of proportionality when estimated over all 23 technologies ( see Appendix 1 for details ) . This finding is not an artifact of the data generation process - e . g . , that patents tend to have three infringement suits and one challenge . In fact , few patents in the data are involved in both infringement and challenge suits . Clearly there is something to be explained . The simplest economic interpretation of this finding is that it reflects the positive externalities generated by a successful invalidity suit ( since invalidation generates potential benefits for all competitors and users of that invention ) . Suppose , for argument’s sake , that the probability of litigation is proportional to the expected benefits , as a reduced form representation of some underlying strategic litigation game . If a firm successfully challenging a patent can only capture a fraction α of the benefits , then the marginal effect on the probability of litigation of an increase in patent value would only be α percent as large for patent challenges as for infringement suits . Under this interpretation , our point estimate of α = 0 . 14 suggests that a plaintiff can appropriate about 14 percent of the benefits from a successful patent challenge . 23 This interpretation is consistent with the observation ( Panel B , Table 1 ) that patent invalidity suits are much less common than infringement suits . Table 7 summarizes the how the estimated litigation probability differs for “low - value” and “high - value” domestic corporate patents . At the mean profile , the estimated probability is 0 . 7 percent for all technology groups . For a patent with one standard deviation more claims , or forward cites per claim , this probability roughly doubles . With one standard deviation greater claims and cites per claim , the probability is more than three times the mean . In drugs and health , a patent with one standard deviation greater claims and cites per claim above the mean is more than four times as likely to be litigated , with a probability of 7 . 4 percent compared to 1 . 8 percent . The table also provides the estimated litigation probability for the patent in the sample with the maximum number of claims and cites per claim in each technology group . In the mechanical and electronic technology groups , the estimated maximum probability of litigation is about 10 23 An alternative interpretation is that the probability of winning a challenge suit ( rather than the ability to capture profits ) is lower , so that the expected benefit of litigation for any level of patent value is reduced . But this interpretation only rationalizes the observed proportionality if the probability of winning a 24 percent . In drugs and health , the maximum is nearly 30 percent . 5 . Concluding Remarks To study patent litigation , we have linked detailed information from the U . S . patent office to data from the U . S . federal court system , and then constructed a suitable controlled random sample of the population of potential disputants . This approach enables us to give a broad - based , statistical picture of the relationship between various characteristics of patents and their owners and the likelihood that they become involved in legal conflicts . The most important finding is that there is a relationship . It means , first , that although the rate of litigation is low overall , there is wide variation across patents in their exposure to litigation risk . For high value patents and specific types of patentees , the probability can be quite high and this can offset what would otherwise be the R & D incentive provided by patent ownership . That those at ‘high risk’ may be individuals or smaller firms in newer and more dynamic technology areas should be cause for concern , but the fact that they can be identified can help make this risk insurable . Given our evidence that the characteristics of patents are associated with their litigation risk exposure , the next step in assessing these risks and costs is to examine how these characteristics are related to whether suits proceed to actual trial , and the range of outcomes in trials . The construction of a large sample database of costs and how they differ across types of patentees would be a further important step in determining what patentees can expect to pay to enforce their rights . Such data might include the costs of monitoring competitors for possible patent infringements , the cost of negotiating and administering settlements , and the costs of legal services for a range of case types . Economists have studied the strategic behavior of firms using data on pricing , product choice , R & D investment and other decisions . The results here suggest that court records can provide a new and useful challenge suit , relative to an infringement suit , does not itself depend on the value of the patent . 25 source of information about how firms interact . In principle , court data can be linked to firm and industry databases using the names of the litigating parties . Names could be matched across cases , and to information on oppositions within the patent office , to develop a detailed dynamic picture of conflict between specific firms over intellectual property assets . With links to firm data , one could investigate how the differences we find between corporate and individual litigation behavior , and the role of reputation effects , are affected when we control for firm size , financial capacity and the size and diversity of patent portfolios . It would also be interesting to match these data with information on the timing and content of licensing contracts , to examine the role of cross licensing agreements in facilitating pre - trial settlement . Finally , the ability to associate observable characteristics of patents and patentees to litigation risk should be exploited in developing intellectual property insurance . 26 References Aghion , Philippe and Peter Howitt , 1998 , Endogenous Growth Theory . ( Cambridge : MIT Press ) . Bebchuk , Lucian , 1984 , " Litigation and Settlement under Imperfect Information , " RAND Journal of Economics . 15 , 404 - 415 . Business Insurance . June 15 , 1995 . p . 29 . Cohen , Wesley , Richard Nelson and John Walsh , 1999 , " Appropriability Conditions and Why Firms Patent and Why They Do Not in the American Manufacturing Sector , " Mimeo , Carnegie - Mellon . Cooter , Robert and Daniel Rubinfeld , 1989 , " Economic Analysis of Legal Disputes and their Resolution , " Journal of Economic Literature , vol . 27 , 1067 - 97 . Farber , Henry and Michelle White , 1991 , " Medical Malpractice : An Empirical Investigation of the Litigation Process , " RAND Journal of Economics . 22 , ( Summer ) , 199 - 217 . Federal Judicial Center , Federal Court Cases : Integrated Data Base , 1970 - 89 . Ann Arbor , MI : Inter - university Consortium for Political and Social Research . Tapes updated to 1991 . Fournier , G . and T . Zuehlke , 1989 , " Litigation and Settlement : An Empirical Approach , " The Review of Economics and Statistics . 71 , 189 - 95 . Green , Jerry and Suzanne Scotchmer , 1995 , “On the Division of Profit in Sequential Innovation , ” RAND Journal of Economics . 26 , ( Spring ) , 20 - 33 . Hughes , James and Edward Snyder , 1989 , " Policy Analysis of Medical Malpractice Reforms : What Can We Learn from Claims Data ? " Journal of Business and Economic Statistics . 7 , ( October ) . Jaffe , Adam B . , Rebecca Henderson and Manuel Trajtenberg , 1993 , " Geographic Localization of Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations , " Quarterly Journal of Economics . 108 ( 1993 ) , 577 - 598 . Lanjouw , Jean O . , 1992 , The Private Value of Patent Rights : A Dynamic Programming and Game Theoretic Analysis of West German Patent Renewal Data , 1953 - 1988 . Ph . D thesis . London School of Economics . Lanjouw , Jean O . , 1998 , “Patent Value in the Shadow of Infringement : Simulation Estimations of Patent Value , ” The Review of Economic Studies , vol . 65 ( 1998 ) , 671 - 710 . Lanjouw , Jean O . and Josh Lerner , 1996 , “Preliminary Injunctive Relief : Theory and Evidence from Patent Litigation , ” NBER Working paper no . 5689 . Lanjouw , Jean O . , Ariel Pakes and Jonathan Putnam , 1998 , “How to Count Patents and Value Intellectual Property : Uses of Patent Renewal and Application Data , ” The Journal of Industrial Economics , vol . XX ( December ) , pp 405 - 32 . 27 Lanjouw , Jean O . and Mark Schankerman , 1999 , “The Quality of Ideas : Measuring Innovation with Multiple Indicators , ” NBER Working Paper no . 7345 . Lerner , Josh , 1995a , " Patenting in the Shadow of Competitors , " Journal of Law and Economics . 38 , 463 - 96 . Lerner , Josh , 1995b , “The Importance of Trade Secrecy : Evidence from Civil Litigation , ” Working Paper , Harvard University . Lerner , Josh , 1994 , " The Importance of Patent Scope : An Empirical Analysis , " The RAND Journal of Economics . 25 , 319 - 333 . Levin , Richard , Alvin Klevorick , Richard Nelson and Sidney Winter , 1987 , " Appropriating the Returns from Industrial Research and Development , " Brookings Papers on Economic Activity . 783 - 820 . Merges , Robert , 1997 , Patent Law and Policy : Cases and Materials , 2nd Edition ( Charlottesville , PA : MICHIE Law Publishers ) . Merges , Robert and Richard Nelson , 1990 , " On the Complex Economics of Patent Scope , " Columbia Law Review . 90 , 839 - 916 . Pakes , Ariel and Margaret Simpson , 1989 , “Patent Renewal Data , ” Brookings Papers : Microeconomics . 331 - 410 . P’ng , I . P . L . , 1983 , " Strategic Behavior in Suit , Settlement and Trial , " Bell Journal of Economics . 14 , 539 - 550 . Putnam , Jonathan , 1996 , The Value of International Patent Protection . Ph . D . Thesis . Yale University . Samuelson , Pamela , Randall Davis , Mitchell Kapon and J Reichman , 1994 , “A Manifesto Concerning the Legal Protection of Computer Programs , ” Columbia Law Review . 94 , ( December ) , 2308 - 2431 . Schankerman , Mark , 1998 , “How Valuable is Patent Protection : Estimates by Technology Field , ” RAND Journal of Economics . ( Spring ) , 77 - 107 . Scotchmer , Suzanne , 1991 , “Standing on the Shoulders of Giants : Cumulative Research and the Patent Law , ” Journal of Economic Perspectives . 5 ( Winter ) , 29 - 41 . Shavell , Stephen , 1982 , “Suits , Settlement , and Trial : A Theoretical Analysis under Alternative Models for the Allocation of Legal Costs , ” Journal of Legal Studies . 11 , no . 1 ( January ) , 55 - 82 . Siegelman , Peter and Joel Waldfogel , 1996 , “Toward a Taxonomy of Disputes : New Evidence Through the Prism of the Priest / Klein Model , ” Mimeo , Wharton School of Business . Tong , Xuesong and J . Davidson Frame , 1994 , “Measuring National Technological Performance with Patent Claims Data , ” Research Policy , 23 , 133 - 141 . Trajtenberg , Manuel , 1990a , “A Penny for Your Quotes : Patent Citations and the Value of Innovation , ” RAND Journal of Economics . 21 . 28 Trajtenberg , Manuel , 1990b , Economic Analysis of Product Innovation . ( Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press ) . Trajtenberg , Manuel , Rebecca Henderson and Adam Jaffe ( 1997 ) “University versus Corporate Patents : A Window on the Basicness of Innovation , ” Economics of Innovation and New Technology . Vol . 5 , pp . 19 - 50 . 29 Table 1 Litigation Rates and Composition Panel A : Filed Cases per 1 , 000 Patents , 1980 - 1984 By Technology Group and Ownership a , b Total Domestic Foreign Drugs and Health 20 . 1 26 . 6 6 . 5 Chemical 5 . 4 6 . 1 1 . 4 Electronic 9 . 6 12 . 7 3 . 3 Mechanical 11 . 8 20 . 1 3 . 4 Other 15 . 2 23 . 4 9 . 9 Total 10 . 7 16 . 4 3 . 5 Panel B : Composition of Litigation by Technology Group and Ownership By Technology Group Infringements Challenges Unclassified Drugs and Health 63 . 2 10 . 5 26 . 2 Chemical 57 . 0 11 . 5 31 . 5 Electronic 58 . 1 10 . 5 31 . 4 Mechanical 59 . 4 9 . 8 30 . 8 Other 57 . 9 8 . 1 34 . 0 By Ownership Domestic 60 . 7 10 . 1 29 . 2 Foreign 43 . 8 7 . 4 48 . 8 Total 58 . 7 9 . 8 31 . 5 Notes : a The IPC categories included in each of these groups are : Drugs and Health : A61 and A01N ; Chemical : A62 , B31 , C01 - C20 , D - ; Electronic : G01 - G21 , H - ; Mechanical : B21 - B68 not incl . B31 , C21 - C30 , E01 - F40 ; Other : A - not incl . A61 or A01N , B01 - B20 , F41 - F42 , G21 . b Panel A is based on the sample of all filed cases . Panel B deletes cases where the patent owner is listed as both the plaintiff and defendant , which are almost surely misreported . 30 Table 2 Mean Citations and Claims per Patent Domestic Non - Japanese Foreign Japanese Mean : Matched Litigated Matched Litigated Matched Litigated Forward 6 . 3 12 . 0 4 . 8 11 . 5 5 . 8 12 . 0 Citations ( 0 . 16 ) a ( 0 . 24 ) ( 0 . 19 ) ( 0 . 78 ) ( 0 . 32 ) ( 1 . 55 ) Claims 11 . 2 14 . 7 9 . 7 13 . 2 8 . 8 10 . 2 ( 0 . 18 ) ( 0 . 22 ) ( 0 . 23 ) ( 0 . 60 ) ( 0 . 31 ) ( 1 . 41 ) Forward 1 . 04 1 . 57 0 . 84 1 . 88 1 . 20 1 . 61 Cites per ( 0 . 08 ) ( 0 . 07 ) ( 0 . 09 ) ( 0 . 29 ) ( 0 . 19 ) ( 0 . 32 ) Claim b Backward 1 . 21 1 . 01 0 . 98 0 . 90 1 . 10 0 . 79 Cites per ( 0 . 04 ) ( 0 . 03 ) ( 0 . 04 ) ( 0 . 06 ) ( 0 . 07 ) ( 0 . 08 ) Claim Notes : a Standard errors are in parentheses . b The forward citation per claim statistic is calculated using only cohorts 1975 - 77 to minimize truncation . 31 Table 3 Similarity Index for Backward and Forward Citations Backward Citations Forward Citations Matched Litigated Matched Litigated Domestic Owners Self - citations 0 . 57 0 . 62 0 . 58 0 . 67 ( . 019 ) a ( . 014 ) ( . 017 ) ( . 012 ) Citations by others b 0 . 55 0 . 58 0 . 51 0 . 59 ( . 010 ) ( . 008 ) ( . 008 ) ( . 006 ) Foreign Owners Self - citations 0 . 64 0 . 62 0 . 63 0 . 72 ( . 026 ) ( . 041 ) ( . 024 ) ( . 032 ) Citations by others 0 . 57 0 . 60 0 . 54 0 . 62 ( . 014 ) ( . 025 ) ( . 011 ) ( . 017 ) Notes : a Standard errors are in parentheses . b Citations by others includes all backward or forward citations where the owner of the citing or cited patent could not be directly matched to the owner of the patent . Because of entry errors in the original data and format differences , some self - citations are probably included . 32 Table 4 Publicity Effect of Case Filings on Mean Annual Forward Citations Citation Not Yet Litigated Lag Litigated 1 - yr Back 2 - yrs Back 3 - yrs Back 4 - yrs Back ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) 6 0 . 96 ( . 05 ) a 1 . 22 ( . 11 ) 1 . 04 ( . 07 ) 0 . 95 ( . 08 ) 0 . 84 ( . 08 ) 7 0 . 96 ( . 06 ) 1 . 22 ( . 12 ) 1 . 17 ( . 09 ) 1 . 21 ( . 12 ) 0 . 96 ( . 09 ) 8 0 . 90 ( . 06 ) 1 . 15 ( . 17 ) 1 . 14 ( . 11 ) 0 . 90 ( . 08 ) 1 . 08 ( . 10 ) 9 0 . 87 ( . 07 ) 1 . 42 ( . 16 ) 1 . 08 ( . 13 ) 1 . 10 ( . 10 ) 0 . 73 ( . 06 ) 10 0 . 93 ( . 08 ) 1 . 37 ( . 13 ) 1 . 25 ( . 14 ) 0 . 84 ( . 09 ) 1 . 00 ( . 11 ) 11 1 . 22 ( . 11 ) 1 . 03 ( . 21 ) 1 . 24 ( . 19 ) 1 . 10 ( . 17 ) 0 . 89 ( . 10 ) 12 0 . 93 ( . 11 ) 1 . 46 ( . 15 ) 0 . 77 ( . 11 ) 1 . 38 ( . 17 ) 0 . 97 ( . 14 ) 13 1 . 25 ( . 18 ) 0 . 94 ( . 17 ) 0 . 88 ( . 14 ) 0 . 85 ( . 13 ) 0 . 89 ( . 13 ) 14 0 . 72 ( . 17 ) 1 . 20 ( . 16 ) 1 . 09 ( . 19 ) 0 . 84 ( . 11 ) 1 . 03 ( . 16 ) 15 0 . 67 ( . 26 ) 1 . 10 ( . 45 ) 1 . 36 ( . 22 ) 1 . 11 ( . 20 ) 0 . 79 ( . 14 ) Mean b 0 . 94 ( . 04 ) 1 . 18 ( . 07 ) 1 . 10 ( . 05 ) 1 . 03 ( . 05 ) 0 . 95 ( . 04 ) Notes : a Standard errors are in parentheses . b Overall mean numbers of annual citations taken over citation lags 6 through 15 . 33 Table 5 Chi - Square Tests of Differences in the Breadth of Matched and Litigated Patents Mean Number Pooled Data χ ² / df df p - value Matched Litigated Number of 4 - digit IPC sub - classes 6 . 68 3 < 0 . 001 1 . 243 1 . 197 ( . 009 ) a ( . 008 ) By Technology Group Drugs and Health b 1 . 15 2 0 . 315 1 . 081 1 . 052 ( . 018 ) ( . 019 ) Chemicals 2 . 41 3 0 . 065 1 . 327 1 . 365 ( . 032 ) ( . 040 ) Electronics 1 . 31 3 0 . 270 1 . 207 1 . 182 ( . 016 ) ( . 017 ) Mechanical 4 . 48 3 0 . 004 1 . 259 1 . 191 ( . 014 ) ( . 012 ) Other 1 . 30 3 0 . 270 1 . 276 1 . 229 ( . 019 ) ( . 016 ) Notes : a Standard errors are in parentheses . b In Drugs and Health the maximum number of 4 - digit IPC assignments in the sample is three , so the test has two degrees of freedom . 34 Table 6 Probit Estimation for Patent Infringement and Invalidity Suits a , b Infringement Suits Challenge Suits Parameters Sample Marginal Effects Parameters c Sample Marginal Effects ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) Log Claims 0 . 405 * * 0 . 136 * * 0 . 433 * * 0 . 058 * * ( . 030 ) ( . 010 ) ( . 050 ) ( . 007 ) FWD Cites / Claim 0 . 256 * * 0 . 081 * * 0 . 230 * * 0 . 029 * * ( . 019 ) ( . 006 ) ( . 027 ) ( . 003 ) FWD Cites / CLM ^ 2 - 0 . 0083 * * - 0 . 005 * * ( . 0011 ) ( . 001 ) BWD Cites / Claim - 0 . 033 - 0 . 010 - 0 . 043 - 0 . 005 ( . 023 ) ( . 007 ) ( . 040 ) ( . 005 ) BWD Cites / CLM ^ 2 0 . 0012 0 . 003 ( . 0011 ) ( . 002 ) NO4IPC - 0 . 062 * - 0 . 021 * - 0 . 052 - 0 . 007 ( . 036 ) ( . 012 ) ( . 057 ) ( . 008 ) SIMFWD 0 . 278 * * 0 . 093 * * 0 . 129 0 . 017 ( . 087 ) ( . 029 ) ( . 144 ) ( . 019 ) SIMFWD * CORP 0 . 203 * * 0 . 162 * * 0 . 223 0 . 047 * * ( . 103 ) ( . 020 ) ( . 170 ) ( . 013 ) FWDSELF 0 . 674 * * 0 . 226 * * 0 . 585 * * 0 . 078 * * ( . 106 ) ( . 036 ) ( . 165 ) ( . 022 ) BWDSELF - 1 . 015 * * - 0 . 341 * * - 0 . 936 * * - 0 . 125 * * ( . 173 ) ( . 058 ) ( . 307 ) ( . 041 ) DINDOWN - 1 . 419 * * 0 . 103 * * - 2 . 320 * * 0 . 022 ( . 126 ) ( . 024 ) ( . 205 ) ( . 019 ) FINDOWN - 2 . 321 * * - 0 . 214 * * - 2 . 911 * * - 0 . 059 * * ( . 158 ) ( . 024 ) ( . 250 ) ( . 014 ) JINDOWN - 2 . 305 * * - 0 . 195 * * NE NE ( . 349 ) ( . 071 ) DCORPOWN - 1 . 562 * * 0 . 195 * * - 2 . 466 * * 0 . 060 * * ( . 123 ) ( . 016 ) ( . 200 ) ( . 013 ) FCORPOWN - 2 . 321 * * - 0 . 181 * * - 2 . 963 * * - 0 . 050 * * ( . 129 ) ( . 016 ) ( . 209 ) ( . 011 ) JCORPOWN - 2 . 893 * * - 0 . 287 * * - 3 . 510 * * - 0 . 084 * * ( . 156 ) ( . 015 ) ( . 266 ) ( . 008 ) 35 Table 6 Continued Infringement Suits Challenge Suits No . Observations 6151 4227 Log - likelihood - 3506 . 6 - 1222 . 5 Pseudo - R 2 0 . 141 0 . 115 χ 2 Tests ( df ) No Nationality 374 . 7 ( 4 ) : p - value < 0 . 001 66 . 47 ( 3 ) : p - value < 0 . 001 No Corp / Individual 7 . 3 ( 3 ) : p - value = 0 . 062 1 . 7 ( 2 ) : p - value = 0 . 42 Conversion Factors to Estimate Population Marginal Effects d Infringement Suits Challenge Suits Aggregate 0 . 0222 0 . 0096 Drugs & Health 0 . 0633 0 . 0125 Chemicals 0 . 0082 0 . 0048 Electronic 0 . 0158 0 . 0075 Mechanical 0 . 0263 0 . 0114 Notes : a Statistical significance at the 0 . 01 ( 0 . 05 ) level is denoted by * * ( * ) . b Marginal effects are calculated at the population means of the variables . For dummy variables the partial effect is calculated as the increase in the probability of a case filing with a change in the dummy variable from zero to one . See footnote 17 for details . c NE denotes not estimable . d See Appendix 2 for derivations . 37 Table 7 Estimated Litigation Probabilities for Corporate U . S . Patentees a At means + 1 s . d . ln claims + 1 s . d . cites / clm + 1 s . d . both + 2 s . d . ln claims + 2 s . d . cites / clm All Technologies 0 . 7 % 1 . 2 % 1 . 4 % 2 . 4 % 2 . 2 % 2 . 5 % Claims 8 . 5 19 . 4 - - 44 . 4 - Cites / claim 1 . 0 - 2 . 8 - - 4 . 6 Drugs and Health 1 . 8 % 3 . 2 % 4 . 3 % 7 . 4 % 5 . 7 % 8 . 2 % Claims 9 . 0 21 . 0 - - 48 . 5 - Cites / claim 1 . 5 - 4 . 0 - - 6 . 6 Patents in sample with maximum litigation probabilities : Drugs and Health ( 17 Claims , 132 Citations ) : 27 . 6 % Chemicals ( 65 Claims , 164 Citations ) : 3 . 5 % Electronic ( 4 Claims , 48 Citations ) : 9 . 1 % Mechanical ( 2 Claims , 39 Citations ) : 12 . 8 % Note : a The population probabilities are calculated as described in Appendix 2 , using the sample marginal effects in the second column of Table 7 and conversion factors , K , at the end of Table 7 . 37 Appendix 1 . Marginal Effects Calculations and Test of Proportionality Definition and Estimated Covariance Matrix of the Marginal Effects Let m ( ! β ) be the vector of the marginal effects of changes in the independent variables on the population probability of litigation , implied by the coefficient estimates , ! β , and evaluated at the population ( matched sample ) variable means , X . For a representative continuous variable k , the marginal effect is : m k ( ! β ) = φ ( X ' ! β ) ! β k . ( A . 1 ) where φ ( . ) is a standard normal density function . In the case of a variable with linear and quadratic effects , say βκ and β k2 , m k ( ! β ) = Φ ( X ' ! β ) ( ! β k + 2 ! β k2 ) , ( A . 2 ) where Φ ( . ) is a normal distribution function . In the case of a variable with an ownership interaction term , again β k2 , the marginal effect when the ownership dummy variable is one is , m k ( ! β ) = Φ ( X ' ! β ) ( ! β k + ! β k2 ) . ( A . 3 ) There are six discrete variables indicating the six possible ownership types . For a representative discrete variable k , the marginal effect is a change in the dummy variable from zero to one . The probability of litigation when k is zero is taken to be a weighted average of the probability of litigation for each of the other ownership categories . Thus m k ( ! β ) = Φ ( X − ' ! β , k ) - Σ j ≠ k Pr ( j | k = 0 ) Φ ( X − ' ! β , j ) , ( A . 4 ) where X − is the vector of independent variable means but with ownership dummy variable mean values replaced by zeros except for those appropriate to the ownership category indicated by the second argument , which are one . Pr ( j | k = 0 ) is the sample proportion of patents falling in ownership category j , given that they are not in category k . Taking a Taylor ' s expansion around m ( β ) , the estimated variance - covariance matrix of m ( ! β ) is : V ( m ( ! β ) ) = [ ∂ m ( ! β ) / ∂ ! β ] ' V ( ! β ) [ ∂ m ( ! β ) / ∂ ! β ] , ( A . 5 ) where V ( ! β ) is the estimated covariance matrix of the parameters . Chi - Square Test of Proportionality of the Marginal Effects The Chi - square statistic is calculated by minimizing the following statistic with respect to α : χ 2 ( α ) = [ α m ( ! β I ) - m ( ! β II ) ] ' [ α 2 V ( m ( ! β I ) ) + V ( m ( ! β II ) ) ] [ α m ( ! β I ) - m ( ! β II ) ] , ( A . 6 ) where ! β I and ! β II are vectors of parameter estimates from the probit regressions for infringement and invalidity suits , respectively . This two - step procedure makes the test of proportionality conservative because the β parameters are not allowed to adjust to improve the fit under the constraint . 38 Appendix 2 . Deriving Population Litigation Probabilities and Marginal Effects Population Litigation Probabilities We define classes using characteristics with respect to which the sampling was non - random : IPC groups , cohort , infringement suits , and invalidity suits . Let P ( X i ) denote the population probability of litigation for a patent in class i with a vector of other characteristics X i , and let Q ( X i ) be the corresponding probability in our pooled , litigated and matched , sample . P ( X i ) and Q ( X i ) differ from one another because the matched sample was constructed such that the overall litigation probability is fifty percent controlling for technology and cohort . The task is to infer the ( unobserved ) probability P ( X i ) from the estimated value of Q ( X i ) . We begin by determining to what extent the matched sample for a given class needs to be inflated in order to have it reflect the number of unlitigated patents in that class in the population . Let Q and P represent the aggregate sample and population litigation probabilities for a given class . Q = L / ( L + M s ) ( A . 7 ) where L and M s denote the number of litigated and unlitigated ( matched ) patents in the sample ( the latter contains only one or two litigated patents ) . The population probability is P = L / ( L + M p ) . ( A . 8 ) The number of litigated patents , L , is the same in both cases since the sample contains all ( reported ) litigated patents , and M p is the number of unlitigated patents in the class in the population . Using ( A . 7 ) and ( A . 8 ) , we can solve for the size of M p relative to M s . This yields M p = { ( 1 - P ) Q / ( 1 - Q ) P } M s ≡ KM s . ( A . 9 ) Since , within a class , the matched patents are random draws , the distribution of characteristics X in the matched sample is the same as that in the population . Thus , the number of unlitigated patents with characteristics X i in the population , M p ( X i ) , is , in expectation , greater than that in the sample by the same inflation factor , K , defined above and so is equal to KM s ( X i ) . Letting L ( X i ) be the number of litigated patents with characteristics X i , we can write the expected population probability of litigation for such patents as P ( X i ) = L ( X i ) / [ L ( X i ) + KM s ( X i ) ] . ( A . 10 ) Similarly , Q ( X i ) = L ( X i ) / [ L ( X i ) + M s ( X i ) ] . Solving for M s and substituting into ( A . 10 ) , we get P ( X i ) = { 1 + [ ( 1 - Q ( X i ) ) / Q ( X i ) ] K } - 1 ( A . 11 ) Population Marginal Effects For each characteristic X k , the population marginal effect is ∂ P ( X i ) / ∂ X ki = [ dP ( X i ) / dQ ( X i ) ] ∂ Q ( X i ) / ∂ X ki . ( A . 12 ) The last term in ( A . 12 ) is the sample marginal effect computed from the probit regression . Using ( A . 11 ) , the term in square brackets is dP ( X i ) / dQ ( X i ) = K / [ Q ( X i ) { 1 + [ ( 1 - Q ( X i ) ) / Q ( X i ) ] K } ] 2 ( A . 13 ) 39 Measuring Q ( X i ) by the overall sample probability of litigation in the class , Q , and noting that [ ( 1 - Q ) / Q ] K = ( 1 - P ) / P > > 1 , dP ( X i ) / dQ ( X i ) ≅ 1 / K ( 1 - Q ) 2 ( A . 14 ) We measure P for each class as follows : For the denominator , we take the total number of patents in the class during 1980 - 84 . In the numerator we must adjust for underreporting of cases ( which we assume to be 25 % , as before ) and for truncation . To adjust for truncation , we use the 1975 - 77 cohorts to determine the percentage of first filings that occur within nine years ( as a midpoint in a 7 - 11 year truncation length ) . We do this for IPC groups , infringement and challenge suits . Separate classes defined by cohort are not considered here because our maintained assumption is that the model of litigation is constant across cohorts , rendering non - systematic sampling in this dimension unimportant . Results are at the bottom of Table 6 . Because the derivative in ( A . 14 ) is the same for all X k , for a given class of patents , all sample marginal effects in Table 6 are adjusted by the same factor to convert them to population marginals , maintaining their relative magnitudes .