Cytokinesis in Metazoa and Fungi Michael Glotzer Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology , University of Chicago , Chicago , Illinois 60637 Correspondence : mglotzer @ uchicago . edu SUMMARY Cell division—cytokinesis—involves large - scale rearrangements of the entire cell . Primarily driven by cytoskeletal proteins , cytokinesis also depends on topological rearrangements of the plasma membrane , which are coordinated with nuclear division in both space and time . Despite the fundamental nature of the process , different types of eukaryotic cells show vari - ations in both the structural mechanisms of cytokinesis and the regulatory controls . In animal cells and fungi , a contractile actomyosin - based structure plays a central , albeit ﬂexible , role . Here , the underlying molecular mechanisms are summarized and integrated and common themes are highlighted . Outline 1 Introduction 2 Cellular structures that orchestrate cytokinesis 3 Spatiotemporal control—Introduction 4 Contractile ring assembly and constriction 5 Reconstitution of the contractile apparatus 6 Abscission 7 Context dependence of cytokinetic mechanisms 8 Conclusion References Editors : Thomas D . Pollard and Robert D . Goldman Additional Perspectives on The Cytoskeleton available at www . cshperspectives . org Copyright # 2016 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press ; all rights reserved Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a022343 1 on September 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from 1 INTRODUCTION Cell multiplication requires replication and segregation of the genome and partitioning of the cell contents into two daughter cells through cytokinesis . For this to result in viable , genetically identical daughter cells , the plane of cell division needs to be coordinated with the position of the mitotic spindle . This can be accomplished by the mi - totic spindle directing the position of the division plane or by positioning the mitotic spindle with respect to a previ - ously established division plane . Once positioned , the bio - chemical or structural mark that deﬁnes the division plane must give rise to a physical barrier that subdivides the mother cell . The barrier can be created by vesicle fusion and / or constriction of a contractile apparatus that draws in the plasma membrane . Finally , the membrane that serves as the barrier between the cells needs to be fully separated— a distinct process termed abscission . Although the above account constitutes a minimal description of cell division , in some cell types the process is substantially modiﬁed . For example , cytokinesis can be coupled with growth to maintain cell size , the division plane can be coordinated with the asymmetric segrega - tion of cortical or cytoplasmic factors , the process of cytokinesis can be completely suppressed as in a syncytial division , or just the ﬁnal step can be suppressed , generating daughter cells that remain connected but that function autonomously . Cytokinesis is less well - conserved than nuclear division among eukaryotes . The core molecules that mediate cell cycle progression and nuclear division can be recognized throughout eukaryotes ; however , the molecules that facili - tate cytokinesis vary among the eukaryote lineages . Mem - bers of the opisthokonta clade , including metazoa and fungi ( Adl et al . 2012 ) , contain both ﬁlamentous ( F - ) actin and myosin II that assemble into a contractile ring that drives cell division . However , myosin II is absent from many other eukaryotes , including plants , ciliates , and algae ( Richards and Cavalier - Smith 2005 ; Sebe´ - Pedro´s et al . 2014 ) . Cytokinetic mechanisms in opisthokonts , as exem - pliﬁed by metazoans , and budding and ﬁssion yeast are reviewed . As each step in the process of cytokinesis is dis - cussed , the commonalities and differences in cytokinetic mechanisms in animal cells and fungi will be highlighted . 2 CELLULAR STRUCTURES THAT ORCHESTRATE CYTOKINESIS Cytokinesis involves a large - scale reorganization of the contents of the cell . A reorganization of this scale ne - cessitates machinery that can induce cellular - scale rear - rangements . The principle driving force for cytokinesis in yeast and metazoa is the actomyosin - based contractile ring . Microtubules play a regulatory role in positioning of the division plane and facilitate the abscission step of cytokinesis . 2 . 1 Contractile Ring Pioneering analyses in sea urchin embryos showed that the contractile ring contains actin ﬁlaments closely apposed to the plasma membrane and aligned circumferentially along the cell equator ( Schroeder 1972 ) . In earlyembryonic divisions , the sea urchin contractile ring is (cid:2) 8 - m m wide and projects (cid:2) 0 . 2 m m into the cytoplasm . In these cells , the ring width and thickness is fairly constant during constriction , implying that signiﬁcant disassembly of actin ﬁlaments occurs while the ring constricts . Individual ﬁla - ments are relatively short , (cid:2) 0 . 25 m m . Follow - up studies showed the presence of myosin , some assembled into mini - ﬁlaments , located in the furrow region and associated with actin ﬁlaments of mixed polarity ( Fujiwara and Pollard 1976 ; Mabuchi and Okuno 1977 ; Sanger and Sanger 1980 ; Yumura et al . 1984 ; Maupin and Pollard 1986 ) . Many of these essential conclusions have been conﬁrmed by live - cell imaging with ﬂuorescently labeled actin and myosin in diverse animal species and fungi ( Bi et al . 1998 ; Bezanilla et al . 2000 ; Yumura 2001 ; Murthy and Wadsworth 2005 ) . 2 . 2 Accessory Factors of the Contractile Ring The components of the contractile ring have been most thoroughly inventoried in the ﬁssion yeast Schizosacchar - omyces pombe . The major components enriched in the ﬁssion yeast contractile ring are actin , myosin II and its essential and regulatory light chains , the anillin - related protein Mid1 , the F - BAR protein Cdc15 , the formin Cdc12 , the actin - bundling protein a - actinin Ain1 , the ac - tin - stabilizing protein tropomyosin Cdc8 , and the IQGAP Rng2 ( Wu and Pollard 2005 ) . Orthologs of most of these proteins also accumulate in contractile rings in metazoan cells , with the exception of the F - BAR protein Cdc15 . The recruitment mechanisms for many regulatory proteins are reasonably well understood and will be dis - cussed below . In contrast , the mechanisms that control the accumulation of speciﬁc actin - binding proteins to the contractile ring as compared with other actin - contain - ing structures in the cell are less well understood . Com - petition between various actin - binding proteins for binding to particular classes of ﬁlaments contributes to this sorting process ( Skau and Kovar 2010 ) . For example , ﬁmbrin and tropomyosin mutually antagonize each other’s binding to endocytic patches and the contractile ring , respectively . M . Glotzer 2 Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a022343 on September 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from 2 . 3 Accessory Structures in Fission and Budding Yeast Ultrastructural analysis of the S . pombe contractile ring revealed an arrangement of actin ﬁlaments similar to that of animal cells , albeit at a smaller scale ( Kamasaki et al . 2007 ) . In the mature ring , the actin ﬁlaments average (cid:2) 600 nm in length and show interdigitation . Live - imaging studies with ﬂuorescent proteins revealed that the contrac - tile ring assembles from a series of cortical nodes that con - tain myosin motors and simultaneously nucleate actin assembly ( Vavylonis et al . 2008 ) . These nodes assemble into rings by means of a pathway that will be discussed in detail below . Ultrastructural studies in budding yeast revealed a strik - ingly ordered set of 10 - nm ﬁlaments tightly associated with the plasma membrane and restricted to the bud neck ( Byers and Goetsch 1976 ) . Subsequent analysis revealed that these ﬁlaments are formed by a class of protein called septins ( Haarer and Pringle 1987 ) . Multimeric septin complexes constitute the building blocks of these ﬁlaments ( Sirajud - din et al . 2007 ) . These heteromultimers assemble longitu - dinally and pair through the carboxy - terminal coiled - coil domains , ultimately forming paired , antiparallel ﬁlaments . Despite being highly ordered , the overall arrangements of septin ﬁlaments undergo dynamic rearrangement during the cell cycle , being primarily aligned with the axis of the bud neck early in the cell cycle and , later , aligning circum - ferentially after a single septin ring splits into two rings just before the onset of cytokinesis ( Demay et al . 2011 ) . How - ever , septin rings are not contractile ; instead , budding yeast assemble an actomyosin contractile ring between the split septin rings . Yeast cells are surrounded by a rigid cell wall ; therefore , cytokinesis must be tightly coupled with remodeling the old cell wall and assembly of a new wall or septum . In budding yeast , the actomyosin - based ring and exocytic deposition of septal material constitute parallel pathways for narrowing the bud neck , either of which can support successful cytokinesis ( Vallen et al . 2000 ) . 2 . 4 Anaphase Spindle In animal cells , the anaphase spindle plays a central role in cytokinetic processes . The anaphase spindle consists primarily of astral arrays of dynamic microtubules and bundled , nonkinetochore , antiparallel spindle microtu - bules , forming the central spindle . In addition , antiparallel astral rays can sometimes interact , allowing the formation of midzone - like structures in the cell periphery ( Su et al . 2014 ) . As will be explained below , the central spindle partici - pates in most steps of cytokinesis . It facilitates division - plane positioning , RhoA activation , assembly of the mid - body , and ﬁnally abscission , in which the plasma mem - brane is abscised to generate two separate daughter cells ( for a review , see White and Glotzer 2012 ) . An assortment of microtubule - associated proteins ( MAPs ) and kinesin motor proteins mediates bundling of the antiparallel , central spindle microtubules ( reviewed by Glotzer 2009 ) . Prominent among these microtubule regulators is the centralspindlin complex . Centralspindlin is a heterotetrameric complex consisting of a dimer of the kinesin - 6 MKLP1 ( or its orthologs [ Caenorhabditis elegans ZEN – 4 , Drosophila melanogaster Pavarotti ; MKLP1 here - after ] ) stably bound to a dimer of Cyk4 / MgcRacGAP ( or its orthologs C . e . CYK - 4 , D . m . RacGAP50C / Tumbleweed ; Cyk4 hereafter ) ( Mishima et al . 2002 ) . Another important protein in the spindle midzone is the MAP Prc1 , which preferentially binds to antiparallel microtubules ( Jiang et al . 1998 ; Subramanian et al . 2010 ) . In animal cells , Prc1 complexes with kinesin - 4 and concentrates at mi - crotubule plus ends , where it facilitates bundling of anti - parallel microtubules ( Subramanian et al . 2013 ) . Prc1 is evolutionarily ancient , being found in diverse eukaryotes , including metazoa , yeast , and plants . In contrast , central - spindlin is restricted to metazoans ( Fre´de´ric et al . 2013 ; M Glotzer , unpubl . ) . The chromosome passenger complex is another prom - inent component of the central spindle . This four - protein complex regulates numerous mitotic events by spatially restricting the localization of its catalytic subunit aurora B ( Ruchaud et al . 2007 ) . During mitosis , the complex lo - calizes at kinetochores and , during anaphase , it localizes to both the spindle midzone and the equatorial cortex . 3 SPATIOTEMPORAL CONTROL— INTRODUCTION Cytokinesis is usually coupled to cell cycle progression . However , the degree to which the two processes are coupled varies in different cell types , as do the underlying mecha - nisms . In metazoan cells , cytokinesis is an anaphase event ; cytokinetic events are inhibited until the metaphase - to - anaphase transition , whereas , in yeasts , some aspects of division - plane positioning begin soon after the previous division . Diverse mechanisms contribute to division - plane po - sitioning in different organisms ( Oliferenko et al . 2009 ) . However , these processes can be conceptually uniﬁed by considering division - plane positioning to be a form of cell polarization wherein a deﬁned domain of the cell ac - quires special characteristics . Similarly , during cytokinesis , the division plane , frequently the equator , acquires charac - teristics distinct from the remainder of the cell . This per - Cytokinesis in Metazoa and Fungi Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a022343 3 on September 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from spective is applicable to essentially all dividing cells , despite the existence of divergent mechanisms . In some cell types , cytokinesis is inextricably coupled to cell polarization . Ad - ditionally , the molecular mechanisms that mediate certain types of cell polarization and cytokinesis overlap , both be - ing highly dependent on Rho - family GTPases . There are a number of pathways by which the cell cortex becomes polarized during cytokinesis . In animal cells , this polarization is manifested by the local activation of the small GTPase RhoA , which is directly involved in assembly of the cleavage furrow . Local RhoA activation creates a membrane - associated domain that favors actin polymeri - zation and myosin activation , ultimately building a con - tractile ring . In ﬁssion yeast , the initial polarization is manifested by the accumulation of a set of relatively stable protein - based nodes in the equatorial cortex ( Wu et al . 2006 ) . In budding yeast , the division plane is coincident with the site of bud formation , which is triggered by the local activation of the conserved Rho - family GTPase Cdc42 . In the following sections , each of these cases will be discussed in detail . 3 . 1 Temporal Control in Metazoa Most metazoan cells round up during mitosis , thereby al - tering cell – substrate and cell – cell associations . A number of mechanisms cooperate to induce this cell rounding , in - cluding an increase in osmotic pressure that exerts force against a uniformly contractile actomyosin cortex ( Stewart et al . 2011 ) induced by a modest activation of RhoA ( Mad - dox and Burridge 2003 ; Matthews et al . 2012 ) . During mitosis , the cyclin - dependent kinase Cdk1 – cyclin - B phos - phorylates centralspindlin , inhibiting its association with the spindle ( Mishima et al . 2004 ) , and Ect2 , inhibiting its association with both the plasma membrane and central - spindlin ( Yu¨ce et al . 2005 ; Su et al . 2011 ) . Similarly , inhib - itory phosphorylation by Cdk1 and the polo - like kinase Plk1 on PRC1 limits PRC1 localization during the cell cycle ( Zhu et al . 2006 ; Hu et al . 2012 ) . PRC1 shows multiple modes of microtubule binding , depending on its interac - tion partners in the midzone , notably Kif4 ( Subramanian et al . 2013 ) . Cytokinetic events , per se , do not commence until the metaphase - to - anaphase transition , when the anaphase - promoting complex / cyclosome ( APC / C ) is activated , trig - gering destruction of cyclin B and inactivation of Cdk1 . Removal of inhibitory mitotic phosphorylations activates cytokinetic regulators , including centralspindlin . Activa - tion of RhoA during anaphase also requires activating phosphorylations , including phosphorylation of the cen - tralspindlin subunit Cyk4 by Plk1 . Phospho - Cyk4 binds to the Rho GDP – GTP exchange factor ( GEF ) Ect2 ( Burkard et al . 2009 ; Wolfe et al . 2009 ) , relieving its autoinhibition . 3 . 2 Spindle - Dependent Division - Plane Positioning in Metazoa The anaphase spindle is the primary determinant of posi - tioningofthecleavagefurrow ( Rappaport1986 ) . Itcontains bundledantiparallelmicrotubulesformingthespindlemid - zone and dynamic spindle pole – anchored astral microtu - bules . These structures appear to function coordinately , the dominant structure depending on the cell type in ques - tion ( Fig . 1A ) . Occasionally , spindle - independent mecha - nisms inﬂuence the position of the division plane . The centralspindlin complex is required for division - plane speciﬁcation in metazoan cells . This complex local - izes prominently to the spindle midzone , which lies at var - iable distances from the cell membrane , raising the question of how it impacts events on the membrane when they are well separated . Indeed , a second , smaller pool of central - spindlin that localizesto the plasma membrane has recently been shown to play a role ( Basant et al . 2015 ) . The Cyk4 subunit of centralspindlin contains a weak membrane - binding domain ( Lekomtsev et al . 2012 ) . During anaphase , centralspindlin undergoes regulated oligomerization . Olig - omerization promotes the microtubule association of centralspindlin ( Hutterer et al . 2009 ) and membrane locali - zation ( Basantetal . 2015 ) throughdistinctdomains . Central - spindlin activates the RhoGEF Ect2 , which activates RhoA at the plasma membrane ; thus , these interactions could direct positioningofthedivisionplane ( Fig . 1B , C ) ( Yu¨ceetal . 2005 ; Burkard et al . 2009 ; Zhang and Glotzer 2015 ) . The equatorial localization of centralspindlin is pro - posed to be under control of the chromosome passenger complex that accumulates at the site of the presumptive furrow ( Cooke et al . 1987 ; Basant et al . 2015 ) . Aurora B kinase—the catalytic subunit of this complex—promotes centralspindlin oligomerization ( Douglas et al . 2010 ) . The mechanism of Aurora B localization is incompletely under - stood , although the kinesins of the Kif20 family ( also called MKLP2 ) and Kif4 are required in vertebrate systems ( Gru - neberg et al . 2004 ; Nguyen et al . 2014 ) . Although the mem - brane - bound pool of centralspindlin is important when the midzone and cortex are far apart , in cells in which they are closer , or once the furrow has begun to ingress , in larger cells , the midzone pool of centralspindlin and associated ECT - 2 likely sustain furrow ingression ( Yu¨ce et al . 2005 ; Lekomtsev et al . 2012 ) . 3 . 3 Spindle - Independent Positioning of the Division Plane in Metazoa Although the centralspindlin complex promotes furrow formation , in a number of cell types furrow formation can occur when this complex is disrupted , aurora B is in - hibited , or the spindle midzone is disrupted . For example , M . Glotzer 4 Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a022343 on September 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from in C . elegans embryos , a second , NOP - 1 - dependent path - way for RhoA activation can promote furrow formation in centralspindlin - defective embryos ( Raich et al . 1998 ; Tse et al . 2012 ) . NOP - 1 primarily promotes contractility and polarization of the fertilized zygote and secondarily induc - es global activation of RhoA and its effectors during cyto - kinesis . Cultured mammalian cells depleted of the kinesin - 6 subunit of centralspindlin can also form furrows ( Yu¨ce et al . 2005 ) . In both these cases , the polarized accumulation of RhoA appears to result from local inhibition by the astral microtubules of the anaphase spindle ( Murthy and Wads - worth 2008 ; Tse et al . 2012 ) . The inhibitory mechanism is not fully understood ; however , one component involves local inhibition of anillin function by astral microtubules ( Piekny and Glotzer 2008 ; Tse et al . 2011 ) . These additional mechanisms confer robustness and could be particularly relevant in cleaving embryonic blastomeres . Recently , the use of optogenetic tools in the context of cytokinesis revealed that spatial and temporal control of cytokinesis is largely achieved through the control of RhoA activation . Creation of a zone of active RhoA can induce furrow formation in cells at various cell cycle stages and irrespective of the position of the spindle ( Wagner and Glotzer 2016 ) . In certain animal cells , furrow formation is independent of spindle microtubules . Drosophila pole cells , which ultimately become germ cells , are formed by a bud - ding - like process that encapsulates the germ cell nucleus ( Cinalli and Lehmann 2013 ) . This contractility depends on RhoA and its effectors , as well as on a protein called germ cell - less . An analogous process can be elicited in dividing Drosophila neuroblasts . Depolymerization of the spindle microtubules eliminates the conventional furrow , but a secondary furrow that requires cortical polarity proteins can occur in these cells at the onset of anaphase ( Cabernard et al . 2010 ) . 3 . 4 Temporal Control of Cytokinesis in Fission Yeast In S . pombe , contractile ring assembly begins earlier in the cell cycle than in metazoan cells . The contractile ring as - sembles from equatorially positioned , cortically associated , cytokinetic nodes ( large , membrane - associated multimo - RhoA GEF ECT - 2 Myosin II F - Actin RhoA GAP RGA - 3 / 4 Anillin CYK - 4 ( centralspindlin complex ) 14 - 3 - 3 Aurora B ( chromosome passenger complex ) Rho kinase ( ROCK ) Plk1 RhoA•GDP RhoA(cid:129)GTP Formin and profilin Contractile ring assembly and constriction Aurora B Centralspindlin / ECT - 2 RhoA Actin / myosin A B C Figure 1 . Cytokinesis in metazoa . ( A ) Overview of the mechanism of division - plane positioning . Furrow position is determined by the position of the mitotic spindle . Positive signals from the spindle midzone and bundled astral microtubules cooperatewith inhibitorysignals from dynamic astral microtubulesto position the division plane . ( B ) Pathway that induces accumulation of contractile ring components . Components conserved between metazoa and yeast arehighlightedinblue . ( C ) Spatial organizationoftheactivatorsofcontractile ring components andschematic depicting the contractile ring assembled from short actin ﬁlaments . GAP , GTPase - activating protein ; GEF , GDP – GTP exchange factor . Cytokinesis in Metazoa and Fungi Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a022343 5 on September 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from lecular complexes ) . Cytokinetic nodes are derived from the fusion , during G 2 phase , of two classes of interphase nodes that differ in protein composition , subcellular position , and mobility ( Akamatsu et al . 2014 ) . Components of the contractile ring join one of the two classes of cortical nodes at different times throughout the cell cycle ( see below ) . Following association with class 1 nodes shortly after divi - sion , the anillin ortholog Mid1 ultimately concentrates in the equatorially localized cytokinetic nodes in G 2 ( Akamat - su et al . 2014 ) . Myosin II is also recruited to these nodes before spindle assembly , and other factors , including a nu - cleator of actin ﬁlaments , are recruited during M phase ( Wu et al . 2003 ) . Ring constriction begins (cid:2) 25 min after assembly of a complete contractile ring , which is (cid:2) 10 min after the spindle has fully elongated . A signaling cascade called the septation initiation net - work ( SIN ) regulates both classes of interphase nodes and maturation of the contractile ring . The SIN includes a GTPase , scaffold proteins , and kinases from both the Ste20 and Ndr kinase families ( see Simanis 2015 for re - view ) . This pathway becomes activated during anaphase and localizes prominently at spindle pole bodies ( SPBs ) ( some components accumulate speciﬁcally on one of the two SPBs ) ; the most - downstream components—the Ndr kinase Sid2 and its associated activating subunit Mob1— localize to the contractile ring . Mutations in SIN pathway components prevent com - plete ring assembly ( Hachet and Simanis 2008 ) , and the SIN regulates several contractile ring components . SIN ac - tivation promotes disassembly of type 1 nodes and matu - ration of type 2 nodes ( Pu et al . 2014 ) . The SIN also regulates contractile ring components , including the for - min Cdc12 and the F - BAR protein Cdc15 . Cdc15 regula - tion by the SIN is likely indirect , as Cdc15 is activated by dephosphorylation . Indeed , the SIN activates the phospha - tase Clp1 , which dephosphorylates Cdc15 ( Roberts - Gal - braith et al . 2010 ) . Dephosphorylation of Cdc15 allows its oligomerization , its association with the membrane , and allows it to interact with its binding partner Cdc12 ( Fig . 2 ) ( Roberts - Galbraith et al . 2010 ) . Not only is the SIN required for maturation of the con - tractile ring , its hyperactivation can induce contractile ring assembly and constriction at inappropriate times . Direct activation of the SIN ( Schmidt et al . 1997 ) , or its indirect activation by means of polo kinase Plo1 overexpression ( Cullen et al . 2000 ; Tanaka et al . 2001 ) , induces assembly of contractile rings and septa at various stages of the cell cycle . More downstream , overexpression of a truncated Cdc12 formin is also sufﬁcient to induce ring assembly in interphase ( Yonetani and Chang 2010 ) . Because SINactiva - tionpromotesforminactivation ( Bohnert etal . 2013 ) , these perturbations might share a common mechanistic basis . Cdc15 ( F - Bar ) Myo2 ( myosin II ) F - actin Formin Cdc 12 and profilin Contractile ring assembly and constriction Plo1 ( Plk1 ortholog ) Phospho - Cdc15 Clp1 ( phosphatase ) SIN ( septationinitiationnetwork ) Mid1 ( anillin ) Cytokineticnodes Plasmamembranebinding Cell wall remodeling Septal materials Actin filaments Mid1 / Myo2 / formin nodes A B C Figure 2 . Cytokinesis in the ﬁssion yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe . ( A ) Overview of the mechanism of division - plane positioning . The contractile ring assembles at a site that is determined by the position of the nucleus in G 2 phase . Interphase microtubules serve to position the nucleus near the cell center . ( B ) Pathway that induces accu - mulation of components of the contractile ring . Components conserved between yeast and metazoa are highlighted in blue . ( C ) Schematic depicting the assembly of an actomyosin - based contractile ring from a broad band of cytokinetic nodes that progressively align by means of the so - called search – capture – pull – release mechanism . Note also the relationship between the ingressing contractile ring and the required remodeling of the cell wall materials through septum deposition . M . Glotzer 6 Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a022343 on September 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from 3 . 5 Contractile Ring Positioning in Fission Yeast In ﬁssion yeast , as in metazoan cells , multiple pathways cooperate to position the division plane . These pathways for division - plane positioning converge on Mid1 , an anil - lin - like scaffold protein . Deletion of Mid1 , although not lethal , causes severe defects in ring positioning and as - sembly ( Paoletti and Chang 2000 ) . Mid1 has a cryptic C2 domain , a pleckstrin - homology ( PH ) domain , and an am - phipathic helix that permits it to associate directly with the membrane ( Sun et al . 2015 ) . Its membrane localization is regulated by several pathways ( Almonacid et al . 2009 ; Lee and Wu 2012 ) . One pathway involves regulated export of Mid1 from the nucleus ( Fig . 2A ) , promoting membrane association in the vicinity of the nucleus ( Celton - Morizur et al . 2004 ; Lee and Wu 2012 ) ; an additional regulatory pathway involves the kinase Pom1 , which regulates cell po - larity and prevents Mid1 accumulation at cell tips ( Celton - Morizur et al . 2006 ; Padte et al . 2006 ) . A third pathway that controls Mid1 localization involves cortical nodes of proteins that accumulate during interphase . Two types of nodes accumulate during interphase in wild - type cells ( Akamatsu et al . 2014 ) . Type 1 nodes coordinate growth and the cell cycle ( Moseley et al . 2009 ) . These nodes are nucleated by the cell cycle – regulating kinase Cdr2 and recruit both Mid1 and myosin II . Type 2 nodes contain the adaptor protein Blt1 and a RhoGEF called RhoGEF2 ( Moseley et al . 2009 ; Guzman - Vendrell et al . 2013 ) . Type 1 nodes accumulate in the cell center , whereas type 2 nodes are more mobile . These two types of nodes fuse in late G 2 in the cell center , and some type 1 node components dissipate from these hybrid , cytokinetic nodes during M phase ( Fig . 2C ) ( Guzman - Vendrell et al . 2013 ) . Cytokinetic nodes , loaded with approximately 20 to 40 molecules of Mid2 and myosin II , recruit a small number of Cdc12 formin dimers , approximately 20 molecules of the F - BAR protein Cdc15 , and other ring components ( Wu and Pollard 2005 ; Laporte et al . 2011 ) . These nodes then undergo a well - characterized ring assembly process that will be discussed below ( Vavylonis et al . 2008 ) . Mid1 likely induces local concentration of contractile ring components , as artiﬁcial targeting of several ring components to nodes can largely restore cytokinesis in mid1 mutant cells ( Tao et al . 2014 ) . This is likely to reﬂect a conserved function of the anillin family of scaffold proteins . Despite their central role in cytokinesis , neither type of node appears essential for viability . Deletion of node com - ponents Cdr2 , Blt1 , and Gef2 , either alone or in some pair - wise combinations , delays , but does not prevent , contractile ring assembly ( Almonacid et al . 2009 ; Moseley et al . 2009 ; Akamatsu et al . 2014 ; Goss et al . 2014 ) . Contractile ring positioning in these cells is sensitive to perturbations that would otherwise have mild effects . This robustness could be due to the presence of additional cytokinetic regulators in the nodes , notably the nonessential RhoGEF Gef2 ( Ye et al . 2012 ; Guzman - Vendrell et al . 2013 ) . These results indicate that both types of nodes play a central role in ring assembly and make the process rapid , properly timed and robust to perturbations . However , the relatively mild phenotypes of mutants in both types of nodes suggest the existence of other mechanisms for contractile ring assembly . Consistent with this model , contractile ring assembly in the related ﬁssion yeast Schizosaccharomyces japonicus does not require Mid1 ( Gu et al . 2015 ) . When Mid1 is absent , myosin II does not detectably accumulate on cortical nodes during interphase—it ﬁrst appears in anaphase . Therefore a robust , Mid1 - independent pathway exists in this species ; the aforementioned kinase Pom1 plays a key role in ring positioning ( Gu et al . 2015 ) . 3 . 6 Bud Site Selection in Budding Yeast The spatial control of cytokinesis in budding yeast is di - rectly coupled to bud site selection , as cell division occurs at the bud neck ( Fig . 3A ) . During mitosis and anaphase , one of the two spindle poles , usually the older one , is drawn through the bud neck to coordinate mitosis with the plane of cell division . Despite the fact that the spindle moves relative to the plane of cell division rather than the converse in metazoa , conceptual commonalities exist between the process of bud site selection in yeast and division - plane positioning in metazoan cells . Both processes involve local accumulation of an activated Rho - family GTPase , which in yeast budding is Cdc42 ( see Bi and Park 2012 for review ) . This is accomplished by the cell cycle – regulated activation and localization of a GEF , which in yeast is Cdc24 . Local accumulation of Cdc42 at a cortical site in G 1 phase pro - motes assembly of septin rings at the bud neck , through adaptor proteins . Ultimately , septin ﬁlaments template as - sembly of the contractile ring by recruiting speciﬁc factors at deﬁned cell cycle stages . 3 . 7 Temporal Control of Cytokinesis in Budding Yeast Contractile ring assembly appearsto initiate early in the cell cycle in budding yeast , as myosin II accumulates at the bud neck during G 1 phase . However , two sequential and inde - pendent pathways promote myosin accumulation to this site : One pathway is active during G 1 , and the second is active during anaphase ; only the latter is required for cyto - kinesis ( Fang et al . 2010 ) . Other important events in ring assembly are temporally regulated by a polo kinase ortho - log , Cdc5 . Cdc5 promotes accumulation of the RhoGEF Cytokinesis in Metazoa and Fungi Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a022343 7 on September 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from Tus1 at the bud neck shortly after anaphase ( Yoshida et al . 2006 ) . Tus1 , in turn , activates Rho1 , inducing local recruit - ment of the formin Bni1 , which nucleates assembly of the actin ﬁlaments in the contractile ring ( Fig . 3B , C ) . 3 . 8 Spatiotemporal Regulation—Summary Although diverse , the examples above do not encompass all the known mechanisms for division - plane positioning in eukaryotic cells . Plant cell cytokinesis diverges signiﬁcantly , and other organisms , such as protozoa , divide through distinct mechanisms ( Farr and Gull 2012 ) . However , de - spite this diversity , a number of themes recur . First , redun - dant pathways ensure proper positioning in many cells . Second , lipid binding , multiprotein scaffolds recruit the structural proteins of the contractile ring . Third , polo - like kinases play a major role in promoting cytokinetic events , although their substrates vary between organisms . Fourth , there is an inverse correlation between the degree of order of the structure that templates the division plane and the degree of ﬂexibility in the division - plane positioning mechanism . For example , the septin ring that organizes the contractile ring of budding yeast is highly ordered and stable at the bud neck , and this is the only site at which cytokinesis occurs in this organism . The nodes and nucleus of ﬁssion yeast that position the division plane are moder - ately mobile and allow the division plane to be positioned relative to the position of the cell nucleus . In animal cells , division - plane positioning is highly plastic and allows re - positioning after its initial assembly ( Rappaport 1985 ) . It lacks large structures or stable aggregates , yet each compo - nent of the multiprotein complex that positions the con - tractile ring has membrane - binding motifs , suggesting cooperative membrane association . 4 CONTRACTILE RING ASSEMBLY AND CONSTRICTION Once the upstream pathways induce accumulation of con - tractile ring components at the equatorial cortex , they then assemble into a ring that constricts and deforms the over - lying plasma membrane . This process involves assembly of bundles of actomyosin , coordinated constriction , and ﬁla - ment disassembly , and dynamic , yet force - generating , as - sociation of contractile bundles with the membrane . Many of the key proteins—cytoplasmic myosin , actin , formin , actin - bundlers , the actin - depolymerizing factor coﬁlin , and anillin—accumulate on contractile rings in metazoa and budding and ﬁssion yeast , suggesting that the under - lying assembly process is generally conserved . However , they are not yet fully understood . 4 . 1 The Role of RhoA and Its Effectors in Metazoa Activated Ect2 generates a metastable cortical zone of active RhoA , likely through positive feedback ( Zhang and Glotzer 2015 ) . Active RhoA directly stimulates the Rho kinase ROCK , which induces myosin light chain phosphorylation , ﬁlament assembly , and motor activation ( Kosako et al . 2000 ) . RhoA also directly activates formins , which nucleate assembly of unbranched actin ﬁlaments ( Otomo et al . 2005 ; Watanabe et al . 2008 , 2013 ) . RhoA recruits anillin , Septal materials Septin filaments Rho1•GTP Rho1(cid:129)GTP RhoA GEF Tus1 Myo1 ( myosin II ) F - Actin Bni 1 ( formin ) and profilin RhoA GAP L rg1 Cdc5 ( Plk1 ortholog ) Mlc1 ( myosin essential light chain ) I q gap1 Contractile ring assembly and constriction Septin ring Cell wall remodeling Actin / myosin A B C Figure 3 . Cytokinesis in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae . ( A ) Overview of the mechanism of division - plane positioning . The contractile ring assembles at the neck of the bud , which is positioned in early G 1 phase . The spindle is positioned relative to the bud neck during anaphase . ( B ) Pathway that induces accumulation of compo - nents of the contractile ring . Components conserved between metazoa and yeast are highlighted in blue . ( C ) Spatial organization of the yeast contractile ring , highlighting the relationship between the ingressing contractile ring and the required remodeling of the cell wall materials through septum deposition . GAP , GTPase - activating protein ; GEF , GDP – GTP exchange factor . M . Glotzer 8 Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a022343 on September 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from a scaffold protein that can interact with RhoA , F - actin , and myosin ( Fig . 1B ) ( Straight et al . 2005 ; Piekny and Glotzer 2008 ; Sun et al . 2015 ) . These direct RhoA effectors generate myosin miniﬁlaments and actin ﬁlaments that recruit tropomyosin , a - actinin ( Mukhina et al . 2007 ) , and septin . The process by which these components assemble into a well - ordered ring is not fully understood , in part , because the underlying events involve rapidly rearranging and high - ly concentrated assemblages of ﬁlaments that are challeng - ing to resolve in the light microscope . 4 . 2 Membrane Association of the Contractile Ring The creation of a furrow that partitions the daughter cells requires association of the contractile ring with the plasma membrane . Note that the contractile ring need not encircle the cell for furrow ingression to occur as there are numer - ous examples of unilateral furrowing in which the furrow ingresses from one side before it is fully assembled , includ - ing in amphibians and other species . This indicates that membrane association of ﬁlaments in the contractile ring can support force generation . The nature of this association is not well characterized . Defects in this linkage would result in contractile ring constriction accompanied by a failure to draw in the plasma membrane . There are some molecules that appear to contribute to this bridging function . Manipulation of the levels of phos - phatidylinositol ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate ( PIP2 ) disrupts the as - sociation of the ring with the membrane in a minority of cells ( Field et al . 2005 ) . Lipid kinases and phosphatases responsible for controlling PIP2 levels impact cytokinesis at a variety of stages ( Ben El Kadhi et al . 2011 ; Dambournet et al . 2011 ) . The complete list of relevant PIP2 - binding factors has not been unambiguously identiﬁed , although a class of good candidates is FERM ( 4 . 1 protein – ezrin – radixin – moesin ) - domain - containing proteins ( Fehon et al . 2010 ) . In Dictyostelium , cells deﬁcient in the FERM - domain - containing protein talin show compromised link - age between the ring and membrane ( Tsujioka et al . 2012 ) ; ERM proteins also suppress cortical blebbing during cyto - kinesis , particularly at cell poles ( Roubinet et al . 2011 ) . In both S . pombe and Drosophila , F - BAR - containing proteins might serve as linkers between the membrane and cytoskel - eton ( Roberts - Galbraith et al . 2010 ; Takeda et al . 2013 ) ; in S . pombe , the F - BAR protein Cdc15 also promotes accu - mulation of a polysaccharide synthetase ( Arasada and Pol - lard 2014 ) , which also contributes to productive furrowing ( Liu et al . 1999 ) . Cytoplasmic myosin II associates with anionic phospholipids ( Li et al . 1994 ) . Thus , there might not be a single , speciﬁc tether for the contractile ring , but rather a constellation of diverse contributing factors . Final - ly , late in cytokinesis , the membrane - binding C1 domain of the centralspindlin subunit Cyk4 is required for membrane linkage to the central spindle at the midbody stage ( Le - komtsev et al . 2012 ) , which is also stabilized by the scaffold protein anillin ( D’Avino et al . 2008 ; Kechad et al . 2012 ) . 4 . 3 Contractile Ring Assembly in Fission Yeast The process of ring assembly has been most clearly deﬁned in ﬁssion yeast . The aforementioned nodes that contain myosin and formin nucleate actin ﬁlaments that are cap - tured by neighboring nodes and pulled together ( Vavylonis et al . 2008 ) . The barbed end of the growing actin ﬁlament is anchored by the nucleating formin at the donor node , and the pointed end of the ﬁlament is captured by myosin at the acceptor node ( Laporte et al . 2011 ) . This interaction results in node congression at (cid:2) 30 nm / sec for a duration of (cid:2) 20 sec . Internode connections are severed by coﬁlin ( Chen and Pollard 2011 ) , and this process repeats until the nodes and ﬁlaments are aligned . This is known as the search – capture – pull – release model ( Fig . 2C ) ( Vavylonis et al . 2008 ) . This process has been modeled using physio - logical parameters that recapitulate observations in wild - type and mutant conditions . Some F - actin in the ring is recruited from ﬁlaments that assemble at peripheral sites of nucleation ( Huang et al . 2012 ) . However , as discussed pre - viously , other mechanisms might sufﬁce for functional ring assembly in ﬁssion yeast . 4 . 4 Myosin Function during Cytokinesis Ever since actin and nonmuscle myosin II were identiﬁed as important components of the contractile ring ( Carter 1967 ; Schroeder 1968 ; Fujiwara and Pollard 1976 ; Mabuchi and Okuno 1977 ) , the prevailing model for the process of constriction has involved myosin - II - mediated sliding of actin ﬁlaments . In a wide variety of cell types , including mammalian cells , Drosophila , C . elegans , and ﬁssion yeast , nonmuscle myosin II is required for successful cytokinesis . Myosin V can contribute to cytokinesis in S . pombe ( Lap - lante et al . 2015 ) . The situation in mammals is complicated by genetic redundancy because of multiple isoforms of nonmuscle myosin II that show partial overlap among iso - forms in certain tissues ( Takeda et al . 2003 ; Conti et al . 2004 ; Bao et al . 2005 ; Ma et al . 2010 ) . Nevertheless , there is strong evidence that supports a role for myosin II motor activity in cytokinesis . However , myosin II is not invariably required for cyto - kinesis . Notable exceptions include plants , which lack non - muscle myosin II altogether , and Dictyostelium , in which adherent—although not detached—cells have a myosin - II - independent pathway for cytokinesis ( Neujahr et al . 1997 ; Zang et al . 1997 ) . In budding yeast , there is clear evidence Cytokinesis in Metazoa and Fungi Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a022343 9 on September 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from that myosin performs functions other than ﬁlament sliding in cytokinesis . Remarkably , the requirement for Myo1 can be provided by a headless version lacking the motor do - main . This truncated myosin is therefore not performing a ﬁlament - cross - linking function—more likely it functions as a scaffold that guides deposition of septal materials ( Lord et al . 2005 ; Fang et al . 2010 ; Wloka et al . 2013 ) . Although headless myosin fulﬁlls its essential function , loss of the head has consequences—for example , the motor domain of myosin is needed to accelerate ring constriction and the rate of actin disassembly during constriction ( Men - des Pinto et al . 2012 ) . Models for force generation have been compared and contrasted in a recent review ( Mendes Pinto et al . 2013 ) . 4 . 5 Constriction of the Contractile Ring A number of factors inﬂuence furrow ingression during cytokinesis , including active force generators at the cleavage furrow , active protrusion at cell poles , overall cortical ten - sion , the viscoelasticity of the cytoplasm , and interactions of the cell with its environment ( Poirier et al . 2012 ) . Most cells round up during mitosis , and cell cycle – regulated changes in cortical tension have been measured . However , the timing of these changes during mitosis is not consistent across species ( Hiramoto 1990 ; Ramanathan et al . 2015 ) . Contractile rings in marine invertebrate blastomeres exert forces on the order of 1 – 10 nN ( Rappaport 1967 ; Hiramoto 1975 ) . Contractile rings in ﬁssion yeast , in con - trast , show much smaller forces , although these contractile rings are much smaller in cross section than those of ma - rine invertebrate blastomeres . However , the two types of rings generate similar tensions , on the order of 10 nN / m m 2 ( Stachowiak et al . 2014 ) . As has been extensively dis - cussed , ring ingression in these cells requires myosin motor activity , and sufﬁcient motors are present in the ﬁssion yeast ring to generate these forces , assuming that the actin ﬁlaments are properly oriented ( Wu and Pollard 2005 ; Sta - chowiak et al . 2014 ) . In sea urchin embryos , contractile ring width and thick - ness remain fairly constant during constriction , reﬂecting signiﬁcant disassembly of actin ﬁlaments as it constricts ( Schroeder 1972 ) . Observations of ﬂuorescently tagged myosin indicate that , although the total number of myosin motors decreases as the ring constricts , the local con - centration can increase severalfold or remain relatively con - stant in ﬁssion yeast or C . elegans blastomeres , respectively ( Wu and Pollard 2005 ; Carvalho et al . 2009 ) . The slime mold Dictyostelium provides a clear example of an alternative means of force generation in the furrow . Although myosin II is essential for furrow formation in such cells when grown in suspension ( De Lozanne and Spudich 1987 ) , knockout cells divide with nearly normal kinetics when allowed to attach to the substrate ( Neujahr et al . 1997 ) . Nonuniform changes in cortical tension and hydrodynamic pressures can account for furrowing in such cells ( Poirier et al . 2012 ) . 4 . 6 Septum Deposition in Yeast Although constriction of the contractile ring is largely driv - en by the actomyosin - based contractile ring in metazoan cells , in budding yeast , regulated secretion of cell wall ma - terial makes a signiﬁcant contribution ( Figs . 2C and 3C ) . Indeed , in budding yeast , deletion of the gene encoding myosin II is tolerated in some strain backgrounds . Proteins that act in a parallel pathway to actomyosin contractility would be predicted to be essential in cells that lack myosin . Hof1 , which is related to the ﬁssion yeast F - BAR protein Cdc15 , ﬁts these criteria ( Vallen et al . 2000 ) . Hof1 binds to chitin synthase II , which is essential for secretion of prima - ry septum material . Hof1 also binds to the tail of yeast myosin II , suggesting that Hof1 coordinates the contractile ring and the enzyme crucial for cell wall deposition ( Oh et al . 2013 ) . Similar interactions exist in ﬁssion yeast . Thus , in fungi , the contractile ring could function to guide dep - osition of septal material ( Zhou et al . 2015 ) . 5 RECONSTITUTION OF THE CONTRACTILE APPARATUS Aspects of cytokinesis have been reconstituted in a number of in vitro systems . Contractile ring constriction has been shown in both permeabilized vertebrate cells ( Hoffman - Berling 1954 ; Cande 1980 ) and isolated contractile rings ( Mabuchi et al . 1988 ) . Actin - ﬁlament - stabilizing drugs in - hibit ring constriction ; thus , constriction depends on actin ﬁlament disassembly . This approach has received renewed attention in budding and ﬁssion yeast ( Young et al . 2010 ; Mishra et al . 2013 ) . In the former case , ring constriction occurs in the presence of cytoplasmic extracts ( Young et al . 2010 ) . In S . pombe , constriction occurs in permeabilized cells largely devoid of cytoplasmic components ( Mishra et al . 2013 ) . During constriction of the ring , myosin II becomes progressively concentrated , whereas a signiﬁcant portion of the ﬁlamentous actin disassembles . However , in this case , stabilization of actin ﬁlaments does not im - pair ring constriction . The genetic tractability of this sys - tem should permit dissection of this important step in cytokinesis . The spatially regulated signaling events of cytokinesis have been reconstituted in unfractionated Xenopus egg ex - tracts on supported lipid bilayers ( Nguyen et al . 2014 ) . In this system , microtubules polymerized from neighboring M . Glotzer 10 Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a022343 on September 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from synthetic asters interact , forming discrete overlap zones that recruit central spindle components in a manner de - pendent on aurora B kinase . These zones induce RhoA activation in the adjacent membrane . Cytokinesis - like events have also been modeled in a fully deﬁned system , producing striking results ( Miyazaki et al . 2015 ) . Actin polymerization in phospholipid - delim - ited aqueous droplets in oil results in assembly of ﬁlament bundles that encircle the droplets . Successful ring forma - tion requires the droplet diameter to be smaller than the persistence length of single actin ﬁlaments ( (cid:2) 5 – 15 m m ) . Actin polymerization in the presence of double - headed heavy meromyosin fragments generated constricting rings . The constriction rate is proportional to ring size , similar to that seen in C . elegans embryos ( Carvalho et al . 2009 ) . During constriction , the rings slide along the inner leaﬂet of the droplet , rather than inducing deformations , as seen in permeabilized ﬁssion yeast and spheroplasts ( Mishra et al . 2013 ; Stachowiak et al . 2014 ) . Importantly , ring con - striction under these conditions depends on motor activ - ity—rigor conditions impair the assembly of rings seen in the absence of myosin . Thus , some characteristic features of the contractile ring can be solely attributed to interactions between spatially constrained actin ﬁlaments and myosin motor proteins . 6 ABSCISSION Following cleavage furrow ingression , dividing cells still need to resolve the single membrane that encapsulates the two nascent daughter cells , a process known as abscis - sion ( see Mierzwa and Gerlich 2014 for review ) . This pro - cess is topologically similar to viral budding and formation of multivesicular bodies , in which the neck of the constric - tion is exposed to extracellular space , as compared with endocytosis , in which the neck is exposed to the cytoplasm ( Carlton and Martin - Serrano 2007 ) . This requires that cy - toplasmic machinery that drives membrane scission must be specialized to constrict the membrane without sterically interfering with membrane scission . These processes are mediated by a protein complex , called “endosomal sorting complex required for transport III” ( ESCRT - III ) , that as - sembles into a spiral arrangement of ﬁlaments that associ - ates with the cytoplasmic face of the plasma membrane and induces membrane deformation ( Fig . 4 ) ( see Henne et al . 2011 and Agromayor and Martin - Serrano 2013 for review ) . 6 . 1 Evolutionary Conservation of ESCRT - III The ESCRT - III complex contains four structurally related subunits , called charged multivesicular body proteins ( CHMPs ) , each of which can polymerize on an appropriate membrane ( Shim et al . 2007 ) . However , in vivo and in vitro , the four subunits have distinct functions . CHMP6 / Vps20 is thought to nucleate assembly of longer CHMP4 / Snf7 polymers that are terminated by CHMP3 / Vps24 and CHMP2 / Vps2 ( Teis et al . 2008 ; Wollert et al . 2009 ) . The two terminal ESCRT - III subunits induce a conformational change in the CHMP4 / Snf7 polymers , promoting mem - brane deformation . They also recruit an AAA - ATPase com - plex , Vps4 , that disassembles and recycles ESCRT - III components ( see Mierzwa and Gerlich 2014 for review ) . Abscission timing is closely linked to recruitment of Vps4 ( Elia et al . 2011 ) . The ESCRT - III complex could be one of the most an - cient cytokinesis factors as it is found not only in eukary - otes but also in some archaea . The archaea contains multiple phyla , including the well - characterized Crenarch - aeota and Euryarchaeota . Genomic comparisons of these two phyla suggest that they use distinct molecular mecha - nisms for cell division . Like many eubacterial species , many Euryarchaeota species contain FtsZ , a tubulin - related pro - tein that participates in cell division . However , FtsZ is lack - ing in many Crenarchaeota species . These species do , however , contain CdvB , which is related to ESCRT - III subunits ( Linda˚s et al . 2008 ) , and CdvC , which is related to the Vps4 AAA - ATPase that promotes disassembly of ESCRT - III ﬁlaments . Cdv genes are induced before cell division , and the Cdv proteins accumulate between segre - gated nucleoids ( Linda˚s et al . 2008 ; Samson et al . 2008 ) . Overexpression of an ATPase - defective variant of CdvC prevents cell division , providing functional evidence for its role in cell division . Thus , the involvement of ESCRT - III proteins in eukaryotic cell division likely reﬂects an ancient role . Intriguingly , related proteins are also found in Lokiarchaeota , an archaeal phylum that also contain proteins similar to eukaryotic actin and GTPases ( Spang et al . 2015 ) . Despite this strong evolutionary connection and the compelling evidence for its role in mammalian cells , there is limited evidence implicating the ESCRT - III complex in cytokinesis in other model organisms . For example , in C . elegans , depletion of various ESCRT subunits affects endocytosis and other process—however , it does not cause defects in cytokinesis ( Kim et al . 2011 ) . Residual ESCRT - III subunits might obscure a role for this machinery in cyto - kinesis . In Drosophila , ESCRT - III subunits accumulate at the midbody , but a functional role in cytokinesis has not yet been shown ( Capalbo et al . 2012 ) . Interestingly , in bud - ding yeast , in which the ESCRT system was ﬁrst character - ized , ESCRT - III subunits are not essential ; however , there are weak genetic interactions with mutations in known cytokinesis genes , including genes encoding septins ( Mc - Murray et al . 2011 ) . Septal deposition might provide an Cytokinesis in Metazoa and Fungi Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a022343 11 on September 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from alternative means to drive ﬁnal constriction of the neck of the cell . 6 . 2 ESCRT - III Recruitment Recruitment of ESCRT - III to the cytoplasmic bridge in mammalian cells requires centralspindlin and an interact - ing adaptor protein , Cep55 ( Zhao et al . 2006 ) , which in turn recruits two additional adaptors , Alix and the ESCRT - I subunit TSG101 ( Carlton and Martin - Serrano 2007 ; Morita et al . 2007 ; Lee et al . 2008 ) . Alix and TSG101 di - rectly recruit CHMP4 subunits of the ESCRTIII complex ( McCullough et al . 2008 ) . CHMP4 accumulates in ﬁla - ments at regions of secondary constrictions that ﬂank the central midbody ( Guizetti et al . 2011 ) . For these secondary constrictions to proceed to completion , microtubules in the midbody must be removed as they obstruct the inter - cellular bridge . ESCRT - III directs recruitment of the mi - crotubule - severing complex spastin by means of CHMP1B , a peripheral subunit of the ESCRT - III complex ( Yang et al . 2008 ) . 6 . 3 Regulation of Abscission The numerous steps required for abscission provide oppor - tunities for regulation . Chromatin stuck in the midbody prevents or delays completion of cytokinesis ( Mendoza et al . 2009 ; Steigemann et al . 2009 ) . This delay involves activation of the chromosome passenger complex by the trapped DNA , causing midbody stabilization ( Steigemann et al . 2009 ) . Aurora B phosphorylates CHMP4C ( Capalbo et al . 2012 ; Carlton et al . 2012 ) , which delays abscission , perhaps by acting as an inhibitor of the CHMP4B isoform . This model is based on the ﬁnding that CHMP4C is not essential for cytokinetic abscission—in fact , it acts as an inhibitor of the process ( Carlton et al . 2012 ) . The cellular microenvironment impacts the timing of abscission . The time interval between formation of the midbody and abscission is highly variable . Some variability might be due to the variable rate of daughter cell spreading that exerts tension on the intercellular bridge . Counterin - tuitively , increased tension on the bridge induces a delay in abscission ( Lafaurie - Janvore et al . 2013 ) . Experimentally ESCRT - III and spastin recruitment ESCRT - III mediated scission Spastin - mediated microtubule se v ering Membrane - associated centralspindlin ring ESCRT - III filament Actomyosincontractile ring Figure4 . Abscission inmetazoa . Cell separationismediatedbyendosomalsortingcomplex required for transportIII ( ESCRT - III ) ﬁlaments that assemble in constriction zones that ﬂank the centralspindlin - dense midbody . The remaining microtubules are depolymerized by spastin , and the membrane scission process itself is driven by ESCRT - III ﬁlaments that constrict the neck of the cytoplasmic bridge between the two daughter cells . M . Glotzer 12 Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a022343 on September 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from severing one side of an intercellular bridge under tension releases the tension and induces rapid severing on the other side of the bridge . Recruitment of ESCRT - III subunits is tension sensitive , providing a possible underlying molecu - lar mechanism . 6 . 4 Fate of Midbody Remnants Once the two daughter cells fully separate , a portion of the cytoplasmic bridge or midbody remains . In principle , the structure could be internalized into autophagosomes di - rectly , released into the extracellular milieu , or the particle could be later phagocytosed by the dividing cell or its neighbors and ultimately degraded by lysosomal processes ( Crowell et al . 2014 ) . The balance between these fates varies in a cell type – dependent manner ( Ettinger et al . 2011 ) . Division remnants have been suggested to alter cellular behavior ( Ettinger et al . 2011 ; Kuo et al . 2011 ) , but the perturbations used to alter the fate of internalized mid - bodies might have indirect effects ( Crowell et al . 2014 ) . 7 CONTEXT DEPENDENCE OF CYTOKINETIC MECHANISMS It is tempting to posit that cytokinesis is a singular event that is largely similar in animal cells and fungi . Indeed , there are common requirements that appear in many or - ganisms and cell types . However , it is not difﬁcult to ﬁnd different mechanisms in different species . In fact , the re - quirements for cytokinesis vary within a given organism , depending on the cellular context . For example , during the cleavage stages of embryogenesis , when cells divide without growing , cell size changes over multiple orders of magni - tude , and there are likely to be adaptations required for division of large blastomeres . Indeed , in aqueous droplets that reconstitute contractile rings , droplet ﬂattening , or myosin addition increases the size of the droplets that as - semble intact rings ( Miyazaki et al . 2015 ) . Several Dro - sophila mutants show spermatocyte - speciﬁc cytokinesis defects , providing additional evidence for context - depen - dent requirements ( Giansanti et al . 2004 ) . Likewise , in Dro - sophila , septins are essential for division of epithelial cells that divide in the plane of the epithelia , but not those that divide in the orthogonal plane ( Founounou et al . 2013 ) . Similarly , as contractile rings ingress against cortical ten - sion , defects in force generation in the ring might be com - pensated by reductions in cortical tension . In C . elegans , mutations in CYK - 4 that limit RhoA activation can be partially suppressed by mutations in Arp2 / 3 or its activator Rac1 ( Canman et al . 2008 ; Loria et al . 2012 ) . Abscission regulators also show cell - type - speciﬁc re - quirements . For example , the RhoA - activated kinase citron ( Gai et al . 2011 ) contributes to abscission in cultured cells , but its requirement is tissue speciﬁc in vivo . Mice possess - ing a mutant citron kinase are grossly normal at birth , but they show postnatal neurological defects ( Di Cunto et al . 2000 ) . Multinucleate cells are observed at low frequency speciﬁcally in the brain ; this could result from differential clearance of multinucleate cells . However , it seems more likely that the cytokinetic requirement for citron depends on growth conditions . Thus , the mechanical or biochem - ical properties of a cell or tissue can inﬂuence the genetic requirements for cytokinesis . 8 CONCLUSION Despite the remarkable progress in deﬁning the molecular mechanism of cytokinesis , much remains to be learned about this essential cellular process . The mechanism by which the contractile ring assembles , constricts , and gen - erates force remains quite opaque in many systems . Like - wise , there are open questions concerning the mechanism and regulation of membrane abscission . Finally , accumu - lating results show that , despite signiﬁcant shared com - ponents and mechanisms , different cells and tissues of a given organism have speciﬁc requirements for cytokinesis owing to differences in cell size , cellular microenviron - ment , or the panoply of biochemical regulators . The number of such variations increases when multiple spe - cies are considered . Thus , it is crucial to consider the cellular context when studying cytokinesis . Our under - standing of cytokinesis in intact tissues and animals is particularly limited . Last , some subtle cytokinetic defects could affect particular cell types and result in disease ( Liljeholm et al . 2013 ) . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS I thank Jian - Qiu Wu , David Kovar , Ed Munro , and Tom Pollard for comments and discussion . This work was sup - ported by National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) grant R01GM85087 . REFERENCES Adl SM , Simpson AGB , Lane CE , Lukesˇ J , Bass D , Bowser SS , Brown MW , Burki F , Dunthorn M , Hampl V , et al . 2012 . The revised classiﬁcation of eukaryotes . J Eukaryot Microbiol 59 : 429 – 493 . Agromayor M , Martin - Serrano J . 2013 . Knowing when to cut and run : Mechanisms that control cytokinetic abscission . Trends Cell Biol 23 : 433 – 441 . Akamatsu M , Berro J , Pu K - M , Tebbs IR , Pollard TD . 2014 . Cytokinetic nodes in ﬁssionyeast arise from two distinct types of nodesthat merge during interphase . J Cell Biol 204 : 977 – 988 . Almonacid M , Moseley JB , Janvore J , Mayeux A , Fraisier V , Nurse P , Paoletti A . 2009 . Spatial control of cytokinesis by Cdr2 kinase and Mid1 / anillin nuclear export . Curr Biol 19 : 961 – 966 . Cytokinesis in Metazoa and Fungi Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a022343 13 on September 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from Arasada R , Pollard TD . 2014 . Contractile ring stability in S . pombe de - pends on F - BAR protein Cdc15p and Bgs1p transport from the Golgi complex . Cell Rep 8 : 1533 – 1544 . Bao J , Jana SS , Adelstein RS . 2005 . Vertebrate nonmuscle myosin II isoforms rescue small interfering RNA - induced defects in COS - 7 cell cytokinesis . J Biol Chem 280 : 19594 – 19599 . Basant A , Lekomtsev S , Tse YC , Zhang D , Longhini KM , Petronczki M , Glotzer M . 2015 . Aurora B kinase promotes cytokinesis by inducing centralspindlin oligomers that associate with the plasma membrane . Dev Cell 33 : 204 – 215 . Ben El Kadhi K , Roubinet C , Solinet S , Emery G , Carre´no S . 2011 . The inositol 5 - phosphatase dOCRL controls PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 homeostasis and is necessary for cytokinesis . Curr Biol 21 : 1074 – 1079 . Bezanilla M , Wilson JM , Pollard TD . 2000 . Fission yeast myosin - II iso - forms assemble into contractile rings at distinct times during mitosis . Curr Biol 10 : 397 – 400 . Bi E , Park H - O . 2012 . Cell polarization and cytokinesis in budding yeast . Genetics 191 : 347 – 387 . Bi E , Maddox P , Lew DJ , Salmon ED , McMillan JN , Yeh E , Pringle JR . 1998 . Involvement of an actomyosin contractile ring in Saccharomyces cerevisiae cytokinesis . J Cell Biol 142 : 1301 – 1312 . Bohnert KA , Grzegorzewska AP , Willet AH , Vander Kooi CW , Kovar DR , Gould KL . 2013 . SIN - dependent phosphoinhibition of formin multi - merization controls ﬁssion yeast cytokinesis . Genes Dev 27 : 2164 – 2177 . Burkard ME , Maciejowski J , Rodriguez - Bravo V , Repka M , Lowery DM , Clauser KR , Zhang C , Shokat KM , Carr SA , Yaffe MB , et al . 2009 . Plk1 self - organization and priming phosphorylation of HsCYK - 4 at the spindle midzone regulate the onset of division in human cells . PLoS Biol 7 : e1000111 . Byers B , Goetsch L . 1976 . A highly ordered ring of membrane - associated ﬁlaments in budding yeast . J Cell Biol 69 : 717 – 721 . Cabernard C , Prehoda KE , Doe CQ . 2010 . A spindle - independent cleav - age furrow positioning pathway . Nature 467 : 91 – 94 . Cande WZ . 1980 . A permeabilized cell model for studying cytokinesis using mammalian tissue culture cells . J Cell Biol 87 : 326 – 335 . Canman JC , Lewellyn L , Laband K , Smerdon SJ , Desai A , Bowerman B , Oegema K . 2008 . Inhibition of Rac by the GAP activity of central - spindlin is essential for cytokinesis . Science 322 : 1543 – 1546 . Capalbo L , Montembault E , Takeda T , Bassi ZI , Glover DM , D’Avino PP . 2012 . The chromosomal passenger complex controls the function of endosomal sorting complex required for transport - III Snf7 proteins during cytokinesis . Open Biol 2 : 120070 . Carlton JG , Martin - Serrano J . 2007 . Parallels between cytokinesis and retroviral budding : A role for the ESCRT machinery . Science 316 : 1908 – 1912 . Carlton JG , Caballe A , Agromayor M , Kloc M , Martin - Serrano J . 2012 . ESCRT - III governs the Aurora B - mediated abscission checkpoint through CHMP4C . Science 336 : 220 – 225 . Carter SB . 1967 . Effects of cytochalasins on mammalian cells . Nature 213 : 261 – 264 . Carvalho A , Desai A , Oegema K . 2009 . Structural memory in the con - tractile ring makesthe duration of cytokinesis independent of cellsize . Cell 137 : 926 – 937 . Celton - Morizur S , Bordes N , Fraisier V , Tran PT , Paoletti A . 2004 . C - terminal anchoring of mid1p to membranes stabilizes cytokinetic ring position in early mitosis in ﬁssion yeast . Mol Cell Biol 24 : 10621 – 10635 . Celton - Morizur S , Racine V , Sibarita J - B , Paoletti A . 2006 . Pom1 kinase links division plane position to cell polarity by regulating Mid1p cortical distribution . J Cell Sci 119 : 4710 – 4718 . Chen Q , Pollard TD . 2011 . Actin ﬁlament severing by coﬁlin is more importantforassembly thanconstrictionofthecytokineticcontractile ring . J Cell Biol 195 : 485 – 498 . Cinalli RM , Lehmann R . 2013 . A spindle - independent cleavage pathway controls germ cell formation in Drosophila . Nat Cell Biol 15 : 839 – 845 . Conti MA , Even - Ram S , Liu C , Yamada KM , Adelstein RS . 2004 . Defects in cell adhesion and the visceral endoderm following ablation of non - muscle myosin heavy chain II - A in mice . J Biol Chem 279 : 41263 – 41266 . Cooke CA , Heck MM , Earnshaw WC . 1987 . The inner centromere pro - tein ( INCENP ) antigens : Movement from inner centromere to mid - body during mitosis . J Cell Biol 105 : 2053 – 2067 . Crowell EF , Gaffuri A - L , Gayraud - Morel B , Tajbakhsh S , Echard A . 2014 . Midbody remnant engulfment after cytokinesis abscission in mam - malian cells . J Cell Sci 127 : 3840 – 3851 . Cullen CF , May KM , Hagan IM , Glover DM , Ohkura H . 2000 . A new genetic method for isolating functionally interacting genes : High plo1 + - dependent mutants and their suppressors deﬁne genes in mitotic and septation pathways in ﬁssionyeast . Genetics 155 : 1521 – 1534 . Dambournet D , Machicoane M , Chesneau L , Sachse M , Rocancourt M , Marjou El A , Formstecher E , Salomon R , Goud B , Echard A . 2011 . Rab35 GTPase and OCRL phosphatase remodel lipids and F - actin for successful cytokinesis . Nat Cell Biol 13 : 981 – 988 . D’Avino PP , Takeda T , Capalbo L , Zhang W , Lilley KS , Laue ED , Glover DM . 2008 . Interaction between Anillin and RacGAP50C connects the actomyosin contractile ring with spindle microtubules at the cell di - vision site . J Cell Sci 121 : 1151 – 1158 . De LozanneA , SpudichJA . 1987 . Disruption ofthe Dictyostelium myosin heavy chain gene by homologous recombination . Science 236 : 1086 – 1091 . Demay BS , Bai X , Howard L , Occhipinti P , Meseroll RA , Spiliotis ET , Oldenbourg R , Gladfelter AS . 2011 . Septin ﬁlaments exhibit a dynam - ic , paired organization that is conserved from yeast to mammals . J Cell Biol 193 : 1065 – 1081 . Di Cunto F , Imarisio S , Hirsch E , Broccoli V , Bulfone A , Migheli A , Atzori C , Turco E , Triolo R , Dotto GP , et al . 2000 . Defective neurogenesis in citron kinase knockout mice by altered cytokinesis and massive apo - ptosis . Neuron 28 : 115 – 127 . Douglas ME , Davies T , JosephN , Mishima M . 2010 . Aurora B and 14 - 3 - 3 coordinately regulate clustering of centralspindlin during cytokinesis . Curr Biol 20 : 927 – 933 . Elia N , Sougrat R , Spurlin TA , Hurley JH , Lippincott - Schwartz J . 2011 . Dynamics of endosomal sorting complex required for transport ( ESCRT ) machinery during cytokinesis and its role in abscission . Proc Natl Acad Sci 108 : 4846 – 4851 . Ettinger AW , Wilsch - Bra¨uninger M , Marzesco A - M , Bickle M , Lohmann A , Maliga Z , Karbanova´ J , Corbeil D , Hyman AA , Huttner WB . 2011 . Proliferating versus differentiating stem and cancer cells exhibit dis - tinct midbody - release behaviour . Nat Commun 2 : 503 . Fang X , Luo J , Nishihama R , Wloka C , Dravis C , Travaglia M , Iwase M , Vallen EA , Bi E . 2010 . Biphasic targeting and cleavage furrow ingres - sion directed by the tail of a myosin II . J Cell Biol 191 : 1333 – 1350 . FarrH , GullK . 2012 . Cytokinesisintrypanosomes . Cytoskeleton 69 : 931 – 941 . Fehon RG , McClatchey AI , Bretscher A . 2010 . Organizing the cell cortex : The role of ERM proteins . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11 : 276 – 287 . Field SJ , Madson N , Kerr ML , Galbraith KA , Kennedy CE , Tahiliani M , Wilkins A , Cantley LC . 2005 . PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 functions at the cleavage furrow during cytokinesis . Curr Biol 15 : 1407 – 1412 . Founounou N , Loyer N , Le Borgne R . 2013 . Septins regulate the contrac - tility of the actomyosin ring to enable adherens junction remodeling during cytokinesis of epithelial cells . Dev Cell 24 : 242 – 255 . Fre´de´ric MY , Lundin VF , Whiteside MD , Cueva JG , Tu DK , Kang SYC , Singh H , Baillie DL , Hutter H , Goodman MB , et al . 2013 . Identiﬁca - tion of 526 conserved metazoan genetic innovations exposes a new role for cofactor E - like in neuronal microtubule homeostasis . PLoS Genet 9 : e1003804 . Fujiwara K , Pollard TD . 1976 . Fluorescent antibody localization of my - osin in the cytoplasm , cleavage furrow , and mitotic spindle of human cells . J Cell Biol 71 : 848 – 875 . M . Glotzer 14 Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a022343 on September 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from Gai M , Camera P , Dema A , Bianchi F , Berto G , Scarpa E , Germena G , Di Cunto F . 2011 . Citron kinase controls abscission through RhoA and anillin . Mol Biol Cell 22 : 3768 – 3778 . Giansanti MG , Farkas RM , Bonaccorsi S , Lindsley DL , Wakimoto BT , Fuller MT , Gatti M . 2004 . Genetic dissection of meiotic cytokinesis in Drosophila males . Mol Biol Cell 15 : 2509 – 2522 . Glotzer M . 2009 . The 3Ms of central spindle assembly : Microtubules , motors and MAPs . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10 : 9 – 20 . Goss JW , Kim S , Bledsoe H , Pollard TD . 2014 . Characterization of the roles of Blt1p in ﬁssionyeast cytokinesis . Mol Biol Cell 25 : 1946 – 1957 . Gruneberg U , Neef R , Honda R , Nigg EA , Barr FA . 2004 . Relocation of Aurora B from centromeres to the central spindle at the metaphase to anaphase transition requires MKlp2 . J Cell Biol 166 : 167 – 172 . Gu Y , Yam C , Oliferenko S . 2015 . Rewiring of cellular division site selec - tion in evolution of ﬁssion yeasts . Curr Biol 25 : 1187 – 1194 . Guizetti J , Schermelleh L , Ma¨ntler J , Maar S , Poser I , Leonhardt H , Mu¨ller - Reichert T , Gerlich DW . 2011 . Cortical constriction during abscission involves helices of ESCRT - III - dependent ﬁlaments . Science 331 : 1616 – 1620 . Guzman - Vendrell M , Baldissard S , Almonacid M , Mayeux A , Paoletti A , Moseley JB . 2013 . Blt1 and Mid1 provide overlapping membrane an - chors to position the division plane in ﬁssion yeast . Mol Cell Biol 33 : 418 – 428 . Haarer BK , Pringle JR . 1987 . Immunoﬂuorescence localization of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae CDC12 gene product to the vicinity of the 10 - nm ﬁlaments in the mother - bud neck . Mol Cell Biol 7 : 3678 – 3687 . Hachet O , Simanis V . 2008 . Mid1p / anillin and the septation initiation network orchestrate contractile ring assembly for cytokinesis . Genes Dev 22 : 3205 – 3216 . Henne WM , Buchkovich NJ , Emr SD . 2011 . The ESCRT pathway . Dev Cell 21 : 77 – 91 . HiramotoY . 1975 . Forceexertedbythecleavagefurrowofseaurchineggs . Dev Growth Differ 17 : 27 – 38 . Hiramoto Y . 1990 . Mechanical properties of the cortex before and during cleavage . Ann NYAcad Sci 582 : 22 – 30 . Hoffman - Berling H . 1954 . [ Glycerin water extracted telophase cells as a model of cytokinesis ] . Biochim Biophys Acta 15 : 332 – 339 . Hu C - K , Ozlu¨ N , Coughlin M , Steen JJ , Mitchison TJ . 2012 . Plk1 nega - tively regulates Prc1 to prevent premature midzone formation before cytokinesis . Mol Biol Cell 23 : 2702 – 2711 . Huang J , Huang Y , Yu H , Subramanian D , Padmanabhan A , Thadani R , Tao Y , Tang X , Wedlich - Soldner R , Balasubramanian MK . 2012 . Non - medially assembled F - actin cables incorporate into the actomyosin ring in ﬁssion yeast . J Cell Biol 199 : 831 – 847 . HuttererA , GlotzerM , MishimaM . 2009 . Clustering ofcentralspindlinis essential for its accumulation to the central spindle and the midbody . Curr Biol 19 : 2043 – 2049 . Jiang W , Jimenez G , Wells NJ , Hope TJ , Wahl GM , Hunter T , Fukunaga R . 1998 . PRC1 : A human mitotic spindle - associated CDK substrate pro - tein required for cytokinesis . Mol Cell 2 : 877 – 885 . Kamasaki T , Osumi M , Mabuchi I . 2007 . Three - dimensional arrange - ment of F - actin in the contractile ring of ﬁssion yeast . J Cell Biol 178 : 765 – 771 . Kechad A , Jananji S , Ruella Y , Hickson GRX . 2012 . Anillin acts as a bifunctional linker coordinating midbody ring biogenesis during cy - tokinesis . Curr Biol 22 : 197 – 203 . Kim D - W , Sung H , Shin D , Shen H , Ahnn J , Lee S - K , Lee S . 2011 . Differential physiological roles of ESCRT complexes in Caenorhabditis elegans . Mol Cells 31 : 585 – 592 . Kosako H , Yoshida T , Matsumura F , Ishizaki T , Narumiya S , Inagaki M . 2000 . Rho - kinase / ROCK is involved in cytokinesis through the phos - phorylation of myosin light chain and not ezrin / radixin / moesin pro - teins at the cleavage furrow . Oncogene 19 : 6059 – 6064 . KuoT - C , ChenC - T , BaronD , OnderTT , LoewerS , Almeida S , Weismann CM , Xu P , Houghton J - M , Gao F - B , et al . 2011 . Midbody accumula - tion through evasion of autophagy contributes to cellular reprogram - ming and tumorigenicity . Nat Cell Biol 13 : 1214 – 1223 . Lafaurie - Janvore J , Maiuri P , Wang I , Pinot M , Manneville J - B , Betz T , Balland M , Piel M . 2013 . ESCRT - III assembly and cytokinetic abscis - sion are induced by tension release in the intercellular bridge . Science 339 : 1625 – 1629 . Laplante C , Berro J , Karatekin E , Hernandez - Leyva A , Lee R , Pollard TD . 2015 . Three myosins contribute uniquely to the assembly and con - striction of the ﬁssion yeast cytokinetic contractile ring . Curr Biol 25 : 1955 – 1965 . Laporte D , Coffman VC , Lee I - J , Wu J - Q . 2011 . Assembly and architec - ture of precursor nodes during ﬁssionyeast cytokinesis . J Cell Biol 192 : 1005 – 1021 . Lee I - J , Wu J - Q . 2012 . Characterization of Mid1 domains for targeting and scaffolding in ﬁssion yeast cytokinesis . J Cell Sci 125 : 2973 – 2985 . Lee HH , Elia N , Ghirlando R , Lippincott - Schwartz J , Hurley JH . 2008 . Midbody targeting of the ESCRTmachinery by a noncanonical coiled coil in CEP55 . Science 322 : 576 – 580 . Lekomtsev S , Su K - C , Pye VE , Blight K , Sundaramoorthy S , Takaki T , CollinsonLM , CherepanovP , DivechaN , PetronczkiM . 2012 . Central - spindlin links the mitotic spindle to the plasma membrane during cytokinesis . Nature 492 : 276 – 279 . Li D , Miller M , Chantler PD . 1994 . Association of a cellular myosin II with anionic phospholipids and the neuronal plasma membrane . Proc Natl Acad Sci 91 : 853 – 857 . Liljeholm M , Irvine AF , Vikberg A - L , Norberg A , Month S , Sandstro¨m H , Wahlin A , Mishima M , Golovleva I . 2013 . Congenital dyserythro - poietic anemia type III ( CDA III ) is caused by a mutation in kinesin family member , KIF23 . Blood 121 : 4791 – 4799 . Linda˚s A - C , Karlsson EA , Lindgren MT , Ettema TJG , Bernander R . 2008 . A unique cell division machinery in the Archaea . Proc Natl Acad Sci 105 : 18942 – 18946 . LiuJ , Wang H , McCollumD , Balasubramanian MK . 1999 . Drc1p / Cps1p , a 1 , 3 - b - glucan synthase subunit , is essential for division septum as - sembly in Schizosaccharomyces pombe . Genetics 153 : 1193 – 1203 . Lord M , Laves E , Pollard TD . 2005 . Cytokinesis depends on the motor domains of myosin - II in ﬁssion yeast but not in budding yeast . Mol Biol Cell 16 : 5346 – 5355 . Loria A , Longhini KM , Glotzer M . 2012 . The RhoGAP domain of CYK - 4 has an essential role in RhoA activation . Curr Biol 22 : 213 – 219 . Ma X , Jana SS , Conti MA , Kawamoto S , Claycomb WC , Adelstein RS . 2010 . Ablation of nonmuscle myosin II - B and II - C reveals a role for nonmuscle myosin II in cardiac myocyte karyokinesis . Mol Biol Cell 21 : 3952 – 3962 . Mabuchi I , Okuno M . 1977 . The effect of myosin antibody on the divi - sion of starﬁsh blastomeres . J Cell Biol 74 : 251 – 263 . Mabuchi I , Tsukita S , Tsukita S , Sawai T . 1988 . Cleavage furrow isolated from newt eggs : Contraction , organization of the actin ﬁlaments , and protein components of the furrow . Proc Natl Acad Sci 85 : 5966 – 5970 . Maddox AS , Burridge K . 2003 . RhoA is required for cortical retraction and rigidity during mitotic cell rounding . J Cell Biol 160 : 255 – 265 . Matthews HK , Delabre U , Rohn JL , Guck J , Kunda P , Baum B . 2012 . Changes in ect2 localization couple actomyosin - dependent cell shape changes to mitotic progression . Dev Cell 23 : 371 – 383 . MaupinP , PollardTD . 1986 . Arrangementofactinﬁlamentsandmyosin - like ﬁlaments in the contractile ring and of actin - like ﬁlaments in the mitotic spindle of dividing HeLa cells . J Ultrastruct Mol Struct Res 94 : 92 – 103 . McCullough J , Fisher RD , Whitby FG , Sundquist WI , Hill CP . 2008 . ALIX - CHMP4 interactions in the human ESCRT pathway . Proc Natl Acad Sci 105 : 7687 – 7691 . McMurray MA , Stefan CJ , Wemmer M , Odorizzi G , Emr SD , Thorner J . 2011 . Genetic interactions with mutations affecting septin assembly reveal ESCRT functions in budding yeast cytokinesis . Biol Chem 392 : 699 – 712 . Mendes Pinto I , Rubinstein B , Kucharavy A , Unruh JR , Li R . 2012 . Actin depolymerization drives actomyosin ring contraction during budding yeast cytokinesis . Dev Cell 22 : 1247 – 1260 . Cytokinesis in Metazoa and Fungi Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a022343 15 on September 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from Mendes Pinto I , Rubinstein B , Li R . 2013 . Force to divide : Structural and mechanical requirements for actomyosin ring contraction . Biophys J 105 : 547 – 554 . Mendoza M , Norden C , Durrer K , Rauter H , Uhlmann F , Barral Y . 2009 . A mechanism for chromosome segregation sensing by the NoCut checkpoint . Nat Cell Biol 11 : 477 – 483 . Mierzwa B , Gerlich DW . 2014 . Cytokinetic abscission : Molecular mech - anisms and temporal control . Dev Cell 31 : 525 – 538 . Mishima M , Kaitna S , Glotzer M . 2002 . Central spindle assembly and cytokinesis require a kinesin - like protein / RhoGAP complex with mi - crotubule bundling activity . Dev Cell 2 : 41 – 54 . MishimaM , PavicicV , GrunebergU , NiggEA , GlotzerM . 2004 . Cellcycle regulation of central spindle assembly . Nature 430 : 908 – 913 . Mishra M , Kashiwazaki J , Takagi T , Srinivasan R , Huang Y , Balasubra - manian MK , Mabuchi I . 2013 . In vitro contraction of cytokinetic ring depends on myosin II but not on actin dynamics . Nat Cell Biol 15 : 853 – 859 . Miyazaki M , Chiba M , Eguchi H , Ohki T , Ishiwata S . 2015 . Cell - sized spherical conﬁnement inducesthe spontaneous formation of contrac - tile actomyosin rings in vitro . Nat Cell Biol 17 : 480 – 489 . Morita E , Sandrin V , Chung H - Y , Morham SG , Gygi SP , Rodesch CK , Sundquist WI . 2007 . Human ESCRTand ALIX proteins interact with proteins of the midbody and function in cytokinesis . EMBO J 26 : 4215 – 4227 . Moseley JB , Mayeux A , Paoletti A , Nurse P . 2009 . A spatial gradient coordinates cell size and mitotic entry in ﬁssion yeast . Nature 459 : 857 – 860 . Mukhina S , Wang Y - L , Murata - Hori M . 2007 . a - actinin is required for tightly regulated remodeling of the actin cortical network during cy - tokinesis . Dev Cell 13 : 554 – 565 . Murthy K , Wadsworth P . 2005 . Myosin - II - dependent localization and dynamics of F - actin during cytokinesis . Curr Biol 15 : 724 – 731 . Murthy K , Wadsworth P . 2008 . Dual role for microtubules in regulating cortical contractility during cytokinesis . J Cell Sci 121 : 2350 – 2359 . Neujahr R , Heizer C , Gerisch G . 1997 . Myosin II - independent processes in mitotic cells of Dictyostelium discoideum : Redistribution of the nu - clei , re - arrangement of the actin system and formation of the cleavage furrow . J Cell Sci 110 : 123 – 137 . Nguyen PA , Groen AC , Loose M , Ishihara K , Wu¨hr M , Field CM , Mitch - ison TJ . 2014 . Spatial organization of cytokinesis signaling reconsti - tuted in a cell - free system . Science 346 : 244 – 247 . Oh Y , Schreiter J , Nishihama R , Wloka C , Bi E . 2013 . Targeting and functional mechanisms of the cytokinesis - related F - BAR protein Hof1 during the cell cycle . Mol Biol Cell 24 : 1305 – 1320 . Oliferenko S , Chew TG , Balasubramanian MK . 2009 . Positioning cyto - kinesis . Genes Dev 23 : 660 – 674 . Otomo T , Otomo C , Tomchick DR , Machius M , Rosen MK . 2005 . Struc - tural basis of Rho GTPase - mediated activation of the formin mDia1 . Mol Cell 18 : 273 – 281 . Padte NN , Martin SG , Howard M , Chang F . 2006 . The cell - end factor pom1p inhibits mid1p in speciﬁcation of the cell division plane in ﬁssion yeast . Curr Biol 16 : 2480 – 2487 . Paoletti A , Chang F . 2000 . Analysis of mid1p , a protein required for placement of the cell division site , reveals a link between the nucleus and the cell surface in ﬁssion yeast . Mol Biol Cell 11 : 2757 – 2773 . Piekny AJ , Glotzer M . 2008 . Anillin is a scaffold protein that links RhoA , actin , and myosin during cytokinesis . Curr Biol 18 : 30 – 36 . Poirier CC , Ng WP , Robinson DN , Iglesias PA . 2012 . Deconvolution of the cellular force - generating subsystems that govern cytokinesis fur - row ingression . PLoS Comp Biol 8 : e1002467 . Pu K - M , Akamatsu M , Pollard TD . 2014 . The septation initiation net - work controls the assembly of nodes containing Cdr2p for cytokinesis in ﬁssion yeast . J Cell Sci 128 : 441 – 446 . Raich WB , Moran AN , Rothman JH , Hardin J . 1998 . Cytokinesis and midzone microtubule organization in Caenorhabditis elegans require the kinesin - like protein ZEN - 4 . Mol Biol Cell 9 : 2037 – 2049 . Ramanathan SP , Helenius J , Stewart MP , Cattin CJ , Hyman AA , Muller DJ . 2015 . Cdk1 - dependent mitotic enrichment of cortical myosin II promotes cell rounding against conﬁnement . Nat Cell Biol 17 : 148 – 159 . Rappaport R . 1967 . Cell division : Direct measurement of maximum tension exerted by furrow of echinoderm eggs . Science 156 : 1241 – 1243 . Rappaport R . 1985 . Repeated furrow formation from a single mitotic apparatus in cylindrical sand dollar eggs . J Exp Zool 234 : 167 – 171 . Rappaport R . 1986 . Establishment of the mechanism of cytokinesis in animal cells . Int Rev Cytol 105 : 245 – 281 . Richards TA , Cavalier - Smith T . 2005 . Myosin domain evolution and the primary divergence of eukaryotes . Nature 436 : 1113 – 1118 . Roberts - Galbraith RH , Ohi MD , Ballif BA , Chen J - S , McLeod I , Mc - Donald WH , Gygi SP , Yates JR , Gould KL . 2010 . Dephosphorylation of F - BAR protein Cdc15 modulates its conformation and stimulates its scaffolding activity at the cell division site . Mol Cell 39 : 86 – 99 . Roubinet C , DecelleB , Chicanne G , DornJF , PayrastreB , Payre F , Carreno S . 2011 . Molecular networks linked by Moesin drive remodeling of the cell cortex during mitosis . J Cell Biol 195 : 99 – 112 . Ruchaud S , CarmenaM , Earnshaw WC . 2007 . Chromosomal passengers : Conducting cell division . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8 : 798 – 812 . Samson RY , Obita T , Freund SM , Williams RL , Bell SD . 2008 . A role for the ESCRTsystem in cell division in archaea . Science 322 : 1710 – 1713 . Sanger JM , Sanger JW . 1980 . Banding and polarity of actin ﬁlaments in interphase and cleaving cells . J Cell Biol 86 : 568 – 575 . Schmidt S , Sohrmann M , Hofmann K , Woollard A , Simanis V . 1997 . The Spg1p GTPase is an essential , dosage - dependent inducer of septum formation in Schizosaccharomyces pombe . Genes Dev 11 : 1519 – 1534 . Schroeder TE . 1968 . Cytokinesis : Filaments in the cleavage furrow . Exp Cell Res 53 : 272 – 276 . Schroeder TE . 1972 . The contractile ring . II . Determining its brief exis - tence , volumetricchanges , andvitalroleincleavingArbaciaeggs . JCell Biol 53 : 419 – 434 . Sebe´ - Pedro´s A , Grau - Bove´ X , Richards TA , Ruiz - Trillo I . 2014 . Evolution and classiﬁcation of myosins , a paneukaryotic whole - genome ap - proach . Genome Biol Evol 6 : 290 – 305 . Shim S , Kimpler LA , Hanson PI . 2007 . Structure / function analysis of four core ESCRT - III proteins reveals common regulatory role for ex - treme C - terminal domain . Trafﬁc 8 : 1068 – 1079 . Simanis V . 2015 . Pombe’s thirteen—Control of ﬁssion yeast cell division by the septation initiation network . J Cell Sci 128 : 1465 – 1474 . SirajuddinM , FarkasovskyM , HauerF , Ku¨hlmannD , MacaraIG , Weyand M , Stark H , Wittinghofer A . 2007 . Structural insight into ﬁlament formation by mammalian septins . Nature 449 : 311 – 315 . Skau CT , Kovar DR . 2010 . Fimbrin and tropomyosin competition regu - lates endocytosis and cytokinesis kinetics in ﬁssionyeast . Curr Biol 20 : 1415 – 1422 . Spang A , Saw JH , Jørgensen SL , Zaremba - Niedzwiedzka K , Martijn J , Lind AE , van Eijk R , Schleper C , Guy L , Ettema TJG . 2015 . Complex archaea that bridge the gap between prokaryotes and eukaryotes . Na - ture 521 : 173 – 179 . Stachowiak MR , Laplante C , ChinHF , Guirao B , Karatekin E , PollardTD , O’Shaughnessy B . 2014 . Mechanism of cytokinetic contractile ring constriction in ﬁssion yeast . Dev Cell 29 : 547 – 561 . Steigemann P , Wurzenberger C , Schmitz MHA , Held M , Guizetti J , Maar S , Gerlich DW . 2009 . Aurora B - mediated abscission checkpoint pro - tects against tetraploidization . Cell 136 : 473 – 484 . Stewart MP , Helenius J , Toyoda Y , Ramanathan SP , Muller DJ , Hyman AA . 2011 . Hydrostatic pressure and the actomyosin cortex drive mi - totic cell rounding . Nature 469 : 226 – 230 . Straight AF , Field CM , Mitchison TJ . 2005 . Anillin binds nonmuscle myosin IIand regulatesthe contractile ring . MolBiol Cell 16 : 193 – 201 . Su K - C , Takaki T , Petronczki M . 2011 . Targeting of the RhoGEF Ect2 to the equatorial membrane controls cleavage furrow formation during cytokinesis . Dev Cell 21 : 1104 – 1115 . M . Glotzer 16 Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a022343 on September 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from Su K - C , Bement WM , Petronczki M , Dassow von G . 2014 . An astral simulacrum of the central spindle accounts for normal , spindle - less , and anucleate cytokinesis in echinoderm embryos . Mol Biol Cell 25 : 4049 – 4062 . Subramanian R , Wilson - Kubalek EM , Arthur CP , Bick MJ , Campbell EA , Darst SA , Milligan RA , Kapoor TM . 2010 . Insights into antiparallel microtubule crosslinking by PRC1 , a conserved nonmotor microtu - bule binding protein . Cell 142 : 433 – 443 . Subramanian R , TiS - C , Tan L , Darst SA , Kapoor TM . 2013 . Markingand measuringsinglemicrotubulesbyPRC1andKinesin - 4 . Cell 154 : 377 – 390 . Sun L , Guan R , Lee I - J , Liu Y , Chen M , Wang J , Wu J - Q , Chen Z . 2015 . Mechanistic insights into the anchorage of the contractile ring by anillin and mid1 . Dev Cell 33 : 413 – 426 . Takeda K , Kishi H , Ma X , Yu Z - X , Adelstein RS . 2003 . Ablation and mutation of nonmuscle myosin heavy chain II - B results in a defect in cardiac myocyte cytokinesis . Circ Res 93 : 330 – 337 . Takeda T , Robinson IM , Savoian MM , Grifﬁths JR , Whetton AD , McMa - hon HT , Glover DM . 2013 . Drosophila F - BAR protein Syndapin con - tributes to coupling the plasma membrane and contractile ring in cytokinesis . Open Biol 3 : 130081 . Tanaka K , Petersen J , MacIver F , Mulvihill DP , Glover DM , Hagan IM . 2001 . The role of Plo1 kinase in mitotic commitment and septation in Schizosaccharomyces pombe . EMBO J 20 : 1259 – 1270 . Tao EY , Calvert M , Balasubramanian MK . 2014 . Rewiring Mid1p - inde - pendent medial division in ﬁssion yeast . Curr Biol 24 : 2181 – 2188 . Teis D , Saksena S , Emr SD . 2008 . Ordered assembly of the ESCRT - III complex on endosomes is required to sequester cargo during MVB formation . Dev Cell 15 : 578 – 589 . Tse YC , Piekny A , Glotzer M . 2011 . Anillin promotes astral microtubule - directed cortical myosin polarization . Mol Biol Cell 22 : 3165 – 3175 . Tse YC , Werner M , Longhini KM , Labbe´ J - C , Goldstein B , Glotzer M . 2012 . RhoAactivation during polarization and cytokinesis of the early Caenorhabditis elegans embryo is differentially dependent on NOP - 1 and CYK - 4 . Mol Biol Cell 23 : 4020 – 4031 . Tsujioka M , Yumura S , Inouye K , Patel H , Ueda M , Yonemura S . 2012 . Talin couples the actomyosin cortex to the plasma membrane during rear retraction and cytokinesis . Proc Natl Acad Sci 109 : 12992 – 12997 . Vallen EA , Caviston J , Bi E . 2000 . Roles of Hof1p , Bni1p , Bnr1p , and myo1p in cytokinesis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol Biol Cell 11 : 593 – 611 . Vavylonis D , Wu J - Q , Hao S , O’Shaughnessy B , Pollard TD . 2008 . As - sembly mechanism of the contractile ring for cytokinesis by ﬁssion yeast . Science 319 : 97 – 100 . Wagner E , Glotzner M . 2016 . Local RhoA activation induces cytokinetic furrows independent of spindle position and cell cycle stage . J Cell Biol 213 : 641 – 649 . Watanabe S , Ando Y , Yasuda S , Hosoya H , Watanabe N , Ishizaki T , Nar - umiyaS . 2008 . mDia2inducestheactinscaffoldfor thecontractilering andstabilizesitspositionduringcytokinesisinNIH3T3cells . MolBiol Cell 19 : 2328 – 2338 . Watanabe S , De Zan T , Ishizaki T , Yasuda S , Kamijo H , Yamada D , Aoki T , Kiyonari H , Kaneko H , Shimizu R , et al . 2013 . Loss of a Rho - regulated actin nucleator , mDia2 , impairs cytokinesis during mouse fetal eryth - ropoiesis . Cell Rep 5 : 926 – 932 . White EA , Glotzer M . 2012 . Centralspindlin : At the heart of cytokinesis . Cytoskeleton 69 : 882 – 892 . WlokaC , VallenEA , The´L , FangX , OhY , BiE . 2013 . Immobile myosin - II plays a scaffolding role during cytokinesis in budding yeast . J Cell Biol 200 : 271 – 286 . Wolfe BA , Takaki T , Petronczki M , Glotzer M . 2009 . Polo - like kinase 1 directs assembly of the HsCyk - 4 RhoGAP / Ect2 RhoGEF complex to initiate cleavage furrow formation . PLoS Biol 7 : e1000110 . WollertT , WunderC , Lippincott - SchwartzJ , HurleyJH . 2009 . Membrane scission by the ESCRT - III complex . Nature 458 : 172 – 177 . Wu J - Q , Sirotkin V , Kovar DR , Lord M , Beltzner CC , Kuhn JR , Pollard TD . 2006 . Assembly of the cytokinetic contractile ring from a broad band of nodes in ﬁssion yeast . J Cell Biol 174 : 391 – 402 . Wu J - Q , Pollard TD . 2005 . Counting cytokinesis proteins globally and locally in ﬁssion yeast . Science 310 : 310 – 314 . Wu J - Q , Kuhn JR , Kovar DR , Pollard TD . 2003 . Spatial and temporal pathway forassemblyand constriction of the contractile ring in ﬁssion yeast cytokinesis . Dev Cell 5 : 723 – 734 . Yang D , Rismanchi N , Renvoise´ B , Lippincott - Schwartz J , Blackstone C , Hurley J . 2008 . Structuralbasis for midbody targeting ofspastin by the ESCRT - III protein CHMP1B . Nat Struct Mol Biol 15 : 1278 – 1286 . YeY , LeeI - J , RungeKW , WuJ - Q . 2012 . RolesofputativeRho - GEFGef2in division - site positioning and contractile - ring function in ﬁssion yeast cytokinesis . Mol Biol Cell 23 : 1181 – 1195 . Yonetani A , Chang F . 2010 . Regulation of cytokinesis by the formin cdc12p . Curr Biol 20 : 561 – 566 . Yoshida S , Kono K , Lowery DM , Bartolini S , Yaffe MB , Ohya Y , Pellman D . 2006 . Polo - like kinase Cdc5 controls the local activation of Rho1 to promote cytokinesis . Science 313 : 108 – 111 . Young BA , Buser C , Drubin DG . 2010 . Isolation and partial puriﬁcation of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae cytokinetic apparatus . Cytoskeleton 67 : 13 – 22 . Yu¨ce O , Piekny A , Glotzer M . 2005 . An ECT2 - centralspindlin complex regulates the localization and function of RhoA . J Cell Biol 170 : 571 – 582 . Yumura S . 2001 . Myosin II dynamics and cortical ﬂow during contractile ring formation in Dictyostelium cells . J Cell Biol 154 : 137 – 146 . Yumura S , Mori H , Fukui Y . 1984 . Localization of actin and myosin for the study of ameboid movement in Dictyostelium using improved immunoﬂuorescence . J Cell Biol 99 : 894 – 899 . Zang JH , Cavet G , Sabry JH , Wagner P , Moores SL , Spudich JA . 1997 . On the role of myosin - II in cytokinesis : Division of Dictyostelium cells under adhesive and nonadhesive conditions . Mol Biol Cell 8 : 2617 – 2629 . Zhang D , Glotzer M . 2015 . The RhoGAPactivityof CYK - 4 / MgcRacGAP functions non - canonically by promoting RhoA activation during cy - tokinesis . Elife 4 : e08898 . Zhao W - M , Seki A , Fang G . 2006 . Cep55 , a microtubule - bundling protein , associates with centralspindlin to control the midbody integ - rity and cell abscission during cytokinesis . Mol Biol Cell 17 : 3881 – 3896 . ZhouZ , MunteanuEL , HeJ , UrsellT , BatheM , HuangKC , ChangF . 2015 . The contractile ring coordinates curvature - dependent septum assem - bly during ﬁssion yeast cytokinesis . Mol Biol Cell 26 : 78 – 90 . Zhu C , Zhu C , Lau E , Lau E , Schwarzenbacher R , Schwarzenbacher R , Bossy - Wetzel E , Bossy - Wetzel E , Jiang W , Jiang W . 2006 . Spatiotem - poral control of spindle midzone formation by PRC1 in human cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci 103 : 6196 – 6201 . Cytokinesis in Metazoa and Fungi Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a022343 17 on September 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from published online December 22 , 2016 Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol Michael Glotzer Cytokinesis in Metazoa and Fungi Subject Collection The Cytoskeleton Cytokinesis in Metazoa and Fungi Michael Glotzer Motility during Regeneration and Wound Healing Intermediate Filaments and the Regulation of Cell Fang Cheng and John E . Eriksson MotorsCiliary Motility : Regulation of Axonemal Dynein E . Porter Rasagnya Viswanadha , Winfield S . Sale and Mary Intermediate Filaments and the Plasma Membrane Harmon , et al . Jonathan C . R . Jones , Chen Yuan Kam , Robert M . Neighboring Cells Interactions with the Extracellular Matrix and Actin - Based Adhesion Modules Mediate Cell Nelson , et al . Alexia I . Bachir , Alan Rick Horwitz , W . James Intracellular Motility of Intermediate Filaments WindofferRudolf E . Leube , Marcin Moch and Reinhard Tethering , and Organization of Organelles Microtubule - Based Transport and the Distribution , Kari Barlan and Vladimir I . Gelfand Health and Disease Neurofilaments and Neurofilament Proteins in Aidong Yuan , Mala V . Rao , Veeranna , et al . Intraflagellar Transport and Ciliary Dynamics Hiroaki Ishikawa and Wallace F . Marshall The Nucleoskeleton Stephen A . Adam OrganelleThe Centrosome , a Multitalented Renaissance DoxseyAnastassiia Vertii , Heidi Hehnly and Stephen Intermediate Filaments : Structure and Assembly Harald Herrmann and Ueli Aebi SuperfamilyCytoskeletal Integrators : The Spectrin Ronald K . H . Liem Mitosis J . Richard McIntosh Actin and Actin - Binding Proteins Thomas D . Pollard http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / cgi / collection / For additional articles in this collection , see Copyright © 2016 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press ; all rights reserved on September 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from