International Journal of Decision Support System Technology , 6 ( 4 ) , 49 - 66 , October - December 2014 49 Copyright © 2014 , IGI Global . Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited . ABSTRACT This research project was principally motivated by a concern for the direction and relevance of research in systems that support group work and negotiation . The main areas of research focus are the publication frequency and outlets for GSS and NSS research , the research strategies used in published articles , and the professional relevance of the research . The project has analysed 383 GSS articles and 82 NSS articles published in 16 major journals from 1990 to 2010 . The findings indicate a significant dependence on the Journal of Group Decision and Negotiation but represent an opportunity for newer journals such as the International Journal of Decision Support Systems Technology . Other issues include a focus on experimental research and design science , weak theoretical foundations and research methodologies , and a focus on operational level problems . Of great concern is the finding that GSS and NSS research has relatively low professional and managerial relevance . Eight key strategies for dealing with these issues are recommended . Issues and Strategies for Group and Negotiation Support Systems Research Graham Peter Pervan , School of Information Systems , Curtin University , Perth , Australia David Arnott , Decision Support Systems Laboratory , Monash University , Melbourne , Australia Keywords : Group Support Systems ( GSS ) , International Journal of Decision Support Systems Technology ( IJDSST ) , Journal of Group Decision and Negotiation , Negotiation Support Systems ( NSS ) 1 . INTRODUCTION This paper critically analyses the nature and state of research in group support systems ( GSS ) and negotiation support systems ( NSS ) . These are the systems that are the main foci of both the Group Decision and Negotiation confer - ence and the Journal of Group Decision and Negotiation . The paper presents trends in GSS and NSS research as individual disciplines and in comparison with each other . This investiga - tion is based on the detailed analysis of 465 GSS and NSS articles published in 16 major journals from 1990 to 2010 . The analysis is focused on a number of factors . These include ( a ) publication frequency , outlets , and recog - nition by funding bodies , ( b ) general research factors such as article type , and epistemology , quality of theoretical foundations , research methodologies , and level of importance of the research , and ( c ) relevance to IS practitioners and managerial users . It must be noted that this research is focused on the systems that support group work and negotiation , so only those papers that mentioned a system ( NSS or GSS ) were included in the analysis . DOI : 10 . 4018 / ijdsst . 2014100104 Copyright © 2014 , IGI Global . Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited . 50 International Journal of Decision Support System Technology , 6 ( 4 ) , 49 - 66 , October - December 2014 This project was principally motivated by a concern for the direction and relevance of NSS and GSS research . We suspected that this research was the practice of IS profession - als and managerial users . We also felt that the research was addressing an overly narrow range of concepts and issues and in particular we were concerned about the decision theoretic founda - tion and quality of the area . Further , it seemed that unlike the general trend in information systems research , GSS research was strongly dominated by a positivist , quantitative research orthodoxy . To explore these concerns we initi - ated the literature review project described here . This paper presents the first comprehensive report on the comparative performance of GSS and NSS and is based on the analysis of 383 GSS papers and 82 NSS articles . The paper is structured as follows : first , an introduction to the project is presented , followed by a brief history of GSS and NSS research , including other literature review studies . The research methodology and design is then described in some detail . The following sections discuss the results in terms of the factors listed as ( a ) to ( c ) above . Some recommended strategies for GSS and NSS researchers which address the findings are then outlined . The final section addresses the limitations of the project and provides a summary of conclusions . 2 . GROUP AND NEGOTIATION SUPPORT SYSTEMS RESEARCH A GSS “consists of a set of software , hardware , and language components and procedures that support a group of people engaged in a deci - sion - related meeting” ( Niederman & Bryson , 1998 ) . GSS are typically implemented as group decision systems ( GDS ) ( Pervan & Atkinson , 1995 ) or electronic meeting systems ( EMS ) ( Dennis et al . , 1988 ) . Group Support Systems directly evolved from personal decision support systems by using theories of group behaviour and processes and behavioural decision theory with networked microcomputers ( Arnott & Pervan , 2005 ) . Group environments that require the sup - port of GSS can be classified by the time of the meetings , either synchronous ( same time ) or asynchronous ( different times ) , or the location of the group ( either face to face or dispersed ) ( DeSanctis & Gallupe , 1985 ) . In the early 1980s , GSS research initially focused on “decision rooms” ( synchronous and face to face ) such as those facilities established at the University of Arizona and the University of Minnesota . Negotiation support systems ( NSS ) also operate in a group context but as the name suggests they involve the application of com - puter technologies to facilitate negotiations ( Rangaswamy & Shell , 1997 ) . As GSS were developed , the need to provide electronic sup - port for groups involved in negotiation problems and processes evolved as a focused sub - branch of GSS with different conceptual foundations to support those needs ( Jelassi & Foroughi , 1989 ) . In essence , a negotiation support system is : software which implements models and proce - dures , has communication and coordination facilities , and is designed to support two or more parties and / or a third party in their negotiation activities . ( Kersten & Lai , 2007 , p555 ) Two approaches to constructing systems that support negotiation arose , namely prob - lem oriented and process oriented ( Jelassi , Kersten , & Zionts , 1990 ) . Problem - oriented NSS products include Co - oP ( Bui & Jarke , 1986 ) , DECISION MAKER ( Fraser & Hip - pel , 1984 ) , GDSI and MEDIATOR ( Kersten , 1987 ) . These problem - oriented systems focus on providing support to support negotiation for specific problem types . On the other hand , process - oriented NSS focus on providing general support of the give - and - take process of negotiation ( Chaudhury , 1995 ) . Negotiation support systems has its concep - tual foundations in game theory ( Von Neumann & Morgenstern , 1947 ) , which supports many models of bargaining ( Raiffa , 1982 ) , and social choice theory ( Arrow , 1951 ) . While NSS may be considered a branch of GSS research , it has evolved using different theories , technologies 16 more pages are available in the full version of this document , which may be purchased using the " Add to Cart " button on the product ' s webpage : www . igi - global . com / article / issues - and - strategies - for - group - and - negotiation - support - systems - research / 124312 ? camid = 4v1 This title is available in InfoSci - Journals , InfoSci - Journal Disciplines Library Science , Information Studies , and Education , InfoSci - Select , InfoSci - Computer Systems and Software Engineering eJournal Collection , InfoSci - Management Science and Organizational Research eJournal Collection , InfoSci - Operations , Logistics , and Performance Assessment eJournal Collection , InfoSci - Journal Disciplines Business , Administration , and Management , InfoSci - Journal Disciplines Computer Science , Security , and Information Technology . Recommend this product to your librarian : www . igi - global . com / e - resources / library - recommendation / ? id = 2 Related Content EBDMSS : A Web - Based Decision Making Support System for Strategic E - Business Management Fen Wang , Natalie Lupton , David Rawlinson and Xingguo Zhang ( 2012 ) . Integrated and Strategic Advancements in Decision Making Support Systems ( pp . 265 - 284 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / ebdmss - web - based - decision - making / 66739 ? camid = 4v1a Using the Rhizomer Platform for Semantic Decision Support Systems Development Roberto García ( 2012 ) . Integrated and Strategic Advancements in Decision Making Support Systems ( pp . 62 - 82 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / using - rhizomer - platform - semantic - decision / 66725 ? camid = 4v1a The Development and Measurement of a Customer Satisfaction Index ( E - CSI ) in Electronic Banking : An Application to the Central Vietnam Region Le Van Huy , Pham Long , Aidan O ' Connor and Pham Dinh Tuyen ( 2017 ) . International Journal of Strategic Decision Sciences ( pp . 45 - 58 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / the - development - and - measurement - of - a - customer - satisfaction - index - e - csi - in - electronic - banking / 189077 ? camid = 4v1a An Uncertain Decision Making Process Considering Customers and Services in Evaluating Banks : A Case Study Fatemeh Akbari , Hamed Fazlollahtabar and Iraj Mahdavi ( 2013 ) . International Journal of Strategic Decision Sciences ( pp . 48 - 78 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / uncertain - decision - making - process - considering / 78346 ? camid = 4v1a