Synthesizing information systems knowledge : A typology of literature reviews Guy Pare´ a , * , Marie - Claude Trudel b , Mirou Jaana c , Spyros Kitsiou d a Chair in Information Technology in Health Care , HEC Montre´al , 3000 , Cote - Sainte - Catherine Road , Montreal , Quebec H3T 2A7 , Canada b Department of Information Technology , HEC Montre´al , Canada c Telfer School of Management , University of Ottawa , Canada d College of Applied Health Sciences , University of Illinois at Chicago , United States 1 . Introduction The information systems ( IS ) community has grown consider - ably since it ﬁrst emerged in the 1960s . Over the past 50 years , the development of IS as a scientiﬁc ﬁeld is evidenced by the solid research tradition that has been built . Indeed , an increasing volume of IS research uses IS itself as the reference discipline [ 1 ] . The growth of our ﬁeld is also related to the fact that IS research is emerging as an important reference discipline for other ﬁelds , such as psychology , education , marketing , operations manage - ment , and many other management domains [ 2 ] . The rapid diffusion of IS knowledge both within and outside its own boundaries requires researchers to ﬁnd a way to quickly synthesize the extent of the literature on various topics of interest and address any and all relevant gaps [ 3 ] . The accumulation of knowledge is an essential condition for a ﬁeld to ‘‘be scientiﬁc’’ and to develop [ 4 ] . More precisely , conducting effective literature reviews is essential to advance the knowledge and understand the breadth of the research on a topic of interest , synthesize the empirical evidence , develop theories or provide a conceptual background for subsequent research , and identify the topics or research domains that require more investigation [ 5 – 8 ] . Literature reviews are also valuable as a means of becoming oriented in an emerging domain and as an aid in teaching [ 9 , 10 ] . While the importance of producing high - quality literature reviews in the IS domain is well recognized [ 11 – 13 ] , we feel there remains confusion about the term ‘‘review’’ and , most importantly , the types of review articles that are published in our ﬁeld . The most prevalent type of review is commonly labeled the ‘‘literature review’’ or ‘‘theoretical background’’ within an empiri - cal article . This section of a paper usually provides the theoretical foundations and context of the research question and helps bring the research question into focus [ 14 ] . According to Baker [ 15 ] , it represents an ‘‘essential ﬁrst step and foundation when undertak - ing a research project’’ ( p . 219 ) . More precisely , the literature review section helps the researcher understand the existing body of knowledge , provides a theoretical foundation for the proposed empirical study , substantiates the presence of the research problem , justiﬁes the proposed study as one that contributes something new to the cumulated knowledge , and / or frames the valid research methodologies , approaches , goals and research questions for the proposed study [ 12 ] . There exists another type of literature review that constitutes an original and valuable work of research in and of itself . Rather than providing a basis for the researcher’s own endeavors , it creates a solid starting point for all other members of the academic community that are interested in a particular topic [ 9 , 16 ] . The Information & Management 52 ( 2015 ) 183 – 199 A R T I C L E I N F O Article history : Received 10 July 2013 Received in revised form 25 July 2014 Accepted 23 August 2014 Available online 2 September 2014 Keywords : Literature review Research synthesis Typology Evidence - based practice A B S T R A C T In this article we develop a typology of review types and provide a descriptive insight into the most common reviews found in top IS journals . Our assessment reveals that the number of IS reviews has increased over the years . The majority of the 139 reviews are theoretical in nature , followed by narrative reviews , meta - analyses , descriptive reviews , hybrid reviews , critical reviews , and scoping reviews . Considering the calls for IS research to develop a cumulative tradition , we hope more review articles will be published in the future and encourage researchers who start a review to use our typology to position their contribution . (cid:2) 2014 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . * Corresponding author . Tel . : + 1 514 340 6812 ; fax : + 1 514 340 6132 . E - mail address : guy . pare @ hec . ca ( G . Pare´ ) . Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Information & Management jo u rn al h om ep ag e : ww w . els evier . c o m / lo c ate / im http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . im . 2014 . 08 . 008 0378 - 7206 / (cid:2) 2014 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . so - called ‘‘review article’’ is a journal - length article that has an overarching purpose of summarizing or synthesizing the literature in a ﬁeld without collecting or analyzing any primary data . Review articles can be undertaken for several reasons , such as analyzing the progress of a speciﬁc stream of research , aggregating ﬁndings or reconciling equivocal results of prior studies , reviewing the application of a theoretical model or a methodological approach , developing a new theory or research model and providing a critical account of prior research on a particular topic or method [ 5 ] . Recognizing that knowledge accumulation increasingly relies on the integration of previous studies and ﬁndings , several senior IS scholars have made calls for more review articles in our ﬁeld [ e . g . , 2 , 11 , 17 ] . As a clear indication of the increasing need for review articles , the MIS Quarterly Review department was created in 2001 with the aim of representing an ideal communication outlet for synthesizing prior research and sharing knowledge [ 17 ] . In 2007 , this department became MISQ Theory and Review with the goal of redirecting the attention of researchers to the concepts and theories used in the IS ﬁeld and encouraging them to embark on IS theory building [ 18 ] . Despite this shift in focus toward theory building , MISQ Theory and Review has maintained the review component as part of its mission . In short , we believe that the enhanced role of review articles in our ﬁeld requires that this expository form be given careful scrutiny . Our primary goal in this article is to demystify the various types of literature reviews that exist . To do so , we ﬁrst review the extant literature on that topic to come up with a typology that identiﬁes , deﬁnes and contrasts various forms of research syntheses . It is our hope that the proposed typology will serve as a valuable resource for those that conduct , evaluate and / or interpret reviews both within and outside the IS ﬁeld . Our second objective is to provide descriptive insight into the most common review types found in top - ranked IS journals . To our knowledge , no prior research has conducted a formal assessment of the review practices in our domain . The present study attempts to ﬁll this gap . In the next sections , we explain the process that we followed to develop our typology and then describe and illustrate each review type . 2 . Development of the typology Classiﬁcation is one of the most central and generic conceptual exercises . Bailey [ 19 ] and Smith [ 20 ] make a clear distinction between two forms of classiﬁcation , namely , typologies and taxonomies . While a typology is derived in a deductive manner , a taxonomy is usually derived empirically or inductively using cluster analysis or other statistical methods . Given that knowledge synthesis is not a new concept and that leading methodologists have proposed several approaches and methods to review the literature , it clearly appears that a typology is more aligned with our initial objective . Typologies contain two distinct constructs . The ﬁrst construct is the ideal proﬁle . Ideal proﬁles are used to represent holistic conﬁgurations of multiple constructs . They are intended to ‘‘provide an abstract model , so that deviation from the extreme or ideal proﬁle can be noted and explained’’ [ 21 : p . 32 ] . In other words , ideal proﬁles are theoretical abstractions that are used to examine empirical cases in terms of how much they deviate from the ideal [ 20 ] . Second , ideal proﬁles are described in terms of multiple dimensions called ﬁrst - order constructs [ 22 ] . As a result , each ideal type represents a unique combination of the values associated with the fundamental dimensions . In our context , the term ‘‘ideal’’ is used in the sense that review types are internally coherent . Developing a typology that is both valid and comprehensive represents a complex endeavor . We began our study with two main questions in mind : ( 1 ) What types of literature reviews currently exist ? and ( 2 ) What are their main characteristics or properties ? Initially , each of the authors independently explored different sources of information using informal and unstructured methods and tools . We did not know what speciﬁc search terms and inclusion criteria to use to identify relevant and reliable sources . As shown later , the growth of research synthesis methods over time and their application within several disciplines has led to a plethora of labels and terms that are frequently used inconsistently by academics . Therefore , our initial ‘‘playground’’ contained a fuzzy set of labels , deﬁnitions , and descriptions , which made the search and mapping process quite challenging . Gradually , with time , we realized the importance of searching for relevant material that provided valuable insights into the dimensions that distinguish one review type from another . We also understood that if we searched only for sources that provide the methodological guidelines associated with a particular type of review , we would run the risk of favoring review types that have a well - established tradition while neglecting those that are in the uptake phase of the diffusion cycle . After these initial searches , our strategy became progressively more structured . For example , we contacted several scholars with solid experience in publishing review articles , asking them for advice on how to conduct and reﬁne our search . In parallel , we participated in several workshops and webinars on topics related to systematic reviews . As a next step , we carried out structured searches in four databases ( ABI / INFORM , MEDLINE , ERIC , and Web of Science ) to identify published sources that provided ( 1 ) historical accounts of research synthesis approaches [ e . g . , 23 ] , ( 2 ) detailed descriptions of particular review types [ e . g . , 24 – 27 ] , ( 3 ) guidelines for conducting , writing or evaluating literature reviews [ e . g . , 5 , 11 , 28 – 31 ] , ( 4 ) critical accounts of one or several research synthesis approaches [ e . g . , 32 , 33 ] , or ( 5 ) direct compar - isons between types of reviews with regard to their attributes or characteristics [ e . g . , 2 , 34 ] . Backward and forward searches were also performed to identify more relevant sources [ 11 ] . Throughout the process , there was considerable discussion among the research team as to the identiﬁcation of the key references with regard to our particular objectives . As more sources emerged , we decided to focus on those that drew comprehensively upon one or more type of reviews , made an original contribution to the theory of literature reviews , or had been cited as inﬂuential contributions by research synthesis methodologists . In total , about 40 reliable sources from various disciplines including the health sciences , nursing , education , library and information sciences , management , software engi - neering , and information systems were selected and represent the building blocks of our typology of reviews ( see Table 1 ) . By carefully reading through the detailed descriptions provided in the selected sources , we collectively identiﬁed nine literature review types and extracted seven recurrent ﬁrst - order constructs ( dimensions ) most often used to distinguish between review types ( see Table 2 ) . These ﬁrst - order constructs are ( 1 ) the overarching goal of the review , ( 2 ) the scope of the review question , ( 3 ) the search strategy , ( 4 ) the nature of the primary sources included in the review , ( 5 ) the explicitness of the study selection , ( 6 ) the quality appraisal , and ( 7 ) the methods for synthesizing / analyzing ﬁndings . Although the extent to which authors relied on these dimensions and referred to them when describing review types varied , they were fundamental in the development of our typology . Appendix I presents the sources we used to identify the dimensions of the typology as well as the properties of each dimension . Each source was analyzed independently by at least two members of the research team . We used data extraction forms and conceptual mapping techniques to distil useful information about the prevailing terminology , scope , research design , methodologies , and other characteristics of each review type . The collective G . Pare´ et al . / Information & Management 52 ( 2015 ) 183 – 199 184 analysis , assimilation and synthesis of this body of knowledge occurred during several team meetings . 2 . 1 . Description of the types of literature review This section provides descriptions of the nine review types that comprise our typology . Table 3 illustrates how each review form was applied within the extant literature . We begin with the three types of reviews that aim to summarize the extant literature on a particular topic of interest to provide the readers with a broad and comprehensive background for understanding the current state of knowledge in that area . These types of reviews are often perceived as useful educational articles of great ‘‘heuristic value’’ that place a great amount of emphasis on the perspective used and develop a ‘‘bigger picture’’ of a research context [ 10 , 32 ] . Overall , they can function as a great starting point to bridge related areas of work , provoke thoughts , inspire new theoretical models , and direct future efforts in a research domain [ 2 , 10 , 64 ] . Furthermore , they can direct future research developments by highlighting certain key issues , such as gaps , unexplored areas , opportunities , controversies , or trends [ 2 , 64 ] . In the following paragraphs , we explain in greater detail how the three types of reviews that fall under this category differ from each other . The ﬁrst type of research synthesis in our typology is referred to as the narrative review . In its simplest form , the narrative review attempts to identify what has been written on a subject or topic [ 10 ] . Often , there is no attempt to seek generalization or cumulative knowledge from what is reviewed [ 37 ] . As shown in Table 2 , narrative reviews differ from other review types in many other aspects . Narrative reviews are usually selective in that they do not involve a systematic and comprehensive search of all of the relevant literature . Instead , narrative reviews are often opportu - nistic in that they survey only that literature and evidence that are readily available to the researchers [ 37 ] . Importantly , narrative reviews usually do not provide any explanations of how the review process was conducted [ 2 ] . For this reason , they are vulnerable on the grounds of subjectivity [ 10 , 57 ] . As Dijkers [ 32 ] maintains , ‘‘even if no bias exists , the lack of information in the traditional ( narrative ) review on how primary studies were searched , selected , and combined makes replication by others impossible’’ ( p . 425 ) . This lack of explicit and reproducible methods has been identiﬁed as a key weakness of narrative reviews [ 65 ] . With regard to data analysis , narrative summary Table 1 Sources used to develop the theoretical typology of review types . Ideal review types N D S QS MA R U T C Detailed comparison of multiple review types Card [ 35 ] U U Cooper [ 5 ] U U U Cook [ 36 ] U U U Davies [ 37 ] U U U U Dijkers [ 32 ] U U Dixon - Woods et al . [ 38 ] U U Gough et al . [ 39 ] U U U U U U Grant and Booth [ 34 ] U U U U U Green et al . [ 10 ] U U U King and He [ 2 ] U U U Kirkevold [ 40 ] U a U b U Kitchenham et al . [ 41 ] U U U U Kitchenham et al . [ 42 ] U U Pillemer [ 28 ] U U Rousseau et al . [ 43 ] U U U U Rumrill et al . [ 44 ] U c U U U Whittermore [ 45 ] U U U Detailed description of a speciﬁc review type Arksey and O’Malley [ 46 ] U Becker and Oxman [ 47 ] U Borenstein et al . [ 33 ] U Daudt et al . [ 48 ] U Gmu¨r [ 49 ] U Hammersley [ 50 ] U Higgins and Green [ 51 ] U U Levac et al . [ 52 ] U Noblit and Hare [ 53 ] U Oates et al . [ 54 ] U Okoli and Schabram [ 14 ] U Pawson et al . [ 55 ] U Pieper et al . [ 56 ] U Rosenthal and DiMatteo [ 57 ] U Saunders et al . [ 58 ] U Shepperd et al . [ 59 ] U Smith et al . [ 60 ] U Thomas and Harden [ 61 ] U Tricco et al . [ 31 ] U Webster and Watson [ 11 ] U Wong et al . [ 62 ] U N = narrative ; D = descriptive ; S = scoping ; QS = qualitative systematic ; MA = meta - analysis ; R = realist review ; U = umbrella ; T = theoretical ; C = critical . a Called re´sume´ review . b Called synopsis review c Called empirical literature review . G . Pare´ et al . / Information & Management 52 ( 2015 ) 183 – 199 185 refers to the informal techniques used to synthesize prior study ﬁndings , often including some type of commentary or interpreta - tion [ 30 ] . Second , descriptive reviews seek to determine the extent to which a body of empirical studies in a speciﬁc research area supports or reveals any interpretable patterns or trends with respect to pre - existing propositions , theories , methodologies or ﬁndings [ 2 ] . In fulﬁlling this objective and assuring the generaliz - ability of their results , descriptive reviews collect , codify , and analyze numeric data that reﬂect the frequency of the topics , authors or methods found in the extant literature [ 2 , 44 ] . They usually employ structured search methods to form a representa - tive sample of a larger group of published works that are related to a particular area of investigation . The authors of descriptive reviews extract certain characteristics of interest from each study , such as the publication year , research methods , data collection techniques , and direction or strength of the ﬁnal outcomes ( e . g . , positive , negative , or non - signiﬁcant ) in the form of frequency analysis to produce quantitative results . In essence , each study included in a descriptive review is treated as a unit of analysis , and the published literature as a whole provides a database from which the review authors attempt to identify any interpretable trends and patterns or draw overall conclusions about the merits of existing conceptualizations , propositions , methods or ﬁndings . In doing so , a descriptive review may claim its ﬁndings to represent the state of the art in a research domain [ 2 ] . Third , scoping reviews attempt to provide an initial indication of the potential size and nature of the available literature on a particular topic [ 46 , 48 , 52 ] . Researchers may conduct such a review to examine the extent , range and nature of research activities , determine the value of undertaking a full systematic review , or identify research gaps in the extant literature [ 42 , 44 , 46 ] . Like narrative and descriptive reviews , scoping reviews tend to focus on the breadth of coverage of the literature rather than the depth of coverage [ 44 , 46 ] . Unlike narrative and descriptive reviews , however , the goal of scoping the ﬁeld is to be as comprehensive as possible [ 46 ] . However , practical issues related to time , funding , and the access to resources often require researchers to consider the balance between feasibility and comprehensiveness [ 52 ] . Inclusion and exclusion criteria must be established in scoping reviews to help researchers eliminate studies that do not address the initial research questions . It is also recommended that at least two independent coders review the abstracts yielded from the search strategy , followed by a review of the full articles for study selection [ 48 ] . A debate surrounds the potential need to assess the included studies for their methodological quality as performed in systematic reviews . On the one hand , Grant and Booth [ 34 ] and Brien et al . [ 66 ] are concerned about the inability of Arksey and O’Malley’s [ 46 ] framework to provide for an assessment of the quality of the literature . On the other hand , Levac et al . [ 52 ] recognize the challenges of assessing quality among the vast range of published and gray literature that may be included in scoping studies . Thus , it remains unclear whether the lack of quality assessment impacts the uptake and relevance of scoping review ﬁndings . The synthesized evidence from content analysis [ 67 ] or thematic analysis [ 61 ] is relatively easy to present in tabular form [ 46 ] . Scoping reviews that focus on examining the range and nature of a broad topic area are described by Anderson et al . [ 68 ] as mapping reviews . In these studies , the research question is generic and usually relates to research trends . There is no preconceived plan to systematically review the literature located as part of the study itself . Instead , researchers might simply consider a speciﬁc timeframe for the literature to be mapped , that is , what research has been conducted in the past 10 years . We now turn our attention to reviews that aim to aggregate or integrate prior empirical ﬁndings . Integrative synthesis involves the collection and comparison of evidence that involves two or more data collection methods , while synthesis by aggregation involves the quantitative combination of results from homoge - neous primary studies [ 43 ] . Systematic reviews are frequently seen as concerned with providing research - based answers to speciﬁc questions about what works , or what works best , in relation to some practical problem [ 50 ] . They emerged in the late 1970s and early 1980s in response to calls from the ‘‘evidence - based medicine movement’’ to bridge the gap between the best evidence from research and optimal decision making by organizing the available knowledge about the effectiveness of health care interventions into usable and reliable formats . The terminology used to describe speciﬁc systematic approaches and variations in methods of synthesis for different types of systematic reviews has evolved over time and varies between ﬁelds , groups of researchers , and authors [ 31 ] . In this paper , we adopt the widely accepted deﬁnitions used by the Cochrane and Campbell Collaborations , which are two well - respected international research networks that produce systematic reviews in the ﬁelds of health care , education , Table 2 Typology of literature review types . Overarching goal Theoretical review types Scope of questions Search strategy Nature of primary sources Explicit study selection Quality appraisal Methods for synthesizing / analyzing ﬁndings Summarization of prior knowledge Narrative review Broad Usually selective Conceptual and empirical No No Narrative summary Descriptive review Broad Representative Empirical Yes No Content analysis / frequency analysis Scoping review Broad Comprehensive Conceptual and empirical Yes Not essential Content or thematic analysis Data aggregation or integration Meta - analysis Narrow Comprehensive Empirical ( quantitative only ) Yes Yes Statistical methods ( meta - analytic techniques ) Qualitative systematic review Narrow Comprehensive Empirical ( quantitative only ) Yes Yes Narrative synthesis Umbrella review Narrow Comprehensive Systematic reviews Yes Yes Narrative synthesis Explanation building Theoretical review Broad Comprehensive Conceptual and empirical Yes No Content analysis or interpretive methods Realist review Narrow Iterative and purposive Conceptual and empirical Yes Yes Mixed - methods approach Critical assessment of extant literature Critical review Broad Selective or representative Conceptual and empirical Yes or no Not essential Content analysis or critical interpretive methods G . Pare´ et al . / Information & Management 52 ( 2015 ) 183 – 199 186 social welfare , justice , and international development . Further - more , we incorporate into our typology the three main types of systematic reviews that emerge from the eminent Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions [ 51 ] , namely , meta - analyses , qualitative systematic reviews , and realist reviews . These three types of systematic reviews are described in more detail in the following paragraphs . Meta - analyses use speciﬁc data extraction techniques and statistical methods to aggregate quantitative data in the form of standard effect measures ( e . g . , risk ratios , odds ratios , mean differences , correlation coefﬁcients ) from two or more functionally similar studies , taking into account the relative sample size of each study [ 2 , 69 ] . They usually have four main goals : ( 1 ) evaluate the consistency / variability of the results between the primary studies included in the review ( i . e . , the between - study heterogeneity ) ; ( 2 ) investigate and explain ( if feasible ) the causes of any observed heterogeneity ( e . g . , through subgroup or meta - regression analy - ses ) to improve scientiﬁc understanding ; ( 3 ) calculate a summary effect size along with a conﬁdence interval ; and ( 4 ) assess the robustness of the cumulative effect size through sensitivity analyses and formal evaluations of the potential sources of study bias , including publication bias , that stem from the primary studies and might have an impact on the calculated summary effect . By pooling statistically signiﬁcant ﬁndings with non - signiﬁcant ﬁndings from all relevant studies included in the review , meta - analyses are able to calculate more precise estimates of the effects Table 3 Examples of literature review types . Review type Illustration Narrative review Aloini et al . [ 96 ] conducted a narrative review to compare ERP project risk management approaches and , ultimately , highlight the key risk factors and their impact on ERP project success . The extant literature was also classiﬁed in order to address and analyze each risk factor and its relevance during the different stages of the ERP project life cycle . While this review is not explicit in terms of how the search , selection and coding processes were performed , it provides a solid foundation for the development of new theoretical perspectives in this area along with a set of practical guidelines for ERP project managers . Descriptive review Palvia et al . ’s [ 97 ] analysis of the use of IS research methods represents a typical descriptive review in our ﬁeld . They surveyed articles in seven IS - related journals between 1993 and 2003 , then coded each article for up to two methodologies ( called primary and secondary ) , and ﬁnally calculated the frequency and analyzed the trend of each of 13 methodologies as used in these papers . According to the authors , their ﬁndings ‘‘provide the current state of research methodologies in use’’ ( p . 306 ) in the IS discipline . Scoping / mapping review Archer et al . [ 98 ] describe the design , functionality , implementations , applications , outcomes , and beneﬁts of personal health record ( PHR ) systems , with an emphasis on experiences in the United States and Canada . Based on a comprehensive search of several databases , from 1985 to 2010 , the authors selected 130 studies to provide an indication of the amount of research that is being done on the adoption of PHR systems . Then , in order to put all the studies into perspective , they described and mapped the literature according to study designs and key themes of PHRs ( e . g . , system attributes , purpose , adoption , acceptance , usability , barriers , and clinical outcomes ) . Meta - analysis Schepers and Wetzels [ 99 ] conducted a meta - analysis of previous research on the technology acceptance model ( TAM ) in an attempt to make well - grounded statements on the role of subjective norm . More precisely , these authors compared TAM results by taking into account moderating effects on one individual - related factor ( type of respondents ) , one technology - related factor ( type of technology ) , and one contingent factor ( culture ) . The authors conducted a comprehensive search in three academic databases , Google Scholar and several library catalogs . Explicit inclusion and exclusion criteria guided the selection of articles . All in all , 51 useable articles were found , containing altogether 63 studies . Findings revealed a signiﬁcant inﬂuence of subjective norm on perceived usefulness and behavioral intention to use and moderating effects were also observed for all three variables . Qualitative systematic review Pare´et al . [ 100 ] conducted a qualitative systematic review of the impacts of home telemonitoring , a patient management approach combining various information and communication technologies for monitoring chronic patients at distance . A comprehensive literature search was conducted on Medline and the Cochrane Library to identify relevant articles published prior to 2007 . A total of 65 empirical studies were selected using predeﬁned inclusion and exclusion criteria . Data analyses revealed that home telemonitoring represents a promising patient management approach that produces accurate and reliable data , empowers patients to self - manage their health , positively inﬂuences their attitudes and compliance behaviors , and potentially improves their medical conditions . Umbrella review Mbemba et al . [ 101 ] conducted an umbrella review aimed to synthesize the effectiveness of various strategies including information and communication technology ( ICT ) usage to increase nurse retention in rural or remote areas . The authors consulted several databases including MEDLINE , CINAHL , EMBASE and the search engine Google Scholar . While the search was international , inclusion was limited to publications between 1990 and 2012 . Clear inclusion and exclusion criteria were established by the authors . Two independent coders read the title and abstract of each retrieved article to identify potentially relevant reviews ; reviewed the full text of each potentially relevant article , compared their results and agreed on the ﬁnal codiﬁcation ; and used PRISMA to assess the quality of the included reviews . Of 517 screened publications , ﬁve systematic reviews were included in the ﬁnal sample . Two reviews showed that ﬁnancial - incentive programs have substantial evidence to improve the distribution of nursing staff in rural and remote areas . The other three reviews highlighted supportive relationships in nursing , ICT usage , and health career pathways as factors affecting nurse retention in these areas . Theoretical review DeLone and McLean’s [ 102 ] seminal article on IS success provides an excellent example of a theoretical review . In this article , the authors express the motivation that if IS research is to make a contribution to the world of practice , it is essential to deﬁne a measure of IS success that will be used to evaluate IS policies , practice and procedures . In recognition of this importance , they conduct a literature review of previously published empirical and conceptual studies that have attempted to measure various dimensions and factors pertaining to IS success . Taken together , these studies provide a representative sample of the work conducted in this particular domain from 1981 to 1988 . Subsequently , the authors present a conceptual framework with six interrelated categories of IS success , which is used to organize the extant IS research in this topic and discover patterns and commonalities . Based on this framework they integrate the multiple dimensions of IS success that were discovered from the literature review and propose a comprehensive conceptual model of IS success to guide future research efforts . Realist review Wong et al . [ 103 ] conducted a realist review aiming to produce theory driven criteria to guide the development and evaluation of Internet - based medical courses . The authors searched 15 electronic databases and references of included studies , seeking to identify theoretical models of how the Internet might support learning from empirical studies which ( a ) used the Internet to support learning ; ( b ) involved doctors or medical students ; and ( c ) reported a formal evaluation . 249 papers met the inclusion criteria . The authors identiﬁed two main theories of the course - in - context that explained variation in learners’ satisfaction and outcomes , namely , Davis et al . ’s [ 104 ] TAM and Laurillard’s [ 105 ] model of interactive dialog . Using immersion and interpretation , the authors tested the theories by considering how well they explained the different outcomes achieved in different educational contexts . They came to the conclusion that when designing or choosing an Internet - based course , attention must be given to the ﬁt between its technical attributes and learners’ needs and priorities ; and to ways of providing meaningful interaction . Critical review Balijepally et al . ’s [ 106 ] article on cluster analysis is an example of a critical review . In this article , the authors assess the application of cluster analysis in the information systems literature published in major outlets . Based on the analysis of 55 IS applications of cluster analysis , various deﬁciencies noticed in its use were identiﬁed along with suggestions for future practice . By analyzing the results over two time periods , longitudinal trends in the rigorous application of this technique are also highlighted . G . Pare´ et al . / Information & Management 52 ( 2015 ) 183 – 199 187 of the phenomenon under investigation than those derived from the individual studies alone when these are examined individually as discrete sources of information [ 2 , 57 ] . Meta - analyses are considered to be a powerful research method of synthesis that allows researchers draw meaningful inferences by settling existing controversies that arise from conﬂicting empirical studies . Compared to qualitative systematic reviews ( see below ) that integrate the available evidence narratively , meta - analyses hold many potential advantages , including an increase in power , an improvement in precision , and the ability to discover patterns , moderators , mediators , or even relationships between studies with dispersed ﬁndings [ 57 , 69 ] . Qualitative systematic reviews attempt to search , identify , select , appraise , and abstract data from quantitative empirical studies to answer the following main questions : ( 1 ) What is the direction of the effect ? ( 2 ) What is the size of effect ? ( 3 ) Is the effect consistent across the included studies ? ( 4 ) What is the strength of the evidence of the effect ? They employ the typical systematic review process , but contrary to the meta - analytic approach , they use narrative and more subjective ( rather than statistical ) methods to bring together the ﬁndings of the included studies and follow through questions 1 to 4 [ 51 , 70 ] . Although the extraction of statistical data from the empirical studies ( e . g . , p values , ratios , or correlations ) and numerical analyses may occur simultaneously , the deﬁning element of qualitative systematic reviews is the adoption of a textual approach in the process of analysis and synthesis [ 71 ] . The reviewers , who are usually experts in a given ﬁeld , might use various content analysis methods such as groupings , clusters , frameworks , classiﬁcation schemes , and tabulations of characteristics to summarize the ﬁndings of the selected studies , narratively integrate the cumulative evidence , and arrive at conclusions and / or recommendations . Furthermore , they might use a quasi - quantitative technique called vote counting [ 2 ] to determine the direction and consistency of the effect or relationship between the studies included in the review . Vote counting , also known as box scoring , is a method that uses statistics such as probabilities and p values reported in the individual studies to compare the number of studies with statistically signiﬁcant or non - signiﬁcant results that favor or disconﬁrm a hypothesis [ 2 , 72 ] . For instance , it can be used to count and compare how many empirical studies within the review show the adoption of a particular information system to be positively associated with an organizational characteristic ( e . g . , size ) , and how many show that it is not . It is considered to be a straightforward and easily interpreted method . However , vote counting has a notorious record for being misleading , particularly when the studies included in the review are small and not sufﬁciently powered to reach statistically signiﬁcant results [ 33 , 72 ] . Quantitative empirical studies ( e . g . , randomized or nonran - domized controlled trials and cohort studies ) are central to the endeavors of qualitative systematic reviews and meta - analyses that address questions about the effectiveness of interventions , and in most cases , it is neither appropriate nor possible to include evidence from qualitative research in these types of reviews [ 73 ] . However , over the years , the application of different study designs and review methods has been extended to include the evaluation of multi - faceted and complex interventions that have a more conceptual nature or might be embedded in more dynamic social systems that affect the outcomes of interest [ 59 ] . Evidence from empirical studies that explore the reason why an intervention works or not , for whom and in what circumstances has an important role in ensuring that systematic reviews are of their maximum value to policy , practice and decision - making [ 73 ] . Umbrella reviews , also called overviews of reviews , may be described as a tertiary type of study that integrates relevant evidence from multiple systematic reviews ( qualitative or quantitative ) into one accessible and usable document to address a narrow research question [ 47 , 60 ] . It is a relatively new method of evidence synthesis that has emerged in the health sciences domain both within and outside the Cochrane Collaboration as a consequence of the constantly growing number of published systematic reviews [ 74 ] . A recent study by Bastian et al . [ 75 ] estimated that every day , 11 new systematic reviews and 75 trials are published and indexed in MEDLINE . This increase has led to a rise in the number of systematic reviews that address the same or a very similar set of research questions , with a concomitant increase in discordant ﬁndings or interpretations among them [ 76 ] . Such discordances may trigger passionate debates and pose a signiﬁcant challenge for decision - makers , including policymakers , research - ers , and other stakeholders who rely on these reviews to make informed decisions [ 76 ] . In this context , overviews of reviews represent the next logical and appropriate step to address these shortcomings . Currently , there is no universally accepted technical term for this type of review . As a result , over the years , several labels have appeared in the extant literature , of which the most common are : ‘‘umbrella review , ’’ ‘‘overview of systematic reviews , ’’ ‘‘systematic review of systematic reviews , ’’ and ‘‘meta - reviews’’ [ 77 ] . Each of these terms has its proponents and has been used in recent publications [ e . g . , 80 , 81 ] . Umbrella reviews appraise the methodological rigor and quality of evidence of systematic reviews by means of explicit criteria , such as AMSTAR [ 80 ] and GRADE [ 81 ] . They compare , contrast , and reconcile their results on a variety of different levels ( e . g . , outcomes , interventions , population ) with due consideration of any biases or ﬂaws contained in each systematic review and ultimately compile all available evidence into one summary table [ 47 ] . In general , umbrella reviews employ many of the same methodological standards and data analysis techniques that are used in systematic reviews [ 47 , 56 ] . However , as they represent a relatively new research design , their guidelines , methods , and procedures are still evolving to ensure that the produced results are comprehensive , valid , and reliable for end - users [ 47 , 60 ] . The next two forms of research synthesis aim at explanation building . First , a theoretical review draws on existing conceptual and empirical studies to provide a context for identifying , describing , and transforming into a higher order of theoretical structure and various concepts , constructs or relationships . Their primary goal is to develop a conceptual framework or model with a set of research propositions or hypotheses [ 11 , 82 ] . They can be conducted to tackle an emerging issue that would beneﬁt from the development of new theoretical foundations or a mature topic for which an accumulated body of research exists but there is a lack of appropriate theories or current theories are inadequate in addressing existing research problems [ 11 ] . A theoretical review brings together diverse streams of work and uses various structured approaches such as classiﬁcation systems , taxonomies and frameworks to organize prior research effectively , examine their interrelationships , and discover patterns or commonalities that will facilitate the development of new theories [ 11 ] . As such , it goes beyond merely assembling and describing past work . The primary contribution and value of this type of review lies in its ability to develop novel conceptualizations or extend current ones by identifying and highlighting knowledge gaps between what we know and what we need to know [ 11 ] . Contrary to aggregative reviews , theoretical reviews usually start with a broad review question that is often reﬁned as more evidence is gathered and analyzed [ 83 ] . In terms of search strategy , Webster and Watson [ 11 ] recommend a systematic approach to ensure that a relatively complete census of the relevant literature ( both theoretical and empirical ) is accumulated . Some argue that G . Pare´ et al . / Information & Management 52 ( 2015 ) 183 – 199 188 formal appraisals of quality may not be necessary [ e . g . , 86 ] , while others propose that weak or fatally ﬂawed papers ( from a conceptual or methodological standpoint ) should be excluded from the review altogether [ e . g . , 38 ] . Several methods of synthesis can be used in theoretical reviews . These can be grouped according to the epistemological and ontological assumptions that underlie the review . On the one hand , interpretive methods include grounded theory , meta - ethnography , meta - synthesis , metatrian - gulation , and meta - narratives [ e . g . , 54 , 59 , 83 , 87 ] . On the other hand , positivist methods including content analysis and qualita - tive comparative analysis [ e . g . , 69 ] can also be used . Second , realist reviews ( also called meta - narrative reviews or qualitative evidence synthesis reviews ) are theory - driven inter - pretative reviews that were developed to inform , enhance , extend or alternatively supplement conventional systematic reviews by making sense of heterogeneous evidence about complex inter - ventions applied in diverse contexts in a way that informs policy decision making [ 86 ] . They originated from criticisms of conventional systematic reviews and meta - analyses of non - complex interventions that center on their simplistic , positivist underlying assumptions [ 87 ] . As explained earlier , systematic reviews seek to identify causation : If X is applied , then Y will occur . Such logic is appropriate for scientiﬁc ﬁelds such as medicine and education in which randomized controlled trials and the results of individual trials can be combined and aggregated to see whether a new treatment or intervention improves outcomes . However , Pawson [ 88 ] argues that it is not possible to establish such direct causal links between interven - tions and outcomes in ﬁelds such as social policy , where for any social program intervention , there is unlikely to be a regular , consistent outcome . Instead , there will be a pattern of outcomes , including successful , unsuccessful and ‘‘a bit of both’’ because of different and dynamic contexts [ 88 ] . We concur with Oates [ 87 ] that Pawson’s description of the nature of social programs is analogous to the situation in the IS ﬁeld . Indeed , it has long been recognized that any intervention involving IT is inserted into a socially constructed context , and the intervention can be modiﬁed by the context in which it occurs [ e . g . , 91 ] . To circumvent these limitations , Pawson et al . [ 55 ] have developed a new approach to synthesizing prior knowledge that seeks to unpack the mechanism of how ‘‘complex interventions’’ work ( or why they fail ) in particular contexts or settings . This form of synthesis involves a critical realist approach . Realism is a methodological orientation that has its roots in philosophy and applications in ﬁelds such as sociology , psychology and economics [ 90 ] . Under realism , the basic evaluative question of what works changes to ‘‘what is it about this intervention that works , for whom , in what circumstances , in what respects and why ? ’’ This approach , which has an explanatory focus , has no particular preference of either quantitative or qualitative evidence . Indeed , it sees merit in multiple methods so that both processes and impacts of complex interventions may be investigated . A realist review begins by articulating the likely underlying mechanisms and then analyzes the available evidence to ﬁnd out whether and where these mechanisms are applicable [ 43 , 59 ] . Any relevant primary studies found in the literature are viewed as case studies that can test and modify the initial theories [ 43 ] . The search process in realist reviews is often iterative and purposive . A preliminary search maps out the scope of the topic so that an initial theory can be developed , subsequent searches can look for the empirical evidence to test the theory and a ﬁnal search can ﬁne - tune the emerging research synthesis [ 90 ] . A realist review assesses each primary study for its relevance and the rigor of evidence it offers to support or contradict parts of the emerging theory . It might have strong evidence in one area and weak or no evidence in another ; the individual study might be ﬂawed overall , but it could still offer useful evidence in some sections [ 43 ] . As mentioned earlier , a realist review perceives the task of synthesis as one of reﬁning theory . Realist reviews pose considerable conceptual and methodological challenges , particularly relating to the identiﬁcation of relevant studies , the appraisal of included studies , and the methods of synthesizing evidence [ 63 ] . A more detailed discussion of data synthesis methods and publication standards within a realist framework can be found in Wong et al . [ 62 ] , Pawson et al . [ 55 ] , Shepperd et al . [ 59 ] , Barnett - Page and Thomas [ 91 ] , Pearson [ 92 ] , and Popay [ 93 ] . The ﬁnal form of research synthesis in our typology is called critical review . These reviews aim to critically analyze the extant literature on a broad topic to reveal weaknesses , contradictions , controversies , or inconsistencies [ 34 , 82 , 94 ] . Unlike a review that seeks to integrate existing work , a review that involves a critical assessment does not necessarily compare the covered works to one another . Instead , it holds each work up against a criterion and ﬁnds it more or less acceptable [ 94 ] . The strength of a critical review lies in its ability to highlight problems , discrepancies or areas in which the existing knowledge about a topic is untrustworthy [ 40 , 83 ] . In this way , it can constructively inform other scholars and strengthen knowledge development by giving a focus and direction to studies for further improvement [ e . g . , 97 ] . Critical reviews are either selective or representative , and they rarely involve a comprehensive search of all of the relevant literature [ 40 ] . Importantly , critical reviews may provide expla - nations as to how the review process was conducted , but they rarely assess the quality of the studies selected , especially when confronted with qualitative research for which no hierarchy of study designs exists [ 38 ] . For these reasons , critical reviews are often vulnerable on the grounds of subjectivity . Similar to theoretical reviews , critical reviews can apply a variety of data synthesis methods that can be grouped as either positivist ( e . g . , content analysis ) or interpretivist ( e . g . , meta - ethnography , critical interpretive synthesis ) according to the authors’ episte - mological positions . 3 . Applying the typology to IS research 3 . 1 . Methodology To apply our typology of literature reviews to IS research , we conducted a descriptive review . As mentioned above , descriptive reviews seek to determine the extent to which a body of empirical studies supports or reveals any interpretable patterns or trends with respect to pre - existing propositions , theories , methodologies or ﬁndings [ 2 ] . In this line of thought , our goal is to provide answers to the following research questions : ( 1 ) What are the current review practices in the IS ﬁeld ? ( 2 ) How have these behaviors evolved over time ? What review types are more prevalent in the IS ﬁeld ? Why ? Descriptive reviews do not pretend to be comprehen - sive . Instead , they usually employ structured search methods to form a representative sample of a larger group of published works related to a particular area of investigation . In this study , we considered ﬁve top - ranked IS journals , namely , Information & Management ( I & M ) , Information Systems Research ( ISR ) , Journal of the Association for Information Systems ( JAIS ) , Journal of Management Information Systems ( JMIS ) , and Management Information Systems Quarterly ( MISQ ) . A pilot search using the ISI Web of Science database proved to be inadequate , that is , several review articles in the selected journals could not be captured with the use of broad terms such as review , research synthesis , literature survey , and meta - analysis . As shown later , this might be partially related to the fact that several IS authors do not explicitly state the nature of their reviews in the titles , abstracts or the articles themselves . Hence , we decided to G . Pare´ et al . / Information & Management 52 ( 2015 ) 183 – 199 189 manually search the selected journals over a 15 - year period . Each journal review started with the table of contents and extended to the abstracts , the keywords and the articles themselves . In the search process , we looked for articles whose overarching goal was to summarize or synthesize the extant literature on a given topic or methodology without collecting or analyzing any primary data . Editorials , short research commentaries , and research notes were not considered . Each journal was searched by one member of the research team . The selection process produced a total of 146 review articles . When there was uncertainty regarding the inclusion or exclusion of a particular article , the source was sent to the principal investigator for a second opinion . All in all , seven articles were removed , leaving us with a sample of 139 reviews . The complete list of references is available in Appendix II . A coding scheme was then developed and tested to help us identify the types of reviews published in the selected journals and their relevant characteristics . Our coding scheme included the following sections : ( 1 ) generic information about the review article ( journal name , year of publication ) ; ( 2 ) the dominant review type based on the deﬁnitions provided in our typology ; ( 3 ) speciﬁc terms or labels used by the authors themselves ( if any ) to characterize their reviews and compare them with their dominant types ( based on our coding ) ; and ( 4 ) the main targeted audience for each review article . The reliability of the coding scheme was tested by randomly selecting 10 reviews , each of which was read and independently coded by two members of the research team . This resulted in a 90 % rate of agreement . The differences were reconciled by consensus during a team meeting . Following this pretest , some minor adjustments were made to the coding scheme . The coding of the remaining articles was divided equally among the members of the research team . When there was uncertainty regarding how to code a particular review ( approximately 6 % of all reviews ) , the opinion of another member of the research team was solicited . Consensus was reached in all cases . 4 . Results A preliminary assessment of our sample proves itself to be interesting and therefore deserves some attention . All 139 reviews were classiﬁed according to journal names and publication dates . Table 4 reveals that the number of review articles differs widely from journal to journal . Journal of the AIS and MIS Quarterly lead with 31 % and 30 % of the review papers appearing in their issues , respectively . These journals are followed by Information and Management ( 19 % ) , Information Systems Research ( 14 % ) , and Journal of Management Information Systems ( 6 % ) . All in all , review articles represent 5 % of all papers published in the selected journals during the 1999 – 2013 period . Interestingly , the number of review articles published in these journals has increased over the years , as shown in Fig . 1 . Indeed , reviews published during the ﬁrst ﬁve years ( 1999 – 2003 ) represent 27 % of our sample , while those published between 2009 and 2013 represent 36 % of the sample . Table 5 presents the major review types found in the selected journals . Each review article was coded according to its dominant goal ( s ) . The majority of the reviews in our sample were theoretical ( 37 % ) in nature , followed by narrative reviews ( 27 % ) , meta - analyses ( 10 % ) , descriptive reviews ( 9 % ) , critical reviews ( 5 % ) , and scoping reviews ( 4 % ) . As Cooper [ 5 ] mentions , a particular review might pursue multiple overarching goals or share characteristics that belong to more than one review type . Our sample supports this and comprises nine ( 7 % ) hybrid reviews . For instance , Dube´ and Pare´’s [ 107 ] review was categorized as ‘‘hybrid’’ because it pursued two main objectives , namely , to critically appraise the level of methodological rigor in positivist IS case research ( critical review ) and to identify patterns and trends in our use of this methodology ( descriptive review ) . Interestingly , we found no instance of qualitative systematic reviews , umbrella reviews , and realist reviews in our sample . Lastly , our data set did not exhibit any clear temporal trends in terms of the popularity of each review type . This may be due to the small size of our sample ( 139 reviews ) and / or the short period covered by our survey ( 15 years ) . A closer examination of the articles in our database revealed that almost half ( 47 % ) of them were not explicitly presented as reviews or research syntheses either in the title , the abstract or the text itself ( see Table 6 ) . Among those authors who did , we observed much inconsistency in the naming and labels used to qualify their reviews . Indeed , almost three out of four ( 74 % ) of the ‘‘explicit’’ reviews used labels or terms that did not correspond to those found in our typology . For example , based on our coding of the 139 papers , we identiﬁed 14 descriptive reviews . The authors of these reviews used terms other than ‘‘descriptive review’’ to qualify their work , including ‘‘concise review , ’’ ‘‘literature review , ’’ ‘‘meta - analysis , ’’ ‘‘review , ’’ and ‘‘comprehensive review . ’’ The same situation was observed with the other review methods with the exception of the meta - analyses , which were accurately qualiﬁed by their authors . In our viewpoint , these inconsistencies are Table 4 Review articles by journal ( 1999 – 2013 ) . Journals in alphabetical order # of articles # of reviews % of reviews in each journal % of reviews in our sample I & M 828 26 3 19 ISR 485 20 4 14 JAIS 301 43 14 31 JMIS 566 9 2 6 MISQ 474 41 9 30 Total 2654 139 5 100 8 4 9 9 10 10 7 9 12 10 6 12 8 12 14 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 Fig . 1 . Number of review articles published per year , 1999 – 2013 . Table 5 Types of IS review articles ( n = 139 ) . Review type Number of reviews % Theoretical review 52 37 Narrative review 38 27 Meta - analysis 14 10 Descriptive review 13 9 Hybrid review 9 7 Critical review 7 5 Scoping review 6 4 Qualitative systematic review – – Realist review – – Umbrella review – – G . Pare´ et al . / Information & Management 52 ( 2015 ) 183 – 199 190 precisely the result of a lack of a common typology and of the ‘‘fuzzy’’ nature of review articles . Last , Cooper [ 5 ] discussed the importance of understanding the audience targeted by the review articles ( e . g . , scholars , practitioners , and the general public ) . Although a review may be beneﬁcial and useful to a large crowd , in which the way it is written ( i . e . , style , level of detail , use of jargon , and discussion of implications ) will often vary depending on the nature of the audience and the extent to which it is specialized . The majority of the reviews in our sample ( 66 % ) reported only scholars as their targeted audience , while 34 % referred to both scholars and practitioners . It is also worth stressing that no review reported only practitioners as the targeted audience . 5 . Discussion In light of the calls for an increased use of evidence - based management and research to generate stronger evidence , review articles become essential tools for summarizing or synthesizing the existing literature in all applied ﬁelds , such as medicine , nursing , engineering , and information systems . When appropri - ately conducted , reviews represent powerful information sources for researchers as well as practitioners that seek existing evidence to guide their decision making and practices . In its best form , a review paper becomes a much - cited piece of work that researchers seek out as a ﬁrst clear outline of the literature when undertaking an empirical study . Studies that track and gauge the impact of articles have found that reviews are cited and downloaded more often than other types of published articles [ 108 , 109 ] . As an indication , the reviews in our sample had an average total of 272 citations as of February 2014 . Although it is certainly not easy to undertake the process of creating a review , the commitment to complete a review article provides one’s academic community with a tremendous service [ 110 ] . In fact , several review articles have been recognized as true paradigm shifters in the IS ﬁeld [ e . g . , 107 , 113 – 116 ] . As presented above , a total of 139 reviews were examined to identify the most common types published in ﬁve top - ranked IS journals and determine their main characteristics . An increasing trend over time in terms of the number of review articles was demonstrated , which may have been attributed to the efforts of senior IS scholars encouraging such development . This trend is expected to continue in light of the evidence - based management movement and the value of well - conducted reviews as essential tools for synthesizing existing scientiﬁc evidence related to a research question [ 115 ] . Our assessment revealed that almost half of the reviews in our sample were not explicitly presented as research syntheses . The inclusion of the review type in the title or the abstract of future review articles may improve identiﬁcation as well as indexing in databases . Importantly , the growth in undertaking review articles in the IS ﬁeld has resulted in a plethora of terminology to describe approaches that , despite their different names , share certain essential characteristics . In the results section , we exposed several inconsistencies in the labels used by authors to qualify the different review types with the exception of meta - analyses that were properly identiﬁed . This ﬁnding indicates that there may have been some confusion over the nature of these reviews , the reasons why they are conducted , and how they are developed . For instance , we found a few narrative reviews that were deﬁned by their authors as ‘‘systematic’’ that did not adopt the expected standards in terms of the protection against bias and the quality assessment for the selection of primary research . On this basis , the correct label would be ‘‘structured narrative review’’ and not ‘‘systematic review . ’’ In this line of thought , the present article proposes a typology of nine review types based on seven dimensions to which scholars within and outside the IS ﬁeld can refer in the future . This typology will guide future efforts for the publication of review articles , especially in light of the current absence of common terminology and the labeling of reviews in most business ﬁelds . This was clearly observed in our analysis that revealed a broad diversity of terms used to refer to review articles . The typology we propose herein allows researchers to gain a better understanding of the similarities and differences between review types , which will ultimately ‘‘organize’’ the publication of future research syntheses . It will also inform the decision about the type of review to conduct as well as consult that would be best suited to a speciﬁc question or issue . Furthermore , our ﬁndings show that theoretical and narrative reviews represent by far the most prevalent types of reviews published in the IS literature . Theory plays a central role in our ﬁeld both in explaining why things happen the way they do and in predicting what things might happen given certain circumstances . Table 6 Terms used by authors to qualify their reviews . Clear indication this is a review article If yes Other terms or labels used by authors Yes No Called as such by the authors Called differently by the authors Theoretical review 18 ( 35 % ) 34 ( 65 % ) 1 ( 6 % ) 17 ( 94 % ) Review ; interdisciplinary review ; metatriangulation ; comprehensive review Narrative review 15 ( 39 % ) 23 ( 61 % ) 1 ( 7 % ) 14 ( 93 % ) Historical review ; literature review , systematic review ; overview Meta - analysis 14 ( 100 % ) 0 ( 0 % ) 14 ( 100 % ) 0 ( 0 % ) None Descriptive review 9 ( 69 % ) 4 ( 31 % ) 1 ( 11 % ) 8 ( 89 % ) Concise review ; literature review ; meta - analysis ; review ; comprehensive review Hybrid review 7 ( 78 % ) 2 ( 22 % ) 0 ( 0 % ) 7 ( 100 % ) Comprehensive review ; review ; meta - analysis ; descriptive review Critical review 6 ( 86 % ) 1 ( 14 % ) 2 ( 33 % ) 4 ( 66 % ) Post - positivist review ; reﬂective review ; review Scoping review 4 ( 67 % ) 2 ( 33 % ) 0 ( 0 % ) 4 ( 100 % ) Interdisciplinary review ; literature review ; research synthesis All reviews 73 ( 53 % ) 66 ( 47 % ) 19 ( 26 % ) 54 ( 74 % ) G . Pare´ et al . / Information & Management 52 ( 2015 ) 183 – 199 191 The prevalence of theoretical reviews in the IS ﬁeld cannot be dissociated from the creation of specialized ‘‘departments’’ in both JAIS ( Review & Theory Development ) and MIS Quarterly ( Theory and Review ) , where a large majority of theoretical reviews in our sample have appeared . Our assessment also reveals that most narrative reviews published in our ﬁeld do not provide any explanations about how the review process was conducted , and therefore , they are vulnerable on the grounds of subjectivity [ 65 ] . Although there are no rigid published guidelines that designate how to conduct and report a narrative review , over the years , there have been several efforts to introduce some rigor in their research methodology that will elucidate common pitfalls and bring changes into their publication standards , including a structured approach and transparency in terms of reporting [ 64 ] . In the IS domain , a few researchers have recently contributed to advancing the knowledge on how to structure high - quality narrative reviews . For instance , Levy and Ellis [ 12 ] proposed a generic framework for conducting and writing an effective literature review . Their framework follows the systematic data - processing approach comprised of three steps , namely : ( 1 ) literature gathering and screening ( inputs ) ; ( 2 ) analyzing the evidence ( processing ) ; and ( 3 ) writing the literature review ( output ) . The authors provide detailed instructions on how to conduct each stage of the review process . For their part , vom Brocke et al . [ 13 ] proposed a series of guidelines for conducting IS literature reviews , with a particular focus on how to search and extract the relevant body of knowledge . More recently , Bandara et al . [ 3 ] proposed a structured , pre - deﬁned and tool - supported method to identify papers to review within a feasible scope , extract relevant content from identiﬁed articles , synthesize and analyze the ﬁndings and effectively write and present the results of the literature review . We encourage IS researchers to consult the aforementioned sources to produce high - quality narrative reviews . Contrary to theoretical and narrative reviews , qualitative systematic , umbrella and realist reviews could not be found in our sample . This is consistent with Oates’ [ 87 ] recent ﬁnding that there has been little take - up of the evidence - based practice ( EBP ) paradigm in the IS community . A possible reason for the lack of interest in IS for qualitative systematic reviews ( and umbrella reviews ) may be simply that researchers in our ﬁeld are not knowledgeable about the methods themselves . Indeed , to our knowledge , very few Ph . D . programs in our ﬁeld offer seminars on systematic approaches , methods and techniques . Another reason may be that researchers may feel that qualitative systematic reviews are not appropriate for IS research because conventional EBP focuses on ‘‘what works’’ – whether the introduction of an intervention brings about a successful outcome – and therefore relies on randomized controlled trials that are rarely conducted in IS . We concur with Oates [ 87 ] that a more nuanced systematic review approach is needed in IS given the socio - technical nature of IT projects . According to Pawson [ 88 ] , the aim of explaining ‘‘what works for whom in what circumstances and in what respects’’ calls for systematic reviews that are explanatory in nature . Hence , realist reviews may be more suitable to the complexity of IS phenomena as well as the qualitative , interpretive research that is more common in our ﬁeld than conventional systematic reviews [ 87 ] . With the increased publication of reviews and the awareness of their potential contribution at the research and practice levels , we must also bring the ‘‘quality’’ element to the discussion of conducting literature reviews . Although we assert that our classiﬁcation does not privilege any speciﬁc type of review as being ‘‘better’’ or more valuable than another , we realize that the methodological quality and reporting characteristics of a review are critical aspects that should be discussed and examined when considering any review article . Nevertheless , although prior research has attempted to provide guidelines for evaluating the quality of certain types of review articles ( e . g . , AMSTAR for systematic reviews ) , the general discussion of the quality of reviews remains highly abstract and thus prone to subjectivity and judgment on the side of the readers and assessors . To evaluate the quality of a review , it is ﬁrst important to identify the dimensions that would represent the concept of quality . Speciﬁcally , we suggest that the question of synthesis quality has two dimensions . The ﬁrst dimension involves the rigor of the review , and the second involves its relevance . As with traditional research methods ( e . g . , surveys and case studies ) , the term rigor refers to the reliability and validity of the review process . First , reliability describes the reproducibility of the review process , which may be facilitated by a comprehensive documentation of the literature search process , extraction , coding and analysis performed in the review . Regardless of whether the search is exhaustive and whether it involves a systematic approach to the extraction and synthesis of the evidence , it is important that the review clearly documents the steps and approach that were used in the process of its development . A reader should be able to understand : ( 1 ) the search terminology and databases ( and years ) consulted ( i . e . , what was searched ) ; ( 2 ) the decision rule that is associated with a selective , representative or comprehensive inclusion of articles ( i . e . , what was included ) ; and ( 3 ) a clear statement on whether the quality of the included articles was appraised ( and if so , the criteria used for appraisal ) . Second , validity characterizes the degree to which the review process was conducted ‘‘appropriately . ’’ It goes beyond documentation to reﬂect decisions related to the selection of the databases or publications , the keywords used , the period of time covered , the articles selected in the search , and the application of backward and forward searches [ 11 , 13 ] . Having said this , we caution IS researchers not to confuse the methodological quality or rigor of a review with its exhaustiveness . Instead , the quality of a review is rather reﬂected by the thoroughness of the documentation of the search and synthesis process , and the soundness in the choice of the approach used . At any point in time , a researcher interested in replicating a review should have all of the information needed to complete the process . In other words , there would be ‘‘enough evidence’’ to guide the process . We realize that the nature of the details and process involved in conducting a review is contingent on its type . For example , in the case of narrative reviews , we expect ﬂexibility in terms of designing the review strategy and identifying and selecting the articles [ 2 , 34 ] . On the other hand , descriptive reviews involve a more structured approach to the search of relevant articles and the objective evaluation of existing research [ 2 ] . The same applies for qualitative systematic reviews , meta - analyses and umbrella reviews , which are all characterized by their high level of rigor , structured presentation of methods , and systematic analysis and synthesis of evidence . For their part , critical reviews , which are more interpretative in nature , often involve subjectivity in the aggregation of the literature [ 34 ] . However , in order for the reader – be it a researcher or a practitioner – to beneﬁt from the evidence in the literature on a given IS topic , it is important to document and present an informative explanation about how the review was conducted [ 14 ] . Even if the levels of rigor , analysis and synthesis vary between review types , we concur with vom Brocke et al . [ 13 ] that this information would contribute to the understanding of the relevance of the evidence and its generaliz - ability in various contexts . With regard to the second dimension of quality , relevance , a successful review will convincingly answer the initial research questions [ 5 ] . Hence , it is important to identify upfront the primary goal of the review , as indicated in the discussion of rigor . Some reviews are exploratory in nature ( e . g . , scoping reviews ) , G . Pare´ et al . / Information & Management 52 ( 2015 ) 183 – 199 192 whereas others may be conducted to discover patterns ( e . g . , descriptive reviews ) or involve a synthesis approach that may include the critical analysis of prior research ( e . g . , critical reviews ) or the statistical evaluation of evidence ( e . g . , meta - analyses ) . Hence , to evaluate relevance and utility , it is critical to know upfront why the review is conducted and its primary goal . For instance , theoretical reviews should satisfy the formal criteria for good theories by being consistent , parsimonious , and elegant [ 116 ] . The proposed typology may in itself be useful in supporting and evaluating the quality of review articles and therefore adds a third overarching dimension of quality , namely , the internal consistency of the review . It outlines the core characteristics that are speciﬁc to each review type that are in line with the quality dimensions discussed above and may act as guidelines for scholars that plan to develop reviews . By doing so , it integrates the two quality dimensions of rigor and relevance and allows the evaluation of whether a set of chosen characteristics is internally consistent . For instance , according to our typology authors who establish the goal of aggregating empirical results with the hope of resolving inconsistencies could not couple this objective with selective coverage of the literature . Likewise , the exhaustive citation of prior literature would be counter - productive for a theoretical review . As a ﬁnal example , a review aiming at assessing the extent of progress with regard to the application of a particular methodology in a given ﬁeld would also be inconsistent with a narrative account of the extant literature . In line with the third quality dimension , we strongly recommend that the objective ( s ) of a literature review be made explicit at the start of the process , as this is likely to inﬂuence the methods used for the review . Having common ground and a structured scheme for discussing the fundamental characteristics of different types of reviews will contribute to the quality of IS review articles by supporting authors in their development and reviewers in their evaluation . The key to the use of the typology lies in the willingness of researchers to state explicitly their intent and the underlying process of their reviews . A review article should not be projected as a ‘‘black box’’ that leads the reader to make assumptions about ‘‘what was done’’ and ‘‘how’’ it was realized . The reader should be able to understand what was done and make an informed decision as to the utility of the review to him or her . This is especially important in the current environment with an increasing focus on EBP and the importance of making evidence readily accessible to managers and decision makers . The authors of reviews can make the greatest contribution to the quality of review articles by ensuring the clarity of the process ( i . e . , rigor ) and the main goal of the review ( i . e . , relevance ) and ensuring the alignment of the set of characteristics chosen for a review . As a ﬁnal note , it is important to recognize that beyond the general criteria discussed above , there is no set of speciﬁc rules that applies to all types of reviews . Hence , it would be misleading to evaluate the quality of different types of research syntheses using the same criteria . It is rather important to rely on guidelines that take into consideration the uniqueness and speciﬁcity of each review type . 6 . Conclusion Considering the calls for research in our ﬁeld to be more relevant and for IS to develop a cumulative tradition [ 117 , 118 ] , we hope that more review articles will be published in the future , and we encourage researchers who start a review article to use our typology to position their contribution . The publication of rigorous and relevant reviews will also contribute to the development of vast knowledge and theories related to the development , implementation and management of IS in organizations . These reviews should focus on targeting not only researchers but also practitioners to allow the latter group to learn about progress in our ﬁeld and apply it to their decision making and practices , as suggested by proponents of the EBP movement . We also recommend that future research focus on how to prioritize knowledge synthesis topics and continue to develop guidelines that can further guide the development and writing of different types of reviews in our ﬁeld . Appendix I Main sources used to identify the dimensions of the typology and properties of each dimension across review types . Sources Review types Overarching goal Scope of question Search strategy or coverage Nature of primary sources Explicit study selection Quality appraisal Methods for synthesizing / analyzing ﬁndings Arksey and O’Malley [ 46 ] S U U U U U U Becker and Oxman [ 47 ] U U U U U U U U Davies [ 37 ] N , QS , MA , R U U U Dixon - Woods et al . [ 38 ] R U U U U U U U Grant and Booth [ 34 ] S , QS , MA , U , C U U U Green et al . [ 10 ] N U U U U Grimshaw [ 63 ] SR , MA , R , S U U U U Hammersley [ 50 ] QS U U U Higgins and Green [ 51 ] QS , MA U U U U U U U Kitchenham et al . [ 42 ] S , QS U U U U U Levac et al . [ 52 ] S U U U U U Pawson et al . [ 55 ] R U U U U U U U Rosenthal and DiMatteo [ 57 ] MA U U U U U U U Rousseau et al . [ 43 ] QS , MA , T , R U U U Rumrill et al . [ 44 ] S U U U U U U Shepperd et al . [ 59 ] R U U U U U Smith et al . [ 60 ] U U U U U U Tricco et al . [ 31 ] SR U U U U U Webster and Watson [ 11 ] T U Whittemore [ 45 ] QS , MA , T , C U U U U N = narrative ; D = descriptive ; S = scoping ; QS = qualitative systematic ; MA = meta - analysis ; R = realist review ; U = umbrella ; T = theoretical ; C = critical . G . Pare´ et al . / Information & Management 52 ( 2015 ) 183 – 199 193 Appendix II . List of review articles included in the sample ( n = 139 ) Theoretical reviews ( n = 52 ) Al - Natour , S . , & Benbasat , I . ( 2009 ) . The Adoption and Use of IT Artifacts : A New Interaction - Centric Model for the Study of User - Artifact Relationships . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 10 ( 9 ) , 661 – 685 . Briggs , R . O . , Reinig , B . A . , & de Vreede , G . - J . ( 2008 ) . The Yield Shift Theory of Satisfaction and Its Application to the IS / IT Domain . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 9 ( 5 ) , 267 – 293 . Burton - Jones , A . , & Grange , C . ( 2013 ) . From Use to Effective Use : A Representation Theory Perspective . Information Systems Research , 24 ( 3 ) , 632 – 658 . doi : 10 . 1287 / isre . 1120 . 0444 . Carte , T . A . , & Chidambaram , L . ( 2004 ) . A Capabilities - Based Theory of Technology Deployment in Diverse Teams : Leapfrog - ging the Pitfalls of Diversity and Leveraging Its Potential with Collaborative Technology . Journal of the Association for Informa - tion Systems , 5 ( 11 – 12 ) , 448 – 471 . Cenfetelli , R . T . ( 2004 ) . Inhibitors and Enablers as Dual Factor Concepts in Technology Usage . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 5 ( 11 – 12 ) , 472 – 492 . Chen , D . Q . , Mocker , M . , Preston , D . S . , & Teubner , A . ( 2010 ) . Information Systems Strategy : Reconceptualization , Measure - ment , and Implications . MIS Quarterly , 34 ( 2 ) , 233 – 259 . Clark , T . D . , Jr . , Jones , M . C . , & Armstrong , C . P . ( 2007 ) . The Dynamic Structure of Management Support Systems : Theory Development , Research Focus , and Direction . MIS Quarterly , 31 ( 3 ) , 579 – 615 . Davis , A . , Khazanchi , D . , Murphy , J . , Zigurs , I . , & Owens , D . ( 2009 ) . Avatars , People , and Virtual Worlds : Foundations for Research in Metaverses . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 10 ( 2 ) , 90 – 117 . DeLone , W . H . , & McLean , E . R . ( 2003 ) . The DeLone and McLean Model of Information Systems Success : A Ten - Year Update . Journal of Management Information Systems , 19 ( 4 ) , 9 – 30 . Dennis , A . R . , Fuller , R . M . , & Valacich , J . S . ( 2008 ) . Media , Tasks , and Communication Processes : A Theory of Media Synchronic - ity . MIS Quarterly , 32 ( 3 ) , 575 – 600 . Elliot , S . ( 2011 ) . Transdisciplinary Perspectives on Environmen - tal Sustainability : A Resource Base and Framework for IT - Enabled Business Transformation . MIS Quarterly , 35 ( 1 ) , 197 – 236 . Fichman , R . G . ( 2004 ) . Real Options and IT Platform Adoption : Implications for Theory and Practice . Information Systems Research , 15 ( 2 ) , 132 – 154 . doi : 10 . 1287 / isre . 1040 . 0021 . Gosain , S . ( 2004 ) . Enterprise Information Systems as Objects and Carriers of Institutional Forces : The New Iron Cage ? Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 5 ( 4 ) , 151 – 182 . Gregor , S . , & Benbasat , I . ( 1999 ) . Explanations from Intelligent Systems : Theoretical Foundations and Implications for Practice . MIS Quarterly , 23 ( 4 ) , 497 – 530 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 249487 . Grifﬁth , T . L . , Sawyer , J . E . , & Neale , M . A . ( 2003 ) . Virtualness and Knowledge in Teams : Managing the Love Triangle of Organiza - tions , Individuals , and Information Technology . MIS Quarterly , 27 ( 2 ) , 265 – 287 . Gupta , S . , & Bostrom , R . P . ( 2009 ) . Technology - Mediated Learning : A Comprehensive Theoretical Model . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 10 ( 9 ) , 686 – 714 . Jasperson , J . S . , Carte , T . A . , Saunders , C . S . , Butler , B . S . , Croes , H . J . P . , & Zheng , W . ( 2002 ) . Review : Power and Information Technology Research : A Metatriangulation Review . MIS Quar - terly , 26 ( 4 ) , 397 – 459 . Javadi , E . , Gebauer , J . , & Mahoney , J . ( 2013 ) . The Impact of User Interface Design on Idea Integration in Electronic Brainstorm - ing : An Attention - Based View . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 14 ( 1 ) , 1 – 21 . Jia , R . , Reich , B . H . , & Pearson , J . M . ( 2008 ) . IT Service Climate : An Extension to IT Service Quality Research . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 9 ( 5 ) , 294 – 320 . Kappos , A . , & Rivard , S . ( 2008 ) . A Three - Perspective Model of Culture , Information Systems , and Their Development and Use . MIS Quarterly , 32 ( 3 ) , 601 – 634 . Karjalainen , M . , & Siponen , M . ( 2011 ) . Toward a New Meta - Theory for Designing Information Systems ( IS ) Security Training Approaches . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 12 ( 8 ) , 518 – 555 . King , W . R . , & Malhotra , Y . ( 2000 ) . Developing a Framework for Analyzing IS Sourcing . Information & Management , 37 ( 6 ) , 323 – 334 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0378 - 7206 ( 00 ) 00046 - x . Kock , N . ( 2009 ) . Information Systems Theorizing Based on Evolutionary Psychology : An Interdisciplinary Review and Theory Integration Framework . MIS Quarterly , 33 ( 2 ) , 395 – 418 . Leidner , D . E . , & Kayworth , T . ( 2006 ) . Review : A Review of Culture in Information Systems Research : Toward a Theory of Information Technology Culture Conﬂict . MIS Quarterly , 30 ( 2 ) , 357 – 399 . Li , Y . , & Kettinger , W . J . ( 2006 ) . An Evolutionary Information - Processing Theory of Knowledge Creation . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 7 ( 9 ) , 593 – 617 . Melville , N . , Kraemer , K . , & Gurbaxani , V . ( 2004 ) . Review : Information Technology and Organizational Performance : An Integrative Model of IT Business Value . MIS Quarterly , 28 ( 2 ) , 283 – 322 . Nan , N . ( 2011 ) . Capturing Bottom - Up Information Technology Use Processes : A Complex Adaptive Systems Model . MIS Quarterly , 35 ( 2 ) , 505 – 532 . Nazir , S . , & Pinsonneault , A . ( 2012 ) . IT and Firm Agility : An Electronic Integration Perspective . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 13 ( 3 ) , 150 – 171 . Nevo , S . , & Wade , M . R . ( 2010 ) . The Formation and Value of IT - Enabled Resources : Antecedents and Consequences of Syner - gistic Relationships . MIS Quarterly , 34 ( 1 ) , 163 – 183 . Niederman , F . , Briggs , R . O . , de Vreede , G . - J . , & Kolfschoten , G . L . ( 2008 ) . Extending the Contextual and Organizational Elements of Adaptive Structuration Theory in GSS Research . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 9 ( 10 ) , 633 – 652 . Orlikowski , W . J . , & Iacono , C . S . ( 2001 ) . Research Commentary : Desperetely Seeking the ‘‘IT’’ in IT Research – A Call to Theorizing the IT Artifact . Information Systems Research , 12 ( 2 ) , 121 – 134 . Petter , S . , deLone , W . , & McLean , E . R . ( 2013 ) . Information Systems Success : The Quest for the Independent Variables . Journal of Management Information Systems , 29 ( 4 ) , 7 – 61 . doi : 10 . 2753 / mis0742 - 1222290401 . Polites , G . L . , & Karahanna , E . ( 2013 ) . The Embeddedness of Information Systems Habits in Organizational and Individual Level Routines : Development and Disruption . MIS Quarterly , 37 ( 1 ) , 221 - + . Robey , D . , & Boudreau , M . C . ( 1999 ) . Accounting for the Contradictory Organizational Consequences of Information Technology : Theoretical Directions and Methodological Impli - cations . Information Systems Research , 10 ( 2 ) , 167 – 185 . doi : 10 . 1287 / isre . 10 . 2 . 167 . Robey , D . , Im , G . , & Wareham , J . D . ( 2008 ) . Theoretical Foundations of Empirical Research on Interorganizational Systems : Assessing Past Contributions and Guiding Future Directions . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 9 ( 9 ) , 497 – 518 . G . Pare´ et al . / Information & Management 52 ( 2015 ) 183 – 199 194 Sambamurthy , V . , Bharadwaj , A . , & Grover , V . ( 2003 ) . Shaping Agility Through Digital Options : Reconceptualizing the Roles of Information Technology in Contemporary Firms . MIS Quarterly , 27 ( 2 ) , 237 – 263 . Sarker , S . , Valacich , J . S . , & Sarker , S . ( 2005 ) . Technology Adoption by Groups : A Valence Perspective . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 6 ( 2 ) , 37 – 71 . Shin , M . ( 2004 ) . A Framework for Evaluating Economics of Knowledge Management Systems . Information & Management , 42 ( 1 ) , 179 – 196 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j1 . im . 2003 . 06 . 006 . Siponen , M . , & Iivari , J . ( 2006 ) . Six Design Theories for IS Security Policies and Guidelines . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 7 ( 7 ) , 445 – 472 . Sun , Y . , Lim , K . H . , & Peng , J . Z . ( 2013 ) . Solving the Distinctiveness – Blindness Debate : A Uniﬁed Model for Understanding Banner Processing . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 14 ( 2 ) , 49 – 71 . Tan , C . , & Sia , S . K . ( 2006 ) . Managing Flexibility in Outsourcing . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 7 ( 4 ) , 179 – 205 . Tanriverdi , H . , Rai , A . , & Venkatraman , N . ( 2010 ) . Reframing the Dominant Quests of Information Systems Strategy Research for Complex Adaptive Business Systems . Information Systems Research , 21 ( 4 ) , 822 – 834 . doi : 10 . 1287 / isre . 1100 . 0317 . Tanriverdi , H . , & Rueﬂi , T . W . ( 2004 ) . The Role of Information Technology in Risk / Return Relations of Firms . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 5 ( 11 – 12 ) , 421 – 447 . Te’eni , D . ( 2001 ) . Review : A Cognitive - Affective Model of Organizational Communication for Designing IT . MIS Quarterly , 25 ( 2 ) , 251 – 312 . Tuunanen , T . , Rossi , M . , Saarinen , T . , & Mathiassen , L . ( 2007 ) . A Contingency Model for Requirements Development . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 8 ( 11 ) , 569 – 597 . Vessey , I . , & Ward , K . ( 2013 ) . The Dynamics of Sustainable IS Alignment : The Case for IS Adaptivity . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 14 ( 6 ) , 283 – 311 . von Krogh , G . , Haeﬂiger , S . , Spaeth , S . , & Wallin , M . W . ( 2012 ) . Carrots and Rainbows : Motivation and Social Practice in Open Source Software Development . MIS Quarterly , 36 ( 2 ) , 649 – 676 . Wasko , M . M . , Faraj , S . , & Teigland , R . ( 2004 ) . Collective Action and Knowledge Contribution in Electronic Networks of Practice . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 5 ( 11 – 12 ) , 493 – 513 . Wheeler , B . C . ( 2002 ) . NEBIC : A Dynamic Capabilities Theory for Assessing Net - Enablement . Information Systems Research , 13 ( 2 ) , 125 – 146 . doi : 10 . 1287 / isre . 13 . 2 . 125 . 89 . Xiao , B . , & Benbasat , I . ( 2007 ) . E - commerce Product Recom - mendation Agents : Use , Characteristics , and Impact . MIS Quarterly , 31 ( 1 ) , 137 – 209 . Xiao , B . , & Benbasat , I . ( 2011 ) . Product - Related Deception in E - Commerce : A Theoretical Perspective . MIS Quarterly , 35 ( 1 ) , 169 – 195 . Zhang , P . ( 2013 ) . The Affective Response Model : A Theoretical Framework of Affective Concepts and their Relationships in the ICT Context . MIS Quarterly , 37 ( 1 ) , 247 – 274 . Narrative reviews ( n = 38 ) Agarwal , R . , Gao , G . , DesRoches , C . , & Jha , A . K . ( 2010 ) . The Digital Transformation of Healthcare : Current Status and the Road Ahead . Information Systems Research , 21 ( 4 ) , 796 – 809 . doi : 10 . 1287 / isre . 1100 . 0327 . Alavi , M . , & Leidner , D . E . ( 2001a ) . Research Commentary : Technology - Mediated Learning – A Call for Greater Depth and Breadth of Research . Information Systems Research , 12 ( 1 ) , 1 – 10 . doi : 10 . 1287 / isre . 12 . 1 . 1 . 9720 . Alavi , M . , & Leidner , D . E . ( 2001b ) . Review : Knowledge Management and Knowledge Management Systems : Concep - tual Foundations and Research Issues . MIS Quarterly , 25 ( 1 ) , 107 – 136 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 3250961 . Aloini , D . , Dulmin , R . , & Mininno , V . ( 2007 ) . Risk Management in ERP Project Introduction : Review of the Literature . Information & Management , 44 ( 6 ) , 547 – 567 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . im . 2007 . 05 . 004 . Alter , S . ( 2013 ) . Work System Theory : Overview of Core Concepts , Extensions , and Challenges for the Future . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 14 ( 2 ) , 72 – 121 . Ba , S . L . , Stallaert , J . , & Whinston , A . B . ( 2001 ) . Research Commentary : Introducing a Third Dimension in Information Systems Design the case for Incentive Alignment . Information Systems Research , 12 ( 3 ) , 225 – 239 . doi : 10 . 1287 / isre . 12 . 3 . 225 . 9712 . Basu , A . , & Kumar , A . ( 2002 ) . Research Commentary : Workﬂow Management Issues in e - Business . Information Systems Research , 13 ( 1 ) , 1 – 14 . doi : 10 . 1287 / isre . 13 . 1 . 1 . 94 . Belanger , F . , & Carter , L . ( 2012 ) . Digitizing Government Interactions with Constituents : An Historical Review of E - Government Research in Information Systems . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 13 ( 5 ) , 363 – 394 . Chang , M . K . , Cheung , W . M . , & Lai , V . S . ( 2005 ) . Literature derived reference models for the adoption of online shopping . Information & Management , 42 ( 4 ) , 543 – 559 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . im . 2004 . 02 . 006 . Chatterjee , S . , & Sarker , S . ( 2013 ) . Infusing Ethical Consider - ations in Knowledge Management Scholarship : Toward a Research Agenda . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 14 ( 8 ) , 452 – 481 . Connell , N . A . D . , & Young , T . P . ( 2007 ) . Evaluating Healthcare Information Systems through an ‘‘Enterprise’’ Perspective . Information & Management , 44 ( 4 ) , 433 – 440 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . im . 2007 . 04 . 002 . Dewan , S . , & Riggins , F . J . The Digital Divide : Current and Future Research Directions . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 6 ( 12 ) , 298 – 337 . George , J . F . , Marett , K . , & Giordano , G . ( 2008 ) . Deception : Toward an Individualistic View of Group Support Systems . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 9 ( 10 ) , 653 – 676 . Granados , N . , Gupta , A . , & Kauffman , R . J . ( 2010 ) . Information Transparency in Business - to - Consumer Markets : Concepts , Framework , and Research Agenda . Information Systems Re - search , 21 ( 2 ) , 207 – 226 . doi : 10 . 1287 / isre . 1090 . 0249 . Greenaway , K . E . , & Chan , Y . E . ( 2005 ) . Theoretical Explanations for Firms’ Information Privacy Behaviors . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 6 ( 6 ) , 171 – 198 . Hosack , B . , Hall , D . , Paradice , D . , & Courtney , J . F . ( 2012 ) . A Look Toward the Future : Decision Support Systems Research Is Alive and Well . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 13 ( 5 ) , 315 – 340 . Huang , W . , Chen , Y . N . , & Hee , J . ( 2006 ) . STP Technology : An Overview and a Conceptual Framework . Information & Manage - ment , 43 ( 3 ) , 263 – 270 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . im . 2004 . 06 . 001 . Kauffman , R . J . , & Lee , D . ( 2010 ) . A Multi - Level Theory Approach to Understanding Price Rigidity in Internet Retailing . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 11 ( 6 ) , 303 – 338 . Larsen , K . R . T . ( 2003 ) . A Taxonomy of Antecedents of Information Systems Success : Variable Analysis Studies . Journal of Management Information Systems , 20 ( 2 ) , 169 – 246 . March , S . , Hevner , A . , & Ram , S . ( 2000 ) . Research Commentary : An Agenda for Information Technology Research in Heteroge - neous and Distributed Environments . Information Systems Research , 11 ( 4 ) , 327 – 341 . doi : 10 . 1287 / isre . 11 . 4 . 327 . 11873 . McKinney , E . H . , Jr . , & Yoos , C . J . , II . ( 2010 ) . Information About Information : A Taxonomy of Views . MIS Quarterly , 34 ( 2 ) , 329 – 344 . G . Pare´ et al . / Information & Management 52 ( 2015 ) 183 – 199 195 Mingers , J . , & Walsham , G . ( 2010 ) . Toward Ethical Information Systems : The Contribution of Discourse Ethics . MIS Quarterly , 34 ( 4 ) , 833 – 854 . Mirchandani , D . , & Pakath , R . ( 1999 ) . Four Models for a Decision Support System . Information & Management , 35 ( 1 ) , 31 – 42 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0378 - 7206 ( 98 ) 00074 - 3 . Nambisan , S . ( 2013 ) . Information Technology and Product / Service Innovation : A Brief Assessment and Some Suggestions for Future Research . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 14 ( 4 ) , 215 – 226 . O’Connor , N . G . , & Martinsons , M . G . ( 2006 ) . Management of Information Systems : Insights from Accounting Research . Information & Management , 43 ( 8 ) , 1014 – 1024 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . im . 2006 . 10 . 001 . Overby , E . , Slaughter , S . A . , & Konsynski , B . ( 2010 ) . The Design , Use , and Consequences of Virtual Processes . Information Systems Research , 21 ( 4 ) , 700 – 710 . doi : 10 . 1287 / isre . 1100 . 0319 . Petter , S . , DeLone , W . , & McLean , E . R . ( 2012 ) . The Past , Present , and Future of ‘‘IS Success’’ . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 13 ( 5 ) , 341 – 362 . Piccoli , G . , & Ives , B . ( 2005 ) . Review : IT - Dependent Strategic Initiatives and sustained Competitive Advantage : A Review and Synthesis of the Literature . MIS Quarterly , 29 ( 4 ) , 747 – 776 . Porra , J . ( 1999 ) . Colonial Systems . Information Systems Research , 10 ( 1 ) , 38 – 69 . doi : 10 . 1287 / isre . 10 . 1 . 38 . Roberts , N . , Galluch , P . S . , Dinger , M . , & Grover , V . ( 2012 ) . Absorptive Capacity and Information Systems Research : Review , Synthesis , and Directions for Future Research . MIS Quarterly , 36 ( 2 ) , 625 – 648 . Robey , D . , Anderson , C . , & Raymond , B . ( 2013 ) . Information Technology , Materiality , and Organizational Change : A Profes - sional Odyssey . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 14 ( 7 ) , 379 – 398 . Schultze , U . , & Leidner , D . E . ( 2002 ) . Studying Knowledge Management in Information Systems Research : Discourses and Theoretical Assumptions . MIS Quarterly , 26 ( 3 ) , 213 – 242 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 4132331 . Sundararajan , A . , Provost , F . , Oestreicher - Singer , G . , & Aral , S . ( 2013 ) . Information in Digital , Economic , and Social Networks . Information Systems Research , 24 ( 4 ) , 883 – 905 . doi : 10 . 1287 / isre . 1120 . 0472 . Tan , F . B . , & Hunter , M . G . ( 2002 ) . The Repertory Grid Technique : A Method for the Study of Cognition in Information Systems . MIS Quarterly , 26 ( 1 ) , 39 – 57 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 4132340 . Vodanovich , S . , Sundaram , D . , & Myers , M . ( 2010 ) . Digital Natives and Ubiquitous Information Systems . Information Systems Research , 21 ( 4 ) , 711 – 723 . doi : 10 . 1287 / isre . 1100 . 0324 . Wade , M . , & Hulland , J . ( 2004 ) . Review : The Resource - based View and Information Systems Research : Review , Extension , and Suggestions for Future Research . MIS Quarterly , 28 ( 1 ) , 107 – 142 . Wand , Y . , & Weber , R . ( 2002 ) . Research Commentary : Informa - tion Systems and Conceptual Modeling – A Research Agenda . Information Systems Research , 13 ( 4 ) , 363 – 376 . doi : 10 . 1287 / isre . 13 . 4 . 363 . 69 . Williams , R . , & Pollock , N . ( 2012 ) . Moving Beyond the Single Site Implementation Study : How ( and Why ) We Should Study the Biography of Packaged Enterprise Solutions . Information Sys - tems Research , 23 ( 1 ) , 1 – 22 . doi : 10 . 1287 / isre . 1110 . 0352 . Meta - analyses ( n = 14 ) Chau , P . Y . K . ( 1999 ) . On the Use of Construct Reliability in MIS Research : A Meta - analysis . Information & Management , 35 ( 4 ) , 217 – 227 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0378 - 7206 ( 98 ) 00089 - 5 . de Guinea , A . O . , Webster , J . , & Staples , D . S . ( 2012 ) . A Meta - analysis of the Consequences of Virtualness on Team Functioning . Information & Management , 49 ( 6 ) , 301 – 308 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . im . 2012 . 08 . 003 . Dennis , A . R . , & Wixom , B . H . ( 2001 ) . Investigating the Moderators of the Group Support Systems Use with Meta - analysis . Journal of Management Information Systems , 18 ( 3 ) , 235 – 257 . Dennis , A . R . , Wixom , B . H . , & Vandenberg , R . J . ( 2001 ) . Understanding Fit and Appropriation Effects in Group Support Systems via Meta - Analysis . MIS Quarterly , 25 ( 2 ) , 167 – 193 . Hameed , M . A . , Counsell , S . , & Swift , S . ( 2012 ) . A Meta - analysis of Relationships between Organizational Character - istics and IT Innovation Adoption in Organizations . Informa - tion & Management , 49 ( 5 ) , 218 – 232 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . im . 2012 . 05 . 002 . He , J . , & King , W . ( 2008 ) . The Role of User Participation in Information Systems Development : Implications from a Meta - analysis . Journal of Management Information Systems , 25 ( 1 ) , 301 – 331 . doi : 10 . 2753 / mis0742 - 1222250111 . Hwang , M . I . , & Thorn , R . G . ( 1999 ) . The Effect of User Engagement on System Success : A Meta - analytical Integration of Research Findings . Information & Management , 229 – 236 . King , W . R . , & He , J . ( 2006 ) . A Meta - analysis of the Technology Acceptance Model . Information & Management , 43 ( 6 ) , 740 – 755 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . im . 2006 . 05 . 003 . Kohli , R . , & Devaraj , S . ( 2003 ) . Measuring Information Technol - ogy Payoff : A Meta - Analysis of Structural Variables in Firm - Level Empirical Research . Information Systems Research , 14 ( 2 ) , 127 – 145 . doi : 10 . 1287 / isre . 14 . 2 . 127 . 16019 . Lee , G . , & Xia , W . ( 2006 ) . Organizational Size and IT Innovation Adoption : A Meta - analysis . Information & Management , 43 ( 8 ) , 975 – 985 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . im . 2006 . 09 . 003 . Petter , S . , & McLean , E . R . ( 2009 ) . A Meta - analytic Assessment of the DeLone and McLean IS Success Model : An Examination of IS Success at the Individual Level . Information & Management , 46 ( 3 ) , 159 – 166 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . im . 2008 . 12 . 006 . Schepers , J . , & Wetzels , M . ( 2007 ) . A Meta - analysis of the Technology Acceptance Model : Investigating Subjective Norm and Moderation Effects . Information & Management , 44 ( 1 ) , 90 – 103 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . im . 2006 . 10 . 007 . Wu , J . , & Lederer , A . ( 2009 ) . A Meta - Analysis of the Role of Environment - Based Voluntariness in Information Technology Acceptance . MIS Quarterly , 33 ( 2 ) , 419 – 432 . Wu , J . , & Lu , X . ( 2013 ) . Effects of Extrinsic and Intrinsic Motivators on Using Utilitarian , Hedonic , and Dual - Purposed Information Systems : A Meta - analysis . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 14 ( 3 ) , 153 – 191 . Descriptive reviews ( n = 13 ) Arnott , D . , & Pervan , G . ( 2012 ) . Design Science in Decision Support Systems Research : An Assessment using the Hevner , March , Park , and Ram Guidelines . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 13 ( 11 ) , 923 – 949 . Boudreau , M . C . , Gefen , D . , & Straub , D . W . ( 2001 ) . Validation in Information Systems Research : A State - of - the - Art Assessment . MIS Quarterly , 25 ( 1 ) , 1 – 16 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 3250956 . Chan , Y . E . ( 2000 ) . IT Value : The Great Divide between Qualitative and Quantitative and Individual and Organizational Measures . Journal of Management Information Systems , 16 ( 4 ) , 225 – 261 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 40398463 . Chiou , W . - C . , Lin , C . - C . , & Perng , C . ( 2010 ) . A Strategic Framework for Website Evaluation Based on a Review of the Literature from 1995 – 2006 . Information & Management , 47 ( 5 – 6 ) , 282 – 290 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . im . 2010 . 06 . 002 . Choi , J . , Yi , S . , & Lee , K . C . ( 2011 ) . Analysis of Keyword Networks in MIS Research and Implications for Predicting Knowledge G . Pare´ et al . / Information & Management 52 ( 2015 ) 183 – 199 196 Evolution . Information & Management , 48 ( 8 ) , 371 – 381 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . im . 2011 . 09 . 004 . Claver , E . , Gonzalez , R . , & Llopis , J . ( 2000 ) . An Analysis of Research in Information Systems ( 1981 – 1997 ) . Information & Manage - ment , 37 ( 4 ) , 181 – 195 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0378 - 7206 ( 99 ) 00043 - 9 . Fjermestad , J . , & Hiltz , S . R . ( 1998 ) . An Assessment of Group Support Systems Experimental Research : Methodology and Results . Journal of Management Information Systems , 15 ( 3 ) , 7 – 149 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 40398383 . Fjermestad , J . , & Hiltz , S . R . ( 2000 ) . Group Support Systems : A Descriptive Evaluation of Case and Field Studies . Journal of Management Information Systems , 17 ( 3 ) , 115 – 159 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 40398496 . Gonzalez , R . , Gasco , J . , & Llopis , J . ( 2006 ) . Information Systems Outsourcing : A Literature Analysis . Information & Management , 43 ( 7 ) , 821 – 834 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . im . 2006 . 07 . 002 . Lee , Z . , Gosain , S . , & Im , I . ( 1999 ) . Topics of Interest in IS : Evolution of Themes and Differences BETWEEN Research and Practice . Information & Management , 36 ( 5 ) , 233 – 246 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0378 - 7206 ( 99 ) 00022 - 1 . Palvia , P . C . , Palvia , S . C . J . , & Whitworth , J . E . ( 2002 ) . Global Information Technology : A Meta Analysis of Key Issues . Information & Management , 39 ( 5 ) , 403 – 414 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0378 - 7206 ( 01 ) 00106 - 9 . Prasad , S . , & Tata , J . ( 2005 ) . Publication Patterns Concerning the Role of Teams / Groups in the Information Systems Literature from 1990 to 1999 . Information & Management , 42 ( 8 ) , 1137 – 1148 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . im . 2005 . 01 . 003 . Vessey , I . , Ramesh , V . , & Glass , R . L . ( 2002 ) . Research in Information Systems : An Empirical Study of Diversity in the Discipline and Its Journals . Journal of Management Information Systems , 19 ( 2 ) , 129 – 174 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 40398580 . Hybrid reviews ( n = 9 ) Aksulu , A . , & Wade , M . ( 2010 ) . A Comprehensive Review and Synthesis of Open Source Research . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 11 ( 11 ) , 576 – 656 . Barrett , M . , Heracleous , L . , & Walsham , G . ( 2013 ) . A Rhetorical Approach To IT Diffusion : Reconceptualizing the Ideology - Framing Relationship in Computerization Movements . MIS Quarterly , 37 ( 1 ) , 201 – 220 . Dube´ , L . , & Pare´ , G . ( 2003 ) . Rigor in Information Systems Positivist Case Research : Current practices , Trends , and Recommendations . MIS Quarterly , 24 ( 7 ) , 597 – 636 . Joseph , D . , Ng , K . - Y . , Koh , C . , & Ang , S . ( 2007 ) . Turnover of Information Technology Professionals : A Narrative Review , Meta - analytic Structural Equation Modeling , and Model Devel - opment . MIS Quarterly , 31 ( 3 ) , 547 – 577 . Legris , P . , Ingham , J . , & Collerette , P . ( 2003 ) . Why Do People Use Information Technology ? A Critical Review of the Technology Acceptance Model . Information & Management , 40 , 191 – 204 . Markus , M . L . , & Mao , J . - Y . ( 2004 ) . Participation in Development and Implementation – Updating an Old , Tired Concept for Today’s IS Contexts . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 5 ( 11 – 12 ) , 514 – 544 . Pare´ , G . , Cameron , A . - F . , Poba - Nzaou , P . , & Templier , M . ( 2013 ) . A Systematic Assessment of Rigor in Information Systems Ranking - Type Delphi Studies . Information & Management , 50 ( 5 ) , 207 – 217 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . im . 2013 . 03 . 003 . Sharma , R . , & Yetton , P . ( 2003 ) . The Contingent Effects of Management Support and Task Interdependence on Successful Information Systems Implementation . MIS Quarterly , 27 ( 4 ) , 533 – 555 . Sharma , R . , & Yetton , P . ( 2007 ) . The Contingent Effects of Training , Technical Complexity , and Task Interdependence on Successful Information Systems Implementation . MIS Quarterly , 31 ( 2 ) , 219 – 238 . Critical reviews ( n = 7 ) Bagozzi , R . P . ( 2007 ) . The Legacy of the Technology Acceptance Model and a Proposal for a Paradigm Shift . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 8 ( 4 ) , 243 – 254 . Balijepally , V . , Mangalaraj , G . , & Iyengar , K . ( 2011 ) . Are We Wielding This Hammer Correctly ? A Reﬂective Review of the Application of Cluster Analysis in Information Systems Re - search . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 12 ( 5 ) , 375 – 413 . Carte , T . A . , & Russell , C . J . ( 2003 ) . In Pursuit of Moderation : Nine Common Errors and Their Solutions . MIS Quarterly , 27 ( 3 ) , 479 – 501 . Compeau , D . , Marcolin , B . , Kelley , H . , & Higgins , C . ( 2012 ) . Generalizability of Information Systems Research Using Stu - dent Subjects – A Reﬂection on Our Practices and Recommen - dations for Future Research . Information Systems Research , 23 ( 4 ) , 1093 – 1109 . doi : 10 . 1287 / isre . 1120 . 0423 Jones , M . R . , & Karsten , H . ( 2008 ) . Giddens’s Structuration Theory and Information Systems Research . MIS Quarterly , 32 ( 1 ) , 127 – 157 . Petter , S . , Straub , D . , & Rai , A . ( 2007 ) . Specifying Formative Constructs in Information Systems Research . MIS Quarterly , 31 ( 4 ) , 623 – 656 . Silva , L . ( 2007 ) . Post - positivist Review of Technology Accep - tance Model . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 8 ( 4 ) , 255 – 266 . Scoping reviews ( n = 6 ) Belanger , F . , & Crossler , R . E . ( 2011 ) . Privacy in the Digital Age : A Review of Information Privacy Research in Information Systems . MIS Quarterly , 35 ( 4 ) , 1017 – 1041 . DeSanctis , G . , Poole , M . S . , Zigurs , I . , DeSharnais , G . , D’Onofrio , M . , Gallupe , B . , . . . Shannon , D . ( 2008 ) . The Minnesota GDSS Research Project : Group Support Systems , Group Processes , and Outcomes . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 9 ( 10 ) , 551 – 608 . Ngai , E . W . T . , & Wat , F . K . T . ( 2002 ) . A Literature Review and Classiﬁcation of Electronic Commerce Research . Information & Management , 39 ( 5 ) , 415 – 429 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0378 - 7206 ( 01 ) 00107 - 0 . Smith , H . J . , Dinev , T . , & Xu , H . ( 2011 ) . Information Privacy Research : An Interdisciplinary Review . MIS Quarterly , 35 ( 4 ) , 989 – 1015 . Venkatesh , V . , Davis , F . D . , & Morris , M . G . ( 2007 ) . Dead or Alive ? The Development , Trajectory and Future of Technology Adoption Research . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 8 ( 4 ) , 267 – 286 . Zhang , P . , & Li , N . ( 2005 ) . The Intellectual Development of Human – Computer Interaction Research : A Critical Assessment of the MIS Literature ( 1990 – 2002 ) . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 6 ( 11 ) , 227 – 292 . References [ 1 ] I . Vessey , V . Ramesh , R . L . Glass , Research in information systems : an empirical study of diversity in the discipline and its journals , J . Manage . Inf . Syst . 19 ( 2 ) , 2002 , pp . 129 – 174 . [ 2 ] W . R . King , J . He , Understanding the role and methods of meta - analysis in IS research , Commun . Assoc . Inf . Syst . 16 ( 1 ) , 2005 , pp . 665 – 686 . [ 3 ] W . Bandara , S . Miskon , E . Fielt , A systematic , tool - supported method for con - ducting literature reviews in information systems , in : V . Tuunainen , J . Nandha - kumar , M . Rossi , W . Soliman ( Eds . ) , in : Proceedings of the19th European Conference on Information Systems , Helsinki , Finland , 2011 , p . 13 . G . Pare´ et al . / Information & Management 52 ( 2015 ) 183 – 199 197 [ 4 ] J . E . Hunter , F . L . Schmidt , G . B . Jackson , Meta - analysis : Cumulating Research Findings across Studies , Sage , Beverly Hills , 1982 . [ 5 ] H . M . Cooper , Organizing knowledge syntheses : a taxonomy of literature reviews , Knowl . Soc . 1 ( 1 ) , 1988 , pp . 104 – 126 . [ 6 ] C . D . Mulrow , Rationale for systematic reviews , Br . Med . J . 3 , 1994 , 309 , 597 – 599 . [ 7 ] C . Hart , Doing a Literature Review : Releasing the Social Science Research Imagination , Sage Publications , London , UK , 1999 . [ 8 ] P . D . Leedy , J . E . Ormrod , Practical Research : Planning and Design , seventh ed . , Merrill Prentice Hall , Upper Saddle River , NJ , 2001 . [ 9 ] J . Pfeffer , R . I . Sutton , Evidence - based management , Harv . Bus . Rev . 84 ( 1 ) , 2006 , p . 62 . [ 10 ] B . N . Green , C . D . Johnson , A . Adams , Writing narrative literature reviews for peer - reviewed journals : secrets of the trade , J . Chiropr . Med . 5 ( 3 ) , 2006 , pp . 101 – 117 . [ 11 ] J . Webster , R . T . Watson , Analyzing the past to prepare for the future : writing a literature review , MIS Quart . 26 ( 2 ) , 2002 , pp . xiii – xxiii . [ 12 ] Y . Levy , T . J . Ellis , A systems approach to conduct an effective literature review in support of information systems research , Inf . Sci . 9 , 2006 , pp . 181 – 212 . [ 13 ] J . vom Brocke , A . Simons , B . Niehaves , B . Niehaves , K . Reimer , R . Plattfaut , A . Cleven , Reconstructing the giant : on the importance of rigour in documenting the literature search process , European Conference on Information Systems Proceedings , 2009 , paper 161 . [ 14 ] C . Okoli , K . Schabram , A guide to conducting a systematic literature review of information systems research , Sprouts : Work . Papers Inf . Syst . 10 ( 26 ) , 2010 , pp . 1 – 46 . [ 15 ] M . J . Baker , Writing a literature review , Market . Rev . 1 ( 2 ) , 2000 , pp . 219 – 247 . [ 16 ] C . D . Mulrow , The medical review article : state of the science , Ann . Intern . Med . 106 ( 3 ) , 1987 , p . 485 . [ 17 ] R . T . Watson , Introducing MISQ review – a new department in MIS Quarterly , MIS Quart . 25 ( 1 ) , 2001 , pp . 103 – 106 . [ 18 ] M . L . Markus , C . Saunders , Looking for a few good concepts and theories for the information systems ﬁeld , MIS Quart . 31 ( 1 ) , 2007 , pp . iii – vi . [ 19 ] K . D . Bailey ( Ed . ) , Typologies and taxonomies : an introduction to classiﬁcation techniques . , ( vol . 102 ) , Sage , Newbury Park , CA , 1994 . [ 20 ] K . B . Smith , Typologies , taxonomies , and the beneﬁts of policy classiﬁcation , Policy Stud . J . 30 ( 3 ) , 2002 , pp . 379 – 395 . [ 21 ] H . M . Blalock , Theory Construction : From Verbal to Mathematical Formulations , Prentice - Hall , New York , 1969 . [ 22 ] D . H . Doty , W . H . Glick , Typologies as a unique form of theory building : towards improved understanding and modelling , Acad . Manage . Rev . 19 ( 2 ) , 1994 , pp . 230 – 251 . [ 23 ] I . Chalmers , L . V . Hedges , H . Cooper , A brief history of research synthesis , Eval . Health Prof . 25 ( 1 ) , 2002 , pp . 12 – 37 . [ 24 ] H . Cooper , L . V . Hedges , The Handbook of Research Synthesis , Russel Sage Foundation , New York , 1994 . [ 25 ] R . J . Light , D . B . Pillemer , Summing Up : The Science of Reviewing Research , Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA , 1984 . [ 26 ] G . V . Glass , Primary , secondary and meta - analysis of research , Educ . Res . 10 , 1976 , pp . 3 – 8 . [ 27 ] G . B . Jackson , Methods for integrative reviews , Rev . Educ . Res . 50 ( 3 ) , 1980 , pp . 438 – 460 . [ 28 ] D . B . Pillemer , Conceptual issues in research synthesis , J . Spec . Educ . 18 ( 1 ) , 1984 , pp . 27 – 40 . [ 29 ] A . D . Oxman , G . H . Guyatt , Guidelines for reading literature reviews , Can . Med . Assoc . J . 138 ( 8 ) , 1988 , p . 697 . [ 30 ] M . Dixon - Woods , S . Agarwal , D . Jones , B . Young , A . J . Sutton , Synthesizing qualitative and quantitative evidence : a review of possible methods , J . Health Serv . Res . Policy 10 ( 1 ) , 2005 , pp . 45B – 53B . [ 31 ] A . C . Tricco , J . Tetzlaff , D . Moher , The art and science of knowledge synthesis , J . Clin . Epidemiol . 64 ( 1 ) , 2011 , pp . 11 – 20 . [ 32 ] M . P . J . M . Dijkers , The task force on systematic reviews and guidelines : the value of traditional reviews in the era of systematic reviewing , Am . J . Phys . Med . Rehabil . 88 , 2009 , pp . 423 – 430 . [ 33 ] M . Borenstein , L . V . Hedges , J . P . Higgins , H . R . Rothstein , Introduction to Meta - analysis , John Wiley & Sons , 2011 . [ 34 ] M . J . Grant , A . Booth , A typology of reviews : an analysis of 14 review types and associated methodologies , Health Inf . Libr . J . 26 ( 2 ) , 2009 , pp . 91 – 108 . [ 35 ] N . A . Card , Applied Meta - analysis for Social Science Research , Guilford Press , New York , NY , 2012 . [ 36 ] D . J . Cook , C . D . Mulrow , R . B . Haynes , Systematic reviews : synthesis of best evidence for clinical decisions , Ann . Intern . Med . 126 ( 5 ) , 1997 , pp . 376 – 380 . [ 37 ] P . Davies , The relevance of systematic reviews to educational policy and practice , Oxf . Rev . Educ . 26 ( 3 – 4 ) , 2000 , pp . 365 – 378 . [ 38 ] M . Dixon - Woods , S . Bonas , A . Booth , D . R . Jones , T . Miller , A . J . Sutton , R . L . Shaw , J . A . Smith , B . Young , How can systematic reviews incorporate qualitative re - search ? A critical perspective Qual . Res . 6 ( 1 ) , 2006 , pp . 27 – 44 . [ 39 ] D . Gough , J . Thomas , S . Oliver , Clarifying differences between review designs and methods , Syst . Rev . 1 ( 1 ) , 2012 , p . 28 . [ 40 ] M . Kirkevold , Integrative nursing research – an important strategy to further the development of nursing science and nursing practice , J . Adv . Nurs . 25 ( 5 ) , 1997 , pp . 977 – 984 . [ 41 ] B . Kitchenham , D . Budgen , O . P . Brereton , Evidence - based software engineering and systematic literature reviews , Eur . J . Inf . Prof . 9 ( 5 ) , 2009 , pp . 34 – 41 . [ 42 ] B . A . Kitchenham , D . Budgen , O . Pearl Brereton , Using mapping studies as the basis for further research – a participant – observer case study , Inf . Softw . Tech - nol . 53 ( 6 ) , 2011 , pp . 638 – 651 . [ 43 ] D . M . Rousseau , J . Manning , D . Denyer , 11 Evidence in management and organi - zational science : assembling the ﬁeld’s full weight of scientiﬁc knowledge through syntheses , Acad . Manage . Ann . 2 ( 1 ) , 2008 , pp . 475 – 515 . [ 44 ] P . D . Rumrill , S . M . Fitzgerald , W . R . Merchant , Using scoping literature reviews as a means of understanding and interpreting existing literature , Work J . Prev . Assess . Rehabil . 35 ( 3 ) , 2010 , pp . 399 – 404 . [ 45 ] R . Whittemore , Combining evidence in nursing research : methods and implica - tions , Nurs . Res . 54 ( 1 ) , 2005 , pp . 56 – 62 . [ 46 ] H . Arksey , L . O‘Malley , Scoping studies : towards a methodological framework , Int . J . Soc . Res . Method . 8 ( 1 ) , 2005 , pp . 19 – 32 . [ 47 ] L . A . Becker , A . D . Oxman , Overviews of Reviews Cochrane Handbook for System - atic Reviews of Interventions , John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . , 2008 pp . 607 – 631 . [ 48 ] H . M . Daudt , C . van Mossel , S . J . Scott , Enhancing the scoping study methodology : a large , inter - professional team’s experience with Arksey and O’Malley’s frame - work , BMC Med . Res . Method . 13 ( 1 ) , 2013 , p . 48 . [ 49 ] M . Gmu¨r , Co - citation analysis and the search for invisible colleges : a methodo - logical evaluation , Scientometrics 57 ( 1 ) , 2003 , pp . 27 – 57 . [ 50 ] M . Hammersley , On ‘systematic’ reviews of research literatures : a ‘narrative’ response to Evans & Beneﬁeld , Br . Educ . Res . J . 27 ( 5 ) , 2001 , pp . 543 – 554 . [ 51 ] Front matter , J . P . Higgins , S . Green ( Eds . ) , Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions : Cochrane Book Series , John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . , Chichester , UK , 2008 . [ 52 ] D . Levac , H . Colquhoun , K . K . O‘Brien , Scoping studies : advancing the methodol - ogy , Implement . Sci . 5 ( 1 ) , 2010 , p . 69 . [ 53 ] G . W . Noblit , R . D . Hare , Meta - ethnography : Synthesizing Qualitative Studies , Sage , London , 1988 . [ 54 ] B . J . Oates , H . Edwards , D . W . Wainwright , A model - driven method for the systematic literature review of qualitative empirical research , in : Proceedings of the International Conference on Information Systems , Orlando , FL , United States , 2012 . [ 55 ] R . Pawson , T . Greenhalgh , G . Harvey , K . Walshe , Realist review – a new method of systematic review designed for complex policy interventions , J . Health Serv . Res . Policy 10 ( Suppl . 1 ) , 2005 , pp . 21 – 34 . [ 56 ] D . Pieper , R . Buechter , P . Jerinic , M . Eikermann , Overviews of reviews often have limited rigor : a systematic review , J . Clin . Epidemiol . 65 ( 12 ) , 2012 , pp . 1267 – 1273 . [ 57 ] R . Rosenthal , M . R . DiMatteo , Meta - analysis : recent developments in quanti - tative methods for literature reviews , Annu . Rev . Psychol . 52 ( 1 ) , 2001 , pp . 59 – 82 . [ 58 ] C . S . Saunders , T . A . Carte , J . Jasperson , B . S . Butler , Lessons from the trenches of metatriangulation research , Commun . Assoc . Inf . Syst . 11 , 2003 , article 14 . [ 59 ] S . Shepperd , S . Lewin , S . Straus , M . Clarke , M . P . Eccles , et al . , Can we systemati - cally review studies that evaluate complex interventions ? PLoS Med . 6 ( 8 ) , 2009 , p . e1000086 . [ 60 ] V . Smith , D . Devane , C . M . Begley , M . Clarke , Methodology in conducting a systematic review of systematic reviews of healthcare interventions , BMC Med . Res . Method . 11 ( 1 ) , 2011 , p . 15 . [ 61 ] J . Thomas , A . Harden , Methods for the thematic synthesis of qualitative research in systematic reviews , BMC Med . Res . Method . 8 ( 1 ) , 2008 , p . 45 . [ 62 ] G . Wong , T . Greenhalgh , G . Westhorp , J . Buckingham , R . Pawson , RAMESES publication standards : realist syntheses , BMC Med . 11 ( 1 ) , 2013 , p . 21 . [ 63 ] J . Grimshaw , A Guide to Knowledge Synthesis , Canadian Institutes of Health Research , 2010 . [ 64 ] P . Cronin , F . Ryan , M . Coughlan , Undertaking a literature review : a step - by - step approach , Br . J . Nurs . 17 ( 1 ) , 2008 , pp . 38 – 43 . [ 65 ] C . Williams , The pitfalls of narrative reviews in clinical medicine , Ann . Oncol . 9 ( 6 ) , 1998 , pp . 601 – 605 . [ 66 ] S . E . Brien , D . L . Lorenzetti , S . Lewis , J . Kennedy , W . A . Ghali , Overview of a formal scoping review on health system report cards , Implement . Sci . 5 , 2010 , p . 2 . [ 67 ] A . Bryman , Social Research Methods , Oxford University Press , Oxford , 2001 . [ 68 ] S . Anderson , P . Allen , S . Peckham , N . Goodwin , Asking the right questions : scoping studies in the commissioning of research on the organisation and delivery of health services , Health Res . Policy Syst . 6 ( 1 ) , 2008 , p . 7 . [ 69 ] J . J . Deeks , J . Higgins , D . G . Altman , Analysing data and undertaking meta - anal - yses , Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions : Cochrane Book Series , 2008 pp . 243 – 296 . [ 70 ] J . Popay , H . Roberts , A . Sowden , M . Petticrew , L . Arai , M . Rodgers , et al . , Guidance on the conduct of narrative synthesis in systematic reviews . A product from the ESRC methods programme , 2006 Version , 1 . [ 71 ] M . Rodgers , A . Sowden , M . Petticrew , L . Arai , H . Roberts , N . Britten , J . Popay , Testing methodological guidance on the conduct of narrative synthesis in systematic reviews : effectiveness of interventions to promote smoke alarm ownership and function , Evaluation 15 ( 1 ) , 2009 , pp . 49 – 73 . [ 72 ] L . V . Hedges , I . Olkin , Vote - counting methods in research synthesis , Psychol . Bull . 88 ( 2 ) , 1980 , pp . 359 – 369 . [ 73 ] J . Noyes , J . Popay , A . Pearson , K . Hannes , A . Booth , Qualitative research and cochrane reviews , in : J . P . Higgins , S . Green ( Eds . ) , Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions : Cochrane Book Series , John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . , Chichester , UK , 2008 . [ 74 ] L . Hartling , A . Chisholm , D . Thomson , D . M . Dryden , A descriptive analysis of overviews of reviews published between 2000 and 2011 , PLOS ONE 7 ( 11 ) , 2012 , p . e49667 . [ 75 ] H . Bastian , P . Glasziou , I . Chalmers , Seventy - ﬁve trials and eleven systematic reviews a day : how will we ever keep up ? PLoS Med . 7 ( 9 ) , 2010 , p . e1000326 . [ 76 ] A . R . Jadad , D . J . Cook , G . P . Browman , A guide to interpreting discordant system - atic reviews , Can . Med . Assoc . J . 156 ( 10 ) , 1997 , pp . 1411 – 1416 . G . Pare´ et al . / Information & Management 52 ( 2015 ) 183 – 199 198 [ 77 ] D . Thomson , K . Russell , L . Becker , T . Klassen , L . Hartling , The evolution of a new publication type : steps and challenges of producing overviews of reviews , Res . Synth . Methods 1 ( 3 – 4 ) , 2010 , pp . 198 – 211 . [ 78 ] E . Ernst , A systematic review of systematic reviews of homeopathy , Br . J . Clin . Pharmacol . 54 ( 6 ) , 2002 , pp . 577 – 582 . [ 79 ] J . K . Seida , M . B . Ospina , M . Karkhaneh , L . Hartling , V . Smith , B . Clark , Systematic reviews of psychosocial interventions for autism : an umbrella review , Dev . Med . Child Neurol . 51 ( 2 ) , 2009 , pp . 95 – 104 . [ 80 ] B . J . Shea , C . Hamel , G . A . Wells , L . M . Bouter , E . Kristjansson , J . Grimshaw , M . Boers , AMSTAR is a reliable and valid measurement tool to assess the methodological quality of systematic reviews , J . Clin . Epidemiol . 62 ( 10 ) , 2009 , pp . 1013 – 1020 . [ 81 ] D . Atkins , D . Best , P . A . Briss , M . Eccles , Y . Falck - Ytter , S . Flottorp , S . Zaza , Grading quality of evidence and strength of recommendations , BMJ Clin . Res . 328 , 2004 , p . 1490 . [ 82 ] R . F . Baumeister , M . R . Leary , Writing narrative literature reviews , Rev . Gen . Psychol . 1 ( 3 ) , 1997 , pp . 311 – 320 . [ 83 ] J . M . Eakin , E . Mykhalovskiy , Reframing the evaluation of qualitative health research : reﬂections on a review of appraisal guidelines in the health sciences , J . Eval . Clin . Pract . 9 ( 2 ) , 2003 , pp . 187 – 194 . [ 84 ] M . Sandelowski , J . Barroso , Classifying the ﬁndings in qualitative research , Qual . Health Res . 13 ( 7 ) , 2003 , pp . 905 – 923 . [ 85 ] J . F . Wolfswinkel , E . Furtmueller , C . P . Wilderom , Using grounded theory as a method for rigorously reviewing literature , Eur . J . Inf . Syst . 22 ( 1 ) , 2013 , pp . 45 – 55 . [ 86 ] T . Greenhalgh , G . Wong , G . Westhorp , R . Pawson , Protocol - realist and meta - narrative evidence synthesis : evolving standards ( RAMESES ) , BMC Med . Res . Method . 11 ( 1 ) , 2011 , p . 115 . [ 87 ] B . Oates , Evidence - based information systems : a decade later , European Con - ference on Information Systems , 2011 , paper 222 . [ 88 ] R . Pawson , Evidence - Based Policy . A Realistic Perspective , Sage , London , 2006 . [ 89 ] W . Orlikowski , CASE tools as organizational change : investigating incremental and radical changes in systems development , MIS Quart . 17 ( 3 ) , 1993 , pp . 309 – 340 . [ 90 ] R . Pawson , T . Greenhalgh , G . Harvey , K . Walshe , Realist review – a new method of systematic review designed for complex policy interventions , J . Health Serv . Res . Policy 10 ( suppl 1 ) , 2005 , pp . 21 – 34 . [ 91 ] E . Barnett - Page , J . Thomas , Methods for the synthesis of qualitative research : a critical review , BMC Med . Res . Method . 9 ( 1 ) , 2009 , p . 59 . [ 92 ] A . Pearson , Balancing the evidence : incorporating the synthesis of qualitative data into systematic reviews , JBI Rep . 2 , 2004 , pp . 45 – 64 . [ 93 ] J . Popay ( Ed . ) , Moving Beyond Effectiveness in Evidence Synthesis : Methodolog - ical Issues in the Synthesis of Diverse Sources of Evidence , NICE , London ( UK ) , 2006 . [ 94 ] H . Cooper , L . V . Hedges , Research synthesis as a scientiﬁc process , Handb . Res . Synth . Meta - analysis 2 , 2009 , pp . 3 – 17 . [ 95 ] S . Kitsiou , G . Pare´ , M . Jaana , Systematic reviews and meta - analyses of home telemonitoring interventions for patients with chronic diseases : a critical as - sessment of their methodological quality , J . Med . Internet Res . 15 ( 7 ) , 2013 , p . e150 . [ 96 ] D . Aloini , R . Dulmin , V . Mininno , Risk management in ERP project introduction : Review of the literature , Inf . Manage . 44 ( 6 ) , 2007 , pp . 547 – 567 . [ 97 ] P . Palvia , D . Leary , E . Mao , V . Midha , P . Pinjani , A . Salam , Research methodologies in MIS : an update , Commun . Assoc . Inf . Syst . 14 , 2004 , pp . 526 – 542 . [ 98 ] N . Archer , U . Fevrier - Thomas , C . Lokker , K . McKibbon , S . Straus , Personal health records : a scoping review , J . Am . Med . Inform . Assoc . 18 ( 4 ) , 2011 , pp . 515 – 522 . [ 99 ] J . Schepers , M . Wetzels , A meta - analysis of the technology acceptance model : investigating subjective norm and moderation effects , Inf . Manage . 44 ( 1 ) , 2007 , pp . 90 – 103 . [ 100 ] G . Pare´ , M . Jaana , C . Sicotte , Systematic review of home telemonitoring for chronic diseases : the evidence base , J . Am . Med . Inform . Assoc . 14 ( 3 ) , 2007 , pp . 269 – 277 . [ 101 ] G . Mbemba , M . P . Gagnon , G . Pare ´ , J . Co ˆ te ´ , Interventions for supporting nurse retention in rural and remote areas : an umbrella review , Hum . Resour . Health 11 ( 1 ) , 2013 , p . 44 . [ 102 ] W . H . DeLone , E . R . McLean , Information systems success : the quest for the dependent variable , Inf . Syst . Res . 3 ( 1 ) , 1992 , pp . 60 – 95 . [ 103 ] G . Wong , T . Greenhalgh , R . Pawson , Internet - based medical education : a realist review of what works , for whom and in what circumstances , BMC Med . Educ . 10 ( 1 ) , 2010 , p . 12 . [ 104 ] F . D . Davis , R . P . Bagozzi , P . R . Warshaw , User acceptance of computer technology : a comparison of two theoretical models , Manage . Sci . 35 ( 8 ) , 1989 , pp . 982 – 1003 . [ 105 ] D . Laurillard , Rethinking University Teaching : A Conversational Framework for the Effective Use of Learning Technologies , Routledge Falmer , London , 2002 . [ 106 ] V . Balijepally , G . Mangalaraj , K . Iyengar , Are we wielding this hammer correctly ? . a reﬂective review of the application of cluster analysis in information systems research J . Assoc . Inf . Syst . 12 ( 5 ) , 2011 , pp . 375 – 413 . [ 107 ] L . Dube´ , G . Pare´ , Rigor in information systems positivist case research : current practices , trends , and recommendations , MIS Quart . 24 ( 7 ) , 2003 , pp . 597 – 636 . [ 108 ] N . A . Patsopoulos , A . A . Analatos , J . P . A . Ioannidis , Relative citation impact of various study designs in the health sciences , J . Am . Med . Assoc . 293 ( 19 ) , 2005 , pp . 2362 – 2366 . [ 109 ] V . M . Montori , N . Wilczynski , D . Morgan , R . B . Haynes , Systematic reviews : a cross - sectional study of location and citation counts , BMC Med . 1 ( 1 ) , 2003 , p . 2 . [ 110 ] M . Petticrew , H . Roberts , Systematic Reviews in the Social Sciences : A Practical Guide , Blackwell Publishing Co . , Malden , MA , 2006 . [ 111 ] I . Benbasat , D . K . Goldstein , M . Mead , The case research strategy in studies of information systems , MIS Quart . 11 ( 3 ) , 1987 , pp . 369 – 386 . [ 112 ] M . Alavi , D . E . Leidner , Review : knowledge management and knowledge man - agement systems : conceptual foundations and research issues , MIS Quart . 25 ( 1 ) , 2001 , pp . 107 – 136 . [ 113 ] W . J . Orlikowski , J . J . Baroudi , Studying information technology in organizations : research approaches and assumptions , Inf . Syst . Res . 2 ( 1 ) , 1991 , pp . 1 – 28 . [ 114 ] M . Wade , J . Hulland , Review : the resource - based view and information systems research : review , extension , and suggestions for future research , MIS Quart . 28 ( 1 ) , 2004 , pp . 107 – 142 . [ 115 ] R . B . Briner , D . Denyer , D . M . Rousseau , Evidence - based management : concept cleanup time ? Acad . Manage . Perspect . 23 ( 4 ) , 2009 , pp . 19 – 32 . [ 116 ] D . A . Whetten , What constitutes a theoretical contribution ? Acad . Manage . Rev . 14 ( 4 ) , 1989 , pp . 490 – 495 . [ 117 ] P . G . W . Keen , Reference disciplines and a cumulative tradition , in : Proceedings of the International Conference on Information Systems , 1980 , pp . 9 – 18 . [ 118 ] I . Benbasat , R . W . Zmud , Empirical research in information systems : the practice of relevance , MIS Quart . 23 ( 1 ) , 1999 , pp . 3 – 16 . Guy Pare´ is a Professor of information technologies and Holder of the Chair in Information Technology in Health Care at HEC Montre´al . His current research interests involve the impacts of health information systems on health care professionals and patients as well as the barriers to adoption and implementation of informa - tion systems in healthcare organizations . His publica - tions have appeared in top - ranked journals including MIS Quarterly , Journal of the American Medical Informat - ics Association , and Journal of Information Technology . Professor Pare´’s expertise has been sought by numerous organizations including the World Health Organization , the Department of Health in France , and Canada Health Infoway . Marie - Claude Trudel is an Associate Professor in the Department of Information Technology at HEC Mon - tre´al . She holds a PhD in business administration ( MIS ) from the University of Western Ontario in London , Canada . Her research interests include health informa - tion systems , information systems for cultural orga - nizations , IT in education , and research methods . Her work has been published in journals such as Interna - tional Journal of Medical Informatics , Health Care Management Review , JMIR Medical Informatics , and International Journal of Social & Organizational Dynamics in Information Technology . Mirou Jaana is an Associate Professor at Telfer School of Management in the University of Ottawa . Her research interests come at the intersection of Health Care Management and Medical Informatics , and involve the implementation of information systems in hospi - tals , risks in clinical IT projects , strategic IT planning and IT management issues in hospitals , evidence - based health care management , and home telemonitoring for chronic diseases . She published articles in top peer - reviewed journals including the American Journal of Managed Care , Health Care Management Review , Journal of Medical Internet Research , International Journal of Medical Informatics , and Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association . Spyros Kitsiou is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Biomedical and Health Information Sciences at the University of Illinois at Chicago . His current research interests involve the effectiveness of home telemonitoring and mobile health interventions for the management of patients with chronic conditions as well as the conduct of systematic reviews , meta - analyses , and overviews of systematic reviews to support evidence - based practice in health informatics . His publications have appeared in the Journal of Medical Internet Research , International Journal of Healthcare Technology and Management , and International Journal for Quality of Life Research . G . Pare´ et al . / Information & Management 52 ( 2015 ) 183 – 199 199