Strategic Management Journal Strat . Mgmt . J . , 33 : 611 – 632 ( 2012 ) Published online EarlyView in Wiley Online Library ( wileyonlinelibrary . com ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj . 1969 Received 15 January 2010 ; Final revision received 10 June 2011 ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE AS A DETERMINANT OF PERFORMANCE : EVIDENCE FROM MUTUAL FUNDS FELIPE A . CSASZAR * StephenM . RossSchoolofBusiness , UniversityofMichigan , AnnArbor , Michigan , U . S . A . This article develops and tests a model of how organizational structure inﬂuences organizational performance . Organizational structure , conceptualized as the decision - making structure among a group of individuals , is shown to affect the number of initiatives pursued by organizations and the omission and commission errors ( Type I and II errors , respectively ) made by organizations . The empirical setting is more than 150 , 000 stock - picking decisions made by 609 mutual funds . Mutual funds offer an ideal and rare setting to test the theory , since there are detailed records on the projects they face , the decisions they make , and the outcomes of these decisions . The study’s independent variable , organizational structure , is coded based on fund management descriptions made by Morningstar , and estimates of the omission and commission errors are computed by a novel technique that uses bootstrapping to create measures that are comparable across funds . The ﬁndings suggest that organizational structure has relevant and predictable effects on a wide range of organizations . In particular , the article shows empirically that increasing the consensus threshold required by a committee in charge of selecting projects leads to more omission errors , fewer commission errors , and fewer approved projects . Applications include designing organizations that achieve a given mix of exploration and exploitation , as well as predicting the consequences of centralization and decentralization . This work constitutes the ﬁrst large - sample empirical test of the model by Sah and Stiglitz ( 1986 ) . Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . INTRODUCTION There is a long - standing concern that the strategy literature needs a better understanding of the rela - tionship between organizational structure and per - formance . This concern goes back at least to Cyert and March ( 1963 : 21 ) , who posed the following questions when motivating their theoretical enter - prise : ‘what happens to information as it is pro - cessed through the organization ? What predictable Keywords : organization design ; omission and commis - sion errors ; exploration / exploitation ; centralization and decentralization ; decision making * Correspondence to : Felipe A . Csaszar , Stephen M . Ross School of Business , University of Michigan , 701 Tappan Ave . R4336 , Ann Arbor , MI 48109 , U . S . A . E - mail : fcsaszar @ umich . edu screening biases are there in an organization ? ’ Yet with few exceptions , questions of this sort remain largely unexplored in the strategy literature ( Rumelt , Schendel , and Teece , 1994 : 42 ) . The lack of knowledge about how decision - making structure affects organizational performance surfaces repeat - edly in different areas of management . For exam - ple , in the context of ambidextrous organizations , Raisch and Birkinshaw ( 2008 : 380 ) note that ‘far less research has traditionally been devoted to how organizations achieve organizational ambidexter - ity , ’ and in the context of R & D organization , Argyres and Silverman ( 2004 : 929 ) show surprise ‘that so little research has addressed the issue of how internal R & D organization affects the direc - tions and impact of technological innovation by Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . 612 F . A . Csaszar multidivisional ﬁrms . ’ These observations are con - gruent with the view that organization design—the ﬁeld speciﬁcally devoted to studying the links between environment , organizational structure , and organizational outcomes—is , in many respects , an emerging ﬁeld despite its long history ( Daft and Lewin , 1993 ; Zenger and Hesterly , 1997 ; Foss , 2003 ) . This article contributes to a better understanding of the relationship between organizational struc - ture and organizational performance by providing the ﬁrst large sample empirical test of the the - ory developed by Sah and Stiglitz ( 1986 ) . Among other predictions , this theory establishes a causal link between the structure of a decision - making committee and the number of omission and com - mission errors the committee will make . Errors of omission and commission ( which are equiv - alent , respectively , to Type I and II errors in statistics ) correspond to missing good choices ( omissions ) and pursuing bad choices ( commis - sions ) . Speciﬁcally , Sah and Stiglitz’s ( 1986 ) theory predicts that committees with a high con - sensus level ( e . g . , requiring unanimous approval ) will make relatively few commission errors but many omission errors . In contrast , committees with a low consensus level ( e . g . , requiring the approval of just one of its members ) will exhibit the oppo - site behavior : they will make few omission errors but many commission errors . Additionally , the the - ory predicts that the higher the consensus level , the fewer projects that will be pursued by the commit - tee . This article ﬁnds empirical support for these three predictions of the Sah and Stiglitz model . The Sah and Stiglitz model makes predictions regarding organizational performance ( e . g . , ex - pected omission and commission errors of a given organization design ) . Yet in many cases , by using a contingency or ‘ﬁt’ - type of logic , one may extend the reach of their model to infer predictions regard - ing competitive performance ( e . g . , proﬁtability in the face of competition ) . For instance , all other things being equal , if in a given competitive situ - ation omission errors are costlier than commission errors , then a ﬁrm whose organizational design produces fewer omission errors will be more prof - itable than one whose design produces more omis - sion errors . From a practical standpoint , empirically validat - ing Sah and Stiglitz’s theory is relevant because it has performance implications for committees , a widespread decision - making structure . Moreover , committees are used in many settings relevant to strategic decision making , such as boards of direc - tors , top management teams , ﬁnance committees , and investment teams . From a theoretical standpoint , conﬁrming the Sah and Stiglitz model is of special interest to organization design , as their theory provides a parsimonious mechanism to explain how micro decisions ( individual choices ) are aggregated by an organizational architecture into macro behav - iors ( organization - level performance ) . In fact , by separating performance into omission and commis - sion errors and then linking structural choices to the occurrence of these errors , Sah and Stiglitz’s model sheds light on such organization design issues as the implications of centralization and decentralization and how organizations can pursue exploration and exploitation . It is especially important to test the Sah and Stiglitz model because it has spawned a large num - ber of descendants . 1 Thus , all these works rely critically on the untested validity of its prede - cessor . Despite there being many ways in which the work of Sah and Stiglitz ( 1986 ) can illumi - nate managerial phenomena , few of the references have come from the management ﬁeld . The occa - sional exceptions include work on mergers and acquisitions ( Gulati and Higgins , 2003 ; Puranam , Powell , and Singh , 2006 ) , venture capital ( Lerner , 1994 ) , technological choices ( Garud , Nayyar , and Shapira , 1997 ) , the implications of alternative eval - uation on search ( Knudsen and Levinthal , 2007 ) , and analyzing the errors of more complex organi - zational structures ( Csaszar , 2009 ; Christensen and Knudsen , 2010 ) . Perhaps the lack of empirical val - idation explains why few of the references to the work of Sah and Stiglitz ( 1986 ) have come from the , largely empirical , management ﬁeld . Sah and Stiglitz’s theory is so simple—it is based solely on the probabilities that different vot - ing rules have of vetoing projects—that one may be tempted to suppose their predictions are obvi - ously true in organizations resembling those in the theory . But without empirical validation , it is not obvious whether Sah and Stiglitz’s ( 1986 ) terse description of organizations has predictive value . For example , it could be that their idea of looking at organizations as veto mechanisms 1 At the time of this writing , more than 180 citations according to ISI Web of Science . Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 33 : 611 – 632 ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Organizational Structure as a Determinant of Performance 613 greatly oversimpliﬁes the communication capac - ity of individuals or the information aggregation rules actually used by organizations . Alternatively , it could be that the process described by Sah and Stiglitz ( 1986 ) does operate in organizations , but that its effects are minuscule when compared with other concurrent effects , such as groupthink ( Janis , 1972 ) , herding ( Bikhchandani , Hirshleifer , and Welch , 1992 ) , power ( Pfeffer , 1992 ) , decision biases ( Kahneman and Tversky , 1979 ) , or mas - sive inaccuracies in managerial decision making ( Starbuck and Mezias , 1996 ) . In sum , determining the falsiﬁability of Sah and Stiglitz’s theory is an empirical question . Science progresses by theory building and theory testing , but Sah and Stiglitz’s theory - building effort has , until now , lacked an accompanying theory - testing effort . This article tests Sah and Stiglitz’s model by using data on the decision - making structure and on the omission and commission errors of mutual funds . One could argue that Sah and Stiglitz’s the - ory has not yet been tested empirically because collecting information on organizational structure and errors ( particularly omissions ) is difﬁcult . Luckily , mutual funds offer a rare opportunity to observe all the required information : mutual funds’ decision - making structure ( which squarely maps into the committees described by Sah and Stiglitz ) is observable from analysts’ reports ; and omission and commission errors can be measured by looking at the investment universe of each fund , the assets that each fund decides to buy and not to buy from that investment universe , and the ex post return of each asset . The current study explores a particular aspect of organization design using a particular setting . Hence , two questions regarding generalizability emerge : how prevalent is the mechanism stud - ied , and how representative is the setting . The mechanism studied—voting—is certainly preva - lent , although it is unlikely to occur in such a stylized way as described by Sah and Stiglitz’s model . In the real world it is probable that other phenomena ( e . g . , power , politics , herding ) would co - occur . It is interesting that , despite the pos - sibility that any number of factors inﬂuence the relationship between structure and organizational performance , the results reported here are consis - tent with Sah and Stiglitz’s parsimonious char - acterization . Regarding the second question , on how representative is the mutual funds setting , one characteristic of this setting that suggests that the ﬁndings reported here may occur elsewhere is that mutual funds are among the most stringent settings imaginable : stock returns are eminently random ( Fama , 1970 ) , so it is hard to imagine that orga - nizational structure could affect any outcome of stock picking . Finding empirical support in this setting , therefore , suggests empirical support in other , less stringent settings . The next section of this article describes the mechanism underlying the Sah and Stiglitz model ; the following section connects the theory of Sah and Stiglitz to the management literature . Then the tested hypotheses are presented , the empirical setting is described , and the results are presented . Finally , the broader theoretical and managerial implications of this research are discussed . AN OVERVIEW OF THE SAH AND STIGLITZ MODEL FROM AN ORGANIZATION DESIGN PERSPECTIVE To understand the scope and applicability of Sah and Stiglitz’s model , it is useful to start by describ - ing how it ﬁts within the three fundamental themes of organization design : ( 1 ) organizational search or alternative generation ( e . g . , Rivkin and Siggelkow , 2003 ; Ethiraj and Levinthal , 2004 ) ; ( 2 ) alternative evaluation ( e . g . , Gavetti and Levinthal , 2000 ; Knudsen and Levinthal , 2007 ) ; and ( 3 ) execution or implementation ( e . g . , Hrebiniak and Joyce , 1984 ; Galbraith and Kazanjian , 1986 ) . In light of this characterization , the work of Sah and Stiglitz ( 1986 ) falls precisely in the category of alternative evaluation . Sah and Stiglitz ( 1986 , 1988 ) 2 model how com - mittees screen projects : that is , how effective they are at separating good projects from bad ones . Although originally developed to compare the performance of central planning with that of free markets , Sah and Stiglitz’s model can shed light on a broader set of organizational issues because many organizations use committee - like structures . Examples include banks choosing which loans to approve , venture capital ﬁrms and mutual funds picking investments , movie studios 2 The paper by Sah and Stiglitz ( 1988 ) generalizes Sah and Stiglitz ( 1986 ) to committees with arbitrary size and consensus levels . For succinctness , only the earlier paper is cited hereafter . Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 33 : 611 – 632 ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj 614 F . A . Csaszar judging scripts , hiring committees selecting candi - dates , and top management teams deciding which strategic projects to pursue . Sah and Stiglitz model committees as compris - ing N decision makers , of which C must approve a project for it to be approved by the commit - tee ( C stands for ‘consensus level’ ) . For example , an organization of three members that approves a project when any member decides to approve it is represented by N = 3 and C = 1 , or simply 3 / 1 ; likewise , 2 / 2 denotes a two - member organiza - tion that only approves projects for which there is consensus . An organization consisting of a single individual is denoted 1 / 1 . The model assumes that individuals are fallible ( i . e . , individuals perceive reality in a noisy fash - ion ) , homogeneous , and uncorrelated ( i . e . , noises in perception are independent and identically dis - tributed ) ; it also assumes that projects are described by a single number ( i . e . , a project quality , which is imperfectly perceived ) . Like all models , this styl - ized description of organizations leaves many phe - nomena outside of its scope , such as organizations whose task is different from screening projects , heterogeneity in ability , group dynamics such as herding ( Bikhchandani et al . , 1992 ) or groupthink ( Janis , 1972 ) , and , more generally , organizational structures different from those describable in terms of N and C . Nonetheless , the model does permit one to focus on some basic mechanisms that are pervasive within organizations : how centralized or decentralized the decision process of an organiza - tion is and how many individuals are involved in it . The following examples illustrate how the model captures these organizational characteristics . For instance , a 3 / 3 could represent the decision - making process within a venture capital ﬁrm in which the three partners must agree on any invest - ment ; it could also represent a three - level hierarchy in which projects received by a low - level employee must escalate up to the CEO for approval . In both examples , all three individuals must concur on the project’s viability before it is approved by the orga - nization . In contrast , a 3 / 1 could represent either of the following decentralized structures : a ﬁrm with three research engineers , any one of whom may independently decide to pursue further research on a new technology ; or it could represent a mutual fund with three autonomous fund managers , any one of whom may authorize the purchase of a secu - rity . In these last two examples , it sufﬁces that one of the three individuals likes the project in order for it to be approved . If the number of decision makers on the com - mittee is ﬁxed , the main predictions of Sah and Stiglitz’s model are that , on average , lowering the consensus level leads to : ( 1 ) more approved projects , ( 2 ) fewer omission errors , and ( 3 ) more commission errors . These three predictions can be explained using basic probability theory . The next example illus - trates the effect of structure on the number of projects approved—that is , Prediction 1 of the model . Imagine two decision makers , each with a 50 percent chance of approving a project , fac - ing 100 projects to be screened . If unanimity is required ( i . e . , if both decision makers must agree that a project is good for it to be approved ) , then they would approve on average 25 projects ( = 100 × 0 . 5 × 0 . 5 ) . If instead the approval of just one decision maker is required , then the orga - nization would approve on average 75 projects ( conversely to the previous case , now each project is accepted unless both decision makers reject it : 100 − 25 = 75 ) . Although the examples so far have assumed that decision makers are homoge - neous ( i . e . , in the example the two managers had the same 50 % probability of approving a project ) , the model can be extended to accommodate het - erogeneous decision makers . But homogeneity is a reasonable assumption in some settings , as when managers have similar training , and also more gen - erally because , on average , heterogeneous settings behave like homogeneous settings . ( For example , a committee whose members have a probability of approval uniformly distributed between 40 % and 60 % behaves , on average , like a committee whose members have a 50 % probability of approval . ) The effect of structure on omission and com - mission errors ( Predictions 2 and 3 ) can be simi - larly illustrated . Imagine that only 50 of the 100 projects are good and that each decision maker has equal probability of accepting and reject - ing good and bad projects ( i . e . , there is a 25 % chance of each decision maker either accepting a good project , accepting a bad project , reject - ing a good project , or rejecting a bad project ) . Then , the unanimous committee ( which Sah and Stiglitz ( 1986 ) call a hierarchy ) would make on average 6 . 25 commission errors ( i . e . , # projects × probability that both decision makers accept a bad project = 100 × 0 . 25 × 0 . 25 ) and 43 . 75 omis - sion errors ( i . e . , # projects × probability that any Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 33 : 611 – 632 ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Organizational Structure as a Determinant of Performance 615 of the decision makers reject a good project = 100 × [ 0 . 25 + 0 . 25 – 0 . 25 2 ] ) . A committee requir - ing the approval of only one decision maker ( which Sah and Stiglitz ( 1986 ) call a polyarchy ) exhibits the converse behavior : on average , it would make 6 . 25 omission errors ( i . e . , # projects × probability that both decision makers reject a good project ) and 43 . 75 commission errors ( i . e . , # projects × probability that any of the decision makers accept a bad project ) . 3 Although not developed for this purpose , the Sah and Stiglitz model can be used to analyze the effects of centralization and decentralization in organizations . The applicability of their model to these effects stems from the facts that ‘decision makers generally base their actions on estimates formulated at other points in the organization’ ( Cyert and March , 1963 : 85 ) and that , in cen - tralized organizations , these estimates must ‘ﬂow up’ through more decision makers ( before reach - ing the ﬁnal decision maker ) than in decentralized organizations ( Robbins , 1990 : 6 ) . Thus , the infor - mation ﬂow in centralized organizations resembles that of hierarchies , whereas the information ﬂow in decentralized organizations resembles that of polyarchies . In sum , the Sah and Stiglitz frame - work captures the dynamic of information passing through more ﬁlters in centralized than in decen - tralized organizations . The appendix generalizes the examples given here by developing a model that makes the same qualitative predictions but under more general assumptions ( regarding number of decision mak - ers , consensus level , individual screening abilities , and types of incoming projects ) . The model in the appendix does not present new theory , but it does serve as a concise summary of the work of Sah and Stiglitz ( 1986 ) that is useful for the purposes of this article . THEORETICAL MOTIVATION What are the effects of organizational structure on organizational performance ? This is among 3 Calculations similar to these—that is , conjunctive ( AND ) and disjunctive ( OR ) probabilities—are commonly used in reliability theory ( e . g . , Rausand and Høyland , 2004 ) . Note that Sah ( 1991 : 68 ) mentions a classic work on reliability ( Moore and Shannon , 1956 / 1993 ) as an antecedent of the Sah and Stiglitz ( 1986 ) model . the fundamental questions in the ﬁelds of strat - egy ( Rumelt et al . , 1994 : 42 ) and organization theory ( Thompson , 1967 ) , so it is no surprise that it has been addressed extensively from sev - eral perspectives since old , even biblical ( Van Fleet and Bedeian , 1977 : 357 ) , times . Therefore , rather than attempting the impossible task of sum - marizing these literatures , this section presents a broad overview with an emphasis on highlighting the main differences and similarities between cur - rent and previous approaches . The review focuses mainly on organizational structures whose build - ing blocks are individuals ( as in Cyert and March , 1963 ) , not business divisions ( as in Chandler , 1962 ) . The focus on this kind of structures is consistent with the Carnegie tradition understand - ing of organizational structure as ‘the pattern of communications and relations among a group of human beings , including the processes for making and implementing decisions’ ( Simon , 1947 / 1997 : 18 – 19 ) . This section is organized in terms of three main disciplines that share an interest in how organi - zational structure affects performance : organiza - tion design , organizational economics , and signal detection theory . Organization design Important early attempts at understanding the rela - tionship between structure and performance are present in the work of Chandler ( 1962 ) and Barnard ( 1938 ) . Their work , like most ensuing efforts in organization design , took an information process - ing perspective . For instance , Chandler ( 1962 : 69 – 70 ) cites memos from Du Pont’s reorganiza - tion in 1919 that were explicit about the role of information processing : ‘the most efﬁcient results are obtained at least expense when we coordi - nate related effort and segregate unrelated effort . ’ Similarly , Barnard ( 1938 : 215 ) mentions that ‘the function of executives is to serve as channels of communication so far as communication must pass though central positions . ’ Inﬂuenced by Barnard , Simon ( 1947 / 1997 ) developed a more formal understanding of orga - nizations as information processing devices com - posed of boundedly rational individuals . Under this view , organizational structure plays a cen - tral role , as it deﬁnes how information ﬂows and is aggregated inside organizations , allowing organizations to accomplish goals that would be Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 33 : 611 – 632 ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj 616 F . A . Csaszar otherwise unattainable by any of its individual members . Led by Simon ( 1947 / 1997 ) , Cyert and March ( 1963 ) gave organizational structure a cen - tral place in the Carnegie tradition . However , with one exception ( Cohen , March , and Olsen , 1972 ) , this tradition devoted most of its energies to deci - sion making in the absence of concerns about organizational structure . In fact , organizational structure has recently been called a ‘forgotten pil - lar’ of this tradition ( Gavetti , Levinthal , and Oca - sio , 2007 : 525 ) . The work of Sah and Stiglitz ( 1986 ) is consis - tent with the information processing perspective that permeates the organization design literature : it views the role of organizational structure as a means to aggregate the information coming from boundedly rational , fallible individuals . Yet in addition to being consistent with organiza - tion design , it extends the information process - ing approach by offering a new set of predictions about structure and types of projects approved . By providing empirical support for Sah and Stiglitz’s model , this article aims to pave the way for these predictions to be used fruitfully in organization design . Organizational economics Several models in organizational economics have studied the effect of structure on performance . In broad terms , the organizational economics lit - erature on structure can be divided into two strands : incentives 4 and information processing . The current article is directly related to this latter strand . The information processing strand of the organi - zational literature has dealt mainly with the selec - tion of projects and the efﬁciency aspects of project implementation . Early works along these lines include Williamson ( 1967 ) on optimal hierarchy size and Marschak and Radner ( 1972 ) on opti - mal decision making by teams . More recent work has studied efﬁciency measures of hierarchies ( e . g . , Radner , 1992 ; Bolton and Dewatripont , 1994 ; Van 4 The incentives strand has dealt mainly with project imple - mentation or execution . Topics studied include the relationship between the manager’s incentives and the range of projects implemented by the ﬁrm ( Rotemberg and Saloner , 1994 ) ; the interplay between organizational structure and formal authority ( Aghion and Tirole , 1997 ) ; and the types of projects that are better served by managers who persuade employees instead of resorting to authority ( Van den Steen , 2009 ) . Zandt , 1999 ) ; the optimal organization of produc - tion as a function of environmental uncertainty ( Cremer , 1980 ) ; the acquisition of knowledge by hierarchies with heterogeneous agents ( Geanakop - los and Milgrom , 1991 ; Garicano , 2000 ) ; the extent to which hierarchies can accommodate coordina - tion and specialization ( Hart and Moore , 2005 ) ; and the relative performance of such common organizational forms as the M - form and the U - form ( Harris and Raviv , 2002 ; Qian , Roland , and Xu , 2006 ) . Sah and Stiglitz ( 1986 ) contribute to orga - nizational economics by introducing two new elements : modeling communication patterns as sequential or parallel circuits and measuring per - formance as omission and commission errors . The literature that has descended from the work of Sah and Stiglitz ( 1986 ) has been primarily the - oretical and focused on voting ( see the intro - duction of Christensen and Knudsen ( 2010 ) for a review ) , so the application of their model to organization design issues remains largely unex - plored . Signal detection theory Almost without connection to the previous litera - tures , a rich body of work that addresses many of the same questions has been developed in social psychology , under the label of signal detection theory , and in the closely related theory of social decision schemes . Signal detection theory ( Peterson , Birdsall , and Fox , 1954 ; Green and Swets , 1966 ; Macmillan and Creelman , 2004 ) provides a mathematical frame - work to analyze perception and decision making by fallible individuals . This theory conceptual - izes decision makers as trying to detect a signal in a noisy environment , and it provides a set of models , measures , and experiments to assess how good decision makers are at detecting those sig - nals under different settings . This theory was ﬁrst used to measure the sensory acuity of military per - sonnel ( i . e . , radar operators ) and was later adapted to study myriad discrimination problems in cog - nitive processes ( e . g . , medical diagnosis , weather forecasting , quality control ) . 5 Given the general - ity of signal detection theory , many problems of 5 The updated bibliography on the 1988 reprint edition of the classic book on the subject ( Green and Swets , 1966 ) lists more than 1 , 000 studies published on the subject during the period from 1967 to 1988 alone . Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 33 : 611 – 632 ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Organizational Structure as a Determinant of Performance 617 choice can be seen as special cases of it . Of par - ticular interest to this article is that some problems of managerial decision making have been ana - lyzed from a signal detection perspective : Puranam et al . ( 2006 ) use the theory to study M & As and Garud et al . ( 1997 ) use it to study technological innovation . One of the contributions of signal detection the - ory is representing the omission and commission errors of different decision makers via a ‘receiver operating characteristic curve’ ( Figure 1 is akin to that representation ) . Although signal detection theory and the Sah and Stiglitz model both pay explicit attention to omission and commission errors and to their costs , one difference between these approaches is that , whereas Sah and Stiglitz ( 1986 ) study the performance of committees , sig - nal detection theory studies the performance of individuals . The theory of social decision schemes ( Davis , 1973 , 1992 ) is similar to the work of Sah and Stiglitz on committees in that it presents mathemat - ical models of group decision making ( although performance is not measured as omission and commission errors ) . This literature has produced empirical results ( Stoner , 1961 ; Stasser and Titus , 1985 ; Hinsz , Tindale , and Vollrath , 1997 ) ; how - ever , because the experiments have primarily been conducted in the laboratory using small groups that meet for brief times , reported results may not be generalizable to more complex organizations ( Argote and Greve , 2007 : 344 ) . In sum , an empirically validated version of the Sah and Stiglitz model can serve to combine the strengths of both signal detection theory ( i . e . , its focus on omission and commission errors ) and social decision schemes ( its focus on groups ) , thereby bringing closer to organization design the rich bodies of work on group decision making that are based in social psychology . Although the reviewed literatures have provided many important insights regarding the impact of structure on performance , the ﬁeld of orga - nizations lacks an empirically validated theory that—starting from structure at the level of indi - viduals—is able to predict organization - level measures of performance that are relevant to ﬁrm strategy . If empirically validated , Sah and Stiglitz’s model would offer such a theory . The contribution of this article is to test this theory empirically for the ﬁrst time . HYPOTHESES The independent variable of the study is organi - zational structure which , from the data set used , can reliably be coded into three nonoverlapping categories : ( 1 ) mutual funds managed by one indi - vidual ( in terms of the model outlined earlier , this corresponds to N = 1 and C = 1 ) ; ( 2 ) mutual funds managed by more than one individual , with each individual operating independently from the others ( in terms of the model , N > 1 and C = 1 ) ; and ( 3 ) mutual funds managed by more than one individual and where decisions are made unani - mously ( in terms of the model , N > 1 and C = N ) . For brevity , these structures will be referred to ( respectively ) as individual , decentralized , and centralized . Because of data limitations to be dis - cussed later , the data set does not contain struc - tures featuring intermediate levels of consensus ( i . e . , N / C with 1 < C < N , such as N = 7 and C = 6 ) . The dependent variables of the study are the three outcomes predicted by the model : number of approved projects , omission errors , and commis - sion errors . Because the model predicts that these three outcomes are most different for centralized versus decentralized structures , the hypotheses are stated as comparisons between those two struc - tures . It would be possible to formulate six fur - ther hypotheses comparing individual managers to centralized structures and individual managers to decentralized structures ; but , to avoid a litany of hypotheses , these comparisons are discussed in the results section without being formally enumerated here . The three hypotheses are equivalent to the three properties of Sah and Stiglitz’s model described earlier . These three hypotheses encompass all the mechanisms exposed in Sah and Stiglitz ( 1986 , 1988 ) regarding committees with exogenously given screening functions . Hypothesis 1 : Decentralized organizations accept more projects than centralized organizations . Hypothesis 2 : Decentralized organizations make fewer omission errors than centralized organizations . Hypothesis 3 : Decentralized organizations make more commission errors than centralized organizations . Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 33 : 611 – 632 ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj 618 F . A . Csaszar EMPIRICAL SETTING AND APPROACH Empirical challenge Before delving into the speciﬁcs of the data set and statistical methods , it is important to understand the structure of the empirical problem . To test the hypotheses , all of the following must be observed : ( 1 ) organizations making decisions about projects , ( 2 ) a measure of the quality of each project decided upon , ( 3 ) the decision that each organization made with respect to every project it faced , and ( 4 ) the organizational structure of each organization . Item 1 exists in many settings ( e . g . , ﬁrms deciding whom to hire , where to expand , what to sell ) . Item 2 is also readily available in settings where the ex post value of the project is visible and can proxy for the project’s true quality . In the venture capital context , for example , it could be a function of the IPO value of a start - up in which a venture capitalist considered investing ; in the R & D context , it could be the number of citations accrued by a patent after a ﬁrm had the opportunity to buy it . Yet items 3 and 4 are serious hurdles for the empirical researcher . First , there is typically no track record of the projects an organization consid - ered but decided not to pursue ( e . g . , all the ﬁrms a venture capitalist screened but did not invest in ) . Second , organizational structure is not avail - able from public databases . Organizational charts are sometimes available , but they give no indica - tion of whether a given decision - making process is centralized or decentralized ( e . g . , by looking at an organizational chart , it is not possible to know the decision process used to set the direction of R & D , perform M & As , or decide on IT investments ) . Mutual funds offer a rare window into the impli - cations of organization design on organizational performance because , in this setting , the four nec - essary ingredients are observable : ( 1 ) managing a mutual fund is essentially about making deci - sions ( i . e . , deciding what to buy and what to sell ) ; ( 2 ) the ex post return of each investment is a good measure of the quality of each decision ; 6 ( 3 ) regulations require funds to disclose their hold - ings periodically , which allows the researcher to distinguish between accepted ‘projects’ ( i . e . , stocks that were bought ) and those that the fund 6 Stock returns are exogenously given ( in most plausible cases they do not depend on anything a fund manager can do ) and , thus , provide a good match for Sah and Stiglitz’s model , which treats quality as exogenously given . rejected ( stocks that were not bought ) ; and ( 4 ) organizational structure is observable from descrip - tions of the fund management prepared by Morn - ingstar . Additionally , there are thousands of mutual funds , and the typical fund makes dozens of deci - sions per quarter . All these considerations make mutual funds an exceptional vehicle for studying the effects of organization design on organizational performance ; indeed , mutual funds would make a good aspirant for the ‘fruit ﬂy’ of organization design . Despite these virtues of mutual funds as an empirical setting , there is a strong tradition in the ﬁnance literature that maintains organizational structure should not be a determinant of fund performance . In a nutshell , the efﬁcient market hypothesis ( EMH ) ( Fama , 1970 ) purports that all available information is already reﬂected in asset prices , rendering future returns unpredictable . If that is true , organizational structure should not predict mutual fund performance . However , two caveats apply . First , the EMH’s performance mea - sure is ﬁnancial return , not omission and commis - sion errors . 7 Second , the EMH is no longer viewed as invulnerable , since a vast literature on market anomalies ( e . g . , Goetzmann and Ibbotson , 1994 ; Chevalier and Ellison , 1999 ; Cohen , Frazzini , and Malloy , 2008 ) has emerged in the last 20 years . Because the variance explained by market anomalies is small ( e . g . , the typical R 2 of an anomaly is less than 1 % ) , any variance explained by organizational structure is not expected to be large . A further implication is that any explanatory power the model has will likely increase in settings where the link between cause and effect is more deterministic . Since stock picking is arguably one of the most random task environments possible , it follows that mutual funds make for a stringent test - ing arena and that the results of this article serve as conservative estimates . Independent variable : mutual fund organizational structure A mutual fund is a type of investment that pools money from many investors to buy a portfolio of different securities such as stocks , bonds , money 7 A surprising result of this article is that the organizational structure of a fund can affect its omission and commission errors in such a way that ﬁnancial return is not affected—a result that supports the apparently contradictory predictions of both Sah and Stiglitz ( 1986 ) and Fama ( 1970 ) . Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 33 : 611 – 632 ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Organizational Structure as a Determinant of Performance 619 Table 1 . Examples of how organizational structure is coded from Morningstar’s fund descriptions ( the ticker symbol of each fund is given in parentheses ) Structure ( N / C ) Excerpts from Morningstar’s mutual fund description 1 / 1 ‘Ron Baron has been at the helm since the fund’s inception . . . He’s the driving force behind this portfolio . . . buys companies he thinks can . . . ’ ( BPTRX ) 2 / 1 ‘Managers Scott Glasser and Peter Hable each run 50 percent of the portfolio . . . ’ ( CSGWX ) 3 / 1 ‘Three management ﬁrms select 10 stocks apiece for this fund’s portfolio . ’ ( SFVAX ) 5 / 1 ‘ ( The fund ) divvies up assets among ﬁve subadvisors , and each picks eight to 15 stocks according to his own investing style . ’ ( MSSFX ) 2 / 2 ‘Teresa McRoberts and Patrick Kelly became comanagers of this fund in late September 2004 . . . They don’t pay too much attention to traditional valuation metrics such as . . . ’ ( ACAAX ) 7 / 7 ‘All investment decisions are vetted by the entire seven - person team . . . Management populates the fund with 30 – 50 stocks . . . ’ ( CBMDX ) market instruments , or other securities . Mutual funds in the United States are regulated by the U . S . Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) ; among other requirements , the SEC requires funds to report their portfolio holdings at the end of the last trading day of every quarter ( Form 13F ) and periodically identify their fund managers ( Form 487 ) . Mutual funds are heavily scrutinized not only by the SEC but also by institutional investors and investment research ﬁrms . Morningstar , one of the leading investment re - search ﬁrms , offers information about mutual funds to investors and ﬁnancial advisors . Using public sources and periodically meeting with fund man - agers , Morningstar’s analysts produce a one - page report—densely packed with statistics and anal - ysis—for each fund they track . For the present study , the most important element of these proﬁles is a section entitled ‘governance and management , ’ which presents a short biography of the managers and describes how they manage the portfolio . This section of the report contains enough information to code organizational structure as modeled in this article ( in terms of number of managers , N , and level of consensus required , C ) . To understand how the coding was done , consider the excerpts shown in Table 1 , which illustrate typical descriptions . To increase consistency , four rules were followed for the coding : 1 . If the description mentions managers’ names , N is set to the number of people mentioned as manager or comanager , with the exception of people who are described explicitly as having a secondary role ( e . g . , if a manager is described as subordinate , performing administrative tasks , not participating in the day - to - day management , or recently promoted but retaining his / her ana - lyst tasks ) . 2 . If the description is explicit about the number of ‘sleeves’ or subadvisors , or if it describes how managers split their portfolios , N is set to the number of divisions of the portfolio and C is set to 1 ( since this is a decentralized fund ) . 3 . If two or more managers are mentioned but nothing is said about how they coordinate ( e . g . , they are addressed as a plurality , as in ‘they invest in . . . ’ ) , it is assumed that the fund employs a consensus ( N = C ) decision proce - dure . This is reasonable , as this is the default structure of comanaged funds , and because if managers work separately , they have no incen - tive to being reported as working in tandem ( managers want to create their own reputation ) . 4 . If no speciﬁc manager names are mentioned ( e . g . , the description mentions only a generic ‘the management’ ) or if the description states that the fund is run by an algorithm ( some funds that track indices operate like this ) , the fund is left unclassiﬁed . Less than 4 percent of the funds fell in the unclassiﬁed group and less than 1 percent of the funds had a consensus level other than 1 or N . These two classes of funds were eliminated from the data set . Because fund descriptions do not include such nuances as the relative sizes of each sleeve of a decentralized fund , the organizational structure of the subadvisor of each sleeve , or the share of power each manager has in a centralized fund , the funds were aggregated into three broader cat - egories : 1 / 1 ( managed by an individual ) , N / 1 Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 33 : 611 – 632 ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj 620 F . A . Csaszar ( decentralized ) , and N / N ( centralized ) . This deci - sion ensures against overinterpreting the results . All the funds were coded both by the author and one research assistant . The percentage of agree - ment between both categorizations was 96 percent . The results presented here use the author’s catego - rization , but all the results are robust to using the other categorization . Dependent variables : omission and commission errors The main intuition behind the measures of omis - sion and commission error developed in this article is as follows : in hindsight , a commission error occurred whenever a fund bought an asset that turned out to have a poor performance ( i . e . , whose ex post return fell below a given benchmark ) ; sim - ilarly , an omission error occurred whenever a fund failed to buy an asset that turned out to have a good performance . 8 To observe these errors , two types of data are required : the list of assets that a fund did and did not buy , and the returns of these assets . Good data sources exist for both elements . In order to make the discussion more precise , some notation is useful . For a given mutual fund F at time t , let A = { a 1 , a 2 , . . . , a n } be the set of assets that F bought during time period t ( subscript t is omitted for convenience ) . The best available information on mutual fund holdings is reported quarterly , so hereafter the unit of time is one quarter . Let U = { u 1 , u 2 , . . . , u M } represent the assets in which F can invest , or F ’s investment universe at time t . The number of assets bought by F at period t is n , and the number of assets in its investment universe at time t is M . By deﬁnition , the assets bought by a fund are a subset of the fund’s investment universe , A ⊆ U . Asset returns are measured as holding period returns ; that is , r ( a ) represents the total return of asset a from the end of period t to the end of period t + 1 ( this measure accounts for changes in price as well as any income from dividends ) . The study uses a per fund benchmark , deﬁned as the average return of the assets in the fund’s investment uni - verse at time t ; thus , b = 1 M M (cid:1) i = 1 r ( u i ) . An asset is cataloged as ‘good’ if its return in a given period equals or exceeds the benchmark b . The subset of 8 Omission and commission errors can also be measured with respect to sell decisions . This case is discussed later . good assets that the fund bought during period t is denoted A + = { a | a ∈ A and r ( a ) ≥ b } and its cardinality is denoted n + . Similarly , the bad assets bought consist of A − = { a | a ∈ A and r ( a ) < b } with cardinality n − . At ﬁrst sight , several measures might capture the commission error of a fund . Two possibilities are the number of bad assets bought , n − , and the total negative return , TNR = − (cid:1) { a ∈ A − } r ( a ) ( the initial minus sign makes the measure increase in the proper direction ) . Yet a problem now arises in that—because different funds invest in a differ - ent number of assets and in different investment universes—these raw metrics are not comparable across funds and , thus , are unsuitable for the pur - poses of this study . One way of solving the comparability problem is to convert these raw error measures into prob - abilistic measures that account for the speciﬁcs of each situation . An example will help clarify this point . Imagine you want to ﬁnd out who is better at games of chance—someone who ﬂipped a coin 100 times and got 60 heads or someone who threw a die 200 times and got 40 sixes . If a probability distribution is placed on the outcomes ( Pr { Head } = 1 / 2 and Pr { Six } = 1 / 6 ) , it doesn’t matter that each person played a different game ; in both cases it is possible to compute a statistic ( in this case , a chi - squared ) and then compare the players in terms of how unlikely their results were . A ﬁrst approach to creating probability - adjusted measures of a fund’s errors is to use the hypergeo - metric distribution . This distribution , whose prob - ability mass function is f ( r ; M , R , m ) = (cid:2) Rr (cid:3) (cid:2) M − R m − r (cid:3) (cid:4) (cid:2) M m (cid:3) , is typically illustrated in terms of the probability of getting exactly r red marbles after drawing m marbles ( without replacement ) from an urn containing M marbles of which R are red . Thus , replacing ‘marble’ with ‘stock’ and ‘red’ with ‘bad’ yields a function that computes the probability of getting a given number of bad stocks ; the function is already adjusted for port - folio size , universe size , and the number of bad stocks in the investment universe . A nice feature of this approach is that it removes the effect of the environment from the error measures . For exam - ple , an economy - wide shock that has a positive effect on one type of fund but a negative effect on another would not distort the measures of error . In other words , that the negatively affected fund Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 33 : 611 – 632 ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Organizational Structure as a Determinant of Performance 621 draws stocks from a ‘tougher’ urn than does the positively affected fund is controlled for by the hypergeometric distribution . Using the bootstrap to compute a better measure of omission and commission errors The hypergeometric approach just illustrated can be further improved by using the bootstrap , an important development in statistics ( Efron , 1979 ; Efron and Tibshirani , 1993 ) . One limitation of the hypergeometric approach is that it weighs all bad decisions equally , regardless of the size of the errors ( i . e . , a stock that slightly underperformed the benchmark is counted the same as a stock whose price collapsed ) . The bootstrap allows one to model a probability distribution that takes into account the size of the errors . 9 The bootstrap consists of creating an arbitrar - ily good approximation of a population via Monte Carlo simulations and using this new population to compute the exact value of a statistic . In this case , the population to be estimated is the set of all possible portfolios of a given size that can be drawn from a given investment universe . An example will clarify how the bootstrap can be used to measure commission errors . Suppose the returns of the assets in the investment universe of fund F are { − 5 % , − 2 % , − 1 % , 1 % , 3 % , 4 % } , the benchmark is b = 0 , and the fund bought the three assets that ended up returning { − 2 % , − 1 % , 4 % } . Hence F ’s total negative return is 3 percent ( TNR = − [ − 2 % + − 1 % ] ) . To assess how large or small this number is , it must be compared to the TNRs of the population of funds that can draw three stocks from the same investment universe as F . In this example , 20 ( = (cid:2) 63 (cid:3) ) other portfo - lios could have been bought , but in realistic cases the space of possible portfolios cannot be explored exhaustively ; 10 hence the method relies on ran - domly sampling the space of possible portfolios . With the exception of some well - known patho - logical cases ( Davison and Hinkley , 1997 , Sec . 9 Distinguishing between large and small errors is a natural property to expect from a measure of errors—especially since models that conceptualize perception as signal plus noise ( such as Sah and Stiglitz’s or signal detection theory ) would predict that blunders are less likely to occur than slight errors . 10 The average fund in the data set buys 16 stocks from a uni - verse of 195 , which creates a space of (cid:2) 19516 (cid:3) ≈ 10 23 possible portfolios . 2 . 6 ) , a statistic computed via bootstrap converges to the real statistic as the number of random draws increases . For the data used in this article , each fund ‘competes’ against 100 , 000 simulated port - folios and the standard error introduced by the bootstrap procedure is less than 0 . 003 . Once the population of portfolios comparable to a fund F is created , the measure of commission error is simply a measure of the deviance of F ’s error with respect to the commission errors of that population . Given the central limit theorem and the large number of simulations , the normal distribution is a good approximation for the TNRs of the population . Therefore , errors are reported in terms of standardized scores ; the higher the score , the higher the error . The omission error can be deﬁned analogously to the commission error . Instead of measuring TNR , in this case one measures the total unbought positive returns ( TUPR ) —that is , the sum of the good assets that belong to the investment universe of fund F but were not bought in the current period . Mathematically , TUPR = (cid:1) { a ∈ U and a / ∈ A } r ( a ) . Following the previous example , the TUPR of fund F is 4 percent ( = 1 % + 3 % ) . As before , the bootstrap is then used to compute a probability - adjusted measure that is expressed as a standard - ized score . Data preparation and limitations of the data set The content and format of Morningstar’s one - page mutual fund reports have changed repeatedly over the years , and in 2007 it started including a ‘governance and management’ section with en - ough information to code organizational structure for a large sample of funds . This implies that the data on organizational structure for Decem - ber 2007 are available only as a snapshot . There - fore , whereas the dependent variables are com - puted using errors from 2004Q4 to 2007Q1 , funds that changed their organizational structure after 2004Q4 but before December 2007 are partially misclassiﬁed in the analysis . Fortunately , changes in the organizational structure of funds are rare . There are no ofﬁcial statistics , but a good estimate of change in the organizational structure of mutual funds can be gathered from Morningstar ( 2008 ) . In addition to 500 fund reports , Morningstar ( 2008 : 29 ) also includes a brief description of all the man - agement changes that took place in these funds Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 33 : 611 – 632 ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj 622 F . A . Csaszar during 2007 . Of the 500 reported funds , 32 expe - rienced some sort of management change ( the most typical change is replacement of a manager ) and only four funds experienced a change in organi - zational structure as coded in this article . This amounts to a 0 . 8 percent yearly probability of such change . In December 2007 , Morningstar kept organiza - tional descriptions for 1 , 687 funds . To increase comparability , only funds that were primarily devoted to stocks ( not other asset classes , such as bonds or options ) were selected . Thus , funds were chosen if their asset composition ( accord - ing to the CRSP data set ‘Mutual Fund Proﬁles and Monthly Asset Data’ ) was at least 60 percent stocks in the time period under study . This nar - rowed the list down to 1 , 087 funds . The CRSP data sets ‘Portfolio Holding Information’ and ‘Monthly Stocks’ were then used to choose only those funds for which CRSP reported the returns of the indi - vidual stocks owned by the fund for at least 50 percent of its portfolio value . This reduced the list to 642 funds . This drop is primarily explained by CRSP’s tracking only the returns of stocks traded on NYSE , NASDAQ , and AMEX ( while many funds invest in international stocks ) and to a lesser extent by observations missing from the CRSP portfolio holdings data set . Finally , funds for which the Morningstar description did not allow an organizational structure to be inferred were dropped , leaving the ﬁnal count at 609 funds owned by 154 different parent ﬁrms . Collectively , for the 10 quarters from 2004Q4 to 2007Q1 , these funds invested in 5 , 833 distinct stocks ( as identiﬁed by their CUSIP number ) , made 153 , 457 buy decisions , and had $ 1 . 6 trillion under manage - ment at the end of the period . The range of dates used is due to data limitations : before 2004Q4 the CRSP holdings database is sparse ; and by Decem - ber 2007 , CRSP had not yet uploaded the holdings information for the quarters after 2007Q1 . The stocks that a fund bought during the quarter ending at date t were determined by looking at the stocks added to the portfolio since the last reported quarterly holdings . The quarterly holdings were gathered from the CRSP data set ‘Portfolio Holdings Information , ’ itself a compilation of the Forms 13F that mutual funds submit to the SEC . An intrinsic limitation of the data is that , if a stock is bought and sold during the same quarter , that buy decision is unobserved . However , this would pose a problem only if the error measures of the unobserved and observed trades differed in a way that depended on organizational structure . There are no reasons to believe a priori that this might be the case . The returns used to determine whether an invest - ment was a good or a bad one were the quarterly returns of each stock from the end of quarter t to the end of quarter t + 1 ; these returns were gath - ered from the CRSP data set ‘Monthly Stocks’ using the ﬁeld ‘Holding Period Return , ’ which adjusts for stock splits and dividends . Because the exact date at which assets are bought is unknown ( i . e . , the holdings database has quarterly resolu - tion ) , a further intrinsic limitation of the data set is that it fails to account for the return accrued since a stock is bought until the end of that quar - ter . Yet this lack of data should affect the results of the study in a conservative way . The reason is that if managers are able to minimize the errors they make , this ability should be more notice - able soon after the decision than later , when more unpredictable events may affect the price of their purchase . The investment universe of a fund at time t was deﬁned as all the stocks available for pur - chase at time t from the union of all the hold - ings reported by the fund in a trailing window of seven quarters , including the current quarter ( i . e . , using the last seven Forms 13F reported by the fund ) . There are at least three other ways to deﬁne the investment universe , but they present conceptual and practical problems that make them less preferable than the trailing - period deﬁnition . The ﬁrst alternative is to use the investment objective , typically reported by each fund in its prospectus ; however , this information is imprecise 11 and not always available , so using it to deﬁne the investment universe would have a sub - jective quality . A second alternative is to include all the 5 , 833 stocks ever bought by all the funds . This approach was discarded because it is unfair to count the failure to buy stocks that would never be bought by a fund as ‘omissions’ ( e . g . , a utili - ties fund does not buy high - tech stocks ) . A third alternative is to use the union of all the stocks 11 For example , a fund may say that it attempts to track a broad index like the S & P500 , but this does not imply that it invests only in stocks that are listed in the index ; many of its investments may fall outside it . Another fund may say that it invests in ‘small caps , ’ a broad category with thousands of stocks , though its investments consistently fall within a group of fewer than 100 stocks . Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 33 : 611 – 632 ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Organizational Structure as a Determinant of Performance 623 ever bought by the funds that share the same Morningstar investment category . Like the previ - ous alternative , this method creates loose invest - ment universes that lead to a similar ( albeit less serious ) unfairness problem . In short , letting the deeds of the fund speak for themselves seemed the most appropriate choice . Robustness checks showed that the third alternative deﬁnition pro - duced results qualitatively similar to those reported here using the trailing - period deﬁnition . RESULTS Although mutual funds offer a unique window into the effect of structure on performance , actu - ally measuring that effect is relatively challeng - ing . An ideal test would consist of comparing the performance of mutual funds making investments in the same sector , with the same managers , at the same time , and differing only in organiza - tional structure . This situation is unattainable , so the challenge consists of statistically controlling for differences other than organizational structure . Fortunately , the bootstrap ( explained earlier ) and the standard control variables in the mutual funds literature ( explained later ) can control for these differences . 12 Each of the three hypotheses was tested using a regression of the form dependent variable i = α 0 + α 1 Decentralized i + α 2 Individual i + α 3 Beta i + α 4 log ( ParentSize i ) + α 5 log ( FundSize i ) + α 6 CatLG i + α 7 CatLB i + α 8 CatLV i + α 9 CatMCG i + α 10 CatSG i + α 11 CatSB i + α 12 CatMCB i + ε i , where the dependent variable is the logarithm of the number of stocks bought per quarter to test Hypothesis 1 , omission error to test Hypothe - sis 2 , and commission error to test Hypothesis 3 . The independent variable of the study , organi - zational structure , was coded as two dummies representing the decentralized and the individual structure ( the centralized structure is the omitted dummy ) . 12 For an example of the use of the bootstrap in the mutual fund literature , see Kosowski et al . ( 2006 ) ; for a tutorial presentation , see Burns ( 2004 ) . The controls used , which are in line with those used in the mutual fund literature ( e . g . , Chen et al . , 2004 ) , were : ( 1 ) Beta i , the risk proﬁle of the fund as measured by its Beta with respect to the S & P500 ; ( 2 ) log ( ParentSize i ) , the size of the parent ﬁrm ( the ﬁrm owning the fund ) as mea - sured by the logarithm of the number of mutual funds that the parent ﬁrm owns ( within the uni - verse of 1 , 087 stock mutual funds tracked by Morningstar ) ; ( 3 ) log ( FundSize i ) , the size of the fund as measured by the logarithm of the net assets managed by the fund ( in millions of dol - lars ) ; and ( 4 ) Cat XX i , seven investment category dummies as coded by Morningstar ( Large Growth , Large Blend , Large Value , Mid - Cap Growth , Small Growth , Small Blend , and Mid - Cap Blend ) . Roughly 80 percent of the funds fell into one of these seven categories ; the rest were consolidated in an ‘Other’ class that grouped 13 smaller cate - gories and was used as the omitted dummy in the regressions . The regressions were run on a pooled cross - section ( and not in a panel ) because there is essentially no variation in the structure of the mutual funds during the period analyzed . The num - ber of observations in the regressions is 6 , 090 , since there are 609 funds and each one has data for 10 periods . The omission and commis - sion errors were computed as probabilities that are independent of the speciﬁc environment the fund was facing ( i . e . , actual stocks in the invest - ment universe and its returns ) , which makes the pooled cross - section speciﬁcation an appropriate choice . To avoid a possible source of endogeneity , all the controls were measured at the beginning of the period used to compute the dependent variables ( beginning of 2004Q4 ) . To counter the effects of heteroskedasticity—and because obser - vations coming from funds that belong to the same parent ﬁrm may not be independent—the stan - dard errors were computed using cluster - robust estimation ( Williams , 2000 ) with clusters deﬁned according to the parent ﬁrm . All reported p - values correspond to two - tailed tests ; this is a conserva - tive decision because the hypotheses tested are of the form a < b , which calls only for running one - tailed tests . Table 2 displays summary statistics and correla - tions . The correlations show no evidence of mul - ticollinearity , which is reafﬁrmed by the variance inﬂation factors—none of which was larger than Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 33 : 611 – 632 ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj 624 F . A . Csaszar Table 2 . Descriptive statistics and correlations ( for the 609 funds in the sample ) mean sd min max 1 2 3 4 1 Omission error − 0 . 16 0 . 48 − 2 . 77 1 . 09 1 . 00 2 Commission error 0 . 14 0 . 47 − 1 . 03 2 . 35 0 . 33 1 . 00 3 Beta 1 . 15 0 . 27 − 0 . 09 2 . 77 0 . 01 0 . 05 1 . 00 4 log ( ParentSize ) 2 . 14 1 . 10 0 . 00 4 . 68 − 0 . 11 0 . 06 − 0 . 04 1 . 00 5 log ( FundSize ) 6 . 17 1 . 68 − 0 . 24 11 . 25 0 . 06 0 . 08 − 0 . 14 0 . 32 Table 3 . Results of regression analysis of number of stocks bought Dependent variable : log ( # stocks bought ) A1 A2 A3 A4 A5 Decentralized ( structure N / 1 ) 0 . 647 ∗∗∗ 0 . 630 ∗∗∗ 0 . 582 ∗∗∗ 0 . 580 ∗∗∗ 0 . 544 ∗∗∗ ( 0 . 141 ) ( 0 . 138 ) ( 0 . 167 ) ( 0 . 169 ) ( 0 . 162 ) Individual ( structure 1 / 1 ) 0 . 119 0 . 091 0 . 041 0 . 041 0 . 047 ( 0 . 100 ) ( 0 . 100 ) ( 0 . 090 ) ( 0 . 090 ) ( 0 . 091 ) Beta 0 . 848 ∗∗∗ 0 . 880 ∗∗∗ 0 . 883 ∗∗∗ 0 . 419 + ( 0 . 236 ) ( 0 . 245 ) ( 0 . 253 ) ( 0 . 250 ) log ( ParentSize ) 0 . 187 ∗∗ 0 . 186 ∗∗ 0 . 210 ∗∗∗ ( 0 . 060 ) ( 0 . 062 ) ( 0 . 060 ) log ( FundSize ) 0 . 003 0 . 013 ( 0 . 027 ) ( 0 . 025 ) Category effects ( joint test ) ∗∗∗ Constant 2 . 215 ∗∗∗ 1 . 259 ∗∗∗ 0 . 851 ∗∗ 0 . 832 ∗ 0 . 982 ∗ ( 0 . 097 ) ( 0 . 273 ) ( 0 . 325 ) ( 0 . 399 ) ( 0 . 414 ) Observations 6090 6090 6090 6090 6090 Adjusted R2 0 . 030 0 . 090 0 . 137 0 . 135 0 . 213 Note : Robust standard errors between parentheses . + p < 0 . 10 , ∗ p < 0 . 05 , ∗∗ p < 0 . 01 , ∗∗∗ p < 0 . 001 ( two - tailed tests ) . 1 . 6 , a number well below the customary thresh - old of 10 . Of the 609 funds in the data set , the most common structure is the individual manager ( 324 funds ) , followed by the centralized structure ( 233 funds ) and the decentralized structure ( 52 funds ) . Number of projects accepted To test Hypothesis 1 , the number of stocks bought by each fund was analyzed . 13 In order to determine whether the relationship between organizational structure and number of stocks bought is statisti - cally signiﬁcant , ﬁve models were tested ( Table 3 ) . Given that the distribution of the number of stocks bought is highly skewed ( see , e . g . , the relation - ship between the average and the maximum in 13 As a robustness check , the number of stocks sold by each fund was also analyzed . The results were qualitatively the same as those presented here for the number of stocks bought . row 1 of Table 4 ) , its logarithm was used as a dependent variable . In all the models , the decen - tralized structure ( N / 1 ) was associated with buying signiﬁcantly more stocks than the centralized struc - ture ( the effect size corresponds to a 30 to 50 % increase , depending on the model and the value of the controls ) . No signiﬁcant relationship is present for the structure 1 / 1 , yet the sign of its associated coefﬁcients has the predicted direction in all the models . The coefﬁcients associated with the controls tell stories that are interesting in themselves . Models A3 to A5 show that funds belonging to larger par - ent ﬁrms buy more stocks—even after the size of the mutual fund and investment category are controlled for . One possible interpretation is that larger parent ﬁrms have better support structures , allowing managers to track more stocks . The regressions also show that the more net assets man - aged by a fund , the more stocks it will invest in ; Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 33 : 611 – 632 ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Organizational Structure as a Determinant of Performance 625 Table 4 . Descriptive statistics—number of stocks per organizational structure N / N Centralized ( 233 obs . ) 1 / 1 Individual ( 324 obs . ) N / 1 Decentralized ( 52 obs . ) Total ( 609 obs . ) avg ( sd ) [ min , max ] avg ( sd ) [ min , max ] avg ( sd ) [ min , max ] avg ( sd ) [ min , max ] 1 ) # stocks bought per quarter 15 . 9 ( 27 . 9 ) 15 . 3 ( 16 . 7 ) 26 . 1 ( 27 . 2 ) 16 . 5 ( 22 . 7 ) [ 1 . 2 , 280 . 0 ] [ 1 . 3 , 131 . 2 ] [ 3 . 4 , 148 . 2 ] [ 1 . 2 , 280 . 0 ] 2 ) # stocks in portfolio 91 . 5 ( 105 . 9 ) 138 . 6 ( 293 . 7 ) 171 . 1 ( 168 . 3 ) 123 . 3 ( 230 . 6 ) [ 18 . 6 , 1220 . 3 ] [ 20 . 3 , 3455 . 2 ] [ 25 . 6 , 990 . 9 ] [ 18 . 6 , 3455 . 2 ] this may reﬂect that large funds are more likely to run into the liquidity limits of the underlying stocks . The fact that Beta has a positive effect can also be explained in terms of liquidity , as higher - Beta stocks , on average , correspond to smaller ﬁrms . Finally , Model A5 shows that there is a signiﬁcant category effect , which gives additional support to the liquidity explanation because the categories with the largest positive coefﬁcients are those involving small companies ( only the cate - gories Small Growth and Small Blend were statis - tically signiﬁcant , with respective coefﬁcients of 0 . 55 and 0 . 91 ) . Models A1 to A5 were rerun using portfolio size instead of number of stocks bought per quar - ter , and all the results were qualitatively the same . This increases conﬁdence in the results by show - ing that what is true for a ﬂow variable ( number of stocks bought ) is also true for its corresponding stock variable ( portfolio size ) . In all , the large and signiﬁcant coefﬁcients accompanying the decen - tralized structure provide ample evidence that decentralized funds accept more projects than do centralized funds ( Hypothesis 1 ) . It is remarkable that this statistically signiﬁ - cant relationship between structure and portfolio size has not been reported in the ﬁnance litera - ture—probably because researchers in that ﬁeld have conceptualized organizational structure sim - ply as number of managers ( e . g . , Chen et al . , 2004 ) . Measuring structure as number of managers is roughly equivalent to comparing the average portfolio size of structure N / N and N / 1 ( since both structures have N managers ) against the port - folio size of structure 1 / 1 . Under that averaging , no difference is noticeable . ( In particular , from the numbers in Table 4 , one can easily calcu - late that the average portfolio size of N / N and N / 1 is 131 . 3 ; and this is not statistically differ - ent from the portfolio size of structure 1 / 1 , which is 138 . 6 . ) In other words , if structure is mea - sured in the wrong way , the relationship between structure and portfolio size is rendered invisi - ble even though that relation is actually quite strong . Omission and commission errors Figure 1 displays the average omission and commission error made by each organizational structure . The axes of the ﬁgure correspond to the standardized measures previously described ( com - puted via bootstrap ) . The ﬁgure looks exactly as Sah and Stiglitz’s model would predict , with the centralized fund at the lower right ( minimizing commission errors ) , the decentralized fund at the upper left ( minimizing omission errors ) , and the individual manager in between . Figure 1 . Average ( centroids ) omission and commission errors of the three organizational structures Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 33 : 611 – 632 ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj 626 F . A . Csaszar Table 5 . Results of regression analysis of omission error Dependent variable : omission error B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 Decentralized ( structure N / 1 ) − 0 . 162 ∗ − 0 . 162 ∗ − 0 . 150 ∗ − 0 . 172 ∗ − 0 . 161 ∗ ( 0 . 077 ) ( 0 . 077 ) ( 0 . 069 ) ( 0 . 074 ) ( 0 . 078 ) Individual ( structure 1 / 1 ) − 0 . 054 − 0 . 054 − 0 . 042 − 0 . 044 − 0 . 043 ( 0 . 046 ) ( 0 . 046 ) ( 0 . 046 ) ( 0 . 046 ) ( 0 . 047 ) Beta 0 . 019 0 . 011 0 . 037 0 . 034 ( 0 . 071 ) ( 0 . 071 ) ( 0 . 071 ) ( 0 . 078 ) log ( ParentSize ) − 0 . 047 ∗∗ − 0 . 062 ∗∗∗ − 0 . 064 ∗∗∗ ( 0 . 016 ) ( 0 . 017 ) ( 0 . 018 ) log ( FundSize ) 0 . 033 ∗∗ 0 . 035 ∗∗ ( 0 . 012 ) ( 0 . 013 ) Category effects ( joint test ) not sig . Constant − 0 . 119 ∗∗ − 0 . 140 − 0 . 039 − 0 . 235 + − 0 . 217 + ( 0 . 039 ) ( 0 . 089 ) ( 0 . 100 ) ( 0 . 127 ) ( 0 . 130 ) Observations 6090 6090 6090 6090 6090 Adjusted R 2 0 . 005 0 . 004 0 . 014 0 . 024 0 . 022 Note : Robust standard errors between parentheses . + p < 0 . 10 , ∗ p < 0 . 05 , ∗∗ p < 0 . 01 , ∗∗∗ p < 0 . 001 ( two - tailed tests ) . All ﬁve models in Table 5 support Hypothe - sis 2 by showing that a decentralized fund makes signiﬁcantly fewer omissions than a centralized one . The magnitude of the coefﬁcients associ - ated with the decentralized structure is sizable , as it can be shown that decreasing an error by 0 . 15 points of the standardized score is associated with a 13 percent increase in annual performance ( relative to current performance ; e . g . , a 10 % annual return would become 11 . 3 % ) . 14 As in the previous set of regressions , the coefﬁcients accompanying the individual manager have the correct sign but are not statistically signiﬁcant . Among the controls , parent size and net assets appear to be signiﬁcant determinants of omission errors . The fact that funds owned by larger ﬁrms make fewer omissions indicates that the ability to avoid missing investment opportunities may reside partly in routines that are more likely to exist in larger ﬁrms , such as research support ser - vices , fund manager training , or knowledge sharing among managers of different funds . Conversely , the ﬁnding that funds managing more assets make more omission errors may be due , in part , to large 14 To compute the effect on a fund’s annual return , a simulation was run using parameters representative of the average fund . This fund buys 16 stocks from a universe of 195 stocks each quarter ; the stock’s returns are drawn from a N ( 0 . 0339 , 0 . 2042 ) distribution ; the portfolio turnover is one year ; and the effect due to superior stock picking is only effective ( this is a conservative assumption ) in the quarter after the stock was bought . funds having little incentive to exploit small , yet proﬁtable investment opportunities because their relative contribution to the fund’s overall prof - itability would be tiny . All the models in Table 6 support Hypothesis 3 by showing that a decentralized fund makes signiﬁ - cantly more commission errors than does a central - ized one . As before , the coefﬁcients for the indi - vidual manager have the predicted sign but are not signiﬁcant . Parent size and net assets , which were signiﬁcant controls in the regressions of omission error , are not signiﬁcant predictors of commis - sion error ; this may mean that small funds devote comparatively more resources to minimizing com - mission ( rather than omission ) errors . Two controls that are typically signiﬁcant in studies of investment performance—the fund’s Beta and its investment category—are not signif - icant predictors of either omission or commission errors . The reason is that the bootstrap mechanism used to compute the errors already controls for these parameters : each fund is compared in stan - dardized terms against a large number of funds that draw stocks from the same investment uni - verse and so , on average , have the same Beta and investment category as the focal fund . Ruling out alternative hypotheses Mutual funds offer the best available setting to test the Sah and Stiglitz model’s predictions because Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 33 : 611 – 632 ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Organizational Structure as a Determinant of Performance 627 Table 6 . Results of regression analysis of commission error Dependent variable : commission error C1 C2 C3 C4 C5 Decentralized ( structure N / 1 ) 0 . 184 ∗∗ 0 . 183 ∗∗ 0 . 177 ∗ 0 . 164 ∗ 0 . 146 ∗ ( 0 . 068 ) ( 0 . 067 ) ( 0 . 071 ) ( 0 . 075 ) ( 0 . 073 ) Individual ( structure 1 / 1 ) 0 . 054 0 . 051 0 . 045 0 . 044 0 . 045 ( 0 . 044 ) ( 0 . 044 ) ( 0 . 042 ) ( 0 . 041 ) ( 0 . 041 ) Beta 0 . 079 0 . 083 0 . 098 0 . 082 ( 0 . 079 ) ( 0 . 080 ) ( 0 . 088 ) ( 0 . 103 ) log ( ParentSize ) 0 . 023 0 . 014 0 . 014 ( 0 . 019 ) ( 0 . 018 ) ( 0 . 018 ) log ( FundSize ) 0 . 019 0 . 018 ( 0 . 014 ) ( 0 . 014 ) Category effects ( joint test ) not sig . Constant 0 . 097 ∗∗ 0 . 008 − 0 . 042 − 0 . 156 − 0 . 183 ( 0 . 033 ) ( 0 . 103 ) ( 0 . 118 ) ( 0 . 178 ) ( 0 . 207 ) Observations 6090 6090 6090 6090 6090 Adjusted R 2 0 . 008 0 . 008 0 . 010 0 . 012 0 . 013 Note : Robust standard errors between parentheses . + p < 0 . 10 , ∗ p < 0 . 05 , ∗∗ p < 0 . 01 , ∗∗∗ p < 0 . 001 ( two - tailed tests ) . this setting offers observability of structure and omissions , a large number of observations , and cross - sectional variance in structure . At the same time , the setting is not perfect because there is essentially no variation of structure over time . This means that when making causal interpreta - tions , close attention must be paid to possible endogeneity and unobserved heterogeneity issues . The following logic shows how difﬁcult it is to construct alternative hypotheses that might bias the results in the same direction as predicted by the Sah and Stiglitz model . The controls used in the regressions ( for parent and ﬁrm size , risk proﬁle , and the investment cate - gory dummies ) serve to rule out simple alternative hypotheses such as relating a type of error to an investment strategy . More importantly , the boot - strap ( described earlier ) —by controlling for the speciﬁc environment faced by each fund—takes care of a large set of possible issues , such as the effect that economy - wide shocks could have on different funds . Unobserved heterogeneity seems unlikely for two reasons . First , any unobserved heterogene - ity explanation due to a deliberate preference of managers for omission or commission errors seems implausible because mutual fund managers are primarily concerned with surpassing a bench - mark , not with how this benchmark is surpassed , and omission and commission errors contribute equally to the performance of the fund vis - ` a - vis the benchmark . Omission and commission errors are equally costly for mutual funds . After all , fail - ing to buy a stock that would have contributed $ 1 to returns is no more or less costly than buying a stock that subtracted $ 1 from returns ; in both cases there is a loss of $ 1 with respect to a competing fund that did not make the same error . Second , most imaginable unobserved character - istics should affect both buy and sell decisions . Yet it turns out that structure affects only the buy decisions . ( In regressions for the omission and commission errors on the sell decisions , available from the author on request , none of the structure coefﬁcients was signiﬁcant . ) This is consistent with a mechanism that surfaced during informal inter - views with fund managers . They revealed that , although the purchase of stocks is quite delibera - tive , the sale of stocks is a semiautomatic process that is often guided by stop - loss orders or tax and liquidity considerations . Another issue that may bias the results would be incorrect imputation of organizational structure . It could be argued that some of the funds that are coded as being managed by one individual are really managed by either a hierarchy ( N / N ) or a polyarchy ( N / 1 ) , but that these details do not appear in the Morningstar report from which structure is coded . Yet if that were the case , it Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 33 : 611 – 632 ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj 628 F . A . Csaszar would bias the conclusions against the hypoth - esized results—namely , it would be harder for funds coded as hierarchy and polyarchy to be sta - tistically different from the mass of funds coded as individually managed . In other words , Morningstar reports that were imprecise in this way would bias the results in a conservative fashion . DISCUSSION This study has used mutual funds as a rich data source to explore how organizational struc - ture affects organizational performance . In perfect accordance with the predictions of the Sah and Stiglitz model of fallible decision making , decen - tralized structures accept more projects ( Hypothe - sis 1 ) , make fewer omission errors ( Hypothesis 2 ) , and make more commission errors ( Hypothesis 3 ) than do centralized structures . This section places these results in perspective . Mutual funds and organizational structure Two questions come to mind regarding the orga - nization design of mutual funds : is there an opti - mal organizational structure for mutual funds ? And why is the individual manager the most common structure ? ( Note that 53 . 2 % of the funds in the data set used this structure . ) As mentioned previously , omission and commis - sion errors are equally costly for a mutual fund concerned only with maximizing returns . Hence , the structure this hypothetical fund should choose is the one that minimizes the sum of both errors . Strikingly , the sum of the omission and commis - sion errors ( measured as standardized scores ) for each of the three structures is statistically indis - tinguishable from zero ( i . e . , if the coordinates of the points on Figure 1 are added , the results are − 0 . 28 + 0 . 28 = 0 . 00 , − 0 . 17 + 0 . 15 = − 0 . 02 , and − 0 . 12 + 0 . 10 = − 0 . 02 for structures N / 1 , 1 / 1 , and N / N , respectively ) . Given this equiva - lency in overall errors , it seems natural that most funds choose the least expensive structure . The existence of funds with structures different from 1 / 1 may speak to other concerns , such as secur - ing continuity against manager turnover , offering promotion opportunities to junior employees , or creating a differentiated product . There is a special beauty to the fact that in the mutual fund setting , the overall error of each structure is not different from the overall error of picking stocks at random : the unpredictability of returns stated by the efﬁcient market hypothesis holds when looking at the overall error , even if each error measured independently is partly predictable . This equivalency in the cost of errors is also beneﬁcial ( and perhaps essential ) for the purposes of the empirical test carried out in this article , for otherwise it is likely that mutual funds would all ﬂock to the structure minimizing the relevant error and thereby drain the data set of variation in the independent variable . Thus , the mutual fund setting has a particu - lar characteristic that does not generalize to other domains : in the structure - errors - performance chain of causation , structure affects errors ( i . e . , organi - zational performance ) but errors ( as long as they cost the same and add up to the same overall error ) do not affect competitive performance . In most other settings ( in which the two errors have different costs ) , errors should affect competitive performance . Generalizing results to such other domains is discussed next . Generalizability to other domains This article’s proof of the hypotheses derived from Sah and Stiglitz ( 1986 ) serves as a foundation on which to guide structure recommendations . The key observation in this context is realizing that dif - ferent organizations face different costs for omis - sion and commission errors . For example , juries are more concerned with commission errors ( i . e . , to avoid convicting the innocent ) ; the typical IT department also is presumably more concerned with minimizing commission errors ( e . g . , not leak - ing sensitive information ) than with minimizing omission errors ( e . g . , implementing every good IT innovation ) ; and a well - funded R & D lab in an industry characterized by ﬁrst - mover advantages is more likely to be concerned with avoiding omis - sion errors . Thus , this article supports the follow - ing recommendations for organizations aiming to choose the best structure given the environment it faces : if the omission error is the costlier error , the organization is better served by a polyarchical ( N / 1 ) structure ; if the commission error is costlier , the organization is better served by a hierarchical ( N / N ) structure . 15 15 It is possible to make ﬁner - grained structure recommendations ( i . e . , recommending a speciﬁc N and C ) by feeding into the Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 33 : 611 – 632 ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Organizational Structure as a Determinant of Performance 629 This research also speaks to the unexplored question of what are the processes that link orga - nizational structure to exploration and exploita - tion ( Siggelkow and Levinthal , 2003 : 650 ; Argyres and Silverman , 2004 : 929 ; Raisch and Birkinshaw , 2008 : 380 ) . A relevant observation in address - ing this question is that omission and commission errors are another way of looking at exploration and exploitation ( Garud et al . , 1997 : 33 ; Garicano and Posner , 2005 : 157 ) . The logic of this argu - ment is that , on the one hand , ﬁrms in unstable or fermenting environments must try to avoid omis - sions because these curtail the extent of explo - ration of new high - ﬁtness positions . Illustrations of this behavior are Bill Gates saying that ‘the real sin is if we ( Microsoft’s R & D ) miss some - thing’ ( Hawn , 2004 : 70 ) and Andy Grove’s quip , ‘miss the moment ( for change in a high - tech ﬁrm such as Intel ) and you start to decline’ ( Strat - ford , 1993 : 58 ) . On the other hand , ﬁrms fac - ing stable or incrementally changing environments try to avoid commission errors , since these could disrupt their currently efﬁcient exploitative opera - tions . Examples of these phenomena include Proc - ter & Gamble , where new product proposals are often reviewed more than 40 times before reaching the CEO ( Herbold , 2002 ) , and IBM’s mainframe era inspired ‘nonconcur policy , ’ which enabled any department to veto projects initiated anywhere in the ﬁrm ( Gerstner , 2003 ) . Hence , given that ( 1 ) it has been shown here how organizational structure can inﬂuence the omission and commission errors made by organizations and ( 2 ) previous research has shown that these errors control the degree to which organizations can explore and exploit , this article exposes a mechanism by which orga - nizational structure can inﬂuence exploration and exploitation . A core debate in strategy and organization design has concerned the direction of causality in the relationship between strategy and structure . On the one hand , there is Chandler’s ( 1962 ) famous dictum that ‘structure follows strategy . ’ On the other hand , several authors have argued in favor of a reverse , complementary logic—in other words , that structure may also inﬂuence strategy ( see , e . g . , Burton and Kuhn , 1980 : 4 ; Burgelman , 1983 : 61 ; Pettigrew , 1987 : 665 ) . The current article describes model information about the situation in question ( e . g . , cost of each of the errors , cost of each decision maker ) . clear mechanisms for both directions of the causal - ity arrow . If strategy is understood as the pool of all the projects pursued by the organization ( akin to Mintzberg’s ( 1978 ) concept of emergent strat - egy ) , then structure inﬂuences the types of project that end up in that pool ( e . g . , hierarchy decreases commission errors ) and , thus , structure inﬂuences strategy . On the other hand , if strategy is under - stood as a deliberate plan ( i . e . , in a Chandlerian way ) , the role of organization becomes subordi - nate to strategy ( e . g . , a ﬁrm that wants to reduce commission errors decides to use a hierarchical structure ) and so strategy inﬂuences structure . Further work Further research could employ alternative settings ( or perhaps alternative experiments ) to explore the predictions of the model that cannot be tested using the current data set . Some questions open to empirical examination involve the omission and commission errors associated with structures other than those studied here , as well as how commit - tee decision making interacts with other organiza - tional dynamics , such as power . Another line of inquiry , very much in the spirit of contingency theory , could explore whether ﬁrms that exhibit better structure – environment ﬁt achieve higher performance or exhibit higher survival rates . For example , in industries requiring more conserva - tive decision making ( i . e . , where commissions are costlier than omissions ) , one would expect the per - formance of ﬁrms using higher consensus levels to surpass those using lower levels . In more general terms , this article also sug - gests that decomposing performance into omission and commission errors can reveal phenomena oth - erwise unobservable when using standard per - formance measures . Hence , future research on organizations may beneﬁt from including omission and commission errors as alternative measures of performance . Conclusions From a theoretical point of view , this research presents a mechanism by which micro decisions are aggregated into macro behaviors and links to important questions of strategy research—for example , ‘do organizations have predictable biases ? ’ ( Cyert and March , 1963 : 21 ) , ‘what do Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 33 : 611 – 632 ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj 630 F . A . Csaszar we know about the relationships between organi - zational size ( or other stable characteristics ) and behavior ? ’ ( Rumelt et al . , 1994 : 42 ) , and ‘what is the relationship between decision making and deci - sion outcomes ? ’ ( Zajac and Bazerman , 1991 : 37 ) . From a practical standpoint , this research sheds light on how the structure of organizations can be modiﬁed to compensate for the shortcomings of individuals , and it allows several managerial concerns to be addressed : what type of organi - zation is required in order to avoid exceeding a given error level ? Is it true that hierarchy ham - pers innovation ? What organizational structures can lead to more innovation ? In regard to this last question , an important area of application is enabling established organizations to exhibit traits usually associated with entrepreneurial ventures . The 9 / 11 Commission Report contains an eloquent call for this sort of transformation : ‘imagination is not a gift usually associated with bureaucracies . . . it is therefore crucial to ﬁnd a way of routinizing , even bureaucratizing , the exercise of imagination’ ( National Commission on Terrorist Attacks upon the United States , 2004 : 344 ) . Maritan and Schendel ( 1997 : 259 ) observe that ‘there has been surprisingly little work that has explicitly examined the link between the pro - cesses by which strategic decisions are made and their inﬂuence on strategy . ’ This article aims to illuminate that topic by advancing a small step toward understanding how organizational struc - ture aggregates individual decisions into strategic outcomes . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS I would like to give special thanks to Dan Levinthal , Nicolaj Siggelkow , Jitendra Singh , and Sid Winter for their insights throughout this project . For their valuable comments , I also thank the seminar participants at Columbia , Harvard Business School , IESE , INSEAD , London Busi - ness School , The Ohio State University , Stan - ford Graduate School of Business , Tuck School of Business , University of Minnesota , University of North Carolina , University of Southern Cali - fornia , University of Southern Denmark , Univer - sity of Toronto , and UCLA as well as the Whar - ton PhD seminar , the 15th CCC doctoral con - sortium , the Academy of Management Meeting ( 2009 ) , the Organization Science Winter Confer - ence ( 2010 ) , the MIT organizational economics lunch , and the SMJ Conference on Strategy and Organizational Design at HBS . Research funding from the INSEAD Alumni Fund and The Ackoff Fund of the Wharton Risk Management and Deci - sion Processes Center is gratefully acknowledged . Errors remain the author’s own . REFERENCES Aghion P , Tirole J . 1997 . Formal and real authority in organizations . Journal of Political Economy 105 ( 1 ) : 1 – 29 . Argote L , Greve HR . 2007 . A behavioral theory of the ﬁrm—40 years and counting : introduction and impact . Organization Science 18 ( 3 ) : 337 – 349 . Argyres NS , Silverman BS . 2004 . R & D , organization structure , and the development of corporate tech - nological knowledge . Strategic Management Journal 25 ( 8 / 9 ) : 929 – 958 . Barnard CI . 1938 . Functions of the Executive . Harvard University Press : Cambridge , MA . Bikhchandani S , Hirshleifer D , Welch I . 1992 . A theory of fads , fashion , custom , and cultural change as informational cascades . Journal of Political Economy 100 ( 5 ) : 992 – 1026 . Bolton P , Dewatripont M . 1994 . The ﬁrm as a com - munication network . Quarterly Journal of Economics 109 ( 4 ) : 809 – 839 . Burgelman RA . 1983 . A model of the interaction of strategic behavior , corporate context , and the concept of strategy . The Academy of Management Review 8 ( 1 ) : 61 – 70 . Burns P . 2004 . Performance measurement via ran - dom portfolios . Available at : http : / / www . burns - stat . com / pages / Working / perfmeasrandport . pdf ( ac - cessed 1 October 2010 ) . Burton RM , Kuhn AJ . 1980 . Strategy follows structure : the missing link of their intertwined relation . Working paper , Fuqua School of Business , Duke University . Chandler AD . 1962 . Strategy and Structure : Chapters in the History of American Industrial Enterprise . The MIT Press : Cambridge , MA . Chen J , Hong H , Huang M , Kubik JD . 2004 . Does fund size erode mutual fund performance ? The role of liquidity and organization . American Economic Review 94 ( 5 ) : 1276 – 1302 . Chevalier J , Ellison G . 1999 . Are some mutual fund managers better than others ? Cross - sectional patterns in behavior and performance . Journal of Finance 54 ( 3 ) : 875 – 899 . Christensen M , Knudsen T . 2010 . Design of decision making - organizations . Management Science 56 ( 1 ) : 71 – 89 . Cohen L , Frazzini A , Malloy CJ . 2008 . The small world of investing : board connections and mutual fund returns . Journal of Political Economy 116 ( 5 ) : 951 – 979 . Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 33 : 611 – 632 ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Organizational Structure as a Determinant of Performance 631 Cohen MD , March JG , Olsen JP . 1972 . A garbage can model of organizational choice . Administrative Science Quarterly 17 : 1 – 25 . Cremer J . 1980 . A partial theory of the optimal organization of a bureaucracy . Bell Journal of Economics 11 ( 2 ) : 683 – 693 . Csaszar FA . 2009 . An efﬁcient frontier in organization design . Available at : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2139 / ssrn . 1097118 ( accessed 15 January 2012 ) . Cyert RM , March JG . 1963 . A Behavioral Theory of the Firm . Prentice Hall : Englewood Cliffs , NJ . Daft RL , Lewin AY . 1993 . Where are the theories for the new organizational forms : an editorial essay . Organization Science 4 ( 4 ) : i – vi . Davis JH . 1973 . Group decision and social interaction : theory of social decision schemes . Psychological Review 80 ( 2 ) : 97 – 125 . Davis JH . 1992 . Some compelling intuitions about group consensus decisions , theoretical and empiri - cal research , and interpersonal aggregation phenom - ena : selected examples , 1950 – 1990 . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 52 ( 1 ) : 3 – 38 . Davison AC , Hinkley DV . 1997 . Bootstrap Methods and Their Application . Cambridge University Press : New York . Efron B . 1979 . Bootstrap methods : another look at the jackknife . Annals of Statistics 7 ( 1 ) : 1 – 26 . Efron B , Tibshirani RJ . 1993 . An Introduction to the Bootstrap . Chapman & Hall : New York . Ethiraj SK , Levinthal DA . 2004 . Bounded rationality and the search for organizational architecture : an evolutionary perspective on the design of organizations and their evolvability . Administrative Science Quarterly 49 ( 3 ) : 404 – 437 . Fama EF . 1970 . Efﬁcient capital markets : review of theory and empirical work . Journal of Finance 25 ( 2 ) : 383 – 423 . Foss NJ . 2003 . Selective intervention and internal hybrids : interpreting and learning from the rise and decline of the Oticon spaghetti organization . Organization Science 14 ( 3 ) : 331 – 349 . Galbraith JR , Kazanjian RK . 1986 . Strategy Implementa - tion : Structure , Systems , and Process ( 2nd edn ) . West Publishing : St . Paul , MN . Garicano L . 2000 . Hierarchies and the organization of knowledge in production . Journal of Political Economy 108 ( 5 ) : 874 – 904 . Garicano L , Posner RA . 2005 . Intelligence failures : an organizational economics perspective . Journal of Economic Perspectives 19 ( 4 ) : 151 – 170 . Garud R , Nayyar PR , Shapira Z . 1997 . Technological choices and the inevitability of errors . In Technolog - ical Innovation : Oversights and Foresights , Garud R , Nayyar PR , Shapira Z ( eds ) . Cambridge University Press : New York ; 20 – 40 . Gavetti G , Levinthal DA . 2000 . Looking forward and looking backward : cognitive and experiential search . Administrative Science Quarterly 45 ( 1 ) : 113 – 137 . Gavetti G , Levinthal DA , Ocasio W . 2007 . Neo - Carnegie : the Carnegie School’s past , present , and reconstructing for the future . Organization Science 18 ( 3 ) : 523 – 536 . Geanakoplos J , Milgrom P . 1991 . A theory of hierarchies based on limited managerial attention . Journal of the Japanese and International Economies 5 ( 3 ) : 205 – 225 . Gerstner LV . 2003 . Who Says Elephants Can’t Dance ? Leading a Great Enterprise Through Dramatic Change . HarperBusiness : New York . Goetzmann WN , Ibbotson RG . 1994 . Do winners repeat ? Journal of Portfolio Management 20 ( 2 ) : 9 – 18 . Green DM , Swets JA . 1966 . Signal Detection Theory and Psychophysics . Wiley : New York . Gulati R , Higgins MC . 2003 . Which ties matter when ? The contingent effects of interorganizational partner - ships on IPO success . Strategic Management Journal 24 ( 2 ) : 127 – 144 . Harris M , Raviv A . 2002 . Organization design . Manage - ment Science 48 ( 7 ) : 852 – 865 . Hart O , Moore J . 2005 . On the design of hierarchies : coordination versus specialization . Journal of Political Economy 113 ( 4 ) : 675 – 702 . Hawn C . 2004 . Microsoft skills . Fast Company 89 : 70 . Herbold RJ . 2002 . Inside Microsoft : balancing creativity and discipline . Harvard Business Review 80 ( 1 ) : 73 – 79 . Hinsz VB , Tindale RS , Vollrath DA . 1997 . The emerging conceptualization of groups as information processors . Psychological Bulletin 121 ( 1 ) : 43 – 64 . Hrebiniak LG , Joyce WF . 1984 . Implementing Strategy . Macmillan : New York . Janis IL . 1972 . Victims of Groupthink : A Psychological Study of Foreign - Policy Decisions and Fiascoes . Houghton Mifﬂin : Boston , MA . Kahneman D , Tversky A . 1979 . Prospect theory : analysis of decision under risk . Econometrica 47 ( 2 ) : 263 – 291 . Knudsen T , Levinthal DA . 2007 . Two faces of search : alternative generation and alternative evaluation . Organization Science 18 ( 1 ) : 39 – 54 . Kosowski R , Timmermann A , Wermers R , White H . 2006 . Can mutual fund ‘stars’ really pick stocks ? New evidence from a bootstrap analysis . Journal of Finance 61 ( 6 ) : 2551 – 2595 . Langlois RN . 1997 . Cognition and capabilities : opportu - nities seized and missed in the history of the computer industry . In Technological Innovation : Oversights and Foresights , Garud R , Nayyar PR , Shapira Z ( eds ) . Cambridge University Press : New York ; 71 – 94 . Lerner J . 1994 . The syndication of venture capital investments . Financial Management 23 ( 3 ) : 16 – 27 . Macmillan NA , Creelman CD . 2004 . Detection Theory : A User’s Guide ( 2nd edn ) . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates : Mahwah , NJ . Maritan CA , Schendel DE . 1997 . Strategy and decision processes : what is the linkage ? In Strategic Decisions , Papadakis V , Barwise P ( eds ) . Kluwer Academic Publishers : London , U . K . Marschak J , Radner R . 1972 . Economic Theory of Teams . Yale University Press : New Haven , CT . Mintzberg H . 1978 . Patterns in strategy formation . Management Science 24 ( 9 ) : 934 – 948 . Moore EF , Shannon CE . 1956 / 1993 . Reliable circuits using less reliable relays ( I and II ) . In Claude Elwood Shannon : Collected Papers , Sloane NJA , Wyner AD ( eds ) . Wiley - IEEE Press : New York ; 796 – 830 . Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 33 : 611 – 632 ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj 632 F . A . Csaszar Morningstar . 2008 . Morningstar Funds 500 . Wiley : Hoboken , NJ . National Commission on Terrorist Attacks upon the United States . 2004 . The 9 / 11 Commission Report : Final Report of the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States . Norton : New York . Peterson W , Birdsall T , Fox W . 1954 . The theory of signal detectability . IRE Professional Group on Information Theory 4 ( 4 ) : 171 – 212 . Pettigrew AM . 1987 . Context and action in the transformation of the ﬁrm . Journal of Management Studies 24 ( 6 ) : 649 – 670 . Pfeffer J . 1992 . Managing with Power : Politics and Inﬂuence in Organizations . Harvard Business School Press : Boston , MA . Puranam P , Powell BC , Singh H . 2006 . Due diligence failure as a signal detection problem . Strategic Organization 4 ( 4 ) : 319 – 348 . Qian YY , Roland G , Xu CG . 2006 . Coordination and experimentation in M - form and U - form organizations . Journal of Political Economy 114 ( 2 ) : 366 – 402 . Radner R . 1992 . Hierarchy : the economics of managing . Journal of Economic Literature 30 ( 3 ) : 1382 – 1415 . Raisch S , Birkinshaw J . 2008 . Organizational ambidex - terity : antecedents , outcomes , and moderators . Journal of Management 34 ( 3 ) : 375 – 409 . Rausand R , Høyland A . 2004 . System Reliability Theory : Models , Statistical Methods , and Applications ( 2nd edn ) . Wiley - Interscience : Hoboken , NJ . Rivkin JW , Siggelkow N . 2003 . Balancing search and stability : interdependencies among elements of organizational design . Management Science 49 ( 3 ) : 290 – 311 . Robbins SP . 1990 . Organization Theory : Structure , Design , and Applications ( 3rd edn ) . Prentice Hall : Englewood Cliffs , NJ . Rotemberg JJ , Saloner G . 1994 . Beneﬁts of narrow business strategies . American Economic Review 84 ( 5 ) : 1330 – 1349 . Rumelt RP , Schendel DE , Teece DJ . 1994 . Fundamental Issues in Strategy : A Research Agenda . Harvard Business School Press : Boston , MA . Sah RK . 1991 . Fallibility in human organizations and political systems . Journal of Economic Perspectives 5 ( 2 ) : 67 – 88 . Sah RK , Stiglitz JE . 1986 . The architecture of economic systems : hierarchies and polyarchies . American Economic Review 76 ( 4 ) : 716 – 727 . Sah RK , Stiglitz JE . 1988 . Committees , hierarchies and polyarchies . Economic Journal 98 ( 391 ) : 451 – 470 . Siggelkow N , Levinthal DA . 2003 . Temporarily divide to conquer : centralized , decentralized , and reintegrated organizational approaches to exploration and adapta - tion . Organization Science 14 ( 6 ) : 650 – 669 . Simon HA . 1947 / 1997 . Administrative Behavior ( 4th edn ) . Free Press : New York . Starbuck WH , Mezias JM . 1996 . Opening Pandora’s box : studying the accuracy of managers’ perceptions . Journal of Organizational Behavior 17 ( 2 ) : 99 – 117 . Stasser G , Titus W . 1985 . Pooling of unshared informa - tion in group decision making : biased information sampling during discussion . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 48 ( 6 ) : 1467 – 1478 . Stoner JAF . 1961 . A comparison of individual and group decisions involving risk . Master’s thesis , School of Industrial Management , Massachusetts Institute of Technology . Stratford S . 1993 . Andy Grove : how Intel makes spending pay off . Fortune , 22 February : 58 . Thompson J . 1967 . Organizations in Action : Social Science Bases in Administrative Theory . McGraw - Hill : New York . Van den Steen E . 2009 . Authority versus persuasion . American Economic Review 99 ( 2 ) : 448 – 453 . Van Fleet DD , Bedeian AG . 1977 . A history of the span of management . Academy of Management Review 2 ( 3 ) : 356 – 372 . Van Zandt T . 1999 . Real - time decentralized information processing as a model of organizations with boundedly rational agents . Review of Economic Studies 66 ( 3 ) : 633 – 658 . Williams RL . 2000 . A note on robust variance estimation for cluster - correlated data . Biometrics 56 : 645 – 646 . Williamson OE . 1967 . Hierarchical control and optimum ﬁrm size . Journal of Political Economy 75 ( 2 ) : 123 – 138 . Zajac EJ , Bazerman MH . 1991 . Blind spots in industry and competitor analysis : implications of interﬁrm ( mis ) perceptions for strategic decisions . Academy of Management Review 16 ( 1 ) : 37 – 56 . Zenger TR , Hesterly WS . 1997 . The disaggregation of corporations : selective intervention , high - powered incentives , and molecular units . Organization Science 8 ( 3 ) : 209 – 222 . SUPPORTING INFORMATION Additional supporting information may be found in the online version of this article : APPENDIX : Model Please note : Wiley - Blackwell is not responsible for the content of functionality of any supporting materials supplied by the authors . Any queries ( other than missing material ) should be directed to the corresponding author for the article . Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 33 : 611 – 632 ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj