Current Biology , Vol . 14 , 1194 – 1199 , July 13 , 2004 ,  2004 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2004 . 06 . 049 Microtubule Dynamics Are Necessary for Src Family Kinase - Dependent Growth Cone Steering bule turnover , but the functional implications of this pro - cess have not been reported . To characterize the spatial characteristics of microtu - Daniel M . Suter , 1 Andrew W . Schaefer , and Paul Forscher * Department of Molecular , Cellular , and Developmental Biology bule exploration , we quantified microtubule extensions beyond a boundary set at 75 % of the width of the P Yale University P . O . Box 208103 domain ( Figures 1A – 1D ) . Whereas a snapshot ( Figure 1A ) catches a few microtubules passing this criterion New Haven , Connecticut 06520 ( arrowheads ) , integrating microtubule behavior over 10 min reveals that microtubules stochastically explore es - sentiallytheentirePdomain ( Figure1B ; seealsoSupple - Summary mental Movie 1 at http : / / www . current - biology . com / cgi / content / full / 14 / 13 / 1194 / DC1 ) . Interestingly , P domain Dynamic microtubules explore the peripheral ( P ) sampling appears to be somewhat region dependent growthcone domainusingFactin bundlesaspolymer - ( Figures 1C and 1D ) , with more frequent long microtu - ization guides [ 1 , 2 ] . Microtubule dynamics are neces - bule extensions on the sides of the growth cone than sary for growth cone guidance [ 3 – 6 ] ; however , mecha - distally along the axis of growth . Histograms of microtu - nisms of microtubule reorganization during growth bule extensions for an individual growth cone over a 10 cone turning [ 7 – 9 ] are not well understood . Here , we min period and for a population are shown in Figures address these issues by analyzing growth cone steer - 1C and 1D , respectively . The lower density of long - lived ing events in vitro , evoked by beads derivatized with distal microtubule extensions along the axis of growth the Ig superfamily cell adhesion protein apCAM . Phar - appears to be due to spatial differences in rates of retro - macological inhibition of microtubule assembly with gradeactinflow . Specifically , actinflowrateswereabout lowdosesoftaxolorvinblastineresultedinrapidclear - 15 % higher in the distal quadrants than on the sides ance of microtubules from the P domain with little of growth cones ( Figure 1D ) . Since microtubules are effect on central ( C ) axonal microtubules or actin - based coupled to retrograde flow (cid:1) 65 % of the time [ 2 ] , this motility . Early during target interactions , we detected probably negatively biases microtubule extension in the F actin assembly and activated Src , but few microtu - distal quadrants . Alternatively , spatial differences in mi - bules , at apCAM bead binding sites . The majority of crotubule assembly dynamics could be present ; how - microtubules extended toward bead targets after F ever , no evidence of this was observed ( unpublished actin flow attenuation occurred . Microtubule exten - observations ) . These results suggest the possibility of sion during growth cone steering responses was regional differences in sensory potential—perhaps en - strongly suppressed by dampening microtubule dy - hanced microtubule exploration on growth cone sides namics with low doses of taxol or vinblastine . These enhances peripheral target detection . treatments also inhibited growth cone turning re - Given that retrograde actin flow transports microtu - sponses , as well as focal actin assembly and accumu - bules out of the P domain at about the same rate as they lation of active Src at bead binding sites . These results assemble [ 2 ] , factors that pause microtubule assembly suggest that dynamic microtubules carry signals in - should result in rapid clearance of microtubules from volved in regulating Src - dependent apCAM adhesion the P domain . To test this prediction , we dampened complexes involved in growth cone steering . microtubule dynamics using either vinblastine ( 25 nM ) or taxol ( 100 nM ) at doses known to block assembly with minimal effects on microtubule structural integrity Results and Discussion or polymer mass [ 3 , 12 ] . Both of these treatments re - sulted in clearance of dynamic microtubules from the P Dynamic Microtubules Efficiently Explore the Peripheral Domain over Time domain , without disrupting microtubule structure in the C domain or significant alteration of peripheral actin Previous studies suggest that microtubule - actin fila - filamentorganization ( Figures1F – 1H ) orretrogradeactin ment “cross - talk” is critical for growth cone guidance flow ( Figure1E ) . Toanalyzethemechanismofthismicro - [ 3 – 6 , 8 , 10 , 11 ] , but the underlying mechanisms are not tubule clearance , we visualized microtubule dynamics clear . Using multimode fluorescent speckle microscopy with FSM before and after drug treatment . Taxol applica - ( FSM ) , we recently showed that microtubules interact tioncausedmicrotubules to undergo long pauses in their closely with filopodial F actin bundles , which serve not assembly ( Figures 1I and 1J ; see Supplemental Movie only as guides for microtubule assembly into the growth 2 ) . When microtubule assembly rates were less than cone P domain , but also transport microtubules rear - retrograde actin flow , microtubules were transported ward byretrograde actinflow [ 2 ] . This processpromotes out of the P domain at about the rate of retrograde actin constant exploration of the P domain and rapid microtu - flow ( Figure 1K ; Supplemental Movie 3 ) . Note that the microtubule tip appeared to remain attached to a mov - * Correspondence : paul . forscher @ yale . edu ing filopodial actin bundle ( arrowhead ) , while the more 1 Present address : Department of Biological Sciences , Purdue Uni - proximal microtubule segment detached and formed a versity , Lilly Hall 2 - 239 , 915 West State Street , West Lafayette , Indi - ana 47907 . loop , suggesting the presence of a microtubule - actin Microtubules and Src in Growth Cone Steering 1195 Figure 1 . Dynamic Microtubules Efficiently Interrogate P Domain Space over Time ( A ) Pdomainmicrotubuledistributionatasin - gle time point visualized by FSM in a live growth cone . The P domain is outlined by an orange line ; hatched green line represents distal 75 % border . ( B ) Microtubule density in P domain summed over 10 min . Images taken every 10 s were binarized and summed . ( C ) Microtubule densities past the 75 % bor - der plotted against time in quadrants ( see in - set in D ) for a single growth cone . ( D ) Plotshowingthattheaveragemicrotubule density ( mean (cid:2) SEM from 6 growth cones ) over time in the distal P domain is inversely correlated with retrograde actin flow . ( E ) Actinflowratesmeasuredwithbeadmark - ers under control conditions and after 20 min in 25 nM vinblastine or 100 nM taxol were not significantly different ( mean values (cid:3) SEM [ n (cid:4) experiments ] , normalizedbycontrolflow rates , t test ; p (cid:1) 0 . 05 ) . ( F – H ) Immunocytochemistry of microtubule ( green ) and actin filament ( red ) distribution in growth cones : control ( F ) ; after 20 min in 25 nM vinblastine ( G ) or 100 nM taxol ( H ) . Micro - tubules normally extend into P domain along actinbundles ( arrowin F ) but areabsent from P domain after dampening microtubule dy - namics . ( IandJ ) MultimodeFSM ( DIC / microtubuledy - namics ) before ( I ) andafter ( J ) taxoltreatment . ( K ) Time - lapse montage ( 10 s intervals ) of mi - crotubule immediately after taxol addition ; microtubuleplusendmarkedbybluetriangle . Microtubulewastransportedat4 . 5 (cid:5) mmin (cid:6) 1 . Scale bars equal 10 (cid:5) m . Supplemental Movie 1 shows DIC / MT visual - ization of a different control growth cone . Supplemental Movie 2 shows DIC / MT visual - ization of the taxol - treated growth cone from ( J ) . Supplemental Movie 3 shows DIC / MT vi - sualizationoftheindividualMTintaxolshownin ( K ) . filament binding complex near the microtubule plus end . sembly , microtubule advance , retrograde flow , and the Src kinase activity during turning responses has not Low doses of vinblastine had similar effects ( data not shown ) . been reported . To address these issues , interactions were halted by fixation at various timepoints , followed by immunolocal - F Actin , Active Src , and Few Microtubules Localize Early at Bead Target Sites ization of microtubules , actin filaments , and activated Src . During the “latency period , ” defined as after bead We were interested in whether the microtubule explora - tion of the P domain described above could be involved placement but before C domain and leading edge ad - vance ( Figures 2A and 2B ) , microtubule distributions in signaling , as suggested in the context of directed cell motility and morphogenesis [ 13 ] and in regulation of were similar to control growth cones ( Figures 2C , 2H , and1F ) withnosignificantaccumulation ofmicrotubules focal adhesion turnover [ 14 , 15 ] . To address this , we used the previously described restrained bead target near bead binding sites . In cells fixed during the latency period , an average of 0 . 8 microtubules were observed interaction assay ( RBI ) [ 16 ] . Beads coated with a recom - binant version of the Ig superfamily cell adhesion mole - near beads ( Figure 2I ) . Note that this number signifi - cantly underestimates actual microtubule activity at cule , apCAM , ( Supplemental Figure S1 ) or 4E8 ( an ap - CAM - specific monoclonal antibody ) elicit growth cone bead targets , since a bead will typically experience 15 – 25 microtubule explorations during a (cid:1) 10 min la - turning responses involving focal actin assembly , slow - ing of retrograde actin flow , and C domain and microtu - tency period ( Figures 1C and 1D ) . Contrasting with the lack of microtubule accumulation , F actin around re - bule advance toward targets [ 16 ] . These responses also depend on recruitment of active Src family tyrosine ki - strained beads increased more than 300 % ( Figures 2D , open arrow , and 3F ) during the latency period . In addi - nase ( henceforth termed “Src” ) at bead contact sites [ 17 ] ; however , the relationship between focal actin as - tion , when active Src distribution was assessed using a Current Biology 1196 Figure 2 . F Actin Accumulation and Src Acti - vation Precede Net Microtubule Buildup , which Correlates with Attenuation of Retro - grade Actin Flow ( A ) DIC image of a growth cone right after placementofabeadcoatedwithapCAManti - body ( 4E8 ) . ( B ) Thesame growth cone 15min later during the latency period ( before C domain exten - sion , tension increase , or leading edge growth ) . ( C ) Microtubule immunocytochemistry at the time point shown in ( B ) . Diffuse bead labeling results from the detection of 4E8 by the sec - ondary anti - mouse antibody . ( D ) F actin accumulation around the bead ( arrow ) . ( E ) Growth cone after 4E8 bead placement . ( F ) 1 min after start of interaction period . ( G ) Microtubule labeling during interaction period attime point in ( F ) reveals (cid:1) 9 microtu - bules at bead . ( H ) Another example during the latency pe - riod shows two microtubules at the bead ( marked with a dashed circle ) . ( I ) Microtubulenumberatbeadsduringdiffer - ent phases of RBIs . Mean values (cid:3) SEM ; n (cid:4) number of experiments . ( J ) F actin flow measurements using marker beads both along RBI axis ( on - axis flow ; Fig - ure 3H ) and outside axis ( off - axis flow ; Figure 3I ) and graphed as on - axis flow rate normal - ized by off - axis flow . Mean values (cid:3) SEM . ( KandL ) ActivatedSrcfamilykinasedistribu - tion ( using Src PY418 antibody ) in growth cones fixed 3 and 5 min into the latency pe - riod . Arrows denote bead positions . previously characterized phosphospecific antibody that attenuation of actin flow ( and microtubule transport ) in the target interaction axis [ 16 ] . To address this , we first recognizes the autophosphorylation site PY418 of acti - vated Src family kinases [ 17 ] , active Src around re - compared microtubule densities at target sites with ret - rograde actin flow rates : ( 1 ) during the latency period , strained beads was increased bymore than 100 % within 5min ( Figures2K and2L , cf . Figure4J forquantification ) . ( 2 ) at the onset of C domain advance , and ( 3 ) during the interaction period ( Figures 2I and 2J ) . Retrograde actin In summary , actin assembly and active Src accumula - tion appear to be early local events at bead target sites flow rates were determined using the laser trap assisted flow coupled bead assay ( see Experimental Procedures during the latency period , whereas microtubules likely explore target sites multiple times during a typical la - andFigure3 ) [ 18 ] . Duringthelatencyperiod , microtubule density at bead sites remained low and retrograde flow tency but do not accumulate during this time . rates within the target interaction axis remained high ( (cid:7) 90 % of control flow rates assessed adjacent to the Dynamic Microtubules Are Necessary for apCAM - Mediated Target Interactions bead binding site ) . In contrast , retrograde flow had slowed significantly by the onset of C domain extension We previously reported that C domain advance is corre - lated with slowing of retrograde actin flow during the with a corresponding slight increase in microtubule den - sity . However , during the interaction phase , microtubule target interaction phase [ 16 , 18 ] ; however , the mecha - nism of microtubule advance is unknown . When RBIs density at target sites increased dramatically and retro - grade actin flow rates slowed maximally to 15 % of con - were halted by fixation during the interaction period ( i . e . , after the start of C domain advance ) , microtubule trol flow rates ( p (cid:8) 0 . 001 ) . Thus , microtubule advance is well correlated with slowing of retrograde F actin flow extension was typically already evident ( Figures 2E – 2G ) . Since under the control conditions microtubules are rates within the target interaction axis . Next , we addressed whether target site - directed mi - transported rearward by retrograde actin flow at about the same rate as they assemble [ 2 ] , we wanted to test crotubule extension depends on microtubule assembly . Growth cones were first tested for RBI competence un - whether microtubules advance during target interac - tions as a result of continued assembly combined with der control conditions using beads derivatized with re - Microtubules and Src in Growth Cone Steering 1197 Figure 3 . Dynamic Microtubules Are Re - quired for All Key Aspects of Growth Cone Steering ( A and B ) Control RBI using a bead coated with recombinant apCAM right after bead placement ( A ) and after C domain exten - sion ( B ) . ( C and D ) Same growth cone after treatment with100nMtaxolfor20min , afterbeadplace - ment ( C ) , and after 15 min of bead restraint ( D ) . Note absence of C domain extension , growth of the leading edge in front of the bead , and tension buildup ( deflection of nee - dle from red to green marker line ) . ( E ) Fixation and labeling at 15 min shows no microtubules ( green ) extending to bead and no actin filament ( red ) accumulation ( white circle (cid:4) bead position ) . ( F ) Relative focal F actin changes at beads during latency ( 5 – 10 min ) and interaction ( 10 – 20 min ) periods and in taxol - blocked RBIs . ( G – L ) Microtubule dynamics are essential for strong apCAM - actin filament coupling . ( G – I ) Control RBI with apCAM bead . ( G ) Overview at start of interaction . ( H and I ) Time - lapse montages of regions in - dicated at same time intervals . On - axis flow in this experiment was 1 . 03 (cid:5) m / min ( H ) ; off - axis flow was 4 . 63 (cid:5) m / min ( I ) . ( J – L ) The same growth cone after treatment with 100 nM taxol . ( J ) Overview . ( K and L ) Time - lapse montages showing that on - axisretrogradeflowintaxol ( 3 . 83 (cid:5) m / min ; K ) was only reduced by 16 % compared to off - axis flow ( 4 . 58 (cid:5) m / min ; L ) . Time in ( I ) and ( L ) in seconds . Supplemental Movie 4 shows a control RBI before taxol treatment , taken from ( A ) and ( B ) . Supplemental Movie 5 shows the same growth as in Movie 4 after treatment with 100 nM taxol , taken from ( C ) and ( D ) . combinant apCAM ( Figures 3A and 3B ) and then chal - tors ( off - axis ) before and after taxol treatment ( Figures 3G – 3L ) . Under control conditions , strong attenuation of lenged with a second bead in the presence of low doses of taxol ( Figures 3C – 3E ) or vinblastine ( Supplemental on - axis retrograde flow rates occurred during interac - tions ( Figures 3H versus 3I ) as previously described [ 16 ] , Figures S2C – S2E ) . Interestingly , dampening microtu - bule dynamics by either method inhibited all key charac - whereas , in taxol , on - axis flow rates were only slightly reduced relative to off - axis rates ( Figures 3K versus 3L ) . teristics of target interactions without marked effects on growth cone motility ( Supplemental Movies 4 and 5 ) . Note that retrograde flow rates observed in taxol were similar to off - axis flow rates observed under control Site - directed F actin assembly around restrained beads , C domain extension , directed microtubule extension , conditions ( Figure 1E ) . Similar results were observed in RBIs blocked by vinblastine ( data not shown ) . These and protrusive leading edge growth near interaction sites no longer occurred ( n (cid:4) 5 ; Figures 3C – 3E ; focal F results suggest that dynamic microtubules are not es - sential for actin - based lamellar motility but play a more actin quantifications , Figure 3F ) . In addition , the late tension increases typical of control RBIs and indicated specializedsignal transductionrolein regulatingapCAM interactions with the actin filament retrograde flow sys - byneedledeflectionswerenotobserved ( linesinFigures 3A – 3D ; Supplemental Figure S2 ) . Interaction probability tem [ 19 ] . was reduced by 82 % and 100 % in taxol ( n (cid:4) 11 ) and vinblastine ( n (cid:4) 7 ) , respectively . Normal Src Function Requires Dynamic Microtubules We also noted that retrograde actin flow did not ap - pear to slow within the target interaction axis in the Under control conditions , activated Src accumulates along with F actin around restrained apCAM bead tar - presence of taxol ( Supplemental Movie 5 ) or vinblastine , suggesting a role for microtubule dynamics in regulation gets , and when Src activity is inhibited , beads no longer strongly couple to the underlying actin flow [ 17 ] . This of apCAM - actin filament coupling . To address this fur - ther , we compared actin flow rates within the interaction behavior resembles the effects of dampening microtu - bule dynamics reported above ( Figure 3 ) and prompted axis ( on - axis ) with flow in adjacent lamellipodium sec - Current Biology 1198 Figure 4 . Microtubule Dynamics Are Neces - sary for Normal Src Family Kinase Function at Target Sites ( A – I ) Control RBI experiment with 4E8 bead ( A – C ) , RBI blocked by 25 nM vinblastine ( D – F ) , and RBI blocked by 100 nM taxol ( G – I ) . Upper row ( A , D , and G ) shows growth cones at start of experiment . Middle row ( B , E , and H ) shows time points when interaction was completed in controls ( B ) , or when beads were restrained in the presence of the drugs ( E and H ) for at least the corresponding con - trol latency and interaction time periods . C domain boundary indicated with yellow dashed lines . Bottom row ( C , F , and I ) shows immunolocalizationofactivatedSrcfamilyki - nases using the Src PY418 antibody . ( J ) Quantification of % Src PY418 labeling increase at bead sites in control and in the presence of the Src family inhibitor PP2 ( 25 (cid:5) M ) or vinblastine ( 25 nM ) . ( K ) Average intensity of Src PY418 labeling in thePdomainafter (cid:1) 30minPP2orvinblastine treatment plotted relative to controls . Mean values (cid:3) SEM ; n (cid:4) number of experiments . ( L ) Model ( see text ) . us to investigate a possible relationship between micro - inhibitor PP2 also inhibits apCAM bead target interac - tions and suppresses focal accumulation of active Src tubuledynamicsandSrcfunction ( Figure4 ) . Localization of active Src family kinase was assessed with the Src ( Figure 4J ) [ 17 ] ; however , there are some important dif - ferences . Whereas treatment with PP2 ( 25 (cid:5) M ) reduced PY418 antibody during apCAM - mediated RBIs , and in - creased levels of Src PY418 were detected around 4E8 - average Srcactivity in theP domain by 36 % as expected ( Figure 4K ; p (cid:8) 0 . 05 ) , vinblastine ( 25 nM ) treatment had coated beads in controls ( Figures 4A – 4C ) as reported . To investigate a possible role for microtubule dynamics no effect on average Src activity ( Figure 4K ; p (cid:4) 0 . 4 ) and affected Src accumulation only at target sites ( Fig - in Src signaling , growth cones were first tested for inter - action competence and then treated with low doses of ures 4F and 4I ) . These results suggest that dynamic microtubules play a role in accumulation of active Src vinblastine ( Figures 4D – 4F ) or taxol ( Figures 4G – 4I ) and challenged with a second target bead . Dampening of at target contact sites but are not necessary for main - taining Src activity per se . Possible scenarios could in - microtubule dynamics with vinblastine or taxol inhibited target interactions as above and also strongly sup - volve microtubule - dependent delivery or activation of Src itself , a Src docking protein , or factors that could pressed accumulation of activated Src around bead tar - gets ( Figures 4F , 4I , and 4J ) . Note that Src family kinase potentiate Src activity at target sites . The latter would Microtubules and Src in Growth Cone Steering 1199 References include membrane components since local insertion of new membrane at the growth cone appears to depend 1 . Tanaka , E . M . , andKirschner , M . W . ( 1991 ) . Microtubulebehavior critically on dynamic microtubules [ 20 ] . in the growth cones of living neurons during axon elongation . A model summarizing the above effects is shown in J . Cell Biol . 115 , 345 – 363 . Figure 4L . Before a target interaction ( Figure 4L , pre - 2 . Schaefer , A . W . , Kabir , N . , and Forscher , P . ( 2002 ) . Filopodiaand actin arcs guide the assembly and transport of two populations interaction phase ) , native apCAM is freely diffusible and of microtubules with unique dynamic parameters in neuronal microtubulesexplorethePdomainbyperiodsofgrowth , growth cones . J . Cell Biol . 158 , 139 – 152 . pause , and shrinkage , i . e . , the classic properties of mi - 3 . Tanaka , E . , Ho , T . , andKirschner , M . W . ( 1995 ) . Theroleofmicro - crotubule dynamic instability ( Figure 4L , t 0 , t 1 , t 2 are suc - tubule dynamics in growth cone motility and axonal growth . J . cessive microtubule positions ) . Interestingly , maximum Cell Biol . 128 , 139 – 155 . rates of microtubule growth ( (cid:1) 7 (cid:5) m / min ) are only 4 . Williamson , T . , Gordon - Weeks , P . R . , Schachner , M . , andTaylor , J . ( 1996 ) . Microtubule reorganization is obligatory for growth slightly greater than the constantrate of retrograde actin cone turning . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 15221 – 15226 . flow . Since microtubule assembly rates fluctuate sto - 5 . Challacombe , J . F . , Snow , D . M . , and Letourneau , P . C . ( 1997 ) . chastically , this results in a steady state where microtu - Dynamic microtubuleends are required forgrowth cone turning bules transiently explore the P domain during periods to avoidan inhibitory guidancecue . J . Neurosci . 17 , 3085 – 3095 . of growth by “beating retrograde actin flow” and are 6 . Buck , K . B . , andZheng , J . Q . ( 2002 ) . Growthconeturninginduced cleared from the periphery whenever they pause by cou - by direct local modification of microtubule dynamics . J . Neu - rosci . 22 , 9358 – 9367 . pling to retrograde flow [ 2 ] . This results in rapid turnover , 7 . Sabry , J . H . , O’Connor , T . P . , Evans , L . , Toroian - Raymond , A . , but little or no accumulation of , microtubules in the P Kirschner , M . , andBentley , D . ( 1991 ) . Microtubulebehavior dur - domain in the absence of a target substrate . This pattern ing guidance of pioneer neuron growth cones in situ . J . Cell of constant microtubule exploration persists during the Biol . 115 , 381 – 395 . latency phase , during which time restrained apCAM - 8 . Lin , C . H . , and Forscher , P . ( 1993 ) . Cytoskeletal remodeling dur - coated beads can also trigger assembly of an actin inggrowthcone - targetinteractions . J . CellBiol . 121 , 1369 – 1383 . 9 . Tanaka , E . , and Sabry , J . ( 1995 ) . Making the connection : cy - filament structure around the target bead . This may act toskeletal rearrangements during growth cone guidance . Cell as a scaffold for localized recruitment of active Src 83 , 171 – 176 . ( P - src ) and possibly other cell adhesion and signaling 10 . Dent , E . W . , andKalil , K . ( 2001 ) . Axonbranchingrequiresinterac - components . Importantly , inhibition of microtubule dy - tions between dynamic microtubules and actin filaments . J . namics preventsboth formationof theactin scaffoldand Neurosci . 21 , 9757 – 9769 . active Src accumulation , suggesting that microtubule 11 . Zhou , F . Q . , Waterman - Storer , C . M . , and Cohan , C . S . ( 2002 ) . Focal loss of actin bundles causes microtubule redistribution dynamics supports a step upstream of these early and growth cone turning . J . Cell Biol . 157 , 839 – 849 . events in the target interaction sequence . Finally , during 12 . Jordan , M . A . , and Wilson , L . ( 1998 ) . Use of drugs to study role the interaction phase , retrograde actin flow attenuation ofmicrotubuleassemblydynamicsinlivingcells . MethodsEnzy - is observed and microtubules extend toward the target mol . 298 , 252 – 276 . site , likely because the average rate of microtubule as - 13 . Kirschner , M . , and Mitchison , T . ( 1986 ) . Beyond self - assembly : sembly now exceeds opposing retrograde actin flow . from microtubules to morphogenesis . Cell 45 , 329 – 342 . 14 . Kaverina , I . , Rottner , K . , and Small , J . V . ( 1998 ) . Targeting , cap - Microtubule assembly is clearly necessary for microtu - ture , and stabilization of microtubules at early focal adhesions . bule advance , since low doses of taxol or vinblastine J . Cell Biol . 142 , 181 – 190 . completely blocked microtubule extension during target 15 . Kaverina , I . , Krylyshkina , O . , and Small , J . V . ( 1999 ) . Microtubule interactions ( Figure 3 ) . These results do not , however , targeting of substrate contacts promotes their relaxation and rule out a potential role for molecular motors in the dissociation . J . Cell Biol . 146 , 1033 – 1044 . microtubule extension process and bears further inves - 16 . Suter , D . M . , Errante , L . D . , Belotserkovsky , V . , and Forscher , P . ( 1998 ) . The Ig superfamily cell adhesion molecule , apCAM , tigation . The current work compliments previous find - mediates growth cone steering by substrate - cytoskeletal cou - ings that dynamic microtubules are not essential for pling . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 227 – 240 . growth cone motility but play a higher - level role that 17 . Suter , D . M . , and Forscher , P . ( 2001 ) . Transmission of growth enables discrimination of molecular guidance cues . conetractionforcethroughapCAM - cytoskeletallinkagesisreg - ulated by Src family tyrosine kinase activity . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 427 – 438 . Supplemental Data 18 . Lin , C . H . , and Forscher , P . ( 1995 ) . Growth cone advance is Supplemental Data including Experimental Procedures , figures , inversely proportional to retrograde F - actin flow . Neuron 14 , and movies are available at http : / / www . current - biology . com / cgi / 763 – 771 . content / full / 14 / 13 / 1194 / DC1 . 19 . Rodriguez , O . C . , Schaefer , A . W . , Mandato , C . A . , Forscher , P . , Bement , W . M . , and Waterman - Storer , C . M . ( 2003 ) . Conserved Acknowledgments microtubule - actin interactions in cell movement and morpho - genesis . Nat . Cell Biol . 5 , 599 – 609 . TheauthorsthankDr . E . Kandel ( ColumbiaUniversity , NY ) forprovid - 20 . Zakharenko , S . , and Popov , S . ( 1998 ) . Dynamics of axonal mi - ing the 4E8 monoclonal antibody . We are indebted to Dr . Tracy Cao , crotubules regulate the topology of new membrane insertion Dr . Mark Mooseker , Doris Kemler , and Nadia Ruthardt for technical into the growing neurites . J . Cell Biol . 143 , 1077 – 1086 . advice and assistance in production of recombinant apCAM using the Baculovirus expression system . We further thank Dr . Laurie Iten ( Purdue University , IN ) for help with digital movies . Received : November 24 , 2003 Revised : May 24 , 2004 Accepted : May 24 , 2004 Published : July 13 , 2004