Nursing Inquiry . 2018 ; 25 : e12204 . wileyonlinelibrary . com / journal / nin | 1 of 9 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / nin . 12204 © 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd Accepted : 8 April 2017 DOI : 10 . 1111 / nin . 12204 F E AT U R E Applying cultural safety beyond Indigenous contexts : Insights from health research with Amish and Low German Mennonites Amélie Blanchet Garneau 1 , 2 | Helen Farrar 3 | HaiYan Fan 4 | Judith Kulig 4 1 Faculté des sciences infirmières , Université de Montréal , Montreal , QC , Canada 2 School of Nursing , University of British Columbia , Vancouver , BC , Canada 3 Fran and Earl Ziegler College of Nursing , University of Oklahoma , Norman , OK , Canada 4 University of Lethbridge , Lethbridge , AB , Canada Correspondence Amélie Blanchet Garneau , Faculté des sciences infirmières , Université de Montréal , Montreal , QC , Canada Email : amelie . blanchet . garneau @ umontreal . ca Funding information Funding was gratefully received by Judith Kulig from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research for : The Discovery of Death and Dying Beliefs among Low German - speaking Mennonites : Application to Best Practice Guidelines ( # 93741 ) and Mental Health Wellness & Illness Knowledge and Beliefs among Low German - speaking Mennonites : Development of Best Practice Guidelines ( # FRN119533 ) . Funding was also provided to Helen Farrar from the Donald W Reynolds Foundation and Jonas Foundation . People who identify as members of religious communities , such as the Amish and Low German Mennonites , face challenges obtaining quality health care and engagement in research due in part to stereotypes that are conveyed through media and popular discourses . There is also a growing concern that even when these groups are engaged in research , the guiding frameworks of the research fail to consider the sociocultural or historical relations of power , further skewing power imbalances inherent in the re - search relationship . This paper aims at discussing the uses of cultural safety in the context of health research and knowledge translation with groups of people that are associated with a specific religion . Research with the Amish and Low German Mennonites is provided as examples to illustrate the use of cultural safety in this con - text . From these examples , we discuss how the use of cultural safety , grounded in critical theoretical perspectives , offers new insight into health research with popula - tions that are traditionally labeled as minority , vulnerable , or marginalized , especially when a dominant characteristic is a unique religious perspective . KEYWORDS critical inquiry , cultural safety , health equity , health research , knowledge translation , religious pluralism 1 | INTRODUCTION Health professionals provide care and perform research in many different contexts and to diverse populations groups , and yet policies , structures , and practices remain in large part grounded in mainstream Western worldviews . Evidence that so - called marginalized 1 or minority groups experience discrimination , stigmatization , and social exclusion in both health care and health research contexts is well documented ( e . g . , George , Duran , & Norris , 2014 ; Krieger , 2014 ; Tang , Browne , Mussell , Smye , & Rodney , 2015 ; Wyatt , Laderman , Botwinick , Mate , & Whittington , 2016 ) . Discrimination , stigmatization and social exclu - sion are inherent to the production and maintenance of health and social inequities and injustices and have significant effects on health status ( Krieger , 2014 ) . In Canada , for example , the life expectancy of Indigenous people and low - income Canadians remains lower than the life expectancy of the general population ( Public Health Agency of Canada , 2014 ) . Mortality rates and the prevalence of cardiovascular disease , heart disease , and diabetes are also higher among these groups . People living in rural and remote areas face challenges in accessing health care and are more likely to experience poorer health outcomes ( Public Health Agency of Canada , 2014 ) . Hence , despite multiple efforts to reduce health inequities , they persist globally and have profound effects on the health of marginalized or minority populations . An important boundary to research with groups of people who are labeled as marginalized or minority groups is the inherent power imbalance ( McCleland , 2011 ) . For these groups , this imbalance is 1 In this article , ‘marginalized’ refers to the conditions that sustain structural , social , and health inequities while also acknowledging strengths and capacities of communities and people’s agency . 2 of 9 | BLANCHET GARNEAU ET AL . perpetuated by assumptions of what makes up one’s identity as an individual and as a member of a unique group . Indeed , health research with marginalized or minority groups has suffered from assumptions about racial , ethnic , religious , and cultural characteristics . Often , these assumptions are based on a legacy of disenfranchisement and colo - nization , well known to Indigenous populations ( McCleland , 2011 ) . In the case of nursing research with marginalized or minority reli - gious groups , religion is often studied as a single category of iden - tity , obscuring the social contexts that qualify how religion is lived out ( Reimer - Kirkham & Sharma , 2011 ) . Even with the presence of preva - lent humanist and holistic discourses in nursing , religion is still mostly framed as one category isolated from other social locations and reali - ties ( Reimer - Kirkham & Sharma , 2011 ) . Critical theoretical perspectives and the developing concept of cul - tural safety , grounded in these perspectives , each emphasize the tran - scendence of boundaries to gain a comprehensive understanding of the human experience . Critical perspectives help people to understand ‘the interaction of numerous characteristics of vulnerable populations , not only at the individual level but also at structural levels so as to capture the multiple contexts that shape individual lives and health statuses’ ( Dhamoon & Hankivsky , 2011 , p . 16 ) . Even if cultural safety has been developed and applied mostly in the context of Indigenous people , this concept has also been used in a non - Indigenous context to guide health care practices in ways that counteract the effects of stigma , discrimina - tion , and inequitable access to care by focusing on multiple , intersecting forms of discrimination and how these are often co - constituted determi - nants of health and well - being for individuals , communities , and popu - lations ( Mkandawire - Valhmu & Doering , 2012 ; Mortensen , 2010 ; Pauly , McCall , Browne , Parker , & Mollison , 2015 ; Reavy , Hobbs , Hereford , & Crosby , 2012 ) . Hence , critical theoretical perspectives , coupled with cul - tural safety in health research , can inform health professionals’ practices and research so that they are inclusive and responsive to client popula - tions coming from various intersecting social positions ( e . g . , age , gender , religion , poverty , ethnicity , and socioeconomic status ) . In this article , we discuss the application of cultural safety in the context of health research with groups that are identified as religious minority groups . We also examine how cultural safety can be used in knowledge translation ( KT ) to highlight the outcomes of nursing research in this context . This discussion is grounded in our previous work in conceptualizing cultural safety ( Blanchet Garneau & Pepin , 2012 ) and using this concept in nursing research and KT with Amish ( Farrar , 2014 ) and Low German ( LG ) Mennonite communities ( Kulig & Fan , 2013b , 2016b ) . We define KT as a dynamic process that includes disseminating research findings to enhance health care services and the health of individuals and communities ( Graham & Tetroe , 2007 ) . A core aspect of both critical inquiry and cultural safety is the recognition of self - identity rather than the categorization by the outside group . In this regard , we recognize that although the Amish and LG Mennonites are often framed as unique ethnic or cultural minorities , they self - identify their religious faith as central to all life circumstances . We will then refer to the Amish and LG Mennonites as religious groups , although they can be considered racial , ethnic , religious , or cultural minority groups by some authors and researchers . 2 | AMISH AND LG MENNONITE COMMUNITIES’ HISTORICAL CONTEXT AND EXPERIENCES OF DISCRIMINATION There are three Anabaptist groups that reside in North America ; the Amish and the Low German Mennonites represent two of these groups . There are over 500 Amish communities located in 31 states in the United States and 2 Canadian provinces with an estimated popula - tion size of 300 , 000 ( Young Center for Anabaptist and Pietist Studies , 2015 ) . These communities tend to have homogeneous , sequestered , rural lifestyles characterized by high levels of physical activity , the use of a parochial school system , and involvement in primarily agricul - tural occupations with large family and community support systems ( Kraybill , Johnson - Weiner , & Nolt , 2013 ) . LG Mennonites live in simi - lar conditions but do not live a communal lifestyle and vary from being conservative to more liberal in their religious beliefs which has bear - ing on their lifestyle including education . They are one of the three Anabaptist groups that reside in North America . Currently , there are 80 , 000 - 100 , 000 LG Mennonites in Canada and 25 , 000 in the United States ( Janzen , 2010 ) . Throughout their history , LG Mennonites have experienced reli - gious persecution , which led to several migration movements to ensure they could maintain their conservative views , remain separate from mainstream society , and adhere to pacifism . Their migration his - tory includes moving to Canada and then relocating to countries such as Mexico , Bolivia , and Paraguay ( Loewen , 2013 ) . Some of them have then returned to Canada for economic and religious reasons . Amish communities have experienced similar discrimination . This discrimina - tion drove them to migrate to North America in search of religious freedom . Amish pacifistic beliefs during wartime and their preference for childhood education using a parochial school system also resulted in numerous conflicts with the United States government and society . As self - sufficient groups with a rural context that dictates inde - pendence when addressing the basic needs of the communities , Amish and LG Mennonite have developed their own health care system . This health care system includes , for example , self - taught LG Mennonite health care practitioners , including women as midwives , and both women and men as bonesetters , who diagnose and treat an array of ailments ( Kulig & Hall , 2004 ; Kulig et al . , 2002 ) . Because of their lifestyle that sets them apart from mainstream society and their will to preserve their cultural capital ( Bourdieu , 1986 ; Brubacher , 2016 ) , both the Amish and LG Mennonites are often referred to as marginal Christian groups ( Seljak , 2012 ) , or marginalized groups ( Montesanti , Abelson , Lavis , & Dunn , 2016 ; Region of Waterloo Public Health , 2011 ) . This exclusion from mainstream society can enhance margin - alization of these communities when seeking health care in the main - stream system . Earlier literature about the relationship between the Amish and Western health care providers follows a multicultural model in which checklists of Amish characteristics are used to guide culturally com - petent care . For example , nurses are invited to implement a list of behaviors in their practice , such as being friendly and calm , and hav - ing a polite demeanor , in response to specific cultural characteristics | 3 of 9 BLANCHET GARNEAU ET AL . of Amish peoples found in the literature ( Wenger , 1991 ) . Physicians are told to consider home visits to overcome transportation barriers , be prepared to negotiate or barter for payment , include families in decision - making , and not to flaunt specialized training ( McCollum , 1996 ; Wiggins , 1983 ) . These prescriptive to - do lists fail to acknowl - edge the socioeconomic , historic , and political contexts and the potential ethnocentric perspective of the health care provider , as recommended by a conceptual position of cultural safety . Recently , researchers observed that the Amish are increasingly seeking health care services outside of their communities , particularly for people with chronic illnesses ( Cates , 2014 ; Farrar , 2014 ; Gillum , Staffileno , Schwartz , Coke , & Fogg , 2010 ; Kueny , 2011 ) . There is little scientific research with the Amish about their relationship with the Western health care system . The research that is available is over 2 decades old and follows a multiculturalist model where religion is conflated with culture . Moreover , these publications rarely include the direct perspective of an Amish person ( Farrar , 2014 ) and do not address structural or systemic barriers to health care that an Amish person may experience while seeking health care in the mainstream system . Generalizations made about LG Mennonites , including references to them as ‘naive’ or ‘illiterate’ , are common in the mainstream health care sector ( Quiring , 2003 ; Turner , 2013 ) . Anecdotally , we know that some health care providers still hold assumptions that the low literacy levels and religious beliefs of LG Mennonites curtail them from being involved in codeveloping appropriate health care for themselves or their families . This , in turn , has perpetuated and created stereotypes , stigmatization , and discrimination of this group in the mainstream health care system ( Treaster , Hawley , Paschal , Molgaard , & Romain , 2006 ) . Considering the combination of pervasive stereotyping of the Amish and LG Mennonites as ‘simple’ or ‘backward’ and a history of systemic discrimination in their relations with the mainstream sys - tems , cultural safety , which aims to understand the power differentials inherent in health service delivery and address these health inequities , is an appropriate concept for research with these communities . 3 | CULTURAL SAFETY ORIGINS AND DEFINITION The concept of cultural safety is closely tied to the history of coloni - alism and its aftermath . The concept was formalized in 1988 at the annual conference of Maori nurses in New Zealand . Maori health professionals were concerned about the health status of the Maori population compared with the rest of the population , as well as the lack of attention given to the cultural dimension in the education pro - grams ( Wepa , 2003 ) . Therefore , Maori nurse leaders developed the concept of cultural safety to capture the negative impact of coloni - alism on both the health care delivery and health care status of the Maori people ( Ramsden , 1990 ) . The Nursing Council of New Zealand ( NCNZ ) , which oversees nursing education and practice , incorporated cultural safety into its education programs and the country’s nursing entrance examination in 1992 . Cultural safety has been defined in the context of nursing and mid - wifery education and practice . Most authors have used the definition of cultural safety , which was specified in the guidelines formulated by the NCNZ in 1992 and has been amended multiple times until its most recent version in 2011 . NCNZ defines cultural safety as : The effective nursing practice of a person or family from another culture , and is determined by that person or family . Culture includes , but is not restricted to , age or generation ; gender ; sexual orientation ; occupation and socioeconomic status ; ethnic origin or migrant experience ; religious or spiritual belief ; and disability . The nurse delivering the nursing service will have under - taken a process of reflection on his or her own cultural identity and will recognise the impact that his or her personal culture has on his or her professional practice . Unsafe cultural practice comprises any action which di - minishes , demeans or disempowers the cultural identity and well being of an individual ( Nursing Council of New Zealand , 2011 , p . 7 ) . Even if cultural safety has been defined since the mid - 1990s as in - clusive of age , gender , sexual orientation , socioeconomic status , ethnic origin , religious or spiritual beliefs , disability , and other social locations , the literature on a culturally safe research process and KT methods re - mains focused mainly on Indigenous people’s experiences and health ( e . g . , Swain & Barclay , 2015 ; Tait Neufeld , 2014 ; A . M . Wilson , Magarey , Jones , O’Donnell , & Kelly , 2015 ) . In recent years , there has been more interest in translating cultural safety to non - Indigenous contexts , such as illicit substance use , cultural and linguistic diverse groups , and refugee populations , and in the context of international placements in nursing education ( Mkandawire - Valhmu & Doering , 2012 ; Mortensen , 2010 ; Pauly et al . , 2015 ; Reavy et al . , 2012 ) . 3 . 1 | Cultural safety theoretical underpinnings Cultural safety is grounded in critical theoretical perspectives and draws attention to critically oriented knowledge , such as racializa - tion , culturalism , institutional racism and discrimination , and health and health care inequities ( Browne et al . , 2009 ) . In neoliberal societies where individual responsibility and behaviors are highly valued , there is often little attention given to the social conditions that shape health and health care ( Browne , 2001 ) . Cultural safety helps to look at the structural conditions creating power imbalances and shaping health and health care ; therefore , it is in line with health equity and social justice thinking in which ‘a structural analysis is applied to understand the conditions in which individuals make choices and enact decisions’ ( Pauly et al . , 2015 , p . 127 ) . Indeed , it highlights the power imbalances and inequitable social relationships in health care by shifting away from cultural difference as the source of the problem toward the culture of health care as the site for transformation ( Doane & Varcoe , 2015 ) . Attention is then deviated from individual behaviors to recognition 4 of 9 | BLANCHET GARNEAU ET AL . that people make choices within particular social , historical , economic , and political contexts . A cultural safety lens also prompts us to reflect on organizational and societal policies and practices that impact the access and delivery of healthcare ( Bourque Bearskin , 2011 ; Canadian Association of Schools of Nursing , 2013 ) . Therefore , cultural safety helps to shift health care practices and policies away from dominant neocolonial approaches , which may have unwittingly created ineq - uities in health care service access and delivery , toward those that support the health of groups within society that may be considered marginalized or in the minority . Some assumptions are at the core of the conceptualization of cul - tural safety . One assumption is that cultural safety shifts power from providers to recipients of care . It is the person receiving the care that determines whether the care received is culturally safe . Cultural safety involves the recognition of each person’s skills and knowledge , as well as the recognition of the existence and legitimacy of the differences in the social , economic , and political contexts in which people evolve . In the context of research , any relationship must begin with explicit recognition that the individual community members are the ‘knowers , doers and givers of health and healing and so must be respected as their own witnesses in encounters with nurse clinicians , managers and researchers’ ( Dion Stout & Downey , 2006 , p . 328 ) . Cultural safety assumes that all relationships have a cultural dimension and that this dimension is essential to build a relationship of trust before cultural safety can be considered ( Bourque Bearskin , 2011 ; Mackay , Harding , Jurlina , Scobie , & Khan , 2011 ) . This implies for health care providers a critical reflection on their own social locations and the effects that their locations can have on their relationships ( Parisa , Reza , Afsaneh , & Sarieh , 2016 ) . This reflection does not refer to ethno - specific content but to an understanding of contexts that affect the health status of populations and social and health inequi - ties that involve identifying the historical , social , cultural , political , and economic causes of health inequities ( Racine , 2003 ) . A key aspect of cultural safety is the examination of one’s own privilege and power in relation to patients and how one’s values , assumptions , and perspec - tives can impact the development of trusting and therapeutic relation - ships with patients ( Pauly et al . , 2015 ) . To foster cultural safety , nurses need to recognize this gap in trust and reflect on how societal ste - reotypes play out in health care and nursing practice . Therefore , cul - tural safety prompts nurses to reflect on the structures and assump - tions that frame the delivery of health care ( Browne et al . , 2009 ) . This understanding is necessary to acknowledge social and health inequali - ties , power imbalances , and injustices in social , economic , and political processes , as well as their impacts on health . As a result of a concept analysis , Blanchet Garneau and Pepin ( 2012 ) identified three interrelated dimensions that represent the foundations of cultural safety regardless of its application context : equal partnership , active participation , and protection of cultural identity and well - being . Equal partnership involves the creation of a space for mutual respect and dialogue between two parties ( Wilson & Neville , 2009 ) . This relational space is the starting point for devel - oping an awareness of power imbalances in the health care system on a microscopic , mesoscopic , and macroscopic level ( Bourque Bearskin , 2011 ) . Active participation implies a sincere commitment by both par - ties on a cognitive , affective , and behavioral level throughout each phase of care , education , or research . On a larger scale , this partic - ipation implies this commitment by both parties at every step in an organizational or political decision ( Bourque Bearskin , 2011 ; Thomas , 2008 ) . The protection of cultural identity and well - being aims at min - imizing the potential for exploitation or danger as a result of the per - petuation of cultural stereotypes by critically examining the ethical foundations of the relationships , whether at an individual or organiza - tional level ( Wilson & Neville , 2009 ) . People who are identified as members of marginalized religious groups face challenges in obtaining quality health care due in part to stereotypes that are conveyed through media and popular discourses . For example , people who identify as Amish are often seen as ‘sim - ple’ in North American societies , and most health care providers are only familiar with stereotypes perpetuated by reality dramatizations . Media representations such as ‘Breaking Amish’ portray youth strug - gling with their decision to leave or stay in the church . LG Mennonites have been stereotyped as individuals with limited education and large families who only want to keep to themselves and their own church community ( Turner , 2013 ) . Research based on a critical perspective aims to expose assumptions , critique existing research orientations , and orient the researcher in a position of an advocate ( Kincheloe & McLaren , 2004 ) . Cultural safety , embedded in a critical perspective , presents the potential to enhance the capacity for nursing to address key health inequities and social justice issues for these populations . In the following two examples , we discuss how cultural safety theoretical underpinnings were translated to the context of research and KT with members of Amish and LG Mennonite religious communities . 4 | CULTURALLY SAFE RESEARCH PROCESS : USING CRITICAL THEORY AND CULTURAL SAFETY WITH AN AMISH COMMUNITY In this first example , we introduce the works of the second author with an Amish community . My research partnership with this com - munity began with a dissertation research study regarding the care of older adults and interactions with mainstream health care system providers . When I first contacted this community , I realized that both the community members and I were in uncharted waters ; the Amish community members did not have experience with research , and I was a novice researcher . I felt unprepared for the negotiations necessary to develop rapport and navigate the power differential . Educational exposure to critical theory ( e . g . , Habermas , 1987 ) allowed for aware - ness that this developing relationship was affected by social , politi - cal , and historical events . However , there was no guideline for how to incorporate these ideas into this specific context . The concept of cultural safety and a community - based participatory approach to the research ( Israel , Eng , Shulz , & Parker , 2005 ) were instrumental in my capacity to develop an equal partnership with the participants of the study . The participants had control over every aspect of the project | 5 of 9 BLANCHET GARNEAU ET AL . and could articulate their perspective directly with explicit protection of the well - being of people , families , and communities throughout the research relationship . Early in the research relationship , an incident brought me to reflect on power differentials and potential harms of the research relationship for the Amish community . The community elder and I had a conversa - tion about research that had been done in other Amish populations in North America . I assumed he and his community would be aware of these research studies . When I acted surprised that he was not famil - iar with this research , the power differential was dramatically shifted in my favor . At this point , one might further exacerbate this differential by acting as if the Elder should have known , using this as an opportunity to showcase the research benefiting the Amish . An alternative choice , and the choice that I made , was to leave my large binder of printed research with the Amish with the Elder and ask him at a later meeting what he thought and if he had any questions . This action reflected both an awareness of power imbalances and the social nuances of me , a young female researcher , developing a working relationship with an older , esteemed Elder of the community . Applying cultural safety to a research relationship also meant that I had to reflect on my perceptions and underlying assumptions of how the Amish care for their older adults and their interactions with the mainstream health care system . My assumptions , grounded in the lit - erature that I read while preparing for this research , were that Amish care - giving was an entirely positive demonstration of familial responsi - bility and a reflection of a community orientation to respect elders and avoid modern technology , including the care of older adults in facilities outside of the home ( Wenger , 1995 ) . As described in a study by Hurst and McConnell ( 2010 ) , I defined Amish people’s healthcare practices as a combination of folk , popular , and professional behaviors medi - ated by community elders and their interpretation of the ‘Ordung’ , an unwritten prescription for Amish lifestyle . I made a conscious effort to share my assumptions with the Elder and the participants throughout the study . In turn , both the Elder and the participants shared that they knew little about research or researchers , having never met one or been involved in a research study . The mutual acknowledgement of how each other person was perceived represents the use of a cultural safety approach . Over the course of the study , I also considered partic - ipants as experts of their own experience and valued their knowledge and expertise . At the end of the study and before the results were shared outside of the community , the Elder and I hosted a dinner with all the partic - ipants . During this dinner , participants were encouraged to reflect on their experience in the research study . In addition , they could share any thoughts regarding the resulting data and how the data repre - sented their experience . We could also obtain their input about the diffusion of the results , including publishing the results in scientific literature and sharing the results with other researchers involved with the Amish , both within this community and with other Amish com - munities . These actions demonstrate the principle of protecting the well - being of the participants through reflection on the interaction as safe or unsafe and respecting their ways of knowing and sharing knowledge . 5 | CULTURALLY SAFE KT PROCESS : DEVELOPING PRACTICE GUIDELINES FROM RESEARCH WITH LG MENNONITES In this second example , we introduce the works of the third and fourth authors with LG Mennonites . For the past 20 years , JK has been work - ing with this particular group . The two most recent research studies have applied cultural safety ( Kulig & Fan , 2013b , 2016b ) . The imple - mentation phase of the studies included the development of care guidelines to support the physical and mental health among this group of people ( Kulig & Fan , 2013a , 2016a ) . We believed that by applying the cultural safety concept in a research study , we were formally identifying the importance of understanding , rec - ognizing , and incorporating LG Mennonite knowledge in health care prac - tices . Similar to other religious , social , or ethnic groups , LG Mennonites have developed their own knowledge system for understanding or coping with health problems and for communicating with health care providers . Therefore , to engage with LG Mennonite clients using open and respect - ful communication , it is imperative that health care providers remind themselves that everyone’s knowledge is valuable and valid . The development of the care guidelines included discussions with our clinical advisory group along with the incorporation of findings from research with the principles of cultural safety . The main purpose of the guidelines was to assist health care providers who stated that they struggled to provide effective care for LG Mennonites . Included within each guideline was some historical background to provide health care providers a better understanding of the power relation - ships within LG Mennonite communities and the factors , such as the pastor’s involvement , that could affect individual LG Mennonite decision - making . In each guideline , an overview of the LG Mennonite’s history , lifestyle , and beliefs was also provided to contextualize the need for culturally safe practices . By including this information , we hoped that there would be a reduction in assumptions made based on LG Mennonites’ appear - ance , language proficiency , and commitment to traditional beliefs or practices . The care guidelines included the following five princi - ples of cultural safety ( Ball , 2007 ) : Protocols , Personal Knowledge , Partnerships , Process , and Positive Purpose . Table 1 presents a sum - mary of these five principles and their application in the context of KT in LG Mennonite studies . In order to help health care providers to develop self - awareness of social and historical contexts shaping health and health care deliv - ery to LG Mennonite clients , the guidelines also included case studies highlighting some essential issues , such as spiritual health . Emphasizing self - reflection , health care providers were asked to consider their own social locations , beliefs , and feelings regarding religion and health and how these played out in their relationships with the community . Health care providers were also asked to apply the five principles of cultural safety ( Ball , 2007 ) to these case examples . Through this exercise , health care providers identified the gap between what they knew about cul - tural safety and what needed to be adjusted in order to meet the spe - cific needs and preferences of LG Mennonite clients . Case studies also reinforced the idea that cultural safety is an ongoing process . 6 of 9 | BLANCHET GARNEAU ET AL . In summary , the research and the KT processes presented in these two examples address some of the key dimensions of cultural safety . Specifically , we worked at developing equal partnerships , helping to ensure that there was active participation . In addition , we incorpo - rated mechanisms to protect the Amish people’s and LG Mennonites’ cultural identities and well - being . Retrospectively , there were also missed opportunities to translate the concept of cultural safety to research with the Amish and LG Mennonites . These missed opportuni - ties are now discussed along with the challenges that have influenced our capacity to use the concept of cultural safety to its full potential . 6 | CHALLENGES OF CULTURALLY SAFE RESEARCH AND KT PROCESSES Building on the literature on cultural safety and the previous two examples , we propose a reflection on the challenges of including cul - tural safety in research and KT processes with members of groups who are often categorized as marginal and religious minority populations . 6 . 1 | Accessing and disseminating participant voices As cultural safety involves that nursing practice is assessed through the perspective of the recipients of care , an ongoing challenge in foster - ing cultural safety is accessing patient voices . Wilson ( 2012 ) highlights the need for empirical research that explores patients’ perspectives and experiences of what constitutes culturally safe care . Accessing and expressing the patients’ voices were challenging in the context of research and KT with the Amish and LG Mennonites . Among the Amish and LG Mennonites themselves , cultural safety is linked with preserving their culture so that they can maintain their way of life as it always has been . This implies that these groups would accept health care providers that can ‘safely meet their needs , expectations and rights’ ( Tiatia , 2008 , p . 4 ) . However , as research may not be well understood by all of the Amish or LG Mennonites , there are greater difficulties for them to understand the usefulness of cultural safety for research and KT . This may result in reproducing unequal partnerships and participation in research and KT processes between researchers and members of these communities . In the dissemination of findings , expressing the voices of partici - pants ( not just the researchers’ account of the participants’ experiences ) remains an important issue . Decolonizing the research process from conception to KT is then important , so the voices of the participants are truly heard and their knowledge and expertise are acknowledged ( McCleland , 2011 ; Racine & Petrucka , 2011 ) . Racine and Petrucka ( 2011 ) argue that cultural safety can be used as a step toward achiev - ing research decolonization . The decolonization of research implies to question Western scientific objectivity and to consider non - Western knowledge as a source of theorization that reflects non - Western ways of knowing . Therefore , by integrating the knowledge of marginalized populations to understand health and health care from a different per - spective , researchers counteract the effects of a colonialist science , which perpetuates marginality and subalternity ( Spivak , 1988 ) . This highlights the importance to continue to document the experiences of researchers , educators , and health care providers in using cultural safety in their practice and its relevance to improve health equity and quality of care for marginalized populations . 6 . 2 | Exposing the social , political , and historical contexts of health and health care delivery Another challenge we found in doing research and KT with the Amish and LG Mennonites was how to expose the social , political , and histor - ical contexts of health and health care access and delivery . As much as researchers tried to respect the principles and assumptions of cultural safety , it remains a great challenge to go beyond the individual level to TABLE 1 Application of principles to engender cultural safety in knowledge translation ( KT ) with LG Mennonites Principles to engender cultural safety Application in KT in LG Mennonite studies Personal knowledge Become mindful and critical of one’s own cultural identity and socio - historical location in relation to service recipients Invite health care providers to reflect on their own attitudes and feelings about death / mental health . Include some historical background to provide health care providers a better understanding of the power relationships inside and outside LG Mennonite communities and the factors that affect people’s decision - making . Partnerships Engage in collaborative practice and power sharing with a view to joint action Acknowledge that everyone’s knowledge is both valuable and valid and should be included in the guidelines . Protocols Demonstrate mutual respect , dialogue , and reciprocity in actions taken Have partners in the LG Mennonite community provide input in development and use of care guidelines . Process Engage in mutual learning and ensure equity for all parties Include case studies highlighting some essential issues that are a concern of LG Mennonites from their perspective . . Recognize and respect different forms of engagement in health care and social services that are practiced by LG Mennonites . Positive purpose Build on strengths and do no harm Recognize that using cultural safety is a continual action rather than a set of objectives to achieve . Incorporate a mechanism to protect LG Mennonites’ identity and well - being . | 7 of 9 BLANCHET GARNEAU ET AL . address structural inequities when cultural safety is not embedded in critical theoretical underpinnings . Critical perspectives are then essen - tial to translate cultural safety beyond individual - level processes and counteract the power differential in health and health care delivery . Cultural safety was helpful in situating critical reflection at the core of the research and KT processes . In both examples , engaging in critical reflection was central to the implementation of cultural safety principles in the research and KT . In the Amish case example , deliber - ate conversations about cultural assumptions allowed the researcher and the Elder participant to gain insight . The researcher acknowl - edged that her understanding of the Amish was largely based on ste - reotypes , and the Elder shared that his community was unaware of all of the research that had been done with the Amish communities . These initial acknowledgements led to a process of mutual dialogue about differences in terminology , perspectives , and needs throughout the research process . In the LG Mennonite example , the researchers found that cultural safety provided an opportunity for critical reflec - tion by health care providers to make necessary changes to their prac - tice when caring for this group . Hence , just as Browne et al . ( 2009 , p . 171 ) stated ‘in the knowledge - translation process , we were interested in positioning cultural safety as a way of prompting critical reflection among practicing nurses—not as a set of practice standards applicable to any one particular group—but about practice in general in relation to the key areas of knowledge we distilled from our research’ . However , for critical reflection to address power differentials and inequities , one needs to reflect at the macro level of social , political , and historical contexts shaping health and health care delivery . In the LG Mennonite example , the use of Ball’s ( 2007 ) framework may have been a limit to this level of reflection , as it fails to capture the transformative dimen - sions of cultural safety . Attention to social , cultural , and historical rela - tions of power and to the need to directly address health inequities was not explicitly prompted by Ball’s framework , and it has been in our subsequent closer study of cultural safety and its underpinning critical philosophies that we have come to deeper insights about structural influences on health . Critical perspectives , which enable an analysis of socially embedded relations of power , are then essential to integrate cultural safety into research and KT processes . Indeed , to avoid the oversimplification of the cultural safety concept , Browne et al . ( 2009 ) suggest embedding the concept in critical inquiry at both the individual and institutional levels . Using cultural safety as one con - cept in research without embedding it in a larger critical perspective framework leads to the risk to ignore contexts . Hence , we would rec - ommend drawing on critical theoretical perspectives if one wishes to integrate cultural safety assumptions , key dimensions , and principles to research and KT processes in a responsive and contextual manner and would aim to shape health care providers practice in ways that could foster equity and social justice . 7 | CONCLUSION Nurses have an important role to play in improving the quality of health service delivery and people’s health outcomes . Translating the results of research into practice without falling into the trap of ‘check - lists’ and ‘how to’ guides is definitely challenging . Moreover , address - ing specific groups , such as the Amish and LG Mennonites , without essentializing or fixing them in a marginalized position remains an important dilemma . While doing research and developing KT activi - ties ( e . g . , the development of guidelines ) , one could unwittingly repro - duce culturalist discourses leading to stereotyping , discrimination , and health inequities . Integrating cultural safety into research and KT processes and embedding it in critical theoretical underpinnings help in this regard because they focus on critical reflection by the health care provider who can create a partnership to provide responsive and contextualized care . Cultural safety has been criticized for its lack of a clear and comprehensive framework to guide health professional practice ( Anderson et al . , 2003 ; Blanchet Garneau & Pepin , 2012 ; Gerlach , 2012 ; Johnstone & Kanitsaki , 2007 ) . While in some popu - lations , improvements in health outcomes have been demonstrated , documenting culturally safe research , KT , education , and practice grounded in critical perspectives that allow the transformative shift and deeper uptake is still needed to make visible its positive impacts on health and health care inequities . REFERENCES Anderson , J . , Perry , J . , Blue , C . , Browne , A . , Henderson , A . , Khan , K . B . , … & Smye , V . ( 2003 ) . “Rewriting” cultural safety within the postcolonial and postnational feminist project : Toward new epistemologies of healing . Advances in Nursing Science , 26 ( 3 ) , 196 – 214 . Ball , J . ( 2007 ) . Supporting Aboriginal children’s development . University of Victoria . Retrieved from http : / / www . ecdip . org / capacity / Blanchet Garneau , A . , & Pepin , J . ( 2012 ) . La sécurité culturelle : Une anal - yse du concept [ C ultural safety : A concept analysis ] . Recherche en Soins Infirmiers , 111 , 22 – 35 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3917 / rsi . 111 . 0022 Bourdieu , P . ( 1986 ) . The forms of capital . In J . C . Richardson ( Ed . ) , Handbook of theory and research for the sociology of education ( pp . 241 – 258 ) . New York , NY : Greenwood Press . Bourque Bearskin , R . L . ( 2011 ) . A critical lens on culture in nurs - ing practice . Nursing Ethics , 18 ( 4 ) , 548 – 559 . https : / / doi . org / doi : 10 . 1177 / 0969733011408048 Browne , A . J . ( 2001 ) . The influence of liberal political ideology on nursing science . Nursing Inquiry , 8 ( 2 ) , 118 – 129 . Browne , A . J . , Varcoe , C . , Smye , V . , Reimer - Kirkham , S . , Lynam , M . J . , & Wong , S . ( 2009 ) . Cultural safety and the challenges of translating crit - ically oriented knowledge in practice . Nursing Philosophy , 10 ( 3 ) , 167 – 179 . https : / / doi . org / doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1466 - 769X . 2009 . 00406 . x Brubacher , C . ( 2016 ) . Low German Mennonite experiences in alternative edu - cation programs in southwestern Ontario . Retrieved from http : / / scholars . wlu . ca / brantford _ sjce / 17 / , January 08 , 2017 . Canadian Association of Schools of Nursing . ( 2013 ) . Educating nurses to address socio - cultural , historical , and contextual determinants of health among Aboriginal peoples . Ottawa , ON : Canadian Association of Schools of Nursing . Cates , J . A . ( 2014 ) . Serving the Amish : A cultural guide for professionals . Baltimore , MD : John Hopkins University Press . Dhamoon , R . K . , & Hankivsky , O . ( 2011 ) . Why the theory and practice of intersectionality matter to health research and policy . In O . Hankivsky ( Ed . ) , Health inequities in Canada : Intersectional frameworks and practices ( pp . 16 – 50 ) . Vancouver , BC : UBC Press . Dion Stout , M . , & Downey , B . ( 2006 ) . Nursing , Indigenous peoples and cul - tural safety : So what ? Now what ? Contemporary Nurse , 22 ( 2 ) , 327 – 332 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5555 / conu . 2006 . 22 . 2 . 327 8 of 9 | BLANCHET GARNEAU ET AL . Doane , G . H . , & Varcoe , C . ( 2015 ) . How to nurse : Relational inquiry with individuals and families in changing health and health care contexts . Baltimore , MD : Wolters Kluwer Health / Lippincott Williams & Wilkins . Farrar , H . M . ( 2014 ) . Older adult caregiving in an Amish community . Doctoral dissertation . University of Oklahoma , Norman , OK , ProQuest ( 3583890 ) . George , S . , Duran , N . , & Norris , K . ( 2014 ) . A systematic review of barri - ers and facilitators to minority research participation among African Americans , Latinos , Asian Americans , and Pacific Islanders . American Journal of Public Health , 104 ( 2 ) , e16 – e31 . Gerlach , A . J . ( 2012 ) . A critical reflection on the concept of cultural safety . Canadian Journal of Occupational Therapy / Revue Canadienne d’Er - gothérapie , 79 ( 3 ) , 151 – 158 . Gillum , D . , Staffileno , B . , Schwartz , K . , Coke , L . , & Fogg , L . ( 2010 ) . The prev - alence of cardiovascular disease and associated risk factors in the old order Amish in northern Indiana : A preliminary study . Online Journal of Rural Nursing and Health Care , 10 ( 2 ) , 28 – 37 . Graham , I . D . , & Tetroe , J . ( 2007 ) . Some theoretical underpinnings of knowl - edge translation . Academic Emergency Medicine , 14 ( 11 ) , 936 – 941 . Habermas , J . ( 1987 ) . System and lifeworld : A critique of functionalist reason . Cambridge , UK : Polity Press . Hurst , C . E . , & McConnell , D . L . ( 2010 ) . An Amish paradox : Diversity and change in the world’s largest Amish community . Baltimore , MD : John Hopkins University Press . Israel , B . A . , Eng , E . , Shulz , A . J . , & Parker , E . A . ( 2005 ) . Methods in communi - ty - based participatory research . San Francisco , CA : Jossey - Bass . Janzen , J . ( 2010 ) . Hemispheric approach [ Notes ] . Paper presented at the MCC Networking Meeting , Steinreich Bible School , Cuauhtémoc , Mexico . Johnstone , M . , & Kanitsaki , O . ( 2007 ) . An exploration of the notion and nature of the construct of cultural safety and its applicability to the Australian health care context . Journal of Transcultural Nursing , 18 ( 3 ) , 247 – 256 . Kincheloe , J . & McLaren , P . ( 2004 ) . Rethinking critical theory and qualita - tive research . In N . Denzin & Y . Lincoln ( Eds . ) , Handbook of qualitative research ( 3rd ed . ) ( pp . 303 - 342 ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Kraybill , D . B . , Johnson - Weiner , K . M . , & Nolt , S . M . ( 2013 ) . The Amish . Baltimore , MD : John Hopkins University Press . Krieger , N . ( 2014 ) . Discrimination and health inequities . International Journal of Health Services , 44 ( 4 ) , 643 – 710 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2190 / hs . 44 . 4 . b Kueny , A . M . ( 2011 ) . Amish family care for children with chronic illnesses : An ethnography . Doctoral dissertation . University of Iowa , Iowa City , Iowa . Kulig , J . , & Fan , H . Y . ( 2013a ) . Best practices for diverse populations : End - of - life care among the Low German - speaking Mennonites . Lethbridge , AB : University of Lethbridge . Kulig , J . , & Fan , H . Y . ( 2013b ) . Death and dying beliefs and practices among Low German - speaking Mennonites : Application to practice . Lethbridge , AB : University of Lethbridge . Kulig , J . , & Fan , H . Y . ( 2016a ) . Cultural guidelines to support mental health among the Low German Mennonites . Lethbridge , AB : University of Lethbridge . Kulig , J . , & Fan , H . Y . ( 2016b ) . Mental health beliefs and practices among Low German Mennonites : Application to practice . Lethbridge , AB : University of Lethbridge . Kulig , J . , & Hall , B . ( 2004 ) . Health and illness beliefs among southern Alberta Kanadier Mennonites . Journal of Mennonite Studies , 22 , 185 – 204 . Kulig , J . , Hall , B . , Wall , M . , Janzen , W . , Campbell , R . , & Babcock , R . ( 2002 ) . Kanadier Mennonites : Gaining an understanding of their health and illness beliefs . Lethbridge , AB : University of Lethbridge . Loewen , R . ( 2013 ) . Village among nations : “Canadian” Mennonites in a trans - national world , 1916 – 2006 . Toronto , ON : University of Toronto Press . Mackay , B . , Harding , T . , Jurlina , L . , Scobie , N . , & Khan , R . ( 2011 ) . Utilising the Hand Model to promote a culturally safe environment for interna - tional nursing students . Nursing Praxis in New Zealand , 27 ( 1 ) , 13 – 24 . McCleland , A . ( 2011 ) . Culturally safe nursing research : Exploring the use of an indigenous research methodology from an indigenous researcher’s perspective . Journal of Transcultural Nursing , 22 ( 4 ) , 362 – 367 . https : / / doi . org / doi : 10 . 1177 / 1043659611414141 McCollum , C . ( 1996 ) . Physicians’ perspectives on treating Amish patients . Wisconsin Medical Journal , 95 ( 3 ) , 157 – 161 . Mkandawire - Valhmu , L . , & Doering , J . ( 2012 ) . Study abroad as a tool for promoting cultural safety in nursing education . Journal of Transcultural Nursing , 23 ( 1 ) , 82 – 89 . https : / / doi . org / doi : 10 . 1177 / 1043659611423831 Montesanti , S . R . , Abelson , J . , Lavis , J . N . , & Dunn , J . R . ( 2016 ) . Enabling the participation of marginalized populations : Case studies from a health service organization in Ontario . Canada : Health Promotion International . Advance online publication . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / heapro / dav118 Mortensen , A . ( 2010 ) . Cultural safety : Does the theory work in practice for culturally and linguistically diverse groups ? Nursing Praxis in New Zealand , 26 ( 3 ) , 6 – 16 . Nursing Council of New Zealand . ( 2011 ) . Guidelines for cultural safety , the treaty of Waitangi and Maori health in nursing education and practice . Wellington , NZ : Nursing Council of New Zealand . Parisa , B . , Reza , N . , Afsaneh , R . , & Sarieh , P . ( 2016 ) . Cultural safety : An evo - lutionary concept analysis . Holistic Nursing Practice , 30 ( 1 ) , 33 – 38 . Pauly , B . B . , McCall , J . , Browne , A . J . , Parker , J . , & Mollison , A . ( 2015 ) . Toward cultural safety : Nurse and patient perceptions of illicit substance use in a hospitalized setting . Advances in Nursing Science , 38 ( 2 ) , 121 – 135 . Public Health Agency of Canada ( 2014 ) . The chief public health officer’s report on the state of public health in Canada 2014 : Public health in the future . Ottawa , ON : Public Health Agency of Canada . Quiring , D . ( 2003 ) . The Mennonite Old Colony vision : Under siege in Mexico and the Canadian Connection . Steinbach , MB : Crossway Publications . Racine , L . ( 2003 ) . Les potentialités de l’approche théorique post - coloniale en recherche infirmière culturelle sur l’adaptation du soin infirmier aux populations non - occidentales . [ The post - colonial theoretical approach in cultural nursing research about adapting nursing care to non - Western populations ] . Recherche en Soins Infirmiers , 75 , 7 – 14 . Racine , L . , & Petrucka , P . ( 2011 ) . Enhancing decolonization and knowledge transfer in nursing research with non - western populations : Examining the congruence between primary healthcare and postcolonial fem - inist approaches . Nursing Inquiry , 18 ( 1 ) , 12 – 20 . https : / / doi . org / doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1440 - 1800 . 2010 . 00504 . x Ramsden , I . ( 1990 ) . Cultural safety . New Zealand Nursing Journal , 83 ( 11 ) , 18 – 19 . Reavy , K . , Hobbs , J . , Hereford , M . , & Crosby , K . ( 2012 ) . A new clinic model for refugee health care : Adaptation of cultural safety . Rural and Remote Health , 12 , 1826 . Region of Waterloo Public Health . ( 2011 ) . The Waterloo region healthy communities : Partnership community picture . Retrieved from http : / / chd . region . waterloo . on . ca / en / researchResourcesPublications / resources / WlooRegionCommunityPicture . pdf Reimer - Kirkham , S . , & Sharma , S . ( 2011 ) . Adding religion to gender , race , and class : Seeking new insights on intersectionality in health care con - texts . In O . Hankivsky ( Ed . ) , Health inequities in Canada : Intersectional frameworks and practices ( pp . 112 – 127 ) . Vancouver , BC : UBC Press . Seljak , D . ( 2012 ) . Protecting religious freedom in a multicultural Canada . Canadian Diversity , 9 ( 3 ) , 8 – 11 . Spivak , G . C . ( 1988 ) . Can the subaltern speak ? In C . Nelson , & L . Grossberg ( Eds . ) , Marxism and the interpretation of culture ( pp . 271 – 313 ) . Chicago , IL : University of Illinois Press . Swain , L . S . , & Barclay , L . ( 2015 ) . Exploration of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander perspectives of home medicines review . Rural and Remote Health , 15 , 3009 . Tait Neufeld , H . ( 2014 ) . Patient and caregiver perspectives of health provi - sion practices for First Nations and Metis women with gestational diabe - tes mellitus accessing care in Winnipeg , Manitoba . BMC Health Services Research , 14 , 440 . https : / / doi . org / doi : 10 . 1186 / 1472 - 6963 - 14 - 440 | 9 of 9 BLANCHET GARNEAU ET AL . Tang , S . Y . , Browne , A . J . , Mussell , B . , Smye , V . L . , & Rodney , P . ( 2015 ) . ‘Underclassism’ and access to healthcare in urban centres . Sociology of Health & Illness , 37 ( 5 ) , 698 – 714 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / 1467 - 9566 . 12236 Thomas , D . ( 2008 ) . Nursing and cultural safety : A student’s perspective and new - found sense of belonging . Whitireia Nursing Journal , 15 , 54 – 58 . Tiatia , J . ( 2008 ) . Pacific cultural competencies : A literature review . Wellington : New Zealand Ministry of Health . Treaster , C . , Hawley , S . R . , Paschal , A . M . , Molgaard , C . A . , & Romain , T . S . ( 2006 ) . Addressing health disparities in highly specialized minority populations : Case study of Mexican Mennonite farmworkers . Journal of Community Health , 31 ( 2 ) , 113 – 122 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10900 - 005 - 9002 - 4 Turner , K . ( 2013 ) . Living on the edge : Old Colony Mennonites and digital tech - nology . Unpublished master’s thesis . University of Waterloo , Ontario , Canada . Wenger , A . F . ( 1991 ) . The culture care theory and the Old Order Amish . National League for Nursing Publications , 15 – 2402 , 147 – 178 . Wenger , A . F . ( 1995 ) . Cultural context , health and healthcare decision mak - ing . Journal of Transcultural Nursing , 7 ( 1 ) , 3 – 14 . Wepa , D . ( 2003 ) . An exploration of the experiences of cultural safety educators in New Zealand : An action research approach . Journal of Transcultural Nursing , 14 ( 4 ) , 339 – 348 . Wiggins , L . R . ( 1983 ) . Health and illness beliefs and practices among the Old Order Amish . Health Values , 7 ( 6 ) , 24 – 29 . Wilson , D . ( 2012 ) . 20 years of cultural safety : How far have we come ? Nursing New Zealand , 18 ( 4 ) , 18 . Wilson , A . M . , Magarey , A . M . , Jones , M . , O’Donnell , K . , & Kelly , J . ( 2015 ) . Attitudes and characteristics of health professionals working in Aboriginal health . Rural and Remote Health , 15 ( 1 ) , 2739 . Wilson , D . , & Neville , S . ( 2009 ) . Culturally safe research with vulnerable populations . Contemporary Nurse , 33 ( 1 ) , 69 – 79 . Wyatt , R . , Laderman , M . , Botwinick , L . , Mate , K . , & Whittington , J . ( 2016 ) . Achieving health equity : A guide for health care organizations . IHI white paper . Cambridge , MA : Institute for Healthcare Improvement . Young Center for Anabaptist and Pietist Studies . ( 2015 ) . Amish Population Profile . Retrieved from https : / / groups . etown . edu / amishstudies / statistics / population - by - state / How to cite this article : Blanchet Garneau A , Farrar H , Fan H , Kulig J . Applying cultural safety beyond Indigenous contexts : Insights from health research with Amish and Low German Mennonites . Nurs Inq . 2018 ; 25 : e12204 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / nin . 12204