RESEARCH ARTICLE Taking Stock of Engineering Epistemology : Multidisciplinary Perspectives Vivek Kant 1 & Eric Kerr 2 Received : 10 May 2017 / Accepted : 14 September 2018 # Springer Nature B . V . 2018 Abstract How engineers know , and act on that knowledge , has a profound impact on society . Consequently , the analysis of engineering knowledge is one of the central challenges for the philosophy of engineering . In this article , we present a thematic multidisciplinary conceptual survey of engineering epistemology and identify key areas of research that are still to be comprehensively investigated . Themes are organized based on a survey of engineering epistemology including research from history , sociology , philosophy , design theory , and engineering itself . Five major interrelated themes are identified : the relation - ship between scientific and engineering knowledge , engineering knowledge as a distinct field of study , the social epistemology of engineering , the relationship between engineer - ing knowledge and its products , and the cognitive aspects of engineering knowledge . We discuss areas of potential future research that are underdeveloped or B undone . ^ Keywords Philosophy of engineering . Epistemology . Design . Engineering knowledge . Engineering methods . Technological artifacts 1 Introduction The engineer , and more generally the designer , is concerned with how things ought to be — how they ought to be in order to attain goals , and to function … With goals and B oughts ^ we also introduce into the picture the dichotomy https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s13347 - 018 - 0331 - 5 * Eric Kerr eric . kerr @ nus . edu . sg Vivek Kant vivek . kant @ iitb . ac . in 1 Industrial Design Centre ( IDC School of Design ) , Indian Institute of Technology , Powai , Mumbai 400076 Maharashtra , India 2 Asia Research Institute , AS8 , 10 Kent Ridge Crescent , National University of Singapore , Singapore , Singapore Philosophy & Technology ( 2019 ) 32 : 685 – 726 Published online : 26 2018 / September between normative and descriptive . Natural science has found a way to exclude the normative and to concern itself solely with how things are ( Simon 1996 , pp . 4 – 5 , emphasis in original ) . Given the multiple meanings associated with the venerable term , it might be wise to locate the study of engineering specialities in the context of what are now called cognitive studies , studies in which questions of knowledge acquisition and manipulation are treated quite comprehensively . But the study of engineering knowledge must not be divorced from the social context of engineering , for it is this context that links engineering knowledge to engineering professionalism ( Donovan 1986 , p . 678 ) . Perhaps unlike other professions , engineering is strangely difficult to define or describe . This is nowhere as evident as when an attempt is made to articulate its epistemological basis ( Grimson and Murphy 2015 ) . How engineers comprehend , conceptualize , operate in , and act on the world is a central aspect of research in the philosophy of engineering . In this article , we present a conceptual thematic review of engineering epistemology with a focus towards taking stock of existing viewpoints from within and outside of the philosophy of engineering to inform and identify directions for further research . The article identifies five key , highly interrelated , themes from this survey of engineering epistemology . 1 Two major streams of thought have addressed engineering knowledge . We will refer to these as B social ^ and B analytical . ^ The social stream characterizes engineering knowledge as a product of myriad forces of actor - based choices , societies , and com - munities , in which it is constructed , contested , reframed , and resisted . The analytical approach , in contrast , emphasizes the metaphysics , epistemology , and ethics of basic concepts that engineers employ — such as the nature of designed objects , engineering failure , instrumental reasoning , and the like , and situates these within existing philo - sophical methods and questions , especially those derived from the philosophy of science . This latter approach has a more recent history and has started gaining the most amount of traction in the last decade . In our review , we treat both the social and analytical dimensions of engineering epistemology as commensurable or mutually informative approaches . Even though the two approaches have mostly run parallel to each other , we have systematically tried to develop themes , wherever possible , that employ insights from both these viewpoints . 2 The first theme discussed in the article is the relationship between scientific and engineering knowledge . 3 We discuss this relationship in its sociohistorical context to understand how the concept of engineering knowledge can be understood in relation to 1 For a historical overview of the philosophy of engineering and technology , see Brey ( 2010 ) 2 See Christensen et al . ( 2015b ) for a similar perspective . 3 The interaction has been widely discussed and still remains in a state of flux ( Niiniluoto 2016 ; Radder 2009 ; Pedersen 2015 ; Hansson 2015 , 2016 ; Forman 2007 ) . The science engineering ( and technology ) is a historical relationship and its present state can be found by considering its growth trajectory . For example , in American engineering , see the following for a historical treatment of engineers and their ways in comprehending and contesting the science - engineering divide : Belanger ( 1998 ) , Kline and Lassman ( 2015 ) , Kline ( 1987 , 2000 ) , Akera and Seely ( 2015 ) , and Seely ( 1993 , 2013 ) . V . Kant , E . Kerr 686 its , at least in philosophy , more widely investigated scientific cousin . The discourses of science continue to permeate in engineering and the latter is often viewed in popular images , and in the minds of many engineers and laypersons , as applied science . We , following many engineers , historians , and philosophers , argue for the distinctiveness of engineering knowledge , despite its many overlaps and imbrication with scientific knowledge . In addition to differences between science and engineering , another prom - inent theme is the social nature of engineering knowledge and the ways in which engineering knowledge is inseparable from socially determined concerns , goals , and purposes . The cognitive basis of engineers ’ and designers ’ ways of knowing and acting , which are often missing from debate in discussions of engineering epistemology , are explored in the final major theme . The themes raised in this article cannot be straightforwardly sifted from the existing literature but must be considered in light of the various undercurrents and groups currently present in the landscape of engineering epistemology . Sociologists , historians , design theorists , and engineers among others have contributed to the discussion of engineering epistemology and provide varying , overlapping , and sometimes incom - mensurable conceptions of the main concepts and viewpoints . In many cases , engi - neers , who are the main actors in the growth of engineering knowledge , are not often concerned with philosophical discussions . Similarly , many engineers equate philoso - phy to a personalized viewpoint and value system , such as in one ’ s B personal philosophy . ^ Within the philosophy of engineering and technology , there is little crossover with the various trends and developments in epistemology , although many researchers are concerned broadly with epistemological issues . Even within the philos - ophy of technology , there is little explicit discussion of engineering epistemology . For example , the entry in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy ( Franssen et al . 2013 ) briefly alludes to general themes and a short discussion of an epistemological viewpoint in the philosophy of technology . The entry in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy similarly mentions epistemology briefly , in connection with Aristotle and Gernot Böhme ’ s paradigms of contemporary philosophy of technology ( Reydon 2017 ) . Re - cently , philosophers in general have emphasized the need and have advocated the need for engineering epistemology to grow as a subdiscipline ( Michelfelder et al . 2013 p . v ) . This article does not aim at minutely detailing all of the literature in professional philosophy concerning engineering and knowledge . Instead , we aim to provide a view of engineering epistemology that reflexively engages with engineering epistemology spread over the various disciplines . With full attempt at disclosure , the authors of this article are two souls caught in limbo — a philosopher with practical experience in engineering and an engineer interested in philosophy . Between these two identities , our aim has been to contribute to engineering epistemology with our attention towards multidisciplinary perspectives , practice - informed philosophy , and underdeveloped re - search . As such , our approach was syncretic in nature with an eclectic sifting between selected broad themes with the various instantiations found in the literature of various disciplines . We realized early on in our examination of engineering practice that there is no one central manner in which engineering knowledge can be abstracted away from its various instantiations . In addition , the article extends into the history of engineering as we recognize that to fully comprehend epistemological positions and perspectives , they must be situated historically . In compiling a multidisciplinary perspective , we note that , unsurprisingly , different disciplines write according to their disciplinary conventions . Taking Stock of Engineering Epistemology : Multidisciplinary . . . 687 For example , historians have discussed engineering knowledge extensively , but this discussion is generally embedded in an analysis of historical events rather than a goal in itself . We also recognized , based on engineering practice , that many topics are present in engineering that have not reached philosophical discourse . We therefore have attempted to highlight and bring these into the broader conversation . While developing this review , we adopted a dialectical outlook mindful of both a top - down perspective and a bottom - up approach . In the preparation of the review , we assimilated various themes , outlooks , and perspectival frames that , in most cases , cut across different disciplines . Not surprisingly , the five themes are interlinked , and to comprehend each of them , one has to recognize these links . Similarly , in the case of future directions , we point in directions that have not been systematically addressed in the existing philosophy literature , including broader issues in engineering practice , engineering explanations , and converting ill - structured customer needs into reasoning , among other topics . Ideally , all the topics in engineering practice form an open set for engineering philosophers to address and analyze . While we acknowledge that other researchers may structure the available material differently , we believe that the various themes , insights , and directions presented in the current article would still have to be addressed by them , albeit in different shapes and guises . To summarize , in this article , we recognize that engineering epistemology is not reserved by any particular discipline . To this end , the following sections present a variety of viewpoints deriving from engineering , science and technology studies , history and sociology of technology and engineering , design studies , as well as the philosophy of technology and engineering . These viewpoints serve as the basis of the five themes presented in the article . We conclude the article by highlighting various issues that are at a rudimentary stage or even yet to be discussed in engineering epistemology ( Sect . 8 ) . 2 Challenges Associated with a Comprehensive Account of Engineering Epistemology Broadly , the goal of engineering epistemology should be to characterize , clarify , and criticize basic assumptions , foundations , and practices in the production of engineering knowledge . One of the greatest challenges for addressing this has been historical notions of categories of knowledge . The Western epistemological canon has , since at least Ancient Greece , maintained a hierarchical distinction between practical and theoretical knowledge . Aristotle , for example , distinguished between five modes of knowing : episteme ( what we would today call science or scientific knowledge ) , techne ( art or craft - related knowledge ) , phronesis ( practical knowledge ) , nous ( intuitive apprehension ) , and sophia ( wisdom ) ( Nichomachean Ethics Book VI , Chapters 3 – 7 ) . Aristotle held a metaphysical distinction between natural things ( physis ) and non - natural things ( poiesis ) . What characterized this distinction was that the principles of existence by which natural things come into being , remain in existence , move and transform , are contained within the things themselves whereas things which exist due to an external agent — a chair , for example — exist because of agents ’ actions of making and maintaining it . The Aristotelian epistemological scheme held theory ( episteme or scientia ) apart from practice ( praxis or experientia ) ( Smith 2012 ) . Theory was based on knowledge V . Kant , E . Kerr 688 derived from syllogistic reasoning and geometric demonstrations ; thus , certain in nature . In contrast , praxis was studied by collection of experience and could not be studied as deductively as theory ; thus , it was considered not as certain as theory . Praxis was divided into two categories — roughly , things done and things made . Things done comprised knowledge related to history , politics , economics , and the like ; whereas things made were bracketed under techne . Techne was considered a lowly form of activity , one that used manual labor to produce artifacts . Episteme was held in much higher regard , and it is well known that this hierarchy has held in position for some time in Western society . The distinction is articulated in several places in the Cratylus and the Republic . In the Cratylus , Plato claims that the user of an artifact knows it better than its maker . The user decides what the proper function of the artifact is and then assesses the extent to which it fulfills that function . Luciano Floridi describes this as the prioritization of the B user ’ s knowledge tradition ^ over the B maker ’ s knowledge tradition ^ ( Floridi 2011 ) . In contrast with the low regard in which the Ancient Greeks held techne , we may be seeing today a reversal where the constructive , active knowledge of engineers is perhaps even more highly prized than scientific knowledge . This possibly gives further justification for reflection on the state of the art in engineering epistemology . In addition to the need for incorporating the maker ’ s / designer ’ s knowledge , there is a fundamental challenge posed by intuitions about the notion of knowledge itself . Differ - ent attitudes towards the purpose of knowledge prevail within different communities , professions , and cultures . Not all of these groups will take it as intuitive that knowing and inquiring are primarily aimed at true belief , as has become a standard view in contemporary analytic epistemology . Some of these groups may take knowledge to be primarily functional ( i . e . , they take knowledge to be that which enables them to do something ) . The distinctions between various forms of knowledge are also entrenched in the academic division of labor . In the case of philosophy , a student often finds questions of knowledge being raised in relation to belief . Commenting on this standard view , philosophers of engineering , Anthonie Meijers and Peter Kroes , comment : None of these books , considered to be central to the current epistemological canon , develop a systematic account of the types of knowledge other than those that are belief based ( Meijers and Kroes 2013 , p . 19 ) . In accounting for engineering epistemology , Meijers and Kroes depict a taxonomy comprising structural knowledge , functional knowledge , prescriptive knowledge , design - related knowledge , and know - how ( Meijers and Kroes 2013 ) . By these catego - ries , the authors emphasize that to understand engineering epistemology , it is necessary to comprehend the functional aspects of design , normative claims about correct functioning , and the physical / chemical / structural makeup of things , along with know - how of developing and making things . 4 Taking into account these categories , the authors also conclude that the traditional view of epistemology is to be extended to account for knowledge that does not fit into the standard justified belief paradigm . The normative aspect of engineering knowledge has been expressed by Mario Bunge 4 Given the social nature of engineering knowledge , discussed later , we may want to add to this another kind of knowledge : group knowledge . It is beyond the scope of this article to address the notion of group knowledge in any detail . An overview can be found in Schmid et al . ( 2011 ) . Taking Stock of Engineering Epistemology : Multidisciplinary . . . 689 ( 1966 ) among others ( see , e . g . , Houkes 2013 ) . Bunge ( 1966 ) suggests that rules or instructions are central or emblematic products of engineering knowledge . For exam - ple , a rule might be , B To open a can , use a tin - opener . ^ This seems intuitively plausible as a characteristic feature of engineering knowledge although , as noted by Houkes ( 2009 , p . 340 ) , cashing out what counts as a rule is a philosophically arduous task . In philosophy , one significant reason for the neglect of engineering epistemology stems from a long - held misconception that engineering is completely subsumed under the label of applied science ( e . g . , see Arden 1980 , p . 8 ; Layton 1974 , p . 31 ; Vincenti 1990 , p . 3 ) . Scientists discover , understand , and deduce ; engineers B do ^ things and apply scientific knowledge in a relatively straightforward and epistemologically unin - teresting way . However , despite this being the prevalent view in much of society , research in the philosophy of engineering has recognized that there are aspects to engineering knowledge that need to be coherently addressed for the growth of analyt - ical aspects of engineering epistemology , as well as there are social - historical reasons that led to engineering being recognized as an application of scientific knowledge ( Nordmann 2006 ; Nordmann et al . 2011 ) . This was much discussed in the sociology of science and technology in the 1970s and 1980s although its implications have not been fully accepted . There are many discussions of this in the sociological and STS literature , especially from Barry Barnes , Edwin Layton , and Trevor Pinch and Wiebe Bijker ’ s landmark text The Social Construction of Facts and Artefacts . ( Barnes 1982 ; Layton 1974 , 1976b ; Pinch and Bijker 1984 ) . It is not our intention to detail that history here . The early formulations of it are aptly summarized in Layton ( 1977 ) who wrote : Science and technology have become intermixed . Modern technology involves scientists who B do ^ technology and technologists who function as scientists … The old view that basic sciences generate all the knowledge which technologists then apply will simply not help in understanding contemporary technology . ( Layton 1977 , p . 210 ) As Pinch and Bijker ( 1984 ) observe , an obsession with measuring the exact nature of this interdependence muddles the picture as science and technology are not monolithic , unchanging institutions . However , in emphasizing the intermixture of science and technology , we suggest that the specifics of engineering knowledge can be lost among a general B technoscientific ^ epistemology . For this reason , this article focuses on work that considers engineering knowledge to be worthy of specific attention . An issue with addressing engineering knowledge from one of the above two viewpoints ( social and analytical ) is aptly demonstrated by Gary Downey et al . ( 1989 ) . The authors note that the disciplinary interests of sociologists , philosophers , and historians have reduced the focus on engineering to two related questions . The first tried to characterize engineering in terms of social or cognitive phenomenon ; whereas , the second tried to categorize between practice - oriented theories or structure - oriented studies . Such categorizations render the actual activity of engineering invisible . The authors suggest the following approach to comprehend engineering knowledge ( Downey et al . 1989 , p . 211 ) : B [ W ] hat is needed is a theoretical account of engineering as epistemologically significant social action that produces new technologies through a combined process of constructing and reproducing sociocognitive structures . ^ V . Kant , E . Kerr 690 The advocated emphasis of Downey and colleagues on the modus operandi of knowl - edge practice is not without its own challenges . Engineers often use multiple ways and meanings for solving their problems , many of which can be at times ambiguous if taken out of the context in which they have been used , making meanings and concepts context - specific rather than specific to engineering as a discipline . For example , the concept of functions appear quite prominently in engineering literature , however , the philosopher of engineering Pieter Vermaas ( 2013 , 2016 ) notes the flexibility in the concept usage in engineering . Specifically , Vermaas notes the ambiguities involved due to various engineers using multiple ways in characterizing engineering functions . Further , functions as a concept in the philosophy of engineering differs from the already entrenched meanings in other branches of philosophy , such as philosophy of biology ( Krohs and Kroes 2009 ) . Similar to function , a homologous problem remains in the concept of engineering failure . The engineer - philosopher Luca Del Frate ( 2014 ) notes three different conceptual approaches towards the possibility of addressing engineering failure , ranging from an engineering to a philosophical viewpoint . Therefore , while engineering practice provides an adequate arena for engineering discussions , the engineers themselves do not present a common usage of terms and definitions . Engineering epistemology has been addressed by two main groups — ( 1 ) sociolo - gists / historians / socially oriented philosophers / social - and historical - minded engineers , along with ( 2 ) analytical - oriented philosophers / engineers . Both have emphasized close - ly linked but different dimensions of engineering epistemology . While these subgroups have developed parallel to each other , the themes below try to balance these major viewpoints in light of core concepts required for characterizing engineering epistemology . 3 Theme 1 : the Relationship Between Scientific and Engineering Knowledge The science - engineering / technology nexus has been extensively debated and reflected upon by historians , anthropologists , social scientists , engineers , and philosophers . The dominant and popular image is that engineering knowledge is an application of scientific knowledge . While various proponents recognize that engineering knowledge cannot be reduced to scientific knowledge , a formal answer to what constitutes engineering knowledge is yet to be coherently conceptualized . This may be due to engineering as an epistemic enterprise having an enormous breadth ranging from civil to electrical engineering as well as different scopes of problems ( e . g . , Grimson and Murphy 2015 for challenges of scope ; Zwart and de Vries 2016 for challenges associated with categorizing engineering projects ) . At the same time , a different challenge would be due to the received understanding of the science - engineering knowledge relationship . In popular discourse , science aims at understanding the world as it is , whereas engineering aims at creating or changing the world ( when all goes well ) for the better . This orientation has led engineering knowledge to be closely aligned to art ( Ferguson 1992 ; Hindle 1981 , 1982 , 1986 ; Hansson 2016 ) . The major belief behind this linkage is the creativity , visuo - spatial thinking , and artifice required to solve problems which shares space with those that artists use in creating novel and esthetic work . Similarly , engineers armed with knowledge from science , mathematics , Taking Stock of Engineering Epistemology : Multidisciplinary . . . 691 and engineering theory , in light of their trained judgment , ethics , and professional undertaking aim to create , improve , and maintain artifacts and systems . Vincenti ( 1990 ) and Edwin Layton ( 1971 , 1976a , 1991 ) subscribe to the thesis that technological knowledge ( of which engineers are the primary possessors and , crucially , which requires an education in engineering subjects ) is knowledge of how to do or make things whereas science has a more basic epistemic aim . Vincenti writes in support of Barry Barnes ’ B interactive model ^ from the sociology of science , which purports to describe the way in which science and engineering are in mutual symbiosis rather than non - mutual parasitosis . This seems to dilute the claim that these are two separate types of knowledge , one of the central claims of his book . We would argue that although the two professions do intermingle and there is certainly no clear line to draw between the two — as if an engineer could not walk across the corridor or to the library and pick up and make use of a physics textbook and vice versa — there are good reasons for looking carefully at the particular practices and institutions that produce knowledge in a field - like petroleum engineering as distinct and different from those practices in , for exam - ple , a molecular biology laboratory . Vincenti ( 1990 ) , in his argument that engineering knowledge and research has a different character from scientific , puts forward the use of numerical approximations to the Navier - Stokes equations to describe aerodynamic flow over an aircraft and the use of Miner ’ s rule to calculate fatigue damage . These are solutions that involve some understanding of the natural sciences which is relatively elementary and well - understood , but because of the subject of the problem , no exact solution is readily available . Towards this view , a recent debate between Galle and Kroes ( 2014 , 2015 ) and Farrell and Hooker ( 2012 , 2015 ) has occurred between the need for establishing design as different from science . A significant lesson from this discussion , and related work , is that we should be careful not to mischaracterize engineering as a heterogeneous discipline . Bucciarelli ( 1994 ) is notable for extending the discussion of engineering in philosophy to the various design processes used and demonstrated that no one process is dictated by the nature of the object being designed or the problem to solve . Proper function is thought , in part , to be determined by design considerations . Design , in this instance , can mean both the content of a set of places ( as in B the design for a new production logging tool ^ ) and the process by which those plans are realized , which typically will involve specifications of the configuration , layout , and dimensions of the artifact ; testing of the artifact to see if it fulfills its function either through mathematical analysis or experiment ; and modification ( Vincenti 1990 , p . 10 ) . Galle and Kroes ( 2014 , 2015 ) emphasize that design cannot be subsumed under the disciplinary con - vention of science : B arguably , science and design are relatives , perhaps even siblings ; they often enjoy each other ’ s company , but they are hardly twins , and certainly not identical twins ^ ( Galle and Kroes 2014 , p . 228 ) . In contrast with the social labeling described for the science - engineering debate , the design theorist and philosopher , Galle and Kroes ( 2014 , 2015 ; c . f . Farrell and Hooker 2012 , 2015 ) make analytic distinction between science and design on four aspects : aim , product , subject matter , and methodology . The primary aim of science , on this view , is different from that of design . Science attempts to study the world in order to V . Kant , E . Kerr 692 comprehend its inner workings . As a result , the scientist is expected to adopt a value - free neutral stance towards the subject matter under consideration . In contrast , design is an attempt to make , and hence change , the subject matter under consideration . As a result , the designer is always intimately entwined with the subject matter . A second difference between science and design is in terms of their products ( see Pedersen 2015 ) . For science , the products are primarily in terms of cognitive knowl - edge ( theories ) rather than tangible artifacts or aspects related to artifacts , such as plans , blueprints , and the like , which can be identically reproduced . In contrast , designers produce artifacts and , in the process , change the ways in which users act in the world . Thus , designers are involved in producing proposals as well as artifacts , which can be identically reproduced in physical form . While science and design both deal with the world at large as their subject matter , they both adopt different methods . Methodologically , science adopts a primarily cognitive - descriptive approach in conceptualizing theories . Design approaches adopt practical criteria for creating and assessing products . As such , the approach adopted by design is practical - prescriptive , i . e . , the process of design itself and the artifacts it produces have to be understood in terms of the context of practice as well as the prescriptive solution it provides to direct the activity of the user . To clarify , designers embody certain ideas into products . These ideas regulate how the users effectively use the products . Users work within and sometimes around the prescriptions , in the form of artifacts , provided by the designers ( Pinch and Oudshoorn 2005 ) . Likewise , Vincenti ( 1990 ) argues that the engineering methods and engineering knowledge are not the same as , or derived uninterestingly from , the scientific method and scientific knowledge . He quotes the British engineer G . F . C . Rogers ( 1983 ) , B Engineering refers to the practice of organizing the design and construction [ and , I would add , operation ] of any artifice which transforms the physical world around us to meet some recognized need . ^ ( Vincenti 1990 , p . 7 , Vincenti ’ s own parenthesis ) Indeed , towards the end of the book , Vincenti provides a case study which purports to show that sometimes science plays B no role ^ in providing the solution ( Vincenti 1990 , p . 193 ) . He starts from the viewpoint that by reducing technology to applied science , there would be no unique form of knowledge that could characterize the achievements of technology which are independent of scientific discovery ( also see Pitt 2007 ) . This viewpoint can be supported by an example derived from the demands of improving the efficiency of artifacts such as water wheels and safety in boilers in the nineteenth century that led to systematic investigations and growth of engineering knowledge . In engineering , the B cut - and - try methods ^ were supplemented with systematic techniques for investigating particular phenomena . However , this engineering knowledge was not applied science . Rather , this comprised the engineering sciences ( Layton 1988 , 1991 ) . Engineering involves a distinct knowledge approach and cannot simply be sub - sumed under the label of applied science . Engineering is task oriented ( Pitt 2001 ) . While engineering knowledge can be partly addressed in terms of characterizing the behavior of technical artifacts , it also ought to include a broader comprehension of designing , constructing , and operating the various facets of designed systems . Engi - neering sciences consist of analytical statements about artifacts and are tailored for the Taking Stock of Engineering Epistemology : Multidisciplinary . . . 693 purpose of practical design ( Layton 1988 ; Channell 2009 ) . An instance of development of engineering science is provided by the historian , Edward Constant ( 1983 ) , in the context of water turbines . Constant notes that evolution of water turbines was made possible by the systematic technological testability centered around the Prony dyna - mometer . Further , the tradition of technological testability became more generic and could be used by systems other than the ones they were originally devised for , thus laying the groundwork for a broader systematic body of knowledge . Vincenti ( 1990 ) , a practicing engineer and historian , and his case studies from the history of aeronautic engineering appear to support this view . Broadly , one can make technological discov - eries that are not scientific discoveries . Consequently , despite his admiration for the interactive , mutual , technoscientific model of the Strong Program ( Barnes 1982 ) , Vincenti also wants to claim a particular territory for engineering knowledge — in other words , an B epistemic emancipation of technology ^ ( Houkes 2009 ) . The historian Layton ( 1974 ) had similarly wanted to position engineering as its own discipline and area of knowledge . He argued that it may be divided into two types . The first involves , B less idealized natural sciences , ^ while the second includes sciences that provide a scientific understanding of the B behavior of man - made devices . ^ For exam - ple , studies of thermodynamics that provide insights into the studies of heat engines ( Layton 1974 , p . 10 ) . Layton further observed that if there is a distinction between science and engineering , it would be in terms of social organization and not based on B abstract functions of knowing and doing . ^ In this vein , researchers failed to notice the social constructions that gave them form . Sociologists such as Barry Barnes , Wiebe Bijker , and Trevor Pinch argued that there were no underlying distinctions beyond the particular , contingent distinctions that arise out of social negotiation and organization . Based on the above viewpoints , the aim of this review is to characterize the social viewpoint complementarily with the analytical viewpoint . Therefore , along with the discussion provided by analytical discussion of engineering knowledge above , there is a need to comprehend the ways in which engineering knowledge got subsumed under the label of science . The popular image of engineering knowledge as subsumed by scientific knowledge was not always present ( Mitcham and Schatzberg 2009 ; Schatzberg 2006 , 2012 ; e . g . , Channell 2009 ) . To comprehend the matter further , let us consider the dynamics of science and engineering knowledge historically along with the growth of the American engineer . The historian Robert Bruce ( 1987 ) shows that in the period between 1846 and 1876 , even though technology owed much less to scientific knowledge than was popularly conceived : B the triumphs of technology were themselves artfully seized upon by the scien - tists as justification for that support . During most of the nineteenth century , technology actually owed much less to scientific knowledge than the public was led to believe ^ ( Bruce 1987 , p . 6 ) . This insight is supported by the historian John Burnham ’ s ( 1987 ) observation that Americans lumped together invention , technology , and science labeling these as science simpliciter , progress , or both . Taking the examples of major journals such as Literary Union , a Journal of Progress , in Literature and Education , Religion and Politics , Science and Agriculture , published in Syracuse , USA in 1849 , Burnham ( 1987 , p . 147 ) notes , B of the items labeled ‘ science , ’ over half were technology and V . Kant , E . Kerr 694 another one - eighth medicine . ^ He also highlights that by the mid - nineteenth century , B the Scientific American was virtually all technology . ^ Robert Bruce ( 1987 ; also see Burnham 1987 , 1988 ) emphasizes that science was gaining a cultural ascendancy ; the progress of the age was ascribed to science : B What was new was the dubious but spreading popular assumption that every - thing in technology was rooted in science ^ ( Bruce 1987 , p . 128 ) . Debates regarding engineering knowledge should be considered in the historical backdrop of engineering and in terms of large cultural drifts of society that enable the growth of particular styles of engineering . In nineteenth - century America , as industrialization was taking roots , there was a cultural drift towards the formation of a middle class and its demarcation between three sets of concepts : head and hand , mind and body , along with human and machine . The cultural historian Stephen Rice ( 2004 ) notes that negotiating these relations provided the basis for division of power without undermining the dignity of workers . To demonstrate the cultural drift , Rice ( 2004 ) discusses the contesting of the label of the engineer in the backdrop of boiler explo - sions . Due to the growth of steam power , there were numerous accidents in the USA . Initially around the 1820s and 1830s , boiler design required experiential knowledge . Yet , as boiler accidents continued , the American public demanded that the engineers involved in the process should possess a theory of steam . The American public contested that boiler explosions were not due to negligence but an incomplete theory of steam . In other words , the American public argued that boiler explosions were due to the lack of theoretical training . Rice ( 2004 ) highlights that in 1851 , an article from the Journal of Franklin Institute titled , What constitutes an engineer ? emphasizes theoretical knowledge . The author of the article did not deny the experience based on knowledge but insisted that engineer - ing should have a more theoretical orientation . In contrast with the above , working engineers questioned the necessity of the theory . As steam engineering expanded along with boiler explosions , a new regulatory law was passed in August 1852 , which came into effect from 1 January 1853 , requiring examination and licensing of engineers of the passenger steamboats ( Rice 2004 ; also , Hunter 1985 , Ch . 6 for boiler explosions ) . This law also sets the standards for competency , elevating theory over practice and requirements for engineering conduct — shift in the cultural perception of what consti - tuted engineering knowledge . This cultural shift is important to comprehend because the nature of the scope of engineering knowledge was decided by these widespread debates . It is to be emphasized that the content of engineering education was delimited by these debates ; in short , engineering knowledge was a socially constituted phenom - enon . This is further visible in the emphasis on theoretical training in comparison with practice , in order to elevate the status of the engineer ( Rice 2004 , p . 141 ) : B The subordination of experience to theory was a means of elevating the author - ity and social status of the steam engineer by figuring his work as a form of mental labor more than a form of manual labor . The distinction between experi - ence and theory was analogous to that between head and hand , mind and body . Experience was bodily — the experienced engineer relied on knowledge he gained from looking at the color of steam , listening to the sound of the safety valve , and Taking Stock of Engineering Epistemology : Multidisciplinary . . . 695 so on . Theory was cerebral — it was understood to be gained , not from sensual engagement but from classroom study . Experience was the work of hand ; theory , the work of the head . As writers and lecturers highlighted the theoretical training believed to be necessary for steam engineer competency , they began to place the engineer as a member of the professions . ^ The growing ascendancy of science and the demeaning of manual labor was the ideology under which engineering knowledge was scientisized . This scientification was also present in the education process of the engineer . In education , the scientification of engineering knowledge was achieved via the development of educa - tional programs in universities and colleges . Similar to Robert Bruce ( 1987 ) , the historian of American engineering Raymond Merritt ( 1969 ) notes that by 1875 , scientific education had become notably respectable . Even engineers understood that they had to be aligned with science to achieve status and security and be regarded as a professional . In the late nineteenth century , there was a growth of scientific - based approaches in engineering , especially in areas such as steelmaking and electrical technology . This shifted the mechanics ’ B rule of thumb ^ to B rule of science ^ methods along with a shift towards the professionalization of engineering raising the social standards of engineers as well as their claims to esoteric knowledge . American engineering , which had beginnings in the craft knowledge , became a profession by the beginning of the twentieth century . During the period between 1880 and 1920 , the engineering profession increased from 7000 to 136 , 000 members ( Layton 1986 , p . 3 ) . The historian David Noble ( 1977 ) notes that in the first three decades of the twentieth century , the engineer linked science with industry . This process occurred due to the interweaving of three strands . First , the engineer was involved in the setting up of science - based industrial laboratories that systematized research . Second , through an interconnection of university labs , government bureaus , trade association labs , and research foundations , the link was made possible . Finally , there were national organi - zations , such as the National Research Council , promoting industry . Starting with the 1870s , scientists and the public accepted the value of science . By the turn of the twentieth century , science had attained a cultural status based on rhetoric of facts , truth , objectivity , and knowledge ( Burnham 1987 , p . 162 ) . It was positioned as providing the most reliable and useful path to knowledge . It provided the practitioner with moral autonomy and social authority . Scientists gained strength by popularization as well as the appropriation of the products of engineering under the banner of science . Thus , they played a key role in government policy and nation building . In emphasizing the scientific method , the B men of science ^ were routinely touted as saviors ; a new discovery was a B whisper of salvation ^ ( Lafollette 1990 , p . 16 ; Burnham 1987 , 1988 ) . The growing ascendancy of science was present since the latter part of the nineteenth century ; in the early twentieth century , this trend continued . To cash in on the status afforded by science , engineers adopted the cloak of scientific knowledge . The historian of science , LaFollette ( 1990 ) , notes : B Belief in progress became a central article of B the dominant American faith ^ ; life was getting better and , with skill ( and science ) , it might be possible to speed up the process . The popularity of Fredrick W . Taylor ’ s B scientific management ^ idea , for example , gained strength from science ’ s image as the ultimate reliable V . Kant , E . Kerr 696 authority . To proponents of these and other sociopolitical movements , scientific and engineering knowledge ( aided by a technocratic emphasis on efficiency ) appeared able to solve every problem , to supply an answer to every question . ^ It is to be noted that the meaning of the labels of science and engineering had themselves changed from the nineteenth to the twentieth century . In the mid - nineteenth century , B engineering ^ was equated with the B useful arts ^ and the emphasis of practitioners and the understanding of the public was on useful manufactures . However , with the dawn of the twentieth century , science afforded a superior form of knowledge . As science acquired cultural currency , scientists developed a distinction between pure and applied science ( Hounshell 1980 ; Lucier 2012 ) . Scientists emphasized that science should be kept B pure ^ ; i . e . , separate from its focus on applications or use . The historian Paul Lucier ( 2012 ) notes that the distinction between B pure ^ and B applied ^ grew sharply after the American Civil War ( i . e . , after the mid - 1860s ) . In the mid - nineteenth century , Americans would use the term B application ( s ) of science ^ or B practical science . ^ Later , these terms were exchanged for distinctions between pure and applied science . Lucier emphasizes that since B pure ^ was a protean concept , it could allow for a multitude of meanings . The most familiar among these were B science - for the - sake - of - science . ^ Historians ( Hounshell 1980 ; Lucier 2012 ) note the ideal of pure science in the speech of Henry A . Rowland , a noted experimental physicist at Johns Hopkins University , at the 1883 meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science ( AAAS ) . Rowland ’ s speech highlights the rhetoric of science towards the end of the nineteenth century , emphasizing the moral and ideological force of pursuing science for knowledge and the sake of truth . In the above milieu , there was a developing ideal of B pure science , ^ referred to the search for higher ideals and a motivation for the love of truth rather than financial gain . In contrast with pure science , B applied science ^ was a distinct endeavor . In the post - civil war era , Lucier highlights that B the application of science ^ was equivalent to the B process of invention . ^ To maintain distance from the applied view , scientists argued for preserving the purity of science . However , Lucier further notes that applied science also had multiple meanings . Applied science allowed for the linking of research with useful purposes . Along with this main agenda , it allowed for promoting a B moral economy ^ as well as B selflessness or duty to others , before a singular and selfish pursuit of one ’ s own interests . ^ Lucier ( 2012 , p . 536 ) takes the example of the engineer Robert Thurston to note that engineering community had a very different view of science : In B The Mission of Science , ^ Thurston defined B applied science ^ rather easily as B the union of science and art , which is the distinguishing characteristic of the age in which we live . ^ B Applied science ^ was B most closely related to the industries of the world , ^ and B in industry , ^ explained Thurston , B applied science finds its plainest and its most obvious line of application . ^ The application of applied science — this was a very confounding concept to purists , who thought that science was supposed to be separate from invention . The historian Ronald Kline ( 1995 ) emphasizes that between the years 1880 and 1945 , applied science as a keyword had a new epistemological framework . Rather than being associated with craft practices , the use of applied science implied that the knowledge Taking Stock of Engineering Epistemology : Multidisciplinary . . . 697 was gained through more B scholarly means . ^ Thus , it could mean application of scientific theories or it could also mean a different process in which science was used in useful manufactures . Kline notes that the relation between applied science and B technology ^ as keywords had multiple meanings as well as changing meanings over the first half of the twentieth century . These meanings had implications for constituting engineering knowledge for engineers , educators , and the public at large . Along with the tension between science and engineering , in the formation of the idea of engineering and engineering know - how , there was also an emphasis on science and engineering education in the early twentieth century . The historian Bruce Seely ( Akera and Seely 2015 ; Seely 1993 , 1999 , 2005 ; Reynolds and Seely 1993 ) mentions that between the years 1900 and 1960 , a new style of academic engineering arose that influenced the orientation and values of engineering education towards science and engineering science . These labels applied to science and engineering had an impact on engineering education and shaped how formal engineering programs positioned them - selves ( Akera and Seely 2005 , 2013 ; Reynolds and Seely 1993 ; Grayson 1993 ; Hagge 1995 ) . The intricate dynamics of science - engineering relationships also sharply question any idea that construes engineering knowledge as the simple application of science . 4 Theme 2 : Engineering Knowledge as a Distinct Field of Study One foundational attempt at characterizing engineering knowledge from the perspec - tive of engineering practice and the history of engineering is to be found in Walter Vincenti ( 1990 ) . Through a detailed history and exploration of US aeronautics from 1908 to 1953 , Vincenti constructs a rich account of engineering knowledge and the engineering method . He is critical of the B applied science ^ view of engineering that had been prevalent for many decades and the idea that engineers typically B borrow ^ or appropriate their knowledge from scientists and B by some occasionally dramatic but probably intellectually uninteresting process , ^ use this knowledge to build technical artifacts and shape our local environments . Using case studies from aeronautical engineering , Vincenti categorizes knowledge in engineering under the following cate - gories : fundamental design concepts , theoretical tools , criteria and specifications , quantitative data , practical considerations , as well as design instrumentalities . Vincenti argues that engineering knowledge often deals in areas in which the basic science are well understood but the problems are too complex and variable to solve in a precise way . An example of this is the use of numerical approximations to describe aerody - namic flow over an aircraft . Further , engineering practice employs methods that are not typically used in scientific research , such as variation of parameters . Based on the above intellectual milieu , we might be tempted to conclude from the above discussion that studying the epistemology of science will be more than enough for understanding the knowledge content of engineering ; the former , in other words , will subsume the latter . He argues we would be mistaken to draw this conclusion . Rather , there are unique facets of engineering and design knowledge that would warrant study quite apart from what happens in science . In contrast , Vincenti ( 1990 ) notes that we should not think of engineering knowledge as treasure handed down by science and parasitic upon science . Further , the engineering method ( or methods ) is a distinct approach for producing knowledge from within the discipline that is not V . Kant , E . Kerr 698 contained within the scientific purview . Vincenti ’ s approach is from an engineer ’ s perspective and addresses a process - oriented view in which design knowledge is explored . The book has had a significant impact on the philosophy of engineering as a sustained attempt to analyze engineering as a distinct form of knowledge and one that sometimes does not rely on scientific knowledge at all . Along with these two attempts , other concepts have been raised by philosophers that take into account the related analysis of skill and knowing ( e . g . , Polanyi 2005 , 2013 ; Peck 2008 ) . However , even though philosophers of technology have addressed engi - neering , their scope is larger and the specifics of engineering epistemology are often overshadowed by a focus on technology as the object of study ( Dusek 2008 ; Houkes 2009 ; Scharff and Dusek 2014 ) . Further , early approaches in the philosophy of technology dealt with issues from a primarily moral and humanistic viewpoint ( see Mitcham 1994 ) . The role of technology was discussed in terms of technology and industrial society , technology , and the human self and among humanistic themes pertaining to individuals , communities , and societies ( e . g . , in the work of scholars such as Lewis Mumford , Martin Heidegger , and Herbert Marcuse ) . In addition , another viewpoint has been addressed by theorists who have been influenced by a particular form of social epistemology that prioritizes social aspects of knowledge and sociological explanation in the production of knowledge such as the Strong Program in the sociology of scientific knowledge ( Bloor et al . 1996 ) . The proponents of the Strong Program approach are suspicious of B rationalistic ^ ( logical inference , parsimony , induction from experience , and so on ) or B veritistic ^ ( derivation from true axioms ) concepts used in explanation of why a theory or model succeeds or in normative prescriptions for scientific and engineering practice . Instead , a focus is placed on the practices involved , the behavior and relationships within scientific and engineering communities , the interactions between people , the settling of disputes , and the resolution of problems . According to this viewpoint , one cannot appeal to idealized visions of the scientific method and Platonized interpretations of what scientists and engineers say , to explain the success of theory , progression , and design . Philosophers of engineering have often reached into more traditional philosophical work for inspiration and guidance . For example , Vincenti invoked Gilbert Ryle ’ s distinction between knowing that ( the propositional kind of knowledge with which epistemology is almost entirely concerned ) and knowing how to describe the distinc - tion between what engineers and scientists know ( Vincenti 1990 , p . 13 ; Ryle 1949 , p . 441 ) . In fact , when Vincenti talks about knowledge , he explicitly wants to include both know - how and knowing that . In the last couple of decades , more attention has been paid to engineering knowledge in analytic philosophy , primarily by scholars located in the Netherlands ( Boon 2011 ; Brey 2010 ; de Vries and Meijers 2013 ; Franssen et al . 2016 ; Hansson 2013 ; Houkes 2006 , 2009 ; Meijers and Kroes 2013 ) . These scholars seek to use the methods of analytic epistemology and metaphysics to answer questions in the philosophy of engineering that sometimes mirror those in the philosophy of science but also create new problems such as the hard problem in the ontology of technical artifacts ( Houkes and Meijers 2006 ) . Instead of the epistemologically relativ - ist , sociological approaches presented by sociocultural approaches , they evaluate tech - nological change using the concepts of ontology , rational design , categories of knowl - edge , functional ascription , and so on . Studies in this direction have addressed the nature of technical objects ( e . g . , Kroes 2010 ; Kroes and Meijers 2006 ) , theories of Taking Stock of Engineering Epistemology : Multidisciplinary . . . 699 technical function ( Houkes and Vermaas 2010 ; Preston 2009 ) , engineering failure ( e . g . , Del Frate 2012 ; Del Frate et al . 2011 ) , and sociotechnical systems ( e . g . , Franssen and Kroes 2009 ; Franssen 2015 ) among an expanding list of topics . A body of work around the subject of technological knowledge has emerged , to the extent that some scholars have argued that it amounts to its own kind of knowledge ( Norström 2015 ) . Norström observes that the discussion around Ryle ’ s distinction never refers to technological knowledge but that this type of knowledge ( learned through the acquisition of skill and training ) cannot be properly accounted for within existing explications of propositional knowledge . 5 Consider the following uses of B knows ^ ( and its cognates ) : knowing that a tin opener is for opening tins ; a computer technician ’ s knowledge of how to recover damaged data from a hard - disk drive ; S knows which wire is ‘ earth . ’ Uses such as these have been categorized by Wybo Houkes as ‘ use know - how . ’ Houkes claims that knowledge about the function of an artefact is not provided exclusively by beliefs about its physical characteristics , it is primarily provided by what he calls ‘ know - how related to its use ’ . According to Houkes , knowledge of the B proper ^ function of artifacts is B primarily based on testimony and a social division of labor with respect to rational artefact use . ^ This provides a normative epistemology that is often missing from more historically or sociologically focused perspectives . Knowledge of technical artifacts contains norma - tive judgements about how the artifact ought to be used . the best evidence for the claim that an artefact can be used to f , or has the possible function to f , is that you have use know - how , that is , that you know how to use it to f successfully . ( Houkes 2006 ) Use know - how has three distinctive components . It is something more than simple observation of physical characteristics , including dispositions , since many of the qualities that give an artifact its artificial nature cannot be simply B read off ^ on casual observation . Further , components of artifacts such as function and use are not physical characteristics . It requires : a ) Knowledge that a sequence of actions leads to the realization of a goal , what may be called B procedural knowledge ^ — knowing that executing a use plan for the artifact in a certain range of circumstances and employing a set of skills and auxiliary items realizes the goal state of the plan , and b ) The skills needed to take these actions , what may be called B operational knowledge . ^ Procedural and operational knowledge are often complementary ; typically , use know - how is based on both , and only in special cases on either one . In an important analysis of technological knowledge , Houkes notes that efforts to contrast scientific and engi - neering knowledge often appeal to the thought that engineering knowledge is practical , 5 It is not the purpose of this paper to detail this discussion in full . For more on knowledge how / that and its relation to technological knowledge how , see Hetherington ( 2015 ) , Houkes ( 2006 ) , and Norström ( 2011 , 2015 ) . For more on a traditional discussion of technological knowledge , see Cupani ( 2006 ) , de Vries ( 2003 , 2006 ) , and Meijers and de Vries ( 2012 ) . V . Kant , E . Kerr 700 useful , and applied , and further , that this is opposed to veretistic or truth - oriented goals ( Houkes 2009 , p . 312 ) . He calls this the B truth vs . usefulness ^ intuition and identifies it in Vincenti , as well as among others . Crucially , Houkes notes that this intuition alone is not enough to show the distinctive character of engineering knowledge because it depends on an often - unsupported definition of scientific knowledge with which to contract engineering knowledge and that it does not clearly identify the target of engineering knowledge . Does it include , for example , engineering practice , engineering science or research , engineering design , technology itself , or some combination of all or none ? Social epistemologists and historians of technology often recognize that engineering knowledge cannot be subsumed under the primacy of scientific knowledge . However , the analytical thrust on characterizing engineering knowledge has started gaining traction after the empirical turn in the philosophy of technology . Towards this end , philosophers of engineering have started addressing basic aspects of engineering such as design , malfunctions , technical functions , and technical artifacts . At the same time , it should be noted that some aspects of engineering knowledge may differentiate it from some scientific knowledge , but the two also often share many aspects in common . It may be that no sharp line can be drawn between the two but , we would argue , there is still value in pursuing the question of engineering knowledge since the pursuit of this question will shed light on both scientific and engineering knowledge . Philosophers of science and epistemologists often draw on the natural sciences to inform their models and accounts , but we submit that understanding engineering knowledge , for example , that which is involved in aircraft flight or construction , can be equally illuminating and ought to be as thoroughly investigated . Returning to our earlier discussion of technological knowledge how , procedural and operational knowledge are often complementary ; typically , the use of know - how is based on both , and only in special cases on either one . We would add that normally such knowledge is of a social , testimonial character . Consider the acquisition of using know - how for riding a bicycle , to borrow Houkes ’ example . That a bicycle can be used for cycling may be explained , at least in part , by appealing to B the mechanical principles on which its use plan is based . ^ However , it may actually be necessary to show someone how to ride . This type of skill - based knowledge may be B a necessity rather than a merely convenient alternative . ^ It is the norm , in other words , that knowledge of technical artifact function is social . Houkes appears to agree as he accounts for proper function through appealing to the role of testimony . If I do not know what an artifact is for , it would be theoretically possible for me to try and work out what it might be . Reverse engineering and archeology are replete with examples of this ( Vaesen and van Amerongen 2008 ) . However , typically , it would not be sensible to start experimenting or deliberating on my own about what I might use it for . Especially for complex artifacts , I will probably ask someone else . The norm , then , is that we rely on testimony for knowledge of possible and proper functions . We will return to this issue when discussing the role that the philosophy of artifacts plays in engineering knowledge . We discussed earlier how Western epistemology has generally prioritized know - that over know - how and that this has a long history going back , at least , to Plato . However , drawing upon them , no strong account of engineering knowledge has been upcoming . Here , we submit that a contextualist account of knowledge attributions may be helpful to the engineering context . Different authors spell this context - dependent relation out in Taking Stock of Engineering Epistemology : Multidisciplinary . . . 701 terms of high and low B standards ^ ( Cohen 1987 ; DeRose 1992 ) , B stakes ^ ( Leite 2005 ; Nagel 2008 ; Stone 2007 ) , B thresholds ^ ( Cohen 1998 ) , B practical interests ^ ( Stanley 2005 ) , as well as contexts of B alternatives ^ ( Dretske 1970 , cf . Schaffer 2001 ) , and B warranted assertability ^ ( Blaauw 2003 ; Brown 2006 ; Stone 2007 ; cf . Baumann 2011 ; Pritchard 2005 for critical discussion ) . Schaffer ( 2005 ) observes that there are fine details to be considered between what it is that shifts relative to a context . He further argues that defending the claim that x shifts relative to a context must B illuminate inquiry ^ ( Schaffer 2005 , p . 117 ) ; i . e . , whether we focus on stakes , as we have here , standards , thresholds , practical interests , or whatever else , our account of this variable must connect to the role that knowledge ascriptions have more widely in practices of inquiry . Although it is of course true that one can know something and not be able to answer a particular question ( either out of shyness , or muteness , or other constraints ) , the purpose of ascribing knowledge is , in part , to assert that the attributee can , generally , answer a question . Based on the above reasoning , we suggest that a contextualist account could be most appropriate for analyzing engineering knowledge ascriptions . However , more research needs to be undertaken to understand how work in epistemology can shed light on engineering knowledge in the same way that it informs the philosophy of science . After discussing the role of engineering epistemology as an enterprise , the next step is to engage the epistemic agent involved in this undertaking . 5 Theme 3 : the Epistemic Agent and the Sociohistorical View of Engineering Knowledge The myth of the scientist as a lone man looking at the world around him , drawing up hypotheses , and then testing them against the evidence in a dispassionate and amoral manner bears little relation to reality as borne out by research in the sociology and anthropology of science . Despite this , in popular understanding of science , this myth remains quite prominent ( Haynes 1994 ) . Most often , it manifests in discovery and knowledge produced by individual flashes of inspiration in the mind of a single genius . Of course , there can be little doubt that science does occasionally leap forward because of B Eureka ^ moments . However , most progression is through collective step - by - step advancement ; a tower of ancestors each standing on the other ’ s shoulders ( Merton 1965 ) . Not only is the scientist who makes progress alone rare but if it was common , scientific knowledge would progress at a slower rate . Dunbar shows that teams of scientists have a significant advantage over individuals pursuing the same task but only when the members of the group have different areas of expertise ( Dunbar 1995 ) . He suggests that this may be because progress and discovery in science often depends on analogy and application of knowledge from other disciplines to the current problem . Where members of the group all have similar B analogical reserves ^ to draw upon , this confers little advantage above and beyond the work of any single member of the group . Alongside the myth of the lone scientist , there existed ( and exists ) a mythical engineer : again , typically , a man acting alone . This man is personally interested in B how things work ^ and making stuff : homo faber rather than homo rationalis . Billy V . Koen , for instance describes the engineer as a pragmatic individual using a set of heuristics to B cause the best change in a poorly understood situation within the available resources ^ ( Koen 2003 , p . 28 ) . While this provides a working definition of V . Kant , E . Kerr 702 the B engineering method , ^ as discussed in Sect . 5 , it is a poor definition of the distributed networks and teams that most commonly characterizes the actual practice of that method . Engineering practice almost always involves drawing on the resources and background knowledge of others to solve problems . This myth is not the fault of scientists or engineers or even solely our lay misun - derstandings of science and engineering . It exists in philosophy as well , suggesting it reveals something much more deeply ingrained in our understanding of ourselves and our place in the world . Part of our motivation in adopting social epistemology in this article is to challenge epistemologists who draw conclusions based on lone , isolated individuals , single - handedly inquiring into the nature of some fact or asocially and apolitically going about their business . No doubt these individualist epistemologists are partly motivated by Occamian considerations , but it seems that social epistemology , which gives consideration to more complex social organizations and individuals ’ places in them , has solid grounds to justify its position as an important addition to the individualistic epistemology , particularly in the fields of science and engineering . The differences between engineering and scientific epistemic communities should not be over - exaggerated . Here , an account of scientific knowledge , that acknowledges its communal aspects , can be helpful in shedding light on engineering knowledge . John Hardwig points out that each of us believes many things for which we , alone , have no evidence ( Hardwig 1985 , p . 335 , 1991 , p . 693 ) . That we are all epistemically dependent on innumerable experts in their own fields is fairly platitudinous . Hardwig goes one step further opposing epistemic dependence to epistemic autonomy . While epistemic autonomy was once , perhaps during the Enlightenment , the most noble goal of the educated person , it is now not much more than a pipe dream . What is more , there are good reasons to think it should not be our goal even if it were realizable . Hardwig ’ s account , focused on the role of trust in science , offers a challenge to individualistic accounts of knowledge more generally ( expert or otherwise ) . Similarly , engineers typically work in large teams on specific projects , often across cities and even nations . In producing knowledge , engineers consequently have to incorporate a range of different social , political , and ethical interests . The social dimensions of engineering knowledge have been thoroughly explicated in the aforementioned sociological and anthropological approaches , but these have , naturally , prioritized their own disciplinary perspective and often elide normative and conceptual analysis . The challenge for developing engineering epistemology as a social endeavor involves recognizing the kind of B social ^ approach to be addressed . Here , we can make use of Frederick Schmitt ’ s ( 1994 ) distinction between the sociology of knowledge and social epistemology . For Schmitt , social epistemology is the B conceptual and normative study of the relevance of social relations , roles , interests and institutions to knowledge ^ whereas the sociology of knowledge involves B empirical study of the contingent social conditions or causes of knowledge or of what passes for knowledge in a society ^ ( Schmitt 1994 , p . 1 ; emphasis ours ) . Studies of engineering knowledge have tended to follow the latter approach but exploration of the former , such as there has been in philosophy of science , may prove similarly fruitful . Assessing trends in social epistemology is illuminating in identifying another lacuna in engineering epistemology . Martin Kusch , in his survey of social epistemology , identifies two distinct movements : one allied with the sociologist Steve Fuller , which he calls the Science Policy Program ( Fuller 1987 ; Kusch 2002 ) and one Taking Stock of Engineering Epistemology : Multidisciplinary . . . 703 allied with Alvin Goldman , which he calls the complementary program ( Goldman 1999 ) . The science policy program is an explicitly political attempt to influence policy - making decisions in scientific institutions in order to make them more democratic and accountable to the public . It considers knowledge to be a social phenomenon and approaches this phenomenon sociologically . The complementary program is also evaluative of policy - making decisions , but it distinguishes between individual and social aspects to knowledge . Traditional epistemology , it says , is going in the right direction but has largely neglected these social aspects . Kusch ’ s own project — com - munitarian epistemology — distinguishes itself by being descriptive , rather than pre - scriptive , towards the epistemic make - up of scientific and other knowledge - based institutions . It uses traditional methods of epistemology but rejects the dualism of the complementary program . As these discussions continue in epistemology and philoso - phy of science , parallels and insights may be drawn for the epistemology of engineer - ing . We return to the potential application of analytic epistemology to engineering knowledge later . The myth of the lone engineer is also complemented by the notion of existence of an B engineering method . ^ In the next section , the possibility of such a method is discussed in relation to knowledge styles . Engineering knowledge is closely intertwined with engineering identity ( Murphy et al . 2015 ; more broadly , see Christensen et al . 2015b ; Buch 2015 ) . Both entities in themselves and in relation to each other are historical products . While production engineers in the USA may share the same label with the one in the UK , their practice and knowledge styles may differ widely ( e . g . , Buchanan 1989 ; Subramanian 2015 ; Silva et al . 2015 ; Valderrama et al . 2009a , b ; Brown et al . 2009 ; Lundgreen 1990 ) . Engineering epistemology is constrained by the institutions and practices that have emerged in situ in relation to the technology at one end , to society on the other . Scholars have often remarked that while one can quite properly speak of a national philosophy , the same cannot be said of science : there is no B Indian neuroscience ^ or B Japanese biology , ^ just neuroscience and biology . Science is the same all over the world , at least in its aims . On the other hand , it would be difficult to deny that there are national engineering practices . These practices have emerged as salient acquiring their own set of methods , heuristics , school or university dependence , practical experience , geographical conditions , available resources , moral attitudes , personal viewpoints and much more , which are used to solve problems in light of materials at hand and the proposed scope ( e . g . , Grayson 1993 ; Meiksins and Smith 1996 ; Smith and Whalley 1996 ; Lucena 2005 ; Downey and Lucena 2004 ; Valderrama et al . 2009a , b ; Reynolds 1986 ; Subramanian 2015 ; Bassett 2016 ; Kostyszak et al . 2015 ; Christensen et al . 2015a ; Grimson and Murphy 2015 ; Zhu and Jesiek 2015 ; Newberry 2015 ; Smith and Lucena 2016 among many others ) . Engineering methods can be accumulated into broader modes of thought and activity , which we might term B styles . ^ These vary across communities of engineering and are often shaped by engineering identities , histories , and materials . Different countries and communities have their own favored styles . These are most often identified by dominant image of nationalistic styles and images of engineering ( e . g . , Meiksins and Smith 1996 ) . For example , different nationalistic styles are visible in the comparison between engineering knowledge in America and France . In comparing the nineteenth - century engineering cultures of bridge design in America and France , the historian Eda Kranakis ( 1997 ) highlights the difference of knowledge approaches employed in the V . Kant , E . Kerr 704 two nations . These knowledge approaches differ in the way the social and institutional structures shaped engineering practice in both countries . Kranakis uses the case studies from the American engineer James Finley and the French engineer Claude - Louis - Marie - Henri Navier . Finley used empirical techniques for a more fundamental design of suspension bridges whereas Navier approached these bridges mathematically and deductively using calculus , statics , and the theory of elasticity . Finley was a farmer and a country judge and was interested in bridge design . Finley ’ s design was suited for American conditions and was meant to be readily constructed by carpenters and blacksmiths , thus requiring less analytical expertise . In contrast , Navier was a product of an elite French engineering school and designed a bridge best suited for French monumental architecture . Using the example of the two engineers , Kranakis highlights the distinctions between the engineering cultures of America and France . The American engineering focus , ideology of empirical research , and ingenuity of design were in stark contrast with French emphasis on mathematical analysis . These nationalistic styles of engineering can also be a result of the relationship an engineer has with the overall economic development of countries . For example , while the British engineer has been argued to be closer to engineering practice , the American engineering profession , historically , has been divided between the demands of engi - neering and management . During the turn of the twentieth century , the corporatization of American industries created a niche for the American engineer as a manager ( e . g . , Noble 1977 ) . The changes in British industry did not share the same enthusiasm for scientific management ( Guillén 1994 ) . Further , Smith and Whalley ( 1996 ; c . f . Meiksins 1996 ) write that in Britain , technical training was fit for the labor classes and B the latter part of the nineteenth century saw middle - and upper - class rejection of the production and technological ethos . ^ As a result , engineers relied on apprenticeship , pupilage , day release , and professional association system for training . This is partly due to the influence of the British industry and its emphasis on quality small - scale production rather than mass production . It was only after World War II ’ s expansion of the British universities that a greater emphasis was laid on the graduate training of engineers in British industries . The result of this different modes of industrial development is that British engineers rely on different ways of engaging with their work activity ( Smith and Whalley 1996 ; for background of British Engineering , see Buchanan 1989 ; Cassis et al . 2005 ) . The distinction between different knowledge approaches between American and British engineering is depicted by the historian John Brown ( 2000 ) . Brown discusses the role of mechanical drawings in Britain and America . Typically , design plans are touted as objective and universal documents that support production . However , Brown notes that design plans are best understood in the context of the nationalistic engineer - ing culture . To demonstrate this aspect of engineering knowledge , he provides the example of design plan exchange between Britain and America . In the summer of 1940 , when British merchant ships were under attack from German U - boats , the British government sent a commission for purchasing replacements from American shipyards . In order to save time , the British sent the design documents to American shipyards . However , the Americans were at a loss in deciphering the contents of the British design documents . This was due to the fact that the British documents were not suited to the mass production techniques that were practiced by the Americans . As a result , the Americans had to extensively revise the documents to aid production . Taking Stock of Engineering Epistemology : Multidisciplinary . . . 705 The above example shows that the aspects of engineering knowledge cannot be simply reduced to technicalities but also involve a significant view of engineering identities . For example , after the 1850s , the American engineer had become a cosmopolitan and was involved with a large variety of works in Central and South America . Along with technical knowledge , the engineer had knowledge of distant lands and the way technology was to be supported there . The engineer had to work with a variety of people from different nationalities and by effective supervision , get the projects completed . The historian of engineering , Raymond Merritt ( 1969 , p . 93 ) recounts the story of the American engineer Hezekiah Bissell who laid the tracks along the Purcara river towards the ancient Inca capital of Cuzco in South America . Bissell was helped in developing infrastructure by Indian and Chilano workers , Italian stone - cutters , Irish - Australian masonry contractors , a Chinese cook , a British interpreter , a Spanish architectural student and a German Topographer . Merritt observes that these cosmopolitan engineers became B rootless in their employment , ^ B flexible in their work ^ and B variable in their associations ^ and adopted an impersonal value system in dealing with people around the world ( Merritt 1969 , p . 91 ) . This emphasizes that engineering knowledge , currently as well as in the past has to be understood as not only in terms of an internalist approach but also in terms of economic , political , geograph - ical , social , and material makeup of a nation . In short , engineering know - how is best characterized as relational to the existing times and developmental trajectories of engineers . Similar to the historians of technology and engineering , engineering - studies scholars recognize that engineering epistemology is influenced by a wide variety of factors ( e . g . , Downey and Lucena 2004 ; Buch 2015 ; Downey 2007 ; Constant 1989 ; Johnson 2009 ) . Downey and Lucena ( 2004 ) note that engineering advocates , in fash - ioning engineering as a profession , have responded to notions of progress . The authors labeled the concept as B metrics of progress ^ in recognizing that in each era , people responded to the dominant image of progress . This view of what constitutes as progress shapes the engineer and engineering knowledge based on a variety of aspects . 6 Theme 4 : the Relationship Between Engineering Knowledge and Technologies A discussion of engineering epistemology requires not only a scrutiny of its basic constructs but also a discussion of its products . Many engineers , designers , and philos - ophers of engineering have recognized the centrality of design knowledge to engineering knowledge ( Law 1990 ; Law and Dorst 2009 ; Dorst 2004 ; Kroes 2009 ; Vincenti 1990 ; Bucciarelli 1988 , Bucciarelli 1994 , Bucciarelli 2003 ; Petroski 1996 ) . The use , classifi - cation , and application of tools and technological artifacts is central to engineering practice and to engineering knowledge . Vincenti aptly summarizes the focus of knowl - edge in this domain writing , B Engineers use knowledge primarily to design , produce , and operate artefacts … Scientists , by contrast , use knowledge primarily to generate more knowledge ^ ( Vincenti 1990 , p . 226 ) . Although there is , of course , knowledge of how to , for example , operate tools within scientific practice , these are means rather than ends . Unlike in the natural sciences , engineers aim to explain , predict , and describe phenomena in technological artifacts , rather than nature alone , and they aim for such knowledge to have the potential to be utilized in the design of technical artifacts ( Boon 2006 ) . V . Kant , E . Kerr 706 In addressing the creation of complex systemic artifacts , Edward Constant ( 1980 ) makes a distinction ( echoing that made in the philosophy of science ) between B normal ^ and B radical ^ technology . Normal technology , he states , is what engineers and technolo - gists spend the vast majority of their time doing . It involves practicing and making small improvements to the accepted traditional practices of the community . Radical technology , on the other hand , occurs when technological communities face a problem which cannot be solved using traditional methods and must innovate to produce an entirely new artifact , the configuration of which , and even how it works , is largely unknown to the community . To this concept of normal and radical technology , Vincenti adds normal and radical design ( Vincenti 1990 , p . 10 ) . Normal design adheres to the accepted customs and practices of the community when designing an artifact . The type of artifact , how it functions , and how it should be used , is well understood . When an engineering problem requires the invention of a new kind of artifact , the mechanics and functions of which are little understood , practitioners become involved in radical design . Both design paradigms are multilevel and hierarchical . He describes the levels at which design takes place in aeroplane design and how problems at the higher levels ( including the project definition and the general overall design ) tend to be B conceptual and relatively unstructured ^ ( Vincenti 1990 , p . 12 ) . This typically includes the translation of societal requirements into some technical problem and then a technological solution , typically an artifact ( de Vries 2009 ) . The products of engineering ( designed artifacts ) deserve special attention due to their apparent hybrid nature . Technical artifacts are not simply natural or social things . Rather they are complex entwinements of these two polarities — a hybrid of mind and matter ( e . g . , Kroes 2002 , 2009 , 2010 , 2012 ; Kroes and Meijers 2006 ) . Second , these artifacts involve the notion of correct functioning and malfunction . These notions of correct functioning and malfunction do not explicitly fit in well with either the natural or intentional viewpoints but require a combination of both . Therefore , a discussion of the products of engineering knowledge is required . Design theorists , engineers , and philosophers of engineering have successfully argued for the idiosyncratic nature of engineering design and the special mode of knowing and acting it entails . In Sect . 3 , we highlighted the idea that science is often seen as the dominant form of knowledge , achieving a cultural capital that raised its status as a higher , more rational form of knowledge . As a result , it is often taken for granted that if a particular form of knowledge is not scientific , it becomes untenable . Therefore , design knowledge , being an integral aspect of engineering knowledge , is often molded into scientific knowledge . This labeling , however , remains under active debate among design theorists and philosophers ( as discussed previously ) . Along with the above ongoing debate , after the B empirical turn ^ in the philosophy of technology ( Franssen et al . 2016 ; Brey 2010 ) , philosophers have stressed engineering design and engineered artifacts . The B empirical turn ^ in the philosophy of technology emphasizes clarification of concepts used in engineering practice along with technology and its everyday functioning . Expanding on the nature of engineering design , philoso - phers of engineering and technology have increasingly accepted that technical artifacts are worthy of attention due to their constitution ( e . g . , Baker 2009 ) . In this vein , Peter Kroes ( 2002 , 2009 , 2010 , 2012 ) notes that designed objects are special as they are of a dual nature — a simultaneous blend of matter and mind . That is , they require a physico - chemical ( matter ) explanation to describe them as objects as well as an intentional ( mind ) explanation to describe them in terms of what they are being designed for . Taking Stock of Engineering Epistemology : Multidisciplinary . . . 707 Intentional explanation has to be understood in terms of the roles of the people involved in the explanation — designers and users . On the one hand , an artifact can be used in the proper manner for what it has been designed for ; i . e . , a pair of scissors can be used for cutting . On the other hand , artifacts can be used in ways for which they were not designed ; i . e . , the same pair of scissors can be used as a paperweight . In this second case , the physical structure should support the usage . To highlight this distinc - tion , philosophers of engineering ( Kroes 2012 ; Scheele 2005 ; Schyfter 2016 ; for a broader view of technical functions , see Feenberg 2016 ) use the terms B proper functions ^ and B accidental functions . ^ Proper functions afford correct usage , i . e . , what it is designed for ; whereas , accidental functions afford usage other than the ones the object is designed for by the designer . Thus , accidental functions provide an insight into the various ways , unintended by the designers originally , an artifact can be used by users . Along with accidental and proper function - based usage , a third type of use is possible , based on the interpretation of the person using the artifact . However , in this case , the classification of the artifact does not completely depend on the usage of the artifact . For example , a person who has not encountered a coin before may end up using it as a screwdriver in a particular instance of usage . However , the ability to be used in a particular manner does not completely characterize the artifact or its preferred function . Therefore , along with a definition of the artifact in terms of functions and physical form , a related category would be that of interpretation of the artifact ( Dennett 1995 , p . 213 ; Vaesen and van Amerongen 2008 ) . The interpreted usage provides an insight into possibilities of ( mis ) - use as well as extension of the artifact ’ s possible uses . The challenge of interpretation 6 of possible usage depends on the artifact as well as the person and the circumstances in which they interact . At a functional level , a technical artifact describes what it ought to do , but it does not provide the details of the structures by which the high - level functions are accomplished . The design educator and engineer , David Ullman , provides the following description for considering functional view : A common way of classifying mechanical devices is by their function . In fact , some devices , having only one main function , are named for that function . For example , a screwdriver has the function of enabling a person to insert or remove a screw . The terms drive , insert , and remove are all verbs that tell what the screwdriver does , we have given no indication of how the screwdriver accom - plishes its function . To answer how we must have some information of the form of the device ( Ullman 2010 , pp . 28 – 29 ; emphasis in original ) . Engineers use a functional description in the initial stages of the design process to chart out the requirements . In the later stages , these functional descriptions are connected to physical ( structural ) embodiments . The physical embodiment provides an insight about objects based on their physico - chemical basis as well as structural basis . In this mode of explanation , the focus is on what it is rather than what it is for . Thus , as earlier mentioned , Peter Kroes and Anthonie Meijers have argued , keeping in mind the engineer ’ s approach , designed objects require a dual description to characterize their idiosyncratic nature — a functional as well as a material / structural description ( Kroes 6 The challenge of interpretation is one of the biggest problems in archeology . V . Kant , E . Kerr 708 and Meijers 2006 ; also , Kroes 2002 , 2009 , 2010 , 2012 ) . Proper function is thought , in part , to be determined by design considerations . Design , in this instance , can mean both the content of a set of places ( as in B the design for a new production logging tool ^ ) and the process by which those plans are realized , which typically will involve specifica - tions of the configuration , layout , and dimensions of the artifact ; testing of the artifact to see if it fulfills its function either through mathematical analysis or experiment ; and modification ( Vincenti 1990 , p . 10 ) . Parallel to this discussion of the metaphysics of artifacts , a debate has emerged over who has the epistemic authority to assert what is the function of an artifact . 7 While designer and user intentions and use plans generally align , they do not always . This raises the question whether the designer has the authority to stipulate the functions of an artifact or , as often seems to be the case , can users detour the function of an artifact through stable collective use ? Thomasson ( 2003 ) argues that the designer of an artifact has an epistemic privilege with regard to it in that he or she cannot be ignorant of or be in error concerning what it is ( cf . Bloom 1996 ; Hilpinen 1993 ) . Perhaps we can say that the designer enjoys some special authority in the beginning of the artifacts history , but this can be changed through continued and systematic use . What determines the proper function then , perhaps , is some communal standard for what the artifact is for . Such an account could be given for some artifacts and not others . An artifact that is common , has been around long enough , its use is general rather than specialized , perhaps it does not require any particular skills — such artifacts proper functions can be detoured by communities of users . For artifacts with highly specialized , sophisticated uses , it might not be possible , or at least very difficult , for their function to change . Houkes and Vermaas ( 2010 , p . 93 ) put this in terms of functions ( or , in their case , use plans ) being relative to social consensus : B Proper use is the execution of a use plan that is accepted within a certain community ; improper use is the execution of a use plan that is socially disapproved . ^ The function - structure view , or dual - nature view , of technical artifacts is supple - mented by the notion that designed objects are designed to function correctly . In other words , the function - structure linkage is not arbitrary but exemplifies a certain correct relation that the object embodies . Correct functioning is a crucial aspect of design . Engineers design artifacts , systems , and the like , for correct functioning . Thus , the avoidance of failure or malfunction is a major concern for engineers ( Petroski 1992 , 1996 Del Frate et al . 2011 ) : An idea that unifies all of engineering is the concept of failure . From the simplest paper clips to the finest pencil leads to the smoothest operating zippers , inven - tions are successful only to the extent that their creators properly anticipate how device can fail to perform as intended . Virtually every calculation that an engineer performs in the development of computers and airplanes , or telescopes and fax machines , is a failure calculation ( Petroski 1996 , p . 89 ) . In contrast , science does not address the notion of correct functioning simply because the natural world is not approached from the standpoint of design . Consider a simple stone to comprehend the absurdity of approaching the natural world from a function - 7 For more extensive discussion on the metaphysics of artifact kinds see , e . g . , Franssen et al . ( 2013 ) , Margolis and Laurence ( 2007 ) , and Vaccari ( 2013 ) . Taking Stock of Engineering Epistemology : Multidisciplinary . . . 709 structure linkage perspective or an instrumentalist viewpoint ( Powell 2015 ; also , Krohs and Kroes 2009 on the difference between biological and technological views on functions ) . What is the correct functioning of the stone ? For serving as a place under which an insect could hide ? For serving as a doorstop ? Apart from the stone , in terms of biological entities , parts of entities can be addressed in terms of functions , as well as , the functions in engineering are different than those in biology ( see Krohs and Kroes 2009 for a detailed discussion ) . Similarly , discussions of the notion of correct func - tioning and malfunction in natural systems are difficult to be simply equated with their engineering counterpart ( Powell 2015 ) . 8 In order to consider the notion of correct functioning and hence malfunction in a sustained and conjoined manner , an insight provided by the philosopher Michael Polanyi ( 2005 ) will be used . Polanyi notes that in order to understand any contrived device ( mechanism ) , there is the necessity for comprehending the B logic of contrivance ^ . This logic allows for viewing designed objects as working on operational principles . These designed objects cannot be explained merely based on the sciences ( see Sect . 3 ) . A physical or chemical analysis will not provide an insight into the operational principles and the device ’ s correct mode of functioning : The first thing to realize is that a knowledge of physics and chemistry would in itself not enable us to recognize a machine . Suppose you are faced with a problematic object and try to explore its nature by a meticulous physical or chemical analysis of all its parts . You may thus obtain a complete physico - chemical map of it . At what point would you discover that it is a machine ( if it is one ) , and if so , how it operates ? Never . For you cannot even put this question , let alone answer it , though you have all physics and chemistry at your finger - tips , unless you already know how machines work . [ . . . ] The physico - chemical topography of the object may in some cases serve as a clue to its technical interpretation , but by itself it would leave us completely in the dark in this respect . ( Polanyi 2005 , p . 346 ) Polanyi emphasizes two kinds of knowledge — scientific and technical . These streams cannot be reduced to each other and are asymmetrical in their interaction . Therefore , simply understanding the physico - chemical composition of a designed entity ( in this case a machine ) does not provide an insight into its engineered aspects . To fully characterize its engineered dimension , the notion of correct functioning and malfunc - tion should be incorporated . This engineered dimension is not comprehensible from the purview of natural sciences of physics and chemistry . While engineers have studied failures extensively , they have varying meanings and concepts for addressing failure ( Del Frate 2012 , 2014 ) . With the change in the nature of systems , interlinkages and complexity , engineers recognize that oftentimes they deal with intractable challenges . Thus , even though the notion of failure , malfunction , and correct functioning is a central aspect of engineering epistemology it is yet to be developed further . 8 It is very difficult to present a clear - cut difference between the natural and the artificial . With the growth of new biological devices and advances in biological engineering , the natural and artificial is even further blurred . However , in some cases , for ease of discussion , it is possible to make demarcations . The examples presented here are used to show the difference between natural and engineered systems . V . Kant , E . Kerr 710 To summarize , in the earlier themes , the crucial aspect of engineering knowledge was identified . Building on those ideas , this current theme addressed the products of engineering knowledge : engineering design and its resulting artifacts . A key idea is that engineered artifacts are contrived , their constitutional make - up is in the form of a function - structure linkage embodying a logic of contrivance . In addition , engineered artifacts display correct functioning and malfunction that make them different from natural entities . The implications of this for engineering knowledge can be partly comprehended in terms of considering the cognitive dimension of design , discussed in the following section . 7 Theme 5 : Cognitive Bases of the Designer ’ s Ways of Knowing and Acting In order to present engineering knowledge coherently , a foray into the designer ’ s ways of knowing and acting is required , with an emphasis on design thinking ( e . g . , Schön 1988 ; Kimbell 2011 ; Johansson - Sköldberg et al . 2013 ; Brown and Wyatt 2010 ) . There have been extensive historical , sociological , and anthropological studies conducted on designers , as well as , multiple theories have been proposed to characterize design thinking and expertise ( e . g . , Lawson 1979 , 2005 ; Dubberly 2004 ; Schön 1983 ) . An important point raised by these theorists is that the nature of design thinking is different from ones adopted in scientific thinking . Design is not the process of analysis and then application of that analysis to products . Rather , design thinking is a complex activity that analyses situations and their constituents to promote a reordering to suit the situation . The design theorist Lawson ( 1979 ) notes that designers follow a different approach to knowing and acting as compared with scientists . Lawson ’ s study was conducted to understand the differences in the knowing and acting of design - oriented students as compared with science - oriented students . In this study , the experimenters presented a set of red and blue - colored blocks . The participants were asked to place the blocks on a grid to complete the task . There were hidden rules that allowed certain combinations in comparison with others . Participants only got a response from a computer , informing them whether the placement conformed to the predefined answer . Lawson points that the two groups of students adopted a different approach to the task . The science - oriented students first tried to understand the structure of the problem and then found the solution . In contrast , the design - oriented students did not conduct an exhaustive background analysis . They proposed solutions based on what they thought would provide the appropriate answer and checked for the feasibility . If not allowed , they modified their solutions until they found the allowed answer . They displayed a focus on forming and discarding and reforming concepts . In short , they worked with problem - solution pairs . Another design theorist , Cross ( 2006 , Ch . 5 ) , conducted studies on outstanding designers ranging from engineering design to product design . He notes that designers often frame the problems in such a manner that it stimulates and pre - structures design concepts . These concepts are then extensively revised as the designed product emerges . While design knowledge has been addressed extensively from a cognitive view - point , a few researchers have endeavored to comprehend it in terms of its various Taking Stock of Engineering Epistemology : Multidisciplinary . . . 711 instantiations in different disciplines ( for a thorough but slightly dated summary of design cognition studies done in various fields , see Cross 2001 , p . 80 ) . For example , Akin ( 2001 , 2009 ) addressed the differences between architectural design in relation to electronics and electrical engineering . The main focus of Akin ( 2001 , 2009 ) was on the invariants ( and variants ) in design cognition . Similarly , Purcell and Gero ( 1996 ; Kokotovich and Purcell 2000 ) addressed differences in design cognition in the disci - plines such as graphic design , product design , industrial design and mechanical engineering design . Their emphasis was on the study of representations in mental synthesis as well as on fixation effects . Gero et al . ( 2013 , 2014 ; Kan and Gero 2011 ; Jiang et al . 2014 ) have also addressed various aspects of the designer ’ s cognitive efforts and reasoning about problems and solutions in various design disciplines . To address and comprehend the cognitive aspect of design knowledge , researchers have typically employed verbal protocol studies for structured tasks as well as design review conver - sations ( Craig 2001 ; Matthews 2007 ) . In terms of addressing design knowledge theoretically , the Function - Behavior - Structure ( FBS ) ontology has received some prominence in the field of design studies ( Gero and Kannengiesser 2004 ; Vermaas and Dorst 2007 ; Dorst and Vermaas 2005 ) . The FBS ontology links the teleological function to the expected behavior and ulti - mately to the structural relations of the components . Along with the FBS ontology , design educators have stressed certain cognitive dimensions of design knowledge which include , mental imagery , representational aspects related to design - based think - ing , structuring of design problems and solutions , along with the framing of the design tasks and solutions among other epistemological dimensions . Along with design theorists , the historian Brooke Hindle ( 1981 , 1982 , 1986 ) argues that a key aspect of mechanical ingenuity is a visual and non - verbal dimension of knowing and acting . In discussing the aspects of visual and non - verbal thinking , he presents case studies of two artifacts — the steamboat and the telegraph . Both these artifacts have been produced by the process of what Hindle ( 1981 ) labels as B emulation . ^ Hindle ( 1981 ) notes that the visual - spatial thinking and the non - verbal dimension was a key aspect in the actual development of the final form of technologies . Even though the presence of steam power made the steamboat possible , it was not the result of the mere application of scientific principles of steam engineering . The design of mechanism required a view into the motive power of steam in order to translate this power into a useful working mechanism Designers and inventors B emulate ^ and work in tradition of existing forms . In emphasizing the mechanics mode of understanding , Hindle ( 1981 ) quotes Robert Fulton ( designer of the steamboat ) , who provides a coherent statement to describe the circumstances : ‘ The mechanic ’ , he wrote , ‘ should sit down among levers , screws , wedges , wheels , etc . Like a poet among the letters of an alphabet , considering them as the exhibition of his thoughts , in which a new arrangement transmits a new idea to the world ( Hindle 1981 , p . 135 ) . Similar to the logic of the steamboat , electromagnetism made the presence of the telegraph possible ( Hindle 1981 , 1982 , 1986 ) . However , the actual design and structure was not due to the application of electromagnetic theory . Both these artifacts required a mode of understanding that reflects the complex process of arrangements that brings V . Kant , E . Kerr 712 together the multiple parts into a cohesive whole . The emphasis on visual and spatial thinking has also been provided by the historian Eugene Ferguson ( 1977 , 1992 ) . Ferguson emphasizes that drawings form a vital part of engineering knowledge . He notes the craft origins of engineering and points out that the difference between the drawings of the engineer and the artisan is one of format rather than conception . Similar to Hindle and Ferguson ’ s stress on visual representation in engineering , sociologists , based on ethnographic studies ( Henderson 1999 ; Laureillard and Vinck 2003 ; Bucciarelli 1988 , 2002 ; among others ) provide emphasis on the visual culture in engineering design . Based on participant observation studies in engineering design centers , sociologists have repeatedly highlighted the rich visual representations , such as engineering plans and diagrams , used in everyday engineering practice that embody experiential knowledge . In summary , these various notions of design discussed by philosophers , engineers , design theorists and historians point to the idiosyncratic nature of design knowledge . This idiosyncratic nature of design should be viewed along with the notion that engineering knowledge is not reducible to the application of science . 8 Underdeveloped and Undone Research The scope of engineering epistemology is broad both in a disciplinary and thematic sense . It includes questions which have no primary disciplinary home such as : What is the epistemic culture of engineering ? What kinds of knowledge do engineers have and in what sense is that kind of knowledge specific to engineering ? How best to charac - terize the products or outputs of engineering practice ? What is the role of reasoning in engineering and design processes ? In addition , the processes of engineering , such as establishing system boundaries , formulating a systemic understanding , and assessment can in turn gain from rigorous philosophical analysis . Topics in this vein include tacit and phenomenological understanding of engineering from engineers ’ viewpoint ( see , e . g . , Polanyi 2005 , 2009 and the discussion in Houkes 2009 , pp . 330 – 334 ) , instrumen - tal means - ends reasoning , connecting instrumentality to broader societal basis , engi - neering methods , and engineering control among broader issues of engineering practice ( e . g . , Buch 2015 ; Lavelle 2015 ; Pritchard 2009 ) . Currently , scholars have partly addressed aspects such as systems and sociotechnical systems ( Franssen and Kroes 2009 ; Vermaas et al . 2011 ) , explanation in engineering and technology ( Pitt 2009 ) , esthetics and engineering ( Schummer et al . 2009 ) , converting ill - structured customer needs into reasoning ( de Vries 2009 ) , mereology ( Vermaas and Garbacz 2009 ) , testing , failure , and human - technology interaction from an engineering viewpoint among many other topics . The ways in which the philosophy of engineering may inform engineering practice is not the primary focus of this article and we do not aim to provide a comprehensive list here . Instead , in the following , we discuss other work that is less developed than the previous discussions or can even be classified as B undone . ^ We borrow David Hess ’ ( 2016 ) term B undone research ^ here to contain the idea that the philosophy of engi - neering ought to also examine the reasons why such research has not yet been done . Part of an explanation for that can be found in the discipline ’ s small and nascent form . Another answer can be found in our discussion above exploring the connections drawn in philosophy between science and engineering , particularly the ways in which the Taking Stock of Engineering Epistemology : Multidisciplinary . . . 713 philosophy of technology and the philosophy of engineering have not been considered to be as important or as philosophically interesting as philosophy of science . While the philosophy of engineering has emerged strongly as a subdiscipline within the philos - ophy of technology ( Michelfelder et al . 2013 ) , we have below outlined some future areas of research which are underdeveloped or unexplored . The purpose of this section is not to suggest that no research exists on the below topics but that there has been little concerted , systematic investigation into these areas . Further , we suggest that , following our earlier claims regarding the intermixture of science and technology and , neverthe - less , the merits of studying engineering knowledge as having a distinctive research character , these are areas which have been widely investigated in the philosophy of science and related disciplines . It is this specific combination — of high levels of research regarding the natural sciences and no substantial systematic investigation in the engineering sciences — that makes these topics particularly B undone . ^ 8 . 1 Engineering Ignorance Much of this article has been concerned with what engineers know and how they know it , to borrow from Vincenti . A different approach would be to chart what engineers do not know ? ( Bucciarelli 2003 ) . Specifically , we should be interested in how , both from within and outside of engineering practice , engineering ignorance is constructed . In recent years , a new field of agnotology ( Proctor and Schiebinger 2008 ; Oreskes and Conway 2010 ) has emerged which studies the contribution of ignorance to the produc - tion of knowledge . This is core to the central themes of the idea of undone research . There are always reasons why research has not been done and it is not always , or perhaps even often , the result of a lack of time . Rather than seeing ignorance as a lack of knowledge , scholars have described how ignorance influences what is known . The issue of ignorance does not only go beyond attempts to corrupt both public under - standing of science , access to data , and the science itself ( as in , for example , the cases documented in the tobacco industry or around climate change skepticism ) but also to the practices of normal science . The history of scientific knowledge is replete with examples of how supposedly meaningless information was later found to be significant ( from so - called junk DNA to the B silent ^ areas of the brain ) . While much of this literature has focused on sociopolitical factors in the construction of ignorance around scientific knowledge about , for example , health and climate change , less attention has been given to the role forms of technology play in constructing ignorance and the ways in which the construction of ignorance within engineering may play out differently than within the natural and life sciences . 8 . 2 An Engineering Methodology ? Is there an engineering method ? While the purported scientific method has been much discussed , engineering , and the question of whether there is an B engineering method , ^ has been largely ignored . And yet , it does seem that there is something distinct and worth preserving about the methods used in engineering which cannot easily be reduced to simply applying science but includes design methods , methods applying engineering knowledge , methods for operating technical artifacts , production and manufacturing methods , and so on . In addition , the sheer breadth of engineering makes V . Kant , E . Kerr 714 it extremely difficult to analyze and comment upon any particular B engineering method ^ akin to a scientific method . However , a few aspects are prominent in engineering and often cut across individual disciplines . These include but are not limited to abstract concepts such as heuristics and design . Further , distinctions have been made such as knowledge of capacities and mecha - nisms which are more central to engineering than scientific laws . In addition , explana - tions of a phenomenon or process involve modeling that phenomenon or process within a distinct spatial region ( Boon 2008 ) . As discussed earlier , one reason to distinguish engineering from scientific knowledge is by its dependence on scarce resources . Engineers aim at progressively B improving ^ the world within constraints of time and resources and consequently require methods that would maximize success , while minimizing risk , cost , time , among other attributes . Patrons requiring these attributes are in the form of governments , commerce , industry , military , as well as wider society . Consequently , the methods of engineering are always sacrificial , compromising , and social : to bowdlerize Abraham Lincoln , B you cannot please everyone all the time but you can please some of them some of the time . ^ Many cases of scientific knowledge proceed in opposing terms . For example , in answering the question of how our solar system works , we do not need a pressing solution . Instead , we aim to achieve progressively improved answers as our scientific knowledge advances . Within the philosophy of engineering , one prominent effort to capture what is distinctive about the engineering method is provided by Billy V . Koen ( 1985 , 1988 , 2003 ) who focuses on the idea of heuristics . His definition of a heuristic runs as follows : A heuristic is anything that provides a plausible aid or direction in the solution of a problem but is in the final analysis unjustified , incapable of justification , and potentially fallible ( Koen 2003 , p . 28 ) . Engineering heuristics might include B allocate resources to the weak link , ^ B safety first ! , ^ B improve upon designs incrementally , ^ rules of thumb , and so on . It is easy to see why these methods appear to suggest that engineering is very different from science . Further , whereas in science we tend to assume that there is one correct answer for each problem , if there is an answer at all , different engineers may approach a problem in different ways and be able to provide justifications as good as each other for their solutions . Thus , Koen suggests the following definition of the engineering method , [ T ] he use of heuristics to cause the best change in a poorly understood situation within the available resources . ( Koen 2003 , p . 28 ) These heuristics are inevitably dualistic . They are based partly on knowledge of physical structure and dynamics as well as knowledge of social needs and requirements . With all these viewpoints in the background , how can we characterize engineering knowledge as differentiated from scientific knowledge ( Sect . 3 ) ? Is it accurate to say that engineering knowledge is heavily dominated by the content and application of heuristics ? The first thing we can say is that engineering methods do not attempt to Taking Stock of Engineering Epistemology : Multidisciplinary . . . 715 produce accurate ( in the sense of true , in the sense of corresponding to reality ) models of the phenomena it studies . Rather , it produces useful models which can aid engineers in accomplishing their ultimate aim , whether that is to extract hydrocarbons from a subterranean rock or to build a gas pipeline and so on . The models and schemes involving abstraction , decomposition , and optimization are oftentimes instrumental to the problem - solving process ( see , e . g . , Boon 2008 ; Boon and Knuuttila 2009 ; Nersessian and Patton 2009 ; Zwart 2009 ) . It is not the product of disinterested inquiry — they are schema to support engineering activity . Further , there is no one - to - one correlation between the process of inquiry and the model as there often is in the natural sciences ; the engineer may justifiably select from a number of available models and solutions . The second assertive notion is that what counts as a correct procedure of inquiry depends on a lot of extra - theoretical factors : time , resources , location , personnel , and so on . Likewise , what counts as a B satisfactory answer ^ depends on the same extra - theoretical factors . Since societal needs influence the framing of a problem in engi - neering , there is rarely one solution . In a broad sense , if an overarching engineering method exists in terms of the counterpart to the scientific method , then as mentioned before , the engineering method is a sacrificial , compromising , and constituted as a social based heuristic . While the engineering method and knowledge styles are con - textual and engineering knowledge is a social product ( many would also add relativ - istic ) , an aspect that consolidates engineering viewpoints and binds them together is the output in terms of technical artifacts . Artifacts are crucial products of engineering knowledge and design that circumvent traditional descriptions and have been discussed before to account for their idiosyncratic nature . 8 . 3 What Is the Nature of a Problem in Engineering ? As discussed above , any engineering problem can be approached using a variety or combination of methods and the best approach is the one that is likely to bring the best results or , in hindsight , brought about the best results ( Pitt 2007 ; also see Downey 2005 on the nature of problem formulation ) . 9 Engineering problems are oftentimes B pressing ^ in a way that some scientific questions — such as how was the Universe formed or why humans have two legs — are not . They call for a decision to be made within a specified time frame and using certain limited resources . Crucial to the nature of a problem in engineering is that for any given problem , multiple solutions exist . The task of the engineer , then , is to identify , interpret , and recognize the constraints on a solution or design in order to produce a result that is B good enough , ^ however that may be conceived within the constraints of resources , physical limitations , technical capa - bilities , the need to consider flexibility , multioperability , future - proofing , potential modifications that may be required at a later stage , user friendliness , and many other limitations that , in a sense , are non - rational . In addition , at times , these problems are not well - defined as to elicit a B correct answer . ^ This is very much in keeping with the engineering spirit and dealing with complex challenges . They are , in a sense , B wicked ^ problems . Rittel and Weber ( 1973 ; 9 Related to this is the question of whether there is such a thing as technological explanation ( Pitt 2000 , Ch . 4 , 2009 ) . V . Kant , E . Kerr 716 also see Simon 1996 for ways of addressing complexity and design ) classify problems as B tame ^ and B wicked . ^ Tame problems such as chess - playing , even though compli - cated are solvable . In contrast , wicked problems lack a strict formulation ; they are often constrained by the lack of resources and even may not have a finite solution or a stopping rule . With the growth of globalization and challenges of sustainability , these wicked problems require not only strategies for solutions but also ways in which the structure of engineering problems can be addressed . This would involve a dissection of ways in which problems are formulated in various disciplines of engineering such as electrical , mechanical among its various subdisciplines , and so on . For example , how do electrical engineers comprehend the maintenance of a high voltage transmission system ? Or , how do mechanical engineers address the challenges of finding an amenable solution for testing parts emanating from a mass production in terms of material cost , human resource deployment and production overheads ? While these aspects are staple fare for engineers in their everyday work , a challenge for philoso - phers is to comprehend the nature of engineering problems not only at a generic level but also in terms of individual disciplines . At a generic level of engineering comprehension , consider the following example provided by Billy V . Koen ( 1985 , p . 9 ) : suppose we ask an audience of engineers and non - engineers to tell us how many ping - pong balls you could fit in a given room of fixed dimensions . Typically , according to Koen , most non - engineers will not put their hand up to offer an answer . The engineer , at least so the story goes , always will . The quality and nature of the answer depends , in part , on resources , time and the importance or pay - off awarded for a good solution . If they were given 30 s , we could expect a quick back - of - the - envelope calculation . If the time duration involved a couple of minutes along with a tape measure , we might expect them to quickly measure the walls , estimate the dimensions of a ball and derive a figure from the difference . If their lives depended on an accurate answer and they had several months or just for the fun of it , they might fill the room with ping - pong balls in order to arrive at the answer or try even more extensive measures . It is an anecdote , but it carries a point : the engineering answer depends on a variety of factors ranging from the resources available to the possibilities of ways of achieving the solution . The engineer provides an answer that is never a final answer to the problem but involves the best answer given the circum - stances . In terms of epistemology , this description of engineering knowledge seems to support an account of knowledge attributions that is context dependent . A grand challenge for philosophers in engineering is to recognize problem construction in subdisciplines as well as how it relates to an overall generic viewpoint of engineering as a whole . 8 . 4 Engineering Evidence Engineers gather , comprehend , interpret , gather , disseminate , compare , debate , and characterize evidence every day but philosophy of engineering has not systematically analyzed the nature of evidence in engineering compared with the extensive literature that already exists in the philosophy of science , philosophy of mind , law , and epistemology . Kerr ( 2017 ) argues that such an analysis of engineering evidence reveals a particular conception of evidence that is socially and technologically - mediated . First , that knowledge claims in engineering , as we discussed above , are dependent on social Taking Stock of Engineering Epistemology : Multidisciplinary . . . 717 imperatives has implications for what counts as evidence . Second , that such evidence is typically generated through the use of technologies and that those technologies play a role in representing the data upon which evidence is based . Evidence , in this sense , then , is not neutral but shaped by technology and social imperatives . In some cases , evidence may be gathered and interpreted by non - human systems . It may also be gathered and interpreted by many individuals such that each is dependent on another in his or her interpretations . This suggests that evidence can be extended through technologies and groups ( Kerr and Gelfert 2014 ; Kerr 2017 ) . In addition , in accident investigations and forensic engineering , in general , engineers have often tried to comprehend challenges related to engineering evidence . This often results in new frameworks , modes of thinking and ways of dealing with globalized problems that transcend nationalized contexts and the related evidence thereof ( e . g . , see Petroski 1992 , 1996 for engineering failure ; also , Del Frate 2012 , 2014 for insights in philosophical view of failure ) . A more detailed scrutiny of engineering evidence is needed and discussions of its forms thereof . These aspects become crucial in engineer - ing failures , malfunctions , and the associated litigations in the form of expert witness testimonies by engineers . While the above are few directions in relation to engineering epistemology , many questions abound : how do engineers deal with uncertainty , failure , and error margins ( see , e . g . , Bucciarelli 2003 , Ch . 3 ) ? What is the specific relationship between engineer - ing epistemology and engineering ethics ? How should we include the competing social factors that contribute to engineering practice and epistemology ( environmental , finan - cial , resource - based , issues of knowledge management , etc . ) within an engineering epistemology ? How can design processes of large - scale systems be made commensu - rable with product design ? What mode of education is required for creating the next generation of engineers ? Is the current engineering knowledge capable of dealing with upcoming global problems ? What is the role of professionalism in engineering and its relation to social responsibility ? Is the protean nature of engineering epistemology a result of the myriad social forces in which engineers find themselves ? These are a few questions whose answers are yet to be formulated — in this sense , B undone ^ — and which , indeed , transcend the epistemological study of engineering . 9 Conclusion The aim of this article up to this point has been to summarize work that has been done across disciplines that has informed our understanding of engineering epistemology with a view to producing a current state of the art from a multidisciplinary perspective and identifying areas for further research . The richness of the discussion beyond philosophy , as discussed above , shows the continuing value in doing this . In the preceding paragraphs we have aimed to provide a synthesis of philosophical , historical , sociological , and psychological approaches to identify areas of further research specif - ically within the philosophy of engineering . Engineering ( and design ) knowledge has been addressed by philosophers , historians , design theorists , sociologists , anthropolo - gists , and engineers and each of these disciplines has presented a variety of insights helpful for understanding engineering knowledge in its multifaceted complexity . How - ever , an image of engineering knowledge still exists as viewed from a kaleidoscope of V . Kant , E . Kerr 718 these various disciplines . The way forward requires careful scrutiny of engineering knowledge in relation to existing engineering practices . While engineering is an abstract term used to characterize a number of practices and disciplines , knowledge within these particular instances can present a unified sense of engineering knowledge . Acknowledgements Vivek Kant would like to thank his teacher and mentor Scott Campbell for his encouragements towards adressing the science - engineering relationship . Funding Information Eric Kerr ’ s work on the project benefited from the financial support of a Singapore Ministry of Education Academic Research Fund Tier 2 grant entitled B Governing Compound Disasters in Urbanising Asia ^ ( MOE2014 - T2 - 1 - 017 ) . References Akera , A . , & Seely , B . ( 2015 ) . A historical survey of the structural changes in the American system of engineering education . In S . Christensen , C . Didier , A . Jamison , M . Meganck , C . Mitcham , & B . Newberry ( Eds . ) , International perspectives on engineering education , Philosophy of engineering and technology ( Vol . 20 , pp . 7 – 32 ) . Cham : Springer International Publishing . Akin , Ö . ( 2001 ) . Variants in design cognition . In Design knowing and learning : cognition in design education ( pp . 105 – 124 ) . Oxford : Elsevier Science . Akin , Ö . ( 2009 ) . Variants and invariants of design cognition . In J . McDonnell & P . Lloyd ( Eds . ) , About designing , analysing design meetings . London : Taylor & Francis Group . . Arden , B . W . ( 1980 ) . What can be automated ? Cambridge : MIT Press . Baker , L . R . ( 2009 ) . The metaphysics of malfunction . Techné , 13 ( 2 ) , 82 – 92 . Barnes , B . ( 1982 ) . The science - technology relationship : a model and a query . Social Studies of Science , 12 ( 1 ) , 166 – 172 . Bassett , R . ( 2016 ) . The technological Indian . Cambridge : Harvard University Press . Baumann , P . ( 2011 ) . WAMs : why worry ? Philosophical Papers , 40 ( 2 ) , 155 – 177 . Belanger , D . O . ( 1998 ) . Enabling American innovation : Engineering and the National Science Foundation . West Lafayette : Purdue University Press . Blaauw , M . ( 2003 ) . WAMming away at contextualism . Nordic Journal of Philosophy , 4 , 88 – 97 . Bloom , P . ( 1996 ) . Intention , history and artifact concepts . Cognition , 60 , 1 – 29 . Bloor , D . , Barnes , B . , & Henry , J . ( 1996 ) . Scientific knowledge : a sociological analysis . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Boon , Mieke . ( 2006 ) . How science is applied in technology . International studies in the philosophy of science , 20 ( 1 ) , 27 – 48 . Boon , M . ( 2008 ) . Diagrammatic models in the engineering sciences . Foundations of Science , 13 , 127 – 142 . Boon , M . ( 2011 ) . In defense of engineering sciences : on the epistemological relations between science and technology . Techné , 15 ( 1 ) , 49 – 71 . Boon , M . , & Knuuttila , T . ( 2009 ) . Models as epistemic tools in engineering sciences . In A . Meijers ( Ed . ) , Handbook of the philosophy of science ( pp . 693 – 726 ) . Amsterdam : North - Holland . Brey , P . ( 2010 ) . Philosophy of technology after the empirical turn . Techné , 14 ( 1 ) , 36 – 48 . Brown , J . K . ( 2000 ) . Design plans , working drawings , national styles : engineering practice in Great Britain and the United States , 1775 - 1945 . Technology and Culture , 41 ( 2 ) , 195 – 238 . Brown , J . ( 2006 ) . Contextualism and warranted assertibility manoeuvres . Philosophical Studies , 130 , 407 – 435 . Brown , T . , & Wyatt , J . ( 2010 ) . Design thinking for social innovation . Development Outreach , 12 ( 1 ) , 29 – 43 . Brown , J . K . , Downey , G . L . , & Diogo , M . P . ( 2009 ) . The normativities of engineers : engineering education and history of technology . Technology and Culture , 50 ( 4 ) , 737 – 752 . Bruce , R . V . ( 1987 ) . The launching of modern American science , 1846 – 1876 . New York : Knopf . Bucciarelli , L . L . ( 1988 ) . An ethnographic perspective on engineering design . Design Studies , 9 ( 3 ) , 159 – 168 . Bucciarelli , L . L . ( 1994 ) . Designing engineers . Cambridge : MIT Press . Bucciarelli , L . L . ( 2002 ) . Between thought and object in engineering design . Design Studies , 23 ( 3 ) , 219 – 231 . Taking Stock of Engineering Epistemology : Multidisciplinary . . . 719 Bucciarelli , L . L . ( 2003 ) . Engineering philosophy . Delft : Dup Satellite Delft . Buch , A . ( 2015 ) . Studying engineering practice . In S . Christensen , C . Didier , A . Jamison , M . Meganck , C . Mitcham , & B . Newberry ( Eds . ) , Engineering identities , epistemologies and values , Philosophy of engineering and technology , vol ( Vol . 21 , pp . 129 – 145 ) . Cham : Springer International Publishing . Buchanan , R . A . ( 1989 ) . The engineers : a history of the engineering profession in Britain , 1750 – 1914 . London : Kingsley , Jessica . Bunge , M . ( 1966 ) . Technology as applied science . Technology and Culture , 7 , 329 – 349 . Burnham , J . C . ( 1987 ) . How superstition won and science lost : Popularizing science and health in the United States . New Brunswick : Rutgers University Press . Burnham , J . C . ( 1988 ) . Paths into American culture : psychology , medicine , and morals . Philadelphia : Temple University Press . Cassis , Y . , Crouzet , F . , & Gourvish , T . R . ( Eds . ) . ( 2005 ) . Management and business in Britain and France : the age of the corporate economy . Oxford : Clarendon Press . Channell , D . F . ( 2009 ) . The emergence of the engineering sciences : an historical analysis . In A . Meijers ( Ed . ) , Philosophy of technology and engineering sciences ( pp . 117 – 154 ) . Amsterdam : North - Holland / Elsevier . Christensen , S . H . , Didier , C . , Jamison , A . , Meganck , M . , Mitcham , C . , & Newberry , B . ( Eds . ) . ( 2015a ) . Engineering identities , epistemologies and values engineering education and practice in context , volume 2 . Cham : Springer . Christensen , S . H . , Didier , C . , Jamison , A . , Meganck , M . , Mitcham , C . , & Newberry , B . ( Eds . ) . ( 2015b ) . Engineering identities , epistemologies and values . Cham : Springer . Cohen , S . ( 1987 ) . Knowledge , context , and social standards . Synthese , 73 ( 1 ) , 3 – 26 . Cohen , S . ( 1998 ) . Contextualist solutions to epistemological problems : Scepticism , Gettier , and the lottery . Australasian Journal of Philosophy , 76 , 289 – 306 . Constant , E . W . ( 1980 ) . The origins of the turbojet revolution . Baltimore : The Johns Hopkins University Press . Constant , E . W . ( 1983 ) . Scientific theory and technological testability : science , dynamometers , and water turbines in the 19th century . Technology and Culture , 24 ( 2 ) , 183 – 198 . Constant , E . W . ( 1989 ) . Science in society : petroleum engineers and the oil fraternity in Texas , 1925 - 65 . Social Studies of Science , 19 ( 3 ) , 439 – 472 . Craig , D . L . ( 2001 ) . Stalking Homo Faber : a comparison of research strategies for studying design behavior . In Design knowing and learning : cognition in design education ( pp . 13 – 36 ) . Oxford : Elsevier Science . Cross , N . ( 2001 ) . Design cognition : results from protocol and other empirical studies of design activity . In Design knowing and learning : cognition in design education ( pp . 79 – 103 ) . Oxford : Elsevier Science . Cross , N . ( 2006 ) . Designerly ways of knowing . London : Springer . Cupani , A . ( 2006 ) . The peculiarity of technological knowledge . Scientiae Studia , 4 ( 3 ) , 353 – 371 . de Vries , M . J . ( 2003 ) . The nature of technological knowledge . Techné , 6 ( 3 ) , 117 – 130 . de Vries , M . J . ( 2006 ) . Technological knowledge and artefacts : an analytical view . In J . R . Dakers ( Ed . ) , Defining technological literacy : towards an epistemological framework . Basingstoke : Palgrave - Macmillan . de Vries , M . J . ( 2009 ) . Translating customer requirements into technical specifications . In Philosophy of technology and engineering sciences ( pp . 489 – 512 ) . Amsterdam : Elsevier . de Vries , M . J . , & Meijers , A . W . M . ( 2013 ) . Beliefs , acceptances and technological knowledge . In Norms in technology ( pp . 55 – 65 ) . Dordrecht : Springer . Del Frate , L . ( 2012 ) . Failure of engineering artefacts : a life cycle approach . Science and Engineering Ethics , 19 ( 3 ) , 913 – 944 . Del Frate , L . ( 2014 ) . Failure : analysis of an engineering concept . Delft . Available at : http : / / p - e . ieis . tue . nl / node / 133 . Del Frate , L . , Zwart , S . D . , & Kroes , P . A . ( 2011 ) . Root cause as a U - turn . Engineering Failure Analysis , 18 ( 2 ) , 747 – 758 . Dennett , D . C . ( 1995 ) . Darwin ’ s dangerous idea : evolution and the meanings of life . City of New York : Simon and Schuster . DeRose , K . ( 1992 ) . Contextualism and knowledge attributions . Philosophy and Phenomenological Research , 52 ( 4 ) , 913 – 929 . Donovan , A . ( 1986 ) . Thinking about engineering . Technology and Culture , 27 ( 4 ) , 674 – 679 . Dorst , K . ( 2004 ) . On the problem of design problems — problem solving and design expertise . Journal of Design Research , 4 ( 2 ) . Dorst , K . , & Vermaas , P . E . ( 2005 ) . John Gero ’ s function - behaviour - structure model of designing : a critical analysis . Research in Engineering Design , 16 ( 1 – 2 ) , 17 – 26 . Downey , G . ( 2005 ) . Are engineers losing control of technology ? : from problem solving to problem definition and solution in engineering education . Chemical Engineering Research and Design , 83 ( 6 ) , 583 – 595 . V . Kant , E . Kerr 720 Downey , G . L . ( 2007 ) . Low cost , mass use : American engineers and the metrics of progress . History and Technology , 23 ( 3 ) , 289 – 308 . Downey , G . L . , & Lucena , J . C . ( 2004 ) . Knowledge and professional identity in engineering : code - switching and the metrics of progress . History and Technology , 20 ( 4 ) , 393 – 420 . Downey , G . L . , Donovan , A . , & Elliott , T . J . ( 1989 ) . The invisible engineer : how engineering ceased to be a problem in science and technology studies . Knowledge and Society : Studies in the Sociology of Culture Past and Present , 8 , 189 – 216 . Dretske , F . ( 1970 ) . Epistemic operators . Journal of Philosophy , 67 , 1007 – 1023 . Dubberly , H . ( 2004 ) . How do you design ? : a compendium of models . San Francisco . Dunbar , K . ( 1995 ) . How scientists really reason : Scientific reasoning in real - world laboratories . In R . J . Sternberg & J . Davidson ( Eds . ) , Mechanisms of insight ( pp . 365 – 395 ) . Cambridge : MIT Press . Dusek , V . ( 2008 ) . Philosophy of technology : an introduction . Malden : Wiley - Blackwell . Farrell , R . , & Hooker , C . ( 2012 ) . The Simon – Kroes model of technical artefacts and the distinction between science and design . Design Studies , 33 ( 5 ) , 480 – 495 . Farrell , R . , & Hooker , C . ( 2015 ) . Designing and sciencing : response to Galle and Kroes . Design Studies , 37 , 1 – 11 . Feenberg , A . ( 2016 ) . The concept of function in critical theory of technology . In M . Franssen , P . Vermaas , P . Kroes , & A . Meijers ( Eds . ) , Philosophy of technology after the empirical turn , Philosophy of engineering and technology ( Vol . 23 , pp . 283 – 303 ) . Cham : Springer . Ferguson , E . S . ( 1977 ) . The mind ’ s eye : nonverbal thought in technology . Science , 197 ( 4306 ) , 827 – 836 . Ferguson , E . S . ( 1992 ) . Engineering and the mind ’ s eye . Cambridge : The MIT Press . Floridi , L . ( 2011 ) . A defense of constructionism : philosophy as conceptual engineering . Metaphilosophy , 42 ( 3 ) , 282 – 304 . Forman , P . ( 2007 ) . The primacy of science in modernity , of technology in postmodernity , and of ideology in the history of technology . History and Technology , 23 ( 1 – 2 ) , 1 – 152 . Franssen , M . ( 2015 ) . Design for values and operator roles in sociotechnical system . In J . van der Hoven , P . Vermaas , & I . van de Poel ( Eds . ) , Handbook of ethics , values , and technological design ( pp . 117 – 149 ) . Dordrecht : Springer . Franssen , M . , & Kroes , P . ( 2009 ) . Sociotechnical systems . In J . K . B . Olsen , S . A . Pedersen , & V . F . Hendricks ( Eds . ) , A companion to the philosophy of technology ( pp . 223 – 226 ) . Wiley - Blackwell : Oxford . Franssen , M . , Kroes , P . , Vermaas , P . E . , & Reydon , T . A . C . ( Eds . ) . ( 2013 ) . Artefact kinds : ontology and the human - made world . Dordrecht : Springer . Franssen , M . , Vermaas , P . E . , Kroes , P . , & Meijers , A . W . M . ( 2016 ) . Editorial introduction : putting the empirical turn into perspective . In M . Franssen , P . Vermaas , P . Kroes , & A . Meijers ( Eds . ) , Philosophy of technology after the empirical turn , Philosophy of engineering and technology ( Vol . 23 , pp . 1 – 10 ) . Cham : Springer . Fuller , S . ( 1987 ) . On regulating what is known : a way to social epistemology . Synthese , 73 ( 1 ) , 145 – 183 . Galle , P . , & Kroes , P . ( 2014 ) . Science and design : identical twins ? Design Studies , 35 ( 3 ) , 201 – 231 . Galle , P . , & Kroes , P . ( 2015 ) . Science and design revisited . Design Studies , 37 , 67 – 72 . Gero , J . S . , & Kannengiesser , U . ( 2004 ) . The situated function – behaviour – structure framework . Design Studies , 25 ( 4 ) , 373 – 391 . Gero , J . S . , Jiang , H . , & Williams , C . B . ( 2013 ) . Design cognition differences when using unstructured , partially structured , and structured concept generation creativity techniques . International Journal of Design Creativity and Innovation , 1 ( 4 ) , 196 – 214 . Gero , J . S . , Kannengiesser , U . , & Pourmohamadi , M . ( 2014 ) . Commonalities across designing : empirical results . In J . S . Gero ( Ed . ) , Design computing and cognition 12 ( pp . 265 – 281 ) . Dordrecht : Springer . Goldman , A . ( 1999 ) . Knowledge in a social world . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Grayson , L . P . ( 1993 ) . The making of an engineer : an illustrated history of engineering education in the United States and Canada . New York : Wiley . Grimson , W . , & Murphy , M . ( 2015 ) . The epistemological basis of engineering , and its reflection in the modern engineering curriculum . In S . Christensen , C . Didier , A . Jamison , M . Meganck , C . Mitcham , & B . Newberry ( Eds . ) , Engineering identities , epistemologies and values , Philosophy of engineering and technology ( Vol . 21 , pp . 161 – 178 ) . Cham : Springer . Guillén , M . F . ( 1994 ) . Models of management : work , authority , and organization in a comparative perspec - tive . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Hagge , J . ( 1995 ) . Early engineering writing textbooks and the anthropological complexity of disciplinary discourse . Written Communication , 12 ( 4 ) , 439 – 491 . Hansson , S . O . ( 2013 ) . What is technological knowledge ? In I . Skogh & M . J . de Vries ( Eds . ) , Technology teachers as researchers ( pp . 17 – 31 ) . Rotterdam : Sense Publishers . Taking Stock of Engineering Epistemology : Multidisciplinary . . . 721 Hansson , S . O . ( 2015 ) . Science and technology : what they are and why their relation matters . In S . Hansson ( Ed . ) , The role of technology in science : philosophical perspectives , Philosophy of engineering and technology ( Vol . 18 , pp . 11 – 23 ) . Dordrecht : Springer . Hansson , S . O . ( 2016 ) . Technology as a practical art . In M . Franssen , P . Vermaas , P . Kroes , & A . Meijers ( Eds . ) , Philosophy of technology after the empirical turn , Philosophy of engineering and technology ( Vol . 23 , pp . 63 – 81 ) . Dordrecht : Springer . Hardwig , J . ( 1985 ) . Epistemic dependence . Journal of Philosophy , 82 ( 7 ) , 335 – 349 . Hardwig , J . ( 1991 ) . The role of trust in knowledge . Journal of Philosophy , 88 ( 12 ) , 693 – 720 . Haynes , R . D . ( 1994 ) . From Faust to Strangelove . Representations of the scientist in Western literature . Baltimore : The Johns Hopkins University Press . Henderson , K . ( 1999 ) . On line and on paper : visual representations , visual culture , and computer graphics in design engineering . Cambridge : The MIT Press . Hess , D . ( 2016 ) . Undone science : social movements , mobilized publics , and industrial transitions . Cambridge : MIT Press . Hetherington , S . ( 2015 ) . Technological knowledge - that as knowledge - how : a comment . Philosophy and Technology , 28 ( 4 ) , 567 – 572 . Hilpinen , R . ( 1993 ) . Authors and artefacts . Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society , 93 , 155 – 178 . Hindle , B . ( 1981 ) . Invention and emulation . New York : WW Norton . Hindle , B . ( 1982 ) . Necessity is not the mother of invention . American Heritage , 34 ( 1 ) , 8 – 9 . Hindle , B . ( 1986 ) . From art to technology and science . In : Proceedings of the American Antiquarian Society . 96 ( 1 ) . Worcester : American Antiquarian Society , pp . 25 – 37 . Houkes , W . ( 2006 ) . Knowledge of artefact functions . Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part A , 37 ( 1 ) , 102 – 113 . Houkes , W . ( 2009 ) . The nature of technological knowledge . In A . Meijers ( Ed . ) , Philosophy of technology and engineering sciences ( pp . 309 – 350 ) . Amsterdam : Elsevier . Houkes , W . ( 2013 ) . Rules , plans and the normativity of technological knowledge . In M . de Vries , S . Hansson , & A . Meijers ( Eds . ) , Norms in technology . Philosophy of engineering and technology ( Vol . 9 , pp . 35 – 54 ) . Springer . Houkes , W . , & Meijers , A . W . M . ( 2006 ) . The ontology of artefacts : the hard problem . Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part A , 37 ( 1 ) , 118 – 131 . Houkes , W . and Vermaas , P . E . 2010 . Technical functions : on the use and design of artefacts ; New York : Springer . Hounshell , D . A . ( 1980 ) . Edison and the pure science ideal in 19th - century America . Science , 207 ( 4431 ) , 612 – 617 . Hunter , L . C . ( 1985 ) . A history of industrial power in the United States , 1780 – 1930 . Volume 2 : steampower . Charlottesville : University Press of Virginia . Jiang , H . , Gero , J . S . , & Yen , C . - C . ( 2014 ) . Exploring designing styles using a problem – solution index . In J . S . Gero ( Ed . ) , Proc . Design Computing and Cognition DCC ’ 12 ( pp . 85 – 101 ) . Johansson - Sköldberg , U . , Woodilla , J . , & Çetinkaya , M . ( 2013 ) . Design thinking : past , present and possible futures . Creativity and Innovation Management , 22 ( 2 ) , 121 – 146 . Johnson , A . ( 2009 ) . Hitting the brakes . Durham : Duke University Press . Kan , J . W . T . and Gero , J . S . ( 2011 ) . Comparing designing across different domains : an exploratory case study . In : DS 68 - 2 : Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Engineering Design ( ICED 11 ) . Impacting society through engineering design , vol . 2 : design theory and research methodology . Lyngby / Copenhagen , Denmark , 15 – 19 August 2011 . Kerr , E . ( 2017 ) . Evidence in engineering . In D . Michelfelder , B . Newberry , & Q . Zhu ( Eds . ) , Philosophy and engineering , Philosophy of engineering and technology , vol ( Vol . 26 , pp . 43 – 59 ) . Cham : Springer . Kerr , E . , & Gelfert , A . ( 2014 ) . The B extendedness ^ of scientific evidence . Philosophical Issues ( Nous supplementary volume ) , 24 ( 1 ) , 253 – 281 . Kimbell , L . ( 2011 ) . Rethinking design thinking : part I . Design and Culture , 3 ( 3 ) , 285 – 306 . Kline , R . ( 1987 ) . Science and engineering theory in the invention and development of the induction motor , 1880 - 1900 . Technology and Culture , 28 ( 2 ) , 283 . Kline , R . ( 1995 ) . Construing B technology ^ as B applied science ^ : Public rhetoric of scientists and engineers in the United States , 1880 - 1945 . Isis , 86 ( 2 ) , 194 – 221 . Kline , R . R . ( 2000 ) . The paradox of B engineering science ^ : a cold war debate about education in the U . S . IEEE Technology and Society Magazine , 19 ( 3 ) , 19 – 25 . Kline , R . R . , & Lassman , T . C . ( 2015 ) . Competing research traditions in American industry : uncertain alliances between engineering and science at Westinghouse electric , 1886 – 1935 . Enterprise and Society , 6 ( 04 ) , 601 – 645 . V . Kant , E . Kerr 722 Koen , B . V . ( 1985 ) . Definition of the engineering method , ASEE Publications . Available at : http : / / files . eric . ed . gov / fulltext / ED276572 . pdf . Koen , B . V . ( 1988 ) . Toward a definition of the engineering method . European Journal of Engineering Education , 13 ( 3 ) , 307 – 315 . Koen , B . V . ( 2003 ) . Discussion of the method : rightly conducting the engineer ’ s approach to problem solution . New York : Oxford University Press . Kokotovich , V . , & Purcell , T . ( 2000 ) . Mental synthesis and creativity in design : an experimental examination . Design Studies , 21 ( 5 ) , 437 – 449 . Kostyszak , M . , Wadowski , J . , & Zaród , M . ( 2015 ) . Engineering education in Slavic languages countries . In S . Christensen , C . Didier , A . Jamison , M . Meganck , C . Mitcham , & B . Newberry ( Eds . ) , International perspectives on engineering education , Philosophy of engineering and technology ( Vol . 20 , pp . 125 – 143 ) . Cham : Springer . Kranakis , E . ( 1997 ) . Constructing a bridge : an exploration of engineering culture , design , and research in nineteenth century France and America . Cambridge : The MIT Press . Kroes , P . ( 2002 ) . Design methodology and the nature of technical artefacts . Design Studies , 23 ( 3 ) , 287 – 302 . Kroes , P . ( 2009 ) . Foundational issues of engineering design . In Philosophy of technology and engineering sciences ( pp . 513 – 541 ) . Amsterdam : Elsevier . Kroes , P . ( 2010 ) . Engineering and the dual nature of technical artefacts . Cambridge Journal of Economics , 34 ( 1 ) , 51 – 62 . Kroes , P . ( 2012 ) . Technical artefacts : creations of mind and matter . New York : Springer . Kroes , P . , & Meijers , A . ( 2006 ) . The dual nature of technical artefacts . Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part A , 37 ( 1 ) , 1 – 4 . Krohs , U . , & Kroes , P . ( 2009 ) . Philosophical perspectives on organismic and artefactual functions . In U . Krohs & P . Kroes ( Eds . ) , Functions in biological and artificial worlds : comparative philosophical perspectives ( pp . 3 – 12 ) . Cambridge : The MIT Press . Kusch , M . ( 2002 ) . Knowledge by agreement : the programme of communitarian epistemology . Oxford : Clarendon Press . Lafollette , M . C . ( 1990 ) . Making science our own : public images of science , 1910 – 1955 . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Laureillard , P . , & Vinck , D . ( 2003 ) . The role of graphical representations in inter - professional cooperation . In V . Dominique ( Ed . ) , Everyday engineering . ethnography of design and innovation ( pp . 159 – 175 ) . Cambridge : MIT Press . Lavelle , S . ( 2015 ) . Engineering as a technological way of world - making . In S . Christensen , C . Didier , A . Jamison , M . Meganck , C . Mitcham , & B . Newberry ( Eds . ) , Engineering identities , epistemologies and values , Philosophy of engineering and technology ( Vol . 21 , pp . 251 – 269 ) . Cham : Springer International Publishing . Law , J . ( 1990 ) . Descriptions of the design process . In How designers think ( pp . 22 – 36 ) . Amsterdam : Elsevier . Law , J . , & Dorst , K . ( 2009 ) . Design expertise . Burlington : Architectural Press . Lawson , B . R . ( 1979 ) . Cognitive strategies in architectural design . Ergonomics , 22 ( 1 ) , 59 – 68 . Lawson , B . R . ( 2005 ) . How designers think : the design process demystified ( 4th ed . ) . Burlington : Architectural Press . Layton , E . ( 1971 ) . Mirror - image twins : the communities of science and technology in 19th - century America . Technology and Culture , 12 ( 4 ) , 562 – 580 . Layton , E . T . ( 1974 ) . Technology as knowledge . Technology and Culture , 15 ( 1 ) , 31 – 41 . Layton , E . T . ( 1976a ) . American ideologies of science and engineering . Technology and Culture , 17 ( 4 ) , 688 – 701 . Layton , E . T . ( 1976b ) . Technology and science [ B Vive La Petite Difference ^ ] . PSA : Proceedings of the Biennial Meeting of the Philosophy of Science Association , 2 , 173 – 184 . Layton , E . T . ( 1977 ) . Conditions of technological development . In I . Spiegel - Rosing & D . J . de Solla Price ( Eds . ) , Science , technology , and society . Beverly Hills : Sage . Layton , E . T . ( 1986 ) . The revolt of the engineers : social responsibility and the American engineering profession . Baltimore : Johns Hopkins University Press . Layton , E . T . ( 1988 ) . Science as a form of action : the role of the engineering sciences . Technology and Culture , 29 ( 1 ) , 82 – 97 . Layton , E . T . ( 1991 ) . A historical definition of engineering . In P . T . Durbin ( Ed . ) , Critical perspectives on nonacademic science and engineering ( pp . 60 – 79 ) . Cranbury : Lehigh University Press . Leite , A . ( 2005 ) . Some worries for would - be Wammers . Grazer Philosophische Studien , 69 , 101 – 125 . Lucena , J . C . ( 2005 ) . Defending the nation : US policymaking to create scientists and engineers from sputnik to the B war against terrorism ^ . Lanham : University Press of America . Taking Stock of Engineering Epistemology : Multidisciplinary . . . 723 Lucier , P . ( 2012 ) . The origins of pure and applied science in gilded age America . Isis , 103 ( 3 ) , 527 – 536 . Lundgreen , P . ( 1990 ) . Engineering Education in Europe and the U . S . A . , 1750 – 1930 : the rise to dominance of school culture and the engineering professions . Annals of Science , 47 ( 1 ) , 33 – 75 . Margolis , E . , & Laurence , S . ( 2007 ) . Creations of the mind : Theories of artefacts and their representation . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Matthews , B . ( 2007 ) . Locating design phenomena : a methodological excursion . Design Studies , 28 ( 4 ) , 369 – 385 . Meijers , A . W . M . , & de Vries , M . J . ( 2012 ) . Technological knowledge . In J . K . B . O . Friis , S . A . Pedersen , & V . F . Hendricks ( Eds . ) , A companion to the philosophy of technology . Hoboken : Wiley - Blackwell . Meijers , A . W . M . , & Kroes , P . A . ( 2013 ) . Extending the scope of the theory of knowledge . In M . J . de Vries , S . O . Hansson , & A . W . M . Meijers ( Eds . ) , Norms in technology , Philosophy of engineering and technology , vol ( Vol . 9 , pp . 15 – 34 ) . Dordrecht : Springer . Meiksins , P . ( 1996 ) . Engineers in the United States : a house divided . In P . Meiksins & C . Smith ( Eds . ) , Engineering labour : Technical Workers in Comparative Perspective ( pp . 61 – 97 ) . New York : Verso . Meiksins , P . , & Smith , C . ( 1996 ) . Engineering labour : technical workers in comparative perspective . Londres New York : Verso . Merritt , R . H . ( 1969 ) . Engineering in American society , 1850 – 1875 . Lexington : University Press of Kentucky . Merton , R . K . ( 1965 ) . On the shoulders of giants . New York : Harcourt , Brace & World . Michelfelder , D . P . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Foreword : prospects in the philosophy of engineering : an exchange between the editors and Carl Mitcham . In D . P . Michelfelder , N . McCarthy , & D . E . Goldberg ( Eds . ) , Philosophy and engineering : reflections on practice , principles and process . Dordrecht : Springer . Mitcham , C . ( 1994 ) . Thinking through technology : the path between engineering and philosophy . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Mitcham , C . , & Schatzberg , E . ( 2009 ) . Defining technology and the engineering sciences . In A . Meijers ( Ed . ) , Philosophy of technology and engineering sciences ( pp . 27 – 63 ) . Amsterdam : Elsevier . Murphy , M . , Chance , S . , & Conlon , E . ( 2015 ) . Designing the identities of engineers . In S . Christensen , C . Didier , A . Jamison , M . Meganck , C . Mitcham , & B . Newberry ( Eds . ) , Engineering identities , epistemol - ogies and values , Philosophy of engineering and technology ( Vol . 21 , pp . 41 – 64 ) . Cham : Springer International Publishing . Nagel , J . ( 2008 ) . Knowledge ascriptions and the psychological consequences of changing stakes . Australasian Journal of Philosophy , 86 ( 2 ) , 279 – 294 . Nersessian , N . J . , & Patton , C . ( 2009 ) . Model - based reasoning in interdisciplinary engineering . In A . Meijers ( Ed . ) , Handbook of the philosophy of science ( pp . 727 – 757 ) . Amsterdam : North - Holland . Newberry , B . ( 2015 ) . The dialectics of engineering . In S . Christensen , C . Didier , A . Jamison , M . Meganck , C . Mitcham , & B . Newberry ( Eds . ) , Engineering identities , epistemologies and values , Philosophy of engineering and technology ( Vol . 21 , pp . 9 – 22 ) . Cham : Springer . Niiniluoto , I . ( 2016 ) . Philosophy of technology after the empirical turn . In M . Franssen , P . Vermaas , P . Kroes , & A . Meijers ( Eds . ) , Philosophy of engineering and technology ( Vol . 23 , pp . 93 – 106 ) . Cham : Springer . Noble , D . F . ( 1977 ) . America by design : science , technology , and the rise of corporate capitalism . New York : Knopf . Nordmann , A . ( 2006 ) . Collapse of distance : epistemic strategies of science and technoscience . Danish Yearbook of Philosophy , 41 , 7 – 34 . Nordmann , A . , Radder , H . , & Shiemann , G . ( 2011 ) . Science transformed ? : debating claims of an epochal break . Pittsburgh : University of Pittsburgh Press . Norström , P . ( 2011 ) . Technological know - how from rules of thumb . Techne , 15 ( 2 ) , 96 – 109 . Norström , P . ( 2015 ) . Knowing how , knowing that , knowing technology . Philosophy and Technology , 28 ( 4 ) , 553 – 565 . Oreskes , N . , & Conway , E . M . ( 2010 ) . Merchants of doubt . London : Bloomsbury Press . Peck , D . ( 2008 ) . Practical action : Polanyi , hacking , Heidegger and the tacit dimension . Saarbrucken : VDM Verlag Dr . Muller . Pedersen , S . A . ( 2015 ) . The tension between science and engineering design . In S . H . Christensen et al . ( Eds . ) , Engineering identities , epistemologies and values ( pp . 179 – 198 ) . Cham : Springer . Petroski , H . ( 1992 ) . To engineer is human : the role of failure in successful design . New York : Vintage . Petroski , H . ( 1996 ) . Invention by design : how engineers get from thought to thing . Cambridge : Harvard University Press . Pinch , T . J . , & Bijker , W . E . ( 1984 ) . The social construction of facts and artefacts : or how the sociology of science and the sociology of technology might benefit each other . Social Studies of Science , 14 ( 3 ) , 399 – 441 . V . Kant , E . Kerr 724 Pinch , T . J . , & Oudshoorn , N . ( Eds . ) . ( 2005 ) . How users matter : The co - construction of users and technol - ogies . Cambridge : MIT Press . Pitt , J . C . ( 2000 ) . Thinking about technology . New York : Seven Bridges Press . Pitt , J . C . ( 2001 ) . What engineers know . Techné : Research in Philosophy and Technology , 5 ( 3 ) , 116 – 123 . Pitt , J . C . ( 2007 ) . What engineers know . Techné , 5 ( 3 ) , 116 – 123 . Pitt , J . C . ( 2009 ) . Technological explanation . In A . Meijers ( Ed . ) , Philosophy of technology and engineering sciences ( pp . 861 – 879 ) . Amsterdam : Elsevier / North - Holland . Polanyi , M . ( 2005 ) . Personal knowledge . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Original work published in 1958 . Polanyi , M . ( 2009 ) . The tacit dimension . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Original work published in 1966 . Powell , R . ( 2015 ) . Adopting a technological stance toward the living world . Promises , pitfalls and perils . In S . Hansson ( Ed . ) , The role of technology in science : philosophical perspectives , Philosophy of engineering and technology ( Vol . 18 , pp . 149 – 172 ) . Preston , B . ( 2009 ) . Philosophical theories of artefact function . In A . Meijers ( Ed . ) , Philosophy of technology and engineering sciences ( pp . 213 – 233 ) . Amsterdam : Elsevier / North - Holland . Pritchard , D . ( 2005 ) . Contextualism , scepticism , and warranted assertability manoeuvres . In J . K . Campbell , M . O ’ Rourke , & H . S . Silverstein ( Eds . ) , Knowledge and skepticism . Cambridge : MIT Press . Pritchard , M . S . ( 2009 ) . Professional standards in engineering practice . In A . Meijers ( Ed . ) , Philosophy of technology and engineering sciences ( pp . 953 – 971 ) . Amsterdam : Elsevier / North - Holland . Proctor , R . N . , & Schiebinger , L . ( Eds . ) . ( 2008 ) . Agnotology : the making and unmaking of ignorance . Palo Alto : Stanford University Press . Purcell , A . T . , & Gero , J . S . ( 1996 ) . Design and other types of fixation . Design Studies , 17 ( 4 ) , 363 – 383 . Radder , H . ( 2009 ) . Science , technology and the science - technology relationship . In A . Meijers ( Ed . ) , Philosophy of technology and engineering sciences ( pp . 65 – 91 ) . Amsterdam : Elsevier / North - Holland . Reydon , T . A . C . ( 2017 ) . Philosophy of technology . Internet encyclopedia of philosophy . Retrieved from http : / / www . iep . utm . edu / technolo / . Accessed 20 Sept 2017 . Reynolds , T . S . ( 1986 ) . Defining professional boundaries : chemical engineering in the early 20th century . Technology and Culture , 27 ( 4 ) , 694 . Reynolds , T . S . , & Seely , B . E . ( 1993 ) . Striving for balance : a hundred years of the American Society for Engineering Education . Journal of Engineering Education , 82 ( 3 ) , 136 – 151 . Rice , S . P . ( 2004 ) . Minding the machine : languages of class in early industrial America . Berkeley : University of California Press . Rittel , H . W . , & Webber , M . M . ( 1973 ) . Dilemmasinageneraltheoryofplanning . Policysciences , 4 ( 2 ) , 155 – 169 . Rogers , G . F . C . ( 1983 ) . The nature of engineering : a philosophy of technology . London : Macmillan Press . Ryle , G . ( 1949 ) . The concept of mind . Chicago : Chicago University Press . Schaffer , J . ( 2001 ) . Knowledge , relevant alternatives and missed clues . Analysis , 61 ( 3 ) , 202 – 208 . Schaffer , J . ( 2005 ) . What shifts ? : thresholds , standards , or alternatives ? In G . Preyer & G . Peter ( Eds . ) , Contextualism in philosophy : knowledge , meaning , and truth . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Scharff , R . C . , & Dusek , V . ( 2014 ) . Philosophy of technology : the technological condition : an anthology . Chichester : Wiley . Schatzberg , E . ( 2006 ) . Technik comes to America : changing meanings of technology before 1930 . Technology and Culture , 47 ( 3 ) , 486 – 512 . Schatzberg , E . ( 2012 ) . From art to applied science . Isis , 103 ( 3 ) , 555 – 563 . Scheele , M . ( 2005 ) . The proper use of artefacts : a philosophical theory of the social constitution of artefact functions . Retrieved from http : / / resolver . tudelft . nl / uuid : ee901137 - 5d77 - 4c16 - b5a6 - d29a5915d624 . Accessed 15 Aug 2017 . Schmid , H . B . , Sirtes , D . , & Weber , M . ( Eds . ) . ( 2011 ) . Collective epistemology . Frankfurt : Ontos Verlag . Schmitt , F . F . ( 1994 ) . Socializing epistemology : the social dimensions of knowledge . Lanham : Rowman and Littlefield . Schön , D . A . ( 1983 ) . The reflective practitioner : how professionals think in action . New York : Basic Books . Schön , D . A . ( 1988 ) . Designing : rules , types and words . Design Studies , 9 ( 3 ) , 181 – 190 . Schummer , J . , MacLennan , B . , & Taylor , N . ( 2009 ) . Aesthetic values in technology and engineering design . In A . Meijers ( Ed . ) , Philosophy of technology and engineering sciences ( pp . 1031 – 1068 ) . Amsterdam : North - Holland / Elsevier . Schyfter , P . ( 2016 ) . Function and Finitism : a sociology of knowledge approach to proper technological function . In M . Franssen , P . Vermaas , P . Kroes , & A . Meijers ( Eds . ) , Philosophy of technology after the empirical turn , Philosophy of engineering and technology ( Vol . 23 , pp . 305 – 325 ) . Cham : Springer International Publishing . Taking Stock of Engineering Epistemology : Multidisciplinary . . . 725 Seely , B . ( 1993 ) . Research , engineering , and science in American engineering colleges : 1900 - 1960 . Technology and Culture , 34 ( 2 ) , 344 – 386 . Seely , B . E . ( 1999 ) . European contributions to American engineering education : blending old and new . Quaderns d ’ Història de l ’ Enginyeria , 3 , 285 – 294 . Seely , B . E . ( 2005 ) . Patterns in the history of engineering education reform : a brief essay . In National Academy of Engineering . 2005 . Educating the engineer of 2020 : adapting engineering education to the new century ( pp . 114 – 130 ) . Washington , DC : The National Academies Press . Seely , B . E . ( 2013 ) . The other re - engineering of engineering education , 1900 - 1965 . Journal of Engineering Education , 88 ( 3 ) , 285 – 294 . Silva , É . R . , Bartholo , R . and Proença , D . ( 2015 ) . Engineering Brazil : national engineering capability at stake . In : S . Christensen , C . Didier , A . Jamison , M . Meganck , C . Mitcham , B . Newberry ( eds ) International perspectives on engineering education ( pp . 95 – 104 ) . Philosophy of engineering and technology 20 . Simon , H . A . ( 1996 ) . The sciences of the artificial ( 3rd ed . ) . Cambridge : MIT Press . Smith , P . H . ( 2012 ) . The body of the artisan : art and experience in the scientific revolution . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Smith , J . M . , & Lucena , J . C . ( 2016 ) . Invisible innovators : how low - income , first - generation students use their funds of knowledge to belong in engineering . Engineering Studies , 8 ( 1 ) , 1 – 26 . Smith , C . , & Whalley , P . ( 1996 ) . Engineers in Britain : a study in persistence . In P . Meiksins & C . Smith ( Eds . ) , Engineering labour : technical workers in comparative perspective ( pp . 27 – 60 ) . New York : Verso . Stanley , J . ( 2005 ) . Knowledge and practical interests . Oxford : Oxford UP . Stone , J . ( 2007 ) . Contextualism and warranted assertion . Pacific Philosophical Quarterly , 88 ( 1 ) , 92 – 113 . Subramanian , B . ( 2015 ) . Engineering education in India : a comprehensive overview . In S . Christensen , C . Didier , A . Jamison , M . Meganck , C . Mitcham , & B . Newberry ( Eds . ) , International perspectives on engineering education , Philosophy of engineering and technology ( Vol . 20 , pp . 105 – 123 ) . Cham : Springer International Publishing . Thomasson , A . L . ( 2003 ) . Realism and human kinds . Philosophy and Phenomenological Research , 67 ( 3 ) , 580 – 609 . Ullman , D . G . ( 2010 ) . The Mechanical Design Process ( 4th ed . ) . Boston : McGraw - Hill . Vaccari , A . ( 2013 ) . Artefact dualism , materiality , and the hard problem of ontology : some critical remarks on the dual nature of technical artefacts program . Philosophy and Technology , 26 ( 1 ) , 7 – 29 . Vaesen , K . , & van Amerongen , M . ( 2008 ) . Optimality vs . intent : limitations of Dennett ’ s artifact hermeneutics . Philosophical Psychology , 21 ( 6 ) , 779 – 797 . Valderrama , A . , et al . ( 2009a ) . Engineering education and the identities of engineers in Colombia , 1887 – 1972 . Technology and Culture , 50 ( 4 ) , 811 – 838 . Valderrama , A . , et al . ( 2009b ) . Engineering education and the identities of engineers in Columbia , 1887 - 1972 . Technology and Culture , 50 ( 4 ) , 811 – 838 . Vermaas , P . E . ( 2013 ) . The coexistence of engineering meanings of function : four responses and their methodological implications . Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing , 27 ( 03 ) , 191 – 202 . Vermaas , P . E . ( 2016 ) . An engineering turn in conceptual analysi . In Philosophy of technology after the empirical turn ( pp . 269 – 282 ) . Cham : Springer International Publishing . Vermaas , P . E . , & Dorst , K . ( 2007 ) . On the conceptual framework of John Gero ’ s FBS - model and the prescriptive aims of design methodology . Design Studies , 28 ( 2 ) , 133 – 157 . Vermaas , P . , & Garbacz , P . ( 2009 ) . Functional decomposition and mereology in engineering . In A . Meijers ( Ed . ) , Philosophy of technology and engineering sciences ( pp . 235 – 271 ) . Amsterdam : Elsevier . Vermaas , P . et al . ( 2011 ) . A philosophy of technology : from technical artefacts to sociotechnical systems . Synthesis Lectures on Engineers , Technology and Society , 6 ( 1 ) . Morgan & Claypool . Vincenti , W . G . ( 1990 ) . What engineers know and how they know it : analytical studies from aeronautical history . Baltimore : Johns Hopkins Univ . Press . Zhu , Q . and Jesiek , B . K . ( 2015 ) . Confucianism , Marxism , and pragmatism : the intellectual contexts of engineering education in China . In Christensen S . , Didier C . , Jamison A . , Meganck M . , Mitcham C . , Newberry B . ( Eds . ) , International perspectives on engineering education ( pp . 151 – 170 ) . Philosophy of engineering and technology 20 . Zwart , S . D . ( 2009 ) . Scale modelling in engineering : Froude ’ s case . In A . Meijers ( Ed . ) , Handbook of the philosophy of science ( pp . 759 – 798 ) . Amsterdam : North - Holland . Zwart , S . D . and de Vries , M . J . ( 2016 ) . Methodological classification of innovative engineering projects . In M . Franssen , P . Vermaas , P . Kroes , A . Meijers ( Eds . ) , Philosophy of technology after the empirical turn ( pp . 219 – 248 ) . Philosophy of engineering and technology 23 . V . Kant , E . Kerr 726