Ontology - based Retrieval of Geographic Information Wei Liu 1 , 2 , PhD student 1 . Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Resources and Environmental Information Engineering ( China University of Mining and Technology ) , Xuzhou China , 221008 2 . Center for Spatial Information Science and System , George Mason University , Greenbelt , MD , USA , 20770 wliu3 @ gmu . edu liuwei @ lreis . ac . cn Chunmin Peng , PhD student Center for Spatial Information Science and System , George Mason University , Greenbelt , MD , USA , 20770 pcming @ gmu . edu Hehe Gu , Professor Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Resources and Environmental Information Engineering ( China University of Mining and Technology ) , Xuzhou , China 221008 guhh @ 263 . net Dayu Cheng , PhD student Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Resources and Environmental Information Engineering ( China University of Mining and Technology ) , Xuzhou China 221008 dayc @ cumt . edu Abstract - In the era of information explosion , information retrieval has become a bottleneck in information sharing and integration . However currently , the existing information retrieval methods are mainly based on keywords matching , which can not fully take advantage of the information context and potential knowledge . Although in the later researches , Geo - ontology has been used to enrich geospatial objects with semantic information which could be very helpful in the geospatial information retrieval , these researches have rarely considered the key feature of geospatial information - the complex spatial relationship . The researches focused on the general concept and primarily from the perspective of vocabulary describe the geographic information , which can not be used to describe the spatial relationship of geographic information and lack of support for retrieval of spatial relationship of geographic information . In this paper , we propose a new approach for geographic information retrieval , we have established the topology and direction and distance spatial relation of geographic information . Firstly , we analysis the shortcomings of current geographic information retrieval methods , and use a case to illustrate the shortcomings of current retrieval methods . Secondly , we analysis the spatial properties and non - spatial properties of semantic relation , and proposed that uses to describe geographic information of spatial relations of Attribute Relational Graph - ARG . Thirdly , according to the reference ontology , using Geo - ontology Building Algorithm - GOBA to build the geographic ontology instance . Finally , take the DALIAN Bay land utilization ontology as the example to show the availability of this method . We have also analysis the approach’s merit and deficiency in the conclusions part . Keywords - geographic information retrieval ; geo - ontology ; Attribute Relational Graph - ARG ; Geo - Ontology Building Algorithm - GOBA I . I NTRODUCTION With the rapidly developed of Geographic information system ( GIS ) and remote sensing ( RS ) and global position system ( GPS ) , the data we obtained from RS , GPS , GIS become more tremendous and the problems we need to process become more complicated , and these problems always involve a great deal of data retrieval . The current GI retrieval approach primarily focused on keyword matching , the specifications ( GML [ 1 ] , WMS [ 2 ] , WFS [ 3 ] etc . ) provided by the Open Geospatial Consortium ( OGC ) enable syntactic interoperability and cataloguing of GI which can support the keyword matching of GI retrieval . However , a range of problems cause by semantic heterogeneity still present challenges for GI retrieval in keyword - based matching approach . There are some approaches to overcome these problems in the explicit of knowledge by uses of ontology [ 4 ] , i . e . explicit format specifications of shared conceptualizations [ 5 , 6 ] . Recent research [ 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , and 11 ] has applied the concepts of semantic web to geospatial data retrieval and sharing . Semantic web [ 12 ] promotes the use of ontology languages such as Resource Description Framework ( RDF ) and Web Ontology Language ( OWL ) to provide semantics for data usually found in databases or other structured documents [ 13 ] . One important advantage of RDF and OWL ontology is that it is easier to de ﬁ ne semantics for data using ontology constructs such as classes and properties . In addition , combined with ontology semantic constraints , the ontology can allow reasoners based on Description Logic ( DL ) to infer further knowledge from partially speci ﬁ ed data and check for data consistencies [ 14 ] . Tools like Jena allow inference rules be used to support more powerful query of ontology data . In [ 15 ] , they present an approach and architecture for ontology - based discover and retrieval of geographic information through a Web Feature Service ( WFS ) that overcomes some problems caused by semantic heterogeneity . However those approaches are merely description of the relationship between geographic concepts , for example , waters that contains lakes , rivers , reservoirs and tidal flats etc . , after building the waters of semantic relationship , when query the waters , it will automatically reasoning into the lakes , rivers , reservoirs and tidal flats etc . . However , those approaches didn’t description of the spatial relations of GI and therefore didn’t support retrieval that based on spatial relations . For example , it is not Supported by the National High - Tech Research and Development Plan （ 863 ） of China under Grant No . 2006AA09Z139 possible to retrieval all the rivers which located in the north of QINGHAI Lake and within 50 miles . In this paper , we present a new approach that not only can retrieval the semantic information of GI but also can retrieval the spatial relations information of GI . In our approach , we building the topology and direction and distance of spatial relations for GI , and proposing to use the Attribute Relational Graph ( ARG ) to describe the spatial relations , then using GOBA to create the geographic ontology instance according to the reference ontology and ARG . Thus , we can retrieval the spatial relations and semantic relations of geographic entities at once time . The remainder of the paper is structure as follows . Section Ⅱ introduces a motivating example for our work and gives a detailed description of the types of retrieval problems that may occur during the process of GI retrieval . The theoretical part for the presented approach is described in section Ⅲ , which builds the semantic relations and spatial relations of GI , and the spatial reference ontology is built that use to create the geographic ontology instances , and section Ⅴ , which introduces the GOBA to create geographic ontology instances . In section Ⅵ , the approach of ontology - based retrieval is presented , including a description of the tree structure , the geographic ontology instances and an example walkthrough illustrating a prototypical implementation , and a conclusion and pointers to future work are given in section Ⅶ . II . PROBLEMS CAUSED BY SEMANTIC HETEROGENEITY In current standard - based catalogues [ 16 ] , user can formulate queries using keywords . The keywords matching , which is limited to redesigned pattern , only several keywords are allowed for the user to represent a query , and just does keywords or sub - string matching in its internal query process . Even though natural language - processing techniques can increase the semantic relevance of search results with respect to the search request [ 17 ] . Keyword - based techniques are inherently restricted by the ambiguities of natural language . If a different terminology is used by providers and requesters , keyword - based search can have a low recall , i . e . not all relevant information sources are discovered . If terms are homonymous or because the ability to express complex queries in keyword - based search is limited , precision can also be low , i . e . some of the discovered services are not relevant [ 18 ] . For example , if John , who is interested in the measurement of the forest land area at a special regional of the DALIAN Bay , uses “forest land ” as a keyword , he may fail to find the existing WFS that are offering this information ( low recall ) , because there is only the data of wood land ( NO . 123 ) , shrubbery land ( NO . 23 ) , sparse - woods land ( NO . 12 ) and suitable - forest land ( NO . 34 ) in the database , and each is composed by several subset data . If the keyword matching approach is used , John inputs “forest land” can not get any results . However , the forest land is composed by wood land ( NO . 123 ) , shrubbery land ( NO . 23 ) , sparse - woods land ( NO . 12 ) and suitable - forest land ( NO . 34 ) , they all have already existed in the database , and should be returned together with the relations between them and the ones that John wanted explicitly expression . Another major difficulty can arise during the second task when John wants to access GI via one of the discovered WFS . The DescribeFeatureType request returns the application schema for the feature type , which is essential for formulating a query filter . John now runs into trouble if the property names are not intuitively interpretable . For example , he can only guess that the property names “Jiuy _ wl” ( Wood land ) and “Heb _ sl” ( Shrubbery land ) ( Table Ⅰ ) both refer to the measurement of the area in a land . Also , it is not obvious that the first measurements are given in M 2 , while the second measurements are given in Km 2 . In this scenario , it might be sufficient to offer John a natural language description for each property . However , our work is aimed at automating the process of discovery and retrieval , and this makes a machine - interpretable description of the properties indispensable . TABLE I . NAME OF THE GML FEATURES RETURN BY THREE WFS AND THEIR PROPERTIES WFS Wood landShrubbery landSparse - woods land Name of the region Area in M 2 ( Woodland ) or Km 2 ( others ) Geometry as polygon Date of measurement NO . of the region Jiuy _ wl Heb _ sl Wuj _ sf 123 23 12 16400 0 . 35 0 . 56 polygon multpolygon polygon III . SEMANTIC ANALYSIS AND RELATIONS BUILDING OF GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION In addition to the data structure of heterogeneous in GI , there are also have the semantically heterogeneous . Semantically heterogeneous in GI can be divided into spatial properties and non - spatial properties heterogeneous , the following is the discussion of these two kinds of semantic heterogeneous . A . Semantic Analysis and Build the Relations of Spatial Propetites Spatial properties of semantic relations in this paper can be divided into the following three . 1 ) Topological relation : The topological relation reflect the logical relation between geospatial entities ; it does not require coordinates , distance information , is not limited scale , nor changes in the relations with the projection . Thus , in GI retrieval , topological relations for geographic information retrieval have very important significance . In this paper the topological relations including Contain , Touch , Overlap , Cover , Disjoint , Equal , CoverBy and Internal 8 kinds of relations , in which Cover and CoverBy , Contain and Internal are the inverse relation . 2 ) Direction relation : The direction relation is one geographic entity relative the other geographic entities of orientation relation . The 8 well - known direction relations : North , Northwest , West , Southwest , South , Southeast , East , Northeast , may also have left , right , up , down and other direction relations . In our approach , take the central geographic entity of a map ( image ) as the first one starting position to determine the other geographic entities relative the central geographic entity of the direction relations ; then take the first one starting position as the center and around to find a geographic entity as a reference , accordance with this method to determine the spatial location relations between the geographic entities . As shown in Fig . 1 , first take A as the first one starting reference entity , build other geographic entities relative A entity the spatial orientation relations ; Then in the geographical entities set ( F , G , H ) choosing one of them as the next reference entity , in our approach , we according to the clockwise direction choice F as the second reference entity , then build other geographical entities ( excluding the A entity which has been built spatial orientation relations ) relative F geographic entity the spatial orientation relations . Using the same method to build all the spatial orientation relations between geographical entities . A B C D E G F H B / NE B / E B / SE B / S B / SW B / W B / NW B / N A N SENW N S S W W E E NESW SE NW NE SW Figure . 1 Reference relations Figure . 2 Inverse relations In the spatial orientation relations , A and B have the following inverse relations , as shown in Fig . 2 . • If B is located in the North to A , then A is located in the South to B ; • If B is located in the Northwest to A , then A is located in the Southeast to B ; • If B is located in the West to A , then A is located in the East to B ; • If B is located in the Southwest to A , then A is located in the Northeast to B ; • If B is located in the South to A , then A is located in the North to B ; • If B is located in the Southeast to A , then A is located in the Northwest to B ; • If B is located in the East to A , then A is located in the West to B ; • If B is located in the Northeast to A , then A is located in the Southwest to B . The above orientation relations will be used in spatial reasoning , using OWL to build their mutual relations ; we can infer the spatial relations between them by Jena 1 . 3 ) Distance : usually people use far , close , farther and closer , etc . to describe the distance between the two geographic entities , but this kind of description is not accurate and easily lead to ambiguity . In our approach , the distance relations we use the object centroid of standard Euclidean distance . In response to these spatial data of semantic heterogeneity issues , we proposed using Attribute Relational Graph ( ARG ) to describe the geographic entities and their spatial relations information . Refer to Fig . 3 , the geographic entities and their ARG , ARG nodes marked with the geographic entities of label . The edge between two nodes , marked with the spatial relations information of the two nodes . Between N1 and N2 the edge marked with ( N1 , D , 67 , 8 . 9 , N2 ) , which shows that N1 and N2 the topological relationship is Disjoint , the angle between them is 67 degree ( counterclockwise direction measurement ) , the distance between them is 8 . 9 units . N1 N2 N3 N1 N2 N3 ARG （ N2 , CO , 126 , 2 . 3 , N3 ） ( N1 , D , 67 , 8 . 9 , N2 ) ( N1 , D , 74 , 10 . 7 , N3 ) ( N1 , D , D , SW , SW , 8 . 9 , 10 . 7 , N2 , CO , SE , 2 . 3 , N3 ) Features point Figure . 3 The mapping process of geographic entities and their ARG After for each map building the ARG , ARG should be mapped to the feature space of a multi - dimensional point , the feature point according to some pre - specified sequence organizations ( in our approach , the central geographic entity as the first one starting reference entity ) . First , is the first one geographic entity , followed by the first geographic entity and all other geographic entities the spatial relations ; then is the second geographic entity and the all subsequent geographic entities the spatial relations , accordance with this method , until building the completely ARG . At this stage , the azimuth angles between geographic entities are converted to position predicates . As shown in Fig . 3 , between N 1 and N2 the angle 67 degree is mapped to the southwest ( SW ) direction . B . Semantic Analysis and Build the Relations of Non - spatial Properties Non - spatial properties the semantic heterogeneity , mainly due to people in expression the same class of geographic entities using difference concepts , as for “Beijing” , it is known as the “Forbidden City” , also is known as “Peking” ; some National’s geographic division of the “State” equivalent to the concept of “Province” in China . The semantic heterogeneity of Non - spatial properties is generally divided into the following two : Heterogeneous synonyms , i . e . we use a different vocabulary to express the same meaning , such as “Beijing” , also known as “Forbidden City” , or “Peking” ; isomorphism homograph , i . e . we use the same vocabulary to express different meaning . The non - spatial properties of semantic relationship can be described use following method . For the above - mentioned problems , there have a large number of the spatial properties and non - spatial properties of semantic heterogeneity in geographic information sources . We used the OWL built a description of the geographic entity the universal character and semantic relations of reference ontology Geo - Reference - Ontology ; this ontology can be referenced by other ontologies . In the Geo - Reference - Ontology we define the field of geographic information the three most important ontologies : GeoFeature ontology , http : / / jena . sourceforge . net / GeoCoordination ontology and GeoRelation ontology . GeoFeature ontology provides a framework for geographic elements and geographic element sets , which describes the geographic entities are some abstract objects , such as lakes , rivers , bays and inlets etc . and their attributes , including length , area , etc . ; GeoCoordinationSystem ontology is used description the concepts of geographic coordinate system , including GeographicCoordinateSystem and Projected - CoordinateSystem and LocalCoordinateSystem . Geo - CoordinationSystem used to define the concept of geographic coordinates reference system which is use the longitude and latitude to define the points in the Earth’ location ; ProjectedCoordinateSystem used to define the projection coordinate system ; LocalCoordinateSystem used to define the local coordinate system , or with certain places or objects related the coordinate system . GeoRelation ontology is used to qualitative and quantitative description the basic spatial relations of concept sets , including Topology , Direction and Distance , in which Topology including Contain , Touch , Overlap , Cover , Disjoint , Equal , CoverBy and Internal 8 kinds of spatial topological relations , Direction including isNorthOf , isEastOf , isSouthOf , isWestOf , isNorthEastOf , isSouth - NorthOf , isNorthWestOf and isSouthWestOf 8 kinds of orientation relationship , these properties all have transitivity , some properties have the inverse relations , e . g . isWestOf and isEastOf have the inverse relationship , Distance including TemaoralDistance and SpatialDistance , which Temaoral - Distance represents the time distance , SpatialDistance represents the spatial distance . The parts of the basic ontologies of geographic information in Geo _ Reference _ Ontology can be seen in Table Ⅱ . TABLE II . THE BASIC ONTOLOGIES OF GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION IN GEO - REFERENCE - ONTOLOGY ( PARTIAL ) Type Tag GeoFeature Topology ( class ) GeoCoordination GeoRelation Lake , River , Beach , Bay , Area ( property ) , Length ( property ) GeographicCoordinateSystemProjectedCoordinateSystemLocalCoordinateSystem isCotain , isTouch ( property ) Direction ( class ) isNorthOf , isNorthEastOf ( property ) Distance ( class ) metresOf , kilometresOf ( property ) Ⅴ . SPATIAL DATA EXTRACTION AND APPLICATION ONTOLOGY INSTANCE BUILDING After build the ARG and the semantic relations of GI , refer to the Fig . 4 the Geo - ontology Building Algorithm - GOBA for automatic building the application ontology instances . Firstly , according to the reference ontology and data source structure , GOBA creates a new empty OWL document and insert the root node ; and then following the ARG of the feature space of feature points the sequence extract a spatial object , such as N1 , according to the type of the spatial object to create a new node and insert into the root node , at the same time creating the spatial object nodes , which need to create the spatial object’s properties : in N1 corresponding to the feature point extract a geometric property , and create an instance of the geometric properties insert into the new node N1 , which need to be judged until all the spatial properties creating complete , In the same way to create the spatial object’s non - spatial properties , until the all non - spatial properties creating complete . Once this spatial object creating complete , need to justice whether there are other spatial objects . If there have other spatial objects not created , and then repeat the process until all the geographic objects and the corresponding spatial properties and non - spatial properties converted into the application ontology instances . After creating the instances of application ontology , the OWL document will be built ; part Ⅵ will be used the built OWL documents . Empty OWL document N1 is what kind of geographic entity ? Build an instance of N1 Extract an geo - property from the feature points which corresponding to the N1 Build an instance of the geometric properties Extract a property from the N1 non - geoproperties Build an instance of the non - geoproperty New spatial object Output OWL document New property ? New properties ? yes no yes no no yes According to feature space of space points the sequence extract a spatial object , such as N1 Figure . 4 Geo - ontology Building Algorithm - GOBA process Ⅵ . TEST ANALYSIS Following is a test to show DALIAN Bay region land utilize application ontology instances ( Fig . 6 ) generated by the above algorithm , which describes the DALIAN Bay region land utilize information , including spatial properties and non - spatial properties of semantic information , Fig . 5 is the corresponding land utilize ontology tree structure diagram . Ontology building process reference to " National Resources and Environment Remote Sensing Macro - survey of Land Resources Classification System " and the Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Geographical Sciences and Natural Resources Data Center land - utilize classification ontology system . When a user want to retrieval in north - east direction and located in 50 km of DALIAN Bay , and contains lake all the forest land geographical entities , this query is very complicated , including orientation relations ( DALIAN Bay , north - east direction ) , distance relations ( DALIAN Bay , 50 km ) and topological relation ( lake within forest land ) and semantic relations ( forest land is the parent class of wood land , Sparse - woods land , suitable - forest land and shrubbery land ) . Traditional methods are difficult to achieve such complex query , by building DALIAN Bay region application ontology can be a good solution for this kind of complex query . This test is developed based on Jena and ArcServer , first in the server - side call the ontology query function ( using Jena parse ) , and then inference used the application ontology of spatial semantic relationship . As shown in Fig . 5 and 6 , " Wood land " , " Suitable - forest land " , " Shrubbery land " and " Sparse - woods land " are the subclass of " Forest - land " , " Suitable - forest land " and " Grass land " are the synonymous relationship , " Shrubbery land " and " Sparse - wood land " are parent - class of " Forest grassland " . When query keyword is " Forest land " , utilizing Jena is easy to infer expansion query to the " wood land " , " Suitable - forest land " , " Shrubbery land " , " Sparse - woods land " , " Grassy slope " and " Forest grassland " . Query on spatial relations , the application ontology has been described topological relations ( e . g . isContain ) and orientation relations ( e . g . isNorthEastOf ) and distance relations ( e . g . 11 . 7 , 36 . 5 ) only need to use Xpath and Xquery the queries can be converted . Then the query results organized into a SQL statement passed to the ArcServer’s GetFeature class , by ArcServer return the query results , the client display them . Client - side display query results as shown in Fig . 7 , which highlighted in yellow , are the query results . Land - utilize Forest land Wood land Suitable - forest land Shrubbery land Sparse - woods land Pasture land Natural grass land Man - made grass land Grassy slope Grass land Forest grassland Grassy marshland Figure . 5 Land utilize ontology tree structure ( partial ) < rdf : RDF xmlns = " http : / / www . latis . csiss . gmu . edu / 2 . 0 / ontology / LandUtilize # " > < owl : Ontology rdf : about = " " owl : versionInfo = " 2 . 0 " > < owl : imports rdf : resource = " http : / / csiss . gmu . edu / 2 . 0 / GeoFeature . owl " / > < owl : imports rdf : resource = " http : / / csiss . gmu . edu / 2 . 0 / GeoRelation . owl " / > < owl : imports rdf : resource = " http : / / csiss . gmu . edu / 2 . 0 / GeoCoordination . owl " / > . . . < / owl : Ontology > < owl : Class rdf : ID = " Land Utilize " > < / owl : Class > . . . < owl : DatatypeProperty rdf : ID = " No . " > < rdf : type rdf : resource = " http : / / www . w3 . org / 2002 / 07 / owl # FunctionalProperty " > < / owl : DatatypeProperty > < owl : Class rdf : ID = " Suitable - forest land " > < rdfs : subClassOf rdf : resource = " # Forest land " / > < owl : 12 rdf : resource = " # No . " / > < owl : sameAs rdf : resource = " # Grassy slope " / > < owl : isContain rdf : resource = " # Lake " / > . . . < owl : isNorthEastOf rdf : resource = " # DALIAN Bay " / > . . . < owl : kilometresOf 11 . 7 rdf : resource = " # DALIAN Bay " / > . . . < / owl : Class > < owl : Class rdf : ID = " Shrubbery land " > < rdfs : subClassOf rdf : resource = " # Forest land " / > < owl : 23 rdf : resource = " # No . " / > < owl : Isa rdf : resource = " # Forest grassland " / > < owl : isContain rdf : resource = " # Lake " / > . . . < owl : isNorthEastOf rdf : resource = " # DALIAN Bay " / > . . . < owl : kilometresOf 36 . 5 rdf : resource = " # DALIAN Bay " / > . . . < / owl : Class > . . . < / rdf : RDF > Figure . 6 Land utilize application ontology instances - OWL ( partial ) Figure 7 GI Query Results Ⅶ . CONCLUTIONS Geographic information query and retrieval is a prerequisite for spatial information sharing . However , between the users cognitive model and the system that exist the concept of semantic heterogeneity , the data retrieved is often not what users really want . Through the establishment of equivalence relations , inheritance relations , inverse relations , topology , direction and distance spatial relations of geo - ontology , and used in the search request may be resolve the semantic heterogeneity . In order to achieve a higher level of retrieval , in the search processing , we utilizing spatial data attributes diagram - ARG to describe the geographical entities of spatial relations , based on application ontology instances generation algorithm - GOBA and semantic reasoning tools Jena achieve heterogeneous digestion and semantic expansion , which greatly improves the retrieval accuracy rate . The following are the advantages of this solution and future work . • Proposed the describe spatial relations of ARG model , utilizing ARG can easily query any two geographic entities the spatial relationships , and improving the traditional spatial relationship query of SQL extensions inconvenience ; • Established the non - spatial data of semantic relation - ship , meeting the demand for more comprehensive retrieval data ; • Presented the application ontology instance generation method , which can more easily generate the required application ontology instance . As a future work , we will focus on the following point . • Build ARG model , it takes a lot of time , and error - prone , the next step we will research a more automated method to establishment the required ARG . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] OGC document 02 - 023r4 . Geography Markup Language ( GML ) , version 3 . 00 ( 2003 ) . [ 2 ] OGC document 04 - 024 . Web Map Service , Version 1 . 3 ( 2004 ) . [ 3 ] OGC document 04 - 094 . Web Feature Service , Version 1 . 1 . 0 ( 2005 ) . [ 4 ] WACHE , H . , VO¨ GELE , T . , VISSER , U . , STUCKENSCHMIDT , H . , SCHUSTER , G . , NEUMANN , H . and HU¨ BNER , S . , 2001 , Ontology - based integration of information - a survey of existing approaches . In IJCAI - 01 Workshop : Ontologies and Information Sharing , Seattle , WA , pp . 108 - 117 . [ 5 ] GRUBER , T . R . , 1995 , Toward principles for the design of ontologies used for knowledge sharing . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , 43 , pp . 907 - 928 . [ 6 ] STUDER , R . , BENJAMINS , V . R . and FENSEL , D . , 1998 , Knowledge engineering : principles and methods . Data and Knowledge Engineering , 25 , pp . 161 - 197 . [ 7 ] Budak Arpinar , I . , Sheth , A . , Ramakrishnan , C . , Usery , E . L . , Azami , M . , Kwan , M . - P . : Geospatial ontology development and semantic analytics . Transactions in GIS 10 ( 4 ) , 551 - 575 ( 2006 ) [ 8 ] Egenhofer , M . : Toward the Semantic Geospatial Web . In : Tenth ACM International Symposium on Advances in Geographic Information Systems , pp . 1 - 4 ( 2002 ) [ 9 ] Fonseca , F . , Egenhofer , M . , Agouris , P . , Camara , G . : Using ontologies for integrated geographic information systems . Transactions in GIS 6 ( 3 ) , 231 - 257 ( 2002 ) [ 10 ] Peng , Z . - R . : A proposed framework for featurelevel geospatial data sharing : A case study for transportation network data . International Journal of Geographic Information Sciences 19 ( 4 ) , 459 - 481 ( 2005 ) [ 11 ] Zhang , C . , Li , W . , Zhao , T . : Geospatial data sharing based on geospatial semantic web technologies . Journal of Spatial Science 52 ( 2 ) , 35 - 49 ( 2007 ) [ 12 ] Berners - Lee , T . , Hendler , J . , Lassila , O . : The Semantic Web . Scientific American , 34 - 43 ( 2001 ) [ 13 ] Hobona , G . , Fairbairn , G . D . , James , P . : Semantically - assisted geospatial workflow design . In : Proceedings of 15th ACM International Symposium on Advances in Geographic Information Systems , November 2007 , pp . 194 - 201 ( 2007 ) [ 14 ] Baader , F . , Calvanese , D . , McGuinness , D . L . , Nardi , D . , Patel - Schneider , P . F . : The Description Logic Handbook : Theory , Implementation and Application . Cambridge University Press , New York ( 2003 ) [ 15 ] KLIEN , E . , EINSPANIER , U . , LUTZ , M . and HU¨ BNER , S . , 2004 , An architecture for ontologybased discovery and retrieval of geographic information . In 7th Conference on Geographic Information Science ( AGILE 2004 ) , Heraklion , Greece , pp . 179 - 188 ( Heraklion , Greece : Crete University Press ) . [ 16 ] GDI - NRW 2002 , Catalog Services fu¨r GeoDaten und GeoServices , Version 1 . 0 , ( Geodateninfrastruktur NRW ) . [ 17 ] RICHARDSON , R . and SMEATON , A . F . , 1995 , Using WordNet in a Knowledge - based Approach to Information Retrieval ( Technical Report CA - 0395 ) ( Dublin : Dublin City University ) . [ 18 ] BERNSTEIN , A . and KLEIN , M . , 2002 , Towards high - precision service retrieval . In The Semantic Web - First International Semantic Web Conference ( ISWC 2002 ) , 9 - 12 June 2002 , Sardinia , Italy , pp . 84 - 101 ( Berlin : Springer ) .