Beyond relevance - characteristics of key papers for clinicians : an exploratory study in an academic setting * t By MaryEllen Sievert , Ph . D . Professor School of Library and Informational Science Emma Jean McKinin , M . A . Assistant Professor ( Retired ) School of Library and Informational Science E . Diane Johnson , M . A . Head , Information Services J . Otto Lottes Health Sciences Library John C . Reid , Ph . D . Professor , College of Education , Medical Informatics Group Joyce A . Mitchell , Ph . D . Associate Dean , School of Medicine ; Director , Medical Informatics Group ; Professor , Department of Child Health University of Missouri - Columbia Columbia , Missouri 65211 Objective : The purpose of this study was to determine what factors beyond relevance influence a clinician ' s decision to choose to read one journal article over another in satisfying an information need . Design : Seventeen health care providers were interviewed and then surveyed regarding the characteristics of key articles ( those they would not want to miss ) . On a Likert scale , the clinicians graded forty - two characteristics for importance in the decision process . Relevance was assumed and not at issue . Setting : The study took place in an academic health sciences center . Subjects : The subjects were seventeen clinicians , all with patient care responsibilities . There were four internists , four surgeons , three family practitioners , three pediatricians , two psychiatrists , and one clinical psychologist . Results : Factors beyond relevance that most often influenced the decision process pertained to methodological rigor , authors and their institutional affiliations , document types , and population studied . Conclusions : Among the clinicians surveyed , factors beyond topicality influenced judgments as to what constitutes an important article . The emphasis respondents gave to certain attributes is echoed in other published work and highlights the need for more intensive investigation of these non - subject indicators as search parameters . Improved searching capabilities might well lead to a significant reduction in the clinician ' s information overload . INTRODUCTION * Supported by grant LM04605 from the National Library of Med - For clinicians , the problem of information overload icine . The views expressed are solely those of the authors . has com cute . the memiof literatuis ove t Address for correspondence and reprint requests : MaryEllen has become acute . The medical literature is said to be Sievert , Ph . D . ; Professor , School of Library and Informational Sci - underutilized [ 1 ] and several studies have docu - ence , 104 Stewart Hall , Columbia , Missouri 65211 mented a significant time lag between publication of Bull Med Libr Assoc 84 ( 3 ) July 1996 351 Sievert et al . an innovation in patient care and its adoption by practicing physicians [ 2 - 4 ] . One reason often given for this underuse is the difficulty in sifting infor - mation of importance from an overwhelming volume [ 5 ] . The search for the " key " article instead of the merely relevant one is an important quest for infor - mation specialists in all disciplines . Mechanisms for identifying key articles have been dubbed " quality filters " [ 6 ] . The urgent need to retrieve only the key or best information on a topic comes at a time when infor - mation systems have not yet attained the sophisti - cation necessary even for retrieving only the relevant . Studies measuring the efficacy of retrieval systems have documented mean precision rates ( the number of relevant items retrieved divided by the total num - ber of items retrieved ) of no more than 60 % , even for trained searchers ; for novices the rates are often much lower [ 7 ] . Even the idea of relevance is receiving much closer scrutiny . In a recent issue of the Journal of the American Society for Information Science devoted to the topic of " relevance research , " Hersch suggested that two types of relevance , " topical " and " situational , " need to be considered in evaluating medical information sys - tems . Topical relevance refers to subject content and situational relevance to the " impact of the system on the user " [ 8 ] . Barry found that " situational factors other than the inherent topical content of documents influence the relevance judgment process . . . " These factors relate to elements such as authors , their affil - iated institutions , and document types [ 9 ] . " In spite of the ambiguity regarding relevance , the pursuit of quality filters continues . The call for filters in information systems was first sounded in 1971 [ 10 ] , and one article on quality filtering in medicine ap - peared in 1975 [ 11 ] , but it was not until the mid - 1980s that articles on quality filtering began to appear reg - ularly in the medical literature . A flurry of articles on the identification of articles on randomized con - trolled trials [ 12 - 15 ] sparked a discussion that contin - ues today . Efforts to provide simple methods of extracting the important as opposed to the merely relevant journal articles are under way . Finding search parameters that go beyond subject content and point to the rel - ative merit of documents is an important aspect of the quest for quality filters [ 16 - 17 ] . So far most of the attention has been focused on methods of identifying a specific type of article , the solidly based and rig - orously executed research study [ 18 - 20 ] . Scant atten - tion has been given to the definition of " high qual - ity , " which varies depending upon the background and purpose of the person requesting the article . Physicians have been surveyed to determine spe - cific information needs at various points in their prac - tice day [ 21 - 23 ] and the information sources used to meet those needs [ 24 - 26 ] . Prior to the present study , only Florance had asked physicians how they distin - guish relevant articles from irrelevant ones [ 27 ] : from the articles they viewed , the physicians were able to select the " best " item . However , the purpose of Flor - ance ' s study was to learn about the physicians ' cog - nitive strategies , and the collection of information on relevancy judgments was only incidental . Thus , no previous studies have asked specifically how health care professionals distinguish important articles from merely relevant ones in a generic sense . This paper , which contains some answers to that question , reports on one aspect of a larger study of quality filters for the medical journal literature . The overall goal of the work is to arrive at search strategies that will serve as filters in the full - text databases and to compare the results with those of similar strategies designed for bibliographic counterparts . Interviews and follow - up surveys were conducted as a first step in arriving at definitions of quality , which could then be fashioned into search techniques as part of a larger project . METHODS Seventeen health care professionals in five clinical specialties serve as co - investigators for the MED - LINE / Full Text Research Project [ 28 ] : four internists , four surgeons , three pediatricians , three family prac - titioners , two psychiatrists , and one clinical psychol - ogist . Representatives of these specialties were cho - sen because most of the journals in the full - text med - ical databases fall into these areas . Each of these clinicians was interviewed by two information specialists and all interviews were taped . At the beginning of the interview one of the infor - mation specialists defined what was meant by " key . " A relevant article addressed the topic requested ; a key article both addressed the topic requested and appeared so important that the clinician would not want to miss it . To ensure that all interviews covered the same factors , the interviewers worked from a printed schedule . The interviews , however , were not highly structured and the clinicians were allowed to develop their thoughts according to their own pat - terns . The interviewers were responsible for ensuring that all the items on the schedule were covered , re - gardless of the order . Prior to the interview , each participant received a letter , a copy of a search request , and a print - out of citations generated in response . The first question asked in the interview was , " When you look at a list of citations , how do you judge what is a key paper , that is , a paper you would not want to miss in re - viewing the topic ? " This general question was posed at the beginning of the interview to elicit unprompt - ed comments about the decision process . After the Bull Med Libr Assoc 84 ( 3 ) July 1996 352 Beyond relevance participant had listed characteristics , the interviewers suggested other characteristics gleaned from the lit - erature on quality filtering , earlier discussions with physicians , and in some cases from earlier interviews . Using the tapes and the interviewers ' notes , a team member created a composite of all of the interviews . This composite was used to develop a survey , a list of forty - two characteristics , which were sent for eval - uation to the same clinicians who had been inter - viewed . ( A copy of the survey may be obtained from the authors . ) For the survey , participants were told they had re - ceived a bibliography of 200 citations and abstracts of relevant articles , so relevance was not at issue . Respondents were asked to judge the degree to which each characteristic on the list might influence their decision to read a particular article by using an 8 - point scale : - 1 , negative ; 0 , not important ; 1 , least important ; 2 , of little importance ; 3 , somewhat important ; 4 , im - portant ; 5 , very important ; 6 , most important . RESULTS Interviews The most obvious point revealed by the interviews was the importance placed by the clinicians on the relevance of the paper . The interviewers did not ask about relevance because they were seeking to differ - entiate between articles that were merely relevant and those which were key . However , the clinicians seemed unprepared to begin with the assumption that they were only discussing distinctions among relevant items . The characteristics presented by participants at the beginning of the interviews were of special interest because their mention was unprompted . The first per - son interviewed responded to the opening question by stating that his own level of knowledge about a topic greatly influenced what he was likely to regard as key . When other participants were questioned on this point , most agreed with his statement . Five clinicians said the purpose of the search in - fluenced their decision as to what was key . In dis - cussing the relationship between purpose of the search and characteristics that defined the key article , many indicated that the characteristics seldom varied but that some became more important for certain pur - poses than others . For example , review articles or articles containing tables and graphs became more important , and more likely to be key , when preparing for teaching than when searching for information on some aspect of patient care . SURVEYS One of the most striking aspects of the results was the variability of the responses , both in the interviews and to the survey . Two physicians ( a surgeon and an internist ) seemed to feel that there were few , if any , features besides the topicality of the information need that influenced their decisions about which articles were key . These clinicians rated very few character - istics at the high end of the scale on the survey . How - ever , others named characteristics such as the insti - tution where the study took place or the presence of a leading authority as an author as important features . In spite of these differences , some agreement emerged . Table 1 lists the forty - two characteristics on the sur - vey with the mean , standard deviation , maximum , and minimum responses for each . Of most interest are those characteristics that re - ceived high , low , or widely varying responses . The characteristic " valid study design " received the high - est mean score and was tied for the lowest standard deviation , meaning it was ranked consistently as im - portant . Of the seventeen clinicians , three ranked it as the most important feature , nine ranked it as very important , four ranked it as important , and one ranked it as somewhat important . The clinicians recognized that not all methodologies were applicable to all stud - ies . For example , there are few , if any , randomized controlled trials in genetics . Accordingly , the phrase " valid design " was used to categorize studies , wheth - er or not they were recognized as having a specific methodology , that had qualities the clinicians viewed as valid . The participants said as much in the inter - views . Whatever they perceived as the most rigorous method for their specialty , the clinicians were inter - ested in studies with what they considered valid de - signs . The second characteristic about which there was little disagreement ( the item tied for the lowest stan - dard deviation ) was " a large population . " All clini - cians ranked this characteristic between important and very important . Seven ranked it as very impor - tant , six ranked it as somewhat important , and four ranked it as important . Such agreement is noteworthy given the differing specialties represented by the cli - nicians and the generally wide variation among their responses . This result suggests that most clinicians outside the survey group would find this character - istic important . A valid design and a large population were the only two items on the survey that all respondents ranked as important or higher . These responses were confirmed by what the health care professionals said during the interviews . The characteristic receiving the second highest mean score ( 4 . 7 ) was the " randomized controlled tri - al . " Four clinicians ranked this characteristic as the most important while another seven ranked it as very important . Only two ranked it as less than important and the remaining four ranked it as important . In interviews , clinicians in surgery and genetics noted Bull Med Libr Assoc 84 ( 3 ) July 1996 353 Sievert et al . Table 1 Descriptive statistics for characteristics listed on survey Characteristic Mean Standard deviation Maximum * Minimumt Study has a valid design 4 . 8 0 . 8 6 3 Randomized controlled trial 4 . 7 1 . 1 6 2 Prospective study 4 . 5 1 . 1 6 2 Author well - known on topic 4 . 3 1 . 3 6 2 Large population in study 4 . 2 0 . 8 5 3 Journal refereed 4 . 2 1 . 5 6 0 Practice guideline 4 . 2 1 . 6 6 1 Long - term follow - up 4 . 1 1 . 3 6 2 Article contains detailed diagnosis and treatment 4 . 1 1 . 6 6 1 Review article 4 1 . 5 6 1 Journal prestigious in all of medicine 3 . 9 1 . 2 5 0 Journal prestigious in specialty 3 . 8 1 . 3 5 0 Consensus statement 3 . 6 1 . 4 6 1 Prestigious institution 3 . 6 1 . 5 6 1 Study population is same age 3 . 5 1 . 7 6 1 Meta - analysis 3 . 4 1 . 3 6 1 Multi - institutional study 3 . 2 1 . 5 5 1 Study population is same gender 3 . 2 1 . 8 6 1 Study supported by a national agency 2 . 9 1 . 4 5 0 Article is practice - based 2 . 9 1 . 4 5 0 Author from same specialty 2 . 6 1 . 5 6 0 Study conducted in U . S . 2 . 5 1 . 8 5 0 Retrospective study 2 . 2 1 . 5 4 - 1 Editorial 2 . 2 1 . 7 6 0 Article contains tables , graphs , etc . 2 . 1 1 . 4 4 0 Study conducted with out - patient population 2 . 1 1 . 7 5 0 Study reports negative results 2 1 . 8 5 - 1 Article prompted later letters 1 . 9 1 . 5 4 - 1 Study conducted in Canada 1 . 9 1 . 7 5 0 Basic science study 1 . 9 2 . 1 5 - 1 Study conducted with in - patient population 1 . 8 1 . 5 4 0 Study conducted at a single institution 1 . 7 0 . 9 3 0 Study conducted in Western Europe 1 . 6 1 . 5 5 - 1 Study conducted in a public institution 1 . 2 1 . 5 4 0 Study conducted in a private institution 1 . 2 1 . 5 4 0 Case report 1 . 1 1 . 1 3 - 1 Study supported by a drug company 1 1 . 5 3 - 1 Study conducted in Third World 1 1 . 6 4 - 1 An animal study 0 . 9 1 . 7 3 - 1 Journal from nursing , allied health , or dentistry 0 . 8 1 . 7 3 - 1 Author from nursing , allied health , or dentistry 0 . 7 1 . 6 3 - 1 Letter 0 . 4 1 . 5 3 - 1 Maximum indicates the highest ranking given by any of the respondents . t Minimum indicates the lowest ranking given by any of the respondents . that there were few such studies in their areas , but that when they appeared , the physicians viewed them as important . The characteristic ranked third in mean score is also part of what one of the clinicians called " the holy trio " ( randomized , prospective , and multicenter stud - ies ) in the interview . The characteristic " prospective study " had a mean score of 4 . 5 and the same standard deviation ( 1 . 1 ) as the randomized controlled trial . Nine of the clinicians ranked it as very important or most important ( three as most important and six as very important ) , and only one ranked it as being of little importance . " Multicenter studies " appeared to be less important to these clinicians . The mean score was 3 . 2 and no one ranked it as most important . In the in - terviews , these characteristics - randomized , pro - spective , and multicenter - were repeated almost as a litany , but the written responses suggested that the multicenter study was the least important of the three to these clinicians . At the other end of the scale were characteristics that could be considered negative influences on ar - ticle selection . For three of the characteristics , the rating chosen most often was - 1 ( the lowest ) . Articles from nursing , dentistry , or allied health journals , an - imal studies , and letters were all rated by more than half of the clinicians as negative on the scale . Authors from nursing , dentistry , or allied health and articles from the third world also received many negative rankings . Bull Med Libr Assoc 84 ( 3 ) July 1996 354 Beyond relevance LIMITATIONS This study was exploratory and the sample was small . It seems likely that all , or at least most , of the char - acteristics likely to influence clinicians ' choice be - tween key and relevant items have been identified . It is not clear , however , based on this small sample , whether other clinicians would rank the character - istics the same way . A survey of a larger , random sample might be valuable to clarify the rankings . Given the size of the sample , it was not possible to determine whether the purpose of the search would change the ranking of characteristics significantly . From the interviews it was clear that , while respon - dents cited many of the same characteristics as im - portant , the ranking of these characteristics might change with the purpose of the search . A survey of a larger sample also might clarify these differences . In the survey , the authors asked the clinicians to rank each characteristic independently . In the inter - views , the clinicians indicated that they often saw characteristics occurring together , as in the " holy trio " ( randomized , prospective , and multicenter ) . A study that examined the characteristics in relation to one another could reveal which , if any , other combina - tions of characteristics influenced clinicians . No attempt was made to query the clinicians about the date of publication . The authors assumed that in clinical medicine , the timeliness of an article was im - portant . DISCUSSION While the population for this study was small , it was also diverse . The participants varied in department , rank , specialty , and gender . In spite of these varia - tions , some agreement did emerge . Barry indicated that , in eliciting the factors that determined rele - vance , a level of redundancy was reached with the ninth respondent ; that is , no new factors were listed after the first nine persons were interviewed . The authors of the present study also felt that redundancy was reached early in the interviews . It is likely , there - fore , that if the clinicians surveyed were typical , then the characteristics of interest to clinicians have been identified . The characteristics identified as important are similar to those that Florance found clinicians using to judge relevance [ 29 ] . A larger , random sam - ple would be needed to ensure that these clinicians were representative of the larger population . Without being asked , the health professionals in this study stated that topicality was the most impor - tant factor in deciding what to read . This emphasis on topicality suggests that the pursuit of topical fea - tures is still an important first step in finding infor - mation for clinicians ; quality filters should be used after all the topical aspects of an information need have been addressed . However , clinicians also use a number of additional parameters in deciding which articles to pursue . Fur - ther research is needed to learn if clinicians really do choose articles with the characteristics they have de - scribed as important for key articles . As database de - signers and searchers seek ways to lighten the burden of information overload for health care providers , it may be time to consider the role of these non - subject parameters in more depth . Additional research may be in order to determine which characteristics are most useful to the greatest number of users . Once identified , characteristics not already incorporated into databases as searchable elements might be given that status , and their availability publicized or built into searching software . Findings from this study indicate that the attention given to the identification of studies of methodolog - ical rigor is not misplaced . Many of the characteristics cited by clinicians are related to the quality of study design , and several have been included as searchable elements in electronic databases . Both health profes - sionals who do their own searching and search in - termediaries are being urged to use them [ 30 - 31 ] . A number of the characteristics included in the survey , however , are not available as elements for searching . Table 2 indicates the availability of the forty - two features in the MEDLINE database . For in - stance , MEDLINE does not identify refereed journals , but this capability currently is incorporated into an - other health - related database , Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature . Determining peer review policies in medical journals is not a sim - ple matter . To provide a reliable , searchable marker for refereed status , a database designer would require clear statements of peer review policies from all jour - nals . For some journals , even among those included in MEDLINE , such statements are not available [ 32 ] . The identification of articles that provide details about patient management is a much knottier prob - lem . The literature indicates that respondents in the present study are not alone in recognizing the need to identify such articles . Wilczynski et al . [ 33 ] assessed means of identifying research studies dealing with clinical aspects of disorders , and McKibbon suggested methods for retrieving such items for different types of studies [ 34 - 35 ] . Slawson outlined methods for dis - tinguishing between " patient - oriented evidence that matters " and disease - oriented evidence [ 36 ] . Ironi - cally , articles that are primarily about clinical prob - lems , regardless of their overall quality , are seldom easy to identify in medical databases . Although Na - tional Library of Medicine indexers use many clinical terms - etiology , therapy , drug therapy , diagnosis - as subheadings , those terms are often applied so lib - erally that it remains difficult to recognize articles in Bull Med Libr Assoc 84 ( 3 ) July 1996 355 Sievert et al . Table 2 Availability on MEDLINE of survey characteristics * Article characteristic Search availability Study has a valid design Randomized controlled trial Prospective study Author well - known on topic Large population in study Journal refereed Practice guideline Long - term follow - up Article contains detailed diagno - sis and treatment Review article Joumal prestigious in all of medi - cine Joumal prestigious in the spe - cialty Consensus statement Prestigious institution Study population is same age as clinician Meta - analysis Multi - institutional study Study population is same gender Study supported by a national agency Article is practice - based Author from same specialty Study conducted in U . S . Retrospective study EditorialArticlecontains tables , graphs , etc . Study conducted with out - patient population Study reports negative results Article prompted later letters Study conducted in Canada Basic science study Study conducted with in - patient population Study conducted at a single in - stitution Study conducted in Western Eu - rope Study conducted in a public insti - tution Study conducted in a private in - stitution Case report Study supported by a drug com - pany Study conducted in Third World NoPublication type and MeSH term for random allocation There is a MeSH term for this feature NoNot on MEDLINE ( EMBASE indicates those studies with a population of fifty or more ) Not on MEDLINE ( CINAHL notes this feature ) Publication type MEDLINE indicates a follow - up study but does not indicate the length of the follow - up The subheadings are so liberally ap - plied that they do not really distinguish those with detailed diagnosis and treat - ment ( Section 19 . 1 ) Publication type Possibly the Abridged Index Medicus journals could be used for this purpose No Publication type No Check tags indicate age groups but are used so frequently they do not always function to distinguish the primary pop - ulation ( Section 18 . 5 ) Publication type Publication type Check tags indicate gender but are used so frequently they do not always function to distinguish the primary pop - ulation ( Section 18 . 5 ) MEDLINE has check tags to indicate support from the U . S . government No No Geographic terms are available but are not always assigned in MEDLINE MeSH term for this feature Publication type Not on MEDLINE ( indicated on CINAHL or Health Periodicals Database ) The MeSH term is not always applied NoThe existence of comments on MED - LINE could be used as an indicator of this feature Geographic terms are available but are not always assigned in MEDLINE ( Sec - tion 36 . 1 - 36 . 5 ) No The MeSH term is not always applied No Geographic terms are available but are not always assigned in MEDLINE No No Check tag The tag SUPPORT , NON - U . S . GOV ' T includes drug company sponsorship but many other kinds of support also Geographic terms are available but are not always assigned in MEDLINE Table 2 Continued Article characteristic Search availability An animal study Check tag Journal from nursing , allied The subfiles in MEDLINE could be used health , or dentistry to eliminate these journals Author from nursing , allied No health , or dentistry Letter Publication type * Comments on the applicability of certain features are the opinions of the authors . The number in parentheses indicates the section of the MEDLARS Indexing Manualt where the topic is discussed . t MEDLARS Indexing Manual . Bethesda , MD : National Library of Medicine . the MEDLINE files that emphasize patient manage - ment . In most medical databases , the size , age , and gender of the primary population discussed in the article cannot be determined easily . Like the clinical sub - headings , age and gender indexing terms in the MED - LINE file are applied so liberally that identification of the primary population is often difficult . Such an indexing approach is required to accommodate oc - casions when comprehensive retrieval is necessary , but it becomes a deterrent in the identification of studies of specific populations . Only one database , EMBASE , allows searchers to identify studies with fifty or more subjects . This information is often in - cluded as a separate section in structured abstracts . Perhaps searchers could take advantage of this fact in searching for articles when age , gender , or study size is important . Except on an individual basis , it is difficult to see how author or institutional prestige could be used in quality filters by searchers . However , the health care professionals in the present project clearly were in - fluenced by these factors ; many mentioned them as influential without prompting . They indicated that this information needs to be visible when a citation is presented to clinicians . Authors , of course , appear in all viewing and printing formats in medical da - tabases . Institutional affiliation may or may not be visible . It also may be useful to identify characteristics of the least important articles - those least likely to be regarded as key . Several of the characteristics with very low ratings might be considered as candidates for exclusion , particularly when the volume of lit - erature is high and the application of positive filters not productive . Arriving at high - quality articles by a process of elimination seems a dubious approach , at best . However , it would be one way of reducing in - formation overload . Means for identifying and thus eliminating case reports , letters , editorials , and spe - cific journals exist in most medical databases . How - Bull Med Libr Assoc 84 ( 3 ) July 1996 356 Beyond relevance ever , identifying basic science studies or work sup - ported by a pharmaceutical company might prove more difficult . Additional research on characteristics most likely to be used for exclusion could be useful , but it is not as vital as improving positive attributes . Regardless of the basic structure of a medical jour - nal database ( that is , whether it is designed for tra - ditional Boolean searching or for non - Boolean algo - rithms and ranked output ) , research on these non - subject indicators could provide valuable information for system designers . CONCLUSIONS Among the clinicians surveyed , topicality was the most important feature of an article , but factors be - yond topicality clearly influenced judgments as to what constituted an important article . It also appeared that some factors became more or less important ac - cording to the expected use for the information re - trieved . That is , some characteristics became more important when an article was to be used for teaching rather than for patient care . The importance given to certain attributes is echoed in other published work and highlights the need for more intensive investi - gation of non - subject indicators used as search pa - rameters . Improved searching capabilities might help to reduce significantly the clinician ' s information overload . REFERENCES 1 . HurH EJ . The underused medical literature . Ann Intern Med 1989 Jan 15 ; 110 ( 2 ) : 99 - 100 . 2 . WILLIAMSON JW , GERMAN PS , WEIss R , SKINNER EA , ET AL . Health science information management and continuing education of physicians : a survey of U . S . primary care prac - titioners and their opinion leaders . Ann Intern Med 1989 Jan 15 ; 110 ( 2 ) : 151 - 60 . 3 . STROSS JK , HARLAN WR . The dissemination of new med - ical information . JAMA 1979 Jun 15 ; 241 ( 24 ) : 2622 - 4 . 4 . STROSS JK , HARLAN WR . Dissemination of relevant in - formation on hypertension . JAMA 1981 Jul 24 - 31 ; 246 ( 4 ) : 360 - 2 . 5 . WILLIAMSON , op . cit . 6 . ETZIONI A . The need for quality filters in information systems . Science 1971 Jan 15 ; 171 ( 967 ) : 133 . 7 . HAYNES RB , McKIBBON KA , WALKER CJ , RYAN N , ET AL . Online access to MEDLINE in clinical settings : a study of use and usefulness . Ann Intern Med 1990 Jan 1 ; 112 ( 1 ) : 78 - 84 . 8 . HERSH W . Relevance and retrieval evaluation : perspec - tives from medicine . J Am Soc Inf Sci 1993 Apr ; 45 ( 3 ) : 201 - 6 . 9 . BARRY CL . User - defined relevance criteria : an explora - tory study . J Am Soc Inf Sci 1993 Apr ; 45 ( 3 ) : 149 - 59 . 10 . ETzIONI , Op . cit . 11 . PAO ML . A quality filtering system for medical litera - ture . J Med Educ 1975 Apr ; 50 ( 4 ) : 353 - 9 . 12 . POYNARD T , CONN HO . The retrieval of randomized clinical trials in liver disease from the medical literature : a comparison of MEDLARS and manual methods . Control Clin Trials 1985 Dec ; 6 ( 4 ) : 271 - 9 . 13 . DICKERSIN K , HEWITr P , MUTCH L , CHALMERS I , ET AL . Perusing the literature : comparison of MEDLINE searching with a perinatal trials database . Control Clin Trials 1985 Dec ; 6 ( 4 ) : 306 - 17 . 14 . CHALMERS I , HETHERINGTON J , NEWDICK M , MUTCH L , Er AL . The Oxford Database of Perinatal Trials : developing a register of published reports of controlled trials . Control Clin Trials 1986 Dec ; 7 ( 4 ) : 306 - 24 . 15 . BEGG CB , POCOCK SJ , FREEDMAN L , ZELEN M . State of the art in comparative cancer clinical trials . Cancer 1987 Dec 1 ; 60 ( 11 ) : 2811 - 5 . 16 . JOHNSON ED , McKININ EJ , SIEVERT ME . The application of quality filters in searching the clinical literature : some possible heuristics . Med Ref Serv Q 1992 Winter ; 11 ( 4 ) : 39 - 59 . 17 . McKIBBON KA , WALKER - DILKS CJ . Beyond ACP Journal Club : How to harness MEDLINE for diagnostic problems . ACP J Club 1994 Sep - Oct ; 121 ( Supplement 2 ) : A10 - 2 . 18 . KIRPALANI H , SCHMIDT B , McKIBBON KA , HAYNES RB , Er AL . Searching MEDLINE for randomized clinical trials in - volving care of the newborn . Pediatrics 1989 Apr ; 83 ( 4 ) : 543 - 6 . 19 . BERNSTEIN F . The retrieval of randomized clinical trials in liver diseases from the medical literature : manual versus MEDLARS searches . Control Clin Trials 1988 Mar ; 9 ( 1 ) : 23 - 31 . 20 . McKIBBON KA , DILKS CW . Panning for applied clinical research gold . Online 1993 Jul ; 17 ( 4 ) : 105 - 8 . 21 . OSHEROFF JA , FORSYTHE DE , BUCHANAN BG , BANKOWITZ RA , ET AL . Physicians ' information needs : analysis of ques - tions posed during clinical teaching . Ann Intern Med 1991 Apr 1 ; 114 ( 7 ) : 576 - 81 . 22 . COVELL DG , UMAN GC , MANNING PR . Information needs in office practice : are they being met ? Ann Intern Med 1985 Oct ; 103 ( 4 ) : 596 - 9 . 23 . WOOLF SH , BENSON DA . The medical information needs of internists and pediatricians at an academic medical cen - ter . Bull Med Libr Assoc 1989 Oct ; 77 ( 4 ) : 372 - 80 . 24 . FUHRER MJ , GRABOIS M . Information sources that influ - ence physiatrists ' adoption of new clinical practices . Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1988 Mar ; 69 ( 3 Pt 1 ) : 167 - 9 . 25 . CURLEY SP , CONNELLY DP , RICH EC . Physicians ' use of medical knowledge resources : preliminary theoretical framework and findings . Med Decis Making 1990 Oct - Dec ; 10 ( 4 ) : 231 - 41 . 26 . CONNELLY DP , RICH EC , CURLEY SP , KELLY JT . Knowl - edge resource preferences of family physicians . J Fam Pract 1990 Mar ; 30 ( 3 ) : 353 - 9 . 27 . FLORANCE V , MARCHIONINI G . Information processing in the context of medical care : proceedings of the 18th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval , 1995 : 158 - 63 . 28 . McKININ EJ , SIEvERT ME , JOHNSON ED , MITCHELL JA . The MEDLINE / full - text research project . J Am Soc Inf Sci 1991 May ; 42 ( 4 ) : 297 - 307 . 29 . FLORANCE , op . cit . 30 . JOHNSON , op . cit . Bull Med Libr Assoc 84 ( 3 ) July 1996 357 Sievert et al . 31 . McKIBBON , Beyond the ACP Journal Club , op . cit . 32 . COLAIANNI LA . Peer review in journals indexed in Index Medicus . JAMA 1994 Jul 13 ; 272 ( 2 ) : 156 - 8 . 33 . WILCZYNSKI NL , WALKER CJ , McKIBBON KA , HAYNES RB . Assessment of methodologic search filters in MEDLINE . In : Safran C , ed . Proceedings of the Symposium on Computer Applications in Medical Care , 1993 Oct 30 - Nov 3 , Wash - ington , DC . New York : McGraw - Hill , 1994 : 601 - 5 . 34 . IBID . 35 . IBID . 36 . SLAWSON DC , SHAUGHNESSY AF , BENNETT JH . Becoming a medical information master : feeling good about not know - ing everything . J Fam Pract 1994 May ; 38 ( 5 ) : 505 - 13 . Received January 1996 ; accepted April 1996 Bull Med Libr Assoc 84 ( 3 ) July 1996 358