1 Active Ran regulates anillin function during cytokinesis Daniel Beaudet * † , Tara Akhshi * ‡ § , Julia Phillipp † , Christopher Law ¶ and Alisa Piekny † # Running Head : Chromatin regulates cytokinesis Keywords : Cytokinesis , RhoA , Anillin , Ran , Actin - myosin * Co - author † Department of Biology , Concordia University , Montreal , QC , Canada , H4B 1R6 ‡ Program in Cell Biology , The Hospital for Sick Children , Toronto , Ontario , Canada , M5G 0A4 § Department of Biochemistry , University of Toronto , Toronto , Ontario , Canada , M5S 1A8 ¶ Centre for Microscopy and Cellular Imaging , Concordia University , Montreal , QC , Canada , H4B 1R6 # Corresponding author : alisa . piekny @ concordia . ca http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / content / suppl / 2017 / 09 / 18 / mbc . E17 - 04 - 0253v1 . DC1 Supplemental Material can be found at : 2 Abstract Cytokinesis cleaves a cell into two daughters at the end of mitosis , and must be spatially coordinated with chromosome segregation to prevent aneuploidy . The dogma is that the mitotic spindle governs the assembly and constriction of an actomyosin ring . Here , we reveal a function for active Ran in spatially restricting the ring . Our model is that during anaphase , ‘free’ importins , whose gradient inversely correlates with active Ran and chromatin position , function as a molecular ruler for the recruitment and localization of anillin , a contractile protein and crucial regulator of cytokinesis . We found that decreasing Ran - GTP levels , or tethering active Ran to the equatorial membrane affects anillin’s localization and causes cytokinesis phenotypes . Anillin contains a conserved Nuclear Localization Signal ( NLS ) in its C - terminus that binds to importin - β , and is required for cortical polarity and cytokinesis . Mutating the NLS decreases anillin’s cortical affinity , causing it to be more dominantly regulated by microtubules . Anillin contains a RhoA - GTP binding domain , which autoinhibits the NLS and neighbouring microtubule - binding domain , and RhoA - GTP binding may relieve this inhibition during mitosis . Retention of the C - terminal NLS in anillin homologues suggests that this is a conserved mechanism to control anillin function . 3 Introduction Cytokinesis is driven by the ingression of an actomyosin ring , which cleaves a cell into two daughters . The contractile ring is spatially controlled by the mitotic spindle to coordinate with the segregation of chromosomes and cell fate determinants ( Green et al . , 2012 ; Akhshi et al . , 2014 ; D’Avino et al . , 2015 ; Cheffings et al . , 2016 ) . Failed or dysfunctional cytokinesis causes changes in cell fate and ploidy , which can be detrimental and / or cause cancer ( Lacroix and Maddox , 2012 ; D’Avino et al . , 2015 ) . During early anaphase , actomyosin filaments accumulate to a broad region of the cortex which transitions into a tight ring - like organization as the cell progresses through mitosis ( Green et al . , 2012 ; Akhshi et al . , 2014 ; D’Avino et al . , 2015 ; Cheffings et al . , 2016 ) . The highly conserved protein anillin is a crucial regulator of cytokinesis in metazoans , and has binding sites for key regulators and core effectors of cytokinesis including F - actin , myosin , RhoA , septins , phospholipids , and microtubules ( Piekny and Maddox , 2010 ; Tse et al . , 2011 ; van Oostende Triplet et al . , 2014 ) . Due to its ability to bind to these components , previous studies have focused on how inputs from different pathways are integrated by anillin to spatially control the contractile ring ( e . g . Zanin et al . , 2013 ; van Oostende Triplet et al . , 2014 ) . Multiple pathways regulate cytokinesis yet their requirement varies between organisms and cell - types . The majority of studies have focused on microtubule - dependent mechanisms where the prevailing dogma in the field is that the anaphase spindle determines the division plane for cytokinesis . The central spindle stimulates contractile ring assembly around the equatorial cortex ( Somers and Saint , 2003 ; Bement et al . , 2005 ; Yüce et al . , 2005 ; Zhao and Fang , 2005 ) , while astral microtubules exclude contractile proteins from the poles ( Dechant and Glotzer , 2003 ; Bringmann and Hyman , 2005 ; Werner et al . , 2007 ; Lewellyn et al . , 2010 ; van Oostende Triplet et al . , 2014 ) . However , signals from other cellular locations , such as kinetochores , chromatin or centrosomes , also influence the localization of contractile proteins ( e . g . Canman et al . , 2000 ; Canman et al . , 2003 ; Potapova et al . , 2006 ; Deng et al . , 2007 ; Petronczki et al . , 2007 ; Silverman - Gavrila et al . , 2008 ; Cabernard et al . , 2010 ; Kotadia et al . , 2012 ; Dehapiot et al . , 2013 ; Kiyomitsu and Cheeseman , 2013 ; Zanin et al . , 2013 , Rodrigues et al . , 2015 ) . A kinetochore pathway functions in Drosophila and human cells to mediate relaxation of the polar cortex during anaphase , independent of microtubules and centrosomes ( Rodrigues et al . , 2015 ) . A kinetochore - tethered complex containing PP1 phosphatase and its regulatory subunit Sds22 4 dephosphorylates the actin - regulator , moesin , at the cell poles to promote cortical relaxation ( Carreno et al . , 2008 ; Roubinet et al . , 2011 ; Rodrigues et al . , 2015 ) . Although the balance of active moesin is crucial , it is not essential for cytokinesis per se , and this pathway functions for just a short time during early anaphase . Microtubule - independent pathways may be crucial for cytokinesis in cells where the spindle is positioned far from parts of the cortex , such as in highly polarized cells . In support of this , the cortex still polarizes and ingresses in the absence of polymerized microtubules or an intact mitotic spindle in dividing Drosophila neuroblasts with apical / basal polarity ( e . g . Cabernard et al . , 2010 ) . Chromatin - associated signals also regulate the cortex during cytokinesis . In yeast and metazoans , a NoCut pathway regulates the abscission machinery to prevent the cortex from cutting through unsegregated chromosomes ( Norden et al . , 2006 ; Mendoza et al . , 2009 ; Steigemann et al . , 2009 ) . Acetyltransferase is associated with chromatin and regulates the activity of Ipl1 / Aurora B kinase to modulate proteins that control abscission , such as Boi1 and Boi2 ( anillin - like proteins ) and septins in yeast , or MKLP1 in human cells ( Norden et al . , 2006 ; Potapova et al . , 2006 ; Mendoza et al . , 2009 ; Steigemann et al . , 2009 ) . However , the mechanisms by which chromatin - associated signals regulate the cortex during earlier stages of mitotic exit are not well - understood . In Drosophila neuroblasts , increasing the length of chromatid arms causes an increase in the breadth of active myosin localization during late anaphase and early telophase , leading to dramatic changes in cell shape ( Kotadia et al . , 2012 ) . During meiosis of mouse oocytes , chromatin positioned near the cortex induces the formation of an actin cap via Ran - GTP , and the placement of DNA - coated beads near the cortex induces cortical polarity independent of microtubules ( Deng et al . , 2007 ) . These studies suggest that a chromatin - associated Ran - GTP gradient functions as a molecular ruler to organize the cortex . Furthermore , this gradient may regulate active Cdc42 and Rac for actin cap formation , while excluding ERM ( Ezrin / Radixin / Moesin ; Dehapiot et al . , 2013 ; Dehapiot and Halet , 2013 ) . However , it is not clear if this mechanism applies to cytokinesis , where Cdc42 and Rac are not essential . In another study , Ran - GTP was shown to positively regulate the actomyosin cortex for pseudocleavage furrowing in the early Drosophila embryo ( Silverman - Gavrila et al . , 2008 ) . Ran - GTP releases importin ( s ) from a NLS that overlaps with the septin - binding site in the C - terminus of anillin to permit septin binding ( Silverman - Gavrila et al . , 2008 ) . It is not clear how this model applies to cytokinesis , since the contractile ring assembles and ingresses away from chromosomes . Another 5 study showed that Ran - GTP inhibits vs . promotes anillin’s cortical localization in mitotic mammalian cells ( Kiyomitsu and Cheeseman , 2013 ) . While anillin clears from the cortex near chromatin in cells with depolymerized microtubules and induced to exit mitosis , it fails to clear in cells with decreased active Ran ( Kiyomitsu and Cheeseman , 2013 ) . The authors suggest a model where Ran - GTP regulates cell elongation in response to chromatin in order to maintain the division plane during cytokinesis ( Kiyomitsu and Cheeseman , 2013 ) . However , they did not study the function of Ran - GTP during cytokinesis , or the molecular mechanism by which Ran - GTP regulates the cortex . Here , we show that human anillin is regulated by active Ran during anaphase . We found that decreasing Ran - GTP leads to the ectopic localization of anillin and myosin to the cell poles and blocks furrowing in BHK ( Baby Hamster Kidney ) epithelial cells . In HeLa cells , targeting active Ran to the furrow membrane causes a reduction in anillin localization and oscillation phenotypes similar to those observed after anillin depletion . Anillin contains a highly conserved nuclear localization signal ( NLS ) in its C - terminus that binds to importin - β , and is required to mediate cortical polarization and cytokinesis . Furthermore , mutating the NLS reduces anillin’s affinity for the equatorial cortex , causing it to be more dominantly regulated by astral microtubules during cytokinesis . However , high over - expression of importin - β negatively regulates anillin’s cortical localization . Thus , ‘free’ importins may function as a molecular ruler , where optimal levels mediate the cortical recruitment of anillin by stabilizing a conformation that improves accessibility to cortical proteins and lipids . However , high levels of importins could reduce ‘off - rates’ and sterically hinder binding to other sites in the C - terminus . Interestingly , anillin’s RhoA - GTP binding domain blocks accessibility to the NLS and neighbouring microtubule - binding domain , and we propose that RhoA - GTP binding during early mitotic exit relieves this autoinhibition . Thus , our model is that RhoA - GTP binding to anillin opens the conformation of the C - terminus to make it more accessible for binding to importin and microtubules . A gradient of ‘free’ importins forms in response to chromatin , where Ran - GTP levels are high . Optimal levels of importins likely form near the equatorial plane , and facilitate anillin’s cortical recruitment during anaphase . These results shed light on a novel mechanism through which Ran - GTP polarizes the cortex during cytokinesis . 6 Results Active Ran spatially regulates cytokinesis Recent studies have shown that there is a correlation between chromatin position and the localization of cytokinesis proteins ( Rodrigues et al . , 2015 ) . During mitosis , Ran - GTP forms a gradient around chromatin that regulates proteins required for bipolar spindle assembly ( Kaláb et al . , 2002 ; Kaláb et al . , 2006 ; Clarke and Zhang , 2008 ) . This gradient persists into anaphase and we propose that it influences the cortex ( Li and Zheng , 2004 ; Lee et al . , 2012 ) . To test the role of Ran in cytokinesis , we determined how decreasing the levels of endogenous active Ran affects the localization of contractile proteins in tsBN2 cells , which contain a ts mutant of RCC1 ( Ran GEF ) in Baby Hamster Kidney epithelial cells ( BHK ; Nishimoto et al . , 1978 ) . A reduction in Ran - GTP occurs within minutes of upshift to restrictive temperature ( 39 . 7˚C ) , and all of our analyses were done after cells were upshifted for 30 - 40 minutes ( Lee et al . , 2012 ) . Longer upshifts were detrimental and prevented cells from exiting mitosis , likely due to spindle defects ( Kaláb et al . , 2002 ; Kaláb et al . , 2006 ) . A significant proportion of tsBN2 cells , 59 % for GFP : anillin and 35 % for GFP : myosin ( MLC ; myosin light chain ; active ) , failed to ingress when upshifted to restrictive temperature in comparison to tsBN2 cells at permissive temperature ( 33˚C ; 0 % for GFP : anillin or GFP : myosin ) , or BHK cells at either temperature ( 0 % , at 39 . 7 or 33˚C for anillin : GFP ; Figs 1A , S1A ) . To ensure that the mitotic spindle formed properly in the upshifted cells , we labeled microtubules with Sir - tubulin ( in red ; Fig . 1A ) . Anillin and myosin appeared to be ectopically recruited to regions outside the equatorial plane , so we measured their cortical accumulation . To do this , a linescan was drawn around the perimeter of the cell and the pixels above 50 % maximum levels were summed and calculated as a ratio vs . the total perimeter ( Figs 1B , S1A ) . In tsBN2 cells at restrictive temperature , the ratio of cortical endogenous anillin and GFP : myosin was greater in comparison to cells at permissive temperature ( Figs 1B , S1A ) . Therefore , decreasing Ran - GTP levels during mitosis causes contractile proteins to be ectopically recruited , likely blocking furrow ingression due to altered cortical properties at the cell poles . However , there is always the caveat that these phenotypes are caused indirectly by spindle perturbations , which can occur when Ran - GTP levels are insufficient . In addition , these phenotypes could be caused by the presence of cortical regulators that should be sequestered to the nucleus , since a reduction in Ran - GTP prevents nuclear envelope reformation ( Clarke and Zhang , 2008 ) . 7 To test whether there is a more direct role for Ran - GTP in regulating cytokinesis , we targeted active Ran to the cleavage furrow membrane . Ran or constitutively active Ran ( Q69L ) tagged with mCherry were targeted to the equatorial membrane in cells stably expressing anillin : GFP using the phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PI 4 , 5 P 2 ) - binding domain of Neuromodulin ( 1 - 60aa ; Liu et al . , 2012 ) . Cytokinesis phenotypes were observed in cells strongly over - expressing active Ran ( fluorescence intensity 1 , 500 < 3 , 000 a . u . ) , which were separated into categories of weak cortical instability , such as blebbing or ruffling ( 39 % ) , and oscillation ( 35 % ) , where the furrow failed to remain stably positioned ( Fig . 2A ) . Cells weakly over - expressing active Ran ( 460 < 1 , 500 a . u . ) also displayed weak cortical instability ( 54 % ) , while only a small proportion of cells strongly over - expressing Ran displayed weak cortical instability ( 23 % ; Fig . 2A ) . Furrow oscillation and cortical instability are reminiscent of the phenotypes reported for anillin depletion in HeLa cells ( Straight et al . , 2005 ; Piekny and Glotzer , 2008 ) , suggesting that active Ran negatively regulates anillin function . We also determined if the over - expression of Ran or Ran ( Q69L ) is sufficient to cause phenotypes without being targeted to the membrane ( Fig . S1B ) . No cytokinesis phenotypes were observed in cells over - expressing GFP : Ran or GFP : Ran ( Q69L ) , however , there may be a mild increase in the breadth of anillin in cells over - expressing active Ran ( Fig . S1B ) . To determine if membrane - targeted active Ran affects anillin localization , we measured the ratio of cortically accumulated anillin vs . cytosol ( Fig . S1C ) , and the ratio of anillin breadth vs . cell perimeter just prior to furrow ingression ( Fig . 2B ; Zanin et al . , 2013 ) . There was no significant change in the total levels of cortical anillin in membrane - targeted active Ran vs . Ran or control cells ( Fig . S1C ) . However , there was a significant increase in the breadth of anillin in the equatorial plane in cells where membrane - targeted active Ran was highly over - expressed ( Fig . 2B ) . This data suggests that there is less anillin in the equatorial plane in cells expressing membrane - targeted active Ran . Therefore , targeting active Ran to the membrane may cause insufficient levels of anillin to persist in the equatorial plane to stabilize the ring . To ensure that membrane - targeted Ran overlapped with anillin , we measured co - localization between Ran and anillin in cells at the onset of furrow ingression , which ranged from 40 - 98 % for Ran and Ran ( Q69L ; Fig . S1D ) . Anillin is a target of the Ran pathway 8 To find a target of the Ran pathway , we determined which of the known regulators of cytokinesis are required to polarize the cortex in response to chromatin . First , we verified that Ran polarizes the cortex in HeLa cells lacking polymerized microtubules and induced to exit mitosis ( Kiyomitsu and Cheeseman , 2013 ) . HeLa cells display cortical contractility after treatment with 100 nM Nocodazole for 3 - 4 hours to depolymerize microtubules , followed by 22 . 5 μM Purvalanol A to inhibit Cdk1 activity and promote mitotic exit ( e . g . Figs S2A , 3A ; Petronczki et al . , 2007 ) . Contractile proteins accumulate around the region of the cortex furthest from chromatin causing cells to polarize . This polarization is reminiscent of monopolar cells treated with S - trityl - cysteine ( STC ) to block centrosome separation and forced to exit mitosis ( Fig . S2A ; Hu et al . , 2008 ) . To show that cortical polarity is influenced by Ran , HeLa cells lacking polymerized microtubules and induced to exit mitosis were treated with 100 nM Importazole , which was previously shown to disrupt Ran - GTP - importin binding ( Fig . S2B ; Soderholm et al . , 2011 ) . Cells were assayed for polarization by measuring asymmetric anillin distribution . Anillin was determined to be asymmetric if the ratio ( R ) of accumulated anillin around part of the cortex , perpendicular to the axis of chromatin position , deviated from the other part by R > 1 . 2 ( see schematic in Fig . 3A ) . Indeed , while anillin was asymmetric in 53 % of control cells , it was not asymmetrically distributed in the majority of Importazole - treated cells ( 14 % ; Fig . S2B ) , consistent with previous studies showing that the Ran pathway influences the localization of contractile proteins during mitotic exit ( Kiyomitsu and Cheeseman , 2013 ) . Next , we monitored changes in cortical polarization after treating cells with different siRNAs or drugs to deplete or inhibit known cytokinesis regulators ( Fig . S2C ) . Depleting Ect2 blocked the cortical recruitment of anillin : GFP , consistent with its requirement to generate active RhoA for contractile ring assembly ( 5 % asymmetric vs . 61 % control ; Yüce et al . , 2005 ) . Inhibiting myosin with Blebbistatin had no effect on polarization and anillin : GFP localized asymmetrically in response to chromatin ( 62 % when Blebbistatin was added ‘early’ with Purvalanol A , and 68 % when Blebbistatin was added ‘late’ ~ 7 minutes after Purvalanol A ; Fig . S2C ) . However , in anillin - depleted cells , myosin and RhoA were globally localized regardless of chromatin position , and the majority of cells failed to polarize ( 10 % and 3 % , respectively vs . 56 % GFP : myosin and 65 % GFP : RhoA ; Fig . S2C ) . Asymmetric anillin distribution and cortical polarization was restored in anillin - depleted cells co - expressing GFP - tagged RNAi - resistant full - length ( FL ) or C - terminus ( C - term ) of anillin ( 75 % for endogenous anillin and 9 % after anillin 9 RNAi vs . 64 % for anillin RNAi + FL anillin ( 1 - 1087 ) , and 67 % for anillin RNAi + C - term ( 608 - 1087 ; Figs 3A , B ) , suggesting that anillin’s N - terminal actin and myosin binding sites are not required for polarization . This data shows that the cortical polarization of cells lacking polymerized microtubules is regulated by anillin or upstream regulators of anillin , as shown in the schematic in Fig . S2D . We determined the molecular mechanism by which anillin mediates polarization in response to Ran - GTP . Human anillin contains an NLS in its C - terminus , but this site has not been extensively studied ( Oegema et al . , 2000 ) . An NLS in the C - terminus of Drosophila anillin overlaps with a putative septin - binding region , and was shown to bind to importins in vitro ( Silverman - Gavrila et al . , 2008 ) . It was hypothesized that importins released in the vicinity of chromatin - associated Ran - GTP during cellularization permit anillin to form a functional complex with septin ( s ) at the nearby cortex ( Silverman - Gavrila et al . , 2008 ) . However , it is not clear how this model fits with other published data showing that Ran - GTP inhibits vs . promotes anillin’s cortical localization during mitotic exit ( Kiyomitsu and Cheeseman , 2013 ) . Our data is consistent with the hypothesis that Ran - GTP negatively regulates anillin’s cortical localization . However , in addition to using Drosophila vs . mammalian cells , different methods were used ( gain - of - function vs . loss - of - function ) , and the model could be more complex than either study revealed . The NLS in human anillin maps to a disordered loop emanating from the C2 domain in the C - terminus ( Sun et al . , 2015 ) . To determine if the C - terminal NLS in human anillin is functional , we expressed different GFP - tagged anillin constructs and monitored nuclear localization in interphase HeLa cells ( Fig . 4A ) . Nuclear localization was determined to be positive if the ratio of GFP in the nucleus vs . cytosol was > 1 . 3 , and only cells with levels > 1 , 200 a . u . were considered ( see Fig . S3A ) . Full - length and the N - terminus of anillin ( 1 - 460 ) were previously reported to localize to the nucleus in interphase cells ( e . g . Fig . 4A ; Oegema et al . , 2000 ; Chen et al . , 2015 ) . The C - terminus ( 608 - 1087 ; RhoA - GTP binding domain – RBD + C2 + Pleckstrin Homology domain – PH ) , and a fragment containing the N - terminal actin and myosin domains , and the C - terminal PH domain are non - nuclear ( e . g . Fig . 4A ; Piekny and Glotzer , 2008 ; Chen et al . , 2015 ) . We found that a fragment lacking the RBD ( 748 - 1087 ; C2 + PH ) was nuclear ( Fig . 4A ) . The localization of C - terminal fragments to the nucleus had been previously reported , but it wasn’t clear why some fragments localized more strongly vs . others ( Oegema et al . , 2000 ) . We propose that the C - terminal NLS is inhibited intramolecularly by the 10 RBD during interphase . Treating cells with 100 nM Importazole for 8 hours decreased nuclear localization of the C2 + PH fragment , while point mutations in the NLS ( 850 KK 851 - DE ) blocked nuclear localization altogether ( Fig . 4A ) . Higher concentrations of Importazole were not used , because it affected cell viability . This data suggests that the C - terminal NLS of anillin is responsive to the Ran pathway for nuclear import . We further assessed if the C - terminal NLS could respond to Ran via binding to importins . This site matches the consensus sequence of a classical bi - partite NLS , which binds to importin - β to mediate nuclear entry , and is highly conserved among vertebrates ( Fig . 4B ; Soniat and Chook , 2015 ) . As mentioned above , the C - terminal NLS also appears to be conserved in Drosophila , where it was shown to bind to importins . However , it is not clear if this conservation extends to C . elegans , as the sequence is more divergent . We pulled down Myc - tagged importin - β from cell lysates using recombinant MBP - tagged human anillin constructs that contained or lacked the RBD ( Figs S3B , C , 4B ) . As expected , Myc : importin - β localized to the periphery of the nucleus and cytosol in HeLa cells ( Fig . S3B ) . Myc : importin - β bound weakly to an anillin fragment containing the RBD , but bound more strongly to a fragment lacking the RBD , and mutations in the C - terminal NLS ( 850 KK 851 - DE ) abolished binding altogether ( Figs S3C , 4B ) . These mutations do not impart gross structural changes in the C - terminus of anillin , since Ect2 and RhoA binding were not affected ( Fig . S3D ; Piekny and Glotzer , 2008 ; Frenette et al . , 2012 ) . The C - terminal NLS of anillin regulates polarization and cytokinesis Next , we determined the function of anillin’s C - terminal NLS in cortical polarity . To do this , rescue assays were performed expressing GFP - tagged RNAi - resistant full - length or C - terminal anillin constructs with the NLS point mutations described above ( 850 KK 851 - DE ; NLS mutant ) in anillin - depleted cells lacking polymerized microtubules and forced to exit mitosis ( Fig . 3A ) . Cells were assessed 25 minutes after Cdk1 inhibition , when the majority of control cells had sufficient time to polarize . As described earlier , while the proportion of polarized cells with asymmetric anillin was restored in cells expressing non - mutant anillin constructs ( 64 % for FL and 67 % for C - term ) , cells failed to polarize with NLS mutant anillin ( 28 % for FL and 32 % for C - term ; Figs 3A , B ) . Since Ran - GTP may affect anillin during earlier stages of mitotic exit , we repeated this assay , but examined cells 15 minutes after Cdk1 11 inhibition . At this time , the majority of control cells were not polarized , but anillin was cortically recruited ( Fig . S4A ) . To measure cortical localization , linescans were drawn across the central plane of the cell and the maximum levels of cortical anillin were compared to the cytosol ( Fig . S4A ) . Anillin was considered to be cortical if the ratio of cortical to cytosolic anillin was > 1 . 1 ( Fig . S4A ) . Indeed , while anillin was recruited cortically in 96 % of control cells and in 84 % of anillin - depleted cells co - expressing RNAi - resistant GFP : anillin ( FL ) , NLS mutant anillin was cortical in only 29 % of the cells ( Fig . S4A ) . Together , this data suggests that the C - terminal NLS of anillin is required for cortical recruitment during early stages of polarization , and also to polarize cells in the absence of microtubules . The ability of the mutant constructs to localize cortically during later time points suggests that other proteins and / or lipids are sufficient to recruit anillin to the cortex . Next , we determined if the C - terminal NLS of anillin is required for cytokinesis . GFP - tagged RNAi - resistant FL or NLS mutant anillin were expressed in anillin - depleted cells co - expressing H2B : mRuby to visualize chromatin , and cells were imaged during cytokinesis ( Fig . 5A ) . Anillin accumulated along the equatorial cortex ~ 2 minutes after anaphase onset , which narrowed as the contractile ring ingressed to pinch in the cell ( Figs 5A , B ) . However , mutant anillin was recruited ~ 6 minutes after anaphase onset to a narrow region , and cytokinesis failed in a higher number of cells ( 33 % vs . 12 % for control cells ; Figs 5A , B ) . Interestingly , although this delay in accumulation correlated with an overall delay in ingression , once mutant anillin was recruited , the time from accumulation to ingression did not vary in comparison to non - mutant anillin ( Fig . 5B ) . To further test the requirement of the C - terminal NLS in cytokinesis , we also performed rescue assays in asynchronous populations of cells , and calculated the proportion of cells that were binucleate and failed cytokinesis . Anillin depletion caused cytokinesis failure ( 63 % vs . 6 % untreated cells ; Fig . 5B ) , while expression of RNAi - resistant full - length anillin restored cytokinesis in the majority of cells , consistent with previous studies ( 24 % ; Fig . 5B ; Piekny and Glotzer , 2008 ) . However , a larger proportion of cells expressing RNAi - resistant NLS mutant anillin failed cytokinesis ( 41 % ; Fig . 5B ) , supporting that the C - terminal NLS is at least partially required for cytokinesis . To further characterize the affect of the NLS mutations on anillin localization , changes in the breadth of non - mutant vs . mutant anillin were quantified by measuring the ratio of cortical anillin vs . cell perimeter . The breadth of mutant anillin was narrower compared to non - mutant 12 anillin ( Fig . 5B ) , although the peak of intensity was comparable ( data not shown ) . A C - terminal anillin construct containing the NLS mutations also appeared to localize with a narrower breadth in comparison to non - mutant anillin ( data not shown ) . Collectively , this data suggests that the C - terminal NLS is required to mediate anillin’s recruitment and distribution at the equatorial cortex during anaphase for optimal contractile ring ingression . To show that pools of importin - β localize to the equatorial cortex , linescans were drawn across the equatorial plane , and Myc : importin - β levels were compared to endogenous anillin ( Fig . 5C ) . Indeed , the two proteins overlapped at cortical peaks in the equatorial plane ( Fig . 5C ) . However , we were surprised to see that the over - expression of Myc : importin - β ( levels 1 , 500 > 4 , 000 a . u . ) decreased the breadth of endogenous anillin ( Fig . 5C ) . As described earlier , a previous study found that there was competition between importin -  and a putative septin binding site in the C - terminus of Drosophila anillin ( Silverman - Gavrila et al . , 2008 ) . Therefore , high levels of importin - β could similarly hinder the binding of proteins and / or lipids to the C - terminus of human anillin . Together , our data suggests that ‘free’ importins ( e . g . not bound to Ran - GTP ) may function as a molecular ruler for anillin , where optimal levels facilitate recruitment , vs . when levels are too low or high . The timing of Ran - regulation of anillin likely occurs during anaphase , prior to furrow ingression . During this time , sister chromatids move toward the poles , where Ran - GTP levels influence anillin’s cortical recruitment and localization in the equatorial plane via importins . To further test this model , we compared the temporal and spatial accumulation of non - mutant and mutant anillin in relation to chromatin position . As with the experiments above , cells were depleted of endogenous anillin and rescued with GFP - tagged RNAi - resistant non - mutant vs . mutant anillin . An Image J ( NIH ) macro was written to sample the intensity of anillin ( by a circular region of interest ( ROI ) 320 nm in radius ) at 43 evenly spaced points around the cortex , as well as the distance from these points to the closest point of a mask describing chromatin ( see cartoon , Fig . 6A ) . Measurements were taken every two minutes from anaphase onset until 6 minutes after , and the data from 5 cells for non - mutant vs . mutant anillin was averaged and graphed ( Fig . 6A ) . Consistent with our model , the accumulation and clearance of cortical non - mutant anillin strongly correlated with changes in chromatin distance ( Fig . 6A ) . However , there was no correlation with mutant anillin until 6 minutes after anaphase onset , when the central spindle likely promotes the accumulation of active RhoA and anillin in the equatorial plane ( van 13 Oostende Triplet et al . , 2014 ) . This data suggests that the localization of mutant anillin likely is not influenced by chromatin or Ran - GTP . Importin binding influences anillin’s affinity for the equatorial cortex Our analyses of NLS mutant anillin suggest that disrupting importin binding weakens anillin’s affinity for the equatorial cortex . Typically , the boundary of equatorial anillin tightly matches active RhoA , and will loosely correlate with mitotic spindle position ( yellow arrows ; Fig . 6B ; Piekny and Glotzer , 2008 ; van Oostende Triplet et al . , 2014 ) . The decrease in breadth of mutant anillin’s localization is similar to what we had observed when the proportion of astral microtubules was increased near the equatorial plane via MCAK RNAi ( Zanin et al . , 2013 ; van Oostende Triplet et al . , 2014 ) . Indeed , the localization of NLS mutant anillin tightly matched the boundary of microtubules near the equatorial cortex ( white arrows ) , while non - mutant anillin loosely correlated with their position as shown previously ( Fig . 6B ; van Oostende Triplet et al . , 2014 ) . We previously reported that the C - terminus of anillin weakly bound to microtubules in vitro ( Tse et al . , 2011 ; van Oostende Triplet et al . , 2014 ) . Since importin - β binding to the C2 domain is inhibited by the RBD , we compared microtubule binding to the C - terminus and the C2 domain using co - sedimentation assays . Microtubules bound more strongly to the C2 domain in comparison to the C - terminus ( Fig . 6C ) . In addition , a deletion that removes the NLS and a small region upstream ( DFEINIE ) that lies at the hinge of the RBD and C2 also bound to microtubules more strongly ( data not shown ; Piekny and Glotzer , 2008 ) . Therefore , the microtubule - binding domain is auto - inhibited by the RBD similar to the NLS . We did not observe a significant change in microtubule binding with the C2 NLS mutant ( Fig . S4B ) . Thus , the change in NLS mutant anillin localization in cells suggests that there is a reduction in its affinity for the equatorial cortex . To further show that the localization of NLS mutant anillin at the equatorial plane is strongly regulated by microtubules , we monitored changes in its localization after depolymerizing astral microtubules using a low dose of Nocodazole ( 33 nM ) . The localization of non - mutant and mutant anillin broadened along the equatorial cortex to a similar extent , supporting that microtubules were responsible for restricting mutant anillin localization ( Figs 5A , B ) . We previously reported that both the central spindle and astral microtubules contribute to 14 restricting anillin localization , and is why we do not see anillin expanding into the polar regions of the cell ( van Oostende Triplet et al . , 2014 ) . Discussion Our studies shed light on a microtubule - independent mechanism that ensures robust cytokinesis . Previous studies showed that HeLa cells lacking polymerized microtubules polarize , and the contractile protein anillin localizes away from chromatin ( Kiyomitsu and Cheeseman , 2013 ) . Ran - GTP is required for this polarization , since anillin fails to move away from chromatin after reducing the activity of its GEF , RCC1 , or reducing Ran - GTP - importin binding using the drug Importazole ( Fig . S2B ; Kiyomitsu and Cheeseman , 2013 ) . Thus , a Ran - GTP gradient associated with chromatin may lead to relaxation of the polar cortex when the mitotic spindle shifts too close to one pole to restore the cleavage plane ( Kiyomitsu and Cheeseman , 2013 ) . Our studies add to this model by showing that anillin is a molecular target of the Ran pathway during cytokinesis . Anillin is a key regulator of cytokinesis that binds to multiple contractile ring components including RhoA , and we have shown that anillin can feedback to influence active RhoA in vivo ( Piekny and Glotzer , 2008 ; Frenette et al . , 2012 ) . We propose that the Ran pathway modulates cytokinesis by affecting anillin’s recruitment to the cortex . During mitotic exit , RhoA - GTP levels increase and bind to the RBD of anillin , causing a change in its conformation that make other binding sites in the C - terminus more accessible , including the NLS and microtubule - binding domain . Importin - binding may stabilize this open conformation to further enhance anillin’s recruitment to the cortex . However , in the vicinity of chromatin , high Ran - GTP would bind to importin ( s ) and prevent them from binding to , or promoting their release from cargo such as anillin , which would favor anillin’s cytosolic localization . ‘Free’ importins ( e . g . not bound to Ran - GTP , but could be bound to cargo ) form an inverse gradient to Ran - GTP , with optimal levels likely occurring near the cortex , where importin -  could bind to anillin and favor its cortical recruitment ( Fig . 6D ) . We have several pieces of evidence to support our model . First , we show that Ran - GTP levels influence the localization of contractile proteins and cause cytokinesis phenotypes . Reducing the levels of Ran - GTP led to the ectopic recruitment of anillin and myosin to regions of the cortex where they normally would not accumulate , likely causing a change in cortical properties at the cell poles and blocking furrow ingression ( Fig . 1 ) . Consistent with a function for 15 Ran - GTP in negatively regulating anillin , increasing the levels of active Ran in the equatorial furrow caused a reduction in anillin and cortical instability phenotypes similar to anillin loss - of - function ( Fig . 2 ) . There are two ways that Ran - GTP could do this : 1 ) by directly binding to and competing importins from cargo / target proteins that promote or prevent a specific function , or 2 ) by regulating nuclear sequestration of cytokinesis regulators . Upshifting tsBN2 cells to inactivate RCC1 ( the GEF for Ran ) , likely keeps the nuclear envelope from re - forming causing cells to remain in a persistent cytokinesis - like state ( Fig . 1 ; Clarke and Zhang , 2008 ) . This may occur because regulators of actomyosin contractility that are normally nuclear in telophase ( e . g . Ect2 ) have continued access to the cortex when the nuclear envelope fails to form . However , our experiment targeting active Ran directly to the membrane provides evidence that Ran - GTP directly influences the cortex ( Fig . 2 ) . Second , we found that anillin contains a highly conserved NLS in its C - terminus that binds to importin -  , and is required for anillin’s localization , cortical polarization and cytokinesis ( Figs 3 - 6 ) . This site can function in response to the Ran pathway to mediate nuclear entry , but is autoinhibited by the RBD ( Fig . 4 ) . The RBD also blocks accessibility to anillin’s microtubule - binding site ( Fig . 6 ) . This autoinhibition could ensure that anillin’s C - terminus only has access to importin or microtubules when RhoA - GTP levels increase during mitotic exit . A recent study showed that anillin is also regulated by phosphorylation , via a site that lies just N - terminal to the RBD ( Kim et al . , 2017 ) . An extension of our model is that phosphorylation may further influence RhoA - GTP binding , to couple the timing of changes in anillin’s activity with its requirement for cytokinesis . We found that the C - terminal NLS is required for anillin’s localization , since the equatorial domain of anillin is more restricted when the NLS is mutated ( Figs 5 , 6D ) . This is similar to what we observed when astral microtubules were enriched in the equatorial plane via MCAK RNAi ( van Oostende Triplet et al . , 2014 ) , suggesting a decrease in anillin’s affinity for the equatorial cortex and a shift toward microtubules in spatially controlling anillin . Indeed , the localization of NLS mutant anillin changes / broadens after astral microtubule perturbation ( Fig . 5 ) . Our study reconciled two models that had been proposed to explain how Ran - GTP could influence the cortex ( Silverman - Gavrila et al . , 2008 ; Kiyomitsu and Cheeseman , 2013 ) . One study showed that importin -  competes for septin binding in the C - terminus of anillin , and could release anillin for septin binding in the vicinity of chromatin during cellularization ( Silverman - Gavrila et al . , 2008 ) . A different study showed that Ran - GTP inhibited vs . promoted anillin’s 16 cortical localization during mitotic exit ( Kiyomitsu and Cheeseman , 2013 ) . Our data supports the latter model , as described above . However , we also found that over - expression of importin -  decreased the breadth of anillin’s localization in the equatorial plane , similar to the NLS mutant , which cannot bind to importin -  . Thus , we propose a hybrid model where importin binding facilitates anillin’s cortical recruitment , but likely binds with low affinity to ensure that anillin can favorably bind to other proteins and lipids . Thus , importins could function as a molecular ruler , where optimal levels favor the localization of cortical proteins at precise locations vs . when they are too high or too low . A recent study identified a putative phospholipid - binding site in the C2 domain of anillin , which may partially overlap with the C - terminal NLS that we describe here ( Sun et al . , 2015 ) . They found that this site functions cooperatively with the RBD to recruit anillin to the cortex ( Sun et al . , 2015 ) . Our data fits with this previous finding , and importin binding could also influence phospholipid binding , leading to the enhancement of anillin’s recruitment to the cortex . It is important to note that the NLS mutations used in this study are not in the predicted phospholipid - binding domain described in Sun et al . ( 2015 ) . Further , although delayed , all of the anillin constructs containing mutations in the NLS localized to the cortex , likely due to their recruitment via other proteins and / or lipids . The Ran pathway likely regulates the cortex during anaphase . During metaphase , Ran - GTP forms a gradient around chromatin where it regulates bipolar spindle formation ( Kaláb et al . , 2002 ; Kaláb et al . , 2006 ; Clarke and Zhang , 2008 ) . We propose that Ran - GTP also regulates cortical proteins during mitotic exit . We observed a strong correlation in the timing and spatial distribution of anillin’s cortical localization to the distance of the segregating sister chromatids ( Fig . 6 ) . This correlation was no longer apparent when the NLS was mutated , which was only recruited to a narrow region of the furrow ~ 6 minutes after anaphase onset likely via the central spindle ( Fig . 6 ) . The regulation of protein - protein interactions via importins is not a new concept , but our model expands on the understanding of how importins could regulate the conformation and function of cortical proteins . While our studies were performed in HeLa cells , which divide symmetrically , it would be interesting to determine if the Ran - anillin pathway more dominantly regulates cytokinesis in asymmetrically dividing cells . Furthermore , this pathway may improve the robustness of cytokinesis in cancer cells with high chromosomal instability and altered 17 ploidy , particularly since cancer cells with polyploidy have steeper Ran - GTP gradients ( Hasegawa et al . , 2013 ) . Materials and Methods Cell culture , transfection and drug treatments HeLa , BHK ( Baby Hamster Kidney ) , and tsBN2 ( with a ts mutation in RCC1 in BHK ) cells were plated and grown in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium ( DMEM ; Wisent ) , supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ; Thermo Scientific ) , 2 mM L - glutamine ( Wisent ) , 100 U penicillin and 0 . 1 mg / mL streptomycin ( Wisent ) with 5 % CO 2 . HeLa cells were maintained at 37°C , and BHK and tsBN2 cells were maintained at 33°C . For transfection , cells were plated in DMEM media without antibiotics ( PS ) , and transfected using Lipofectamine 2000 ( DNA or DNA and siRNA co - transfection in HeLa , BHK or tsBN2 cells ; Invitrogen ) or Oligofectamine ( siRNA transfection in HeLa cells ; Invitrogen ) according to manufacturer’s protocol , except that 4 μL of Lipofectamine was used per 2 mL of media with 0 . 5 – 1 . 5 µg DNA and 3 µL of 2 nM siRNAs , as described previously ( Yüce et al . , 2005 ; Piekny and Glotzer , 2008 ) . Cells were imaged 24 - 26 hours after DNA transfection , and 27 - 30 hours after co - transfection of DNA and siRNAs . Anillin and Ect2 siRNAs were used as described previously ( Yüce et al . , 2005 ; Piekny and Glotzer , 2008 ) . The following drugs were used and dissolved in DMSO as 1000X stocks : Importazole ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , S - trityl - L - cysteine ( STC ; Sigma - Aldrich ) , Blebbistatin ( Sigma - Aldrich ) and Purvalanol A ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . To make cells monopolar , 2 μM of STC was used to arrest cells in prometaphase , followed by the addition of 22 . 5 μM Purvalanol A to promote mitotic exit ( Hu et al . , 2008 ) . For Nocodazole ( Sigma - Aldrich ) treatments , 33 nM was added to cells 3 minutes after anaphase onset to selectively disrupt astral microtubules , while 100 nM was added to cells for 3 - 4 hours to depolymerize the majority of microtubules and cause mitotic arrest . 22 . 5 μM Purvalanol A was then added to promote mitotic exit during imaging . 100 µM Blebbistatin was added to cells to inhibit myosin II activity during imaging . 100 nM Importazole was added to HeLa cells for either 4 hours in combination with Nocodazole to test for changes in polarization , or for 8 hours to test for changes in the nuclear localization of anillin . Control cells were treated with DMSO for all of the experiments involving drug treatments . tsBN2 cells with a ts mutation in RCC1 was generously provided by I . Cheeseman ( Whitehead MIT ; Nishimoto et al . , 1978 ; Kiyomitsu and Cheeseman , 2013 ) . HeLa cells stably 18 expressing GFP : non - muscle regulatory myosin light chain ( T18E S19E ) and anillin : GFP were previously described ( Zanin et al . , 2013 ; van Oostende Triplet et al . , 2014 ) . Myc - tagged human karyopherin ( importin - β1 ; KPNB1 ; accession number NM _ 002265 ) cDNA was obtained from Origene . H2B : mRuby was generated from H2B : GFP , generously provided by G . Hickson ( University of Montreal ) . GFP was replaced with mRuby using BamHI ( New England Biolabs ) and XbaI restriction enzymes ( New England Biolabs ) and the pcDNA3 - mRuby2 plasmid kindly provided by C . Brett ( Concordia University ) . mCherry : Neuromodulin ( 1 - 60 ) Ran ( WT ) was generated via PCR using Ran cDNA ( True Clone ) , and the pTK24 plasmid ( Addgene ) , using XhoI and EcoRI restriction enzymes ( New England Biolabs ) . Ran Q69L was generated in the same vector by quickchange PCR . GFP : Ran and GFP : Ran ( Q69L ) was cloned into pEGFP - C1 ( Life Technologies ) using XhoI and EcoRI restriction enzymes . The anillin constructs were previously described ( Piekny and Glotzer , 2008 ) , except for GFP : anillin ( 748 - 1087 ) , which was cloned into pEGFP - C1 ( Life Technologies ) using HindIII and SacII restriction enzymes . mRuby : anillin was generated from GFP : anillin by replacing GFP with mRuby using AgeI and SacI restriction enzymes . The 850 KK 851 - DE mutations were generated in the anillin constructs by quickchange PCR . All constructs were verified by sequencing . Fixation , immunoflourescence and live imaging Cells were fixed for immunofluorescence using 10 % trichloroacetic acid ( TCA ) or 100 % cold methanol as previously described ( Yüce et al . , 2005 ) . Fixed cells were immunostained for microtubules using 1 : 200 mouse anti - tubulin antibodies ( DM1A , Sigma - Aldrich ) , anillin using 1 : 200 rabbit polyclonal anti - anillin antibodies ( Piekny and Glotzer , 2008 ) , GFP using 1 : 100 mouse Clones 7 . 1 and 13 . 1 ( Roche ) or 1 : 200 rabbit anti - GFP polyclonal antibodies generously provided by M . Glotzer ( University of Chicago ) . Anti - rabbit or mouse Alexa 488 and anti - mouse or rabbit Alexa 568 ( Invitrogen ) secondary antibodies were used at a 1 : 250 dilution . DAPI ( Sigma - Aldrich ) was added at a 1 : 1000 dilution ( 1 mg / mL stock ) for 5 minutes before mounting the coverslips onto slides . Fixed cells were imaged using a Fluoview FV10i confocal laser scanning microscope ( Olympus ) , with the 60x / 1 . 35 oil immersion objective , and 3x magnification ( total magnification of 180x ) . Images were acquired as 0 . 5 µm Z - stacks with the pinhole set at 1 airy unit . Fixed cells also were imaged using a Leica DMI6000B wide - field 19 microscope with the 63x / 1 . 4 PL APO oil immersion objective ( pixel size 0 . 102 μm ) , and Z - stacks of 0 . 5 μm were acquired with a Hamamatsu OrcaR2 camera and Volocity software ( PerkinElmer ) using a piezo Z stage ( MadCityLabs ) . Fixed cells also were imaged with high resolution using the Zeiss LSM800 airyscan mode with the C - APO 63x / 1 . 2 oil immersion objective , and Z - stacks of 0 . 17 μm , using a 32 channel GaAsP Airyscan spatial detector that provides spatial resolution 1 . 7x typically achieved via confocal imaging at 1 airy unit . Image files were exported as TIFFs , which were opened with Image J ( NIH ) and converted into maximum intensity Z - stack projections . Projections and merged colour images were then converted into 8 - bit images and imported into Illustrator ( Adobe ) to make figures . To perform live imaging , media was replaced with phenol red - free DMEM media . Cells were plated and transfected on 25 mm round coverslips ( No . 1 . 5 ) placed in a 35 mm Chamlide magnetic chamber ( Quorum ) , or on a 35 mm µ - Dish with 2 mL volume ( ibidi ) , or on µ - Slide Angiogenesis tissue culture - treated 15 - well dishes ( ibidi ) . Cells were kept at 37˚C ( except for BHK and tsBN2 cells , which were kept at either 33˚C or 39 . 7˚C ) with 5 % CO 2 using the INU - TiZ - F1 chamber ( MadCityLabs ) . For BHK and tsBN2 cells , Sir - tubulin ( Cytoskeleton ) was added to a final concentration of 200 nM 3 - 4 hours before filming , and Hoechst 33342 ( Invitrogen ) was added to a final concentration of 160 nM 30 - 40 minutes before filming . tsBN2 cells were upshifted for 30 - 40 minutes before imaging . Live imaging was performed on an inverted Nikon Eclipse Ti microscope with a Livescan Swept Field confocal unit ( Nikon ) , using the 60x / 1 . 4 CFI PLAN APO VC oil immersion objective ( pixel size 0 . 27 μm ) , a piezo Z stage ( MadCityLabs ) , and with the iXON897 EMCCD camera ( Andor ) . Images were acquired with 200 ms exposures using the 488 and 561 nm lasers ( 100 mW , Agilent ) set between 20 - 40 % power , depending on the intensity of fluorescent signals ( settings were kept constant for related experiments ) , and multiple Z - stacks of 0 . 5 µm were taken every 40 - 60 seconds per cell using NIS - Elements acquisition software ( Nikon ) , and a narrow GFP or dual filter ( 500 - 544 and 600 - 665 nm ; Chroma ) . The tsBN2 cells were kept at 33˚C ( permissive temperature ) , and were upshifted to the restrictive temperature ( 39 . 7˚C ) to inactivate RCC1 in late metaphase or immediately following anaphase onset . All of the images co - expressing GFP and mRuby or mCherry probes were spectrally unmixed using the NIS - Elements acquisition software ( Nikon ) , and deconvolved using Autoquant X software ( Media Cybernetics ) . Image files were exported as TIFFs , which were opened with Image J ( NIH ) and converted into maximum intensity Z - stack 20 projections . Projections and merged colour images were then converted into 8 - bit images and imported into Illustrator ( Adobe ) to make figures , or saved as AVI movie files . Pulldowns , immunoblots and co - sedimentation assays Purified protein was made from E . coli BL21 cells transformed with the following constructs : MBP – anillin ( C2 ; 750 – 872 ) , MBP – anillin ( RBD + C2 ; 672 - 940 ) , and MBP : anillin ( C - term ; 608 - 1087 ) as described previously ( Piekny and Glotzer , 2008 ) . NLS mutant MBP - anillin ( 850 KK 851 - DE ) was generated in the anillin constructs by quickchange PCR . Bacteria were resuspended in lysis buffer [ 2 . 5 mM MgCl 2 , 50 mM Tris , 150 mM NaCl pH 7 . 5 , 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 , 1 mM dithiothreitol ( DTT ) , 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride ( PMSF ) and 1 X protease inhibitors ; Roche ] , incubated with 1 mg / ml lysozyme on ice for 30 minutes , then sonicated three times . Extracts were incubated with amylose resin ( New England Biolabs ) for 5 hours at 4˚C with rotation . After washing , protein loaded beads were stored as a 50 % slurry at 4˚C or eluted in equivalent volumes of 100 mM maltose on ice for 2 hours . Protein concentration was determined before use . Microtubules were prepared from lyophilized microtubules ( Cytoskeleton ) as per the manufacturer’s instructions in resuspension buffer ( 15 mM PIPES , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 20 µ M taxol ; Bioshop ) at room temperature for 10 – 15 minutes with gentle mixing . Aliquots of 45 . 5 µ M were flash frozen and stored at - 80˚C , then thawed in a circulating water bath and diluted with resuspension buffer to 9 . 1 µ M . Purified anillin proteins were pre - spun by centrifugation at 279 , 000 g for 25 minutes at room temperature . Co - sedimentation reactions were prepared as described previously ( van Oostende Triplet et al . , 2014 ) . Transfected Hela cells were lysed in 50 mM Tris pH7 . 6 , 150 mM NaCl , 5 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 , 1 mM DTT , 1mM PMSF with protease inhibitors ( Roche ) and incubated with 5 - 10 µ g of purified MBP - tagged anillin protein on amylose resin beads at 4°C to pull down Myc : importin - β , Myc : Ect2 C - terminus ( 422 - 881 ) and GFP : RhoA ( Q63L ) . Beads were washed 3 – 4 X with 50 mM Tris pH7 . 6 , 150 mM NaCl , 5 mM MgCl 2 before adding SDS sample buffer to denature the proteins for SDS - PAGE . All pull downs were run by SDS - PAGE and wet - transferred to nitrocellulose membrane for western blotting . All blots were reversibly stained with Ponceau S to show total protein . Western blots were treated with either mouse anti - Myc antibodies ( clone 9E10 ; DSHB ) used directly or 1 : 2000 mouse anti - GFP antibodies ( Roche ) . The 21 secondary antibody used for all blots was anti - mouse Alexa 488 ( Invitrogen ) . Blots were scanned at 488 nm using the Typhoon Trio phosphoimager ( GE ) . Images were converted to 8 - bit by Image J , and made into figures using Adobe Photoshop and Illustrator ( Adobe ) . Quantification The breadth and ratios of cortical accumulation for anillin and myosin were performed using Image J . Maximum intensity Z - projections were generated for each cell , and the breadth was determined using a linescan drawn along the cell cortex . The breadth was determined as the number of pixels above 50 % of the maximum intensity ( width of the peak ) after subtracting cytosol levels , which was divided by the total number of pixels to give a ratio of breadth to length of cell perimeter . To measure the ratio of cortical accumulation vs . cytosol , the average intensity was determined in an area drawn around the cortex from one pole to the other . This value was then divided by the average fluorescence intensity from a ROI from the cytosol . To measure the asymmetric distribution of GFP - tagged anillin , RhoA and myosin , a line was drawn through chromatin perpendicular to the axis of polarization to bisect the cell . The breadth of accumulation was measured for each half of the cell and a ratio ( R ) was determined ( schematic in Fig . 3A ) . Cells with R = [ 0 . 7 - 1 . 2 ] were scored as symmetric , while cells with R > 1 . 2 were scored as asymmetric . In cells where there was no visible cortical protrusion , a line was drawn arbitrarily through chromatin . To measure the cortical recruitment of anillin in polarized cells , a linescan was drawn through the central plane of the cell . The ratio ( R ) of maximum cortical vs . maximum cytosolic levels was determined , and anillin was scored as cortical in cells with R > 1 . 1 ( schematic in Fig . S4A ) . To compare the localization of Myc : importin - β and anillin at the equatorial cortex , a linescan was drawn through the cell at the equatorial axis , and their fluorescence levels were compared in a line graph . To measure the nuclear localization of GFP - tagged anillin , the average fluorescence intensity from ROI’s in the nucleus and cytosol were measured and a ratio of nuclear vs . cytosolic levels ( R ) was determined . Cells with R > 1 . 3 were scored as nuclear , while cells with R < 1 . 3 were scored as cytosolic . All data was imported into Excel ( Microsoft ) , where calculations were performed including standard deviations and to generate graphs . All experiments with fixed cells were replicated at least three times and analyzed using the Student’s t test , or one - way Anova . Live imaging experiments were replicated a minimum of five times to obtain sufficient n’s , which were pooled and statistically analyzed 22 via the Fisher’s exact test . To choose cells with Ran over - expression for analysis in Fig . 2 , the levels of mCherry - tagged Ran were measured in cells co - expressing GFP - tagged anillin . The exposure time and gain were kept constant for Ran vs . Ran Q69L . Cells were determined to have high over - expressed Ran if the levels were above 1 , 500 and below 3 , 000 , and to have low expression of Ran if the levels were above 460 and below 1 , 500 . Co - localization measurements between mCherry - tagged Ran and GFP - tagged anillin were performed using the Co - localization Analysis plugin in ImageJ ( NIH ) . The ROI was determined for each region of the cell cortex ( as indicated in Fig . S1B ) after background subtraction , and a scatter plot was generated to show the co - localized pixels for varying intensities for each channel . The percentage of co - localized pixels was determined based on the Pearson’s coefficient for each cell , and the average for the population was determined . The mean of the averages for multiple cells , and standard deviations were calculated and graphed in Excel ( Microsoft ) . The expression levels of the constructs used in Figs 3 – 6 were determined based on controls where anillin RNAi cells co - expressing either full - length or C - terminus of anillin were tested for their ability to polarize or rescue cytokinesis , respectively . The imaging parameters used for the rescued cells were optimized to fluorescence intensities between 1 , 200 – 3 , 500 for the GFP channel , and were kept constant for the other constructs to ensure that only cells with sufficient levels of expression were considered . To assay changes in the localization of GFP - tagged anillin along the cortex during anaphase in relation to chromatin distance , an ImageJ ( NIH ) macro was written . Briefly , the cortex of a cell was traced at each time point ( anaphase onset ; 0 , 2 , 4 and 6 minutes ) , and a series of 43 points ( in total ) were drawn around each half of the cell , encompassing 220º . At each point , the shortest distance to a binary mask that described the chromatin was measured , and a circular sampling window of 640 nm diameter was used to measure mean anillin intensity . All of the images and graphs were transferred to Illustrator ( Adobe ) to make figures . 23 Author Contributions A . P . wrote the original manuscript and conceptualized and designed the methodology for experiments . T . K . A . and D . B . also helped design methodology and perform experiments , as well as helped to edit the manuscript . D . B . validated experiments performed by T . K . A . J . P . also performed experiments . T . K . A . , D . B . and J . P . formally analyzed the data . A macro for Image J ( NIH ) for formal analysis was written by C . L . A . P . , T . K . A . and D . B . helped visualize the data in figure format . Supervision was carried out by A . P . and D . B . Acknowledgements We thank C . van Oostende Triplet , M . Jaramillo Garcia and G . Lapointe for help with imaging studies as part of the Centre for Microscopy and Cellular Imaging at Concordia University . We thank C . Brett ( Concordia University ) , I . Cheeseman ( Whitehead MIT ) and G . Hickson ( University of Montreal ) for reagents . 24 References 1 . Akhshi TK , Wernike D , Piekny A ( 2014 ) . Microtubules and actin crosstalk in cell migration and division . Cytoskeleton 71 , 1 – 23 . 2 . Bement WM , Benink HA , Von Dassow G ( 2005 ) . A microtubule - dependent zone of active RhoA during cleavage plane specification . J Cell Biol 170 , 91 – 101 . 3 . Bringmann H , Hyman AA ( 2005 ) . A cytokinesis furrow is positioned by two consecutive signals . Nature 436 , 731 – 734 . 4 . Cabernard C , Prehoda KE , Doe CQ ( 2010 ) . A spindle - independent cleavage furrow positioning pathway . Nature 467 , 91 - 94 . 5 . Canman JC , Hoffman DB , Salmon ED ( 2000 ) . The role of the pre - and post - anaphase microtubules in the cytokinesis phase of the cell cycle . Curr Biol 10 , 611 - 614 . 6 . Canman JC , Cameron LA , Maddox PS , Straight A , Tirnauer JS , Mitchison TJ , Fang G , Kapoor TM , Salmon ED ( 2003 ) . Determining the position of the cell division plane . Nature 424 , 1074 - 1078 . 7 . Carreno , S . , Kouranti , I . , Glusman , E . S . , Fuller , M . T . , Echard , A . , and Payre , F . ( 2008 ) . Moesin and its activating kinase Slik are required for cortical stability and microtubule organization in mitotic cells . J . Cell Biol . 180 , 739 - 746 . 8 . Cheffings TH , Burroughs NJ , Balasubramanian MK ( 2016 ) . Actomyosin ring formation and tension generation in eukaryotic cytokinesis . Curr Biol 26 , R719 - R737 . 9 . Chen A , Akhshi TK , Lavoie BD , Wilde A ( 2015 ) . Importin ß2 mediates the spatio - temporal regulation of anillin through a noncanonical nuclear localization signal . J Biol Chem 290 , 13500 - 13509 . 10 . Clarke PR , Zhang C ( 2008 ) . Spatial and temporal coordination of mitosis by Ran GTPase . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9 , 464 – 477 . 11 . D’Avino PP , Giansanti M , Petronczki M ( 2015 ) . Cytokinesis in animal cells . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 7 , a015834 . 25 12 . Dechant R , Glotzer M ( 2003 ) . Centrosome separation and central spindle assembly act in redundant pathways that regulate microtubule density and trigger cleavage furrow formation . Dev Cell 4 , 333 – 344 . 13 . Dehapiot B , Halet G ( 2013 ) . Ran GTPase promotes oocyte polarization by regulating ERM ( Ezrin / Radixin / Moesin ) inactivation . Cell Cycle 12 , 1672 - 1678 . 14 . Dehapiot B , Carrière V , Carroll J , Halet G ( 2013 ) . Polarized Cdc42 activation promotes polar body protrusion and asymmetric division in mouse oocytes . Dev Biol 377 , 202 - 12 . 15 . Deng M , Suraneni P , Schultz RM , Li R ( 2007 ) . The Ran GTPase mediates chromatin signalling to control cortical polarity during polar body extrusion in mouse oocytes . Dev Cell 12 , 301 - 308 . 16 . Frenette P , Haines E , Loloyan M , Kinal M , Pakarian P , Piekny A ( 2012 ) . An anillin - Ect2 complex stabilizes central spindle microtubules at the cortex during cytokinesis . PLoS One 7 , e34888 . 17 . Green RA , Paluch E , Oegema K ( 2012 ) . Cytokinesis in animal cells . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 28 , 29 – 58 . 18 . Hasegawa K , Ryu SJ , Kaláb P ( 2013 ) . Chromosomal gain promotes formation of a steep RanGTP gradient that drives mitosis in aneuploid cells . J Cell Biol . 200 , 151 - 161 . 19 . Hu C , Coughlin M , Field CM , Mitchison TJ ( 2008 ) . Cell polarization during monopolar cytokinesis . J Cell Biol 181 , 195 – 202 . 20 . Kaláb P , Weis K , Heald R ( 2002 ) . Visualization of a Ran - GTP gradient in interphase and mitotic Xenopus egg extracts . Science 295 , 2452 - 2456 . 21 . Kaláb P , Pralle A , Isacoff EY , Heald R , Weis K ( 2006 ) . Analysis of a RanGTP - regulated gradient in mitotic somatic cells . Nature 440 , 697 - 701 . 22 . Kim H , Johnson JM , Lera RF , Brahma S , Burkard ME ( 2017 ) . Anillin phosphorylation controls timely membrane association and successful cytokinesis . PLoS Genetics 13 , e1006511 . 23 . Kiyomitsu T , Cheeseman IM ( 2013 ) . Cortical dynein and asymmetric membrane elongation coordinately position the spindle in anaphase . Cell 154 , 391 - 402 . 26 24 . Kotadia S , Montembault E , Sullivan W , Royou A ( 2012 ) . Cell elongation is an adaptive response for clearing long chromatid arms from the cleavage plane . J Cell Biol 199 , 745 - 753 . 25 . Lacroix B , Maddox AS ( 2012 ) . Cytokinesis , ploidy and aneuploidy . J Pathol 226 , 338 - 351 . 26 . Lee YP , Wong CH , Chan KS , Lai SK , Koh CG , Li HY ( 2012 ) . In vivo FRET imaging revealed a regulatory role of RanGTP in kinetochore - microtubule attachments via Aurora B kinase . PLOS ONE 7 , e45836 . 27 . Lewellyn L , Dumont J , Desai A , Oegema K ( 2010 ) . Analyzing the effects of delaying aster separation on furrow formation during cytokinesis in the Caenorhabditis elegans embryo . Mol Biol Cell 21 , 50 – 62 . 28 . Li HY , Zheng Y ( 2004 ) . Phosphorylation of RCC1 in mitosis is essential for producing a high RanGTP concentration on chromosomes and for spindle assembly in cells . Genes Dev 18 , 512 - 527 . 29 . Liu J , Fairn GD , Ceccarelli DF , Sicheri F , Wilde A ( 2012 ) . Cleavage furrow organization requires PIP ( 2 ) - mediated recruitment of anillin . Curr Biol 22 , 64 – 9 . 30 . Mendoza M , Norden C , Durrer K , Rauter H , Uhlmann F , Barral Y ( 2009 ) . A mechanism for chromosome segregation sensing by the NoCut checkpoint . Nat Cell Biol 11 , 477 - 83 . 31 . Nishimoto T , Eilen E , Basilico C ( 1978 ) . Premature of chromosome condensation in a ts chromatin - mutant of BHK cells . Cell 15 , 475 – 483 . 32 . Norden C , Mendoza M , Dobbelaere J , Kotwaliwale CV , Biggins S , Barral Y ( 2006 ) . The NoCut pathway links completion of cytokinesis to spindle midzone function to prevent chromosome breakage . Cell 125 , 85 - 98 . 33 . Oegema K , Savoian MS , Mitchison TJ , Field CM ( 2000 ) . Functional analysis of a human homologue of the Drosophila actin binding protein anillin suggests a role in cytokinesis . J Cell Biol 150 , 539 - 552 . 34 . Petronczki M , Glotzer M , Kraut N , Peters JM ( 2007 ) . Polo - like kinase 1 triggers the initiation of cytokinesis in human cells by promoting recruitment of the RhoGEF Ect2 to the central spindle . Dev Cell 12 , 713 – 725 . 27 35 . Piekny AJ , Glotzer M ( 2008 ) . Anillin is a scaffold protein that links RhoA , actin , and myosin during cytokinesis . Curr Biol 18 , 30 – 36 . 36 . Piekny AJ , Maddox AS ( 2010 ) . The myriad roles of Anillin during cytokinesis . Sem Cell Dev Biol 21 , 881 – 891 . 37 . Potapova , T . A . , Daum , J . R . , Pittman , B . D . , Hudson , J . R . , Jones , T . N . , Satinover , D . L . , Stukenberg , P . T . , and Gorbsky , G . J . ( 2006 ) . The reversibility of mitotic exit in vertebrate cells . Nature 440 , 954 - 958 . 38 . Rodrigues NT , Lekomtsev S , Jananji S , Kriston - Vizi J , Hickson GR , Baum B ( 2015 ) . Kinetochore - localized PP1 - Sds22 couples chromosome segregation to polar relaxation . Nature 524 , 489 - 492 . 39 . Roubinet , C . , Decelle , B . , Chicanne , G . , Dorn , J . F . , Payrastre , B . , Payre , F . , and Carreno , S . ( 2011 ) . Molecular networks linked by moesin drive remodeling of the cell cortex during mitosis . J . Cell Biol . 195 , 99 - 112 . 40 . Silverman - Gavrila RV , Hales KJ , Wilde A ( 2008 ) . Anillin - mediated Targeting of Peanut to Pseudocleavage Furrows Is Regulated by the GTPase Ran . Mol Biol Cell 19 , 3735 – 3744 . 41 . Soderholm JF , Bird SL , Kaláb P , Sampathkumar Y , Hasegawa K , Uehara - Bingen M , Weis K , Heald R ( 2011 ) . Importazole , a small molecule inhibitor of the transport receptor importin - ß . ACS Chem Biol 6 , 700 - 708 . 42 . Somers WG , Saint R ( 2003 ) . A RhoGEF and Rho family GTPase - activating protein complex links the contractile ring to cortical microtubules at the onset of cytokinesis . Dev Cell 4 , 29 - 39 . 43 . Soniat M , Chook YM ( 2015 ) . Nuclear localization signals for four distinct karyopherin - β nuclear import systems . Biochem J 468 , 353 - 362 . 44 . Steigemann P , Wurzenberger C , Schmitz MH , Held M , Guizetti J , Maar S , Gerlich DW ( 2009 ) . Aurora B - mediated abscission checkpoint protects against tetraploidization . Cell 136 , 473 - 484 . 45 . Straight AF , Field CM , Mitchison TJ ( 2005 ) . Anillin binds nonmuscle myosin II and regulates the contractile ring . Mol Biol Cell 16 , 193 – 201 . 28 46 . Sun L , Guan R , Lee IJ , Liu Y , Chen M , Wang J , Wu JQ , Chen Z ( 2015 ) . Mechanistic insights into the anchorage of the contractile ring by anillin and Mid1 . Dev Cell 33 , 413 - 426 . 47 . Tse YC , Piekny A , Glotzer M ( 2011 ) . Anillin promotes astral microtubule - directed cortical myosin polarization . Mol Biol Cell 22 , 3165 - 3175 . 48 . van Oostende Triplet C , Garcia MJ , Haji Bik H , Beaudet D , Piekny A ( 2014 ) . Anillin interacts with microtubules and is part of the astral pathway that defines cortical domains . J Cell Sci 127 , 3699 - 3710 . 49 . Werner M , Munro E , Glotzer M ( 2007 ) . Astral signals spatially bias cortical myosin recruitment to break symmetry and promote cytokinesis . Curr . Biol . 17 , 1286 – 1297 . 50 . Yüce O , Piekny A , Glotzer M ( 2005 ) . An ECT2 – centralspindlin complex regulates the localization and function of RhoA . J Cell Biol 170 , 571 – 582 . 51 . Zanin E , Desai A , Poser I , Toyoda Y , Andree C , Moebius C , Bickle M , Conradt B , Piekny A , Oegema K ( 2013 ) . A conserved RhoGAP limits M phase contractility and coordinates with microtubule asters to confine RhoA during cytokinesis . Dev Cell 26 , 496 - 510 . 52 . Zhao WM , Fang G ( 2005 ) . MgcRacGAP controls the assembly of the contractile ring and the initiation of cytokinesis . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102 , 13158 – 13163 . 29 Figure 1 . Reducing active Ran affects the localization of contractile proteins during cytokinesis 30 A ) Timelapse images show Baby Hamster Kidney ( BHK ) and tsBN2 [ BHK with a ts mutation in RCC1 ( Ran GEF ) ] cells , expressing GFP : anillin ( green ) , treated with Sir - tubulin ( red ) and Hoechst ( stains DNA ; blue ) during cytokinesis at permissive ( 33°C ) and restrictive temperatures ( 39 . 7°C ) . The scale bar is 10 µm . A bar graph shows the proportion of cytokinesis phenotypes observed for the different cell types and conditions . The data was analyzed using Fisher’s exact test ( * p < 0 . 05 ; * * p < 0 . 01 ) and the n’s are indicated on the graph . B ) A schematic shows how cortical anillin accumulation was measured . A line graph shows a cortical linescan of anillin : GFP around the cell perimeter , with the length ( pixels ) on the X axis and fluorescence intensity ( a . u . ) on the Y axis . Regions of the cortex with anillin above 50 % maximum levels were summed together to generate the total breadth of accumulated anillin . A dot plot shows the ratio of accumulated anillin vs . cell perimeter for tsBN2 cells at permissive ( n = 9 ) or restrictive temperature ( n = 16 ) . The means are indicated , and the data were analyzed using the Student’s t test ( * * p < 0 . 01 ) . 31 Figure 2 . Furrow - localized active Ran causes cytokinesis phenotypes 32 A ) Timelapse images show HeLa cells expressing anillin : GFP ( green ; top panel ) , or co - expressing anillin : GFP and mCherry : Ran ( mem - Ran ; red ; 1 , 500 < 3 , 000 a . u . ; middle panels ) or RanQ69L ( mem - Ran ( Q69L ) ; 1 , 500 < 3 , 000 a . u . ; bottom panels ) fused to the phospholipid - binding domain of Neuromodulin ( 1 - 60 ) during cytokinesis . The scale bar is 10 µm . To the right , a bar graph shows the proportion of cytokinesis phenotypes observed in the different cells , as indicated . Cells co - expressing anillin : GFP and low levels of mem - RanQ69L ( 460 < 1 , 500 a . u . ) were also included in the analysis . The data was analyzed using Fisher’s exact test ( * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 ) and the n’s are indicated on the graph . B ) A line graph shows a cortical linescan of anillin : GFP around the cell perimeter , with the length ( pixels ) on the X axis and fluorescence intensity ( a . u . ) on the Y axis . The width of the peak at 50 % maximal levels of intensity represents breadth . A dot plot shows changes in the ratio of the breadth of anillin vs . cell perimeter for control ( n = 9 ) , membrane - targeted Ran ( n = 13 ) , low expressing membrane - targeted Ran ( Q69L ; n = 11 ) and membrane - targeted Ran ( Q69L ; n = 23 ) . The means are indicated and p values were determined by the Student’s t - test ( * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 ) . At the bottom , cartoon schematics show the oscillation phenotype observed in cells over - expressing membrane - targeted Ran ( Q69L ) . The components of the cell are shown in the legend . 33 34 Figure 3 . Anillin is required for cortical polarity in the absence of polymerized microtubules A ) Images show fixed HeLa cells treated with anillin RNAi and co - expressing RNAi - resistant full length GFP : anillin , ( 1 - 1087 ) or C - terminal GFP : anillin ( 608 - 1087 ; C - term ) with or without mutations in the C - terminal NLS ( 850 KK 851 - DE ; NLS Mutant ) , treated with 100 nM Nocodazole and 22 . 5 µM Purvalanol A to depolymerize microtubules and induce mitotic exit , respectively . Cells were co - stained for endogenous anillin or GFP ( green ) , tubulin ( red ) and DAPI ( chromatin ; blue ) . Black arrows indicate regions of the cortex where anillin accumulates . The scale bar is 10 µm . To the right is a schematic to show how anillin’s cortical localization was determined to be asymmetric . In cells where the cortex was polarized , a line was drawn through chromatin , perpendicular to the axis of polarization . Linescans were drawn around the cortex in each region ( e . g . red vs . yellow ) to measure the accumulation of anillin . In cells where the cortex was round , a line was drawn arbitrarily through chromatin , and each side was measured . The ratio ( R ) of accumulated anillin was determined , and R > 1 . 2 was defined as asymmetric . B ) A bar graph shows the percentage of cells with asymmetric anillin distribution after rescue with the different anillin constructs as indicated . Bars show standard deviation , and p values were determined by the Student’s t - test ( * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 ) . The n’s are indicated on the graph . 35 Figure 4 . Anillin contains a functional NLS in its C - terminus A ) Images show fixed HeLa cells expressing GFP : anillin constructs co - stained for GFP ( green ) , tubulin ( red ) and DAPI ( chromatin ; blue ) . White arrows indicate cells with expression levels above 1 , 200 levels . The scale bar is 10 µm . To the right , a schematic shows the structure of 36 anillin with its binding domains in different colors [ myosin ( purple ) ; actin ( blue ) ; RBD , RhoA - GTP Binding Domain ( dark pink ) ; C2 ( orange ) ; PH , Pleckstrin Homology ; cyan ] and corresponding amino acid numbers , as well as the locations of the N - terminal and C - terminal NLS’s . The AHD ( Anillin Homology Domain ) is also shown . Constructs that localize to the nucleus are indicated as ‘yes’ or ‘no’ based on previous studies ( * e . g . Oegema et al . , 2000 ; Piekny et al . , 2008 ; Chen et al . , 2015 ) , or this study . Underneath , a bar graph shows the percentage of cells with nuclear anillin ( C2 + PH ) . Bars show standard deviation , and p values were determined by the Student’s t - test ( * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 ) . The n’s are indicated on the graph . B ) Immunoblots show pull downs of Myc : importin - β from lysates with purified MBP and MBP - tagged anillin proteins as indicated ( C2 vs . RBD + C2 , and C2 vs . C2 NLS mutant ) . An alignment of the C - terminal NLS is shown for human ( H . sapiens ) anillin with mouse ( M . musculus ) , frog ( X . laevis ) , Drosophila ( D . melanogaster ) and C . elegans . Sequences highlighted in green are strongly predicted to be an NLS , or have been shown to bind to importins ( Silverman - Gavrila et al . , 2008 ) , while the amino acids highlighted in blue are weakly predicted to be an NLS . The box to the right shows structures for the RBD , C2 and PH ( modified from Sun et al . , 2015 ) , to demonstrate how the NLS in the C2 domain of anillin may be intramolecularly inhibited by the RBD . 37 Figure 5 . The C - terminal NLS regulates anillin’s function during cytokinesis 38 A ) Timelapse images show HeLa cells depleted of anillin , expressing GFP - tagged RNAi - resistant non - mutant ( n = 17 ) or NLS mutant anillin ( n = 21 ) co - expressing H2B : mRuby . Also shown are cells after treatment with 33 nM Nocodazole to reduce astral microtubules ( n = 7 for non - mutant and n = 7 for mutant anillin ) . Cartoon cells to the right show changes in the distribution of anillin in the different conditions . The scale bar is 10 µm . B ) The bar graph shows a comparison in the timing of anillin recruitment ( green arrow ) , and time from anaphase onset to complete furrow ingression for anillin - depleted cells rescued with non - mutant anillin in comparison to NLS mutant anillin from anaphase onset . Standard deviations are shown as bars and as time for cortical recruitment , and the data was analyzed by the Student’s t test ( * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 ) . The n’s are shown on the graph . A bar graph in the middle shows the percentage of binucleate cells + / - anillin RNAi , and after rescue with GFP - tagged RNAi - resistant non - mutant or NLS mutant anillin . The bars show standard deviation , and p values were determined by the Student’s t - test ( * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 ) . The n’s are indicated on the graph . The dot plot to the right shows changes in the ratio of the breadth of anillin vs . cell perimeter in anillin - depleted cells rescued with non - mutant ( n = 15 ) or NLS mutant anillin ( n = 21 ) , and after treatment with Nocodazole to reduce astral microtubules ( n = 7 for wt and n = 7 for NLS mutant ) . The means are indicated , and the data was analyzed by a Student’s t - test ( * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 ) . C ) Images show fixed cells expressing Myc : importin -  ( red ) , co - stained for anillin ( green ) and DAPI ( blue ) in anaphase or during furrow ingression ( telophase ) as indicated . Linescans show the levels of anillin vs . Myc across the equatorial plane ( dotted yellow line ) in a cell with low levels of Myc ( < 1 , 000 a . u . ; top ) or high levels of Myc ( 1 , 500 > 4 , 000 a . u . ; bottom ) , with length ( pixels ) on the X axis and fluorescence intensity ( a . u . ; dark grey = anillin , light grey = importin -  ) on the Y axis . The green rectangles highlight regions of the equatorial cortex . To the right is a dot blot of the ratio of the breadth of anillin vs . perimeter in cells with low ( control , n = 11 ) vs . high Myc ( n = 9 ) . The data was analyzed by the Student’s t - test ( * p < 0 . 05 ) . 39 40 Figure 6 . The C - terminal NLS influences anillin’s affinity for the equatorial cortex during cytokinesis A ) A macro written for Image J measured average anillin intensity at 43 points around the cortex as well as the distance from each point to chromatin . Line graphs show anillin intensity ( top graphs ; green ) , and distance to chromatin ( bottom graphs ; blue ) as indicated in the schematic above , from anaphase onset to early ingression . The graphs on the left show measurements from anillin - depleted cells rescued with GFP - tagged RNAi resistant anillin ( n = 5 cells ) , and the graphs on the right show anillin - depleted cells rescued with GFP - tagged RNAi resistant NLS mutant anillin ( n = 5 cells ) . Bars show standard deviation . B ) Images show HeLa cells treated with anillin RNAi expressing GFP - tagged RNAi - resistant anillin or NLS mutant anillin , co - stained for GFP ( green ) , tubulin ( red ) and DAPI ( chromatin ; cyan ) . Yellow arrows point to astral microtubules . The scale bar is 10 µm . Zoomed in regions of the boxed insets show anillin and microtubules at the furrow as indicated . White arrows point to the demarcation of anillin localization . The scale bar is 2 µm . B ) A cartoon schematic shows binding domains in the C - terminus of anillin ( RBD – RhoA - GTP Binding Domain , PH – Pleckstrin Homology ) . Underneath are Coomassie - stained gels of co - sedimentation assays ( S – supernatants , P – pellets ) using 1 . 5 µM purified microtubules ( MT ) incubated with 1 . 5 µM purified MBP - tagged anillin proteins as indicated . A comparison between C2 and C - term is shown . C ) Cartoon schematics show anillin vs . NLS mutant anillin ( right ) localization during anaphase and early telophase . Zoomed in regions highlight how the zone of anillin is determined by RhoA - GTP and importin - β , the latter of which permits the spread of anillin beyond the boundary of astral microtubules . The levels of ‘free’ importin - β are determined by the Ran - GTP gradient formed around chromatin .